Romish Doctrines NOT FROM THE BEGINNING, OR A REPLY To what S.C. (or Serenus
Cressy) A ROMAN CATHOLIC has returned to Dr. PIERCES SERMON Preached before
his MAJESTY at WHITEHALL, Feb. 1. 1662.

IN Vindication of Our CHURCH Against the NOVELTIES of ROME.

By DANIEL WHITBIE M.A. and Fellow of Trin. Coll. Oxon.

1 Jo. 2.24. Let that therefore abide in you which ye have heard from the
beginning. LONDON, Printed by R. W. for Tho. Basset in St. Dunstans Churchyard
in Fleet Street, and Ja. Magnes in Coven-Garden. 1664.

Imprimatur,

Nov. 6. 1663. Tho. Grig. R. in Christo P.D. Humfr. Epis. Land. a Sac.
Domesticis.

To the Right Reverend Father in God SETH Lord Bishop of Exeter.
My very good Lord,
BEing informed of a Book which passed the decretorial sentence against our
Church, and that it was written by an Author grave and sober, whose reason was
very keen and sharp, one who was the Coryphaeus of the Roman Party, and
therefore from whom I might expect all that the matter could well bear; one
lastly who was once a professed son of the Church of England, and therefore
would not be so ungrateful to his Mother as to pass so heavy a doom upon her
without the greatest evidence, and conviction; I first set upon perusing it,
big with expectations, but finding my self miserably disappointed, I was put
into such a passion, as vented it self into this Reply, which humbly lies
prostrate at your Lordships feet, begging the favor and honor of your
acceptance, and that you would be pleased to take it into your protection. And
indeed what can be more proper then to commit a discourse of this nature to the
protection of such a Father of the Church, whose zeal for the Churches good is
as ardent, as her enemies rage and fury violent? What therefore my former
promises of tendering my first fruits unto your Lordship, and the influence of
your instructions and encouragement have made your own, flies to the shelter of
your goodness, where leaving it, I securely rest,

Your Lordships most humbly devoted Servant, DANIEL WHITBIE.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Cannot but expect to be censured as a bold adventurer, as one who has pulled
upon himself a burden, not sufficiently considering, Quid far recusant;
Quid valiant humeri.
In that I have dared to appear in a matter of such concernment as this I have
undertaken, you will happily cry out of an impar congressus betwixt one of
yesterday, and Father Cressy; But notwithstanding this objection which lies so
fair in the view of all men, I shall not despair of a milder censure, if it be
considered,

1.That I did not presume to venture upon the Work till I had found that every
citation produced from the Fathers, by S.C. was already Answered to my hands by
the Champions of our Cause, so that when any matter of Antiquity is scanned by
me, know that I steared my course by the greatest lights our Nation or other
reformed Churches would afford me; that I speak the mind of an Hammond, Field,
Salmasius, or a Baron in the business of the Popes Supremacy; of an Usher,
Fern, and Dally, in that of Purgatory; of a Tailor, and Featly in the business
of Communion in one kind; of a Crakanthorp and Dally, in that of Images; of an
Usher, Andrews and Crakanthorp, in that of Invocation of Saints; of an Hall,
Tailor and Calixtus, touching Celibacy of Priests; of a Chillingworth in the
two great Controversies of the Infallibility of the Church, and Schism; of a
Chamier, and a Lord du Plessis, in them all; and if you will but acknowledge
that Bellarmine has been Answered, and that it is not a thing impossible for
such an one as I am, to have seen those Answers, and to be able to transcribe
them, you will consequently be obliged to grant, that it was possible for me to
have returned an Answer to this Epitomie of him, which our Author has produced.

And yet after all this I must say, 2. That these collections (for so I am
content they should be called) have not passed without the censure of some
Critical eyes to whom I have wholly referred my self for the addition to, or
alteration of what ever seemed good unto them so to do; and that I have
moreover omitted many things of lesser moment, wherein I had clearly the
advantage of my Adversary, that I might not be too much burdensome to the
Readers patience. Now if these things be impartially considered, I hope the
Objection which before appeared so considerable, will vanish; and this poor
Treatise (which intends only to tell the world that the advantage of our Cause
is such, as that the wisest of our Antagonists may be encountered by even the
meanest sons of the Church of England; that to plead for Popery, is but to give
us the trouble of transcribing the Answers of our learned Protestants) may find
a favorable acceptance from thee.

Farther, I entreat thee not to be offended either with the breach of Pages,
which was necessary from the employment of diverse Printers in this work, or
with some false Pointings, which may easily be rectified, or lastly, with some
few Marginal citations not very appositely placed, which hoping thou will
gratify me in, I bid thee farewell.

D. W.

A Catalogue of some Books Printed for T. Basset in St. Dunstans Churchyard in
Fleet Street.
SCintilla Altaris, or Primitive Devotion in the Feasts and Fasts of the
Church; the third Edition, by E. Spark D.D.

Dr. Collets Devotions for every day of the week.

The new Book of Common Prayer, with choice Cuts in Brass, suited to all the
Feasts and Fasts of the Church of England throughout the year, in a Pocket
volume.

LOGIKLATPEIA, The Reasonableness of Divine Service, in Answer to the contrary
pretentions of H. D. in a late Discourse concerning the interest of words in
Prayer and Liturgies, by Ir. Freeman, M A.

An exact Abridgement of all the Acts of Parliament in force and use since the
16. K Chapter 1. to this present, by W. Hughes of Grayes-Inn Esquire.

A Synoptical Directory on the Canons of the Scripture, by Ferdinando Parkhurst.

The Extravagant Shepherd, an Anti-Romance in fol.

ERRATA.
PAge 3. l. ult. r. Morton. p. 10. l. 26. r. abundantia. p 20. l. 9. r. E
Cathedra. l. 15. r. secondly. p. 33. l. 33. add to. p 38. l. 8. r. now p. 46.
l. 33. add illi. l. 34. r. praeceptio. p. 52. l. 22. r. or. p 60. l. 8. r. it.
l. 27. r. his. p. 67. l. 29. del. S. 15. p. 76. l. 17. r. (...). p 84. l 27.
dele not. p. 94. l. 26. r. next query. p. 106. l. 7. r. p^opositions. l 33. r.
can we. p. 112. l. 34. add are. p. 117. l. 1. r. (...). p. 118. l. 20. add etc.
p. 172. l. 5. r. that. p. 176. l. 4. r. not. p. 182. l. 28. add the. p. 194. l.
32. r. they. p 200. l. 14. dele Answ. p. 201. l. 1. r. of. p. 204. l. 31. r.
(...). p 205. l. 23. dele by. p. 208. l. 1. r. eat. p. 225. l. 20. r. and. p.
230. l. ult. dele if. p. 233. l. 32. r. the. p. 237. l. 5. r them. l. 25. r.
non negant. p. 239. l. 16. r. as that. l 23. r. the. p 242 l. 12. r. Cabrera.
p. 249. l. 27. r. enormities. l. 40. r. what p. 158. l. 20. r. retractations.
p. 262 l. 38. r. or two. p. 267. l. 17. r. (...) p. 277. l. 16. dele of. p.
283. l. 26. r. the. l. 28. r. this. p. 284. l. 35. r. Saint. p. 371. l. 6. add
the. p. 376. l. 34. r. this. p. 377. l. 21. r. it. p. 391. l. 14. r. intimated.
p. 395. l. 20. dele that. p. 397. l 25. r. the. p. 398. l. 19. r. (...). p.
410. l. 23. r. theses. p. 422. l. 6. r. think. p. 448. l. 32. r. ridiculous and
so elsewhere. p. 461. l. 4. r. it. l. 8. r our. p. 475. l 5 r. has. p. 487 l.
37. r. they. in the Margin p. 4. r. Print. p. 41 add lib. 2 Indic 11. p 45. r.
(...). and (...). p. 61. add D. Field. p. 81. r. ut vos. p. 182. r. Scr. p 38^.
r. did. 82 and Cap plurimos, and Taraca, and Wigorn. p. 388. add commun. p.
402 r. ablutionis. p. 473. r. Greg.

CHAP. I.
Popish Cruelties, Sect. 3. No evidence of their fidelity, Sect. 4, 5. The
Council of Lateran is for the destruction of those whom they call Heretics,
Sect. 6. Which is the judgment of the most eminent Papists, ibid.

I Cannot forbid my self to wonder, Commendam from many Protestants, should yet
lie open to so many and so plain exceptions, such as, if all advantages were
taken, would stretch an Answer into many Volums; for to return our Antagonists
words upon him, I protest that not one period can I find that is extraordinary,
not one instance but I will undertake to show, that it is either very
impertinent, ushered in with disadvantages to the truth, or open forgery; or
lastly, such as has frequently received a full and satisfactory answer from
others heretofore.

And are we not come to a fine pass, Bellarmine should I say? or rather the
objection of a Field and Hammond, should be esteemed sufficient proofs of the
Popes Supremacy? (as if we had not been able to transcribe their Answers) when
that which may sufficiently be answered by the meanest Son of the Church of
England shall be thought sufficient to load her with the guilt of Schism, to
unchurch her, and pronounce the sentence of damnation upon all her members.

And first, Page 3.
can you not remember one single instance of a Sermon in those days, that has
employed your pens for an Answer? Page 4.
yea with what face can you charge the Doctor with any bitterness, in saying,
That his Sermon might be like to meet with men that are apt to confute their
opponents with fire and faggot? for are not you the men that have disputed
against us with Flame and Gunpowder, with Armies and Navies? are not you the
men that murdered so many thousands in cold blood in Ireland? that destroyed
the Monks of Bangor for living contrary to the manner of the Roman Church? who
can be ignorant of the floods of Christian blood that have been shed by the
Roman hands in Savoy, France, Poland, Germany, Bohemia, Ireland, England? of
the treacherous conspiracies that have been made by these Popish Emissaries
against our Kings, and Queen in England? of the butcheries of Princes, and
Nobles committed by them elsewhere? how truly have they been drunk with the
blood of Saints? and would not these blood-thirsty men pretend as high to
Loyalty as you now do? was it not the Papal interest (which you jointly manage)
that prompted them to the commission of such execrable facts? was it not an
opinion that we were Heretics (which you also passionately assert) that
emboldned them to these actions? and can you blame his Majesty, or his
Parliament, if they endeavor to secure their Protestant Friends and Subjects
from such cruel and unreasonable men?

Be it acknowledged that Catholic Religion cannot stand justly charged with
these crimes, Fr. White against Fisher, p. 571.
many Papists refuse it, yea persecute those who hold it lawful to be taken.
Shall it be your subscriptions to any form acknowledging his due Supremacy?
Alas do not we know, that (1.) many amongst you allow of mental reservations,
and equivocations, an Artifice that will excuse and free you from the most
accurate Oath imaginable; and what if you swear that you take your Oath without
any mental reservation? may you not mean any that you intend to acquaint us
with? how can any man be assured that you do not all hold these mental
reservations, seeing you may deny the tenent by a mental reservation, and yet
hold it? but admit that none of you held this Tenent, yet do not many of you
say, That you may break your faith with an Vide Crakenth. def. Ecc. Ang. where
you have the judgment of Symancha, Thom. Aquin. and the Counc. of Constance
for it. p. 625. See also Dr. Mortons Popish posit. and practices for Rebel.
Pacenius (...) Epist. monit. Jac. Regis. Tit. B. 2. and 3. Dr Morton. ib.
Heretic, and all of you that we are Heretics? but were this otherwise,
Thirdly, Do not many of you hold that if the Pope dissolve the Oath, you are
freed from it? as also when he declares it unjust, which when he pleases he
may do; hear the excuser of the Powder Plot from the imputation of cruelty
(because both seed and root of an evil herb must be destroyed) thus deriding
the simplicity of his Majesty in composing and requiring the Oath of
Allegiance; He thought (says he) that no man could any way dissolve, with a
safe conscience, the Oath which he had made; but he could not see, that if the
Pope dissolve the Oath, all its knots, whether of being faithful to the King,
or of admitting no dispensation, are dissolved; yea, I will say a thing more
admirable, you know I believe that an unjust Oath, if it be evidently known to
be such, or openly declared such, obliges no man; that the Kings Oath is
unjust, is sufficiently declared by the Pastor of the Church himself, you see
now that the obligation of it is vanished into smoke; and that the bond which
so many wise men thought was made of Iron, is less then straw. Yea further,
cannot good Pope Cardinal Ossatus Ep. 87. ad D. de ville-roy. Suarez. adv.
sect: Aug. l. 6. c. 4. s. 14 etc. 6. s. 22, 24. Azorius I^st. Moral. part. 1. l
8. c. 13. See the Jansenians mystery of iniquity. Abbots Antilogia.
Clement the VIII. suggest to You (as he did to the King of France, tied by the
bond of a Sacred Oath to the Queen of England) that your Oath is made to an
Heretic, but you stand bound (against her and her Succcessors) in another Oath
to God, and to the Pope? Fourthly, What is his Majesty the better for your
subscriptions to his due Supremacy, whereas many of you hold that when the Pope
has deposed him, no obedience is due unto him, yea that then ipso facto he
becomes a Tyrant, and may be dealt with as such an one, and consequently be
slain by a private man? Suarez defens. fid. Cathol. l. 6. c. 4. Norson ubi
supra.

Will you plead your fidelity, See p. 7.
and even the Religion of the Kingdom, in sacrificing your blood and fortunes
for his Majesty? 1. With what confidence can this be pleaded by you? when the
whole College of your Jesuits in London say, Mr. Baxters Key for Cath. c. 45.
That they will rather promote the cutting off of the Kings Majesty, (then
hinder it) least they (the Puritans) should make use of his extremities to any
advantage; nor are we ignorant who it was that has of late been convicted of
rejoicing at that unsavage butchery. 2. For shame do not say you were
unanimously so, was it so in Ireland? In two Letters to Arch B. Laud extant in
Print introduc. p. 102, 112. Vide Bax. ibid.
no, Bishop Bedle will assure us his Majesty was with the greatest part of
Ireland as to their hearts and consciences King, but at the Popes discretion,
and that in Ireland the Pope had another Kingdom far greater in number then his
Majesty's, and as he had heretofore signified to the Lords Justices and Council
(which since is justified by themselves in Print) constantly directed and
guided by the order of the new congregation, de propaganda fide, lately erected
at Rome. 3. What reason do some of you give why you should be quiet under his
Majesty's dominions? even this, because you are not able to manage a war
against him; In Th. 22. qu. 13. art. 2. non licet eis tol^rare talem Regem.
Bell. l. 5. de Paul. c. 7. s. 3. And again, they are obliged not to suffer him.
s. probatur they are bound to deprive him of his dominions. Bull. Pauli. 5.
cont. Hen. 8. yea it is meritorious of eternal life, says Card. Commens. in his
letter to Pareus.
thus Bannes, The faithful (Papists) in England and Saxony are to be excused
that they do not free themselves from the power of Superiors, nor make war
against them, because commonly they are not strong enough to manage these wars,
and great dangers hang over them: were they then strong enough, not to rebel
would be unexcusable.

But that which without doubt you plead with greatest confidence, Page 4.
is, That if all the received Canons of the Church were searched, not one could
be found to testify the shedding of blood simply on the account of Religion.
In Answer to this, I shall return you the words of one of your approved General
Councils, the fourth at Lateran under Innocent the third, as Binius and others
of your own record it, where in the first Chapter they set down their Catholic
Faith, two Articles of which are, 1. That no man can be saved out of their
universal Church. And 2. That the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament of the Altar
are transubstantiate into the body and blood of Christ, the appearances
remaining. And in the third Chapter, they say We Excommunicate and Anathematise
every Heresy extolling it self against this holy Orthodox Catholic Faith,
which we have before exponed, condemning all Heretics, by what names soever
they be called. And being condemned, let them be left to the present secular
powers, or their Bailiffs, to be punished, the Clergy being first degraded of
their orders, and let the goods of such condemned ones be confiscate, if they
be Laymen; but if they be Clergymen, let them be given to the Churches whence
they had their Stipends. And those that are found notable only by suspicion, if
they do not by congruous purgation demonstrate their innocence; according to
the considerations of the suspicion, and the quality of the person, let them be
smitten with the sword of Anathema, and avoided by all men, till they have
given sufficient satisfaction; and if they remain a year excommunicate, let
them then be condemned as Heretics. And let the secular powers, in what office
soever, be admonished, and persuaded, and, if necessary, compelled by
Ecclesiastical censure, that as they would be reputed and accounted believers,
so for the defense of the faith, they take an Oath publicly, that they will
study in good earnest, according to their power, to exterminate all that are by
the Church denoted Heretics from the Countries subject to their Jurisdiction.
So that when any one shall be taken into Spiritual, or Temporal power, he shall
by his Oath make good this Chapter. But if the Temporal Lord being required or
admonished by the Church, shall neglect to purge his Country of Heretical
defilement, let him by the Metropolitan and Comprovincial Bishops be tied by
the bond of Excommunication. And if he refuse to satisfy within a year, let it
be signified to the Pope, that he from thenceforth may denounce his Vassals
absolved from his fidelity, and may expose his Country to be Seized on by
Catholics, who rooting out the Heretics, may possess it without
contradiction, and may keep it in the purity of faith; saving the right of the
principal Lord, so be it that he make no hinderance hereabout, and oppose not
any impediment: and the same Law is to be observed with them that are not
principal Lords. And the Catholics that taking the sign of the Cross shall set
themselves to the rooting out of the Heretics, shall enjoy the same
Indulgences and holy privileges, which were granted to those that go to the
relief of the Holy Land. Moreover we decree that the Believers, Receivers,
Defenders, and favorers of Heretics, shall be excommunicate, firmly
decreeing, that after any such is noted by excommunication, if he refuse to
satisfy within a year, he shall from thenceforth be ipso Jure infamous, and
may not be admitted into public offices, or councils, or to the choice of
such, nor to bear witness. And he shall be intestate, and not have power to
make a Will, nor come to succession of inheritance. And no man shall be forced
to answer him in any cause, but he shall be forced to answer others. And if he
be a Judge, his sentence shall be invalid, and no causes shall be brought unto
his hearing. If he be an advocate, his Plea shall not be admitted. If a Notary
(or Register) the Instruments made by him shall be utterly void, and damned,
with the damned Author. And so in other the like cases we command that it be
observed: Thus the Council. The Sum of which is, that all the Pope calls
Heretics, must be condemned and destroyed, That all Kings, Princes, or Lords
that will not execute his sentence, and root them out; must be dispossessed of
their Dominions, and the subjects absolved from fidelity, (whatever Oaths they
had taken) and all others that do but favor or receive them, be utterly
undone, and exterminated. Now seeing our Author tells us that the determination
of a general Council is infallible truth, and we have this with the decernimus
and firmiter statuimus of a general Council, this must be acknowledged to be
so. Indeed I confess that some Romanists do affirm that this is not the genuine
Decree of the Lateran Council, but only of Pope Innocent foisted in amongst the
genuine Decrees; Epist. Monit. ad Johannem Barclaium.
But against this Eudaemo-Johannes asks, if the business were so, Cur in
editione hujus Canonis ne Vnus quidem reclamavit? cur ne unus quidem ex tot
Imperatorum et Regum oratoribus mutire ausus sit? Yea, why is it so generally
Extant in all Editions? Co^t. Barclaium.
(2.) Bellarmine tells us that it was defined in a general Council at Leyden
under Innocent the fourth, in a Roman Synod under Gregory the seventh, Ad quam
plurimi Episcopi undique convenerant omnibas consentientibus and laudantibus.
to which there was a general Conflux of Bishops from every place, who all
consented to, and applauded the determination, and by another at Rome under
Paschal the second, by one at Colen under Gelasius the second, at Rhemes under
Calixtus the second, at Beneventum under Victor the third, at Placentia under
Vrbane the second, and further that it was the judgment of twenty one prime
leading men in Italy, and as many in Spain, fifteen in France, twelve in
Germany, England and Scotland seven, (besides many others which unquestionably
he had not read) I say he tells us that it was the judgment and definition of
all these, that it was in the power of the Pope to Excommunicate Kings and
Emperors, and deprive them of their Kingdoms, if they be Heretics, and must
it not thence follow that this (Dominus fac totum) this Lord Paramount may
dispose of their Dominions to others, and they obtaining thus a right may
invade the King, and exterminate all that do oppose them, all that are Loyal to
their Sovereigns? does it not hence follow that their subjects thence forwards
are absolved from their obedience to them, and may make insurrections against
them without scruple? and then (not to add their Jesuits Oaths of blind
obedience to go whethersoever, and do whatsoever the Pope shall be pleased to
require) is it not sufficiently evident that even the Canons of the Church of
Rome do allow the effusion of blood upon religious accounts?

CHAP. II.
Why this Work was undertaken by the Author, Sect. 1. M. C'. Protestation
incredible, Sect. 2. His Slur cast upon his Majesty, Sect. 3.

OCcasionally perusing this Author, was not either disingenuously forged, or
fully and satisfactorily answered already by Protestant Divines, and therefore
I thought it proper for such a one as I, though I should profess no greater
abilities then to write and read, to evince this unto the world, and to make it
appear that the greatest Champions of the Roman Church, are able to bring
nothing in the defense of their Novelties, but old and bafled arguments; such
as any man may Answer, who can write and read.

And here I tremble to consider, call God to witness upon his soul, Page 10.
that his purpose was studiously to avoid all cavilling distortions, either of
Text of Scripture, or the holy Fathers, and much more those falsely called p^as
frauds, corruptions of either; And that he would allege nothing as a proof
which for the present he thought could possibly be answered. For let any man
read what is answered to his defense of the infallibility of the Church,
Purgatory, Invocation of Saints, Celibacy of Priests, but especially
Transubstantiation, and the Popes Supremacy, and if he do not find Scriptures
miserably distorted, Fathers not only wrested, but corrupted, I will forfeit
presently my life. And is it possible that any man should believe him,
persuaded that his proofs are unanswerable, who knows that he has read and so
diligently perused the famous Chillingworth, and Reverend Dr. Hammond, out of
whom I have transcribed so many satisfactory Answers to his arguments? He that
considers his Discourse upon the Churches practice of Praying in the Latin
tongue, will find it altogether unpossible for him to imagine that there is any
thing of truth in what he here asserts with such a solemn invocation of
Almighty God.

And Thirdly, Page 11.
of transgressing his injunctions to his very face, does he not cast a slur
upon his Majesty, in making him so highly pleased with such notorious
disobedience, as to give special command that his Sermon should be Published,
and consequently others be encouraged to commit the like enormities to his face?

CHAP. III.
The Challenge of Bishop. Jewel owned by us, Sect. 1. M. C's. malicious
accusation of our Church, Sect. 2. His mistake, Sect. 3. Antiquity not
acknowledged to run contrary to us, Sect. 4. His abuse of Dr. Hammond ib. Not
We, but the Romanist, self-condemned, Sect. 5. This evidenced from their
Indices expurgatorii, Sect. 6. M.C's. Mistake rendering his whole Book
impertinent, Sect. 7. An Answer to his Questions, Sect. 9. Scripture not abused
by the Doctor, ib.

IN this third Chapter, You begin with a bold assertion, Defen. Eccl. Ang. c.
15. and again c. 18. s. 3. Ecclesia illius temporis (ad 600. annos) sola nostra
est; nihil omnino ab ea vel decretum vel receptum pro sidei dogmate quod non
est nostrum: vide quae sequuntur. Demonst. of the Problem in fine. Defense of
the way, c. 43. F. Ap to his third Book.
That Bishop Jewel and the Doctor are singular in the matter of challenging the
concurrence of Antiquity for themselves, and imputing Novelty to the Catholic
Church; whereas we persist in Bishop Jewels challenge unanimously, and are
rather willing to enlarge it, then contract it. Dr. Crackentborp does not only
tell you, That Bishop Jewels provocation was most just, but reitterates it
himself, and adds, that albeit this worthy Prelate (the Chariots of our Israel
and the Horsemen thereof) is now in Heaven, yet has he left behind him in the
Camp of the Lord many Valiant men who dare without the least fear provoke all
your Philistines and Goliahs to the like Battle. Yea further, that he would not
be very bold or rash, qui numerum istum plusquam duplicet: which is consonant
to that of Mr. Perkins, No Apostle, no holy Father, no sound Catholic, for
1200. years after Christ, did ever hold or profess that Doctrine of all the
principles and grounds of Religion, that is now taught by the Church of Rome,
and authorized by the Council of Trent. Dr. White you know rises up to 800.
years, and Dr. Fields Appendix clearly proves that the Latin or West Church in
which the Pope Tyrannized, was and continued a true Orthodox and Protestant
Church, and that the devisers and maintainers of Romish errors and
superstitious abuses were only a faction in the same, at the time when Luther,
not without the applause of all good men, published his propositions against
the profane abuse of Papal indulgences. Yea Mr. Baxter insults over you in
this matter, and tells you There was never such a creature as a Papist known in
all the world till 600. Safe Rel. p. 175.
years after the birth of Christ; we confidently affirm (says he elsewhere)
and challenge all the Papists in the world to dispute the point with us; P.
118.119.
that Popery is a Fardel of new Doctrines unknown to the first Churches. And
again let any Papist living bring out their cause to the trial of Antiquity,
and let them that are of the most ancient Church and Religion carry the cause;
yea further, he desires no better recreation then to entertain a dispute about
it with any Papist that will undertake their cause: I hope you will take up the
Cudgels.

To pass over your impertinent Citation of Beza, p. 17.
etc. persons that are strangers to us (1.) You maliciously accuse our Church
for leaving out these words in the Roman office, V. Be mindful of thy
Congregation, (O Lord)
R. Which thou did possess from the beginning.
Because say You apparently, the Church from the beginning could not be ours:
Yea You add We had rather no Prayers at all should be made for the Church, then
for that which was from the beginning.

Answ. This is a very uncharitable surmise, and it might as well have been
concluded, that because the first Reformers have left out the words immediately
ensuing, V. Fiat pax in virtute tua.
R. Et abundatia in turribus tuis.
That they had rather the English Church should have no Prayers, then that she
should pray for the peace and prosperity of the Church Catholic. (2.) The
surmise is the more uncharitable in that our first Reformers so solemnly
profess they rejected nothing but your innovations and superstitions; and that
the Religion they had chosen was everywhere conformed to the primitive Purity;
how unreasonable is it upon such pitiful surmises to conclude that all these
Reformers should be such gross and notorious Hypocrites? and should so solemnly
profess what was so great a contradiction to the convictions of their
conscience? (3.) Yet had it been purposely left out by them least it should be
offensive to some weak people, not able to distinguish betwixt a Reformation,
and an Innovation, betwixt the Purgation of a Church from its superstitions,
and the introducing of a new Religion; would it have deserved such Sinister
Constructions, or have been blame worthy?

You tell us Bishop Jewel had not the confidence to reckon in his Catalogue, as
novelties, the infallibility of the Church, P. 19.
invocation of Saints, purgatory, prayer for the dead, celibacy of the Clergy,
or Sacrifice of the Mass.

Answ. You are still weak in your deductions (to let pass your mistake of the
sacrifice of the Mass, which was one of the Novelties he charged you with) may
I not in like manner argue that M. C. had not the confidence to defend
traditions not mentioned in Scripture, as necessary to salvation, and to be
embraced with equal authority to the Word of God, nor the Trent Canon of
Scripture, because he declined the doing of it?

In your twentieth Chapter You renew the discourse of Antiquity, P. 309, etc.
and when the Doctor had most truly said that you never have showed that Iota
in which we have left the yet uncorrupted or primitive Church or the four first
general Councils, you are put into a passion, and call this most palpable and
notorious truth a shameless boast. And then you send us to Simon Vogorius, Ibid.
as if we could not send you to twenty Authors that have answered, and bafled,
what ever he or others of your party can allege; You send us to your Chapter
of the Celibacy of Priests, to view your forgeries there. Page 3 12^
Again You cite such concessions of men (some of which are mere strangers to
us) as that no rational man can think you did believe them to be pertinent; for
what if Luther says there was never any one pure Council, but either added
something to the faith, or subtracted, must we be accountable for all Luthers
words? (2.) How will you evince that he speaks of such things as are matters of
dispute betwixt us? or that we esteem these things to be additions or
substractions which he did? and what if D. Whitaker assert that to believe by
the testimony of the Church, is the plain Heresy of the Papists, did ever any
Protestant say otherwise? do not the Fathers require us to believe them upon
the sole authority of Scripture reason, or tradition, handed down from the
Apostles? which to be sure the Doctor never dreamt of; but the Carbonaria
fides, you so often speak of; and whereas he says that the Popish Religion is
a patcht coverlet of the fathers errors sown together (viz. Origin,
Tertullian, etc.) See the fragments of old Heresies, out of which he proves
Pope^y to have risen, and with which to symbolize; To. 2. p. 800. 2 These. 3.
is it not perfectly ridiculous hence to conclude that we deserted Antiquity in
deserting these errors? And again, to what end do you cite Dr. Willet speaking
of your supposed Antiquity? is that a confession that Antiquity is Yours! then
must he confess, that all the Doctrines which you maintain are real truths,
because by you they are supposed to be so; What if he tell us from Scripture,
Antichrist began to reign in St. Paul's days, that the Mystery of iniquity did
then work? did he speak of your Papal Supremacy! then evidently did the Apostle
also, for to his sentence he refers; did he not! then is you citation still
impertinent; Again, is it not a wonder that you should so confidently tell us
that Dr. P. 310.
Hammond should contract his challenge to three hundred years; when as he
himself has twice considered this Calumny, P. 142.
(1.) in his reply, where he tells us that it was nowhere intimated in that
treatise, that we were not ready to stand to the fourth age, but only that the
three first ages, and four general Councils, were competent witnesses of the
Apostolical Doctrines, and traditions, it being unimaginable that any thing
should be so per saltum conveyed to us from the Apostles, P. 141.
as to leap over those three Centuries next to them without leaving any
footstep discernable among them; the like we have in his Schism disarmed: C^^.
S. 4.
and yet these things so manifestly disclaimed, must be still objected without
the least regard of ingenuity or truth. And when Bishop Laud tells you, (...).
28. p. 2^7.
that we offer to be tried by all the Ancient Councils and Fathers of the
Church for four hundred years, and somewhat further, does he not give you scope
enough? if you cannot find any of your doctrines, received by the Church of
God, as Articles of faith, or necessary to be believed within that time, is it
not a shrewd sign, that they were not traditions received from Christ or his
Apostles?

At last you tell us that evident truth on your side has extorted a confession
from the mouths and pens of a world of the most Learned Writers, (...). 5.
that antiquity declares it self for the Roman Church; and for proof of this,
you refer us to the Protestants Apology, the triple cord, with an etc. Page 313.
at the end of it, and then please your self in this extraordinary advantage,
and infer that we are properly condemned by our own consciences. Add to this
Dr. James his confutation of Romish Superstitions by their own testimonies. Dr.
Feilds Appendix, etc. De usu patrum l. 1. c. 4. Excogitato commento persaepe
negamus and comm dum iis sensum affingimus.
Answ. 1. Sure you are not such a stranger in England, as to be ignorant, that
your Catholic Apology has been answered by the Reverend Bishop Morton, in
folio, and the Antiquity of our Religion showed from many thousand Confessions
of the Roman Doctors; and must not you then be (...) by your own argument? nay
let a man consult your Indices expurgatorii, how many thousand sentences of
your own Authors, will he find condemned, and ordered to be expunged, only
because the evidence of truth forces them to speak like Protestants? Yea the
Authors of the Belgian Index stick not to confess (as Mr. Dally has it) That
when we oppose unto them in disputation, the errors (as they are pleased to
call them) of the Ancient Catholics, they do either extenuate, or excuse them,
or very frequently find out some artifice, or invention to deny them, or feign
some sense that they may commodiously put upon them; and therefore they will
afford the like ingenuity to Bertram (albeit it would not much trouble them
were he out of the world) and having expunged some of the most evident places
against them, will let him pass thus gelt (as they have done many other
writings of ancient Catholics) into the world, that so heretics may not
object that they burn and prohibit Antiquity when it makes against them: Yea to
pass over your additions to, detractions from, De usu Patrum l. 1. c. 4. Def.
Ecc. Ang. c. 13. s. 10. Index Belgicus.
yea and prohibitions of the Ancient Fathers, of which tho learned Dally,
Chrakanthorp, and others afford sufficient instances: let us but see a little
how one single Index expurgatorius has dealt with the Indexes of the Fathers
in that very point of Justification, in which you would have us confess
Antiquity to be our adversary: Out of the Index of St. Austin must be expunged
Fides sola justificat; Opera et si non justificent, sunt tamen ad salutem
necessaria: out of the Index of St. Chry. sost. Fide sola hominem justificari;
salutem esse ex sola gratia, non ex eporibus: out of Hilary's, Fides sola
justificat (albeit they be his very words) out of Ambrose, Impius per solam
fidem justificatur apud deum? Abraham non ex operibus legis, sed sola fide
justificatum vident: out of the Index of St. Jerome, Impium per solam fidem
justificat deus; Vt Abrahae, ita omnibus qui ex gentibus credunt, sola fides ad
justitiam reputatur: out of St. Basils, Hae^ est perfecta gloriatio apud deum,
quando non ob justitiam suam quis se jactat, sed novit quidem seipsum verae
justitiae indignum esse, sola autem fide in Christum justificatum; with other
passages of the like import, which evidently speak the mind (if not the words)
of the text it self: what can more clearly evidence that you sufficiently know
Antiquity to be against you, then that you use all means imaginable to conceal
it from us, or make it speak what you know it does not?

In the same Section, Page 19.
have been produced 100 times; whither this be so or no, I am sure the same may
be evidenced of all that you have produced against him.

You go on and say, That he did well to fix a distinct measure of time after
which only whatever doctrines are broached, Page 20.
ought in his opinion to be esteemed Novelties, viz. The time of the Apostles
and so downward till the fourth General Council inclusively.

Ans. This is an evident untruth; but yet it was necessary to be told in the
Proeme, or else every citation of your book would have been impertinent, nor
would you have been able to have found any thing, which could have been
nicknamed an Answer to Dr. Pierce. What other ground Mr. C. had to infinuate
this palpable untruth, is not imaginable; the Doctor upon this account defies
this Antagonist, and rejoices to find that his Sermon cannot be confuted
without the Artifice of more falsehoods than he has pages; but surely the
Doctor must have somewhat whence this saying of Mr. C. takes its rise, it being
not imaginable that even a Papist (though impudent enough to do it) should be
so imprudent as to fasten this upon the Doctor without the least show of
evidence. Ans. Assuredly there is nothing in the Doctors Sermon from whence it
can tolerably be argued. Indeed the Doctor says, They ever complain we have
left their Church, but never show us that Iota, as to which we have left the
Word of God, or the Apostles, or the yet uncorrupted and Primitive Church, or
the four first General Councils; now I hope to say, We have not left the
Doctrine of the four first General Councils or deserted them; is not to say,
That from after the time of their convention, all novelties must be dated; then
could not Socinianisme, Anabaptisme, Presbyterianisme, be esteemed novelties by
the Doctor; for he acknowledges them to have been within the time of these
four Councils; nor was our Author ignorant of this; for speaking of the appeal
of Dr. Hammond to the three first Centuries or the four General Councils, he
thus paraphraseth it: Page 311.
Where by submission to the four first General Councils, he means only to the
bare decisions of these Councils in matters of faith, not obliging himself also
to the authority of those Fathers who flourished in the time of these four
Councils and sat in them.

He goes on and tells us, That the Doctor did this (which he never did) not out
of a voluntary liberality, Ibid.
but because an Act of Parliament obliges him; wherein it is said, that such
persons to whom Queen Elizabeth should give authority to execute any
jurisdiction spiritual, should not judge any matter or cause to be Heresy, but
only such as heretofore has been determined to be Heresy by the Authority of
Canonical Scriptures, or by the first four General Councils; which Argument
runs thus; If no person authorized by Queen Elizabeth to execute any spiritual
jurisdiction, must adjudge any matters to be Heresy, which were not determined
to be so by the first four General Councils, then is Dr. Pierce obliged to fix
the times of the Apostles, and so downward till the fourth General Council
inclusively, as that distinct measure of time, after which Only whatever
Dctrines are broached, ought in his opinion to be esteemed novelties: But;
verum prius; ergo. Truly Sir, you your self when you wrote it, might think the
inference valid, but no man else now can.

He comes next to propound some questions (the shrewdest way of arguing when
dexterously managed) And the first brings the Doctor to this great absurdity,
to acknowledge, Page 21.
with the rest of his fellow-Protestants, that Scripture alone is the rule of
Faith.

The second, to acknowledge what we generally do, that no Authority on earth
obliges to internal assent: shrewd conclusions ushered in with a train of
blunt Dilemmas.

Your third Question shall be considered in Answering the twelfth Section of
your last Chapter.

Fourthly, He asks What answer the Doctor will make to God for abusing
Scripture? Page 25.
Ans. He will plead not guilty.

But how can that be, because the Doctrines imposed upon them are novelties,
and from the beginning it was not so: whereas he should have evinced that it
was contrary, that being the import of our Saviors words? Rep. The Doctor will
have little cause to fear his doom if no better plea can be brought against
him: for (I pray you tell me) does he not either confront the evidence of
Scripture against you (as in the doctrine of the Popes Supremacy, and
Transubstantiation, and Communion in one kind, forbidding Marriage) or the
intent of the Apostles, or rather of God himself (as in the restraint of
Scripture from the Vulgar) or Thirdly, tell you expressly that you oppose the
verdict of Gods Word (as in the matter of Divorces, and Prayers in an unknown
tongue.) Secondly, When you confess that the things defined by your Councils
are only such as were always matters of faith, Page 241.
and conveyed to us by the general practice of the Church, is it not enough to
show our innocence, in not accepting them for such, because ab initio non fuit
sic? especially, when (thirdly) you know we hold, that in all matters of faith,
it is all one with us to be praeter Scripturam, and to be contra; Page 25.
but you ridiculously add, That he should have cited such Scriptures as these,
"S. Peter and his Successors never had, nor ought to have any Supremacy of
jurisdiction, etc. Which here I bind my self to do, when you can make it appear
that the Doctor was obliged to do so, or that the Scripture anywhere says,
That the Trent Councils definitions are to be received as a rule of Faith, The
body of Christ is transubstantiated, It Is unlawful to give the Scriptures to
Laymen to peruse, The English Church is guilty of formal Schism, and such
like stuff which you pretend to deduce from Scripture.

Lastly, You tell us that the Fathers cry out against innovations, Page 27.
and therefore cannot be thought to have introduced any. Answ. Presbyterians
cry out of Innovations by Bishops, the Greek Church and the reformed condemn
the Romanist as an Innovator; the Arrians, the Nicene Fathers; therefore it
cannot reasonably be thought that any of these are Innovators by Mr. C.

CHAP. IV.
Mr. Cs. mistake, Sect. 1. His first Argument from the necessity of an
universal Bishop to hinder Schism considered, Sect. 2. His second Argument from
the Presbyterians, Sect. 3. The Doctors first Argument from Mark. 10.42.
defended Sect. 4. His second from Rev. 21.14. Sect. 5. His third from Gal. 2.
Sect. 6. His Argument from the notion of an Head strengthened, Sect. 7, 8, 9. A
further evidence of the no necessity of such an Head, Sect. 10.

THE first Novelty, Cap. 4. s. 1.
but whereas he would make him moreover to assert, That this Authority was
never acknowledged in the Church till the time of Boniface; And further, that
we have not separated from any Authority, if any were exercised by the former
Popes, during the times of the four first General Councils, he deals
disingenuously with the Doctor, in whom no footsteps of this assertion can be
found, albeit it be a great and evident truth. But whereas he would make him
further to affirm of the whole heap of Roman Novelties, That there was no
mention of them in the time of the four first General Councils, he does more
grossly and palpably abuse him, only that he might make room for those
Citations, which otherwise would have been evidently impertinent, and might
seem to fight against the Doctors Sermon, when he is only beating that man of
clouts, which himself has made. Nay Dr. Pierce evidently acknowledges, that
some of their Heresies may be derived from Origin, Tertullian, etc. So, that
our Author (which is a bad omen) stumbles at the threshold, builds his whole
Fabric on a mistake, and confutes only what himself has fancied, not what the
Doctor has asserted. Well then, that which he has to do, if he would
contradict his assertion, is, to show, not whither the Popes praeceding
challenged a supremacy of jurisdiction, but whither the Roman Bishop was
acknowledged of the Church of God, as an universal head; as one who had
received from the beginning, a power of jurisdiction over the Universal Church.
Now in returning an answer to what is delivered for the proof of this, we shall
consider, first, his reasons; secondly, his testimonies; thirdly, his returns
to what the Dr. brought to confute this Supremacy.

Well then to make it appear reasonable, That since General Councils (the only
absolute supreme Authority Ecclesiastical) either for want of agreement among
Princes, Page 45.
or by the inconvenience of the long absence of Prelates, or their great
expenses, etc. can very seldom be summond, it would be impossible without an
ordinary constant standing supreme Authority to prevent Schism, that is, it is
impossible the Church should subsist. This Argument reduced into Syllogismes
sounds thus: That without which the Church cannot subsist, ought in all reason
to be granted; But, Without the supreme jurisdiction of the Pope, the Church
cannot subsist. Ergo. The major we pass as evident by its own light; The minor
is thus proved; That without which it is impossible to prevent Schisms, is that
without which it is impossible the Church should subsist; but this supreme
jurisdiction of the Pope, is that without which it is impossible to prevent
Schisms. To give a satisfactory Answer to this, it will be necessary to
premise, that Schism is a rupture of one part from another, and that of the
visible Church, as appears, because it is a crime punishable by the
Ecclesiastical Magistrate, which it could not be, if it were a secession from
the invisible Church only, 2. This Schism may be either of one particular
Church from another, or of one member of that particular Church from the same
Church; and I hope our Author will not say that to the redressing of this
Schism, The Supreme Authority of the Pope is necessary, seeing he must
necessarily permit this to these Rulers, which he imagins inferior to him, and
therefore must acknowledge them sufficient to redress the said miscarriages. 3.
The Schism of one particular Church from another, may be either in things
necessary to salvation, or in things not necessary, but of lighter moment. Now
then to answer to his Major, if he intended it of Schisms of the former nature,
it is true; for errors in things necessary to salvation destroy the very being of
a Church: In this sense therefore we grant the Major, but deny the Minor; If he
understand it in the latter sense, we deny the Major, as holding that not every
breach upon such slight accounts, or circumstantial businesses, does dissolve
the visible Church, but it may subsist with such a breach, if so be the
essentials and vitals of Religion be still preserved, and the Sacraments truly
administered; For if the Church of God remained at Corinth, when there were
divisions, Sects, emulations, contentions, quarrels, and the practice of such
things which were execrable to the very Heathens, and of such whereof the
Apostle expressly says, We have no such custom, who dares deny them to be the
Churches of God, who differ from others only in circumstantials? What would
such men have said to the Galatians, who so far adulterated the Gospel of
Christ (purely kept and preserved in other Churches) that the Apostle
pronounces concerning them, that they were bewitched; and if they still
persisted to join Circumcision and the Law together with Christ, they were fallen
from Grace, Christ would profit them nothing, whom yet the Apostle
acknowledges to be the Church of God, writing to the Church which is in
Galatia. Secondly, Suppose a Supreme jurisdiction were necessary to the
preventing Schisms, must it needs be the Supremacy of the Pope? why may it not
as well be the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Patriarch of Constantinople, or
one elected by the suffrages of particular Churches? 3. We deny, that the
Authority of the Pope is necessary to this end, even to the suppression of
lesser Schisms, yea or expedient; for were it so, then either of Schisms
arising from breach of charity, or difference of judgment; Not the first; for
it is not possible for the Pope, to insuse charity into any party, or to use
other means to effect it then rational motives from Scripture, which any other
man may do: If it be expedient for difference of judgment, seeing the Schisms
that arise from that difference concern himself, it would then, 1. Be
expedient, that he should be judge in his own cause; as for instance, It Is
doubted whither the Pope of Rome has any Authority delegated to him from
Christ over the Universal Church; whither it is expedient, such an Authority
should be admitted; whither the Authority of a Pope should transcend that of a
General Council; whither the Religion the present Pope subscribes to, and
publicly maintains, be true; whither the contrary which he persecutes, be
false; whither he be infallible, in his sentence and Cathedra; and whither the
interpretation of Tues Petrus, and Pasce Oves, be to be sought from his mouth
or no. Is it expedient, will the Church of France say, that he should judge in
all these Causes? the Church of England, that in any? and does not reason say
so to? and what madness were it for each to hold so stiffly the contrary, if we
could persuade our selves, that it were thus? or if this were so necessary,
that without the acknowledgement of such a power and submission to it, it were
impossible to prevent Schisms, and the destruction of the Church thereby; is it
not wonderful, that in the whole Scripture there should not be any thing
directing us to go to the Church of Rome to have these Schisms, which are so
destructive to the Church, prevented? That the Apostle among all his charges to
the Church of Corinth, to break off their Schisms, all the means to prevent it,
should neglect that without which it was not feasible? that speaking of the
damnable Doctrines that should spring up in the latter time, we should have no
Items where the truth was to be kept inviolable, and whither to have recourse
to avoid them? If a Jesuit had been at St. Paul's elbow, when after the
rehearsal of those Doctrines he says to Timothy, If thou put the Brethren in
mind of these things, etc. he would have added [and sendest them to the Pope
for Preservatives against them] thou shall then be a good Minister of Jesus
Christ; otherwise no Minister at all, but an Heretic. And when he tells them,
that perverse Teachers should arise, and commends them thereupon to the Word of
God, a Jesuit would have told him that this was the way to make them Heretics,
nothing more pernicious, and that he should commend them to the Pope. Yea (3.)
That the Scripture should exhort us on the contrary to run to the Law and to
the Testimonies, and tell us that if they speak not agreeable thereto, there is
no truth in them, when we ought not to meddle with them, especially so, as to
judge with the judgment of discretion, what is Truth and Error, that the
Apostle should bid us try the spirits, Yea try all things, and hold fast the
Truth, and that directing us to no other touchstone then Scripture, and reason;
that sure word by which we are to take heed, is not agreeable to these
pretentions; for should it be that we may try no other truth, yet assuredly we
must try whether the Pope has the supreme authority or no, and so be Judges of
our Judge, which sure is dangerous. Yea (4) Is it not wonderful, that St. Paul
amidst all the bands of Unity so carefully reckoned up, Ephesians. 4.4. One Body, one
Spirit, one Hope, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God, should forget, one
Bishop of Rome, or spiritual Monarch, without whose Soverain power, if our
Author may be believed, the Church of God cannot subsist? Sure if there had
been any such thing, this had been a proper place, wherein to mention it. No,
had the Apostle thought of the delegacy to St. Peter and his Successors, it
would not have been to the Law, and to the Testimonies; but to the Popes,
Council and his Cardinals? (4.) To multiply no more, the prevention of Schisms
of the latter sort is not necessary to the subsistence of the Church
simpliciter, but to its subsistence in statu meliori. Now thence to infer, that
God has provided an Head to govern the Universal Church, is as Illogical, as
if because the Church Militant would be in a better Condition, were its members
impeccable, to infer that God has provided some external means to effect it:
Or because the making them all of one mind, or enlightening them with the truth,
would prevent Schism and Heresy, therefore God should do so, or provide other
means beside his word to bring it to pass; To infer, that thence the members of
the Church should spontaneously submit to one such single persons judgment, so
as to have their Conscience guided by his Verdict, is to submit religion to the
mercy of a man as fallible as themselves; to slight the judgments of many
thousands, that we may rest in One as weak as any of these we neglect, is to
endanger even the being of Religion, that we may the better secure its
Circumstantials. Undeniable is that of Mr. Chillingworth, He that affirms the
Popes infallability, puts himself into his hands to be led by him at his
pleasure into all Heresy (especially seeing it is notoriously evident that
many of them have been Heretics, and it is Granted they may be so) and even to
hell it self, and cannot with reason say (so long as he is constant to his
Grounds) cur ita facis, but must believe white to be black and black to be
white; virtue to be vice, nay (which is most Horrible, yet a certain truth)
Christ to be Antichrist, and Antichrist to be Christ, if it be possible for the
Pope (who has been known to esteem the Gospel a very fable) so to say. Which I
say and maintain, however you daub and disguise it, is indeed to make men
Apostate from Christ, to his pretended Vicar but real enemy. Lastly, to submit
to him so, as not to bind our Consciences to consent, but our selves not to
practice or declare contrary to his determinations, is (1) That which our
Author and his party explode as ridiculous; (2) It Is very Dangerous, seeing by
these means the practice of Religion, the worship of Jesus may be exploded in
most Churches in Christendom, the witnesses of the truth silenced, and men be
hindered from confessing with their mouths the Lord Jesus, which yet is
necessary to salvation. Yea (3) Is it not more safe to submit to any particular
provincial Council in this matter then to one man, and to a General one (when
it may be had) then to that?

Well, Page 45.
But our Author will borrow an argument from the Presbyterians, and it is this,
If there be a necessity of setting up one Bishop over many Presbyters for the
prevention of schism, there is (say they) as great a necessity of setting up
one Archbishop over many Bishops, and one Patriarch over many Archbishops,
and one Pope over all, unless we will imagine that there is danger of Schism
among Presbyters only, and not among Bishops, Archbishops, etc. which is
contrary to reason, truth, history and experience.

Answ. I cannot tell what you would imagine in answer to this stale argument,
but I can tell what returns have been made to it, before ere it was managed by
the Presbyter. And had they not been like you, at least some of them, in
overlooking Answers given to their Arguments, they might have spared all their
pains in this particular. (1.) Then, let Ocham tell us, the same form of
Government is not always most expedient for the whole and for each part,
seeing one may sustain the Hearing, Dispatching and Determining the greater
causes and more important matters in one Kingdom, or Country; but no one can so
manage the weightiest business of the whole world; In like sort, though it be
expedient ( sc. for the preventing of Schism) that there should be one Bishop
over some part of the Church, yet there is not the same reason, that there
should be one over the whole; Pontificis unius arbitrio subjicere sidem totius
Ecclesiae expedita via est ad unitatem, add tamem proclivis ad errorem; nam
talem unitatem Turcae, talem Haeretici talem ipsi, Philesophi habere possunt,
si ex caetu suo unum aliquem eligant cui caeteri omnes teneantur fidem
adhibere; sed sapienter de hac re scripsit Archidiac. Bonon. Periculosum esset
fidem nostram unius hominis arbitrio committere; quis enim ausit praestare hunc
hominem nunquam erraturum? Davenant, de sup. Judice controversiarum.
seeing no one can dispatch the greater businesses, and manage the weightier
matters of the whole Christian world. Besides says he, it would be most
dangerous, to assign any particular person as the supreme ruler of the whole
Church; for if he should fall into Error or Heresy, all the whole would be in
great danger of seduction by him; the members for the most part conforming
themselves to the head (especially when they are taught, that he is
Infallible.) Out of all that has been said, we have three Answers. (1.) That
the Argument is not good from a Bishop to a Pope; because the one is able to
hear and dispatch Causes so as to prevent Schism, which the other is not. (2.)
That this Argument will as well prove an Universal Monarch, it being once
granted that Monarchy in a particular Province is the best Government for the
preventing of Political Schism. (3.) If it were expedient to prevent Schism,
yet the danger and mischief of it would be worse then the disease, whereas no
such thing can be asserted of a regular Episcopacy. But (2) I answer that in
respect of a Diocese, or Parish, there is a particular Authority resting in
one, and therefore if this one Minister of a Parish should have Authoritatem
(...), all might be filled with Schisms; so also Bishops may abuse their peculiar
Authority, and therefore to the prevention of Schism, it is meet they should have
an Authority to bound them; But now for a Metropolitan, he has no jurisdiction
over Bishops he can do nothing (out of his own Diocese, in which he is a
Bishop) without the concurrence of the Major part of the Bishops of the
province, though he be in order and honor the first; so in like sort, the
Patriarch may do nothing without the advice and consent of the Metropolitans
and Bishops subject to him; seeing therefore these have no power of
Jurisdiction, but only a Primacy of Order and Honor, there needs none over
them, especially with a power of Jurisdiction, to prevent their Schisms; so
then (says Cham. De Oecum. Pontis. l 9. c. 14. s. 12.
) here is a ridiculous comparison of things dislike, as if one should say, It Is
convenient, that there should be one Primate over Bishops, but so as to be able
to do nothing without their sentence; therefore there ought to to be one over
these Primates, endued with full power of jurisdiction. (3.) The Fathers, which
are for one Bishop over Presbyters, upon the account that Schism might be
prevented, yet never resorted to this one Universal Bishop for the same end;
but redressed all Schism by calling Synods; neither is there any Unity employed
in the whole Church, or Churches of diverse Provinces, which may not be
preserved by the multitude of diverse Pastors, conspiring and consenting
together, as well as by the Unity of one chief Pastor. And in this sort we
shall find the Church of God to have stood in perfect Unity in the first and
best ages thereof, without finding any want of the help of one chief Pastor.
Oh but Ecumenical Synods cannot be had always. Answ. Nor is it needful: for
the most part Provincal ones will serve the turn; But if the Schism be very
dangerous, and betwixt Province and Province, Apud Cham. ibid. c. 13. s. 10.
then will Pope Innocent tell us (not that we must run to him, but) that we
wust necessarily have recourse to a Synod, quam quidem donec consequamur,
expedit medelam Calamitatis hujus committere voluntati Magni Dei, ac Christi
ejus, Domini nostri, who will be sure to provide sufficiently for his Church.
And indeed to what purpose should they go to one man, till it can be proved,
and not Begged, that God has set him over the persons that are to be
reconciled? will his Verdict put an end to their Schism, that think him as
fallible as themselves? And can we think that God appointed such a Mediator.
whom all the world in case of Trial would undoubtedly refuse, till they had
evidence of his infallibility, or the Delegacy of his power from Christ, and
yet not give us one Iota to persuade us of his will in this matter? What he
has in the third section of the sixth Chapter, are but the presumptuous
Dictates of a bold Romanist in despite of truth, as our Answers to the Fathers
alleged by him will evidence. Thus having answered his reasons for the supreme
jurisdiction of the Pope, we come now to consider, what he has to return upon
the Doctor.

And first, Mark. 10.42, 43, 44. S. 5. p. 33.
They that rule over the Gentiles, exercise Lordship over them: but so shall it
not be among you. Now (1.) he will tell us, Page 34.
that not the affecting, but lawful exercising of supremacy of power and
jurisdiction is so far from being an impudent opposition to the precept, that
it is established by the Text, for as much as it makes mention of some that are
Chief. To this stale argument, it has been Answered, that to argue from this,
Mark 10.44. Whosoever will be chief, that there was one appointed to be chief
among the Apostles, is as ridiculous, as from Luke 9.48. He that is least among
you, the same shall be greatest, to argue, that there was some one Apostle of
less power and dignity then any of the rest; or from Luke 22.26. He that is
Chief, as he that does serve, that some of the Apostles waited upon the rest.

2. He tells us, that this is so evident, in the next verse, Ibid.
that had the Doctor but rehearsed it, he would have published to his meanest
reader his abuse of Scripture. It seems the Doctor is very much to blame: but
let us hear the Objection, which Bellarmine will lend him, which is this, that
our Savior gives them his example to confirm his Exhortation, who surely had
Authority, yea Supremacy of Jurisdiction over the Church; How then are they to
imitate Christ? in renouncing their Superiority? did he himself do so? No. Well
then, they are to do it in keeping their humility with that supremacy of
Jurisdiction. Answ. This Argument has been answered several times, by telling
Bellarmine, that it is true, in Christ there was supreme Authority, as well as
humility, but the latter only was the thing propounded to their imitation;
thence therefore to infer, that this supremacy of power is not inconsistent
with that Command of his, is as vain a Fancy, as because he that Commanded them
his humility, thought it no roberry to be equal with God; thence to infer, that
therefore this humility was not inconsistent with the pride of Lucifer. (2)
Christ though he had this power, yet never exercised it upon Earth, but was in
the form of a servant, and this he propounds to their imitation.

3. Ibid.
Whereas he tells us, The Apostles were Church rulers, what inference can he
make? For can he think that the Doctor esteemed himself and all our Hierarchy
impudent opposers of the letter and sense of this precept? If so, he is more
impudent then this opposition; if not, then is that spoken besides the purpose,
and without any Contradiction to the Doctor: Well then, What is it, that is
forbidden? viz. Page 35.
(quoth he) The exercising it with such an arrogant pride, as Heathen Princes
usually do, Ambitious seeking of Authority, and after a secular manner Lording
it over Gods Heritage; Now here he jumps with the Doctor, whose words are: For
any Bishop to affect over his Brethren a supremacy of Power, is a most impudent
opposition both to the sense and letter of our Saviors precepts; Now that the
Pope affects this, may be a^gued in that without any tolerable pretense from
Scripture, with manifest opposition to the primitive Fathers, and invading the
rights of others, he bandies for it, and albeit he knows it is one great occasion
of Schism, and of the breach of the Churches peace, yet would he force all upon
pain of Damnation to acknowledge it, and excommunicates all, who do not; then
which, greater Tyranny and Ambition cannot well be found. But yet there may be
an Argument framed out of the text from this, Abalens. in Math. quaest. 83.
that the Apostles even to the last contended who should be greatest, which
sure they would not have done, if they had thought that Peter by the giving of
the Keys or any other act of Christ was preferred before them. Yea it is
wonderful, that when (as our Adversaries say) this contention came before
Christ, four several times, he would never intimate to them, that which was so
necessary to prevent Schism, that he intended St. Peter for the chief: when
those that contended for it so strongly, and especially their Followers, were
not likely to afford it him, without some express from Christ.

In answer to the Doctors second Argument from Rev. P. 71. s. 6.
That he will acknowledge all the twelve Apostles to be equally foundations of
the Churches building, and that the same Authority that was first given to St.
Peter, was afterward given to the rest of the Apostles, that ( as St. Cyprian
says) the same that Peter was, the rest of the Apostles likewise were, endowed
with an equal participation of Honor and Power. Thus he; but I doubt he will
hereafter be more cautious of such liberal concessions; for out of these I
argue ad hominem (1.) The same that St. Peter was, the rest of the Apostles
likewise were; But St. Peter by the verdict of the Council of Florence was
Prince of the Apostles: ergo, The rest of the Apostles were Princes over St.
Peter. (2.) St. Peter had a supremacy of power over the whole Church; but the
rest of the Apostles had equal power with him, ergo, The rest of the Apostles
had a supremacy over the whole Church, and consequently every member beside
themselves. Now then, either Christ, who gave them this power, gave them a
liberty to exercise it, or forbad them the external administration of it. If
the first, then was there no subordination in the exercise of this power, to
Peter, unless the same person can be sub and equal too; If the second, then did
he give them it perfectly in vain; for Authority can be to no end, but to
exercise it on those, over whom it is given; Nay it is a contradiction to say a man
has power over another, when he cannot exercise it de jure, when as power over
him supposes a right to exercise Authority: and when will they be able to
evince such a prohibition? Yea (3) how have they equal power (not to speak of
honor) whereof one may exercise authority over the world, the other may not?
by the same reason it may be said that a Presbyter has equal power with a
Bishop. Well, but says our Author, we must give leave to Scripture and Fathers
to interpret themselves; then it follows, Ibid.
We grant therefore (as if we Benedictines were Scripture and Fathers) that all
the Apostles, and all Bishops their successors, enjoy the whole latitude of
Episcopal jurisdiction, for as much as concerns the internal essential
qualifications of either; but for the external administration, there may be,
and always was acknowledged a subordination, and different latitude in the
exercise of the same Authority both among Apostles, Ibid.
and Bishops. Answ. He did wisely to add, let him not find fault with this
distinction, for it is as liable to exception, as any can be. For (1.) What is it
that qualifies Peter for the external administration over the rest of the
Apostles? See Mr C. Page 73. Page 71.
Is it, that Christ gave him the name of a Rock? surely no; seeing we have it
acknowledged, that all the rest of the Apostles were equally foundations of the
Church, and consequently equally Rocks; for Peter is therefore so, because our
Savior tells him he would build his Church upon him, or because he was one,
upon which the Church was to be founded. Yea further, among foundation stones
there is but one that has any eminence above other, and that is Christ, the
(...), as it is appropriated to him, Ephesians. 2.20. And so still nothing pertains
to St. Peter in the matter of being a Stone, or foundation, which does not
appear equally to belong to the others also. Yea lastly, Peter is not called a
Rock, as the Romanists would have him; for seeing upon this Rock the Church was
built, and Peter was a member of that Church, it would follow hence, that Peter
and all the Popes his Successors must be built upon themselves; Evident is
that of St. Sermon. 13. de verbis Domini.
Austin, Upon that Rock which thou confessedst will I build my Church, that is,
upon my self, upon me will I build thee, not me upon thee. And again, in his
Retractations, L. 1. C. 21.
it is not said, Thou art Petra, but thou art Petrus: Petra autem erat Christus,
Mr C. p. 73. And what if in the Syriack there be no such difference, seeing in
the Greek which is Authentic it is observed.
quem confessus est Simon. 2. Is it because he is always in the Gospel placed
first, and called (...) the first? Alas, it is otherwise; for we find Joh. 1.44.
The City of Andrew and Peter. Mark 16.7. The Disciples and Peter: and what is
it to the purpose, that he is reckoned first in the Evangelists, when almost
always he is put last in the Epistles? 1 Cor. 3.22. Chap. 9.5. Or in the
midst, as Gal. 2.9. 2. That this ordering of the names of the Apostles, is no
argument of their different Authority, is evident from this, that albeit there
were some (...), yet are they not placed next to Peter. And then for the (...),
it cannot give him this supremacy; for it is afterward promised to him, you
say, Matthew. 16. I will give thee the Keys, etc. It being then afterward
promised, cannot be supposed to be already possessed by him, when it is said,
(...). 2. We know that all the time of Christ's life, John had the dignity of
place next Christ; (for he was the Disciple whom he loved, and who lay in his
bosom) and therefore Peter had not the superiority. For though the dignity of
the place may be without superiority; yet superiority of Jurisdiction is never
to be found in any without the (...), or priority of place; yea, it is
sufficiently evident, that the Church of God thought as highly of St. John, as
of St. Peter, in that they stood upon his example for the celebration of
Easter, against Peter's. 3. We say, that, notwithstanding his contradiction,
Peter is called first, Page 73.
either because of his zeal and (...) in confessing Christ, or because he was
the Apostle first called, or else only as (...) is a numeral; Or if it intimate
any priority, it is of order, not of superiority; as we have proved.

Nor, 3 Was this power of Administration given him, See Mr. C. page 73.
because Christ bids him feed his Sheep indefinitely; For sure the other
Apostles were commissionated to feed them too; and that they were to do it
indefinitely, appears, because they are sent by him to all Nations, not fixed to
any part of his flock. Yea I demand, whether, when St. Paul Act. 20. gave
commandment to the Bishops of Ephesus, to feed the flock, over which Christ had
made them overseers, (...), he might not have charged them in these words, feed
the sheep of Christ. Whether, seeing he had a Commission to go teach all
Nations, common to him with the rest, he might not indefinitely have
constituted Bishops, and given them this charge; or whether he that had this
indefinite power of commanding others, were not an indefinite Pastor, and had
not a commission of feeding Christ's Sheep or Lambs, which is all that is
affirmed of St. Peter? If therefore, what was given to St. Peter, was likewise
conferred upon all the rest, how can it be, that hence a supremacy of St. Peter
above the rest of the Apostles should be concluded? And, whereas it is argued,
that St. Peter is constituted Pastor of Christ's flock indefinitely, and
therefore of the Apostles, seeing they are Christ's Sheep, may it not with equal
reason be concluded, that seeing the Apostles had commission given to teach all
Nations, and every creature, they were commissionated teachers of St. Peter,
and he ought to be subject to them, as a Disciple to his Teacher? Yea the
argument is more forcible, seeing here we have mention made of every creature,
whereas St. Peter is not bid to feed all Christ's Sheep. De Agon. Christi. c. 30.
Add to this the suffrage of St. Austin, Cum dicitur Petro, ad omnes dicitur,
Pasce oves meas.

Nor, Mr. C. p. 73.
4. In that he had the power of the Keys assigned to him, it being manifest
that the same power was given to the rest of the Apostles, Matthew. 18.18. Thus
Origin in Matthew. Hom. 1. Were the Keys given by Christ to Peter only? no; this
is common to them all; for when in the Gospel of St. John, Jesus said to his
Disciples, Receive the Holy Ghost, he constituted them all such as was Peter:
to which Testimony may be added Hieron. Ambrose, Cyprian, Hilary, Austin,
Theophylact, Leo, Euthym. Bed. Anselm, Hugo, Lyran, and the Council of Colen.
All which you may see in the Learned Crackenthorp, de Eccl. Angl. c. 22. s. 6.

Nor, Mr. C. ib.
5. From this, that St. Peter was made the Minister of Circumcision; for so was
St. Paul of the Uncircumcision, or the Gentiles, who yet will not be allowed to
have this external administration. Ibid.
And to talk of a dedication of St. Paul's office by St. Peter's going to
Cornelius a Proselyte, when St. Paul was at Tarsus, is so weak a proof of his
supremacy over him, that I will not disparage any Reader so much as to think it
needs a confutation: Especially if it be considered, that notwithstanding this
St. Lib. 1. de prove. Dei. Hom. 8. de laud. Pauli. Hom. 2. ad Romans Hem. 18. ad
Romans Hom. 25. in 2. ad Corin. V. de Crak. ubi supra.
Chrysostom will tell us, That there was none greater than blessed St. Paul,
nay nor equal to him: That he, as another Aaron, was anointed Priest over the
whole world: That he was a Pillar of the Church, more firm (not only than
Peter, but) than any stone, rock, or iron: To whom the universal dispensation
through the whole world was committed. And (which is most observable) that he
governed the whole world as one house, or one ship: In which ship (as St.
Ambrose tells us) Christ is the foundation, the Father is the Pilot, the Holy
Spirit Proram servat, and which the twelve Apostles, as her bank of Oars bring
into the Haven. So that here is no peculiar place assigned to St. Peter. Now
then these things being so, I argue thus; Either in these places, our Savior
did give St. Peter this external administration, or he did not; if he did, then
it follows evidently, that he gave the same power to the Apostles also, seeing
what he gave to St. Peter, we have proved he gave to them; if not, then let
them tell us, where Christ gave this power to St. Peter, and what more likely
arguments can be produced to conclude it. 2. It is manifest, 1. That Christ
immediately constituted Apostles, and that they received not their Apostleship
from St. Peter; for he says, have not I chosen you twelve? Joh. 6.70. Joh.
20.21. as my Father sent me, so send I you. 2. It is manifest that Christ gave
supreme jurisdiction to the whole company of Apostles; and this your Bellarmine
confesses, De Pontis. l. 4. c. 23.
yea that he gave them all power, whether external or internal; yea he proves
it too; 1. Because he says, as my Father sent me, so send I you, whosesoever
sins ye remit, etc. But now (says he) Christ without all controversy was sent
with full and absolute power, and therefore his Apostles must be so; and this
Exposition or Argument from the place, he backs with the Fathers; and Maldonate
with Jansenius say the like. 2. In locum.
He proves it hence, that the Apostle St. Paul making mention of the distinct
orders of officers in the Church, does it thus; first Apostles, secondarily
Teachers, thirdly Prophets, etc. And this he does, when his design is to show
that some part of the Church has more abundant honor than the rest; and
having done so, puts the question, Are all Apostles? can they all plead to
equal power with them? Now had there been one supreme over the Apostles, why
does he say in general, first Apostles? when it is his design to speak of the
degrees which God had placed in the Church: why does he leave out the chief?
Certainly if the Apostles were all first, Chilling.
to me it is very probable, that no one was before the other; for by first all
men understand, either that which is before all, or that before which is
nothing; Now in the former sense, the Apostles could not be all first; for then
every one of them must be before every one of the rest; (or if you say, that
all the Apostles were before all other Pastors, but St. Peter first of all,
then why does not the Apostle say first St. Peter, then the rest of the
Apostles?) and therefore they must be first in the other sense, and therefore
no man, and therefore not St. Peter must be before them. Bellarmine elsewhere
says, that St. Paul speaks not of the Hierarchy of the Church, but of those
that were endowed with extraordinary gifts, and that therefore he leaves out
St. Peter. But, 1. What does he think of Teachers, were they extraordinary
persons? 2. If this be the reason, why have we no mention of him Ephesians. 4.11.
where we have Pastors, Evangelists, Prophets, Apostles, (without any
distinction) set over us, till we all come in the unity of faith unto perfect
men? 3. He proves it, because they had commission from Christ to go teach all
Nations, and out of those whom they taught, to ordain some Pastors wherever
they came; which shows they had an universal jurisdiction from Christ, and a
power to exercise it: and so much for the second proposition.

3. Hence it follows, that they could not be limited in this power by St.
Peter; for Par in parem non habet potestatem. Now to restrain another power as
to its exercise, is evidently to exercise power over him; And hence it follows,
that they had equal power of Administration with St. Peter. And indeed, that
St. Peter should have authority over all the Apostles, and yet not exercise one
act of it upon them, and that they should show to him no sign of subjection,
methinks is as strange, as that a King of England for 24 years should exercise
no act of regality, nor receive any one acknowledgement of it; as strange
methinks it is, that you so many ages after should know this so certainly, as
you pretend to, and yet the Apostles (after these words were spoken in their
hearing, by virtue whereof St. Peter is pretended to have been made their head)
should still be so ignorant of it, as to question which of them should be the
greatest; yet more strange, that our Savior should not bring them out of their
error by telling them St. Peter was the man; No less a wonder was it, that St.
Paul so far should forget St. Peter and himself, as that 1. Mentioning him
often, he should do it without any title of honor, yea further, that speaking
of himself in particular, and perhaps comparing himself with St. Peter rather
than any other, he should say in plain terms, I am in nothing behind the very
chiefest of the Apostles. How is it, that the other Apostles fall foul upon St.
Peter for going in unto the Gentiles, Act. 11.23. so that he is compelld to
defend himself by that special revelation made unto him? How is it that he
passed not the Decretorial sentence in the Synod? Acts 15. did he transfer his
power to St. James?

4. See Mr. C. p. 71.
The distinction of Archbishop Whitgift serves him not at all; for he says
only this, that Quoad ministerium, viz. as to Preaching, Administering the
Sacraments, Absolving and Remitting, and such things, which are done by
Pastors, (and carrying not Jurisdiction in them, but Ministry or Service) they
are equal, but Quoad Politiam, as to Government, they are unequal; and what is
this to the purpose? Mr. C. p. 72.
Nor does his example of my Lord of Canterbury help out the matter; For, 1. His
grace has no power of Jurisdiction over a Bishop, as Dr. Field, and Dr.
Hammond will tell him. 2. If he be said to have it, 'twere ridiculous to say
that the Bishops of single Diocesses are of equal Authority, Jurisdiction, or
Power with him, seeing he has Power over them, which Par in parem non habet.

To the two Testimonies of St. Cyprian and St. Jerome, we have no other Answer
then what in general is given to these Scriptures: Whereas, 1. The words of St.
Cyprian afford not the least ground of this evasion; nay the words seem
unconsistent with it; for having told us that Christ had given the Keys to St.
Peter, bid him seed his sheep, told him that what he bound, should be so, and
that upon him he would build his Church, he presently adds, That he did this,
Pari consertio praediti houoris and potestatis, sed exordium ab uaitate
proficiscitur.
albeit he had given to the rest of the Apostles parem potestatem, and so
intended not any superiority in him above the rest, but only to show the
necessity of unity. And then for St. Jerome, he does not only say, that the
Bishop at Rome and Eugubium are of the same merit, but infers it hence that all
are Successors of the Apostles; and that one City, though Rome it self, is not
be objected against the custom of other parts of the world; but for the defense
of this citation I refer you to the Learned Dr. Field. p. 548.

In the second Chapter of St. Paul's Epistle to the Galathians, we have many
things which are inconsistent with the Supremacy of St. Peter contended for.
And, 1. Whereas he mentions James, Cephas, and John, and calls them (...); may
it not plausibly be argued from the order of the names that St. Paul esteemed
not St. Peter Superior to the rest, because he mentions him in the middle? for
if this be a sufficient evidence of his Supremacy, that the Evangelists put him
in the front of the Apostles, why should it not be as good a plea against it,
that the Apostle St. Paul, when speaking of the chiefest Apostles, should not
do so? 2. Why does he mention them all as (...) and put no difference betwixt
them, if indeed St. Peter were Superior to them? especially if it be
considered that he elsewhere calls them (if we may believe St. Chrysostom,
Theophylact, Oecum. Aquinas, Hugo, Salmero, Justinian, Cornelius a Lapide, and
others) (...), putting no difference at all betwixt them. And that, 3. This
being evidently his scope to show that there was no reason to reject his
doctrine touching the no necessity of circumcision, because these (...) were
pl^ased to admit of it, (and indeed that he was not inferior to these Apostles,
whose Authority they urged against him) had St. Peter been constituted in such
a degree of Supremacy over the Apostles, how had it concerned his design to
have told us (not thus in general these (...), but in particular) that even St.
Peter the chief of the Apostles had given him the right hand of fellowship? and
therefore his neglecting of this is a shrewd argument against this Supremacy;
and persuades me to believe with the Doctor, that St. James and St. John were
St. Peter's Peers. Again, ver. 7. the Apostle tells us, that even these Pillars
saw it evident, that the Gospel of the uncircumcision was committed to him, as
the Gospel of the circumcision was to St. Peter, and that hereupon it was
agreed, that St. Paul with his companions should go unto the Gentiles, and they
unto the Jews, or circumcision. Now, 1. By whom was the Gospel of
uncircumcision committed to St. Paul? was it not by Christ? by him that wrought
effectually in them both, ver. 8. Now then, if Christ committed to St. Paul the
uncircumcision, to St. Peter the circumcision, is it not evident that he
esteemed not St. Paul inferior to him? did ever any body hear that his Majesty
divided the Government equally betwixt his Viceroy in Ireland or Scotland, and
the inferior Governors under him? yea committed the greater part of the
Government to the inferior; especially if it be considered that St. Paul tells
us, 2. The uncircumcision was committed to him, sicut Petro circumcisio, In
locum. Ibid.
whence the Fathers usually infer his equality with St. Peter: St. Ambrose
says he had primacy over the Gentiles parimodo, (...). id. in chapter 1. ad. Gal.
in like manner as St. Peter over the Jews: St. Chrysostom. That he showed
himself (...) of equal honor with the best and chiefest of the Apostles, and
that he was equal to St. Peter; and Oecumenius cries out, See how he makes
himself equal to St. Peter: to whom you may add St. Austin in c. 1. ep. ad Gal.
3. Was it ever heard, that a Prince should consent to the division of his
Province betwixt himself and his inferior? yea afford him the largest portion
in this division, as here St. Peter does; yea, why was no special power
exercised in this case by the Prince of the Apostles, if he were such, but the
matter indifferently determined by all three?

3. It Is further argued, that if St. Peter had been Prince of the Apostles, St.
Paul would not have had the confidence to resist him to the very face:
Bellarmine will tell us, that an inferior may rebuke a superior.

Answ. But let it be considered that this rebuke was public, and a resistance
of him, ((...)) that he charges him of not walking uprightly, not agreeably to
the truth of the Gospel, but doing things for which he deserved to be rebuked
by him, and all this without the least show of reverence, and submission,
without any artificial preface, begging the pardon, or deprecating the anger
and displeasure of his Superior, which seems sufficiently to argue that he did
not thus esteem him. When St. Paul had rounded the High Priest, and told him
that God would smite him for judging and condemning him to be smitten contrary
to the Law, how presently does he correct himself upon information given that
he spoke to the High Priest? and when he takes up St. Peter in this manner,
might he not as truly have said, I wist not that he was the High Priest, the
Prince of the Apostles? Mr C. p. 75. l. 2. de Bapt. cont. Donatum.
Now all the answer which is returned to this objection, is, that St. Austin
says, The Superior was reproved of the Inferior: Now here let it be
considered, 1. That this will do him little service, unless he will be pleased
to grant that the inter pretation of one single Father, or two at the most, is
a sufficient evidence and ground of receiving such a sense of any Paragraph of
the Word of God; which I am confident he dares not assert. 2. I Answer, that
what he renders Inferiors, is in St. Austin posteriores, such as were made
Apostles after him; now the same Austin informs us that ejus honorem implet
clarificatio Domini, Vbi supra c. 1. cp. ad Gal.
si quid habebat ordo temporis minus; and as for his first citation, That St.
Peter being reprehended did not answer that the Supremacy belonged to him, and
therefore he would not be reprehended by a novice, and one that was posterior:
I answer, That he has gelded the place and made it look otherwise then indeed
it does; Ib. l. 2. de Bapt.
for the words of St. Austin are Nec Petrus sevindicavit, aut arroganter
aliquid aut insolenter assumpsit ut diceret se primatum tenere, Peter did not
arrogantly and insolently take upon himself to say that the Primacy belonged to
him; which shows that to have challenged such a Primacy would have been
insolence and arrogance in St. Peter, according to the judgment of St. Austin.

The Doctor goes on to argue thus, If the Pope be head of the Catholic Church,
Mr C. p. 78. s. 15.
then when there is no Pope at all (which is very often) the Catholic Church
must have no head. Now here having told us that never did old Heretics make
use of such an argument to invalidate the Popes authority, which is very true,
because they were elder brothers to it: He further answers, That for all this
Papacy is immortal, and in some sense it may be said, Mr C. p. 78.
that Popes dye not, because their Jurisdiction remains in the body of
Electors: And secondly, When an Ecclesiastical Superior dies, there remains by
Christ's ordination a vis generativa in the Church to constitute another in his
place. I answer, There may be a vacancy not only by death, but Heresy,
Paganism, things incident to Popes, as may be seen in Mr. Page 22, 23, 24.
Baxters Key for Catholics, and yet the power does not devolve it self upon
the Electors; and if it does, what if they also prove Heretics? as it is sure
they may, and ten to one but they did in the time of Liberius, when none were
suffered to be in public places but such as were Arrians; then sure he must
grant a vacarcy: Again, when anciently the people were Electors, did the power
devolve it self upon them? in a word, either the Pope is an essential head, or
an accidental; if the last, then may the Church subsist without him, and the
being of a Pope is not necessary to the being of a Church, seeing accidents
potest abesse sine subjecti interitu, the contrary to which you above assert,
and thence conclude the necessity of a Pope; If the first, then 1. May the
Church be unholy, because an essential part of the Church may be so, unless you
will have the confidence to assert that all the Popes that have been or shall
be, must necessarily be holy. Then 2. must the Pope be head when a general
Council is convened, and consequently be superior to that, seeing an essential
head can never cease to be so: And 3. He that does not acknowledge the Pope,
can be no member of the Church, as not being united to this visible essential
head, and so God must necessarily damn all those righteous souls that live not
in communion with him, both in all the reformed Churches, and all the other
parts of the world; a thing so contrary to the goodness of God, that none but
Papists can believe it; and a thousand such absurdities, as you may see them
reckoned up if you please in Mr. Baxters Key for Catholics, Part the second.

The Doctors second inference was, That when there were many Popes, there would
be many Heads, and so the Church would become a Monster. To this he Answers
That as when after the death of the King, Mr. C. p. 79. s. 16.
several pretenders to the Crown appear, there is still by right but one
Legitimate Successor, and all the rest are Tyrants; (yea and their adherents
rebels) so likewise when such a Schism happens, he that is Legitimately elected
is the right head, all the rest are Schismatics.

Rep. And so must their Adherents also; so then in the time of the Schism from
Urban the sixth, to Martin the fifth, which lasted forty years: The Schism
betwixt Alexander the third and four Schismatics which lasted seventeen years;
the Schism betwixt Benedict the ninth, and five others; all those that were not
with the right Popes, were Scismaticks, and consequently cut off from the
Church of Christ; so that for forty years together happily half the Roman Church
was unchurched; for seventeen year happily four parts were cut off from the body
of Christ: In the time of Benedict the ninth, five parts at least must be
absciended: If the Pope be an essential head of the Church, (as they must
necessarily hold) it necessarily follows, that all the poor Christians, even in
America, must be unchurched, if they side with no Pope; and damned, if with the
Schismatic; albeit it sometimes happens, that the most conscientious men
cannot tell whom they should acknowledge as Legitimate: how can any man that
believes God to be infinite in goodness, be tempted to imagine that he will
damn all those that after their diligence in this search, mistake the true
Pope, and so become Schismatics? or can any sober man think, that this is
sufficient to unchurch them who walk in love to God, and endeavor to their
utmost to glorify his name, and to make them presently be rejected by him, and
if they dye thus, perish everlastingly?

2. I ask (seeing you acknowledge it contrary to his providence, not to have
provided against Shism (what expedient God has provided in this case? Mr. C.
tells us a General Council cures all. P. 80.
Rep. But who shall call it when it is asserted that the power is peculiarly the
Popes? and consequently when we know not who is Pope, we know not who is to
convocate the Synod. 2. How difficult is it to assemble them? 3. Who shall have
place there, seeing one part of the Church must necessarily be Schismatical,
and consequently have no right to Vote in General Councils? Mr. C. p. 80. s. 17.


3. The Doctor says, if the Pope should prove an Heretic, the Church would
deserve to be bereaved of her head; cease to be (not only on head, but)
member of the Church, and the Sea presently becomes vacant, to which we have
sufficiently replied above.

Now for a conclusion of this business, giving us either the name or titles of
this head, nor the seat of his Empire (to prevent the claim of others) nor
appointing him his work, nor directing him how to do it (albeit inferior
Bishops have their instructions very clearly given them) when he has the
greatest work in the world to do, and such as surpasses the strength of many
thousands, never giving him any advice and direction for the determining of his
very many occurring difficulties, (albeit St. Paul sends instructions unto
Timothy to direct him, 1 Timothy 3.14, 15.
how he should behave himself in a particular Church until his coming) nor
giving us any notice of his power, nor telling us of his prerogative, nor what
officers he shall appoint under him, and how, nor acquainting us with our duty
to obey him, never telling us of the succession of this Sovereign, in whom it
shall reside, of any successor of St. Peter, rather then St. Paul? I say that
not a word of this should be mentioned by Christ, or his Apostles, even when
there was so great occasion, and so many opportunities, when Peter was among
them, when there was striving for supremacy, when the Churches were lamentably
contending about the pre-eminence of their teachers, and some were for one,
some for another, some for Cephas himself, when so many Heresies arose and
hazarded the Churches, as among the Corinthians, Galathians, and others there
did, yea when an Epistle was written to the Romans themselves, that in that
Epistle there should be no instructions touching this head; when Ignatius was
so vehement for the rendering of obedience to the Bishops constituted over us by
God, that he should not have one intimation of the obedience due unto the Pope;
yea that Clemens Romanus (though Bishop of Rome) should write so earnestly to
the Corinthians for the avoiding of Schism to obey their own Bishops, and not
add one syllable in behalf of his own authority: these are things so hard to
be believed by one that believes the wisdom and love of Christ, his Apostles,
and the zeal of these Primitive Fathers against Schism, that I should sooner
persuade my self of the truth of Mahomets fables, then of this pretension.

CHAP. V.
The impertinence of Mr. C's citation of Popes in their own cause, Sect. 1. The
testimonies of Pope Leo, Pelagius, Gregory, and Gelasius, Sect. 2, 3, 4.
Evidence against this Supremacy from Pope Julius, Leo, Gregory, Agatho, and
others, Sect. 5.

THus having encountered our Authors reasons (in which he does not usually
abound) we come now to a consideration of those authorities in which he is more
copious. Petitio principii, made by many Popes, and reiterated by Mr. Cressy,
who loves to beg the thing in question rather then evince it. His work was to
evidence from the undoubted records of Antiquity, that the Popes Supremacy over
the world was a thing acknowledged ab initio, by the Universal Church; instead
of doing this, our Author puts us off with the pretenses of some Popes,
derided, and contemned by their fellow Patriarchs, and branded with the names
of Pride and Tyranny. Pope Leo is mentioned to advance the number; but seeing
he is not pleased to produce his words, Spalat. l. 4. c. 4. Dr. Field on the
Church, l. 5. Satlivius, etc. Mr. C. p. 31. Hesye. apud Phot^^^pro^. p. 125.
Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 1.
we refer him to those in the Margent, that have both produced and answered
them to our hand, only noting that to receive his authority from St. Peter, the
Prince of the Apostles, which is the utmost that he pretends to from these
three citations, will be no tolerable proof of universal jurisdiction in the
Pope, till it can be made evident, 1. That to be called Princeps Apostolorum
gives authority to St. Peter over his fellow Apostles, and the whole world; and
to be called (...), and Bishop of the Apostles, can give no such authority to
St. James and his Successors. 2. That to be Princeps Apostolorum, does infer
not only a Primacy of order, which we grant, but also of dignity which we deny.
And 3. That St. Peter's authority was necessarily conferred upon his successors
at Rome in the same latitude as it was delegated to him; if our Author can
produce no better testimonies out of St. Gregory, Protestants will have no
further cause to complain against him, as he says they do.

But alas this is the least of our Authors excellencies to be impertinent;
spurious Authors too, as will be seen throughout. In Decrex Ep. p. 645.
And such is that second Epistle of Pelagius, as you may see evinced by the
Learned Blondel.

St. Gregory is brought upon the stage to^plead for that Title which he so
passionately condemns in his fellow Patriarch: And he tells us, Mr. C. p. 48.
indic. Ep. 3.
The Sea Apostolic is preferred before all Churches.

Answ. True we acknowledge, with the Council of Chalcedon, that being the
Emperors Seat, it had a Primacy of order confered upon it; but how will he be
able to conclude a Primacy of jurisdiction from this testimony?

His second citation as it is frivolous, and already answered, Ibid.
so is it false and not to be found but in some Vtopian Edition.

A third is very unsuitable to his protestation, P. 10. Sect. 6. Ibid. L. 5.
Indic. 14. Ep. 24. Dr. Ham. 3. defense c. 5. s. 9. Nu. 42.
For whereas the words of the Epistle tell us, that Eusebius Bishop of
Constantinople acknowledged the Supremacy of the Sea of Rome, he knowing that
there was no such Eusebius contemporary to St. Gregory, and consequently the
Epistle must needs be spurious, as Protestants do generally thence conclude,
claps in John Bishop of Constantinople; L. 2. indic. 10. Ep 37, Ibid.
a very palpable deceit.

His next quotations will afford us, as he reads it, this, that if any of the
four Patriarchs had committed such an act (as the person he complains of did)
such disobedience would not have passed without great scandal: whereas the
Latin runs tanta contumacia; and who knows not, that stubbornness is a disease
incident to equals, L. 7. ind. 2. Ep. 64.
though disobedience be proper to inferiors? Another of his testimonies speaks
thus, When any fault is found in any Bishop, I know no Bishop that is not
subject to the Sea of Rome: but in the Latin it is, subjectus sit, may not be
subject to the Sea of Rome, viz. may not be subject, if the Emperor refer the
cause to his decision, C. 5. S. 9.
which here was evidently the case; and if the Pope himself had been found
faulty, he might have thus been subjected to the Patriarch of Constantinople,
L. 5. indic. 14. Ep. 24.
as the Reverend Dr. Hammond proves in his third defense where you have this
citation shamefully exposed: that which brings up the rear is this, that in a
cause of John the Priest against John of Constantinople, he according to the
Canons had recourse to the Sea Apostelick, Ibid.
and that the cause was determined by his sentence.

Now to this the same Doctor Answers, That here was no appeal from an inferior
to a superior, but only a desire of help from the Bishop of Rome, who
accordingly writes to John of Constantinople, tells him what was to be done in
this matter, according to the rules of justice; accordingly the Patriarch
though he dislikes the interposing of the Pope, yet it seems he does justice to
the injured person, Pope Leo pretended the Nicene Canons in the Council of
Chalcedon, and P. Julias in the matter of Athanasius.
and this is the defining of the cause here spoken of; And where he talks of
the Canons of the Church, the Doctor calls it a pretense of Canons, a device
which sometimes Popes made use of. Thus Zezimus pretended the Canons of the
Nicene Council for the subjecting the Africans unto him, but was found a
falsifier, as you may see in the learned Chamier; and what wonder, if his
successors were in this his followers?

2. What if there were such Canons as allowed appeals, to this end that the
Bishop of Rome might admonish the Patriarch, De Occ. Pon. l. 13. C. 7. S. 6.
See our proofs from popes.
what his duty was, and intercede in the Priests behalf? might not this be done
without an universal Pastorship? but I refer you to the Learned Doctor in the
Section cited.

Indeed the words of Pope Gelasius sound higher; for they pretend, that The Sea
of the blessed Apostle St. Peter has a power to loose whatsoever things shall
be bound by the sentences of any Bishops whatsoever, Mr. C. p. 50.
as being the Church which has a right to judge every other Church, neither is
it permitted to any one to censure its judgment, seeing the Canons have
ordained, that appeals should be made to it from every part of the world: but
then the Epistle comes from the Vatican, ex vetusto codice Vaticano, says
Binius; and what false ware he has brought us thence, who can be ignorant?
this Epistle, I am sure, smells rank of forgery. Sutlivius calls it an impudent
fiction and makes it evident.

1. Because it says that Dioscorus Alexandrinus was condemned by the authority
of the Sea Apostolic, Act. 1. et 2.
whereas the Acts of the Council of Chalcedon show, that he was condemned and
deposed by the Fathers of that Council, L. 2. c. 18.
which Evagrius also witnesses, to which he might have added, that the same
Epistle tells us the Council of Chalcedon was called by the Authority of the
Roman See, Act. 1.
when as the very Synod tells us that they were called by the Decree of the
Emperors Valentinian and Martian.

2. (Says he) the Epistle tells another lie, L. 4. C.
in saying that Peter of Alexandria was condemned by the Apostolic See,
whereas this Peter was Athanasius his Successor, and as Socrates says, Vir
valde pius and eximius, and consequently such a one as no honest man would
offer to condemn.

And thus we have considered the pretenses of their Popes for this Supremacy;
See. 5.
let us see what we can deduce from them against it, and

1. Pope Julius, Dr. Ham. 3. def. c. 2. s. 4.
who was willing enough not only to defend, but take advantage to exalt his
power, does yet in his Epistle written upon the occasion of his interposing to
absolve Athanasius, Ep. Jul. p. 741, 753.
defend the right of his act by an ancient custom especially, and by the Canon
of Nice (which yet it is plain would not justify it) and not by pretense of any
Divine Authority, or in any such Dialect that could intimate his pretension,
that from St. Peter this belonged unto him, which sure he would have done, and
thereby have silenced all Catholic opposers, if thus it had then been believed
by them, or even by himself to have belonged to him.

2. So in that African Council where St. Austin was present, and the Popes
pretensions were disputed, and his power in their Churches denied, he made no
such challenge from Christ's donation to St. Peter, but from the Canons of Nice,
which yet were so far from justifying his pretensions (no such Canon being
found upon examination) that if he could have thought that other pleadable, he
would certainly have discerned cause to make use of it.

Add to this, 3. That other instance of Pope Leo in the great cause of the
(...), in the Council of Chalcedon, of which anon; where note

1. That the Pope interprets the injury done in that Council to have been a
breach against the Nicene Canons and dispositions of Ecclesiastical affairs
without mention of any others.

2. That through the Epistles written on that occasion, he deduceth not his
Primacy from St. Peter.

3. That he takes no notice of any injury done to himself in that Council, but
only to the Bishop of Alexandria, Antioch, and other Metropolitans.

4. That the deducing the dignity of the Roman See from the greatness of that
imperial City, which was more then pretended by that Council, was never so much
as quarrelled at by the Popes Legates in that controversy; which sure is a
competent prejudice to the deducing it from St. Peter.

Add 4. That solemn prohibition of Gregory to Eulogius Bishop of Alexandria,
Ep. ex. reg. l. 7. indic. 1. c. 30.
enjoining him not to call him universal Father, that being derogatory to his
brethren, etc. a manifold testimony that this did not in his opinion belong to
him, by the law of Christ; for then

1. According to Christ's own rule (You call me Lord and Master, Joh. 13.13.
and you do well, for so I am) he had done well in giving him this title.

2. It could not have been derogatory to his brethren.

3. Reason could not have required the contrary as he says it did.

4. He could not have averted it with an absit recedant, without even fighting
against God, much less could he have spoken those things of it which we have
mentioned elsewhere.

Add fifthly, The clear confession and manifest declaration of Pope Agatho (in
his letters sent to the Emperor concerning a General Council) that his Primacy
did extend only to the Bishops of the West and not to the East, (...). Act. 4.
p. 45. to 2. Con. And again p 47. he excuses himself for sending so late. 1.
(...): ergo, beyond the Ocean then it was not. 2. Because he hoped that
Theodorus his fellow Bishop, and Archbishop of the Great Island of Britain
with others there living would join with him; the words run thus, (...), a
clear evidence, 1. That the Patriarchate of Rome even in Agathos time extended
no farther than the Ocean, and so not to Britain. And, 2. That Britain was
not numbered by him amongst the (...) the multitude of those who were under the
inspection of the Pope, or belonged to his Patriarchate.
which is a sufficient evidence that at that time the Bishops of Rome had no
such universal Primacy.

CHAP. VI.
The Law of the Emperor Valentinian considered, Sect. 1. St. Basils testimony
not concluding, Sect. 2. The Ecclesiastical Canon interpreted, Sect. 3. The
Popes restoring Athanasius and others, Sect. 4. The Argument from the Council
of Ephesus, Sect. 5. From the Council of Sardica, Sect. 6 Of Arles, Sect. 7.
His negative Argument from St. Cyprian, Sect. 8. His persuading the Pope to
depose Marcianus, Sect. 9. His Argument from his 68. Epistle not concluding,
Sect. 10. The example of Pope Victor, Sect. 11. Cyprian de unitate Ecclesiae
against them, Sect. 12. St. Jeroms testimony of an Head constituted to avoid
Schism, Ibid. And St. Cyprians of the Chair of St. Peter, no evidences of the
Popes Supremacy, Sect. 12, 13. Nor that of Optatus, Sect. 14. Nor that of St.
Chrysostom, Sect. 15. Nor that of St. Austin, Sect. 16. We not members of the
Roman Patriarchiate; the invalidity of the inference thence, Sect. 17. The
conclusion of the Chapter, Sect. 18.

IN the seventh Chapter Mr. C. Valentinian, which runs thus, That whatever had
been or should be established by the Sea Apostolic, Mr. C. p 54. Novel. Theo.
of. Tit. 24.
should have the force of a Law to the Bishops of France, and all others, and
that secundum veterem consuetudinem; Yea further he adds, That this Supremacy
of the Sea Apostolic has been established both by the merit of St. Peter, who
is the Prince of Episcopal society, and by the dignity of the City, and by the
Sacred Authority of a Synod.

Ans. 1. All this falls short of an universal Jurisdiction, which Valentinian
being only Emperor of the West, could not be imagined to confer upon the Pope,
nor can his Edict be supposed to reach those Bishops which came not within the
compass of his Empire.

2. Consider who was it that made this Edict; Valentinian a young Emperor, and
as yet sub potestate matris; yea says the great Salmasius, De primatu Papae,
c. 17.
it was procured a Principe intertissimo, imbelli, desidiaque ac luxury
perditissimo. And further, against whom was it framed? even against pious and
learned St. Hilary, a man acquainted I presume with the ancient customs of the
Church, as well as this young Emperor or his instructor Pope Leo.

3. This Law was got from him by the suggestion and false dealing of the Pope,
and that manifestly ambitious of and yawning after this Supremacy: and hence it
is that the Edict says, Hilary ( as we have found by the faithful relation of
that venerable man the Pope of Rome) vindicates his unjust ordination of
Bishops used only out of temerity, not consulting Pontificem Romanae Ecclesiae;
which is sufficient evidence (says Salmasius) that this Edict was put forth by
the arts and suggestions of the Roman Pontifex; as also he gathers from another
clause, viz. Sola mansueti praesulis humanitas permittit Hilarium adhuc
Episcopum nominari, words that smell rank of a Pope, and are exactly parallel
to what Leo writes in his Epistle to the Bishops of the Province of Vienna;
that as for St. Hilary, suae civitatis sacerdotium pro sedis Apostolicae
pietate perceptio nostra servaverit.

4. (Says he) he restrains the authority of the Pope, and will have it only
acknowledged, Si quid a quopiam contra veterem consuetudinem tentaeretur; and
in the beginning of his Edict ne quid praeter authoritatem sedis Romanae
illicitum praesumptio adtentare nitatur, and therefore the Pope has nothing to
do, when all things are done rightly, and according to ancient custom, so that
this Edict sends us only to look what that was.

5. He sums up all and concludes that this Edict should not seem to have much
authority, if it be considered that it was suggested by a false relation, (
viz. that St. Hilary did against right and the ancient customs, in ordaining
Bishops without consulting the Pope, which is very false) that this relation
was made by him whose interest it was to say so, and who was manifestly
ambitious to Lord it over Gods Heritage, that this Edict was made, St. Hilary
not being heard to plead for himself; that it was extorted from a young Prince
and ignorant of these things.

And lastly, That this Edict had very little or no authority in following
times; for diverse Councils (a thing which contains the height of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, and which Leo for bad to Hilary) were called without the
authority of the Pope, in diverse parts and Cities of France, to define weighty
matters of Faith and Discipline; thus we find it in Synodis, Agathensi prima,
Epaunensi, Aureliensibus aliquot, Turonensi, Matisconensi, Avernensi, and many
more, all affirming that they came together, Solo deo authore ac moderatore,
and by the permission, or command of the Emperor, whither he were Gothus
Burgundus, vel Francus; and thus I hope Mr. C. has little cause to brag of the
weight this testimony carries with it, especially seeing were it all as true as
Gospel, yet does it not reach to a jus divinum, and so is mutable.

As for the decrees of Pope Zosimus, Innocent, and Siricius, Mr. C. p. 56.
so trivial and impertinent, that he dares not transcribe them, I refer him to
the answers of Dr. Field, Sutlivius, Page 527. cont. Bellar. l. 2. de Summo
Pontif. Turon. 11. Can. 20.
and Chamier, made to them long ago. Nor will I trouble my self with what the
Council of Toledo held An. Dom. 633. or that of Tours 570. seeing these
Councils concern only France, or Spain; and moreover this last says only this,
That it would be a piece of arrogance or presumption for a Priest (who by Mr.
Cr. was made a Bishop) to contradict the determination of the Apostles See;
Can. 4.
and the first speaking of the use of trine immersion, tells us how that
Leander Bishop of Spain desired the advice of Pope Gregory, who answers that in
such matters as these it was indifferent what custom they observed; yet to
avoid any symbolizing with Heretics; one simple immersion might be more
convenient: this now is called his Precept, and this for the reason assigned by
the Pope, they agree to follow: but yet that the Popes decrees were received as
Laws in France or Spain, neither do these citations prove, nor has the
assertion in it any thing of truth.

The great St. Basil with whom he next assaults us, will do him little service;
Ep. 52. Mr. C. p. 57.
for his words are only these; It seems convenient to us to write to the Bishop
of Rome, to consider our affairs, (...), and give his advice, or acquaint us
with his mind, and sentence (not interpose the judgment of his decree, as Mr.
C. has rendered it) and because it is difficult to send any thence by a common
Synodical decree, that he using his own Authority (which in the other case he
could not have) should choose men fit to under go the trouble of the journey,
The Greek runs thus, (...). Page 534.
and also able by their meekness and dexterity (not by power delegated from the
Pope) to correct the perverse and thwarting spirits amongst us, fitly tempering
and dispensing their words, and having all things with them that were done at?
Ariminum, to the rescinding of what was there done, or rather that so what was
there done by force and violence may be rescinded. And had not Dr. Field cause
to say, That the alleging of this testimony shows they have very little
conscience that allege it? for these are the circumstances of Basils Epistle,
whereof let the Reader judge. Basil writing to Athanasius, advises him that
the only way to settle things put out of order in the Eastern Churches by the
Arrians, was the procuring of the consent of the Western Bishops, if it were
possible to entreat them to interpose themselves; for that undoubtedly the
Rulers would greatly regard, and much reverence the credit of their multitude;
and people everywhere would follow them without gainsaying; but seeing this
which was rather to be desired would not in likelihood easily be obtained, he
wishes that the Bishop of Rome might be induced to send some of good
discretion, and moderation, who by gentle admonitions might pacify the minds
of men, and might have all things in readiness that concerned the Arimine
Council; so that this Epistle makes very much against their opinion, that
allege it; for he prefers and rather wishes a (particular) Council, than
this interposition of the Pope alone, if there had been any hope of a Council;
besides, those whom the Pope was to send were not to proceed judicially and
authoritatively, but by entreaty and gentle admonitions to pacify the minds o^
men; and therefore here is nothing of visiting the Easte^n Churches and voiding
the acts of the Council of Ariminum by way of setence.

The Argument taken from the Ecclesiastical Canon, Mr C. p. 57, 58.
viz that no decrees should be established in the Church without (not the
assent as he would have it, but) the opinion and the advice of the Bishop of
Rome, upon which ground the new confession of the Council of Nice, was argued
of nutl^y, which he confirms from Socrates, Hist. Eccles l. 2. ca^ 5. Athanas.
Apol. sec. Sozom. Hist. Eccles. l. 3. c. 9. Valentinian, etc is fully answered
by the Author of the review of the Trent Council, Page 155.
who tells him that all that can be proved hence, is, That a General Council
cannot be holden, unless they (viz. the Popes) be called to it, and this (says
he) appears from the application which Pope Julius makes of it, when he
complains that he was not called to the Council of Antioch, where Athanasius
was condemned, charging them for that with the breach of that Canon; Lib. 2 ^
13.
Julius (says Socrates) in his letters to the Bishops of the Council of
Antioch, tells them they had offended against the Canons of the Church, in that
they called him not to the Council; for as much as the Ecclesiastical Canon
forbids the making of any decrces in the Church, without the opinion and advice
of the Bishop of Rome: And Sozomen says, Lib. 3. c. 9.
that Julius writ to the Bishops which were assembled at Antioch, accusing them
for seeking after novelties, contrary to the faith and belief of the Nicene
Council, and contrary to the Laws of the Church, for not calling him to the
Council; forasmuch as by virtue of a Law made in behalf of the dignity of
Priests, all decrees, viz. made in a General Council are invalid, which are
enacted without the opinion and advice of the Pope of Rome; and of this, Pope
Julius had reason to complain, considering that a Council cannot be termed
General, nor any decrees and Canons made to bind the whole Church Catholic,
unless all those which ought to be present, especially the Patriarchs, be
lawfully called thereunto. Ib s. 5.
Secondly, He tells us, this was no special privilege of the Bishop of Rome,
but a right common to him with all other Patriarchs, who ought of necessity to
be summoned to all General Councils; and this is the reason, why the second
Council of Constantinople is not accounted properly General, because all the
Patriarchs were not there; however says Balsamon, In Com. ad Synod. Constant.
1. ad finem.
the Synod of Constantinople be no General Council, because the other
Patriarchs were not there, yet it is greater than all other Synods; and the
Archbishop of that See was styled, Universal Patriarch: For this cause also
Nestorius when he was summoned to appear at the Council of Ephesus, Socrat. l.
7. c. 33.
answered, that he would so, as soon as John the Patriarch of Antioch was come
thither; and this was the reason why the Patriarch of Antioch was so highly
offended with Cyril, (who would not vouchsafe to stay for him) that being come
after the sentence of deposition against Nestorius, he banded with his own
Bishops against Cyril, Alexandria's Deputy, who came somewhat tardy, gave
thanks to God at his coming, because he supplied what was wanting to a General
Council, and made it most complete. Nay they were not only called to General
Councils, but the custom was, for honors sake, to wait for them certain days
when they did not come at the day appointed: So at the Council of Ephesus, they
stayed sixteen days after the time was expired for the Patriarch of Antioch.
And the eighth General Council having expected the Popes Legates for certain
days, Id. s. 10.
and seeing they came not, took this ensuing resolution; Considering the
deputies for the Sea of old Rome have been a long time expected, and that it is
against all reason to wait for them any longer, we hold it an unbeseeming thing
to slight and endanger the tottering Church of our Savior Christ by such
delays: and thus much for that Argument.

He comes now to add a few examples more, viz. When some Eastern Councils had
deposed Athanasius Patriarch of Alexandria, Paul Bishop of Constantinople, P
58. s. 8. L 3 c. 7. Non sinesadissima labe and lapsu cum a Julio restitutum
dicit Sozamenus. Crakenth. def. Ecc. Ang. c. 22. s. 69. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 4.
Marcellus Primate of Ancyra, and Asclepas Bishop of Gaza; the Bishop of Rome
(says Sozomen) to whom for the dignity of his Throne the care of All things
does pertain, restored to every one of them their own Church; and he adds
further, that he commanded them, who had deposed them, to appear on a day
appointed at Rome, to give an account of their judgment, threatening that he
would not leave them unpunished, if they would not cease from innovating; all
this he did (says Theodoret) not by usurping, but (...) according to the Law
of the Church. Now to this we answer, Lib. 4. c. 4. s. 10.
in the words of the same Author, who replies to Bellarmin, that he takes out
of Sozomen what makes against him: For, 1. He does not any way speak of
appealing from the Council to the Pope, for that was not then in use. He says
indeed, that Athanasius and some other Bishops being deprived of their Sees,
and persecuted by the Arrian Bishops, which were in the East, fled to Rome, as
to an Haven of refuge, that the Pope having heard their Confessions according
with the Nicene Creed, received them into Communion, restored them to their
Churches, and writ to the Eastern Bishops, whom he rebuked for deposing them;
but we must always remember, that they were Arrians and Persecutors, and that
the Controversy was not between party and party. If Bellarmine deny it, or if
he answer, that he must look here only to the form of proceeding, which was
ordinary, we will take him at his word, and presently oppose to him the
Authority of his own Author; who says, that these Bishops, so soon as they had
received these letters, framed an answer full of Ironies and threats, and
confessed (as he said) that the Church of Rome was the principal, as that which
was from the Prime of the Apostles, and the Metropolitan from the beginning for
Piety (howbeit these that planted Christian Religion there, came first out of
the East) but they were displeased, that he should think they were inferior to
himself, because his Church was of greater luster, though they excelled him in
Virtue, and Sanctity of life; they objected also against him as a crime, that
he had communicated with Athanasius and the other Bishops, and that they could
not endure to see their sentence made invalid by him, as if it were by a
Council; so that what he did was by way of Usurpation, and not by Right: and
that which our Author cites out of Theodoret for the contrary is very
disingenuous. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 4. Mr. C. p. 59.
For Theodoret says only thus; That Athanasius foreseeing, what designs were
on foot against him, fled to Rome to Pope Julius; and those that were
Eusebians, sent many Calumnies against him to the Pope; But Julius (...)
following the way of the Church (in not condemning a Bishop before he has been
heard, and put in his plea for himself) bids them come to Rome to make good
their Accusations, and show that their proceedings were just and equal, and
accordingly appointed a day (...), for the deciding of the Case, at which
Athanasius was ready to appear, but these liars would not. In this therefore he
followed the Law of the Church, that he required evidence of the fact, before
he renounced his Communion; but Theodoret does not so much as mention the other
Circumstances, which we meet with in Sozomen; much less say, that the Pope
followed the Law of Custom of the Church in them: and so much for that
instance. Nor does it at all conclude his Supremacy, that he is said to have
the care of all the Churches upon him; for this was common to him, not only
with other Patriarchs, but other Bishops, as the Fathers everywhere speak; I
will cite Origin for them all, who in his sixth Hom. on Isaiah, says, He that
is called to a Bishopric, is called ad servitutem totius Ecclesiae: which you
may see confirmed by Mr. Collins his Defense of the Bishop of Ely p. 174. and
more copiously elsewhere; yet the Bishop of Rome was to do it more especially
for the dignity of his Seat, which made him Prime in order of the Bishops.

Again, p. 59. s. 9. That the Council of Ephesus entering into a debate about
the cause of John Patriarch of Alexandria, the Bishop of Jerusalem interposed,
affirming that according to the ancient custom, the Church of Antioch was
always governed by the Roman, whereupon the whole Council referred the
judgment of that cause to the Pope. And for this he cites Conc. Ephesians. p. 2.
Art. 5. in relat. ad Caelestin; But he might as well have cited Aristotle; for
there it not one Iota of any Bishop of Jerusalem in that place, nor one
syllable of any such affirmation of his, nor any such reason alleged to
Caelestinus, but there say they, we deliberated of passing the same sentence
upon him, which he did upon them who were condemned of no crime; but that we
might overcome his temerity with long suffering, albeit we might justly have
done it, or he would justly have suffered it, yet have we referred it to the
judgment of your Holiness. Indeed Act. 4. The Bishop of Jerusalem says, that
John ought presently to have had recourse to the Apostolic seat sitting with
him, viz. by his Legates in the Synod, (...). But it is the Apostlique seat of
Jerusalem, not of Rome, which he tells us he ought to have been directed and
guided by; Well then, this John of Antioch being a Patriarch, and Cyrill being
his enemy, they did well to stay their sentence against him, till they knew the
mind, and had the suffrage of the Patriarch of Rome, who was Prime of the
Patriarchs. But sure our Author did not so well in foysting in Rome for
Jerusalem, albeit Binnius was his warrant for it. Add to this that even this
fiction makes against them; for had the Pope received an universal
jurisdiction, and that from Christ, why does the Bishop of Jerusalem omit the
delegation of the power from Christ, and sink down as low as custom? why does
he particularize Antioch, when not only that, but all other Patriarchical Sees
(if we may believe our Adversaries) were to be guided and directed by the Sea
of Rome, or by his Holiness?

We are told further, Ibid, Sect. 10. That when Dioscorus Patriarch of
Alexandria, in the Schismatical Council of Ephesus had deposed Flavian Bishop
of Constantinople, Flavian appealed to the Pope, and this he did says the
Emperor Valentinian, (...), according the custom of Synods.

To this it is Answered by the same Author, Review l. 4. c. 4. s. 11. Act 1.
Con. Chal. Evag. l. 2. c. 2. Act. 3 Con. Chal.
It is easy to make it appear, that it was not so.

For first, It is plain from the Acts, that the appeal was put in simply by the
word Appello, without mentioning to whom.

2. The Appealants presented a petition to the Em^epours tending to this
offect, that they would be pleased to refer the cause unto a Council.

3. The Council passes the judgment upon the case of the Appeal.

And 4. The Pope himself was condemned by that Synod; He was one of the
Plaintiffs against Dioscorus, the head of it. Whereupon it was said to his
Legates by the Presidents of the Council of Chalcedon, Act. 1. Con. Chal.
Nichol. in Epist. ad Michael. Imperat.
that they being accusers, could not be judges. Yea Pope Nicholas himself
testifies, that Dioscurus was not so much condemned for his Heresy, as for
daring to pass sentence against the Pope; to what end then had it been to
appeal to him, seeing he himself was condemned, and was a Plaintiff? Indeed the
Epistle of Valentinian tells us that he appealed to the Pope, Ad Theodos. in
Praeamb. Con. Chal.
(...), but it appears to have been no otherwise, then to procure his
intermediation to the Emperor for the Calling of a Synod, and this he did
(...), because it was the custom, when contentions arose about the faith, to
Call Synods.

2. What is said to be given to the Pope, was only given to the Legates, that
so he might be acquainted with the business, and know that he had appeall'd, as
appears from the 23. Ep. of Leo to Theodosius, Because our Legates have stoutly
stood it out against the Synod, and this Bishop [Flavian] given them a bill of
Appeal, we beseech your Gentleness to command a General Synod to be Celebrated
in Italy.

And thus we let him pass to the Council of Sardica, Mr. C. p. 59. s. 11.
That in any Controversy between Bishops, which could not be determined in
their own respective Provinces, the person aggrieved must appeal to the Bishop
of Rome, who might renew the process, and appoint judges; and when such a case
happened, till the Pope had determined the cause, it was not permitted that
another Bishop should be chosen in his place. De Oec. Pout. l. 13. c. 7.


But 1. Says Chamier, this Council was not Ecumenical, but only made up of
the Western Bishops. For Sozomen L. 3. C. 10. tell us, that the Bishops of the
East and West could not agree, but severally set forth their Decrees, and
therefore it uses not to be reckoned among the General Councils. It Is true, as
Sulpitius says, Sac. Hist. l. 2.
it was called from each part of the world, but of the Eastern Bishops came but
seventy six to Sardis, and these (says Socrates) would not once come into the
sight of the Western Bishops; but their conditions being denied, Confestim
discedunt, they presently depart.

2. This Canon is manifestly contrary to the fifth of the General Council of
Nice, which refers the final determination of all causes of Bishops to the
Primate or Patriarch, which the Emperor also confirms, and will have no man
to have power to contradict the sentence which the Primate or Patriarch shall
give.

3. The Affricans took no notice of this Decree, Dr. Field p. 566.
and yet there were Bishops of Africa at the Council, so that in likelihood
this decree was not confirmed by subsequent practice, acceptance, and
execution. Yea they willed the Pope to send no more any of his Clarks to
dispatch causes at any man's suit; for that this was the way to bring in the
Smoaky puff of worldly pride into the Church; and in very earnest besought him
not to be Eafie in admitting any Appeals brought from them.

4. This Canon makes rather against them; for by it all matters must be ended
at home, or in the next Province to that wherein they arise; And the Pope may
not call matters to Rome there to be heard, but is only permitted in some cases
to send a Presbyter, having his authority, and to put him in Commission with
the Bishops of the Province, that so he and they may jointly re-examine things
formerly judged.

To which you may add 1. That it was not in the power of the Pope to command
Appeals to himself, but only to receive them, when brought.

2. That this power of Appealing was Ad Julium Romanum not ad Papam Romanum,
and therefore a personal privilege, which was to cease on the death of Julius.

3. That the very same thing, viz. the like power of Appealing to the Bishop of
Constantinople was defined in the General Council of Chalcedon, Ca^. 9.17.
as you may see evinced by the learned Crakenthorp, Defens. Eccl. Angl. C. 31.
Sect. 7. And therefore if the Argument hold good for the Supremacy of the Pope,
it must infer the same in the behalf of the Bishop of Constantinople. As to
what he adds of the second proposal of Gaudentius, he might have done well to
have told us that the Synod would not add their Placets to it as you may see in
the three copies of it extant in Binnius; but alas then it would have been
unserviceable to them, yea evidently on our sides; for why should they have
denied this to the Pope, or he sued for it, if an universal inspection of the
whole world were by Christ allowed him?

His second Council is that of Arles. (says he) we have a Patriarchical
Council sending their Decrees to the Bishop of Rome, as being the chief person,
from whom all Christians ought to receive information of what they ought to
believe and practice, and by whom, no doubt, they were to be obliged thereto.

Answ. Our Author does well to beg the question, when he cannot prove it. In
all this (were it perfectly as he relates it) there is nothing at all of
jurisdiction, but only somewhat of trouble to the Pope, viz. to acquaint all
whom it concerned, what the Council had decreed; which the King may command the
Master of the Post Office to do in his Dominions; and this He saw, and
therefore thought it necessary to add, by whom no doubt they were to be obliged
thereto. But indeed he must give us leave to doubt it, till we have a better
argument (then his confidence in asserting any thing) to prove it.

2. Vide Samasium de Primatu Papae. c. 21. and especially, c. 10.
Is it not perfectly ridiculous to prove an acknowledgement of his universal
jurisdiction from this, that a Patriarchical Council sent their Decrees to him?

Especially 3. When they declare that they send their Decrees to him upon this
account, quod majores teneat Dioeceses, or which is the same, because he was
the greater Metropolitan. Had the whole world been his Diocese, they might well
have said, Majores teneat Dioeceses, albeit they could not have given this
reason.

2. The Council seems rather, to bind the Pope with the rest, We have signified
to thee, what we have decreed in Common Council, that all might know hereafter
what they ought to receive. What then, Will he lay hold on the title Lord? he
knows it is frequently given even by Popes to other Bishops. Thus Liberius in his
Epistle to Vrsacius Valens, and Geminius, His Literis Convenio vos Domini
Fratres Charissimi; See more of this in Salmas. p. 155. de Primat. Pap. Is it
lastly, that they bid him according to custom to write letters to all? alas,
what of Jurisdiction is there in this?

2. This being a Patriarchical Council only, this all can extend it self no
further then the Western Patriarchate, and then it will be unserviceable to
conclude the Popes Supremacy over all the world.

We come now to consider the testimonies of the Fathers,

1. Eusch Hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 4, 6. Mr. C. p. 70. s. 5.
Because when the Pope inflicted or at least threatened excommunication to some
of the Churches of Asia, that held a necessity of rebaptization, after Baptism
received by Heretics, St. Cyprian, and Firmilian never questioned his
authority, though as they thought unjustly employed.

Answ. This argument falls very short of the thing intended; for first, See
infra, s. 11.
as to his refusal to communicate with the Eastern Bishops, which is all that
Eusebius says of him, how unserviceable, is it to infer an universal
Jurisdiction, seeing other Bishops likewise frequently threaten, upon the
dislike of the Popes actions, that they would not have communion with him?
Secondly, No wonder then if these Bishops did not question this universal
Jurisdiction, seeing the Pope in this matter never pretended it, Vid Epist. 75.
inter. Epist. Cyp. qu^^ est Firmil.
but an ancient tradition of keeping Easter contrary to their custom, as
appears evidently from their answers.

He tells us further, that St. Cyprian endeavored to persuade the Pope to
depose Marcianus, a Metropolitan Bishop of Arles siding with Novatian.

To which it is answered, by the learned Doctor Field, Mr. C^p. 70. Cyp. Ep.
67. P. 551.
This allegation is too weak to prove the intended conclusion; for it is most
certain by all circumstances of the Epistle of Cyprian, that Stephen the Bishop
of Rome, did not depose Martianus by himself alone, and therefore Cyprian does
not send to Stephen, that he should suspend Martianus, but that he should write
to the Bishops of France to do it, and not to suffer him any longer to insult
over the company of Catholic Bishops, for that he was not yet suspended and
rejected from their communion; but some man perhaps will ask, why Cyprian
desires Stephen to write to the Bishops of France, and writes not himself.

Answ. Surely there may be three reasons given of his so doing; the first
because he was nearer to them then St. Cyprian. The second because he as
Patriarch of the West, with his Bishops was more likely to prevail, then
Cyprian with his Africans only. The third for that as Cyprian observes in the
end of the Epistle, it more concerned him then any other, to maintain the
reputation of Lucius and Cornelius his predecessors, and to oppose himself
against Martianus, who joined himself with Novatianus, that had Schismatically
divided himself from them, and made a breach in the Church. But you will say
that he is bid to write, commanding that Marcianus be excommunicated.

Answ. True Mr. C. tells us so, but it is his own addition; for Cyprian says
only, let Letters be directed to the people, and Province of Arles, quibus
abstento Marciano; by reason of which Marcian being excommunicated (viz by the
Bishops following his advice) another may be substituted in his room, viz.
chosen by the people with the directions of the Bishops of France, as appears
from his words, (qua propter facere te oportet plenissimas literas, ad
coepiscopos nostros in Gallia constitutos, ne ultra Marcianum pervicacem and
superbum, and Divinae pietatis, ac fraternae salutis inimicum, collegio nostro
insultare patiantur) and yet if all this answer was waved, the instance infers
this only that the Pope had power over France, as being Patriarch, not over the
whole world, as universal Bishop.

That which he cites out of the sixty eighth Epistle, Cyprian writes to the
Clergy and People of Spain, that they had rightly deposed Basilides, and
Martial, and substituted in their room Sabinus, and Faelix, and that it was not
sufficient to rescind their ordination; That Basilides after his crime
manifested, went to Rome, and there deceived Stephen, being far distant from
Spain, and ignorant of the thing done, and of the truth concealed, to the
intent that he might request (Exaembiret) to be injustly reposed in his
Bishopric, from which he was justly deposed; Stephen hereupon with his Bishops
communicates with him, and so (as much as in them lies) restores him to his
former Bishopric. Cyprian condemns the false and ill dealing of Basilides,
and reproves also the negligence of Stephen, that suffered himself so easily
to be misled, taxing him, and such as consented with him, for communicating
with such wicked ones, showing that they are partakers of their sins, and that
they violate the Canon of the Church, which the Bishops of Africa, and all the
Bishops of the world, yea even Cornelius the predecessor of this Stephen had
consented on to wit, That men so defiled with Idolatry, as Martialis and
Basilides were, should be received to penitency, but be kept from all
Ecclesiastical honor; these are the circumstances of Cyprians Epistle, wherein
he relates the proceedings against Basilides and Martialis justly put from
their office and dignity, and the inconsiderate course of the Bishop of Rome,
hastily communicating with them; whereby we may see how wisely and advisedly,
our adversaries urge Cyprian to prove, that in ancient times the Bishops of
Rome had power to restore such Bishops to their places again, as were deposed
by others; for thus they must reason from this place of Cyprian, if they will
make any use of it, Basilides, and Martialis justly put from their office, fly
to Stephen Bishop of Rome, hoping by his means to procure the reversing of that
which was done against them; he with such as adheared to him, though they could
not restore them to their places, yet communicated with them; Cyprian offended
herewith charge Basilides with execrable wickedness, for abusing Stephen, and
misinforming him, and Stephen with intolerable negligence, and unexcusable
violation of the Canons, for partaking with such wicked persons, and wishes
all his Brethren, and Colleagues constantly to hold on their course against
them, notwithstanding the failing of Stephen, and his adherents; therefore the
Ancient Bishops of Rome restored to their places such as were judicially
deposed by others, and were acknowledged by the Fathers to have power and
authority so to do; which kind of reasoning is like all the rest in this
Chapter, that is, evidently weak; but happily you will say, Why does not
Cyprian tell them, that the Pope has not power to restore them?

Answ. Does he yet not sufficiently, in advising them to hold on their course
against them, which sure he would not have done had he acknowledged any such
power in the Bishop of Rome? for this would have been to contradict lawful
authority.

2. St. Cyprian is discontented with the proceedings of these Bishops, in going
to Stephen so far distant, which sure he would not have been, if he had thought
him to have had such an universal Jurisdiction, as our Author pleads for; no
certainly, these words savor strongly of what St. Cyprian tells us of
Fortunatus and Felicissimus, their appeal to Rome, when condemned in Africa,
Ep. 55. ad Cornelium, that it is just and equal, that every ones cause should
be there heard, where the crime is committed, and that it behoved not their
Bishops over whom they were set, to run about (as these did to Rome) but to
plead their cause there, where their accusers, and their witnesses might be
had, unless a few desperate wretches will think, that the authority of the
Bishops of Africa is less, (viz. then that to which they run) What evasions are
made against this saying of Cyprian by Bellarmine, and Pamelius, are taken off
by Chamier in the fourteenth Book, De Oec. Pent.
the second Chapter, from the sixth section to the two and twentieth.

Another negative Argument we have from Pope Victors excommunicating the Asian
Bishops, It was not imputed to Victor by Irenaeus or Polycrates, that he
exercised an usurped Authority over Bishops not subject to him; ergo, he had
Authority over these Asian Bishops.

Answ. This (says Mr. Chillingworth) is to suppose that excommunication is an
act, or Argument, or sign of Power and Authority in the party excommunicating,
over the party excommunicated, whereas it is undeniably evident out of the
Church story, that it was often used by Inferiors upon Superiors, and by Equals
upon Equals, if the Equals or Inferiors thought their Equals or Superiors did
any thing which deserved it.

2. Says he, When they admonish him, that for so small a cause he should not
cut off so many Provinces from the body of the Church; what is this, but to
esteem that as a small and unsufficient cause of excommunication, which Victor
and his adherents thought great and sufficient; and consequently, that Victor
and his party declared that to be a matter of faith and necessity, which they
thought not so, and where was then their conformity?

To what he adds further out of Cyprian, etc. the same most learned Author
returns this Answer; That whosoever will but read over that Book, shall find
most certainly, and undoubtedly, that he speaks not in that Book of St.
Peter's Headship of the universal Church as our Author phansieth, but of the
Head Original; and first beginning of Pastoral commission, which he makes
appear by laying down the principal and most material circumstances of this
Book, written upon occasion of the Schism of the Novatians; The first thing
that occurs in the whole discourse of the Book, is the observation of the
malice of Satan, in finding out Schisms and Heresies to subvert the faith. 2.
He shows, that this so falls out, because men return not back to the first
Origin of Truth, because they seek not the Head, nor keep the doctrine of the
Heavenly Master; which if a man would consider, there would be no need of many
Arguments, but the truth without any great search would offer it self unto him;
for therefore did Christ when he was to lay the foundations of the Christian
Church, say especially to Peter, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I
build my Church: and again after the Resurrection, Feed my sheep, because,
though rising again from the dead, he gave like power to all the Apostles, when
he said, As my Father sent me, so send I you; Whose sins ye remit, etc. Joh.
20.21, 23. Yet he would by speaking especially to one, and by appointing one
Chair, show what unity should be in the Church; the rest of the Apostles, says
St. Cyprian, were undoubtedly the same that St. Peter was, equal in honor and
power, but therefore did Christ in the first place give, or at least promise to
give; especially, or particularly to one, that Apostolic Commission which he
meant also to give to the rest, that he might thereby show that the Church must
be one, and that there must be but one Episcopal Chair in the World; all the
Apostles says Cyprian are Pastors, but the Flock of Christ is but one, which
they are to feed with unanimous consent; there is but one Body of the Church,
one Spirit, one Hope of our Calling, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God;
this unity all men must endeavor to keep, especially Bishops, that they may
make it appear that there is but one Episcopal Commission in the Christian
Church, cujus a singulis in solidum pars tenetur, whereof every one
indifferently, and in equal sort has his part: Here is nothing that proves
the universality of the Papal power, but this place most plainly overthrows
it; for Cyprian teaches, that Christ meant to give equal Power and Authority
to all his Apostles; and the reason why intending no more to one than to the
rest, yet he more especially directed his speech to one than to the rest, was
only to show that there must be an unity in the Church, which He settled in
that beginning with one, from him he proceeded to the rest, not meaning that
the rest should receive any thing from him, but that from himself immediately
they should receive that in the second place, which he had first, and that they
should receive the same Commission together with him, into which he was put
first, that they might know him to be the first of their Company; for it cannot
consist (says he) either with truth, with the opinion of St. Cyprian, or of
our Adversaries themselves, that the rest of the Apostles received their
Ministerial Power from Peter, and were subject to him, as to an Head and
absolute Commander over them, seeing he says expressly that they were the same
that Peter was, and equal to him both in honor, and power; and besides both in
this book, and in many other places, he is wont to derive the original of
Schisms, and Heresies, from the intrusion of men into places, without due
admittance and allowance of them that in a kind of coherent concord rule and
govern the Church, and never from the resistance of one Supreme Commander set
over all: Well then to the places objected, upon that one, viz. St. Peter, he
builds his Church, we Answer in the words of St. Jerome preceding, The Church
was built upon St. Peter; but yet true it is, the same thing is done upon
others, and the strength of the Church equally rests upon all. But you will say
that St. Jerome there asserts, That among the twelve one was chosen, Cont.
Jovin. l. 2.
that an head being constituted, the occasion of Schism might be taken away,
which seems to advance St. Peter above the rest.

Answ. Not as to any thing of Authority; for then St. Jerome would contradict
himself, when he says, that the Church was founded ex aequo upon the twelve:
so that his meaning is, that before the Apostles were sent over the World, and
whilst they made up one particular company, for better orders sake, he was
chosen Head, that so things might be done communi concilio, and there might be
no Schism between them.

2. He tells us this was given to Peter, quia Petrus crat senior, which being
but a personal advantage, cannot be applied to the benefit of the Romanist, who
is to prove the Popes Supremacy, and not only the Primacy of St. Peter; not to
mention that these words are not St. Jeroms, but Jovinians, and speak not of a
plenitude of Power but only Primacy, with many other Answers which you have in
Dr. Ham. Sch. dis. p. 238.

And for the second citation from St. Cyprian, Peter upon which the Church is
founded, cannot think that he is in the Church: Lib. 12 de Oec. Pont. c. 5. s.
3.
He might have learned from Chamier, that it is a mere gloss crept into the
Text, and not to be found in some Editions; but if it could deserve an Answer,
the learned Dr. Field will inform him; That St. Cyprian by that Chair intends
not one particular Chair appointed for a General Teacher of all the World to
sit in, but the joint commission, unity and consent of all Pastors, which is
and must be such, as if they did all sit in one Chair; which sense of one Chair
founded upon Peter you may find in the same Cyprian ad universam plebem, Lib.
ep. 8,
where he urges the unity of the Church and Chair (not to show that obedience
was to be given to the Church of Rome, but) to show that against them that are
lawfully placed in a Bishopric with consenting allowance of the Pastors at
unity, others may not be admitted; and that they who by any other means get
into places of Ministry, then by consenting allowance of the Pastors at unity
among themselves, are in truth and indeed no Bishops at all.

And this is a sufficient Answer to that passage of Optatus cont. This would
have perfect truth^ in it (says Dr. Ham. Sch dis p. 192) had it been spoken of
any other plantations of the Apostles, the Chair of St. John in Asia etc Seeing
the meaning of the Chair does evidently signify the Church brought down by
succession from the Apostles, which the Donatists could not pretend to; see him
exactly scanning the whole place, p. 190, 192, 193.
Parmen. l. 2. At Rome a Chair was placed for St. Peter, to the end that unity
might be preserved of all, and for fear the other Apostles should challenge to
themselves each one his particular Chair: And sure you could not be ignorant of
the Answer returned to the passage by the incomparable Chillingworth, viz. The
truth is, the Donatists had set up at Rome a Bishop of their Faction, not with
intent to make him Bishop of the whole Church, but of that Church in
particular; now Optatus going upon St. Cyprians above mentioned grounds, of one
Bishop in one Church, proves them Schismatick^ for so doing, and he proves it
by this Argument; St. Peter was first Bishop of Rome, neither did the Apostles
attribute to themselves each one his particular Chair, (understand in that
City, for in other places others had Chairs beside St. Peter) and therefore he
is a Schismatic, who against that one single Ch^ir erects another; Understand
(as before, in that place) making another Bishop of that Diocese besides him
who was lawfully elected to it.

We pass on to St. Chrysostom, from whom two sentences are pressed for the
service of the Pope; but to the first I return a Non est inventus; after twice
reading the third Hom. cited by him, In Act. Apost. c. 1.4.
I can find nothing like the words produced; In the second is evident
prevarication, for having told us that these words Follow me, showed his
special care he had of St. Peter, he adds, How then was it, may some say, that
St. James (...); to this I Answer says he, (...), he (that is Christ) ordained
him Teacher, or if you will Master, not of any Throne, but of the whole Werld,
(as he did also the rest of the Apostles) for which our Author has it (not of
that See of Rome alone) in which the fraud is manifest; it is true, Jerusalem,
and can by no stratagems be drawn to the Sea of Rome; well then if he would
have this citation serviceable to him, he must first show that St. Peter was by
Christ constituted Bishop of Rome, and by so doing he will contradict St.
Chrysostoms (...).

2. That only St. Peter and not any of the Apostles besides him were appointed
to be (...), by our Savior.

3. Which is the most difficult of all, that the Bishops of Rome are to succeed
him in being so.

There is one passage remaining of St. Austins, who tells us, That Melchiades
judged the cause of the Donatists in Africa. Judicante Melchiade sedis Romanae
Episcopo cum collegis suis, quos ad preces Donatistarum miserat Imperator.
ibid. ep. 162. Third def. c. 2. s. 4. Non provocent nisi ad Africana concilia,
etc. Ad transmarina autem qui putaverint appellandu^, a nullo intra Africam in
communionem recipiantur. Reply p. 40.
Where (not to take notice of his interpreting de collegio suo removere to
remove from his Communion.) 1. This was no Authoritative, but only a brotherly
decision. 2. Done at the prayers of the Donatists. 3. By power delegated from
the Emperor. 4. All this we find in Reverend Dr. Ham. together with a
complaint that many other things offered by him in consideration of this
passage could find no Answer: Now seeing all these Answers are clearly
satisfactory, is it not strangly absurd, that the objection should be brought
upon the stage afresh, without the least considerations of the returns that
were made unto it? Now that St. Austin was far enough from acknowledging the
Supremacy contended for, as well as the rest of the African Bishops, is argued
from this, that in the Milevitan Council where he was present, speaking of
Appeals from their Bishops, their rule is cap. 22. that they should appeal to
none but the African Councils, or the Primates of their own Provinces; and if
any shall think fit to appeal to any transmarine (or foreign) Judicature they
are not to be admitted into Communion by any within Africa, and this they
determined agreeably to the Council of Nice, and declare as much to Pope
Celestine, as you may see in the Reverend Dr. Hammond.

It Is a common Proverb, that the Devil will play at small game, rather than
stick out; Rome cannot be Universal Monarch, he will plead for him as Patriarch
over the West, and thereby think to bring us into subjection to him; but seeing
it is notorious and almost generally confessed that the power of Patriarchs is
not of Divine but humane institution; if he will affirm that this Dignity was
given to him by the Fathers, he must either allow and acknowledge that they
never dreamed of his being Universal Monarch, or else were so wise as to decree
that he should have allotted to his Jurisdiction the third or fourth part of
the World, whom they knew to have received from Christ a title to the whole. 2.
Were he Patriarch over all the West, and we included in the circuit of his
Patriarchate, yet would not this afford him any Authority over England: Dr.
Ha^. third def. p. 124.
Seeing the dignity of a Patriarch includes not any Authority over more then
the Province or (...) that belongs to him as a Primate or Metropolitan, and
therefore infers no kind of Authority over all those that belong to the circuit
of his Patriarchate: Just. vinet c. p. 249:
Bishop Bramhal gives him three further Answers. 1. That the British neither
were, nor ought to be subject to the jurisdiction of the Roman Patriarch, as is
irrefragably proved in his third conclusion. 2. That Patriarchical power being
not of Divine right may be quitted (and that this the Pope has done by taking
up an Universal Monarchy unconsistent with it) forfeited (by many exerbitant
abuses of which the Roman Bishops have been guilty beyond expression) or
lawfully transferred as was done by the King and the whole body of the
Kingdom. And, 3. That the power which we have cashiered, nor any part of it
was ever given to any Patriarch by ancient Canons; so then it is superfluous to
consider his Authorities, only in short. 1. Zonaras and Balsamon are esteemed
Heretics by himself: And secondly, are affirmed by the Learned Salmasius to
have mistaken the mind of the Canon. Salmas. de pr^matu Papae. c. ult.
2. St. Basils calling the Bishop of Rome (...) makes him only the chief in
order and most eminent Bishop of the West, which title we can very well allow
him. Salmas. 16.
3. In the testimony of St. Austin he has fo^sted in the Western Church,
whereas St. Austin speaks only of the Church in which St. Peter suffered
Martyrdom, that is the Church of Rome; it being searce ever heard, that any one
was said to have suffered Martyrdom in the West. 3. Nor can it be inferred
from that place of St. Jeromes, Let them condemn me with the West, that is with
Damasus, that he thought him Patriarch of all the West; but his meaning is
this, Salmas. ib.
Let them condemn me with the most famous men and Churches in the World; of
which having mentioned two, he leaves the rest to be understood. Lastly, It Is
objected that Justinian the Emperor affirms, that the whole World was subject
to five Partriarchs, that is (...) to Western Rome, Constant. Alexandria,
Antioch, and Jerusalem; Nevel. 123:
now says he unless Hesperia signifies the whole West, to what Patriarch was
France, Spain, Africa, etc. subject? Ans. It Is true the Emperor reckons up
five Patriarchs, but does he any where say, that all the World was necessarily
subject to them? does he deny that it was in the power of Princes to make more,
or limit the Dominions of these? did not he create de novo, Carthage, and
Justiniana prima? and give them all power of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, the
Supreme Priesthood, Supreme Honor and Dignity; and ordain that final appeals
and the Dignity of Apostolical Sees shall be given to them, as is evident from
his very words cited by Dr. Hammond in his ^ract of Schism, Page 101, 102, 103.
and then what service can you have from this his testimony? Lastly,
Notwithstanding this, there were many Provinces that were not subject to the
Jurisdiction of any of the forementioned Patriarchs.

I should now cite Fathers against Fathers, Crakanthorp, (...) 22. (...). 56.
Poteram integras patrum phalanges per singula saecula agglomerare (vide ^.15.
praestitum a celeberrimo Blondello) qui omnes velut agmine facto suprematum
tuum (Spalatensem alloquitur) appugnent, sed quidopus? d^^rtho loxis ad
unumomnthus ^^ipso qu^^ conciliis quinque primis consensisse eos non est du^^^^
(...) ab omnibus suprematum istum tuum qui in e^s ^amnatur anathematizari; in
which one sentence he evinceth the concurrence of above 1000 Fathers, besides
some 1000s more cited by him, when he produces 26 Councils for the
condemnation of this Supremacy of the Pope, and we can be contented to be
accounted Heretics, when we have six or seven thou^and Fathers at the least
that must be thrust into the Catalogue, yea the infallible Church of God,
stablishing by their reiterated decrees this newfound Heresy.

CHAP. VII.
The Argument from the Canon of the Council of Chalcedon largely vindicated,
Sect. 1. As also another from that of Nice, Sect. 2. Four Councils of Carthage
deny the Popes Supremacy, Sect. 3. So also does this second General Council,
Sect. 4. As also two British Councils, Sect. 5.

I Pass now to the Vindication of what the worthy Doctor brought against the
Usurpation of the Popes Supremacy over the World by Divine Right: Chalcedon
sticks very much in Mr. C.'s stomach, and what Arts does he not use to avoid
its stroke? and reason good, for it is a most clear and perspicuous refutation of
that dream.

For, (...). can. 28. (...). Ibid. P. 76. s. 13. (...), Ibid.
1. The Fathers of the Council tell us, that the privileges of Rome (above
other Patriarchs) were given her by the Fathers of the Church; whence it is
evidently inferred, that the Primacy of the Pope of Rome (albeit it were a
Primacy of order only) was not from any appointment of Christ, but the
constitutions of the Church.

2. They tell us, this Primacy was by the Fathers allowed unto him (not because
he was the Vicar of Christ, or Successor of St. Peter, but) upon this account
that the City he presided in, was the Imperial City; this * Mr. C. would have
done by John of Constantinople, that so he might avoid the evidence it carries
in it.

3. They decree that the Bishop of Constantinople should have equal privileges
to the Pope (the first seat excepted) and be advanced to the like greatness in
Ecclesiastical affairs indefinitely and Universally, as appears, 1. From the
only exception mentioned, that of place; for exceptio firmat regulam in non
exceptis. 2. From the ground of those equal privileges, the equal dignity of
the City, which evidently destroys all the pretensions of the Pope to an
universal jurisdiction, seeing he could have no jurisdiction over the Bishop of
Constantinople, thus made equal to him.

4. (...). Act. ib.
That this Decree was made with the full concurrence of the Council, consisting
of six hundred and thirty Bishops (the Legates of the Pope excepted only) for
after the canvasing of the business, when the Judges had pronounced that the
Bishop of Constantinople was to have equal privileges with him, the whole
Council presently cries out, This is a just sentence, this we all say, let this
be consigned or confirmed.

5. The Fathers proceed to the making of this Decree and the confirming of it,
notwithstanding the dissent of the Roman Legates, and that by the command of
their Pope; whence it is manifest that they did not esteem the approbation of
the Pope necessary to the establishing of their Decrees, or his contradiction
sufficient to make them null (as Mr. C. pretends from an old Canon, the sense
of which we have manifested above to be very alien from this business) for
otherwise these six hundred and thirty Fathers would never have proceeded to
establish this Decree for an Ecclesiastical Law, which was made invito and
reclamante Pontifice.

6. Aetius Archdeacon of Constantinople makes a relation how after matters of
Faith agreed upon, they proceeded according to the manner to some
constitutions; in these they desired the Legates to join with them, but they
refused, saying they had received commands from Rome to do so, which being
remonstrated to the Judges, and their leave asked that the present Council
might determine the business, they ordered that the Council should proceed; and
hereupon the Decree was unanimously made, (...). P. 51. s. 8,
and it was appealed to them all whether it were not true, nothing being done
clancularly, or by stealth, but of course regularly and Canonically; whence we
may collect,

1. What truth there is in that Parenthesis of our Author, that the Canon was
compiled by the Bishop of Constantinoples bargaining with some Bishops, and
violence to others; Whereas not only the Council openly contradicts him, but
further when by the appointment of the judges, and in the presence of the
Legates, they that were most concerned (the Bishops of Asia, Pontus, and
Thracia, who were now brought under the Patriarchate of Constantinople, being
supposed formerly to be free) were called out severally, (...).
and asked whether they had acted under any force; they severally answered, I
subscribed willingly as in the presence of God.

2. How ingenuously does our Author deal in telling us that it was an infamous
Canon surreptiously made, after the departure of the Judges, the Senate, and of
the Legate of the Sea Apostolic? When from the Acts of the Council it is
evident,

1. That the Legates were desired to be present and resused, and that upon
their appearance the day following all their objections against the Canon were
taken of, and their pretenses clearly answered in the Council.

2. Council. To. 3 p. 460.
It is likewise evident that albeit the Judges were then absent, yet did they
give order that the Council should proceed, and that when on the morrow they
were present and canvased the whole matter, they conclude thus, that they had
weighed all, and found that none had injury; the privileges of the Bishop of
Rome were preserved entire according to the Canons; and that the Bishop of
Constantinople was to have equal privileges with him, and this being their
sentence, (...).
they desire the whole Council to deliver theirs, and they all cried out, This
is a just sentence, this we are all well pleased with; and so the Judges
pronounce, the Synod has confirmed all.

Well, Mr. C p. 51
but he answers further, that this was a despised Canon, not inserted among the
other Canons; and his reason is, because according to the most ancient Greek
and Latin Copies of that Council (as appears from Dionysius Exiguus and the
testimony of Theodoret Anagnostes a Grecian) the Council of Chalcedon published
only twenty seven Canons, whereas this is reckoned the twenty eighth.

Answ. This is put in to admonish us, what respect we owe to the Romanists
collections; for it is certain this Canon is in all the Greek Copies, both
Printed and Manuscript, and from thence the Copy of that Council must
originally be fetched, yea many of the Romanists confess there was such a Canon
made, and the story of the fact is by all the Ancients agreed on; and Leos
Epistles and many other evidences put it beyond all dispute and indeed Lees
Legates resisting, and not consenting to it, and complaing to the Judges that
it was done without them (when yet they voluntarily did absent themselves) is
an evidence still that there was such a Canon made, and made by the Council,
and yet it is left out in the Codex vetus Ecclesiae Romanae, and Dionysius
Exiguus his Codex; but we sufficiently know in whose interest they did it; and
what is it to the purpose whether the Canons of that Council be twenty seven or
twenty eight, when it is sure that this was one? yea this despised Canon is not
only mentioned by Socrates and Sozomen, L. 5. C. 8. L. 7. C. 9
but it was also renewed by the Council in Trullo, in these words, renewing the
Decree of the hundred and fifty Fathers who met in this City of Constantinople
(in which was Trullo (secretarium palatii) from whence the Council was so
named) and by the six hundred and thirty Bishops assembled at Chalcedon, We
define that the Sea of Constantinople shall have equal prerogatives of honor
with that of Rome, (...). Mr. C. p. 52.
and shall be equally advanced in Ecclesiastical matters; next we are told that
Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople was both ashamed, and sorry for this Canon;
and this he proves from the fifty fifth Epistle of Leo, which is says he in
Answer to Anatelius; but alas that Epistle is not written to Anatolius, but
Pulcheria Augusta, nor has it any thing of his shame, and sorrow, but much of
his pride and ambition; and as for the matter of fact, he was so much ashamed
of it that he exercised it in an eminent manner on the Patriarch of Alexandria,
Leo the Emperor having put wholly into his hands the judging of a great
affair, and quieting a disturbance in that Church; and if it be considered that
this was adjudged to him formerly by the Council of Constantinople, determined
here by the six hundred and thirty Bishops; that the Bishop of Constantinople
held this dignity by a custom that had been long in force, and many other
things collected by the Reverenp Dr. Hammond, Reply p. 82, 83, 84.
there will be no possibility of assenting to this crude and audacious
affirmation that the Patriarch was ashamed of this Canon. Nay, it is much more
reasonable to affirm that the Popes themselves were at last ashamed of their
opposing it; for within thirty years after we find says the same Doctor,
Faelix the third of his own accord consenting to his Primacy, Ep. 1.
and acknowledging Acasius Bishop of Constantinople to have power over the
Bishops that were under him, and Innocent the third confirms it with a solemn
constitution; yea in the Gregorian Edition of the Decree, we are told that at
last this was granted to the Bishops of Constantinople for peace and quietness
sake, Cap. 5. Con. Lat. Did. 22. ad cap. Constable.
that I add not the establishment of it again by the Council of Florence,
Sess. ult. in tit. Vnionis. What he adds from Gelasius, as it has nothing of
truth in it, so has it much of fraudulent dealing. Gelasius there tells us,
that this Synod of Chalcedon as to its determinations touching matters of
Faith, was universally received; but other things the Apostolic See received
not; and afterward that the Sea Apostolic consented not to this Canon that
the Emperor (albeit he desired the Apostolic See to consent) did not impose
it, nor Anatolius use it, and the whole as it is said in sedis Apostolicae
positum est potestate (not was put, Petente Marciano Principe.
but) is put (as the series of the discourse shows) in the power of the Sea
Apostolic, arrogating this unto that See, ita quod firmavit in Synodo seeds
Apostolica, hoc robur obtinuit, quod refutavit, habere non potuit firmitatem;
and therefore what it confirmed in that Synod, (which words our Author was
pleased to conceal) that was valid. As the words are related by our Author, any
one would imagine, that the deciding of this business, viz. whether the Sea of
Constantinople should have equal privileges with that of Rome, had been
referred to the Sea Apostolic, whereas in truth here is nothing but the
arrogant assertion of a Pope (from an obscure fragment) that the consent of the Sea of Rome is necessary to the validity of this Canon.

Lastly, Whereas we say, with the General Council of six hundred and thirty
Bishops, and that other commonly called Trullensis, that these privileges were
Decreed to the Sea of Constantinople by a former Canon made in the second
General Council of Constantinople, Mr. C. p. 52. s. 9.
he calls upon us to observe the false dealing of the Bishop of Constantinople,
and his Clergy, in that they fraudulently thrust in the words (...), when the
Canon had only (...).

Answ. It Is well he had the modesty to accuse the Bishop of Constantinople and
his Clergy only; for had he spoken out, and told us that the whole Synod, and
that in Trulso also, had thus affirmed (which is the very truth as you may see
in the twenty eighth Canon of the Council of Chalcedon, and the words cited
from that in Trullo) he would have been called upon to have rubd his forehead
for his rashness as he may justly be called upon to do for accusing the Bishop
of Constantinople and his Clergy of this false dealing; for had he cast an eye
upon the Acts of this Council, he might have found Aetius the Archdeacon
reading thus, (...), these things were decreed by the hundred and fifty Bishops
met at Constantinople, and after other things concluding with this Canon (...).
So that I cannot imagine how Mr. C. will be able to free himself from the
imputation of a manifest untruth; and indeed it is a likely matter that such a
fraud should be committed, and the Roman Legates never object it, nor the Popes
amidst all they did to invalidate this act, not mention one syllable of this
deceit; so then it was not the Bishop and Clergy of Constantinople that made
this addition, but the General Council of Chalcedon, and after them of
Constantinople that so interpreted it.

And thus from the Council of Chalcedon, Nice, which tells us that the Ancient
customs should obtain in Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis; that the Bishop of
Alexandria enjoy a jurisdiction over them all, for as much as the Bishop of
Rome has the like custom, ( viz. to have power over the Suburbicarian
Regions) now to this he Answers, Mr. C. p. 64.
That the Roman Bishop in his Patriarchate is made the pattern of the Bishop of
Alexandria, not in regard of his universal jurisdiction in the Church of God,
(which in that time was not in being) but only as to his custom and practice
of calling Synods, correcting manners, making ordinations according tr his
Patriarchical and Metropolitical jurisdiction; for not only Patriarchical
(which Salmasius tells us was not then hatched) but Metropolitical authority is
spoken of in this Canon; so that it signifies no more then this, that the
Bishops of Rome did ordain either immediately or by commission all the Bishops
in the Suburbicarian Churches (and therefore) so ought the Bishop of Alexandria
to do in Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis.

Now 1. We Answer, Were this Canon to be limited to ordination, the custom of
calling Synods etc., seeing it is granted that as the Bishop of Rome did ordain
either immediately, or by commission from him, so must the Bishop of Antioch,
Alexandria, and other Provinces; hence it follows, that the Pope has nothing
to do in their ordinations, no more then they have to do with his; for such
ordinations as were performed by the delegates of the Pope, unless they were
supposed to consent to it, would neither be done by them immediately nor by
their Commission; and seeing as the learned Bishop Bramhal says, Rep. p. 193.
all other rights of jurisdiction follow the right of ordination, neither can
the Pope plead any jurisdiction over them.

2. In the Canon it is said (...), id est, as in Alexandria and Rome, so also in
Antioch, and other Provinces (...), that is the government, Hes. (...).
principalities, or dignities, shall be preserved to the Churches, and
consequently it speaks not of ordination, and power of calling of Synods only,
but of the whole jurisdiction of each Province, and comparing these with Rome,
and telling us that these prerogatives, shall be allowed to the Provinces of
Alexandria, etc. because the custom was such, that the Bishop of Rome had
(...) over the Provinces where he resided, it seems to argue, that the power of
the Roman Bishop was not universal, but confined to those Provinces the Canon
speaks of; for when we say that Italy reaches to the Ionian, Adriatic, and
Tyrrhenian Seas, and toward France and Germany to the Alps, we mean that it
is terminated there, and extends it self no further; and in like manner when we
describe the Dominions of a Prince or Emperor, so here when the Canon says
the Pope has (...) in his Provinces, it may consequently be argued that his
power is limited to them, and does not reach to the other Provinces attributed
to the Bishop of Antioch. Alexandria, etc. And as when the Patriarch of Antioch
or Jerusalem mentions his Bishops, he is supposed to understand such as are not
subject to the Bishop of Alexandria; even so here, when it is said the Bishop
of Allexandria shall have power over his Bishops, seeing the Bishop of Rome
has power over his, we are to understand by the Bishops of Alexandria such as
are not subject to the Roman Bishop, and consequently his Ecumenical power
must be here denied; and indeed unless the Roman Diocese were limited, it
could not possibly be a copy or reason of limiting the Alexandrian (it being
unreasonable to say Alexandria must have limits because Rome has none) which
yet that it was (besides the evidence of the words themselves) is the express
affirmation of one of their own Popes, who tells us That the Nicene Synod
conferred no increase on Rome, Nicholas 1. Ep. 8.
but rather took from Rome an example particularly what to give the Church of
Alexandria. Well then, if at the making of the Nicene Canon, Rome had bounds,
it must needs follow by the Ephesine Canon ( viz. that all Provinces everywhere
shall ordain their Bishops, within and by themselves, and that no Bishop shall
meddle with another Province which has not from the beginning been under him,
( i. e. his predecessors power) that these bounds must be at all tiems
observed, which is sufficiently destructive to the universal Pastorship of the
Roman See; for hence it is evident that an universal (...) or power of ordaining
belongs not to the Bishop of Rome, See Dr. Ham. Sch. disar. p. 105, 106, 107.
and therefore ordination and jurisdiction going together, he cannot have the
universal jurisdiction over Bishops, or which is all one, universal Pastorship.

3. That the Ancients understood it of government and (not only as to the
matter of ordination) in the sense we plead for, is apparent from their words;
thus Ruffin tells us that the mind of it is, that the Bishop of Alexandria
should have the care of Egypt, as the other had of the Suburbicarian Churches;
and Aristinus, a Greek Author, in his collection of Canons gives us the sixth
of Nice thus, Let the Bishop of Alexandria have (...) the government of Egypt,
Lybia, and Pentapolis; the Bishop of Rome of those Churches that are about his
City, ((...)) where the words (...) do exactly express Ruffinus's Suburbicarias
Ecclesias or regiones; yea the Arabic compilation of these Canons set out by
Turrianus the Jesuit speaks thus, It Is decreed that the Bishop of Egypt ( the
Alex. Patriarch) should preside and have power over all Egypt and all the
places and Castles that are about it (quia sic convenit) for so it is meet,
seeing the Bishop of Rome likewise has power over all the places which are
about it, and likewise the Bishop of Antioch, let him have power over that
whole Province; and the Paraphrase upon the Canon tells us, that this was done
because the Bishop of Rome had power over the Cities or places that were near
him; again Zonaras (with whom consent Balsamon and Nilus) says that the
Alexandrian Bishops shall preside over his Provinces, (...). Lastly, the Canon
as cited by Paschasinus the Popes Legate shows as much; Con. Chal.
for thus it runs, The Church of Rome always had its Primacy, ((...)) let
Egypt have so also, that the Bishop of Alexandria may have power of all (under
him) because the Roman Bishop has this custom, likewise he that is
constituted Bishop of Antioch: and in other Provinces, let the Church of larger
Cities have the Primacy. Does he speak of Primacy of order, which the Popes had
over all the world? then is it a ridiculous argument, and a contradiction; if
of jurisdiction, then was not the Pope to have any jurisdiction over them,
seeing they were all to have (...) Primacy of jurisdiction in their own
Provinces. Add to this the Councils following who generally thus interpret it.

Nor is this Supremacy condemned only by the Nicene, Council, and most
evidently by the Council of Chalcedon, An. Dom. 258.
but also by the Council of Carthage under Cyprian, which thus Decrees, That no
man should make himself Bishop of Bishops, or go about tyrannically to enforce
others to a necessity of obeying, seeing each Bishop has his liberty, and no
one may judge another, nor be judged of another, but they must all be judged of
God, in which Decree they directly strike at the priod of Pope Stephen, who had
styled himself Bishop of Bishops, and threatened excommunication to those that
thought otherwise, as even Baronius does acknowledge; A^. 258. Na. 42. An. ^41
in C^^^^. Afric. c. 15. and 12. An. 407. The Acts of the Council are extant
amongst the African Councils, Acts apud Bi^. p. 781. To. 1. Joct ^am cleri^atus
accipiant. c. 72. An. 416 in their letters to Pope Celastine.
yea the Council of Antioch decrees, That a person condemned by all the Bishops
of his Province, shall by no means be juaged by others, but the sentence of the
Bishops of his Province shall remain firm, unless the guilty person shall
appeal to a more pl^nary or General Council: The like we have in another
Council of Carthage in which it is decreed, That whoever are cast out of
communion in Africa, if they go to communicate bey^nd the Seas (they chiefly
aim at the Roman Church) shall l^se their Priesthood; now to take away appeals
to the Pope to reject his sentence of the persons appearing, is evidently to
destroy his Supremacy. Again in the sixth Council of Carthage at which St.
Austin was present, it was determined, That the Bishop of Rome should not
receive the Priests or excommunicate persons that appealed to him, and that for
this reason, because this was never derogated from the Africa Church by any
definition of their forefathers; and the Nicene Decree does commit both the
inferior Clergy and the Bishops themselves to their Metropolitans; for they
most prudently and justly provided, that all businesses should be finished in
the places where they were begun, and the Grace of the Holy Ghost (^^y they)
will not be wanting to each Province. Let this equity (therefore) be constantly
and prudently observed by Christ's Priests, especially seeing every man has
leave, (...).
if he be offended with the judgment of the known, to appeal to a Council of
his Province, or to a General Council, unless there be any man that can think
that God can inspire a justice of Trial into any one person (or Pope) and deny
it to innumerable that are convened in Council. And whereas the Bishop of Rome
would have sent his Legates into those parts to take cognifance of their
affairs, they Answered, That any should be sent as Legates from your Sanctity
to us, is a thing which we find not constituted by any Synod of the Fathers;
Can 26. al. 27. An. Do. 397. see Bin. To. 1. p. 759.
moreover in the third Courcil of Carthage they determined, That the Bishop of
the first See shall not be called the chief of the Priests, or the chief
Priest, or any such thing, but only the Bishop of the first See.

Again the second General Council determines, That the Bishops that are without
any Diocese, Extra dioecesia.
shall not intermeddle with the Churches beyond their bounds, (...).
but according to the Rules constituted ( viz. by the Nicene Synod) the Bishop
of Alexandria shall govern those only that are in Egypt; the Bishops of the
East shall take care only of the Eastern Churches (...). And again, The Bishops
uncalled shall not go beyond their Diocese to ordain Bishops, or dispose of any
Ecclesiastical causes, but shall observe the Rule above written, de unaquaque
dioecesi (says the Latin) for it is manifest by what is defined in the Nicene
Council that in every Province (...) the Provincial Synod ought to administer
and govern all things; Mr. C. p 53. What is this to the Bishop of Rome?
is this nothing to the Church of Rome? has the Bishop of Rome no Province?
did the Nicene Canon speak nothing of him? and if all things in every Province
must be determined by the Provincial Synod, what will become of Appeals to the
Church of Rome?

I will conclude with something which concerns our own Nation, Austin proposed
three things to the British Clergy; 1. That they should submit to the Romish
Bishop (whose very Name they were ignorant of at that time, Bish. Bra. Just.
vind. p. 103, 104.
as appears from their language, The man whom thou call the Pope.) 2. That
they should conform to the customs of the Roman Province about the observation
of Easter, and the administration of Baptism. And lastly, That they should join
with him in preaching to the Saxons, all the British Clergy assembled
themselves together in two several Synods one after another to deliberate
hereupon, Spel. con. an. 601. Galt. Mon. l. 2. c. 12. vid. Bed. his. l. 2. c. 2.
and after mature consideration they rejected all his propositions Synodically,
and refused flatly and unanimously to have any thing to do with him upon these
terms; these things being considered, must not our Author well deserve the
whetstone, Page 53.
when he so confidently affirms, That there was never any received Council in
Gods Church that excluded the Pope from an Universal jurisdiction? when as
besides the Council by me cited you have twenty more in the learned Crakanthorp
unanimously condemning this usurpation. Def. Eccles.


CHAP. VIII.
St. Gregory against the Popes Supremacy, Sect. 1. An objection answered, Sect.
2. It Is not safe to admit this Supremacy, Sect. 3. The instance of the Kings of
France considered, Sect 4. An Answer to his Questions, Sect 5. The Power we
assign to Bishops is not contrary to any Acts of Parliament or the Oath of
Supremacy, Sect. 6.

THirdly the Doctor argued from the known testimonies of St. Gregory, who flies
out excessively against the very name of Universal Bishop, calling it a wicked,
profane, and blasphemous title, importing that the times of Antichrist were at
hand, yea an imitation of the very Devil, who despising the Legions of Angels
socially created with him, endeavored to mount the top of singularity, Ep ex.
Reg. l. 4. cp. 38. It wasdone by Theodorus and Ischiron two distressed Deacons.
Dr. Field p 523. To John of Jerusalem by the Synod of Constant. sub. Menna.
Act. 5. p. 451. to Minnas by the same General. Council, Act. 4. p. 437, 438,
440. and by Justinian. Novel. 42. to Sergius Bishop of Constant. in the sixth
General Council, Act. 13. to Tharasius in the Nicene Council, Act. 3. and that
even by Hadrian the Pope, as well as other Bishops of the East.
that he might seem to be under none, sed solus praeesse videretur: to this we
are, 1. Told by him p. 38. That this very title was given to Pope Leo by the
Council of Chalcedon (attributing that to a General Council which was done by
an inconsiderable part of the Popes flatterers) but were this true as our
Adversary pretends, this title was attributed to others also, and therefore is
no fit medium to conclude the Universal Supremacy of any Patriarch, rather then
of all to whom it was given, especially seeing it is supposed to have been
given to the Pope by that very Council, which determined that the Bishop of
Constantinople should have equal prerogatives with him, to whom this title was
allowed. 2 He tells us, That John of Constantinople Ibid.
whilst he took this title, still acknowledged the Popes Superiority not only
of place but Authority over him. Ans. This affirmation is an immodest fiction
(to say no worse) built upon a forgery which he has used in foisting John into
the place of Eusebius, as before is showed. At last he comes to the business
and tells us, Sect. P. 39. s. 4.
That Gregory did not so much combat John's present intention as the probable
consequences of such a title, which might argue that besides himself there were
no Bishops in the Church; for if he were the Universal Bishop and the whole
world his Diocese, since by the Canons there can be but one Bishop in a place,
it would fellow that all others were only Bishops in Name, and by their
Character had no other office, but as his substitutes, depending on his will,
whereas the Apostles received their Office and Authority immediately from our
Lord himself. Ans. This is a profound Argument which Gregory (I am confident)
would have been ashamed of; for if the Pope be Universal Bishop (whether we
style him so or not) is not the whole World his Diocese? has he not Authority
to exercise the functions of a General Bishop in the whole World? and then does
it not follow with the same evidence of reason, that all the Bishops of the
World are only titular? 2. He manifestly opposes receiving a right of
Jurisdiction from any but Christ, and a receiving it from an Universal Bishop,
when he says, The Bishops (the Successors of the Apostle) would never
acknowledge the receiving of their Episcopal right of Jurisdiction from any but
Christ himself, not from an Universal Bishop as the words preceding manifestly
show; and yet he presently gives a reason which shows these two to be most
consistent; for says he, Though a particular Bishop be ordained by a
Metropolitan, etc. or Pope himself (might he not have said, or Universal
Bishop?) and his Jurisdiction be given him by them, they indeed are the
Ministers of Christ to conveigh his Authority, but the inherent Authority it
self Christ only gives him; by whose means I pray you? supposing him ordained
by the Pope, is it not by the means of the Universal Bishop? 3. It Is plain and
evident, that Gregory speaks against this title as that which argued the
subjection of all other Bishops and Patriarchs to him, as appears from these
passages. L 4 Ep. 30. Quae superviendo se caeteris praepomit. Ep. 34.
He that claims this title, i^ a forerunner of Antichrist, because in making
himself proud he sets himself before others, from the comparison of him with
the Devil, who in the singularity of his pride despised the equality of joy
among the Angels, saying, I will advance my Throne above the Stars of Heaven:
And again, What Answer will thou make to Christ the Head of the whole Church,
Ep. 38. Cuncta ejus membra tibi supponere. Ep. 34. Ut omnibus dignior esse
videatur. Ep. 36. Christi membra sibi subjugare. Ep. 18 Ut nulli subesse, and
solus omnibus par esse videretur. lb. Semet ipsum praeponere, cosque sub se
premere. Ep. 32. Sine aliorum imminutione. ep. 38. Restat ut ob vos Episcopi
non sitis.
who go about under the name of Universal Bishop to subdue all his members
unto thee? The like complaint he has to the Empress Constantia, That John
desired he might seem worthier than all others. To Eulogius Bishop of
Alexandria, that he studied by the haughtiness of a pompous title to subject
under him Christ's members: and to John himself, That he did affect that title,
that he might be subject to none, and seem only to be over all; that he desired
thereby to set himself before all other Bishops, and to press them under him;
and wishes, that this title might be attributed to one without the lessening
of all others, implying that in his judgment it could not be so.

But you will say, Solus conetur Episcopus appellari. Ibid.

Answ. Cupis Episcoporum nomen tui comparatione calcare. Ibid. Sacerdotum omnis
honor adimitur dum als uno universalis super omnes authoritas arrogatur. ep.
32. And again, Prisantur honor debito universi, dum quod aliis commune est, ut
privatum uni tribuitur; and a third time, Coercendus ille qui cord tumet and
honori imperii caeterorum se per privatum vocabulum superponit, Ibid. Ep 32. ad
Mauritium.
He sufficiently explains himself that he means this comparatively, not
absolutely, as if he should have said, You are indeed Bishops, but in
comparison of him you are none; for when the title of Universal is admitted
whereby one may be above another, and depress the rest, they fall from the
ancient right of Bishops, by which right they are of one merit and Priesthood;
neither does the potency of Rome make an higher Bishop, nor the poverty of
Eugubium a lower; all are deprived of this due honor, if any thing private be
given to one, and they in comparison of him are not to be dignified with the
name of Bishops.

2. He says it, because as he argued, if there should be any such Universal
Head, upon the failing of him, the whole Church, and consequently all the
Bishops of it must necessarily fail; and the same Argument we have in that
Epistle of Pelagius cited by our Author, where having told us, That if the
Supreme Patriarch should be called Universal, the title would be taken from the
rest (they being no longer (...) but under the dominion of another) He adds, If
John therefore be permitted to take this title, the honor of all Patriarchs is
denied, and probably he who is called Universal will perish in his error, and
there will not be found one Bishop in the State of Truth; so little was Papal
Infallibility dreamd of in in those days: Thus Dr. Hammond, As for Patriarchs,
it is manifest that the Universal Pastorship of one is a prejudice to that,
because a Primate or Patriarch (by the notation of each word) being one that
has none over him in respect of Authority or Power, and so is absolutely first
in his own Diocese; this supposing a supreme power in one must needs prejudge
that, as much as a Monarchick power in one is incompatible with an Aristocracy;
and this was the very reason why Pelagius and Gregory refused it, because they
should have wronged the rest of the Patriarchs in assuming it. Third Def. p.
406.

Now whether his asserting this Primacy, Novelty, whether his proofs or ours be
more concluding, let the Reader judge; I am content to refer it to his
conscience as our Author does. We come now to discuss the safety of admitting
this Supremacy. And, 1. Mr. C. p. 81.
Mr. C. assures us, That whilst such a Primacy purely Spiritual was
acknowledged (which for the first six hundred years was never so much as heard
of) the Church here was never torn in pieces with Schisms nor poisoned with
Heresies. Just. Vindic p. 58, 59.
Answ. Bishop Brumhal can tell you, No Saxon, English or British King ever
made any obliging solemn formal acknowledgement of their submission to the
Bishop of Rome; that the Popes power in England was of courtesy, not duty;
that former Kings were as tart and vehement against him as King Henry the
eighth, with this only difference, that they endeavored to draw the people out
of the Popes claws at home, and he thought it more expedient to cast the Pope
over the British Seas once for all; And if so, your very supposition will give
you the lie, unless you will sink down to Queen Mary's days. Secondly, If they
were not torn in pieces with Schisms, yet through your blood-thirsty tyranny
they were torn in pieces for Schisms, burned for Heresies, that is for the
plain evident Truths of the Gospel, by your ignorance branded with the odious
names of Schismatical and Heretical Tenants. Thirdly, I pray you tell me, were
there no Protestants in Queen Mary's days? did none suffer before her days
when you suppose the Supremacy of Antichrist agnized? how many righteous souls
were butchered by you in prosecution of your Sanguinary Articles against poor
Protestants? how many piles were builded in Queen Mary's days to sacrifice
their lives upon to your rage and malice? and durst you be so bloody against
those who were neither Schismatics nor Heretics? and what wonder is it that
you had no Schismatics, etc. when to be such was the sure way to have no
being, and they could find no other Answer to their Arguments but fire and
faggot; yea when the light was withheld from them that so they might not see
the truth! You go on and tell us, Ibid.
The Throne was never in the least danger upon that account, never was a sword
drawn for or against it. Answ. Very good, if Princes will crouch to his
Holiness, Nonne Rex Anglorum n^^er vass^llus est ^t (ut (...) di^ (...)
be his Vassals, suffer him to drein their Kingdoms, rob and beggar their
Subjects, exhaust their Dominions, he will not arm their Subjects against them,
dethrone them, or seek their ruin; but if they once offer to withstand his
tyranny, question his intolerable encroachments, cannot be content tha^ their
Subjects wealth should be converted into St. P^^^^ Patrimony, then must they be
Sacrifices to Papal (...) Witness that terrible and unparalleld excommunication
and interdiction of England, the deprivation of Henry the eighth published at
Dunkirk; witness the bull of Anathematization and deprivation by Pius the fifth
against Queen Elizabeth and all her adherents, absolving all her Subjects from
their Oath of Allegiance, without so much as an admonition preceding; witness
the Popes Negotiations with the English, Spanish, French, etc. to have Queen
Elizabeth taken away by murder, published at Rome by Hieronymo Culena
Secretary to the Cardinal Alexandrino, in the time and with the privilege of
Sixtus the fifth; witness the Legantine Authority given to Sanders, and the
hollowed Banner sent with him and Allen two Romish Priests to countenance the
Earl of Desmond in his rebellion; the Phaenix Plume sent to Terowen to
encourage him likewise in his rebellion, and a plenary indulgence for him and
all his assistants from Clement the eighth. Lastly, witness the two Briefs sent
by the same Pope to exclude King James from the inheritance of the Crown of
England, unless he would take an Oath to promote the Roman Catholic interest.
Witness the rebellious Tenants of your English Seminaries, the many treasons
and rebellions in the time of Qu. Elizabeth, and King James, all which you may
see in the Reverend Bishop Bramhal, page 136, 137, 138. of his Repli. so that
you do in effect say it is safe for his Majesty to admit the Popes Supremacy; for
otherwise he may expect the absolution of his Subjects from their obedience, a
Spanish Invasion, a Gunpowder Treason, or some other mischievous enterprises of
the Romish Emissaries to take away his life.

You tell us further, That the Kings of France account it one of the most
sparkling Jewels in their Crown, Ibid.
that they call themselves the eldest (and most devoted) sons of the Catholic
Church; the acknowledging the spiritual Primacy of the chief Pastor, they find
a greater honor and defense in them then many Armies would, because it
preserves peace and unity in the Kingdom, by subduing their minds and
captivating their consciences to faith and obedience. Answ. The acknowledgement
of the same Supremacy in the Turk (that civil Pope who gapes for the Universal
Monarchy) would be as great an expedient for peace and unity; let our Author
make the inference. Secondly, Why may we not deny, that this peace and unity is
not to be derived from the acknowledgement of the Popes Supremacy, seeing (as
our Author has it in another case) in so many places both they are not where
it is, and are where it is not (as under the Turks Dominions, etc.) Thirdly, We
tell you that his Majesty of France does not acknowledge the Popes Supremacy,
From. page 190, to 200.
as it is undeniably evinced by Bishop Bramhal in his just Vindication.

Lastly, You fall to Divining That without such an Authority all our preaching
and laws will prove but shaking Bulwarks for supporting Monarchy.

Answ. Very likely! for to be sure if your Priests and Jesuits (men born for
the subversion of Governments) be permitted, Hoc genns hominum natum est ad
interitum Christianae reipub. was the prediction of the University of Paris,
and it was confessed this was their business to set all on fire by John Brown a
Roman Priest. Prin introd. p. 202. N. 82. s. 20.
you will never leave your rebellious Attempts and treacherous conspiracies,
till you have brought us into new confusions, and built your nests upon our
ruins.

Again we are told how earnestly Roman Catholics here have protested their
renouncing any acknowledgment of the least degree of temporal power or
jurisdiction as of right belonging to the Pope, over any subject of his
Majesty's. See B. Bram p. 137, 138.


Answ. We cannot be ignorant that Campian being asked if the Pope should send
forces against the Queen, whether he would take part with the Queen or the
Pope, openly professed, and testified under his hand that he would stand for
the Pope; yea that his fellows being examined in like manner, either refused to
Answer, or gave such ambiguous and prevaricatory Answers, that some ingenuous
Catholics began to suspect that they fostered some tteachery, that the
Colleges or Seminaries of English Priests at Rome, at Rhemes, at Doway, held
that the Bishop of Rome has supreme authority and most full power over the
whole world, yea even in temporal matters: now whether you have changed these
opinions or no, we know not.

2. How long you will hold to this, whether after the declaration of the Pope
to the contrary, whether you will esteem his Majesty to have any subjects when
absolved by the Pope from his obedience; whether your acknowledgements be not
with mental reservations, and whether your intent be not (as in Queen
Elizabeth's time it was acknowledged by some of your own party) by reconciling
in confession to absolve every one in particular from all oaths of allegiance
and obedience to the Supreme power; See B. Bram. ib.
and whether you do not yet think, that faith with Heretics may be broken,
when the good of the Catholic cause requires it, may be doubted; and
therefore you are too hasty in concluding that you acknowledge merely a pure
spiritual authority in the Pope; have you the confidence to affirm it of your
Italian Papists or Jesuits? but to yield what you so confidently assert, and so
weakly prove, you Catechize us thus, Is this now dishonorable? is it unsafe?
Answ. Both. To whom? Answ. All Kings and people, the whole Church of God: You
reply, Catholic Princes protest against this opinion either of dishonor or
danger. Answ. No such thing, it being manifest that all Kingdoms and Republics
of the Roman communion do exempt themselves from this obedience to, and
jurisdiction of the Pope of Rome, or at least plead for it, when they have
occasion, Just. Vind. c. 7.
as is irrefragably evinced by Bishop Bramhal, yea particularly when Pope
Adrian would have had Hinemare (a man condemned by three French Synods for a
turbulent person, and deposed) sent to him, to recieve justice, the King of
France asked him What hell vomited out this law, what bottomless pit had
belched it forth? Yea further, when the Bishops of France were summoned by the
Pope to the Trent Council, he finding that all things were done at Rome, rather
then at Trent, does not only contemn all these Papal Decrees, but commands his
Bishops to depart and leave the Council, whether they were summoned by the Pope.

2. Are they not ever and anon crying out of grievances? complaining of the
Popes usurpations, and tyranny, exhausting the wealth of their Kingdoms,
prodigality of indulgences, etc. and is it safe to admit that power which has
such pernicious attendants; that power which albeit it should be purely
spiritual, is used almost everywhere in ordine ad temporalia, to enlarge the
Popes Coffers, and the like?

2. See B. ^am. Just. Vind. p. 161, 162.
They have more reason to acknowledge him then we; they profess him to have
been their Patriarch; but it is beyond all question he has no title to be ours.

3. They may Protest against a truth, esteem that not to be dishonorable which
indeed is so, as being a disclaiming of that power and care over Gods Church
which he has committed to them, suffering a proud ambitious Prelate to rob
them of the service they owe to Christ, and tyrannize it over the Bishops they
should protect, and the faith they are styled defenders of; but he proceeds, If
only (says he) to the dissenters from Catholic religion this be
dishonorable, Nero and Diocletian had reason on their sides when they
persecuted a religion dishonorable and dangerous to the Roman Em^ire.

Answ. But how will it appear to have been so (was it begun and upheld by
Treason, Rebellions, continual Bloodshed, all manner of vice and wickedness,
as the Romans evidently was and is) why forsooth neither St. Peter nor any
other Apostle or Bishops but were as to their spiritual Authority independent
on the Emperors?

Answ. But what of all this? did such intolerable extortions, excessive rapines
accompany the spiritual power of the Apostles or succeeding Bishops, as do
accompany this power of the Pope? was there the same reason to resist a power
proved to be derived from God, by signs and wonders, yea and manifestly tending
to the confirming obedience to higher powers, and to resist an evident
usurpation, and a tyrannical yoke, unjustly put upon the neck of those that are
by the law of God and nature, and the constitutions of the Kingdom free from
it, which is found to tend to the subversion of the true faith, and the
enslaving of the Kingdom; and was not the spiritual power of Bishops regulated
by Christian Emperors albeit it was wholly independent upon Pagans?

And what if we acknowledge a pure spiritual authority in our Bishops, over
their Presbyters and Diocese, to ordain, etc. (we acknowledge such a power in
the Pope over the Suburbicarian Provinces) may not the Bishop of Canterbury as
well require upon this account to exercise a jurisdiction over the Bishops in
Spain, France, etc. and say it would not be dishonorable to them to suffer
such an usurpation as the Pope exercises over us, because it is purely
spiritual? else would it be so, to suffer their own Bishops to exercise the
like authority. Is there any statute that hinders the exercise of this
authority by our Bishops? is it contrary to the Oath of Supremacy rightly
understood? does not Bishop Bramhal tell you,

1. That this Oath was composed only by Papists, Rep. p. 289, 290, 291, 292,
293.
no Protestants having any hand in it.

2. That they were zealous in defending the Doctrine contained in it.

3. That there is no supremacy ascribed to his Majesty in that Oath, but merely
Political, and such as is essentially annexed to the Imperial Crown of every
Sovereign Prince.

4. The addition of spiritual causes is thus to be understood;

1. Either by himself, or by fit substitutes, who are Ecclesiastical persons.

2. Of these causes which are handled in the exterior Court, not in the inner
Court of Conscience.

3. That as for other Ecclesiastical causes, his power consists in seeing that
Ecclesiastical Persons do their duties.

4. That this is plainly evinced to be the sense of the Oath from the 37. art.
of the Church of England.

5. That the same power is exercised by the King of Spain in Sicily, a lay
Chancellor in the Court Christian, and an Abbess over her Nuns. But you argue
thus, Our Clergy promise Canonical obedience to their Bishops; Page 83.
they do not so to the King; ergo they admit a jurisdiction in Bishops of which
the King is not the root.

Answ. We grant the whole; who ever thought that his Majesty was the root of
Episcopal jurisdiction, or that it was only jure Regio?

2. The Bishop that ordains us is authorized by his Majesty to require this
obedience, and therefore he is in a sense the root of it.

But you proceed to some questions worthy to be stated in a Court Sermon; only
the difficulty would be how to keep the Courtiers serious whilst they were
examined; Mr. C. p. 85.
thus then you argue; Is it dishonorable either to the King or Kingdom that a
purely spiritual authority should be acknowledged in him to whom,

1. This whole Kingdom from its first conversion to Christianity;

2. The whole Christian world submitted it self as to its supreme Pastor?

Answ. Yes, Because the person you speak of, is some Utopian Pastor, and both
these surmises are evident untruths. And is it honorable that the same
authority should be granted to more then twenty of his subjects?

Answ. Yes, because they have a right to it, As if the Bishops were indep. on
his Majesty.
he no title but usurpation, which it would be dishonorable to permit.

Again say you, Is it unsafe that Canonical obedience for Christian unity sake
should be professed to one Prelate (to whom we owe no obedience) a thousand
miles off?

Answ. Yes, because he is a thousand miles off.

And is there no danger in making the same profession to so many at home? (who
are by his Majesty over us, to whom Canonical obedience to all their lawful
commands is due, who are present with us.)

Answ. No. What follows, is a surmise that it is to be feared the Bishops may
depress, when their interest leads them to it, the royal prerogatives, and I
leave it to their Answer.

CHAP. IX. Of the Infallibility of the Church.
Mr. C's State of the question, Sect. 1. We acknowledge no (...) written
traditions as the rule of faith, Sect. 2. Why we p^efer the four first General
Councils before others, Sect. 3. Reason alone our guide, Sect. 4. Scripture and
the guidance of the Spirit are not excluded by this guide, ib. The fallibility
of it no prejudice against its guidance, Sect. 5. We own no judge of our faith
but Scripture, Sect. 6. Mr. C's. Calumny, Sect. 7. The Romanist not guided by
Reason, Scripture or Antiquity, Sect. 8. No necessity of an infallible judge
besides Scripture, Sect. 9. Mr. C's. Arguments for the Churches Infallibility;
first, From Deuteronomy. 17.8, 9, 10. Sect. 10. His second from Christ's promise of his
presence with his Disciples, considered, Sect. 11. From Christ's promise of his
presence with two or three, Sect. 12. Of leading his Church into all truth,
Sect. 13. That the gates of hell shall not prevail against her, Sect. 14. From
his command of obeying the Church, Sect. 15 From the unity of the Church, Sect.
16. Mr. C's abuse of Mr. Chillingworth, Sect. 17. These promises not to be
applied to particular Churches, Sect. 18. His Argument from St. Gregory,
Constant. and the Anathemas of Councils, Sect. 9. Bishop Bramhal and Dr.
Hammond plead not for such infallibility, Sect. 20. The Doctors Argument from
the prevailing of Arrianism defended, Sect. 21. From the opinion of the
Millenaries, Sect. 22. From giving the Eucharist to infants, Sect. 23.

IN his ninth Chapter concerning the Churches Infallibility, etc. the only rule
is the holy Scripture: But both Catholics, and English Protestants, though
they acknowledge Divine Revelations to be their only rule, yet they admit
certain universally received traditions, besides express Scripture. But as for
the guide, from which we are to learn the true sense of this rule, he tells us
That Dr. Pierce, Page 91.
and the generality of English Protestants own the primitive Church, or four
first General Councils; but since their writings, are as obnoxious to disputes,
as the Scriptures themselves, a speaking judge of the sense of all these, is
our Ecclesiastical Synods, or Bishops when Synods are dissolved; but
principally those that are to make or determine the sense of Acts of
Parliament, and upon those accounts against Sectaries they use the help of
Catholic weapons, the authority of the Church, etc. but against Catholics
they turn Fanatics, and fly to a kind of private spirit or reason, so that let
them Preach as much as they will, the result of all the dispute between them
and us, must come to this, whether their last speaking judge in England, or
ours in the whole Catholic Church, deserves better to be believed and relied
on. But its the Roman Catholic Church alone, that is guided both by reason,
God spirit, the primitive Church, and the visible Governors of the present
Church: this is the sum of his seven first Paragraphs, Through which runs such
a palpable vein of dissimulation and falsehood, that the most courteous charity
cannot excuse it from being as wilful, as gross. For,

1. You tell us, P. 90. s. 2.
That though we acknowledge Divine Revelations to be our only rule, yet we
admit beside express Scripture, certain universal Traditions for the rule of
faith; But what are these universally received traditions that we admit to be
rules of faith? why did you forbear to name some of them? and yet confidently
assert that we hold, what we know we do not hold? do not all English
Protestants prove against you, that Scripture is the sole and adequate rule of
faith? how then can they admit of any traditions as part of this rule? And
though we make use of universal tradition, yet not as a rule, but as a motive
or argument for our faith, as one argument that evidenceth the Scripture to be
Gods word, is the attestation of the Church in all ages (which upon rational
grounds we embrace as creditable) to confirm and conveigh this to us: and this
use we may make of the very testimonies of the bitterest enemies to
Christianity, such as Celsus, Julian, Porphyrie, etc.

But we (say you) Receive the determinations of the Primitive Church or four
first general Councils, (if we can believe you) we constitue judges of the
traditions received by us.

Answ. We do I confess, appeal to the four first general Councils, not because
we believe them infallible, but because we conceive them to agree with
Scripture, which is infallible; so that we make them secondary, not primary
guides; we resolve not our belief of their decrees into their authority, but
into their agreement with Scripture; we do not say, we must believe this or
that, because any one of the four first general Councils has defined it, but
because what the Council has defined, is evident in Scripture, therefore do we
believe it; And if we should find, that in any Article they dissented from
Scripture, we should in that as much oppose them as we do you: our Appeal then
to them is not as Rules, but as conformable to the Rule; and so we should to
the Council of Trent it self, had it been as Orthodox as they; but I hope we
should not thence make them guides, or their Decrees rules of our faith. Though
(that I may not be mistaken) I allow the four first a pre-eminence above the
ensuing Ecumenical Councils, (were there any such) because from their nearness
to the Apostolical times, they had greater advantage of being acquainted with
the Apostles minds and practices; but then the pre-eminence we grant them above
others, is derived from the probability of their consonancy with that which we
avow to be infallible. We appeal therefore to the four first general Councils,
not because we think it absolutely necessary to conform our belief to theirs,
but ex abundanti to show you, that should we appeal to the Church, as you would
have us, that in the most pure and uncorrupted Ages, its belief carried an
exact harmony with Ours; so that were the Church judge (as it is not) the
primitive Church would stand for us; And this is all we mean in our appeal to
the four first general Councils. How impertinent then is Mr. Cressys Dilemma,
P. 1. s. 8.
that if Dr. Pierce submit to the four first general Councils, not because of
their inherent authority, but because he judged their decisions conformable to
Gods express word, then he deludes us, and with Presbyterians, Independents,
etc. makes Scripture alone the rule of Reformation! How does he delude you? did
he ever deny this? what delusion is it to tell you that I hold what I hold? But
then (you say) Dr. Pierce must make Scripture his only rule; What then? nothing
but this, that Dr. Pierce affirms what he affirms, and what absurdity is that?
a shrewd Dilemma that forces Dr. Pierce to believe what he does believe! In
the next place, when you tell us, that beside reason, our Ecclesiastical
Synods, Bishops or Parliamnts are admitted as guides of our faith, you do but
evidence by your imputing to us what we hold not, you cannot confute what we
hold. For

We assert therefore that Reason alone is, and can be our guide which we
demonstrate, because Reason alone is our judge in all cases; for I either have
reason for my belief, (whatever it be) or I have not; if the latter, then my
belief is.

1. Irrational; for my belief must be Irrational, when I have no reason to
believe; and as Irrational, so

2. Altogether uncertain, and its object may as well be a falsehood as a truth,
because if I have no reason why I believe it true, then have I no certainty,
but it may be false; for the only certainty I can have that my belief is not
false, is because I have rational grounds to evidence it true, which when
removed, what certainty can I have that I do not err? But if the former, that
is, If whatsoever I believe or assent to, I do it because my reason judges it
a truth, then reason is my judge and guide in whatsoever I believe, which is
the proposition to be proved. And this is easily confirmed and illustrated by a
few particular considerations; as when the question is, Whether I am bound to
embrace any religion at all? I bring my reason to judge, which after it has
examined the weight and evidence of the arguments suggested to it, and found
them valid, determines and judges, that I ought to own some religion; after
this, my next enquiry is, Amongst the various kinds of Religion professed in
the world, which is the true one? here again having examined all their
pretenses, my reason judges which is most consonant to truth, and hereupon I
close with the Christian profession, because I find their arguments most valid,
and highly satisfactory to an ingenuous and unprejudiced understanding, and
such as carry with them so full an evidence, as that it will make all unbelief
infinitely irrational. And hitherto as reason is my only guide, so my only rule
too; for I can have no other Canon whereby to guide it, but its own
acknowledged Laws and Maxims, by which I examine the verity of all other
rules, and therefore can have no other rules whereby to judge, seeing they
themselves are the matters judged of; and therefore when we dispute with the
Romanists, whether Scripture be our sole rule whereby to determine
controversies, it is not to be taken absolutely, as if there were no other rule,
(for I can never confute a Jew from a text of the new Testament, nor an Atheist
or an Infidel out of either Testaments) but limitedly, that its the sole rule
whereby to determine controversies of faith, among those that profess the
Christian Religion; in which sense alone it concerns their dispute, which is
not with Infidels, but Christians, who have already acknowledged Scripture to
be a rule of faith. But to proceed, having by embracing the Christian Religion
received a new rule, the old guide may still suffice; that which could guide me
into the right way, will much more guide me in it, especially when its plain
and easy. But now Christianity is professed, and a new rule owned, my nex
quere is, what party among the several pretenders adhere to this rule, and so
with what Church I must join; here again reason must sit on the bench, and pass
judgment of all the Churches in the world, which of them keep to the rule of
faith, and which swerve from it. Let us then first call the Socinian Churches
to the bar; here the enquiry would be, whether I may embrace any thing for
Truth, though sufficiently manifested to be of Divine Revelation, if it seem to
contradict or thwart my reason? hereto reason it self must be judge, and so the
enquiry is, whether it be more rational to believe a Truth Divinely revealed
that I cannot comprehend, or upon that account to reject it; My reason judges
it most rational to captivate and submit it self to infinite Wisdom, and
believe what it cannot comprehend; because I, and all the World beside, do
acknowledge such things as transcend our comprehensions; v. g. an infinite
extension of space, an eternal duration, etc. and therefore I think not their
principle sufficient to explode a truth for a falsehood; beside, I know the
Divine knowledge and wisdom is infinite, and so incomprehensible to any sinite
and shallow intellect, and therefore that he may know and consequently reveal
such matters which are too deep and too wide to be contained within the bounds
of our narrow understandings; and therefore what more absurd then to measure
the immensity of the Divine wisdom by the standard of our imperfect and short
apprehensions? Wherefore we do not proscribe the Doctrine imputed to the
Socinians, because it makes reason the Judge (as the Romanists would fain
persuade us) but because it makes it the rule of Faith, and believes nothing
for a truth, but what we can comprehend as to the manner of its existence, that
it is; whereas nothing is more evident, then that we may be certain of the
being of a thing when we understand not the manner of its being. Though I have
been already too tedious in this instance, yet because I had rather offend by
tediousness, or any thing, rather then disingenuity, I must venture a very
short digression, to avoid dealing disingenuously with the Socinians. When then
I charge this principle upon them, I have it rather from their Adversaries then
from themselves; for I must profess, I could never meet with it expressly
asserted in their own writings; they will not avow, that they reject manifestly
revealed Truths, because they seem contradict ons; but on the contrary, that
they believe not contradictions, because not manifestly revealed, and so they
pretend to explode the Doctrine of the Trinity, not in the first place, because
it seems a contradiction, but because they conceive it not to be clearly
discovered in Scripture; and then after this, they urge against it its
repugnancy to the principles and common notions of reason; and so their
principle runs thus, That which is not clearly revealed in Scripture, and is
contradictory to reason, is not to be believed; and if there were as much truth
in the first part of their Maxim, as there is in the last, there would be one
more Socinian in the world then now there is; I have stayed the longer upon
this particular, because as its an irrefragable evidence of reasons
sovereignty, so is it a full Answer to the Objections against it; for whereas
they object, that we must captivate and submit our reasons to Faith, how then
can we make them Judges of our Faith? from the the preceding instance we Reply,
That we even then place reason on the Bench, when we seem to dethrone it, and
at the same time make it an Umpire, when we make it a Captive: But in the last
place, to come nearer our present purpose, and to show that the Romanists as
well as we do at last appeal to their private reasons: If my enquiry were,
Whether the Roman Church, or the reformed Churches were the true Church? here
neither the Romish Church, nor ours must be judge, seeing they both pretend to
it, and both are the purest to themselves: How then shall I know which is
really so? only by examining both their pleas, and then that which I judge to
be purest, do I adhere to. When Mr. Cressy renounced the Protestant Communion
to join with the Roman Church, he either did it upon motives of reason, or not;
if not, it was a brutish, unreasonable act; but if he did, then did he enter
into the Roman Communion, because his own reason judged it to be the purest
Church; and when he believes his Church infallible, he either has reason for
his belief, or he has not; if he has not, then again is his belief
irrational, uncertain, and absurd; if he has, then he believes his Church
infallible, because his reason judges it to be so, and so the Church is
beholden to the judgment of his private reason for his belief of her
infallibility. And has not Mr. C. given us his reasons (such as they are) why
he judges and believes the Church infallible? to what purpose if reason be so
unfit a Judge? and let him do what violence he can to his rational faculties,
unless he become a mere brute, his own private reason will rule him, and in
spite of Pope or Council keep the Chair. And I dare challenge all the
Romanists in the World to demonstrate, that unless every man's reason be his
guide, he must follow chance and uncertainty. Before I pass hence (to avoid
captious mistakes) be pleased to note, that when I make every man's reason his
guide, I do not exclude the guidance of the Divine Spirit, but rather imply it;
because that does not move us by irrational and violent impulses, but by
discovering to our reasons a fuller evidence or farther connection of truths,
then without its illumination we could have discerned, and so forces our
assents by a stronger conviction of our reasons, which is the Criterion whereby
we difference the impressions of the Divine Spirit from delusory and false
inspirations; in that these black vapors darken and blast our reasons, and act
us by illiterate and brutish phantasmes, whilst the Spirit of God clarifies our
understandings and leads us by the rules of reason and sobriety. And therefore
our Enthusiastical Sectaries, are in part Romish Proselytes; for their folly is
the same, though not in the same instance, viz. of quitting the surer conduct
of their reasons, to entrust themselves to more uncertain guides, and such as
they cannot know (unless from their reasons, which they dare not trust) but may
be mere delusions and impostures.

Now the only exception, C. following his predecessors, urges against this
Supreme Authority of reason, is, that its fallible, and so may deceive and
misguide us. But,

1. If this impeachment be valid, then lets renounce our reasons, and with one
consent turn Scepticks; how shall I be assured that twice two make four; that
the whole is more then a part; that the same thing cannot at the same time
exist and not exist? I must not trust the judgment of my reason, for that may
deceive, says Mr. Cressey; what then must I confide in? must I appeal to a
General Council, whether two and two make four?

2. Can you bring me to a surer guide then reason? Yes, you will answer, to the
Church; but if my reason being fallible may misguide me, why may it not; when
it conducts me to the Church; especially when your selves profess to believe
the Churches infallibility upon prudential motives, if I may not trust my
reason, why should I trust it here? Again, if my considence in the Churches
infallibility be built upon my reason, and I have no certainty of it but from
my reason, then cannot I have more assurance in the Churches guidance, then in
the conduct of my reason; for the superstructure cannot be stronger then the
foundation; if then my reason be too weak to trust to, much more that which is
built upon it.

3. What Is your meaning, when you object, that reason is fallible? is it this,
that its possible we may be deceived by it? but then, 1. Is it not possible the
Church may deceive us too? 2. As long as we follow reasons true rules, its
impossible to err, because they are certain and infallibly true. But if men
will abuse their reasons and bend them to their interests, they may so, and so
they may the Churches Authority; and may not the Church abuse her Authority?
will Christ violently force her into truth? Give us a guide that cannot be
abused by wicked and unreasonable men, or else upon that account reject not
this. Divine Revelations are abused by some to undermine our Faith; shall they
therefore not be allowed to be foundations of it? The question is, What is the
surest guide of our Faith? we say pure and unprejudiced reason, and that if we
will follow its dictates, we are in the safest way to happiness; and though
then we may err about some lesser truths, because not perspicuous, yet not
about any thing that is a necessary Article of Faith. But if men will not follow
their own guides, but force them into bypath, and follow the blind guides of
interest, prejudice, or passion, then they may perish, not because they follow
their free reasons, but because they either stifle, or violently divert them.

4. I would beseech Mr. C. and his brethren, to beware of strengthening the
hands of Atheists and Scepticks, whilst they endeavor to weaken ours; for
beside the damages they bring to all. Religion, its no small one they bring to
their own; for hereby they show, that upon the same grounds that a man is a
Papist, he may be an Atheist too, and that they cannot build their own Religion
but upon the ruins of all Religion. For let me ask, will not his exception
become an Atheists mouth, and be more serviceable to his cause then to Mr.
Cressey's? What if he should ask, Why do you embrace any Religion? give what
account you can, he will enquire what Warrant you have, that you are not
deceived? what assurance can we give him, if we dare not credit our own
saculties? and how Mr. C. who will not allow us to trust our own reason, will
answer him, I understand not. But I am certain, let him reply what he will, the
doubt will still return upon him; for if he take refuge at the Church, the
quere will be, how he is certain that the Church does not deceive him? And
imagine he could return an Answer, yet unless he at last appeal to his reason,
it will serve only to give occasion to a new question. But though Mr. C. by his
principles cannot answer a Sceptick, yet by ours we may satisfactorily answer
him; for I know, that if my faculties are right, and the common notions of
humane reason are true, that I err not, and I will never desire greater
assurance, that I am in the right, then that my faculties are so; and if the
Sceptick will rather reject all certainty, then acknowledge his faculties to be
true, his fancy is so odd, that upon the same score he may cast himself from a
precipice, because its possible he might only dream that he was there.

But let us talk what we will of reason, we have (as Mr. C. Mr. C. s. 4.
would persuade us) our last speaking Judge as well as they, viz. Our
Ecclesiastical Synods, or Bishops, or Parliaments; so that the result of all
dispute must come to this, whether the last speaking Judge in England, or that
in the whole Catholic Church, deserves better to be believed and relied on? To
this,

1. Have not you your self expressly set down the difference of Protestant
obedience from that of Papists unto the judgment of the Church? whose words
are these, which we find in the thirteenth phragraph of this Chapter: The
Universal Church representative has an influence over the souls of men,
requiring much more then an external submission, which yet is all that
Protestants will allow to the most authentic General Councils. Now what a vast
difference is there between giving external submission as we do, and internal
assent to the truth of their decrees as you do?

2. What Protestant ever asserted (what your Church challenges) that our
Convocations, Bishops, or Parliaments are Judges of our Faith? or when did they
themselves require that upon pain of damnation we should take up our faith upon
their Authority? nay when did they challenge any power over our minds and
consciences? do not our Divines affirm, that our internal actions fall not
under the verge or cognizance of any external power whatsoever, whether
Ecclesiastical or Temporal? do we not teach, that the end of the Government in
the Church is to preserve its peace and unity? and that whatsoever disturbs not
them, falls not under the Churches cog^isance? and that therefore our Church
does not condemn or punish so all difference from her in opinion, but for
divulging these differing opinions, which creates Schisms and Factions in the
Church? whom did our Convocations ever damn for not internally receiving their
Decrees? do they not leave every man to the liberty of his judgment? and only
challenge the Authority of it (which all men resign up to the Governors of
those Socieries, of which they are members) they do not require that we should
in all things believe as they believe, but that we should submit to their
determinations, and not contradict them; their decisions are not obtruded as
infallible Oracles, but only submitted to in order to peace and unity (which we
esteem to be of an infinitely greater value then the propagation of any little
truth) So that their work is rather to silence then determine disputes, or if
they do positively determine, they either do not then require that all should
positively believe their determinations, but expect that all should so far
acquiese therein, as not to proceed in opposing them, and so make Schisms and
divisions incurable; or if they do require a positive assent, its not upon
pretense of any infallibility, as your Church does, but because the thing
determined is so evident in Scripture, as that all denying of it, must be
willful. v. g. They do not require us to believe there is but one God upon
their Authority, but because its expressly asserted in Scripture; but in matters
which Scripture has left doubtful, our Church permits her members every one to
abound in his own sense, because she knows no way to determine them but by
Scripture, and therefore Scripture not having clearly revealed them, she dares
not be so arrogant, as positively to determine them. What impudence then is it
to charge us as if we had changed the Pope for my Lord of Canterbury? and a
General Council for a National Convocation? and the Conclave of Rome for a
Parliament at London? giving that very Authority to the Church of England, that
we take from the Church of Rome, when the difference is so infinitely great,
between the Authority which you give to your Church, and we give to ours?

Whereas Mr. C. etc. its a most pitiful and false exception; for we accuse not
Sectaries for not believing our Church, as the Romanists accuse us for not
believing theirs, but for not obeying her in things lawful, and separating from
her unnecessarily. Who ever urged them to believe as the Church believes? or
who ^amns them for not doing it? there are many Topics used to convince their
private reasons (the use of which we allow them) but the Churches infallible
Authority is none of them. Now is it all one to say you must believe this,
because the Church which is infallible asserts it, as you to us? and, you must
do this because the Church has enjoined it, and therefore not being unlawful,
ought for peace sake to be submitted to, as we to them? keep your weapons to
your selves, we can fight and conquer without them.

In the next place, Mr. C. s. 6.
and the primitive Church, this is but a specious pretense to varnish over
their Churches usurpations; when they have placed all these with their own
Church upon the bench, they signify no more there then do the Russian
Emperors poor Senators at the solemn audience of foreign Ambassadors, that
sit only to make a show. The same mockery do the Pontificians put upon
Scripture and Reason, etc. when they give them the name and title of judges,
and yet deny them the office of judges, and this they do when they make their
own Decrees our ultimate and supreme rule and guide; for if Scripturr must bend
to their Decrees, and not their decrees to Scripture, and if we must have no
sense of Scripture but what they think fit, then their Decrees and not
Scripture must be our last rule; for that is the rule to which other things are
reduced; if therefore from their Decrees we must receive the sense of
Scripture, which is Scripture it self, then are they the supreme standard and
rule of faith, and the sole judges of it; As a judge if he have an unlimited
power of interpreting the laws, would be both judge and law too. Thus when the
Norman Conqueror promised the English, that he would govern them by their own
Laws, yet if he did (as some say he did) take an absolute power of interpreting
them, and allow them to say only what he pleased, could he be thought to
satisfy his promise? might not all exclaim that his own will and tyranny, and
not the laws ruled them, because he ruled them after the same manner as he
would, if there had been no such laws, and so the laws were made useless, as if
they had never been laws? Thus the Romanists may tell us, that they acknowledge
Scripture to be in part our rule* yet if their Church must have an unlimited
power to interpret it, and put what sense upon it they please, and that we must
upon peril of Damnation receive their sense, howsoever it seem to us absurd and
contradictory to the Scripture it self, they need no more to shut out
Scripture, and to make themselves both sole Lords and rules of our faith; its
nothing for them to comply with Scripture, when they have forced that to comply
with them. After the same manner Councils and Fathers, and all their venerable
Antiquity (which they pretend so much to reverence) must truckle to their
present Church; for they will allow us to receive them no further then they
agree with their own Decrees, seeing we must fetch the sense of their writings
from their Decrees; so that Scriptures, Fathers, Councils, and all must bend to
their wills, and can give no other judgment then the Church of Rome will
permit, if we must (as they contend that we ought) receive their judgment from
the judgment of the Church of Rome. It Is a pretty device first to rule the
rule, and then to be ruled by it. When therefore they talk of other guides and
rules beside their own pride and tyranny, their hypocrisy is so transparent
through all its disguises, that we cannot but discern it, unless we were as
blind as they would have us; and lastly as for our private reasons, Mr. C. will
call them guides too; strange he dare trust himself with a guide so fallacious!
but to avoid the danger of that, it must with humility follow the Church; a
strange guide that must be tamely guided and led in a string by another! if the
Church can command our reasons, then must they necessarily cease to be guides,
and blindly follow her whithersoever she leads. I wish they would make their
Church but such a guide, and then we should soon agree in this point. If then
to exclude reason from guiding us be to become beasts (as Mr. C. teaches us in
the fifth Paragraph of this Chapter:) then what must all Romanists be? for
nothing is more plain, then that what is wholly guided by another, is not it
self a guide; otherwise every thing that is guided might be called a guide;
therefore if your reasons must follow the guidance of your Church, they cannot
be your guides, and then in your own opinions what difference between a
Catholic and his Ass?

Now at length having made my way through this black Regiment of falsehoods,

1. But he should first prove, that God has appointed an infallible judge, and
therefore its necessary there should be one, and not conclude that he has
appointed one, because he conceives a necessity of it. I could name an hundred
privileges, that Mr. C. could conceive to be highly beneficial to the Church,
which yet God never granted to it; and if we may deduce infallibility from the
necessity or convenience of it to secure us in our way to Heaven, and decide
our controversies, then why may we not conclude, that some body else beside
your Pope and Council is infallible? Is it not more conducive to these ends,
that every Bishop should be infallible? more still, that every Preacher? and
more yet, that every individual Christian? would not these infallibly secure
them from all danger of erring? Might not God send some infallible interpreter
from heaven, to expound all obscure and doubtful places of Scripture? might not
the Apostles have left us such a Commentary? might not God (if he had pleased)
have spoken so perspicuously in Scripture, that there should be no need of an
infallible interpreter to make it plainer? but if from the advantage and use of
these dispensations we should infer their actual existence, the conclusion
would confute the Premises.

2. The plea for an infallible guide, to secure us from wandering out of the way
to heaven, is invalidated by the plainness and easiness of the way, which we
cannot miss unless we will; so that he who will keep his eyes open, is in no
more danger of losing his way, then in the walks of his own garden; for we know
the conditions which God has made necessary to salvation are clear and easy,
unless God should bind us upon pain of damnation fully to know and believe
Articles obscure and ambiguous, and so damn men for not believing that the
truth whereof they could not discover, which is highly repugnant both to his
revealed goodness and justice. We therefore distinguish between points
fundamental and not sundamental, those being clearly revealed, and so of a
necessary belief; to determine their sense, there is no more need of a judge,
then for any other perspicious truth. What need of a judge to decide whether
Scripture affirms that there is but one God? that this God cannot lie? that
Jesus Christ was sent by his commission into the world? that he was crucified
and rose again? that without faith and obedience we cannot come to heaven?
these, and such like, are the truths we entitle Fundamental; and if the sense
of these need an infallible judge, then lets bring Euclids Elements to the
bar, and call for a judge to decide whether twice two make four. Then for
points not fundamental, their belief being not absolutely necessary to
salvation, we may err about them, and not err damnably, and so this plea for an
infallible judge is wholly evacuated. And with no more difficulty may we baffle
the other, taken from its necessity to determine controversies; for if any man
oppose fundamental doctrines, or any other evident truths, our Church can
censure him, without pretending to be infallible; what need of an infallible
judge to convict him of heresy, that shall deny the resurrection of the dead?
(which yet some of your own Popes have not believed, if some of your own
Historians may be believed) Then for Doctrines not fundamental, being not
clearly revealed, our Church does not take upon her to determine these, but if
any disputes arise about such points, its her work to silence and suppress
them, and when she gives her judgment of that side she thinks most probable,
though she does not expect that all her children should be so wise as to be of
her opinion, yet she expects they should be so modest, as not to contradict
her, which is as effectually available to end controversies as is your
pretended infallibility.

Now my next work must be to consider his arguments for their Churches
infallibility, and our submission to it,

His argument why we must stand to the Churches decisions, under pain of
damnation, is, because in Deuteronomy. 17.8, 9, 10. God commanded the Israelites in
all quarrels to Appeal to the Priests and Levites and stand to their sentence,
and enacted that the man who would do presumptuously, and would not hearken to
the Priest, should be put to death.

To pass by many other exceptions that might be made against this Argument,
only take notice,

1. That this Appeal was from the lesser Consistories to the great Sanhedrin,
only in civil and private quarrels, as is evident by the eighth verse, If there
arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment between blood and blood, between
plea and plea, between stroke and stroke, being matters of controversy, within
thy gates, etc. Now because these words so plainly import private injuries and
Law suits, Mr. C. jumps from them and cites 2 Chronicles. 19.8. where this is not so
plain, though plain enough too. Now what to his purpose can follow hence,
unless he will make out this consequence, We must submit to the decisions of
the Magistrate in all our contests and brawls, and therefore we must assent to
all the determinations of the Church as true and infallible! But these
proportions are at such a wide distance from each other, that I doubt he will
never be able to fit himself with a medius terminus large enough to couple them
together.

2. What more can be deduced hence, then that we are bound to submit to the
sentence of superiors? and this what Protestant denies? do not we plead for it
as well as you? but what like an Inference can be drawn from this, for an
internal submission of judgment? Nothing at all, till he can make good, that
we cannot submit to the sentence of our judges, unless we believe them just and
true. An assertion ridiculously false. But

3. You tell us, that in this obedience was employed an assent or submission of
judgment; but how Sir will you prove this? I dare not take your bare word for
it, notwithstanding your solemn protestation at the beginning of your book.

4. You tell us, that this assent and submission of judgment must be given;
otherwise the obedience would be against conscience, in case the party
continued in a contrary opinion of the sense of the Law. But we can not submit
to the judges sentence without hypocrisy, unless we assent to its equity?
suppose they should mistake (as you say they might) the innocent for the
injurious, must the party think himself a knave because they think so, like the
poor fellow that though he saw the Priest lie with his wife, yet did penance
for saying so, and was forced to say, Tongue thou lie. This is such an
assertion, that I believe never yet any Casuist dreamt of. When we appeal to
judges, our meaning is not we will think as they think, but we will
submissively acquiesce as they shall determine. Again, it is still more strange,
that when false judgment is given, the contending party must either believe a
lie, or must confront his conscience in not believing it; for if he assents not
to the equity of the decisions, he goes (say you) against his Conscience; and
if he does, he must believe against the truth, when he believes that to be the
sense of the law which is not.

Arg. 1.

Answ. 1. I might perhaps tell you, that the (...), which we translate the end
of the world, refers to the end of the Jewish state, and so signifies only the
end of that age; as frequently in scripture this very phrase signifies only
some great period of time; Now if this sense be taken, as no reason but it may,
then did this promise dye with the Apostles, and so could not be entaild on
their successors. But because I will not be too rigid with him, it shall be
The end of the world.

2. Mr. C. from this and the other ensuing arguments, endeavors to evince the
Infallibility of the Roman Church, which by reason of their impertinence the
Reader may have need to be minded of it, and then its pleasant to behold the
wide Chasme between his premises and conclusions, and the large leaps he is
forced to make from them to these. Christ has promised to be with his Apostles
to the end of the world, ergo the Roman Church is infallible. Well leapt! Is it
possble you should erect your infallibility upon such a foundation, were you
not first resolved to be infallible, and then catch at any thing to prove it?
For here is not one syllable of infallibility, and then why may not any other
privilege be promised here as well as that? I will be with you to the end of
the world, that is, say you, I will secure you from all error; and why not as
well, I will exempt you from all sin, or from all persecutions? are not these
as express in the promise as infallibility? and yet no body was ever yet so
foolish as to argue hence that the Church is free from all sin, and not liable
to any persecutions. Again could not Christ be with them, unless he endowed
them with infallibility? Is there no other way for him to be with his servants,
unless by inspiring them with that? Is not his spirit with every particular
believer as well as with the Church! and must all Christians be therefore
infallible? If, in a word, wherever Christ is present by his spirit, there is
no error, then is every individual Christian infallible, and then what need of
any other infallible guide? but if where Christ is present by his spirit, there
may be error, then how gross is the inference, that because Christ has
promised to be with his Church by his spirit, that therefore he exempts it from
all error?

3. This argument fights alike for every cause, and may be listed for the
service of all pretenders. What if the Church of England should arrogate
infallibility? would it not serve our turns as much as yours? What if the Greek
Church should urge it for themselves, how would you answer them? Is not this
consequence, Christ has promised to be with his Church to the end of the
world, ergo The Greek Church is infallible, as good as yours? that because our
Savior has made such a promise, ergo the Roman Church is infallible? What
disparity can you give, unless you first suppose what is to be proved! And then
what answer you would give to them, the same give to your selves.

Arg.

Ans. This Argument is far more frivolous (if that can be) then the former. Is
Infallibility promised here, or is it not? if not, then this Text is nothing to
the purpose; if it be, then 1. Wherever two or three Christians meet together
in Christ's Name they are infallible, and then what need of General Councils,
seeing two or three honest men can as infallibly decide all controversies? Mr.
C. must own this inference, if his own is good; seeing therefore this is false,
his can not be true. 2. Does not this Argument furnish every Conventicle with a
pretense to infallibility as much as your Church? Does it not as much justify
all the Doctrines vented at the Bull and Mouth, as the Canons of the Trent
Council? Suppose a Quaker there should urge this Argument for the truth of all
their Doctrines, how would you Answer him? fancy what Reply you please, and
that's the very same we give you. How strange is it that ever men should damn
one another for not believing the validity of such ridiculously absurd
deductions!

Ar. 3.

Answ. Now he seems to misgive, and a little to mince the matter: that the
Church shall be led into all necessary truths we assert; what need of his
running to that? either he would here prove the Church infallible in all
things, or not; if the latter, then he either gives up the cause, or beats
beside the Question; but if the former, then let him speak out, and let us see
how sound his proof is. Where then has Christ promised to lead his Church into
all truth? he knows there is no such promise in all the Bible, and therefore
sets down no particular Text, as he is wont to do in his other proofs. Such a
promise indeed Christ made to his Apostles, That he would send them his Spirit,
that should guide them into all truth, Joh. 16.13.
and show them things to come, which we find fulfilled, Act. 2. But how can we
prove that this promise appertains to any besides the Apostles? or if to any,
why to the Roman Church more than to the Greeks, the Abassines, the Georgians,
etc? Sure that Argument can not be faithful to you, that is as strong for your
adversaries as for your selves. Ob. But you are the Successors of the Apostles
and not they; A. But the mischief of it is, that this is the very thing to be
proved. Beside Christ here promises the power of Prophesying; but I hope the
Church of Rome does not undertake to foretell-things future (and though she
did, the event would soon confute her infallibility) and therefore this promise
belongs not to her. Its a pretty inference, that because the Apostles were
infallible, that therefore the Churches in all ages must be so; But prettier
still, that therefore the Roman Church particularly must be so.

Ar. Peter, the gates of hell (that is Heresy, say the Fathers) shall not
prevail; therefore it shall be infallibly free from Heresy.

Answ. As if he were not absurd enough in his former arguings, he must now be
impertinent too; what is it to the purpose to prove that God will preserve his
Church from being overcome with Heresies? which we grant; his task (if to the
purpose) is to prove, That God will preserve his Church from all manner of
erring. But what if Heresy shall not prevail against the true Church? does it
follow that it shall not prevail against any particular Church? the Greek
Church was once a true Church in your esteem, but now you say it is poisoned and
destroyed by Heresy. If then this promise was made to no particular Church,
why must it be so applied to your own particular Church? Before you use this
Argument to any purpose, first prove yours to be the Universal Church; but of
this you presume; its a sad symptom of the weakness of your cause, when you
build it upon begged and ungranted presumptions, and still suppose your most
difficult and material dispute to be granted.

Ar. 5. He has commanded, that whoever shall not obey his Church, Anathemas
pronounced by his Church are valid. Our Lord indeed speaks of decisions made by
a particular Church in quarrels among Brethren; therefore if disobedience to
such decisions be so grievously punished, what punishment may we suppose
attends such as are disobedient to the decisions of the Universal Church,
(called by the Apostles the pillar and ground of truth) made for the composing
of public debates about the common faith?

Answ. 1. Because his very objection has furnished us with a superfluity of
Answers, it will be superfluous to Criticize in the word (...), by not applying
it to any established Christian Government, when it may be, and by many
Interpreters is referred to the College or Assembly of the Elders among the
Jews; by others, to any multitude by agreement convened, as Justin Martyr
Paraphraseth it (...), and so may be equivalent with the (...), 1 Timothy 5.20.
and then what is all this to the Churches Authority? but let this go.

2. What Is this to Infallibility? will he infer that particular Churches are
infallible, because their Decisions must be submitted to? if he will, then he
proves what himself will deny, and constitutes us infallible Judges at home,
without recourse to Ecumenical Councils; but if he does not, then how enormous
is his deduction? because the Decisions of particular Churches, which are
granted to be fallible, must be obeyed, therefore the Church of Rome is
infallible.

3. Our Savior enjoined them obedience to the commands of the Scribes and
Pharisees, are they infallible too? children are commanded, Prove. 6. to be
subject to their Parents in all things, are all Fathers too therefore
infallible? we must obey the commands of Kings and Princes, cannot they err
neither? and is not the inference as concluding, We are bound to obey Parents
and Governors, ergo they are infallible; as because we are bound to obey the
Church, therefore that is infallible?

4. The judgment of the Church that must here be submitted to, is about
quarrels and injuries among Brethren; but does it follow, that because the
Church may be Judge of our quarrels, that it may be Judge of our faith too? if
it do, we will have all decided by our Judges of Assize, without going to Rome:
its time now you should have learned the difference of submitting to the
determinations of Judges in matters of right between man and man, from
assenting to their decrees in matters of faith between God and man.

5. The Greek Church says, she is the true Church and you are Heretics; but
to your selves you are the true Church, and she is Heretical. How shall I know
to which of your Churches this Text directs me? why is it not as cogent to
drive me to them as to you? if they tell me (as you do) that unless I obey the
Church that is their Church, I cease to be a Christian; how shall I answer
them? if you can teach me, you will but teach me how to answer you.

Ar.

A. Not to repeat that we have as sovereign a remedy to preserve unity, without
an infallible Authority, as you have with it: We believe the Churches unity,
yet believe too that this is only an unity of faith, and an agreement in the
essentials of Religion; we are all but one in Christianity, and so one Church.
But should we believe such an unity in the Church as that it should have no
diversity of opinions, (as you would persuade us) we must believe against
experience; for unless we will unchurch all parties but our own, (which would
be a most uncharitable presumption) we must acknowledge a diversity of opinions
in the true Church, and so not make unity of judgment in the Church an Article
of faith. And if there were no Church without it, then your selves must be
unchurched, seeing you cannot deny, but that there be variety of differing
opinions among your selves, even about the very means to preserve unity. Urge
us not then with this Argument any more, till you can prove, that we believe
any other unity in the Church, beside an unity and agreement in the Christian
faith, and that you are any more then so one among your selves. Now let all
that's rational judge, whether we have reason to believe your Commission Divine,
when you can exhibit no better Credentials for it, then these which we have so
clearly evinced to be mere blancks, and so your selves, who pretend from their
validity to be esteemed as infallible Commissaries authorized from Heaven, to
be most notorious cheats and impostors.

By these Answers, Mr. C. p. 101.
without flying to that miserable shift, which you most disingenuously fasten
on Mr. Chillingworth; viz. That all these promises are only conditional, and
depending on the piety of Church Governors: I say disingenuously. For,

1. Why did you not refer us to the page in Mr. Part 1. c 2. p. 86.
Chillingworth? only that your abuse of that worthy person might escape
unknown. For,

2. Mr. Chillingworths Answer is, that suppose, God had promised to assist the
Roman Church for the delivery of true Scripture, would it follow thence, that
he had obliged himself to teach them this true sense of Scripture, not only
sufficiently but irresistibly? he gave the children of Israel a fire to lead
them by night, and a pillar of cloud by day, but he constrained no man to
follow them; what then if your Church will not follow Gods guidance, is he not
free from his promise, and yet you in an error too? do not call this a shift,
but show that it is so.

3. That you may see Mr. Chillingworth could answer you without this shift,
read, and confute if you can the next immediately ensuing words. What an
impudence is it to pretend that your Church is infallibly directed concerning
the true meaning of the Scripture, whereas there are a thousand places of
Scripture, which you do not pretend certainly to understand, and about the
interpretation whereof your own Doctors differ among them^^ves? If your Church
be infallibly directed concerning the (...) meaning of Scripture, why do not
your Doctors follow her infallible direction? and if they do, how comes such
difference among them in their interpretations? Again, why does your Church
thus put her candle unde a Bushel, and keep her talent of interpreting
Scripture infallibly thus long wrapped up in Napkins? why sets she not forth
infallible Commentaries upon all the Bible? is it because this would not be
profitable to Christians, that Scripture should be interpreted? it is blasphemy
to say so; the Scripture it self tells us, all Scripture is profitable, and the
Scripture is not so much the words, as the sense thereof; and if it be not
profitable, why does she employ her Doctors to interpret Scripture fallibly?
unless we must think that fallible interpretations of Scripture are profitable,
but infallible interpretations would not be so: How durst you upbraid this
worthy and victorious Champion, as if he had no other shield wherewith to
defend himself, when this Argument is so full and cogent?

Well then, the sense of these promises (The gates of hell shall not prevail
against you, I will be with you to the Worlds end) is only this, That God will
so order it in his Providence, as that his Church shall still continue upon the
face of the earth, maugre all the malicious designs of men and devils to
overthrow, and quite extinguish her; And so your other quarrel with our
Protestant Writers is a mere impertinence, albeit we meet with it once and
again in your Treatise of Schism, where we will throw away some time in
confuting of it, seeing you are not pleased to afford us any better employment.

In your next Paragraph, Seeing these promises, P. 102.
( viz. which concern the Church essential, or diffused) are Yea and Amen, the
Doctor must apply them to his English Protestant Church, since he will not
allow them to the Catholic (i. e. Roman) for to some Church they must be
applied.

Answ. 1. As if there were no Church besides the Roman and the English Church
in Christendom: had the Church of Sardis thus argued for these Promises,
against the Church of Thyatira, or others now overrun with Mahumetisme, would
not the event have showed the fallacy?

2. The Doctor allows them to the Catholic in the sense we speak of, viz. That
however she may be distressed, and brought low, and seem to be disserted, yet
shall she continue and persevere to the worlds end; but does it follow, that
because he allows it to the Catholic, he must do it to the Roman (or any other
particular Church) which is but at best an infected member of the whole?

3. We will be so liberal, as to grant you a right in them, but your absurd
interpretations of them, and absurder deductions from them we deny; you must
first prove that any of them promise infallibility, before you conclude a
necessity from them, that some Church must be infallible.

And to what purpose do you annex a sentence of St. Gregory's, and another of
Constantines in defense of the four first General Councils? If (say you) the
Doctor applies these promises to his own, and not to the Catholic Church, then
does he condemn St. Gregory that professed he venerated the four first General
Councils ( ergo the Roman Church against which the Doctor disputes) as the four
Gospels; but the Doctor does allow them to the Catholic, and so no fear of
quarrelling with St. Gregory in their own account; yea he will not fear to
grant with the Reverend Archbishop, that they are de post facto (that is being
received by the Universal Church diffused) infallible, as to the matters of
faith determined by them; and yet this sequel seems somewhat harsh, I venerate
the four first General Councils as the four Gospels; ergo the promises cited by
Mr. C. belong to the (Roman) Catholic Church in all ages; an inference so
entirely absurd, and weak, that it is a shame to insult over it; nor will the
profession of Constantine any thing avail to prove the infallibility of the
Roman Church, but at the most of a General Council only; albeit I cannot see
but that it may fairly admit of another sense; for speaking of the Paschal
Feast, which the Council had decreed should be kept unanimously, he calls it a
Divine command, and gives this reason, because whatever is decreed in the
Councils of Bishops, (...), has respect to the Divine Will, they meddling not
with humane affairs, but Divine only; and yet we add, that if it were true,
which Constantine is deemed by him to say, it would little avail him, since
none of our controversies have been determined by a General Council against us;
albeit for a close, we dare not Idolize the holy Emperor so much as to think
his verdict infallible.

But when you talk of condemning all the Councils Ecumenical of Gods Church,
and our Acts of Parliament, viz. by denying your Church to be infallible (for
that is the dispute) you talk at random, and your reason, (because the Fathers
in these Councils pronounced Anathema's against those who would not believe
their decisions) is as weak, as it is old; for we have often returned unto you,
that these Anathema's are no good Arguments, that the propounders of them
conceive themselves infallible, but only that they conceive the Doctrines they
condemn evidently damnable, or at least contrary to Scripture and right reason,
and so proscribe them with a rational and humane certainty, (the same we have
in our Courts of Judicature, on which men's lives and estates wholly depend, and
yet are neither the Juries verdict, nor the Judges sentence infallible) as is
evident from this, that particular Councils, nay particular Fathers have been
very prodigal of their Anathema's, which yet were never conceived infallible,
Not words but things are the objects of our faith; therefore the introducing
new words is no making of new Articles; but if you will assert that under those
new expressions were couched new Articles too, upon this supposition it would
be no ill manners to reprove their presumption.
either by others or themselves; and thence it is apparent, that we are not
presently to yield up our assent to proposals, because attended with these
Anathema's, seeing by so doing we may assent to an untruth, and be obliged to
believe the contrary to what Scripture has revealed: nor can I imagine, to
what end you should inform us of new expressions in these General Councils, as
(...)(wherein you are mistaken) and (...), will this prove the Roman Church,
yea will it prove a Council to be infallible? this sure is an easy way to
become infallible: would you thence conclude their Authority to broach new
Doctrines? then must not Christ be thought (...), nor his Sacred Mother (...),
before the Nicene Council thus decreed, and what else you could design, I am
not able to imagine.

And have you not a good stock of confidence, Baxters Safe Religion, from p.
299, to 372. but especially from p. 357, to the end.

Lastly, How vainly do you call in the suffrage of the Reverend Bishop
Bramhall, and Dr. Ham. to conclude this infallibility, because forsooth they
promise to submit to a lawful General Council; seeing they also promise, and so
does every regular son of the Church of England, to submit to the
determinatious of the Church of England, and acquiesce in them, without the
least manner of opposition, and yet never dreamt of any infallibility residing
in them! Yea,

2. The places cited, speak only of a General Council, which finds an
approbation and reception among all the Bishops and Doctors of the Church
diffused. See Dr. H. Her. s. 13. nu. 2. s. 9. nu. 1.


3. Can they be esteemed to have said so much of the Roman Church, (whose
infallibility the Doctor questioned) and yet write so resolutely and
convincingly as they have done, against her tyranny and superstitions?

To the objection taken from that almost General Apostasy in the times of the
Emperor Constantius, Mr. C. p. 105.
That the Catholic Bishops were indeed persecuted and many banished, but not
one of them changed the profession of the Nicene Faith, unless you will accuse
Pope Liberius, who for a while dissembled, and then repented.

Answ. Can this be affirmed with any truth, when as that saying was almost
Proverbial, Athanasius opposed the world, and the world Athanasius: Theod. His.
l 2.
when Liberius having the contemptible paucity of his adherents objected to
him, Answered, There was a time when but three opposed the decree of the King,
and yet those three were in the right, and the rest in the wrong. Ep. 48 ad
Vincentiu^.
When the Professors of error (as St. Austin confesses) surpassed the number
of the Professors of truth in proportion, as the sands of the Sea do the Stars
of Heaven. When the Author of Nazianzens life testifies, That the Heresy of
Arius had possessed in a manner the whole extent of the world: I^ vita Naz. I^
Orat. con. Artan. and p^o^se ipso.
Yea and Nazianzene himself cries out, Where are they that reproach us with our
poverty, who define the Church by her multitude, and despise the little flock!
they have the people, but we the faith. Yea lastly, When Athanasius was so
overborn with floods of Arians, as that he was forced to write a Treatise on
purpose against those who judge of the truth only by plurality of adherents.
Her c. 6.
Did you never read Vincentius Lirin. complaining that Arianorum venenum non
jam portiunculam quandam, sed paene totum orbem contaminaverat, adeo ut prope
cunctis Latini nominis Episcopis, partim vi, partim fraud dece it is, calgio
quaedam mentibus effunderetur? Or^t in Athanas.
Nor that of Nazian. (...) except a very few, which either because of their
virtue resisted, or by reason of their obscurity were contemned, all ob^yed the
times, (i. e. became Arrians) differing only in this, that some did it earlier,
some later, some were ringleaders in that impiety (of Arianisme) some were in
the second place, either by fear or gain, flattery or ignorance, circumvented
and drawn in; which ignorance will not (says he) excuse them, it being
shameful for a Bishop to be ignorant of the principles of Faith. Nor that of
Basil, We may now say, that we have neither Princeps, Basil. ep 71.
Propheta, nor Praeses left us; in so much that he cries out, Has the Lord
quite deserted his Churches? is it the last hour? does the defection now take
place, by which the son of perdition is to be revealed? but if all these must
be overlooked, must you needs contradict St. Jerome whilst you had him before
your eyes, telling you that, tunc ousiae nomen abolitum est, tunc Nicenae fidei
damnatio conclamata est, ingemuit tot us orbis, etc. does St. Jerome here tell
you, that no Bishops changed the profession of the Nicene Faith, or did you say
it in despite to Dr. Field, who informs us, that in the Council of Seleucia and
Ariminum the Nicene Faith was condemned; and all the Bishops of the whole world
carried away with the sway of time, fell from the soundness of the Faith, only
Athanasius excepted, and some few Confessors, that sub Athanasii nomine
exulabant, as Hierome notes, writing against the Luciferians? His second
Answer is, Ibid.
That at first all the Articles made in the Council of Ariminum were perfectly
Orthodox, and that the Catholic Bishops subscribed to nothing, but what in
their sense was true, though defective in delivering all the truth; that
presently after being at liberty; themselves and all the rest renounced what
they had subscribed to.

Answ. We grant, that when the Council was first called, the major part were
Orthodox, Socrat. His. Ec. l. 42. c. 29.
as their Epistle to the Emperor Constantius shows; but that afterward they
relented and consented to the Arians, appears from the Epistle of Pope Liberius
to the Bishops of the East, who tells them, That albeit all the Bishops of the
West who met at Ariminum, Apud So^. l. 4. c. 11. and Sulpitius. l. 2. c. 58.
Plerique nostrorum partim imbecillitate ingenii, partim taedio peregrinationis
evicti dedere se adversariis -- sactaque semel inclinatione animorum catervatim
in partem alteram concessum donec ad viginti usque nostrorum numerus est
imminutus, that is till 400, came to 20. see c. 5, 6. Soz. His. Ecc. l. 7. c. 2.
and which either compelled by force, or enticed by deceits, a fide tum quidem
desciverant, yet now they were returned to a sound mind, subscribed to the
Nicene Faith, and renounced the form of Faith made by the Council of Ariminum
with an Anathema. So then all these Bishops of the West (as well as the whole
East, Jerusalem excepted) did a fide deficere, and albeit they afterward
renounced Arianisme, yet confessedly, for sometimes they yielded to it. And as
to their subscriptions to the Arian Creed, where the (...) was changed into
(...), if that were not contrary to the Doctrine of the Nicene Council, why did
the Orthodox Fathers so stiffly plead against it in the Council of Ariminum as
such? why did they not assent to the Arian Bishops, or the Emperor, who
required no more? See Soz. ubi su^ra. Sulp^c. S^^. l. 2. c. 55. ubi (...) crat
Seriptum quod unius est substantiae, illi (...) quod est similis substantiae
scriptum esse diccebant, concedeates sim litudinem dum adimerent unitatem.
yea, why did the Orthodox Fathers condemn and censure them as Arrians, who
subscribed to the Councils of Ariminum and Seleucia? but the contrary is
evident; for seeing nullum simile est idem, he that says that our Savior is
(...) cannot say that he is also (...).

Next for the Doctrine of the Millenaries he says, It Is great irreverence in
the Doctor, to charge upon the Primitive Church the sayings of two Fathers.

Answ. Were there but two that asserted it? might you not have found in the
renounced Dally, Papias, Justine, Irenaeus; Mr. C s 18. In his Letters to Mr.
E^^wich, to Dr. Tw^ss.
Tertullian, Ambrose, Lactantius, Victorinus, Amphilochius? to whom Mr. Mede
will add St. Cyprian, yea, and to boot will show, that it was favored even by
the General Council of Nice; and at last St. Jerome, albeit a professed enemy of
the opinion, will add that multi Ecclefiasticorum virorum and martyrum ista
dixerunt? and then might you not have multiplied your two into two hundred?

2. He Answers, That albeit Justin Martyr says, That all that are purely
Orthodox, held this Millenium; yet he thereby shows, that his own opinion was
not Universally embraced by the Church. I pray you Sir, what Topics do you use
to draw this sequel out of Justins words? especially when they run thus, Indeed
I acknowledge, there are some who are (not) pure and pious Christians, who thus
think; but they are only in name Christians, but indeed Atheists, and
arch-Hereticks; and anon bids Trypho not look upon such as Christians, and then
adds, (...). but I and all thoroughly Orthodox Christians, (not only in name) we
believe the resurrection and the Millenium, so that he excludes out of the roll
of the (...) those that believed not the Millenium: L. 3 Cont. Marc. c. 24.
Tertullian likewise brings it in with a Confitemur, we Christians confess,
etc. As for the double Millenary that our Author speaks of, it is very
unserviceable to him, seeing not one of these Fathers (except Lactantius, whom
yet Mr. Mede excuses) are suspected of it. His last refuge therefore is, that
it was never condemned by the Church.

Answ. This is not to the purpose; for seeing it is manifest, that it was
received by the Church of God for above two hundred years without any manner of
contradiction, either you must grant the Church fallible, as the Doctor thence
argues, or else speak out and say, That it is still to be embraced and believed
as the Primitive Church esteemed, and then your Church must have erred in not
believing but contradicting it as we see now they do.

Lastly, Touching the communicating of Infants, Maldonate, received as
necessary by the Church till six hundred years; he tells us, that St.
Augustine, etc. held a necessity that Infants should communicate of the flesh
and blood of our Lord, but this not Sacramentally, but spiritually, by such a
participation as may be had in Baptism: which Answer may be confuted out of
twenty passages of Saint Augustine. For,

1. He speaks expressly of the Sacrament, in his Tract against Pelagius and
Bonifacius, where comparing the Pelagians to the Manichees; Both of them, says
he, are unwilling to have Infants freed by the flesh and blood of Christ; the
first by denying that Christ took flesh; the second, by saying there is no evil
in them, from which by the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, they should be
freed.

And again having urged the necessity of Baptism to Salvation, he adds, When
Christ says, If you eat not my flesh, you shall not have life in you; should I
say that an Infant should have life, L. 3. Cont. Julian. c. 1. Dicturus fueram
parvulum habiturum vitam, qui sine islo sacramento finisset hans vitam! C. 12.
L. 5.
who ends his life without that Sacrament? Yea,

2. He speaks of their receiving the Sacrament after Baptism, and therefore
cannot be thought to speak of such a Spiritual participation of it, as might
there be had. Thus in his Book against Julian; Where will you put Infants? for
they shall want eternal life (although baptized) because they have not partaken
of the bread, etc. and so in his Hypognosticks (where in the Margent you find
Eucharistia infantibus, sub utraque specie, fit to admonish our Author, of
what we meet with in his Parenthesis) but most irrefragably in his book de
Peccati meritis, L. 1. c. 20.
and that in a place, which our Author refers me to for the contrary. Let us
hear our Lord, says he, speaking of the Sacrament of the holy Table, whether
none rightly comes, but he that is baptized; Quo nemo ^^te nisi Baptizatus
a^cedit.
and then citing the place, Unless you eat my flesh, etc he adds, Dare any say,
that the sentence belongs not to children, but that they may without the
participation of the body and blood of Christ, have life in themselves? and
tells us, we may as well conclude, that it belongs not to the adult: which
testimony does conclude most evidently the business; for these words, quo nemo
accedit nisi Baptizatus, cannot possibly be understood of any Spiritual
participation of the Sacrament at all, L. 10.
much less of such an one as may be had in the use of Baptism. Yea,

3. He speaks of Baptism and the Eucharist, as equally necessary, presses
them both with like Scriptures; and then what ground can there be to understand
the one Spiritually, the other Sacramentally? Thus when he writes in his Book
against two Epistles of Pelagius, You give to them that are not baptized a
place in Heaven, nor do you attend what is written; He that is not baptized
shall be damned; nor do you understand, that those cannot have life, who are
expertes corporis and sanguinis Christi, ipso dicente, Nisi manducaveritis,
etc. and in his 107. Epistle, he says, That Infants shall receive according to
what they have done in their body, when by the hearts and mouths of them that
hear them they believed, or not, at which time they were baptized or not, did
eat the flesh of Christ or not, and drink his blood or not; I say when these
things are so conjoined in the Series of his discourse, without the least
intimation of a diverse sense, what reason can we have so to interpret them?
nor do the places he refers to, conclude that St. Augustine meant the contrary,
to what these testimonies seem to speak; nor does he there say, as our Author
cites him, Baptism alone may suffice to the salvation of Infants: indeed one
of the places tells us, that there is full remission of sins in Baptism, and
consequently, if the person Baptized should instantly depart this life (si
continuo consequatur ab hac vita migratio) he will not be obnoxious to any
thing; agreeable to which, is the place cited from venerable Bede; but hence we
can only infer, that St. Austin thought in such a case of absolute necessity
they might be dispensed with, through the mercy of God; but yet it is evident,
he held they had a right to the Sacrament, and that ordinarily it was necessary
to their obtaining life eternal. Which also most evidently appears from the
Book cited by our Author cap. 24. (he cites cap. 22.) From an Ancient, and (as
I suppose) Apostolical Tradition, the Churches of Christ have this deeply
settled in them, that without Baptism, and the participation of the Lords
Supper, no man can attain to the Kingdom of God, nor yet to life eternal,
(which after he had endeavored to prove from 1 Peter 3. and John 6. he
proceeds thus) If therefore so many testimonies Divine convince us, that
everlasting life is not to be expected without Baptism, and the body and blood
of Christ, it is in vain to promise it to children without them: Now if this
opinion, which St. Austine says, was so deeply settled in the, See Austin. ep.
95. De usu Patrum. p. 263, 264.
Church of God, and which was held by Innocent the first, by St. Cyprian, and
others, (as Dally may inform you) be not a flat contradiction to the Trent
Councils, Anathema upon those, who hold Parvulis necessariam esse Eucharistiae
communionem, let any reasonable man judge.

CHAP. X.
The Question stated by Mr. C. Sect. 1. Prayer for the dead infers not
Purgatory, Sect. 3. The Doctrine of the Church of Rome not faithfully related,
Sect. 4. Prayer for the dead not of Apostolical Antiquity, Sect. 5. The
Testimony of St. Denis considered, Sect. 6. Of Tertullian, Sect. 7. Of St.
Cyprian, Sect. 8. St. Chrysostom, Sect. 9. Eusebius, Sect. 10. Epiphanius,
Sect. 11. An evasion confuted, Sect. 12. St. Ambrose, Sect. 13. St. Austin not
for Purgatory, Sect. 14. Mr. Cs. Dilemma considered, Sect. 15. Arguments
against Purgatory, Sect. 16, 17. Mr. Cs. Argument Answered, S. 18, 19.

IN this Chapter our Author tells us, That the Church obliges all Catholics
no further, Sect. 4. and 5. 111, 112.
then simply to believe there is a State or place of Souls, in which they are
capable of receiving help or ease by Prayers: whereupon he gives us a Prayer of
the Mass, which mercifully desires to all that rest in Christ a place of
refreshment, light and peace, through Christ our Lord: and also another, which
beseeches the Lord to absolve the soul of his servant from all the Chains of
his sin. Now (says he) if it can be demonstrated, That by the Universal
practice of the Church such Prayers as these were made for the dead; it
unavoydably follows, that the souls for whom they are made are neither in
Heaven, nor Hell; and if so, where are they, Dr. Pierce? speak like an honest
man.

Answer, This is a shrewd Argument, which forces the Doctor either to lose his
Honesty, or his Cause. But sure the Case is not so desperate: For were this the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome, (which yet is an evident untruth; and were
these Prayers used from the beginning, and that through the Universal Church of
God) which cannot be proved) yet would I defy his Conclusion, and his Argument
to infer it.

For 1. one Saint, one Martyr, nay, not the Virgin Mary her self now in Heaven:
seeing the Prayer begs this to all that rest in Christ, Sess. 9. De invocatione
Sanctorum.
and then farewell the Council of Trent, which talks of Saints reigning with
Christ; and aeterna felicitate in Coelo fruentium. Nay the Liturgy of Saint
James prays for the Spirits of all flesh which they had prayed for and which
they had not, from righteous Abel to that very day, that they might rest in the
Region of the living, in the Kingdom of God, in the delights of Paradise, in
the bosom of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob: And yet will our Author say, That
there is not one of these souls in Heaven? And so for the absolving of their
sins (which is his second instance:) The Liturgy of Saint Crhysostom: Prays
for all the Fathers and Brethren, (...), that had gone before them, for all
that had labored and administered in the Holy Function before them; for the
forgiveness of the sins of the builders of their Mansions, worthy to be had in
perpetual remembrance, and prays God to pardon ((...)) all the Orthodox
Fathers and Brethren which slept in the Communion of God, in the hope of the
Resurrection, and Eternal Life. Dall. de Satisfact. page 510. And likewise
Saint Augustine prays for his Mother that the Lord would pardon her sins.
Confess. l. 9 c. 13
I know, O Lord, (says he) That she was merciful, and from her heart forgave
her Debtors. Do thou therefore forgive her debts, if she has contracted any
after her Baptism, for so many years: Forgive her Lord, forgive her. I beseech
thee do not thou enter into judgment with her; And so on: and yet the same
Austin tells us, what ever it be that is signified by Abraham's bosom, there
his Mother is, ibi vivit; nam quis alius tali animae locus, for what other
place was fitting for her? Of such prayers our Author may find good store in
Dall. ubi supra, and page 520. Now then, is Abraham's bosom Purgatory? Are all
the Orthodox Fathers in Purgatory? or if not, is it not evident that the Church
has made such prayers for those that are not in Purgatory?

2. We shall tell him, in the sequel of the Chapter, That these prayers of the
Fathers depended partly upon suppositions exploded by the Romanist himself,
partly upon other things, which cannot suppose a Purgatory in the mild'st sense.

place wherein souls are capable of receiving help or ease by prayers, why then
may it not be Heaven? for the souls there may be helped to a fuller state of
Glory by our prayers, as the Fathers generally affirm.

2. The Trent Council tells us that the Catholic Church out of Scripture, and
the ancient Tradition of the Fathers, and the holy Councils, has taught us
that there is a Purgatory, and thereupon commands the Bishops to be diligent
that the sound Doctrine of Purgatory taught by the Fathers and Councils should
be believed, held, and every where preached.

Now I ask, whether the Scriptures, Thus Bellarmine. lib. 2. c. 10. That there
is some fire in Purgatory, appears from these words of Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 3. He
shall, etc. So also from the Testimony of the Fathers eited in the first Book,
who generally call the punishment of Purgatory fire, and this he puts among the
thing in which all agree.
upon which especially they build their Purgatory, be not such as these: They
shall be saved, yet so as by fire; some sins are forgiven in this world, some
in the world to come? And as for the Tradition of the Fathers, is not the
purging fire they speak of most insisted on? And do not many of the places
cited by our Author speak of the pardon of their sins? Well then, if this was
the Doctrine confirmed by Scripture, and delivered by Tradition of the Fathers,
then must Purgatory needs be a place of fire wherein the souls are tormented,
or something analogous thereunto.

2. It must needs follow, that Purgatory is a place where souls be imprisoned
till they have satisfied for their sins.

3. Is it not the common Doctrine that sounds almost in every Pulpit, that
Purgatory is a place under the Earth, in the lower regions of it, wherein some
souls departed are grievously tormented, and where they are to continue till
they have satisfied Gods Justice for some venial sins, unless they can be helped
out sooner by the prayers of the living, sacrifice of the Mass indulgences of
the Pope, etc. Let Master Cressy speak his Conscience, whether this be not the
Doctrine most frequently taught in their writings, and in their Sermons ad
populum: And being so, I ask him whether it be the sana doctrina the Trent
Council speaks of: If it be not, then are all their Bishops disobedient to this
Council which charges them to look to it generally that the sound Doctrine be
taught: And if so, either this disobedience is wilful and contrary to their
knowledge, and so they live continually in a wilful sin; or from ignorance of
the true Doctrine of the Church; and then must our Author say, that he knows
the Doctrine of the Church better then all these Bishops. If it be, then is the
Doctrine which we commonly oppose the Doctrine of the Church of Rome.

Again, are these things tending to Edification, or not? if not, then are all
the Bishops in fault for suffering them to be taught, contrary to the Council:
If they be, then I hope they are the sound Doctrine of Purgatory The Trent
Council speaks of.

Again, De Puigatorio.
Their Bellarmine will tell us, l. 2. c. 6. That Purgatory is in a place nigh
unto the damned, and prove it from the second of the Acts, solutis doloribus
inferni, the pains of Hell being loosed, which Saint Augustine (says he)
understands of Purgatory: and that hence it is, that the Church in the Mass for
the Dead says, Deliver the Souls departed from the punishments of Hell, and
the deep Lake:
Libera animas defunctorum de paenis inferni, and de profundo lacu. Yea,
secondly, He will tell you from the venerable Beda, That this was confirmed by
a Vision wherein Purgatory was seen next to Hell: And thirdly, that omnes fere
Theologi, almost all their Divines assert, that the souls in Purgatory are in
the same place, and tormented with the same fire as the damned are. Well then,
first if the Mass prays that the souls in Purgatory may be deliverd from the
punishment infernal, and de profundo lacu, then must they be supposed to be in
some infernal place; if almost all the Divines teach this place to be the same
with that in which the damned are tormented, then must almost all the Divines
be guilty of contradicting the Decree of the Synod of Trent, all the Bishops be
negligent of the charge there given, or else this which they teach must be the
sana Doctrina which it required to be held. Sess. ult. doc. de Purg.
Again, I suppose, your Trent Council when it speaks of holy Councils defining
Purgatory, excludes not the Florentine which thus defines it; That if true
penitents depart in the love of God, before they have satisfied for their sins
of Omission or Commission, by fruits of repentance, their souls go to Purgatory
to be purged: and the Indulgencies which the Pope gives sometimes to these poor
souls are nothing else but the Application of the satisfaction of Christ, or
his Saints to the dead. So then out of these things so deduced, we have all
that usually we charge you with.

First, That there are some sins venial, such as if God should deal with men in
rigor deserve only a temporal punishment.

Secondly, That you hold, that albeit the sin may be pardoned and remitted, yet
there may be a guilt of punishment to be endured for it. This is clear from the
Council of Florence, and these two Bellarmine joins together; De Purg. l. 2. c.
2.
The true and Catholic opinion is, that Purgatory is a place appointed for
those that die with some venial sins, which are the hay and stubble mentioned,
1 Cor. 3. and again, for those that depart with the guilt of punishment, the
fault being formerly remitted.

Thirdly, That you say the souls of many that die in the Lord go into
Purgatory, to satisfy for these venial sins, or to undergo the Temporal
punishments due to these sins whose fault is pardoned.

Fourthly, That this Purgatory whither they go is a place of punishment next to
Hell, and that there they are tormented with the same torments which the damned
suffer, however they may differ for Degree and Space. Now these are things
which all your skill shall never be able to deduce from prayers as they were
used by the ancients for the dead.

And first, whereas you say, De Satisfac. page 452.
these prayers for the dead have confessed Apostolical antiquity to plead for
them; here Dally telling you, That of the custom of praying for the Dead,
Justine and Irenaeus who flourished in the second Age, do make no mention; so
that it is credible it came in after that Age, for Causes we shall hereafter
mention.

But to pass on to your proofs, p. 112. Sect. 6.
you tell us That the Author of the Book fathered on Saint Denis the
Areopagite, by Confession of Protestants, lived within the second Century after
the Apostles, when as even Bishop Forbs, upon the Question, tells you that he
lived in the third or rather the fourth Century; and it is clear that he speaks
of Monks, which had no being till the third Century of Temples, and Altars,
which Origin and Arnobius, who flourished in the third Century, have told us
the Christians never had. And therefore whereas he says, that what he teaches
he had from the Apostles, his Divine Teachers, this lie can sure avail you
nothing, but to evidence how willing cheats are to put off their ware at the
best hand. But as he is, let us hear him telling us what the Priests demand
from God, for the person departed, Eccles. Hist. c. 7.
a pardon of all fins committed by him through humane frailty, and that he may
be conducted into Abraham's bosom, into a place from which grief, sadness and
mourning, was banished: But that this place of Dionysius makes nothing for
Purgatory, appears, first, in that the party is described by him to have
departed out of this life replenished with Divine joy, as now not fearing any
change to worse, being come to the end of all his labor, and to have been both
privately acknowledged by his friends, and publicly pronounced by the
Ministers of the Church to be a happy man, See Dr. Fern against Spencer, C. de
Purgatorio.
and to be verily admitted into the society of the Saints that have been from
the beginning of the world.

Secondly, in that the Bishop or Priest, so praying, is said by him to be the
Interpreter or publisher of the Divine Judgments; viz. in giving rewards
according as men deserve: And how that the Divine loving kindness, in great
goodness, over-looks their infirmities, or spots and stains of sin contracted
by humane weakness. Thus that prayer which begs the full forgiveness of his
sins is doctrine to the living, showing and assuring them of Gods mercy to them
that strive to live well; notwithstanding through humane weakness they offend
often, and cannot be free from all spots and stains of sin. Then in relation,
as it seems, to the other part of the prayer which begged, that he might be
placed in light, etc. This Author adds: The Bishop or Priest knows such good
things are promised, and therefore prays that they may come to pass and be
given to them that have lived well. Also he knows that the good things promised
will come to pass; and therefore as the Interpreter of Gods Will, he shows that
they will surely be made good to them that so live and die; and if these be the
intents of this prayer, surely they will not conclude a Purgatory. Well then;
when he prays for the pardon of his fin, he refers to that second sentence of
the day of Judgment, that God would then proclaim him pardoned, and then would
receive him into heaven, Ibid. c. 7.
both as to body and soul: And hence our Dionysius tells us, that in these
Solemnities the Church was wont to read the undoubted promises which were
recorded touching the resurrection; and then devoutly sang Psalms of the same
Argument: As you may see in Bishop Usher, page 205.

Secondly, as for that of Tertullian, faithful wife pray for the soul of her
husband -- begging for him refreshment, and a part in the first resurrection:
Ter. de Mon, c. 19.
Dally will tell you, First that he was infected with the error of the
Millenaries, and thence it was that he required her to pray for a part in the
first resurrection, supposing some to be raised sooner, and some later, within
that 1000. years. Or secondly, that this refreshment is begged at the day of
Judgment, or the Resurrection, See Dall. p. 513. 517. Digna co loco solatia
and refrigeria.
and that the Ancients supposing those that were departed to be touched with a
longing desire of being in Heaven, they begged a refrigerium to them, that is,
the enjoyment of such comforts as they were thought to have had while they lay
in the bosom of Abraham, expecting the Resurrection.

As touching the place of Saint Cyprian, Epist. 66.
the Answer lies hid in a word which he has cheatingly concealed in his
Translation; for whereas Ib. p. 116. p. 516.
he has Translated it, that no Oblation shall be made for him; viz. That names
in his Will for an Executor an Ecclesiastical person, The Latin has it pre
Dormitione ejus: (and as Dally answers his Bellarm.) refers to the
Eucharistical thanksgivings, which they offered ob Dormitionem ejus, that the
faithful soul was delivered from the evils of the world; which he confirms from
the testimony of the Author of the Commentary on Job, commonly ascribed to
Origin; And from Saint Ambrose, who tells us, Diem quo obierint (sancti sc.) De
Cor. Mil. c. 3. See Dally, p. 516.
colebri solennitate renovamus, which is as far from Purgatory, as Earth from
Heaven. And this is that which Tertullian says, Tradition was the Author, and
Custom the confirmer of.

The first Testimony which he borrows from Chrysostom, tell us only this, That
according to the Apostles Institution, In Ep. ad Philip. c. 1. Hom. 3.
Commemoration was made of the dead.

Secondly, That this was done that some comfort and refreshment might accrue to
them thereby. Now that the first comes not up to a show of any proof for
Purgatory, is evident to any eye but blur'd with prejudice, as appears from
those many other ends, for which the Fathers esteemed it useful; as to bring
and keep their souls in Abraham's bosom, See Dally, de Satisfac. l 5. c. 12.
to procure them a portion in the millenary reignhere on earth, an augmentation
of their Glory, to procure the Resurrection of their bodles, an abatement or
exemption from the flames of the last day, and the rigor of the last judgment.

And as for the second, Hom. Cor. in c. 15. v. 46.
S. Chrysostom. might well say, that 'twas not in vain to pray for sinners, when
he held that thereby the torments of the greatest sinners were or might be
alleviated, as appears from his, 21. Hom. on the Acts of the Apostles, where
speaking of a man who had not lived one day to himself, but to Voluptuousness,
Intemperance, Covetousness, to sin, and the Devil; if he chance to die (says
he) shall we not mourn for him? shall we not endeavor to pull him out of these
dangers? For there be ways, if we will, whereby his punishment may be made
light for him: If then we do continually make prayers for him, if we bestow
Alms, though he be unworthy, God will respect us: And whereas he adds, that it
was the practice of the Church, we grant it; but the Church then practiced it
for the ends now specified, not because she believed the Roman Purgatory. For
that Saint Chrysostom thought that the parties deceast if they had lived well
were in a state of Joy, and not of Grief, appears by the funeral Ordinances of
the Church related by him, which were appointed to admonish the living of it.
Hom. 4. in Ep. ad Hebr.
For tell me (says he) What do the bright Lamps mean? Do we not accompany them
therewith as Champions? what mean the Hymns? Consider what thou do sing at
that time. Return my Soul unto thy rest, for the Lord has dealt bountifully
with thee. And again, I will fear no evil, because thou art with me. And again,
Thou art my refuge from the affliction that compasses me: Consider what these
Psalms mean. The same General Practice, and the like Intention of the Church
therein, is expressed and earnestly urged by him in the same Homily on the
Epistle to the Hebrews. Do we not praise God, and give thanks unto him for that
he has now crowned him that is departed, for that he has freed him from his
labors, for that quitting him from fear be keeps him with himself? Are not
the Hymns for this End? Is not the singing of Psalms for this purpose? All
these be tokens of rejoicing. Whereupon he thus presses them that used
immoderate mourning for the dead. Thou say return O my soul unto thy rest,
for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee, and do thou weep? Is not this
Stage Plays? Is it not mere simulation? For if thou do indeed believe the
things that thou say thou lamentest idly; But if thou playest and
dissemblest and think those things to be Fables, why do thou then sing?
why do thou suffer those things that are done? wherefore do thou not drive
away them that sing? And in the end he concludes somewhat prophetically: That
he very much feared, lest by this means some grievous disease should creep in
upon the Church. Whether the Doctrine now maintained in the Church of Rome,
that the Children of God, presently after their departure out of this life, are
cast into a Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone, be not a spice of this
disease; and whether their practice in chanting of Psalms (appointed for the
expression of joy and thankfulness) over them whom they esteem to be tormented
in so lamentable a fashion, be not a part of that Scene and Pageantry, at which
Saint Chrysostom does so take on, I leave it unto others to judge; That his
fear was not altogether vain, the event it self does show.

The Citation out of Eusebius touching the prayers of the people and clergy,
not without tears and groanings, De vita Constan. l. 4 c. 9.
for the soul of Constantine, what does it infer more then this, that they were
earnest with God, that his soul might be partaker of some of those various
benefits which we mentioned before, and none of which at all refer to
Purgatory? But yet notwithstanding, that they thought the Emperor in a State
of Bliss must needs be granted, if we suppose them to have believed what he
told them, being at the point of death, that he had now attained the true life,
Eusebius. de vita Constant. l. 4 c. 63.
and that none but himself did understand of what happiness he was made
partaker; and that therefore he hastened his going immediately to God.

As to that of Epiphanius, That prayers made f^^ the dead profit us, albeit
they do not blot out entirely all (mortal) sins: First, if this word stand
which he puts in, then must it be granted that they alleviate even Mortal sins,
and are well made for those that dye under the guilt of them, and then he is
necessarily to be understood in Saint Chrysostomes sense, or else he
contradicts the known Doctrine of the Church of Rome; which is, that those
prayers are not made for any that dye under the guilt of Mortal sin. And indeed
if this be the sense, viz. That prayers for the dead are profitable; (...),
albeit they do not wholly blot out the sins of those that are prayed for: then
must it be said, that some are prayed for, whose sins are not yet wholly
forgiven. Secondly, the Case stands thus; Aerius had objected, if the Prayers
of those here do (...) altogether profit the dead, then let him procure some to
pray for him after he is dead, that those heinous sins he has committed may
not be required at his hands, and then there will be no need of his being good.
Now Epiphanius thus Answers; He that would see more of the sense of Epiph. in
this place may Consult Bishop Usher, from p. 236. to 246. where he shows
evidently that the Romanists are A^rians. not we.
Although the prayer for the dead do not cut off all their sins (which is the
only thing thou go about to prove (yet does it profit notwithstanding for
another purpose. Now from this Sentence can it not be inferred that Epiphanius
thought these prayers profitable to the cutting off of any sins which the
person had committed in his life time: But this is only added, because Aerius
went about to prove this only, that prayers made for the dead did not cut off
all their sins.

Now whereas, Sect. 10. our Author would avoid the Answer usually returned upon
their Arguments, p. 115, Sect. 11.
by the Fathers, which yet they dare not say are still in Purgatory;) with this
old Salvo, that such prayers as are made for remission of sins refreshment,
etc. are not made for them but imperfect sinners: 'This reply has been
obviated already by me, by showing that such prayers as these he mentions were
made for the Martyrs and Apostles, as it is more largely done by Dally, Page
501. and 507. as to refreshment, with such abundant Evidence, as I am confident
Master Cressie will not be able to reply unto it; and as to remission of sins,
with convictive Evidence. Yea further, they prayed for them that they might be
delivered from the punishments of Hell, and obtain everlasting bliss, as
appears from the Liturgy of Saint James: That they might pass by the Gates of
Hell, and the ways of Darkness. From the prayers used of old in the Roman
Church; For all departed in the Confession of the Holy Trinity, that they might
be separated from the punishments of the wicked, and obtain everlasting bliss.
And from what the Romanists say daily in their Mass, Desiring the Lord Jesus,
that he would deliver the souls of all the Faithful that are departed from the
pains of Hell, and from the deep Lake, and from the mouth of the Lion, that
Hell do not swallow them up, that they fall not into darkness.

Well, but our Author proceeds, and tells us, that indeed many of these prayers
did regard the day of Judgment, p. 115. Sect. 11.
and the glory ensuing; yet withal, that they thought to some souls a present
refreshment did accrue in the intermedial condition is evident from what Saint
Ambrose says, He would never cease his Intercessions for the Soul of the dead
Emperor, till he found a deliverance by them. And we answer him, Where is it
that Saint Ambrose says so? And of what Emperor? Does he think we have
nothing to do but to read over Authors to find out his Quotations? Quotations
did I say, or falfifyings? For let us hear Saint Ambrose thus speaking; Let us
believe that Valentinian is ascended from the desert, that is to say, De Obitu
Valent. Imp.
from this dry and unmanured place, unto those flowery delights, where being
conjoined to his Brother; He enjoys the pleasure of everlasting Life; blessed
are you both: If my Oraisons can prevail any thing, no day shall overslip you
in silence, no Oration shall pass you over unhonoured, no night shall steal by,
wherein I will not bestow upon you some portion of my Prayers, with all
Oblations will I frequent you: Only the mischief is, he does not add, till I
find a Deliverance of you from Purgatory, or any such words: Indeed in his
Oration on the death of the Emperor Theodosius; he tells us that he will
follow him to the Region of the living, nor will he leave him till by his
Prayers and tears he has brought him into that place his deserts did
challenge; quo sua merita vocant, viz. Into the Holy Mount of God, where there
was everlasting life, where there was no Contagion of Corruption, no sighings,
no grief, no company of the dead; (does he understand it of Souls? then must
none of the Souls of the dead be in heaven; of bodies? I hope our bodies must
not go to purgatory with our souls,) But the Region of the Living, where this
mortal shall put on Immortality, this Corruptible Incorruption. But yet he
presently tells us, that Theodosius remains in light, and glories in the
companies of the Saints, (purgatory to be sure was a place that he had cause to
glory of;) and enjoys rest for his soul (they rest very quietly, sleep in
utramque aurem in purgatory.) Yea a little before he told us, that he now
enjoyed Eternal Light, (I suppose as being enlightened by the fire of purgatory)
and continual tranquillity, and for the things which he did in this body, he
rejoices in the fruits of Gods reward, (and was that think you purgatory?) and
because he loved the Lord his God he has obtained the society of the Saints.
But you will say, If Saint Ambrose thought him in bliss, or an happy State,
what is the meaning of his former words?

Ans. You may see, by what is said already, that he cannot Intend to bring him
out of purgatory by his prayers: which is sufficient for me; nor (2.) Can he be
supposed to weep for him till his mortal did put on immortality, unless he
thought he should live till the Resurrection, or Theodosius rise before it.
Well then (3.) Dally will tell you, that it is usual in Scripture, and Sacred
Writers, to speak of things as done, which they were certain would come to
pass. So Isaac says, Genesis 27.37. I have made Jacob Esau's Lord, and all his
brethren his servants, because he had foretold it would be so; Even thus S.
Ambrose says, he will never leave praying till the Emperors resurrection,
because he was sufficiently assured that God would raise him unto life Eternal,
and transser him to heaven. Now then, seeing it is as clear as the Sun, that
Ambrose thought them both in Heaven, or in Abraham's bosom, ( viz. The
Emperors, Valentinian and Theodosius,) is it possible he should pray for their
deliverance out of purgatory? what good could they need besides that which he
prays for, a speedy resurrection, who already enjoyed the pleasures of Eternal
life? If Eternal life be purgatory, I will not give two pence for the Popes
indulgences, to be delivered from it. This being so, is not our Author a brave
jugler, who durst add [for deliverance] to Saint Ambrose; and that he might
not be found out, Cite neither place, nor tell us of what Emperor, whether
Theodosius, or Valentinian, he meant it, albeit he produces the place only to
prove, that the Ancients thought the Souls departed to have some present
refreshment, which indeed they did allow to Saints, supposed to be in Abraham's
bosom; And that from the company of Angels, and Archangels, and the vision of
Christ which they were supposed to enjoy in those receptacles, and the
increments of Divine light and joy, which Ambrose speaks of,

He has four places more out of Saint Austin in behalf of purgatory. Confess.
l. 9. c. 21
But the (1.) where his mother begs that she may be remembered at the Altar,
falls strangely short of purgatory; since I have made it appear, that those who
were supposed to be in Heaven were there remembered, and this remembrance was
made for diverse other reasons. Nor (2.) Is there any thing in that which Saint
Austine says, De cnra per mortem, c. 5.
we must by no means omit necessary supplications for the Souls of the Dead,
that repose might be obtained to them, since it is as clear as the Sun, that
they prayed for repose to all the Servants of God departed; and Saint Ambrose
begs rest for the Emperor Theodosius, of whom he tells us that he was in rest
already. Nor will the (3.) place Cited out of his Enchiridion do him service,
viz. C. 110.
That the Sacrifice is offered as a thanksgiving for Martyrs, but as a
propitiation for others. For (1.) It is evident, that Saint Austine, when he
wrote this book, was of Saint Chrysostoms opinion; for as much as he tells us,
E^ch. c. 110.
that these whom our suffrages do profit, they do it, either that they may have
a full remission, or a more tolerable damnation: And then no wonder if he
allowed the Sacrifice of the Eucharist, or prayers to profit for the remission
of sins. (2.) It might be offered for a propitation, in respect of others, and
they not in purgatory, but in Abraham's bosom, as well as Saint Augustine might
pray so earnestly for his mother, that God would be propitious to her, and yet
she be in Abraham's bosom, as above is manifested. As to that (4.) Instance,
which he calls convincing, Ser. 32. de verbis Apost. Note that this 32. Sect.
is not to be found in the Index of Possidius.
the outmost that can be gathered from it is, that in Saint Austin's and the
Churches judgment, it was not to be doubted that our Brethren were helped by
these prayers, so that God might deal with them more mercifully then their sins
deserved, and that prayers and offerings were made for them, out of an
intention of commending them to Gods mercy; and what of all this? For (1.) Does
not the same Austine pray, that God would deal more mercifully with his mother
then her sins deserved? did he not commend her to Gods mercy, albeit he verily
thought she was in Abraham's bosom? (2.) What is this more then what Saint Paul
prays for Onesiphorus, that he might find mercy in that day, the day of
Judgment, and Saint Peter's speaking of sins to be blotted out at the day of
our refreshment? Well then, they commended their brethren to Gods mercy, as
knowing that they deserved these punishments, from which they could not be
otherwise delivered then by the clemency and mercy of God; which is very true,
and yet makes not at all for purgatory; and indeed their prayers for pardon of
sins was only thus, that God would at the last day proclaim them pardoned, and
would not cast them into Hell with the damned, but receive them into glory;
which prayers the Church of Rome at this day makes for all the faithful.

Now after these testimonies produced, Page 120.
Author returns to his Dilemma, before sufficiently confuted; If these Souls
were believed to be in Heaven, would it not be ridiculous (and must then
Liturgies and Fathers cited by us be ridiculous which pray for pardon of sins,
refreshment, light and peace, and a place in the bosom of Abraham, for those
whom you acknowledge to have been already at rest, in the enjoyment of God in
Abraham's bosom?) If in Hell, would it not be impious, (Oh impious St.
Chrysostom, St. Augustine, Origin. Greg. Nyssen, Jerome.
and perhaps, Epiphanius) to offer the dreadful sacrifice, to make
supplications, to be at charge in alms for the obtaining them repose? etc. but
if they be neither in Heaven nor Hell, where are they then? Answ. In sinu
Abrahae, or at rest in some state of pleasure, and free from all punishment;
(as you are told by Irenaeus, Tertullian, Origin, Pseudo-Justin, Lactantius,
Victor, Dilly de Satisfact. l. 5. c. 3, 4, 5, 6.
Hilary, Ambrose, Prudentius, Chrysostom, Jerome, Augustine,) expecting the
enjoyment of the Kingdom of Heaven at the Resurrection.

And thus having gone over our Adversaries testimonies in Defense of Pugatory,
we shall now add, ex abundanti, a few Arguments against it. And first, if there
be no such punishments as the Papists do imagine suffered by the faithful
after this Life, then are not their Souls in Purgatory; but there is no such
punishment of the faithful after this Life: And first, were there any such
punishments of the faithful after this Life, how wonderful is it that no
Consolations should be given in against them! There is not any evil that can
befall us here, but the Scripture has afforded us some Consolation against it;
But though the punishments in Purgatory be more grievous, by their own
confession; then any we can suffer here, yet have we not one word of
Consolation against them. Secondly, Abraham tells Dives that he had received
his good things in this Life, and Lazarus his evil; and now he is comforted and
thou tormented; what is this comfort, but his being carried into Abraham's
bosom? When was he carried thither? when he dyed, verse 22. The beggar died
and was carried (not into Purgatory, but) into Abraham's bosom: The rich man
dyed also and was buried. I suppose, none will deny that the rich man was
buried presently after his death, and then why should they deny that Lazarus
was carried into Abraham's bosom soon after his death; And if Abraham's bosom
were Purgatory, (I cannot say he had cold, but) I Am sure he had but small
comfort of being there; But be it so, that he was not in Abraham's bosom, yet
he had received his evil things in this Life, says Father Abraham; which with
what truth could he have so said, had he been to receive so great and so long
punishments when his life was ended?

Now seeing this beggar had no prae-eminence over other beggars, that are
supposed to live piously as this Lazarus did, or above other of the Saints of
God, if he escaped Purgatory, and was immediately received into Abraham's
bosom, why may not they? Thirdly, The evils which the faithful suffer, they
suffer in the time of their peregrination, and absence from their Fathers
house; but that is terminated and defined by our being in the body; thus Peter
Ep. 1. c. 1. verse. 17. calls it the time of our sojourning, (...), the time of
our being from home, the time of our being in this world, says Estius; And
again; 2 Cor. 5.6. Dum sumus in corpore peregrinamur a Deo? And when we are
absent from the body we are present with the Lord; therefore we are not absent
from the Lord: when we are in Purgatory we are absent from the Lord; Ergo, when
we are absent from the body we are not in Purgatory.

A second Argument shall be this; They that go to Abraham's bosom, Paradise, or
an house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens, do not go to Purgatory at
the same time; but the faithful presently after death go to the forementioned
places, or some of them; Because they go to them when their earthly Tabernacle
is dissolved, 2 Cor. 5.1. We know that if our earthly tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a building not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens. Now
this implies that as soon as we are dispossessed of one of these houses we go
to the other; or else the comfort would be but cold, and the oration not worthy
of God, but delusory. For put the Case, I should tell my friend, I see thy
house is going to ruin; But care not for it, I have a better for you to betake
your self to, when that fails: If he should come to me a while after for this
house, and I tell him, true, I have an house for him, but he must be content to
lie first ten or twenty years in the street, and after that he shall go into
it; would not my friend think, I had dealt very deceitfully with him, having
given him ground to hope that presently after the fall of his house he should
have another? So God here tells us, well Christians, if your house once fall,
your body be dissolved, be not troubled, you shall have an house in heaven;
when their body is dissolved, they come expecting an house in heaven, pleading
his promise; should God say, true, you shall have an house in Heaven, but you
must burn In purgatory first for a 100. years or two: would he not seem to mock
us? (2.) The house is said to be had, when our earthly body is dissolved: now
this is either because we are then presently to enjoy it, and then down falls
purgatory; or else, because after a hundred years in purgatory we shall enjoy
it: If so, why may we not be said to have it before this house is dissolved,
seeing by our good works, Martyrdom, indulgence, procured, we may make our
purgatory the shorter while we live here? Bellarmine Answers; true, we shall go
to heaven presently, but only we that are clothed, that is, endued with
excellent virtues, and merits, and have perfected our repentance. But the rest
that are naked shall be saved so as by fire. But (1.) The Apostle says, they
alone shall have the heavenly house who are clothed, that being the condition;
yea this is the condition of their groaning to be dissolved, which (says he)
we would not do were we to be found naked; and yet they that were in this
tabernacle did groan, therefore none of them would be found naked. (2.) Those
that go to Heaven are clothed upon; But those that go naked to purgatory
cannot be so; For seeing to be clothed is to be adorned with more eminent
degrees of virtue, and they themselves acknowledge that in purgatory there is
no place for the increase of virtue, there is no probability of being clothed
upon, and therefore they cannot be supposed to go to purgatory naked, since
they that go thither are sure afterward to go to heaven. Again, verse. 6, 7. the
Apostle tells us, that whilst we are at home in the body we are absent from
the Lord, and that, Here the faithful desire to be absent from the body,
because it hinders them from the presence of the Lord, and walking by sight;
now had they been acquainted with purgatory, surely they would have expressed
their desires of being absent from that also, seeing that was like not only to
be more irksome to them, but also more durable, and therefore a greater
impediment; since therefore they groaned so much to be delivered from a short
life here, which hinders their enjoyment of Gods presence, and not at all for
deliverance from a hundred or two hundred years continuance in purgatory, (for
so long, says Bellarmine, the Church has prayed for Souls in purgatory) we
infer, they were not acquainted with it. Again, they that are to be received
into Eternal habitations when their life fails them, are to be received at
death, for then they fail: But so are charitable men, (and by parity of Reason
other pious souls.) The minor is proved from Luke 16. v. 8. Make unto your
selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that is use it so, (...), that
when you fail, i. e. die, they may receive you, that is, may procure you a
reception, or rather (as Doctor Hammond) you may be received into everlasting
habitations.

But our Author has his arguments also, Macchabees: Now not to call upon him
for an Answer to Dr. Cosens of the Canon of Scripture, as knowing how
impossible it is to be done; albeit it be necessary to make this Testimony a
Cogent proof, seeing he only tells us that there is such a place in the Book
of Macchabees: I will add where the words may be found, even in Dally, page
439. where they are fully considered, and it made evidently to appear that they
come not up to a proof of Purgatory; neither are they consistent with the
received Maxims of the abettors thereof: and whereas our adversary calls in the
Universal Tradition, and practice of the Synagogue of the Jews to justify this
place, the same worthy person has made it evident, that neither this nor any
other Testimony produced by them is any tolerable proof of such practice: p.
449. 450.
Nay he evinceth most clearly from this passage that this practice was not
received in our Savior's, or the Apostles time; Ne apud infimos and corruptos
Judaeos: yea, he spends the 14. Chapter of his second Book, to evidence that
the Jews were ignorant of Prayers for the dead; and should we after all this
give any credit to your confident assertions of such evident untruths? It
concerns you, if you respect your credit to answer what is extant in the
forecited places of the Learned Dally, and to evince this universal Tradition
and practice you here speak of without the least offer of any proof, unless
what follows must be so esteemed, viz. that from the Jews no doubt Plato
borrowed this Doctrine, and from Plato Cicero: But I pray you, Sir, permit us
(who have the Arguments forementioned to evidence that in our Saviors time,
the Jews had no such Custom) to doubt of what you boldly here assert, l. 4.
c. 5. p. 360.
especially when the same Dally runs antipodes unto you, and tells us, though
with greater modesty, ab iis (Platonicis) ut videtur illam Purgatorii rationem
baustam atque acceptam tum Judaei, tum adversarii retinent; Mr. Cr. P. 120.


You have one assault more from natural Reason, which you say, will tell us,
that heaven, into which no unclean thing can enter, is not so quickly and
easily open to imperfect souls, as unto perfect; nor have we any sign that
merely by dying sinful livers become immediately perfect. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17.
Now to this I Answer, that what ever natural Reason may seem to dictate. I am
sure the Oracles of God will tell us that they who are alive at the
Resurrection, if pious souls, (though surely some of them shall be imperfect)
shall not go to Purgatory for 100. years, but be caught up into the Clouds to
meet the Lord in the Air, and so shall be for ever with the Lord.

Secondly, albeit there be nothing of Reason, or Scripture, to intimate that
only by dying we become perfect, yet does both Reason and Scripture more then
intimate, that presently after death we are amongst the Spirits of just men
made perfect; that when this Tabernacle is dissolved we go to an house Eternal
in the Heavens; when we are absent from the body we are present with the Lord;
and consequently are purified by the holy Spirit from the imperfections that
adhered to us.

CHAP. XI.
Master Cressie's misadventures, Sect. 1. His first Argument from, 1 Cor. 11.
Answered Sect. 2. His second from Reason, Sect. 3. His Authorities spurious,
Sect. 4. As (1.) Saint Basils Liturgy, Sect. 5. Cyrils Mystag. Catechism, Sect.
6. The Acts of the Nicene Council, Sect. 7. Greg. Nyssens Catechism, Sect. 8.
Saint Cyrils testimony considered, Sect. 9. His Authorities say no more then
our Churches Liturgy, Sect. 10. Saint Chrysostom not for them, but against
them, Sect. 11. His Citation abused by Master Cressie, Ib. as likewise Saint
Ambrose, Sect. 12. The Doctors argument from the fruit of the Vine vindicated,
Sect. 13, 14. Mr. Cressie's evasion confuted, Sect. 15. The weakness of his
argument against the Doctors Exposition evidenced, and confessed by Jansenius,
Sect. 16, 17. an argument against Transubstantiation, Sect. 18. Why the Fathers
not insisted on, Sect. 19. The Fathers are not for the adoration of the
Sacrament, Sect. 20. Saint Chrysostom, Saint Ambrose, and Saint Austins
testimonies considered, Sect. 21, 22, 23. The contrary evidenced from Doctor
Tailor, Sect. 24.

IN this Chapter we meet with many misadventures, Mr. Cressie, p. 124.
and mistakes, as (1.) that the word (...) is as old as the first general
Council, whereas it was never used by any Father, or at least never applied
unto this matter, for the space of a thousand years and upwards; nor can I find
any of their own writers, besides himself, that ever pleaded the use of such a
word. (2.) Another mistake is, that the Church only says, the change made in
the holy Sacrament is usually called Transubstantiation, when the Trent Council
expressly tells us, Mr. Cressie, p. 124.
that it is called so proprie, convenienter, and aptissime, most fitly,
properly, and conveniently. (3.) Whereas you tell us, Bishop Taylor's Discourse
upon this Subject: if you are able to except any thing against his Stating of
the Question do it; if not, cease to calumniate, and know that the renewed
Rubric is an Explication of what the Church of England believes in this
matter; and if you have any thing to produce against it, besides the empty name
of Zuinglianisme, we are ready to consider it.

But to pass these things, hoc est corpus meum, or the sixth of John, he lays
hold on a passage of Saint Paul's in the 1 Cor. 11.29. and tells us, that if
this Transubstantiation should not be received, Mr. Cressie, p. 128.
none could receive the body of Christ unworthily, because according to
Protestants it is not the body of Christ, but mere bread, that an impenitent
sinner receives. And Saint Paul's charge would be irrational when he says, such
an one receives judgment to himself, in that he does not discern the Lords
body.

Ans. (1.) This Argument is a manifest contradiction to the Apostle, who says,
let a man examine himself, 1 Cor. 11.
and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup, for he that eats
and drinks unworthily ( viz. that bread and cup) eats and drinks
damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords body; so that the unworthy eater
of the bread is the person that discerns not the Lords Body. (2.) Such persons
are said not to discern the body of Christ, because they deal with the Elements
that are Instituted to represent his Body and Blood as with common meat, not
treating them with addresses proper to the mystery. So Saint Austine, non
dijudicat, (...) c. 8.
i. e. non discernit a caeteris cibis veneratione singulariter (illi) debita,
so also the Greek Schol. upon the place.

Sect. 3. But our Author proceeds thus; If the change be not in the Elements,
but in the receivers Soul; (that is, if the Elements be not transubstantiated)
what need is there of Consecration? what effect can it have? why may not
another man or woman as well as a Priest, administer the Sacrament? what
hinders that such a presence may not be effected every dinner and supper?

Answer. Such Arguments as these, may very well persuade us that our Author
received this Doctrine from Tradition, M^. Cressie, p. 12^. s. 8
not Ratiocination, as before he tells us; For if he had received it by such a
Ratiocination, his Baptismal water must necessarily have been changed into I
know not what. For if it remain water still, may not I ask him what need of any
Consecration to become Sacramental? what effect can Consecration have upon it?
why may not another man or woman as well as a Priest, administer this
Sacrament? what hinders but we may have such a presence of Christ or the Holy
Spirit every time we go to wash our selves? This happily our Author saw, and
therefore he durst not say, if the elements be not transubstantiated; but if
the change be not in the Elements, which we grant it is, (the Bread is no
longer common Bread, but holy, separated from a profane use to a sacred; it is
now become an instrument to convey the benefits of Christ's death, which before
it was not; represents Christ's broken body, which before it did not:) But
Thirdly, to make a little sport with his demonstrations, Tell me, is there no
use of Consecration but to transubstantiate? What is their Holy Water? Are all
their Bells, their holy relics and images, transubstantiate? Secondly, Has
Christ required the Consecration of the Eucharist should be done by a Priest,
or not? If not, then let him tell me, why a Master of a family may not
consecrate these Elements as well as the Paschal Lamb? If he has required it,
then surely, whether Transubstantiation be true or false, it cannot be effected
by a Laick. But, Thirdly, tell me, what is the Bread we eat at dinner, the
Bread broken for us? Is the Wine the Papists drink on their fasting-dayes, the
Blood shed for the remission of their sins? Do men by eating and drinking
remember Christ's death till he come? Have they any promise of such blessings
from the partaking of their common Bread as Sacramental? If not, why does our
Author trouble us with such a frivolous comparison?

He next proceeds to demonstrate this change out of the Fathers, Sect. 10. In
all ancient Lyturgies, (that is, all spurious ones) as Blondel himself (and for
your better directions, you may see the name of Blondel in the Margin, without
any Addition of Book or Chapter.) Though an Hugonot confesses, the prayer for
the Consecration of the Elements was, that God would by his holy Spirit
sanctify the Elements, whereby the Bread may be made the Body, and Wine the
Blood of our Lord. And for this he cites St. Basils Liturgy, Cyrill. Hieros.
Mystag. Catech. after that the Acts of the Council of Nice, Cyrill. Alexand.
Ep. ad Calosyr. and Greg. Nyssen. Orat. Catech. And here we have all that
pretend to demonstrate this change, except Optatus, who tells us that the Altar
is the seat of the Body and Blood of Christ. Now the mischief is, first, that
all these Authors, (unless we may except Cyrill of Alexandria) are spurious,
and have been proved so by Dr. Hoyle, in his Answer to a popish Friar, and some
others.

And first, as for Saint Basils Liturgy, Bellarmine himself dares not reckon
it among St. Basils works. Secondly, in this Liturgy is appointed to be sung
the (...), a Hymn, See the Epist^h of the same, Felix to Peter Bishop of
Antioch, and Zeno the Empetor in the second T^mb of the Councils.
which began to be sung in the Church about the time of Felix the third, who
lived Anno Domini, 480. Whereas Basil flourished Anno Domini, 370. or
thereabouts. It mentions Confessors after Martyrs, whereas the Romanists
themselves confess, they were not mentioned in their offices till after the
days of this St. Basil. These and many other things you may find against it in
Mornaeus, and Cocus, and other Protestant Writers.

Secondly, As for the Catechism of Cyrill of Jerusalem, p. 467, 468. that even
Papists themselves ascribe it to one John of Jerusalem, that lived about 400
hundred years after: Yea, even Gretser tells us, that he has seen a manuscript
which ascribes these Catechis^res to John of Jerusalem: Yea, in the Greek
Library, which the City of Augusta bought of Antonius Governor of Corcyra,
this book goes under the same title; The Mistogogi call Catechismes of John of
Jerusalem, as the Index of these books does evidence. Nor does the putter forth
of this Index in Possevine, among other European Libraries, deny it; and for a
taste of the Author, Harken to his notable Hyperbole, that the wood of the
Cross is so multiplied that all the world is full of it.

Thirdly, Next, for the Council of Nice, he tells us, p. 466. out of Cardinal
Baronius, that they are held a mere forgery. The true Nicene Acts (says he)
(except some fragments raked at second hand out of several Authors) are
sufficiently known to be all lost, as being made away, and having suffered
shipwreck in the Arrian tempests; And again, whereas all ages have been most
eager in the pursuit of so noble a Monument, never a man could hitherto find
it; and concludes that now no hope remains of so fertile a vintage: Nay, when
hard search was made for a new Nicene Canon pretended by the Bishop of Rome, in
defense of his supremacy, and by St. Augustine himself, and many Learned
Bishops more, messengers were dispatched into Greece and Egypt, where the first
and best Copies were; News was returned both from Atticus of Constantinople,
and Cyrill of Alexandria, that no more of that Council could be found save
only twenty Canons.

Fourthly, As for Nyssen his Catech. Orat. he tell us, first, that some in
their Editions leave it cut, as knowing it (says the Bishop of Spalat) to be
corrupted. So Siphanius his Basil. Ed. Anno Domini 1571. others, that let it
pass, tell us, that this 37. Chap. here cited is not frequently to be found in
Ancient manuscripts, and that the Book is tainted with the opinions of Origin
foysted into it. So the Author of the Paris Edition, 1573. Thirdly, that it
mentions Severus, an Eutychian, a full 100 years later then Cyrill. Fourthly,
that it speaks contrary to Nyssen himself; and Fifthly, that it holds no
correspondence with all that Theodoret cites thence. And lastly, refers us to
twelve Arguments of Spalatensis, against this and the following Chapter.

Fifthly, Cyrills Epistle ad Calosyr. is not extant among his works; and
whether Cyrill of Alexandria wrote it is very uncertain. And (albeit I can no
where come to a perusal of it, yet) it is capable of this sense, Christ is not
altered; (viz. the Sacrament representing Christ is not altered) neither is his
Body (that is, the Symbols of his body changed) by being kept till another day
but the virtue of Benediction and quickening grace perpetually remains in it;
for what is it that is blessed? sure not the Body of Christ, that being not
present till after the benediction even when hoc est corpus meum is pronounced;
and therefore it is the Eucharistical bread which he calls Christ.

And yet were all these Authors true they might be answered by telling our
adversaries they might as well have cited our Common Prayer Book, which calls
the Bread, viz. Sacramentally, and Representatively, but not by any substantial
Mutation.

The rest of the Fathers are quoted for adoration of the Eucharist;
Chrysostom, to wit, The most precious thing in Heaven I will show thee placed
upon Earth: 1 Cor. 10. Hom. 24.
But this may be fairly interpreted thus, That it is placed upon Earth in its
representation in those Elements which convey the Virtue of his Body to us, and
therefore deservedly are called his Body. Let Chrysostom interpret himself;
who in his Epistle ad Caesar. contra Haeres. Apollinar (cited by Damascen, and
the Collector of the Sentences of the Fathers against the Severians, set forth
by Turrian) has these words. Before the Bread is sanctified we name it Bread;
but the Divine Grace sanctifying it by the means of the Priest, it is freed
from that Name, and is esteemed worthy to be called the Lords Body, although
the nature of Bread remains in it.

And yet I must not forget to tell you, p. 130.
that whereas our Adversary renders a Clause of Saint Chrysostomes sentence,
Thou not only see the body it self; Saint Chrysostom has it (...), Thou
do not indced see the very same body, not properly the same that the Magi
saw; But thou know both the Virtue and the whole Dispensation and art
ignorant of nothing that was done, being accurately (...), taught all these
things (in the Mysteries,) and so the place makes more against then for him.

The same Answer may be returned to that of Ambrose; That the same flesh is in
the Mysteries which the Apostles worshipped in our Lord Christ, De Spir.
viz. it is in the Mystery representatively; See Bishop Tailor of real Pres. p,
384.
it is here in Imagine, as St. Ambrose elsewhere; But in heaven in Veritate, the
Truth, the substance is there. Thus l. 4. De sacram. C. 5. He calls it the
figure of the Body and Blood of Christ; and c. 4. tells us, It is a wonderful
power of God, which makes that the Bread should remain what it is, and yet be
changed into another thing: and then again, How much more operative is the word
of Christ, that the things be what they were, and yet are changed into another,
and so, that which was bread before Consecration, now is the Body of Christ;
which words, because they could not answer, they corrupted: And thus having
returned an Answer to his Arguments, we come now to vindicate our own.

The Learned Doctor had framed an Argument thus;

1. Mr. C. 132. S. 12.
I confidently pronounce it evident that these Matt. 26.29.
words were neither spoken by our Lord in the same breath after the
Consecration of the Chalice, nor had they any regard to the Sacrament. And why
so I pray you? Because Saint Luke mentions them after the eating of the Paschal
Supper, and antecedently to the Mystical Consecration of his blessed Body and
Blood: who says he will write (...): Ans. A great reason of Confidence indeed!
put it into Syllogivm, and it runs thus. That which has reference to the
Passover, and the drinking of the Cup which was annexed to it, has not
Reference to the Sacrament of the Supper of our Lord: But these words have
reference to the former: Now all their who tell us that Christ spoke the
sentence twice will deny his Major, seeing the words might have reference to
both according to their various times of utterance. Now that this
Interpretation must take place against our adversary I will prove; because he
grants it does refer to the Passover in Saint Luke: And evidently it refers to
the Consecrated Cup in Saint Matthew. G. 26.
For he says, Christ took the Cup, and gave it to them, saying, Drink you all
of this: this, what? This in the Cup: why so? for this is my Blood, and then
immediately follows: But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of the
fruit of the Vine, until the day when I drink it new with you in my Fathers
Kingdom. Now then, this fruit of the Vine Saint Matthew speaks of is this that
the Disciples are bid to drink of, as even the series of the words show; Drink
ye all of this, for this is my Blood; but I will not drink of this.

2. The fruit of the Vine must necessarily demonstrate some Wine; so St. Marks
fruit of the Vine, must also have reference to some Cup demonstrated by him:
But they mention no other Cup besides this Sacramental: therefore they must
necessarily speak of this: and so much for his Major. Now I deny his Minor,
which must be proved thus. That which S. Luke mentioned before any Consecration
began. Immediately after, the Cup confessedly belonging to the Passover must
belong to it. But these words St. Luke thus mentions. Now I retort upon his
Major thus; That which Saint Matthew and Saint Mark mentioned not till after
Consecration, and immediately after the Sacramental Cup, must belong to it; But
this sentence is thus mentioned by them. I know he will tell us the disparity
is in this, that St. Luke promised to write (...), which the other Evangelist
did not.

Answer; Grotius will tell him, that (...)signifies only sigillatim, as you may
see, Acts 4.18.23. which Interpretation must take place here, it appearing
sufficiently, that he frequently for the Coherence of things, joins those
passages which were separated in order of time As the same Grotius in his
Comment does evince, Vide Grot. in locum.
and therefore this reason of disparity is taken away.

Thus I have confuted his Confidence; Vide Jansonium in locum.
that St Luke also speaks of the Consecrated Cup (as Saint Augustine would have
it) by preoccupation, that so this saying, parallel to that of eating no more
of the Passover, might be joined together. For Matthew and Mark speak of four
things belonging to this Sacramental Cup: 1. Giving of Thanks. 2. Distribution
of it. 3. The asserting of it to be his Blood.


(4.) His protestation of not drinking of it any more. Now Saint Luke speaks
only of the third of these, If you will not allow the other verse to refer to
the Sacred Cup. But if this be granted, then are all these actions mentioned in
S. Luke directly as in the other Evangelists; Now then the interpretation makes
all Harmonious between the Evangelists, whereas he bids defiance to S. Mark,
and especially to S. Matthew, who (as I have proved) must necessarily be
understood of the Eucharistical Cup.

But our Author has another answer, viz. that were it so that the wine after
Consecration were called the fruit of the Vine, Mr. C. p. 133.
yet this does not argue against a change of it is nature, for Moses his Rod
after it was changed into a Serpent was called a Rod still because it had been
one. Exodus 7.12 And John 2.9. it is said of the Master of the feast, shat he
tasted the water that was made wine.

Now to this I return, (1.) That the cases are no way parallel; for, first, in
these instances, the matter remained, the form only being changed, it being
proper conversion; but in the Eucharist; the Trent Council has defined, that
the substance of Bread remains not, and so there is not so much Reason why it
should have the same name.

(2.) These might well be called so, because the Serpent was made out of a Rod,
tanquam ex causa materiali, and the wine out of water; but you dare not say,
that the Blood of Christ is so made out of wine.

(3.) There were Circumstances annexed in these Cases, which did obviate all
possibility of Fallacy. The Serpent is called a Rod, but such a one as devoured
the other Rods; the wine mentioned by S. John is called Water; but it is Water
made Wine; as if I should say, panis transubstantiatus, which phrase you would
not much dislike; you will say, this Wine is called the Blood of Christ.

Ans. Well, but whether Spiritually, or Corporally, is not said.

(2.) We answer, that if this be a sufficient reason why the Blood of Christ
should be called the fruit of the vine, though it be not really so; then may
this be a sufficient reason why the bread may be called the body of Christ,
though it be not so; See Paraeus de Reg. phrasium Sacrament. In Cor. 11. v. 23.
because Sacramental signs have often the names of the things signified by
them. The sequel is evident from the parity of Reason, the same foundation of
Each being the Analogous phrase of Scripture: and in the great hold of
Transubstantiation must be quitted.

But (3.) He says he will drink no more of the fruit of the Vine; which
Argues, that before, viz. In other pasovers, Or at least in this, He had drank
of it before; now that which he had drank of before (this being the first
institution of the Sacramental Cup) must be really the fruit of the Vine; Well
then, that which he says he will drink of no more must be the same also.

From what has been said we may see sufficiently the weakness of his argument
hence for transubstantiation, Ergo, the Consecrated Cup was not the fruit of
the Vine. For not to tell him, See Beza in locum. Heins. In Mat. c. 21, v. 41,
etc.
the Syriack Copies leave out the two verses in which the stress of all this
Argument lies, nor yet to mind him of Beza's transposition of the verses, a *
thing sufficiently probable.)

(1.) How will he prove that our Savior drank of the Consecrated Cup? will he
run to Matt. 26? Alas, He has told us, that it Concerns not this Cup; will he
cite universal tradition? Let him show it, and at the same time he will show,
that he interprets Saint Matthew. contrary to them, seeing they that affirm it
gather it from his words.

(2.) Why may not his (...), be thus interpreted; I will not drink any more,
viz. after the solemnity ended? Have we not S. Matthew's (...), to bear us out
in it; and Saint Mark's, (...) which also may very well be borrowed from the 16
verse. in Saint Luke; It being very ordinary for Sacred Writers to leave a
particle to be understood from the words foregoing or consequent. And if this
interpretation stand, it can only be inferred, that after the solemnity ended He
drank no more of the fruit of the Vine, which advantageth him nothing.

And yet (3.) If neither of these two answers could stand, yet seeing we have
made it probable, if not necessary, that these words should be understood of
the Eucharisticall Cup, His argument falls to the ground irrevocably. Jansenius
has long ago told him, that this Argument is frivolous and unconcluding. Hence
it appears, In locum.
(says he) How infirm that Argument is, which some of our men suppose
efficacious to prove Transubstantiation, from this that Christ said, non bibam
de genimine vitis, inferring, that what he drank of was not so, etc. For (says
he) should we grant, (which yet is less probable,) that this was said by S.
Luke before the Consecration, yet by Saint Matthew. and Mark, it seems clearly to
be spoken after; so that our arguing from uncertainties, which with greater
probabilities may be rejected then alleged, will never be sufficient to
establish any Dogma, or opinion, but rather give occasion to Heretick's to be
more pertinacious in their Errors, when they see such weak arguments brought
against them.

Thus I have vindicated the Doctors Arguments; Mich. le Faucheur de la eene de
Signeur.
though I can tell him where to meet with an hundred; and that is this: That
which the Apostle six or seven times in one or two Chapters calls Bread is
bread; but the Eucharist after consecration is so called by the Apostle. 2 Cor.
10.16, 17. chap. 11. verse. 26.27, 28. The minor is evident to any that has
eyes, and will believe them.

The major I prove thus, (1) If that which is once called the body of Christ be
sufficiently argued to be so, albeit it has all the accidents of another
thing, and seems to all our senses to be so, then that which is called Bread
seven times, and seems to all our senses so to be, is sufficiently proved to be
so, but the first is true. For the Council of Trent thence proves the Body of
Christ to be Corporally in the Sacrament. If it does it efficaciously, then it
must be so; If not, then it is not an infallible interpreter of Scripture nor is
their argument thence concluding. Now, that this was said but once by Christ,
albeit repeated by three Evangelists and one apostle, is clear. This sequel is
also evident; For there is greater reason for the one then the other, viz. That
what is seven times called bread by the Spirit of God should be so, when all
our senses testify it, then that which was but once called the body of Christ
should be so, in Contradiction to all the senses of the Universe.

To cite all the Fathers that here speak for us would be an endless work;
Vshers Answer to the Jesuits challenge, Bishop Morton, Bishop Tailor, and
Doctor Featly, on this very Subject; (Books very obvious) but especially the
two voluminous confuters of Cardinal Perron. Mich. Le Faueheur, and Bernardus
Albertinus, to whom I refer the Reader for abundant satisfaction; and shall
content my self with one only passage of Theodoret, who in his second Dial.
brings in a man contending that Christ's humane nature was swallowed up of the
Divine; which he illustrates thus: As the Elements or Symbols of the Lords body
before the invocation of the Priest are one thing, but after Invocation are
changed, and made another; so the Lords body after his Ascension is changed
into a Divine substance; to which he answers; You are caught in your own net,
for the Symbols do not go out of their proper nature, but remain (...), in the
former substance wherein they were.

And thus I have finished the first part of the Chapter concerning
Transubstantiation;

And first, the place which he cites out of St. Chrysostom, will not conclude
his purpose. For albeit he says, 1 Cor. 10. Ho. 24.
let us imitate the barbarous Magi, yet does he not say (as our Authors
parenthesis would have him) that we should imitate them in worshipping our
Lord, but only tells us that they addressed themselves unto him, (...), with a
great deal of fear or horror: Let us therefore stir up our selves, (says he)
(...), and show (...), far greater fear then they. For this Exposition of the
word (...) the comparison requires. And that this word ordinarily bears the
sense, if any would farther be informed, let him have recourse to Beza, or any
other Commentator upon the 5. Heb. 7 and he may receive satisfaction from them.

Secondly, Did Chrysostom indeed speak of Adoration, yet might he bid us
imitate these Magi, not by adoring the Elements, but him that is represented by
them. Hom. 8 q. in Matthew.
Thus when elsewhere he says, that it is Christ who begs and receives in the
poor man's sheaf, and bids us reverence him: I suppose he would not have the
reverence done to the poor man, but directed to our Lord and Savior.

The other three Citations tell us only this, Mr. Cr. p. 131.
and what is that to the purpose; for it is very well known that the Greek
(...), and the Latin Adoro, are used by the Fathers for any kind of reverence;
as when it is said by Tertullian, Adoro Scripturae plenitudinem; and by the
Council of Carthage, apud Cyprianum; Adorabilia Scripturae verba, and (...), as
Isid. Pelusiot. Lib. 1. Ep. 136.

But to come to particulars; Ambrose does not necessarily refer to the
Sacrament. De Sp. l. 3. c. 1.


Answ. But were it to be understood of the Eucharist, he says no more then
this; That in these mysteries we worship Christ, and consequently the flesh of
Christ, as being not divided from him; but he does not say, that in adoring the
mysteries we adore Christ.

And as for Saint Augustine, I fear (says he) to worship the Earth, lest he
that made Heaven and Earth should damn me for it; thus fluctuating I turn to
Christ, and here I find how the Earth may be worshipped, because flesh is of
the Earth; now he took flesh upon him, and gave us his flesh to eat, which no
man eats, nisi prius adoraverit, but he that has first adored, viz. Christ; As
it follows, cum adoras illum, that is, when you worship him, (to wit, Christ,)
Let not the thoughts be of the flesh: No, you must not worship that alone, but
as conjoined with the Deity) Do we eat that flesh that is the body which we
worship? Saint Austine will tell us presently, no; for he brings in Christ
speaking to his Disciples thus; You eat not the body which you see; I have
commended to you a Sacrament, which being spiritually understood shall quicken
you. That which is brought out of the 120 Epistle needs no further answer, but
only to note, that our Adversary has added (it) to worship, determining the
object, which Saint Austine did not; and by the same reason (says the Lord Du
Plessis) may be added to body transubstantiated or what you please.

Adoration upon the Elements, is made out evidently by the Learned D. Tailor in
these words: Lib. de trans. toward the end.
If the Primitive Church had ever taught that Divine worship was to be given to
the Sacrament, it had been certain that the Heathen would have retorted most of
the Arguments upon their heads, by which the Christians reproved their
worshipping of Images. The Christians upbraided them with worshipping the works
of their hands, to which themselves gave what figure they pleased, and then by
certain forms consecrated them; and made by invocation (as they supposed) a
Divinity to dwell there. They objected to them, that they worshipped that which
could neither see, nor hear, nor smell, nor taste, nor move, nor understand;
That which could grow old and perish, that could be broken and burned, that was
subject to the injury of rats and mice, of worms and creeping things, that can
be taken by Enemies, and carried away; That is kept under lock and key for fear
of Thieves, and sacrilegious persons: Now if the Church of those ages had
practiced and thought, as they have at Rome in these last ages, might not they
have said, why might not we as well as you? Do not you worship that with divine
honors, and call it your God, which can be burnt and broken, which your selves
form into a round or square figure, which the oven first hardens: And then your
Priests consecrate, and by invocation make to be your God, which can see no
more, nor hear, nor smell, then the silver and gold upon our images. Do not you
adore that which rats and mice eat? which can grow moldy and sour, which you
keep under locks and bars for fear your God be stolen? Did not Lewis the ninth
pawn your Deity to the Sultan of Egypt, insomuch that to this day the Egyptian
Escucheons, by way of Triumph, bear upon them a pix with a wafer in it? True it
is, that if we are beaten from our Cities we carry our gods with us; But did
not the Jesuits carry your Host, (which you call God) about their necks from
Venice in the time of their interdict? And now, why do you reprove that in us
which you do your selves? What could have been answered to them if the Doctrine
and accidents of the times had furnished them with the like instances? In vain
it would have been to have replied; Yea, but ours is the true God, and yours
the false gods. For they would easily have made a rejoinder, that this is to be
proved by some other Argument: In the mean time, all your Objections against
our worshipping of Images return violently upon you, upon this account; since
none of the witty and subtle Adversaries of Christianity ever did or could make
this defense by way of recrimination, it is certain there was no occasion
given; And therefore those trifling pretenses made out of some sayings of the
Fathers, pretending the practice of worshipping the Sacrament, must needs be
Sophistry and Illusion, and need no particular consideration.

Will they say that the Fathers kept these mysteries secret, Julian, such as
the pesecutors of the Church forced to relinquish their profession of
Christianity? Such as turned Christians chiefly upon these Arguments, enforced
upon them by the Champions of the Christian cause? Does not Saint Paul tell us,
that even in his time all that were in Asia fell away from the truth, 2 Timothy
1.15. And could it be that none of these should be able to retort this
Objection? Was it not strange that none of the Converts of the Church should be
scandalized at this, when as Avicenna presently cries out, Quandoquidem
Christiani adorant, quod comedunt, sit anima mea cum Philosophis.

CHAP. XII.
The State of the Question, Sect. 1. The lawfulness of communicating in one
kind not proved from the Christians practice in the times of persecution, Sect.
2. Nor from their communicating of Infants, Sect. 3. Nor from their
communicating of the sick and penitents at the point of death, Sect. 4. Nor
from communions at Sea, Sect. 5. Nor lastly, from communions sent to other
provinces, Sect. 6. Christ's institution respected Laics as well as Priests,
Sect. 7, 8. An evasion obviated, Sect. 9. Further evidence of the Laics
interest in the Cup, and a farther evasion obviated, Sect. 10. Christ's
Institution a Command, Sect. 11. The verdict of Antiquity for us, Sect. 12. No
evidence of concomitance, Sect. 13, 14. Three Arguments against it, Sect. 16,
17, 18. The vain pretenses alleged for this half communion, Sect. 19. Upon
what conditions a dispensation may be granted, Sect. 20.

THe State of this Question is not, Mr. C. p. 138. Ibid.
whether The receiving in both kinds be necessary to the essence of the
Communion; (Albeit that be very true) but whether the administering the
Sacrament in both kinds to the people, or Priests non-Conficients (capable of
it in both kinds) be not necessary necessitate praecepti, or from the
injunction of our blessed Savior; or, in a word, whether the withholding of
the Cup from such be not a violation of the will of Christ; If so, then farewell
Trent Council. Now this we assert to be so; our Author on the contrary will
make it good, that the Fathers thought the contrary, and appeals to Doctor
Peirces Conscience, Ibid.
whether if he should side with us in it, he should not be overwhelmed with the
Depositions of the most ancient Fathers against him; And then he produces his
old Arguments in defense of this apparent Novelty.

And, first, he tells us out of Tertullian and Cyprian, during the times of
persecution the Eucharist was delivered to the faithful under the species of
Bread alone, Ibid.
and carried home to be reverently participated by them according to their
particular Devotions.

To which we Answer; P. 184.
First, in the words of Doctor Featly, That the Sacrament was anciently carried
home in both kinds, and not in one, as the Romanist here pleads. And this is
proved from Justin Martyr, who in his second Apology declaring the order of the
Church, says thus, Of the things that be consecrated, viz. the Bread, Water
and Wine, they give a part to every one, and carry them to those that be
absent. And Gregory Nazianzen writes to his sister Gorgonia, (...).
that if her hand had laid up any portion of the tokens of the precious Body
and Blood of Christ, in her Devotions she mingled it with her tears, and so
received it.

2. See Dr. Tailor duc. dub. B. 2. c. 3. p. 425.
We acknowledge, that it was attempted to be changed upon occasion of the
Eremites, who coming but seldom to Church could but seldom receive the
Chalice; but desiring more frequently to communicate, they carried the
consecrated Bread with them into their Cells; and when they had a mind to it, in
that imperfect manner, Can. 3.
did celebrate the Lords Supper; But this custom was condemned with a curse in
the Council held at Caesar-Augusta in Spain; Non Consumpsisse in Ecclesia.
which says, If any man receive the Sacrament, and can be proved not to have
finished it in the Church, let him be accursed for ever.

3. We say that the Doctors of the Church in Tertullian and Saint Cyprians time
did think it necessary to receive the Cup, and therefore could not be thought
to have approved this half communion except in cases of necessity.

Justin Martyr (who was before Tertullian) tells us, P. 97. 98.
that the Deacons distributed to all present the body and blood, and that the
Apostles in their Gospels had delivered to them, (...), that Christ had so
commanded them. S. Lib. 2. Ep. 63.
Cyprian tells us, that if it be not lawful to break one of Christ's least
Commandments, much less is it lawful to break any of those great commandments
belonging to the passion of our Lord or the Sacrament of our Redemption, Hom.
16. on Numb.
or by humane Tradition to alter them. And Origin says (speaking of the
Sacrament) the Christian people embrace him, who says, Except you eat the
flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, you have no life in you. Now he
that says so, surely, must be supposed to think it necessary that the people
should have this blood to drink which is so necessary to their spiritual life.

Fourthly and lastly, only. To. 3 l. 9. c. 3.
And this you have been told by Chamier and other Learned Protestants upon this
Controversy; produce your Fathers in the next, and confirm it from their words.

The next supposed Evidence he brings, is,

1. That Saint Cyprian and others cited in his Margin do not say, that the
Infants which communicated received in one kind only, and that they mention
but one kind, does prove no more the thing in contest, then Saint Paul's charge
of the unworthy persons not discerning the Lords Body proves that he
participated not of the Cup; or if he did participate, discerned it.

2. We say that Infants did communicate in both kinds; As you may see in D.
Featly's Grand Sacrilege. p. 186. Chamier To. 4. l. 9.
and this is proved from the testimony of the same Cyprian, from Saint Anstin,
Ep. 107. (To which you may add a passage in his Hypognostic's cited by the
Learned Chamier) and by Gennadius.

3.

4. We acknowledge also, that upon occasion of this use, Bishop Tailor, duc.
dub. l. 2. c. 3, p. 426. Can. de Consecrat. did. 2d.
some fell in love with the trick, and would have had it so in ordinary
Administrations; but against those Pope Julius opposes himself, declaring it
to be against the Divine Order, and Apostolical Constitutions, and contrary to
the Doctrine of the Apostles, and Custom of the Church; and his words are
remarkable to show from whence this Article is to be determined. Non
difficulter hoc ab ipso font veritatis probatur, in qua ordinata ipsa
Sacramentorum Mysteria processerunt: showing that the very institution of the
Sacrament is the Fountain from whence we are to derive the truth in this
inquiry: But when this superstition was again revived about the year 580. the
now mentioned Decree of Pope Julius was repeated in the third Council of
Braccara, and all set right again according to the perpetual custom of the
Church, and the institution of our blessed Lord: and their pretense (which was,
lest they should spill any thing of the holy Chalice) laid aside as trifling
and superstitious.

His third instance is the Communicating of the sick and penitents at the point
of death, Ibid.
which according to him was in one kind: Now to this we say, that the two last
answers given to the former instance suit to this. For the Church did sometimes
administer the bread dipped in the Chalice to dying persons; And upon that
occasion also it was abused, and the opposition now mentioned was made to that
abuse. Next, we say, his proofs are not concluding, indeed Eusebius. l. 6. tells
us, That the old man's mouth was dry, and therefore the Boy was desired to
moysten the Bread by sopping it: but thence to argue, that the old man received
no Wine, is a strange and contradictory inference.

3. We say, and that out of the same Authors by him cited, that such did
communicate in both kinds. This appears by the charge that Dionysius Alexand.
Euscb. Eccl. Hist. lib. 6. c. 6.
gave to his Priests, that if any that were ready to die desired to partake of
the Holy Mysteries, they should obtain their desires, If in health they had
been humble suitors for it: Yea this may be gathered from Justin Martyr, who,
in the place forecited, says, That the body and Blood of our Lord before hand
consecrated was sent to those that were absent, amongst whom were necessarily
the sick.

Lastly, Bishop Tailor, duc. dub. l. 2. c. 3 N. 429. S. 28.
the Council of Turon considering the necessities of sick and dying persons
appointed the consecrated Bread to be sopped in the Consecrated Chalice; adding
this reason, that the Priest might truly say, The Body and Blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ be profitable to you for the Remission of your sins unto Eternal
Life: 'wherein they intimate, that it was necessary to the truth of these
words, and cousequently to the receiving an entire Sacrament, that the sick
person should participate of both the Elements, and consequently never dreamed
of your concomitance, the only salvo imaginable, for this your sacrilege.

Fourthly, Ibid.


Now, First, He should have made this good by testimony, and not have produced
it backed with no authority; especially when,

Secondly, It Is manifest from their asserting the necessity of both species,
that they would not omit it if it could be otherwise; and therefore Greg.
Nazianz. in praise of Gorgonia, says, Omnes in Navi residentes Corpus and
Sanguinem Christi accepisse.

Thirdly, If this were practiced, This Answer agrees to all the forementioned
instances.
it was only in case of necessity; and that which is only made lawful by an
unavoidable necessity, when that necessity is taken away is unlawful; And
indeed, by the same reason a Jew might have proved the neglect of Circumcision
lawful at any time, because when the Children of Israel traveled in the
wilderness, by reason of their uncertain removes, it was necessary to omit it.

Fourthly, I cannot tell what necessity of communicating in one kind should
happen to them, since they might take Wine with them, or go to Land to procure
it.

Fifthly, As to the Communions sent to other Provinces, Eulogia, in token of
their Communion in the same Church. Stillingfleet, Iren. p. 399, 370. But that
they participated of it as Sacramental Bread, or that they did it without Wine;
or doing it so, supposed themselves to celebrate an entire Sacrament, are
things remaining to be proved. And thus we have endeavored to return somewhat
satisfactory unto our Adversaries pretenses for Justification of their
half-Communion; It remains, that I briefly confute the same, which I shall
endeavor by these degrees.

(1.) Christ Instituted the Sacrament in both kinds;

(2.) I say Christ Instituted in both kinds not only for Priests but Laics;
which appears (1.) from the Reasons annexed to the receiving of both kinds; and
(1.) The Reason of their receiving the bread is this; because it is the body
broken for them; take it (says our Savior) this is my body which was broken
for you; Ratio legis est lex.
This therefore being the Reason why they were to take and eat, and this Reason
concerning all believers as well as the Apostles and other priests, the
institution or precept to take and eat most consequently concern them; and if
it do not, by what Argument will they conclude, that this Institution, as to
any part of it, concerns Women, yea, or the successors of the Apostles? Now
transfer the Argument to the cup, and it runs thus; The Reason of participating
of the Cup, Mat. 26.28.
viz. (Because it is the Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for the
remission of sins) does concern Laics as well as priests: Therefore the
command [drink ye all of this] to which the Reason is annexed, 1 Cor. 11.
concerns them also. Again, another Reason why we must do this, why we must eat
the Bread, and drink the Cup, is, that we may remember Christ's death, and show
it forth till His second coming, as the Scripture speaks, and all the world
acknowledges; and does not this concern all believers as well as priests? Yea,
seeing the words recorded, verse. 26. For as often as you eat this bread and
drink this blood, 1 Cor. 11.24, 25, 26.
you show the Lords death till he come, were not (as we can find in any of the
Evangelists) spoken by our Savior, they must be spoken by S. Paul, who applies
himself to the whole Church of Corinth, and consequently the words preceding,
this do, as often as you drink, in remembrance of me, must belong to them by
reason of the connective particle, which connects the 25 and 26 verses; and
makes it necessary, that the same persons should be related to in the words;
this do, etc. for as often as ye eat, etc.

Again, 1 Cor. 10.16.
as says the Apostle to the Corinthians, (who I suppose were not all priests)
upon this account exhorting them not to partake of Idol Sacrifices (in which I
suppose he did not grant a liberty to the people, but intended by this argument
to restrain them from partaking of the table of Devils, as well as priests.)
The Major is evident, for sure it concerns Laics to partake of that which is
to them the Communion or Communication of the body of Christ: this argument may
also be transferred unto the Cup: for that being the Communion of the blood of
Christ, when worthily received, as well as the bread, it equally concerns them
to participate of that as of the bread.

Now that which I foresee may be returned to these arguments is this;

Now (1) (To omit the refutation of this figment of concomitance till anon)
this Answer destroys the Energy of Christ's words, who, after they had
participated of the body, bids them also drink of this cup, because it was his
blood shed for sinners, when as yet he knew that they had already done so, and
could have told him that he might have spared his cup and his Reason both.

(2.) Were this so, then would the participation of the cup be evidently
superfiuous, it being Instituted after the participation of the body, to
exhibit that blood to us which by the participation of the Body was already
exhibited.

Arg. (3.) Bishop Tailor duc. Du^. p. 422, 423. S. par. 2.
but as representatives of the whole Church, Then was the Sacrament Instituted
in both kinds not only for priests but Laics; for that which was given to
them, and they required to receive as representatives of the whole Church, must
concern the whole Church, not only priests but Laics: Now if they were not to
be considered in this capacity, where shall we find a warrant that the people
may receive at all? for if they received only in the capacity of Clergy men,
then the Institution extends no farther; and it is as much Sacrilege for the
people to eat and drink the Symbols, as it is to offer at the consecration (for
it is a meddling with Sacra, which equally belongs not to them.) But if they
received in the capacity of Christians only, then they received the
Commandment for drinking in the Chalice for themselves, and for all Christians.
Their usual evasion is, that the Apostles as Laics received the Bread; But
then when Christ said, hoc facite, he made them Priests, and then gave them the
Chalice as representatives of the Clergy, not of the people.

This one would think were a strange shift, and yet it is such a one as they are
forced to fly unto.

But, First, Let it be considered how unlikely it is that Christ should at one
time institute two Sacraments (for they pretend Ordination also to be a
Sacrament) of so different natures, and yet speak nothing of the use, or the
reason, the benefit or the necessity of one of them; nor tell them that he did
so, nor explicate the mystery, nor distinguish the rite or the words, but
leave all this to be supposed by the most improbable construction in the world.

Secondly, If the Apostles were made Priests by hoc facite, spoken before the
institution of the Chalice, then does not hoc facite, signify offerte
sacrificium, as the Trent Council (that infallible interpreter of Scripture)
would have it, and consequently cannot make them Priests, that is, in their
language, Sacrificers. For by their own Doctrine to offer both kinds is
necessary to a sacrifice.

Thirdly, If the Apostles were thus made Priests, and drank of the Chalice
under that capacity, then seeing this is a Command (as we presently shall
evince) it ought to be followed, at least so far, and all the Priests that are
present ought to receive the Chalice; which because they do not in the Church
of Rome, it is apparent that they praevaricate the institution; and that they
may exclude the Laity from the Cup, they use their Clergy as bad when
non-Conficients.

Thirdly, Trent Council tells us, that hoe facite, etc. is a command or an
injunction to the Disciples and their successors to offer the same body and
blood which was offered by him. Yea, the Apostle Intimates to us, that this is
a standing Institution, in telling us of showing forth the Lords death till ^e
come. Now it is evident, that hoc facite is a command to eat the Bread or Body
of Christ; in that it is said, Take, eat, this is my Body; this do, this which
I bid you do; what was that? eat his Body. But it is more clear concerning the
Cup, of which it is said, this do as often as you drink it, in remembrance of me:
Clearly showing that to do this was to drink the Cup; and with greater evidence
if possible from the 26. verse, where the Apostle infers, that we do this in
remembrance of Christ, because as often as we eat this Bread and drink this Cup,
we show forth the Lords death till he come; Clearly intimating, that to do this
is to eat this Bread and to drink this Cup: Wherefore this being a Command, it
is apparent we have a Command to eat this Bread and drink this Cup, (...).

Now that Antiquity sides with us is beyond-dispute; In 1 Cor. 11. Quest. 59.
in Levit.
for beside the evidence already given, St. Augustine says, Not only no man
is forbidden to take the blood of the sacrifice for nourishment; but, on the
contrary, all men who desire life are exhorted to drink it: By whom? sure, by
our blessed Savior and his Apostles.

Pope Leo calls the refusal of the Cup, Hom 4. de quadr.
practiced by the Manichees, sacrilegious simulation, and would have such men
driven from the society of the Saints: Yea, when at the general Council of
Calcedon, Act 10. there was an accusation brought in against Iba, Bishop of
Edessa, that in some Churches of his Diocese there was but little Wine, and
that corrupt and sour, provided for the Altar to be sacrificed and distributed
to the people, that Bishop was severely taxed; Whereby it appears, that at the
time of this Council, the Administering of the Sacrament of the Lords supper to
the people without Wine was held a profanation of it. De Consecrat. did. 2.
comperimus etc.
The words of Pope Gelasius are remarkable, (as you find them in Gratian) We
find that some receiving a portion of Christ's holy Body, abstain from the Cup
of his most sacred Blood; which because they do out of I know not what
superstition, we command that either they receive the entire Sacraments, or
that they be entirely withheld from them; In Psa. 6. poen.
because this division of one and the self-same mystery cannot be without
Grand Sacrilege. Thus a Pope, e Cathedra; And Saint Gregory cries out, Who can
sufficiently express what a mercy it is to have these mysteries of Christ's Body
and Blood distributed, De C rp. and Sang. Domini, c. 15. and 19.
by the perception of which the Church, his Body, pascitur and potatur: I will
conclude with Paschasius, who tells us, That neither the Flesh without the
Blood, nor the Blood without the Flesh, is rightly communicated: And expounding
the words of Christ, says, He alone it is that breaks this Bread, and by the
hands of his Ministers distributeth it to all believers, saying, Take, drink ye
all of this, as well Ministers as the rest of the faithful. He that would see
more of Antiquity let him go to Cassander, and De Eccles. l. 4. c. 19.
Modrevius, Papists; and to Doctor Featly, who vindicates these places from
Bellarmines exceptions.

We pass on now to the Fourth Section; M^. C. p. 139.
That the Receivers in one kind, in the forementioned cases, did not think
they received more of Christ at public Communions in the Church, when the
Sacrament was delivered in both species, then when at home in one only.

But, First, How came he acquainted with their Mind? Has hi^ Guardian Angel
told him so?

Secondly, In the forementioned cases, which include in them a necessity of
participating in one kind, (if there be any such) we can readily allow them to
expect as much benefit from one as both, yea from spiritual Communion as
cor^oreal, or by the Elements, when this latter way cannot be had; but thence
to argue against the necessity of participating by outward Symbols would be
strangely ridiculous and impertinent.

But he tells us farther, Christ was received by them in each divided particle
of the species of Bread, Ibid.
and every divided drop of the species of Wine; and that the Flesh of Christ
eould not be received without concomitance of the Blood, Soul, and Divinity of
Christ; Nor his Blood without the concomitance of his flesh, etc. Now, not to
require a proof of him, that ever the Fathers made any mention of the species
of Bread or Wine, (a strong suspicion of their ignorance of the Romanists
Transubstantiation) nor to inquire too rigidly what pretty creatures particles
of species no where subjected, and divided drops of species, should be, let us
come to his proofs.

And, First, He summons in Saint Ambrose, to tell us, that Christ is in the
Sacrament, because it is the Body (that is the representation of the Body) ^f
Christ: Next, the Council of Ephesus, to inform us, that we participate the
flesh of Christ, not as common, but as truly quickening flesh; That is, which
by our spiritual reception of it is made quickening to us.

And, Thirdly, Saint Austine, This he did, says he, quodammodo con. 2. in Ps.
33. And this quodammodo is non rei virtute sed significante mysterio, cp. 23.
ad Bonif. l. 12. in Joan. c. 32.
to teach us that Christ was carried in his own hands, that is, (Christ real
and corporeal di^ carry these Elements which represented him in his hand) Ergo,
in every divided particle of the species of Bread is the Blood, Soul, and
Divinity of Christ; A Consequence very irrational and absurd: Nor will the
testimony of Saint Cyrill be able to conclude the business; for if he argue
from these words; The four parts of the world have divided amongst themselves
his flesh, without dividing of it. I Answer, he adds, The Paschal Lamb was
found amongst all the Israelites, divided and yet undivided; And will our
Author thence argue, that he esteemed each part of the Paschal Lamb to be the
whole, or that he that received the least particle thereof received the whole?
(...).
If he argue from the following words, for the only begotten (not passing
into, as he renders it, but) being distributed to them all, and sanctifying
each of their Souls and Bodies by his own flesh, is in all of them whole and
entire, being every where one; for, as Saint Paul teaches, he is not divided:
I say, if hence he argue, I answer, that he is in all of them whole and entire,
as being truly God, and truly (though mystically) united to them; For having
sanctified them by his flesh spiritually received, he is spiritually made one
with them, as the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 10.17. And thus have we dispatched
his pretenses for concomitance; his fifth and sixth Sections are built upon the
third and fourth, and therefore must fall with them; C. 13. S. 4.
I pass on therefore to urge an Argument against concomitance.

And (1.) viz. that this Sacrament is a commemoration of Christ's Sacrifice, Mr.
C. p. 146.
of his former immolation, and the real^ shedding of his Blood; do this in
remembrance of me being sufficient warrant for his assertion.

(2.) I suppose that in this Sacrament the shedding of Christ's blood is by the
Symbols represented.

For (1.) Why else have we the Wine separated from the bread?

(2.) How is it a representation of Christ's Sacrifice upon the cross? that
being a Sacrifice in which his Sacred blood was shed?

(3.) How do we by partaking of his blood show forth his death, but by showing
that his blood was separated from his body?

(4.) I suppose that Christ's blood is represented by the wine consecrated, not
antecedently to the consecration; else may it represent it in the Cellar, as
well as in the Church.

(5.) I suppose that shedding of Christ's Blood is the separating it from the
body, or at least from the veins; and consequently the representation of it as
shed is the representation of it as severed from the veins; but now it is
impossible that such a representation should be made to an assertor of
concomitance, seeing he is bound to believe that where one single drop of blood
is resident, there also must the Sacred body of Christ reside entirely; and
consequently it is impossible that concomitance should be a truth.

(2.) Paul received from Christ, and the common practice of the Church for a
thousand years.

Secondly, Then must you grant that by communicating in both kinds, more of
Christ is received, contrary to your fourth Section; if the latter, then (not
to speak of the superfluity of Christ's instituion.) First, you must assert,
that albeit a man receive entire Christ, and that worthily, and have the pardon
of his sins, and the benefits of the new Covenant sealed to him, yet may he be
never the better.

And secondly, You will be troubled to give a reason why the Conficient should
be obliged by you to drink the Chalice, and not excused by concomitance.

Thirdly, Consecration in both kinds, rather, then the Reception in both kinds;
and therefore seeing the Trent Council says peremptorily, De Missa, Sess.
sexta. c. 10.
that Christ commanded the Apostles and their Successors to offer in both
kinds, why should she not also say, that he commanded them and their Successors
to distribute in both kinds?

But were this salve good,

And (1.) He tells us, wonderful increase of the Communicants, and decay of
their devotion, whence very great danger of irreverence and effusion of the
precious blood of our Lord was like to follow, if not thus prevented.

Now (1.) (Not to tell him that this excuse has been by the Primitive Church
rejected as Superstitious) lay aside that monstrous opinion of
Transubstantiation, and what great harm will it be, if casually and by no fault
of ours, or wilful contempt, some of the Wine should be spilt?

(2.) With what conscience can they pretend their Reverence to the Sacrament,
for this, when our Author supposes there be multitudes little sensible of
Religion, and so multitudes of wicked men to whom they without scruple give the
holy bread which is Christ's body, albeit some of them may happily vomit him, some
spit him out again, some throw him to the Dogs, etc. I can very easily persuade
my self that Christ had rather be spilt upon the ground, then devoured by
wicked men.

Secondly, Berengarius might occasion this order of the Church. Mr. C. p. 142.


Ans. But who gave the Roman Church warrant to violate Christ's Institution to
those ends, to commit Sacrilege to uphold a gross untruth, and to conspire
with the heresy of the Manichees against an Orthodox and apparent truth? and
here our Author leaves Divining, though some of his brethren add, that should
the Laity have the Cup, then some drops of Christ's blood might stick unto their
beards, some might be ejected with their spittle; and if I may be permitted to
add my Symbol, some of them may be poisoned by the cup; the Romanist knows how
to play such pranks.

Oh, Mr. C. p. 141.
but a dispensation may happily be had, seeing the Trent conventicle, or the
General Council of fifty Bishops, has referred this matter to the Pope.

Ans. Very good, but with these provisoes.

(1.) That those who are willing thus to communicate do in every other thing
agree with the received faith, doctrine and manners of the Roman Church, and
religiously observe all the decrees of this Synod.

Secondly, That they believe and confess that the custom of communicating in
one kind is laudable and to be observed as a Law, unless the Church decree the
contrary; and that those who continue to think otherwise are Heretics (that
is, she will permit the Pope to grant us a dispensation if we will acknowledge
it to be needless.)

Thirdly, That they will give all Reverence to the Pope as Bishop and Pastor of
the Universal Church, (the Pope you see has not this power of dispensation
given him for nothing) with other the like stuff; and after all these things
it is but videtur posse concedi, it seems the Pope may grant a dispensation.

But were it, as he would have it, seeing we openly declare this, as one ground
of our separation, that the Church of Rome necessitates us not only to receive
an half Communion, but also to profess, that we believe this manner of
Administration agreeable to the word of God, is it possible that the Schism
should be on our part, who proclaim our selves willing to close with her, if
she will cease to require these unlawful terms of Communion; and not rather on
the part of the Church of Rome, which still obstinately persists in exacting
such conditions from us?

CHAP. XIII.
The state of the Question, Sect. 1. No Argument from the name of Sacrifice,
Sect. 2. Preaching called a Sacrifice, and the Testimony of Saint Austine
considered, Ibid. Alms called a Sacrifice, and testimony of Irenaeus largely
considered, Sect. 3. The Eucharist a symbolical Sacrifice, and the testimonies
of Ignatius and Saint Cyprian considered. Sect. 4. In some sense propitiatory
Sacrifice, and the testimony of Saint Chrysostom considered; Mr. C. says no
more then our Church does, Sect. 6. The Eucharist no true proper Sacrifice,
Sect. 7.

THe Council of Trent has pronounced her Anathema upon all who shall affirm
that in the Mass there is not offered a true and proper Sacrifice,

1. Sacrifice is attributerd to those things, both by Scripture and the
Primitive Fathers, which even the most rigid Papist must acknowledge not to be
truly and properly so called; and consequently the Argument taken from this
Topic must be invalid.

And first, (...), in locum: (...) Haer. 79. Coul. Collor. in Lovit. l. 5. Mr.
C. P. 146. l. 2^. De Civ. Dei, c. 10. C. 20. v. 6. Qui proprie jam vocantur in
Ecclesia Sacerdotes.
the preaching of the Gospel is called a Sacrifice, Romans 15.16. where the
Apostle tells the Romans that he did ((...)) Sacrifice the Gospel of God.
Whence Origin styles the preaching of the Word a work of Sacrificing, Epiph.
says that the Apostles were elected to Sacrifice the Gospel, and Cyril of
Alexandria, that the Priest did slay the Host of the Word of God, and offer the
victimes of Holy Doctrine. To omit the like sayings of Chrysostom, and others:
and hither we refer that of Saint Austine (cited by Mr. C. to evince this
proper Sacrifice) where descanting upon that passage of the Apocalypse, They
shall be Priests with God and Christ, and shall reign with him 1000. years; he
informs us that this Text speaks not in a peculiar manner of Bishops and
Presbyters. to whom the name of Priests was appropriated in the Church, but is
to be extended to all Christians, so styled, as being members of their high
Priest. So that he says they are Priests properly so called, not in reference
to any proper sacrifice to be offered by them (of which no mention at all was
made:) but in Opposition to other Christians not entered into holy Orders;
Seipsum obtulit and ejus sacrificii similitudinem in suae passionis memoriam
celebrandum obtulit, lib. qu. 83. qu. 6. Epist. 23. ad Bonif.
and therefore catachrestically called so. And that Saint Austine was far
enough from asserting the Eucharist to be a proper sacrifice, is extremely
evident, in that he calls it the similitude of Christ's sacrifice, and tells us
He that says Christ is immolated in this Sacrament would not lie, because if
Sacraments had not a similitude of things of which they are Sacraments, they
could not be so: Now from this similitude they take the names of the things
themselves, even (as says he) after a manner the Sacrament of Christ's Body is
his Body, Secundum quendam modum.
and the Sacrament of the Blood of Christ his blood: which therefore, according
to Saint Austine, are such only by way of similitude, or by a Metonymie of the
sign for the thing signified, and accordingly the Sacrifice must be so styled
on the same account: And hence it is that elsewhere he says, L. 10. Cont.
Faust. c. 2. L. 20. c. 21. and c. 28. Christiani peracti ejuedem sacrificii
memoriam, celebrant sacrosancta oblatione and perticipatione corporis and
sanguit is Christi.
That which by all is called a true sacrifice, is the sign of a true sacrifice;
and then presently after will have it to be a sacrifice of remembrance, or the
remembrance of a sacrifice.

. 3. Secondly, Alms and Offerings made for the poor are called Sacrifices: S.
Paul styles them Offerings well pleasing and acceptable to God, Philip. 4.14.
and Victims, Heb. 13.16. l. 4. c. 32. De Elemosyna. L. 4. c. 32. Mr C. p. 114.
1.
Irenaeus says, That these first fruits are the Offerings of the Universe, S.
l. 4. c. 32. Dee Elemosyna. L. 4. c. 32. M. C. p. 114.1.
Cyprian checks the rich widow for approaching the Lords Table without her
Corban, without a Sacrifice, yea eating of the sacrifice the poor man bronght.
And in St. Austins phrase, the Alms of pious Matrons are Oblations. And of this
sacrifice does: Irenaeus speak (in the Sentence urged by Mr. C. to evince this
proper sacrifice) when he tells us That our Savior giving counfel to his
Disciples to offer the first fruits to God of his creatures; (not as if he
wanted any thing; but that they might not be unfruitful, or ungrateful) took
the creature of bread, and gave thanks, saying, this is my Body, Qui est ex ea
creatura quae est secun^um nos.
and the C^p likewise (which consists of a creature which is usual amongst us,
he confessed to be his blood, and brought a new Oblation of the New Testament,
which the Church receiving from the Apostles offers through all the world unto
that God who gives us nourishment (to wit) the first fruits of his gifts in the
New Testament, of which the Prophet Malachy speaks, cap. 1. verse. 11. where it
is manifestly declared that the former people (of the Jews) have ceased to
offer unto God, and in all places a pure sacrifice is now offered to him: Where
first, not to deal rigidly with him, in telling him that Irenaeus does not
determine whether this Oblation be Eucharistical, or Ilastical; or if
Ilastical, whether properly or rather metonimycally: so I confidently affirm
that the Sacrifice here mentioned can not be the sacrifice of the Mass, or of
Christ's Body and Blood; the reasons are:

1. From these words, Chap. 34. The Oblation of the Church which the Lord
taught us to be offered in the whole world is reputed a pure sacrifice before
God, and acceptable to him; not because God wants our gift or sacrifice; but
because he that offers is glorified thereby if his gift be accepted: When
therefore thou offerest this gift at the Altar: Matt. 5.24, 25.
Go first and be reconciled to thy brother, then come and offer it. You must
therefore offer to God the first fruits of his creatures; Deuteronomy. 16.26.
as Moses said, Thou shall not appear empty before God. Now had he spoken of
the sacrifice of Christ's Body and Blood, would he have told us that it is
reputed apure sacrifice, not is so; when to be, and to be reputed are
disparates.

But secondly, the Oblation which he speaks of is that which all Christians
offer not the Priest only as is evident from the two places cited, when thou
offerest thy gift. And thou shall not appear empty before God. Seeing therefore
that the first fruits of the creature to be offered to God here, are not the
Body and Blood of Christ; (and Irenaeus tells us that he speaks of this
Oblation which the Church offers throughout all the world) neither can that be
such.

3. You have a further Evidence in that it is said, We offer this sacrifice to
God; not that he wants it, but that we should not be unfruitful, For that this
passage must refer to Alms, not to Christ's Body; Let Irenaeus himself assure
us, who in this 34. Chapter tells us, that God wants not any thing of ours; but
yet it is needful we offer somewhat to him: for, as Solomon says, Pro. 19.17.
He that has mercy on the poor lends to the Lord; and that God which wants
nothing yet takes our good works as done to him, that he may give us a reward
of his good things for them, as our Lord says, Come you blessed of my Father
etc. for I was an hungry and you gave me to eat; I, Mat. 24.25.
and a little after he tells us, that God will have these things done by us,
that we may not be unfruitful; so that evidently this refers to Alms and the
Oblations at the Eucharist, not of the Eucharist; and therefore the same words
in this Sentence touching the same matter, must in all reason be esteemed to
refer unto them also.

Again, in the same Chapter he adds, The Sacrifice does not sanctify the man,
but the conscience of him that offers, being pure, does sanc^ifie the
Sacrifice. Seeing therefore with simplicity (or sincerity.) The Church does
offer the Sacrifice is justly reputed pure by God. And hence it is that Saint
Paul calls them an Odor of sweetness, an Offering acceptable and well pleasing
unto God: For we must offer unto God; Thus the Church offers to him the first
Fruits, and that of his Creatures; and a little after, we offer, sanctifying
the Creature.

Now first, can it be tollerably said, we sanctify the sacrifice of Christ's
body, and that it sanctifies not us? That this sacrifice is reputed pure
before God from our sincerity in offering? That the Apostle in the place now
cited, speaks of the Body of Christ, not Alms? And consequently can the
Offering of the first Fruits of his Creatures be any other? Seeing therefore
this Offering of the New Testament which the Church offers is expressly said to
be primitias suorum munerum, the first fruits of her gifts offered to him that
affords us sustenance: is it not rationally inferred, that it refers also to
these Alms and Oblations made at the Sacrament, not to any Oblation of the
Sacrament? well then;

2. Mr. Mede's Christian Sicrifice.
In short in the Primitive times the Church of God was wont to offer very
freely of what God afforded them; and amongst the rest, they offered Bread and
Wine to him that was (...), chief Minister of the Brethren, who took it and
gave thanks and glory to the Lord of the whole world: then made a large and
prolix thanksgiving to him that had made them worthy of such gifts, and the
rest of the Offerings were distributed either to serve the necessities of the
poor, or for other uses of the Church, as you may find in Justin Martyr, Apol.
2.
and Irenaeus, every where. And to this it is that he here refers, when he
tells us that our Lord instituting this Sacrament taught us a new Oblation of
the New Testament.

I confess Bellarmine here objecteth that Irenaeus speaks of such a sacrifice
as was to succeed the sacrifices made in the Jewish Paedagogy; Now such were
not the sacrifices of Alms, Prayers, Thanksgivings; and therefore Irenaeus
cannot be supposed to speak of them.

But first, Irenaeus does no where say, that the sacrifice he speaks of
succeeds those of the Jewish Laws, but only that they have ceased to Offer,
and in their places we now do.

2. See this Argument shamtfully balfled, in Mat. Boehart. traitte du sacrifice
de la M^sse, second party, Chapitre 5.
Will it hence follow, that we must offer a proper sacrifice as they did? Does
not our service succeed theirs, and must it be therefore carnal, as well as
this service of the Jews? If this Argument be good, our sacrifice succeeds a
proper sacrifice, and therefore it is so: must not this also be esteemed so?
Our sacrifice succeeded a bloodysacrifice and therefore it is such; our
sacrifice succeeded a sacrifice of bruit beasts, and therefore it is such,

Our second Consideration is, that the Eucharist may be called a sacrifice
symbollically, as representing, applying, and some way impetrating for us all
the benefits of Christ's real sacrifice on the Cross: For seeing the signs are
often put for the things signified, Chrysostom. H. 27. in Heb. (...), Eusebius. them.
Evan l. 1. (...) Vide For. Cons. mod. p. 451.
and the (...) acquire the names of what they represent, and bring to our
remembrance; Yea seeing the Apostle tells the Galathians, that Christ was
crucified amongst them; because his sufferings on the Crofs were most lively
represented to them by his preaching; why may not we on the same account call
the Eucharist in this sense a sacrisice, as being that in which Christ's
sufferings, are far more lively and accurately set forth? Yea, a perfect
remembrance of a sacrifice as the Fathers call it? yea secondly, we allow it to
be a sacrifice in this sense, as exhibi ting to us all the benefits of Christ's
sacrifice upon the Cross. for we all allow, that what ever Christ dying and
shedding his blood for us procured, is not only represented there, but applied
to the faithful, and exhibited to his faith.

And here come in the residue of his citations and (1.) That of Ignatius is
Spurious, Epist. ad Smyrn. S. 2 p. 144.
you may find the words upon which the force of the argument depends, written
in Red Letters, in the Edition of Bishop Usher.

Secondly, As to that of S. Cyprian, In his Epis. to Caecil. (not. Cyril. as
Mr. C.)
who was more a Priest of the most high God then our Lord who offered a
sacrifice to God the Father, and offered the very same that Melchisedec
offered, that is, bread and wine, to wit, his own body and blood, (which it
could not be otherwise then figuratively, or significatively) and commanded the
same ( viz. bread and wine) to be afterward done in memory of him; that Priest
therefore does truly supply the place and function of Christ, and imitates that
which Christ did, who undertakes to offer, as he sees Christ himself offered,
viz. bread and wine, as the Ancient Church was wont to do (and this they
believed our blessed Savior himself did, when at the Institution of this holy
Rite, Mr. Mede, ib.
he took the Bread and Cup into his hands, and looking up to heaven gave thanks
and blessed) who after his example first offered the bread and wine unto God,
to agnize him Lord Paramount of the Creature, and then received them from him
again in a banquet, as the Symbols of the body and blood of his Son: now the
words thus expounded have nothing in them Son: now the pertinent to your
purpose, nothing to prove any sacrifice of Christ's body; much less to prove a
true and proper sacrifice, which that S. Cyprian never dreamed of we may be
sufficiently assured from this Epistle to Caecilius, whose words are these,
because (says he) we make mention of Christ's passion in all our sacrifices,
(for the passion of the Lord is the sacrifice we offer) we ought to do no other
thing then what Christ did; If the passion of Christ be the Sacrifice we offer,
how is the Eucharist properly so? seeing the Scripture tells us that Christ
ought to suffer only once, and his glorious body is now impatible, how does he
really suffer? and if not, then is there only a remembrance of his passion
made, and therefore his passion (that is, the Commemoration of it) must sure be
called the sacrifice offered by the Church. Ubi supra, and especially in his
first Chap. of the same, 2. part. where Bellar. Arg. hence is abundantly
refuted. Mr. C. p. 145.
And as Bochartus has it, how impertient is it to allege a passage where it
is said that Christ offered the same which Melchisedech offered, which was
undoubtedly true bread and wine, without any transubstantiation, to prove that
Christ was sacrificed under the Species of bread and wine.

Lastly, The eighteenth Canon of the Nicene Council tells us, that it is a
thing which neither Canon nor custom has delivered, that those who have no
power of offering, ( viz. the Symbols in commemoration of Christ's sacrifice
made upon the Cross) should give the Body of Christ (that is, these Symbols of
his body) to those who offer.

Ans. What of all this? Is there any thing in this passage to evince a true and
proper sacrifice of Christ's body and blood?

Secondly, Eusebius, who was present at this Council, can tell us what kind of
sacrifice the Church then offered. Them. Evang. l. 1. c. 10. (...).
For thus he speaks, Christ offered an excellent sacrifice for the salvation of
us all, delivering to us the memory thereof to be presented to God in lieu of a
sacrifice; And toward the end of that chapter, we sacrifice the memory of that
great sacrifice according to the mysteries delivered to us by Christ.

Secondly, Gelasius from whose Authority you have this Canon, (...). Premire
party Chapitre 10.
tells us moreover, that the Nicene Fathers said, the Lamb of God was here
sacrificed by the Priest, without a sacrifice, that is, Representatively so,
for so the Grecians called (...), holy things not offered, as you may see
evinced by Bochartus de la Mess, where the interpretation of Cardinal Perron
is abundantly refuted, and it is made good that the words were not intended to
signify (...), as the Cardinal contends, but only sans estre Sacrifie which is
the proper and natural signification of the word (...).

Fourthly, and lastly, we allow it to be a propitiatory sacrifice, for as much
as by the right participation of it we enjoy remission of sins; not as if we
thought there was any force in those mysteries to satisfy Gods justice; but
because hereby we have sealed to us that remission which was purchased by the
sacrifice of the Cross. And this affords us an Answer to that of S.
Chrysostom, Hom. 21. Mr. C. p. 145.
that the Eucharist is a sacrifice for remission of sins, for the Priest that
offers, for the multitude, for the procuring plenty, which indeed it was
esteemed partly upon this account that so many petitions were put up to God at
the solemnity; (for this oblation of prayer was made through Jesus Christ
commemorated in the creatures of bread and wine; and it was the custom of the
Ancients, upon the consecration of the dona, Mede ib.
to be the Body and Blood of Christ, to offer to the Divine Majesty as it were
over the Lamb of God, then lying upon the table, their supplications and
prayers for the whole State of Christ's Church, and all sorts and degrees
therein; thus the Author of the Mystagogical Catechis. Lib. 5.
upon these propitiatory hosts we beseech God for the common peace of the
Church, the tranquillity of the world, for Kings, Soldiers, Companions, the
afflicted; in fine for all that stand in need of help. Christ. Sac. S. 3.
See more of this in the Ingenious Master Mede) and partly because it was such
a commemoration of Christ's sufferings as conveyed unto us an interest in what
he has suffered for us, which therefore we are enabled to plead for our selves
and others; but that Saint Chrysostom. never esteemed it a proper Sacrament is
apparent from these words of his 17. Hom. on the Heb. What do we not
continually offer? Yes (says he) we offer, but only by a commemoration of his
(Christ's) death, there is but one host, not many; how so? because it was
offered once, and that host ( viz. once offered) was carried up into the holy
of holies, this that we celebrate is the figure of that former, and that the
truth of this. And a little after, he is our high Priest who offers that
sacrifice which cleanses us which we now offer, (and) which then was offered,
(...).
nor possibly can be consumed; this is done in a remembrance of that which was
then done, according to that of Our Savior, do this in remembrance of me, we
do not offer another sacrifice, as the Jewish Priests, but continually the
same, or rather a remembrance of a sacrifice; what can be more express then
this?

And indeed our Author says the same thing; S. 4. p. 146.
his words are these, Ordinarily the conception of a sacrifice is supposed to
import an immolation, shedding of blood, and killing; and no such matter
appearing here, but only a commemoration of a former real immolation, and
shedding of Christ's Blood, therefore we (Sectaries) will not allow it the name
of sacrifice; Now (not to note, that if this be the ordinary conception of a
sacrifice, that then the Fathers must be granted in this matter to have spoken
contrary to the ordinary sense which the word bears, and to that which it is
supposed commonly to import, (1) hence it is clear that he holds the
celebration of the Eucharist to be only a commemoration of a sacrifice; which
we will endeavor to evince from his own words (only premizing that Christ's
sacrifice was a real immolation, and shedding of his blood) thus; where there
is only a commemoration of the real immolation, and shedding of Christ's blood,
there is only the commemoration of Christ's sacrifice offered on the Cross, but
here (that is, in the celebration of the Mass,) there is only a commemoration
of a former real immolation, and shedding of Christ's blood, and therefore a
commemoration only of his sacrifice; S. 6. p. 148.
nor is it any thing to the purpose which he adds, that it is in the most
proper rigorous sense an oblation of the very same body and blood that our Lord
now offers in heaven. For (to let pass the question, sufficiently handled
already, whether the very same body and blood which Christ offered on the Cross
be present in the Sacrament, or only the Symbols of it) either he terms this a
proper oblation, because in the Sacrament somewhat is properly tendered, or
presented unto God, and thus we all acknowledge a proper oblation in the
Sacrament, for there we show forth the Lords death by presenting before him the
sacrifice of atonement that Christ has made, commemorating the pains that he
endured, entreating God that we may all enjoy the purchase of his blood, and
reap the benefit of his passion reached forth unto us in the Symbol; and that
for the sake of the Bloody sacrifice of his Son, in which by the faithful
receiving of the elements we are interested, he will turn away all his anger
from us. Or Secondly, as this word is taken in a stricter sense, to signify a
sacrifice of inanimate things, as fruits, incense, etc. (and thus it is
distinguished from a sacrifice of an animate being, which was accompanied with
an (...), or an effusion of blood) to which it is requisite, Clopen. Scb. Suc.
ab initio.
if properly and strictly such, ut vel incendio, vel alio convenienti ri^u
sacro, per sacerdotis ministerium destruatur, that it be destroyed by fire, or
any other convenient Rite, by the ministry of a Priest; and if this be his
sense of an oblation, we deny that there is any such destruction or consumption
of the real body and blood of the Lord in the holy Sacrament, and shall now
consider it.

Fourthly, Bell: from the perpetual use of Scripture, when speaking of a
proper sacrifice; for what ever in Scripture is properly so called was
necessarily to suffer such a mutation, if it had life, by the deprivation of
it; if it were an inanimate and solid, being as Frankincense, Salt, etc. by
combustion; if liquid, as wine, blood, and water, by effusion. Levit. 1.2.

Secondly, He proves it, because all the Sacraments did prefigure the death of
Christ, their death or mutation being Typical of his; with Bellarmine consents
Cardinal Alanus, De Eucha. sacrif. l. 2. c. 3.
who tells us, that unless the intervention of some mutation be allowed to the
nature of a sacrifice, we must acknowledge that first fruits, Tithes, the
firstborn, religious persons, and innumerable other things (which in the Law
were consecrated to God) must be called sacrifices; there being no difference
in them from true and proper sacrifices imaginable but this, that these gifts
thus consecrated remain entire, but the things which are sacrificed do not, but
suffer as it were a change into another species; being either killed, roasted,
bruised, or boiled, or by some other action of the Priest consumed; But now
there is no real mutation here of the thing sacrificed; for the thing
sacrificed is the very same body and blood which our Lord offered upon the
Cross, as our Author tells us, P. 148. and p. 135. We acknowledge an oral
manducation, but without any suffering or change in the divine body it self.
and the victim (says he) suffers nothing; But should he eat his words as he
does his God? I will thus force him to confess the truth; If the body of
Christ suffer any mutation when sacrificed, then either as to its real being in
Heaven, or its Sacramental, but neither can with reason be affirmed. Not the
first, for Christ's natural body is now impassible; not the second, for then
would the body of Christ lose its being in the Sacrament; which, first, is
contrary to what P. 131.
he himself produces from Cyrils Epistle ad Calosyrium; And, secondly, were it
so, either it loses this Sacramental being when it is eaten, or before or
after, viz. when the species of bread cease to remain. If this last, then is it
sacrificed in the belly, not on the Altar; if when it is eaten, it is sacrificed
in the mouth; if before, then do not the Communicants eat the body and blood of
Christ.

Secondly, if this be sufficient to make it a proper mutation, because the body
of Christ loses his esse Sacramentale, and cease to be present under these
species; then by parity of reason, God himself (and his Angels) may be said to
suffer a real Physical mutation, when he cease to be where he was, by the
destruction of that wherein he was, or the annihilation of the same.

Secondly, If Christ did not offer a true and proper sacrifice, then neither do
his Ministers; but the first is so; the sequel is evident; because that which
is delivered to us to be done, was received from Christ; for seeing it is
delivered by the Evangelists and Saint Paul, and we are peremptorily told by
him delivering what the Evangelists had rehearsed, that he received it of
Christ, and delivered no other thing; If Christ did not offer a true and proper
sacrifice, neither did he deliver it to us from Christ; but Christ did not
offer such a sacrifice; Hist. Conc. Trent.
for then the oblation of the Cross would have been superfluous, because
Mankind would have been redeemed by that of the Supper, which went before.
Besides, the Sacrament of the Altar was instituted by Christ for a memorial of
that which he offered on the Cross; now there cannot be a memorial but of a
thing past, and therefore the Eucharist could not be a sacrifice before the
oblation of Christ on the Cross, but showed what we were afterward to do.

And thus I have considered what is material in this Chapter, and only desire
Mr. C. in case he reply, to state evidently this Doctrine of their Church; and
wherein they differ from us, and what are the requisites of a sacrifice; that
so we may know what we are to dispute against.

CHAP. XIIII.
Why Master C. omits the dispute touching the Books styled Apocryphal, Sect. 1.
His way of reasoning weak, Sect. 2. 3, 4, 5, 6. The Primitive Fathers against
the veneration of Images, Sect. 7. All their pretenses evacuated by the
Fathers, Sect. 8. The Honor given to Images is called worship by the Romanists
themselves, Sect. 9. To worship false Gods not necessary to Idolatry, Sect. 10.
Vulgar Papists give divine honor to Images, Sect. 11. Papists pray to them,
Sect. 12. Master Cs. Argument for veneration of Images, Answ. Sect. 13. An
Argument, against it, Sect. 14. His Story further requited, Sect. 15.

WE come now to consider his Pleas for the Roman Churches practice in
veneration of Images, Doctor says only this; That the Council of Trent was
not afraid to make new Articles, the Invocation of Saints, the worship of
Images; yea, says he, many humane writings, the Apocryphal Books, and many
unwritten Traditions also were by her decreed to be of equal Authority with the
Scripture, and an Anathema added to all that should not so receive them. Now
because he formerly had managed a dispute with Mr. Bagshaw about Images, he
takes advantage of these few words, to transcribe the whole dispute,
over-looking that which more copiously is insisted on; to wit, the ascribing
Divine Authority to the Books which we commonly style Apocryphal, Doctor. John
Reynolds, and Bishop Cousens.
which sure was only upon this account; because it has been made appear by
two Champions of our Church, that this decree of the Trent Council is contrary
to Reason, and the suffrage of the Fathers and learned men, even from Christ
time to the Sessi^n of this worthy Conventicle, we call upon him for answer to
them in his next: Well, but we will be content to undergo this trouble also,
and that the rather because this piece is esteemed by some to have a vein of
Reason in it, although it be fraught (if I mistake not) with inconsiderable
Sophismes.

First if then he catechizes us thus, Should you see the Picture of our Lord
hanging on the Cross, Mr. C. p.
could you possibly avoid the calling to mind who our Lord was, and what he had
done and suffered for you?

Answer. Your own Gerson will tell us another story, compertum est, etc. It is
very well known that some devout persons by aspect of Images had their thoughts
turned from holy cogitations and pure affections, to carnal, filthy, wicked,
and impure, yea, execrably blasphemous; but to let this pass.

Secondly, I see a Crucifix almost every day in our College windows, and yet
seldom have found such an effect upon me; and I appeal to the carvers of these
Pictures, whether they do not often behold their workmanship without this
effect; to the members of our Colleges, whether they do not often look upon
their windows, without such remembrance of the Saints or Apostles there lively
pictured, as may make them spiritual, or compel them into a fit of devotion;
yea, the reason why our Church thinks meet yet to preserve them in her
Assemblies, notwithstanding the loud cries of the Phanaticks, that they are
scandalous and dangerous, is evidently this; because she knows they have an
historical use, and that the people upon the sight of them are not found
inclined to yield any worship or corporeal reverence unto them.

Thirdly, The picture of Cromwell or Bradshaw, the parts of the Rebels that
hang up at the Gates of London, Spanish Inquisition, Irish Rebellions, Popish
Cruelties to the Waldenses, and Albingenses, yea, the picture of Hell and the
Devil, are apt to bring their cruelties and torments into our remembrances; and
doing so, may not I adresse my self with Praises and Thanksgivings to this God
who has delivered us from such Tyrants, and pray heartily to be freed from the
torments of Hell, and tyranny of Satan? Is not there as much reason for my
devotion here, as at the sight of an Image? yea, the very names of Peter and
Paul, Heaven and Hell, are as subservient to the productions of such thoughts;
and therefore when I read in a play, Heavens bless, etc. must I turn to my
devotions? I might be endless in such instances. Again he tells us, Should we
have the picture of his Majesty and Bradshaw, should we have the Bible and
Pantagruel, they would force upon us quite contrary thoughts, almost impossible
to be avoided.

Answer. First, Would not the mention of their names have the same effect upon
us?

Secondly, When he walks along London streets, and there sees the sign of his
Majesty at so many Taverns, does he find it impossible for him to avoid
thoughts of due subjection and reverence? And should he have Faux in his
Oratory? Would he after two or three sights of him be moved against his
Rebellions? Yea, when he goes to the Booksellers, and sees many gilt Bibles on
the one hand, Plays and Romances on the other, is he troubled with a diversity
of Passions in his breast? But we suffer him to proceed; well then.

He infers, If then unavoidably he must think reverently of the objects, or
contemptuously, he may as well speak, or behave himself externally, after the
same manner to them respectively.

Answer. True, will any body say, he should not reverence his Majesty? Or may
not behave himself contemptuously toward Bradshaw, or any other Rebel now
alive? But,

Secondly, If thence he would infer a reverence due to that which represents
these objects (albeit we grant the thing of a civil reverence) yet his
deduction he infers it from will as well prove that his Majesty's name in print
should be reverenced, and men should do obeisance to his Proclamations,
especially if his Picture be there also; Yea, seeing the Ladies carry him upon
their breasts, we should do well to bow to them upon this account; yea, seeing
Cromwell and Bradshaw, and the greatest Rebels, may represent unto us his
Majesty's Clemency; Hell, and the Devil, Christ's exceeding love in enduring
these torments, and delivering us from the roaring Lion; we should therefore do
reverence to the pictures of these Rebels, yea, of Hell and the Devil; or at
least, on the same score, we should reverence a Lamb, as putting us in mind of
the Lamb of God; a Dove, as putting us in mind of the Spirit of God; an old
man, as being the Emblem of the ancient of days, and such like things.

In his fifth Section he proves that we have affections not only to the
person, but picture representing him; Judas and Bradshaw's picture. Moreover
the Bible we would not put to an unclean use, as happily we might deal with
Aesops Fables.

A. I should not scruple to tear his Majesty's pictures, which sometime may be
found in smoky Alehouses, so strangely deformed, that it is no way apt to
create a reverence, and were the greatest Rebel pictured by the hand of an
Apelles, I should be loath to have it defiled. Yea had I Ogilbies, Aesops
Fables, I should be very unwilling to condemn it to such an office: But had I a
a piece of the Popish Mass, in which happily an Episte or Gospel may be extant:
I should without remorse permit it to this use: for let me ask him a few
questions.

1. Should he meet with a Postiller that had stuffed both pages with Citations
from Scrip. or any such like Author, would he think it a sin to condemn that
page with the rest to such an use.

2. Suppose the Printer of a Bible had a sheet superfluous, must it be laid up
as an holy Relic? or may it be put to a profane use? should a shop keeper
send him Tobacco in a part of it: whether he would think it meet to reprove him
for it? When a Church Bible is grown old and worm-eaten, whether the good women
would sin in putting it under their ^ies? Or should they meet with one of the
Old Translation, with the Gelding baptized by Philip; (which yet in its literal
sense is not more ridiculous then the Bells baptized by that Papists) and the
knave of Jesus Christ whether it might not be lawful thus to use it? Whether I
might not change my Bible for an Aesop's Fables of far greater worth? When his
Casuistical faculty has been exercised on these Question, he shall have some
more: In the interim, we pass on to.

Sect. 6. In which he tells us that we look on Saint Peter, instrument of
promoting our eternal happiness; and therefore we place his Picture in our
Oratory.

Ans. He proves it from Lactantius, who lived An. Dom. 330.
1. Did not the Primitive Christians know this as well as we, of whom yet I may
say with Cassander, that it is certain that in the beginning of the Gospel
aliquanto tempore (for 300. years) there was no use of Images in the Church of
God.

2. May you not procure the picture of some good man living, that has been
instrumental these ways, and will you give it sacred veneration, will you bow
and cringe before it? Well, but why is that placing it in my Oratory a sacred
veneration of it?

Ans. Ibid.
Because all things that are appointed on purpose to mind us of God and Heaven,
and the salvation of our souls we call sacred. Now sure the Picture of Hell,
the Devil, the great enemy of their souls may put them in mind of securing
their salvation, and then I hope he must into their Oratory to have sacred
veneration from them; yea they must give sacred veneration to the whole
Universe, seeing God made it to this end, that these visible things might show
unto us him that is invisible: yea seeing, praesentem refert quaelibet herba
Deum, they must afford a Bow to every one of them.

Well, Mr. C. p. 156.
as if no reverence could be paid but this; or at least if it be lawful to
reverence them, then to kneel to, and bow with an etc. at the end of it. We
reverence the Bible, and so do they, but do we bow and kneel to it? We
reverence the Names and Writings of good men, but do we bow and kneel to them,
or do they so? Well but they give outward reverence only to to the picture. And
this veneration, common Reason, and humane Naeure cannot but allow.

A. I pray Sir, what were the Primitive Fathers? Were they not men of common
Reason, and had they not humane Natures whilst they lived? L. 2. c. 17.
(Though now you have Deified some of them:) Let us then hear their Verdict.
Lactantius having told us, that these images which vain men worship are Earth,
he infers; Now who is there that understands not, that it is unfit for an
upright Creature to be ^o^ed down, that he may worship the Earth, which for
this cause is put under our feet, that it may be trodden upon, not worshipped
by us? Orat. Adhors. ad Gentes.
So Clemens Alexandr. Are they not prodigious creatures, who worship stones?
these Images (made of stone) are more vile then any (the most despicable)
creatures, then Worms, Earwigs, Moles, Annon terra and ex terra? Ego autem
terram calcare didici, in Ps. 113. part. 2d.
Mice' etc. These are all better then Images. But happily their Images are made
of Gold and Silver, if so, let the same Father tell you, that Gold and Silver,
Brass and Iron, and preciousstones, are they not Earth, and taken out of the
Earth? But as for me, I have learned to tread upon the Earth, not worship it.
So Saint Augustine says, they are worse then bruit beasts: Lib. 7. Conr. Celsum.
and if you are ashamed to worship the one, you may be ashamed to worship the
other. So Origin, we do not venerate Images, with many other like places; In
Consul. lit. de Imag.
which made Cassander cry out. How far the Ancients were ab omni veneratione,
from all veneration of Images one Origin declares. Cruces ( says Mintius
Felix) nec Colimus, nec optamus; and there we find it objected to them, cur
nulla nota simulachra habetis: Hence Lactan. l. 2. c. 7. They think there is no
Religion where these (Images) appear not.
not as if they had any kept secretly, but (as * Dally puts it beyond dispute)
because the Heathens thought it impossble to worship God without some sensible
Image. Saint Cyprian Why do thou bow thy captive body before foolish Images,
and terrene figments! God has made thee straight, and when other animals are
made prona and ad terram depressa, thou have a countenance erect toward God
and Heaven: thither look, thither direct thy eyes, not to Images, seek God
above. The 36. Canon of the Iliberine Council tells us its pleasure was, there
should be no Images in the Church. De Imag. Ep. ad. Demetr. Lib. 2. cap. 19.
Lactantius tells us, there can be no Religion, where there is an Image. Saint
Ambrose will tell you the Church knows no vain Idea's and diverse Figures of
Images: Yea, Ambr. de suga secul. c. 5.
this was so notorious to the very Heathens, that when Adrian commanded that
Temples should be made in all places without Images, they presently conceived
they were for Christians, Lamprid. in vit. Alexandri Severi:

What should I say? Orig. in Cells. l. 2. p. 373.
there is not any Father almost but is evidently against you. Nay, you can
scarce find out any excuse, which they have not prevented with their
contradiction.

1. You tell us that images are instruments to call to your memories the
Objects they represent: Orig. tells us, If we be not out of our wits, we must
needs laugh at this folly who look on Images, and by the sight thereof offer
prayer to him who is conceived thereby. In Ps. 113.
Saint Augustine will tell you this answer is borrowed from the Heathens, who
use to say, I neither worship the very Image, nor the Devil, but by corporcal
representation I look upon the sign of that which I ought to worship. Dissert.
38.
And indeed Max. Tyr. has taught you, that these (...) are (...) They lead you
by the hand to the remembrance of the things they represent. That in procuring
them, you do like lovers, who willingly behold the Images of those they love,
that so their memory may be stirred up in them.

2. In Ps. 113.
But Saint Augustine says, they are very dangerous, especially to them; for
who is it that adores or prays, beholding an Image, and is not so affected as
to think he is heard by it? Epiphanius will warn them to avoid these helps.
Have this in your memories, beloved Children, not to bring Images into the
Church, nor into the Coemeteries of the Saints; no not into any ordinary House,
but always carry about the rememberance of God in your hearts: Epiph. Ep. ad
Joan. Hicros. Tom. 1. oper. Hier. Ep. 60.
for it is not lawful for a Christian man to be carried about in suspense by
his Eyes, and the wandering of his mind. He will tell you, that the having them
in the Church is contrary to our Religion to the authority of Scripture. Give
charge against it, He is cited by the Fathers of the Council of Constant. An.
Dom. 754. Eus. Hist. l. 7. C. 17. Ubi supra.
and tear such a one, though it were the Image of our Lord and Savior.
Amphilochius will add we have no care to figure by colors the bodily Visages
of the Saints in Tables, because we have no need of such things, but by virtue
to imitate their conversations. Eusebius will assert that you borrowed this
Custom from the Heathens. And surely Max. Tyrius lent you this pretense, who
tells you that the use of Images is (...), quoniam tenuitatis Nostrae ita
poscat ratio and it is the (...), that was the cause of it.

You say that Humane nature cannot hinder it, Sect. 11.

They say that God and Religion forbid it: (And does God forbid what humane
nature cannot hinder?) and the Jews abhorred it; had they razed out their
natural principles?

You say, that we call this Honor given to him worship,

Ans. 2. Council of Nice by them General. S^e the places in Dally. de Imag.
Cat. Romans par. 1. C. 2.5.14 ut Colantur. and licet illis cultum adhibere. In 3.
par Th. quaest. 24. Art. 3. Orthodox. Consul. par. 2. Reg. 1. In Ep. ad Romans C.
1. In 3. Th. quaest. 25. Art. 3. disp 2. Nu. 5. Apud Cabr. ib. p. 796.
Has not a General Council called it so an hundred times? do not almost all
your writers call it so? Does not your Trent Catech. require the priest to
declare that the images of Christ are put in Churches that they may be
Worshipped? and that it is lawful to worship them; and that it has still been
done, to the great good of the faithful? Does not Cajetan tell us, that they
are painted that they may be worshipped (ut adorentur) as the frequent use of
the Church does testify? And Boverius, that this is the Doctrine of the Roman
Church, imagines pia religione colendas esse; will not Jacobus Naclantus tells
you, that albeit you speak warily in this matter, yet the very truth is, that
the faithful in the Church do adore, not only coram imagine, sed and imaginem?
Will not Friar Pedro de Cabrera teach you your lesson a little better, that you
must downright and absolutely say, that images are to be worshipped in
Churches, and out of Churches, and that the contrary is heretical? And Franc.
Victoria will back him in asserting it to be plainly so; Yea, and Arriaga for a
close, will tell you, Haeretici, negant non Exemplarium venerationem; and what
you plead for he does not think any Heretic so simple as to deny. I might here
add half an hundred of your Authors, who tell us that Images are to be
worshipped with that very homage we afford to the exemplar; but I let that
pass, for happily I may have another opportunity to acquaint you with them. I
shall conclude with the Roman pontifical, which tells us, Cap 2. de bened.
Sanct. Crucis.
that the Pontifex, (in which name other Bishops are included) ante imaginem
crucis genua flectit, eamque devote adorat and osculatur. Magist. Ceremon. lib.
2. and de feria 6. Majoris Heb.
And feria sexta, or on good Friday, when the Pope or Priest uncovereth Gently
the Cross, and cries ccce signum crucis, and the singers answer, venite,
adoremus, that the Pope puts off his shoes, or makes as if he did so, and genu
ter flexo adorat, and osculatur, and then all the rabble ad infimum caudatarium
omnes crucem adorant and osculantur. So then you have no cause (I hope) to
quarrel with us for saying you worship images, when so many of your great
Doctors, that knew this practice of the Church as well as your self,
acknowledge that as a doctrine of faith which you so warily disclaim, when
General Councils yea and common practice can assure us of the truth thereof.

You ask us further, Sect. 10. p. 158.
whether indeed we think that you worship false gods, and true devils?

Ans. You may be idolatrous in worshipping the true God, in an image, as well
as the Israelites in their worshipping God in a Calf, (2.) That you worship
false Saints and Elilim, De cultu Sanct. Ibid.
see abundantly evidenced in the Sedan Divines.

(3.) You ask, whether we consider our Images, as they did their Idols, to
which by magical conjurations they annexed an evil Spirit to do wonders, and
extort Divine Worship from the seduced.

Ans. What if some of the learned among the Heathens, as Athenaeus confesses,
Legate. pro Christ.
thought that the deity or some divine vitrue accompanied the statute after
consecration, would it cease to be Idolatry if the Image of Jupiter were
worshipped, or any other Deity, without these magical Enchantments?

(2.) What shall we think of these images which you call miraculous, which you
say sometimes sweat blood, sometimes nod their heads, or stretch forth a wooden
or stony arm unto their suppliants? Vid. miss. Romans sub tit. de ritu Sermon.
where you have as bad or worse in the Dedication of the Cross, the Image of
Saint John, and the Agnus Dei.
or of the form of Consecration? Viz. Sanctify, O God, this form of the
blessed Virgin, that it may bring saving health to thy faithful people, that
thundrings and lightnings may be driven away the sooner; that immoderate rains
or floods, and civil wars, may at the presence of this be suppressed. Pont. Romans

(3.) Might not the Jews have put the same question to those that accused them
of idolatry in worshipping the brazen image?

(4.) What matter is it whether the Heathens esteemed their Deity present or
absent, Quis nisi totus fatuus haec Deos esse credit?
seeing they acknowledge most evidently that they did not worship their images,
but their Gods by these images? as you may see in Origin, Contr. Cells. l. 7. p.
384. Arnob. l. 6. advers. Gentes. Lact. l. 2. de divin. Deos per simulachra
veneramur.
Institut. c. 2. we fear not the works of men's hands, (viz. these Images,) but
those we fear to whom these are consecrated. August. in ps. 96. I do not
worship that stone, or that image which is without sense, but I adore what I
see, and serve him whom I do not see.

(5.) It Is evident, that many of the Heathens thought their Gods to dwell in
heaven, Act. 14.
and to be absent from their Statutes. Hence the Lycaonians cry out, upon the
miracles wrought by Paul and Barnabas, the Gods are come down amongst us. See
Price upon the place, making out this by Heathen Authors: and what said the
Chaldeans to Nebuchadnezzar, even that their Gods dwelt not with flesh, Dan. 2.
verse. 11. what need I cite Max. Tyr. Plut. de Isid. and Osyr. Cicero, etc. for
a thing so clear?

Lastly, you tell that us, Groom or Kitchin-maid so ignorant, but had rather
burn an image then afford it any honor due to God only.

Ans. True. But neither would these Heathens; who thought them arrant fools who
esteemed images to be God.

(2.) Nor can we reasonably think, that the Israelites intended any such thing
in worshipping the Calf. But,

(3.) Tom. 1. de prob. sp. Number. 17.
Gerson will tell you that people were so infected with Superstition as to
yield divine honor to Images. And Cornelius Agrippa, that it is not to be
spoken, De vanit. scient. de Imag. fol. 73.
how great Idolatry is fostered among rude people by Image Worship, while the
Priests connive at these things, and make no small gain thereby. Cassander;
Consul. de Imag.
it is more manifest then that it can be denied, that the worship of Images and
Idols has too much prevailed, and the Superstitious humor of people has been
so cherished, that nothing has been omitted among (you) either of the highest
adoration or vanity of Panims, in worshipping and adoring Images. De invent. l.
6. c. 13.
And Polydor Virgil, that there are many rude and stupid persons that repose
more trust in Images then in Christ, or the Saints to whom they were dedicated.

Lastly, Simon Majolus, a great stickler for Imagery, Defens. Imag. Con. 9. c.
19.
confesses, that some rural persons esteem Images as if they were God.

You tell us Sect.

Ans. To let pass your O crux Ave, what can you say to Salve Sancta facies
Nostri Redemptoris!
In qua nitet species divini splendoris,
Impressa panniculo nivei candoris.
Salve vultus Domini Imago beata,
Nos deduc ad propria O felix figura,
Ad videndum faciem Christi, quae est pura.


And again, Brevar. Romans Reformatum in par. Hyemali ad 3. Martii in festo
inventionis Sanctae crucis.
O crux, etc. quae sola fuisti digna portare mundi talentum, dulce lignum,
dulces claves, dulcia ferens pondera, salva proesentem catervam, in tuis hodie
laudibus congregatam.

Lastly, all your distinctions are used with you, as miracles, and the gift of
tongues were, not for them that believe, but them that believe not. For
strangers and them that make objections, not for the obedient, that worship
Images and break the Commandment.

Well, Mr. C. p. 156.
And,

First, You tell us, that in Scripture we find Kings adored, and a prostration
of body paid to them; yet for all this, no man will suspect that any dishonor
was intended to God thereby.

Answer. True, and yet you may dishonor him by giving this worship unto
Images, seeing he has commanded, saying; Thou shall not bow down to them, nor
worship them, which your Gerson paraphraseth thus: In comp. Theol. explic.
praecepti. primi.
Thou shall not bow down to them with the veneration of thy body, ut inclinando
eis, vel genu flectendo: Nor shall thou worship them with the affection of thy
mind.

Secondly, Cap. de Imag.
The Divines of Saumur have already told you, this is a wide sequel from the
honor done to the (living) Image of God, to infer we may bow and kneel to
Images; whereas the one lives, the other wants all sense and motion; the one is
civil worship, and such as has the precept and example of Christ and his
Apostles, the other neither.

Thirdly, What did Job mean by telling us, C. 13. v. 26, 27.
that had he kissed his hand upon the beholding of the Gun, (that glorious
pourtraicture of Gods power, Wisdom, and Goodness,) he had been guilty of
Idolatry; our Author could have informed him better, by telling him that
Children kiss their hands when they do homage to their Superiors; yea, he had
less reason to suspect himself then Papists have; for God has set the Sun in
the firmament to give light unto this truth, that there is a wise disposer and
orderer of all things, but never appointed any Images to be a medium to bring
us to the knowledge or service of him.

Secondly, P. 157.
You argue that Images are capable of a sinful disrespect, and consequently a
due respect may be paid unto them.

Answer. We may grant all this, and yet not bow unto them, as questioning
whether that respect be due unto them; I suppose you do not bow to the picture
of his Majesty, and yet you will not deny that due respect may be paid unto it.

Secondly, A Surplice or Cope, etc. yea a good advice, are capable of
disrespect; and yet will you infer that this is motive sufficient for us to
come down upon our knees before them?

Thirdly, An Image is not capable of any disrespect by the neglect of religious
actions or veneration, and, consequently, is not capable of any such respect by
their performances.

Thirdly, Ibid.
You tell us that by honoring with outward regard a picture, you intend only
to give a testimony what respect you bear to the person or holy thing
represented by it; so the reverence that we show to Saint Peter's picture
signifies only we venerate Saint Peter.

Answer. First, This is a contradiction to what immediately precedes, viz. that
we give a respect unto them, because such sacred things as fix our thoughts
upon objects, good for our Souls.

Secondly, We say it is evidently absurd; and that upon the same score you may
bow and kneel to, go bare before, and kiss a Lion, Eagle, or an Ox, as
representing St. Mark, Saint John, Saint Luke, etc.

Thirdly, This pretense might have been made by the Jews, in venerating the
Calf; yea, the very Heathens have instructed you in this lesson, as I have
showed before: Now to requite your story.

I shall return you one Argument amongst many lying by me, Ergo, they are wont
to commit Idolatry: l. 10. de Ecclesia, c. 13. In tertiam partem, Th. p. 25.
ar. 3. did. 2 number. 15.
The minor is evident from their own Authors, who tell us, suaves odores etiam
offerimus in Ecclesia (not only coram imagine, but, Imaginibus) and reliquiis.
Thus Bellarmiue, and Petrus de Cubrera, amongst the things to be performed to
Images, reckons Oblationes Suffituum; Yea, the Roman Pontifical, set forth by
Pius the fifth, informs us in the Chapter of the benediction of the Cross, Mox
came incensari, i. e. ei incensum adoleri.
that the Pope puts incense into the Censer, then sprinkles it with holy water,
and presently offers Incense to it; The major I evince from the Idolatry of the
Israelites, in offering Incense to the brazen Serpent, the reason being
evidently the same; for whereas Bellarmine tells us, that the Israelites did
offer Incense to it, tanquam Deo, if he means they gave it that worship which
was due to God, it is very true, but a confirmation of what we say; that to
offer Incense to a creature is to give it the honor due to God: if he mean
that the Israelites esteemed it as God, it is shamefully ridiculous to imagine
that what had been so long kept without any sign of the least virtue proceeding
from it, should presently. be thought by them to be the maker of Heaven and
Earth, that which they knew to have been made by Moses, yet to have been before
all time.

Secondly, He tells us, that Incense was a sacrifice under the Old Testament,
because none but Priests might offer it; not so now, because in their Church
it is offered by them that are not so.

Ans. So then, it seems, if a whole Hecatomb should be offered not only to
God, but to the people (as he tells us their Incense is) 'twould not be a
sacrifice, if not offered by a Priest, and consequently not Idolatry; nor could
any of the Christians that were not Priests by offering to Idols commit
Idolatry.

Secondly, How ridiculous is it from an instance in his own Churches behavior,
which we accuse of manifest Idolatry, to prove that they are not Idolaters.
Well then, seeing there can be no sufficient disparity, John 3.
this being a representation of Christ as well as their Images, and worshipped
not because a God, but as an instrument which God had used to work miracles by;
or the like; if we can evince that this was Idolatry, we show also that the
Papists are Idolaters; now that this is so, may be gathered.

First, From the Context, which reekons it with the confessed Instruments of
Idolatry; 2 Kings 18.4.
He removed the high places, and brake the Images, and cut down the groves, and
brake in pieces the brazen Serpent.

Yea, Secondly, He calls it Nehustan, a piece of brass, of which appellation
no other reason can be easily assigned, but that this was done in opposition to
their Idolatry, in giving it that worship which could by no means agree to a
piece of brass.

Thirdly, The sin that occasioned the breaking of this Serpent, was the
Children of Isreal's offering Incense to it; now it is evident this was no sin
against the second Table, no breach of the Sabbath, no taking of Gods Name in
vain; for if it were an acknowledgment of it for a Deity, it was the most gross
Idolatry; and therefore the Romanist will not yield to that: Well then, it must
be a sin against the second Commandment; it cannot be a sin against any other
clause of it then this, Thou shall not worship Images, or as the Papists will
needs have it, Idols; and if so, it must consequently be Idolatry: Again, did
they give dulia only to it, or latria? if the first, then can you not say they
sinned, or did any thing which should justly cause it to be broken: Seeing you
acknowledge dulia due unto your Images; if latria, then again, according to
your own principles, they were the grossest of Idolaters.

Secondly, The Idolatry of Achaz is thus described, that he made high places
wherein to burn Incense unto other gods, and likewise the Idolatry of Israel:
This burning Incense is therefore Idolatry, Jer. 44.21, 23.
because the Nature of Idolatry agrees to it, which is to give the honor due
unto God unto another thing; and therefore seeing this was done by burning
Incense to the brazen Serpent, that also must be Idolatry; for to say that it is
not sufficient to make an act idolatrous, that it attributes the honor due to
God unto another thing, unless it be an Idol, is very false; for then the
offering of sacrifice to the Image of Christ would not be Idolatry; the giving
it latria terminated thereon, would not be so: The Arrians could not have been
accused of Idolatry in worshipping our Savior with divine honors, and yet
esteeming him to be (...); The Collyridians, in worshipping the Virgin Mary;
the Carpocratians in worshipping, the Image of Christ, and a 1000. other things.

2. This major may be farther confirmed thus; to offer sacrifice is Idolatry by
the confession of the Mag sent. l. 3. did 9. Bell. li. de Eccles. Triumph. c.
12. See Exodus 22. He that effers sacrisice to any but God alone shall be cut
off. And Act. 7. The Israelites are said to offer sacrifice to the Calf, and
then presently are called Idolaters. Ste 1 Cor. 10.
Papists themselves; but to offer Incense to an Image (or any other thing) is
to offer sacrifice. Thus Tertull. Apol. c. 30. Offero majorem hostiam quam ipse
mandavit, non grana Thuris; so that, according to him, Incense must be a
sacrifice; and Gyprian de lapsis, speaking of those that presently went to
offer Incense, They would not stay (says he) to be apprehended, nor did they
leave this to themselves, ut sacrificare Idolis inviti viderentur. Saint Basil
tells us, in his Oration on Barlaam the Martyr, that they brought him to the
Altar, and put Incense into his Hands, that so by casting it out he might seem
to offer sacrifice; and this he calls, (...): Thus Lib. de poenit. c. 14. p.
512. Tom. primi. (...) (male (...)) (...), Lat. ver. pro more daemoniaci
libaminis.
Peter Bishop of Alexandria (as we have it in Balsamon) tells us that the hands
of many were brought unwillingly to offer prophanum sacrificium, that is, as
Balsamon has it, coacti sunt thus immolare; yea, Saint Austin, C. 16. de unico
Baptismo, having said that Petilian accused Melchiades de Thurificatione, of
offering Incense, he adds, that had it been true, he might have been excused as
being not bound to plead his cause coram homine sacrificijs idolorum inquinato:
It may be Answered, that to offer animate or living sacrifice, is Idolatry; but
as for inanimate sacrifices, they may be given to a creature.

Rep. Now not to mention how arbitrary this distinction is, the Fathers
frequently teach this offering of inanimate sacrifices to be Idolatry: Thus
Epiphanius condemns the Collyridians for offering cakes to the blessed Virgin,
which yet were inanimate sacrifices; Ep. au (...) number, l. 10. Ep. 97.
so Pliny tells the Emperor, that some worship his Image with Incense and
Wine, which they that are true Christians cannot be compelled to do (albeit it
was the Image of him who was himself (...)) as counting that homage due to God
alone. Now this refusal Tertullian calls, obstinationem non sacrificandi; The
only fault, says he, with which the Christians stood charged by Pliny in his
Epistle to the Emperor; yea, the Carpocratians were condemned as Heretics for
offering Incense to the Image of Christ, among other things, l. 1. c. 24.
as you may see in Irenaeus. Observationem circa cas similiter ut Gentes
faciunt, they observed the rites of the Gentiles toward them; what were they?
Saint Austine tells us, l. de Haer. c. 7.
they did it, adorando incensumque ponendo. Eis thura adolebant ac libahant,
says Theodoret; l. de Haer. fab
And this as he condemned in the Israelites (who worshipped the brazen Serpent)
of Idolatry, calling them Ophitae, worshippers of a Serpent, qu. 18. in 4. Reg
so here he adds, and tanquam deos adorabant, not that they did it by any other
sacrifice of which we have no mention made, but that the performing of these
ceremonies was an evidence thereof, this being worship proper to a Deity; Haer.
27.
and Epiphanius tells us, that with the Images of the Philosophers, imagines
Jesu collocant, they place the Images of Christ, and worship them, and perform
the Rites of the Gentiles to them, or Heathenish Rites; and then presently he
adds, Gentium myfleria persiciunt. Tom. 2. l. 1. (...)((...)) (...). Cap. nunc
autem, distinct. 2. P. 334, 335.
what are the Rites of the Gentiles, but sacrificium, and alia? Now what he
means by sacrifice, he tells us in his Epit. viz. to offer Incense; yea,
Bellarmine informs us that Marcellinus sacrificed to Idols, and proves it from
the Pontifical of Damasus, the Epistle of Nicholaus the first to Michael; but
the Pontifical only says, he did incendere and offerre, burn Incense and
offer it; and Nicholaus, that he did grana thuris super prunas imponere, put
corns of Incense on the coals. So then, from Scripture, and the assertions of
Fathers grounded on it, we have evinced them to be Idolaters.

And yet I cannot choose but requite your story with an other out of Master
Chillingworth; That one great impediment which among many kept the seduced
followers of the faction of Donatus from the Churches Communion, was a visible
Calumny raised against the Catholics, that they did set some strange thing
upon their Altar, which as Optatus informs us, was a picture which the
Donatists (knowing how detestable a thing it was to all Christians at that time
to set up any Pictures in a Church to worship them as your new fashion is)
bruted abroad to be done in the Churches of the Catholic Church; but what
Answer do Saint Austine and Optatus make to this accusation? do they confess
and maintain it? Do they say as you would now, it is true, we do set Pictures
upon our Altars, and that not only for ornament and memory, but for worship
also; but we do well to do so, and this ought not to trouble you, or fright you
from our Communion what other. Answer, your Church could now make to such an
Objection is very hard to imagine: And therefore were your Doctrine the same
with the Doctrine of the Fathers in this point, they must have answered so
likewise; but they on the contrary, not only deny the crime; but abhor and
detest it. 'Yea, Optatus tells us that had the matter been so their separation
would have been just, that this mixture of Images would have been a pollution
of divine service that it was a thing which Christians should be afraid of, and
very different from the Custom of the Church; the whole passage of Optatus
runs thus: Opt. l. 3. Cont. Don.
Dicebatur illo tempore, venturos esse Paulum and Macarium qui interessent
sacrificio and cum altaria solenniter aptarentur, proferrent illi Imaginem quam
primo in altari ponerent sic sacrificium offeretur. Hoc cum acciperent aures
perculsi sunt and animi; and uniuscujusque lingua in haec verba commota est, ut
omnis qui haee audieret, diceret qui inde gustat de sacro gustat. Et recte
dictum erat si talem famam talis veritas sequeretur. At ubi ventum est a supra
dictis, nihil tale visum est, ex eo quod fuerat paulo mentita fama nihil
viderunt Christiani oculi quod horrerent. Nihil probavit aspectus ex iis,
quibus perturbatus crat auditus. Visa est puritas and ritu solito solennis
consuetudo perspecta est.

CHAP. XV.
Mr. C. Clamours against the permission of Scripture to the Vulgar, Sect. 1.
The reason of it, Sect. 2. His Argument from the perniciousness of it
considered, Sect. 3.4, 5, 6, 7.8. from their aptnes to be misled, Sect. 9. How
vainly the Romanists requires an internal assent to all their interpretations
of Scripture, Sect. 10. Mr. Cressies Argument from 2 Pet. 3.16. considered, S.
11. The Dr. unjustly charged with a mistake, Sect. 12. The Service of the
Church anciently performed in the Vulgar Tongue and Mr. Cressies pretenses
confuted, Sect. 13.14. His miserable pretenses for the continuance of the
service in an unknown Tongue, Sect. 15.16, 17, 18, 19.20.21. Arguments against
it from 1 Cor. 14. v. 12.13. Sect. 22. v. 14. Sect. 23. v. 15. Sect. 24. v. 16.
Sect. 25. v. 17. Sect. 26. Mr. Cressies Answers and Evasions considered, Sect.
27.28.

IN this Chapter our Authors pen runs out against the holy Scripture, Alpha.
and Omega, which is drawn from a Consideration of the perniciousness of the use
of Scripture, which he thus Rhetorically sets forth, telling us that the
Calamities already happened both to the Royal Family, and the whole Nation, are
chiefly to be imputed to it is public use; Hence he derives the rudeness of the
Common people the Iast twenty years in this our Kingdom; what was it (says
he) but Scripture as it was used, and of which use themselves were the first
cause (by suffering it freely to be Read) and hereafter will never be able to
prevent that justified coffeehouse against the Government Civil and
Ecclesiastical, that put swords and guns into the hands of subjects against
their King, and all that were faithful to him, that dissolved the entire frame
of the Kingdom, that encouraged men to plunder: and all manner of Rapine, that
arraigned and murdered our last and excellent King, that endangered the life
of his most Gracious Majesty now living, and forced him into a long necessitous
Banishment; that has revived and given strength to old and new monsters of
Heresies, to the astonishment of mankind, some of which are no where else to be
seen, and the rest in no place so venomous as in England.

And why does the Church of Rome thus spit her venom against the Word of God?
Ps. 1.2.
by rendering it impossible for them to meditate in the word continually, or to
obey their Savior, Joh. 5. v. 39.
requiring them to search the Scriptures; we dare not bereave them of that
Touchstone of Truth, the Law and the Testimonies to which they are exhorted to
have recourse; we dare not imitate their sacrilege who rob them of that Law
which is the rule they are to walk by, Ps. 197.
that Law that converts the soul, that so they may continue Aliens from God;
Ibid.
those Testimonies that make wise the simple, that so they may continue in
their simplicity, and be induced to worship stocks and stones, as the Vulgar
Papists do; that Law which enlightneth their Eyes, V. 8.
that so they may be still blinded by the Prince of Darkness; once more, that
Scripture which is able to make them wise unto salvation; 2 Timothy 3.15.
that so they may eternally miss of it. Nor do we so much regard these false
Disciples of St. Peter, as blessed Peter himself, who teaches, that they do
well who take heed unto this Word, 2 Pet. 1.19. As David, who tells us, that
it is more precious then Gold, yea then fine Gold, sweeter then Honey, or the
Honey Comb: Well then, to return an answer to his Sophism.

1. It is not Scripture, or the frequent reading of it, Chrysostom in his
Preface to the Ep. to the Romans, tells his Flock, That from the ignorance of
Scripture have infinite evils sprung: Hence is that great Plague of Heresies
that bud among us, hence is that negligence of our lives: Thus he; and a
greater then Chrysostom. could tell the Sadduces, that they Erred not knowing the
Scripture, Matthew. 22.29.

2.

Again, may not we as well argue, that the restraining of Scripture is thus
pernicious? What made the Irish Rebels destroy so many thousands in cold blood?
Was it not the restraining of that Scripture from them, which says, Thou shall
not kill? What made so many illiterate Papists be instrumental in the
Gunpowder Treason? Was it not the restraint of that Scripture, which cries out
touch not mine anointed which made the insurrection thereupon? Was it not the
restraint of the Scripture, telling us, that to resist is the ready way to
procure Damnation to our selves?

Thirdly, See the Jesuits Letter in Rushworth, coll. ct.
and done all that they could to invent and broach new Doctrines? Was it not a
Jesuit who tells us, How some of their own Coat have re-incountred themselves,
how admirably in speech and gesture they could act the Puritan? These, these
are they who have industriously led others to Hell, industriously instructed
them in damnable Doctrines, studying how they might by damning so many Souls
make way for their Idolatry and Tyranny.

Now seeing it is evident, that it was not the common people that wrested these
Scriptures of their own accord, but Jesuits (and others) that taught them so to
do; what follows? Not surely that Scripture should be hid from them; but that
all Jesuits, Popish Priests, men that can teach them what they know will
infallibly lead them into Hell, should be removed.

And as for the rebellions of the people, if the Scripture had any hand in
them, it was only thus, as it was wrested by the Preachers: These were the
Trumpets of sedition, who cried out so loudly, Curse ye Meroz; And had not
these men wrested the Scripture, the people would have been at quiet. Now
surely this Argument proves nothing against the permission of the public use
of Scripture, but only the wrested interpretations of it made by seditious
Ministers; and infers this only, that seditious Preachers ought most carefully
to be prevented, and most severely punished, as Incendiaries of the State.

Again, that you may see how instrumental the Holy Scriptures were in the
promoting these Rebellions, were not the forwardest in them, viz. the Quaker,
Anabaptist, etc. to quit themselves of these enforcements of Obedience from
Scripture, forced either to throw off Scripture, and run to the light within
them, or to present Impulses of the Spirit, or, thirdly, to say they might
comply with providence against precept? Was there any thing more cogent to keep
many thousands from such rebellion, then that place of Saint Paul to the
Romans? etc. Cap. 13.
And how were the ringleaders of the people forced to wind and turn and
squeeze it, that they might persuade the multitude of the legality of their
actions? And yet at last could not by any means effect it, but by telling them
that the Parliament was equal to the King, and so robbing him of his higher
Power: Yea,

Thirdly,

Fourthly,

First, How hard a thing is it to make a right use of the grace of God? Do not
the generality of men abuse it, and turn it into wantonness? And yet, I hope,
this does not hinder but the people may be made acquainted with it as revealed
in the Gospel: Yea,

Secondly, Did not our Savior know how likely the Jews were to reject and
crucify him, to blaspheme his miracles, and continue obstinate against all the
evidences of his being the Messiah? And will our Author add, that therefore he
should not have been revealed unto them?

Thirdly, who knows not how hard a thing it is for persons to have parts and
not be proud of them, to be in high places, and not be partial, tyrannical, or
addicted to some vices, which commonly attend such greatness? Shall we
therefore have no Magistrates? Shall we have no endeavoring to procure the
greatest talents?

Fourthly, Yea, on the same ground, seeing the Common Prayer and the Ceremonies
were accidentally the cause of the War; and we see by experience, how unlike,
weak, and unstable men are to make good use of them, they must down too.

Lastly, Seeing the power of Parliaments was so abused, it would be necessary
to dissolve them: seeing preaching and instructing of the people was abused
most of all, It would be requisite (a thing which the Papists heartily desire)
to hinder that: Yea, seeing that, among the old Heresies, scarce one was
broached but by the Learned, and our late swarms of monstrous opinions were
evidently the products of Learned Men, whether Jesuits or others; If this
Argument were good, it would rather prove that Scripture should be withheld
from the Learned, then from the vulgar sort of people.

Fifthly, that they should declare his precepts, his word, unto their Children;
that they should meditate on them sitting in their house, and walking on their
journey, when they lay down, and when they rose up; that they should bind them
for a sign upon their hands, and as frontlets between their eyes; that they
should write them upon the posts of their houses, and upon their gates, Deuteronomy.
6.7, 8, 9. So earnest was God with them to be acquainted with his Word, albeit
it seemed not then so full of moral precepts, so plain and intelligible, as the
greatest part of the New Testament: Yea, and the sweet singer of Israel
commends it, as that which will make wise, not pervert the simple, as that
which is more to be desired then glod, not rejected as poison. And our Savior
calls upon the Jews to search the Scriptures; which if it were spoken, (...),
as Saint Cyrill has it; and the word Jews not limited by the Context fairly
pleads, then have we our Saviors command to the vulgar to read the Scripture.
But if it be spoken to the Pharisees, as Stapleton restrains it, yet is it a
more cogent Argument, they being men so notorious for the abuse of the
Scripture, as never were the like: What brought up their Phylacteries, but an
abuse of the place forecited? What caused their obstinacy against the Gospel,
but the mis-interpretation of the Law? And a supposition; falsely deduced from
Texts, that it was eternal? How much of this may any body see in Buxtorf,
Seldom, Lightfoot, and others, that concern themselves in these matters? Our
Savior (pardon the expression) was either not so wise as to know this was the
way to make them worse, or else so malicious as to set them in that way which
would be so pernicious to them. Origin, as great a Scholar as he was, Hom. 2.
in Esai.
knew not the danger we are now acquainted with, when he so vehemently cries
out, De Baptismo, l. 2. cap. 4. In cap. tertium ad Colos.
I would to God we could all do what is written, viz. search the Scriptures.
Nor Saint Basil, when he requires the same duty from us. Nor did Saint
Chrysostom consider this, when he so passionately called upon the people; O
all ye secular men get you Bibles, the physic of the Souls; else sure he would
have bid them throw them away as the poison of the Soul; but the good Father
had not learned to blaspheme the Scripture: Yea, even Saint Paul himself was
ignorant of this Divinity, (so necessary to prevent the murder of Kings, the
dissolution of Governments, the Schisms and Ruptures of the Church, the
swarms of Heresies that fly about, if we may believe this Advocate of the
Church of Rome.) For this is the Encomium that he gives to Timoth, 2.3. That
from a youth he had learned the Scriptures, and makes it a part of nobility in
the Be^eans, that they compared his Doctrine with the Word of God, brought it
to this touch stone, to see if it could abide the proof; And lastly, writing to
the Corinthians, assures them, 2 Ep. 1.13.
that the matter of his Epistle was no other then what they read and did
acknowledge.

But let our Confuter proceed, p. 167. he tells us, That Catholics knowing how
impossible it is for ignorant persons to understand it, and for passionate
minds to make good use of it; think it more conducing to Edification, that such
easily misled Souls should be taught their duties rather by plain Catechismes
and inst ructions, prudently, and with all clearness gathered out of Scripture.

Answ. Be it so, but let them not persuade us to think that the one must
exclude the other, when we protest against them still for doing so; let them
not be angry, if we with our blessed Savior and his Apostles think both
expedient, and very much conducing to Edification, if we adhere in this to the
Primitive Church, and among other instructions exhort them diligently to read
the Scripture: Nor do we think any person so ignorant that can read, as not to
know the Essentials of his Christianity, and to find things plain and easy
which will suffice for his Salvation; Nor is it therefore fit to be restrained,
because we have some of passionate minds, which, whilst such, are not like to
make good use of the Word of God, no more then they are to be hindered from a
good Sermon, Catechism, or other means of instruction; because, whilst such,
they are not like to make good use of them; or to be deprived of their goods,
because they are apt to abuse the creature. But rather they are to read the
Scripture, that they may learn thereby to lay aside their passion.

It Is true, Sect. 6. That the abuse of Scripture by ignorant and passionate
Laics is not so certain and probable to follow in the Catholic Church, where
men are bred up in a belief of that most necessary duty of submission, even of
their minds to her authority, for the delivery of the only true sense of
Scripture; whereas in our Church no person can be persuaded that the sense of
Scripture given by us, can challenge an internal assent, or that it may not
with sin be contradicted.

But then we say, First, If this be so, how can you plead the danger of your
peoples erring, as a pretense to restrain Scripture, when as this would more
confirm them, they being bred up in a belief, that what sense you put upon
Scripture is the mind of God? What an evident contradiction therefore is there
in these two pretenses?

Secondly, We dare not thus Lord it over the Consciences of men, as not
thinking we have any such assistance of the Scripture, as will guide us
infallibly into the true sense of Scripture; and therefore supposing our selves
fallible, we do not bind our people to an internal assent unto our
interpretations upon our sole authority, lest we should bind them to believe an
Error; Glad would we be to find the Roman Church endued with this
infallibility; how fast would we nestle into her bosom were it so? But we know
that challenge is vain and idle: Yet seeing they pretend thus much, is it not a
wonder that this Church, which has authority given her to deliver the true
sense of the Scripture, should never do it? To what end, I pray you, has God
given it, but that your people should have the benefit thereof? Why then are
parties at so great a variance among you, about the true sense of Scripture,
and your Church still neglects the exercise of its authority, in putting an end
to those strifes, by her declaration of it? But speak your Conscience; do you
not know or fear that this would be a most convincing Argument against that
infallibility you so much boast of? When we should make it appear (as no doubt
we could) that some of your interpretations were false, and contrray to the
infallible Rule of Scripture.

Thirdly, Therefore albeit we do not require of our people that they should
assent to such an interpretation of Scripture, because that we who interpret it
are guided by an infallible Spirit; yet do we say that the people ought to
receive the interpretation of doubtful places from the Pastors God has placed
over them, not contradicting them without evident reason, but submiting to
them; that when they are by some passage of Scripture induced to think
otherwise, they ought not presently to condemn the Church of Errors, but
reflect upon their own weakness, and seek for better information from men of
Learning and Judgment, and acquiesce in it; unless they can evidently show
that they err in their interpretation. And indeed, I could never persuade my
self that the vulgar Jews were bound to accept all those false and corrupt
interpretations which the Scribes and Pharisees put upon Scripture; And indeed,
had they been so obliged, then might they have refused to give maintenance
either to Father or Mother, by telling them that it was Corban by which they
should be relieved; yea, then they were bound to believe that our Savior
Christ was not the Messiah, that he was not from God, but an Impostor: Well
then, either these were Judges infallible or not; if so, then the absurdity
forementioned is not avoidable; if not, then let him tell us what other
infallible Judge they had, or acknowledge they had none; and if so, then I ask
leave to inquire what necessity have we to think the people should have such a
one under the Gospel, when they were far more ignorant under the Law, nor had
such guidance of the Spirit to lead them into all truth; and yet God did not
then think it meet to constitute such a one.

Well, Mr. C. 168.
and it may thus be formed; Certainly none of them whom we know to be apt to
pervert the Scriptures should be permitted to read them. 2 Pet. 3.16.
But the unlearned and unstable are apt to do so: therefore, etc. And for
Confirmation of this we are told, that the unlearned and unstable of England
are 99 of each hundred; therefore if they are not to be permitted to read the
Scripture, 99 of each hundred in England should not be permitted. To this
Argument we reply,

(1.) That the major is false, as is evident. For tell me, were not the Jews
apt to pervert the Scripture? who were yet commanded to be daily conversant in
the same? were not the Scribes and Pharisees apt to pervert Scripture? And yet
our Savior bids the one search the Scripture: tells the other, that they err
not knowing the Scripture.

(2.) Does not Saint Peter, 1 Epist. chap. 1. prescribe attending to the word
as a remedy to keep us from the deceptions of false prophets? And if you will
say, with Stapleton, we are bid indeed to attend to Scripture, but as preached
by the Pastors of the Church, not read, the contrary is evident; for it is a
word of prophecy, which holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost; and sure, that is the Scripture.

(3.) If this were true, then were the fathers much to blame, who called the
Heretics to Scripture, bid them look to Scripture and see their Errors, when
it is notorious that they were made Heretics by perverting Scripture. Again,
to the minor I say, that the Apostle does not say, that such are apt to pervert
all Scripture, but something hard and difficult in Saint Paul's Epistle and
other Scripture; and now, the benefit we receive by the other places not so
hard may recompense the danger.

(2.) I say the unlearned are so, if they proceed to judge of the scripture,
and will take things in their own sense without going to God for direction,
begging his Spirit, and using the help of the guides set over them; whence it is
well inferred, they should not read scripture, without a sense of weakness and
aptness to pervert it, when they permit themselves to draw conclusions and
decide controversies by it: and therefore should not read it after such a
manner; but pray to God more for his Assistance in reading, and have closer
dependence on the guides that are given them, and not dote upon questions,
which administer strife, rather then edifying.

The second part of this Chapter is taken up in a miserable defense of their
Churches prayers in an unknown tongue, which cannot more effectually be
confuted,

And (1.) he tells the Doctor, Mr. C. p. 172.
that he mistakes the Churches meaning, as if one of it is positions were, that
Gods public worship ought to be in an unknown tongue; or as if it forbad the
people to understand it, And truly (says he) if it were so, we could never
hope to be reconciled with that passage of Scripture, out of Saint Paul, 1 Cor.
14.13. thus he: Answ. But where I pray you has the Doctor one Iota from whence
you can be able to make good this charge? why did you not direct us to his
words from whence this consequence could be inferred? but confidently tell him
he mistakes, when as it is only your prevarication makes him do so? did you
peruse that paragraph, or not? if you did not, then what unparalled boldness
was it at all adventures to charge him with mistakes? if you did, what wilful
insincerity was it to charge him with that which you knew to be a palpable
untruth?

Secondly, Had he affirmed what you unjustly charge him with, yet might he very
easily be freed from a mistake; for seeing your Trent Conventicle has
determined that it is not expedient that the public service should be
celebrated in the vulgar Tongue, it must have consequently determined that it
ought not to be so; seeing the Apostles rule requires that in things lawful in
themselves we should be guided, 1 Cor. 6.12. See Bishop Sanderson his Sermon In
locum.
as to practice, by expedience, and consequently that if the vulgar tongue be
not expedient in Gods public service, it ought not to be used; and if so then
sure a tongue not vulgar or unknown, must necessarily take place.

Thirdly, I affirm that if you could not reconcile her command to celebrate
Gods public service in an unknown tongue with that passage of S. Paul, neither
can you reconcile her practice; it being notoriously evident that what S. Paul
there speaks respects the practice, not the commands of the Church of Corinth,
but only as the prohibition of the practice infers a prohibition of the
commanding such a practice, so that our Authors mouth sufficiently condemns
him; but to proceed.

He tells us, That they generally acknowledge the service of God in the
primitive times to have been performed in a tongue better understood then now
it is, but yet not for many places, or countries, in their vulgar native or best
known tongue; for (says he) it is evident by Saint Augustine that in Africa it
was in the Latin, not in the Punick, which yet was the only tongue the vulgar
understood.

Ans. If this be not related Punica fide let any indifferent man judge, for do
we not know that his Sermons ad populum were in Latin? when as yet you
generally acknowledge they ought to be in the vulgar tongue; does not he tell
us in his retractions, l. 1. c. 10. psalmum qui iis cantaretur per latinas
literas feci. De verbis Apost. Ser. 16. In psalm. 50. and ps. 138.
that being willing to have the cause of the Donatists known to the meanest of
the vulgar, that it might stick upon their memories he made a psalm which
should be sung to them in Latin Letters. Yea, does he not give them a Punick
proverb in the Latin tongue? and annex this reason, quia Punice non omnes
nostis? did he not condescend to the use of barbarous words, ossum for os,
sanguines and sanguina, upon this account, because it was better Gramarians
should reprehend him, See Dr. Field, p. 246. etc. and du pless. Sac Mis l. 2 c.
6. c. 7.
then that the people should not understand him; could you be ignorant of these
(and other evidences of this truth) and cite so frequently that Dr. Field from
whence I had them.

And would it not make an Heraclitus laugh to hear you tell us of S. Sect. 14.
Ib.
Basils Liturgy used in the Greek tongue in most parts of the Eastern Churches,
and add that this was not the vulgar (or tongue sufficiently understood) in
many of these Eastern Churches, Act. 14.11.
and that because the people said in the language of Lycaonia the Gods are come
down to us in the likeness of men; Act. 2.8, 9, 10.
and further, Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and the dwellers of
Mesopotamia, and in Judea, and Cappadocia, in Pontus, and Asia, Phrygia, and
Pamphilia heard the Apostles speak in their own tongues the wonderful works of
God. For can this do you any service till you have proved these things?

(1.) That Saint Basils Liturgy was in all, or any of these places?

(2.) That those places where this Liturgy was used did not understand Greek,
as well as their vulgar tongue;

(3.) That if they could not understand Greek in the days of the Apostles,
neither could they do it 600 years after their decease and upwards (about which
time this spurious Liturgy might happily have been used) and when all this is
done, which will be ad Graecas Calendas, the consequence will be only this,
that after six hundred years Saint Paul's precept was disregarded by some
Eastern Churches.

Farther, we have sufficient evidences, that in many parts of Asia the Greek
was a sufficiently vulgar tongue; Saint Chrysostom preached in Greek at
Antioch; S. Basil at Caesarea, Athanasius at Alexandria, Cyril at Jerusalem:
thus from Constantinople to Antioch throughout Asia was the Greek language
sufficiently known; S. Jerome will tell us, Tom. in Ep. ad Gal. in proamia pro
Archia Pocta.
sermme Graeco omnis oriens loquitur; all the East used the Greek tongue; and
Cicero, Graeca leguntur in omnibus fere gentibus, that almost all Nations used
it; and why not then those places in which this Liturgy was used?

But you go on to inform us, Sect. 15. Ib.
that your Church did not intend that her public devotions should therefore be
in Latin, because it is not vulgarly understood, but this has happened as it
were by accident of the mixture of barbarous nations, (but why then was it thus
performed in England where it was always a tongue unknown unto the vulgar:) and
notwithstanding this accident you do not think meet to change it upon these
accounts.

(1.) Because no example can be given of anciently established Churches, that
any of them changed the Language of Gods public service entirely?

Ans. Were it so, the reason evidently must be the no-necessity of such a
change, seeing it is evident beyond all possibility of contradiction, that the
most holy and pious of every age required the performance of Gods service in a
language known; Rupert. de Diz. officiis, l. 3. c. 8.
hence in mixed congregations the Service was read both in Greek and Latin; and
at the funeral solemnities of Paula the Greeks, Hier ad Eustoch. Epitaph.
Paulae.
Syrians, Latins, etc. had their devotions in their proper tongues. Yea
Innocent the third decreed that seeing there were mixed people of diverse
languages in sundry parts within the same Diocese, or City, the Bishops of
these places should provide fit men to Celebrate Divine Service, p. 248. De
Sac. Mis. l. 2. c. 6.
according to the diversities of their Rites, and Languages, as you may see in
Doctor Field; he that would be glutted with the suffiages of Antiquity let him
have recourse to the honorable the Lord du Plessis, and he shall find abundant
sati^faction.

Secondly, As the evasion is evidently weak and impertinent, so is it
notoriously false; for Methodius having translated the Scripture into the
S^lavenian tongue, persuaded the Dalmatians to explode the Latin, and make use
of their own in the service of God, p. 434.
as Aventinus informs us; yea, the same M^thodius went into the Kingdoms of
Boiaria, and sought to persuade Noricum, Pannenia, and Veneda to abandon the
Latin, and have the service in the vulgar: and albeit at the present he was
resisted, yet afterward the attempt took effect, See Doctor Field, ubi supra.
at least in part, as appears by Aventinus, telling us that in his age the
priests of Liburnia did celebrate Divine Service in their own, De missa Latin
facienda in locis communibus. p. 241.
that is, in the Sclavonian tongue; yea, Eckius, a rigid Papist, will consess,
that heretofore the Divine Service was in the Dalmatian tongue, throughout all
Illiricum; the same you may find evinced of many others that now use the
Latin, in the most Learned Dr. Field.

You go on, now use the Ancient Mass of Saint Chrysostom, Mr. C. p. 173.
written in pure Greek, as much dissering from the vulgar, as Latin from the
Italian, Spanish, etc. and that the like may be said of the Syrian, Cophtites,
etc. yea, the Jews continue their devotions in the Hebrew to this day; albeit
understood by few of them.

Ans. 1. The Lord du Plessis would have informed you, albeit the Mass which the
Greek Church uses is different from their vulgar, p. 268.
non tamen quantum aut Italica a Latina, aut Gallica ipsa a Narbonensi; and
farther that where the Greek tongue is not in use (as among the Muscovians and
Russiane) albeit they follow the Greek customs, yet do they celebrate Divine
Service in the vulgar tongue; and I have so much confidence of the truth of his
assertion, as to judge your contradiction to it to exceed the bounds.

Secondly, The Egyptians indeed have their service in a bastard Chalde, or
Syriaque, their vulgar being Arabique, Field, p. 241.
but then they first read the Gospel in the Chaide, and afterward in Arabique,
which is not done in their public Services.

Thirdly, When the example of the Russians, Muscovians, Com. in 1 Cor. 16.
disp. 50. s 7. l 2: de verbo dei c. 16.
Aethiopians, etc. was objected to Salmeron in behalf of Service in the vulgar
tongue; he Answers, we will not be moved with the examples of such barbarous
people; and their famous Bellar, adds it is all one as if Lutherans and
Anabaptists should be called for confirmation of an opinion, seeing these are
Heretics as well as they; so that our adversary might as well have argued that
Arrius and his followers denied the Godhead of Savior, and therefore we also
ought to do so; the Jews deny him to be the Savior of the world, blaspheme him
in their Services; and therefore so should we.

Again, he argues thus, Sect. 17. Ib.
a great fitness there is that the most public service should be in the most
public tongue; but Latin is the most public tongue in Europe. But,

(1.) This Sophisme will turn our Sermons into Latin, which yet the Romanists,
notwithstanding their other impudent oppositions to the word of God) have not
asserted.

Secondly, What reason can any mortal man imagine, why the service of God
should be celebrated in that Language which is most public in Europe, rather
then in Asia?

Thirdly, How blind were the primitive Churches, which could not see so great a
fitnes in this way of worship? Cont. Cells. l. 8. singuli precentur propria
lingua. Just. novel. 123 Ed. Haloandri,
for amongst them, as Origin tells us, every one prayed in his own tongue, and
Justinian commanded all Bishops and Presbyters to celebrate holy prayers and
mysteries, clara and vernacula voce, so that the vulgar might understand
telling them out of the Apostle, to what little putpose it was to do it
otherwise; and that they should not only be accountable for it at the day of
judgment, but punished by him also upon transgression of this command.

Fourthly, We deny that the Latin tongue is the most public in Europe, or
that there is any fitness that the Service of God should be celebrated in all
Europe in that Language which is most public.

And what if the Latin tongue be understood (which yet is not always true) by
those that frequently recite the prayers, Paul so vehemently cried down was
understood by him that spoke it) what if that were a truth which you so crudely
suggest, p. 175.
that a great part of the service was composed for the Clergies proper use?
when as the thing you are blamed for, is, that in the public service which
concerns the common people, and according to the Apostles Doctrine, ought to be
done so as that they may understand it, and be edified thereby, is locked up by
you in a tongue unknown; Again, why do you marry in the Latin tongue? is that
proper to your Clergy?

Your last evasion is, Sect. 19. Ib. 6.
that by this means, ( viz. the keeping of your service in the Latin tongue)
your Doctrine is kept from being innovated, whereas by the change of other
Languages the Doctrine would lie under a danger of being changed; Liturgyes
(preserved the same in the Latin tongue) must ever and anon be altered, and
infinite expenses be laid out in Printing them.

Ans. Is not this a shrewd sign of a sinking cause to lay hold upon such
bul-rushes as these? to catch at such vain and empty shadows? what, is it
better that the poor people should want the bread of life, the comfort and
edification of the Churches service, then buy a Common Prayer Book once in 20
or perhaps an 100 years? Is there any danger of being undone by such a
contribution of the parish that in an age will rob each family of a single
penny? should these infallible keepers of the truth of God fear the loss of
their Religion upon the change of a word or (2.) In the Chruches Liturgy? what
new Doctrine has been broached by having our Liturgy in the vulgar tongue?
what great need have we had of new translations? or what danger have we found
by turning Paul the knave of Jesus Christ into the servant of Jesus Christ? how
did the Syriack, Greek, etc. corrupt in the time of the Ancient Fathers, who
yet did never complain of these inconveniences, or think them sufficient to
make use of the Latin tongue in their public service; these objections are so
absurd as that nothing can make them more ridiculous.

For a close, he tells us that Popes have granted, p. 177.
that the service of God should be celebrated in that manner which we contend
for, one of them having been induced to it by a miracle.

A. And is it not wonderful that they should dare to contradict a miracle, and
when upon their consultation touching this matter God answered from heaven, let
every tongue confess unto me, should say, not so, only the Latin tongue shall
do it?

Farther he says,

Ans. Very good: but till then let them not blame us for not communicating with
them, seeing we continually proclaim that we are ready to communicate with them
when ever we can procure a dispensation, from these and the like enormities;
yea let them acknowledge that the Church of Rome has erred by introducing this
service into the Church; has contradicted the verdict of the infallible word
of God; which that it is the very truth we come now to demonstrate from that
place of 1 Cor. 14. mistaken (if we may believe him) by the Doctor.

Now to pass over those arguments which with sufficient evidence may be drawn
from the 11 first verses of this Chapter, in the 12 verse. Apostle thus exhorts
these emulators of the gift of tongues, that seeing they so importunately
desired to abound in gifts, they would do it to the edification of the Church,
endeavoring to excel in that which tends unto this noble end. Now what was
that? the Apostle Ans. The interpreting of tongues, that the people may know
(...), the import of the voice, wherefore (seeing we ought with greatest vigor
to pursue (those things that make most for the edification of the Church) he
that speaks with an unknown tongue let him pray that he may interpret, where
two things may be inquired.

(1.) To what part of service that verse refers.

Ans. Prayer, As is evident from the reason given, verse. 14. Let him pray that
he may interpret, for if I pray in an unknown tongue, etc.

Secondly, Why must he pray that he may interpret?

Ans. That the Church may receive edification, verse. 5. Yea, this is farther
evident from the series of the words, verse. 12. seek that you may excel to the
edification of the Church; wherefore let him that speaks in an unknown tongue
pray that he may interpret, as also from the Apostles precept; that all things
should be done to edification, and consequently prayer. Now hence I argue.

That which is requisite, that we may excel to the edification of the Church,
we ought to practice in our public prayers; for as much as the Apostle bids us
seek to excel (in this matter) to the edification of the Church; but praying
in a tongue known to the people which join in service with us is requisite to
this and (this being the end of our praying that we may interpret) therefore we
ought to practice it. Our Author here tells us that the Trent Council observes
the mind of the Apostle, in that she has commanded all Pastors, during the
Celebration of the Mass, to expound some part of what is read. An Answer worthy
such a cause.

For (1.) Was it ever heard before that expounding perhaps an Epistle or Gospel
(or something else, which to be sure is not a prayer) should be interpreting
the Churches Prayer? or dare he affirm that the Pastors interpret their Prayers
as they are Read?

(2.) Does the Apostle require that only some part of the Prayer should be
interpreted? is there not equal reason for the whole? especially when he adds,
let all be done for edification?

(3.) Were this done frequently, yet it is evident that the Apostles precept
would be neglected, though more rarely:

His 2 Ans. I shall confute in consideration of the 16. v. It follows. v. 14.
the extraordinary gift of the Spirit in me; thus Chrysostom, Theodoret,
Photius: I know the Rhemists by Spirit understand affections, and make the
sense run thus; in this case my heart and affections pray, albeit I understand
not what I say; But were this the truth, that he that speaks in an unknown
tongue understands not himself;

Then (1.) We must acknowledge that when the Apostles at the day of Pentecost
were endued with the gift of tongues, they understood not what they said; which
will not easily be granted.

Secondly, The word (...), in this Chapter, ordinarily imports the gift of
tongues, and therefore most probably it does so here.

Thirdly, The Fathers generally do thus interpret it, besides the three already
cited; Saint Hierom, Basil, Oecumenius are clearly for this sense, and
therefore Papists cannot without perjury run counter to it.

But (4.) The Apostle in this very Chapter tells us, he that speaks with
tongues edifies himself, verse. 4. and also that where the voice is not
understood it does not edify. verse. 15, 16.

Fifthly, In the very next verse he requires that over and above praying by the
spirit, we should add praying with the Understanding also; so that how ever
you interpret your praying with the spirit, yet must you pray so also as to be
understood: well then our Exposition must take place. It follows, but my mind
is unfruitful, that is the reason why an unknown tongue is prohibited in
prayer, viz. because although our spiritual gift perform it is work, the mind
becomes unfruitful: now here by mind some understand the Intellect, some (as
the Reverend Bishop Morton) the matter of the prayer, which is the effect of
the mind, and made out of the conceptions that we have of the necessities of
Gods Church, etc. But this is not material in our dispute; this mind is said to
be unfruitful, not to our selves, as the foregoing arguments evince, but to the
hearer; thus Saint Jerome, men's ejus non ipsi efficitur fine fructu sed
audienti, In loeum.
and Saint Basil, In locum.
when they that are present understand the prayer, then he that prays has
fruit, to wit, the edification of those that are helped by his prayer; now to
be unfruitful in this sense, what is it but to be such whereby the Auditour
reaps no benefit, the Church is not edifyed; others are not instructed? as the
19. verse does clearly intimate, where we have these words, in the Church I had
rather speak five words, (...) with my mind (understood) that I may instruct
others, then ten thousand in an unknown tongue; now hence I argue, That which
makes the prayer unfruitful to the hearers ought not to be done, (this being
the reason of the Apostles prohibition) but the expressing of public prayers
in an unknown tongue makes them unfruitful to the hearer.

Verse. 15. orabo mente is evident, as from the precedent verse, which tells us
that if we do not pray in a known tongue our mind will be unfruitful unto
others, and thence infers that we must so pray in the Spirit as that we pray
(...) vol sc. (...), for to understand it of the mind of him that prays is to
make a ridiculous inference, after this manner, if you use only the gift of the
Spirit you will be unfruitful unto others, therefore pray so as to understand
your self, or that your mind may be employed; Nay, it is further evident from
the next verse, which tells us that otherwise the Idiot cannot say Amen; Now
surely my understanding my own mind, will nothing contribute unto the Idiot, or
make him more able to say Amen. Well then, to pray with the mind, or
understanding, is to pray so as that the Congregation, made up of learned and
unlearned, may comprehend the import of our words, and so this verse affords us
a third Argument. If we must pray so as to be understood by the Congregation,
made up of literate and illiterate persons, and Idiots, then must we not pray
in an unknown tongue, but in the public service of the Church we should thus
pray, according to the mind of our Apostle.

Verse 16. when thou shall bless with the spirit (which is a part of prayer)
how shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned, say Amen at thy giving
of thanks? for he understands not what thou say; still the Apostle speaks
of Thanksgiving (which is a part of prayer) and must be concluded with Amen:
Now here we shall inquire what is meant by the (...)? The Clerk, say some
Papists; but surely they themselves are Idiots; for it is very evident that the
whole people in the time of the Apostle, yea, See Du Plessis ubi supra.
a great while after their Martyrdom (as Justine Martyr, Clom: Alexand: and
others do inform us) did sound forth Amen with the greatest vigor: Well then,
it is an Hebrew Idiotism, and signifies no more then he that is an Idiot; for as
Moses Egypt. informs me, More Nevoc. part 1. c. 8. and Bux. lex Talm. p. 2001.
voce (...).
the Hebrew (...) is extended to note, estimationem hominis in certa quapiam
re; and they use to say, N: est in tali loco, in hac vel illa re, and such a
one (...) does patrissare; So here, (...), he is an Idiot: And thus the Fathers
generally interpret it; Chrysostom and Oecumenius, indoctum, and Plebium,
Jerome, and Theodoret, laicum; Ambrose, imperitum, Sedulius, Anselme, Haymo,
and Thomas Aquinas, propriam linguam tantum modo scientem, all in locum. Well
then, this Idiot is he that understands not the learned Tongues; and the
Congregation is divided into two parts, (see Acts 4.13.) the literate, and the
unlearned; and prayers in an unknown Tongue are here prohibited, because the
unlearned part of the Church are not able to say Amen unto them; and the reason
given, because they understand not what is said by him that prays in such a
Tongue: Whence we infer,

First, That it is the duty of the unlearned to join with the Minister in
prayer, for he must say Amen, which he cannot do if he join not with him; that
is, if his understanding does not accompany his prayer.

Secondly, That such are unable to perform this duty, unless they understand
the matter of the prayer; for that is the reason assigned by the Apostle, why
they cannot say Amen.

Thirdly, That to say Amen, is not barely to pronounce the word (for that
assuredly might be done by him that understands not what we say) but to
profess our Assent to what is prayed, our willingness that it should be
granted, our confirmation of the benediction; which the Idiot cannot do, as not
knowing whether thou do beg a blessing, or imprecate a curse; whether thou
blessest God, or rather do blaspheme him: Now hence I argue,

First, That which the Idiot or unlearned cannot say Amen to is not to be used
in the Church; but prayer in an unknown. Tongue is such, according to the
Apostles Doctrine.

Secondly, That which the Idiot understands not is not to be used in the Church
(because he cannot say Amen thereto but an unknown Tongue) is that which the
Idiot understands not; and consequently ought not to be used in the Church.

Now here our Author answers; That the Latin Tongue is always a known
Tongue to some, if not to all; and there are always of those that
understandingly say Amen: But,

First, What is this to the purpose, when the Apostle distinguishes the
Congregation into the Idiot and others, and blames the prayers which were
uttered in an unknown Tongue, because they were such as the Idiot could not
understand; will he have the whole Church, besides the Minister, to be Idiots?

Secondly, Is God an accepter of persons? would he have the learned edified by
the Churches service, which have least need of these helps, and the unlearned
want the benefit? If not, must it not be acknowledged that the Apostles Reason
dictated by the Spirit of God concerns them both?

Thirdly, Is it not the duty of the unlearned to say Amen unto the prayers that
are used in public service? And if so, then must he also understand them; for
otherwise as the Apostle here assures us, he cannot do it.

Again, verse 17. For thou verily give thanks well, but the other is not
edified; It might have been replied, why may not the Idiot say Amen, seeing the
matter of my prayer is good?

Answer. True, says the Apostle, thou for thy part give thanks well, but
albeit it be so that which makes thy thanksgiving unlawful; is that (...),
others that are Idiots are not edified thereby; thy benediction or
thanksgiving contributes nothing to his spiritual joy, does not enlarge his
heart with a sense of Gods goodness into thanksgiving and praises, and so he
is not edified; whereas it is better to speak five words to his instruction and
edification, then five hundred in that Tongue which he understands not, and
consequently is not profited by: Hence I argue, that which the Idiot is not
edified by, is not to be used in the Church; this being the reason assigned by
the Apostle why the unknown Tongue should not be used; but prayer in an unknown
Tongue is that by which the Idiot ((...), spoken of, verse 16.) is not edified.

The other answers which our Author returns are very weak; but as they are we
shall consider them.

First, Then, he tells us that the service of the Church being a known set form
in one set Language, P. 176.
recurring continually the same according to the feast; those that are ignorant
of it at first, may by due attention and other diligence, arrive to a
sufficient knowledge, at least, of the chief parts thereof; they having in
their Manuals, Primers, and Psalters, ready translated both the Psalms,
Hymns, and Prayers, etc. And there being severeal Books both in English, and
all vulgar Languages, that expound the Churchservice, even to the meanest.

Answer. Quid verba audio cum facta videam, what do you tell us, that such and
such things might by the due attention of the ignorant be done; When it is
notoriously known, that the people still continue ignorant? and whilst it is
so, you transgress the Laws of the Apostle by praying in a Tongue they
understand not? was it not notorious here in England, in the days of Q. Mary,
that scarce two in a Parish under stood the Service? Let us have service in a
vulgar Tongue, until you find the Latin service understood, and then we will
cease to charge you with contradicting the Apostle?

Secondly, Could they at last be able to understand the Latin service as to
its chief parts, yet would not this acquit you from a violation of the Apostles
precept; Who would have every benediction spoken to their capacity, all things
done to their edification; and consequently, so a that they may be able to
understand them? Do not his reasons conclude against the performance of any
part of divine service in an unknown Tongue? Seeing that Hymn, Prayer, or
Psalm, that is so performed, is such by which the Idiot is not edified, with
which he cannot join, as being not able to understand it: Yea farther, do you
not read your lessons and other portions of holy Scripture in Latin also? And
will you permit them an English Bible, by which they may learn to understand
them?

Thirdly, is it not a thing extremely difficult, if not morally impossible, for
an illiterate person to retain in his memory a bulky quarto Mass; or at least
by comparing Manuals, etc. with it to understand it, and be able to join with
the Priest each Holy Day? Can you produce any illiterate Papists amongst us
that have used this diligence? And if some were able, What must those many
thousands, yea, Myriads, that know not Letters, do? What will their Manuals and
Primers avail them?

Fourthly and lastly, For I might be endless, is the whole Mass extant in these
Manuals or not? Is it so extant as that the meanest of the vulgar may have
recourse unto it? Are you diligent to instruct them what parts of their English
Manuals, etc. do Answer to the parts of their Mass read on every day throughout
the year? Do you suffer them to bring these Books into the Assemblies, and is
it usual so to do? Do you exhort them to the attention so requisite to their
understanding of the Churches service, reprove them for not doing it? If you
deal sincerely with us here, all these questions must be answered in the
affirmative, which I suppose you will blush to do.

Your last Answer is, That the Latin Tongue by reason of its affinity with
many vulgar Tongues, P. 177.
and its constant use, is not so much unknown as we imagine, and so there is
not the same motive for a dispensation as in other places; Hill. l. 1. c. 1.
yea, and our venerable Bede informs us, that in his time to the English,
Scotch, Britains, Picts, the Latin Tongue by perusing the Scripture, (a fit
citation for a Chapter penned in defiance of it) was made common to them all.

Answer. Notwithstanding all this, i^ it not evident that the people do not
understand their service, will not their own witers confess as much? Hear
Billet on this subject cited by Cassander; What shall we say of our times, l.
de off. pij viri, p. 41.
wherein scarce, or not at all, either he that hears or reads understands
what he hears or reads; and Cassander himself says, it were to be desired
that consideration should be had of the people, according to the mandate of the
Apostle, and that the ordinary and vulgar sort of believers might not for ever
be excluded wholly from all communion in prayers and divine service: Yea, was
there ever any Papist that durst say the people understood their Latin
Service? In a word, either they do understand it so far as to be able to join
with the Priest, or not; if the latter, to what end is this Answer produced by
you? If the former, what need of all the former evasions, what need of an
interpreter of their Mass, of Manuals, and other helps, to understand the
Churches prayer? Doubtless, the Peasants in France, and Carters in England,
understand Latin both alike, and the recourse of the service once a year is
very like to help them much.

Secondly, If there were less reason for a change in France and Italy, etc.
why had we not a change in England? why have they not in Germany, Ireland, etc?
Yea, Retento ubique cujusque Ecclefia antiquo ritu.
why does the Council of Trent require that the old custom of Latin service
should every where remain?

To conclude, in your citation of venerable Bede, Haec (Britannia) in praesenti
juxta numerum librorum quibus Lex divina scripta est, quinque gentium linguis
unam eandemque summae veritatis, and verae sublimitatis scientiam scrutatur and
confitetur; Anglorum, Britannorum, Scotorum, Pictorum, and Latinorum, quae
meditatione Scripturarum caeteris omnibus est facta communis; That is, in
short, Britain at present enjoyes five Tongues; English, Scots, Picts, British,
and Latin; which by meditation of the Scripture is made common to them all,
that is some learned men there are in all these parts, some Scots, Picts,
English, etc. that have attained to a knowledge of the Latin Tongue; John
Trevison, l. 5. c. 24.
but yet that the Vulgar did not understand it, and that Bid could not so
imagine, is Evident; because this Bid Translated a part of the Bible into the
Saxon Tongue for the peoples use. L. 4. c. 24.
Yea, and in this same History, tells us of a certain Brother in the Monastery
of the Abhess Hilda, Quicquid ex divinis literis per interpretes disceret.
Cuncta quae audiendo discerc poterat. See Dr. Field ubi supra.
who would presently express in verse in his own Tongue, that is in the
English; whatsoever he learned by Interpreters out of the Holy Books, and
whatsoever by hearing he could possibly learn, he turned it into most sweet
Poems. And no wonder if the Scriptures were read in Latin by the Saxons, when
as Learned men are of Opinion, they knew not how, before Bedes time, to write
in their own Language.

CHAP. XVI.
The Trent Councils Decree touching Invocation of Soints, Sect 1. The Romanists
practice, Sect. 2. Mr. Cressies Pleas considered, Sect. 3. His Argument from
begging the Prayers of the living, Sect. 4. No Evidence that Saints pray for us
in general or particular, Sect. 5, 6. His Argument to prove the presence of
Angels with us confuted, Sect. 7. Of the Sphere of their activity, Sect. 8.
Whether God reveals our prayers to Saints, Sect. 9. Rev. 5, 8.8, 3. No proofs
of the Saints offering up our prayers to God, Sect. 10. His Argument from
Miracles answered, Sect. 11. Some Authorities produced by Mr. Cr. very
inconsequent, as that of Saint Hilary, the Council of Chalcedon, and Saint
Austin, Sect. 12. The testimony of St. Basil abused by Mr. C. Sect. 13. Saint
Chrysostoms testimony considered, Sect. 14. Saint Ambrose, Sect. 15. St.
Austine, Sect. 16. The passages from Theodoret and Nysen spurious, Sect. 17.
Dr. Pierces Argument from Saint Austin vindicated, Sect. 18. No footsteps of
this in the Old Testament, Sect. 19. Nor in the New, Sect. 20. the Testimonies
of Irenaeus, Tertullian, Saint Cyprian, Origin, and others, produced against
it, ibid. The judgment of the Fathers further evidenced. 1. From their putting
God into the Definition of prayer, Sect. 21. Their affirming God alone to be
the Object of it. Sect. 22. Their arguing Christ to be truly God on that
account, Sect. 23. The Council of Laodicea against it. Sect. 24. As also that
of Constantinople, Ibid. The Opinions of many of the Fathers contrary to it.
Sect. 25. The Conclusion, Sect. 26.

IN this Chapter we have the Definition of the Trent Council touching the
Invocation of Saints, P. 179.
wherein we are told That it is good and profitable to invocate them, to have
recourse to their prayers, help and assistance for the obtaining good things
from God by his Son Jesus Christ: P. 199, 180.
And further, that they are impiously persuaded, who hold the invocating them
to pray for us to be idolatry, repugnant to Gods Word, or contrary to the
honor of the one Mediator Jesus Christ, or that it is a foolish thing to
supplicate them with words or mind: On the contrary, we say that the invocation
practiced by the Church of Rome is, 1. Superstitious and Idololatrical. 2.
Derogatory to our Lord Jesus Christ. 3. Repugnant to Gods Word, and, 4. That to
pray to them, especially with the mind, is foolish:


All this might be evinced with a little pains, but it is already done in many
Treatises of the Romanists Idolatry; and therefore I shall content my self to
show their practice, and leave it to impartial considering men to judge.

And first, Solve polluti labii reatum nunc potens nostri meritis opi
mispectorisdures lapides repelle.
they pray to them for pardon of sins; thus the Roman Breviary in the Nativity
of Saint John Baptist: Thou that art powerful, break the hard stones of our
hearts by thy rich merits, and absolve as from the guilt of a polluted lip: And
if you would be so charitable as to think that they intend no more then that
the Saints should pray for their absolution, they will not suffer you to be so,
for they elsewhere have it: Nos a peccatis omnibus solvite jussu quaesumus,
quorum pracepto subditur salus and languor omnium, Brev. Romans in Cor. Apost.
(speaking to the Apostles.) You that shut Heaven with a word, and loose its
Locks, we pray you command that we be absolved from all our sins, for the
health and languishing of all men is subject to your precept. And in the Feast
of Saint Peter, and Paul to Saint Peter, they pray much after the same manner;
and yet the Scripture puts the question, Who can forgive sins but God? Mar. 2.7.

Secondly, They pray to them for Grace and Glory: Ps. 56.
Lady in thy name let me be safe, and free me from my unrighteousness; have
mercy upon me, and cleanse me from all mine iniquities: and again, Ps. 27. and
50.
Dissolve the Bonds of mine iniquities: Take away the bundles of our sins purge
my soul from its filth. Ps. 3. and 87.
By thy Holiness are my sins purged. Ps. 44.
Thou art the beginning, and end of my whole salvation, totius salutis meae,
etc. Ps. 41.
Ps. 136.
By her are sins purged, by her is made true satisfaction for sins: etc.
whereas it is Gods propriety to be the God of all Grace.

Thirdly, they pray for these things upon the account of the merits of the
Saints. Thus the Roman Breviary By the merits of Saint Franciscus, April 2.
Let us enjoy our promised rewards, and grant that by the merits of Saint Peter
and Saint Paul, we may attain to eternal Glory: July 6.
That by the merits of Saint Nicholaus, the Church may enjoy perpetual peace,
by the intercession of the merits of Saint Basil, Sept. 10.
Let us be absolved from allour sins; and to the blessed Virgin Mary; Jan. 14.
By thee let the wrath of God be averted from me, appease him by thy merits:
and again, By the blood which Saint Thomas shed for thee, Ps. 72.
make us to ascend that Heaven whither Thomas is ascended: and this is
consonant to that of Bellarmine, Prec. ad usum Sacrum in fest. Th. Becket.
who tells us that it is lawful to pray unto the Saints even for salvatian, and
other spiritual blessings, if so be we understand it thus, that they should
impetrate them by their merits. Now if this be not derogatory to the Merits of
Christ to have veram satisfactionem de'peccatis, to have Grace and Glory
purchased by the blood and merits of others, let any unreasonable Man judge.

Section 4th. and 5th. we may beg prayers from one another, as Saint Paul
himself did from the Ephesians (and others) c. 6.19. c. 2. These. 3.1.4. Col. 3.
where he bids the Brethren pray for him.

Answer, Very good, but yet we dare not beg from these our Brethren Grace,
Glory, pardon of sins; nor say with the Roman Breviary, to the Virgin Mary, We
fly unto thee, O Virgin Mary for thy defense, and for as much as (being
conscious of our great offenses, we fear the wrath of a severe Judge, whom we
dare not see; We fly unto thee his Mother, that thou would intercede for us
unto God, excuse our sins, and obtaining for its the Grace of thy Omnipotent
Son procure us the pardon of what ever we have committed.

Secondly, He tells us such begging of prayers is far from Idolatry or
diminution to Christ since holy persons (living or dead) are not invocated as
donors, but fellow beggars with God for us.

Answer, Why then does your Breviary talk so often of procuring Grace and
Glory, and the pardon of sins, by the merits of the Saints? Why do you tell us,
that by the Holiness of the Virgin Mary are your sins purged; That she is the
beginning and end of your salvation, that she has made true satisfaction for
us; are these things no diminution to Christ's merits, and satisfaction, to
procure mercy for us upon these scores is this to procure it as fellow b^eggars

Thirdly, say you the refusing of the assistance of those whose prayers God
more willingly hears is a neglect of using all means helpful to us.

Answer, True, but if the neglect of this Invocation of Saints, be the neglect
of any means thus helpful, then were the Apostles negligent in giving us no
intimation of our duty in this particular: Yea, the Saints of God for some
thousand of years under the Old Testament, and the Primitive Church for 300
years, must be accused of this negligence; for of their practice in this case
nullibi vola nec vestigium, Scripture and Histories afford us no one Tittle,
but pregnant Evidence to the contrary.

But you proceed, Mr. C. S. 5.
If the prayers to Sts. departed be prejudicial to the merits and intercessions
of our Lord,

Answer, Is it not then a wonder that Saint Paul (if he may be permitted to
have known as much as Mr. C.) should thrice call upon his Brethren alive for
their supplications, and yet not put up one Petition to a Saint or Angel?

Secondly, We know it is the duty of living Saints to pray for one another but
whether the Saints departed pray at all, whether for any in particular, and how
far, we know not. We know a certain way to excite the Saints on earth to the
performance of that Duty in reference to us; but we are ignorant of any way of
conveighing our desires to the Saints in Heaven. We have Rule, President, and
Command in Scripture for the first, not one jot of all these in reference to
the second: the Requests we make to the living are no elicite Acts of Religion,
the requests made by the Romanist to the Saints departed are. We pray to the
living neither directly nor indirectly, but desire them only, by virtue of our
Communion with them to assist us in their prayers, as we might ask an Alms or
any other good turn at their hands the Saints departed are by you directly
invocated, and in your devotions you immediately step from God and Christ unto
a Saint. We do not plead the merits of our Brethren, nor bid them do so in our
behalf, you do both in reference to the Saints departed; we do not kneel to our
Brethren, or ly prostrate before them on these accounts; we do not invoke them
in our Churches, insert them into our Liturgies, believe them to be (...) any
way, or that we are committed to their care or custody; all this you do believe
in inreference to the Saints departed: Is not this therefore a very good
Argument if the prayers made to Saints departed by the Romanists, wherein they
beg of them Grace and Glory, and all spiritual good things, trust in their
Patronage, plead for audience on the account of their merits be prejudicial to
the merits of satisfaction, and intercession of our Savior, or otherwise
unlawful; then must the asking of my brothers prayers (in spite of all these
differences) be so.

Again, Mr. C. informs us,

Answer, But let me tell him that it is generally questioned by our French
Divines. Chamier solves all their Arguments with the greatest perspicuity,
except that single one which is taken from the advancement of their Charity;
whence you infer that they should be more respectful of our welfare then they
were on Earth, where they did afford us the benefit of their Prayers: but this
Argument albeit the most plausible, is yet unconsequent: for whilst they were
here on Earth, they happily procured good men to exhort their Relations unto
Piety: if Ministers spent themselves in preaching, and the like, but in Heaven
they send no Angels (that I ever heard of) on such errands, nor have we any
Preachers from the dead. Whilst they were here, they were sollicitous touching
the welfare of their absent friends; but do they now (think you) ask their
Guardian Angel how it is with them?

Secondly, Notwithstanding they have their Charity augmented, yet will it not
follow that they must pray for their friends below (much less for others)
seeing happily the very knowledge of their friends may be hid from them: and were
it otherwise, it may seem to be grievous to them to consider in what state many
of their Relations have been left; add to this, that they have no certainty
that they do not die the next moment after them. Yea lastly, how can any man
assure me, that the Saints in Heaven pray at all?

Secondly, P. 182. S. 6.
You tell us these Learned sober men will not deny that they may and do pray
personally for their former known acquaintance, as Saint Austin believed his
Mother did for him.

Answer, This I have already obviated and albeit some who are not willing to
think contrary to what some Fathers do allow of may grant it to you; yet seeing
you can produce neither Scripture for it, nor the universal consent of Fathers;
To. 2. S. 8.
And seeing your Arguments are so clearly answered by Chamier, we take the
liberty to deny, or at least to question it.

Once more, Ibid.
You tell us they will grant, that albeit they be in Heaven, they may either by
Gods Relation, or the Revelation of Angels be informed of the Prayers made to
them by any others on Earth.

Answer, That this is not impossible at least for God to do, we willingly
acknowledge; but I very much doubt, whether any Protestants allow that they
actually do so, or that it is probable they should be thus acquainted with our
desires, or if any do, they are never the more Learned for it.

Secondly, It Is not perhaps impossible, there may be men in the Moon, and they
good Christians; and that if a Papist should pray unto them, God or his Angels
might reveal it: And yet I suppose, should they upon this account become
Petitioners unto them, they would be thought little better then Lunaticks; yea
the same may be said of the Saints in Purgatory, which you affirm of the Saints
in Heaven; and why then do you not pray unto them? Will you refuse the
assistance of those who are perfected in Charity, and other Graces, and
consequently whose Prayers God hears more willingly then your own? will not
their prayers be more effectual? for sure in Purgatory they will be servent, or
will they refuse to do us the kindness who do the like for them? sure one good
turn deserves another; and if they will be so surly to us we, with the leave of
his Holiness, will be so to them.

But to proceed, Mr. C. P. 183.
will tell us that albeit this rests upon so many uncertainties, yet is not
that sufficient to hinder them from acknowledging that the practice of
invocating Saints by name, is very beneficial to them, and that on these
accounts.

1. P. Id. ibid.
Because the Angels are continually present with us on the Earth, and that it
is by them we are defended from the Devils malice, who having such a wonderful
strength exceeding ours, would otherwise destroy us all in our sins, nor can it
be said that God hinders him, seeing he does not ordinarily interpose his power
immediately in Natural Actions.

Answer, This then is the best figment they can Imagine, and yet it is most
strangely ridiculous to any considering man; for was it not the protection of
God, which kept Satan from Job, so that he could do nothing without his
Commission: and when he had given him Commission could not go beyond it? and
may he not as easily do the same to others?

Again, secondly the Scripture tells us, the Angels are Mistring spirits, sent
forth for the good of those only that believe; and why does not the Devil post
the wicked down into Hell presently, seeing they have no such good Angel to
relieve them?

3. Will Mr. Crossie say, that all the Cattle, the sheep and Camels and Oxen;
yea the Asses of Job had their Guardian Angels? if so we will allow our Author
one; if not, then let him tell us, why Satan complained he could not come at
them.

Again, Have the Tombs of the Martyrs, the holy relics and Images of their
Saints every one an Angel to keep them? if not, why does not Satan break them,
or conveigh them away? Unless perhaps he approves of your Idolatry; and how are
ye sure that your Relics are not changed by him? Once more, and I have done;
Have all the Houses in London, all the Papists Houses in Rome, as many Angels
as will guard them, and keep the Devil from setting fire on them? If so, the
blessed Angels are well employed; if not, why does not that Gand Enemy of
Mankind, set fire on them every Night?

Again, when on the Lords Day all the Angels of so many Millions of souls come
to Saint Peter, to tell him such a one in treats his Prayers for such a thing,
who guards the persons committed to their charge the while? or if these Angels
be bound to stay here, who carries up the prayers to Saint Peter?

Again, seeing so many prayers are put up to the Virgin Mary, Surely she must
do nothing else but pray, there being not one moment, when some or other do not
pray to her, and then what time will she have to hear these nimble Tabellarii,
telling her of New suitors, must they interrupt her in her Prayers?

Again, These Saints must not only be told when such a one prays; but whether
Hypocritically or no, and so I suppose, that question must be asked of the
Nuncio's. Now here is work enough for Saint Mary to receive so many Messengers
every day, and to enquire whether her suppliants pray in sincerity or not. But
happily it may be said, if any one pray Hypocritically the Guardian Angel will
not present that Prayer.

Answer, Very good, but seeing the Angel Guardian knows not the heart, How will
he be able to judge of this? Once more, when all the Saints in Heaven are
prayed to at once, (as it is in many Collects, and peculiarly on all Saints
Days) surely that day is not an holy day to the Guardian Angel, who must be
fain to trot to all the Saints in Heaven, and acquaint them that Serenus
Cressie being very sick and weak desires their prayers. But when they pray to
all Angels, then the poor Angel must not travel over all the Heavens only, but
the Earth to boot.

But we will not deal too severely with him; let him proceed, and thus he does
it, History tells us, that Magiclans have always the Devil ready to come at
their call; why then should not Angels be witnesses of our Actions, P. 184.
and especially our prayers, which (as the Scrripture says) they offer as
Incense to God. Now to I eave the Scripture till anon) Here we have more work
for the Angel, for seeing it is an Angel, Apoc. 8.3. that offers up the prayers
and incense of all Saints, the Guardian Angel must make a journey to him to,
unless you will have him to be Christ, which will do our Author but little
service.

2. History likewise will tell us, that Magicians and Witches can swim over the
Sea in a shell, can creep through a keyhole, Can dip their finger in a little
juice and fly away out of the Chimnie, and he may believe one as soonas the
other. Lastly, the number of Magitians ( I hope) is few in comparison of other
men, and so there is some difference as to that, for one Devil may better
afford to be nigh them, especially seeing his service is so much promoted
thereby. As to that dispute of Saint Austine which concludes the Section, I say,

1. That he was very uncertain in it, and one while denies; and again suspects
that such a thing might be.

2. He says only possit fieri, it may be done this way. And again,

3. Vt quaedam cognoscant that they may know something, and how little service
this will do him, every one may see. P. 184. S. 8.


2. He further tells us, We are ignorant how great the sphere of Activitie of
the glorified Saints may be, in respect of this whole visible world: perhaps
says he (in the words of Spalatensis) the whole sensible world may be no more
to one of them, then its proper body to an humane soul informing it.

Answ. And are not these men think you put to their shifts who are fain to coin
such inventions to salve their Hypothesis. But tell me, is it probable they
inform the whole world so, as to be present each of them in every part of the
world?

Or, Secondly, to operate in each part of the world, albeit not present there;
If the first, then will they be little short of omnipresent, nor will it be
proper to God to fill Heaven and Earth: and they being in Hell as well as
Heaven, and also in Purgatory, How do they escape the fire? How ^re the Angels
said to ascend to Heaven, and descend from it? Is it (...) only? How are the
souls of the Fathers delivered from their limbus, said to depart thence, and to
be with Christ? to be absent from the body, and present with the Lord; was
Lazarus's soul carried to Heaven, and afterward extended?

Again, to what end is this extension, seeing they may be happy without it,
and why should we imagine it, seeing here it is certain they are not extended
beyond their bodies? If the second, let them tell me how, or by what Operation,
a soul that is in Heaven can tell that such a one, who prays in his mind only,
is praying to him? And suppose two were praying together, and the one prayed to
Peter, and the other to Paul; by what operation can these spirits discern that
the one prayed to him, and not the other? I suppose a Prayer to Saint Paul
makes a different motion in their Orb of Ether; but then how does St Paul know
who it is that prays to him? Perhaps different men, make different motions;
but Saint Paul never knew them, and how shall he be informed? Why, the Guardian
Angel must go up, and tell him it is S. C. that makes such a motion, and happily
he will remember it. But how will he know when he prays Hypocritically, why
truly; when an Hypocrite prays it makes a different motion from a sincere one
in the spirits Orb of Air. This Platonical stuff is all that I can imgine to
salve the Hypotheses: Si quid novisti rectius istis candidus imperti.

Lastly, be it that their presence or operations were so vast, yet could they
not judge of the heart, seeing to be (...), is proper to God, and consequently
must be as zealous for an Hypocrite as a devout Christian.

Thirdly,

Answ. Nor he, whether he reveals any thing to them at all; and therefore in
these things he does most evidently (...).

2. What a ridiculous thing is this to suppose such a Circle, that when a man
has made a prayer, that prayer should come to God, and be revealed by him to a
Saint, and that Saint bring it to God again?

3. Why must he be thought to reveal this to the Spirits in Heaven, and not to
the Souls in Purgatory? or if equally, why are not they also prayed to?

4. But it is evident from Scripture, that God does not make any revelations of
this kind: for it is said, Eccles. 9.5. The Dead know nothing that is done in
this world, neither have they any more a portion for ever in any thing that is
done under the Sun.

And again, Abraham is ignorant of us. Esaias 93.16.


5. Bellar. himself confutes this Evasion by 2 Arguments:

1. If it were so, the Church would not say so boldly to all Saints, Orate pro
nobis, but sometimes would prayto God to reveal our desires to them.

2. No good reason can be given, why Saints under the Old Testament should not
be invoked; for God might have revealed their Petitions to them, though in
Limbo Patrum: and sure their prayers might have been as beneficial as the
prayers of such as were alive.

6. Why upon the same presumption should we not pray to the Saints living? for
albeit their prayers be not quite so effectual, as the prayers of Saints
departed, yet they are effectual, and consequently to neglect this will be to
neglect one means conducing to our welfare. I say upon the same presumption for
this reason why God must be supposed to reveal our Prayers, can be no other
then our good, and would not the reason move him to reveal them to. Saints on
Earth, as well as those in Heaven: Mr. Cr. p. 185.
Oh but (says our adversary) If God said to Abraham, a Pilgrim on Earth,
shall I hide from Abraham the thing that I do; how much more may we imagine,
tha he hides not the mighty works of his, mercy and justice here from his
Domestic Servants? It Is pity that this Argument was not framed before the
Church of Israel madeher complaint, that Abraham was ignorant of her? It would
have taught her better divinity

2. It Is no Demonstration; sure God would not hide from Abraham the thing he
was to do, which concerned so much his Brother Lot: (albeit he never revealed
afterward to any of his dearest servants that we read of, unless his Prophets,
any such thing: therefore he will reveal to any Saint in Heaven the prayers
that are made to them by any person whatsoever. By what has been said I may be
bold to infer, that the invocation of Saints is very foolish; and if so, that
the Church of Rome is not infallible.

But our Author claps in two places of Scripture without any coherence at all,
We read (says he) not only an Angel, but every one of the four and twenty
Elders to have in their hands golden Censers, and Vials full of Odours, Rev.
8.3.5.8.
which are the prayers of the Saints; that is, of their Brethren upon Earth.

Now to take these two places in their Order:

1. Revel. 8.3 We read another Angel came and stood before the Altar, having a
golden Censer and many Odours were given to him that he should offer them with
the prayers of all Saints, upon the Golden Altar, which was before the Throne:
and verse 4. The smoke of the Odours which came of the prayers of the Saints,
ascended up before God out of the Angels hand:

Now 1. Let it be granted, that to one Angel was this given, to offer Odours to
come up with the prayers of all Saints: How does it follow that they are to be
invocated? or that he knows when any particular person prays to him, or any
other Saint? May not he offer up his incense continually, as knowing only
this, that prayers are made continually?

2. If one Angel do this, How will it follow that all do it, or that all Saints?

3. If this be a created Angel, is there not a fine round of Prayers?

1. They are carried by an Angel, or revealed by God to the Saints, then he
pteseuts them to the Angel, the Angel to Christ, and Christ to the Father.

2. This Angel is said to offer Odours, to come up with the prayers of all
Saints, which surely is to do somewhat which may make them more acceptable to
God, and will they say that the Virgin Mary is no Saint? or that any Created
Angel offers somewhat to God which makes her prayer more acceptable? Well, but
we deny it to have been a created Angel, but say it was the Angel of the
Covenant, who by the incense of his merits and intercessions, offers the
prayers of all Saints to God, and makes them more acceptable unto him. For it is
manifest, that here is reference to that which was used to be done in the
Levitical administration; where the Priest entering the Temple offered Incense
on the Golden Altar, whilst the people in the Court put up their prayers to
God, Luke 1.10. Whence we may understand that phrase that the Angel offered his
Odours with the prayers of the Saints.

Now the Levitical Priest, who offered incense, was a type of Christ, not of
the Angels: and this is that which the Apostle intimates, that Christ the Angel
of the Covenant, Typified by the Levitical Priest, offers up the prayers, and
sighs of his members, groaning under the Tyranny of wicked men, and by the
incense of his merits makes them acceptable unto God.

The second Scripture is Apocal. 5.8. where we are told, That twenty four
Elders fell down before the Lamb, having every one of them Harps and Golden
Vials full of Odours in their hands, which are the prayers of the Saints.

Answ. 1. Many interpret these of the Elders of the Church as Beda in verse 10.
Here it is more plainly declared, that the Beasts and the Elders are the
Church, redeemed by the blood of Christ, and gathered from the Nations; also he
shows in what Heaven they are, saying, they shall reign upon the Earth. And
so Irenaeus, lib. 4. cap. 33. Ambrose on the Apccalyps, and Haimo.

2. Vossius will tell you that here is nothing intended but Eucharistical
prayers, not petitory; and the four and twenty Elders only intimate that the
whole Family of Christians in Earth and Heaven, did render continual
Doxologies to God for the redemption of the World by his Son.

There is one Argument of greater moment insisted on, and that is taken from
the miraculous effects, not only of prayers directed to God at the monuments
of the Saints, but also directed to the Saints themselves: Now to this I answer.

First, By denial that any approved testimonies can be produced of such
miraculous effects wrought by any prayers immediately directed unto Saints; the
Instances which Mr. C. refers us to, shall be answered anon.

Secondly, I say that these pretended miracles may justly be suspected for
Satanical delusions, and that upon several accounts.

First, From the silence of all undoubted Antiquity of any such Sepulcher
wonders, in the three first ages; albeit the Christians long before had used to
keep their assemblies at the Coemiteries and Monuments of their Martyrs. When
God had ceased to exert his power as in former times; that he should thus
freshly exert it upon these occasions, seems incredible; and that which cannot
easily be admitted, by considering men who are acquainted with the Artifices of
the Devil.

Secondly, from the nature of them, which renders them very ridiculous.
Basilius Selutensis, l. 2. c. 10.
Thus of Saint Thecla, we are told, that they who watch the night before her
festivity do at at that time yearly see her, driving a fiery Chariot in the
air; and removing from Seleucia unto Dalisandus, a place which she did
principally affect in regard of the commodity and pleasantness of the
situation; that when she had demanded of Alypius the Grammarian, C. 24.
forsaken by the Physicians what he ailed, and he had replied upon her in that
of Homer, (...), thou know, why should I tell it thee that know all
things? the Martyr being delighted partly with the man, and partly with the
verse, (for you must know that after her death she was much affected with
Poetry and Oratory, C. 21. and 24.
and continually delighted with such as would be accurate in her praises,)
conveyed a certain round stone into his mouth, with the touch whereof he was
presently healed: Yea, the same Basil tells us, how having prepared an Oration
for her anniversary festivity, the day before it should be pronounced he was
taken with such an extreme pain in his ear, C. 27.
that the Auditory was like to be quite disappointed: But that the Martyr the
same night appeared to him, and shaking him by the ear took all the pain away.
He adds further, C. 16.
that when he begun to be weary of writing this same Book she sits her down
close by him, smiles whilst she reads it, shows her self wonderfully pleased
with it, and that it behoved him to finish it: The like miracles we have
related by Severus, of one Martinus a Monk, De vita B. Mart. S. 24. Ibid. S. 17.
who could see the Devil though he remained in his own substance, fright him
with the sign of the Cross continually; who putting his hand into the mouth of
a Demoniack, forced the Devil out at his posteriors; Yea, (which is most
wonderful of all) that could by the smell of the body, Hieron. in Hilarione.
or the clothes, know what Demon tyrannized in such a body. These were the
miracles that helped forward the worshipping of Saints, and the monkish
superstitions.

Thirdly, Because the old Demons worship prevailed upon the world by the same
means. Thus Tertullian, Apol. c. 51.
Search therefore the Deity of Christ, whether it be true or not; if it be that
by the knowledge whereof a man shall be reformed to good, it follows then that
the false be renounced, especially that whole mystery (of Daemon-worship)
being discovered; which under the names and images of the dead through Signs,
Miracles, and Oracles, obtains a Divinity. And Chrysostom, they (the Gentile
Demons) oftentimes by their skill cured diseases, Orat. in Judaizantes.
and restored to health those that were sick; what should we partake therefore
with them in their iniquity, God forbid? De Praep. Evan. l. 5. c. 2.
And the like we have from Eusebius, who informs us, that the wicked Demons
counterfeited by working many miracles the Souls of them that were deceased;
and thence they were thought worthy to be celebrated with greater service: But,

Thirdly, we Answer, Mr. Stillingfleet p. 351.
That after the true Doctrine is confirmed by divine miracles, God may give the
Devil power to work, if not real miracles, yet such as men cannot judge by the
things themselves whether they be so or no; and this for trial whether we will
forsake the true doctrine confirmed by greater miracles, for the sake of such
doctrines as are contrary there to; and are confirmed by false Prophets, by
signs, and wonders: Now in this case our rule of trial must not so much be the
miracles considered in themselves, whether real or no, as the comparing them
with the miracles wrought in confirmation of that doctrine which is contrary to
this, which these words tend to the proving of. Therefore Gods people under the
Law were to examine the drift and scope of the miracles; and if they were
intended to bring them to Idolatry, what ever they were they are forbid to
hearken to them; as you may see most evidently, Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3. So now under
the Gospel, the worship of the true God through Jesus Christ, and by the
doctrine revealed by him, is the standard whereby we ought to judge of all
pretenders unto miracles; so that let the miracles be what they will, if they
contradict that doctrine which Christ revealed to the world, we are to look
upon them as only trials of our faith in Christ, to see whether we love him
with our whole hearts or no, and accordingly we look upon these miracles as
trials whether we will forsake the Head Christ Jesus, give this worship of the
Creator to the creature, and the like; and are sufficiently warded against the
force of this assault, 2 These. 2.9.
by being told that Antichrist must be ushered in with signs and lying wonders.

Fourthly, We add, that these miracles might have been done by God himself, and
that at these Martyrs Tombs, but only to confirm the faith they suffered for.

Now as for the testimony of Antiquity in this point,

First, Many of the places produced by him speak nothing of the Invocation of
the Saints departed; nor do they infer any thing but what we generally confess;
thus that of Saint Hillary tells us, Ps. 129.
That our infirmity needs the intercession of Angels.

Answer. Be it so, we add that our infirmity needs the intercession of good men
on earth; yet we are not able to see this consequence, that they must or may be
invocated or prayed unto; Again, does the Council of Chalcedon say, let Flavian
pray for us, Act. 11.
we say so too; let all the Saints and Angels in Heaven, all the men on earth
pray for us, we are willing to have the benefit of their intercessions or
prayers for us: Albeit (to speak the truth) this sentence looks quite anothery
way; the business was this; there was a long contention betwixt Bassianuus and
Stephanus, for the Bishopprick of Ephesus; Bassianus, albeit not rightly
ordained, kept it for the space of four years, and with him communicated
Flavianus; this was urged in the Synod by the favorers of Bassianus, as an
acknowledgment made by Flavian, that Bassianus was lawful Bishop: This Argument
they thus enforce, if you will not hearken to our reasons, let Flavianus the
Martyr entreat this of you, he, though dead, judges the cause to Bassianus;
then after Cecropius had spoken in his behalf, the Bishops and Clergy of
Constantinople stand up and cry, this is the truth; (viz. Flavianus was a
favourer of Bassianus, etc.) Flavian lives after death, (that is, his judgment
and his memory, as afterward Flavian is here, that is, we have here his
judgment for Bassianus) let the Martyr entreat for us, (that is, in this cause
of Bassianus, let him entreat the Council for us) Haec vera and genuina
verborum men's est, cui nisi pertinax aut imperitus refragari nemo potest, says
our Crackanthorp; Nor do we scruple to say, with Austine, Def. Eec. Ang. c. 59.
let Cyprian, yea, let Mr. C. help us as with his prayers; only let him
remember, that this is not vox invocantis, sed optantis, an indication of our
willingness, Orat. in 40. Mart. Mr. C. p. 190. (...), let it here be noted
that Mr. C. could scarce be ignorant of his forgery, it being charged upon them
by the Bishop of Ely, and Forbs, in those very Books which are cited by him in
this Chapter.


Saint Basil is suborned to say, whosoever is in any pressure let him fly to
the assistance of these Martyrs; and again, whosoever is in a state of joy let
him pray to them; the former, that he may be delivered from misery; the later,
that he may be preserved in prosperity.

Answer. Here we have a double corrupting of the Text, (an Artifice which our
Author, notwithstanding his solemn protestation to the contrary does every
where use.) Saint Basil says, (...), he does fly to them, (Mr. C. let him fly)
Saint Basil, he does run to them, (that is, to their monuments) Mr. C. let him
pray to them; and then Saint Basil adds, here it is that a woman praying for
her sons is heard, or wishing a safe return to her traveling Husband;
wherefore, together with these Martyrs, let us pour forth our prayers:
Immediately before he told the people they had often sought for one that might
intercede to God for them; Here (says he) are forty sending up as it were one
prayer; and if where two or three be gathered together God is there present,
who doubts his presence where forty are? He therefore, etc. From whence it is
plain, that here is not one Iota that bids us pray unto them; but when it is
said, he that is under any pressure flies unto them, it is not to pray unto
them; but because they were esteemed (which the Fathers frequently intimate) to
pray with them; and this interpretation is evinced, as by the argument that we
shall be heard because we are in the presence of forty; so from that which
follows, that upon this account it is, that the Wife comes hither and is heard.
And the testimony of Ruffinus will reach no higher then this does; Hist. Ecc.
l. 2. c. 23.
and it only shows that the Emperor came to the monuments of the Martyrs,
that so he might more assuredly procure the intercession of the Saints;
according to that vulger opinion above mentioned. But Mr. C. will never be able
from this intercession to conclude their Invocation, unless he can assure us
that they hear us, and show us a command to pray unto them; no, says Bishop
Andrews, they will intercede for us on their own accord, not being called upon
to do so, but must not be invocated by us so to do.

Saint Chrysostom's 66. Hom. ad pop. Antioch. must be cited, albeit he knows it
to be spurious, Possevin apparat: in Chrysostom. Bellar. de Scrip. Eccl. in eundem
Reply to Card. Perron.
and his own party do confess it; and as for the same passage cited from the
26. Hom. in 2 Cor. Bishop Andrews has told him that it smelt rank of forgery
in Erasmus's nose; who in his Preface before his Latin Translation of Basil
and Amphilooc. de Spiritu Sancio, says that there are some things there which
must own him for their Parent, qui dulcissimis Athanasii libellis de Spiritu
Sancto suas loquaces, sed Elumbes, attexit noenias, quique in Epistola ad
Corinthios posteriore, and in Actis Apostolerum, Chrysostomus haberi studuit:

And, Secondly, That this passage is not extant in the Latin Edition by
Stelsius at Antwerp, 1556. set forth by Johannes Affinius, so that all Copies
had it not; yea further, that this place is found in Garetius, P. 69.
de Invocatione Sanctorum, cited under the name of Theodorus Daphnopatus; whom
thence the Reverend Bishop well concludes to have been the Author of it: And
yet if it had not been spurious, we could have told you that it was thus to be
interpreted; The Emperor who is clothed with purple makes a journey to visit
these Sepulchers (of Saint Peter and Saint Paul) and laying aside his pomp
stands, (...), (...). Consid. Modest. p. 113.
wanting the Saints to go before him in their prayers to God, or intercede for
him; He whose Temples are encompassed with a Diadem wants for his protection
even the Tent maker and Fisherman though dead. Bishop Forbs, I acknowledge,
quarrels with this interpretation, but he has nothing at all confuting it, as
will appear to an unprejudiced eye.

Yea, lastly, In Saint Chrysostom's Rhetorical style, he might very well be
said to desire the prayers of the Saints, because he went to those places where
the assistance of their prayers (according to the vulgar opinion then on foot)
was especially to be had. As to that of Saint Ambrose, De Viduis. l. 1. de off.
and let us not be ashamed to employ them as Intercessors for our infirmities.

I Answer, Bishop Andrews makes it evident that this was written by him whilst
a Neophite; for (says he) he was fain to be christened before he could be
consecrated; now the very next year after that he wrote his Commentaries upon
Luke, as Baronius proves from his own words in his eleventh Book upon the
twentieth Chapter; in which Commentary he cites this Book de viduis, which
therefore must needs be written before these Commentaries, and so consequently
in the first year of his Christianity; yea, he ingeniously confesses, that he
began^ to teach before he had learnt; and Saint Austine confirms it, saying,
Instruct. Hist.
Ambr. Vix Christanus de rebus Ecclesiae scribit, thus he. Now here we must be
sent to Vossius and Forbs, who considers some other passages, but gently
slideth over this convincing evidence without the least notice taken of it; but
because he sends us to Forbs, let him hear him giving us this rule. l. 7. c. 5.
When one and the same Writer seems to speak contradictions, let it be
considered where he professedly states the Question, and confirms his sentence
by the suffrage of Scripture and Reason, confuting disertly the opposite
opinion, and where he speaks of the same thing (as it were aliud agens, by the
by, without such confirmation from the testimonies of Scripture and Reason, and
confutation of the opposite opinion) such things as do not well consist
therewith; and in this case that which he taught in the former manner must be
esteemed to be his Doctrine. l. 3. c. 12. C. 1.
Thus says he, ^aint Ambrose in his Book De Spiritu Sancto, and De Fide,
teaches that God alone is to be worshipped? not the Virgin Mary, or any
creature: This he confirms, ex professo, by the testimonies of Scripture and
manifest Reason; and yet in his Dook De Viduis he delivers a Doctrine which is
plainly otherwise; but then it is not operose confirmata, industriously
confirmed; and therefore we must estimate Saint Ambrose his judgment from the
former places. To which we add, that as he grew elder he grew wiser; Ambros. de
obitu Theod.
for afterward he had learnt to say, Thou, O Lord, only art to be invocated.

Secondly, This may be interpreted to be the obsecration of deeds rather then
words; for there he teaches the Widow (pleading she was weak and without help)
to make the Apostles her friends and neighbors, to procure her help, as Peter
and Andrew entreated our Savior to cure Peter's wives Mother; Now the way,
says he, to make them so to her, was to draw near to them in the fellowship or
likeness of piety and doing good; for it was not the relation of blood, but the
kindred of Virtue, that makes the Martyrs our Friends and neighbors.

To that place of Austine, Ad viginti Martyrs, etc. ut vestiretur oravit.
Further, let lt be considered, that here we have no better president then a
Tailor, and that so simple as to bargain with the Martyrs how many halfpence
he would have to buy his Cloak.
cited from the 22. Book, De Civ. Dei, and the eighth Chapter; (to let pass the
corruption of this Chapter, by Ludovicus Vives, ingenuously confessed.) We say
that it is thus to be interpreted; He prayed, (viz. to God) at the twenty
Martyrs, that is, at their Tombs or Monuments: (so in Basil, (...), that is,
at their Monuments, as above we have showed) and this Exposition the very words
do lead us to; for who ever heard of orare ad aliquem, to pray unto one? But
you will Object, that the boys jeered him, as if he had begged of the Martyrs
fifty half pence.

Answer. It can be no more concluded hence that he prayed unto them, then that
our Savior prayed unto Elias, because the Jews were pleased to say so.

Next for his 32. and 33. Homilies, de diversis, I could have told him that
Bellarmine himself doubts of 43. of them; Rivet of them all, but especially of
those which were added by the Divines of Lovain, (and indeed we have reason to
suspect what ware you obtrude upon us) and therefore I take leave to pass the
sentence thence cited over.

Lastly, that which is cited from his Book, De cura pro mortuis, I interpret
thus; Ut dum recolunt ubi sint pofita little quos diligunt corpora, cisdem
Sanctis illos tantum patronos susceptos apud Deum adjuvandos orando, commendent.
That whilst they call to mind where the bodies of those that are dear to them
are laid, they commend them to the Saints as to Patrons, that by their prayers
(or praying for them) they may be helped with the Lord; and then the Argument
is null.

Secondly, They may very well be said to be commended to the Saints by praying
to God for them, either at the Monuments of the Saints and Martyrs, or at the
remembrance of the Saints and Martyrs; for that Saint Austine speaks of such
prayers as were to be directed to God, is evident from the very next Chapter;
where continuing his discourse, he tells us, that it very much concerns any,
where they place the body of their deceased, who pray for his Spirit unto God;
because both the preceding affection has chosen an holy place, and the body
being placed there the remembrance of that holy place renews and augments the
affection: So then, they do commend them by praying, but it is to God, not to
Saints and Angels; See Doctor Fernes Answer to Spencer. P. 276.
Nor is it any thing to the purpose that follows, viz. That whenever the
Mind recounts where the body of some dear friend lies buried, and straight the
place occurs renowned for the name of some Martyr, the affection of him who
thus remembers and prays forthwith commends the beloved Soul to the same
Martyr: For this may be done by praying to God, (as we do for the help and
assistance of the holy Angels) that he would commend the Soul unto such a
Martyr.

Secondly, This prayer, albeit poured out to God, may be styled a commendation
of him to the Martyr, because done at the Monument or remembrance of the
Martyr, even as Saint Austine in this very place tells us, Meritis Martyris.
that the believing that the Soul is helped by the merits of the Martyr,
Supplicatio quaedam est, is a kind of prayer; and if any thing profits, it is
this:

We have two other Authors in the front; Tom. 2. l. 8. de uno Med. c. 7.
And (1.) for Greg. Nyssen. you have five Arguments produced against him by
Chamier, none of which are touched by Mr. C. or Bishop Forbs; yea, happily, this
was the reason that he cited him in gross, and would not vouchsafe to direct us
to the place.

Secondly, As for that of Theodoret, it is proved spurious, not only because we
have no mention of it in Nicephorus, to whom you may add Photius, but also
because what is here cited from him directly contradicts what he has in his
undoubted Comment on the Colessians; this Argument you manfully skip over; and
for your Answer to the first, that he mentions not some which are extant in
Gennadius, if you had looked into the Preface of your Gennadius, you might have
found that there were some things added to him; that he approves variety of
Authors rejected by the Church; that he is under the censure of your
Catholics at Lovain, (enough to crack his credit with you,) And lastly, that
he names but two of his Books, one of which we have (though imperfect) the
other is no where to be found: And yet if all these Fathers had given in their
suffrages for you, they would not have advantaged you one whit; Seeing many of
our Divines acknowledge, that about the fourth age (in which all your Fathers
are comprehended) this corruption began to be introduced. Albeit, to tell you
of it in transitu, Vossius, who is cited by you for this confession, does, in
his tenth Thesis, manifestly restrain his words to some; telling us that,
plurimi invalescenti se errori opponcbant, p. 201. That very many opposed this
error.

The Doctor had cited a passage from Saint Austine, Saints were not invoked by
the Priest who sacrifices. Now to this, you tell us,

First, That here is an evidence for a sacrifice, yea, and this Propitiatory;
But how can you free your self from disingenuous dealing, when even in the
place cited by you in answer to this Argument, Saint Austine tells you, that he
means only Sacramentum Memoriae, which Protestants acknowledge as well as you.

2. Have you not need to rub your forehead when you so considently tell us that
the Doctor says there was no such thing as a Christian Sacrifice; whereas that
which has given occasion to your whole Discourse upon this subject is only
this, that he tells us there were new Articles of Faith, viz. The Sacrifice of
the Mass, the Doctrine of Purgatory imposed on us; but does he any where deny a
Christian Sacrifice, such as before has been granted by us, by the Trent
Conventicle?

Secondly, You tell us that the Saints are not sovereignly invocated by way of
sacrifice, which is a mere impertinence; for S. Austin does not say they are
not sacrificed unto, but are not so much as invocated by the Priest who
sacrifices; farther you tell us that they are not invocated at the Mass, nay
nor the second or third Person of the Trinity according to the Canon of the
Council of Carthage.

Ans. Still you are resolved to be impertinent; for what is this to you who in
your Mass invoke the whole Trinity, have 3 Collects to the second Person of the
Trinity, as you are told by the Reverend Bishop Andrews; yea what say you to
that return of his to this Answer, what reason can be alleged why if the
Saints may be prayed unto they may not be so as well by the Priest as by the
people, as well at Mass, as at Mattins, as well at the Altar as in the body of
the Church. Indeed you tell us it might have been lawful if the Church had so
ordered it. But do you think S. Austin would have said so too? is it not his
business to distinguish betwixt the honor which was given to the Martyrs by
the Christians, and by the Gentiles to the Demons? and having said that they
erect no Altars to them as the heathens did for sacrifice, but sacrificed to
God alone, he adds, that at this sacrifice the Martyrs were not invocated (as
the Gentile Demons were) but only nominated? now what is it to his purpose to
tell us they are not invocated at the Altar, if they were invocated elsewhere?
well then your last refuge is the invocation of Latria which Saint Austin must
be thought to speak of; C. 21.
because he tells, us in his twentieth Book against Faustus Manichaeus, that
they do not worship the Saints with Latria.

Ans. But who told you that invocation of them was not esteemed Latria by him,
why else does he say that the Saints were not worshipped sicut dii, as the
Heathen Gods, and then after this non invocantur?

Secondly, Does he not say non invocantur, sed nominantur? now I hope your
invocation is not nomination, and therefore it is somewhat above it, and
consequently somewhat comprehended in that which he opposes to it; so
likewise, in the place you cite, he tells us they afforded that cultum
dilectionis, and such as was given to holy men, that were now alive; yea, says
he, we sound forth their praises, but we do not worship them with Latria; where
albeit Faustus there objected that they worshipped them votis similibus, with
such prayers or vows as the heathens worshipped their Idols with, yet could he
not get Saint Austin to acknowledge they prayed unto them at all; but having
told us that they praised them, there he stops and rises no higher, albeit the
objection, and the business in hand (which was to show what honor the Saints
did receive from them, and what they thought not fit to yield unto them) did
require it. Thus have we returned an Answer to our Authors pleas from
Scripture and Antiquity: our next work should be to confront to them those many
arguments by which our Champions do confute this superstition, and plead the
cause of Christ against them; but I shall wave it at present, and content my
self with evidencing the judgment, and practice of Antiquity to run contrary
to them. And

(1.) Trent Council does imagine, in that we find neither precept, nor example
of all the Fathers of the Old Testament, whereby this kind of service to them
may be warranted?

To this the usual Answer of the Papist is, Vid. Bellar. praefat. in
controvers. de Eccles. triumph ante.
that the spirits of the Patriarchs and Prophets, and other Worthies who
flourished under the Old Testament, were kept in limbus patrum, a place nigh to
hell, appointed for these Fathers to be retained in till the descent of our
Blessed Savior thither.

But this Answer is evidently grounded upon a false foundation, it being clear
from Scripture, that they were not included in such a place, but did enjoy the
Kingdom of Heaven, Luke 13, 28. For Abraham's bosom is clearly propounded as
the place into which the Blessed Angels before the death of Christ conveyed the
souls of those which departed in the favor of God; Luke 16.
and that this bosom is virtually, and in terms equivalent, Cap. 8. (...).
Shall ly down.
promised to those which afterward should believe, is sufficiently evinced
from that place of Saint Matthew, many shall come from the East and West and
shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of heaven, for the
joys of heaven are likened to a feast in which according to the custom then in
use they lay down with the head of one toward the breast of another who is
therefore said to lie in his bosom; and therefore when it is said of the
faithful that believed after Christ's death (...), they shall lie down (at this
feast,) with Abraham it is as much as if he had said (...), as Euthymius
paraphraseth it, that is, they shall lie down in the bosom of Abraham; add to
this, that when God translated Enoch, and Elias was carried up in a Chariot to
heaven, they could not be conveyed to this limbus patrum, a place so nigh to
the receptacle of the damned spirits; yea it is not likely they were conveyed to
a place where they had no vision of God; and yet there is no reason to think
Abraham, David, Daniel, and other of the Prophets, should be in a worse place
or condition then Enoch or Elias, seeing they had as large a testimony of their
pleasing God as they.

We go farther yet, and urge against them, Paul does frequently solicit his
brethren to pray for him, and for the furtherance of the Gospel, P. 1.
but not one petition can we find directed to an Angel, or Saint departed; here
presently they fly to their traditions, but in vain, for if any such tradition
as this were at first delivered, we demand how it should come pass that for the
space of 360 years together after the birth of our Savior we can find no
mention in the Fathers of any such thing; but, on the contrary, when urged by
heathens that it was their duty to pray to Saints and Angels, they stoutly
denied it, and cried away with such evil counsel. Irenaeus, in his first book,
speaks of Heretics that had strange phansies concerning Angels, attributing
much unto them, in relation to which he denies that the Church did any thing,
l. 2. c. 57.
( viz. in reference to miraculous cures) by invocation of Angels, or by
incantations, but purely and manifestly directing prayers to the Lord which
made all, and invocating the name of our Lord Jesus Christ; now whereas
Fevardentius tells us that he speaks of the invocation of evil spirits, we ask
him why then is it that no limitation is given, but all Angellical invocation
absolutely denied? why is it that he binds up the prayers of the Church to God
the Father through the name of his Son? Lib. de Orat. cap. 12.
Tertullian says, we deservedly upbraid those prayers with vanity which are
made without the Authority of any precept of our Lord or his Apostles, for such
are rather to be esteemed superstitious then Religious; show us then a precept
of our Lord or his Apostles, and we will cease to impeach your practice as
superstitious vanity; but seeing that is impossible to be done, you must not be
angry with Tertullian for saying you are superstitious; Apolog. c. 30.
Again, when he had told us that Christians pray for the safety of the
Emperor, entreating for him, quaecumque hominis and Caesaris vota sunt, he
adds, these things; I may not ask from any other then from him from whom I know
I shall obtain them, because he it is who alone vouchsafes them, and I am his
Servant unto whom it appertains to obtain what is requested, Et ego sum
famulus ejus qui eum solum observo. Lib. de orat. Dom.
who observe or worship him alone, ( viz. in my prayers) and therefore he gave
no heed to Saints and Angels in them. Thirdly, S. Cyprian informs us that to
pray otherwise then Christ has taught us is not only our ignorance but fault,
he having said, you reject the command of God that you may stablish your own
tradition; Wherefore unless the Papists can show us this doctrine taught by
Christ, we must esteem them ignorant and blameworthy in the exercise thereof.
Fourthly, When Celsus had said that Angels belong to God, and in that respect
we should pray unto them to be favorable to us, (...). l. 8. Orig. Cont. Cells.
(...).
Origin answers him, away with Celsus his counsel saying that we must pray to
Angels, and let us not so much as afford any little audience unto it, for we
must pray to him alone who is God over all, and we must pray to the word of
God, his only begotten, and the firstborn of all Creatures: and whereas Celsus
had further said that we must offer first fruits unto Angels and prayers as
long as we live that we may find them propitious unto us. Answer is returned by
Origin in the name of the Christians, that they held it rather fit to offer
first fruits unto him who said, let the earth bring forth grass, Genesis 1.
the herb yielding seed; (that is to the Creator of the world) and to whom we
give the first fruits (says he) to him also do we send our prayers, having a
great high Priest that is entered into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God; page
239.
Again, in his fifth book, he lays down this conclusion, All prayers and
supplications, and intercessions, and thanksgivings, are to be sent up unto
God, the Lord of all, by the high Priest, who is above all Angels, being the
Living word, and God; for to call upon Angels (the like may be said of Saints
departed) we not comprehending the knowledge of them which is above the reach
of man is not aggreeable to reason; and if by supposition it were granted that
the knowledge of them might be comprehended, their very knowledge declaring
their nature to us, and the charge over which every one of them is set, would
not permit us to presume to pray unto any other but unto God, the Lord over
all, who is abundantly sufficient for all, by our Savior, the Son of God.

(5.) Athanasius says, never any man prayed to receive any thing from God and
the Angels, or any created being; l. 4. Cont. Arian. the Papists say frequently
Deus custodiat te and Virgo Maria.
neither did ever any body conceive such a form of prayer, God and the Angel
give thee such a thing; but on the contrary, he begs (it) from the Father and
the Son by reason of their unity and uniform reason of giving.

(6.) That of Saint Austins is very worthy to be pondered; whom should I find
that might reconcile me unto thee? should I have gone unto the Angels (he might
as well have added Saints) with what prayer? with what Sacraments? many
endeavoring to return unto thee, and not being able to do it by themselves, as
I hear, (he then had no experience of it from the Churches practice) have tried
these things, and have fallen into the desire of curious visions and were
accounted worthy of illusions.

(7.) In Cap. 1. ad Romans See an excellent place parallel to this in Arnob. adv
Gentes. l. 3. p. 101, 102.
Saint Ambrose (or whoever was the Author of the commentaries upon Saint Paul's
Epistles extant among his works,) says, those that are ashamed of their
neglecting God, are wont to use this miserable excuse that by those (Saints or
Angels) we may go to God as to a King by his Officers; go too (says he) is
there any man so mad, or so unmindful of his safety as to give the kings honor
to an Officer, whereas if any shall be found but to treat of sucha matter, they
are justly condemned as guilty of high Treason; and yet those men think
themselves not guilty who give the honor of Gods name to a creature, and
leaving the Lord adore their fellow servants, as though there were any thing
more that could be reserved to God; for therefore do men go to the King by
tribunes or Officers, because the King is but a man, and knows not to whom he
may commit the State of the Common wealth; but to procure the favor of God,
from whom nothing is hid, we need no spokesman but a devout mind; for
wheresoever such a one shall speak unto him he will Answer him; So then, to go
to God by others, is to neglect God, and to adore our fellow creature; it is a
miserable excuse, yea it is to give the honor of God to a creature, and so
Idolatry, a superfluous thing, and consequently superstitious in those who
esteem it necessary.

Farther, Orat. in Julit. Mart. Orat. 1. de Or.
thus Basil. prayer is a request of some good thing which is made by pious men
to God. Greg. Nysen. prayer is a conference with God, and again it is a request
of good things which is offered with supplication unto God. Chrysostom. 2. de
Orat. dom. In Genesis Hom. 30 de Orat. l. 2.
Prayer is a colloquy or discourse with God; and again, every one that prays
discourses with God, and Damascene Prayer is an ascension of the mind to God,
as a request of things that are fit, from God.

Again, In Ps. 5. ad Deum solum dirigitur. Tom. 10. vide Forb. confid. mod. p.
295. In 1 Cor. Hom. 1.
thus (to omit Saint Ambrose above cited) Saint Basil says, Prayer is not
directed to man but to God alone. Saint Ephraim, to the (O Lord) and to none
besides thee, do I make my prayer, and further Chrysostom. on those words, with
all that call upon the name of the Lord, gives this Exposition, not of this or
that (Creature) but of the Name of the Lord. Again, on these words do all in
the name of the Lord Jesus (...), giving thanks (or praying) to God the Father
by him, he thus Paraphraseth, do all things to God, bring not in Angels, do
thou eat? give thanks to God, (or pray, (...)
See 1 Cor. 14.16, 17.) before and after meat, do thou sleep? give thanks to
God before and after, and so in other things. And that prayer is one of these
things that must be done to God, and not to Angels, appears from that which
follows, Or (...). Lat. orantem vel quidvis facientem.
whatever you do in word or deed, that is, says he, either praying or doing
any other thing; then presently after he tells us that it was the Devil that
brought in (...) This Invocating and worshipping of Angels (for he is speaking
still of Prayer.) and this he did, envying us that honor of going immediately
to the Trinity or Christ; but (says he) be he Angel or Archangel, yea or
Cherubin, do not suffer it, (much less if he be a Saint only) for they will not
endure it, but shake you off; when they see this contumely done unto their
Lord. I have honored thee (says God) and said call upon me, and thou
dishonourest him, Viz. by invocating Angels or others besides him.

Thirdly, the Fathers argue that Christ is God blessed for ever, because he is
invocated by us, and accepts of our prayer; and therefore could not invocate
the Saints whom they esteemed not to be gods. Thus Origin, Saint Paul when in
the beginning of the Epistle to the Corinthians, L. 8. in Ep. ad Romans c. 10.
he speaks thus, (with all that call upon the name of Christ Jesus) pronounces
Jesus Christ whose name is called upon to be God: De Trin. c. 14.
and Novatian, If Christ be only Man, why is a Man invocated in our prayers as
Mediator? seeing the invocation of a Man is judged of no force to yield
salvations: why is there Hope reposed in him, seeing hope in man is said to be
accursed: so likewise Athanasius, C. 16.23.
in the place forecited, Cyril of Alexandria upon that of Saint John, If you
ask any thing in my Name, I will do it, cries out, He clearly manifests
himself to be God, in that he promises to receive our prayers.

Theophilus Alexand. Paschae Sec.
How will they call upon him in whom they have not believed? We must therefore
first believe that He is the Son of God, that our invocation of Him may be
right: And as he is not to be worshipped (who is not God, So on the contrary,
He is to be worshipped who is manifestly so.

Yea the Council of Laodicea decreed that we ought not to forsake the Church of
God, Can. 35. S. 24.
and depart aside, and invocate Angels, (...)
and make meetings, which are things forbidden: If any man therefore be found
to give himself to this privy Idolatry, let him be accursed, because he has
forsaken our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God, and betaken himself to Idolatry.
Some very wisely would read angulos corners; and make the Council forbid the
invocating corners; Brev. Can. S. 90 Cod. Con. number 138. Brev. Can. S. 184.
Henric. Canis. Tom. 6. p. 424.
but the Greek expressly reads (...), which in that Tongue has no affinity
at all with corners: Cresconius, Dionysius, Exiguus, Fulgentius, Ferrandus, and
pope Adrian, in the Epitome of the Canons which he delivered to Charles the
Great at Rome, reads Angelos; and Theodoret gives us the mind of the Synod
thus: The Synod, of Laodicea following this rule viz. of the Apostle, (...) On
the 3d. chap. of the Col. v. 17 On the 2d. chap.
Col. 3.17. (of coming to the Father by Christ, and not by Angels) and desiring
to heal that old Disease, made a Law that they should not pray unto Angels, nor
forsake our Lord Jesus Christ. And again, The Synod forbad them by Law to pray
unto Angels: And Oecumenius says, The Synod of Laodicea did by Law forbid to
come unto Angels, and pray unto them. Yea, in that great Council of three
hundred thirty eight Bishops, at Constantinople, l. 1. de Con. c. 6.
which Binius and Bellarmine style general, these two Canons were fra^dulently
inserted.

1. Defin. 15. Conc. Constable. citat. in Conc. Nic. 2. Act. 6. page 380. Ib.
Defin. 17. Crakanth: Def. Ec. An. page 420. Ab omnibus rejectum est For which
the cites Paul. Dial. l. 22. and again, Omnes uno ore rejicerunt sanctorum
invocationem and Cannonem illum. Notis in Con. Constable. sub Steph. 30.
If any with a sincere Faith implores not the Intercessions of the Virgin Mary,
let him he Anathema.

2. If any one shall not confess all the Saints to be Honorable before God,
and shall not entreat their prayers, let him be Anathema; But when the
definition came to be read in the Council ((...)) they rejected them, and
caused them to be blotted out; and this, says the Conluter Act the 6th. (...)
all men know; yea further they bound their Members or themselves by an Oath
(Juramentum Sacro Sanctum and solenne a suis exegerunt) That they would never
invocate the Saints, Apostles, Martyrs, or the blessed Virgin? as Binius
relates.

Yea, Lastly, the greater part of the Fathers, viz. Irenaeus l. 5. in fine;
Justine Martyr, qu. 76. Tertull. ad. Mar. l. 4. Clem. Romans l. 2. Hypotepos.
Origin. Hom. 7. in Lev. Lactantius, l. 7. Institut. c. 21. Victorinus Com. in
Apoc. c. 6. Prudentius, Him. pro exequio defunct. Ambrosius, l. 2. de Cain and
Abel, c. 2. Chrysostom, Hom. 39. in 1. ad Cor. Austin, in Ps. 36. Euthymius in
c. 23. luc. Theodoret in cap. 11. ad Heb. Arethus, in Apoc. Oecumenius, in cap.
11. ad Heb.) Cont. Whit. 1. c. 2. In part. 2. direc. inquis. Com. 21.
denied the souls of the Saints to have nay enjoyment of the beatifical Vision;
and this is acknowledged by their Stapleton, and Franciscus Pegna: and
therefore these Fathers according to their own doctrine, and practice of
invocating only the Saints in Glory, and the fruition of the beatifical Vision,
can not be reasonably supposed to have held the Invocation of Saints.

To Conclude, I know what Distinctions they use, of Prayer direct and indirect,
of prayer relative or terminative, etc. but

First, They are only shifts to cover a des^erate cause; the Fathers never
used any one of them on this Occasion, but reject this worship and invocation
without such distinctions, even in those places where it seemed necessary to
have used them, had they been acquainted with this Sophistry; yea Celsus and
others intended no more.

Secondly, These distinctions are equally serviceable for the evacuating the
Fathers Argument hence for the Divinity Christ.

And Lastly, are contradicted by the Fathers; Let one Athanasius speak for all;
who not content to tell the Arrians, they must acknowledge that Saints (i. e.
Christians) do not pray to any created being to be their helper elsewhere adds,
Or. 2. Cont. Ar. sub finem. De incar. verbi p. 528.
that if they worship the Lord Christ, because the Word of God inhabited in
him, they might as well worship the Saints, because God dwells in them.

CHAP. XVII.
The Question stated by Mr. C. sect. 1. A short Paraphrase upon 1 Cor. 7. ver.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. sect. 2. Arguments evincing this gift not to be
attainable by all, sect. 3. Mr. C's. Evasions confuted, sect. 4. His own
Argument not answered by himself, sect. 5. His Arguments against our Thesis
Answered, sect. 6. His Question touching the late Marriage of some Ministers,
Answered, sect. 7. His Evasions further confuted, sect. 8. The Vow of Celibacy
unlawful, sect. 9. The Drs. Argument defended, sect. 10. 1 Timothy 5.11, 12.
explained, sect. 11. The Council of Eliberis concludes nothing against us,
sect. 12. Nor that of Carthage, sect. 13. Nor the African Council, sect. 14.
The Nicene Council stands for us, sect. 15. Why after Ordination, the Ancients
required abstinence from Marriage, sect. 16. The Synod of Gangra for us, sect.
17. As also that convened in Trullo, sect. 18. The Eastern Church permitted
Marriage to her Priests, and that after Ordination, sect. 19. The Testimonies
of St. Jerome to the contrary, considered, sect. 20. And of Epiphanius, sect.
21. Of Ambrose and St. Austin, sect. 22. The Testimony of Dionysius Bishop of
Corinth, St. Clemens, Athanagoras, and Justin Martyr, Origin, and Tertullian,
against the Romanists, sect. 23. Married Priests in the Primitive Church, sect.
24. Scripture interpreted by the Fathers, in favor of us, sect. 25.
Particularly, 1 Timothy 3.2. sect. 26. Heb. 13.4. sect. 27. And Mat. 19.12. sect.
28.

IN the seventeenth chapter,

The question must be, Sect. 4. p. 204.
whether a perpetual abstinence from Marriage, and all Carnal lusts, may
lawfully by Priests be made the matter of a vow; and tells us, that we condemn
the practice, at least considered, as extending it self generally, to any whole
order or state of men, and especially any obligation imposed on them to this
practice: On the contrary he tells us, that the Church of Rome enjoins Celibacy
to Priests, and holds that it is such a gift, that is denied to none, that
rightly seek it, and therefore may be made the matter of a vow: Agreeably to
their Trent Council, which tells us, Deus id recte petentibus non deneget.

Now here (to omit his stating the question of Carnal lusts) are two
differences betwixt us.

1 They say, all may have this gift of Continence, who rightly seek it.

2 That it is lawful to impose such an obligation of perpetual Celibacy upon
their Priests; both which we deny.

And first, chap. of the 1 Ep. Cor.

In which, the first Question moved, is, Whether a Christian should embrace a
Conjugal estate?

To this it is Answered, V. 1. It is good for a man not to touch a woman.
That (as the case stood then) 'twas very commendable for a man, so to moderate
his affections, and get such a noble victory over the flesh, as not to need
this remedy; ('it is good for a man not to touch a Wife.)

Nevertheless, seeing the condition, by reason of the rareness of the gift of
Continency, will lay you open to the danger of Fornication; V. 2. To avoid
Fornication, let every one have his own wife. V. 3. Let the Husband render to
the wife due benevolence. V. 4, The wife has not power over her own body. V.
5. Defraud not one the other, except it be with consent for a time, that you
may give your selves to fasting and prayer, and come together again, lest
Satantempt you for your incontinency. V. 6. I speak this by permission, and not
of command. V. 7. I would that all men were even as I, but every one has his
proper gift. V. 8. I say therefore to the unmarryed and widows, it is good for
them if they abide even as I. V. 9. But if they cannot contain, let them marry.
for the avoiding of the same, let every man (to whom this special gift is not
vouchsafed) either procure himself a Wife, ((...)) or retain her, if he has
procured her, and every woman her proper Husband; or if she be a Virgin, submit
to the bond of Matrimony; and when the Conjugal knot shall once be tied, and
they be under this relation of Man and Wife (since avoiding Fornication was the
chief motive to this condition) let due benevolence be mutually given; for the
woman not having any longer power over her own body, cannot without open fraud
deny it, when moderately desired: And in prosecution of the ends of Marriage
(which reason equally concerns the Husbands body) unless it be by the
interceding of some such Cautions as these,

1 That it be with the mutual consent of both.

2 That it be in some rare and extraordinary case; viz. in time of Fasting, or
being importunate with God in Prayer.

3 Thatsuchseparation be not long. And these cautions are necessary to be
observed, least Satan, who will neglect no opportunity, do ensnare you; and by
reason of your deficiency in this gift of Continence, prevail upon you, and
kindle the flames of unclean desires. Yet would I not here seem to enjoin all
married state, or a continual use of the marriage bed, neither do I speak this
as a precept to all, but advice to the incontinent. For verily I could be glad
that the Divine bounty (if it were his pleasure) would afford this gift of
Continence, he has given me, to every Christian; but seeing his infinite
wisdom has thought meet that it should be otherwise, and that this gift (as
others which according to his pleasure are distributed) should be peculiar to
some; my decision is, that 'twere more commodious for Widows and Virgins (if
they could contain) to live in Celibacy, as I do. But if they find it
otherwise, then does a necessity lie upon them, either to enter into the state
of Matrimony, or to burn; and therefore to extinguish these flames, they must
use this means to prevent it, which God has appointed for this end.

This Paraphrase is clear and evident, yet will I further evince, what ever can
be denied in it by the obstinate.

Do they tell us, in answer to the 2 verse, that the Apostle speaks of persons
already married? I assent; do they tell us it is a counsel? I say so also, only
minding them that thence, according to their doctrine, unavoidably it will
follow, that it is of greater virtue and merit, for every one to have his own
wife, then not.

Will Bellarm. add, that the Apostle speaks of Fornication, not ustions; I must
mind him, that the Apostle determines very plainly, that it is better to marry
then to burn.

2 That these lustful motions and stimulations, which the Apostle intends by
ustion, must needs be sins, for according to our Saviors rule, Mat. 5.28. They
are spiritual Adultery.

Lastly, Is it farther said, that this concerns those that have not made this
vow of Continence?

Answer, Must not others then avoid Fornication? may they defraud each others?
or if single, may they live in uncleanness? or refuse to marry though they be
not able to contain? must a vow be the bond to manifest iniquity?

Secondly, If any obstinately deny my interpretation of due benevolence, for
the use of the body; the reason assigned will confute them; viz. that the
Husband has not power over his own body, etc. and that they must not defraud
each other.

Thirdly, That by Prayer verse 5. is understood accuratior precatio, as St.
Chrysostom there has it, or some extraordinary engagement in that duty, is
evident from it is conjunction with fasting, it is limitation to a time, it is
exemption from the marriage bed, and lastly, the charge of the Apostle, to
return to Cohabitation, when it is ended.

These things being thus evinced, verse, I argue thus. If it be a necessary
means for the avoiding Fornication, to procure or use a Wife, then all have
not, nor can have the gift of Continence, but the former is true from the
Apostle; for he does not say, let them fast and pray, and vow Continence, but
let them use the remedy God appointed. Whence it is obvious to conclude, that
this was the remedy necessary for some, to avoid Fornication, which could not
be, if all may attain to the gift of Continence.

From the 5 verse, thus. If abstinence from the marriage bed, even in those,
that are engaged in fasting and prayer, must be but for a time, and that least
Satan prevail upon them to incontinence, then will not the use of means be
sufficient to procure the gift to all; (For what means more available then
fasting and prayer?) But the first is evident from the words of the Apostle,
and therefore the consequence of it must be so.

From the 8 verse, thus. That which is a proper gift, and that upon this
account, because it pleases the Divine bounty to afford it some, and not to
others, cannot be common to all, though never so diligent in the use of means
(seeing it cannot be procured by any, to whom it is not the good pleasure of
God to give it) but such is the gift of Continence.

From the 10th verse, thus. The Apostle says to the unmarried and widows, if
they cannot contain let them marry; therefore he supposes that all cannot have
this gift of Continency.

Again verse 25. The Apostle tells us, in these indifferent matters, I have no
precept, but yet my counsel is, that Virgins and Widows would abstain from
Marriage (if they have the gift of Continence) as being a condition, in which
they are more free from the combrances of the world, and will find less
impediments of an holy life: this therefore I speak, consulting their good; but
by no means would I lay a necessity on them to embrace this Celibacy, for this
would be a certain way to cast a snare on them. The imposition of such a Yoke,
without the least respect unto their power of Continency, or the want thereof,
would prove such a continual perplexity, that I think it necessary to decline,
even the very suspicions of it.

Now from hence I argue, if all may have this gift of Continency, then would it
not be a snare to impose it (especially, when it was so exceedingly more
Eligible) but the Apostle so esteems it: Ergo.

From Verse. 37. Thus: if the Apostle says, if need so requite, that a Virgin
marry, let her do it, she sins not. and Hieron. in locum. si sentiat
Carnem, etc. If she be sensible, of the too much prevailing of the flesh, that
it does Ebullire in libidinem, is not to be kept back by the Bridle of
Continency, but she must either marry, or fall; Then has not every one the
gift of Continency; But this they evidently assert, ergo.

Now here our Author has somewhat to say in answer to us (I suppose.) For
having told us, that we deny Celibacy, Cor. 7.7.) not bestowed on all: P. 205.
Sect. 6.
well (says he) it is granted that it is a gift of God, the fruit of his Holy
Spirit, and cannot by natural means be obtained, so as to be practiced in
obedience to him, but (then he replies with his Master Stapleton, Antid. p.
280) so are all virtues, so is faith, so is repentance, so is charity; all
which notwithstanding we vow in our Baptism, and why do we vow a practice of
these virtues, which are pure gifts of God? Because we are assured, the same
God, who commanded that vow, will not be wanting to supply strength to perform
it, in all those that sincerely beg those gifts of him, by earnest prayer, and
by avoiding all known, and possible to be avoided impediments to the practice
of these virtues. But (1) This would never have made a show of any answer, had
not the word special, wherein the whole stresse of our argument consists, been
Sophistically left out. (2) As it is, it has received two answers, from
Pareus, Notes upon Cor. p. 379.
who tells his Stapleton, that there is a manifest disparity. (1) Because the
vow of Baptism is commanded by God, and cannot be neglected without sin, but as
for perpetual Celibacy, it has no command, for if it had, it would not be a
Counsel, as our Antagonist contends. Well therefore, seeing God has commanded
the one vow should be made, and not commanded so much as the matter of the
other, there is not the same reason surely for the exercise of both. (2) Says
he, the obedience we promise in our vow of Baptism is Universal, enjoined on
all upon pain of Damnation, and albeit the performance of that vow exceed our
natural strength, yet God has promised that he will give that faculty and
grace, which shall enable us to perform it; but the vow of perpetual Celibacy,
is neither commanded to all, nor is it given to all [ex part dei] nor has it
the promise of God, that it shall be so. Now then we say, to whom God commands
this vow, assuredly he will give strength to perform it, but to suppose, that
he has done it to all, is the most ridiculous begging of the question
imaginable, yea it makes the marriage of all men sinful, as being contrary to
Gods Command of a vow of Celibacy, and it makes the Celibacy of Priests, jure
divino, which our Author dares not aver.

But our Author has an Argument against himself, Ibid. Sect. 7.
Those, that aspire to perfection, are but few, even in the opinion of the
Roman Church, this council concerns only them, that aspire to perfection,
ergo, it concerns but few, and consequently ought not to be imposed upon all,
of any order, unless we would impose it beyond the intent of Christ. And what
does our worthy Author return to this? Sect. 8. p. 207. al. 206.
Even that all this, Cum Grano Salis, is acknowledged by them. What is it, that
they acknowledge? That this Counsel reaches but few. What follows? That withal
Protestants know, that this abstinence, is a gift bestowed upon very many, and
I hope they may be allowed to know, that very many, are not few, and
consequently, he that tells us, this gift is bestowed upon very many, is not
of his opinion, who tells us it respects but few, that aspire to perfection.
It Is not a grain of salt, that will make this savor, otherwise, then a
Contradiction.

But let us see how he will prove, very many, and in some cases, is necessary
to almost all. (1) Then he brings us an Argument of Maldonates, Ibid.
that otherwise it would be unlawful for Parents to keep their Children
unmarryed, after the time they are Capable, and thereby to expose them to
unlawful lusts, since they are not sure they have such a gift.

To which we answer, when the children declare, or they have reason to suspect
the want of this gift, they ought not to hinder their married state, or the
procuring the remedy God has appointed, but if they declare themselves not to
be stimulated with such desires, but to be able to contain, must they compel
them to marry, may they not in charity suppose the contrary? (2) He says, Ibid.
It would be unlawful for Merchants and Travellours to make long Voyages
abroad, and leave their Wives at home, deprived of the necessary lawful means
against the incursions of Lust.

Answer. If there be no necessity of leaving their Wives at home, it seems more
convenient to have them with them, according to the Apostle's Rule, 1 Cor. 7.5.
But if there be a necessity, God who put them upon it, will give them relief,
if they wait upon him for it, but (3) He tells us, Ibid.
that were it otherwise, all Statutes of Colleges ought to be repealed, which
forbid marriage still to all Fellows, and heretofore to all Precedents, upon
penalty of forfeiting their whole subsistence. As if they might not leave their
Fellowships, and seat themselves in Parsonages, but must necessarily want means
of subsistence, when they leave the University. But (4) he tells us, with the
worthy refuter of Bishop Hall, that a long sickness inflicted by God on either
of the parties, Ibid.
would be far more dangerous to their souls, then to their bodies, so as if the
abstinence now spoken of, were such an extraordinary gift of perfection,
England would have more Saints, or more Adulterers, then she is aware of. Answ.
Yes, and so peradventure, she has; And not few of the latter, as having more
Jesuits, and Pseudo Catholic Priests, then she is aware of. Who, if their own
party may be credited, are not a little guilty of this notorious uncleanness.

Secondly, Why have we no return to Bishop Halls substantial answer; viz. if
they call on him, who calls them to Continency by this hand of his, he will
hear them and enable them to persist [and why not then in the necessity of our
vows?]

Answ. This is a necessity of our own making, Ibid.
that is, of His; he has bound himself to keep his own promises, not ours.

And here he comes in with a question which will strike all dead; P. 206. al.
207.
Why do the Ministers of England live many of them till thirty years of age,
and then Marry? I doubt (quoth he) they force themselves to live single till
they have a Benifice; and then as soon as they can maintain a Wife, they get
one; and then concludes, is not this mere Hypocrysie, to talk of marrying out
of tenderness of Conscience, to allay their Concupiscence, when the danger is
almost past, and make no provision to prevent the unruliest part of their age.
To this worthy question, we return these answers. (1.) I hope this is charity
mistaken, to say they make no provision to prevent incontinency: He ought to
suppose, that these that stay till thirty (which are not the half nor third
part) and then marry, have made provision, unless he were assured of the
contrary. But then he may object, Why will not that provision serve them for
the future? A. Happily God may restrain their concupifcence for some time, for
ends best known to himself, and afterward cease to do it. (2.) Perhaps a
stronger diet may be necessary for them in the Country, as having more work to
do, than in the University, and yet that Diet may inflame them. (3.) Perhaps
all that Marry do it not to the end, but for the better Convenience of living,
that they may keep up their Name, or satisfy their Parents, or a hundred other
Ends; which may legitima^e that Marriage to them, which is honorable in all.
(4.) It may be the earnest defire of the Wife, that may make it necessary. (5.)
We will satisfy you with question for question: If it be so easy to
abstain, did. 81.
how is it that you have so many Fornicatours among you? that the gloss upon
Gratian complains, pauci sine illo vitio inveniantur, and that if your
Fornicatours should be deposed, Consult. Art. 23.
you would have but few Clerks. Why is it that your honest Cassander tells us,
vix Centesimum invenias, you can scarce find one in an hundred free? Why did
Cauda Salax sacrificulorum become a Proverb? Brom. sum. pred. voce luxuria.
And why did a Ghost complain that there came daily such store of Priests to
Hell for Letchery, that he had not thought there had been any left on Earth?
Why does Erasmus tell you, Apol. pro Declar. Matri. Thuan. Hist. 136. De.
invent. Rer. lib. 5. C. 4.
that under pretense of Chastity, you are more vile and filthy in your Lusts?
Why is it, that Caesar Maximilian Complains, that in his age you were, omnes
fere scortatores Publici, almost all common whore-masters? Why is it, that
your Polidore Virgil, cries out, of the great Infamy, that was cast upon you,
the great dishonor brought upon Religion, the great grief to all good men, by
the lustful practices of the Priests? Why is it, that your Monastical Ladies,
are so often pregnant, and there may be found so many bones of Infants in your
Ponds? Have you never seen the Mystery of Jesuitism, what in continence he
charges them with? Have you never heard of Peter Jarridge, a Jesuit for the
space of twenty four years, who Chap. 2. tells us of the Jesuits murdering of
Infants. Chap. 10. Of their uncleanness in their own Classes, and their foul
actions in their visits. Chap. 12. their filthiness committed in their
Churches. and Chap. 13. In their own Houses. Chap. 14. In their travails, and
in their Country Houses. Nor yet the sad stories of Alvarus Pelagius, (de
planctu Ecclesiae lib. 2. Art. 73.) who tells us, of the Incests and
Fornications of the Priests and Friars, of their receiving Boys into their
Houses, and Cloisters, their Conversation with Nuns and secular women? Nor that
St. Bernard, (lib. de convers. ad clerum Chap. 20.) Compared the Clergy even of
his age to the Nicholaitans, whom God hated for their uncleanness? Not to
mention Wicelius his Via Regia. Andreas Fricius and Modrevins de Matrim:
Clericorum, and his Apology ( Chap. 20. lib. 4. de Eccles.) a Controv. 15. sub
initio
Albertus Pighius, b l. 7. de just. and jur. Quest. 6. Art. 11.
Dominicus Soto, c Gravam. 75.91.
the Hundred grievances of Germany, and many others, whose words you may find
in Calixtus de conjug. Cleric. in many places. The scandal must needs be
notorious and intolerable, when so many persons of your own party durst so
openly complain, and wish the disanulling of that Law of Celibacy, to the
Clergy. Yea do we not know, that the Officials of your Bishops, have taken
annuities from all the parish Priests, for licenses to keep Concubines, and if
they came to a continent person, that told them he kept none, they replied,
that yet he must pay, for as much as liberty was granted so to do. In Ep. ad
Tit. C. 1.
As is reported by the Hundred grievances, and by Espencaeus. So that we shall
conclude with Cassander, that if ever there was time to change an old custom,
certainly these times require it, wherein all the best and most religious
Priests acknowledging their infirmity, and abhorring the turpitude of perpetual
Fornication, if publicly they dare not, yet privately they marry. And I doubt
whether such Advocates of Celibacy as Mr. C. If strict inquiry were made, might
not be often found, even where the Cardinal of Crema was.

. 9. This Champion tells us,

Answ. Not, unless we can be convinced of the promise made to one, as well as
to the other, of the necessity of making this, as well as the Baptismal Vow.
Which our Author goes not about to prove, but confidently lays down his
assertion as if he had the infallibility of his Pope delegated to him.

2. And of what defect will he accuse St. Ipse ergo, qui ob gehe^nae metu^ tali
me Carceri damnavera^, choris interera^ puellarum, palleba^t ora jejunijs sed
men's desiderijs aestuabat in frigido Corpore, and ante homine^ suum, jam Carne
praemortua, sola libidinu^ incendia Ebulli^^ant.
Jerome that great Zealot for Virginity, who, as he tells us in his Epist. ad
Eustoch. when he was alone in the Desert, found lust to be his Companion, who
found that body which was covered with Sackcloath, and under the greatest
Austerity, yet harboring this fire of lust, who found cold water able to
kindle this flame, and that so lasting, that no substraction of fuel was able
to quench it: If such as he, after the use of such means did burn, what shall
we say or think of the Continence of our shaven Crowns; I think if they were
not shaven, it would not be long ere they were bald.

Yea, let it be considered, that those persons who have undertaken it
(undoubtedly upon these accounts) and had eminent Graces, and were persons of
rare and exemplary Piety; yet could not preserve their Virginity, without
destroying their body. Evagrius the Priest, Bp. Tailors ductor dub. par. 3. c.
4. p. 335.
used to go into a Well in the winter nights; St. Bernard into a Lake, to cool
his burnings; St. Francis, to Roll his body in the Snow; St. Omar, in Nettles;
St. Benedict upon Thorns; St. Martinian, upon burning Coals, quenching one heat
with another, and overthrowing the strongest passion by the strongest pains.
And when Origin was resolved to live continently, he found no way but one to
effect it, by making it impossible to be otherwise. Ought not Christians
therefore, rather to choose the remedy by God appointed, than thus to be
instruments of their own torment? Is it not evident that these worthies took
the worser part, in choosing ustulation before Marriage, directly contrary to
the Apostle. 1 Cor. 7.


3. If the case were so, it was a wonder that the Apostle who had judged
Marriage so inconvenient for their times of Persecution, should not have
exhorted them to have been contented with these means, to have made use of
these remedies, when in danger of Burning, but should bid them Marry.

Yea, 4. after he had told us of the benefits of a single life, to the
avoiding the temptations, solicitudes, and distractions of the flesh, and the
devoting our selves more to virtue and piety, should not tell us, that this was
any call to Celibacy, but permit Marriage still; that is, permit us to resist
this Call, and refuse to lay upon us any necessity of a single life, least it
should prove a snare unto us.

Secondly, Sect. 10. That this is the ground on which the Church enjoins
Celibacy to her Priests, P. 209. Conc. Trid. Sess. ^4. Can. 9.
because she holds that God denies not the gift of Chastity to any, that ask it
aright: We having proved that this is a peculiar gift, not attainable by all;
we have proved that this Ground is false and contradictory to scripture, and
consequently, that it is unlawful for the Church to enjoin this Celibacy to
Priests, unless she can lawfully do that which is contrary to the scripture:
Nor is it any thing which Bellarm. tells us, That he that cannot contain from
Marriage, may from Priesthood; for beside that it is a manifest sin to exclude
a man that is called by God, and qualified for his service, upon that account
which God has no where required to his entrance. How can they generally
promise perpetual Celibacy, when no man can be assured, that he shall
continually be free from Burnings, but upon these two accounts: Either (1.)
that God will grant the freedom to all, that use such means as they prescribe
for the procuring of it; which I have already disproved. Or (2.) that God has
made some peculiar promise to such an order of men, rather then to others;
which no Papist that I know of, has ever asserted; I am sure, there is not one
Iota in the word of God to warrant it.

But the Learned Doctor has, Doctrine of Devils, says the Apostle, 1 Timothy
4.13. But to enjoin perpetual Celibacy, is to forbid Marriage: Ergo. to this
our Author answers, with the rest of his Fellows: P. 210.211. Sect. 11.
That St. Paul intends such Apostates as abstain from, and prohibit Marriage as
unlawful and unclean; which thing the Encratites, Montanists, Marcionites, and
Manichees held, as esteeming Marriage the work and design of the Devil. But
that their Church prohibites it not absolutely, but upon the undertaking such
an employment, which they imagine not to suit so well with Matrimony. And this
is the substance of his first and second answer. To which it is replied. (1.)
That the Apostle asserts, the very doctrine of forbidding Marriage, to be a
doctrine of Devils. Now as poison is poison, whether it be absolutely taken, or
conditionally; even so the Doctrine of Devils remains such, whether absolutely,
or conditionally propounded. (2.) P. 723.
It Is answered (by the Reverend Bishop Hall) that the doctrine thus stigmatized
is (...), of those in general that forbid Marriage, not condemn it upon such or
such particular accounts: The act is one (says he) the prohibition of
Marriage, whether to some, or to more, or to all; St. Paul expresses not. The
number does not vary the quality of the Act: This then only they have gained,
that some others have been deeper in the Condemnation than themselves. (3.) He
adds that the Romanists have condemned Marriage absolutely also, as evil in it
self. Who was he that accused Marriage of unholiness out of Sancti estote; of
uncleanness, out of Omnia munda mundis; of Contamination with carnal
Concupiscence, Exup. Tolos. E^is. Ep. 3. c. 1 did. 182. proposuis^.
was it not Pope Innocent? who was he that interpreted the text Romans 8.8. Those
that are in the flesh cannot please God; of Marriage, that called the married
man no less then whore manger, sectatorem libidinum praeceptorem vitiorum, a
follower of lust, a teacher of vice, Lad. did. 1. plurimos ad Himeriu^.
Taruca. Epist. 1.
that said Marriage was a loosing the Reins to luxury, an inhiation after
obscene lusts; was it not Siricius, the first founder, if we may believe their
now defaced gloss, of forced continency? who was it that called Marriage a
defiling with unclean society and execrable Contagion? was it not his Council
of Toledo? Con. Toledo 8. c. 5. cit. a. c. ^. P. 231. Vide regist. Ecc. Wigron.
postea. l. 3. Fulk in locu^.
who was it that called marriage filthy beastliness, was it not St. Dunstan
and St. Oswald? Thus he. (4.) Dr. Fulk tells you, that these old Heretics that
ascribed the first institution of Matrimony to Satan, and the creation and
procreation of Mankind to the Devil, spoke not falsehood in Hypocrisy, but in
open blasphemy, and therefore might easily be avoided; but you that under
pretense of religion, holiness, chastity, purity, fasting and Prayers, by laws
and decrees forbid Marriage to some sort of people; are they of whom the spirit
of God speaks evidently, that they utter their false doctrine in Hypocrisy,
and therefore had need to be described by their special notes, and the Church
be forewarned by this prophecy against them.

But he adds, when these Heretics were accused by the Fathers for such
errors, It was ordinary for them to recriminate the Orthodox with the same
things, and they received from them such replies, Ambros de offic, Cap. ult.
as the Romanists give us.

Answ. They might well recriminate when some of the Fathers spoke of Matrimony
as a stain, and others tell us it is forbid by Scriptures, and an evil thing, as
St. Jerome. We acknowledge, that some of the Fathers, as Austin and Jerome, were
a little addicted to the present Romish error. And therefore they might well
answer as the Romanists do; But we will undertake to show, that the greatest
and purest stream of antiquity runs against them: And yet he is somewhat
unhappy in his instance, Omnino facere Vergines
for St. Austin in the place here cited has this dilemma, either it is the
doctrine of Devils absolutely to make Virgins, that is, by telling them that
she that marryeth does well, but she that marryeth not does better, that the
unmarryed cares for the Lord, etc. and by suffering those that are thus
inclined to keep their purpose, without persuading them to the contrary, which
ways the Church of Christ uses, either (says he) you think that procuring of
any persons to keep their Virginity by these, or any other way, is a doctrine
of Devils, or to do it by the prohibition of marriage, if this last, this
concerns not us: yea, he adds that he would be not only a fool, but a mad man,
who thinks that what is granted by a public law (of God) as marriage is, can
be forbidden by a private, but then if you say, that to favor the purpose of
continence in a Virgin, not to bear a reluctance to her desire, be the doctrine
of Devils, I am afraid of St. Paul. And this being so, with what face could our
Author tell us that Faustus the Manichee, Unde viro non tam concumbere quam
nubere prohibetis concumbitur enim causa libidinum numbetur autem non nisi
filiorum.
made the very same objection which we do, seeing we never objected any thing
against spontaneous embracing of Virginity, but against the prohibition of
marriage to their Priests, and therefore the close of St. Austins answer to
that objection exactly fits you. viz. It is not we (Protestants) that teach the
doctrine of Devils, but you in detesting that enjoyment of the marriage bed,
which alone is honest and conjugal, and which the matrimonial tables mention
for the procreating of Children, whence not so much the enjoyment of lust, as
marriage is forbidden by you (to your Priests) for then are you properly said
concumbere when lust is the motive, but to marry when the procreation of
children is so.

Oh but our doughty Antagonist will raise up the ashes of an old argument, 1 Timothy 5.11, 82.
to prove the Apostle cannot so be understood, forsooth because he forbids
marriage to Widows, who had consecrated themselves to the Lords service. Now
that he for bids them, it is argued.

1. Because he bids the Church Governors refuse them, lest they should marry.

2. He calls this marriage a casting off their first faith, as all the Fathers
Interpret it, and tells them that it will procure their damnation. Now, (says
he) whether Widows are esteemed by the Preacher, to be more nearly and
perfectly consecrated to the Divine Service by the Office of Deaconesses then
men by Priesthood. It is expected he [the Dr.] should declare. Now albeit this
stale Objection has received variety of answers. Yet will not our Antagonist
take notice of any of them

1. Then the learned Camero tells us, In locum. Vide These. Salmur. de voto con.
pt. Post. Sect. 36.
the Papists would have the Apostle here to approve the vow of Continency, and
dis-allow the solution of it upon any terms, but says he, this must not be
granted. For the Apostle discourses of such Widows, who had devoted
themselves to the Ministry of the Church, promising the performance of those
Offices, which were proper for persons so devoted; Now seeing there was no
legitimate pretense for such as were so addicted to decline the further
performance of these Offices, but the necessity of marriage. When they began
(...), which as Hesychius tells us, is (...), to wax insolent and weary of this
ministry to the Church (partly for the labor, and partly for the seeming
vileness of it,) that they might become free, they did pretend necessity of
marriage as a covert of their pride and floath.

That therefore which the Apostle reproves in them is not their marriage, but
the using of it as the veil of their idleness, and thence it is, that he
accuses them, first of their insolency in vilifying that Ministry, in which
they were engaged. And herein is the wisdom of the Apostle Conspicuous, that
least he should seem to condemn simply the marriage of such, He first shows
wherein they had offended; viz. not in that they married, but that they did so
out of such an end, as knowing that such a pretense only, was a just cause of
rejecting the burden they had cast upon them; (For it could not be, that she
who was not sui juris, but at the power of her Husband, could be able to
perform the office of a Deaconess, as then was requisite.) Now this
interpretation is evidently contradictory to that of the Papists, but that it
is the truth, I offer this Argument to evince. Either the Apostle inveighs
against the pretense of Marriage in these younger widows, or against their
Marriage; Not the latter, therefore the former. That it is not the latter I
prove, because the Apostle bids them marry. Juniores volo nubere, Verse 14. You
will say with the Rhemists, that he speaks of other widows, that had not yet
entered into the Churches service, not of those which had made this promise.

I Answ. It must be extended to them also; as may be proved,

First, In that he requires that widows should be blameless, which condition
could not well agree to younger widows, who were in danger of having (...),
for doing that which is blameworthy, in violating such a promise.

Secondly, He would have such widows refused, which were in danger to wax
wanton against Christ, to marry and so violate their promise to the Church; but
such were those younger widows which had made this promise, Verse 11, 12. Nor
can it here be said, that it could not be free for them to go back from their
promise.

For 1. There can be no reason assigned of such an assertion, seeing it must be
made with this tacit limitation, if the Church will accept them, and therefore
if the Church see cause to refuse them, they are ipso facto absolved.

2. Be it, they had vowed (which cannot be proved) yet that vow cannot be
obligatory to performance, which puts a person in a real danger of waxing
wanton against Christ, of having the condemnation of violating his first faith;
it being absolutely unlawful for any one to continue in such a condition, and
contrary to the Apostles precept, of abstaining from all appearance of evil;
and therefore such a vow made to bind one in such a state, is a bond of
iniquity, and consequently Null.

Thirdly, The Apostle would have such widows refused, who were in danger to be
idle tatlers, busy bodies, wanderers, etc. but such were younger widows,
already made Deaconesses, verse 13.

Fourthly, The Apostle would have things so managed, as that no occasion might
be given to the Adversary, to speak reproachfully; but this could not be, if
younger widows, already Deaconesses should not be refused as well as others,
Verse 14.

Fifthly, The Apostle would have that altered, which might be an occasion of
turning young women aside unto Satan, but such was the keeping of them in that
condition, and had been already, as the Apostle tells us; v. 15. For some (
viz. of these young Widows) are already turned aside unto Satan: But you will
say, that the Apostle plainly says, they are therefore blame worthy, because
they have left their first Faith.

I Answ. 1. They are therefore blameworthy, because (...), out of Pride,
Sloth, and Insolency, they have broken their Faith. (Not if (...), they had
left this office) as being supposed to have made this promise only upon
condition, of the continuance of the gift of Continency; seeing to make it
absolutely, we have proved unlawful.

2. By first Faith, we may understand the Faith they took upon them, when they
first became Christians; which because it binds them not to be insolent, but
humble, and ready to do the meanest office of love to their fellow members; not
to be sloathful, but to be diligent in Gods service; They that are guilty of
these crimes, may be said to have made Null their Faith, seeing it will be of
no virtue nor efficacy to their souls.

2. Others have long ago answered, that the Apostle is to be understood not of
any promise made to the Church, but to God or Christ, upon their entrance into
Christianity, and tell us, that these women having (happily moved with sorrow for
their Husbands death) cast themselves into the College of Widows, and
afterward finding themselves not to have the gift of Continence, but to want
the remedy of Marriage, least they should be branded with the note of infamy,
inconstancy, and lightness in departing from their purpose; they chose rather
to fall off from Christ unto Gentilism and Marry, whence they are condemned of
forsaking their first Faith; not simply, in that they would Marry, but that
they would do it cum abnegatione fidei, and Christianae religionis.

Obj. But you will say, if they had a mind to Marry, what necessity of doing
it with Jews or Pagans?

Answ. Because had they Married to Christians, they would continually have been
twited by them for their levity and inconstancy; for their negligence in the
office of the Church, gadding abroad, etc. yea, and being such, could scarce
hope to procure a Husband among them, and therefore that they might not fail of
them, and that they might live more free from these taunts and disgraces, they
rejected their office and faith together: Now that they did so, as it is
probable from the (...), which signifies, excutere habenas Christi; so is it
more then so from the 15 v. which tells us, that they had turned aside to
Satan; a phrase in Scripture used to denote Apostasy from Christ and God: For
as turning from the power of Satan to God, is a description of turning
Christian; so Apostates are said to be transferred again into Satan's Kingdom.
Luke 11.13. And to turn (...), John. 6.66. as here (...). And (...). Heb.
12.13. 1 Timothy 1.6.4.4. as here also it is said, (...).

Lastly, That it cannot be understood of a solemn vow of Continency, joined
with an abnegation of the married state, beside, what I have said before is
proved,

1. In that the Apostle denies that he would cast a snare upon any, that is,
lay a necessity on them to contain unmarried; but on the contrary gives this
general axiom, that it is better to marry than to burn. And therefore it is
altogether unlikely, that he would now tell them, that they must continue,
though he found they had not the gift of Continence, under pain of damnation.
No, rather he would have admonished them to repent of their rash vow, and told
them with Epiphanius, Epiph. de tradit.
(who is clearly ours as to this) that it is better to have the guilt of one
sin, viz. a rash vow, then of many, viz. Continual burnings. Calling the first
(...), or a fault, to which he enjoins penance, the other (...), or that which
will bring damnation.

2. If the vow of Continence be the first faith here spoken of, then may not
any woman or widow make this vow by the Apostles charge, till she be sixty
years old, Sess. 25. C. 15.
which how is it this day practiced in the Romish Church, since the Trent
Council admits them at sixteen? Let them then confess, that this Text speaks
not of votaries, or else that they sin against the Apostles precept, by warrant
of their infallible general Council. For it is evident, the Apostle bids them
not admit a Widow under sixty, for fear of her incontinency, and for that
reason requires them to refuse those that are younger then so: I confess
besides, Bellarm: who is very frivolous, and every where confuted, Estius tells
us,

1. That there is not the same reason for Widows, as for Virgins; For these
having not felt the pleasure of due benevolence, are not so much tempted, as
Widows; But to this,

1. It is evident, you admit even Widows, long before this time, yea at any
time.

2. Seeing marriage was ordained for the abating of this fire of lust, sure it
will somewhat do so, not more inflame it, and it is unconceivable that women,
though thirty or forty, once married, should be more prone to lust, then those
of sixteen or eighteen, never Married.

3. Be it, that there were some difference, yet surely not such as will put
Virgins out of danger; especially when the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 7. that
there may be need, and therefore he will not put a snare upon them.

2. He tells us, that they had no Cloisters to be immured in then, as there
be now, and therefore they were more obnoxious to this failing.

Answ. By no means, when it must be granted that Church Discipline was more
strict then, Christianity more lively, and better practiced then now.

2. Solitariness does not help this disease, but increase it rather.

3. That their Cloisters do not abridge them of occasions of lust, appears by
their frequent pregnancy, and the above cited Authors; neither ought they to
change the Apostles precept, upon such slight and frivolous grounds. In a
word, to conclude, why may not this sense of the words pass for current? you
admit younger Widows into this Office upon their promise of continuing in that
estate, when alas they are in danger to wax wanton against Christ by this
means, and when they have done so, to marry, which course of yours will bring
condemnation upon them. This waxing wanton, being an evident breach of the
promise of obedience to the Commands of Christ, which they made at their
entrance into Christianity. And whereas he tells us, that his Exposition,
(which makes it plead for their vow of Continency) is not contradicted by any
of the Ancient Doctors: Bishop Hall will tell him, p. 725. I had thought I had
read in Holy Athanasius, woe to you, that make void the first faith of Baptism.
I thought that St. Jerome had said in the preface to the Ep. to Titus. They are
not worthy of belief, qui primam fidem Baptismi irritam fecerunt, who have made
void their first faith in Baptism. Now if a contrary Interpretation be not a
contradiction to the sense contended for, I may say as well that the
Interpretation of these two Fathers was never contradicted by any of the rest.

But it is the consent of antiquity in which our Adversary vaunts himself.

1. M. C. p. 216.
As for the council of Eliberis, (which if we may believe him, Can. 33.
absolutely commanded to Bishops, Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, to abstain from
their Wives, and not to beget Children) let it be considered, Melchior Canus l
5. de locis. c. 4. Binius p. 239. Bellar. l. 2. de. Imag. c 9. Baron. ad An.
56. Hum. 119.


1. That when the decree of this council is urged by us against Images, they
presently deride us, as producing a Council of nineteen Bishops, met in a
corner of the world, telling us that it was an erroneous Council, bordering
upon Novatianism, and manifestly void, and null, in many things ( viz. In those
in which it thwarts their superstitions.) Now if these things be true, what
advantage can they have from these nineteen Bishops? may not we as lawfully
reject them as the Romanist?

2. The Canon does not command this abstinence to Bishops and to other sacred
Persons absolutely, but only in the time of their ministration, or whilst it
is their turn to assist at the Altar, which thing is determined in many
councels, and is not in the least manner contrary to us.

3. The words of the Council run exactly contrary to what you have given us,
even thus, this Council has thought good (not to command, but) wholly to
forbid Bishops, Priests, etc. to abstain from their Wives, and not to beget
Children. And so it will be parallel to the Canon of the Nicene Council, (...),
and made in opposition to the condemners of due benevolence in Priests.

Another Council produced by him is the seventh of Carthage, Can. 2.
it was agreed unto by all the Bishops, that Bishops, Priests, Deacons, As you
may see in Calixtus de con. Cler. p. 286. Mr. C. p. 215.
and such who dispense Sacraments, should be observers of chastity, and abstain
even from their own Wives, that so what the Apostles taught, and Antiquity
observed, we likewise may keep.

Answ. Now here again, Est quidem alia lectio secundum quam quod unus Fausti^us
dixit universis Episcopis tribuitur, sed eam mendosam esse cum resipsa tum
Graecus codex evincit. Quomodo enim ab universis dictum est quod mox Universi
mutarunt and alitur extulerunt? Calix. ibid.
he is somewhat dis-ingenuous and takes some part of the sentence of Aurelius,
and joins it to the proposal of Faustinus. And

2. Taking advantage of a spurious lection, makes that to be agreed upon by all
the Bishops, which was only the proposal of one Faustinus, a legate of the
Roman Church, to which the Synod does not assent.

I will faithfully transcribe the whole matter, that you may see the truth of
what I say. Aurelius then speaks thus, It pleased the Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons to be continent in all things (which sure they may be in marriage) as
it behooves Bishops, Priests, and Levites, or those who serve at the Holy
Sacraments, that so they may obtain what they ask of God, and that what the
Apostle taught, ((...). And again, defraud not one another, except it be with
consent for a time, 1 Timothy 3. 1 Cor. 7.5.
that you may give your selves to fasting, and prayer:) and Antiquity observed,
(in abstaining from those lawful pleasures at such times of fasting and prayer
and engagement in Divine Service. Vide Can. 3. and 4.
) We also may keep. Thus Aurelius. Next comes Faustinus, and proposes, that
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, and all who handle the Holy Sacraments, should
abstain even from their own Wives, to which the Synod answers only thus. It
pleases us, that those who wait at the Altar ( should (...) preserve
chastity.) And therefore it does not at all appear that they consented to his
proposal, seeing chastity may be preserved in lawful Wedlock, as the
Carthaginian Bishops in the third Synod do acknowledge.

The like prevarication we meet with, Afric. Coun. which in brief runs thus:
Aurelius the Bishop said: Uxores nisi eustodita pudicitia. duxerint (lectores)
legere non sinantur, Can. 19 Vide Calix. edit. Helm. p. 397. See Mr. C. p. 215.
I add, Reverend Brethren, that which has been confirmed in diverse Synods, in
their relations (or consultations) about the temperance (not intemperance as
Mr. C.) of Clerks with their own Wives, and chiefly Readers. That Bishops,
Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons, handling the Holy Mysteries in their proper
turns of service, (words which our Author thought good to change) should be
Continent even from their Wives, and be as if they had them not; which if they
do not, etc. Indeed the Canon, as it is in latin, agrees with his
interpretation as far as it extends, but that we should rather follow the
Greek version, appears from this, that the Canon in its full extent, is no
where extant in latin; and now for the sense of it, that it intends the
prohibition only in propriis viois suae temporibus appears.

1. From the very words, which determine and prescribe this Continence, (...)
according (not to former decrees but) to the proper terms of their attendance.

2. Balsamon upon the Canon tells us, that this was the very mind of the
Council, nec prohibuit eis Synodus, cum ipsis consuetudinem nisi in propriis
terminis, i. e. in prestitutis uniuscujusque vicis die^us. Yea, the general
Council at Trullo, Can. 13. does evidently declare for this interpretation;
their words are these:

We know that those who met at Carthage, being careful of the holiness of
Priests, decreed that Presbyters, Deacons, and Subdeacons, handling the holy
Mysterys, should (...)(the very words of the Greek Canon) (...): Which words do
not only evidence this sense, and tell us that the (...) are proper turns of
administration, or (...), but also evidently explain the meaning of that clause
in the former Canon (that so what the Apostle taught, and Antiquity observed)
to be the very same which I have imitated: from what has been said, I thus
argue; they which limited this abstinence to a certain time, did not intend
that it should be perpetual (seeing regula firmat in non exceptis) but thus did
these Synods, Ergo.

Thus have we returned answer to his Synods, Synods against him:

And 1. I will begin with the Nicene Council, the History of which we have
related by Gelasius Cyzicenus, and in that this passage: It seemed good to some
Bishops in the City, to introduce a new law or custom into the Church, (...).
and to define that Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, Subdeacons, (...).
or any other sacred Persons, ought not to use those Wives, as Companions of
their Bed ((...)) which being Laics they had married; these things being thus
determined, (...).
Paphnutius rose up and cried with a loud voice, Oh do not make grievous the
yoke of Priests! (for Marriage is honorable amongst all, and the bed
undefiled) least by too much exactness (or severity) you rather bring detriment
to the Church (then good.) (...),
Neither are all sufficient to exercise this Apathy, (thus to restrain their
sensual appetite) nor will any I suppose, be kept in chastity, if women should
be thus deprived of their husbands, Moreover, I affirm that the affording due
benevolence by any man to his lawful wife, is honest chastity; wherefore, her
whom God has joined (or whom any, being yet a Lectorer, or Singer, or Laick
has married) do not you separate. Soz. (...).
To which the whole Synod assented, and left every man to his freedom, to
abstain, or not. This history we have in Suidas. Verb. Paphn. in Gratian C.
Nicaena did. 31. In M. Aurelius Cassiodorus l. 1. c. 14. Sozom. l. 1. c. 22.
Socrat. l. 1. c. 8. Niceph. l. 8. c. 19. Now there is scarce any thing asserted
in this chapter, which is not contradicted by the decree of this Nicene
Council: does he tell us, that a matrimonial use of Wives to the formerly
married, Mr. C. p. 215. Cujusque arbitrio abstinentiam ab uxoris consuetudine
permittentes. Soc. Mr. C. Ib. Mr. C. p. 206.
was forbidden? the Story tells us, that it was left free by the Synod, to
abstain or not: Will he cite some passages to persuade us it is an Apostolical
decree? the Story will inform us 'twas an innovation; will he say, that all may
contain? Paphnutius tells him (...), all cannot.

Fourthly, The reasons which Paphnutius uses, are these;

1. That this would be a burden too heavy for the Priests to bear.

2. That scarce any Wives thus separated, would be kept Chaste.

3. That all Priests are not sufficient for such Continence.

4. That it would tend to the detriment of the Church.

5. That Marriage was honorable, even in Priests.

6. That this separation would be a divorcing of them whom God had joined: So
that the Romanists, by the practice and allowance of such divorces, must be
guilty of all this.

Fifthly, The Synod assented to all this, says Socrates, (...), the whole
Synod was persuaded by his words, yea, they applauded his advice, Synodus
laudavit sententiam ejus.
says Gratian, and Sozom. and that upon these accounts, thus mentioned
((...)says Gelasius) all which being put together, will yield us sufficient
advantage against the Romanists innovation in this matter.

Well, Socrates and Sozomen relate, Mr. C. p. 214.
that it was consonant to the ancient Tradition of the Church, that those who
had entered into Holy Orders before they had Married Wives, should afterward
forbear from Marrying.

Answ. The Romanist will get but little advantage hence, if it be considered,

1. That Gratian and Gelasius (who tells us, that he compiled his relation from
the very acts of the Nicene Synod then extant, as in his Proem you may see)
have no such thing, and that Sozom. and Socrates, from whom this is cited, See
Cham. de coel. l. 16. c. 10. Bell. l. 1. de Cler. c. 20. Baron. an, 325.
are generally excepted against by our Adversaries in this very matter.

2. That albeit it were an Ancient custom, yet can it not be proved to have
been derived from the Apostles, as is fully evinced by Calixtus de conjugio
clericorum.

3. That they admitted anciently no Presbyter under 30, Can. 11. Novel. 123. c.
13. P. 206.
as the Synod at Neocaesarea decreed, or 35 as Justinian; nor a Deacon under
25. now even according to Mr. C. if a man can contain so long, he may very well
be supposed, able to contain the residue of his life.

4. The Ancients thought it somewhat unfit for a Minister to be employed in
wooing, and courting Mistresses; this they esteemed a thing below the gravity
of a Priest, Synod Agath. c. 39.
as likewise to interfair with the Marriage Festival, whence they were
forbidden to be present there; Novel. 3.
this is intimated by Leo the Emperor, in his Novels when he says, Whereas
the Ecclesiastical Orders had constituted, Per omne^ vitam caelibatum voveant.
that they who were ordained Priests, should promise perpetual Celibacy; if
they trusted they should not falsify their promise, or if they thought
themselves unable to contain, should first Contract lawful Matrimony, and then
take upon them the Ministry: The custom which at present obtains is, that
they may first be made Priests, and after two years Marry, which because it
seems undecent (indecorum) we require that the ancient prescript be observed;
for it is an unworthy thing, that they who have ascended unto spiritual things,
should again slide down to carnal, but contrariwise, they should go from carnal
to spiritual.

5. To add no more, they had their choice when they came to be Ordained,
whether they would Marry or not, they had their liberty to Marry before they
came to Ordination: Now here is nothing which can well be quarreld with, seeing
men may well be supposed sufficiently acquainted with their abilities at
thirty, and consequently as they find themselves, may either then Marry, or
promise to abstain.

To this purpose is that of the excellent Bishop Tailor; Duc. dub. l. 3. c.
The Primitive Church commonly chose her Priests and Bishops of great age, of
known virtue and holiness; they were designed to a public and dangerous
employment, for some whole ages, they were under persecution, and the way of
the cross was a great delatory to flesh and blood, and therefore they might the
rather require it of them, whom in those dispositions they found fit to be
taken into an employment, which would require a whole man, all his time, and
all his affections; now if we consider that the married Priests were commanded
to retain their wives; and the unmarried had been tried to be of a known and
experienced Continence, they might with much reason and great advantage,
require that they should remain so; that is, they might ask their consent, and
trust their promise, for here was liberty and but little danger; the Priests
were few, and the unmarried much fewer, and their age commonly such as was past
danger, and the public affairs of the Church required it, and the men were
willing, and then all was right; and then as for the practice of the Church,
he shows that it was the custom of the whole Greek Clergy, to marry after
holy Orders, yea, gives examples of it in the Latin Church.

But now the Canons of the Church of Rome afford no such liberty, but make all
vow perpetual Abstinence, or else refuse to admit them to the sacred Ministry;
and so reject many thousand persons, for that which is honorable in all, and
which is permitted by the Apostle, Can. 10.
even to a Bishop; and as for Deacons, the Counsel of Ancyra permits them
Marriage after Ordination, if at the time of their Ordination they declare
(...), that they must Marry being not able to contain, because the Bishop (say
they) has granted them a License or dispensation; what other exceptions are
made against this Counsel, you may see largely refuted in Chamier, and
especially Calixtus, if you do but consult their Indexes.

Our next Synod shall be that of Gangra, Paphlagonia, Ann. 339.
which though it was but a particular Council, yet has it the authority of a
general, for as much as the Canons of it were unanimously approved by the whole
Eastern and Western Churches; yea, always received amongst her rules, insomuch
that Baronius pronounces from the words of Pope An. 361, Nu. 44.
Symmachus, Canones Gangrenses Apostolica authoritate conditos esse. This Synod
was convened against Eustathius and his disciples, who as Sozomen informs us,
Lib. 3. c. 13.
were reputed as men accusing Marriage, refusing to pray in the houses of
married persons, and despising (...), Lib. 2. c. 33. (...).
married Presbyters. And Socrates says, that they did decline tanquam scelus,
the benediction and Communion, (...), of a Presbyter having a wife, which
whilst a Laick, he had Married (as the custom was, or) according to the law (
viz. that those among the Clergy, who would have wives, should procure them
before their Ordination) yea, the Synod tells us in the preface, that they
despised the married Presbyters, and would not touch the Sacraments administered
by them. Now against these Eustathians, the fourth Canon thus decrees: If any
one separate himself from a conjugated Presbyter, (...).
as though he ought not to participate of the offering administered by him, let
him be Anathema. From whence we gather, that according to the sentence of these
Bishops in this Synod, yea, and the whole world embracing their decrees, that a
Presbyter ought not to be deposed for being married, or reserving of his wife.
Here,

First, They quarrel at the word (...), as if it were to be rendered, who has
had a wife, not who has at present, but

1. Balsamon tells us, that the Canon Anathematizeth those, who would not
indifferently communicate in the holy things of married persons, that have
wives, (...), and with him Gratian consents; Distinc. 28.
and whereas the Synod and Sozomen have it (...), Socrates has it, (...); yea,
when it is said they refused to pray, (...), is it credible, that they would not
pray in the houses of such as had once been married, though afterward they
rejected that estate?

2. It Is evident that the word bears this sense ordinarily, 1 Cor. 7.10. (...),
To those that are married, speak not I, but the Lord, let not the woman be
separated from her Husband. See Chamier l. 16. de cael. c. 8. Calixtus p. 208.

Secondly, They tell us that Eustathius and his Disciples thought marriage
absolutely evil.

Answ. What is that to the purpose, seeing it is also evident that the Synod
thought the married state consistent with the Priesthood.

2. We grant they did so, and this is condemned Canon the first, (...).
If any man condemn Marriage or detest it, and criminate a faithful and
religious Woman giving due benevolence to her Husband, as if she could not
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, let him be accursed.

Lastly, Perhaps they will say the Synod determines, that it is lawful for a
Presbyter to have a Wife, and not to use her.

Answ. 1. Can any imagine that the Eustathians could think a Presbyter so
defiled by having once married a Wife, when a Layman, though he now rejected
her from his bed.

2. The Synod, and Socrates inform us, that many women upon their persuasions
left their Husbands, and being not able to contain, they polluted themselves
with Adultery, and this grievance they came to redress, which they do by
requiring due benevolence, and surely this being the only case, (according to
the ancient Law Paph. speaks of,) in which Priests marriage was permitted, that
they professed their inability to contain, or else entered upon that state
before they came to Ordination, as finding in themselves a defect of
Continence, the Council could not think it unlawful for them to enjoy this
remedy of their incontinence.

A third Synod is that convened in Trullo, Quinisexta, Can. 13.
seeing we have heard (say the Fathers) that in the Roman Church it is
delivered as a Canon, that whosoever are to be ordained Deacons, (...).
or Presbyters, should profess that they would not henceforward use their
Wives, we following the Ancient Canon of the exact Apostolic constitution,
declare our pleasure that the cohabitation of Sacred Persons, according to the
Laws be from henceforward firm, (...). L. copulam. (...), lat. Mutua
consuetudine.
and established, no way dissolving their conjunction with their Wives, or
depriving them of giving due benevolence to each other, at times convenient,
and therefore who ever is found worthy of the order of a Subdeacon, Deacon, or
Priest, let him not be prohibited from this degree, because he cohabits with
his lawful Wife, least by so doing we should be compelled to bring an ignominy
upon that Wedlock which God has instituted, (...).
Mat. 19.6.
the Gospel in the mean time crying out, What God has joined let no man
separate, and the Apostle, Marriage is honorable, and the Bed undefiled: Heb.
13.4.
and further, art thou bound to a Wife, seek not to be loosed, (...).
if any therefore rising up against the Apostles Canons, dares to deprive any
Consecrated Presbyter, or Deacon of the commerce of his lawful Wife, let him be
deposed; Now here let it be observed:

I, That in this Synod or rather supplement of the two former Synods, Paul of
Constant. Peter of Alexandria, (...). In Praefat. 6. Syn. Totius Synodi Romanae
Ecclesiae vicem gerentes.
Anastasius of Jerusalem, George of Antioch, all Patriarchs, were present, and
the rest of the Bishops out of every Province and Region, as the sub-scription
has it, and as Balsamon tells us he found in the subscriptions, Basilius a
Metropolitan of Gortina in Creet, and a certain Bishop of Ravenna were there to
represent the Roman Church, and besides as legates of the Pope were present,
the Bishops of Thessaly, Sardis, Heraclea and Corinth.

2. Act. 2. quod in s^xtae Synodi divine and legaliter predicatis Canon. etc.
Act. 4. and 7.
That albeit Sergius did not acquiesce in his subscription to this Synod, yet
did Hadrian the first receive the Synod, and its Canons, and that as rightly
and divinely decreed, as you may see in an Epistle of his extant in this second
Nicene Council; Yea farther, in this second Nicene Council, the Roman Legates
not at all contradicting it, they are cited under the names of the Canons of
the Holy Ecumenical sixth Synod.

3. That this is done in perfect opposition to the Roman Church, and therefore
they little dreamed of its infalibility, or any submission due unto it.

4. That they affirm that this depriving Presbyters, etc. of the use of their
Wives, or the Marriage Bed, is a flat contradiction to two aphorisms of the
Apostles, a separating what God has joined, and a casting ignominy upon the
Gospel, and consequently, that in the judgment of this Synod, the Roman Church
her practice then, and judgment at this present, are justly charged with all
this.

5. That all this is done in compliance with the Apostles Canon, which allows
and approves, according to their judgment, (...) which sure is a little more
then providing for their Wives, or cohabitation without the use of the Marriage
bed, and the words of the Apostolic Canon do infer it; For they do not only
say that it is unlawful for a Bishop to put away his wife, but that he must
not do it (...), under a pretense of piety, now how could they under a pretense
of piety refuse to provide for their own flesh, Apud Great. causae. 3. q. 2. c.
3.
and therefore Pope Nicholaus himself interprets it of separation from the Bed,
for speaking of that matter he says, nullius religionis pretextu debet conjux
dimittere conjugem? And Zonaras upon the Canon tells us, that this casts an
obloquy upon marriage, making that impure, Extat. C. 8 to. 1. Juris insit. de
clericis uxores suas ejicientibus.
which the Scripture entitleth honorable, and the Novel of Alexander Comnenus
rejecting the Apostolical Canon adds, this was established by the Gospel, that
no man should put away his Wife pro libitu, for this seems to cast a snare
upon marriage, (...). Again,

6. They acknowledge this constitution of the Apostles, to be a sincere
exquisite, and orderly constitution, and ratify this liberty for ever.

7. They give charge that no man by the cohabitation with his lawful Wife be
hindered from ascending to the highest degree of holy orders.

8. That in the time of their Ordination, it be not so much as required of them
to abstain from the lawful accompanying their Wives.

9. That if any man shall presume so far, as to offer to debar any Priest,
Deacon or Subdeacon, from the conjunction, or society with his lawful wife, he
shall be deposed; or if any Priest, or Deacon, shall voluntarily cast off his
wife, upon pretense of Religion, that he shall be suspended, and if he go on,
deposed.

I shall not add the suffrage of other councils, but content my self with the
moderation which our Author uses.

1. He says enough to render his whole discourse impertinent and ineffectual
in that he acknowledges the Eastern Priests to have had liberty to marry, M.
C. p. 214.
(in which confession he yields no more then what Pope Stephen had granted
long ago) in telling us the tradition of the Eastern Churches is otherwise then
that of the Roman Church, whose Priests, Distinct. 31. c. aliter.
Deacons and Subdeacons, are joined in Matrimony.) For hence it follows,
that he can produce no evidence of the Universal practice of the Church of God,
and consequently, Mr. C. p. 217. Just. vindic.
nothing that lays any obligation upon us, for what he adds of our subjection
to the VVestern Patriarch is exploded and refuted by Bishop Bramhal beyond all
possible reply.

And therefore he did well to allay this liberal concession.

1. By telling us, that no Canon of either Church, Ibid.
can be produced, permitting Priests to contract marriage after Ordination.

Answ. Now to this I have returned many things already, to which I add, that
albeit the Ancient Canons did generally enjoin their Clergy not to Marry after
Orders (for before Orders they might) yet this thing did not prevail, but
Deacons, Priests, and Bishops, good men and orderly, did after Ordination use
their liberty, The words of Athanasius to him are, (...): etc. So that the
Bishops did not only marry, but beget children, as is evident from the words,
and the opposition included in them, Athan. ep. ad Dracontium. Tripart. hist.
l. 6. c. 14.
as they found it necessary or expedient. This is evident from the Epistle of
Athanasius to Dracontius, a Monk of Alexandria (who refused to be made a
Bishop, because he impertinently thought, it was not so spiritual an estate,
as that of Monks; since he saw the Bishops married men, and full of secular
affairs) where he is told that he might be Bishop, and yet retain his asketick
course of life he had engaged in; and was informed moreover, that all Bishops
did not enter into the married state, nor all Monks abstain; now if none did,
such an answer to Dracontius, had been more full, and would not have been
omitted. And Cassiodorus gives an instance of Eupsychius, Bishop of Caesarea in
Cappadocia, that took a wife but a little before his Martyrdom; he was first
indeed a Priest, and afterward a Bishop, and having newly married a wife, was
Crowned with Martyrdom: Yea, the gloss upon the 31. distinction tells us, That
the Greeks in their ordinations did promise Continence, neither explicitly,
nor tacitly; and if that be true, there is no peradventure, but many of them
married after their Consecrations: Yea, amongst the Greeks we find, that for
almost two hundred years together, after the Synod in Trullo, the Greek Priests
had after their Ordination, two years time for probation, whether they could
bear the yoke of single life, and if they could not, they had leave to Marry.
Now this being the custom of the whole Greek Church, in which the Bishops,
because of the Ordination were engaged; it is evident that it was not illegal,
nor irregular, but an approved custom of the Church, though after (upon a very
trivial reason) prohibited by an Imperial law.

2. Vide supra. p. 393.
He tells us, That even among the Grecians a co-habitation with their Wives,
Ibid.


Answ. True, even as it is thought to have been to the married Priests and
Levites under the Old Testament, in their weekly courses; but how impertinent
is this to the continual Celibacy of the Roman Clergy?

3. Therefore he recollects himself, and adds, that even in many of the Eastern
Churches, a greater strictness was observed, Mr. C. p. 216. Lib. cont. Vigil.
which

1. He evidenceth from the testimony of St. Jerome to Vigilantius, which speaks
thus; If none but married Deacons must be admitted Priests, no Clerks, but such
whose Wives are pregnant, what shall the Churches of the East do? (who admit so
many to Ordination that are unmarried) what shall the Churches of Egypt do, and
of the Sea Apostolic? all which receive Clerks, either such as are Virgins or
Continent, or if they have wives, cease to be husbands to them (not refusing
them upon any of these accounts.)

Answ. These words thus explicated by me, need no further Answer.

2. As for the Eastern Church, that they did many of them, oppose this
Celibacy, which the Papists intrude upon their Clergy, is sufficiently evident
(as from the Councels of Gangra and Nice, the testimony of Pope Stephen, and
others; l. 5. c. 22.
so also) from Socrates, who tells us, that (albeit this custom obtained in
Thessaly, Thessalonica, Macedonia, and Hellas in Achaia, and that introduced by
Theodorus a Priest of Triva yet) all the famous Priests throughout the Eastern
parts of the world, and the Bishops also, refrained the company of their wives
at their own choice, without law or compulsion, for many of them
notwithstanding their Bishoprics, did beget children also on their lawful
Wives. So that either St. Jerome must be understood as my parenthesis does
explicate him, or at the furthest, of those few Eastern Churches mentioned by
Socrates.

2. What he says of Egypt must not be taken generally, as is evidenced from
the instance of Dracontius, the Alexandrian Monk, for why should Athanasius
tell him, that some Bishops did not beget children (though others did) if
throughout all Egypt it had been unlawful for a Bishop to have had a wife, or
beget children, in that condition? For that he is so to be understood is
evident, because he tells him how he might live in the condition of a Bishop,
nor did it concern Dracontius at all, what lives the Bishops lead before their
instalments, but what they used to be when they ascended the Episcopal Chair.

3. Why does St. Jerome, though dealing with one by Nation a Spaniard, and
inhabiting in France, fly to Egypt, and the East, but that he knew there was
no such matter observed in Spain, France, and other places of the Western
Church? St. Jerome is so far from showing that this severity obtained in the
East, that he rather evidenceth by this, that it obtained not generally in the
West (but only in the Roman Diocesses, or the Suburbicarian Churches.)

The second place produced from St. Jerome runs thus, Epist. ad Pammachium.
All Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, and the whole Sacerdotal and Levitical
Chore, know they cannot offer sacrifice, if they use the Act of Marriage.

Answ. True, if they use it at the time of Sacrificing, or when their turn of
attendance upon the Altar comes. or,

2. This must be understood only of the Clergy of the Church of Rome, of which
he was a member, as also Pammachius to whom he writes, in this Apology, or
else there can be nothing of truth in it, Mr. C. p. 214.
it being so evident (that our Author is even forced to grant it) that the
Eastern Bishops did generally allow themselves a liberty in this.

Next you produce the empty name of Origin (to whom you have a sufficient
answer in Calixtus) and tell us, M. C. P. 159. 160.
that Eusebius says somewhat which you durst not produce, P. 227. 228, 229.
To. 3. l. 17. c. 9. sect. 11.12, 13, 14, 15. Haer. 59.
because happily you knew that it was evidently impertinent as you might have
seen in Calixtus and Chamier.

Epiphanius you introduce to inform us, that a Bishop, Priest, Deacon,
Subdeacon, that is the husband of one Wife, and begets children is not
admitted in the Church, (...), very exact and severe, (which was not in many
places) then he objects that in some places, the Presbyters, Deacons, and
Subdeacons, beget children.

To which he answers: Ibid.
that this is against the Canon, ( viz. the exact Canon he before spoke of) and
to be imputed to the minds of men so quickly languishing.

2. Happily he speaks only of the Church of Cyprus, and Salamis, where he was
Bishop, or some parts adjacent; For what shall we think of the Canons of the
Nicene Council, and of Gangra, were they not sufficiently exact?

From the Western Church he produces only the testimony of two Fathers.

The first is, l. 1. de officiis. c. ult.
St. Ambrose, whose testimony makes the Marriage of Priests, impure, corrupt, a
stain, and violation of marriage, which Mr. C. dares not approve of.

2. He tells us that (not in certain, as Mr. C. but) in most places, more
obscure (then Mediolanum) the Priests did beget children. Ep. 82. Non quo
excludat ex sortem conj^gii sed ut conjugali eastimonia servet ablationis suae
gratiam. Lib. de adult. conjug. c. 20. Bishop Tailor. duc. dub. l. 3. c. 4. p.
348.


3. The same Ambross elsewhere tells us, that the Apostle when he commands,
(viz. the Bishop, to be the Husband of one wife, does it not to exclude the
unmarried, but that he ( viz. who had not the gift of Continence, but lay
under the danger of fornication) should keep the grace of his Baptism by using
this remedy of Wedlock.

The second Father is, St. Austin, who says only this, that the continence of
those Clerks who were snatched as it were into the ministry, and violently
compelled against their will (as it was with Austin himself, with Pinianus,
ordained against his will, and the tears of his Wife, with Panlinianus whose
mouth was stopped that he might not deny it) was proposed by him, as an example
to others; and they are said to be taken, ad eam sarcinam subeundam, because
they were hastened to the Ministry before ordination, and after that time the
Church permitted them not the use of marriage. But yet here is nothing of an
Ecclesiastical Law, much less a Divine, but only an irregular action which,
(as matters then stood) laid a necessity upon persons thus abused to be single.
Nor can it be imagined that such men ever made a vow of single life, as the
Popish Priests do, or that these were fiting circumstances for a vow.

Thus have we gone over the Fathers produced by him, Calixtus, Chamier, and
Bishop Hall.

1. Then, Dionysius Bishop of Corinth writing to Pinytus Bishop of Gnossus (who
as it seems, would have brought his Clergy into this snare) exhorts him, Eusebius.
l. 4. c. 22. (...).
That he would not put this heavy Yoke of Continence (this burdensome purity)
upon his Brethren, but would have respect to the infirmity of many: (...).
Constable. Apost. l. 6. c. 17. Si male intelligatur non solum libidinem sacerdotum
Graecorum defendat, sed Latinis quoque ad petendam quod concedi non potest
aditum praeparet and muniat. (...), Athenug. apol. ad Anton. Philos.
Had there been any Apostolical sanction, or Ecclesiastical constitution in
this case, how durst Dionysius have dissuaded the exercise of it? or called it
a grievous Yoke, not to be imposed on the Brethren? why does he speak
particularly to Pinytus? yea, why does not Pinytus in his Answer mind him of
it, and defend himself with it? but only tell him, that they should not
perpetually be fed with milk, but at last come to more solid meat.

2. The Author of the Apostolic constitutions (vulgarly attributed to St.
Clemens) tells us, that Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, if at Ordination they
be married, must not be joined to others, but content themselves with her,
whom at their Ordination they enjoyed: words very pregnant and emphatical
(which Turrianus himself acknowledges) and therefore contends for another
Lection, ( viz. (...) not (...)) in which he is sufficiently confuted by
Chamier, to. 3. l. 16. c. 7. sect. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.

3. When Athenagoras and Justin Martyr (to whom you may add Irenaeus, Tatianus,
Theophilus, Antiochenus) come to answer what was objected against the
Christians, concerning Promiscuous Mixtures, they tell them among other things,
that they are so far from such uncleanness, that there might be found amongst
them many, Ante medium
both Men and Women, that were unmarried, even to old age; (the like has
Justine, in his Apology to Antonius Pius.)

4. Lib. 7.
Consonant to this, is that of Origin against Celsus, who tells him, That
amongst the Christians, there were men, which needed not Hemlock, as the
Athenian Pontifex, to keep them Chaste, but the Word of God was sufficient for
them.

Now had there been any sanction of the Apostles, any custom of the Church,
which enjoined this Celibacy to the Clergy, could it be imagined that this
(amongst other things) should not have been mentioned by any of these Champions
of the Christians? But that their apologies should run so generally as they do
in the places mentioned. Could it reasonably be thought that Origin would have
said so crudely there wants not men amongst us, if he could have instanced in
the Clergy, would he not rather have opposed our pontifices to theirs?

5. That Tertullian was married, his books written to his Wife do sufficiently
assure us, that he did not separate from his wife, is evident, from the seventh
Chapter of his first Book, quare facultatemcontinentiae, etc.
where speaking of Continence, he says, quod in matrimonio non valemus
inviduitate sectemur, that which our matrimonial condition will not bear ( viz.
the former abstinence) in Widdow-hood let us follow after, embracing the
occasion which has took away what necessity ( viz. that of the married state)
required. C. 3. delendis conjunctionibus, etc.
Yea, in the same Book he says, Christ came not to separate marriages or to
dis-joyn those that were made one, and chap. the first he exhorts her that
after his decease with as much Continence as she could, she would renounce
marriage. But if in respect of humane infirmity she could not, that she would
marry to a Christian, not an Heathen. Would he have writ thus to her, if she
had already abstained from the embraces of her Husband from the time of his
Ordination? and already promised perpetual Continency?

6. How many married Bishops, Priests, Deacons, do we meet with in the
Primitive Church? Chamier and Calixtus reckoned up according to the Centuries
they lived in. To 3. lib. 16. c. 13.
Now as to the answer usually given, that these abstained from their wives, it
is very improbable, if it be considered.

1. (...), ante medium. propter quod conjugia copul^nda sunt de Hares C. 46.
(...). Paeda g. l. 2. ab initio.
That they tell us procreation of children is the very end of Marriage, Justin
Martyr ubi supra, we (says he) do not marry at all but to get children, St.
Austin. Without doubt they condemn marriage and as much as in them lies forbid
it, when they forbid to beget children to which end the Marriage knot is to be
tied. And Clemens Alexandrinus the aim of the married parties is the
procreation of Children.

2. That the marriage of the Clergy was required to be before Ordination,
only upon this ground, that the person professed he either could, or would
not Contain, and it is strange that they who married upon these accounts should
not use the remedy which they thought necessary.

3. That they who were Orthodox, esteemed marriage honorable in all, and the
bed undefiled by this act, as we shall see hereafter. And

4. That it is recorded of some of them that after their Ordination they did
not abstain, Car. de ejus vita.
as Gregorius Nazianzenus tells us, that he had not lived so many years as his
Father had spent in the Priesthood.

To these testimonies we add the suffrage of Scripture by them interpreted.

1. The Scripture tells us that St. Peter and St. Mrt. 8.14. Marck 1.30. Luke
8.18. 1 Cor. 9.5.
Philip with others of the Apostles were married; Now here it is answered, they
begot no children, no young Apostles: Rep. Clem. Alex. tells us they did. It is
again answered, that however after their Apostleship they ceased to do so.
(...). Stro. 7.


1. Who told them so?

2. It is evident they might have done it by their own rules, seeing the
marriage bed has nothing of defilement in it, we never read of their divorce,
nor it is permitted by our Savior, but in case of Adultery, due benevolence is
commanded to be given, and the withholding of it is styled fraud, and
therefore undoubtedly had it been required they would have given it.

2. We produce the Apostles testimony, let a Bishop be blameless, the husband
of one Wife, so that a Bishop may have one wife and yet be blameless, 1 Timothy
3.2.
nor is the having of one wife sufficient to hinder a man from ascending the
Episcopal chair, but the having two. Now here some give this answer, The
Apostle says, a Bishop may be ordained, not who is, but qui fuerit, who has
been the Husband of one wife; To which we reply.

1. That Dominicus a Soto, a great stickler for Celibacy, sufficiently confutes
this answer, L. 7. de just. and jure qu. 6. Art. 2. con. 1.
thus. It does not sufficiently clude this place to say the Apostle speaks of
such as have been married, but now are separated from their Wives, for St.
Paul's Text manifestly shows, that he speaks of those that remained in the state
of marriage, for as much as unius uxoris vir, is the same with uxorem habens,
and also because the Apostle requires amongst other virtues of the Bishop, that
he look well to his house, etc.

2. The very text is contradictory to this sense, for the words in Timothy runs
thus, 1 Ep. c. 3. v. 2.
It behooves a Bishop to be blameless (...)((...):) and the Epistle to Titus,
ordaining in every City Presbyters, (...), ((...)) (...).

3. He that had a Wife, but now has her not, is not any longer, unius uxoris
vir, but nullius, and therefore a Widdower, for these relata mutuo se ponunt
and tollunt.

2. Others answer that he permits them to have a Wife, but yet they must cease
from the use of wedlock.

Answ. Neither can this exposition hold good; for in the Apostles times it was
a thing unknown, that a man should have a wife, and yet no power to make use of
her, which all husbands from the Creation to those days had; seeing therefore
he reiterates the phrase, it is manifest he understands it in the common sense:
yea,

2. It is contrary to the Apostles rule, of not defrauding each other; contrary
to justice, for the wife has power over the husbands body, contrary to the
Apostles decree, touching widows, that they should be permitted to marry, and
get children; Now the widows of Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, could not do
so without adultery by the Papists own tenent, of the indissolubility of the
knot of Matrimony.

3. ad Oceanum in multis uxoribus liberos sparge^e.
The Fathers here are for us, St. Jerome. Ep. 83. the Patriarchs and Priests,
under the old Testament had liberty to have many wives. The Apostle therefore
Commands that the same liberty be not taken by the Priests of the Gospel, Bina
and trina pariter conjugia, sed ut singulas uno tempore uxores habeant. Uxores
habcant.
to have two or three wives together, but will have them to be content with
one. Where note two things.

1. That Sacerdotes, Bishops, Presbyters, etc. (For he is interpretting this
place of Timothy which speaks of them) may have wives, which opposes the first
interpretation.

2 That uxores habere, and in uxoribus liberos spargere, is the same, with St.
Jerome, and therefore this also is granted by him to priests, to beget Children.
Ibid.
And in the case of Carterius, Bishop of Spain, who had married one wife before
Baptism, and the other post lavacrum, the former being dead, do you think
(says he) that he contradicted the Rule of the Apostle, let a Bishop be the
Husband of one Wife? No says he, omnis mandus his ordinationibus plenus est.
the whole world is full of such ordinations, not only of Presbyters, but
Bishops, whom if I should reckon up, they would exceed the number of Bishops
convened at Ariminum, that is 400. But why did Bishop Carterius, desire a wife?
St. Ibid.
Jerome will tell you (ille in uxore optavit liberos) he did it that he might
have Children by her; Yea he adds, that it is written to him, Marriage is
honorable, and the bed undefiled: And was this written unto him only? Not to
other Bishops, and innumerable Presbyters? Did he only in uxore optare
liberos, and none of the residue of the Prelates or Presbyters?

Clemens Alexand. Stromat l. 3. p. 521.
says the Apostle permits that either Presbyters, (under which name he
includes the Bishop) or Deacons should be the husband of one wife, utens
matrimonio citra reprehensionem. Chrysostom tells us, in Tim. Hom. 10
that he does not necessitate a Bishop to have a wife; sed ejus rei modum
constituit, he gives bounds to him, ( viz. permitting but one wife at a time)
for the Jews were permitted Digamy, and Hom. 2. upon Tit. he says this to stop
the mouths of Heretics, who did (...), showing that it is so honorable, that
(...) with it the Episcopal chair may be ascended. Now let any man judge,
whether according to common speech, p. 327 Ed. Helm. 1631.
he does it cum Conjugio, who separates from his wife, Quid enim est Conjugium
(ut been Calixtus) nisi maris and faeminae societas cum reciproca potestate
unius in corpus alterius, eaque indissolubili, vitandae fornicationis and
generandae sobolis ergo? Jam si Episcopatus imponat necessitatem abdicandi a se
istam potestatem, and seperandi uxorem, quommodo vere diceretur in conjugio
positus cum suo Conjugio Episcopalem Thronum ascendere? quomodo, inquam, vere
diceretur Episcopatus cum conjugio non pugnare? Si qui Episcopus factus sit,
generare prohibeatur, propter quod conjugia (ut Augustinus loquitur) copulanda
sunt; De Haeres. c. 6.
And Theodoret (to omit Ambrose, Austin, Theophilact, Hugo, Clemens Romans Leo,
etc. approves of the interpretation of those that say, whereas the Jews and
Greeks were permitted to be joined in Matrimony with more wives then one, the
Ministers of the Gospel should have only one, but yet he admits their
interpretation, Si urgens natura, ut secundae conjungatur, coegerit.
who permit a second marriage after the death of the first, if the infirmity of
humane nature does require a second; evidently supposing that nature might
compel some to make use even of a second wife.

Again the Scripture says that marriage is honorable in all, Paphnutius, the
council in Trullo, Heb. 13.4.
and St. Jerome extend to Priests, and therefore understand it of all persons
not things, and the Argument of the Apostle pleads for the same sense, as
telling us that God has provided a remedy for incontinence, honorable in all,
and free from defilement, and therefore if this remedy be neglected, and men
commit fornication, he will severely animadvert upon such offenders; For as
Chrysostom. and Oecum. have it, (...). If marriage be granted, fornication is
justly punished.

Again from Matthew 19.12. Syriach and Grotius, but indeed from our Savior,
who hereupon adds, he that can receive it, let him receive it, as if he
should have said I acknowledge that all are not sufficient for this matter, and
therefore I permit them to their liberty, he that finds himself sufficient,
let him do it, he that is otherwise, let him forbear. You will reply, the text
faith not, all men cannot receive this saying, or all men cannot be sufficient
for this, but all men are not: To this I reply, the Text gives the reason,
because it is not given to all of God; now no man can contain unless it be
given. But you will again return, would they use the means, it might be given.

Ans. 1. Then our Saviors Argument would not be good, for the Apostles
Aphorism is consultius esset non nubere, no says our Savior, because all
cannot contain, as not having the gift of continence, and might not the
Apostles have replied that this was nothing to the purpose, seeing they might
purchase it if they pleased.

2. The Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 7.7. that this is a proper gift, vouchsafed
therefore only to some, even as the gift of tongues, of healing diseases, etc.

3. Our Savior says, he that can receive it let him receive it, and therefore
he evidently shows, that there are some who cannot.

The Fathers here consent, St. Hilarie tells us, C. 19. in Math.
that Christ makes nature in one, necessity in another, and the will in a
third, to be the cause of this abstinence; Cont. Montanistas, Har. 48.
now to the last (says he) we are admonished to be like, si tamen possimus
if we be able, which includes a supposition that some cannot be so. Epiphan We
exhort him that can, Et Apostolus in suadendo non trepidaret l. 1. cont. Jovin.
id. in C. 19. Mat.
but impose no necessity upon him that cannot. St. Jerome, if all could be
Virgins, our Lord would not have said, he that can receive it, let him receive
it, nor would the Apostle have been so nice in his persuading it. And again
Christ says this; that every one may consider his strength, whether he be
able to satisfy this command of Virginity, and Chastity, for our abilities
ought to be considered, that so he that can receive it, may. St. Austin, Lib.
1. de nupt. and concup. ad voler. C. 16. id. ad Pollent. In cap. 20 Leviticus
Pt 3. cur. past. C. 30.
this virtue of such excellent Continence, he that can receive, let him receive
it. And again the Apostle counsels Celibacy to him that can receive it. Hesyc.
we do not require any thing beyond men's power, but only what is possible, viz.
virginity of him to whom it is possble. And Gregory, He that is truth it self,
says all cannot receive this Word. And again, the Pastors that are single are
to be admonished that if they cannot withstand the storms of temptation
without difficulty of Shipwreck, they betake themselves to the Haven of
Wedlock. To these you may add Ignat. Ep. 8. ad Smyrnenses. Cyril. L. 1. Ep. 11.
Si perseverare nolunt aut non possunt nubant. Lactan. L. 6. Inst. C. 23.
Chrysostom. L. de Virg. and Homil. 19. in 1 Cor. Bernard in Sermon. de convers. ad
Cler. C. 29. and Amrbose cited in Jure Canon. C. Integritas 32. qu. 2. yea Bell
armine himself C. 34. resp. ad 19.

CHAP. XVIII.
Schism is an unnecessary separation, sect. 1. Our separation necessary, by
reason. (1) Of many things unjustly required to be believed. (2) To be
practiced by us, sect. 2, 3. That supposing, these doctrines to be innovations
we are bound to separate, sect. 4. The result of Mr. C 's. positions, ibid.
His pretensions to make his assertion reasonable, considered, sect. 5, 6, 7.
The Church of Rome Schismatical, sect. 8. The Arguments to the contrary
answered, sect. 9, 10, 11.

WE are at length arrived at our last,

Now in this business Mr. C. as he is more voluminous, so is he more weak, and
more confused. And therefore I will not follow him (...), but draw up some
thesis, or propositions, and confront them to his assertions, and then return
an answer to his arguments.

1. 1. Proposition.
Therefore Schism is an unnecessary separation: that it is a separation, for
schism there cannot be, in leaving the communion of any Church, Chilling p. 17.
unless we were obliged to continue in it, man cannot be obliged by man, but
to what either formally, or virtually, he is obliged by God, for all just
power is from God; God the eternal truth, neither can, nor will oblige us to
believe any the least, or the most ^n^ocent falsehood to be a Divine Truth,
that is to err; nor to profess a known error, which is to lie. So that
seeing you require the belief of errors among the conditions of your
Communion, our Obligation, to communicate with you cease, (yea we are obliged
not to communicate with you upon these terms, (which are evidently sinful) and
so the imputation of schism to us vanishes to nothing, but it falls heavy upon
your own heads, for making our separation from you just and necessary, by
requiring unnecessary and unlawful conditions of your communion.) Thus being
not content with Christ the Mediator of mankind, you require us to hold the
Saints departed to be our Mediators, besides the head Christ Jesus, you
require us to believe the Pope to be the head and Husband of the universal
Church, by Divine right; besides the Sacrifice of the Cross, you force upon us
that of the Altar, as a true and proper Sacrifice; besides the blood of Christ,
you command us to expect our cleansing from the sufferings of Martyrs; besides
the torments of Hell which are threatened to the wicked, you require us to
assert Purgatorian torments, to be inflicted on the faithful. Besides the
Worship of the great God, you require us to adore, and that with the worship
due and proper unto him, the holy Sacraments; besides the holy Scriptures, you
require us to receive with equal authority certain Books Apocriphal, and
Traditions like unto them, with the same faith we give to these Holy
Scriptures, the veneration of Images, the transubstantiation of the elements
into the body and blood of Christ, you require us to believe.

The Churches power in mutilating the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, in
enjoining the celebration of public service in a tongue unknown, in imposing
perpetual Celibacy upon such as take upon them holy orders, you require us to
acknowledge. These things you have established in your councels, and thundered
your Anathemaes against all those that will not yield their assent unto them,
so that without the belief of these things it is impossible for us to keep in
the communion of your Church: nay, the denial of any of these Articles,
excludes us (at least in your esteem) not only from the Roman, but the Church
of God, and makes it unlawful for you to communicate with us; the confessions
of these things, you exact from us with the greatest rigor, and that as the
true Catholic faith, Bulla pii quarti extra quam ne^o salvus esse potest.
without beleiving of which, there is no salvation to any man; continually
proclaiming, that you esteem them Heretics, enemies of Christ, and worse than
Infidels, that reject these opinions, or any of them; nay (which is worst of
all) in making of these and such like decrees, you give out that you are
infallible: So that to question any one of them, is ipso facto, to thrust our
selves out of your Communion; since therefore you require the belief of these
untruths, as necessary conditions of communion, you evidently free us from the
guilt of Schism, in refusing to communicate with you upon such terms.

Again we confidently assert, Babylon, when we cannot stay there, Rev. 18.4.
but we must be partakers of her sins. And evidently to practice, what I esteem
and look upon as forbidden by God, is to be guilty of damned hypocrisy, and
wilful disobedience against him; seeing therefore the Church of Rome requires
of us the practice of such unlawful actions, as the Adoration of the Sacrament,
which is Idolatry, the Invocation of Saints, Veneration of Images, petitions
for deliverance of Souls from Purgatory, which are superstitions, yea, and
injoyns her Ministers a vow of Celibacy, which is a snare, the Celebration of
the Sacrament in one kind, which is open Sacrilege; the reading of Divine
Service in an unknown tongue, which bids continual defiance to the Apostle;
there is a necessity of our separation from her, and consequently our departure
cannot be Schismatical.

This being so, C. though it were far more probable that the Catholic Church,
Mr. C. p. 232.
had been guilty of Innovation, in all the points mentioned by the Dr. yet
since by the Protestants confession, those points are not fundamental, their
voluntary separating themselves from her communion, will be in Gods esteem very
Schism. For seeing his Church requires the profession of these Innovations
which the Dr. mentioned, as the truths of Christ, and the practice of such of
them, as are unlawful and contradictory to the word of God, as the Dr. every
where asserts; he apparently affirms, that albeit it be required of us to
believe what we count an error (which is impossible) to assert, an Innovation
to be the truth of Christ, which is to lie; to practice what we deem unlawful
and forbidden by God, which is to live continually in Hypocrisy, and
disobedience to the revealed will of God, yet cannot these conditions be
refused, but we must incur the guilt of Schism. And seeing God strictly
requires us to avoid this guilt, he must consequently enjoin us to lie, to live
in continual Hypocrisy, and disobedience to his will, (as being necessary to
this end) albeit he has every where denounced damnation upon persons guilty of
these crimes, which is horribly blasphemous. And yet this is the evident result
of two other passages of his Book; As

1. Where he says, Mr. C. p. 259.
that albeit the Sanhedrim should command any thing (not fundamental) contrary
to the sense of the Law, the Jews were under the utmost penalty, obliged to
obey them; which obedience required a submission of judgment, and internal
assent to such commands, that they are agreeable to Gods law, because it would
be utterly unlawful to obey any commands of men, which the subject believed to
be contrary to Gods law. Ans. And sure it may be reasonably thought, that
amongst so many thousands of learned Rabbis, which the Jewish Nation did
afford, some might believe that to be contrary to Gods law, which indeed was
so; and then poor creatures, they must be obliged upon the utmost penalty, to
an impossibility, viz. of yiedling internal assent to that, as agreeable to
Gods law, which they believed to be contrary thereunto; is it not wonderful,
that the decision of seventy persons, contrary to Gods law (to the belief of
which all Jury was obliged) should not only disanul the obligation of seven
hundred thousand (of giving credit to that law) but force them upon the utmost
penalty, to believe the contrary? that he who pronounces such a woe upon
those, who say, Ezekiel. 13.
the Lord says, when he has not said it, should yet enjoin his people upon
the penalty of the greatest woe, to say so too? That he who sends them to the
Law, and to the testimonies, telling them, that those who speak contrary unto
them, have no truth in them; should yet oblige the same persons, upon the
utmost penalty, to embrace decisions contrary to these laws and testimonies, as
the truths of God. Credat Judaeus Apella.

Now the reasonableness of this command of God appears (says he) in this, Ibid.
that it was a less evil and inconvenience, that some legal precepts of no
great importance should be transgressed, then that contentions and disputes
should be endless.

Answ. God does not esteem so lightly of his precepts as Mr. C. but has
severely animadverted upon those who violated them in smaller matters, as his
breach upon Uzzah, and the sons of Aaron does evince.

2. How unwarrantable is it, to plead an inconvenience against a Precept? (for
whereas he talks of a command, we shall consider that pretense hereafter)
might not the greatest Rebels (who pretend Religion for their Rebellion) plead
with parity of reason, it is a less evil and inconvenience, that some petty
precepts of subjection to Governors, should be transgressed, then that
Religion should be hazzarded? But,

3. What is this, but tacitly to suppose that to obey God in every thing, and
to keep close to his precepts, were the way to make contentions endless? or
that if the disobeying of any of Gods precepts, might conduce to the ending of
contentions, we might do so, in pursuit of such an end. And is not this
apparently to do evil, that good may come on it; to say that God has need of
our lie and disobedience, to preserve the unity of his Church?

The like we have page sect. 14. where he tells us, that albeit (upon
supposition of the Churches fallibility in non fundamentals) she should err in
such decisions (which he is pleased to call, not much concerning) and by
consequence, our assent would be erroneous, yet that small incommodity would be
abundantly recompensed, with the most acceptable virtue of obed^ence, love of
peace and unity, which accompanies it.

Answ. Let him not talk of obedience, till he can show a precept, something
from God, which obliges us to believe an error, or to tell a lie, when their
Church commands us. To disobey God, and play the Hypocrites, that we may
perform obedience to her injunctions; to deny his truths out of humility, and
to purchase peace and unity by these means.

2. Seeing fundamentals (that is doctrines, See Mr. C. c. 19. sect. 6.
without an explicit belief, whereof none can be saved, are very few) does not
this lay us open to a necessity of dis-beleeving the greatest part of the Word
of God, yea, of assenting to what is contrary to it, if the Church of Rome
shall happen to make such decisions; and is this agreeable to Gods frequent
injunctions, to try all things, and hold fast the truth?

And whereas he further tells us, that both truth and error in such things,
lies only on the Churches, Ibid.
and not at all on their account. This cannot be built upon any other
foundation then this, that we are obliged to follow the dictates of the Church
(of Rome, or else it is impertinent to our discourse of Schism) though
contrary (in our judgments) to reason, and the Word of God, which is the very
thing in question.

2. If this be truth, why does Christ call us out of Babylon? least we should
be partakers of her sin, and consequently from any other assembly, with which
we cannot communicate without sin; seeing their sins, whether they be
erroneous practices, or opinions, lie only on their account, not ours.

Seeing therefore it is evidenced, 2 Proposition.
that we are free from the guilt of Schism, it follows undeniably, Rome must
be the Schismatic, as sus-spending her Communion upon conditions unlawful and
unjust; and this I could sufficiently evince from many other topics, but that
I am unwilling to be burdensome to the Readers patience, whom therefore I
refer to the reverend Bishop Bramhal, Reply to the Bishop of Calcedon, c. 8.
and proceed to the consideration of those Arguments, which he uses to defend
their Church from so great a guilt.

1. Therefore says he, if our Church was Schismatical, either it was so before
the reformation, Mr. C. p. 395.
or it began afterward so to be.

Answ. It was so before, and afterward it began to aggravate it is Schism; it
was so before causally, as doing that which gave sufficient cause for her
members to separate, it was so afterward, both causally and formally; but he
proceeds, Ibid.
' If it was so before, where was the Church from which we separated?

Answ. 1. The Greek and other Churches of the East.

2. Bishop Bramhal Rep. p. 342.
You have departed from the pure and uncorrupted Church of Rome by introducing
errors, corruptions, and abuses into it, and this is a moral departure from a
Church, and truly schism.

3. You have departed from the Catholic Church, and this you have done by
separating from you by your Censures, three of four parts of the Christian
World, as Catholic, yea, more Catholic then your selves.

Lastly, you separated from the purer part of your own Church, which then as to
the main was Orthodox. Again, might not the Arrians have argued thus, See Dr.
Fields Appen. to his third part.
where is that Church from which we separate? Are not all the famous Churches
of the world of our communion? will you say Gods Church has failed? or will
you call a few inconsiderable people in Dens, Caves, Woods, and Deserts, the
Church of God? might not the Idolatrous Priests of Judah, have argued after
this very manner? might they not have asked Elijah with greater confidence,
where was the Church from which they separated?

Again, Ibid.
(says he) If we become Schismatical after their separation, then (because
the Professors in this, nothing vary from the former Age) may the Church,
remaining the same without any alteration at all, be the true Church of Christ
to day, and the Synagogue of Satan to morrow?

Answ. 1. It is not every Schism that turns the Church of Christ into a
Synagogue of Satan, but only a Schism in fundamentals, as we shall presently
evince.

2. Your Church was Schismatical before, though not in such an high degree as
after the Trent Council she has been, for before that time she required
unlawful conditions of her Communion, denounced Anathemaes against those that
refused to obey them, and the like, but after the session of the Trent Council,
her unlawful conditions of communion have been more augmented.

Again (says he) no particular Church which is a member of the Catholic
Church, but has a power to Excommunicate those that desert her Communion,
transgress her Laws.

Answ. What, whether her Laws be just or unjust? Had the Eastern Church a power
to excommunicate the Western, because transgressing her Laws and deserting her
Communion, about the celebration of the Easter Festival? Had the Churches of
Asia, a power to Excommunicate Pope Stephanus and others of the Western Church,
who deserted their Communion by reason of a difference touching the
Re-Baptization of persons Baptized by Heretics? Has not this been continually
the custom of the Church of God, yea even of Rome it self, when any persons
excommunicated by other Churches were found Orthodox, to receive them into
their Communion? of which examples have been given above, and hundreds more
might be produced.

Well then in a word, the Church of Rome has a power to excommunicate those
who desert her, and transgress her Laws, even as the Magistrate has a power
to inflict a mulct or penalty, upon such as transgress his laws and sanctions;
but then, as the exertion of this power upon persons innocent, or in
prosecution of Laws which are manifestly unjust, is a transgression of the
bounds and limits of this power, and criminal in the person that thus exerts
it, even so the excommunication used by the Church of Rome upon other Churches,
who are necessitated by the law of God to forsake her communion, and only
transgress her laws, when inconsistent with the observance of the laws of
Christ, is a transgression of the bounds and limits of her power, and criminal,
not in him that separates (but in them that make this separation) he being
bound to obey God rather then man, so that it is impossible for you to justify
your Excommunications, unless you can justify your laws and tyrannical
exactions, upon the consciences of men.

The second sect. of his twenty fourth chap. The visible communion (says he)
betwixt the now English Church, and all other in being before it beyond the
Seas, is evidently changed and broken.

Answ. This is as true, as that the Church of Italy has no visible communion
with Spain and France; do not we communicate with them in their services when
we have occasion? and do not they mutually communicate with us? do we not
proclaim our selves their Brethren? did we ever renounce their communion? or
were we ever rejected by them? do they differ in some opinions from us? so do
the Italian and French Catholic Churches: But he goes on, The same public
service which our first reformers found in Gods Churches, all the world over,
they refuse (says he) to join in, for fear of sin.

Answ. As if the whole world at the time of our reformation had used the same
Liturgy, the public service of the Graecians, and other Eastern Churches, had
fully accorded with the service of the Western, or could be different from it,
and yet the same; and yet had this been so, must we be necessarily Schismatics
in so doing? would King Josiah. or Hezekiah, have joined in the services of
those Idol Priests, which at the time of their reformation were observed?
could they have sacrificed in the high places without sin, or were they
Schismatics for refusing to join with their corruptions? when Arrianisme
prevailed in the Church of God, when their Creeds and Doxologies were received
and practiced, were the reformers that cast them out, Schismatical? and when
that Prophecy, that even all Nations shall worship and do homage to the beast,
shall be fulfilled, will a reformation afterward be no better then a Schism?
will it be unlawful to alter, what then shall be observed?

Again (says he) most of the Ecclesiastical laws, which were formerly enforce,
Ibid.
we have abrogated, and without the consent of any other Churches, made new.

Answ. We have abrogated none, but such as were abrogated by Gods Law, such as
could never oblige us, but by our consent, and consequently can oblige no
longer then we do consent; such as were contrary to the doctrine of the
Primitive Church, we have done it legally, and with sufficient Authority, due
moderation, and other conditions requisite; yea, we had the implicit consent
of the Eastern Church, which does with us, reject these Laws of the Church of
Rome; this we constantly plead in our own behalf, and yet we must be
Schismatics, though neither all, nor any of these pleas can be invalidated.

Again (says he) They acknowledged themselves subject to the Church of Rome,
and esteemed this Patriarchical Church, Ibid.
the only Orthodox universal Church, and a separation from its Pastor, to
beformal Schism.

Ans. And will not the worshipers of the Beast do so to him, should the
Grecian Churches entertain this Faith, would you esteem it any argument to
prove them guilty of the crime of Schism, because formerly they esteemed your
Church Heretical, and your supreme Pastor an Usurper? if so, then must men be
Schismatics, whether they separate from you, or join in communion with you; if
not, I pray you why? but because it was their duty to change their opinions in
these particulars, which is evidently our plea; we found that what you called
Ancient Doctrines, from the beginning were not held, what you required to be
embraced as a truth, was evidently condemned in the Word of God, etc. and when
you have talked your self hoarse about the nature of Schism, you will still
labor in the fire, till you have proved that we are under an obligation, to
believe those doctrines as the truths of God, which we reject, as contrary to
his revealed will; which I expect should be performed at latter Lammas.

You tell us from St. Austin, Mr. C. p. 292. sect. 11. Reply p. 89, 90.
that there is no just cause of separating from the communion of all Nations,
or the whole world. To which it is answered by Bishop Bramhal, Let him always
bring such proofs, which concern not us, but make directly against him; it is
they who have separated themselves from the communion of the whole world,
Grecian, Russian, Armenian, Abissine, Protestant, by their censures; we have
made no absolute separation from the Roman Church it self, but suppose it had
been so, the Schism lies at the door of the Roman Church, seeing she separated
first from the pure Primitive Church, which was before her, not locally, but
morally: Well but to say thus, Mr. C. p. 294.
and to acknowledge, the actual departure was ours, and yet we are not
Schismatics, as leaving the errors of the Church of Rome, rather then the
Church, is to act the Donatist.

Answ. Yes, by all means, because the Donatist pretended not to find any thing
in the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, See Dally Apol. c. 6.
from which they separated, contrary to their belief, both the one and the
other taught the same faith, read the same books, exercised the same services:
well but the Donatists derive the word Catholic, not from the Universality of
Nations, but integrity of doctrine. Which is most apparently the error of the
Church of Rome, which esteems none members of the Catholic Church, but those
which embrace her doctrines entirely, but concerns not us, who esteem them
members of the Catholic Church, that differ from us. See Bishop Bramhal Rep.
p. 281.

CHAP. XIX.
Our third Proposition, that all Schism is not damnable, limited, sect. 1.
Proved from diverse instances, sect. 2. Mr. C 's. Arguments answered. And (1)
his similitude from Civil Governments considered, sect. 3. (2) His Arguments
from the division of the Schismatic from Christ's body, sect. 5. From the
Fathers, as St. Chrysostom, St. Austin, St. Pacian, St. Denis, and Irenaeus,
sect. 7. His inference from hence, that the Church of Rome is not Schismatical,
considered, sect. 8.

MY third Proposition shall be this; 3 Proposition.
That all Schism is not damnable,

Before I enter upon the proof of this assertion, I shall propose this one
distinction; viz. that Schism may be either through weakness (viz. in persons
desirous to know the truth, and earnest endeavourers after it, who
notwithstanding through the weakness of their intellectuals, or prejudices from
friends, or education, or such like causes miss their aim) or wilfulness, as it
is in persons who are either negligent, as to their inquiry into truth, or act
against the convictions of their consciences; now for these latter sort of
Schismatics, I grant their separation to be damnable; but for the weaker
Brother, the person or Church which out of frailty only is Schismatical, I
undertake to be an advocate, and free such, though not from crime, yet upon
general repentance, for unknown sins, from the sad sentence of damnation. For,

1. In that combustion which arose in the Church of God, Rome, about the Popes
Supremacy, in some of which the best men knew not whom to cleave unto; will any
charitable Papist say, that all who died on the erring part, were necessarily
damned? Again, the Myriads of Jews that believed in Christ, and yet were
zealous of the law, were guilty of this crime, as requiring such conditions of
their communion, which they ought not to have required, and excluding men from
it, upon terms unequal; and yet to say that all these Myriads (who through
weakness and infirmity, thus erred) did perish, and that their beleiving in
Christ, served them to no other ends, but in the infinity of their torments, to
upbraid them with Hypocrisy and Heresy, is so harsh a speech, that I should
not be very hasty to pronounce it: Yea further, let but a man consider the
variety of men's principles, their constitutions, and educations, tempers, and
distempers, weaknesses, degrees of light, and understanding, the many several
determinations that are made, even by most Churches, the various judgments of
the most learned, touching many of them; I say, let these things be considered,
and then let any man tell me whether it be consistent with the goodness of
that God, who is so acquainted with our infirmities as that he pardons many
things in which our wills indeed have the least but yet some share, to condemn
those to eternal torments, who after diligent enquiry into the truth, err in
some little punctilioes determined by the Church, and thinks themselves bound
to deny obedience to her in them, albeit this error has nothing of the will
in it? What I have here said I refer to the judgments of sober and impartial
men, with whom I am confident these instances, with an hundred of the like
nature, will more prevail then any thing that on the contrary is tendered by
Mr. C. and comes now to be considered.

1. to entertain principles, which if put in practice would withdraw Subjects
from their due obedience, is an offense of an high nature, Mr. C. p. 228.
but the actual cantonizing of a Kingdom, and the raising in it Courts, or
Judicatures, Independent on, and opposite to the common tribunal of the
Country, is the utmost of all crimes, and both the Seducers, and Seduced, here
are pursued by arms as the worst of enemies, it is so (says he) in the Church
whose Unity we are taught to believe, for if Unity, then Order, then
Subordination of Governors, (with an etc. at the end of them to signify the
Lord knows what) What therefore is the great sin against the fundamental
constitution of the Church but Schism? a dissolving the communion and connection
that the members of this great body have among themselves, with relation to the
whole?

Answ. This confused stuff, cannot very well be dealt withal, especially in
the lump.

1. Therefore as to his example in civil Governments, I

Answ. 1. That the case cannot easily be the same, for seldom is it that
there is such a conflict of reason, with reason, authority with authority,
amongst men learned in those matters; but suppose it should ever happen to be
so as that the most learned Lawyers, can scarce tell how to decide the case?
Would a gracious King think you, presently condemn all those to the utmost
severity, who in such cases after consultation and deliberation duly made
should by reason of some prejudices, or weaknesses in reasoning, be induced to
think it their duty to follow the mutinous party? Put the case some leading
Papist should rebel, and seek to reduce our Nation to the government of the
Pope by force of arms, (albeit the case be not so difficult but it may easily
be resolved for his Majesty against the Pope) should those Incendiaries of
Kingdoms, (I mean the Jesuits, and other of your Priests,) by all the
arguments they could invent, solicit the illiterate Papists of this Nation,
to side with this Rebellion, (as too frequently they have done) answer all
their demurres, and propound to them Indulgences, and deliverance from
Purgatory, and the meritoriousness of the fact, and such like motives, which
should be effectual in them all, and these deluded souls, thus thinking it
their duty to obey their spiritual guides, and having no other means to inform
them better, should make a party in an Insurrection; would you not put in one
plea for the excuse of these persons? Would you think it meet without respect
of persons to make a general slaughter of them all in cold blood?

I am sure the bowels of our Gracious Sovereign would yern toward them, and
must the bowels of God be more contracted? Shall we charge him with such
austerity, as is hardly incident to humane frailty? (...); It is true, a great
severity may sometimes be necessary in these cases, but still upon political
reflections, which are not incident to our Maker; Now then apply this to the
Unity of the Church, and you have an Answer to your Argument. But

2. I deny the supposed parity of the similitude, for there is greater reason
why such severities should be exercised by the civil government in the case
proposed; because the raising of Courts and Judicatures, thus independent do
ipso facto dissolve the frame of Government, but now the cases of Schism by me
mentioned and many other, do not so, for albeit they do somewhat disturb that
external unity of order, and sub-ordination of Governors which ought to be
preserved inviolate in the Church, yet is not that the Unity which is essential
to the Church, but an internal Unity of Faith and Charity, the Unity mentioned
by the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.4.5.
and albeit the dissolution of the other Union be a sin, yet that it is not
damnable seems evident to me, in that God sure has not made it as a necessary
condition of eternal life to believe this subordination of Governors, in which
this unity consists, and that he has not done so I conclude, because it is no
where so manifestly revealed to us that the meanest capacity may apprehend it.
Whereas what ever is necessary to be believed under pain of Eternal Damnation
must be plainly and evidently revealed: c. 6. v. 8.
for if ever that of Micah will hold, (he has showed thee O Man what is good!
and what does the Lord require of thee?) It is in this particular.

As an Appendix to this Objection, English Church, viz. that if a Province in
England had withdrawn it self from the public civil Authority, p. 231.
it would not excuse them to say, we do not intend to quarrel with those that
continue in obedience to the King, etc. Which if you produce to evidence this
only, that in case we had really subtracted our obedience from lawful
Authority, excuses like to these would be unserviceable to us, it is very
pertinent and close, but that it may do you any further service it must be
evidenced, not begged, that you had any Authority de jure over us, and that such
as we could not lawfully refuse to grant, or that to withdraw from usurpation
is sinful, which will be as easily performed as the former.

Again,

Answ. This division from the body of Christ is twofold, either in things in
which it is absolutely necessary to be united, and he that is thus divided is
necessarily cut off from Christ, and must bear his burden; or in these things
in which it is not absolutely necessary to be united, as in the same
Liturgies, or Ceremonies, the same opinions, as to matters not fundamental, in
which it is as impossible to obtain a general consent, as in the lineaments of
our faces; Now to assert that a Schism in such matters, by reason of the
infirmities which are incident to humane frailty should presently cut off our
weak Brother from the body of Christ, is to assert that God requires upon pain
of damnation, that a man should truly judge of that which many thousands even
of learned men very differently decide, and which is so obscurely revealed, if
at all it be so, as that the most piercing intellects dare not peremptorily
assert, they have found the truth; Thus whether the Church of Rome is the only
Orthodox Church of Christ? whether a general council may err, and whether the
Pope be the supreme Pastor of the Church of Christ, are questions which
extremely trouble the Church of God. You affirm all this, the Protestants and
Eastern Churches contradict you. Arguments are produced on both sides from
Scripture, Reason, and Antiquity. Now that it should here be necessary, for
all the Eastern Churches, all the Churches of the Protestants, upon pain of
Damnation to desert their own opinions, and embrace what you obtrude upon them,
when you shall be able to demonstrate and I see it done, I shall not despair
of a demonstration to evince that snow is black, or to be convinced of any the
most amazing Paradox.

And whereas you say that the Schism of ignorant souls seems to be more
contradictory to humane reason, because the more ignorant they ought to know
they are, and being professedly no Pastors, the more ought they to submit their
judgments to authority, Mr. C. p. 229.
and consequently the preferring of their own conduct, or the conduct of
particular Churches, before the Universal authority of the Church, (For what
you add of their Excommunicating the whole Church, both Pastors and flocks as
Heathens, and Publicans, it is so impertinent as nothing can be more) is a
presumption so contrary to humane nature and reason, p. 230.
as that their want of learning is that which will most condemn them. And this
you speak not of persons absolutely Idiots, but such as discourse of matters of
Religion, and pass their judgments on them. Now here do you not suppose, that
to reject your Doctrines is to reject the Universal Authority of the Church,
which we are not very likely to acknowledge.

2. Are such persons bound to conform their judgments, to the most or not? If
not, why do you trouble us with this Argument; If so, then in the times of
Arrianisme they were bound to deny the divinity of our Savior, and under the
Old Testament, when Idolatry prevailed, they were obliged (unless they would do
things contrary to humane nature and common reason) to become Idolaters, and
seeing the Rulers of Israel believed not on Christ, but rejected him as a
Blasphemer, the people were bound to do so too; these and a thousand such like
absurdities, are the very natural consequences of your positions.

But you have Fathers to produce;

1. Ad Ephesians. Hom. 11.
That of St. Chrysostom we consent unto, in this sense, viz. that (wilfully)
to divide the unity of Christ's Church, does inevitably infer damnation, as
surely as the piercing of Christ's body, but does this prove that a dissent from
a particular Church in matters of inferior moment, out of humane frailty, does
inevitably do so?

2. Ad Sympr. cp. 2.
As for that of St. Pacian, who tells us, that Novatian was nor Crowned,
because he died out of the Communion of the Church: We,

Answ. That in St. Pacians phrase, to dye out of the Communion of the Church,
was to dye without charity to the members of it, as it immediately there
follows, hear the Apostle, if I have all faith, and have not charity, I am
nothing.

3. De Symb. ad Catech. l. 4. c. 10.
In his citation from St. Austin he abuses us, for whereas St. Austin says,
it will nothing avail him that is found without the Church, quod credidit, that
he believed in Christ, or professed Christianity, or did so much good, without
respect to the chiefest good; Mr. C. will have him to asser,t that it does
nothing profit such a one, Mr. C.p. 226.
that he is Orthodox in belief; whereas St. Austin speaks of Heretics, and
presently cries out, hear this, O ye Heretics; and again, quaecunque
congregatio cujustibet Haeresis in angulis sedet, concubina est, non matrona;
and a third time, O Haeresis Arriana quid insultas? Now separation from the
Church by Heresy, we acknowledge to incur damnation.

The passage of St. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 6.
Denis is very true, viz. That all things should be endured, rather then we
should consent to the division of Gods Church, but this he speaks not of the
evil of sin, but of pain and misery, and what of this?

Lastly, Irenaeus does no where say, there cannot possibly be made any
reformation, etc. but only they ( viz. Propter modicat and quaslibet causas l.
4. c. 62.
who for crisling causes divide the body of Christ, who strain at Gnats and
swallow Camels, such as these) can make no reformation of any such importance,
as to countervail the danger of a division, which is altogether impertinent to
the design, for which it is produced: but of these two last places, see the
incomparable Chilling. p. 256, 257.

From what has been said, we may see the weakness of this Argument, which we
find p. 296. viz. Salvation may be had in the Church of Rome, and therefore
it cannot be schismatical. Albeit you cannot be ignorant, that we distinguish
the quality of persons, considering your Church, either in regard of those, in
whom, either negligence, or pride, or worldly fear, or hopes, or some other
voluntary sin, is the cause of their Schism, and continuance in your church;
and of such we pass the heaviest sentence; or in regard of those who owe their
Schism to want of capacity, or default of instruction, or such like
involuntary defects, and these we say, may have salvation, albeit they
continue members of your Church.

CHAP. XX.
General Councils are not infallible, whether considered with the Pope, sect.
1. Or without the Pope, sect. 2. Their infallibility not concluded, (1) From
Scripture, sect. 3. That place of Deuteronomy. 17. considered, ibid. As also the
Argument from Genesis 49. sect. 4. From 1 Timothy 3.16. sect. 5. From Mat. 23. v. 3.
sect. 6. Nor (2) from reason, sect. 7. Mr. C's. Arguments answered, sect. 7, 8.
The worthies of our Church do not confess it, sect. 9, 10.11. Nor lastly, is it
evinced from the consent of universal Antiquity, sect. 12. The testimonies of
St. Athanasius, Optatus, Vincentius Lirinensis, and St. Austin, produced
against it, sect. 12, 13, 14, and 15.

4 Proposition.
GEneral Councils are not infallible.

Now touching the infallibility of General Councils;

1. Do you mean such a one as is confirmed by the Pope, or one without, or
before his confirmation; if the confirmation of the Pope be requisite, then
without it, is the judgment of all the Bishops fallible, and if so, then
either the judgment of the Pope is so too, or not; if the first, then the whole
General Council is fallible in it is determinations, for it can have no other
members but the Pope and others, and if both these be fallible, it is evident
that the Council is so; if infallible, then are the Bishops bound to follow the
sentence of the Pope, and cannot sit as Judges of the cause; it being very
right and equitable, that fallible persons, who of themselves may dangerously
err, should submit to the judgment of him, who cannot do so: If you say he is
infallible, not in decrecing, but in this, that he shall not confirm an error.

I Answ. This assertion implies, either that the Pope e Cathedra, cannot err,
and then the veriest Idiot may be styled infallible, as well as a General
Council, because the Pope e Cathedra, cannot confirm, what he erroniously
dictates. Or,

2. That in confirming the decrees of General Councils, only he is unerrable,
and then, pray you where is that promise of such peculiar assistance at that
time? where is that Scripture, or single passage of any Father, that albeit the
Pope may err in decreeing any matter of faith, yet in confirming the decrees
of a General Council, he cannot? Ede tabulas, but if not one Iota in
scripture, reason, or antiquity for this, how can I be assured that it is so?
and consequently have an infallible guide to lean and rest upon? As for
scripture, what place can they bring, but that of Luke 22. I have asked for
thee, that thy faith fail not; but is there any thing of teaching the whole
Church? does he say, that the Pope may fail in manners, but shall not in
doctrines of Faith? or in decreeing Doctrines of faith, but not in confirming
them? or does he at all speak of the Pope of Rome? Yea,

2. Did that prayer hinder the denial of Christ by Peter? was Peter then summus
pontifex, or not? If not, then does not this concern him in that relation, and
consequently, neither those that succeed him; if he was, then what hinders but
that the summus pontifex may fail? Neither is there any thing to the purpose,
in that of Mat. On this rock will I build my Church, and the Gates of Hell
shall not prevail against it. For,

1. Is here one syllable of the Pope, or infallibility? or if there were, is
there any thing of it for the Pope, more then for the Church? why then did our
Author produce it for the Church? and if touching the Pope, is it rather in
confirming the decrees of Councils, then in decreeing doctrines of faith?

And as for antiquity, had this been taught in the Primitive times, could they
have avoided this argument? The Pope has confirmed this, Ergo it is true; this
Council was approved by the Pope, Ergo it is infallible; but there is not one
syllable to be heard in all Antiquity of this nature.

Again, if the Pope must be included, may not the Pope and Council run counter,
and what shall we do then? what shall we do in a time of Schism? when there
are several pretenders to the Popedom, as frequently there have been; to whom
then must we hearken? how shall we know which of these is the true Pope? if a
Council must decide it (as indeed none else can) either the Council is
fallible, and may determine wrong, or infallible, and then it is so without the
Pope: And so the assertion I dispute against, is deserted, and another taken
up, of which anon.

Again, suppose any Popes misdemeanors be to be judged of, as for example;
whether Sixtus Quintus got into St. Peter's chair by Simony, in this case the
Pope cannot be Judge, and therefore if the Council without the Pope be not
infallible, how can we know whether their determination be aright, seeing it
may as well be wrong; Further tell me, how may I be assured that the Pope is a
true Pope? If he came in by Simony, he is none, and how is it possible for me
to know that? seeing some have been Simonaical, how can I be certain that many
others have not been so too? and if so, then not only all fallibility is
ceased, but your succession too. For all the Cardinals created by a Simonaical
Pope, can be no Cardinals, and if so, then Sixtus Quintus being evidently
convicted of Simony before the Council of Sicil, could be no Pope, his
Cardinals, no Cardinals; neither could the Popes, created since by those
Cardinals, be truly such; so that from his time, your Church has been without
a lawful universal head.

Again, how shall I be certain, that the Popes election is legal (for, unless
it be so, your selves deny him to be Pope) when sometimes the People, sometimes
the Clergy chose him, sometimes both; in one age the Emperor, in another the
Cardinals, in a third a General Council: Further I might ask you, how you are
assured the Pope is rightly ordained and Baptized (for if he was not, by your
own principles, he can be no Pope) and that he was, I cannot be certain,
unless I could know the intention of the Priest that Baptized him, and the
Bishop that ordained him: and though I did know (what cannot be known) their
intentions, yet how shall I know the intentions of the persons, that Baptized
and Ordained them; and so on to that endless chain of uncertainties, propounded
by Mr. Chillingworth, in his second chap. which it is impossible you should ever
be able to solve. But I am oppressed with copiousnesse of Argument, and
therefore must break off from this member to the next.

2. Again, therefore if you say,

1. p. 51. sect 8.
You contradict your self in requiring the consent of the Pope to the
Obligation of the Councils Canons; for if they be infallible, are we not bound
to assent to them notwithstanding? Or can we do well in opposing what is
infallible?

2. How shall we know, whether the Pope or Council be supreme, when the
council of Basil and Constance determined it one way, the council of Lateran
the other way? So, the second Council of Nice asserted the corporeity of
Angels, the first of Lateran denies it. Can infallible persons contradict each
other?

Who must be the Members of this Council? whether only Bishops, or
Presbyters, and Deacons too? upon what certain account, do you shut out
Presbyters, if you admit only Bishops? or if you require, that Presbyters be
called to the Council, what certain grounds can you produce for it? Why should
you exclude Laymen from a place in these your Councils? especially, when the
Scripture tells us, that in the Council which was called about circumcision,
mention is made not only of Apostles, but of the Elders of the Church, and of
the Brethren. Acts 15.23. Bellarm. Says indeed, that this multitude was called
not to consent, and judge, but only to consent. But upon what authority does
he build this interpretation? Or what certainty can we have in the
determinations of Holy Scriptures? If we may thus apply unto them our idle
fancies, add and distinguish, where no other Scripture, no circumstance or
context leads us to it, but rather the contrary strongly is insinuated; for as
much as the definitive sentence runs thus; It has pleased the Apostles, and
Elders, with the whole Church, etc.

Further, why must Bishops be called to it out of one Country and not our of
another? why will so many out of this Kingdom suffice? What if the members of
the Council be chosen illegally, and by a certain faction, so that the major
part of those that were capable of being Members of the Council, be of a
contrary opinion to the persons actually elected? Why should we believe them
then? For if the contrary faction should prevail, their determinations would
be contradictory to the others, and so the Articles of our faith must be
formed by chance and faction. Again, what if all the persons called come not,
will the Council be general? Why may not the greater part of the Council err,
and yet the Church be infallible? as well as the greatest part of its Members
diffused err, and yet the diffused Church be infallible? Especially seeing
Gods promises must be acknowledged to concern them both? Shall they be
infallible, whether they fast, pray, study, and use means, or not? If so, then
to what purpose, have they generally done so? and why are there such debatings?
If not, how shall we, so far distant from them, be able to know how they
acquit themselves in these things, and consequently, whether they be
infallible in their particular determinations? Yea seeing the packing and
fore-resolution of votes does null their Decrees, (or else your Answer to the
Canon of the Council of Chalcedon is perfectly vain) in such a corrupt age as
we live in, p. 51. sect. 8.
wherein, if ever, all may be said to seek their own: how shall we know
whether all the Bishops of the Church of Rome, come not, as they did to the
Trent Council, with resolutions to condemn the Protestants right or wrong?
Furthermore, who must call this Council? Pope or Princes? when they are met,
how shall we know, that they are fit Members, when we cannot know the
legality of their Baptism, and Ordinations, because we cannot know the
intentions of all the particular persons, who Baptized and Ordained them? What
if there can be no general Council? What if Princes will not suffer Bishops
within their Dominions to repair to it? Must we call general Councils to
suppress every novelty? How shall we know true Councils? Have you not large
Catalogues of reprobate and doubtful Councils? Upon what uncontrollable grounds
do you reject this, and own that? whence have you any infallible evidence, that
your charactarismes of a true Council are true ones? Must this general Council
be made out of the whole Christian world or not? If not, how is it a general
Council? How can the promises made to the whole World be applied to it? How is
it a representative of the whole Church? If it must be from all parts?

1. It Is evident, we never had a general Council; For what Bishop came in the
primitive times from India, Aethiopia, Persia, Parthia, Armenia, what British
or Scottish Bishops were there? And

2. A general Council is then a thing impossible, for some Bishops be in
America, and others in the East Indies, some dispersed through most of the
Turks Dominions, and how long would it be before all these could have tidings
of a Council? How long would they be in journying to the place appointed for
convention? How many of the most aged will dye by the way? How many will be
hindered by Infidel Princes? Who will provide for such a multitude, when
convened? How will it be possible for them to confer, by reason of the
difference of their language? Or to provide Interpreters for them all? what
will become of their Flocks at home, while they spend so many years journey to
a Council? These and an hundred questions more, of the persons appointed to
call them, of the place, and the like, might be insisted on, to show that
general Councils were never instituted by God for the Rule of our Faith. But I
am weary, and therefore send you to Mr. Baxters key for Cath. pt. 2.
and others.

Nor can this infallibility of general Councils be concluded either from
Scripture reason, the suffrage of Antiquity, England: Though all these Topics
are made use of to this purpose. And.

1. To return answer to his evidence from Scripture, that of Deuteronomy. 17. from the
8. to the 13. is very unserviceable to his design; For not to tell him with
Episcopius, Mr. C. p. 258. sect. 12.
how inconsequent this deduction is from the Old Testament, (wherein, if we may
believe our Author, we have an express evidence from God of such an
infallible convention) to the New, which affords us no such thing. We answer
further,

1. It is not evident from the place, that any mention is made of Religious
causes; for albeit there be mention of cause and cause; yet in the Hebrew it
is (...) which signifies a cause before brought to the inferior Judges V. 8.
before whom the causes of Religion were not brought.

2. That their judgment was not infallible is evident. For

1. The Scripture affirms of these Priests, who are here appointed to Judge,
that they departed out of the way, caused many to stumble at the Law, yea,
corrupted the covenant of Levi. Mal. 2.8.9. They accepted persons in that Law,
that is in judging, the law was wrested by them in favor of persons whom they
particularly affected; yea further, these Judges condemned the Prophets of the
Lord, Jer. 26.8. The priests, Prophets, and all the people condemn Jeremy to
death.
and that for accusing the people and Priests of defection from the Lord, to
Idolatry; from the Precepts of the Law, to the most enormous sins. Matthew.
23.17. Yea, they approved of false Prophets, as is every where extant in the
Old Testament; for that this was done by these Judges, appears, in that a
Prophet was not to be Judged but by the Senate, whence Christ says, Luke
13.33. It cannot be that a Prophet should perish out of Jerusalem, because it
was the place where this Sanhedrim was.

2. Had it been so, why was it that so many sects were found among them, of
Sadduces, Pharisees, Essens, Gaulonites and Herodians? How is it, that this
infallible Judge never went about to interpose his sentence? How is it, that
they never resorted to him for satisfaction, but indeed these Sects were made
up of the persons that were to judge, and so no equal decision was like to be
made by such interested persons.

3. We know that this Synod was made up of Sadduces and Pharisees, the one of
which denied the Resurrection; the other by their traditions annihillated the
Command of God: Now these, as we may read in Josephus, mutually prevailed in
the Nation; Now then, had this Synod been to judge of the Resurrection, when
the Sadduces prevailed, would they have been infallible in their Judgments.
Surely no more then the Arrian Councils. And when the Pharisees, would they not
(yea did they not) determine such things which made void the Commandments of
God? but what need we flick upon these arguments, when we have such an
illustrious instance, in their rejection of our Savior, and refusing to
believe on him; would the Synagogue have judged him to be the Messiah, when
none of the Rulers thereof believed on him, when Nicodemus was so twited by
them, for offering to speak for him? yea, P. 259.
did they not with their President condemn him, Mat. 26.57. Oh! but (say they)
Christ was now come, and their infallibility was ceased, and God now permited
them to be deceived.

Answ. But was it not necessary that they should be acquainted with the will
of God? for how else could the Senate be accused, or the people for following
their determinations? when the Senate by the virtue of this promise, as they
interpret it, must needs suppose themselves to be infallible in their
judgment, and the people being bound also to esteem them so, must necessarily
assent to their determination, and had just cause to help forward his
condemnation, insult over, crucify and blaspheme him.

2. Christ accuses them of committing the like error long before, in killing
and condemning the Prophets sent to them, Mat. 21.35, 36. compared with verse
45. And Stephen, which of the Prophets have not your Fathers persecuted,
slaying them, which showed before, the coming of the just one; yea, our Savior
tells them, they were blind guides, such as would neither go into Heaven
themselves, nor permit others. Mat. 5. and 15, and 23.

His next Argument from Scripture is very rediculous, Genesis 49.
that the Scepter should not depart from Judah, nor the Law giver from betwixt
his feet (that is, that they should always have a civil Government (as all
interpreters that ever I met withal, do agree) then must the Church or
Ecclesiastical Government be infallible: But the former is so, and therefore
the consequence must be good. But did this Paragraph speak of the Jewish
Church, as undoubtedly it does not, yet what has it of infallibility? or if it
would infer infailibility in some portion of the Jewish Church, must that
necessarily be the Sanhedrims? When Mr. C. is able to make these things good,
I shall he contented to let this pass for a demonstration.

3. Roman Church, produced in a Parenthesis, that passage of the first Ep. c.
3. v. 16. P. 100.
Tim. where the Church of Ephesus is styled the Pillar and Ground of truth,
which because it was altogether impertinent in that place, I have referred
hither;

And Answ. 1. With Mr. Chillingworth, That it is neither impossible nor
improbable, that these words may have reference not to the Church, but to
Timothy, and the sense of the place run thus; that thou may know how to
behave thy self (as) a Pillar and Ground of truth, in the Church of God: This
exposition offers no violence to the words at all, but only supposes an
Ellipsis of the particle ((...)) in the Greek very ordinary; neither wants it
some likelihood, that St Paul comparing the Church to an house, should here
exhort Timothy to carry himself as a Pillar in that house (according as he had
given other principle men in the Church the name of Pillars) rather then having
called the Church an house, to name it presently a pillar, which seems
somewhat Heterogeneous.

2. The Church which St. Paul here speaks of, was that in which Timothy
conversed, and that was a particular Church (and that not the Roman) now such
you will not have to be infallible. That this is the very truth, is manifest
from an impartial consideration of the place; for the Apostle writes to
Timothy, and gives him directions, that he may know how to behave himself in
the Church of Ephesus (and not the universal, in part of which St. Paul was,
when he wrote this to him) and consequently in a particular Church; Now the
same Church in which he directs him to behave himself, the Apostle calls the
Pillar and Ground of truth, therefore he gives this title to a particular
Church.

3. Mr. Chill.
Should we grant you this on courtesy, yet must we put you in remembrance,
that many attributes are not notes of performance, but of duty, and teach us
not of necessity what the thing or person is, but what it should be: Ye are
the fait of the earth, faith our Savior to the Disciples; not that this
quality was inseparable from their persons, but because it was their office to
be so; for if it could not have been otherwise, in vain had he put them in
fear of being cast upon the dunghill as unsavory, so the Church may be by duty
the Pillar and Ground of all truth, not only necessary, but profitable to
salvation, and yet it may neglect and violate this duty, and be in fact, the
teacher of some Error.

4. We say, that this part of the verse may be connexed with the following,
after this manner; The Pillar and Ground of truth, and without controversy,
great is the mystery of Godliness; And that,

1. Because Irenaeus seems to have read it so; for in the beginning of his
third book, he tells us, that the Apostles had delivered to them the will of
God, which they before had preached in the Scripture, to be the pillar and
foundation of our Faith.

2. Otherwise the Apostle would begin a new sentence with a conjunction
copulative, which is somewhat harsh.

3. The Jews were wont to introduce those doctrines of their Church, which were
of greatest moment and consequence, with such a form as this is: thus Moses
Aegyptius in the beginning of that great work, which he calls (...), speaks
thus: the foundation of foundations, and pillar of wisdom, is the knowledge of
the first and supreme being.

5. We say, that if this also were allowed, yet must this sentence be
understood of the Church diffused, which will be always the maintainer and
teacher of all necessary truths (that being essential to her very being) not of
a representative Church, collected in a General Council.

What he adds farther, that our Savior enjoined obedience to all the commands
of those who sat in Moses his Chair, cannot be serviceable to him to prove an
infallibility in the Sanhedrim. For,

1. How will it appear that he speaks of them, considered as members of the
Sanhedrim, and not rather as teachers in their Synagogues, in which case sure
they were not infallible.

2. If he plead for the infallibility of the Sanhedrim, seeing he, the Shilo,
was already come, the Sanhedrim must be held infallible after his coming,
which (as it is contrary to Mr. C's assertion in this very place, so it) lays
a necessity on us to acknowledge, that either their decree against our Savior
was to be believed by the Jews, or that to believe in the Messiah was no
fundamental. But

3. This clause of yiedling obedience to the Scribes, and Pharisees, is to be
limited to what they taught from, and according unto Moses and the Prophets;
For elsewhere he puts in a cave at against the doctrine of the Pharisees, Mat.
16.6, 12. calls them blind guides, whom to follow would endanger our falling
into the ditch, Mat. 15.24. Seducers, V. 15. of this chapter; which is evidence
sufficient, that he never intended they should be followed absolutely, but only
when they followed the Law of Moses.

2. This infallibility cannot be proved from reason, which to evince I will
carefully ponder what Mr. C. has produced from this topic.

1. Then to help him out a little, I will premise that nature teaches us that
what is necessary to the Christian Faith for its preservation, and to hinder
the undermining of it, ought to be practiced, Mr. C. p. 239.
but it is absolutely necessary (says he) for the Church often times to make
her decisions of points in controversy, for otherwise the Devil would have
power to undermine a great part of our Faith, if permission were given freely
to maintain. (I suppose he means, to deny) any thing that does not appear to
any one expressly, either in Scripture or Tradition.

Answ. We also grant a necessity or at least a convenience of a Tribunal to
decide controversies, but how? not by causing any person to believe what he
did not antecedently, to these decrees upon the sole authority of the Council,
but by silencing our disputes, and making us acquiesce in what is propounded
without any public opposition to it, keeping our opinions to our selves, and
not troubling the Church of God with them; and therefore we are far enough
from granting a permission to maintain openly such things as appear to any
private judgment to be a truth, as knowing this may breed disturbances, but
yet a liberty of using private discretion in approving or rejecting any thing
as delivered or not in Scripture, we think ought to be allowed, for faith
cannot be compelled, and by taking away this liberty from men, we should
force them to become Hypocrites, and to profess outwardly what inwardly they
dis-believe.

But you further add, p. 242.
that upon such a decision it cannot be avoided but that an obligation of
believing it will arise to Christians, or else to what end does the Council
state it?

Answ. We acknowledge that this is the end of her decrees and that when ever
her decisions are Divine Truths, we are under an Obligation to believe them,
but to suppose they are always such, is evidently to beg the question, and to
assert this Obligation, when they are not such, is to lay upon us a necessity
to believe as many errors as it is possible for a Council to decide, which the
experience of the Lateran, 2. Nicene, and Trent Council tells us may be very
many, and very dangerous.

2. This undoubtedly was the end of the decisions of the Arrian Councils, yea
of every Council in the Church of God, and yet will Mr. C. assert that they
unavoidably laid an obligation upon every Member of their respective Churches
to obey them:

Well therefore, Baron, will tell you, Objecto fidei. c. 17. quae quamvis non
sit exse infallibilis. etc. ad vitandam confusionem, and Ecclesiarum,
dilacerationem. etc. qui palam contradicunt.
that we confess the highest Ecclesiastical power to be a general Council,
which albeit it be not of it self infallible, and therefore cannot from its
own authority oblige to give credit to its determinations, yet does it avail to
that end to which it was instituted, i. e. for the avoiding the confusion, and
renting of the Church. Seeing such a Council can Excommunicate and subject to
Ecclesiastical censures those who openly contradict her.

2. The Authority of general Councils has a great weight and moment in the
begetting a persuasion of the truth of the Doctrine defined by it: For such
decrees cannot rashly be rejected, as being made by those, Timere and non
adhibita accurata and gravi observatione.
who

1. Have greater assistance of the Spirit of God.

2. Greater means of finding out the truth, viz. by Prayer, Fastings: and
Disputations.

3. Authoritatem. divinitus datam definiendi controversias fidei.
Better reason of discovering what is the opinion of the whole Church; yea

4. Says he, an authority delegated from Christ to decide controversies of
Faith.

Your second Argument is, God will not be wanting to his Church to keep it in
truth and unity; P. 245.
Ergo not only a general Council, but as general a one as can be had, ought
to have the force and obligation of a general, or Oecume^nical, that is, it
ought to be infallible: Ans. But pray you sir, do you not here apparently beg
the question? For if any of us thought that God would be wanting to preserve
his Church, in truth and unity, if General Councils were not infallible, how
soon would we embrace their infallibility? but this is it that we constantly
deny, maintaining that albeit there be no such infallible Judge, yet has God
sufficiently consulted the welfare of his Church, in that he has given us
his Word as a Rule to walk by, and his Spirit who will infallibly guide his
children into all saving truth: and indeed the Church whose unity we profess,
is not an Organical body, made of several particular Congregations, or
provincial Churches, but only consists of the true and living members of
Christ's body, scattered through the world, which are united to him by faith,
and the mystical union of the Spirit, and to one another by the bond of
charity, and are infallibly guided by the Spirit into a belief of all saving
truth.

2. It is evident hence that want of charity, profaneness and Hypocrisy are
as great breaches of the Churches unity, as want of truth, and yet I hope you
will not accuse God of being defective to his Church, because he has provided
no other means then his Word, Spirit, and Ministers, against these things; and
why then should we esteem him so in not making further provision for the unity
of his Church?

3. As God has sufficiently provided for Kingdoms and commonwealths, by his
ordinance of Magistracy, albeit they be not infallible in their Laws, but may
sometimes enact such things as tend to the prejudice of their Subjects, even so
he has sufficiently provided for the external unity of the Church by the
Ecclesiastical Governors he has placed in them, albeit they be not so. But

4. This is an undeniable evidence that God does not think these means so
necessary to unity as you pretend, viz. that he has not at all acquainted us
with this means of unity. For it cannot be that the Infinitely wise God, should
make that to be the only sufficient means of unity, about the nature, and
requisites of which there be so many hundred doubts, that the wisest man is
not able to resolve them, or return any thing satisfactory to them; Peruse but
the questions I have made touching this matter, unless you are able to resolve
them all with the greatest perspicuity and evidence, this means will evidently
be uneffectual to the end that God intended it, for still it will remain in
dubio whether this convention have the conditions of a Judge infallible, seeing
therefore it is evident, that most of the questions proposed by me are
variously maintained by men of learning, and abilities, and it is as evident
that God has not interposed his decision touching any of them, it seems
apparent unto me, that he never intended a general Council as a Judge, to
whose decisions upon pain of damnation we must assent, and to which we must
necessarily submit our judgments, if we would avoid the ruin of the Church;
For sure it cannot be that what is so necessary to the unity (that is the
being) of the Church, should be left by an all-wise God, at such infinite
uncertainties? And I appeal unto your self, whether we who say the Scripture
must be Judge in fundamentals, or things necessary to Salvation, (as that God
is, and that he is a rewarder of those that diligently seek him, that he is
holy, just, and good, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners,
dyed for us, rose again, will raise us up at the last day, and bring us unto
judgment, that faith, repentance, and obedience, or holiness of life, are
necessary for our attainment unto happiness) are at such uncertainties. Has
not the Scripture laid down these things with the greatest perspicuity? Are
they not writ as with a Sun beam? Is there any need of a general Council to
determine these things? and must the Church undoubtedly be ruined if she does
not? Now as for other things which may be variously conceived and held,
without the destruction of faith or good manners, a liberty of judgment may
be allowed, only with such restrictions as shall obviate all public
disturbances of the Church. Nor does it weaken this discourse at all, that we
are uncertain touching the number of fundamentals, seeing it cannot rationally
be denied that whatsoever is so, is perspicuously laid down in Scripture,
albeit we cannot say e contra, that whatever is perspicuously laid down in
Scripture is fundamental.

4. England, he would have the infallibility of General Councils to be
asserted by Dr. White, Dr. Field, and the most Reverend Archbishop Lawd; but
it is no where so affirmed by them, Arch. Lawd confer. sect 37. Number. 3.
Dr. White indeed is charged by A. C. to have confessed, that the visible
Church had in all ages taught the unchanged faith of Christ, in all points
fundamental, and this he had reason to affirm; but that he understands not the
visible Church represented in a General Council, appears,

1. Because a General Council has not been assembled in all ages. And,

2. Those that have been assembled, have not taught all fundamentals, but some
only, at the most. And therefore he understood it (if he ever said so, which we
have Fide jesuitica) of the visible Church diffused through the universe.

The other passage out of sect. Ibid. sect. 21. N. 5.
that should Mr. Cressie invoke God to witness, that he understood the Arch
Bishop otherwise, one could not possibly believe him. For he tells him, diverse
Protestants believe the same with him, Cites Keckerman thus speaking; The
question is whether the whole Church, universally considered for all the Elect,
who are members of the Militant Church, can err in the whole faith, or any
weighty points thereof, and answering, it is simply impossible. And the passage
of Dr. Field runs thus; that it is impossible that the Church should ever by
Apostasy and mis-beleif, wholly depart from God, taking the Church for all the
beleivers now living, and in things necessary, to be known expressly. And having
proved that the whole Militant Church is holy, he thence infers, that she (the
whole Militant Church) cannot possibly err in fundamentals, albeit she may
err in superstructures; for if she could, she would not be Holy, but
Heretical, it being most certain that no assembly (be it never so general) of
such Heretics, is or can be Holy.

He goes on and tells us, that the Arch Bishop asserts, that a General Council
de post facto is unerrable, that is, p. 254.
when it is decisions are admited once, and received Generally by Catholics;
Now because he could not but know, that he had abused the Arch Bishop in this
citation, instead of sect. 38. he gives us sect. 33. But to pass that, the Arch
Bishop says only this; That a General Council is a very probable, but yet a
fallible way of introducing truth, but after it is determinations are admitted
by the whole Church, then being found true, it is also infallible, that is
(says he) it deceives no man; for so all truth is, and is to us, when it is
once known to be truth. So that he only says this, when the Church has found
it is determinations true, they are infallible. Hear his words, It Is true, a
General Council de post facto, after it is ended and admitted by the whole
Church (which he supposes cannot err in matters of faith) is then infallible,
for it cannot err in that which it has truly determined already, without
error (as that is supposed to be, which the whole Church acknowledges as a
matter of Faith.) But that a General Council a part ante, when it first sits
down and continues to deliberate, may truly be said to be infallible in all
it is after determinations, what ever they be, I utterly deny. P. 305.
What he further cites from Mr. Ridley, Dr. Bilson, Dr. Potter, is evidently
inconsequent, nor does Mr. Hooker say absolutely, that the will of God is, to
have us do what ever the sentence of Judicial and final decision shall
determine, but manifestly restrains his words to litigious and controverted
causes of such quality, as our Ceremonies are, as you may see in his preface,
sect. 6.

Lastly, As for the consent of universal Antiquity, C. here contends for, and
indeed had it been otherwise, how is it, that in so many Volumes writ by them,
against all kind of Heretics, they never touch upon this Argument, never
press the infallibility of General Councils, never produce them as the Oracles
of the holy Ghost, or tell their adversaries, that they must yield the same
obedience to them as Scripture; had this been then admitted as a principle in
the Church of God, how can it easily be imagined that the Fathers of the
Church, should have over looked so facile and compendious a proof, and yet they
have not only done so, Frustra igitur circumcursitantes praetexunt Synodos ob
fidem e^postulare cum sit divina Scriptura omnibus potentior. Athan. l. de Syn.
speaking against the Arrians. Epist. ad Epict.
but asserted many things which are evidently repugnant to this pretense. Thus
Athanasius, it is in vain that the Arrians pretend Synods for their faith, when
they have the divine Scripture more powerful then them all; from whence the
Argument is apparent, that which is more powerful then all Synods for the
stablishing of faith, is a sufficient means of unity (because the power of
General Synods is supposed to be so) but such is the holy Scripture, according
to Athanasius: Ergo. Nor is there any contradiction to this, in what is cited
from Athanasius, by Mr. C. viz. that he wonders how any one dares move a
question touching matters defined by the Nicene Council, since the decrees of
such Councils cannot be changed without error: For what consequence is this,
the decrees of such Councils as the Nicene, whose decrees were Orthodox, and
regulated by the Scripture, cannot be changed without error; Ergo general
Councils are infallible, especially when Athanasius immediately gives this
reason, viz. because the faith there delivered according to the Scriptures,
seemed sufficient to him to overturn all impiety; so then, this is the reason
of their immutability, because their decrees were delivered according to the
Scriptures.

2. Optatus Milev. speaks thus, we must seek Judges (viz. in the controversies
betwixt you Donatists, Cont. Parmen. l. 5.
and us Catholics) on earth there can no judgment of this matter be found,
(viz. none which is infallible, as appears from the words precedent) no body
may believe you, nor any body us, for we are all contentious men; and again, by
fiding, the truth is hindered: we must seek a Judge from heaven, but wherefore
should we knock at Heaven, when we have it here in the Gospel; in which place
he evidently concludes, that no convention of men are to be believed; for
their own Authority, nemo vobis (Donatistis) nemo nobis Catholicis credat.

2. That there could be no infallible Judge of that controversy upon earth,
both which are sufficiently repugnant to this pretended infallibility.

3. Vincentius Lirinensis in his discourse upon this Question, Adv. Her. c. 1.
how a Christian may be able surely to discern the Catholic truth, from
Heretical falsity, advises us to this end, to fortify our Faith;

1. By the authority of Gods Law.

2. By the Tradition of the Catholic Church, Hujusmodi semper responsum ab
omnibus fere retuli.
this way (says he) I was directed to, by almost all the Learned men I
enquired of: So that this opinion here delivered was not his private one, but
it was the common way by which the Fathers of his age discerned truth from
error, and here let it be considered,

1. That by the Tradition of the Catholic Church, he does not understand the
definition of any General Council, but partly the universal consent of the
members, of the then present Church, partly the constant and perpetual
profession and doctrine of the Ancient Church, Cap. 3.
as his own words do evince unto us, for he tells us that is properly
Catholic, Quod ubique quod semper quod ab omnibus creditum est.
which is believed every where, at all times, and by all men; this says he, we
must be careful to hold, as we shall he, if we follow universality, antiquity,
and consent. What ever exceptions are made by the Papists to this evidence, De
formali objecto fidei. p. 210, etc.
are taken off by the Learned Baron.

2. Let it here be noted, that Vincentius does not so much as once in all his
Book, direct us to the determinations, much less to the infallible
determination of the Pope, Roman Church, or a General Council, as the way to
discern truth from Heresy, and yet his silence in these particulars could not
easily be imagined (in a treatise written purposely on that subject, and
wherein he undertaketh to give us, full and certain directions to avoid
Heresy) if the Church had then been of the Romanists opinion.

St. Austin's testimony is as clear, for thus he speaks; Ep. 19. ad Hieron.
I have learned to give only to those writings, which are now called Canonical,
this reverence and honor, as that I dare say, that none of them erred in
writing, but others I so read, that how holy and learned so ever they be, I do
not therefore think it true, because they so judge it, but because they
persuade me, either by those Canonical books, or by probable reason, that they
say true; If therefore this honor of being free from error in their writing,
is only to be ascribed to the Canonical Books of Scripture, then must the
decretal Epistles of Popes, the decrees of General Councils, be excluded from
it, according to St. Austin, as being writers which are not Canonical. For the
particle solas, excepts all that are not so; yea, he does not only compare all
other writers with Scripture in this contest, but their writings also, as in
this same Epistle: Only to the holy Scriptures, Ep. 112.
do I owe this ingenuous servitude, so to follow them alone, as not to doubt,
that the writers of them erred in any thing: And again, If any thing be
affirmed by the clear Authority of the holy Scriptures, it is undoubtedly to
be believed, but as for other witnesses or testimonies, whereby we are
persuaded to believe any thing, Tibi credere vel non credere liceat.
we are free to believe them or not.

But undeniable is that of his third Book, against Maximinus, neither ought I
as fore-judging to bring forth the Nicene Council, nor thou the Council of
Ariminum. I am not bound by the Authority of this, nor thou of that, let matter
contend with matter, cause with cause, reason with reason, by the authorities
of the Scriptures, which are witnesses not proper to either of us, but common
to both. Here we are told that St. Austin speaks not his own mind, but the
mind of the Heretics he has to deal with (an answer happily borrowed from
Zabarel, or some other Commentator upon Aristotle, who when they are not able
to avoid his sentences any other way, tell us that he speaks ex mente aliorum
Philosophorum) but the truth is otherwise, as appears from the 18. and 19.
chap. of his Book de unitate Ecclesiae, where the like passage may be found,
and the Question being there stated, which is the true Church, he desires the
Donatists to demonstrate their Church, not in the speeches and rumors of the
Africans, not in the Councils of their Bishops, etc. but in the
Canonical-Authorities of the sacred Books, and c. 19. gives this reason of his
demand, because (says he) neither do we say, that they ought to believe us to
be in the Church of Christ, because that Church which we hold, is commended by
Optatus, Ambrose, or innumerable other Bishops of our Communion, or because it
is predicated by the Councils of our Colleges, etc. and then speaking of the
holy Scriptures, he says, These are the documents of our cause, these are it is
foundations, these are it is upholders, as if he should have said, not these
which I have mentioned before, but the holy Scriptures are the foundations of
our Faith; but our Author has somewhat to produce out of St. Austin, though
little to the purpose: And,

1. St. Austin says, the last Judgment of the Church, is a general Council.

Ans. So say we, and yet question their infallibility, Questionis hujus
obscuritas propioribus ecclesiae temporibus ante Schisma Donati magnos viros
and magna charitate praeditos patres Episcopos ita inter se compulit salva pace
disceptare atque fluctuare ut diu conciliorum in suis quibusque regionibus
diversa statuta nutaverint donec plenario totius orbis concilio quod
saluberrime sentiebatur etiam remotis dubitationibus confirmaretur. De Baptismo
contra Donat. c. 4.
this Argument therefore we remit to its proper topic of petitio Principii.
His second instance from St. Austin, runs thus, The obscurity of this question
in the former times of the Church, before the Schism of Donatus, made many
great men endowed with great charity, Fathers and Bishops, so to differ and
fluctuate amongst themselves, as that diverse decrees of councils in their
several regions, did for a long time waver, till by a General council of the
whole world, what was wholsomely thought, was confirmed, and the doubts removed
(or if Mr. C. will needs have it so) was without further doubts confirmed (good
Reader see a little what a brave version Mr. C. has given us) now what of all
this? is here any thing of the infallibility of a General council? no sure. But
in his second book he tells us that St. Cyprian, had this Authority been
declared in his time, would without doubt have believed it.

Answ. Sure the Fathers have done M. C. some strange discourtesie, else he
would never abuse them so grossly as he does, for St. Austin says, not
crederet, he would believe, but cederet, he would submit, and that not simply,
but if the truth of the Question, being declared and made evident Eliquata, had
been confirmed by the Council, but the words immediately foregoing, that even
former full Councils are often corrected by the later; sufficiently show what
was the judgment of St. Austin; and here not only the fabric of the words,
but the occasion of the question, being a matter not of fact, but of faith,
does put by all the Answers given to the place, and they are largely considered
by the excellent Baron. in the place forecited, to whom therefore I refer you.

CHAP. XXI.
The limitations of Bishop Lawd and Dr. Field touching General Councils,
propounded, sect. 1. Mr. C 's, cavils against them, considered, sect. 2. And
(1.) The liberty which they allow, not destructive to our Church, sect. 2, 3,
4. The supposition that a Council esteemed by them general should err, not
impossible, nor improbable, sect. 5. Particular persons may judge of universal
tradition, sect. 7. Our Writers do not acknowledge General Councils infallible
in fundamentals, sect. 8. We may judge of the legality of their proceedings,
sect. 9. No General Council has determined against Protestants, sect. 10. The
Trent Council not general, sect. 11. Mr. C 's. defense of that Council,
considered, sect. 12.

BUt albeit we do not assert an infallibility in General Councils, Bishop Lawd
Dr. Field.
that their decrees are to be observed by every Christian, provided.

1. That they keep themselves to Gods Rule, and do not attempt to make a new
one of their own.

2. That the clear evidence of reason come not against them.

3. That there be no gainsaying of men of worth, place and esteem.

4. That there appear nothing that may argue an unlawful proceeding of the
Church: in such cases, we must not (says the learned Dr. p. 666.
Field) so much as publicly profess the contrary: yet may we in the secret
of our hearts remain in some doubt, carefully seeking to the Scriptures, and
monuments of antiquity to find out the truth; neither is it necessary for us
expressly to assent; Now these limitations of the reverend Arch Bishop Lawd,
and Dr. Field, are esteemed by him very licentious and rediculous, and
considered with a great deal of pomp and triumph, and yet to me it seems easy
to blow off what ever odium he can cast upon them. And

1 Whereas he calls this a liberty to annul what ever has been, Mr. C. p. 254.
or shall be determined by the supreme Tribunal of Gods Church. He may do well
to acquaint us, whether to dissent from a decree be to annul it, whether the
Papists or Presbyterians have annul'd our Acts of Parliament by dissenting from
them, and refusing obedience to them:

2. Whereas he tells us, this liberty is manifestly destructive to our own
Articles, Canons, and Acts of Parliament; Mr. C. ibid.
there being many men of esteem, yea, the greatest part of the world, who
pretend most certainly to know the contrary to them; Which objection is also
largely managed, p. 267, 268, 269.

Ans. But should a confuter of Mr. Chilling, thus trifle? P. 282. sect. 71. and
P. 286. sect. 80.
has he not told you long ago, true, others may make the same defense as we
do, a murderer may cry not guilty, as well as an innocent person, but not so
justly, nor so truly; the question is not what can be pretended, but what can
be proved. The Presbyterians may pretend their demonstrations against our
Churches constitutions, as we do against yours, but that they can prove their
accusation so strongly, that appears not. To the Jews, and Priests imposing
that sacred silence mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles, St. Peter answered,
we must obey God rather then men; the three Children to the King of Babylon
gave in effect the same answer. Give me now any factious Hypocrite, who makes
Religion the pretense and cloak of his rebellions, and who sees not that such a
one may answer for himself in these very formal words which the holy Apostles,
and Martyrs made use of? And yet I presume no Christian will deny this answer
to have been good in the mouths of the Apostles and holy Martyrs, though it
were obnoxious to be abused by traitors and rebels, certainly therefore this
is no good consequence, Presbyterians and others may pretend to a demonstration
against the constitutions of our Church, though unjustly and untruely,
therefore we may not pretend to it (though justly and truly we can do it)
against the constitutions of your Church. And what if men of worth and esteem,
think otherwise then our Church does? Do we say, that it will excuse our
people to err with men of worth and esteem? Or does he that says the
observance of the decrees of a General Council may not be refused unless there
be a gainsaying of men of worth, place, and esteem; assert, moreover, that
when ever it is so, this will legitimate to any the refusal of this observance
without respect to the truth of them? Should I tell a Layick that he must not
trust to his private interpretation of any Paragraph of Scripture, without the
concurrence of some learned Commentator; could I be reasonably thought to tell
him that he might embrace any thing as the sense of any paragraph of Scripture,
which any learned Commentator lays down as such? Well then, all that we
assert, is, that this conflict in the judgments of learned men is ground for
him to advise, and consult and look into the truth, but will not free a man
from guilt, who upon that sole account refuses to observe the decrees
forementioned.

3. Mr. C. p. 268.
may question, contradict, and make parties, to reverse all the Laws,
Decisions, etc. both of the English, and Gods Church too. This is another
misadventure, for neither do we allow any private man's Authority openly to
question, or contradict, much less, make parties to reverse the decrees of the
particular Church, of which he is a Member, but constantly assert that such a
one when ever he happens to think contrary to the determinations of that
Church, must keep his judgment to himself, and not trouble the Church with it;
only refusing obedience with all humility, till he be better informed, that he
may perform it without disobedience against God. And the same is said by many
of a particular Church, in reference to the decrees of the universal,
represented in a General Council.

2. Let any Christian man's conscience judge, Mr. C. p. 267.
whether this be to be admitted as a fitting, respectful, or even possible
supposition, that the whole Church, (or as we have it p. 257. that the supreme
guides of all Christians, who were by our Lord placed in the Church, and graced
with such promises, who are the only guardians of the Scripture it self, and
the only unappealable Judges of the sense of it,) should conspire to make
decisions in matters of Christian Doctrine, against which express Scripture,
or evident demonstration can be produced.

Answ. 1. (To let pass these precarious suppositions, that a General Council is
of Divine right, that the promises considered above, belong to such
conventions, and that they are the only guardians of Ssripture, which can never
be proved by him) who sees not, that this Argument proceeds upon two gross
mistakes.

1. That a General Council is the whole Church, when as they cannot be the
hundredth part even of the Ministers of Gods Church.

2. That if such persons thus convened, define any matter of Doctrine contrary
to scripture, they must conspire to do so, as if they could not define it out
of weakness, rashness, prejudice, etc.

2. I Answ. With Dr. Tailor, In his liberty of Prophesying
that either these Councils are tied to the rule of Gods Word, or not; if the
first, then are they to be examined by it; and to be followed no farther, then
they adhere to this unerring Rule; and consequently, we must be allowed a
liberty of judgment, to discern whether they keep close to this word, or not:
If they are not tied to the guidance of this Rule, then may they transgress it,
cancel the laws of Christ, and enact things contrary thereunto, which even the
Romanists disclaim.

3. Unless we are bound to shut our eyes, unless the Authority of a Council be
so great a prejudice, as to make us do violence to our understanding, so as not
to dis-beleive it is decrees, though they seem clearly to be contrary to
Scripture, but to believe they agree with the Rule of Scripture, though we
know not how; unless I say, we be bound in duty to be so obediently blind and
sottish; we are sure some Councils, which by our Adversaries are reputed
General, have notoriously receded from the words and sense of Scripture. For
what wit of man can reconcile the decree of the thirteenth Session, of the
Council of Constance, with Christ's institution, delivered to us by way of
precept; seeing in the preface of that decree, Christ's institution, and the
practice of the Primitive Church is expressed, and then with a non obstante,
communion in one kind is established.

Again, is it possible for any man to contrive a way to make the decree of the
Council of Trent, friends with the fourteenth chapter of the Corinthians? how
do the Hyperaspistes of that Council sweat, to reconcile it to St. Paul? and
the wisest of them do it so poorly, as to proclaim to all the world it is not
feasible. What vice in Scripture is prohibited with greater evidence, then this
practice? and therefore on the same score, that we are reconciled to such
decrees, we may be reconciled to the most gross enormities. What ever is
brought to prove the infallibility of Councils, cannot make it so certain that
they are infallible, as these two instances do prove infallibly, that they were
deceived, and if these were, others might have been.

4. What shall we say to all the Arrian Councils, celebrated with so great and
numerous Assemblies, called by the authority of the Emperor, which at that
time, did convocate all Synods, and to which, as many, or more did come, then
to the Nicene Council: Is it necessary to suppose that these have erred in
matter of doctrine, and must it be unpossible to think the same of the less
numerous assemblies, at the first and second Nicene Council, or of the fifty
Bishops met at Trent?

5. I hope men may be permitted to know a contradiction, now it is evident that
your General Councils have contradicted each the other; Sess. 25.
the Council of Trent, allows picturing of God the Father, the second Council
of Nice denies it. Act. 5. and 7.


Lastly, The Sanhedrim was as much representative of the Jewish Church, as a
General Council is of the Christian, and yet I hope the people might judge of
their decrees, and were not bound to think that they did well in establishing
those traditions, which made void the commands of God, in condemning the
Prophets, and that Messiah whom they foretold.

And whereas he adds, as for universal Tradition, there can be no judge of it,
Mr. C. p. 257.
but the whole Church, i.e. a general Council; need we any other instances to
confute that assertion? the veneration of Images, is delivered by the second
Nicene and Trent Council, as an universal tradition: Now let a man consult the
Fathers of the first 600 years, who every where denied them this Veneration;
and must he not be convinced the vanity of this pretense; let any man read what
one single Dally has produced against the decrees of the second Nicene and
Trent Councils, and he cannot choose but acknowledge that the judgment of the
Church of God in this matter, was contrary unto them.

What he discourses p. 255. sect. 8. and again, p. 266. sect. 2. touching
infallibility in fundamentals, is a strange miscarriage, for albeit he gives
us this assertion in Italian Characters, that General Councils are infallible
in fundamentals, yet does he assuredly impose upon the Reader, for neither the
Archbishop, nor Dr. Field, have any such assertions in the places cited; and
therefore I am not obliged to consider what he returns- to a limitation, which
is framed by himself.

Lastly, to the fourth condition, that there appears nothing, He asks still who
shall judge? We

Answ. Who was it that judged the proceedings in the Council of Calcedon to be
unlawful, was it not Mr. C? yea, p. 51.


2. Is it not evident in the story of the Acts of the Council of Ariminum, that
matters were unlawfully handled there, need we any General Councils to tell us
of the illegality of the Trent Council, is it not so legible, that he that runs
may read it? and that from the testimonies of Roman Catholics, eye witnesses
thereof.

But were General Councils absolutely infallible, and were their decrees
without any limitations, or demurs, to be assented to, yet what will this
advantage the Church of Rome, which cannot show, that any of the doctrines
which we refuse to assent unto, were ever determined by a General Council, nay,
this pretense does undeniably free us from the guilt of Schism, in rejecting
the new Articles, she requires of us, as conditions of her Communion; Can. 7.
(...).
seeing she requires them, contrary to the express words of the Ephesine
Council, which says, that it should not be lawful for any man to produce,
write, or compose any belief, beside that which was established by the Fathers
of Nice, and that they which should dare to compose, or tender, or offer any
such other Faith, to any that were willing to convert from Judaism, Gentilism,
or any other Heresy whatsoever, if they were Bishops, should be degraded, if
Layicks, anathematized, or excommunicated. And this brings me to my next
Proposition, which is this.

The Trent Conventicle was no General Council. Proposition. 5.


This we have excellently evinced by Bishop Bramhall,

How was that General where there was not any one Bishop out of all the other
Patriarchates, or any Proctours or Commissioners from them, either present, or
summoned to be present, except peradventure some tituler Europian
mock-Prelates without cures, such as Olaus Magnus, entitled Archbishop of
Vpsall, Or Sir Robert the Scotchman, entitled Archbishop of Armagh? How was
that General, or so much as patriarchal, where so great a part of the West was
wanting, wherein there was twice so many Episcopelles out of Italy (the Popes
professed Vassails, and many of them the Popes parasitical hungry Pentioners)
as there were out of all other Christian Kingdoms and Nations put together?
See the Review of the Trent Council, written by a Roman Catholic? lib. 1. c.
9. sect. 8. chap. 10. sect. 2.

How was that general, wherein there were not so many Bishops present at the
determination of the weightiest controversies concerning the rule of Faith, and
the exposition thereof, as the King of England could have called together in
his own dominions, at any one time upon a months warning? Idem. lib. 1. c. 10.
sect. 1. How was that general, which was not generally received by all
Churches, even some of the Roman Communion not admitting it? For it was stoutly
rejected by the Kings of France, id. chap. 1. lib. 2. And until this day,
though they do not oppose it, but acquiesce, to avoid such disadvantages, as
might ensure thereupon, yet did they never admit it.

And as it was not general, so neither was it free, nor lawful; Not free, where
the place could afford no security to the one party, it being in the Popes
dominions, and his Armies continually abroad, Sleid. l. 17.
Idem. lib. 1. c. 7. sect. 16. Where any one, that spoke a free word, had his
mouth stopped, or was turned out of the Council, where the few Protestants, that
adventured to come thither, were not admitted to dispute, where the Fathers
were noted to be guided by the Spirit sent from Rome in a Male, where diverse
not only new Bishops, but new Bishoprics, were created, during the sitting of
the Convent, to make the Papalins able to over-vote the Tramontains, Id. l. 1.
c. 9. Nor yet lawful in regard of the place, which ought to have been, in
Germany; Actor debit rei forum sequi. A guilty person is to be judged in his
Province, and the cause to be pleaded, where the crime was committed; and
likewise in regard of the Judge. In that

1. The Pope was a party, whose reformation was urged, And therefore by his own
Canon Law could not be Judge, or President in the Council.

2. Appeals were put from him to a lawful Council, and it was never known, that
he from whom the appeal was made, should be Judge in the very case of appeal,
Idem lib. 1. cap. 3. Again, in every Judgment, there ought to be four
distinct persons; The Accuser, the Witness, the guilty person, and the Judge.
But in the Council of Trent, the Pope by himself, or his Ministers, acted all
these parts himself. He was the right guilty person, and yet withal, the
accuser of the Protestants, the witness against them, and their Judge:

Lastly, No man can lawfully be condemned, before he be heard; But in this
Council the Protestants were not permitted to propose their cause, much less
to defend it by lawful disputation, but were condemned, before they were
called. id. sect. 1. c. 5.

Now in defense of this Council we are told.

1. That the liberty of the Bishops was only straightened by their own respective
temporal Princes, and not by the Roman Court. Mr. C. p. 270.


Answ. It was so far restrained that nothing was done there but what pleased
the Pope, and for this reason the decision of things proposed, was frequently
prorogued, because the resolution of the Pope, and Court of Rome, Mr. C. Ib.
was not known unto them, id. sect. 1. chap. 9.

2. Says he, the Pope gained no access to his Authority thereby, which it
concerns not me to refute, and therefore I refer you to the same Author, l. 1.
c. 1. sect. 4. sect. 6. c. 14. sect. 1, 9. l. 4. c. 1. l. 5. c. 7. l. 6. c. 1,
2, 3. in all which places the Author shows that the Council ascribed too much
to the Pope.

3. We are told that these Bishops were unanimous in condemning the Protestants
Doctrines. Mr. C. p. 271.


Answ. True, the History of that Council tells us, they resolved upon the
condemnation of the Lutherans, before they proceeded to debate the matter, and
the Bull of Paul the third, bearing date August 23.15 35. informs us, that the
very end of calling this Council was, the extirpation of the plaguey Lutheran
Heresy.

Lastly, Mr. C. ibid.
he adds, that the Doctrines of this Council, are now actually embraced by all
Catholic congregations (i.e. all Papists) wherefore by the Arch Bishops
concessions (viz. that when the decisions of a General Council, are embraced by
the universal Church, spread throughout the world, they are infallible) they
are to be esteemed infallibly true. Which Argument is built upon this
supposition, that the Archbishop, even when defending the reformed Churches,
against the imputations of the Church of Rome, should yet acknowledge her to be
the universal Church of God.

CHAP. XXII.
Absolute submission not due to Patriarchical Councils, sect. 1. The Reason of
it, sect. 2, 3. Mr. C 's. Arguments for it, Answered, sect. 4. Nothing can
thence be inferred against us, sect. 5. A Judgment of discretion must be
allowed to private men, sect. 6. The reasons of it, sect. 7, 8.

THe sixth Proposition shall be this;

That we are not obliged to yield obedience to the decrees of Patriarchical
Councils, 6 Proposition.
but may reject them, when ever they contradict the word of God.

For the eviction of this, which is the main Pillar of our Authors Fabric: I
will premise,

1. That such Councils are not infallible, this is evident from the
contradictions of them to each other (thus the Council of Constance defined a
General Council to be superior to the Pope, that of Lateran the contrary, the
second Council of Nice decreed for Images, the Council of Constantinople
contradicted that) from the evident errors determined by them (thus the
corporiety of Angels, by that of Nice, the (...) by the Arrian Councils at
Ariminum, Seleucia, and elsewhere) from the want of any promise of
infallibility, from the appeals permitted from them to a General Council, the
correcting and nulling their decrees by that higher power, and many other
things.

2. That such conventions of men thus fallible, Rome; thus V. G. the Council of
Trent has decreed for communion in one kind, celibacy of Priests, the worship
of God in an unknown tongue, the Council of Lateran for the supremacy of the
Pope over a General Council; now let the Patriarcks of Constantinople,
Alexandria, Antioch, and other of the Eastern Church, assemble such a Council,
would they not undoubtedly decree the contrary to all these? and then according
to Mr. C's. own rule, must not all the National Churches under them, be bound
to contradict the decrees of the Trent Council, and consequently to be
Schismatics? yea, if Provincial Churches may not examine the decrees of such
fallible conventions, must they not lie under a necessity of asserting any
error, or practicing what ever they define, though never so contradictory to
the law of God?

Once more, it cannot be denied but that the Arrian Councils at Ariminum and
Seleucia, were at least Patriarchical, or equivalent to such, and will you add,
that therefore every Province, from whence they were convened were bound to
submit to their determinations? You will say no, because they contradicted the
General Council held at Nice.

Ans. True, but does not your Rule assure us, that former plenary Councils may
be corrected by those that follow, and were not the Bishops at Ariminum, more
numerous then those at Nice?

2. What if this of Ariminum had been assembled before the Nicene Council, must
Arrianisme then have commenced Orthodox? Was there any impossibility but it
might have been so? He that permitted Arrianisme then to triumph, might have
done it, if he pleased, in the former Centuries.

Lastly, Trent Council matters stood, and they openly professed they came to
extirpate and condemn the Plaguey heresy as they called it, of the Lutherans

By these things we may see what we are to think of this axiom of our
Antagonist, Mr. C. p. 237.
viz. That if any law, custom, or doctrine, in any Diocese, be discordant
from, but especially if it condemn, what is by Law in force, in the Province,
or any Provincial law, what is in force in the Patriarchate, such a law ought
not to be made, or being made, ought to be repealed. Now apply these former
instances to the Rule, and it will follow, that if any Province in the Eastern
Churches should acknowledge the supremacy of the Pope, and decree Communion in
one kind legitimate, etc. They were bound to alter such Doctrines and decrees,
and consequently bound to refuse the conditions of Communion tendered to them
by the Church of Rome. Thus again, under the Old Testament, when the ten Tribes
departed from the Worship of God in the place appointed by himself, and set up
the Calves at Dan and Bethel, it was unlawful for the Tribe of Judah to
practice the contrary, much more to hold it unlawful so to transgress the Law
of God, more yet to decree it to be so, and had the lesser convention of twenty
three determined for Christ, and held him the Messiah that was to come, had
they given him the veneration due unto him, yea, decreed it should be so, all
this must necessarily have been nulled by the contrary decrees of the greater
Sanhedrim?

The only Argument which he uses to uphold this fundamental Rule, as he is
pleased to call it, Mr. C. p. 246.
is that if a Provincial Synod could disannul the formerly received Acts, of a
National, or a National of a Patriarchical, there must of necessity follow a
dissolution of all Government and Unity as to the whole Catholic Church, yet
we profess in our Creed, unam Catholicam: Which Syllogistically runs thus: if
there be one Catholic Church, then must a National Synod be subject to a
Patriarchal. But the first is true, the sequel depends upon this assertion,
that without such subjection, there could not be one Catholic Church. Answ.
This is manifestly untrue. For that cannot be necessary to the unity of the
Church which may be sinful, but such may be the submission of a National
Church, to the decrees of a Patriarchal, as our instances sufficiently declare.

Again, he further tells us that no inferior power can abrogate and reverse
the laws of a superior.

Answ. True, and thence we infer that seeing the laws of Christ are evidently
the laws of the most sovereign power, the decrees of patriarchical and General
Councils must yield to them, and consequently, when ever they require any thing
contradictory to this law, we must refuse our obedience; to which,

2. We add that Patriarchical Councils have no authority at all in any Nation,
but by permission and consent, of Princes and other Governors thereof, and
therefore antecedently to their permission, cannot be called a power superior
to our provincial Synods.

What he adds from the restimony of St. Austin, is nothing to his purpose,
but much to ours; It being the very design of St. Austin there, to evidence,
that Fathers and Councils, and all humane VVriters, must yield to Scripture,
and that his evidence thence, must prevail against all the authorities of
Fathers and Councils produced by his adversaries, for speaking of the
Donatists, who pleaded the authority of St. Cyprian, and some councils for
them, he thus goes on: Cur authoritatem Cypriani pro vestro Schismate
assumitis, De Bapt. cont. donat. l. 2. c. 3.
and ejus exemplum pro Ecclesiae pace respuitis? quis autem nesciat sanctam
Scripturam Canonicam tam vet. quam Novi Testamenti certis suis terminis
contineri eamque omnibus posterioribus Episcoporum literis ita praeponi ut de
illa omnino dubitari and disceptari non posset utrum verum vel utrum rectum sit
quicquid in ea scriptum esse constiterit Episcoporum autem literas quae post
confirmatum Canonem vel scriptae sunt vel scribuntur and per sermonem forte
sapientiorem cujuslibet in ear peritioris, and per aliorum Episcoporum
graviorem authoritatem, doctiorumque prudentiam and per concilta licere
reprehendi. Si quid in eis forte a veritate deviatum est, and ipsa concilia
quae per singulas regiones vel provincias fiunt plenariorum consiliorum
authoritati quae fiunt ex universo orb christiano sine ullis ambagibus cedere,
ipsaque plenaria saepe priora posterioribus emendari, cum aliquo experimento
rerum aperitur quod clausum erat, and cognoscitur quod latebat.

And yet were this assertion granted, C. seeing the Councils that have
determined against us were either unlawful, See the Author of the review of the
Trent Council. l. 4. c. 7, 8. Dr. Tailors duc. dub. p. 285.
as that of Lateran, and Florence, or else contradicted by other Councils as
great as they, as the second of Nice by that of Constantinople, and all of them
by the decree of the General Council of Ephesus against the enlarging of the
Apostles Creed. In which case, by our Authors Fundamental Rule, (that the
decrees of a Patriarchical Council, must not contradict a General, p. 250) they
must necessarily be null.

My seventh Proposition shall be this.

That private men ought to judge with a judgment of discretion, 7. Proposition.
at least whether the determinations of Councils, whether particular or
general, are to be received as doctrines of faith, and are not without all
enquiry to submit to them. For

1. If God had intended, to appoint them such an infallible Judge, (above and
beyond his Word) in whose determinations they must acquiesce, then would he
have infallibly told them which, and where to find him; if a General Council,
he would have named him, told us the conditions requisite to the celibration
of it, what persons ought to be members of it, how far they were infallible, 3
Proposition.
and in what not, with many other things above mentioned. The reason is,
because the certain knowledge of these things can be your only security, that
the determination of this Judge will be infallible. For my obligation to
receive this Judge as such, can be no other then Gods revelation of it to me,
or my certain knowledge, that his Will is such.

Now God has no where revealed unto us the necessity of yiedling internal
assent to a General Council, or afforded us any standard whereby to determine
those infinite disputes that are on foot touching this matter, and the decision
of which are necessary to the certain knowledge of this infallibility of our
Judge; there being a total silence in Scripture touching these things, and a
perpetual conflict betwixt reason and reason, authority and authority.

2. That cannot be the rule of Faith to private persons,

3. If the Church must judge, it can be no other then the true Church, and
where, and how, shall this be found by a private man?

2. Is not this evidently to make the Church Judge in her own cause, and will
it convince any one that doubts of her infallibility.

3. Where shall such find the Church thus speaking? in her private Doctors:
many are unable to consult them, and if they should.

1. May they judge of the sense of Fathers?

2. Will they find them all agreed in the points disputed?

3. How will they be assured by them, that the whole Church in their days
taught agreeably to their doctrine? Yea

4. How will they be assured what works of the Fathers are true, what
spurious, what interpolated, what not, what is by the fraudulency, of men
subtracted, seeing both parts acknowledge and complain, that these piae
frandes have been exercised upon them.

5. How will he know that the Fathers are to be Judges, yea or no? and which?
whether all, or some? And if all, what must he think of those which tell him
they must not be Judges any further then they bring their evidence? Is not this
enough to crack their credits with him? If some, what some? and why they more
then others? and who must determine concerning them? Must he hear the Church
speaking in a general Council. But

1. This has never been determined in a General Council.

2. Either he believes already that a General Council cannot err, and then he
has no need of this determination, or believes it may? and then he is but
where he was, after this determination must he come to reason.

1. The definitive sentence of private reason you reject.

2. Why may not he be allowed to judge for himself, in things perspicuously
laid down in Scripture, who must be permitted to do it, touching the
infallibility of a General Council, which is no where evidently revealed?

2. Must he not judge also in what cases she is thus infallible, and so to be
esteemed? whether when contradicting or seeming to contradict the voice of
Scripture, or evident demonstration? whether when determining matters of
discipline and circumstantials, or of faith only? whether she be contradicted
by men of worth, place, and esteem, or no? whether when there appears any
thing that may argue an unlawful proceeding, or not? if you here acknowledge
that in these and such like causes, private reason must sit as Umpire, then
what becomes of all your objections to the contrary, ushered in with such
solemnity and triumph? if not, then is he evidently left at uncertainties, when
the determinations of his guide are infallible, when not, it being clear that
the knowledge of many of those cases by me propounded, must be precognita to
this.

3. Whence shall he fetch his reason to conclude this infallibility? from
Scripture? this is already exploded, from others? neither can this be
rationally said, seeing other assemblies consist of men, that are fallible in
themselves, nor can they challenge to themselves infallible assistance from God
without his promise, which is not to be found, but in holy Scripture.

3. If the Apostles commended them who examined their Sermons, by their
conformity to the law, and the Prophets; and the men of Berea were esteemed
noble for searching the Scriptures, to acquaint themselves, Acts 17.11.
whether those things which they taught, were so or no; I suppose it cannot
reasonably be denied, but that the decrees of a General Council may also be
tried by private men, whether they be conform to Scripture, yea, or no; for I
hope they will not say, that the decrees of such Councils, are of greater
Authority then the Apostles Sermons, which yet were submitted to the trial of
private men, by the rule of Scripture. Add to this, that the Apostles Doctrine
was attended with a train of miracles (motives very prevalent to induce belief)
and therefore if they were commended, who even in this case, and after the
Sanhedrims determination against their Doctrine, and the rejection of it by the
Scribes and Pharisees, did thus make search into the word of God, and determine
according to their private interpretations of it; how can it be a thing
blameworthy in us, to plead for such a liberty, in reference to the decrees of
General Councils?

4. The Scripture commands us to try all things, and hold what is good; to try
the spirits whether they be of God or no; 1 These. 5. 1 John 4.1.
to take heed least we be seduced; by what touchstone I pray you must we try?
by Scripture? then have we what we so much contend for: by a General Council?
then were not these commands in force, 'till the days of Constantine, they
concerned none of those to whom they were indicted, nor had they sufficient
means to try the truth. The Church diffused, alas poor creatures! must they
travel throughout all the world, to know the decisions of every Church? and
when this is done, how shall they know, that what they hold to day, shall be
held to morrow? when they are divided, how shall they know who are in the
right? judge by Scripture and reason, they must not say you, and what other
judge could be obtained for three hundred years after Christ, and upward, I am
not able to divine.

Again, why are we bid to read the Scripture? meditate in it day and night, to
pray for the illumination of our minds, the spirit of wisdom and revelation,
and the assistance of Gods holy spirit, that we may know it? is it not
sufficient to read and understand what our infallible judge says? what need of
the assistance of the spirit, and the illumination of my mind, to know the
sense of Scripture, if this judge must give it me? and I cannot have it
elsewhere? yea, why does God promise, that his secret shall be with them that
fear him, he will teach them his covenant: that if we search for
understanding as for Silver, Prove. 2.2-6.
and for hid treasures, we shall find it; what need of all this search by any
(excepting only Bishops, who are to be members of a General Council) if it be
so dangerous, to judge without them, and when they have once judged, we have
infallibly the truth.

Lastly, That rule of faith is deservedly suspected, which will not endure the
trial, but such is this which will not suffer men to use their judgments to
examine it; is not that bruta fides, which requires a man's belief, albeit he
knows no reason for it, but evident reason to the contrary. You will say that
he judges this at least, that it is very unlikely the Church should err, and
this is sufficient to make his judgment rational.

Answ. Then the faith of Jews, who rejected our Savior with their Sanhedrim;
of the Pagans, who with their wisest men rejected Christianity, must be good
and rational.

And if private men must be allowed this judgment, much more must it be
granted to whole Nations, wherein happily there be ten times as many learned
men, as ever met in any Synod.

CHAP. XXIII.
Our eighth Proposition, sect. 1. Separation from the external or internal
communion of a Church, sect. 2. The Church Catholic, not organical, sect. 3.
It Is essential unity not external, sect. 4. What separation is the sin of
Schism, sect. 5. To leave the Church, and to leave her external communion, not
the same, ibid. The Church of Rome not the guide of Faith, ibid. We separated
not externally from the Church Catholic, sect. 6. Why from the Roman, sect. 7.
Mr. C 's. assertion that the Articles we reject, are as old as St. Gregory,
sect. 9. Our evidence to the contrary largely produced, sect. 10, 11.

My eighth Proposition is,

THat it cannot be proved that Protestants have separated from the communion of
the Catholic Church, 8. Proposition.
or if it should be granted, that they externally separated from all visible
Churches beside themselves, yet could they not justly be charged with Schism,
especially from the Roman Church.

Where 1. I premise that separation is twofold.

1. From the internal communion of the Church,

2. I assert,

2. In the days of Elijah, there would have been no Church, there being no
such organical body. And

3. Under the prevailing of Arrianisme, those Righteous souls who renounced
Communion with the Arrians, and fled into dens and caves, must have renounced
the Church Catholic, as being Members of no such Organical Body.

Now hence it follows, that the unity of the Church Catholic, cannot be
external, (which Mr. C. every where suppose^^, and takes for granted) but only
internal, or that of faith and charity; and consequently to prove our
separation from the holy Catholic Church, it must be proved that we have not
that faith, obedience and charity, which is requisite to make us members of
that Church, which is a task so hard that Mr. C. durst not set upon it.

3. Mr. Chilling. p. 255. sect. 9.
this is evident,

1. From the instances now produced.

2. Because a man unjustly excommunicated, is not in the Churches external
Communion, and yet he is still a member of the Church. And this also
strengthens the former Corollary.

4. Id. p. 264.
That not every separation, but only a causeless separation from the external
Communion of any Church, is the sin of Schism; This we have sufficiently
proved above. Whence it evidently follows, that those Protestants who say they
forsook the external Communion of the Church visible, that is, renounced the
belief and practice of some few things, which all visible Communions besides
them did believe and practice, cannot precisely upon this account lie under the
imputation of the sin of Schism, (any more then the seven thousand that refused
to bow the knee to Baal, or those in the primitive times that refused communion
with the Arrian Churches.) As doing it upon conviction from Scripture, Reason,
and Antiquity, that all the visible Churches of the world had in these
observances swerved from the Word of God, Reason, and Antiquity, which is every
where their plea. Mr. Chil. p. 265. sect. 32.


Now hence it follows, that to leave the Church, and to leave her external
Communion, is not the same, that being done by ceasing to be a Member of it;
that is, by ceasing to have faith and obedience, the requisites to make us
such, (which can never be necessary,) this by refusing to communicate with any
Church in her Liturgies, and public worship, and indeed were these the same,
it must of necessity follow that no two Churches divided in external communion
can be both true parts of the Catholic Church, Mr. Chil. p. 271 sect. 50.
and consequently, that either the Church of Rome which is thus divided from
all other Christians, is no part of the Catholic Church, or which is more
uncharitable, that all the Churches of Christendom besides her, must be
excluded from being parts of the Church Catholic, as being divided in external
communion from the Roman, yea, when the Western and Eastern Churches refused
communion with each other, one of them presently must be excluded from the
Catholic Church. Yea, it will follow that either there is some particular
Church, that is by promise from God freed from ever admitting any superstitions
or corruptions into her Liturgies and public services, or else that to
separate from superstitions and corruptions crept into these particular
Churches, is to become no Churches, which is as rediculous, as to say, that to
purge any person from those distempers which others labor under, were to
un^man him. Indeed I know that the Roman Church pretends to be the guide of
the faith of others, to be secured from these corruptions, and consequently to
be the Root of Union to other true Orthodox Churches, but this pretense is so
assaulted by Mr. Chil. P. 337. sect. 20.
that I am confident they are not able to stand out against the evidence of his
Reason; Thus then he. Is it possible that any Christian heart can believe,
that not one amongst all the Apostles (who were men very good, and desirous to
direct us in the surest way to Heaven, instructed by the Spirit of God, in all
necessary points of Faith, and therefore certainly not ignorant of this most
necessary point of Faith) should ad rei memoriam, write this necessary doctrine
plainly so much as once? certainly in all reason they had provided much better
for the good of Christians, if they had wrote this, though they had writ
nothing else. Meethinks the Evangelists undertaking to write the Gospel of
Christ, could not possibly have omitted any one of them, especially this most
necessary point of faith, had they known it necessary, (St. Luke especially who
plainly professes that his intent was to write all things necessary.)
Meethinks St. Paul writing to the Romans could not but have congratulated this
their privilege to them. Meethinks instead of saying, Your faith is spoken of
all the world over, (which he says also of the Thessalonians) he could not
have failed to have told them once at least in plain terms that their faith was
the Rule for all the world for ever, but then sure he would not have put them
in fear of an impossibility, as he does, chap. 11. That they also, nay the
whole Church of the Gentiles if they did not look to their standing, might fall
away to infidelity, as the Jews ahd done. Meethinks in all his other Epistles
or at least in one of them, he could not have failed to have given the world
this direction, had he known it to have been true, that all men were to be
guided by the Church of Rome, and none to separate from it under pain of
damnation. Meethinks, writing so often of Heretics, and Antichrist, he should
have given the world this, (as you pretend) only sure preservative from them?
How was it possible that St. Peter writing two Catholic Epistles mentioning
his own departure, writing to preserve Christians in the faith, should in
neither of them commend them to the guidance of his pretended successors the
Bishops of Rome? How was it possible that St. James, and St. Jude, in their
Catholic Epistles should not give this Catholic direction? Meethinks St. John
instead of saying, he that believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God,
(the force of which direction, your glosses do quite enervate and make
unavailable to discern who are the Sons of God,) should have said, he that
adheres to the Doctrine of the Roman Church, and lives according to it, he is
a good Christian, and by this mark you shall know him. What man not quite out
of his wits, if he consider as he should, the pretended necessity of this
doctrine to salvation ordinarily, can possibly force himself to conceive, that
all these good and holy men, so desirous of men's salvation should be so deeply
and affectedly silent in this matter, as that not one of them should say it
plainly so much as once, but leave it to be collected from uncertain
principles, by many more uncertain consequences.

5. English Church separated from the external Communion of the Church
Catholic, let Mr. C. produce any one thing which we allege as a reason of
our separation, and show, that it was held as a matter of faith, or practiced
in the public Worship of all other Churches, and then we shall acknowledge it.

2. We have not separated from the external Communion of the reformed Churches,
much less from the Communion of our selves, and therefore not from the
universal, of which, both they and we are parts. And thus Mr. Chil. explains
himself, and tells you that his meaning was only this, P. 295.
that by a Synecdoche of the whole for the part, Luther and his followers might
be said to forsake this external Communion of the visible Church; But that
properly speaking he forsook the whole visible Church, (viz. As to external
Communion) you must excuse me if I grant not, and my reason is this, because
he and his followers were a part of this Church, and ceased not to be so by
their reformation, now he and his followers, certainly forsook not themselves,
therefore not every part of the Church, therefore not the whole Church, and
what other plea could have been made by the Church of Jury in the days of
Elijah, or the Church of Christ under the prevalency of Arrianisme, I
understand not. And what has Mr. C. to evidence the contrary?

1. Says he, p. 262.
a separation from any one true member of the Catholic Church, for doctrines
that are commonly held by other Churches in communion with that member, is
indeed a separation from all Churches.

Ans. But the Church of Rome has separated from the Church of England, a true
Member of the catholic Church; for doctrines commonly held by other churches,
in communion with her. Ergo she has separated from all Churches.

2. The Argument evidently supposes, some of these untruths.

1. That a true member of a Church, or a particular true Church, cannot require
unjust conditions of communion, or at least cannot have any other to consent
with her in these conditions; or that if she do, it is unlawful for others to
separate when such conditions are required: Yea, lastly, it supposes the very
thing in question, that all true Members in the Church Catholic, must
necessarily communicate externally with each other.

2. Ibid. Reply p. 47, 48.
He tells us, that Calvin confesses this separation, which confession is
considered by Bishop Bramhal.

3. Says he, no Church can be found antecedent to our separation, p. 263.
with which we are joined in external communion.

Answ. What inference do you make hence, seeing we are joined in internal
communion, with all the Churches of God, and are willing externally to do so,
if no unjust conditions be required.

2. What think you of the Churches which reformed before us? Ibid.
Again he adds, no Church has Laws or Governors in common with us.

Answ. What of all this? is it necessary to our external communion, that all
the Laws or Governors of other Churches, should be the same with ours.

2. Have not the Eastern Churches the same Governors with us. Ibid.
Repl. they are manifestly Heretical.

Answ. This we constantly deny, as you may see in Bishop Bramhal, Reply, p.
349.
Bishop Mortons Apol. Dr. Field, Mr. Pagits Christianography, and others. He
proceeds, not one Church can be found, Ibid.
which will join with us in public offices, or we with them.

Answ. Who told you so? Bishop Bramhal informs you, that albeit the Eastern
Churches use many rites that we forbear, yet this difference in rites is no
breach of communion, nor needs to be (for any thing he knows) if distance
of place, and difference of language, were not a greater impediment to our
actual communion, seeing we agree in the acknowledgement of the same Creeds,
and no other; nor do we require agreement in lesser matters, as a condition of
communion, in which the Church of Rome is extremely Schismatical: Obj. But
their Patriarch Jeremiah refused communion with us. To this Bishop Bramhel
Replies in two full pages, that the thing is not true, and 2. that since his
time Cyril the Patriarch has professed communion with us. Lastly, Says he,
surely they could not become ipso facto in communion with the Grecian Church,
by separating from the Roman.

Answ. Surely we may so, as having since left off, to require those unjust
conditions, or practice those unlawful things, which before we did require and
practice.

6. The reason of our separation from the Church of Rome, is not so much,
because they maintain errors and corruptions, as because they impose them,
Chill. p. 267. sect. 40.
and will allow their communion to none, but to those that will hold them, and
have so ordered, that either we must communicate with them in these things, or
nothing. Now this I hope is not a reason common to you with other Churches, for
what they hold, they hold to themselves, Id. ibid. p. 306. sect. 106.
and refuse not to communicate with them that hold the contrary; so that we may
continue in their communion, without professing to believe their opinions, but
in yours we cannot.

Lastly, Rome, for doctrines which were common to her, See Pagits
Christianography.
with other Churches; yet can it not be hence inferred, that we must close with
the Church of Rome in all her unjust demands; but only in those doctrines, if
there were any, in which she has the consent of the Eastern Church, and all
others, which we esteem the Church of God.

Again, p. 287. sect. 12. we are told that the Articles mentioned by the Dr.
most of them had been expressly declared in former Councils, and all were as old
at least, as Christianity in England: whence he infers, that the English
separation, made from the Roman Church, should have been made on the same
grounds: from the universal Church above a thousand years since, seeing it is
evident that in St. Gregory's time, both Eastern and Western Churches, were in
perfect unity. Where not to take notice either,

1. Of his false supposition, that Christianity in England was no older than
St. Gregory, or Austin the Monk, when it was above two hundred years older than
the very being of a Monk. Nor,

2. Of his rediculous assertion, that these Articles which we contend against,
are not new, because most of them declared in former Councils (when as I am
confident, he must sink down as low, as a thousand years to make this good) let
him cite any Council expressly declaring for any of these Articles, excepting
the Celibacy of Priests, and the worship of Images, which is as evident an
innovation, as any possibly can be. Nor,

3. To mind him, that not the asserting of these opinions, but the imposing of
them on us, as conditions of our communion with them, the obtruding them into
their Liturgies and public offices, are the causes of our refusing Communion
with them, and therefore that Mr. C. would he draw the Parallel must evidence,
that this was done by the universal Church, in the days of St. Gregory. Nor,

4. That it is not evident, that there was such an Harmony betwixt the Eastern
and Western Churches, but rather the contrary, as touching the Celibacy of
Priests, the power of the Pope, etc. I say, to omit all these and many other
things, my last Proposition shall be this,

That neither St. taught all these Doctrines, nor yet were they embraced by our
Church at that time. 9 Proposition.


For to begin with St. Gregory.

1. I have sufficiently evinced already, that he denied the Popes Supremacy.

2. As for the infallibility of the Roman Church, had he known this to have
been the opinion of those days, is it not a wonder that he should never plead
it against his opponents and Adversaries?

3. Touching transubstantiation, Communion in one kind, the Sacrifice of the
Mass, what can you produce out of Gregory for them. And

1. Mr. C. p. 137.
As for Communion in one kind, you acknowledge that it was not practiced for a
thousand years and upward; and where does St. Gregory tell us, that it may be
practiced otherwise? we have showed you above, that Pope Leo and Gelasius,
thought it no better then Sacrilege to Rob the People of the Cup: and
therefore if you affirm Gregory to have held the contrary, as it is gratis
dictum, so will it be but an evidence of his departing, from what was formerly
maintained by his own Church.

2. Where does he say, that Christ is corporeally in the Sacrament? and that
the substance of bread and wine remains not? Nay, Sacrificium quod passionem
filii semper imitatur. Dial. l. 4. c. 58. Non inordinate agimus si ex libris,
licet non Canonicis, sed tamen ad edificationem Ecclesiae editis testimonia
proferamus. Moral. l. 19. c. 16. Graeg. in Ezekiel. l. 1. Hom. 9.
that it then obtained not in the Church of God, nor was esteemed as an Article
of their faith, is fully evidenced by Bishop Usher, in his book de Christ.
Eccles. success l. 1. c. 2. And for the sacrifice of the Mass, he tells us,
that Christ is Mystically there offered, and that this is such a sacrifice,
which is an imitation of Christ's passion.

Against your new Canon of Scripture, which the Dr. quarreld with, he is most
evident in his Morals; where he says, citing the 6 of Maccabees, that it was
not Canonical.

Against your Traditions, necessary to supply the defect of Scripture, he
tells us, whatsoever serves for edification, and instruction, is contained in
the Volume of the Scripture. And again, Heretics do usually for the
confirmation of their perverse opinions, suggest such proofs which are not
found in Scripture; and what I pray you, are your Traditions, yea, all the
doctrines you contend for in this Book?

And whereas you Sacrilegiously Rob the People of the use of Scripture, he on
the contrary assures us, Graeg. l. Epist. 40. ad Theod. Med.
that it is an Epistle sent from God to his Creature, that is, to Priest and
People. And if thou receive a Letter (says he) from an Earthly King, thou will never sleep nor rest till thou understandest it: The King of Heaven, and
God of men and Angels has sent his Letters to thee, for the good of thy soul,
and yet thou neglectest the reading of them; Therefore I pray thee study them,
and daily meditate on the Word of thy Creator, and learn the mind of God in
the words of God.

You tell us, that the worship of images must be observed, Graeg. l. 9. Ep 9.
Adorare imagines omnibus modis devita.
and acknowledged by all means; he contrariwise, that by all means it must be
avoided; And again in the same place, it is unlawful to worship any thing that
is made with hands, because it is written, thou shall worship the Lord thy God,
and him only shall thou serve: and again, in his Epistle to Serenus Bishop of
Massilia, I commend you, that you had that Zeal, that nothing made with hands
should be worshipped; but yet you should not have broken them, etc. but let them
be proserved, and forbid the people the worshipping of them, that the ignorant
may have whence to gather the knowledge of the history, and yet not sin in
worshipping the Picture.

You assert a Purgatory after this life, he is thought to contradict it by John
Pank, who p. 20. proves the contrary,

1. Moral. l. 8. c. 8.
From his Morals, where he says, whom mercy now delivers not, him justice
after the world alone imprisoneth, To which purpose is that of Solomon, That in
whatsoever place the tree falls, whether toward the South, or toward the
North, there it shall be; because at the time of a man's death, either the good
spirit or the evil spirit shall receive the soul going from the body, he shall
hold it with him for ever without any charge; that neither being exalted, it
can come down to punishment; nor being drowned in eternal punishments, can
thenceforth rise to any remedy of Salvation. If then after death there be no
deliverance, there be no change, but as the Angel, either good or bad,
receives the soul out of the body, so it continues for ever, either exalted
in joy, or drowned in punishment; then there can be no Purgatory, then there
can be nothing but Heaven or Hell, where they that come shall abide for ever.
And in another place, It is undecent to give our selves to long affliction for
them, whom we are to believe have come by death to true life: This therefore
seeing we know, we are to have a care, not to be afflicted for the dead, but
to bestow our affliction on the living, to whom our piety or devotion may be
profitable, and our love yield fruit. Here is no place for Purgatory, seeing he
teaches us to believe, that the faithful in death do attain to true life, and
that their passage from this world is to a better: Neither does he acknowledge
any use of Prayers, Masses, Trentals, or any other offices or obsequies for the
Dead, who says, that our devotion and love, yeildeth no fruit or profit to
them.

Lastly, as for Marriage of Priests, I do not deny, but that at first Pope
Gregory did command them to live single, but when he understood that they were
given secretly to fleshly pleasure, and that hereupon many Children were
Murdered, many infants heads found in a Fish Pond, he disanulled that
commandment, p. 288.
Vid. Sup. chap. 17 sect. ult. Now against this evidence, we have nothing but
the confession of an Osiander, an H^mphry, and a Carrion, whose citation by the
way is altogether impertinent, with an Argument from the Anathemaes annexed to
the decrees of Councils, which have been sufficiently refuted already, and
therefore I pass to the second part of my Proposition, to show that these
Doctrines, etc. were not received by us in the time of Pope Gregory, or
esteemed matters of Faith.

For 1. British Councils it was Synodically rejected, and it is confirmed by
Bishop Bramhal in his tract of Schism, and his Reply to the Bishop of Calcedon,
and by Ephraim Pagit in his Christianography, beyond all possibility of
contradiction.

2. The denial of the infallibility of the Church of Rome, appears sufficiently
from that stiff opposition, which was made by the British, Picts, and Irish,
against the Church of Rome, touching the Celibration of Easter (of which the
Reverend Primate enlarges in his religion of the ancient Irish, Bishop Usher.
from p. 92. to p. 116.) and their aversness from communion with those of the
Roman party, which he relates p. 108, 109, 110. where among other things, you
have these verses, made by one of the chief of their wise men, Woe be to him
that does not keep
From Romish Wolves, his sheep,
with staff, and weapon strong.


3. As for Purgatory and Prayers for the Dead, let it be observed, that the
Prayers and oblations mentioned, are expressly noted to have been made for such,
whose souls were supposed at the same instant to rest in bliss. See Bishop
Usher p. 27, 28. And again in his answer to the Jesuit, p. 189. Bed. l. 3.
Hist. Eccl. c. 2.
he gives these instances. The Brothren of the Church of Hexham, in the
anniversary commemoration of the O^its of Oswald King of Northumberland, used
to keep their vigils for the health of his soul; and having spent the night in
praising God with Psalms, to offer for him in the morning, Id. l. 4. cap. 23.
the sacrifice of the sacred oblation, as Beda writes, who tells us yet
withal, that he r^igned with God in Heaven, and by his prayers, he procured
many miracles to be wrought on Earth. So likewise does the same Bid report,
Bed. l. 4. Hist. cap. 23.
that when it was discovered by two several visions, that Hilda the Abbess of
Streansheal (or Whitby in Yorkshire) was carried up by the Angels into Heaven,
they which heard thereof presently caused prayers to be said for her soul. And
Osbenn relates the like of Dunstan, that being at Bath, and beholding in such
another vision, the soul of one that had been his Scholar at Glassenbury, to
be carried up into the Palace of Heaven, he straightway commended the same
into the hands of the Divine piety, Divinae pietatis.
and entreated the Lords of the place where he was, to do so likewise.

4. As touching the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the same was taught then,
which we teach now, as you may see in the Homily of Elfrick, approved by diverse
Bishops in their Synods, and appointed to be read in the Church upon
Easter Day, before the receiving of the Communion. This Book is subscribed by
the two Archbishops of Canterbury and York, Hom. in D^e Sancti paschat. p. 17.
and thirteen other Bishops; and the words of it are, There is great difference
betwixt the body wherein Christ suffered, and the body which is hallowed
Howsel. The body truly that Christ suffered in, was born of the fle^sh of
Mary, with blood, with bones, with skin, and with sinews, in humane limbs, with
a reasonable soul-living: And his Ghostly body (which we call the Howsel) is
gathered of many corns, without blood and bone, without limb, without soul. And
therefore, there is nothing to be understood bodily, but all is Ghostly to be
understood.

5. From hence it follows undeniably, that they rejected your proper sacrifice
of the Mass.

6. And for communion in one kind, it was decreed in a Synod under Cuthbert in
the year 747. Can. 23. That Layicks should be admonished to communicate more
often, lest they should want the food and drink of salvation. Pagit.
Christianography, part. 3.
Our Lord saying, except you eat the flesh, and drink the blood of the son of
Man, you shall have no life in you. From whence it is evident, that they
thought it necessary for Layicks to participate of both the Elements.

7. That the Layicks were permitted, yea commanded to read the Scriptures,
appears from what Bid reports of Bishop Aidan, That all such as went in his
company, Lib. 3. c. 5.
whither Clerks or Layicks, were tied to exercise themselves either in reading
of the Scriptures, or learning of Psalms.

That they had their service in their own tongue, I have but little evidence,
neither have you more to the contrary. Bishop Jewels reply. page 190.
But the best I yet find given of it, is this, that Theodore the seventh
Archbishop after Austin, brought the Latin service into England.

That they rejected Image Worship, is evident from this, that our learned men
opposed the second Nicene Council's determination concerning Images; and when
the acts of that Council were sent into Britain, by Charles, King of France,
Alcuine wrote an Epistle against it, substantially grounded upon the authority
of the holy Scripture, which Epistle, with the said Book, with our Kings and
Princes hands, was brought to the King of France. See Pagit part 3. p. 41. ex
Hoveden and aliis.

That they rejected invocation of Saints, Holinshed's Hist. ad An. 1100. p. 27.
is proved from the History of King William the second, who protested openly,
that he believed that no Saint could profit any man in the Lords sight, and
therefore neither would he, nor any man, See other evidences in Pagit. pt. 3.
p. 83.
that was wise, (as he affirms) make intercession either to Peter, or any
other Saint for help.

Till the year 1100. it was not prohibited to the Clergy to marry (says Henry
of Huntington;) At which time Anselm endeavored to put the Popes Letters in
execution, but at last after the pressures, tyranny, and arts, of an hundred
and thirty years continuance, (for it began in 970, and was not finished till
1100. as Polydore Virgil computes it) the Clergy were driven from their chaste
Wives, and betook themselves to Concubines, whom they changed, or multiplied
without disturbance. And this tyranny was exercised by Pope Calixtus the
second. Whereupon our Simon of Durham made these Verses, not very good, though
very true.

O bone Calixte, nuno omnis Clerus odit te,
Nam olim presbyteri solent Uxoribus uti.
Id praevertisti quondam cum papafuisti.
Which Prideaux in his History has bettered by his translation.

The Clergy now the good Calixtus hate,
For heretofore each one might have his mate;
But since thou gotten have the papal Throne,
They must keep Punks, or learn to lig alone.
By which you may see, that it was not Calixtus the First, who lived Anno Dom.
221, that enjoined Celibacy, (as our Author intimates, and would have the
learned Dr. guilty of the same blunder, Mr. Cr. p. 309
albeit he has not one syllable whence he can infer it.) But Calixtus the
second, who lived, An. Dom. 1119. Sim. Dunelm. in Chron. lib. 20. Math. Paris
in Hen. 1. page 67
who in a Synod held at Rome, An. Dom. 1120. Made this decree, that Presbyters,
Deacons, and Subdeacons, should be altogether interdicted the cohibitation of
Concubines and Wives.

CHAP. XXIV.
Particular Nations have a power to purge themselves from their corruptions,
sect. 1. Mr. C's. limitations considered, ib. The example of the Emperor
Justinian for it, sect. 2. Of Carolus Magnus, sect. 3. Mr. C 's. evasion
obviated, sect. 4. The testimonies of Balsamon, sect. 5. The example of the
Kings of Judah vindicated, sect. 6. Mr. C 's. Objections answered, sect. 7, 8.
The History of the reformation, sect. 9. We might reform without Synodal
concurrence, sect. 10.

IN the consideration of this twenty fourth Chapter,

First, Whereas the Dr. had said, that by the concessions, of the most learned
Popish VVriters, particular Nations had still a power to purge themselves from
their corruptions as well in the Church, Mr. C. p. 285.
as in the state, without leave had from the Sea of Rome. This (says he) is
willingly granted. But then,

1. He will not have them grant such a power of purgation against the consent
of the Sea of Rome.

Answ. As if they who have power to do this without the leave of the Sea of
Rome, might not do it with a non obstante to the contradiction of that See.

2. Were all the decrees and statutes of the Germain, Spanish, Gallican
Churches, against the encroachments of the Pope, his indulgences, his bulls,
etc. (so largely insisted upon by Bishop Bramhal) made by the consent of the
Roman See? did she not with greatest violence oppose them?

Secondly, says he, did they allow this liberty against the consent of the
whole Church Catholic? Ibid.


Answ. We have showed that we did not separate from the whole Church
Catholic, but being constrained by your obstinacy in imposing on us unjust
conditions of communion, refused to communicate with you (the most ulcerated
part of the Church Catholic) upon these terms.

2. When the Church in Athanasius his days, was overrun with Arrianism; the
Church of Israel, in the days of the Prophet Elias, with Idolatry, was it not
lawful for particular Churches, and particular Tribes, to purge themselves from
those corruptions?

3. What promise have we, what evidence to assure us, that there never was,
can, nor will be, any superstitions in all the Liturgies of the Church of God?
if you tell us that there be such promises, we must call upon you to produce
them, if not, then might there have been cause of our altering some things,
which were universally practiced in the visible Church, at the time of our
reformation, when we returned to that Primitive purity, that was more or less
deserted by it.

Thirdly, Ibid.
Not a Purgation (quoth he) from the whole faith and discipline, in any thing
they thought fit to be rectified, that by the authority of Councils and laws of
Princes, had been received, and enforce ever since this Nation was Christian,
and by which they declared themselves members of the Catholic Church.

Answ. Every word is a misadventure, for neither were the chief things reformed
by us (as the tyranny of the Pope, the Idolatry of Images, the Sacrilege in
withholding the Cup, etc.) decreed by any Councils, established by any laws of
Princes, or received by us, at the first conversion of the Nation, as we have
sufficiently evinced; much less did the asserting of them, declare us members
of that Catholic Church, which never owned them, but detested them.

Fourthly, Ibid.
He tells us, that we cannot produce one example, either of States or Princes,
that ever made any laws, to repeal any doctrines declared, or disciplines
established in the Church.

Answ. If he speaks of a particular Church, it is so palpable an untruth, that I
will not disparage any Reader so much as to think he needs an instance to the
contrary; if of the whole Catholic Church, it concerns not us, for never will
he be able to evince, that we have done so; or if we had done so in
sleighter matters, where they have swerved from Scripture and Primitive
antiquity, how are we blameworthy in so doing? has not your Trent Council
decreed against the necessity of giving the Eucharist to Infants, which yet was
the Doctrine of the universal Church, in the fourth century? have you not laid
aside some Ceremonies which in the Primitive Church were practiced universally?

Lastly, Ibid.
You say that the Purgations conceded and executed by Princes truly Catholic,
were to extirpate all Innovations in Doctrine, all transgressions of
discipline, that swerved from the decrees and ordinations of the Church, and no
other.

Answ. The Purgations executed by our Princes were truly so, and this we
constantly assert, let Queen Elizabeth speak in her own behalf.

England (says she) has embraced no new religion, Cambdens Annals of Eliz. p.
35, 36.
nor any other then that which Jesus Christ has commanded, that the Primitive
and Catholic church has exercised, and the Ancient Fathers have always with
one voice and one mind approved.

And 1. Justinian (the first instance produced by the Dr.) let it be only
considered, that it was he who banished Pope Silverius, who created Justiniana
prima, and Carthage new Patriarchates by his imperial power, who made so many
laws contrary to the decrees of former Synods, and for the correction,
limitation, or right ordering thereof; who made so many laws concerning
Ecclesiastical persons, and Benefices, and holy Orders, and appeals, and the
Patronage of Churches, concerning Religion, the Creed, Sacraments, Heresy,
(excommunicating all Heretics, and that of Nestorius and Eutyches in
particular, ordaining that if the followers of them did not return after
warning given, by virtue of his Edict, they should have no favor, L. cum recta
C. de summa. T^^^
or pardon, but be condemned, and punished, as convicted, and denounced
Heretics,) who made so many Laws touching Schism, Sanctuaries, Simony, and all
other matters of Ecclesiastical cognizance, yea, who expressly says, (...),
Novel. 133.
that nothing comes amiss to the Prince, every thing is under his Royal
cognizance. I say, if this be considered, Justinian alone, if all other
Presidents were lost, were sufficient to evince this Political supremacy of
sovereign Princes, over the Church, within their own Dominions, and
consequently to justify the Oath of Supremacy (which Mr. C. tells us we
cannot hence justify) there being nothing ascribed to his Majesty thereby, See
Mr. C. p. 290.
but only Political Supremacy as is excellently evinced by Bishop Bramhal.
Rep. p. 290.
Yea

2. To justify our reformation, it being only to the casting out of
innovations in doctrine, and irregularity in manners, which is the confessed
purpose of these laws.

Secondly, For the Emperor Charles the great, (which was the Doctors second
instance) we are told by the Emperor himself, that he convocated Bishops to
counsel him how Gods Law, and Christian Religion should be recovered. Apud
Surium die 5. Jun.
Therefore (says he) by the council of my Religious Prelates, and my Nobles,
we have appointed Bishops in every City, and Boniface their Archbishop, and
appoint that a Synod shall be held every year, that in our presence the
Canonical decrees, and the Rites of the Church may be restored, and Christian
Religion may be reformed. Yea, he tells us that he resided in his councils
not only as an hearer, but Judge also, and by the gift of God determined and
decreed, what was to be held in these inquiries; Part. 1. page 3.
As you may find in the collection of Goldastus, yea, he made a decree against
the worshipping of Images, and gave sentence against the second Nicene Council
in this particular; And to add no more in the preface of his capitulary, he
speaks on this wise to the Clergy of his Empire: We have sent our Deputies unto
you, to the intent, that they by our Authority may together with you correct
what shall stand in need of correction, we have also added certain chapters of
canonical Ordinances, such as we thought to beemost necessary for you. Let no
man I entreat you, think, or censure, this p^ous admonition, for presumptuous,
whereby we force our selves to correct what is amiss, to cut off what is
superfluous, and briefly to compact what is good. But rather let every man
receive it with a willing mind of charity. For we have read in the Book of
Kings, how Joas endeavored to restore the Kingdom which God had given him, to
the service of the true God, by going about it, by correcting and admonishing
it; So that here we have him not only acting as high as the oath of Supremacy
will allow our Prince, but particularly by the council of his Prelates, and his
Nobles, acting for the recovery and reformation of Religion, yea, without
Synodal authority cutting off what was superfluous, correcting what was amiss,
and justifying himself by the example of King Joas, who undoubtedly reformed
Religion it self, c. 24. sect. 7.
as our Author confesses, of the Kings of Judah.

Now to these things what answer is returned by Mr. C. but that these Laws were
all regulated by the Laws of the present Church in their times, that they were
only the reduction of the faith and discipline of the Church into imperial
Laws, that they were never intended as acts of an absolute Ecclesiastical
Supremacy, but as consequences of the Churches Authority, and that this will be
found a truth by any one who casts an eye upon those Laws. De imperio sum.
potest.
Now this is evidently otherwise, for, as Grotius tells us, Justinian made new
Patriarchates, ordained they should enjoy the full rights of a Patriarchate,
contrary to the twelfth canon of the council of Chalcedon, altered the Canons
touching the election of Bishops, which was very usual for Emperors to do, as
Tollet there confesses, to omit many other instances of like kind. And as for
Charles the great, he tells us from Bochellus, that it was very well known that
anciently as often as Synods were assembled, their decrees were not ratified till
approved by the King in his privy Counsel, and if any things there displeased,
they were exploded, which (says he) from the Council of Tours, Cabilonensi.
and Chaloun, under Charles the great, we have already demonstrated, thus
Bochellus. Yea farther, the same Emperor added to the Senate held in
Theodonis-Villa, and gives us notice, that he did so by annexing, or prefixing
of this clause, hoc de nostro adjicimus, but I will not trouble my self any
further to insist on this, seeing the same Grotius has abundantly evinced in
his seventh chapter, their power to rescind and amend these Ecclesiastical
Canons, and that this power was adjudged to them as their right by the Synods,
thus convened by them. But

2. Be it so, that these Imperial Laws were the Churches faith, and Canons,
for discipline, and consequences of the Churches authority, then must it be
acknowledged that the decrees of Charles the great, against worshipping of
Images and the sentence of the Nicene Council, was a part of the Churches
faith, a consequence of her authority, Justin nov. 123. S. ad haec jubemus.
Carol. mag. capit l. 1. c. 70.
and regulated by the Laws of the present Church. And the decree both of
Justinian and Carolus Magnus, that Divine Service should be celebrated in the
vulgar tongue, as being required to be celibrated so, by the Apostle, and by
God himself, who would require an account of them who should do otherwise, at
the day of Judgment; the prerogatives given by Justinian to the Bishop of
Carthage, notwithstanding the pretensions of the Bishop of Rome to the
contrary, must be all actions regulated by the Churches of their time, and
according to the faith, and discipline of the same.

And what has he to persuade us, that what he says was the very truth? as to
the practice of Charlemain, just nothing, and for the Emperor Justinian, as
bad as nothing; for what says he, but that the Rules of the Holy Councils, (
viz. the four first General Councils) shall obtain the force of Laws, for their
Doctrines we receive (says he) as the Holy Scriptures themselves, and their
Rules we observe as laws, ergo, all the decrees of the Code and novels of
Justinian, (though made, touching sundry things of which the Church had
prescribed nothing) were regulated by the Law of the present Church; again, our
Laws disdain not to follow the holy and divine Rules, that is, such of them as
required only things determined by former Councils, ergo, they were not
intended any of them as Acts of an absolute Ecclesiastical Supremacy, but all
of them, as consequences of the Churches Supremacy.

Balsamon must be called a malicious Schismatic, Mr. C. p. 283.
C. would be angry if we call him so, and then we must be told, that he says
only that the Emperor has an inspection over the Churches, Bals. in C. 38.6.
Syn. in Trullo.
so that he can limit or extend the jurisdiction of Metropolitans, erect new
ones, etc.

Answ. But this etc. cuts off the most material part of the sentence, which
tells us, that the Emperor may not only set a form for the election of
Bishops, but for other administration of them, so as he shall think good; which
perfectly reaches the King Supremacy; nor is this all that is there said, but
we are told, moreover, that it is fitting the Ecclesiastical Orders should
follow the Civil commands, and therefore how Mr. C. will acquit himself from an
untruth, I am not able to divine: If Balsamon here have not said enough, let
him hear him on the twelfth Canon of the Synod of Antioch, where he says, the
Patriarch himself shall be judged of the Emperor, who has cognizance over
the power of the Church; peradventure as Sacrilegious, an Heretic, or guilty
of any other crime, for we have diverse times seen such Judicial proceedings.

To the last example of reformation, Judah, Ibid.
he answers, it is granted here was a reformation of Religion, but adds,

1. That they are no where said to have reformed all the Priests, or the high
Priests, or not to have found him as Orthodox as themselves.

Answ. Bishop Andrews tells you, that seeing it cannot be denied, that Kings
were to be Nursing Fathers of the Church, to see to the preservation of the
purity of Religion (seeing the Scripture of the Old Testament, every where
complains of their neglect, in not removing the High places in which the people
offered sacrifice, and when the people became Idolatrous, 'twas imputed unto
the defect of a King in Israel) you ought to show us where these limitations
are to be found, you shall reform, but not all the Priests, not the High
Priests, though they go before the people in Idolatry, not against the Priests,
if they are minded to continue their Idolatry, not without the Priests, albeit
they refuse to consent to the restoring of Gods worship. No, in such cases you
must suffer my people to perish in their Idolatry? if they all cry out to Aaron
for a Calf, and he satisfy their desires in making one, these Calves must be
continued by our Moses, or chief Governors, unless God extraordinarily command
the breaking of them: This I am confident, would have been new Divinity to King
David. Could ever the Kings of Israel after Jeroboam, have reformed, without
reforming all the Priests, who were manifest Idolaters? or at least
transgressors of Gods law; and therefore can it be avoided by Mr. C. but that
they ought to have suffered the people in the ways of Jeroboam, who made
Israel to sin? might not the High Priest be guilty of Idolatry, as well as
Aaron? yea, was he not think you, in the days of Elijah, and might not
Jezabels whoredoms have been corrected notwithstanding? were the declarations
of the Church, necessary to legitimate such a reformation? why is the church
never blamed for not declaring for such a reformation? why not the Priests, and
especially the High Priests? but constantly it is charged, as the Princes
fault, that the High places were not removed: It Is true, the Priests lips
should preserve knowledge, as Mr. C. has it, and when they do so, even the
King should seek it at their mouths, asking their advice in matters of such
great concernment, but if they turn Idol shepherds, causing the people to err,
if both Priest and Prophet be profane, then must he be so far from making
their verdict his Standard in his reformation, as to reform them before, and
above others; and indeed had it been otherwise, Idolatry must have commenced
Orthodox, and passed uncontroled in the Church of Judah, when ever it had
pleased the greatest part of the Priests to have it so. But

2. Neither is this our case, our reformation in the days of King Henry,
Edward, or Queen Elizabeth, was not a reformation without, or against the whole
body of our Priests, but only against the Idolatrous Priests of the Romish
party, the Doctrines reformed by K. Edward, were reformed by the consent of a
lawful Synod, of Bishops and other learned men; and as King Joas had the
consent and concurrence of the true Priests and Prophets of the Lord, when he
deposed the Idolatrous Priests, whom the Kings of Judah had ordained to burn
incense; even so Queen Elizabeth, by the advice and concurrence of her true
reformed pastors, legally deposed the Idolatrous Priests, which Queen Mary or
his Holiness had placed in the Land: Nor does he invalidate this example, by
saying that these Reformers, were Prophets as well as Kings, for neither were
Hezekias, Josias, or Jehn Prophets, nor did they act here as Prophets, but as
Kings, or otherwise why were they blamed for this neglect, who were no
Prophets? were none but Prophets to be Nursing Fathers of the Church? or would
this have argued them to be so, to let their Children suck in the poison of
Idolatry?

But he has some objections, which come next to be considered; And

1. Princes are not exempt from that of our Lord, he that hears you, Mr. C.
p. 286.
hears me. Ergo, the supreme power may not purge the Church from it is
corruptions, though by the advice and consent of the Nobles, and the sounder
Orthodox part of the Clergy.

Again, Christ never said, nor can we find in reason or Antiquity, any ground
to apply to Princes that comm^ission, as my Father sent me, etc. Receive the
Holy Ghost (a new commission) teach all Nations; ergo, Princes may not with the
advice of Nobles and Clergy, and with the concurrence of Parliament, reform
corruptions in the Church, I suppose no body will offer after such clear and
evident demonstrations, ever to defend the Kings supremacy.

3. There is a promise made peculiarly to the Apostles, (or rather a
prediction) that when the spirit should be sent to them, he would guide them
into all truth; which, says he, was never made to Princes any other way, then
whilst they follow the direction of their Pastors (no nor then neither) Ergo
they may not with the advice, etc. purge themselves from the corruptions of
their Church, and the Church from them.

2. I can tell him of a promise, that the secret of the Lord shall be with them
that fear him, and he will teach them his Covenant, if they search for wisdom,
etc. then they shall find it, if they do the will of Christ, they shall know
the Doctrines, whether they be of God or no. Now let him either say, that
Ecclesiastical Pastors can never teach their superiors any errors, or advise
them to what is Superstition, or that when so, they cannot have the benefit of
those promises, or else acknowledge that they may sufficiently be guided into
all saving truth without them.

4. Says he, Princes are sheep, not pastors; yea, are sons of the Church.

Answ. True, but notwithstanding all this, they are Nursing Fathers of the
Church.

2. All the families of any Parish, are sheep, not Pastors, Ergo, they may not
reform themselves without their Pastor.

His second unavoidable demonstration is, Mr. C. p. 287.
then must there be a spiritual power over of them all, which is in the Church.

Answ. Bishop Brambal tells you, Reply p. 287.
that the Kings of England, are under the foreign jurisdiction of a General
Council: and is not this an unavoidable demonstration, that forces us to
acknowledge, what we do acknowledge? did ever Dr. Pierce deny this? but if we
should deny it with Grotius, De sum. Pot. c. 7.
how miserable is our Authors proof? who tells us, that if there be not
spiritual laws, and a spiritual director to them all, what will become of unity.

Answ. Why may they not have such laws, and yet be independent? is it necessary
they should disagree?

2. They may have diverse laws in circumstantials, and yet preserve their
unity; seeing the unity of the Church, is that of Communion, not of
apprehension, and may stand with any difference of opinions, in all matters
that destroy not the foundation, and Ruin not the being of a Church.

3. They have spiritual laws, and a spiritual director common to them all, the
Word of God; Oh but they must have a General Council! Rep. Why so good Sir?
Ans. Because otherwise, they will not obey the Rules of Scripture: Rep. Nor
will they obey the Rules of your Ecumenical Council. Ans. They should obey
them. Rep. So should they obey the prescripts of Gods Word. So that unless
persons voluntarily consent to the decrees of a General Council, what
preservatives of unity will there be; and if all Princes or Churches would
consent to the laws and doctrines of one, the remedy against Schism would be
as sovereign, and indeed do you not here beg the the thing in question with
your adversaries? God has provided, say they, no other remedy against the
Schisms of particular Churches, but his Word, yes say you, a general Council,
or patriarchical, no necessity of them, say they, to unity, let men believe the
foundations of Christianity, and be charitable to their brethren, bearing with
the weak as the Scripture requires in other matters, it is enough; Now to this
you learnedly ask, how then shall the whole Church be kept in unity? even say
they, by holding the foundations of Christianity, so plain, that they need no
determination, and permitting a liberty of opinion touching other things
without breach of charity.

And here comes in another of his Arguments, to prove us Schismatics, and our
reformation ^o be illegal, which runs thus. That Reformation which was begun
without sufficient authority, by Queen Elizabeth, must be illegal and
Schismatical, but such was the Reformation of the Church of England. Now to
make this good, he gives us an History of it, and tells us that the
convocation called by the Queen, Mr. Cr. p. 274.
unanimously persisted in a resolution not to forsake the old Religion (or more
truly the superstitions,) restored by Queen Mary, and then he gives us what
was done in this convocation, viz. that they composed certain Articles of
Religion, which they tendered to the Bishops, who in the name of the whole
Clergy, presented them to the Lord Keeper.

Ans. The business is only this, the reformed Ministers being either cruelly
Butchered, or else Banished and persecuted out of the land, when Queen
Elizabeth came first to the Crown, she found the Roman Clergy stated in their
Benefices, and albeit many of these reformed Ministers and particularly, three
Bishops that escaped the fire now appeared, and the rest came flocking from
beyond the Seas, yet did she not presently dispossess the one, and restore the
other, (being not willing to make a reformation on a sudden, but by degrees,)
now of these Priests consisted the convocation held under the blood-thirsty
Bonner, (who had warmed himself at so many Bone-fires of our Bishops, and
learned Clergy, without any other remorse then this, that he did not cut off
root and branch.) Dr. Heylin. Hist. of Queen Eliz. p. 113.
But such was their fear, modesty, or despair, of doing any good to themselves,
and their cause, that there was nothing done by the Bishops at all, and not
much more by the lower Clergy then a declaration of their judgment, in some
certain points (mentioned here by Mr. C.) which at that time were thought fit
to be commended to the sight of the Parliament then assembled, but that this
was tendered in the name of the whole representative Clergy, is his own
addition, it being only a declaration of the judgment of the lower Clergy,
and whether it were so or no is not much material; hereupon a disputation
betwixt these two parties was concluded on, and learned men of each party were
elected, to be disputants of each side, wherein the Bishops of the Romish
party so demeaned themselves, and so obstinately refused to stand to their own
conditions, that it was generally thought, they were not able to defend their
Doctrine, Dr. Heylin ib. p. 104.
in the points to be disputed. But to proceed in the History of the
Reformation, after the Religion established by Queen Mary, had continued
un-interrupted for a month, and somewhat more, afterward it was tolerated and
withal required, to have the Epistles and Gospels, the ten Commandments, the
Symbol, the Lettany, and the Lords-Prayer, in the vulgar tongue, Cambden. p.
10, 11.
and this upon the occasion of some certain Ministers, who impatient of delay,
by the length of time, which ran and passed away in other matters, desiring
rather to run before good laws, then to expect them, in their fervent zeal
began to preach the Gospel of Christ's true Doctrine, Id. p. 33, 34.
first privately in houses, and then openly in Churches: On the 22th of March,
the Parliament being assembled, the Order of Edward the sixth was
re-established, and by Act of the same, the whole use of the Lords Supper
granted under both kinds. The 24th of June by the authority of that which
concerned the Uniformity of public prayers, and administration of the
Sacraments, the Sacrifice of the Mass was abolished, and the Liturgy in the
English tongue more and more established. In July the Oath of Allegiance was
proposed to the Bishops, of which anon, and in August Images were thrown out of
the Temples, and Churches; Def. Ec. Ang. p. 637.
Now if it be considered with Dr. Crakanthorp, that what was here done by this
most Religious Queen, was not introductory of what was new, that so it should
be necessary to discuss it in a Synod, but only restoratory of the Laws made
in the 5th and sixth years of King Edward the sixth, with the consent and
concurrence of a lawful Synod of learned Bishops and Presbyters, that Queen
Elizabeth, did only justly restore what her Sister Mary had unjustly abrogated.

2. ^ul. Chapter Hist. l. 9. p. 52.
That this alteration of Religion, was also enacted by the Parliament, which
repealed the laws of Queen Mary, made against the Protestants, and revived
those of King Henry the 8: and King Edward the 6. in favor of them. And

3. How many learned Protestant Divines she had, desiring and advising her to
these things, yea, and old Bishops also (for whereas our Author tells us in
effect, that she had none to advise with, p. 274.
but such as were now ordained, the rest being generally averse from her
proceedings: It Is void of truth: For what does he think of William Barlow, John
Scory, Miles Coverdale, and John Hodgskins, who consecrated Archbishop Parker,
Bishop Bale, and the old Bishop of Landaffe? must these be counted averse from
this reformation? or new ordained, because some of them were transferred) I say
he that shall impartially weigh these things (to omit other answers till anon)
cannot but acknowledge, that the Queen had sufficient ground for what she did,
and that there was no necessity of the concurrence of any Synodal Authority, to
legitimate her actions.

On the 24th. Dr. Heylin. ib. p. 114.
of June, the public Liturgy established by the Parliament, was required to
be Officiated in all the Churches of the Kingdom, and the Bishops were called
in by certain of the Lords of the Council, commissionated thereunto in due form
of Law, and were required to take the Oath of supremacy, according to a law
made in that behalf, by the orders of the Land, now albeit the Bishops had
taken the like Oath, as Priests or Bishops in some part or other of the reign
of the two last Kings, albeit it had been pleaded for by men of their own
party, and Synodically defined by them, to be the right of King Henry the 8.
yet did they now obstinately refuse the said Oath, and were these upon deprived
of their several Bishop-pricks, as the law required. The Oath is tendered next
to the Deans and Dignitories, Ib. p. 115.
and by degrees also to the Rural Clergy, refused by some and took by others,
as it seemed most agreeable to their consciences, or particular ends; for the
refusal whereof, or otherwise for not conforming to the public Liturgy, I
find no more to have been deprived of their preferments, then fourteen
Bishops, six Abbots, Priors, and Governors of religious Orders, twelve Deans,
and as many Archdeacons, fifteen Presidents, or Masters of Colleges, fifty
Prebendaries of Cathedral Churches, and about eighty Parsons or Vicars, the
whole number not amounting to two hundred men, which in a Realm consisting of
above nine thousand Parishes, and twenty six Cathedral Churches, could be no
great matter.

About three years after a Convocation was called, Heylin ib. p. 158
wherein the thirty nine Articles (very little differing from those which in
the Reign of King Edward the 6. An. Dom. 1552.
had formerly been published) were agreed upon by the Archbishops and Bishops
of both Provinces, and the whole Clergy in the convocation, holden at London,
in the year 1562 ten years after the composing of the former Articles; So that
if the beginning of the reformation had been illegal, by reason of the defect
of any Synodical concurrence of the Clergy (as indeed it was not) yet after the
concurrence and consent of this convocation of Bishops, and the whole Clergy of
the Nation, it could no longer be esteemed so, that being taken away, upon
which this pretense of illegality was built; nor can it be excepted here, that
a purgation of the Clergy was first made, and then the convocation called; for
that which Mr. C. styles a purgation, was only such a deprivation as the law
required, and that upon a most just account, the refusal of the Oath of
supremacy, or nonconformity to the public Liturgy, against which no
tolerable exception could be made, and this is so notorious, as that for the
space of ten or thirteen years, the Papists freely resorted to it; add to this
what the Queen returned to foreign Princes, interceding for the Papists, that
these Bishop had in the sight of all the world, Cambden ab initio.
against the laws and peace of the Kingdom, obstinately rejected the same
doctrine, which the most of them had under the Reign of Henry the 8. and Edward
the 6. propounded to others voluntarily, and by public writings, which things
jointly considered, do make this exception vanish into smoke and nothing. But,

3. If all this were laid aside, yet we affirm, that the supreme power may
reform against the greater part of the Clergy, or with the advice of some of
them, albeit he have not their Synodal concurrence, for otherwise, the
Idolatries of many of the Kings of Israel could not have been reproved by the
Lord, seeing they had the consent of the Priests and Levites, in so much that
Elijah cries out, that he alone was left of all the Servants of the Lord. Yea,
the Preaching of Christ could not legally have been permitted, since the
Sanhedrim did oppose it, nor the asserting of the Nicene faith, when by the
Arrian Bishops, the contrary was spread through the Christian world, and the
Orthodox Bishops but an handful in comparison of them; nor could the
reformation of Hezekiah, Josiah, or other Kings of Judah be esteemed
warrantable, as being unsynodical: and if the Idolatrous Priests which they
deposed, did exceed the number of the Lords Priests, they must have been
reputed as Schismatics, from the Priests of Baal, as now we are; yea, had
Queen Mary called a Synod of the Clergy, which she found in possession of
Ecclesiastical preferment, at her entrance on the Crown, would they not have
determined for the Protestants? had his Majesty called a Synod before the
restitution of the Bishops, would it not have determined for Presbytery, and
against the introduction of the ceremonies? Yea lastly, albeit two British
Synods rejected the propositions of Austine, St. Gregory's legate, you will not
I hope, accuse the King of being Schismatical, for siding with Austin against
those Synods; and verily if any of the things you mention, either the Princes
being liable to mistake the truth, the possbility of this, that the Clergy
opposed by him, should be in the right; if any power of determining matters of
faith, do prejudice the reformation of Queen Elizabeth, they must stand good
also against these instances produced by me; for might not the Idolatrous
Priests, have returned upon Hezekiah or Josias, as ours do too often upon us?
might they not have told them, Sirs, you are very zealous for what you are
pleased to call a reformation? but what if you be mistaken in what you so
esteem? what if the Priests deposed by you, be in the right? what if God has
committed this work, to judge and decide what religion shall be practiced, to
us Priests? are you not Sons of the Church, and therefore to be guided by us,
your spiritual Fathers? Will you say their deviation from the law of God, was
most notorious?

Answ. True, but not more evident then yours, both from Antiquity and
Scripture, in the matters of Prayer in an unknown tongue, Communion in one
kind, worshipping of Images, and the adoration of the Sacrament as God; and
what other tolerable answer you can return to this objection, I profess I know
not.

Next he reckons up the carnal interests of our reformation, which were they
granted, would serve to show the manner of proceeding in the reformation bad,
but conclude nothing against the action it self; we are told of King Henry's
luxury and Sacrilege, as if these were his motives to reformation, but if
Sacrilege and luxury did help to reform superstition, that was the fault of
the reformers, says the Dr. not at all of the reformation. Add to this, the
King protested he reformed out of conscience, his marriage was pronounced
unlawful by seven Universities beside our own, by the Bishops of Canterbury,
London, Winchester, Bath, Lincoln, Bishop Bramhals Reply p. 245.
all the Cardinals of Rome opposed the dispensation, and yet the putting away
of this wife, must be called a carnal interest, yea, our freedom from their
superstitious austerity and prayers, the doctrine of Devils, the allowing one
Wife with the Apostle Paul unto the Clergy to prevent burning, fornication, or
many Concubines, this must be called a carnal interest, and as if this had not
been sufficient, we must be asked whether any such interests as these were
operative in the Council of Trent: he will ask us next I suppose, whether we
dare affirm that there is a God in Heaven, or a Sun in the firmament, for let
any man read the History of that Council, and the Review of it, writ by a
learned Roman Catholic, and he will find the many carnal interests of that
Council, to be as apparent.

CHAP. XXV.
Protestants not obliged to be opponents, sect. 1. Mr. C's rediculous
Arguments, sect. 2. His conditions imposed upon the replyer, sect. 3. An answer
to the first, ibid. To the second, sect. 4. To the third, sect. 5, 6. To the
fourth, sect. 7. What conditions we require from him, sect. 8.

IN the sixth sect. chap. We are told that Catholics cannot be obliged to
produce their evidences for the truth of their Doctrines, but Protestants must
produce them against the doctrines of the Church of Rome.

Answ. This is very unreasonable, for seeing it is acknowledged that the Church
can propose no other doctrines to be believed, Mr. C. p. 235.
then such as either are expressly, or at least in their immediate necessary
principles, contained in divine Revelation; it follows, that what doctrines
they propose to us to be believed, they must be proposed as such, and our
assent must be required to them as such, and such an assent, the Church of
Rome requires of us, to all the particulars disputed in this Book. Now seeing
to assent to them as such, without evidence that they are so, is evidently to
lie, and say the Lord says, when he has not said it; is it not sufficient
for us to answer the Arguments that are brought to conclude them Divine
Revelations, seeing by so doing, we evince that to be rquired to assent to
them, is to be required to lie; and therefore, seeing the Church of Rome
requires this assent to them, as a condition of her communion, she must
demonstrate that she has reason so to do, or else acknowledge her condition
is unjust, as being the profession of a lie.

We are told indeed, that you were in possession of those doctrines, or most of
them for above a thousand years; but to this Mr. Dally returns this
satisfactory answer; In civilibus causis, ubi jus possessionis valet, qui
possidet, pulsatur, and loco, quem tenet, cedere compellitur, in nostro hoc
negotio plane contra res habet. Qui se possessores esse affirmant, ii nos
petunt, id agunt, id urgent, ac contendunt, ut nos suam illam, quam jactunt
possessionem, secum adeamus: postulant enim a nobis, ut secum eadem de
religione sentiamus; hancque suam a majoribus acceptam de religione sententiam
possessionem suam appellant. Ergo si causae totius ingenium, si ipsa rei natura
ac ratio penitius consideretur, liquet istos proprie esse actores unde sequitur
cum actoris sit id, quod intendit, probare, omnino hoc istis incumbere, ut
veris, legitimisque rationibus demonstrent nos jure teneri ad eam, ad quam ab
ipsis vocamur possessionem incundam. Dal. l. 1. de demonst. fidei ex Scripturis
c. 4.

You go on and say, that the Pope has enjoyed an Authority and supremacy of
Jurisdiction, a longer time than any succession of Princes can pretend to; a
jurisdiction acknowledged as of divine right, and as such submitted to by all
our Ancestors, not only as Englishmen, but as neighbors of the whole Western
Patriarchate, yea, of the universal Church, and this as far as any records can
be produced.

Now 1. Seeing Dr. Hammond has so largely considered this pretense, and so
abundantly proved, that in the Notion wherein Mr. C. maintains this supremacy,
viz. from divine right, it has not so much as the feeblest plea of possession
in this Nation, nor ever appears to have had; is it not a wonder that
notwithstanding all that he has said to the contrary, sect. 2, 3, 4, 5. of
his fourth chap. this possession should be asserted without the least ground of
proof.

2. This might have been urged at the beginning of the reformation, but now his
Majesty and his Bishops are in possession, and therefore by your own grounds,
are not bound to produce their evidences, but you who seek to dispossess them;
if you say with S. W. that in things of divine institution, p. 50.
against which no prescription pleads, he only can pretend possession of any
thing, who can stand upon it, that he has had it nearer Christ's time.

We Answ. Be it so, yet must their title stand good, till you can evidence
that you have had it nearer Christ's time then they, which you will never be
able to do.

3. Seeing this title is held by divine right, and no other pleadable, is it
not evidence sufficient against this plea, to show that there is no such right
for it to build on, which is done by answering the Arguments that plead for it.

4. If it had been our parts to oppose, we doubt not to prove it a possession
malae fidei, Sch. dis. p. 29.
by the equality of power given by Christ to the Apostles, by the
unreasonableness that those other Apostles, which survived St. Peter, should be
subjected to his successors, Bishops of Rome, which yet they must have been, if
the universal pastorship were derived to them by tenure of that succession, and
by the many ages, before the power or title of universal Pastor was assumed,
and wherein it was disclaimed as Antichristian.

Lastly, When the dispute is, whether our separation from your Church, be the
sin of Schism, herein it is impossible that we should be any other than
defendants, or you any other than opponents; for when you accuse us of Schism,
surely you are bound to prove or make this accusation good, and it is sufficient
for us to answer all that you bring against us.

Your seventh sect. is the strangest inconsequence imaginable, put it into
Syllogism and it runs thus, if Protestants acknowledge that the Church of God
is in all fundamentals infallible (that is, that some members of those that
profess the Christian faith, shall be kept in all truth necessary to
salvation) then must the proofs that Romanists bring against the Church of
England, though in themselves but probable, be demonstrations, but the first is
so, ergo, which is no better then this, if the Moon be made of Green Cheese,
then is the Roman Church infallible, but the Moon, etc.

Again,

We are at last arrived at those conditions which Mr. C. requires us to observe
in our Reply.

And the first is this, to declare expressly, that in all the points handled in
this Book, we are demonstratively certain, that they are errors and novelties
introduced since the four first general Councils, for says he, without this
certainty, according to the Archbishop, it is unlawful for Protestants to
Question or censure such former Doctrines of the Church. Which reason will then
be valid, when it is proved that the doctrines of the Church of Rome were the
doctrines of the whole Church of God (for of that only, as we have evidenced,
the Archbishop speaks) and not till then. 2. It does not lie upon us to show
that the doctrines imposed upon us as Articles of faith, are novelties and
errors, but only to evince that there is nothing in Scripture or elsewhere,
whence it can be made evident, that they are Articles of faith, traditions
received from the Apostles; for this renders it necessary for us to refuse
those conditions of communion, which require us to believe they are such.

3. We are sufficiently convinced, that your veneration of Images is a novelty,
that your prayer in an unknown tongue, the infallibility of the Church of Rome,
are so many untruths, and that nothing in this or any other Book, said to the
contrary, is convictive.

2.

1. That the universal Church, represented in a General Council, may in points
of doctrine not fundamental, so mislead the Church by errors, that a
particular Church, etc. discovering such errors, may be obliged to separate
externally.

Answ. This is so far from being a main ground of our separation, that it is no
ground at all, neither does it concern us in the least to engage in this
dispute, seeing no lawful General Council has determined one Iota contrary to
us.

That which he calls the second ground of our separation, has been considered
already.

Our third ground of separation must be this, that a particular Church, in
opposition to the universal, can judge what doctrines are fundamental, what
not, in reference to all Persons, States, or Communities, and then he requires,
that a catalogue of such doctrines be given by the respondent, or else
demonstrative reason be alleged, why such an one is not necessary.

Answ. This I bind my self to do, when it can be proved that we ever defined
any thing to be fundamental, against the universal Church, or are concerned to
do so; yea, could it be that the universal Church of God should practice any
thing contrary to us (which yet is a contradiction, seeing we are a part
thereof) yet must she necessarily judge it a fundamental, which is thus
practiced? and as for his catalogue of fundamentals.

1. Mr. Chillingworth has demonstrated, that such a Catalogue is not
necessary, c. 3. sect. 13.

2. I promise to give it him, when he shall be able to evince it necessary, or
show demonstrative reasons why we do not.

3. We urge him with as much vehemence, to give in a list of all such
traditions and definitions of the Church of Rome, without which no man can tell
whether or no his error be in fundamentals, and render him incapable of
salvation.

Well, deny our external separation from the present universal Church, we are
(says he) obliged to name what other visible member of the universal Church we
continue in communion with, in whose public service we will join, or can be
admitted, and to whose Synods we ever have, or can repair.

Answ. This as also the question following, has been sufficiently answered
already, under the eighth Proposition.

Lastly, (says he) since the English Church by renouncing, not only several
doctrines, but several Councils acknowledged for General, and actually
submitted to, both by the Eastern and Western Churches, has thereby departed
from both these; we must find out some other pretended members of the
Catholic Church, divided from both these (that is, some that are not
manifestly Heretical) with whom the English Church communicates.

Answ. Every line is a misadventure, For

1. This passage supposes that we cannot be in the communion with those, from
whom we differ in any doctrine: so that those who hold the Pope above a General
Council, the adoration of Latria due to some Images, the Celibacy of Priests to
be jure divino meritum de condigno, and the like, cannot be in communion with
any other part of the Christian world, which all hold the contrary.

2. That we cannot be in communion with other Churches, unless we receive the
same Councils for General, which they do.

3. That the whole Eastern Church embraces any doctrine or Council as General,
which we do not, which is untrue.

4. That the Reformed Churches, are manifestly Heretical. Yea,

5. If he would not be manifestly impertinent, he must infer, that to
renounce any Doctrine, received by these Churches, or not to acknowledge any
Council to be General, which they do not, must necessarily be Schismatical,
and unchurch us, which it is impossible to prove, unless it appear that we have
not sufficient cause to do so.

Lastly, we say, the Church of Rome can produce no Churches, but manifestly
Schismatical or Heretical, with whom she communicates.

His fourth condition, is, that we must either declare other Calvinistical
reformed Churches, which manifestly have no succession of lawfully ordained
Ministers, enabled validly to celebrate and administer Sacraments, and to be
no Heretical or Schismatical Congregations, or show how we can acquit our
selves from Schism, who have authoritatively resorted to their Synods, and to
whom a General permission, is given to acknowledge them true reformed, and
sufficiently Orthodox Churches. Here again, are many suppositions like the
former. As,

1. That to resort to the Synods of men Schismatical, is to be Schismatics,
which makes the whole world Schismatics, for were not the Eastern or Western
Churches Schismatical, in the difference about Easter, and did they not both
convene in a General Synod? yea, did not the Orthodox Bishops, resort to the
Synod at Arriminum, where there were many Arrian Bishops? was the Church of
Rome Schismatical, for resorting to the Lateran Council, where there were
Eastern Bishops, manifestly Schismatical, according to your Principles.

2. Where does our Church permit us to acknowledge them sufficiently Orthodox?
or if she did, is it not rediculous to suppose, that at the same time she would
grant them not lawfully Ordained?

3. Were we Schismatics in this, what is it to our separation from the Church
of Rome?

4. It Is very impertinent, to trouble us with an Objection, which has been so
largely considered in Bishop Forbs his Irenicum, in Mr. Masons defense of the
ordination of the Ministers, beyond the Seas, in many chapters of Dr.
Crakanthorp's defense of the Church of England: when, what is said by them,
has been refuted, then may this question be seasonable. As impertinent is
that, which you object to us, chapter 3. of giving the right hand of Fellowship to
Presbyterians and Independents, which as it concerns not our separation from
the Church of Rome, so is it fully considered by Bishop Bramhal, Rep. paulo
post init.
and Dr. Crakanthorp, in several chapters of the same Defense, as the contents
of them may sufficiently inform you: If you have any thing to return to their
answers to this question, do it, if not, why do you trouble us with it afresh?

Lastly, Trent Council, is a very poor one, for who knows not that, as too many
of the points in controversy, your Church has not declared her self, but
under an obscure or equivocal phrase hid and concealed her self; thus when she
defines that due veneration is to be given to Images, what are we the nearer,
seeing she has not declared what veneration is due; when she declares for a
proper Sacrifice, she has not told us what are the requisites of a proper
Sacrifice, when she defines for merits, whether she means meritum de condigno,
or in that large sense, in which the Fathers used the word, she has not told
us. The like ambiguities we meet with in her definition of the Arminian
controversies, etc. and is this sufficiently to declare her self?

Again, is it the doctrine of your Church, that the Pope is above a General
Council? then does not the Church of France, hold the doctrine of the Church of
Rome. Or is it contrary to the doctrine of the Church? then does not the Church
of Italy hold your doctrine: or if neither be, how has she sufficiently
declared her self, who in that which is most material has been silent?

And thus we have considered your conditions,

1. You are obliged to consider all the answers that I have given, to any of
your Arguments, for as long as any single Answer remains firm, your Argument
must be invalid.

2. In the doctrine of the Popes supremacy, you must prove these three things.

1. That St. Peter had a supremacy of jurisdiction above his fellow Apostles,
and over all the world.

2. That this supremacy was to be conferred upon his successors.

3. That it was to be conferred by Divine Right, upon his successors at Rome,
and not elsewhere; because all this is necessary to prove the Popes supremacy
by Divine Right.

3. That you be ready to dispute whether the controversies in difference
betwixt us, can be sufficiently decided by the Fathers; or if you will not
dispute that, then that you proceed not to clog your Reply with sentences of
Fathers, but argue from Reason and the Authority of Scripture, otherwise that
kind of disputation must be impertinent.

2. If you accept of this, then secondly I require,

1. That you cite as many as you will own to be sufficient for the confirmation
of any opinion, or the sense of any Paragraph of Scripture, for otherwise your
discourse will be rediculous as bottomed upon that, which you dare not own to
be a sufficient confirmation of it.

2. That you answer the Questions proposed, touching this matter above.

3. That you cite your Fathers from the Original, seeing translations do very
much vary from them.

4. That you cite none, which Rivet, Cocus, and other Protestants style
spurious, unless you answer their Arguments, for such Authorities cannot
convince your adversary.

5. That you be so ingenuous, as to tell us the Editions of your Fathers,
partly that you may avoid the scandal that is cast upon you, for citing old
Editions, which no body can meet with, partly that you may not seem to be
unwilling to have your witnesses examined.

And thus I have run over what ever I was able to reduce into any method, and
indeed what ever I thought necessary to be considered; but to fill up the
vacancy of the last Sheet, I shall take notice of a few things in this part of
Schism not yet considered. And

1. Mr. C. p. 227.
We are told that few who have any liberal education (in that great light
which they have of the continued succession, unity of Doctrine, perfect
obedience, to their spiritual superiors, pennances, and retirements from the
world, etc.) can be excusably ignorant, of the one holy Catholic, Apostolic
Church, that is, that the Roman Church is this Church. Where.

1. As to continued succession, when they are told by men as pious, and as
learned, as any of the Papists.

1. That the Papists have no such succession, but that it has been interrupted
many times, when they see instances produced almost in every Centurie. When
they are told

2. That it is not succession of persons, but of Doctrines, which is a mark of
the true Church, nor the want of it, of a false, for if he be a true
Platonist, that holds the Doctrines of Plato, Chil. p. 356. sect. 38. See this
evinced excellently in the whole section.
albeit he cannot assign any one that held it before him, for many Ages
together, why should not he be a true Christian, who believes all the Doctrine
of Christ, though he cannot derive his assent from a perpetual succession that
believed it before him. When

3. They are told that other Churches which you reject as Heretics, ( viz. the
Eastern Church) have as good evidences of a continued succession as you have;
can this be such a demonstrative evidence that you are only the true Church
of Christ as must leave even illiterate people unexcusable?

Again, can unity of Doctrine be such an evidence to them? when,

1. They find three hundred contradictory opinions of your Church, faithfully
collected out of one single Bellarm. Yea so many thousand sentences of your own
Authors expunged and condemned, for speaking the language of the Protestants.
And

2. They find it evident, that it is not impossible that errors may be held
with as great an unity as you can show. Seeing they find the Grecians, yea, the
professors of Mahometism, at greater unity then your selves. And the same might
easily be showed of your other notes, were it worth the while.

2. You call upon us to procure you an authorized conference, wherein we may
understand one another Churches, and know one another essential Doctrines,
which happily you may procure, when you can give in good security that what S. C.
(or any other persons appointed as Members of this conference) shall affirm to
be the essential Doctrines of the Church of Rome, shall be accepted as the
essential Doctrines of that whole Communion, and by them declared to be such,
and no others, for unless this be so, we may by this means understand the
opinions of S. C. but not what, and which only are the essential doctrines of
the Church of Rome.

FINIS.
APPENDIX.
TO page 65. line 37. add. And whereas he tells us, page 76, 77. that St.
Austin and other Bishops of the Milevitan Council, Austin Ep. 92.
writing to Pope Innocent, acknowledge, that the Popes Authority was, de
sanctarum, Scripturarum authoritate deprompta.

We Answ. The words in St. Austin run thus, Authoritati sanctitatis tuae de
sanctarum Scripturarum authoritate depromptae: That is says Chamier, to thy
drawing forth, and confirming the truth from scripture, they (the Heretics)
will more easily submit; and therefore here is no acknowledgement, that the
Popes Authority was derived from Scripture. Add to this,

2. That it is no way evident, that the authority he speaks of, was any
authority over the whole Church of God.

To page 173. l 30. add, Nor is this sufficiently confuted, by telling us, that
one or two of the Fathers call it an Apostolical custom; seeing it is most
notorious, that they very frequently afford this title to such customs and
traditions, as unquestionably were not derived from the Apostles: Yea, as St.
Jerome most clearly has it, praecepta majorum Apostolicas traditiones quisquis
existimat; every one esteemed, and consequently called the precepts of their
Ancestors, Apostolical traditions. Haer. 75. Decreverunt Apost. feria quarta
and prosabbatho Jejunium. Ep. 86.
Thus Epiphanius tells us, that the Apostles decreed a fast upon Wednesdaies
and Fridaies continually. Where as St. Austin professes quibus diebus non
oporteat jejunare and quibus oporteat precepto Domini vel Apostolorum non
invenio definitum, Christ or his Apostles have not defined what days we should
fast upon. And by Tertullian it appears that the Primitive Church alleged
against the Montanists, De Jejunio.
that the Apostles imposed no yoke of standing and common fasts.

In the first age after the Apostles, Dr. Tailors liberty of Proph. sect. 5.
Papias pretended he received a tradition from the Apostles touching Christ's
millenary Reign on Earth, which pretense was received by all, or most of the
Christian world, in the first three hundred years, and yet there was no such
tradition, but a mistake in Papias; now if a tradition, whose beginning of
being called so, begun with a Scholar of the Apostles, (for so was Papias) and
then continued for some ages, upon the mere authority of so famous a man, did
yet deceive the Church: much more fallible is the pretense, when two or three
hundred years after, it but commences, and then by some learned man, is first
called a tradition Apostolical. Again, St. Austin called the communicating of
Infants, a tradition Apostolical, and yet we do not practice it, because we
dis-beleive the allegation: But I refer you to that excellent discourse now
cited, for abundant evidence.

And whereas they call this praying for the Dead, an Ecclesiastical custom:
this name is frequently given by them, to such things, as were not universally
practiced by the Church of Christ, and therefore is no sufficient evidence,
that this was so. Thus St. Apol. 2. cont. Ruff. To. 2. p. 314 apud Da. de usu
Patrum. p. 207.
Jerome asserts the Church of Christ to have held the immediate creation of
Souls; whereas Prudentius Tricassinus Episcopus tells us expressly, that it was
absque certa definitione relicta. This, and many other instances of the like
nature, you may find in Dally de usu Patrum, p. 206, 207.

To page 176. l. 4. add, Yea, many of the Fathers, especially the most Ancient,
dreamed of a purging fire at the day of Judgment, which was to try every Soul,
and purge it from it is dross, if it had contracted any whilst it lived on
Earth; this was the opinion of Lactantius, Hilarie, Ambrose, Austin, Jerome,
Casarius, Arelatensis; Eusebius, Emissenus, Eligius, Noviomensis, as you may
see in Dally de paenis and Satis. Hum. p. 387. Yea, Maldonate confesses, in
Luc. 11. 35.
that this was the opinion, not only of Origin, sed fere Antiquissimi cujusque
Scriptoris, Dally p. 498. and therefore if the Fathers speak of any purging
fire after death, it will make nothing for Purgatory, unless it can be proved,
that they assert moreover, that the Souls of the faithful, presently after
their departure, are carried to it.

To p. 183 l. 4. ^dde. And should you not blush to tell us p. 116. that without
all controversy, all Churches who professed Christianity before the
reformation, do agree unanimously in the practice of praying for the dead, so
as to beg forgiveness of their sins, a bettering of their state, (which
Protestants allow) an asswagement of their sufferings. Dr. Field's Apen.
Where as the p. 68.
Jacobites, p. 69
Armenians, and p. 70.
Cophti, pray not for the dead at all, nor can it be evinced, that the Eastern
Churches pray for the asswagement of their sufferings; yea, Nilus in his
discourse de Purgatoria tells us, that the Grecians reject, and anathematize
this (...), and that if any remission of sins be given to the dead, that it is
given by the Divine bounty, (...), rather then (...), by inflicting
punishments, see Dally p. 540.

As vain is your ^^mmiseration of the condition of the members of our Church,
P. 117.
because she does not offer up those prayers for the dead, which from the most
Ancient times were offered. For as Mr. Dally has it, if the omission of those
prayers be criminal, this crime is common to us with you, who have together
with us rejected those prayers which they were wont to make in their behalf,
for whereas the Ancients prayed for all the faithful departed, you esteem this
a great absurdity, and will have us pray but for some only.

Again, you have rejected the three great grounds of praying for the dead. On
which the Fathers bottomed their petitions, for that which was the common
opinion of all the Ancients, Atqui veterum pro mortuis preces omnes fere ad
illa tria (vel placita) pertinebant Dally p. 534. horum aliquid in animo
babebant cum pro mortuis precabantur qui ergo ista tria unde omnis veterum
profluebat pro mortuis ^ratio, etc.
viz. that the souls of the faithful departed were kept in some secret
receptacles, extra Coelum; your Florentine Council has decreed against. The
millenary Reign, which most of the Ancient Fathers held, you have exploded, as
ridiculous.

Lastly, The sentence of the purging fire, which was to try and purify all
men, even the most holy, you have deservedly rejected; whereas, upon these
three opinions, did almost all the prayers of the Ancients depend, and how then
can you be said to have retained the prayers which the Ancients used, (albeit
you retain some of their words) who have wholly rejected those opinions upon
which they did depend? I confess, there were some other ends, which I have
mentioned above, of the Ancients prayers, as the obtaining an happy
Resurrection, the augmentation of their glory, at the union of their souls and
bodies, the blotting out of their sins at the day of Refreshment, that they
might find mercy in that day; and would the Church of Rome pray for them to
these ends, and these alone, we would very heartily join with her. But she
has added new ends of her own devising, as the satisfaction of Gods justice,
the procuring pardon of venial sins, not formerly remitted, and a release from
a purgatorian fire, which she has kindled, and is it meet that we, who have
rejected together with them, these prayers, as grounded upon such opinions,
which had confessed Antiquity, to plead for them, should embrace them again
upon such grounds as are not only manifestly false, but also void of all
shadow of Antiquity?

To p. 189. l. 34. add, nor is it ever said in Scripture, that the body of
Christ is received unworthily, but only that the bread and cup are so: further
were it said so, yet will not your transubstantiation follow hence, without
begging the main dispute betwixt us, viz. whether such a passage must be
understood literally and rigidly, or according to the custom of sacramental
phrases, that is figuratively and spiritually.

Lastly, if they that despised the Apostles were said to despise Christ,
because they were commissionated from him, as we have it, Mat. 18.5. and he
that offends a weak brother, is said to offend against Christ, because he does
it against one of his members, why might not he that participates the
Sacramental elements unworthily, be said to receive Christ's body so, as
receiving that which represents and signifies his body, and offers to the
Receivers faith, all the benefits thereof.

2. The confirmation of all that I have cited from Dr. Hoyle, may be seen in
the margin of the places cited.

After p. 211. l. 17. add, we have something alleged, p. 304, 305. In defense
of this half Communion, which here may properly be considered, we are told.

1. That the Protestants use sprinkling, instead of dipping.

Answ. This is El^^ch^s Parium. For

1. Albeit the Apostles used dipping, yet did not either they, or our Savior
command it, he never said dip all that you Baptize, as he said, drink ye all of
this, and therefore that he and his Disciples Baptized in Rivers; and by
dipping, will no more infer that we should do so, then that they say down at
this Supper, or used a clinical gesture, will infer, that we should use it.

2. Dipping is no essential part of the Sacrament, but a mode or circumstance,
and therefore variable, but the cup is an essential, or at least integral part
of the Sacrament, as is fully evidenced by Crocius in his Antibec. p. 214, 215.

3. This we do in case of danger, otherwise the Church requires dipping. Now in
such case, the Scripture gives warrant for such an alteration both by example
and precept, telling us God will have mercy and not sacrifice. Now hence to
argue for a change in the institution of Christ, when no such necessity in the
Church can be alleged, is as if the Israelites should have urged a general
permission for eating the Shewbread, because David and his Servants had it to
supply their necessities.

2. Says he, do we not think our selves obliged to communicate fasting,
albeit Christ instituted the Sacrament after Supper.

Answ. No; We think it highly convenient, but we dare not charge him with sin
that does it otherwise.

2. The time is evidently a circumstantial, not commanded or instituted by
Christ, depending upon the Passover, and therefore very unfit to be
paralleled with this deprivation of the cup.

3. He adds, do they not without scruple eat Black-puddings, non obstant^,
the Apostles gave commandment to the contrary?

Answ. Some who think the precept not temporary, scruple, yea, refuse the
eating of them; and to such, this instance must be impertinent; others that
eat them, do it upon this account, because they suppose they have good reason
to conclude the precept temporary, and made only to avoid the scandal which it
gave unto the Jews, and seeing this cannot with any reason be supposed of
Christ's precept, the instance must be impertinent to them also. Yea, we have
many Texts of Scriptures, which seems to give us this liberty of eating any
such things, but there is not any thing which in the least manner intimates the
lawfulness of withdrawing the cup from Layicks.

To p. 453. l. 14. add, Only whereas he says, that surely prudence, and a
most necessary care of our own salvation by continuing in the unity of the
Church, would dictate to us, that seeing the Church is infallible as to
fundamentals, and therefore cannot mis-lead us to our danger, there can be no
safety but in assenting to all her decisions as if they were of necessary
faith, for only by doing so, we can be sure not to err in necessary points,
and we shall be certainly free from all danger of Schism. p. 266. And by this
means (say you) the Church of Rome is continued in unity, and by assenting to
all decisions, her members are sure never to dissent from those that are
necessary; whereas Protestants by taking a liberty of discerning betwixt
fundamentals and non-fundamentals at least, wherein they think the Church
Catholic may be fallible, are besides a certainty of disunion, exposed to
errors, even in fundamentals.

I Answer, This whole discourse, (to omit diverse other answers very obvious)
depends upon two suppositions, unanimously exploded by us.

1. That the Church which we hold to be infallible in fundamentals, is the
Roman Church, or at least a General Council; whereas when we assert the Church
to be infallible in fundamentals, we do not intend to assert, that any one
society of men is so, but only thus, that whilst the world lasts, there shall
be some men in the world, which err not in fundamentals, Chill. p. 105.
or that religion shall never be so far driven out of the World, but that it
shall always have somewhere or other, some that believe and profess it, in all
things necessary to salvation: Thus therefore you argue, Protestants
acknowledge that some Christians shall be infallible in fundamentals, albeit
they be neither the Roman Church, nor a General Council, nor any other visible
Society; therefore they ought in prudence to submit to the decision of the
Roman Church, or a General Council, as being infallible in fundamentals.

2. You evidently suppose that such a visible Society, infallible in
fundamentals, cannot mis-lead us to our danger, and that by assenting to all
its decisions, we are necessarily free from the sin of Schism: Now seeing
according to our former deductions, such a visible Society may require the
profession, of what I know or judge to be an error, and so a lie; the practice
of what I know to be forbidden, and so a sin; you must suppose also, that to
lie against my conscience (though it be a sin of great affinity with that,
which shall never be forgiven) or practice continually a sin (though it render
the condition, which interests us in the covenant of Grace, viz. sincere and
impartial obedience, impossible) not to be dangerous, and that to renounce
communion with others, that cannot swallow such conditions, cannot be the sin
of Schism.

To p. 471. l. 19. add, And hence it appears how ridiculously you insult over
the Dr. for saying, Mr. C. p. 302.
he will comply with none of your defilements, when to comply with them, is
not to communiate with you in other things, or to acknowledge you as Brethren,
albeit you differ from us in something which we esteem a defilement in you, but
to practice a sin, or to assert a lie, to live in continual hypocrisy, and
disobedience to Gods law, it is a shame that you should triumph in this trifling
Sophism, viz. we comply with Lutherans, and Huguenots, who surely are not
without some little stains, and never take notice of that answer, which you
meet with very frequently in Mr. Chillingworth, that for our continuing in
communion with them, the justification of it is, that they require not the
belief and profession of those errors, among the conditions of their
communion, which puts a main difference betwixt them and you, because we may
continue in their communion, without the profession of their errors, but in
yours we cannot.

To page 478. l. 15. add, And whereas you tell us, chap. 20. sect. 10. that the
doctrines the Preacher treats off, and which the Trent Council defined, were
conveyed to us, by the General practice of the Church, and were always matters
of faith; It is the most notorious untruth imaginable, is it possible that the
Trent Councils definitions, touching the Canon of Scripture, should be a
continued uninterupted Tradition through all ages, when the contrary is made so
evident by Dr. Cosins, through every age of the Church, deducing the doctrine
of the Church of England in this point? is it possible that Image worship
should be the universal tradition of all ages of the Church, when (besides the
numerous citations produced by me to the contrary) Clemens Alexandrinus,
Tertullian, Origin, and Chrysostom, held even the making of Images
unprofitable, and unlawful, and asserted that Christians were forbidden that
deceitful art. Dally de Imag. l. 1. c. 6. could they have talked thus, and at
the same time worship Images? could the Church of God throughout all ages,
esteem your service in an unknown tongue, agreeable to Scripture, when not one
Commentator upon the 14. of Corinthians, but speaks apparently against it? when
Justinian and Charles the Great (whose laws, say you, were but the Churches
faith, and Canons reduced into Imperial laws) so peremptorily forbid it, as
contrary to the Word of God.

Lastly, (to add no more) could that Purgatory which you derive from the
Apostles, be the belief and doctrine of the Church of God, throughout all
ages? When as

First, The Fathers of the Church, constantly interpret all the Scriptures you
apply to Purgatory, another way, as is evidenced by Mr. Dally, de satis. Hum.
l. 6. c. 4. When

Secondly, they assert that there is no place for remission of sins after
death, id. c. 6. And

Thirdly, That we shall remain for ever, where death finds us, c. 7.

Fourthly, That no punishments abide the faithful after death, c. 8.

Fifthly, That the Souls of the faithful, rest and enjoy felicity presently
after death, c. 10. Yea,

Lastly, When the whole Church of God did confidently affirm, that all the
faithful were at rest after death, c. 11.

These things being considered, the defense of the Nicene Council (that they
made no new decrees) is as unseemly in your mouths, as the defense of the
Apostles (we must obey God rather than man) can be in the mouths of the
greatest Rebels.

To page 198. l. 15. add, And this interpretation is backed with the Authority
of the Fathers, St. Austin ex professo, handling this question, whether these
words (I will no more drink of the fruit of the Vine) referred to the Sacrament;
determines for us, as will be evident to any that will consult him, treating de
consen. Evan. l. 3. c. 1. and again, l. 1. c. 42. which made Bellarm.
considering this place, cry out, Augustinus non perpendit hunc locum
diligenter; St. Austin did not diligently weigh this place. In Mat. c. 26. v.
29.
Yea, Maldonate assures us, that Jerome in his Comment. Bid, Euthymius, and
Theophylact, did all refer this passage to the blood of Christ: to whom you may
add, Clem. Alex. Paedag. l. 2. c. 2. p. 116. Orig. in Mat. trac. 25. Epiphan.
cont. Haer. l. 2. Haer. 47. St. Cyprian Ep. 63. Chrysostom. Hom. in Mat. (...).
Eucher. in Mat. c. 26. v. 29. with diverse others, diligently collected by Dr.
Featly, in his Book against Transubst. p. 204. etc.


