A CATECHISM OF CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE.

By THO. WHITE, Gent.

Second Edition, Corrected and enlarged.

Una fides vigeat, prisco quae condita templo est;
Quam Paulus retinet, quamque Cathedra Petri.
Prudent. PRINTED AT PARIS. 1659.

TO THE READER.
THis Catechism having luckily arrived into my hands, I thought it became me
(and would be a service to the public) to be a means that others should have
the like contentment and profit by the view of it, as I had. It would have bin
a sin to let this talent ly buried in the earth without multiplying. This
advantage spiritual goods have of corporeal ones; that one grows not the
poorer by communicating them. Receive then out of my hand this worthy Treatise,
which (if I be not much deceived) is as useful a piece as any this age has
brought forth. The Author's name alone is enough to justify thus much: who, for
profoundness of science, and consummateness in all parts of literature, both
divine and human, is the honor of our times, and may be the envy of the
happiest: though himself be as far from the vanity of delighting in the
reputation got by others praises, as his excellent worth is from needing such
weak supports. The composition of this, was but an entertainment of
divertisment to him, in a time when he had strong and sollicitous thoughts for
the good of others: which so fully possessed him, as he would have even his
recreations contribute to that end. And this he did so dexterously, and
unveiled the deepest mysteries of our faith so knowingly, and delivered them so
familiarly and plainly, and made them appear so reasonable, as they of
tenderest years (for whom he made it) with delight applied themselves to learn
the weightiest and abst^usest points of what Christians are bound to believe;
and easily framed right apprehensions of what he taught them; And yet the most
versed in Theological speculations, found matter to busy their most vigorous
thoughts upon, and learned the Reasons and Causes of those things of which
before they had no more but a bare knowledge that they were true. The
consideration of them for whom he composed it, has made him sweeten his
conceptions by using the gentlest style and famil^arest examples to illustrate
them by, that he could: But, under this humble and plain habit, you shall find
rich and excellent productions of a most learned, strong, and pious soul; so
you apply requisite attention to follow the thread of doctrine which he has here
so masterlike spun out and woven into a complete piece: Or rather, he has
proposed his questions with such artifice and judgment (as Socrates did, when
he made an unlettered child give account of most subtle speculations) that one
must be notably weak in the power of reasoning, not to fall of one's self upon
the true and solid answers to most of them, without further instruction. By
which means, the Caterechumen will learn knowingly what he is to believe; and
not pay himself with the sound of words, often times misunderstood; which
begets yet greater errors in the collections and inferences drawn out of those
mistaken grounds. But I do amiss in offering to forestall any man's judgment
with my vveak and faint commendations* When you have read the follovving
discourse, you will think I have said too little. I am sure, I do.

A CATECHISM OF CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE.
Divided into fifteen Conferences.
FIRST Conference.
MASTER. COme hither child, how old are you?


SCHOLAR. About thirteen, Sir.


M. And what do you remember you did some twenty years since?


S. I did nothing, nor can remember What is not can do nothing.
any thing so long ago; for then I was nothing, and so could do nothing.
Therefore nothing that is, made it self but was made by others of it is own kind.



M. Who then made you be, when you were nothing?


S. My Father and my Mother.


M. And who made them be?


S. Their Fathers, and Mothers, my Grandfathers, and Grandmothers; who likewise
were made be by other fathers, and mothers, and so upwards till Adam, and Eve,
the first and those, finally, by God.
man and woman that ever were.


M. And who made Adam and Eve be?


S. God Almighty, who made all things; and after all the rest, made Adam of
earth, and Eve wherefore
of a rib of Adam's side.


M. And who made God Almighty God was not made,
to be?


S. God always was, and so cannot be made; for, nothing but
can be made unless it once were not, that so it might be made. was ever



M. How do you know that God was always?


S. I was told so, but I cannot give a reason for it.


M. Yes, but you can; for, did you not tell me, that what is not, else
can do nothing? if then once there was nothing, nothing could Nothing could
have been.
have been made: and there would now have been nothing. Now you know therefore,
that seeing now there is some thing, He is then Eternal.
there was always somewhat, and that which always was, is GOD. But what, did
God make nothing but Adam and Eve?


S. Yes, Sir, he made all other things besides, but I can give no account how
I know it, no more then that I have been taught so, unless you can show me
again that I know it. A^am.



M. Well, think you it not as clear that God made the first The first of ^ach
kinds
Horse, and the first Lion, and so of every kind which we see go from sire and
dam to young ones; as that he made the first Man, and Woman?


S. Yes Sir, for I see the same reason for all, since every kind being,
finally, m^de by God,
must have a first, which could not come of it self; and therefore must have a
maker of an other kind till it come to something that always was, which is God.
and



M. And to what purpose would the Earth ^ee, if none of these the Earth
things we^e in it? No beasts, no trees, no fishes? for all these we see
propagated by generation, being
and therefore had a first, and so are brought up by degrees to their original
Author, God. to no purpose without t^ese I^ (and the other Elements) were made
too, and so God made all things.



S. I cannot see to what purpose the Earth (and the same is of the other
Elements) should be an infi^it time without any of these things in it, for whom
and whose su^^enance it seems wholly to serve; and so easily believe it was not
long before them, and that God made it, and all that either belong to, or are
of like nature with it; which is, as I think, what you aim at: That God made
all things.


M. You are in the right, and But God can do all that (himself or) his
Creatures can do;
that is it, which I would bring you to. But now tell me; he that makes a
thing, is he not able to do as much as the thing he makes?


S. Yes Sir, for seeing whatever the thing made does, is done by somewhat that
thing has in it He is then
self; and all that thing has, was made, or given by the maker; and nothing can
give what it self has not; the Maker must have in himself all that by which the
the thing made had power to do such a thing; that is, himself has power to do
the same.


M. Thus you see you have plainly shown God to be Almighty; for, nothing can be
done, but what is done by something; and that something, is made by God;
therefore, seeing God can do whatever any thing made by him; it is clear he can
Almighty.
do all things; which is, to be Almighty. But tell me now; do and Knows all
that Himself
you think when God does a thing, he knows what he does?


S. It were a shame to doubt of that, since we account him a fool who knows not
what he does; besides, since God makes us know what we do; and is or
himself perfecter than we, he must needs know what he does even better than we.


M. And he that knows a His Creatures can do;
thing, does not he know what that thing can do; for example, can a man know a
knife or a clock, without knowing, that and so is
the one can cut, and the other tell the hour of the day?


S. That Is impossible; as also that God should not know what any work of his
can do.


M. See again how you show Allknowing.
that God knows all things: for, since he knows what himself made, and what all
the things he made can do, and nothing is or can be done but what himself and
they do; it follows that God knows all, and every thing that is done, great and
little, to the number of the thoughts of men and angels, to the division of
dust and sands, and whatever else is done; nay and Wherefore
what can be done, though it neither be nor ever will be done. But now tell me,
do you know by your body, or by your soul?


S. By my soul.


M. And wherein differs your Knowledge belonging to Spirits*
soul from your body? is it not in this, that your body has many parts and takes
up room or place; your soul on the contrary is indivisible, and wants no place,
nor has any parts, but is a Spirit.


S. All this I remember to have learnt, now you put me in mind of it.


M. Then, seeing you sind that God knows all things, what do judge him to be?


S. Certainly a Spirit; but yet God is a Spirit.
I know not well what a Spirit is, nor what conceit or apprehension to make of
it.


M. Do you conceive what is meant by these words Mind, Understanding, Wit,
Thought Knowledge etc. If you do, you have made some apprehension of a spirit.
It suffices then at present to conceive God to be and,
such a thing that he is a Knowledge and works by it. But tell me, is God a
Spirit joined with a body, as our soul is, or a pure Spirit without any Body?


S. Methinks if God were made His Existence being necessary,
up of Spirit and body, there were no impossibility i^ him* but his Spirit
might be without his Body, and so God might die or not be, which makes against
the necessity A pure Spirit
of his being always, formerly proved.


M. But yet this Mind or Spirit must have the perfection of all Bodies in it*
since as is already shown) It can do whatever all Bodies can.


S. This is very clear in my mind.


M. Then you see that God is Yet containing All kinds of perfection imaginable.
a pure Spirit or Mind containing in it self the natures, and perfections of
all things (that is) all Being and all Goodness.


Here the Catechist ought to exhart the Cathecumen (or person he catechizes) to
the admiration and reverence of God, out of his plenitude of Perfection: To the
fear of God, out of his Omniscience and Omnipotence: And to the love of him,
out of his All-goodness.

SECOND CONFERENCE.
M. YOU remember you told me that God Almighty Therefore
made Adam. Can you tell me why he made him? and first, He wanted not Adam
whether he wanted him?


S. No, Sir, he could not want him; for seeing he is All-goodness, he could
want no good thing; and for what is bad or nor
naught, there can be no want or need of that.


M. At least, did he get any thing by him? or was he richer could get
after, then before?


S. No, Sir, he that has all, profit
can get nothing.


M. At least, as you have pleasure when your hear your self commended, or see
your self honored and served, so did God get any new content?


S. Sir, without doubt it could not but please him. For so I am taught that my
good works please God, and my sins displease or
him.


M. It Is very true that he is pleased with our good works, and displeased with
our bad. But not so that he conceiv's new pleasure, or displeasure; but with
pleasure by him,
the pleasure of good, which he had for ever, and the displeasure of bad
likewise he had for ever. For, if he could receive new pleasure, or
displeasure, he would get some thing he had not before, which you told me he
could not. But now, if he got neither profit, nor content by making Adam, why
did he make him?


S. Sir, I cannot tell you that, for I never do good but I get something that
contents me.


M. If you should find a poor wretch in a wilderness, ready but made him
to starve, and you had store of victuals, would you not give him some?


S. Yes sir; and should think my self unworthy to live unless I did.


M. And why? for you should neither have honor, nor profit, neither (though
peradventure afterward you would have pleasure) would you think of that when
you did it.


S. I know not, Sir, why; but good nature would make me do out of pure Goodness;
it.


M. And now you have told me why. For it is the nature of Goodness to do good,
as of heat to heat, and of cold to cool. And so, God being all Goodness, needs
no other cause why to do good, then that himself by nature is Goodness, or as
you call it, of a good nature. But, tell me again did and,
God Almighty make you?


S. No Sir, my Father and my Mother made me.


M. Think you so? and I pray, if your Master should whip you, or make the
Stationer give you a fine new book would you thank the Stationer, or be angry
at the rod? or rather be thankful or displeased toward your Master?


S. Toward my Master, Sir. But I do not see that God Almighty either bad my
Father, or Mother make me: or used them to that end.


M. No? Did you not tell me by means of him,
that God made Adam, Adam his Son? and so till it came to your father, and
mother?


S. Yes Sir, but this is a great way off from God's making me.


M. It will come nearer: You told me also that God knew all and causes
that was to be done, or could be done by the things he made: And again, that
what he did, he did out of his Goodness: you see put by God and contin^'d from
him,
then, that he knew your Father and Mother would make you, and would have it
so; and, out of his Goodness, put the causes which should make you. What does
your Master more when he either rewards or punishes you, but only puts the Us;
causes out of which he intends, and knows your good, or harm will follow.
Well, if this be agreed on that God made you, tell me now whether you have any
thing that God did not bestow upon you?


S. No, Sir; for, what ever I should say I had from my self, even to the least
thing we have.
or from any other, you will in the same manner show that the causes coming
from God, he uses them to make me have those things, and so bestowed them on
me.


M. It Is well said. But to whether are you more beholding for the thing you
have? to God* or to him that immediately gives it you? for example, for your
life, and being, to God, or your parents? for your learning, to God, or your
master?


S. Hitherto, S^r, I am sure I have given more thanks to my Parents, and
Masters; but now I know not what I ought to do.


M. How soon have you forgot you own saying? did you not tell me that your
affection was not at all toward the Stationer, Wherefore
or rod (to which your father, and master are compared) but only to your
Master that rewarded or corrected you? how then are you so soon ignorant, whom
you are most to thank; God, or the next causes of your good?


S. By that rule I should ow nothing to my parents and master but only to God.


M. Not so neither, but to every one according to the good will he bears you,
and the share he has in the good deed. Now, as all possible thanks
for God Almighty, you know there is no cause concurring, nor any least part of
the work which belongs not totally to him, on all sides, and from the very
beginning: Therefore, how much the are
good is, it is wholly and entirely due unto him; but your Parents, and Master
are not the thousandth part of the Causes; and, therefore, though thanks be due
to them in respect they are the immediate causes, yet in comparison of what is
due totally due to him.
to God, you are not one thousandth part beholding to them. Again, you told me
God knew perfectly all things belonging to this good you possess, and the best
owing of it; But, the next cause understands not perfectly what himself does,
but is bent to his work beyond his own understanding: as you may easily see by
this, that your self when you walk know not how you do it, and we may be posed
in twenty things which belong to walking, which nevertheless our selves do. nay
*
But, amongst all things you have, are not works some? as singing, playing,
understanding, Every least Action we do comes from God*
eating, and the rest, and therefore also whatsoever you do, comes likewise
from A^mighty God.


S. Yes, Sir, I see well enough, that because my self, and all other causes of
my action come from God, it must needs follow that my actions come from him.
But I dare not say so, for fear I should make him author of my (yet not sin,
sins, which I have been taught he is not.


M. It Is well thought on. But if you knew that S^n were but want of doing, or
not-doing, you would not fear that consequence. For, as you see when a it being
only
man takes a knife to cut with, the cutting p^oceed, from the man, but, that it
cuts not so well as it should, proceeds from the bluntness or want of edge in
the knife: and likewise, the writing proceeds from the Scrivener; but, that the
pen gives not ink well, or blots, comes from the evil fashioning, or slitting
of the pen: so, what a man does is from God, but that he does not so well as he
ought (which is to sin) proceeds Defect of action)
from some defect in the man. For, as from fire cold cannot proceed, nor from
water dryness; so from the Fountain of Being and Goodness, the want of goodness
and being cannot spring. Hence


By this you easily gather that God is the Governor of this God is Universal
Governor of the World.
world, seeing all things are done by his disposition and government.


Here the Catechist ought to exhort his Catechumen to remember and perform his
duty toward God; who as he gives us all things freely, so he deserves that we
offer, independently from reward, all our works and wills to him. As he made
us, so, as creatures, we are his slaves. As he gave us every thing we have,
all our goods are his. As he is more cause then the next causes, so is he to
be preferred before all. As he does all our works in us, so requires he the
honor of all be attributed to him. As he is not author of sin, so is he not to
be charged with any fault or want on his side. And, as he is Governor of the
world, so is he to be prayed to, feared, and respected.

THIRD CONFERENCE.
M. Well; now Adam's made, what did God give him?


S. Sir, I know not that, for I have not read the Scripture, God being a
perfect Agen^
whence that is co be known.


M. But you know what things make a man, and doubt not but God gave them
perfectly to Adam; for a good workman made his immediate wo^k, (Adam) perfect
in Endowments
makes his work good, and would be ashamed, if it should come out of his hands
otherw^se than perfect; according to that saying, that a good tree cannot breed
ill fruit.


S. I know a man is made of Body and Soul, and so Adam had those.


M. What are the perfections of the B^dy? are they not Health, of Body*
which consists in the integrity of all parts of our body, and ability to use
them well? Strength, to carry, heave, draw, push; and and the like? Nimbleness,
or agility? by which we do our actions with life, and quickness; and, lastly,
Beauty which graces both body, and actions? Likewise in the Soul we see
Understanding and Mind *
and Will; Understanding comprehends Memory of things past: Judgment of the
present: and Forecast of things to come. Can you doubt whether these things
were given to Adam?


S. No, Sir, for seeing we have them from Adam, sure Adam could not fail to
have had them, and to have received them from God.


M. But do you think Adam had no more then we have either Also *
in body or soul in our birth?


S. Yes sir; yet I am not well able to imagine what it is.


M. Do you think he knew and loved God above all things?


S. Yes sure; for, knowing His Maker
he was not from himself, but had received all from God, he could not choose
but love him above all things.


M. True: and God disposed all things fit for this: for, having framed his body
^f red clay, he being his first object,
stood in a visible shape before him, that when he first looked up, the first
thing he saw was Almighty God finishing the creation of all things in him; so
in Knowledge and Love of of him above all things.
that his heart being rightly set for this purpose, free from all other
affections, most passive by the daintiness of the mould as yet not mingled with
any others: it could not be but that this sight should make a most deep
apprehension, which must needs carry the whole powers of the soul with it, and
totally subject it to Almighty God. But do you think this wrought any thing in
which must work
the Body.


S. I know not Sir.


M. Do you not find that good news makes your body light, and jocond? have you
not seen boys rid of the hiccock by an apprehension of fear; nay, some speak of
those that have been freed from agues by fears, or angers; and does not in all
this the soul work upon the body? in his body too
why then should you doubt but so strong a love as Adam had, must needs have
it is effects in the Body also, as indeed it had. And, as we see the practice
of memory makes men easy to learn without book, the practice of discoursing fit
to discourse, and so Dispositions
in all actions, and this by nothing but by the fitting of the bodily
instruments, and organs: So, this love did either fit the very conformable to
tha^ Love,
corporeal disposition to such love, or increase that fitness it found there
already: by this means making the very corporeal desires subject to Reason,
that this body or
being prevented with reason, could not incline to any thing subject to Reason.
before Reason gave it leave and order. But tell me farther, have you not heard
that children be like their fathers?


S. Yes, Sir, I know well it is the which would descend
ordinary complement of Gossips to say the child is like the father, which
shows that ordinarily it is so.


M. And this likeness, is it in to the Bodies of his posterity;
the body only, or also in the Soul?


S. I cannot tell how one should be like another in the soul, which has no
parts.


M. Did you not say the Soul and
works upon the body? if then you see those works which come from the soul to
be alike in two, can you think but that their souls be alike als^? ^s* if they
discourse alike, love like things, je^t, write a poem, or oration alike, would
you not judge their Souls alike? So then it is not ill conjectured that when the
body of the Son is ^the Soul
like the body of the Father; also the Soul of the Son is like the Soul of the
Father. And I remember to have heard judicious men say of some persons, that
when they saw them jest or discourse, they thought they saw their fathers.


S. How should the Soul which is made by God come to be like the Soul of the
Father which had nothing to do with it?


M. If there were several kinds being fitted
of matter of divers^ dispositions, as wax, wood, aq a vit ^, stu^ble,
brimstone, etc. of which you intended to make Fi^e, or (as we say in the
schools) to introd ^cethe Form of Fire into them: Though each would become
indeed a thing able to burn, or Fire; yet, would you expect in reason that this
active Principle, or power of burning called the Form of Fire, should be
equally in each of them?


S. No, Sir, I see plainly by experience it is not to be expected; each would
have power to burn on a different fashion, and in a different degree. But I am
not so wise as to see whence this difference s^rings.


M. You see it springs not from the Form of Fire in each, for that has nothing
else to do but to make it Fire or a thing able to burn.


S. True, Sir, for it is one thing to be apt to burn, another to be apt to
burn differently. I conceive therefore this difference arises from the several
dispositions in the Matter, or several Fuells you spoke of.


M. You see then it is the way the All-wise orderer of Nature takes, that a
diversity in the disposition of the matter determins to a diversity in the
active Principle or Form, according to certain degrees within the same species
or kind. The Rational soul then being the Form of man's Body or that which
makes him man; you see it is God's method to put like Souls into like bodies?
therefore the father making the body to the Body)
of the son like his own, will not his soul also be made by God like to the
father's soul? and so the souls of like bodies be like? of unlike bodies,
unlike?


S. Yes sure, sir, that must be so, seeing the soul does fit the body.


M. Then, if the soul of Adam had that operation on it is body as to make a
special disposition in it by which it was subject to reason, to their Souls
also.
and this disposition proceeded from the strong love of Almighty God: as on the
one side Adam would make a son like himself in that subjection to reason, so
God Almighty would give his son a soul fit to love God above all things, the
disposition of the soul proceeding from such a disposition of the body.


S. Yes, Sir, it is evident he that is
would, or else he should not put a fitting soul into the Son's body.


M. This proved, you must know that our forefathers call they would have had
the Love of God above all things, Justice, and Sanctity; which, because it was
so given to Adam, as to descend unto his Heyrs, it was called Original
Justice, and said to be a natural Original Justice.
gift, and to come unto them by nature who were to be born with it.

Besides this gift, God Almighty and
fi^ted the place to the man that there should be no evil^ air, or other
occasion of harm unto him; whence, because wisdom kept him from mischance, and
the place from Immortatality.
infection, he could not die but of Age; for remedy against which God had
provided the tree of l^fe; and so, he would have lived for ever.

But, to proceed yet a little farther. But, losing the Love of God,
If Adam left lovin^ God, would he have this disposition in his body?


S. No, Sir, for if the Love of God were the cause of this disposition,
contrary or passionate dispositions
the contrary would cause the loss of it,


M. You say well, specially if you add that he could not leave off loving God,
but because he would immediately succeed in ^im;
loved some other thing better; which love having it is effect in the body, must
needs cross the o there disposition left before, and if this be so that he left
off loving and be derived
God, how would it fare with his children?


S. How, but that they would be born subject to such dispositions to all his
from their birth
as the love of other things b^ed in them? But, Sir, I have heard that Adam
after his fall did penance, and began to love God a new; wherefore me thinks
he should again recover the disposition of loving God, for himself and his
posterity.


M. What you have heard is true, but not the good effect you gather. For his
second love finding dispositions in the ^recoverably,
body contrary to it is proper nature, cannot on the sudden extirpa^e them, but
with a great deal of pain, and labor: and, as we experience in our selves,
never wholly, because these Affections are before Reason, and alter the
temperament of the Body due and req ^sit to Original Justice, which it lies
not in the power of Reason nor of other Bodies, being of a different temper,
exactly to repair. Whence it never comes to pass, that the father can
communicate his whole virtuous disposition that is,
to his child, though we see the likeness of a well practiced they must all
have
father to be naturally in the son. And this is that which Christians call
Original Sin, Original Sin.
the missing of Grace or Original Justice in the child, through the fault of
our first father; so that the want or privation is particular to every one; the
cause or actual guilt, only in Adam.


FOURTH CONFERENCE
M. THus far we have declared the nature of Original Sin in it self, can you
tell me the effects it works in us who are the posterity of Adam.


S. I have heard that sins, and ignorance, and also death and infirmities, have
their origin from it.


M. Can you show these things of it.


S. No indeed Sir, for any Experience teaches that Sense governs in a child
thing I know as ye^, but I expect you will make me know it.


M. Then tell me, in a child three or four years old, which is stronger, Sense
or Reason?


S. Sense without question. For, give him an apple and tell him it will offend
God to eat it, I make no question but as soon as you have turned your back
he will eat the apple without regarding the offense of God, so that I see Sense
in him is stronger than Reason.


M. Right; for he understands not what is the offense of God, as yet: nay,
accor^^ng to the and p^rverts
ordinary Judgment of Divines, not till seven years of age: So the
long therefore, sense has the whole government of a child; right working of
reason in all till years of ripe judgment;
and after seven, reason by little and little overcomes till the age of thirty.
The Philosophers not admitting maturity of wisdom and constant Judgment, till
the standing part of our age, which is, when we leave growing; so that, till
then, we are on the losing side. Now, what think you? therefore
is it easy to conquer and root out a thing that is grown in and with us for
thirty years together?


S. It must needs be very hard. these Impressions from sense



M. Do you think that hard which ev^^y man does?


S. No Sir, that is easy which are
all can do, and the harder a thing is, so much the fewer can do it. ^ard to be
overcome perfectly, and are subdued by sew or none; Hence Mankind is Slave to
Sin; and Original Sin causing motions of sense not subject ^o reason, all
Actual Sin



M. Th^n, seeing to overcome Sense perfectly is very hard, and very few can do
it, and most men do it not, Mankind is subject or slave to sin, as being for
the most part conquered ^y it?


S. This is very well; but you do not show, that this comes from original sin.


M. So that it seems you have forgot, that by original sin it first came, that
Sense has it is proper motion not subject to Reason; which if it had not, the
more it should grow, the more virtuous it would make the man, because he would
still become more subject to God and Reason.


S. Sir, I see now that all our Sins come from original sin; and indeed it is no
wonder that one sin should proceed from an other. But springs from original.
I expect how you will show that Ignorance and Infirmities proceed from the
same. For if they were then to be born (as we are now) children, and grow to be
men, I think they must needs also be children in knowledge, and so have
ignorance: so that this cannot be the offspring of original sin: and likewise,
if then they had eaten to grow and keep themselves a live as we do now, they
would not avoid, but meats should have their effect, and so Also,
breed diseases, when out of season.


M. You are not well acquainted Ignorance being
with the difference of not knowing, and being ignorant: for, not every one is
ignorant who does not know, but he who knows not what he ought, or what is
fitting for him to know. the not knowing what is sit to know
For example, what Master either of Divinity, or Philosophy, or any other Art
knows all which may be known in his Art? yet are they not therefore to be
termed Ignorant. So likewise, any and
man who knows what is fitting, is not ignorant. Now I pray, the state of
Innocence
if any one in that estate, knew not what was fitting to know, it was either
because he could not, or would not?


S. True; for whosoever can and will do any thing, it is most giving
clear he does it.


M. Then what think you in both power, and will
that state could he not, or would he not know what was fitting? If he could
not, it was want in himself, or in his teacher; But Adam was perfect in
knowledge and could teach him. If himself were not capable, the to know what is
fi^,
knowledge was above him, and so not such as was fitting, or such as the want
thereof induces Ignorance. If there was want of will, it was because he loved
some other thing better, and that he Ignorance
was not wholly subject to reason: which cannot be without original sin, and so
original sin is cause of Ignorance. Now, if ignorance be cause of sickness and
death, you have no more to reply. and



S. No indeed. But I hear learned men say that it is not in the power of nature
to keep a man from death, and therefore I fear not ignorance should be the
cause thereof. by cons^quence



M. But, what if ignorance or sin be the cause why nature cannot keep a man
from death? let us see: death comes either by violence or sickness; violence
Infirmi^ties
from man, or beast, or some dead thing. But, if men had not sinned they would
neither have fal^ out* nor have been surprised by chance, which proceeds from
not foreseeing; so that from Man no hurt could have proceeded. and
Beasts would all have been tame, and in fear of man, as we Dea^^ spring th^nce
(...).
see those be which use men's company, or as others might be made. And, for
Accidents, unless a man puts himself in danger, they would not arrive*
likewise, if we look into the cause of sickness in Physicians books, we
therefore
shall see it proceeds from some excess or defect, which in that state would
not have been, when the State of Paradise
man had wit and will to prov^de against both.


S. Sir, that was an happy age, Happy*
or rather would have been, if man had kept his honor in which God had placed
him.


M. True; but yet, this we yet ours not unhappy
have would not be miserable, if our selves did not make it so by our own
fault; not seeing what is before our eyes. For, consider, but through our own
fault; For Sin only causes ve^^^ion, (...)
if you please, what is more cause of fin unto us than pleasure? yet no Sin can
be without displeasure.


S. Sir, that were hard to persuade; since we see men daily think nothing sweet
but it; which could not be, did they experience continual* displeasure in it.


M. Can you doubt but that must needs grieve a man which is unnatural.
against his inclination, and nature? then, if Reason be the nature of man, how
can he see himself do against reason (which nevertheless every sin does)
without grief and pain. Again, does not sin set our hearts upon goods, which
may be taken from fixing our affections on perish^ble goods.
us, as money, meat, play, and the like: it puts us then in perpetual danger of
vexation and grief; for who looses what he is in love with, must needs be
grieved according to the measure of his love. Again, if Reason have forecast
of what is to come, and memory of what is past; Sense and
(which is the cause of sin) only consideration of the present; is it not
manifest that sin by sense precipitating us into inconveniency.
precipitates us into future inconveniences, which Reason keeps us out of?
Again, Reason has one conduct and government through all occurrences; But Sense
as many several motions as the things desired are different; distractive,
which, because they are not ever had together, make the vicious man now follow
one, now another; and sometimes miss both. suspensive
Sometimes also be unquiet and uncertain, not knowing what he would have. And
so we see a man given impotently either to and
wealth, or pleasure, never to be at rest, but continually in a painful
wearisome.
pursuit of what he never enjoyes. You have told me that all mankind was
subject to sin and the Devil, and by them, to other mischiefs; But, are you so
good an historian, as to show me this to have indeed passed according The
History
as is declared.


S. No truly Sir; for, although peradventure in sermons I have heard much
thereof, yet I carry away but little. of



M. Well, I am sure you have heard how God was obliged in Mankinds Slavery to
Sin laid out in some remarkable instances
Justice (through the wickedness of mankind) to destroy all but Noah and his
family, eight persons only, by the great flood. And I may add, that Noah might
have talked with some who knew Adam, so that the fresh memory of our loss of
Paradise could not hinder the increase of sin. Peradventure men's lives, being
so long, the fear of death, and hope of future life was cold in them, and
therefore God shortened our days for our greater good. Soon after, our
forefathers grew into the vanity of building Babel tower; and not long after,
into that prodigious luxury, which drew fire from heaven upon the five cities,
whereof Sodom, and Gomorrah were the chief. Wherefore, God seeing all mankind
could not be kept in good order, without an universal miracle destroying quite
the present state of nature (and not perfecting it according as the particular
natures required) which therefore God saw incongruous for the wi^e
administration of the wo^ld, hereupon he chose one family for his elected
people, plied them with perpetual apparitions, prophesies, rewards and
punishments; gave them a law in force of miracles, and astonishing greatness.
Yet the books of scripture teach that they were perpetually straying from Gods
law, till he was provoked to transport them to Babylon, whence they came after
long and severe punishment little amended, and therefore still subject to
oppositions and oppressions by Greeks, and Latins. So that with all the means
which man could invent, it was not possible to keep mankind out of Sin. Can
you tell me the The cause of this
reason of it?


S. Sir, you have told it already; that it was original sin, is Sense making
man prone to follow the present and s^up^d to conceit aright his future true
Good.
which giving our Sense power to work without the command of Reason, caused all
this mischief.


M. Right. But I desire to know what it is that it works, which makes mankind so
backward to it is own good; Is It not that man makes no apprehension of Gods law,
and the good of it?


S. Yes, Sir, the Sense following the present good, hinders the consideration
of the future.


M. You see then the remedy ought to be, to make them believe, and deeply
apprehend the good of the next world; whereto therefore
men being not able to attain either by Sense or discourse, it is necessary to
give them a Teacher to be remedy' by a Teacher.
of whom they are assured that he knows what he teaches, and will not tell them
other then truth. But what must such a one do to persuade the world?


S. He must teach them? but who ^ught to be
seeing you say the matter is above reason, I k^ow not how he should persuade
them that things are so as he teaches them.


M. Will you not believe a man in things whose truth you see not if he work
strange and miraculous effects in proof of his savings? miraculous,



S. Yes, Sir, or else I were very unreasonable.


M. If then this Teacher works most knowing and most true;
wonders, which we call Miracles, he will deserve credit at your hands.


S. Yes; for none can do miracles therefore God:
but Almighty God.


M. Neither is there any, who may not be suspected ignorant of also, most
convinient to teach our nature
such high matters, or safely held incapable of deceiving, but only God: Nor
can any one show the way or be a convenient Teacher for us but only Man: so
that you see our necessity forced God to become man, or else our whole kind
has been damned. and excite love of him; therefore Man. (...) hich rendering
our way to Beatitude connaturall and plain. and so being most ^itting;
Therefore God was made Man.
To which if you add, that we see and converse familiarly with man, and easily
incline to love him: God, we cannot apprehend what he is; so that, by by
God's becoming man the way and means of loving Him, which is our high path to
salvation, being infinitely plained, and mankind made infinitely more capable of
salvation than before, you will easily collect hence that it could not stand
with the Goodness of God to let us^ly in misery, since he could remedy it by a
way so connaturall to mankind, as was his assuming human nature, God therefore
was made Man.


FIFTH CONFERENCE.
M. WE have discoursed already of God as our Maker, Governor, Redeemer; as
Eternal, Almighty, Alknowing, Al-perfect. But have you no other Attribute of
God which bears an eminent place in our Belief?.


S. Yes, Sir, that God is one and three, or that there is a Trinity; but I
despair of understanding in any measure so high a point; so that it is enough to
believe it is so, and this I do already.


M. Doubt not God's Goodness, if your self be not wanting to your self. And,
first, tell me* Notions or apprehensions of things as in themselves are got by
our senses*
have you any apprehension of God as he is in himself?


S. I know not that; but I observe that generally I make no apprehension of any
thing as it is in it self, which I never heard, nor saw, nor perceived by some
sense.


M. Your observation is good; tell me next, what do you apprehend and so
o^ mean by the words Good, just, merciful, and such like? mean you not such
perfections from creatures;
by them as you observed in Creatures?


S. Yes, Sir, I know not else what I could mean by them, for I never converst
with any thing else. Besides, I am persuaded, one that never heard of God means
the same by those words as I do* which shows the meanings and those
of them is taken from creatures. But then me thinks it is an injury to God to
attribute transferred to God,
such low perfections* to him which fall infinitely short of his dignity.


M. No harm, by the grace of God, as long as we hold fast this intention to
attribute them to him only so far as they signify* perfection, and not as they
include which mean Perfectiin^
imperfection. In the mean time you see we cannot speak of God, as in himself,
but by means of those low conceits borrowed from Creatures.


S. By this account we must not s^y he is one and three, for no Creature is
such.


M. You object shewdly; but, since you have already proved therefore chiefly to
Know and Will, which are proper to Spi^its.
God is a Spirit, and seen that a Spirit can Know and Will, if out of these it
be made as plainly follow that God is one and three as out of other
considerations that he is Good, Just, etc. will it not be a degree of
satisfaction above what you could hitherto hope for?


S. I confess it will; and I expect with longing you would lead me to this
apprehension of so sublime a mystery, which hitherto I knew nothing of.


M. Answer me then first, what means this word to know?


S. I am sure I understand what it means, for I understand well Knowledge then
enough the meaning of my own words when I say, I know you are reaching me. But
yet I cannot explain my self nor give account of it.


M. You need not wonder you cannot give account of all that is importing some
Likeness of the thing known;
really in you, for this belongs to Study and Reflection: But do not you
conceive when you know a thing that you have some likeness of that thing in
your Mind?


S. Yes, sure, for otherwise that Knowledge would be indifferently a knowledge
of any other thing or all things as well as this; if, when I knew this, there
were in my Mind no special representation or Likeness of this.


M. You discourse well. What judge you then of a perfect Knowledge of a thing
according and, so, perfect Knowledge,
to all respects imaginable? Must not the perfect Knower of that thing, as he
is the Knower of it, have in himself the perfect Likeness of it?


S. Yes, certainly; for, if every slight Knowledge argue some Likeness, a
Knowledge every way perfect argues by consequence perfect Likeness, that is no
Unlikeness,
an every way perfect Likeness.


M. And those things which are every way alike are no way unlike, are they?


S. It Is impossible they should.


M. And, if no way unlike, they that is no Diversity, that is, Unity or
Identity.
can never be diverse or two.


S. No, Sir, for that Diversity whatever it is, would be an Unlikeness.


M. And those things that are not diverse or two, are they not the same and one.


S. Questionless they are.


M. The thing then known the nature of the thing known perfectly
perfectly, as in the Knower, is the self same as it is in it self.


S. This seems to me a riddle and strange; yet I see not how I can go back with
credit, or answer is the same in the Knower,
better than I have done, though I were to begin again.


M. It Is backwardness and grosnes of Fancy and not verdict of pure Reason which
makes you fly from unexpected consequences without seeing a fault in the
Discourse. Let Us proceed; and tell me, what makes a thing be what it is, for
example, therefore
Peter be a man? is it not because the Knower*
he has man's Nature in him?


S. Yes, without doubt.


M. If then the very nature of as such, is it.
the thing known be in the Knower, the Knower as such, is a thing of that
nature; that is, that very thing.

I feel my self loath to grant i^* but I needs must.


M. Tell me yet further, is not the thing known as such, distinct, and opposite
to the Knower taken precisely as a Knower.


S. You seem to ask me whether ^ut as known
not-knowing be opposite to knowing; for the Thing known considered barely as
known, is, as such, not-knowing; which is no hard question.


M. It Is easilier answered then; it is opposite to, and distinct from the Knower,
therefre To know is to be another as another.
but perhaps there is a further meaning in it; for, when you know a man, that
man leaves not to be what he was in the least for your knowing him; but stand^
aloof from, is independent of, and totally unconcerned by your knowing him;
that is, he as the thing known is out of you and no ways appertaining to you.
The Thing known then, as such, is in some sense another or distinct from the
Knower: And so to Know is to have the nature of another thing in it, or be that
other thing as it is another. Tell me next; does God know himself? God then
knowing himse^f is in himself as in another; that is, There is Distinction in
God; yet, (the Object in the Knower being the same,) without prejudicing his
Unity;



S. How can one doubt of this, since we account him a fool that does not?


M. You see then you have shown that God by knowing himself, is in himself as
in another, that is, there is distinction in God.


S. This may advance to show God three, but will it not destroy his being one?


M. Have you forgot so soon what even now you were forced to grant, that
perfect Knowledge was a perfect Likeness, and so the thing Known is the same in
the Knower, taken as such, as it is in it is self? God, therefore,
notwithstanding this distinction, is more one with himself, if possible, by
knowing himself than other wise he would be. which he has



S. This puzzles me, but does not satisfy me; for still you show not how he is
one and how three.


M. I have already shown you* according to his Nature,
but you did not observe it: what knows God when he knows himself, is it not
his own Nature, Essence, Substance, Properties, etc.


S. Yes sure, Sir, the word Himself can mean nothing else.


M. Well then; add this consideration Being,
that the very self-same Nature of the Thing known is or
in the Knower, it follows that Substance
God is one with himself in nature, Substance, Essence or Being, (for those
words import the same;) which is what Christians profess, that there is but one
God, notwithstanding
or one thing of a Divine Nature.

How did we agree God had His Distincttion
distinction or opposition in him?


S. As knower and thing known.


M. And do you find that these words import substance or Being, as did the
former words, God, according to the notions of Knowing and being Known*
himself, Divine Nature, Essence, etc


S. No, Sir, Knowing and Known mean not so amongst us.


M. That therefore being the meaning of words which is used amongst us whence
they are which are
transferred to God, they retain the same manner of meaning there too: that is,
of a Relation or respect; Relations.
for, you see plainly a Knower as precisely such, only respects the thing
Known, and the thing Known, as purely such, only respects the Knower. which
amounts to this in the and
phrase of Logicians that God is one according to the notion or predicament of
substance; three which
according to the Predicament or notion of Relation. Learned men would also
tell you that Relations, out of our understanding are nothing but the things
related (as that, two yards (God having
to be equal is nothing but to be each a yard; Peter and Paul to be the same
in nature is nothing but to be what they are, thatis, men) whence God being
unchangeable, and so no Accidents (...) Accidents, * relate, and so distinguish
the Substance; yet not substantially.
in himto be related, his very substance must be the thing related, and have
distinction and opposition in it, yet not substantially, but relatively. But, I
fear these terms may prove too subtle for your speculation, at least would need
a longer time to explicate than the intent of so short a Catechism permits.


S. I have been taught that there is in God Father, Son and Holy Ghost, but
Knowledge of the Divine Nature and the same nature Known look nothing like any
of these.


M. Think you so, tell me then what is it to be a Father?


S. It Is to have a Son.


M. We are still as far to And.
seek as formerly; for when I come to ask what it is to be a Son, you may
as well answer it is a Son
to have a Father, which word remaining yet unexplicated we are still at a
loss* But, to go your way, because either of those words explained tell the
meaning of the other, tell me what do you observe to be that which makes one
called a Son?


S. I see he comes or has his being from one of the same Nature, being
as I have from my Father and Mother, whence also I am called their Son.


M. Is this enough? so, one a Living thing proceeding from a Living thing of
the same nature as from a Principle remaining in it,
Fire springs from another, yet the new Fire is not called the other Fire's Son.


S. I see now they must both at least be Living Things, else they cannot well
be called Father and Son.


M. I doubt this is not yet enough. Think you not likewise that the Father
remains in the Son according to some part of him, of which the Son is made.


S. I imagine so, Sir, else I know not how I came by this matter I have, for I
am told God creates none a new.


M. Sum up then what has been said, and you will find that a Son is a living
thing proceeding from a living thing of like nature as from a Principle
remaining in it; This being settled: tell me next, what think you of God (or the
Divine nature) is he not a living thing.


S. Yes, without doubt, he that gives life to all things must needs and
Knowledge in God
himself have life or be living.


M. And, in God whence proceeds this Knowledge of himself we spoke of.


S. Certainly, from Himself or God as Known; for, I observe that when I get any
Knowledge, though my soul knows, yet the object or thing Known makes me know,
or makes that Knowledge. being



M. Add then to these, that perfect Knowing is a perfect resembling another,
that is, a being perfectly It or of like nature with (...), (as was shown) and
that this Nature, in our case, is in both Knower and Thing known, Living; and,
that Knowledge of God proceeds from God as an such in respect of he Divine
Essence known,
object or thing known; lastly, that the Divine Essence known remains in the
Knowledge that proceeds from it; is it not plain that Knowledge of himself in
God proceeds as a living thing That is truly called Son;
from a living of the same nature as from a Principle remaining in it; that is,
as we showed, that this Knowledge is properly a Son, This,
the Divine Nature known properly a Father; and so, that There is in God Father
and Son. Father.



S. Me thinks, Sir, I now begin to see some glimps how the Eternal Son is
begotten of his Father, which before sounded strangely to me; how he is God of
God, only begotten, the Wisdom and Image of his Eternal Father, and such like
expressions which I have read in the Crreds and Prayer-books, but never could
frame any conceit of them, which made my devotion very dull and dry. But
Likewise,
still you have told me nothing of the Holy Ghost.


M. Did you not tell me that God loving Himself, the same thing
a Spirit has Will as well as Understanding or Knowledge? If then the proper
Act of the Will be Love, and that you grant God loves himself, that is, be the
thing loving and thing loved, that is, the same nature, or God is
in both; yet, as loving and loved, importing distinction as well as Knowledge
and thing Known, you will easily gather by a Dsicourse Loving and Loved; yet,
as such, distinct; therefore there is besides in God, a a third, called Divine
Love
parallel to the former that there must be in God, besides Father and Son a
third, that is, Love; One in Nature, yet distinct in Relation, which is that we
call the Holy Ghost.


S. I apprehend in some degree how the Discourse goes, but I see not why the
Holy Ghost is said to proceed from the Father, and the Son.


M. Remember well that the Also*
Holy Ghost is Love, and then tell me what is that whence Love proceeds in
rational things, or that which rational things love. Love intelligent things
proceeding from their proper Good*



S. That which is their Good.


M. And what judge you to be the the proper Good of an Intellectual Nature? Is
it not Truth?


S. I think you mean by Intellectual, capable of knowing; and, which is Truth,
then, it is plain nothing is so opposite and destructive to it as Error, (for
they who have this perfectly, know nothing) wherefore consisting in this
also Truth must by consequence be the perfection and proper Good of an
Intellectual nature.


M. You answer learnedly, but that the Object be in the Knowledge*
I fear it is only repeating by rote what I have so often told you. Well; And in
what consists Truth? Is it not in this that the Object is in the Knowledge?


S. I conceive so, Sir.


M. And what Object can be Divine Love proceeds from the Divine Essence, as
Object, in the Divine Knowledge,
worthy Gods Understanding, or proportioned to it?


S. None, sure, but himself or his own essence.


M. You see then that the Good proper to him and consequently the source of
Divine Love, is that the Divine Essence as Object or that is, from Father and
Son.
Known, be in the Divine Knowledge, which includes (as was shown) Father and
Son* From both therefore conjointly Divine Love or the Holy Ghost proceeds.


S. I am much pleased with this; Which Love
but why is he called Holy? Are not the Father and the Son as Holy as he?


M. Yes; but you must conceive is called
that some sorts of actions are appropriated to each of those three, and so, as
nothing can be Holy Spirit, because He makes us Holy,
so proper to teach us knowledge of God, as that which is essentially Divine
knowledge or the Son (for which reason 'twas he came to be our Master) so
nothing is so proper to cause Love of God in us as that which is essentially
Divine Love; Wherefore, since our Sanctity or Holiness consists in loving God,
and to cause this is particularly attributed to him, he is from this proper
effect of his called Holy, or by
sometimes our Sanctifier. In like manner he particularly is styled Spirit,
because it is his office to inspiring us
inspire or breath into our Hearts those motions of Love of God, and such good
Thoughts as excite with Love of God or Charity, as also Comforter*
them. Also he is called our Comforter or Paraclite; because nothing more
heartens and comforts one in the pursuit of Heaven than ardent Love of it.


S. You have shown me, Sir, a Trinity in God, but I know not what those three
are, nor how to call them. You forbid me to call them three Gods; and I cannot
imagine what they should be else. Common Catechisms and our Again*
Creed tell us they are three persons, but this leaves me as wise as I was,
unless I understood what the word means.


M. Why, do not you understand what a person is?


S. No, Sir, not I.


M. No Sir, not you? and if I should send you to the Church ^ Person
where men, and women, and other things were, and when you came back, ask you
how many persons were there, what would you answer me?


S. I would tell you how many men and women were there.


M. And not how many benches, and forms and candlesticks, being
or Altars withal?


S. No, Sir; we do not call those persons, but things.


M. You see then that what in others you call a thing, that in men you call a
person. For if an Individual or One Intelligent substance, and God having no
Accidents The distinction in him must be* of Persons There are then in One God
three Persons
you were asked how many things were in the Church, you would countpictures,
and forms, and other Animals if any such were there, and as many things as you
could see; but being asked of persons, you would count only men and women: so
that it is no more to be a person then to be a rational or intelligent thing.
Add then to this, that (as was said) there are no Accidents in God, (because
he is unchangeable) and it follows his Substance must be three some way or
other; and three in an intelligent substance make three persons.


S. Me thinks, Sir, if a person be a thing, there being in God three persons
there must also be three things; and then I see not how there are not three
Gods.


M. The Mystery is very hard, as being the mystery of Mysteries; yet your
objection may be answered. For, though every person be a thing, it does not
follow that every two persons be yet
two things; since you see that every thing is not a person, so that there is
difference betwixt the being a thing and being a person; neither is it
necessary that whatsoever makes difference in being a person, should make also
difference in being a thing. And so it may happen that the same thing may be
different not necessarily,
persons. Let this example help your imagination: you see this three-square
Table; is it not one thing?


S. It is.


M. And is not every corner of of it one corner? and to be a corner is not
nothing.


S. That Is likewise true.


M. Then as you see that Three Things
though a corner be in some sense a Thing, yet three corners may be but one
Thing; So conceive, that though a person be a thing, yet three persons may be
but one Thing.


S. If we might understand parts in God, as we do in the table this were well:
but God's a Spirit.


M. What then? does the tables having parts hinder that three parts be not one
thing? and truly one, not many tyd together? in which lies the whole knot of
difficulty. If then, you are content to admit, and can do no otherwise, that
three corners may be one thing, and one corner not the other, and yet the whole
thing taken by every corner; I do not see why in intelligible things and so
high above our capacity as God himself, we should be troubled to conceive the
same. Which of the three persons was it that took flesh, or man's nature upon
him?


S. The second Person, Sir, or Of these, the Second took our Nature,
the Son.


M. How was this done? was God turned to man, or man turned into God, or both
turned into a third thing, when God became man?


S. God cannot be changed, and, so none of these three mutations could be made:
but man was joined to God, and so God became not by charging God,
man.


M. Was he joined equally to God so that the thing made was equally God and
man, or no?


S. No sure, Sr, if God and man be in one thing, the main thing but by joining
Man
must needs be God; and man but a small portion of it. As we see if a little
water be cast into a great deal of wine, it remains still wine; so, since God
is infinitely greater then man, the thing made remains principally God?


M. It remains then both God, and man: and seeing what has not the nature of
man is not man, and much more what has not the nature of God is not God; in
Christ remain two natures, the to God's
nature of God, and the Nature of man. How can two natures remain in one thing?


S. Sir, I cannot tell how, but I see it happens so sometimes, as when a young
scion is grafted in a Tree of another nature: the same tree has two natures.


M. You have said well; and in men, and things better then men, Person:
as was shown, we call this to be joined in Person. Know you And,
now why the second person took man's nature upon him rather than any other?


S. You touched the reason of it on the by, but it was very short; and I have,
I fear, forgot it.


M. Do you not know that therefore the Second,
God came to make us Sons of God? therefore was it fitting that amongst the
three persons, the son because it is p oper to Knowledge or Wisdom to teach us
or be our Master.
should be chosen to be our pattern, and example, and as it were elder Brother.
Besides, Divines say that Wisdom is appropriated to the Son; So then, he
coming to be our Master, and Teacher, it was fit the Wisdom of God should be
chosen for that effect; that is, the Son and second person. But how this was
done, and the whole history A shore History of some signal passages belonging
to our Savior.
of his economy, or dispensation in this world, you may find in the Gospels.
Yet will I briefly deliver it unto you. It was (as is generally thought) the
25. of March upon which the Archangell Gabriel being sent from God, brought the
Message of this great work unto the B. Virgin; and, having got her happy
consent, by the power of the Holy Ghost wrought the frame of this glorious
child in her entrails without the help of man; into which body, God, as into
Adam, breathed the breath of life in the womb of his Mother. Where having laid
nine months he was brought forth in a stable upon the 25. of December, swadled
in clouts, laid upon straw, began to feel hunger and cold, and such like
extremities, as we see it fares with other Infants. After eight days he was
circumcised, and his tender body painfully wounded. And these three Mysteries
the Church celebrates on three several days. His Conception on the day we call
our Lady's of Lent: his Birth at Christmas, and his Circumcision on Newyears
day. After this he is thought to have been kept in Bethlem till the three Kings
came out of east to adore him; whereupon King Herod growing jealous, he ^led
into Egypt, and Herod executed his tyranny upon all the children under two
years old in all the confines of Bethlem. In Egypt you must imagine he was
provided as poor people are wont to be in strange countries; Yet there remains
for some years till the death of Herod. After which being returned (for fear of
Herod's Son) he returned into Nazareth. Whence he every year went to
Jerusalem at the solemn feasts, and there was lost by his parents at 12. years
of age; and, after three days seeking, found in the midst of the Doctors in
the Temple astonishing them with with his wise and learned answers; so he
lived, helping his Father to work, and being obedient both to Father and Mother
(for Father we may lawfully call him who was married to his Mother, and had
paternal jurisdiction over him; as also his Mother called him) till the trumpet
of the Angel from the desert, summoning mankind to penance, sounded the march
for him toward his Eternal Fathers work, for which he was sent. Wherefore,
baptized by S. John, and receiving the visible testimony of the Holy Ghost, he
made his trial in the desert by a fast of 40. days, and 40. nights, and by
the temptation of the Devil. His Baptism the Church celebrates on Twelf day,
the Temptation on the first Sunday of Lent. Then, he began his preaching, and
gathering of disciples, and working of miracles: beginning from the changing of
water into wine, which is likewise commemorated upon Twelf day. So he proceeded
through great contradictions, and dangers, til the raising of Lazarus. Upon
which he entered in triumph into Jerusalem, which we solemnize on Palmsunday.
Four days after he celebrated his last Supper, and the next day, his bitter
Passion: and, within three days, having set free our Forefathers (who never
till then were admitted unto the sight of God) he rose, and instructing his
Church 40. days, in it is sight ascended into heaven, whence after ten days,
he sent the Holy Ghost, himself remaining there till the day of judgment: when
he will return to take account of his benefits he has bestowed upon us.


The Catechist ought to note out of the discourses passed, of how sublime and
unparalleled an essence our God is, who by his Nature, which is purest and most
refined Quintessence of Substance or Being, added to his perfections of Knowing
and Loving himself, obliges us to affirm truly of him, thas he has in one
Nature three Persons, which is highest contradiction in the perfect est of all
Creatures existent or even possible. Also, how God was so good as (our nature
being imperfect of it self) supernaturally to help it with incomparable graces
and gifts. Secondly, how death, Sickness, and all other mischiefs being
excluded by God, crept in by man's own fault, and the procuring of the Devil.
How quickly our nature grew to that extremity, that of the whole world hardly
eight men were found righteous; And, presently again not five men in five
Cities. What a perpetual care God ^^d of the family of Abraham by promises,
miracles, punishments, rewards; yet could not by those means keep them from
sin, and damnation. What it is, for God to be made Man; the eternal,
impassible, essentially-blisfull, to become a child, the most tender and
passive of all creatures, and franght with miseries, and griefs. See his life
nothing different from ours, unless that it was more stuffed with woes; from
one end to the other in poverty, subjection, contradiction, affliction, and in
the end and last act, the example of all indignity, that human wit could
invent, and the shape of man endure: think how all this was suffered for our
sakes, he knowing every one for whom he suffered, and of so great a number
excluding none for whom he did not undertake these pains as if there were no
other: as freely as the Sun shone on Adam when he was alone, no less then upon
the millions that now be. And, out of all these considerations let him strive
to raise the Catechumen to admiration and love of so great Goodness, and a full
resolution to make use of so many and so powerful means to advance himself in
virtue, which is the fruit of all that went before.

SIXTH CONFERENCE
M. HAving now learned that there is a God; his properties; God^ being made Man
how he created man; how he conducted him through so many ages, till the coming
of himself into the world, in the second Person of his blessed Deity; Having
also understood the economy of his sacred Humanity, till his bitter passion,
glorious resurrection, wonderful ascension and gracious sending of the Holy
Ghost; which was the first effect, and chiefest of his whole peregrination. It
follows to consider the End of all, which was the stating of mankind in that to
redeem Mankind
perfection, to which he intended to conduct him. Now then Child, can you tell
me what was the intention of Christ's coming?


S. Sir, you have told me already, that 'twas to redeem Mankind from Sin,
from the deluge of sin, wherein he was drowned by the fall of Adam, and give
him a state and put him in the way to Heaven,
by which he might attain to Paradise.


M. I but, what is the immediate step by which a man comes to Heaven?


S. That also me thinks I have learned to be the Love of God above all things.
For, you told me this was Sanctity: and I know we call those Saints, who either
are in Heaven, or in the right way to it.


M. Well said. But I would have you show me, that the Love of God makes a man
go to Heaven; and, because you cannot without help, hearken a little unto me.
The Good of Heaven which consists see in seeing God;
consists in seeing God Almighty, not with the eyes by which you walls, and
trees, and sun, and stars, but with the eyes by which you know you are this
day, and neither yesterday nor tomorrow: and by which you know you must have
been yesterday, yet it may happen you may nor be tomorrow; and other Truths or
things of this quality, which the least and
of you is capable of. Now, he that loves God above all things Love of God
(especially if he have done it long) cannot choose but desire to know and see
him whom he loves so much. Wherefore, when he dies and has no more any
distraction disposing
by his senses, he is wholly set upon that object; and, so, extremely miserable
unless he and
can obtain it: wherefore, if God be not hard-hearted (as Goodness it self
cannot be) what remains but that he must needs let determining necessarily to
this,
himself be seen by him? which is, to be in heaven. And, this a Divine would
tell you, were to determine God of necessity to the giving of Bliss: as the
putting of all second causes requisite to the making a man, determins him to the
infusion of the rational soul. But we must not be so learned. Do you know how
the Divines or rather all Christians do ordinarily term this Love of God.


S. Yes, Sir, I think this is the virtue they call Charity, by Man is to love
God,
which we love God for himself, our neighbors for him: and for both their
sakes, do all the rest of our actions, and so order our whole lives to the
service of God.


M. It Is well said; but can you tell what reason you have to love as being
God?


S. Yes. For, seeing we naturally love that, which is good, as good meat, good
drink, good All-Good,
clothes, etc. and God is Algodness: there can be no doubt but we have great
reason to love God. Besides, he has done us many singular benefits, or rather
Our most bountiful benefactour
has given us all we have; by which we know he loves us, and for both these
causes, is to be loved by us. and



M. Very well; and, you may add that we are like him, being whose Likeness or
Image we bear.
made wholly to his Image; and things that are like one another, are apt to love
one another, as we see all creatures love their own kind. But, seeing you call
And,
this, Charity, and know there is a second part thereof, which is to love your
Neighbor (or all our Neighbor
other men) as your self, know you why you are to do so?


S. Sir, not well.


M. Why? do you not see that all knives are to cut? hammers being made for the
same End we are, that is, for God;
to knock? and, therefore, who would have a hammer to cut, or knife to knock,
were out of ^^ason. So, likewise, al men being of one Nature, are for one and,
and fit for the same things. He therefore that would wish one thing for himself
because it is fit we ought to wish him that End and means to it, that is, love
him as our self. Also, Love of God necessarily disposing to see ^^m, who loves
God has great reason to hope to see him; grounded in his Goodness and
faithfulness to his promise.
for him, and not wish the like to his neighbor were very unreasonable. And,
if he wishes the like to his Neighbor as to himself, he loves him as himself.
But tell me now, he that loves God, has he not reason to hope he shall see God?


S. Yes, Sir; since it is necessary that who loves God shall see God, no doubt
but he has reason, not only to hope, but to be confident of it, if he die with
this love of God.


M. And, what considerations make him confident?


S. The considerations of the Goodness of God, his love toward mankind, and
his immutable constancy, who has promised happiness to those that love him.


M. I, but, what if a man does not love God?


S. He can have little hope of ever seeing God.


M. True: his Hope must be dead, and a far of: seeing God gives not Bliss but
to those that love him; yet, if he has an intention to labor for the Love of
God, he may have some; otherwise it is Presumption, not Hope.


M. Now you are arrived to put,
Hope and Charity; see if there none can love or hope, un ess knowing the
things which, and motives why, taught by Faith; which secu ely relies On God's
Truth, saying such things; and
were not a step before, which you thought not of. For, unless a man know thus,
as you have said, of God, how can he love him, or hope for any thing at his
hands? by what means or virtue do you come to know these things?


S. By Faith Sir; for, Almighty God having told us that he is such as you have
declared, either in his own person by Jesus Christ, or by his Messengers,
Angels, and Prophets: we can no more doubt whether it be so or no; seeing God
is all Truth, and a falsehood cannot spring from Truth.


M. So far well: but how do you know God spoke it? for I am sure your self heard
him not?


S. Those told me who told me all the rest, and so I have no more reason to
doubt of this, than of all the rest.

You answer according to your pitch; but a wise man would ask better testimony
for things above nature, and which be hard to believe, than for other ordinary
things. Can you then tell me, what warrant God has given us to believe that
this our doctrine comes from him.


S. Sir, I have heard talk, that Tradition or
we must believe what the Church believes; according to the Colliers Faith;
but I know not why.


M. Why? do you not see that the Infallible Attestation of the Church
the Church is the congregation of Christians, which is dispersed through the
whole world, and therefore cannot come together to frame a ly? If then they
consent that he (...) them
together that such a thing was delivered to them for the doctrine of Christ, it
cannot choose but be so. And this is that which Divines call Tradition; to which
no Heresy lays claim: and upon which, Religion is so grounded, that even all
heretics must acknowledge this same Authority for the receiving Scripture. So
that you see your warrant is the Universality of the Church; which cannot be
universal in time, if she has once corrupted the former faith. For a wrong
faith makes a wrong, or There are then three virtues call'-Theologicall (or
immedily respecting God) necessary to mankind's salvation*
rather no Church. Nor can she be universal in place if she maintain a ly. For
so many countries as are necessary to make Universality cannot agree to make a
ly. And, so, casting your accounts, you see you have found three virtues,
Faith, Hope, and Charity; which Divines call Theological; that is conversant,
or employed about God; because you see in Faith we rely upon God's Truth, in
Faith, Hope and Charity.
Hope upon his Liberality, Charity likewise we ground on this that he is all
Perfection, and Goodness.


SEVENTH CONFERENCE.
M. IT follows, seeing we know Christian life, and perfection consists in these
three Virtues, to seek now the means to attain to them. Can you tell me what
those means be?


S. Sir, how should I of my self be able, who knew not whither we were to go
unless you had Faith
directed me?


M. See you not that Faith is a being a Knowledge of supernatural things, the
way to advance Faith
knowledge by which you understand what is necessary for your salvation? your
profession then being to get knowledge, and learning, how can you be ignorant
by what means you are to obtain, and increase Faith? Nay, if you look into it,
your Learning is but Faith. For do you not trust your Grammars, and Syntaxes
that this Verb is of such a conjugation, this Nown of such a Declension, or
Gender; or has thus, or thus in the genitive case, or plural number; that it
must have such a case or construction: that such a syllable is long, suchshort;
that such, and such customs, and places were among the Romans, or Grecians,
and the like. As then you get is
Learning, so* you must get Faith.


S. Sir, we get learning by study. But I have heard that we to increase that
Knowledge by Study of such things, that is, by Prayer: of which Mental has
three parts
must get Virtue by praying. And so we get play, not learning.


M. I child, but there is this difference betwixt your prayer for virtue, and
your prayer for play; that the one is a Study, the other not. And, not to
detain you long, you have heard perhaps, that some Prayer is mental, some
vocal. And, first, to tell you what mental prayer is, know there be three
parts of it. The first is to know, and be sure of the truth To Know the truth
of the point,
you are to consider: and this rather belongs to him who prescribes the
meditation in our present purpose; for it is his part to give a strong and plain
consideration, that he who comes to prayer, need not much ado to be To resolve
according to that Knowledge
convinced of the truth. The next part is to make a resolution according to the
knowledge proposed, by exhorting himself out of the weightiness of the
consideration: and this is properly Meditation: for meditor signifies to think
on often, conn, or exercise something: this part and
then being frequent beating upon good life, and the rectifying To raise the
heart to God, expecting a Blessing,
of our heart and will, is properly meditation. The third is to turn our heart
to God for whose sake we are to do al things, and from whom we are to expect
the increase of our labors. For, as all the husbandman's labor is to little
purpose unless God send rain, heat and fair weather at due seasons: so
likewise, unless God direct our lives, it is to little purpose what ever our
endeavors go about.

Touching the Preparation to prayer, what is substantial, is, that your thoughts
be not preoccupated by any other care either of play, or study; or any other
such matter, which may draw you away: and therefore it ought to be the first
thing you do after you are risen. Then shortly to remember that all other
business be bables, and things not concerning you in respect of this: and this
the only thing which can do you good in this life and the next. Thus much is
enough for a Catechism, the rest you are to seek-in treatises made purposely of
this subject; amongst the rest I recommend to you a little one of Antonius
Molina a Carthusian. As concerning vocal prayer, I hope you can tell me what
that is.


S. Yes, Sir, Vocal prayer is Vocal Prayer is
that we say in our Primers, and beads, and other books.


M. How does this differ from the other, and in what is it better or worse,
than Mental prayer?


S. It differs because we have better than Mental,
set words in our books, which those who meditate have not. But, sure, Mental
prayer is better, because the greater sort use it. Yet Vocal is better for
me, for I know not how to m^d^tate.


M. It Is well answered, though as being composed by able m^n,
not so fully as I desired: Know then that Vocal prayer has two excellency
over Mental. The first is that it is made by some who have more skill then we
and
have, and therefore is more perfect less distractive;
for the most part then one of our Mental prayers. Secondly, it keeps from
distraction much; because by our eyes, if we read them, or our memories if we
say them without book, it holds our But, worse as ^ess satiating the Soul, Less
proportioned to it, and Desective the two first parts mentioned. Hence, of
Mental, the written are b^st for beginners: of Vocal, Those which are best
understood,
understanding to the matter better then when we have no such determination.
But, likewise, on the other side it has two disadvantages: one, that it does
not so we^l fill our souls, being neither so much labored as what we make our
selves, nor so naturally proportionable to us as what we do our selves.
Thirdly, for the most part it wants some of the three parts mentioned or rather
wholly demurrs upon the last, neglecting the two former. But, those which are
called written meditations, if they be well done are very good for beginners,
that practice themselves. sell me now which prayers you think the best?


S. I must needs say, the beads, and the Primer, or Manual, for I have no
other.


M. If you do those well you are well sped. But what I would counsel you is, to
choose such prayers as you understand rather then those you do not: As I fear
and*
you understand but few in your Primer. So that, though that be best in it
self, yet those more befit you which you better understand. And, as for your
beads, I fear you attend but little when you say them; you should therefore
have some mystery of our Savior's, Well attended to.
or our Lady's life, to thank God for, in every two or three Ave Mary's; which
might make you think of what you did. Two tens thus feelingly said, Lastly* ^*
were better then three payr of beads tumbled over, with your mind upon your
breakfast.


S. Sir, I will endeavor to get them as you say.


M. But, in the mean time, tell Prayer*
me, what is the necessity or profit of prayer?


S. Sir, it pleases God, spends our time well, obtains all benefits of him, and
fulfils his commandments.


M. This is very true: but I look yet for another at your hands; which is, that
it is the very being
way or walk to Heaven.


S. Sir, you said that Clarity was the way to Heaven.


M. And is not Prayer the consideration the use of Considerations ^^^i
ca^io^sly moving to love of God, The fruit of Prayer is to advance Charity;
that i^, Prayer is the high way to Heaven:
of things necessary to our salvation? and not a dry consideration, but a
moving of our will out of them; and lastly the excercising of our Affections
toward God Almighty, procured by the said consideration? Now, how do you think
we journey to heaven but by our affections? or come to affections but by
consideration? so that you see Meditation is nothing but the right way to
Heaven, in which other men are lead by sermons, reading good books, and the
like: but the meditatour goes of himself, by his own pains and industry.
Moreover, the use of Mental praver being the thinking wheresore
on, or considering that which is the chiefest good we have; also, our soul
being ever carried backward, unless by due without I^,
consideration it be forced against the stream of our natural inclinations;
hence we must needs Retreat in virtue is inevitable.
live blindly, and go two steps back for one toward heaven without the use of
Prayer, or something equivalent to it. And thus much may (...) for the Utility
and Necessity of Prayer.


EIGHTH CONFERENCE.
M. TO go on; do you think he loves you that beats you without a cause, or
keeps Moreover, Charity, or love, obliging us to give what is due to those we
love, 'twill make us render To God,
your own from you?


S. No Sir; perhaps, indeed, a friend may beat one he loves when there is some
reason for it; but, otherwise, he is no friend and shows little love.


M. Therefore if you love God, your self, and your Neighbor you must not hurt
them; but do them all the good you can; especially if it be due unto them. What
can you do to God?


S. Good I can do none to him; but my duty is to be careful in such things as
concern his honor, such as be all things which Service:
belong to prayers and the Church.


M. You say well, and in Latin the rites of serving God are called Religiones;
whence this virtue is by Divines called Religion; Priests, specially Bishops
and Curats, and such as have care of the publik ceremonies of the Church,
entitled Religiosi: as also such men as bind themselves to certain pious
observations, are called Religiosi or Religions for the same reason. Well; tell
me first what do you ow to your self?


S. Nothing Sir; for I can forgive To our selves,
my self if I did ow any thing to my self; and so it would be no debt or duty.


M. Now you speak beyond your skill; for seeing you are made by God of a
determinate nature, in so making you he has directed you to some actions,
which you by your own free will must what is best for us, that is, 'twill make
us prefer a greater good before a less, which is performed by Temperance; and
avoid a greater harm before a less, which is done by Fortitude: To our
Neighbor, If Infeiour or Equal, Love and Good will; If superior, Obedience
and Respect;
not transgress but second; and; so you are bound to the conservation of your
self, and ow to your self the endeavors conformable to such actions: and the
principles of these actions are, not to prefer a lesser good before a greater,
nor to choose a greater harm before a lesser. And this is done by two virtues;
Temperance, by which you abstain from a less good to get the greater; and
Fortitude or Valor, by which you undergo the less harm, that you may avoid the
greater. What do you ow your Neighbor?


S. I have borrowed nothing; but those who have, ow what they have borrowed, or
taken otherwise from him.


M. Do you not know, your Neighbors are either your Equals, your Betters, or
your Inferioors? To your Inferiors you ow love, and to be ready to do them any
good you can; as others your betters have done, and daily are ready to do for
you. To your Equals the same in substance, although in an other degree. To
your Superiors and Betters, Duty or Obedience and Respect. All this you ow to
your Neighbors; the virtue whe^eof is ordinarily called Justice. So which
belong to Justice. Yet, these three Virtues, unexcited by Love of Heaven,
have you found three virtues called moral, or Cardinal Concerning which you
are to know two things; The first, that we ought to exercise them for the Love
of God, if we will have them profit us for going to heaven: although they have
in them selves a kind of good. For as you see in a fair picture, garden, or
avail not to It,
castle or any such thing an impression of Reason (called Art) which is
delightsome, and conformable though in some sort conformable to Nature.
to our nature; so also in the moral actions of man, there is a decorum, or
honestas, which gives content both to the doer, and the spectatour; which
entices moral men to do such actions. The other is that every They become
one of these is divided into diverse sorts, and kinds, according to several
matters in which they are employed: For example, Fortitude in an action full of
difficulty is several particular Virtues
called Courage; in suffering, Patience; in length, Perseverance; in war,
Valor; etc. Temperance toward women is called as respecting
Chastity; in drink, Sobriety; in action Modesty, etc. Justice toward God,
Religion, or devotion; toward your Country and Parents, Piety, toward Laws,
several Objects.
and Superiors, Obedience; toward your Equals, and Inferiors, in honor,
Courtesy; in words, Affability. But I believe you have heard that the Moral
Also,
or Cardinal Virtues are four: Therefore let me have your help. Can you tell me
what it is to be Discreet.


S. I think it is to be wise.


M. Well ghess'd, although you miss a little: for true it is, every Discretion
wise man is discreet, yet not every discreet man, wise. For if you look upon
men's conversation, you shall observe some have good skill in human actions, yet
for passion or other desires, follow not their knowledge. Others have their
desires so as they should be, but little skill. Others being
have both skill, and will good; others both bad. And these last are both
fools, and knaves for the most part. The foremost of the other three, are
Understanding men, but not Discreet; the others be discreet, but not
understanding: The third are both: that is, Wise. Now I hope you will not fail
to tell me what makes a discreet The right se (...) of ou^ Affecti^^^ in o^d^r
to Act on, and
man.


S. Since a discreet man is h^^ who has his affect ons right i^ human action;
and the three virtues above named make a man's affections such; those three
virtues make a man discreet.


M. It Is very well said. For, the three fore and Virtues giving this, who has
them, has also Dscretion, or, Prudence.
if you note, he who has these three virtues will use the skill he has to the
utter most. And him we call discreet, who, according to his understanding,
carries things well. Which virtue by Divines is called Prudence. It Is office is
to judge a right what is to be done, by him that has it, according to the
proportion of the man's knowledge; and so you have There are then ^our (Moral
or) Cardinal Virtues,
your 4. Virtues called Moral, or Cardinal. But, before I leave, you must
answer me one question farther; which is, whether you think that he who
performs his action according to these Virtues, need have any scruple of the
work done?


S. No Sir, certainly; for, if according to which who acts,
his action be virtuous, as proceeding from a mind which has these virtues, it
must needs be good.


M. And what? (though he has an affection to do well) yet if he has not skill,
can the deed be good?


S. I did not think of that. Then, indeed, it must be naught.


M. True it is, the action is not since not byast by ill affections, needs not
scruple his action, though it hap to be imperfect in some other respect.
good. Yet he need not make scruple of what is passed: because he did his
endeavor. But before the action be performed what is he to do, if he cannot
tell whether part is to be done?


S. He ought to ask some body that knows.


M. You say well; if he cannot, or when he has ask't find no body that can
tell, he may do whither he lists. And whither he miss or no, never make scruple
of it, as long as h^^'s sure that no ^ll affection was guide in his choice,
(...) that he proceeded out of the Love of God, and a good conscience.


In these three Conferences, the motives of virtue and good life frequently
occurring, advertise the Catechist to make his Cathecumen reflect, and move
himself unto them. They be plain of themselves.

NINTH CONFERENCE
M. YOu know by what is said, Christian Life is a Practice of the three
Theological and four Moral virtues, for God's sake;
what Christian life is, viz. the practice chieftly of the three Theological
virtues; and in consequence of the four Cardinal ones; that is, of all virtues.
But can you tell me what it is that gives life to all the rest?


S. I Imagine, Sir, it is Charity, because you said that it gave life to Hope,
and that all Cardinal virtues were to be practiced for God's sake. But I reach
not unto the reason unless you help me.


M. You know not your own strength. For tell me if you should see a dog, or a
horse new killed how would you know whether it were dead or no?


S. By the stirring. For as long as it stirs I should think some life were yet
in it. When I saw which is done by Chari^y,
it stir no more, then I should take it for dead.


M. Very well; so far then is agreed, that, to live is to have a Wh^r fore
since the Life of a Christian is to move toward God
power in it self to move or stir it self. Now can you tell me what is the first
principle of stirring in you, and other men, as they are men. Do not you see
the more in love they are with any thing, the more they stir to obtain it? so
that you see love is that which and
stirs a man and makes him move, toward the thing beloved. Love of God, or
Charity, makes us do so,
Wherefore, the Love of God or Charity is the thing which first moves the
Christian to walk toward him: that is, to exercise all virtue. You see
likewise that It only is a Christians Life
what takes away from us the love of God, brings us death in lieu of life, as
we are Christians. What is that?


S. That is, as I perceive now, and he dead without It. Wherefore what causes
ibis death is Mortal Sin.
mortal Sin; for I imagine it is called Mortal or deadly, because it takes away
l^fe, and life is Charity. Therefore that sin is mortal which deprives our
soul of the Love of God.


M. You are a great Divine; but what is it that takes away the Love of God or of
any thing else from us?


S. I think it is hate; for hate is contrary to love; yet methinks no body can
hate God, and so there would be no mortal sin if that were true.


M. You say well: but do you not remember, that who so loves, must (as you told
me) do good which springs
for him whom he loves if he can; whence it comes that the row of all other
virtues follow Charity? he then who will not from love of Creatures above all
things.
do any of those things which necessarily follow upon Love, loses his love. But
no man would neglect those things unless he loved some other thing, whose love
hindered him from performance thereof: So that you see, how not only hate of
God, but Love of such things as hinder you to do what you ought in love to him,
takes away Charity. Can you now tell me what Sin is mortal?


S. Why, Sir, whoever lovesany thing in such sort that it causes bringing
neglect of our Duties;
him not to perform to God, himself, and his neighbor, all he owes them (that
is, all which the four Cardinal Virtues command) sins mortally; for he loses
Charity, which is, the substance of Christian life.


M. You say well if you understand what you say. For what yet,
think you? is not stealing against Justice, one of the Cardinal virtues? and
yet you will not say that whosoever steals a pin commits a mortal Sin.


S. No indeed, Sir, but truly I know not why.


M. Did you not say that he who not every such neglect, Mortal: but, In those
to our Neighbor, such as would absolutely break Friendship;
commits a mortal sin loses Charity by it: and Charity you know is the Love of
your Neighbor: if then not every thing, as the taking a pin, is sufficient
cause for your Neighbor to fall out with you, you lose not his Love for taking
a pin. Such a breach of justice then, as is a sufficient cause for ordinary
wise men to break of conversation and friendship with you, is a mortal sin. But
what is less than that, is not?


S. This is well, Sir, for a man's Neighbor; but toward God In those to our
selves, such as done us by another
Almighty, I think this measure will not hold. For no man that is in his wits
will fall out with himself, neither is God subject to falling out as men are.
Therefore I know not what to say concerning them.


M. Do you not remember that a man owes certain duties to himself, whereof the
neglect may come to be such as if another man should do it unto you, you would
make us fall out with him;
would fall out with him. Do you not see then that if you do not fall out with
your self for the like occasion it is not for want of cause: And, as for God
Almighty, In those toward God, such misrespect as to our Neighbor were want
of love.
see you not, that if you bore the respect to him you do to your neighbor, you
would be as fearful to do such an indignity toward him, as you are to do it
toward your neighbor? Now the sin is in your soul; if then you see in your
soul misrespect toward God Almighty, such as toward your neighbor were want
of love, it follows there wants Love toward Almighty Other Neglects
God. Can you tell me how many sorts of sins they be, which are not mortal, and
how they are called. are Venial,



S. They be called venial but how many sorts there be of them I cannot tell.


M. They are indeed called venial (that is, easily forgiven) by a name
answering to Mortal in sense, but not in the word; and means a slight offense,
and such as makes no breach of friendship. Of those Divines put three sorts,
either because it is of a kind that generally men slightly respect, as being not
worthy of much consideration; or because it is slight in it is kind, or because
it is performed by oversight, or withour deliberation.

Having seen the nature of the From what is said follows
two lives (I mean of good, and bad) can you resolve me, which of the two is
the pleasanter? I speak of that pleasure for which you prefer a good dinner
before your ordinary fare, a play day before a study day, and the like?


S. There can be no doubt, but, considering that pleasure, sinful life is the
pleasanter. For virtuous life has it is fruit after death.


M. Think* you so? I pray tell me then, which do you think has the pleasanter
life, he that has greater harms, or he who is
has less?


S. He that has less.


M. Then, if Fortitude be the choosing of lesser harms before greater, he that
uses that virtue, has the more pleasant life, even most full
wordly. Again, who has the pleasanter life? he that has more, or fewer
pleasures; greater, or lesser?


S. Sir, now I see what you of
mean, and that it is very true that who lives virtuously has a more pleasant
life, then who does not, Pleasure,
if all were alike. For he by the virtue of Temperance chooses to abstain from
a less pleasure to have a greater. But, Sir, I hear it said that a vi^tuous
man cannot easily come to wealth, and without riches he cannot have pleasure.


M. What do Riches serve for*


S. To have his content of mind.


M. Then, if he has content of mind, what need he care for Riches? consider the
difference betwixt the merry cobbler, and the careful Usurer, and you will see
it is not Riches, but the disposition of the mind which gives content. But tell
me farther, is not the way to get Riches, to have much trading? that is, in
great sums, and withmany men? and is not Credit the greatest stroke and power
of a Merchant.


S. Yes, Sir, but credit comes by opinion of wealth. and



M. I Think you are a little mistaken: look well and you will see it comes by
opinion of honesty, and fair dealing in poor men; for who has the opinion of
being Rich, is already rich, ordinarily speaking, and so is not now to come to
wealth. It Is this opinion of honesty which makes that your word will go
farther then another man's bond, that because of your plain dealing, every man
hopes to have no quarrelling with you; and the like; Credit,
which are the things principally give Credit, especially that credit which is
the way to and goes before Riches; And are not all these caused by the virtue
of Justice? It Is virtue then, not Riches which gives all needful Credit.


TENTH CONFERENCE.
M. PEradventure I need not ask you which of these lives is Also
fitter for the next life, since one It fits us for the next world *
is made for the world to come, the other not. Nevertheless I may ask a reason
why, and perhaps so as may bring you to see it: Tell me then, shall we in the
next world have the same desires we have in this?


S. Sir, how should I know who never spoke with any had been there.


M. When you are a cold, do you desire to walk in the wind? or when you are
hot, to go to the fire?


S. ^ Sir, but contrary.


M. Bu^* what time is it that if a piece of M^^chpane were offered For, who
loves God (or a^y thing)
you though it were presently after dinner, but you would find a hole to put
it in? What Is the reason of this diversity? is it not that the one you desire
for a present commodity, the other you for it is self, is disposed
think to be good of it self?


S. Yes, Sir, me thinks that is the very reason though I never rected on it
before.


M. Then, if over night you loved any thing good for an occasion, or fot the
present disposition you are in, next morning to love it ever,
you will not care for it, the occasion being passed: But, if you love a thing
because you think it absolutely good, next morning you will as freely desire
it, as you did over night?


S. It Is certainly so. Wherefore, Love of God (or desire to see him) remaining
in a soul separated,



M. Then you see that when your soul is out of your body, what ever in the body
it loved as good of it self, that it will love ^^ill. But, what it loved only
for some end, or upon the present disposition of it is body, it will not love.
Now, what one loves in the second manner spoken of, either is God, or mortal
sin; For it is loved for no farther end. But, to go on, do you think that It
shall see him; else.
he who loves God in this sort shall enjoy his desire seeing after death he
shall retain it?


S. Yes, for you told me he would be miserable for loving him, and God cruel.
would be miserable else; and God cannot be so cruel as to let one be miserable
for loving him.


M. And, do you think it will be a great content to see God?


S. Yes, surely, for every one has content to obtain that which Further,
he desires. Besides, to see a good or strange thing breeds also content.


M. Your answer is good; but me thinks there be two faults in this pleasure;
one is, that the seeing any fine sight is not so good, as eating a good dinner,
or The pleasure of the Mind,
playing at some pleasant game. The other, that the thing which is to be seen
is but one, and so has not variety, and we perceive our selves soon weary of
the same thing?


S. Sir, I like seeing better then eating, or playing; for I had rather had by
Knowledge,
go see a strange sight, or a fine play, than eat a good dinner, or play my
self so much time: but for the other I cannot tell what to answer you.


M. You answer well; for Seeing, specially by our understanding, is the
pleasure of the Mind, which must needs be greater than the pleasure of the
Body since the body has pleasure by the mind; infinitely surpassing that of the
body;
and the mind is deaded by the body. But the Understanding infinitely surpasses
the body; because, as Philosophers say, it sees at once all particulars: as,
who knows this universal that all men do such a thing, knows what Sense can
never reach. But, be your self judge: do you remember, that ever at the sight
of a dish of meat, or news of a play and
day, you burst out in laughter?


S. No Sir.


M. But, if you heard a quick jest could you contain your self?


S. Many times I could not, although I bit my lip and used al means to restrain
my self.


M. Then the pleasure of a jest being intellectual, of the others, corporeal;
which kind of pleasure is most strong and efficacious?


S. I doubt not but the pleasure of the mind is stronger. The seeing all
Truths in God, as in the supreme Cause, being the highest Knowledge*



M. Now, of all sorts of knowledge, that by which we understand why a thing is
so, or what makes it so (which Logicians call demonstratio a priori is that
which gives greatest pleasure, and content; and the higher the Cause is the
greater proportionably the pleasure is too. Now, God being so high a Cause that
the Sight of God
he is beyond al causes, and considerd as he is in himself, a more sublime
notion comprehending both to be Cause, and Effect, and that in so noble and
transcendent a manner as all the rest put together, are incomparably and
infinitely short of Him; what pleasure must we imagine it, to see Him as he is
in himself? As for your d^fficulty; note, that you do not desire change, or
variety til you have a satiety of what you enjoy, and have a time of rest and
quiet in it, so that you have perfectly known it, and found it less than your
desires. Now seeing God is beyond, beatifies a Soul.
not only the capacity of our desires, but of millions of millions better then
us, and, is sufficient to satisfy and fill the boundless extent of his own
immense will, it is not possible that who sees God should complain of want of
Variety. Besides, if variety were desirable, in him is al^ that can be desired:
not only because he contains every thing, but because in him may be discerned
the essences, and reasons of every particular thing from the creation of the
heavens to the division of the least grain of dust in the high way; what they
are all, their particular conditions, that they are, and why they are; so that
nothing can be sought for which is not to be found in God.


S. Truly, Sir, I must confess this is a pleasure greater than eye has seen,
or ear heard, or heart can conceive. Nevertheless, me To which is consequent
thinks we should have some content also of our friends in the next life.


M. You shall, of all their good; content in our own former Actions
but. especially, every one shall have particular contentment of his own good
actions; above all of those great ones, Martyrdom, Teaching, and Virginity;
also of the good of every saint and
and creature in the world, and of the punishment of every damned soul in hell;
and the joy shall be greater according to every lawful cause of content that
nature affords us; as, kindred, acquaintance, and the like. But, not to forget
our comparison, Friend.
lets see what the wicked shall have; shall they enjoy their But the thines
desired by the wicked are temporal and fading, therefore, the d^sires of them
remaining,
desires? can you tell me first what their desires be?


S. Their desires were wealth, Authority, meat, drink and carnal pleasures;
which, sure, are then past and cannot be enjoyed.


M. You say well; and in case they do not enjoy them, how will they be contented
with the want of them?


S. They must needs be extremely afflicted if they vehemently desire, and
cannot obtain them; ^x^^ssively t^rments with
and you said that if by choice of reason they took them for absolutely good,
they must needs desire them.


M. Tell me then, are they in pain or no?


S. In Grief sir, I understand Gree^;
they are; but I do not see how they can be in Pain.


M. True it is, we ordinarily take pain for corporal grief; whereas indeed
it is but grief inflicted which, inflicted by another,
by another; only because we see none grieve but such as might leave of, if
they would, we think no grief, pain. But, after is,
this life when the wicked cannot choose but grieve, if you remember truly, Pain.
that all comes from Gods hand* you will see that their grief is also pain. But
do you judge it equal to that pain which the Body feels?


S. I know the pains of hell are far the greater; though I know not well why.


M. If pleasure come from the soul to the body, must not grief do the like? and
if the body dull the edge of pleasure, must it not necessarily dull that also?
If then pleasure of mind infinitely exceed pleasure of body, must not Infinite,
as being in the Soul;
the like be said of grief? But, when shall this grief have an end?


S. I know that neither heaven nor hell have end; but I know and,
not well the reason; more then that it so befits God's goodness, Enledss,
and justice.


M. You are of a short memor^; did you not tell me, God could not choose but
give him bliss that loved him above all things; and that, who saw him being
Allgoodness it ielf, could not but love him above all things?


S. Now I see, that, since neither the blessed can leave to love, nor In regard
Those Desires must ever remain unchanged;
God to bless those who love him, their happiness can have no end.


M. And do you think the wicked can lose the misery, unless they change their
mind from loving what they cannot obtain? The Soul



S. No Sir, but I know not why they should not change their minds.


M. Can they change their minds unless they see some thing of new which they
saw not before, or leave seeing somewhat which they did see and know?


S. No certainly; but methinks (as indivisible)
they can think of what they will.


M. Is not their souls indivisible, and it is actions without motion? and so,
whatever they go about as soon done as it is doing? you see then, necessarily,
that al they can do is already done, al perpetually present, and they see being
unaccessive.
at once al they can see; wherefore they can never change their minds, but are
to be everlastingly miserable; which God defend us Yet Venial Affections are
changeble
from. But is there think you no middle condition between th^se two? and some
in that condition.


S. Yes Sir, there is a third state of those that die in venial sin; who aae in
Purgatory, and thence go to Heaven.


M. You are well taught. For, some being in such a state at their death, as
though they firmly think God their greatest good, therefore
and are content to forgo al other goods for him; nevertheless they love
worldly things withal, something irregularly, so as they are loath to leave
them. These therefore cannot have perpetual bliss til such desires be taken
off; may be purged
and, like gold in the fi^e, purified from all such dross; but til then
remaining in pain, partly for their temporal losses by death; but, chiefly for
their spiritual want, being not able to attain Bliss which they infinitely
desire; til, by the Churches help, God of his mercy rectifies them and
accomplishes their purgation; yet so as by Fire.


S. Me thinks Sir, in all this you talk not of burning, or gnashing of teeth, or
such corporeal pains; which I have been taught are in Hell and Purgatory.


M. These things are said to be in Hell metaphorically when spoken of souls
which want their bodies; and signify no more, than that they are tormented by
fire; as, who is frighted, or dazel'd is tormented, though not Also,
burned. But, are you able to tell me why, and when souls shall receive their
bodies.


S. The time is at doomsday. Souls shall finally receive their Bodies*
The cause why they receive them is I think their love to them.


M. Do you not remember you told me the wicked have not their desires, and the
just desire nothing but according to God's will: If so, it seems your
consequence because
will not be very good. But, to make it so, you must know, naturally a man
desires every thing because it is good, and good is as much as convenient to the
desirer, who is not only Soul but Body too; wherefore if natural Their desires
of them.
desire cannot be frustrated or disappointed by God the Author of nature, and
the desires of our life remain after death, it follows that the desire of good
to our person are natural.
is natural and remaining after death, and therefore must needs be supplied.
Can you tell me how this great work is to be done?


S. Sir, I know we shall al arise at the great day; more I know not.


M. I Will help you: when that Day comes, Christ shall appear The manner ^ow*
in the air over Jerusalem (as it is thought) and suddenly all parts of the
earth and sea shall render their carcases, and whole Mankind be restored to
their Bodies. Where on the one part the Saints shall be carried in the air to
meet Christ; the others shall remain below viewing their glory, and dreading
their own misery; till, judgment being given, those rest happy for ever with
our Savior, the other are swallowed into hell, After which day all motion
shall cease and there shall be no change or alteration but a state of
permanency for ever.


S. Yes Sir, but I doubt not there will be other great differences betwixt the
Saints, and the damned, if you would please to tell me them.


M. Do you not remember the gifts with
you told me were conferred on Adam as to his Body? those very The endowments
of Glorified
same shall be perfected in the Saints. As for health, they shall have
impassibility so that nothing can hurt them. For their strength, they shall
have a power which nothing can resist, called Impenetrability. For Agility,
they shall have a power in the twinkling of an eye to pass beyond any
determined distance whatsoever. And, lastly, for Beauty, they shall have power
to shine, and show themselves in what glory they please. As for and contrary
Dispositions of damned Bodies.
^he Damned, the heaviness of their minds shall make them not only incapable
of all these advantages, but such distempered, deformed and every way
ill-compos'd Bodies as are most suitable to so sadly and so outragedly
distempered minds.


S. What shall the Saints do with these perfections, if there be no motion?


M. These are not for use, but powers and qualities necessarily following the
state of the soul in the body, of which she is to be Mistress, and to have
power to use it as her self pleases. And Hence A virtuous life
so you see what good life brings you to, both in this transitory and the next
eternal world. Can you show me now that the Blessed finally, brings Insinit
more Pleasure, Honor, and Power, than a wicked,
have all that even wicked men can desire?


S. Sir, I see they have more pleasure then this world can afford. And, as for
honor, I see, Saints are more honored then Alexanders and Augustuses. Power I
know not how they have, or wealth.


M. Wealth is not here desired but for necessity or magnificence; the time of
both which is passed; and is above need of wealth.
and for power, sure they want not that, who have all they wish, and can meet
with nothing to resist their will.


The Catechist also here has great occasion to press his Catechumen to good
life, by lively representing him, the greatness of the Joys, and Pains of the
next world, which are most incomparably moving if he declare them well.

ELEVENTH CONFERENCE.
M. NOw you are so learned The means to bring corrupt Mankind to love God, being
as to know, what it was to which Christ labored so much to bring mankind: I
pray tell me, what means he used to plant his doctrine, so, that it should
continue so many ages, so deeply rooted in the heart of man, as we see it has,
and believe it shall. Miracles and Teaching; and this ine^^icacious unless
lively conceited by the Teachers, therefore Divine Love or the Holy Ghost was
to descend upon the Apostles,



S. Teaching, and Miracles, which are the greatest Confirmations that can be.


M. Thus much you told me long ago, but what more? do you not know, Si me vis
stere, dolendum est primum ipsi tibi. I mean, that if a man be not persuaded
affectionately of a thing himself, he cannot well persuade another. Consider
then how necessary it was to send the Holy Ghost, that is, the plenitude of it,
upon his Apostles after his Ascension. Which, according to the outward
apparition, filled their hearts with fiery zeal, and their tongues with the
praises of Almighty God: that they might be vehemently conceited themselves of
the truth, and of the great good in virtue of which primitive v^gour Christ's
doctrine was brought down from them to us, that is, the Church is truly
Apostolical;
the knowledge thereof brought to the world, and earnestly desirous to breed
the like conceit in others; and so it might descend in virtue of the first
plantation by ordinary means to the end of the world. But tell me, who were
those chiefly that received the Holy Ghost?


S. The Apostles were the chief; and all others who came since; have learned of
them, and so I see the Church is truly Apostolical.


M. Yes, and only she; ask any Heretics whether they received their doctrine
from the Apostles, they will answer, yes. By whose hands? they answer, by the
scripture. But a Catholic says, from his Forefathers and they from theirs etc.
so that none lays claym to have their Church Apostolical, but only Catholics.
For the question's not whether there were all the while some of their Religion;
but whethese who now are, were taught and received it from them by true
succession. For, if two studying one thing in diverse times, find and
the same, the one does not receive it from the other, and so it is not true
succession. But where did the Apostles preach?


S. Through the whole world: for such was Christ's command, nor can there be any
doubt but they did what they were bid. And, so, I see the Church is Catholic
Catholic.
over the world.


M. How can that be? seeing the Alc^ran is in as great a part of the world as
Christ's Gospel. Nay, some Heresies have been spread in the greater part of the
Christian world. But, because you are no very great Historian. I will read you
this riddle. You ought as planted by the Apostles universally,
therefore to know that the true Church is the only Catholic in three
respects. First because it alone was at first planted by the Apostles in the
whole world; which is clear, since only one pretends her doctrine by succession
as having some of her profession in each c^untry,
from Them, which al planted by them must needs do. Secondly, because it alone
is found in the whole compass of the Christian world; all Heretics, being
every kind in some Countries, but none in all. Thirdly, because it alone as the
only eminent Congregation in C^^istendome.
commands in that part of Christianity where Religion is in vigor. And these
three come out of it is very nature; for, being the Truth, it alone can
overcome. So you have now two signs or marks of the true Church. The third is
sanctity: can you tell how the true Church is only Holy?


S. Sir, I see there is more praying, more works of charity, devotion, penance.
austereness, and the like, in the Catholic Church, than among Protestans. But
what is among others I know not.


M. It Is well answered; but, to go more orderly, you know sanctity is nothing
but the practice or Confirmation in those virtues that lead us to heaven; which
is the life God Almighty sent his only Son to give us. Also, Having an entire
Body of Faith, or Doctrine fit to promote Sanctity, Laws and Customs
conformable to that Faith, and extraordinary Sanctity attainable by her
Principles, and practiced by her children,
This consists in Three things. First in Faith and Doctrine; wherein you shall
find all heretics, in the points of difference, swarve from this end, and the
Catholic Church hold to it; as in praying to Saints, praying for the dead, and
the like. Secondly, in Laws and Customs, which because they are according to
Faith, must needs be different according to it. Thirdly, in Life and executions
of those Rules: wherein likewise the difference must hold, with this caveat,
that there may be more, and greater wickedness among Catholics by reason of
the multitude of the professors of that Religion; nay of it self; for who have
not so good things to offend against, cannot be so wicked.


S. How then can Holiness be a sign of the true Church, if there be so much
wickedness in the members of it?


M. Though there be much and perhaps more wickedness among Catholics, yet is
there more Sanctity she is likewise Holy.
also. For, among others there is hardly ever any man of extraordinary devotion
heard of: Congregations of men and women abstaining from pleasures, and
separating themselves from the world, none are found unless such as were begun
in Catholic times; extraordinary acts of penance, or heroic virtue are are
not to be looked for. In fine, very little more then nature affoo^ds, besides
some bare words of God, and Christ. And this follows of necessity from the
nature of being the true Church, which by the soundness of its root needs must
confi^m and have effect wh^m the false ones fail. But Lastly,
is there no other mark of the Church besides these three, Apostolik, Catholic
and Holy?


S. Yes; and I have been taught, it is Unity.


M. You say well: And to be One, It must first have one principle in which all
of this Religion agree: wherein if others should also agree, they could not Her
rule of Faith (Tradition)
be of another Religion; This Principle is Tradition, to which none lay claym
but only Catholics. Secondly, it must be Her external Profession of Faith
One in the Trofession of this faith, that is, in Sacraments, For, seeing
Catholic Religion sprung from one Master, Jesus Christ, and
necessary it is that it is R^tes, and, as it were, Essential Actions which
(being outward Expressions of our Faith, and so proportioned to it) are
delivered by the same Jesus Christ, be the same also: whence no congregation
but his Church can agree in all these, no more then any other can agree in all
Faith. Thirdly, in Government Her Government being the same all ov^r, She is
also
his Church must be One, that there may be some end of controversies Civil and
Theological which happen betwixt her children; and this, in Eq^ality, cannot
be. Therefore amongst the Apostles, S. Peter, One.
amongst Bishops, His Successors, have the supreme and definitive sentence.
What touches Faith we have already sufficiently explicated; For the second, can
you tell me what a Sacrament is?


S. No indeed, for though I have often heard of it, I cannot remember it.


M. Sacramentum comes of sacer, or sacrando; and it is by which somewhat is
made holy, Sacred Ceremonies
or, an holy deed: and because a Secret, by an Oath becomes holy, it being a
sacrilege to reveal it after oath, such an Oath is called Sacramentum, and
from the oath the secret sworn is also styled Sacramentum, and in Greek
Sacramentum is called Mysterium, that is a Mystery. So, because Christians used
their rites amongst themselves, and kept them from the knowledge of Infidels;
they were called Sacramenta. As the rites of Ceres or other false Gods, which
were done hiddenly, were called Mysteria. are either
But you must distinguish a little more exactly betwixt other ceremonies and
Sacraments.


S. Sir, I know not what you mean, for I am a mere stranger in this matter.


M. Then you must know there were Sacraments in the Jew's law; there are in
Christ's law: as also things called Sacramentalia, Sacramentalls
that is Sacramentals. Which are all to be distinguished. For Sacraments are
(as we may so call them) the main hinges or knots of a Christian life, and
their institution is from Christ. Sacramentals are instituted by instituted by
the Church; or Sacraments: of w^eh Those of the Old* Law made them only
capable of Temporal Blessings;
the Church: and are but certain formalities and Blessings. As for the
Sacraments of Jews, you are to understand, that as God Almighty brought them to
love and serve him by temporal promises and rewards, that he might give them
celestial in the next world: so their Sacraments made them but capable of
temporal blessings; as, Circumcision made the Jew one, whose part was in the
land of promise: their Purifications made a man one who might offer sacrifice,
and be heard, for children, for good years, but
for peace, for long life etc. wherefore were they said to cleanse the body not
the soul; to be empty and poor instruments or elements. Those of the New
Now, the Sacraments of Christians give the inward thing which their promises
signify. As, actually confer Spiritual ones.
Baptism makes a man one of those whose share is in Heaven. Penance one to
enter the Christian Church, and be heard, when he prays, for Heaven: And the
like. These Sacraments therefore, when received as they ought, are efficacious,
and give true goods, that is spiritual graces to those who participate of them.
But Their Number
can you tell me how many Sacraments there are?


S. Seven: Baptism, Confirmation, Eucharist, Penance, and
Order, Extreme-Unction, and Matrimony. Please you tell me why there are so many?


M. Did not I tell you they were the hinges of Christian life? End.
Now the soul being in a body proportionate to it, Christian life is also
proportioned to this temporal. Consider then that our corporal life is
maintained by these degrees. In birth it takes t's beginnining; next, it gets
greatness and strength, to live among so many contraries and difficulties, as
this world is full of. Then it conserves it self, while it may perform the
actions for which 'twas made. And lastly gives life to others to succeed it is
defect. These are the direct actions which conserve man's life. And to these
correspond 4 Sacraments. Baptism, Confirmation, Eucharist, and Order: besides
these, two more which concern human life in case of necessity; Physic, when we
are sick; and Preservatives, when in danger. To the former, corresponds the
Sacrament of Penance: To the later, because our danger is double from the
double power of our soul; against the fear of death we are secure by
Extreme-Unction; and against the flesh, by Marriage. Wherefore you see that to
furnish our spiritual to the proportion of our corporal life, the Sacraments
are to be just seven. But tell me, have you not heard that some of these are
taken often, others but which reiterable
once?


S. Yes, Sir, Baptism, Confirmation, and Order are taken but once; please you
to yield the reason thereof.


M. Do you not see, if a thing be of an indivisible nature; it and why*
can be done but once. As a book or such other thing can be given away but
once. Why? because one can give but what is his own, and when it is given it is no
more his to give: so, if a man give his service to God which he does in
Baptism, as a Man; in Confirmation, as a Soldier; in Order, as a married man
to propagate God's Church; unless God will release his gift, he can never be
his own to give again. And therefore these Sacraments cannot be given ofter;
the others may. Only Matrimony, and Extreme-Unction ought not, while the
married couple or the same danger remains, be repeated.


TWELFTH CONFERENCE.
M BUt, which of these think Of these
you the greatest?


S. The Eucharist without question, The Eucharist is chi^^est
it con^^ining the Body, and Blood of our Savior, and being called above
others, the Blessed Sacrament.


M. You say well; but there is another reason also. Do you remember how the
virtues were divided, and to which virtue this Sacrament is reduced? Do this,
and I shall say you are a great Doctor.


S. That I can, for you said as respecting the chief virtu^, Charity:
virtues were divided by our duty to God, our selves, and our Neighbor: and
that all Sacraments belong to the virtue of Religion, which exercised what and,
as being
was due from us to God.


M. You have done more than The Christian Sacrifice, which is the first act of
Religion.
I expected; but there is a deeper reason; for this Sacrament is the Christian
sacrifice; and Sacrifice, the principal part of Religion. For since al Religion
is but a doctrine or practice to perform what is due from us to God; and we must
first know there is a God, before we perform our duties to him; and to knowing,
follows acknowledging, as the proper extern act; and Sacrifice is nothing but a
rit^, or ceremony by which we acknowledge God to be our God; it follows that
sacrifice is the first, and chief act of Religion. Now, to show you the
particulars: God signifies as much as the Author of Being to al things, or as
our phrase goes, Mas^er of life and death. To acknowledge this, we give a life
or being to him; that is, we make it away from our selves, in testimony that he
is God; as we give the first fruit of our corn or other harvest, in sign we
acknowledge he gave it us. So now you see what means a Sacrifice; which is
nothing else but the making away the Being of something in testimony that God
is the Author of all being to us, and ours. But, can you tell in particular what
Christian Sacrifice is?


S. Sir, I know it is the Sacrifice The thing sacrificed,
of our Lord Jesus Christ; the same that was made on the Cross; though in
another manner; that is, not in the shape of flesh and blood, but in the shape
of bread and wine.


M. That seems a hard case; why should he, now in Heaven, be sacrificed every
day so?


S. Sir, I cannot tell that: only I know it does not hurt him; for his body is
impassible, and so can receive no harm; further I know not.


M. Then I Will tell you: Know you not that how much greater the Religion is, so
much greater (no other Substance su^^ng with a su^^r natural Religion) could
be only Christ:
the Sacrifice ought to be, at least in proportion. So that a supernatural
Religion must have a supernatural substance for it is proper Sacrifice. Now;
substance supernatural none could be but God; and God to whom the Sacrifice is
made, must not be the host: wherefore had not God become a creature there had
been no fit Host for Christian Sacrifice. Therefore 'twas necessary God and Man
should be sacrificed to him?


S. It Is hard, so great wonders should be done upon a sole convenience. Both
the increase of Charity in the receivers, and The Authority of the Church
requiring the.



M. I told you not so; for both the increase of charity, and devotion in the
Receiver, and the authority of the Church, where upon depend's all
Christianity, are the ends and fruit of this miraculous work; so that, if
rightly considered it will seem so great a benefit, that all the rest without it
had been defective. But, why in the The shape of Bread and wine most proper,
shape of Bread and wine?


S. I suppose, S^^, because 'twas not fit in his own shape; it being both
indecent to him, and hideous to us to see a human sacrifice, and therefore God
would not let Isaac be sacrificed.


M. That Is true; but you are to know besides, that in most sacrifices 'twas the
fashion for as being Things most commonly and unresusedly eaten, and even
signifying the very act of Eating, which belongs to a Sacrifice.
those who were present to eat of the thing sacrificed; and that was part of
the sacrificing: For you see the Priest still is to consummate the Host, and
that the proper time of receiving is in the Mass. This sacrifice therefore
necessarily including a sacramental eating, was to be instituted in the things
most common* because intended for all Mankind. As also because those kind's
best signify the substance of all eating, and drinking: being as it were the
ground work et all the rest; now let me hear what you think you receive when you
communicate;


S. I firmly believe I receive the sacred Body and Blood of our Savior Jesus
Christ who died for us.


M. That Is well as to the Priest; Under each of these
but you that receive but in one kind, must receive but one of them.


S. Yes Sir, both, for Christ is are Both Body and Blo^d; as also whatever is
annexed to Christ's Person:
whole under both kinds, and under every one.


M. You say true, and if this were not, Christ would be killed a new. Nor do
you receive only this, but his Quantity and figure, his wisdom and goodness;
nay even his Godhead also. For nothing that is truly in him can be separated
from him, but al must yet he no^ d^vid^d when Bread is.
be together. Can you tell me how it comes that when the bread is broken, he is
not also divided into two; or when the bread is burned, he is not also burned?


S. Because his body is now impassable, and can receive no harm.


M. Do you not see when bread is cut in pieces, every piece is bread, then, if
Christ's Body be put in the place and conditions of bread; by the division,
both parts must be Christ's body, not parts thereof: for a leg or an arm is not
Christ's body, no more than a piece of a chair is a chair, or one wheel of a
Clock is a Clock. So then you see it cannot be cut or divided but must be whole
in every part. And, for the same Nor is (...) ^here capable of suffering any
indigni^y.
cause, though men may be irreverent to it, yet they cannot annoy him; for
considered as in the Sacrament he sees not with his eyes, nor exercises
sensation upon those things which are about him here: so that in case any
indecency happen or affront be offered, it annoy's him not at all, nor
disgraces him any more than it does God, who by his Divinity is in all, even the
most dishonorable places. But, hence there rises a great difficulty: For, if a
Again, Sacrifice
sacrifice be a destroying of some thing, especially some living thing: and
Christ is not destroyed in the Mass, how is the Mass a sacrifice?


S. You can tell best; for, I never being of that sort of Actions, as leave no
remainder after them*
was taught so deep a lesson.


M. Have you not observed among men's actions, some leave a a remainder made by
them, others not: building leaves a house; cooking, meat; gardening, trees and
herbs etc. But speaking, acting, walking; when they are done, are wholly gone
without any remainder of them left behind. Now, sacrifice being a kind of
acting, or testifying by action, is of the nature of the later sort; though it
be a Destruction,
and, if any thing remain, it is so accidental to the sacrifice, that were it
taken away, nevertheless the sacrifice were entire by the yet
action or doing alone. So then, in our present case, God Almighty Christ
remains not destroyed.
(for only his wisdom could have done it) has found an invention to put a
sacrifice and destruction, yet so that nothing remains destroyed. For, seeing
living creatures are destroyed by the separation of the blood from the body,
he has found how to put the body separate from the blood, without remaining
so. All things remaining under the appearance of wine by concomitancy with the
Blood, though it be only put there; and al things remaining under the
appearance of bread by concomitancy with the Body though it only be put there:
so that the sacrifice consisting in the separating or putting a ^under, this is
exactly performed without the parts remaining separate; an invention beyond the
wit of men and Angels, and only to be at tributed to God. Now, can you tell me
what the Mass is?


S. It Is this sacrifice performed with the true solem^ities appointed This,
performed with due ceremon^^s, is called The Mass: part of whose Words is
Doctrine; part, Prayer.
by the Church; which consist partly of Actions, partly, of Words. The Words
are of three sorts; some secret, which the Priest says to himself; others
public; and these, some in manner of praying, others in manner of doctrine.


M. You say well; and these in manner of doctrine are the Epistle and* two
Gospels: all the rest, prayers or aspirations, called by diverse names: the
difference is, that those which are secret, the Priest is to say softly to
himself, not to withdraw the hearers attention from their proper devotions. The
other to be said so high, that if the auditou^s be capable, they may make their
devotions of them. The doctrinal parts are to be pronounced in a reading tone,
with some little inflexion of the voice; The others, in a tone conformable to
the matter. Both agree in this, that they must boe read with such distinction
that both the Reader and Hearer may comprehend the meaning according to their
capacity. As for the Action, every one is to remember, It Is Action
that as this sacrifice is the most reverend, and grave action of the Church of
God, so he ought to have a greater respect for the decency and comeliness ought
to be the most reverend and grave imaginable;
of it, than if he were to speak before a Prince. But, because this is the
sacrifice of al Christian people, as well as of the Priest; let me ask which
part you think more principal and more to be attended to? that is, whether the
Priest should have more care to say it with devotion and more ^ym'd
in himself, or with such gesture, as may stir up reverence and devotion in the
people.


S. That is too great a matter for me to venture on, therefore I desire to hear
your judgment.


M. Do not your self perceive that in the eyes of God Almighty, two men, and
much more a community, which has a kind of infinity (as not being limited init's
nature, though it be in particular) ^ear a greater respect tha^ one man? if
therefore the saying Mass decently procure the devotion of the community, and
the private devotion is but the good of a single to excite public Devotion
person see you not that God will ask a greater account of the external
reverence, tha^ of the internal devotion? whence we read of the sons of Ely,
that their sin was very great, because they turned away men from e^e Sacrifice
of God. And, truly, seeing in the community of Assis^ants, tha^ p^ivat in the
Priest:
Priesthood is the greatest dignity in the Church of God; that Church, and
Priest who seek not withal their power to perform this Sacrifice with the
greatest respect they can, must needs extremely dishonor themselves. One thing
nevertheless I will note: that there are two devotions requisite in prayer; one,
of which i^ meant of Devotion consisting in his Attention, For his intention is
absolutely necessary.
Intention, the other, of Attention; by the one, we set upon the action with
resolution to do it to the honor of God as it ought to be done. By the other,
attending to our words and deeds, we execute every particular part with a
special devotion. The former is essential, without which it were better to let
the action alone: and without which it is not prayer. The second is that of
which we spoke in comparing it with the outward decorum. Though, where the
decorum con^es not to the peoples perceiving, inward devotion is more to be
respected then it; by this also I hope you understand your own duty in hearing
Mass.


S. What Is the best way to do so?


M. If you have capacity and To attend ^o the passages all along (...) frame
o^^ private Devotion^ thereto is the best way to ^^ar Mass*
commodity, you should attend to all such passages as the Priest speaks out
plain. For the rest, you should have your private devotions, which are so much
the better if accommodated to the course of the Mass. But if not, no great
matter.


S. By what you have said, Sir, I should offer the Sacrifice, and say Mass as
well as the Priest.


M. Not so fast my friend: For, as in the ancient law every man brought his
calf, or his sheep to have the Priest offer it for him; so in the new, God has
given his only Son to the whole world to be all and every ones* Sacrifice: but
so, as to be offered still by the Priest* Nevertheless you may offer it by his
hands; which you do two ways; one by assisting with convenient devotion, or
procuring the Mass to be said; the other, by communicating; which, as I told
you, is the participation of this Sacrament. But, to say Mass is reserved by
Almighty God only to Priests who are of his institution, as is the whole
Christian law, and so none without his order can do it.


THEIR TEENTH CONFERENCE.
M YOu may remember we have said Communicating is a special way of joining with
the Priest in this great mystery; but, can you now tell me what disposition is
requisite for Communion.


S. Sir, I am instructed we ought to go to Confession before Communion; The
Blessed Sacrament
I know no more. But, that I do; though I never studied the reason.


M. True it is; and you know the reason too without studying being a a
spiritual B^^^ quel*
it: For, tell me, if you were to make a banquet, whom would you invite but your
own friend? and, if amongst them some were not friends with one another, you
would not invite them together, None but God's Friends and mutual Friends to
one another are to be invited; that is, Charity is the proper Disposition to
it; and It the Sacrament of Charity, being of incomparable efficacy to bind
Christians thereto.
for fear of turning your mirth into quarrel or sorrow. So, therefore, seeing
Christ invites us in this Sacrament to a Banquet, he requires both that we
should be friends with him, and with one another; that is, have charity. And
therefore, the Ancient Christians when the Pax is given in the Mass (a grave,
Ancient, and material ceremony, and not well begun to be neglected) were wont
to kiss one the other in token of peace and charity, and so communicate
together: whence, not without reason, this Sacrament is called, the Sacrament
of Charity. Here tell me (if man's wit can invent it) what greater means could
God have used to bind Christians in love, and charity one to another? The
greatest conjurations are wont to be made by drinking of blood: The conditions
required in friendship, are Alacr^ty, and constancy, or strength; this is
figured in Bread, the other in Wine. The sealing and concluding of solemn
contracts is at a Feast, and so has he ordained in this. The Ty, some Oath by
what we eminently love, or reverence; Here is no less then the death of God and
man which we take upon our souls. Lastly, bread and wine are most fit emblems
of Unity, for so our wills ought all to be the same by love and Charity; as a
thousand corns and grapes are undiscernable to be different and fast united
together in one loaf, or cup of wine.


S. As yet I see not why this Hence*
makes Confession necessary.


M. Stay a while; do you not Repentance declared or Confession, being most ^it
to re^p ir Charity,
see, if we have offended God o^ our neighbor, the ready way to gain their
love, is to repent and and confess our faults? By nature every noble heart
seeing his enemy subject to him takes compassion; and judging the party now not
the same he was, thinks meet to change likewise his carriage and (...) a soul,
toward him. See we not again, that who has committed some soul fact secretly,
it ^oa^s his heart til he has broken his mind to some one or o her; as showing
how natural an easment of sin, Confession is; so that, where Charity is broken,
Repentance declared (that is, is naturally prerequisit.
Confession) is the most natural soder left upon earth to cement it. Therefore
the Council of Trent concluded, what the Apostle had commanded of every man's
trying himself before Communion, In this
was to be understood of Confession. It remains to know how this Trial is made.


S. By three things; Contrition, joined with Contrition and Satisfaction
consists the Trial of one's self, ant^cedently, whose Method is First, to
examine the Conscience by r^vi^^ing our ordinary and extraordinary. (...) ^^ions*
Confession, and Satisfaction, whereof contrition signifies true hearty sorrow
for our sins. Satisfaction, our performing the penance imposed by the Priest:
Confession is already explicated.


M. You say well; but I must go more more particularly to work with you. I
think the first thing you do is to examine your conscience: And I must know how
you examine it, and of what?


S. For the manner, I look into the ordinary actions which I use every day;
then con^^de* what extraodinary have happened since my last confession; and in
both, note what I think I have done amiss.


M. You have a hard task if you note all that is sin. For, tell me, is not all
that is against reason Sin? and all you do, which you ought not to do; or,
contrary wise, all you do not which you ought to by ^^^^ng The main points*
do, is not that sin? I doubt the you note not al that is sin, but the chief
heads. Wherefore, I would not trouble you wi^h so much nicety, but only as far
as you have a care to amend your self; that is, to note the main points, that
you may strive against them Secondly, Our Motives,
if you pretend to perfection. I would wish you noted not only the evil acts
but the Motives and causes of them. Thirdly, examine such good acts as want
either the intention, or Our care or discare,
attention due to them; that is, which (however nothing appear in them
otherwise then right, yet) your self are guilty to your self to have done them
either without the due end, or Our Insti^^tions:
without consideration of due circumstances. Fourthly, to understand what
yourself, either by nature or the state you are in, are most subject to: and
both more examine, more suspect, and more confess those faults.


S. Thus far I know: my next Next
endeavor is to procure grief for To procure sorrow for sin*
my sins: which has two parts; one, to be sorry for the past; the the other, to
amend what is to come.


M. So far well; but have you not heard that sorrow also has two parts,
Contrition and Attrition? which I think I must help you to understand what they
are. And in a word: you know that take a hard stone and grate it against a
harder, you shall bring it into what fashion you list; yet you leave it still
hard in the middle: but, put it in a mortar and beat it, you turn it al into
dust. The first is called Attrition; the second, Contrition. And, by a metaphor
derived from hence, if a man that has loved some unlawful object or action,
and, be withdrawn from it by fear of either loss of good, or inheriting evil,
but so that still he keeps some longing toward the thing: such a man's
attrite; But if he perfectly forgo and grow into a hatred of the thing before
loved: then he is contrite: and by this you see, how Attrition leaves a desire
and stain to be burned and cleans'd hereafter in purgatory* Contrition purifies
the heart to go immediately to heaven. But, whereon must as bringing
we ground all our sorrow for sin?


S. On the love of God who is Loss of supernatural and natural Goods,
offended with it, and on the fear of hell wherewith we are threatened for it.


M. well said. All hate is grounded on the loss of some good, or the enduring
some evil; Each of which may be both natural, and supernatural. Supernatural
goods and
lost by sin, are the friendship, and face of God in the next world: and the
sweetness which is in such excellent virtues even in this life. The harm gotten
is perpetual Their contrary harms.
damnation in the next: and perpetual torture of consciin this, to those who
know and conceive what they do. Natural goods lost by vice, are health, peace,
credit, estate. Natural harms are the inconveniences which sin drives its
lovers to daily: as diseases, vexations, discredit, poverty, the usual effects
of a disordered life. How do you procure amendment?


S. I purpose never any more to do what I confess, as firmly as I Hence*
can, by God's grace.


M. Well. But it is very hard for a man to purpose to avoid what he is almost
certain he shall not. Therefore, I take it for your surest way to purpose to do
your best endeavor to escape all you confess, rather than directly and
positively to purpose what is full purpose to endeavor amendment;
not morally in your power; and to be sorry you are not likely to have your
endeavors correspondent to your will. And this I think enough. But is it enough
think you to make this purpose?


S. Yes, surely; for I see not what a man can do more.


M. So may you come often to Confession with little profit. You must therefore
consider which, if real;
the occasions which draw you into danger, and study with your self, and take
your Ghostly Father's advice how without greater inconveniences, you may fly
such occasions: that, so, the avoiding of sin may be the easier. And know the
causes of transgressions studies to avoid occasions,
are as well in omission, as in commission. And prudently use such pious
exercises as may withdraw you from temptation. Neither can any be truly sorry
for his sins, who thinks it not worth his care to study how to amend them. But
what do you next?


S. Go to the Priest, and confess my sins as reverently as I can.


M. What affections do you exercise in coming to make your Confession?


S. I do but read my prayers, which are preparatory to Confession.


M. Consider then the countenance Affections
of a man who as^^^ forgiveness of one whom he has offended; you shall see
dejection* submission, shame fastness, sorrow and fear in him. Such as these
too must be your affections. And when you make your Confession what do you
observe?


S. I tell al I think sins as well as I can, that my Ghostly Father may
understand me.


M. Weldone* but you must and some particular carriages observable in
consession.
note; first, to tell nothing in general, for that your Ghostly Father knows well
enough already: as, that you love not God, and your neighbor as you should do,
and such like, which spend time to no profit. Secondly, to avoid, as near as
you can, all unseemly terms, if your conscience force you to speak of unseemly
things. Thirdly, to be as short as you can; as to say you have done such things
so often, expressing withal the necessary circumstances. As for making general
Confessions, after the first time, to what purpose it is I know not: for
neither Absolution is more certain, nor any other notable profit comes of it.
If it be to make the state of his soul known to his Ghostly Father, that will
contain the space but of a little time? and may be done without
particularities, and confession. But now what follows?


S. Nothing on my part but to do what my Ghostly Father enjoins or councels me.


M. True; but, on his part remain two things, which belong to you* one, the
giving absolution; the other, imposing of penance or satisfaction: the first
contains rather a Theological what Absolution of the Priest is;
difficulty than Catechistical, that is, what Absolution the Priest gives. For,
if a man betruly sorry, he is absolved before: if not, the Priest's absolution
does him no good. And, in human judgment the Judge but declares, not makes one
innocent. But we may be casily mistaken in this discourse. For, since God
Almighty has put this condition upon us, that we shall submit ourselves to the
Priest's judgment, whoever is truly cont^^te receives God's favor by being
ready to fulfill this his law; and so, unless he does it when he can, is not
contrite, nor absolved. And when he does it, is absolved, by doing it. Whence
'^is clear the absolution which the Priest gives is necessary what,
Satisfaction toward our Neighbor
and a true forgiving. As for satisfaction, it has two parts; one toward God,
and one toward your Neighbor. For, if you have broken Charity, you ow the
making of it whole again; which, to your neighbor, is submitting and that
toward* God, or the penna^ce enjoined.
your self to amends for the wrong done. Toward God, you must know, the
satisfaction which the Priest imposes is but sacramental, and significativ^*
^n performing whereof, you testify that you are willing in this life and in the
next to satisfy fully God's Justice according to his will. Therefore you must
not wonder the penance often is so little. For it is moderated, according as
the Priest esteems it fitting, for a medicin more than for a punishment.


FOURTEENTH CONFERENCE.
M. What Sacraments are yet untouched?


S. These Sir? Baptism, Confirmation, Matrimony, Extreme-Vinction, and Order.


M (...) Matrimony and Extreme Unction you shall be sufficiently instructed,
when you have use of them. Baptism, because of Baptism,
it is common to al to administer it, I shall tell you the substance of and,
it is, to cast water on the child with these words. I Baptize It Is matter and
sorm.
thee in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. As for
Confirmation, do you think it necessary?


S. I hear some hold it is not.


M. The holding of some neither Confirmation,
makes the Opinion true, nor fiees it from Censure. For, as not every fault, so
not every error and It Is Necessity.
is still taken notice of. As to the point of necessity, it stands in its being
a Sacrament, that is a principal^ action of Christian life, whose Institution
of it self is a Command. Besides, the express words of our* Savior: Unless one
be born again etc. Which Himself applies to this mystery. Add, the Traditions
of the Church, Estimation of Councels, and Fathers, and the Proportion of it to
corporal Augmentation. What other Sacrament remains to be explicated?


S. That of Order, which I understand Holy Order;
to have two degrees: Holy or Greater, and Inferior.


M. So far well, but to what does it correspond in our corporal life?


S. To Marriage, and must consequently be to breed spiritual children.


M. How is that done? if you be so learned as to answer that question.


S. By Baptism; for that you said was the birth of Christians, as Christians.


M. Well remembered. It Is not enough that children be born, but they must be
bred up, instructed, It Is offices,
and governed. And this is wont to be divided into three actions. The first, to
wean them from the love of natural objects. The second, to instruct them, and
let them know what is necessary to supernatural life. And, thirdly, to induce
them to do what they have learnt is necessary. Which three actions in the
mystical language are called the Purgative, illuminative, and and Division.
unitive way. And according to these three is constituted the Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy, of Bishops, Priests, and their Ministers who are chiefly Deacons and
Subdeacons; and afterward the other four lesser orders. And is called
Hierarchy; that is, Holy Power or Principality. The first is done by ceremonies
and majestickness of holy rites, at which sensual men standing in admiration,
begin to think there is some greater mystery in the matter thus handled, and
desire to learn and understand it. The second is done chiefly by Catechizing:
by which the people understand what is to be believed, hoped, and practiced. The
third by Government; by which men are set forward and kept in order, to do what
they have understood to be their duty.


S. Sir, by this, the Deacons and Subdeacons should be the chief instruments of
the Sacraments; whereas we see they belong chiefly to Priests, and Bishops*
Besides, I have heard Preaching is proper to Bishops, which is not Government*
nor belonging thereunto.


M. Sacraments and Ceremonies do two several ways specially belong to Deacons,
and Subdeacons. One, because they are principally instituted for those
administrations, so that it is the height of their office, whereas it is of the
Offices belonging to Bishops and Priests*
but an addition to the office of others. Secondly, because they have no other
spiritual employment, whereas Bishops and Priests have Government and Catechism.


S. Sir, I never understood but that saving Mass, and hearing Confessions was
the greatest office of a Priest; and likewise, of a Bishop to confirm and give
Orders: whereas you seem to prefer other offices before these.


M. Do you not know that God has no need of our serving him, and therefore that
all serving of God was made for the profit of man; and that more excellent
which is most mankind's spiritual profit? So that if Confessions be more
available to That of Government is best
devotion than Sacrifice, that ought to be preferred as more noble. Now then,
which do you think more profitable to Mankind? Government, or giving Orders,
which is the giving Authority to men to be Governors? Certainly Government,
which is the end, the other being but a way to it. This therefore, as also
Confirmation, is reserved to Bishops by Christ for authorizing therefore the
giving Orders* as also Confirmation; r^s^^v'd ^o Bishops to authoris^ the^^, as
also the (...) Sacraments.
their Government, that men should not be so presumptuous as to seek other
Governors who could not have these privileges. Likewise, to Priests are
reserved the Sacrifice, and other Sacraments to dignify their persons, whose
respect is necessary for their office. Otherwise, we understand that Sanctity
consists in Charity, and so much holier and higher things are, by how much more
they approach to Charity: and because Instruction and Government are nearer
Charity than Sacraments (in true Divinity; they are so much holier than the
Sacraments, that they are such in a diverse sense; the one being formally and
absolutely holy, the other but instrumentally and virtually: though in respect
of the People which understand only the outside and appearances, these things
give more authority, and reverence, than those which are the substance: Thus
much being now declared, can you tell me whether the Hierarchy composed of these
three parts be necessary or no?


S. As for Priests and Servitors, The Hierarchy
I see they are necessary; for unless men be revoked by such means from their
ordinary occupations, I doubt they will seldom ever think of Heaven. I see also
that without instruction they know not what is to be done. But for Bishops I
understand and especially
not how they are necessary further than for Confirmation and Orders.


M. Think you not then there is Episcopal Authority absolutely necessary for a
Church,
as much necessity of doing what we know, as knowing what we should do? or at
least, as much difficulty in it? for sure, you are not ignorant that both the
sin and punishment is greater after knowledge than before: according to that,
When the commandment came, sin revived: and, He that knows his Masters will and
does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. And, as for doing what was,
commanded, regarding purely the command, without considering the means to
perform it, the difficulty is no less now, perhaps more. For this was it which
made it necessary Christ should come. This was it wherein the Old Law was
deficient. This was the proper effect of the holy Ghost. This is the field
where nature and grace use their stratagems, and fight their pitched battles.
This therefore is the point for A* Bishop b^ing
which Bishops are necessary. Look into any community, if every Servant and
Officer instead Chief Magistrate and Overs^er* in Ecclesiastical
of attending the publik good should aim at nothing but his own commodity, how
well would things be governed? and so must you imagine the Church is directed,
where there are no Bishops. Can any thing that is governed by man go well without
counsel? or counsel succeed where there is not one end of the Counselers? or
one end be, where there is not one Governor? in fine, it is as ridiculous to
say a Bishop is not needful in a Church, as that a King is not needful in a
Kingdom, a Master in a house, or Pilot in a ship; and so much the more by how
much harder it is for men to be governed in a supernatural, than natural
Estate. But is this all for which a Bishop is necessary?

S. It may be for me, who never knew a Bishop was necessary for so much. and
chief Director in spiritual affairs;



M. Thus much is only for the common. But, even for particulars, Bishops are
necessary in order to spiritual direction. For, they being by Christ's
institution the Supreme Guids and Princes of both speculative and Mystical
Theology, inferior Priests and Directours are to take from them their rules,
and judgment, in all spiritual affairs.


S. Sir, I ever thought, that for spiritual Directions we were rather to go to
spiritual men; that is, to Religious, who seem to have more practice therein.


M. Truly, if there were but one way to heaven by actually forsaking the world,
what you say were advisable; but the spirits of secular persons being as
different from the spirits of Religious, as one life is from the other; their
direction also must be no less different; so that for a Religious man to be fit
to direct a secular man inspirit, he must either live among seculars, or else
have that defect supplied by others directions. Moreover even for spiritual
life of Religious, Bishops are the Rule, and Judges. since all tend (though by
diverse ways) to the increase of Faith and Charity, whose laws are put into
their hands. And, hitherto we have declared the necessity of Bishops, or
Hierarchy, which the Divines call necessitatem medii, that is to say, toward
gaining the end, and consists in this; that though particular persons may come
to salvation without the government of Bishops, yet whole Countries cannot; nor
the Church be without them. Because it is they who are to direct the whole, as
every man by the understanding directs himself; and so we may see some
communities governed by Superiors without laws, and prosper for a while; but,
never was there any seen governed by laws without Superiors; and, if there
were, the Laws would be but occasions of quarrels, and dissensions. Now we must
look into the other necessity and that authority commanded by Christ,
which is called of precept, that it is necessary to have Bishops, because
Christ has so commanded. Do you know Christ did so?


S. No, Sir, nor know I to whom the command is made, to Saint Peter or Bishops.


M. Then you have forgot, that Institution is a Precept, as I told you in the
case of Confirmation, and in this here is more evident? For, who institutes an
in force of It Is Institution,
Authority, by his very doing so commands obedience in them he puts under it:
But, in this point it is specially to be considered, that Christ's coming was to
build a Church, which in it self should have power to conserve and propagate it
self: as you see all States and and Communities have. And this who understands
government knows to be by establishing an Order of Governors, which we call
the Hierarchy; as the Pope, Bishops, Hence who impugns It, impugns Christ and
destroye^ his Church.
Priests, and Ministers: and so, to build his Church included the creating all
these. And whoever impugns these, impugns Christ, and seeks to destroy his
Church. But can you tell me how this is known, that Christ set Bishops to govern
his Church?


S. I who know nothing of the command, how should I tell you?


M. Do you not see Bishops over all the Christian world? ask who made them? you
shall find others who now are dead, and that their fore fathers told them they
had received order to do so from Christ and his Apostles by And
perpetual succession. And, I pray you, have you stronger motives to receive
the blessed Trinity, Incarnation, and Sacraments? From He who believes or
teaches it is not necessary, is (...) Heretic.
this follows if any for ambition, or indirect ends should believe, or ^each,
that Bishops are not necessary in the Church of God, he is an absolute
Heretic: as if he believed or taught there were no Trinity, Incarnation,
Blessed Sacrament, o^ holy Scripture. But are there no degrees in the people or
Subjects, correspondent to these of the Hierarchy?


S. Yes sure, there must be several The Subjects of the Hierarchy
Classes answerable to those of the Clergy as persons employing their spirits
some in the Purgative, some in the Illuminative, and some in the Unitive way.
But who they are I know not. distinguished correspondently to ^t, into Laym^n
and Religious;



M. You must distinguish them according to their states. The first are such as
live in the world, whom we ordinarily call the People, or Laymen. The other
two sorts are of Religious persons. One, of these who dedicate their lives to
works of mercy, as hospital-keepers and the like. The other, who addict
themselves to Contemplation. But know you wherein these differ from the ordinary
people?


S. By the three vows of Poverty, w^o^e v^w^ are three*
Chastity, and Obedience. By Poverty they forsake riches, honors, and such
pleasures as follow them. By Chastity, the comfort of Marriage. And, by
Obedience they subject themselves to the direction of a Superior for their
instruction in spiritual life.


M. Can you tell me which among diverse Religions is the perfectest?


S. No Sir, But I would gladly Of Religions
learn if peradventure it be my own fortune, or of some of my friends to have a
mind to Religion.


M. Attend then; Religious that is perfectest*
life is a w^y to seek perfection; which perfectly consists in loving God, and
in nothing but in order to God. The means they take, is abstinence from
whatever may draw their love to any other thing: and to think often of God. If
then we consider this later part (which is the chiefest) so the most
contemplative are the best, which are ordinarily thought among us to be the
Carthusians. which has best means to ^d^^ance Contemplation.
But, if we consider the other part, then those that live in more austerity are
the perfectest; among which I will not determine the controve^sy, because here
are many Competitours; only this I add, that this want of corporal commodities
is to be judged not by Metaphysical obligations, but by real practice. And so
(whoever is best) those who have no real practice of corporal wants, must needs
be the worst in the nature of Religious; however for their particular lives
they may be Saints.


In these three Conferences the Catechist has occasion to recommend the use of
Mass and Sacraments to his Catechumen, and also to let him understand which be
the Superiors instituted by Christ over his Church, to whom he ows duty: which
virtuous and good men, to whom he ows respect and honor, that so he may give
every one his due.

FIFTEENTH CONFERENCE.
S. SIr, you have all this while commanded my answers; let me now beg leave to
offer you some of my doubts. I have heard talk of an other Hierarchy of Angels
(if I well remember) whereof methinks you speak not.


M. I do not intend to tell you al I know: but what appertains Angels and Saints,
to you to know. As for the orders of Angels you may without inconvenience be
ignorant of them, til it shall please God to bring you to the sight of them.
It Is sufficient for you to know that God has ordained Angels to govern us; to
every one, one: for our Savior tells us that the Angels of the little ones see
the being already in Bliss*
face of his heavenly Father; it has been the constant faith of Christians that
every one has an Angel, for his Governor, or Guardian; to whom you may do well
often to recommend your self.


S. Since you are fallen upon that point, I pray, what obligation Prayers so them
have I to pray to Angels and Saints? and how can they hear me, having no ears
nor other corporal senses by which to come to the knowledge of my prayers?


M. If we remember, Angels are not for their, but the Churches good;
and Saints are in perfect bliss and happiness, we shall easily discover that
all service or ho nour done to Saints by us, is not for their good. but for
ours. And so the keeping holy days, building Churches, and setting up Altars
unto God in memory of Saints, is to be moderated according to the utility which
redounds to the Church by it: and, in proportion, the prayers or what sort of
devotions soever are in private used to their honors, are to be governed by
the same principle. Now the utility redounding to the Church is, that whereas
human nature is easily and
weary of being carried above it self by prayer and other spiritual exercises:
and, on the other side, delighted with variety and novelty; the weariness of
devotion is helped, and in part remedied by the variety, which is artificially
ordered in it. Again, men's humors and states of life being so diverse, it
happens well that every one may have examples in his own kind to affect him, and
many times they make a greater therefore, obligatory when she commands them:
profit by such an affinity to their own condition, than by a great deal of
preaching or good counsel. By this* you may see what obligation there is to
honor Saints, and pray to them: namely, when the Church, for the common
otherwise, only according to the ne^d ^f particular persons.
good of her children, prescribes it, then that is to be done whatsoever she
commands: Otherwise, as far as particular persons find need or help by the
variety of devotion; so far they do very well to follow it.


S. Sir, I hear good men say, it is of great importance toward living well to
have the assistance of some special Saints which are in high favor with
Almighty God particularly of the Blessed Virgin Mother of God: and have been
told stories how she has obtained remission of sins for some persons to whom
Christ our Savior her Son has denied it; nay, (if I remember well) could not
obtain it of his heavenly Father for them. And for this cause I understand some
make themselves by vow* (as I think) her Slaves: and use extraordinary
devotions to her, and have great confidence in such actions.


M. There can be no doubt but Their Prayers for (...) available,
the intercession of the holy Angels and Saints works wonderful effects, and
has a strong force to obtain of Almighty God what is convenient for our
salvation, if they pray for us: nor yet can there be doubt but they pray for
us, seeing they neither can be ignorant of our miseries, or their own favor
with Almighty God; or that he is well pleased they should pray for us; nor,
being full of charity, can they cease to help us, what lies in their power;
their prayer being nothing but ^ desire of our releef represented to God, which
al their desires perpetually are, and cannot choose but be, in heaven, where
their whole hearts are b^nt upon nothing but through Him, and according to his
laws. They therefore pray for us, and their prayers are profitable to us; and
that Saint's most, which is highest in favor with Almighty God. Nevertheless I
am fa^ from believing any of them so compassionat^ no not the Blessed Mother of
Christ) as is her God and Son. And he that should persuade one to turn his
prayers from him to his Mother, misses the mark very wide. They therefore who
counsel so many prayers to our Lady, are to be understood of such prayers as
would not be said at all unless they were said to her: which returns to what I
spoke of: that it is to stir up a failing devotion in us; and not, as if the
object were better. And, among other Saints, I doubt not but the least has
favor enough to obtain al that is fitting for us, and our Savior the Chief of
Saints more then all; were not his Goodness alone, unmoved by the petitions of
others, so great, that when men's dispositions are not failing he cannot hold
himself from doing favors. Whence we understand, that such stories (if
authentical) are but parabolical expressions of the great assistance we receive
from Saints, or rather figurative motions to stir up in us due sorrow for our
sins, and a greater honor of the God of Saints


S. Then Sir, it seems you ^ven Addresses to particular Saints, profitable;
think the devotions used to particular Saints are of little effect; and, in
particular, that of becoming Slaves to our blessed Lady.


S. No such thing follows out of my words: for whatever excites, continues, or
makes our but, making Professions of Slavery to them, unwa^ran^able;
devotion more servent, I hold of great effect, and to that end, well practic't.
Indeed, concerning making our selves Slaves to any Saint, I very much doubt.
For a Slave is he whose service is only profitable to his master, and nothing
to himself. Now, our service is no ways profitable to any Saint, but much to
our selves. Again, our Will is so built by Almighty God as to be totally subject
to him, because he is Al-goodness and ^e only can move our soul perfectly and
satify it: wherefore we are bo^n his slaves, and according to nature we
conform our selves in bending our whole wills to him. But, I fear me, to do the
like to any creature, were to wrong our creation, and attribute that homage
which is due to God alone, that is, to be sole directour of our souls, to a
creature. But, as for those who use it, I presume either they understand not so
much (for I hear Also*
they are not learned) or mean it in some improper sense. Only I would have
you advertised that these extravagant devotions ordinarily argue either vanity
or interest: for which private men run private paths, and desire to carry
disciples after them; let us follow the trodden path of our forefathers. Yet
one thing will I add; that we have not by Jesus Christ or his Church left us
any external actions with promise of grace and reward for the deed done, but
only the Sacraments; which are necessary, more because they are professions of
our faith and charity, and certain initiations or associations to Christ's
Church in some degree, (whence the very external action proceeds from
internal grace when done as it ought:) than that there is any connection
betwixt those external Fretences of extraordinary grants to certain Private
Devotions, as from Christ's promise, without proof thereof by manifest miracle,
to be suspected;
actions and merit, by Christ's voluntary conjunction of them: and therefore all
those devotions which promise particular effects or rewards to the saying of
certain prayers, pretending Christ's special grant to some Saint, as they
cannot be easily convinced of superstition, because God can if he please do
such things, so they are not easily to be credited without manifest miraculous
proof, at least of the good life of the Saint who begins such a devotion; and
that certainly it came from him. Because it is not acccording to the spirit
which Christ has left to his Church; which is to make us adorers in spirit and
truth: And and breed ill-grounded confidences.
therefore Christians ought to be drawn from putting their confidence in such
things, to place their trust in Christ, and walk toward him in the known path
of Charity and good works.


S. Sir, you forgot my doubt, how Saints hear our prayers, since they have no
ears? and yet I have heard wiser men than my self stumble at it.


M. I thought you had been more learned; for it seems you think they should
have this sensible How Saints hear our Prayers.
passion which we call hearing, because we say they hear: but this word,
hearing, in that speech has the meaning of granting, or according to our
petition. So that your difficulty must be, how they know what we ask of them;
which is with their minds, or understandings, as men know sciences: and the
Astronomer sitting in his study, knows the situations, aspects, and courses of
the stars: which knowledge, though in us it has the root in sense, yet in them
may have some other means; or also have root in what came into their soul by
the senses while they lived in this world. And let thus much suffice; for this
present discourse bears not to wade into the depth of things. Besides, in many
things we must be contented to know that they are, though we cannot penetrate
how they are such as we know them to be.


S. Now I am sorry I drew you from your former discourse; wherefore to put you
into it again: I pray tell me, whether you think the use of pictures, and in
particular the special honors done to some, as hanging of lights before them,
carrying them in procession, and making pilgrimages to them, be among those
whom you term extravagant devotions.


M. You ask many questions Use of Pictures necessary for the Church,
in one, I will begin with the principal, that is, the use of pictures; which
if we believe nanature, and experience, is an use very profitable, and (as I
think) absolutely necessary in the Church of God, for the instruction and
spiritual profit of the faithful. First, for memory's sake; As helping the
Faithfulls memories,
for as often as we see pictures, so often we remember the thing painted: and
whether we have need of often remembering heaven and heavenly things, let even
our cold and evil life bear testimony. Secondly, When a man says his prayers
before the picture of our Savior or other As qui kning the apprehension of
devou^ persons,
Saint, he naturally makes a quicker apprehension of the presence of him that is
spoken to; and by consequence a greater respect and attention is bred in him
that speaks. Thirdly, it ser^'s for As serving for an Address in Prayer,
an Address of the prayer, especially if there be any corporal gestures withal.
For, as the ancient Christians were used to turn themselves to the East, and
the Jews toward the Temple when they would adore God; the east and temple
serving for a determination of their action, whereby their adoration was known
to be to God; so much more when I bow, or do any other reverence or pray before
a picture, it is a determination of As exc^ting the affection by a lively
exhibiting some passage.
prayer or respect to God, or that Saint, whose picture it is. Lastly, it is a
help to him that pray's; for it bears with it an expression oftentimes which
would cost many words and works of our memory. As who looking on a Crucifix
would in his heart feel the wounds, and passions of his Redeemer to represent
them either to God the Father, or to his own soul, may find a great facility
and quickness by having the picture before his eyes. These advantages I know
not how others esteem, but experience has persuaded me that they are of very
great importonce.


S. I understand this well, but I see not why they should be honored, or lights
hung before them for this; much less can there bea reason why they should be
carried in processions; or pilgrimages made more to one than to another,
especially of the same Saint. If used ^ for a Religious end, some kind of
religious respect proper to them.



M. As for simple reverence it is a barbarousness and want of common sense to
deny them that, if you admit the use of them: for if they were used for a
religious end, they are belonging to God, and Holy: and therefore to be treated
with respect: try but any that deny this, in somewhat they esteem holy, and you
shall find nature teaches them the same good manners; and it is a mear shortness
of discourse to disallow that to pictures which themselves grant to other
things; for example, to Churches, a Bible, and such like. Now, the reason of
preferring one picture before another, is some antiquity or venerablenes of the
figure Pictures Some particularly venerated and why,
or other rarity which carries a force with it to stir up human hearts in some
extraordinary degree. And men, coming with a greater apprehension, pray the
better and obtain more at God's hands; also this opinion of graces, redoubles
devotion, and causes men to hang lights or carry them in processions, or the
like; which Actions are the children of faith passed, and the mothers of faith
and devotion following; and therefore allowed and recommended in the Catholic
Church.


S. I imagine if I should ask The same, in proportion, to be said of Reliks.
you any thing concerning Reliks of Saints, you would answer me in the same
manner you have done about honoring of pictures; and therefore I will rather
reflect upon that which Reliks make me think on; that is the Souls in
Purgatory. But I hope I can satisfy my self; For, if they be in any pains, me
thinks it is fair reason that the prayers of good people should have as much
force for them as for another; since by their fresh memory and the affection of
the living toward them they seem as yet to be of our society and friendship.


M. You say true, and so you may learn the meaning of that Article of our
Creed, The Communion of Saints, For Saints or holy persons being all either in
pain or pleasure; you see how those who are saying communicate with the other
two, by praying to the Saints in heaven, and for them in purgatory; for whom
also, as for us, those in Heaven pray. And likewise, if you look well, you
shall find the explication of all the rest in these discourses, so that you may
be able to give an indifferent account of all, and make that profit to your
self, as to find the way to heaven and eternal happiness; whither God of his
mercy bring us all. Amen.

The Catechist must not forget to exhort his Catechumen to the profitable use
of prayers to Saints, and the like* devotions; so, as to be circums^ect and not
subject to the superstitions credulity of some poor people* who think good life
and holiness stand in exterior work, and mear exhibition of these devotions.


AN ADDITION TO THE FORMER CATECHISM Concerning the use of BEADS.
THE Beads are a kind of Counters made to keep the memory of a certain number
of prayers which we have proposed to our selves to say. A Method very fit for
such poor people as cannot read, and are of too weak capacity for Meditation.
The prayers most usual in this kind are the ^ ater noster and Ave Maria: the
former left by our Savior Jesus Christ to his Church; the later from ancient
times used in the same Church; and so fitly joined together for good peoples
devotion* so that to make good use of our Beads, we must understand welthese
two prayers.

The Pater noster, or Our Father, is ordinarily thought to consist of Seven
Petitions; or as others count them, six: without prejudice or disrespect to
which opinions I think it may be properly divided into two parts; one
consisting of three Salutations or well wishings. The other of three Petitions
correspondent to the three Salutations. The three Salutations are according to
the three Persons of the Blessed Trinity: Essence, Wisdom, and Goodness. The
first salutation therefore (^after the address or determination of the person
to whom we speak which is done in these words, Our Father which art in heaven)
consists in the next following words hallowed be thy Name. A Name is a word
signifying what the thing signified by the Name is. And, so, this Salutation
belongs to Essence, the property of the Father. Holy is that which is stable
and fixed in virtue and goodness. For sanctus comes of sancio, which is as much
as to make a firm, constant or irrevocable sentence. And, by holy Writ and
Ecclesiastical use, the word sanctus is appropriated to virtue and supernatural
goodness; putting which together, to sanctify and hallow the name of God, must
be, that the Essence or Nature of God be firm and constant in Goodness. But,
because we do not wish for what already is, this must not be understood of the
Name of God in himself, but in us. The meaning then is, that we wish all men
and other creatures, in word and deed, may carry themselves toward God as
toward Sanctity and Holiness it self; having that opinion and esteem of Him,
and bearing themselves toward Him^* s^o^^. And, it seems to be in short what
the Psalms and Canticles more largely dilates in these and the like words;
Bless our Lord al ye works of our Lord, and the following; Sing to our Lord all the whole Earth. Praise our Lord all ye Nations, O praise our Lord from Heaven.
And many more such like.

The second Salutation is, Thy Kingdom come. Which we understand by this word
Kingdom, to belong to Wisdom, For regnum which signifies Kingdom, is derived a
regendo, from governing: and Government is an order of Subjects; and to order,
is the work of Wisdom; as we see in all arts and businesses, it is the charge
of the wisest to direct and order what is to be done; and the office of the
strongest or quickest, to pat in execution what is ordered.

The meaning of this Salutation we learn from Saint Paul, who teaches us that
at the day of Judgment our Savior Jesus Christ shall deliver up his Kingdom or
Government which he has received of him to his Father, and that then God shall
be all in all. Whereby is given us to understand, that at that day shall be an
end of all motions and alterations; and so the work of Wisdom, which is to
govern and order the variety of things, shall pass into the strain of Essence
and Being; and so become a constant Emanation of the same invariable Being for
ever and everin all things. In the mean while the Kingdom of God is as it were
a making; as a King who is going upon a conquest either of Rebels or other
enemies, is making himself a Kingdom. And, by this petition we wish him happy
and speedy success therein; not that we fear or doubt of that which cannot fail;
but show our good will and desire to see that effected which He Is a doing.

The third Wish is comprised in those words, Thy will be done in earth as it is
in heaven. Which we collect to belong to Goodness, and the Holy Ghost, from the
words will and be done; for goodness consists in perfection; o^, that all be
done; and rational Goodness, which is properly such, is in the will and it is
motions: The meaning is plain, that we wish, as in heaven there is a full
subjection without resistance, so there may be the like on earth. These three I
call Salutations or wel-wishes, such as in civil conversation is Ha^l, or God
save you; and in spiritual, The Lord be with you; or Peace be unto you; and the
like; because it is not natural to pray to one for himself, and this word thy
expresses, that these three are goods wished to God. Much less do we entreat any
one to do good to himself unless we think he be out of reason by passion or
ignorance. Thirdly, there is not in the words any expression that God should do
any thing, as in the following; but only that we would see the things be.
And, lastly, if we look into what is asked, we find that all is one, and one
all; for if his Name be sanctified, as we wish, his Kingdom is come, and and
his Will is done as in heaven; and so turn them which way you will, out of any
one follow the other two.

To this succeeds the second part, consisting of three petitions or requests.
The first, Give us this day our daily bread; that is, all things fit for our
maintenance. And this corresponds to that property of God by which he is Author
and Creator of all things. For, it belongs to him that makes a thing, to
conserve and maintain it. Some instead of daily put supersubstantiall; but they
are deceived in the propriety of the Greek word, looking more into the
der^vation than into the use. For, daily, is the more usual and proper
signification, and joining it with the other word this day, we learn two
excellent documents. One, that it was our Savior's will we should say this
prayer every day; since we pray but for one day. The other, that we should
not be sollicitous or troubled with anxiety for future things; especially as
far as they belong to God Almighty, but enjoy the p^esent with thanks giving.

The second Petition is expressed in these words, Forgive us our debts as we
forgive our debtours. Debts signify Offenses, and debtours Offenders; so that
he that wishes any harm to those who have offended him, because they have
offended him, is excluded from this prayer; but not he that wishes due
punishment to an offender, either for his own amendment, or the example of
others, and good of the Commonwealth. The reason is, because* God cannot
forgive him that is not in love and charity* and who ever wishes harm to his
neighbor, loves him not; and, so, is void of Charity. Th^s Petition answers,
Thy Kingdom come; For, as we see Christ's expression in the Gospel, that his
coming was chiefly for remission of sins: So, his Government likewise since
he is gone to Heaven, all, principally tends to same merciful end Then follows
the last Petition thus expressed, Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us
from evil. And by those words of temptation and evil, which belong unto will,
we easily see the correspondence it has with the third salutation and
fulfilling of God's will. The meaning is not hard, only we may note, that we
pray not here, not to be tempted; for temptation is often for our good; as
appears in Saint Paul, who was denied to be freed from carnal temptations for
his good; but, not to be overcome by temptation; for he is gone into
temptation, whom temptation compasses round about, so that he finds no way out:
not he who is, as it were, but touched with it on one side. The word ( but)
seems to show the part following is not different in sense from the foregoing;
and so the Petition but one.

The Ave Maria, or Hail Mary, consists likewise of two parts: One containing
four salutations or well wishes. The first is expressed in these words, Hail Mary
full of grace, or rather in the word Hail, from whence comes Health; and it
avails or imports what the Latin Ave or Salve does; of which the first seems to
be as much as Habe, or habe salutem. that is, have or enjoy Health; and in some
ancient copies is written Have: and salve we know signifies sis salvus, which
is the same: and in English may be explicated, Health be^ide you, or have all
the perfection and happiness due to your Nature, or which your Nature is
capable of. By use 'its come rather to be an Interiection of salutation, or
excitation to the hearing an uncertain good wish, than to retain (...) first
and proper signification.

The second Salutation consists in these words, our Lord be with you; that is,
his protection and assistance. As it is a good use of some who when they come
intoany house, say, God be here, or in certain occasions say, God speed you.

The third and fourth are two Blessings; one upon the blessed Mother, and the
other upon her more blessed Son. A Blessing we call not, as in other places,
the wishing of bliss, or happiness: but, either our approving and
congratulating of the felicities they enjoy, or else a simple and devout
admiration of them.

The later part is a Prayer to the same Mother of God for her intercession for
us now and at our deaths.

The two prayers thus understood, I could wish him who says his Beads, when he
recites his Paternoster to direct mentally his three salutations to the three
Persons, each to the Person to which it is proper, with a bowing to them if time
and place be fitting. And, in saying the Ave-Maria, at the two Blessings to
remember some passage or benefit of our Savior Jesus Christ unto us, for which
we bless him and his holy Mother; for, seeing She brought forth unto us him
that bestowed such benefits upon us, it is reason She should partake of the
blessings which we heap upon her Son for them. Likewise, in the later part*
where we desire her to pray for (...) may determine some good we have need of:
But it is best if we mark some property of the Mystery we bless him for, and
thence take notice of some virtue we want, and heartily entreat for it. For
example, when we make commemoration of our Savior's Nativity, speaking to our
Lady in prayer we say, Blessed art thou amongst women, for feeding the Son of
God at thy breast, and blessed be the fruit of thy womb Jesus, for humbling
himself unto it. Holy Mary, Mother of God, pray for us sinners now, that we
may increase in Humility. And at the hour of our death.

But, those words which be added, are to be spoken only with the heart; the
rest with heart and mouth both. For, so doing, they make us think of what we
say and do; whereas, if we did add them with our tongues, they would slip over
like the rest, and neither help our memory, (...)or make us pray with Spirit.

The number of Ave Mary's to one Pater noster, or of Pater noster and Ave
Mary's, ^i^ at will; and every one who taken the course p^^^^^b'd, may do well
to consider how much time* he was wont to spend in his whole Beads, and say as
many as will take him up as much time, and not care though he has not made an
end of his Beads, if he has no special obligation to the saying them all. Yet,
because the ordinary number is of the five tens, I thought good to design our
Savior's life, and his Blessed Mother's, as far as it goes entangled with it,
appointing one payr of beads for every day of the week, and five and twenty
points for every payr of beads; that is, for every two Ave Mary's one point.
The profit is that by this means we remember and give our Lord thanks once a
week for the most of the passages of his blessed life registered unto us by holy
writ, and stir up our selves to the imitation thereof, that is, to good life,
which is our intent in prayer and al other our devotions. For, as for the
ordinary direction of meditating upon some one mystery while you say a ten,
what has it to do with the saying of the ten: or why were it not better only
to meditate and let the ten alone? or is the time of saying a ten just
sufficient to have fruit of meditating upon a mystery? And, lastly, if delving
or spinning, one thought of the mystery, wherein were it worse then such saying
of our beads? But, this way, every Ave Mary is made a jaculatory commemoration
of the mystery; and your heart and mouth go together, and truly you use vocal
prayer; whereas in the other your mind prays one thing and your mouth another
quite different.

FINIS.

