A CONTEMPLATION OF HEAVEN: WITH AN EXERCISE OF LOVE AND A DESCANT ON THE
Prayer in the Garden.

By a Catholic Gent.

PSALM. 73. 25. Quid mihi est in coelo; and a te quid volui super terram?

AT PARIS, Printed in the YEAR 1654.

To the Virtuous and Honorable LADY, The LADY KATH: WHITE.
MADAM,
NO wonder if a complaint falling from your mouth, that you found the
consideration of Heaven dry, and knew not how to frame a content some thought
of it, was able to set a dull wit on work, and make an insipid pen distill milk
and honey: for it is you that do it. Accept therefore these nine drops of oil,
which the fervor of your desire has extracted from a hard Flint. But I must
advertise you, they still retein their stony nature; and unless you apply the
same fire, according to the Rules of Alchimy, beginning with a soft and gentle
heat, and proceeding with a constant increase; they will neither render their
sweetness to your sense, nor their balsamic virtue to your substance. For
(Madam) in the perusal of these Discourses, you will easily find the best
method to be, first quietly to read them, seeking no farther then only to
understand, and afterward by more serious thoughts to imprint and sink them
deep into your affections. By serious thoughts, I mean not forced impetuosities
of your will, upon a conceit that you are rapt to supernatural and
unintelligible heights; but only such reflections as the care of friends, of
children, or household affairs (where your help is required) use to stir in
you: for these are natural and free, and (applied to what ought to be our
greatest care) work those solid virtues which make a true Christian life the
principal aim of all our desires and endeavors, and the principal wish to
your Ladyship of,

MADAM, Your most affectionate Brother and humble Servant, THO: WHITE.
From Paris this 1. of Sept. 1653.
The Address to English CATHOLICS.
BEhold that rich Comfort, whereof in vain you court and scramble to retrive
the least Drop below in this your Novercall country; behold it here familiarly
stooped to woo your lips from Supernall Jerusalem, the true and free Mother of
us all. The greedy thirst of One (now inebriated above) obtained for Her self
some years since this Elixir; which the choking necessity of these hot Times
has at length dissolved into a charitable diffusion of it self to the wide
world. Drink you, dear Friends, jovially of it; (the deeper the sweeter;)
without fear of excess, which will surelyest render it a calm Lethe to your
sufferings here, and make wider passage and room in you for that Torrent of
Pleasure, it earnest's hereafter.

And though this cheering Cup be proper for you alone, (the happily enrolled
Guests, already sweating in the royal way to the future Feast;) yet is it not
grudged, nor will it, I hope, be unprofitable to those many others (invited too)
your hapless Countrymen, who either ramble through by-Lanes, miserably
erring, or lie in the Hedges timorously watching, or lazily sleeping, whilst
(alas) they pretend your Errand: since, it is bosom Design and choice Virtue is
contrived to rouse and rally the Spirits, and inveigling the Taste, to beget and
sharpen the Appetite; which thus, perhaps, alarmed, might pro, voke a
solicitude, and compel them too to come in that our dread Kings house may be
full.

A CONTEMPLATION OF HEAVEN, Between the Soul and Light.
The first discourse.
Soul. WOe's me! why was I born to see the Sun? why did my Mother rejoice to
hear me cry, and to receive the news that I was a living Soul?


Light. Why do thou moan so pitifully? Cast thine eyes upon the Almighty,
who has so often comforted, and still surely continues his assistance to thee.


Soul. Why do I moan, to whom there is left neither rest in this world, nor
hope in the next? here I do nothing but offend my God, and there what can I
expect, but a just Judge of my perpetual offenses?


Light. Why do you offend him so often?


Soul. Alas! I do what I can, I am in continual watchfulness over my self, I
am always making Examens of my Conscience, but I find no end, no amendment. My
thoughts prevent my care, and in despite of me, draw me to trespass; whilst I
am solicitous of one, another escapes; and thus I live a tortured life, ever
seeking Innocence, and that still flying me.


Light. And do you think God is displeased so highly with you, your self using
all this care and diligence?


Soul. How can he choose, I offending him so perpetually?


Light. Do you hurt him, when you offend him?


Soul. No, my good does him no good, nor can my malice do him any harm, yet I
offend and anger him.


Light. Do you then believe he is in heart vexed and grieved, as we are, when we
are angry?


Soul. Not so neither, for then he received harm and were mutable, since this
boiling of anger in us is a great mischief.


Light. Why, take away this, and anger is nothing but a will to punish you; and
can you think God has such a will? no just man, no good natured Creature is
delighted in punishment, much less Almighty God.


Soul. Why are we then perpetually frighted with Hell for great faults, and
Purgatory for lesser ones, which two continually hang over my head, in a
dreadful manner threatening and tormenting me?


Light. Though Almighty God be not desirous to punish, yet he were not so good
as your self would wish him, if, seeing your own miscarriage would lead you to
great torments, he did not foretell you of them, and use all means apt to
hinder you from falling into them: hence therefore he forbids those actions, by
which you draw upon you such mischiefs, he denounces those mischiefs if you
abstain not from such actions, he promises infinite rewards if you observe what
he prescribes you; which are the ways to deal with Men, as Men.


Soul. This comes but another way to the same point; for still those terrors
hang upon me, and the same carfulness is necessary to me; and consequently
the same torment in this life, and desperation of that to come.


Light. If you are resolved of this, that sin offends not God, farther then as
it disorders your self, you see your care must be changed, and your
solicitousnesse in acts of Penance and Mortification to satisfy for your
sins, must be principally applied in correcting your disorder, and settling your
heart and affections in a due way and poyze; which will be your best means to
take away the horror of Hell and Purgatory so much afflicting you.


Soul. What must I do to redress the disorder of my soul? or wherein consists
the due ordering of it?


Light. A Soul is that by which Man excels all other Creatures; this we see to
be by knowledge and government of himself: by knowledge therefore the Soul is
then in good order, when it truly knows all things belonging to the government
of Man's life, and governs the Man according to that knowledge.


Soul. Why this is but nature, whereas to go to Heaven, it is necessary we walk
in a supernatural Path, much contrary to nature; wherefore sure this cannot be
right.


Light. There are two things in Man which are called Nature; one Reason, which
truly is his Nature, ruling all his actions as he is Man, and distinguishing
him from Beasts. The other is this frame of our Material Instruments, which we
call our Body, consisting of Motion, of Blood and Spirits, which have a course
in us so depending from other causes, that nevertheless a great part is in our
power. Of these two Natures, Reason often contradicts the Inferior, and
therefore Grace and our supernatural way must do the same: Whereas for Reason,
Grace never contradicts it, but guides it, and shows it that many things
(which otherwise it would never have attained to) are very reasonable, and by
force of reason it self ought to be enacted and put in execution. For our
supernatural life is like a Graft, which though it bear a better fruit then
the Stock, yet can it bring forth nothing but by means of that, and in the
season wherein the Stock of it self flourishes.


Soul. Then I must employ my time in gaining knowledge, and governing my self
according to it; but what should I seek to know?


Light. Your enquiry may be fully satisfied, if you confine your search to
these two Heads, To learn the things that concern you in the next life, which
are chiefly, Heaven and Hell; in Heaven I comprehend all that belongs to
Almighty God, as well to his Godhead as his Humanity: And secondly, to study
what in this life imports you, which is the real valuation of those motives
that govern mankind here, and the true and straight way that leads to bliss
hereafter.


Soul. Surely this cannot choose but be a pleasant and delightsome Method: For
what more pleasant then to know, especially such truths as most are ignorant
of? what more delightsome, then to enjoy a clear serenity of mind, free from
those errors we see our Neighbors tossed and turmoyl'd in? But above all,
what can be so ravishing, as to understand we are in the direct path toward
those great felicities promised us in the next life?


Light. If you take the right course and ply it diligently, you shall (instead
of that anxious and troublesome way you walk) possess all this pleasure and
much more, whereof, as yet, you have no feeling: nay (which you little think)
your whole pursuit shall be after pleasures, and those the highest this life
can afford. For, since Reason is our Nature (which has the greatest stroke in
all our actions) and whatever is conformable to Nature, the more powerful
Nature is, the more pleasant that must be; it follows, the pleasures of Reason
are greater far then those of Sense. Now Grace being but an heightening of
Reason, what is conformable to Grace must be still more pleasing to Nature.


Soul. I can easily apprehend the Contemplation of Heaven must be full of
pleasure, especially if the Contemplatour finds in himself hopes of attaining
thither: but I know not how the dreadful consideration of Hell and Death and
Judgment should be pleasing, being of themselves such frightfull things.


Light. As for those fearful objects, you need not trouble your self yet, if
you find the considerations of Heaven take hold of your Soul, which (when they
are once settled and well possessed of your heart) will alone so entertain and
fill you, that you will be free and secure from the irksomenesse of other
apprehensions: but you must first strive to be in love with heaven and heavenly
things, if possibly you can.


Soul. I confess, hitherto my considerations have been very dry, I not being
able to make any apprehension of what pleasure can possibly be found, where all
that gives us content here will be wanting.


The second discourse.
Light. NOw, if you were sure to find there the same pleasures you enjoy here,
in this only changed, that what ever makes them short, noisome, tedious, or
allayes them here with any other discommodity, is not there to be found, so
that the pleasure is there more clear, more sweet, perpetual, and never
cloying; you must, of necessity, make a good apprehension of a desirable place,
and lovely end to aim at.


Soul. If you can make me see this, I hope I shall be better affected to
Heaven, and that with a natural tie. Whereas now I force my self to love a
thing, which I cannot understand what it is.


Light. Well then, do you take pleasure in company of friends with whom you can
be free?


Soul. Very much, especially if their discourse be such as goes down with some
smartnesse and delight.


Light. At least then there is one pleasure in heaven which you can relish: for
friends and acquaintance you cannot want there; all that are in Heaven knowing
all, being familiar with all, and their hearts lying open to all; so that what
delight you can imagine in conversation, you shall have there a thousand fold
multiplied above what it is here.


Soul. But that which pleases me here, is to be with a friend in a corner,
where no body may hear our discourse; for it would be a great annoyance to have
any one partaker of our secrets.


Light. And why (if you have reflected upon it) is it troublesome to have
overhearers of your discourse?


Soul. Because some would laugh at my follyes or imperfections, and jeere at my
conceits, different from theirs; others would carry tales abroad, and make a
business of nothing; others are indiscreet, and altogether unable to give me
either advice or comfort, but talk nonsense, and rather trouble me then do me
good.


Light. Then if the company were such, that from every one you could promise
your self all respect, love, prudence, and such parts as should be fit to
improve and heighten the content you aimed at; the plurality of those with whom
you converse would rather strengthen your pleasure, then any way diminish it.


Soul. It Is true, but I cannot conceive, if the company be greater then a
certain proportion, which by interchange may still keep life in the discourse,
but that the conversation must either be hindered, by many speaking at once, or
dull, by one party's speaking so seldom.


Light. But, on the contrary, if you did apprehend the whole multitude without
intermission speaking together, and that he that speaks, perfectly understood
all the rest, and himself also were perfectly understood by every one; so that
each continually declared his own mind without the least impediment to
understand perfectly at the same time what all others said; and this not only
to himself, but any one to any other: do you not see what the proportion of
content by such discourse would be to the satisfaction you find here, when you
are in the fullest careere of joy that ever you experimented, or can wish, or
even imagine, according to the course of our conversation?


Soul. If this were true, I see an extreme increase of pleasure in Heaven, over
the greatest our Nature is capable of here: but withal, I see it is impossible
men should hear and understand so many persons together, and speak to them all
in exchange.


Light. I confess this is hard to be believed by one that has not yet reached
to the nature of a Spirit: but he that could conceive all this we call Body,
and diffusion of bigness and parts, must of necessity be resumed in the
indivisible thing we call a Spirit, (so that all the imaginable operations of
material substances can never arrive to equal the activity of the least
Spirit) he would easily allow it this privilege of being capable to do as much
as a thousand tongues, and a thousand ears at once. But it is not my task now
to evince a possibility, only to exact a belief of this opinion, and upon
supposal of its truth, show you how infinitely greater the content in Heaven
must necessarily be, then the highest pleasure this world can afford.


Soul. But unless I talk of such persons and things, as both my self and they
with whom I converse, know and are acquainted with the circumstances of every
passage, the conversation is dry and unpleasing. Now here they are very few,
who have knowledge of the same particulars that I have; for their number is
confined to such as I live withal; and I know not whether I can expect to meet
many of them in heaven, the straitness of the way and the paucity of the
enterers being so often and so strongly inculcated to us.


Light. It were a very hard question to determine the number of those that go
to heaven, and at this time would divert our discourse: only this I will say,
that the paucity of the blessed may well stand with this truth, that many of
such Christians as live innocently in the world are saved. Wherefore I fear not
but you may have enough to converse with, who are acquainted with the
particulars your self are. But what will you think, if every one has as clear
a sight of all your circumstances, as your own heart? for it were a great
simplicity to imagine the Soul, abstracted from the Body, has no means to know
things without it, since in the Body it has; and, if it be furnished with any
means, it is not possible but it should know whatever it pleases. But (as I
said before) the proof of these things is to be sought elsewhere: here we are
only to consider how great and full the pleasure of a blessed Soul is, these
things being so as I have declared.


Soul. I must confess you have now made Heaven a tractable thing to me: for by
these considerations, I do not only find a common apprehension of good, but I
can lay hands upon intelligible pleasures, whereby to content my natural
desires, and with hope thereof make them pursue the endeavors, and undergo
the difficulties necessary to the attaining them.


Light. Reflect then a little, and sum up, or rather conclude what kind of
life in Heaven this pleasure will afford you. Remember some afternoon or couple
of hours, in which your pleasing conversation has been at height, remember
the twinkling of some one conceit, which especially carried away your heart,
and for the time possessed it wholly: think with your self, had the whole two
hours continued like that minute, how unspeakable your pleasure had been. Then
elevate your fancy, and conceive in Heaven, not hours, nor days, nor years,
but ages of ages, but an eternity will be of that dainty ravishing contentment.
Join (if you are able) all these increases and advantages, which we have
expressed, whereof there is not one but draws an incomparable extremity with
it: and if only this were once well master of your thoughts, I do not see how
any temporal thing could either please or discontent you, or that you would
not as much long for death, as now you adhorre and fear it.


Soul. The world's changed with me, I find my self refresht with this thought,
and in a cheerful disposition.


Light. Yes for the present, but it will not stay long with you, unless you
play your part, and cultivate the opening seeds, which now ferment in your
heart: and this must be by often thinking of and remembering these and such
other considerations, partly at set times, and partly whenever you find your
self in a fitting disposition, that is, at ease, alone, and your mind free, or
peradventure inclined to good thoughts; lose not these tides, as I may call
them, for they bring great waves of spiritual profit. In the happy
opportunity, strive to penetrate with a clear understanding the verity of such
points; then turn your self upon your self, and see what you do, and what you
should do according to these truths. Encourage your self to what is wanting,
amend what is amiss, and sigh after the great reward we all labor for.


The third discourse.
Soul. HItherto it goes well, but in so great a happiness and so glorious a
State, is there but one content?


Light. If there were no other then what is already declared, I believe there
were more, not only then you can wish in this world, but also then you would be
weary of in the next. Nevertheless since your palate is so dainty that it must
have varieties, think with your self what other thing there is here, wherein
you take great pleasure, and love to spend your time.


Soul. The next that comes to my mind is, that I am much delighted with Masks
and Shows, and in going to Court, especially when there are grea meetings and
bravery there; these things extremely take me, in so much that I can endure to
expect a great while (as half a day or more) in some disease, to be present at
such sights and Assemblies.


Light. And when these things are in their perfection, can you tell what it is
that therein delights you?


Soul. I think it is those passages which (meeting afterward with others that
have or have not been there) I use to discourse of and commend. And all those
being either Things, or Persons; in Things I commend the greatness, beauty, or
good proportion, some fine conveyance, some rare and new invention: in Persons
I praise their comeliness, the gracefulness of their behavior, the perfection
and compleatnesse of their actions. These I conceive for the most part are the
principal causes of the delight and relish I find in such encounters.


Light. I hope then you will not want this contentment also in heaven. For (to
begin with Persons) you shall have in your company those who have ever been the
greatest and worthiest in all considerations; Adam the beginner of the World,
and Noah its restorer; you shall have Abraham the Father of that Nation, which,
after so many ages continuance in the Prerogative of the Elect people of
Almighty God, is now by their dispersion into all Nations, become to them a
Testimony of Christianity; you shall have Moses, who, like the Lieutenant of
the highest, in all sorts of miracles established the Law, the Field wherein
Christianity was blazoned; you shall have David and Solomon, (if his Penance
was true in his old days) you shall have Kings, Captains, and Prophets, all in
their degrees before Christ. What shall I say of Christ and his Apostles, of
Bishops, Martyrs and Hermites? what of the so fruitful devouter Sex? All
these have expressed the most generous evidence of Universal Gallantry, and
shown the noblest effects of all such virtues as breed admiration in humane
hearts. What Court, what Mask, what Show can feign or counterfit so much, as
Heaven will afford you real objects to be ravished with?


Soul. It Is true, but I am not taken with these high and sublime virtues, which
I do not well apprehend. But if I see a Gentleman Noble, Liberal, Courteous,
Valiant, and Honorable of his word, such qualities make a deep impression in
my affections.


Light. Why then, if you find all these perfections, not only to be in your
Company above, but in a far higher degree too, and greater measure of
excellency then can be in any persons here, you must certainly be charmed with
a strange excess of Pleasure. And (to enter a little into the business) I
cannot doubt so much as to ask, whether you are pleased with the outward show
of these virtues, which are in the Heart.


Soul. You need not, for were they counterfeit, or no greater in the heart then
in the outward show, I should lose my esteem of the persons. But out of one
generous Act expressed, we imagine the heart, ready to perform a hundred, and
to be as it were naturally and unchangeably fitted to do the like again, when
occasion is offered: this makes me highly value and be delighted with the
person.


Light. Then if heaven afford you thousands and millions of hearts, which you
may see into, as clearly as into the purest stream or fountain of water you can
imagine, and there behold all these admirable qualities in a high perfection,
and so immutably settled, that sooner heaven and earth may fall in pieces, then
they decline the least tittle from that degree of worth they are exalted to;
how can you then doubt that your pleasure there, even in this very kind, will
not be infinitely preferrable to the greatest the world can furnish you? And
for those high virtues, of which you say you feel little apprehension; your
state there will be so improved, that you will be able exactly to penetrate the
true value of every one, which will make you see with how much passion,
ignorance, and oversight the greatest actions of this life are managed. You Will
discern evidently that the valor of Captains, the wisdom of Statesmen, the
skill of great Clerks, are not comparable to, make no bulk or show in
comparison of that Knowledge, Prudence and Courage, which those contemned
persons, and here reputed-fools ever carried enclosed in their breasts. Think
what infinite pleasure and content you will infallibly receive in contemplating
them, and being informed of their worths.


Soul. All this I must of necessity confess, but yet I do not see that in
heaven there will be either the comeliness of the persons, the gracefulness
of their behavior, or the variety of their attires, and such otherthings,
wherewith (I speak but in mine own weakness) I often find my self here much
taken and carried away.


Light. Alas! do you not consider that all these are but mute and imperfect
expressions of the interior mind; and that it is the thing signified which
takes you in them all, or else their artifice and conveyance? In speaking
whereof you pass into the other part, of Things, which you distinguished
against the consideration of Persons. For take away the mind, and all the rest
may be in a Puppet-play or motion, as they call it. Consider again with your
self, that a cunning Architect is delighted as much with the Model of a House,
as you with the building it self; a good Musician with the notes in his head,
as you with the singing. Out of which I draw this great and curious truth; that
when you shall be perfect in knowledge (as is expected in Heaven) you will not
look after these outward expressions, but the Modells which are in the hearts
you will see will satisfy and fill the desires beyond all you can wish or
imagine.


Soul. Peradventure what you say is not only true, but extremely efficacious,
according to the state we shall be in there; but yet I feel not that impression
which wonted and well known objects use to work in me. If there are not even
these corporeal motions and fashions which delight me so extremely here with
their novelty, variety, extravagance and excellency, me thinks I apprehend a
droughth, not of what shall be there, but of the apprehending what I see shall
be there, yet cannot make carry my fancy.


Light. Since nothing will content you but the flesh and blood you are nuzzled
in, and that you must carry to heaven with you the very imperfection (if not of
your own mind yet) of the world you live in: let us at one blow seek to give a
resolution, not only to this your desire, but also to the other part, that is,
concerning those qualities which delight you in Things as well as in Persons.
Do you therefore remember the answer our Savior gave to the Sadduces
concerning Marriage in the next world?


Soul. You mean, That we should neither marry, nor be married, but be like the
Angels of God: This I remember well; but I desire to know why you put me in
mind of it.


Light. Wherein do you conceive the likeness to Angels consists? For if it be
only in this Negative, why should that be promised for a happiness? whereas we
see the benedictions of marriage promised for a benefit and content.


Soul. When I reflect that Angels have no bodies, and therefore all their
nature is to be purely knowing Creatures, me thinks our Savior in these words
signifies to us, that the pleasures of the next world should not consist in
these corporeal motions which here are grateful to us, by reason of our
bodies; but that they should be of knowledge, such as are proportioned to
Angels: and although we should have bodies, yet they should not hinder our
knowledge and pleasure even by them, from being such as the Angels contentment
is, at least in likeness, if not in equality.


Light. You are very right, and do you not see every man conceits that, though
Angels are no bodies, yet they have means (and those natural means too) to see
and know any thing that passes amongst bodies? do you not hear them set for
Governors of corporeal things, even men delivered to their charge? Wherefore
you cannot but believe they have a natural power and force to know all things
here below at their will and pleasure. Conceive then that Souls freed from the
body have the same capacity, though in a less degree; and that at will they
can see what passes in this world, and not only in this Globe of earth, the
world of Man, but in all the other infinite Mass of Bodies, which in truth and
rigor is termed the world. Now therefore imagine your self seated upon a high
hill (such as the Devil placed our Savior on) with your eyes so perfect and
sharp, that whatsoever you had a mind to see, no remoteness of place, no Hills
or Dales, no Clouds or darkness, no Walls or Dungeons could hide from you: and
then think, what could your heart desire in this sort of pleasure, that you
were not Mistress of? and know that all is far short of what the state of
bliss will afford you, even in this kind. For neither could you in that
posture (no not in a Masking house it self) note all particulars to be seen,
nor listen to all you would desire to hear, nor know all you would be earnest
to ask; and (which is most of all) you could attend but to one thing at once:
whereas in the state of bliss, you shall discern every circumstance perfectly,
and all things that are done at once you may know altogether, the one not
hindering the other, though there be thousands of them.


Soul. But shall I see then whatever I will, of all that passes in this world?


Light. It follows clearly out of what we have said, make no doubt of it, but
raise your thoughts and mark. There is a General mustering his flourishing
Troops, his Drums beating, his wanton Colors dancing in the Air, his
Commanders as glorious as the Stars in the Firmament, his Ranks and Files
glittering in fearful steel; Majesty, beauty and strength at one sight
ravishing the beholders. Here is a Marriage or entertainment of some great
Prince, the wits of two Kingdoms set a work for invention of sports and
Ballads; what Water, Fire, Air, and the dull weight of Earth can do, all
scanned by exact Artificers, and the purest quintessence reduced into a model
or taste, to please the ambition of empty-soul'd Lords. There is a great
Admiral commanding the obedient Waves, and prancing over the Billows with Mast
upon Mast, laden with towred wings, his Streamers fluttering, his Canon
roaring, his People shouting. In other places battles joining, some by Sea,
some by Land; assaults giving and repulsing, undermining of Walls, entrance
upon breaches, Murderers devouring all before them with flaming mouths. Here
great Winds and Shipwracks; there glorious Palaces, mighty Treasures, rich
Jewels, Inventions of all sorts to content those whom Industry or Fortune has
made the Masters of Money. These and a thousand other things, which at leisure
you may reflect upon, (especially those wherewith you are most affected)
consider and think that with a cast of your understanding, more quick then any
twinkling of an eye, you shall see; not one which you most desire, but all, all
you can desire at once, one not hindering the other.


Soul. O glory, O happiness, O Bliss! now you have struck me to the heart. O
when will the happy day come, that I shall sit at this Fountainhead, and not
need with pain to draw the water of pleasure? When shall I arrive at this sweet
ravishment and ecstasy?


The fourth discourse.
Light. GOd Almighty be praised, who, as he created Man of Dust and slime, so
forgets not what he is made of; but provides Motives even out of that to
enamour him of true bliss and happiness. This last consideration is the
slightest of all I have proposed to you, and when you come to understand your
self, you will take least content in it, yet how are you now ravished with it?
But because your distraction is great, I think I had best put you in mind of
one circumstance, which peradventure you may forget. When you go to these
Maskes and great meetings, do you not take pleasure to be seen, as well as to
see what passes there?


Soul. What need I say Yes, to you that know better then my self the most
hidden thoughts of my heart? how can I counterfeit to the Light, which shines
into every corner of my Conscience, and shows my self so clearly to me? I
confess therefore that I seldom go, but to be seen has its share in my
wishes; nay, sometimes the greater: This makes me so exact in dressing my self,
that all things may contribute to their good liking of me; this makes me choice
of my Company and place, and desirous of any thing that may draw eyes upon me.
Happy they that can content themselves with admiring their own perfections in a
Looking-glass! for my part, unless I have the commendations of others, I
little satisfy my self. Hence also it is, that if any great personage take
notice of me in public, my heart leaps to imagine the whispering of friends
and strangers, the one taking notice of the favor done me, the other busily
enquiring who is that so highly honored: when if they light on any of my
wel-wishers, receiving in exchange a Catalogue of all that is good, and to be
esteemed in me, O this is a sweet thing. And if perchance any of their
discourse come to my ears, I know not how to express what a pleasing motion
it makes in me. But should it happen that the King or Queen were the persons
that graced me before all the Company, a year were not sufficient to receive
congratulatory visits, to express every circumstance of the favor, to
profess my self undeserving and overloaden, (though willing enough to hear
others say, it was no more then I deserved.) These things I confess pass
within me, but I am so afraid any should take notice on it, that fain I would
persuade my self many times, my actions depend on other more justifiable
motives. Wonder not therefore that I expect not this in Heaven, where all
hearts being open, I shall not for shame desire it.


Light. How easily the comparison of this world misleads you in the estimation
of the next? since there you shall desire it without shame, and possess it
more fully then your heart can wish here. For if you look into your own
desires, you shall find that two things chiefly delight you, to be known, and
to be esteemed. For the former, consider here below the multitude of persons
into whose knowledge you may fall, the quality of the knowledge they are to
have of you, the worth of their persons, and the goodness of their judgments,
which may make you joyful that their verdicts pass in your favor. As for the
multitude, it scarce ever exceeds one Kingdom even in Princes, and of this
Kingdom not one Shire, not one Town are familiarly acquainted, no not so much
as to know you, if your clothes were changed, but you should walk undiscerned
even in the streets.


Soul. That is true, but all those whose spirits are a little elevated will
know me, and their acquaintance is only worth the wishing: others, whose low
apprehensions cannot ascend to esteem the perfections of the higher sort of
people, are to be neglected.


Light. But the higher you raise their abilities, the lesser you make their
multitude; and even of those whose judgments you esteem in your whole life
time, how many are you like to be known to? Consider, amongst those you know
and are well acquainted with, how many of them your self contemn: think whether
every tenth person be thought fit to judge in those personal matters truly; if
either King or Kings Favorite be known to ten, (who are able justly to judge
of worth betwixt Man and Man) I think it a great number. Turn then the leaf and
look into Heaven, where no part of the Earth is excluded; of all Nations, of
all Ages there are to be found, not one but whose judgment is a touchstone of
truth, the number excessive, the quality of the persons incomparable. And if
yet this do not content you, cast a view upon the vale of Jeho saphat, number
if you can, the two great Armies which are at once to appear, the one glorious
upon the Clouds with our Savior Jesus Christ, the other upon the Earth: see
there is not a child of Adam wanting, from Abel to him that was born the
evening before this great day: and remember the verse of the old Sybil --
Cunctaque cunctorum cunctis arcana patebunt. every one, from the greatest to
the least, shall know all that is true of you, all that you can say for your
self. Think what honor 'twill be at that day, to be graced by him that is in
power; when all those multitudes shall see it, and clearly see as the glory you
receive proceeds from the favor of the highest, so it is proportioned according
to what of worth is really in your own person.


Soul. As I am now affected, I cannot choose but wonder how (believing what you
say) I could so long live in neglect, without ever reflecting upon these two
most evident truths; one, that the highest honor and reputation in this world
is trivial and inconsiderable; for what is it to be in the good opinion of so
few as I perceive come to the perfect and inward knowledge of us? the other,
that truly Fame and Honor is to be found in the next world; especially at the
great day of Judgment, at the meeting of Ages, where whole mankind and all the
quires of Angels shall see and perfectly know all that concerns us. But I Am
afraid that in so great multitudes I shall find little regard, here I Am
esteemed amongst that small number I converse with; and it is a comfort that
though my acquaintance be few, yet they are as many as I have need of, and my
life is amongst no more: There in such an infinity, my place will be so low,
and my share so small, that no body will vouchsafe me one cast of an eye.


Light. Consider then with your self the esteem of the world, what it is,
wherein you are confined to reflect only upon such as have sufficient
acquaintance with you, to furnish them with occasion of understanding your
worth; out of which number too you must exclude, first, all whose judgments
are contemptible, because they are but half-witted people, Secondly, those who
prefer unworthy respects, as Riches, Nobility, Comeliness, Beauty, Youth,
etc. before true wisdom and the parts of Virtue, really and solidly adorning
your person; I speak not of those supernatural graces which are generally
contemned by men of this World, but of such endowments as the wiser sort prefer
before all those empty toys that garboyle the fancies of the multitude:
Thirdly, take out of the rest, those who (upon design either of jeering for
their own sport, or flattering for their private interests) counterfeit to
value and esteem you; as if some great man seem to court and honor you, what
assurance can there be that his civilities proceed from his heart purely for
your consideration, and not for some friends sake or particular project; so
that your back once turned, you are no sooner out of sight then out of mind?
Nay, even amongst those who are sincere and cordial friends, how soon may
therebe a change? upon what slight grounds perhaps took they this opinion? and
upon as slight an occasion can they desert.


Soul. You leave me no breath, no starting-hole, no where to take a little
air, to refresh my self in this world: for I see by your discourse, there is
no glass so brittle as the opinion of Men, no Dirt so base as the Multitudes
favor, and nothing so contemptible as who grounds himself upon their
judgments. Already I understand that the judgments of Heavenly spirits, are
not subject to these blemishes and contingencies; they are all true, all
hearty, all constant, I must change if they do; for as long as I remain with
the same worth, their Sentence cannot alter. Yet can I not see that my share
shall be such there as may be taken notice of, but the multitude and excess of
my betters will keep me without any respect, justly I confess, yet to my grief
and pain.


Light. And why do you not reflect that Celestial spirits are able to attend
all things at once? that neither the multitude of those who are to be esteemed,
nor the excess of their excellency can any thing prejudice your felicity, when
by every one, every degree of your perfections shall be known, considered, and
valued as much, as if there were no others to be thought on but your self? what
can you desire more?


Soul. I cannot tell of what disposition I shall be in the next world, but I
feel in this that no honor pleases me, unless it be with some preference
before others; which, I confess, is not to be desired above, but here below:
whilst we live in this valley of darkness, true worth does not clearly shine,
nor can the degrees of merit be perfectly distinguished, and therefore every
one may desire to be above another, hoping and, for the most part, believing
the privilege of precedence due to his deserts. But this ignorance and the
ambitious effects of it, must surely be banished from Heaven.


Light. I cannot grant you to be more honored then those who deserve better,
nor that they be not more honored then you; yet happily this you may hope for,
that none be preferred before you. You may peradventure have seen great
Princes, when they entertain inferior ones, whom they will neither equal to
themselves, nor yet disoblige by treating them in quality of Subjects; they
contrive therefore all things so as each may be honored without comparison, by
having nothing common, which going from one to the other, may make an order and
priority appear between them. Just so perhaps may't pass in Heaven: every
spirit being as it were a world by it self, and having a particular perfection
and excellency which is found in no other; every one therefore is chief and
highest in its own kind, and by consequence eminently and supreamly esteemed
without order to, or dependence on any other then the common Father of all;
every one extremely pleased with his own Excellency; and although the
inhabiting truth must needs confess others better, yet nothing more fitting for
this person; and so every one both joying in himself, and esteemed by others as
the most rich and excellent piece of all, in his own particular property and
degree.


The fifth discourse.
Soul. AS you put me in mind of one thing I should have forgotten, so you have
emboldened me to ask another I should else have been ashamed to propose, and
yet I confess it has a great power and mastery over my affections: it is that I
love to be beloved. If any show the least sign of kindness for me, methinks
presently, they are the best persons in the world; neither is there so poor a
wretch, but if I see in him a hearty expression of love toward me, I cannot
choose but love him again. Alas, what do I talk of Men? if a little Dog or Bird,
or any other dumb Creature come once to take a haunt to me, and be delighted in
my pany, it is a death to see any harm befall them: and I find a very great
satisfaction and content to see them play and pleased according to their low
manner. Now if this love be wanting in Heaven, I fear 'twill put me out of
conceit with the pleasures there.


Light. You are too fearful, and too little considerate of the joys you aim
at. Think but with your self that Charity is nothing but the love of God and
your Neighbor, that it is the way to Heaven, and that of our three guides and
conducters thither, only that remains with us; and see then whether there can
be any fear you shall want love. Consider that the principal and main
employment in Heaven is nothing else, but to love and be beloved; and those
there are the greatest lovers, who are in the greatest favor and highest
glory. For God himself is love, and none is in God, or God in them, but by
love. Measure therefore with your thoughts the scope of Heaven, from Gods
eternal throne to the least child which by Baptism is made partaker of the
Adoption of Christ; and be sure that all these shall love you, you especially,
love you as much as if there were no others to be beloved but only your self;
that the higher and greater every one is, the more ardent, expressive and
effectual shall his love be to you in person, in particular, by name and
design. What do you now conceit of the base love of this world? of the love of
Dogs and Birds? raise a little your thoughts, and look up at true love where it
reigns in its full glory, where it shows it self in its Magnificence, fly at
it there, fear not, if you love, it cannot escape you; make but your
approaches, it will meet you: it is too ethereall for this cloudy region; lift
but your self above your body, and of it self it will bend and stoop to your
Arms.


Soul. What you have said cannot choose but be a great comfort, but I have a
foolish scruple, if you will give me leave to utter it; yet I need not be so
coy, since you know enough by me: this it is. I have been taught that we should
strive to love all men for Almighty Gods sake; and so I suppose it passes in
Heaven, that all these great lovers which you have expressed to be there, are
of this Nature, that they will love me, because God Almighty commands it. And
this alas, according to my low apprehension, gives me but little satisfaction,
for this love and good will is not to me, but to Almighty God; whereas my
perverseness is such, that I my self would be beloved: and I mark in my self a
great difference between, when I give money to some little child I am pleased
with, and when I bestow an Alms on a poor body that asks me for Gods sake:
in the one I find that affection I desire others should bear to me, toward the
Beggar I have no such inclination; and the cause as I conceive is, that one
seems to deserve my love, the other only to need it. Now if you tell me, that
in Heaven they shall love me, but I shall not deserve it; I confess (as my
affections now stand) 'twill be a great cooling to the esteem I desire to have
of their love.


Light. How truly spoke he that said, I know my self a Man, that is, a proud
and yet a wretched thing? Is it possible you cannot endure to be beloved beyond
your desert? I fear you endure it often enough in this world, but here
self-conceit makes you easily think not only all love and esteem due to you
which is offered, but for the most part that too little is offered. Yet I have
observed, sometimes it happens that we truly conceit another to show more
affection toward us then we have deserved, though I never heard any offended
at such excess, but rather highly pleased, and engaged to an endeavor of
deserving it. Nevertheless I Will strive to give you content, even in this
point: Therefore tell me what you think of a person in whom reason governs in
full measure, so that not a thought passes but according to the pure direction
of it: do you believe in such a person any love can be unreasonable?


Soul. No certainly: so far is past doubt.


Light. And if we love any thing more then it is amiable, do you think that
love is reasonable?


Soul. I perceive whither you aim; that since in Heaven all is governed by
reason, none there can love otherwise then according to desert: but withal I
see there may be that desert in another and not in me; as for example, they
shall love me because God (who deserves to be obeyed) commands them; and if
only thus, I rest as unsatisfied as before.


Light. Why, do you conceive that God can command any unreasonable thing,
especially there, where reason is in it is perfection? (for here I know not what
the mixture of bodily qualities with reason may make it reasonable for God to
command.) or if God would command others to love you beyond desert, yet do you
think that himself (being the essence of reason and understanding) can love you
so? or that any one by his command can love you more then himself does?


Soul. This is right again: Yet I see we love many things for the connection
they have with some other, and not for themselves: a Dog, a Book, a Glove, from
a beloved person is much made of, not for it self, but because the using it
kindly is an expression, or rather a practice of our love toward the person to
whom it belongs. So I imagine because I am a creature of Almighty God's making,
and have cost his only Son so dear a price, those blessed spirits inflamed with
the love of God, may also express an affection to me, which you see is wholly
by the desert of another, not mine; and however it may be infinitely more then
I deserve, yet is it not that which I expressed to be requisite to my content.


Light. Your palate is very nice and delicate, yet you shall be pleased. What
think you then, where reason (as I asked before) is in full height, can any
thing there be omitted which is reasonable to be done?


Soul. No certainly.


Light. And is it not reasonable that every lovely thing should be loved? and
if any person have any loveliness, that there should be a poize and proportion
of love for every grain of it in him?


Soul. All this is just and reasonable.


Light. Take notice then, there shall not be the least good quality in you,
which shall not by every one be loved for its being what it is, and your self
be beloved for its being in you: wherefore sit down and consider what the
things are for which in this world you reasonably desire to be esteemed, and
know you shall be loved for them above, as much as they can deserve, as much as
you can wish.


Soul. Peradventure, they are things I shall not carry with me; as wholly, or
in part belonging to my body.


Light. No matter: You shall be beloved there, because you had such things in
time and place, wherein 'twas fit to have them.


Soul. Now, surely, I have ground enough, without farther curiosity or dispute,
to presume upon the content I desire, since you have so plainly and evidently
demonstrated it. But I know not whether I am arrived at my hopes, for I feel in
my self an expectation that my familiar friends and kindred, and such as I my
self particularly love, should likewise return me a special love.


Light. Fear not, you shall have that also: For mark well the principle I told
you, that there should not be the least thing love-worthy in you, but you shall
be especially beloved for it. Now then, if Friendship, Kindred, Acquaintance,
etc. be things which put a particular obligation of love upon those persons
betwixt whom they are, you will be more lovely to them for these very respects:
wherefore all those will love you more especially then any others; which I
think is that you expressed to be your desire.


Soul. Yes, this is well: but yet a little difficulty molests me. I have been
taught that God loves most and next to himself, the Angels or Saints, according
as they are in degree under him: then if the lowest love me as much as I
deserve, others will love me more then I deserve, which is against reason, and
so impossible.


Light. Two things are to be considered in love; first the comparison of one
beloved object to another; and this way all will love you according to your
desert: for none shall prefer any thing less lovely before you, nor you before
any thing more lovely: a second consideration is the strength of the affection
we call Love, which (being according to the nature out of which it proceeds) in
all above your condition will be greater then you deserve, in all under you,
weaker; according to the proportion of their natures and strengths.


Soul. Yet one thing more comes into my mind: I see some strong natures, in
whom (though by real effects it evidently appears they love their friend yet)
there is no tenderness; you can observe no motion of love in their hearts, no
show in their change of countenance: such a love gives me small content. Shall
we therefore have in Heaven a melting, sweet, delicious love, or only those
strong and solid thoughts, which as they are very good, so are they far from
giving that pleasure, which this other soft and gentle love affords?


Light. Would you not think that man unreasonable, who being cold, and brought
to a good fire, should refuse to warm himself, because there was no smoke, he
having been always accustomed to smoaky fires?


Soul. Yes certainly: for he contradicts his own pretense; smoke being a
hindrance to the heating he desires, besides other inconveniences which render
it offensive.


Light. Such is the passion you call Love, to that which truly is Love: for
(everything being to be discerned by the effects) you shall see those who are
most given to this whining sort of love, least active to help themselves, but
wholly abandoned up to the following of their Passion, without endeavoring to
procure what they desire. So in grief, if you see one fit still weeping and
despairing, you count him womanish; and not so much that his sorrow is great,
as that a little overcomes him. Besides, this passion is but an expression of
the inward mind, or rather a wasting of it; for we see that ordinarily weeping
eases and discharges the heart, which becomes lighter after such venting of it
self by tears. So that this which you desire to have in Heaven, is not love,
but an expression or concomitant of it, weakening and disturbing the affection
for the present, and wasting it for the future; and therefore not fit to give
content to such as understand the happiness of enjoying a place in Heaven.


The sixth discourse.
Soul. There Is yet another thing wherein I find a great inclination and drawing
of Nature; and certainly it is agreeable to some principle within me, though
this kind of delight appears not so sensibly; it is in hearing and understanding
what passes in the world. I cannot epsy a whisper, but I long to know about
what 'twas. If any of my neighbors or acquaintance have met with any change of
fortune, I cannot endure to have it concealed from me: nay, the more secret
such an accident is, the greater is my eagerness to know it: though, as I
said, I observe not those sensible effects in this sort of Pleasure, as in the
former; unless there happen a special reason, out of some other consideration
to raise them. And, perhaps, the curiosity of hearing news proceeds from the
same cause, and belongs to the same head; as also the love I have to reading
Histories, and knowing what passed in our forefathers times: for this, I
perceive, I long after, though I find not therein such apparent delight as in
other entertainments.


Light. And why do you not mention too the feigned Histories and Romances which
the world is full of? find you no delight in them?


Soul. Yes, very great and sensible, they being wholly contrived and framed,
both in subject, fashion, and style to move, nay, even violently to force our
delight, These therefore I did not range under this Head (as likewise seeing of
Plays) because the content arising from them seems to be of a higher order,
then those other pleasures I mentioned.


Light. See you not that other Histories and these are of one nature, though of
different fashions? So that the delight reaped out of both must also of
necessity be of the same nature. And as for Plays, they are but the ample
expression of some little part of that which (comprised more shortly) makes a
History: so that they all agree in substance, though differ from one another in
circumstances. Tell me then, what is it that pleases you in all these things?


Soul. For plays and feigned Histories, I perceive my self taken with the
Passions due to the subject represented. I see I have a tenderness and
compassion toward those who suffer imnocently; I abhor cruel and unnatural
actions; I am glad when good success relieves the afflicted. In fine, if any
word or deed come in very pat and unexpectedly, I am highly ravished. These
things I observe both please me in the reading or seeing, and afterward I find
my self great with desire, till I have discharged my self of them to some
other, whom, I conceive, apt to take pleasure in such passages. In true
Histories and News I am affected with a kind of sober satisfaction; and if I
have heard or read half a story, I feel a want of content till I know the rest,
and be fully possessed of the whole proceeding. As for homebred Curiosities, I
cannot conceive what entertains our affections concerning them, except the
common desire to know, which I imagine is greater toward those things whereof
we have already a beginning; for so, I see, this Itch is pleased, chiefly, in
the business of mine own acquaintance.


Light. And do you think that the common desire of Knowing is a Passion of so
trivial a consequence? which peradventure (if all things were thoroughly looked
into) would appear the chief or sole cause of all our pleasure: at least, it
being the inclination of our understanding and reason, that is, the most
substantial and principal part of us, it must necessarily have great
influence upon all our actions. But besides this, I see another delight, which
is a kind of tickling our affections, whereat they move and have their course,
as strings tuned to certain notes answer one another. And this happens in all
humane affairs; but chiefly in such as bear a particular relation to our own
state and private circumstances. We hear not of any action done by another
man, but it presently strikes a key in our breasts, either of pleasure or
displeasure, because it has a proper and particular report to our condition.

Now consider how small a time you can endure to sit ruminating on a business
that no way concerns you; how impossible it is to take off your hearts from
thoughts, wherein your interest or affections are notably engaged: and then
reflect on the choice which in heaven you shall have, where (according to what
is declared) the whole course of the sons of Adam shall be clear before your
eyes, none of their actions or secretest thoughts hidden from you Think how one
reflection will preoccupate another, how one delight will surcharge another. If
you will see the Counsels of Statesmen and great Princes, there opens it self a
Carriere aperte de vieu, as the French say. If you will see how Scholars came
to their profound learning; how Artificers to their great experience: If you
will see how petty fellows show as much cunning in a little circle, as the
Grandees of the world in their deep and politic designs: If you will see the
increase, as it were, of souls, from the babbling of children that know not how
to spell their letters, to the learned Sermons and sublime Speculations of the
most famous and renowned Masters: in every kind, an excess of examples, a
world of particulars will display themselves to you; all different in some
respects, yet all agreeing in general heads; all inviting and enticeing by
their specialty; all contenting and satisfying, by showing their source in
evident and common principles. Nor shall therebe, in the whole multitude, any
one that shall not affect you with some particular relish and satisfaction, by
its special conformity or difformity to your nature; for both these in that
state shall yield content; as you see here we laugh and are delighted with that
in another, whereat we should be ashamed and displeased, if it were in our
selves.


Soul. Truly, you tell me of a great content: but I have been taught that it is
the propriety of Almighty God to see hearts; and that none else can penetrate
into what passes there, but by revelation from him. Wherefore pray make me know
what you mean when you say, No man's thoughts are hidden from the Blessed; for
this, I hear, is grounded in the holy Scriptures, and so a dangerous matter to
be meddled with.


Light. Those who consider not that the Scriptures are written to men, that is,
to people living in a vale of ignorance and darkness, may, perhaps, too
hastily pass their censure upon the City of Light, whereof we discourse. But,
as far as I can understand them, there is not a word in our holy books
excluding the heavenly Jerusalem from this-knowledge, and our Masters use to
give a rule, that speeches are to be taken secundum subjectam materiam,
according to the matter we treat of; for he that speaks is supposed to confine
himself to the particular subject of the discourse he undertakes:
nevertheless, you have not yet heard me say the celestial habitation enjoyes
this privilege without Revelation; for here I do not display the principles
upon which their conclusions depend; but only declare to you (admitting such
positions to be true) the excess of pleasure and content you are to reap in
that harvest, if you cultivate your land in this world, as you are commanded.


Soul. Then I Will believe what you say without farther enquiry. For truly I see,
that if the day of Judgment declare the justice of Almighty God, this cannot
be done without full and general discovery of all hearts: and if then every
secret thought shall be laid open before the whole world, me thinks it is no
great matter the blessed should in joy the privilege of knowing them before.
Besides, it would be an unhandsome maime both to their knowledge and content,
if seeing the effects, they should be deprived of seeing the causes; which, for
the most part, reside in the inward thoughts. And so have I fallen upon no
small subject of delight to me, that I shall see the Motives and true Sources
of all effects: a thing I observe much aimed at by men of sharpest
understandings; whence it is that Historians are so desirous to dive into the
secrets of affairs; those being accounted the best, who are thought most truly
to have found the deepest ground and bottom of matters of great consequence.


Light. It Is a good and ingenuous reflection. And, if you will take the pains
to examine also the inconveniences which here you find in talking, reading, or
fitting at a Play; peradventure by comparison of your pleasures below, you will
make a fuller conceit of the content you shall meet above; finding there all
the delights sincere and pure, without the mixture of those bitter and
distasteful contingencies, which are so frequently offensive here.


Soul. I have not so ill and slowly followed you, but of my self I can
understand that there I shall not have that incertitude of reports, which here
we wholly rely upon, and yet they are generally so fallible, that it were a
great indiscretion to believe above the tenth part of what is told us. Nay,
even when I hear any strange relation from parties who were present, whose
eyes and ears saw and heard what passed, yet am I often troubled how to
understand their words; some for Interest and Passion, some for carelessness or
ignorance, some because they think it a piece of wit to mend every thing they
tell, so disguising and altering the truth, that it requires a sharp and steady
sight to discern it. Now for reports, how easily they rise, upon what mistakes;
how they are increased, going from hand to hand; with what assurance even those
who are accounted the best intelligencers, will relate, and confidently stand
upon them; our daily experience gives so full a satisfaction, that it is almost
a folly to believe any thing certainly, till a common consent has taken away
all doubt. And all these difficulties may, in a proportion, be applied to
Histories; and perhaps, in some respect remain less answerable then the
objections against living reports: so that I cannot but admire their levity,
who dare with such security ground their judgments in matters of great
consequence, upon the particular relations of some one or few Authors, though
living and present.


I see likewise I shall not be troubled with the dryness, the ill behavior
and importunity of such idle brains, as are generally the inventers of those
News; nor be molested with impertinent discourses upon subjects of little
moment in themselves, and less concernments to me, which often occur in the
best Histories and Plays. Neither shall my body be diseased, my head heavy,
mine eyes sore, my time over-slipt, when business or rest calls upon me: all
which are diminishing circumstances, I feel, continually checking my appetite
toward these delights in this world: and I see (all these being taken away)
there arises a pure, a high, an uninterrupted and never ending contemplatition,
an abundant, a filling and overflowing delight. Now methinks, I begin to
understand how the waters our Savior promised the Samaritan, can prove an
everlasting Fountain of joy and refreshment, perpetually springing to-eternall
life. But yet I do not find I shall have those pleasures, that Plays and
Romances aim at; which consist in passion, and unexpected Contrivances. Nay,
methinks, both are impossible to that State, where neither Passion nor
Ignorance have any place; and nothing can be unexpected but what we are
ignorant of until it comes.

Light. True it is, you shall have no Passion; yet shall you not want the least
delight, even That can afford. For Passion does not please of it self, but only
so far as it increases our knowledge, or heightens our affections. Wherefore if
the impression in the Soul be as great as Passion could make, you shall have
all the pleasure That can procure. Now, unexpectedness moves us by that virtue
which contraries, put near together, have, to increase and set off one another:
such surprises being only a sudden joining of some accident unthought on, to
what was formerly in full and quiet possession of our minds. For whilst our
thoughts are wholly entertained and busily applied to any conceit, we least
expect to see the contrary fall out.


Now consider with your self the passage you must make out of the body into the
state of Eternity; how sudden, how quick, how truly indivisible it will be; so
that whatever surprise can be imagined in this world, is dull and infinitely
slower. Remember farther, that whatever settles in eternity, can never fade or
change, so that how long soever you are out of the body, all things shall be as
fresh and new to you the last day as the first. Conceit then what an
unexpectedness, what a perpetual newness shall be in all you know; what an
extreme difference betwixt the conceits of them before, and those you shall be
endu'd with in that happy condition. An able and judicious person was wont to
compare this change with our going into a Court-mask; when out of a darksome
Gallery, pestred with crowding, noise and confusion, by the short turn of a
wheel, in the twinkling of an eye, we are translated, as it were, into a
paradise of glorious light, attracting spectacles and heavenly company.

Soul. I see there will be no good thing wanting, that can increase and
heighten our pleasures; but that only (in short) which would diminish and abate
the great delights God has created us for; so that you need tell me no more of
this point, for I am fully satisfied, and apprehensive of the vast joys I
shall derive out of this subject.


Light. You must rise yet a little higher, and set your self to contemplate
those great Mysteries which have blinded the sharpest sights, and puzzled the
subtlest wits of the world. Mysteries that dazzled the eyes of S. Paul, and
struck his heart with wonder and astonishment, whilst he stands admiring the
depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God. Think with your self
that the Abysses of Gods judgment shall be laid open to your discovery; the
fates and destinies of Men and Angels: why Jacob elected and Esau a reprobate,
before either of them had done or good or evil; why Pharaoh obdurate and Moses
made his God; why S. Peter head of the Church and Judas a Devil; seeing it was
in the power of the Almighty to have disposed quite contrary of their fortunes,
or brought them all to felicity. But far more content will you receive, to see
why the only seed of Abraham for thousands of years were the Elect people of
God; the rest of the nations all in heaps tumbling into eternal misery: Why,
even since the Gospel, so many and great Nations are inwrapped in no less
darkness and dismal unhappiness for ever: How all this can stand with God's
infinite Goodness and Mercy: Why he does not rather extinguish and annihilate
the unfortunate Angels and Men, then reserve them to such extremity of
torments. Certainly, though all these secret mysterious effects are of so high
a nature, that we cannot reach their causes and true Motives; (for who is able
to be the counselor of Almighty God in the fabric and disposure of the
world?) yet may we arrive at this conclusion, that of necessity there must be
reasons for all: Else what more unreasonable, then to imagine that Almighty God
(who is Reason it self, essential Understanding, and absolute Omniscience)
does these great things without reason? What more absurd then to say, that
(whereas all upright men's wills are governed by reason) God's will (which is
the Author, the Exemplar and Rule of our wills) is blind and wilful? What more
extravagant then to think that the will, which cannot swerve from doing the
best, should work without a best? In fine, what lamenesse were it in Almighty
God, to have his will more ample then his understanding could direct? Reasons
therefore there are: and when you come to lay your mouth to the spring of
eternal truth, there shall you suck in these ineffable Mysteries; there shall
you see how from the essential goodness and the impossibility of swerving
from it, the world and all the variety of Creatures inevitably flow; there
shall you behold how by the infallible manuduction of Reason, every particular
is digested and ordered; how by a constant line of succession, the descent of
effects from causes draws out this long Play, that has so many Ages been acting
upon the stage of this world; there you shall discern the golden threads,
whereby the just retrive themselves out of the Labyrinth of sinners; you shall
penetrate the Adamantine chain, with which the wicked are confined to eternal
flames. In all you shall see the glorious Liberty casting out its Rays: in God
and his Saints strengthened with an undeceivable force of Light; in the ways of
Men struggling in a perpetual Agony with contingency and servitude, except
where in few souls the supernall light more and more hinders the instability of
its estate.


The seventh discourse.
Soul. TEll me no more of these great pleasures, for I feel my self already
full. I can endure no longer. I pant for breath, and languish through excessive
heat of desire. I doubt not henceforth but the state of eternal Bliss
contains far more and higher joys then ever entered into mortal hearts to
conceive. Nor fear I whenever I enter this great field, but for ever to find
a most pleasant and delightful feeding, and eternally drink of the torrent
which inebriates the City of God.


Light. You are too tender: Remember that the kingdom of heaven suffers
violence, and the violent only can be Masters of it. You must look for a
strong Purgatory of love and desire, if you walk this way, you must not give
over without resisting, even to blood. As yet you are scarce got out of the
Circle of Man; it is time now to cast your eyes on the rest of this glorious
frame we call the World, and see what pleasure it affords. It is the whole,
whereof mankind is but a little, though a principal Part. It is a thing in a
manner above us, in a manner our end. If our understanding be but a hunger of
truth, and truth but the perfect possession of a thing without us; you see this
great machine the world, is a principal end to which nature has designed our
application. And truly, when we reflect that the universal Mass of Beings is
the most full expression of Almighty God's Essence, which nature can attain to;
what doubt remains, but that our felicity, in a notable degree, consists in the
perfect contemplation and knowledge of it?


Soul. This I easily believe: For when I have the good fortune to hear a
strange discovery of some secret of nature, such as Philosophers and
Astronomers use to look into; I cannot understand the joy I feel in mine heart.
It Is not of that kind which I have when I laugh, and am taken with some witty
conceit. It Is not such, as when I encounter any welcome news of some advantage
to my self or friends: but of a higher strain mixed with admiration: methinks I
am better and greater then I was before: methinks, they who know these things
are more then men, and are a kind of Demigods. And I observe that Poets and
persons of great brain and capacity (having spent their youth in vain and
worldly pursuits) desire, ordinarily, to consecrate their riper years to these
Sciences.


Light. Reflect then upon the wonders which are stored up in Nature for your
content. Place before your eyes the admirable government of this great Fabric,
the World. Consider the courses of the Sun, Moon, Planets, and fixed Stars,
and hope one day to know what causes and wheels they turn upon. See the Globe
of the Earth, and Men heels to heels walking round about it, without any nayls
or glue to fasten them to it, yet how laborious it is to remove from it.
Really, the serious consideration of the Antipodes renders the mystery so
strange and hard to be believed, that, though we are assured by experience of
the truth, yet if we should always strongly imagine our selves so walking, we
could not but fear, still, falling into the Clouds, when we travailed to one
another. See the perpetual floating of the Sea, like a monthly or yearly
Clock, warning us of the seasons, with as great exactness as do the Moon and
Stars. See the various Climes, with all their affections. The bounds of Seas
and Lands. The difference of temperature in the same proportions to the Sun.
The diversity of Beasts, Birds, Fishes, and Plants, according to the variety of
their habitations. Men themselves, here black, there white, in some parts
tawny, some red: and their very Wills and Affections following the temperament
of their bodily qualities.


When you are weary of these wonders, look into particular Natures. The mixture
of Metals and Stones. How Juices and Liquids penetrate all, and, incorporating
themselves, frame these strange multiplicities of things we converse with.
Plants more wondrous then these: who can choose but be delighted to see a
little Flower or Meal hidden in the earth, and peep out again? now green, then
take body and strength, disperse it self into branches, bud forth leaves, and
flowers, and fruit, and at last other such bags of Meal as it self was. Yet
Living creatures are furnished with a far greater plenty of wonders. The
Worms, the Flies, the Birds, the Beasts, the Fishes, every one affording a
world of admiration and variety.

But above all, MAN the End and Master of all, is a subject of amazing
contemplation. Who would not think a life spent in delight, to understand what
composition that should be, which, turned into blood, becomes first one part of
a heart, afterward a whole heart? what should make it spring and shoot out
into other vital parts? how can a poor heart frame such a variety of Members
as are necessary to the perfect body of a man? What should set two Arms, two
Legs, two Eyes, just such a number of Fingers and Toes upon every man? so many
different parts, so various in their Nature, Figures, Use and Service, and all
these to agree together; and Man, composed of all, to keep so long in tune and
harmony? the deeper we go, the greater's the admiration, though the words
fewer. But what astonishment will it be to discover the subtle nets wherewith
Power and Act (as Metaphysicians call them) are forbidden parting, to penetrate
the divisibility of substance it self? to sing the loves of Matter and Form;
and see how by the Influence of the Overflowing Being, they become the Basis
and Foundation of this fair Pageant? Shall I seek into the rational Soul? and
see the union of the two worlds? or search the Conduits and passages by which
knowledge is conveyed through the Body to the Spirit? How the beating of diverse
weights and figures upon our senses, can beget the skill of knowing all things?
Shall I ask why the Spirit, being subsistent within our limbs, seems dead or
asleep, and can do nothing but by the impression it receives from the body?

But what will it be to make this an occasion of passing into the next world,
there to contemplate the state of so many separated souls, all different, yet
all like one another? then, still to mount up higher to the never-bodied
Spirits, and see their Being, their Natures, their Operations, their Quires,
their Hierarchies? And now there is but one great step more, to behold the
influence of the Divinity upon all, and in all manners; but in none so great
and admirable, as in showing its self, its Face, its Essence to the blessed
Spirits. That Blessing, that Adoption, that Deification, as it is the most
wonderful of all Gods works, so will it be strangely ravishing to behold in
others, as well as feel in our selves.

Soul. I have not the least scruple but that these delights are far beyond
all you have hitherto mentioned; they clearly deserving that estimation and
rank, by the Excellence and Nobility of the Objects, and the pleasure which I
feel even in the meanest of them; for those I confess most affect me, as being
most suitable to my low and heavy disposition.


Light. So it is with you for the present; but, if much and solid contemplation
make you able to manage this point, you will in time experience that even here
these sublime things overdraw all others. Look upon the pains a Democritus, an
Archimedes, a Plato and other Philosophers have taken, to know the lowest of
Truths. The first is said to have put out his eyes, that he might contemplate
the better. The second to have been so absorpt, that he suffered death for not
taking notice of the danger before him. The third to have travailed through all
parts, where he could hear of learned men, to be their Scholar. Another to have
lived in the fields two and twenty years, to discover the customs and
operations of Bees. Think you not these excellent wits found great pleasure in
their contemplations? who was ever moved to so difficult undertakings, by any
worldly design? As for your Alexanders and Cesars, if their lives be well
looked into, they had many collateral respects, and by-invitements; always
conversing amongst multitudes of men, who crying up their conquests, as actions
of immortal fame, still encouraged them to go on and finish their triumphs.


Soul. When time and experience shall have increased my force, I shall be able
(I hope) to grapple with these motives. But in the mean while is there nothing
in these secrets of Nature which may touch my self, and so make me more quick
and sensible of the pleasures thereof?


Light. If it so little move you, that this knowledge is the proper mark at
which your nature aims; at least consider that the knowledge of your self is a
special part of it: and if you believe you are concerned in your self, if
delighted with your own parts and perfections, you shall not want cause of
content. What would you have? would you be the Center of this great
Circumference? would you have nothing done, but you should have a share in it?
If no less will satisfy you, let us see how much is true of this. What think
you? are any two things exactly like one another?


Soul. Peradventure yes, I conceive it no paradoxe to believe so.


Light. Then they would be in the same place, have the same figure, etc.
whereby they would be the same, and not alike.


Soul. That Is true I confess; therefore no two things are absolutely alike.


Light. Can two things in any respect unlike one another, proceed from the same
causes in no respect differing from one another?


Soul. Certainly they cannot: for wherein they vary, there must necessarily be
some cause of their dissimilitude; but the same causes still work the same:
therefore the causes must some way be different, if there be difference in the
effects.


Light. This is well. Then you and all the circumstances had not been the same,
if any one of the causes, which concurred to the making of them, had been
altered in any thing concerning your making.


Soul. That Is very true.


Light. Then cast with your self what part of Nature you draw with you, of all
that passed before you.


Soul. I see well that neither the causes immediately concurring to the making
of me, nor any that concurred to the making of them such as they ought
necessarily to be for the making of me, could from the beginning of the world
to this hour, be other then they have been, if I were to be what I am. But how
far this extends it self I do not clearly see.


Light. Look well into the causes of your body: Do you think the Air
contributes nothing?


Soul. Yes certainly: for it piercing all tender bodies by Perspiration, must
of necessity alter much the disposition of either Man or Child, if it self be
different.


Light. And if the very next Air to that which enters into your body be
different, can that which enters be the same?


Soul. Clearly it cannot; for the next part, in so fluid and penetrable a body,
must of necessity have great Influence into that which pierces my Body.


Light. And how far reaches this operation?


Soul. Marry in this way, going from one to another and still arguing, If the
next be altered this cannot be the same, I see no stop as far as the Air or any
other such penetrable Body extends it self; but the same consequence must be
applied to the whole.


Light. You have forgotten your agreement with me in this point, that the Air
contributes to the bodies which are in it; else you would easily have seen that
all which communicate in the same Air, must be changed, if any the least thing
in you were altered.


Soul. Then if it be true, what I see Astronomers now almost consent in, that
there are no Spears, but a continual Air or other subtle body runs through
the whole frame of Nature; all bodies that are must be altered for the
alteration of any one, unless Almighty God, or some other Spirit, by a
particular and extraordinary interposure, make an unexpected and preternaturall
change in some one or more of them.


Light. You are in the right: but do you reflect upon the consequence, that
nothing created before you could be otherwise, if you were to be what you are;
nor any thing following you could become what it is to be, were not you what
you are? So that you shall find your self a partial cause of all, either
before or after you.


Soul. It Is easy to conceive I may be cause of what comes after me, because
when once I have a being, I can work, and some effects may flow from me: but
before I my self am, how can I be cause of any thing?


Light. Do you not know that God creates nothing, but he foresees and
fore-wills all the good which is to follow upon such a production, and makes it
with design, that such good may proceed from't? Whence you may safely
conclude, that he intended you out of all that went before you: and you are not
ignorant that among the four kinds of Causes, the final, or good intended is
the chief and principal; so that you are more the cause of what is past, then
of what is to come.


The eighth discourse.
Soul. THough I know not what to answer to your Discourse; nay, though it seem
clear and evident; yet the strangeness, and even incrediblenesse of the
Conclusion, makes me distrust mine own understanding. But, is it possible that
all these great knowledges shall fall to my share, if I come to Heaven?


Light. Why should you fear the less, if you be sure of the greater? Do you,
peradventure, doubt whether you shall be partaker of the sight of God? and yet
this is so far beyond all we have hitherto spoken of, that there is no
comparison between them; not so much as of a drop of water to the whole Sea.


Soul. How can this be? since God is but one indivisible Essence, and in what
you have declared, there is an infinity of most worthy and ravishing Objects.
For though I doubt not but the sight of God exceeds far the sight of any one,
his perfections infinitely surpassing all; yet methinks, when there is nothing
else to be done for ever, but to see the one and the other, the variety carries
so high an advantage, in respect of taking delight in knowledge, that there
needs a vast excess in any single object to counterpoise it.


Light. Your own words convince you: for admit that God exceeds any one object
(compared with him, as to the pleasure of seeing,) infinitely, that is, to the
proportion of his worth and dignity; you, by the same reason, conclude him
preferrable to two or three; and so to any number, that is, to all. However, I
shall rather apply my self to give you content in your demand, then press you
severely with your own argument. First then, consider, if there were a color
or beauty of so high a degree, that our eye were not capable to see it without
the assistance of some newfound spectacle; and this, not for the littleness
or distance of the Object, but because the purity of the light or excellency of
the color was so striking and glorious, that an eye of this composure would be
blinded with the luster of its brightness: do you not conceive the sight of so
radiant a splendor would be nobler then the view we have of our ordinary
world? and this in the proportion that the Eye improved and fortified with the
new spectacle, is better and nobler then of its own single nature.


Soul. So far I can epsy no way to escape your reason: for if both Eye and
Object be heightened in a proportion, the very seeing, and by consequence the
pleasure taken in it, must of necessity rise in the same degree, or I have lost
my understanding.


Light. Then ponder what I Am sure you have been often taught, that the sight of
God is so great, so sublime an operation, that it exceeds the power of all
celestial spirits; not only such as are, but even all that can be made, and
the whole campasse of creatures and whatsoever is not God. Consider now how
full and overflowing a measure of delight must necessarily follow upon these
premises; I believe you will find it no less then I speak of.


Soul. What may be the reason of this incredible excess? though I Am a fool to
ask a question you have already so fully answered, by resolving it into the
infinite beauty of Almighty God, whose perfections are beyond all comparison.


Light. In the beginning I bargained with you not to expect the causes of
things in this discourse, but the effects, that is, what pleasure arises out of
them, upon supposition of their truth. Yet if you understand the excess of a
Spirit above Bodies and their gross parts, conceive that God so exceeds a
Spirit, as that is more excellent then a Body: I mean not in equality of
proportion, but I would only express that their excellencies are clear of a
different kind; so that there is no comparison of worths between them, but the
supereminent dignity of one so far surpasses the other, that in respect of
the first the second is no ways estimable. A more particular account you may
make your self at your leisure, by reflecting that our apprehension of things
has three degrees: some we conceive as compounded, others as simple; and one
only thing, which we call Being, has a different nature, in our very language
and understanding from all the rest. Now our Masters put Almighty God in the
degree of Being alone and by himself. If you could thoroughly penetrate these
three manners of apprehending, it would be a great advance toward the knowledge
you desire. For the present let me acquaint you with this observation, that
many great Clerks and studied Sages have so much esteemed this Notion, that
they feared not to pronounce Almighty God absolutely invisible to any created
understanding, and inhabiting a light by no power accessible.


But herein the goodness of God has exceeded the wit of Man, and found a means
to communicate himself to our Souls. Wherefore, wiser are our Masters of
Mystical Divinity, who acknowledge the gracious happiness of the next life,
though here they find themselves silenced. For when by long speculation they
have heaped up all these great Titles of Being, Goodness, Truth, Eternity,
Immensity, Omnipotence, Infiniteness, and whatever else we find attributed to
the Deity; after they have some little while exulted in that height, reflecting
upon what they are pleased withal, suddenly they turn the leaf, and with a
more high Ignorance acknowledge he is none of all these; but an unknown
Nobility, whereof all these are so poor and deficient an expression, that they
are ashamed of what they had said, and now rest in a mute admration; not
finding words wherewith to express the thing, which they only can attain to
by confessing themselves totally ignorant of it.

And this is not only true in respect of Men, but even of Angels; whose
languages if we could speak, that is, were our apprehensions and conceits as
high and great as any of theirs, yet would it not profit us, because not
necessarily conjoined with Charity. However, even their languages exceed our
short capacities, and are not to be expressed with the tongues of Men: which
seems the cause why Saint Paul (who was made partaker of their knowledge,
though short of the sight of the face of God) said, he had heard words of
secret that were not in the power of Man to speak: for so (as I take it) the
Original Text bears, and not that it was unlawful; since, what Law was made
against speaking that which we have heard? unless we participate of the first
Error, conceiving God through envy to hide Mysteries and great knowledges from
us. It was not then unlawful, but impossible to declare what was revealed to
Saint Paul; no words of Man being capable to express the conceits of an
abstracted Intelligence, amongst whom he then conversed.

Soul. You seem to drive me farther off from relishing this which you exalted
as the most eminent pleasure of all others. For if you afford me no other
conceit of it, then of an unapprehensible Light, of a mysterious Darkness, and
a learned Ignorance, I know not how to fasten any Arms of love or liking upon
it. Therefore I beseech you oblige me with some explication of this difficulty,
in such an intelligible way, as may feed and encourage my desire to see that
Glory of Glories.


Light. What shall I say to you? If you can fix your eyes upon what Being is;
how, although but one, yet it runs through all that is in the world; how not
only things and parts of things, but even the most dilated and thin conceits
of every thing have this Nature, as necessarily as the fullest: then think
Almighty God is the first root and necessity of Being. He is Being it self, in
it self, and of it self, because it is its self. I must leave the rest to your
quiet contemplations; but know that in these few words, if you ponder them to
their just merit, you shall find life and bliss. Yet let me say one thing
more: Can you conceive how in a Bean or Acorn, or a Mustard Seed, lies the Herb
or Tree which we see spring out of them? how every Branch, and Flower, and
Knot, and what ever else is in the Offspring, lies hidden in the Seed; not
that every part is distinct there, but the nature of the Seed is such, that out
of it they have their ordinary proceeding and sprouting without fail? From this
low and familiar instance, if you can raise your fancy to conceive that
Almighty God is to all that can be or ever was, as this Seed to that which
comes of it, (not in the dull manner wherein the Seed is considered, in
reference to what springs from it, but) in all sorts of principal and noble
causality: then you have made some little entrance into the displaying of this
unspeakable treasure.


Soul. This example has a little awakened my brains, and given me a hint how
great secrets may be hidden in one uniform and simple thing; but I wish you
would be pleased to go on, and help my dullness to understand it better.


Light. Have you read any of the Spiritual books which treat of Gods
Attributes, and show his Essence, his Infinity, his Truth, his Goodness, his
Eternity, his Immensity, his Providence, his Mercy, his Justice, his Knowledge
and Idea's and what ever else fills up those high Discourses? Have you seen the
volumes by which Divines strive to declare those three Mysterious Words,
FATHER, SON and HOLY GHOST; so plain, and yet so high; so simply delivered in
our Creed, and so laboriously commented upon by all the most prodigigious Wits
of almost sixteen Ages?


Soul. I have to my proportion, had a view of most of those Treatises you
mention, and imagine your design is, to inform me, that this Indivisible
Essence we call GOD, contains in it sublime Mysteries, sufficient to satisfy
any mind that is contented here with these Discourses, which learned Doctors
frame of God. But all this avoids not the Objection, that he is an Indivisible
Essence, when seen in himself, and consequently can give but one contentment,
though that be very high and excessively delightful.


Light. You are not much amiss in my aim: but you cannot deny that the entire
cause of that pleasure which all these books afford, is in that Indivisible
Being you shall contemplate. For besides that it is the same thing, the one
only subject of all those Books; and that clearly discovered, which humane
skill can but weakly express under vails and shadows; you shall see how this
one indivisible sight is variously dispersed and articulated, in all those
admirable Truths which fill those immense volumes: so that on one side you
shall behold the Indivisible Truth, on the other the Multitude we make of it,
and thirdly, how that Indivisible contains all this Multitude: which in effect
makes appear to you, that this Indivisible Essence you had such fear to be
cloyed with, contains large volumes, and corresponds to all the Libraries in
the World, and far exceeds them. Nay, if you reflect upon what we were
discoursing by accident concerning the languages of Angels; and if there be, as
some imagine, Corporeal Rational Creatures in other Globes besides the Earth,
which have new manners of apprehending and expressing, different from us; you
shall find in this Indivisible Essence, whole volumes to entertain and
satiate, with innumerable contemplations, all these varieties of noble
understandings.


Soul. I now see that if a thousand Millions of writers, for a thousand times
as many years, should employ their whole studies to drain the cognoscibility
and pleasure the Indivisible Deity yields, it were absolutely impossible they
should in the least measure exhaust it. So that if I atchieve that happy
enterprise, if I once enter into that blessed State, I fear not to be overflown
with a flood of content, pure, beyond all content, refreshing my heart with
perpetual delight for all eternity.


Light. Since we are come so far together, I must not leave you here, without
proceeding to declare one quality more of this blissfull Vision. Did you never
observe, when some hard business has been explicated, according as you
understood it or not, you would say, you had it or had it not?


Soul. I have often felt such a thought pass within me, but what do you
infer from thence?


Light. Not so quick, you must take along with you this notion likewise; Our
Masters tell us, that the Soul by knowledge becomes the thing known: as if it
knew a House, it becomes a House; if an Ox or Horse, it becomes that Creature;
Not by its being turned into the Object, but by the assumption of the Object
into its self: as the Wall, when the Sun shines on it, becomes the light, Iron
in the fire becomes red. And that which persuades them to this opinion is, they
see Water or Iron, when heated with Fire, will warm or burn, and have the
effects of the assumed Nature; and that universally, nothing has the
particular operation of a thing, but its own Nature. Wherefore finding that the
workman, who knows and has the Idea of a house, can make a house; that as far
as we know of a Dog or Horse, so far we can humor them, and work according to
their Natures: they assure themselves, that knowledge is a kind of having or
being the thing we know. Our Divines go farther, and tell us, Almighty God
cannot be clearly known by similitude; and therefore say, it is necessary this
Essence should be immediately joined to the understanding of the blessed
souls, or else they cannot know him. Out of all which I would derive to your
understanding this great truth, That the sight of God is a full possession of
him, a kind of becoming his nature, and a true and real, though accidental,
Deification. Wherefore if you have any esteem of Almighty God, and Charity
toward him, if any love to your self, any desire to be noble and excellent
beyond all others, if any consideration and rationality in you, fly at this
great Quarry, run for this glorious Prize, fight for this incomparable Crown.
Fear nothing, only ruminate seriously upon it; do but heartily desire it, and
long after it; do but wish it, and you cannot fail; it cannot escape you, but
of it self will stoop to your lure and hand.


The ninth discourse.
Soul. I Can better with a deep thought and silent recollection, imprint upon
my mind these glorious truths you have discovered to me, then by words express
how sensible I am of the charming contents they afford. Now I see you have led
me by degrees through all the pleasures of the mind, from the most familiar and
lowest, to those of so high a pitch, that they exceed the apprehension of Men
and Angels. I know not what remains, but to enquire, since our Bodies shall be
partakers of happiness with the Soul, whether it shall have any proper
pleasure of sense, as it seems to have in this world.


Light. Well said you, as it seems to have; for really it has none: all motions
which appear in beasts so orderly that they make a show of proceeding from some
degree of reason, being only the quavering of certain aeriall or watery parts
of the body, so ordained by Nature, as to be the beginnings of helping it self
in its wants. Now we, out of our experience of our selves, conceit they pass
with knowledge in them, as we find they do in us. But marking our selves well,
we shall easily perceive that in Beasts all those motions may be without any
true knowledge: For if we observe our groaning in diseases, we shall experience
that it is but the course of our breath, which coming forcedly, by reason of
some restraint within, sends forth that sad unmusicall noise, as it would do
out of a Pipe so made as our bodies are in that case. By the same Instrument is
performed the expression of Joy, though tuned to another key; and every passion
causing some variety in our interior Organs, is the reason that our natural
expressions are diverse; which clearly discovers the hypocritical ambition of
such as profess to understand the language of Birds, that truly is none at
all. If then we consider our body abstractedly; as there is no knowledge in it,
but only a course of windy and watery substances shut up in conduits and cases,
so there is no pleasure nor grief, but all depends upon the mind, and is
entirely derived from it, even then when the body so impetuously and
irresistably seems to oppress us.


Soul. But at least, shall the Soul then participate by the Body such
pleasures, as now she does by her senses? Neither do I ask this out of any
strong desire I have of them; for your discourse has weaned me from that, by
demonstrating such excessive store of far more delicious entertainments: but
only led on by a curiosity, to know what shall betide us in that happy Kingdom.


Light. I am glad to see you so reasonable; and therefore propose you only one
question, Whether you think it fit any thing should be in that blessed state,
which might bring trouble and disturbance to its rest and peace?


Soul. Nothing is more assured then that whatever is interruptive of joy, ought
to be banished from so great a felicity.


Light. Then go along with me in one observation more; and remember that all
sensitive pleasures are troublesome and importune, unless the body be in a
certain disposition when such delights are seasonable: as to one whose stomach
is full, not only the taste, but even the very smell of meat is nauseous. Which
single instance, if particularly looked into and improved to the uttermost,
will sufficiently establish this conclusion, that no corporeal pleasure is
good to Man or Beast, but in some want or distress in the Body; when either
it is too full, and would discharge some oppressed part, or too empty, and
demands something to fill it.


Soul. All this I agree to, in pleasures of the taste and touch, and
peradventure, of smelling, which seems to have great affinity with our taste:
but how it should hold in recreations and delights conveyed to us by hearing
and seeing, I do not perceive.


Light. Seeing in generally in order to knowledge; and so the pleasure,
principally and purely, of the mind, not of the body: But for hearing, it is
evident enough that is so, even by the sole experience of music; which we
plainly feel inclines us to sadness or mirth, according to its quality. Who
has not heard that it discharges the venom of the Tarantula in Apulia? And by
what virtue think we, is this strange wonder wrought, but that music is to our
inward, as dancing or running to our outward parts? And as Nature stirs up
all young things, Boys, and Lambs, and Kitlins, to play and run about, by
which they disperse the cloggy humors that otherwise would settle in their
joints: so Music strikes our inward aeriall parts into a quick and active
motion, which discharges them of their grosser humors, and purges all into a
sprightlinesse, as rivers clear themselves by running, and winds by the
swiftness of their flying. For we feel, if we mark it, the sensible strokes of
a Lute or Bandora beat the same measure in our Breasts, as if the strings of
our Heart and of the Instrument were both Unisons: and certainly there is some
substance there able to receive the impression; as we see the Air and Water do
of such things as have any quick motion in them. So that the sound of music is
sweet to us, because the tremble it makes in our ear is agreeable to our Body;
but if you take away that proportion, by which such a shake or motion is fit
for us, Music it self would be ungrateful. Wherefore if we conceive our Body
shall be in the most happy and excellent disposition it can be put into, and
that all Motion must, of necessity, alter it from that temperament, and by
consequence, change it into a worse: we see that state is not a state of
Motion, but of Rest; and that all Motion and alteration will be displeasure to
our body. To which if you join this reason, that all corporeal action is
either Motion, or performed by it; you may conclude there can no pleasure
hereafter flow from Motion, nor pass through our senses, all whose operations
depend upon it.


Soul. Then is all corporeal pleasure to be left with this world?


Light. When you come into the other, or rather, after the Great Day, your body
shall be enriched with all perfections its nature is capable of; your soul with
universal and almost infinite knowledge. If still you desire any farther
pleasures, you shall have both skill and means to apply them to your self. And
as for Music, whose delight consists in the variety and connection of
proportions, those your understanding shall participate more perfectly then any
sense can afford; and this in a high and noble manner of operation, without the
dull and slow assistance of ears, to convey their impression to your mind. Can
you wish for more?


Soul. Not only my utmost wishes, but even my curiosity remains fully
satisfied. For other qualities of our body, I have been taught we shall enjoy
eternally all that can be desired; a Strength irresistible; an Agility so swift
and active, that the Soul cannot sooner command then the Body obey; a Health
firm and constant, which nothing can either diminish or endanger; lastly, a
Beauty, now no beauty, but pure Light and Glory.


Light. You are in the right; and I am very glad to observe your affection to
that happy state, from the kindness of your expressions concerning it: only,
as for beauty, of which some are particularly curious, I shall propose this
speculation; It may be so comprised in a general symmetrie of the body, that
nevertheless every individual person may enjoy such a singular and special
temperament, as shall be a degree of best; the joys of the soul darting their
beams and diffusing their influences throughout the very body, and rendering it
the most lovely and desirable sight that can be imagined.

And now, having driven our discourse up to this height, that we are come
within the view of heaven it self: what remains but burning desires,
perpetual thoughts of, and a dwelling (even whilst we are here) in our
conceived happiness above? which only to understand and desire, is to gain,
and for ever possess. But if neither e^ternall Felicities can allure us, nor
everlasting Miseries fright us into our evident duty: what shall we answer at
that Great Day, if we find our selves upon the wrong hand? What pretense can we
offer to be placed on the right? What excuse can we allege against the
dreadful Nescio Vos? Wherefore to avoid that unhappy separation, to prevent
that irrevocable banishment from our dear JESUS; let us make our selves
familiar with him here, who by a thousand favors solicites our love, and by a
thousand titles deserves our service; having spent His age, and shed His
precious blood, to redeem us from sin, and draw us to himself; to deliver us
from the bondage of Satan, and bring us to His own Kingdom, rewarding us with
the Crowns and Sceptres of Eternity: To whom be given all possible honor and
glory from all things, for all things, and in all things. Amen.


FINIS.
AN EXERCISE OF LOVE, WITH A DESCANT ON THE Prayer in the GARDEN;

By the same Author.

S. Ign. ad Romans Amor meus Crucifixus est.

AT PARIS, Printed in the YEAR 1654.

TO THE Right HONORABLE, THE Lady SOMMERSET.
MADAM,
AS your Commands have been able to strain all the Sinews of my Soul into a
quick and faithful Obedience: So, had they the power to imbue it with that
gentle softness and tender Devotion, whence themselves proceeded, this my Pen
had bled out the sweetest pangs that ever swelld the Breast of any Seraphin.
But finding my Heart Strings too cough and restiff for pliance to such
delicious charms; they leave a necessity on me to beseech your cautious
perusal of these Lines, wherein the jarring discords of my confused
apprehensions, and rugged expressions may otherwise prove too offensive to the
harmony of so equal, so well tuned a Soul: in which I can complain of this
only fault, Your imposing so strong and weighty a task upon so slight, so weak,
though,

MADAM, Your Honors most perfectly subjected Servant, Tho: White.
Paris, 9. Sept. 1653.
AN EXERCISE OF LOVE.
PErmit me, my Lord, my God, to confess to thee thy Mercies, and repeat in thy
presence thy infinite Bounties, that I may love and honor and praise Thee,
with my whole heart and forces. Let me remember how from all Eternity I was
nothing, till by thy order I sprung up a tender Imp and bud, testifying my
Origin by my weakness and inability to help my self. Nor did my Father or
Mother (those kind instruments, to whom thou would have me beholding for my
Being) know or intend me, when they served thee to make me: but thou, before
all time, had (among millions rejected) named me and signed my happy lot,
whilst I lay sleeping in my nothingnesse and unbeing. What could thou see
in me, dread Lord, that might move thy will to select me from that Mass of
Nonentity? Peradventure, did I love Thee? Alas, I who was not, what could I
love? yet if I could have loved, surely, nothing less then Thee, who wast most
contrary to my Nullity. But though I was not, to love Thee, Thou wast, who
could love me; and love me as I was, not able to love Thee, nor yet any
thing else: for I cannot love but what is, and by its amiablenesse produces a
liking in me. How miserable then were I, if Thou lov'dst not me, till I could
afford something that might please Thee! But thou did love me, when I could
not love Thee; and sealedst Thy love, stamping Thine Own Image on my face: on
the face of my Soul first, giving me a power to love Thee; and consequently on
my Body, as it is fitted to such a Soul. The Marks of thy bounty are no less
then all I am and have. Ah, wretched I! that continually wear about me all
those Tokens of thy kindness, and yet not love Thee: and yet fear, that
perhaps Thou love not me. Dear Lord, make me love Thee, that I may not fear
Thou love not me: for, True love knows not what it is to fear.

But, Thou art not content to have made me of Nothing: if thou had not
surrounded me with innumerable Helps; and created, as it were, the whole World,
for me; If the Air and Fire did not afford me breath and warmth; the Land and
Sea with their infinite Issue, variety of food and clothing: and these, not
what confines with my place of residence, but even from their utmost bounds. If
I look upon my Table; I see Fish from the Frozen Zone, Sugar from the Torrid,
and Spices from the East and the West. If on my Attire; the Profundities of the
Earth and Water, the Longitude and Latitude of Man's Habitation meet all in me,
as in a Center, to bestow their Rarities upon me. O Great God! who set the
multitudes of unhappy Creatures, buried in the bowels of Metallic Hills, and
consumed in the Marshes of Brasil, to labor for me? Who commands the Seamen
to burn under the Equator, and freeze by the Poles, to replenish me with
Dainties? Who ordained Kings and Potentates, Counselors and Soldiers to beat
their brains, forget their sleep, and hazard their lives, to produce me Quiet
and Abundance? Not they themselves, who for the most part are carried with vile
and wretched appetites to pursue unworthy ends, neither knowing nor dreaming of
me: but only Thou, my Lord and God, who marshallest Heaven and Earth for those
thou art pleased to bless; who heapest thy favors on a generation of dull
stupid Creatures, that can receive all thy gifts without returning the least
love to the Giver; that live and move and have their being from Thee, and never
so much as acknowledge thy Bounty. Why permittest Thou so unsufferable
ingratitude? Why do Thou not either suspend thy mercies, or make us more
sensible of our duties? From this hour, Dear Lord, let not my hand touch a bit
of bread without a thankful lifting up to the Feeder: let me not put on a ragg
without bending my heart, and tuning its strings to the love of him, by whom I
am rendered the But and Scope of the whole World's government.

What shall I say to Thee, my heart-o'rewhelming Love, when I consider how many
millions are swallowed in eternal perdition, whilst I am one of that small
number* Thou have brought to the light and height of knowing Thee, and finding
the narrow path to salvation? That Thou art not unjust I easily see; for all is
thine, and in thy hand to give and dispose according to thy liberality; to
which he, where Thou extendst it not, can pretend no claim, having more already
to thank Thee for then he is able to esteem. But why then did Thou set set
thine Eye upon me, preferring this wretch before so many thousands? Was I
nobler or more excellent then they? O no: Angels and Hosts of heaven, whose
Being or Nature I am not able to apprehend, lie chained in Sulphur and
darkness. Was my Wit or Parts beyond others? O no: the Sages of India and the
subtle Riddlers of the East were ignorant of thy Law; and perished in their
Ignorance. Was I mightier or richer then they? O no: the Conquerours of
Kingdoms and the Giants, powerful in war, were not chosen by Thee: much
less the Sons of Agar, the Merchants, that traverse the world to purchase
treasure, and heap up the wealth of Nations, were called to thy light. Let me
sound as deep as I can; nothing but thy self-Goodnesse, Wisdom and Power,
without the least preceding disposition in me, can I find to be the source and
spring of all this advantage, O My Soul! What do expect, if this be not
enough to set thee on fire? yet, look but about thee, and behold a farther
endearment. See thine own Country; thy Neighbors, Acquaintance, thy Kindred
and Friends: how many may thou observe, in all degrees, more worthy of
acceptance, then thou; yet they neglected, and Mercy indulged thee? think but
on those, whose good nature and innocent life makes thy self many times
compassionatly grieve at their unhappiness, and desiring to be the means of
bringing them to that great good, wherein thou art a sharer; and reflect that
former Ages and the vast spatiousnesse of the Earth afford many millions of
such: yet, all permitted to undo themselves, and run upon their everlasting
ruin. Consider this strange partiallity of mercy. And yet, thou can doubt,
yet thou can say, Were I sure of Gods love.

But, why did I ask whether I was better then others? so, deserving
preferrence; since I have or can have no good, but from Thee? Could I
pre-ordain my self to be born of Christian and Catholic Parents, who should
take care to incorporate me into the Family of the Heirs of Bliss by the
Sacraments, instituted and afforded by Thee? Might I be the cause why my Mother
and Nurses fed me as soon with wholesome Doctrine as with their Milk? why they
prepared Priests and Masters to guide and frame my tender Age? was it I that led
me to a liking of the true Religion, that only Path of Heaven? or brought I my
self to believe and hope in Thee; to love Thee, and those Rewards thou have
prepared for them that follow thee? No, no, dear and dread Providence; Thou art
our Alpha and Omega. If I do any Good, Thou provid'st and fittest the means for
it; if I abstain from Evil, Thou divert'st the Occasions, Thou presentest awing
Fears, and shak'st perpetually the Bridle over my head, that I may not be
lawless and undisciplined. If I consult of any acceptable work, Thou preparest
me Motives, by Books, by Teachers, by Friends, by Opportunities: Thou directest
my Thoughts and apprehensions; ordering my Spirits in my Brain, that what will
be efficacious should occur. Thou enlightenest my Judgment, to discern the
consequence of Truths necessary to my Resolution: Thou quellest my Appetite,
that it hinder not those Truths from settling in me. If I resolve, Thou so
rangest all things, that I choose what is best, not only for the present, but
what shall be so too in future occasions, whereof I know nothing. And as I am
utterly ignorant of the things that are to fall out many months and years
after, which nevertheless depend on this Resolution, and in their season so
take their force from it, that they would certainly fail if it had not been
made right: no more, or rather much less know I any thing, or did I cooperate
in the least to that long Chain of Causes, which bred in me all those parts and
little circumstances; every one so necessary to this Resolution, that if any
had missed, the Resolution had miscarried more or less, not proving the same,
nor producing the same effects. So that let me reflect on any action, great or
little, long or short, or however qualified, I find that it is I indeed do it,
but the force and virtue (and, by consequence, the honor and praise) is thine.
I do it, but as the Child to whom the Nurse gives Nuts or Beads, and holding
his hand, throws them into a hole; whilst he, alas, thinks it is he plays so
well, and pleases himself as with his own act, not having the wit to consider
it is his Nurses aim: Just so, my God and my tender Sustainer, just so do
thou with me, whilst I often forget thee; my weak brains reaching no farther
then to see that I do the deed, without being able (through dullness or pride)
to pass my self, and discern thee the only true cause and root of all my good.
But seeing my self consult, and resolve, and do, I often take this wretch for
as primary as Thou, for thy coefficient and helper, not purely thine instrument
and wholly depending on thee. Which since I barely am, and that (virtuous
action) my chiefest good proceeds so entirely from Thee; what is left for me,
but to love, ever love, and nothing else but love?

Thus far reach the Entry and Porch of Love's Palace. Then, we discover Its
great Hall; when we begin to contemplate the Essential Deity, macerated and
steeped, for our sakes, in all the Miseries of Mankind. That God of Gods lap'd
up in a Virgin's Womb: delivered naked into freezing winds and the smart
strokes of night-aire: swathed in bands and clouts: hanging at a Maidens
breasts: short in Age, weak in limbs; and not forgetting to fulfill all
infirmities of his Brethren. Soon after, led by his Mothers hand, settling his
tender steps, feeding on the fruits of our earth, following his Parents to
Jerusalem, lost, and sought, and not found, with tears: subject to his Mother,
and her Husband: growing in Wisdom and Virtue, as well as in Body. After this,
working with his reputed Father, and in no visible fashion, differing from the
life of his Parents, till he was baptized by Saint John, his holy Precursor.
Then, fasting forty days in the Wilderness, gathering Disciples, instructing
them, working miracles before them, living on the same meats, dyeting and
lodging with them; maintained by Alms, having no certain abode, but most
commonly among the poor, and simple Fishermen. Farther, we see him weary,
thirsty, hungry, forgetting hunger for love of souls, envied, slandered,
blasphemed, threatened; now ready to be stoned, now to be precipitated, flying,
hiding himself, troubled in spirit, weeping for his friends, weeping for his
Country, contradicted, persecuted, conspired against; His confidents
corrupted, his followers excommunicated, his friends sought to death, others
not daring to acknowledge him: and a thousand such indignities.

But the State of Love shows it self first in the Garden. O the doleful
unheard cries to Heaven! O the bitter Agony and deadly Sweat of blood! O the
ravenous throats of devouring Wolves led on by one of his own dearest household!
See with what outcryes, and howlings, and noise, they drag him through the
streets of Jerusalem; every one looking out at their windows to fill their
eyes with gazing at this strange wonder. See how He is tossed from one Tribunal
to another: here reviled and buffetted, there flouted and spit on; every where
despised and maliciously affronted. But what woeful spectacle is that Pilate
presents to the People, which causes so great and loud cries? The Stature is of
a Man, but the Head of a Monster. A Crown of piercing Thorns; bloody, and
bloodying all that is near it. Hair, such as ravished the heart of the
delicious Spouse; but clotted with gore, sticking some to his Neck and Flesh,
some to the horrid Thorns, all rudely ruffled in a hideous disorder. A Face and
Eyes able to subdue all hearts; if stripes, and buffets, and blood, and
swellings, and marks of blind rage permitted them to beseen. Well-shap'd Limbs;
but disfigured and hidden in their own bruises, and tearings, and shatters. A
red ragged Mantle, and a Scepter of a Reed, to accomplish a King of sorrow,
calamity and scorn. And why all this; this ingenious cruelty, to disguise a
poor Man into so monstrous an Object of disdainful Malice? Alas! all is but to
glut the blood-thirsty jaws of an unfaithful and rebellious Multitude; which,
no longer then five days since, sung praises and Hosanna's to this very
Person, and strewed their garments and Palm-branches in his way. A People
infinitely obliged, and no ways offended by him. A people that cannot accuse
him of the least crime, that have seen him cleared in all Tribunalls: the Judge
himself pleading. His Innocence. Yet no less then his heart's last drop will
satisfy them, though it be at the cost of their own and all their posterities.
Nor can they tell why, more then that they are pushed on by those who abuse and
pillage them, and who have conceived this implacable hatred against him, only
because he discovered their violences, oppressions and tyrannyes over these
very people that so furiously exclaim against him.

Well: if there be no remedy, charge those wounded shoulders with thy heavy
Cross, dear Savior, and show us, on Mount Calvary, a greater and stranger
Transfiguration, able to dim That of Mount Tabor. I see thy spread Arms, thy
nailed Hands and Feet, thy racked Sinews, thy pierced Side, thy bended Neck,
thy fallen Looks, thy torn Body, thy pale and bloudlesse Flesh, thy Company of
infamous Thieves, and thy miserable Favorite and forlorn Mother. I hear thy
last Words and breath'd-out Soul into the Hands of thy Father; not, as they
command Heaven, but as they reach to Hell.

O Love! can thou love, or express it, beyond this? Yes: hark, and consider
Those higher-endearing Charms of heaven. The Father, the most tender and
perfectly-loving Father; whose Essence is pure, distilled spirit of love; He
put his Onely-his Equall-his Intimate-his Co-essentiall Son, with His own
hands, nay, with This Son's own commanded Will and hands, to all these and
infinite more unspeakable tortures and miseries, for thy sake, for thine, my
soul; that thou might not complain thou wantedst an Object, a Motive, thou
had not a Teacher, a Pattern, an Exciter, an Enforcer to Love.

IF there be a Hall for all comers, certainly there is a Parlour too for select
and choice friends; where they may confer together of thine infinite
perfections, and often repeat with joy thy unspeakable bounties; where they may
retire from the noise and distractions of the World, and entertain their
thoughts with the sweet still-musick of contemplation; where they may sit
alone, excluding even themselves, and be chastely ravished with the dear embraces
of the Divine Spouse of Souls. O, what Droanes are our highest-strain'd Lovers,
whose memories in all languages affect immortality for their fantastic
passions! what dull buzzing of Beetles are their kindest expressions to the
melting notes of this heavenly harmony!

But is there no further admittance (O glorious King of Love) for those who
have so happily entered thy Palace? I remember a large upper-room, furnished by
thy self, and richly prepared to give yet a more noble treatment: and methinks
I hear something within me bid me advance a few steps further. What fair gilt
door is that which dazzles so my sight to look on? Sure it is the holy place we
seek, sealed up for thy peculiarly beloved. Open it, some bright and flaming
Seraphin. O my God, what do I see? what is this my eyes behold? Manna raining
from Heaven for those that can get to the shore of that former Red Sea of loves
floods? Truly my God, my Lord, Love has transported thee even to ecstasy, it
has made thee do extravagant and frenetick actions: extravagant indeed and
freneticall, if measured by the narrow and short judgment of poor humanity;
but heights, and depths, and Abysses, if referred to thy uncircled wisdom, and
unlimited reach of bounty and goodness. Behold the Body that hanged on the
Cross, that was anointed in the Grave, that rose again and ascended to the
right hand of the heavenly Creator: Behold, It falls down in wheaten drops,
like Coriander Seeds, to feed and feast the wretches, descended from Adam.
Behold the Body, the Blood, the Soul, the eternal Person, the Deity, the
Trinity; all couched, as it were, in a corn of Bread. The Omnipotency, that
made Heaven; the Wisdom, that linked all possibilities into the Chain of all
Beings; the Bounty, that crowded into Natures teeming bosom all that was Best:
these, all these lie here covered like a Chemical pill in a Sugared wafer,
Those looks from which Heaven and Earth amazedly fly; in whose Presence the
Princes of the celestial hosts, and the Pillars of the World tremble: that
Head, on which depends the fate of Souls, both past and to come: that Tongue
which shall doom in one word, the Nations of all Ages: All are, here humbly
stooped and subjected, to me, and other such wretches; even, to be abused by
our wickedness. Yes, yes: all these are as truly, Here, as they are on thy
Throne in Heaven; as they will be in the midst of the blessed, on the Day of
thy Triumph over Nations. What do I say, as truly: and not, even, more: in a
far more excellent manner? for thy Body is in Heaven, as in another and
different thing: but, in the Sacrament, substantially, in It, as man's Soul and
Body are in Man; as the adored Person of God is in my Lord Jesus Christ; as
every thing is in its self or in its whole, Thou art therefore, my Jesus, both
in Heaven and in the Sacrament, truly; but in one more properly, in the other
more excellently: Reallity is in both, but the Manner different. Wherefore, I
cannot complain thou have left us, by thine Ascension; and bereaved us of that
comfortable Presence, whose force was so magneticall in thy lifetime. No, no;
I see Thee as truly, as they did then: I feel thee as corporally, as did That
Master of Touching, who sought thy Side and Wounds to embalme his Sense in: I
Taste Thee as really, as the Chanaan-Feaster did the Wine Thou sentst him: Thou
deludest not my Senses, by making me only seem to See, Feel and Taste, when
indeed I do not; Thou entertain'st me not with other things or Qualities, which
are with Thee, but not thy self. No, no; the White I see is Thou; the Body I
hold in my hand or mouth, is Thine and Thou; that which yields Savor to my
tongue and palate, is thy-self, and no other thing. This thou have told me;
this thy Church has ever apprehended and taught; this I believe and confess to
Thee. But oh! can I conceive without trembling, or speak without horror? Does
Man's Hand break the Body of my Savior? do Man's teeth rend and mangle the
Sacred vesture of Deity? Yes, yes, my Soul; fear not to confess the Wonders
and Mercies of thy Lord and God: they may be hard to understand, but they are
the Words of Life. So far has He subjected his glorious Body to our use, that
what other bread can suffer, may be wrought upon Him. Not that we can tear a
Finger from his Hand, or his Hand from his Arm, or any one member from another:
but as when we break bread, every piece is still bread; so when we divide his
Body, both parts remain his whole Body; for it was not one part that became one
part of the Bread, and another the rest, but all succeeded to each part of
bread. Let great Clerks in their Schools, with their subtilties search how this
can be effected, (for, seeing it is done in bread, it is not against Nature,
nor unintelligible, even by That) to me let it suffice the Church has taught me
it is so; and that it is the greatest benignity and most gracious condescence
that God himself could express, to have it be so. And is this more, perhaps,
then that thy immortal flesh should nourish my mortal Carcass? that it is
mingled with Mine, as Wine with Water; as two melted Waxes incorporate
themselves? Let none tell me, it is Quantity that is digested into my body: for
then it is not Thou that nourishest me; and I will not forgo those precious
expressions, that Thou feed'st me with Thy Flesh, and giv'st me Thy Blood to
drink. So thy Words sound; so thy Church has taught; and so I believe. How this
can be done, without thy being turned into me; or how thy Substance can,
unchangedly, be changed into mine, that thou may endue my Flesh with a
quality of Immortality, let the Sages question: but I Am sure it is so; this, I
know, is the way of Love; and the most charming Mystery, and enchanting Riddle,
that ever love-spent bowels were able to sing or sigh out.

ANd now, my Soul; having thus (perfunctorily, Alas!) viewed the excessive
benefits of Almighty God: it is time to reflect a little upon thy Duty; and
consider what motions and affections they should stir and work in thee.

First, Thou have seen how all thou have are gifts: and, not only all; but,
wholly. If any friend has done thee kindness: He prepared that Friend; he gave
him the power, the occasion, the will to serve thee; he blessed his endeavors
with efficacy and success, If thou thy self have done any thing to thine own
improvement or advantage: He gave thee, not only Body and Soul, with all their
powers and faculties; not only matter, opportunity, strength, will, liberty,
choice; but every least imaginable perfection of the very stroke of choice and
liberty: insomuch that there is nothing, no considerability of it, so from thy
self, that, even its being from thee comes not from the Almighty, in comparison
to whom, no Friend, no creature ever did or can do any thing for thee. Shall
then, the friendship or love of any Creature have power to draw my affection
from God? permit it not, my great Creator; but thoroughly perfect thy work. Why
am I good by half's, since I am entirely thy Design? I profess, before Thee,
who see my very heart, and before Angels and Men, that I ought not to be so,
that it is folly and madness to be so. Give me then thy grace utterly to
abhor and detest so injurious, so unworthy an ingratitude. And since Thou
vouchsaf'st thus clearly to convince me, that it is a great indignity, and
against all reason and truly-naturall inclination to join any with Thee; grant
me ever with all exactness to observe this duty, That as no Creature has the
least part in doing me good, but merely so far as it has it from Thee; no,
not I my self: so none, none may share with Thee in my Love, but just so far
as thy love, thine order, thy direction applies it to them.

Next, my Soul, thou have seen how the Benefits of God are not only all thou
have, but that they are in an excessive Measure; wide as the World; uncountable
as the sands of the Sea; great as the Creatures can be: since neither the
eminentest Men nor highest Angels are exempt from being ministering spirits,
employed for thy salvation; nay, God himself, in the two Persons of the Son and
Holy Ghost, has condescended to wait on Thee. So various and superabundant they
are, that they comply not only with thy necessity, but serve even thy delights
and recreations. So that thou art neither able to conceive the multitude and
greatness, nor comprehend the worth and pleasingnesse of his favors. What
then can thou say? but only lie gasping with admiration of so vast, so
unknown a Goodness, and sigh out in the center of thy Heart, My sole-Good, my
All; I thought before I was bound to acknowledge thy Benefits, and love Thee
for them, but now I renounce both: for he that acknowledges, makes a show as if
he were able to esteem; and he that loves, seems as if he would render
somewhat. Not so I, my great Master, not so. But I protest my self infinitely
below all thy mercies; unable to value the least of thy Blessings, much less
to repay Thee any thing for them: since, had I any thing worthy thy acceptance,
it were all thine, and I could offer Thee nothing but thine own. What then
shall I do, but throw my heart at the feet of thy bounty, all-open, all-melted,
without any self-will or power of resistance, at every pulse of my breath,
repeating this only Burden, Do thy pleasure upon me.

Again, Thou have seen, my Soul, that (far beyond all created Essences) God has
been so liberal as to bestow Himself on thee. He bowed the Heavens, and came
down, rendering his sacred Person subject to all the miseries of Humanity. He
laid aside all the prerogatives of his most noble and most perfect soul;
exposing it to labors, to tears, to griefs, to those stupendous throws in
the Garden (even, to such a height, that it admired it self, in those
expressive words, My God, my God! to what a point have Thou let me be brought?)
And, in fine, to be commanded even to Hell. He abandoned his Body; to heat, to
cold, to weakness, to hunger and thirst, to weariness, to torments, to death:
and not content with this (after the Resurrection, in Its state and season of
Glory) he sent it again into the World, to be subject to a thousand more
indignities, scorns and abusings. Here now my soul, compare seriously thy
sufferings with His, and consider, First, Since nor health nor wealth, nor any
other good thou possessest is thine, or from thy self, but only vouchsafed
thee during his pleasure and discretion; all thy sufferings can be but a
not-enjoying any longer what is no way due to thee: but He was incapable of any
wants in himself; if his own Will had not taken upon him both a Nature that
could want, and its necessities. Again, what commodities He at any time seemed
to have, he held them from himself, and His purely they were; wherefore He
truly suffered when they were ravished from him: whereas we, through ignorance,
attribute to our selves what we possess, being really but Trustees, not
Masters of the least pile of grass. Farther yet, our mis-call'd sufferings, if
rightly used, are indeed blessings: for if we lose our Fortunes; alas, they
made us not know our selves: if our Health; it is to disaffect us to this world:
if we prove unhappy in our Children, what greater distraction had we from the
love of our hoped glory, then our care and tenderness to them? But Christ's
sufferings could have no such advantageous effects: no, they were, chiefly, to
show us the straitest Path to that life He promised us; and to assure by his
own Example, (who could not but know and embrace what was best) that the way of
Tribulation is the high-Road to Heaven. And can thou, my Soul, after this,
think any Cross heavy, and affliction hard to endure? can thou choose but be
vexed and enraged at thy Flesh and Blood, which, against all evidence, will
force thee to esteem unfortunatenesse an Evil?

O my great and sole Good! suppress these unreasonable follies which boil in
my breast. Make me know whatever happens, good or bad, to me is securely my
best, because it comes from Thee; whilst my only care ought to aim at this,
how to improve it to my best advantage. Make me understand that whatever I
bear with patience, I suffer for thy sake; because I take it, as from Thee;
because I do as Thou command; because it is in imitation of Thee; and lastly,
because it is to obtain Thee, my chief, my only, my most entire Treasure. O
rich Treasure! O mass of Glory! in proportion to whose attainment, all the
labors and tribulations that Men and Devils can heap on me are nothing,
nothing considerable, not deserving even the slightest esteem.

Lastly, My Soul, thou have seen with what ambition and exaggeration of
Courtship, with what unparalled address and exquisite inventions thy Lord
has sought and wooed thy love. First, He gave thee heaven and Earth, with all
their Creatures, for thy Motives to know and love Him. Next, He made Himself
thy Fellow and Brother in flesh and blood, that thou might not strain thy
self, but familiarly conversing, be caught with his love. Beyond that, He has
passed all those fabulous imaginations of dangers and misfortunes, in which
idle wits have framed Errant Ladies to have engaged their Servants for proof
of their fond and obstinate loyalty. He has heaped on thee all the names and
titles of endearment, which either nature or use have introduced among Mankind:
He is thy Maker, thy Father, thy Spouse, thy Brother, thy Ransomer out of
thraldom, thy Deliverer from danger, thy Savior from misery and death, thy
Friend, even thy very Play-fellow. He has gone beyond all this: He is thy Food,
thy Drink, thy Self: for since when thou eatest Him, His Flesh becomes thine,
(as truly as the bread, whereof we increase and nourish our substance, which by
the power of matter and conformity of quality remains in us) how can we choose
but be his Members, so, that if we dishonor our body, we dishonor His? how
can we choose but have a share of Him perpetually in us? and in plain truth be
Relics of Him, of His glorious Flesh and immortal Blood? O Eternal Wisdom,
how truly did Thou say, It was thy delight to be with the Sons of Men? Can
Angels boast of such privileges, of such tendernesses, of such Ecstasies of Thy
love? No; none but so weak a Nature as ours was able to necessitate Goodness
it self to so deep a condescendence as this: and none but all Goodness could
so appropriate it self to all Infirmities. O melting Goodness, that fillest
every corner and chink Thou find capable of thy perfections, wave not this
poor soul of mine, but make it understand the unmeasurablenesse of thy bounties
and Mercy. Shall I for ever apprehend my past sins, still in fear whether
they are forgiven? Shall I not rather, in the very moment of terror, turn me
to Him, of whose readiness to receive me I cannot doubt? Mark how easy thou
art to pardon thy self; and consider thou art one of his Members: whence be
assured, as soon as thou say I have sinned, thou shall hear thy sin is taken
away. Shall I fear that I am not in state to receive his Body, when the very
preparing my self, and having a true will to go meet Him, puts me in state?
Shall I seek outward Medicines for my wounds, whose ulcerousnesse only
consists in bereaving me of Love? O my dearest Lord, make me love and joy in
thee: make me take pleasure to come even corporally to Thee: but much more to
delight and solace my self in thinking of thee, in remembering how Thou love
me, how Thou art my Friend, my Spouse, my Father, and whatever dear name by
which Thou have been pleased to express so blessed a relation. Make me place my
chief felicity in contemplating how happy I shall be, when once I see Thee face
to face, and familiarly converse with Thee, as a Friend does with his Friend.
Mean while establish firmly in my soul this absolute judgment, that the
greatest pleasure and advantage this world can afford me is, often, and long,
and heartily to practice here on earth that sweet and holy conversation which
is to be consummated in Heaven. What Maid, whose Parents have promised her a
person completely qualified for her Spouse, is not pleased to sit by her self,
and stedily fix her thought upon him, wishing for the day she shall once meet
and enjoy him; till then, love and honor him in his Picture, see him in every
one that has seen and known him, and be overjoyed with all Tokens that come
from him? Whereof what variety, my soul, have thou from thy God? All we have
hitherto discoursed is nothing else: Heaven and earth, and all that is in them:
His Divinity, his Humanity, his Body, Blood, and Soul, Thy self, all thou have,
all thou do, all thou have done or ever shall do. -- Se Nascens dedit socium,
Convescens in Edulium, se Moriens in Pretium, se regnans dat in Praemium.

But retire thy self a little, my soul, from the multitude of the Creatures
(His benefits) to thy more united thoughts: for Love's Palace, to be complete,
must have a with-drawingroom. Thither then retire, and consider this Great
Courtier that makes so many Embassyes to thee for thy Love. Know who He is,
whether He be the best worthy thy Affections. First what is His Extraction? Is
He Noble and of an ancient race? He is the First of things, whence all Nobility
derives its esteem: His Ancientnesse is Eternity, higher driven then Time His
Creature and Offspring, which yet is the measure of all other Auncestry. True
it is, He is the First of his House, but the Last too. His nobility is not by
derivation from others, and a participation of their worth: it is entirely His
Own, out-wearing the long Pedegrees of Mankind's successions by the
never-changing greatness of His Own Person. Is He powerful? All things,
except himself, are his Creatures, and the Works of his Hand: they depend for
their being, all they have, all they are worth, on his breath; and would perish
if he did not perpetually drop them from his omnipotent Fingers. He works them
and turns them as he lists with a Fiat; and none can breath a wish to resist
him, but by his permission: nor is Himself able to make a Thing of such
strength, that it can break his least Order or Will. Is He rich? Sea and Land,
and all their Treasures are His: Beasts and Birds, Fishes, and Trees, and
Plants are the store of his Basse-Court: the mines of the Earth and the Jewels
of the Ocean are the refuse of his plenty. All that lies hidden behind the
dazzling stars, (whose riches we cannot imagine) all is His. There Is no end of
his Wealth: and his Creatures are not able to make use of the least part of it.
All this is well. But, peradventure, He is a great way off, and I cannot come
near Him. He is every where: He makes Place it self: He is in all Things and
their Places; to be separated from him is to be Nothing and No where. He is in
thy very Heart, and in the bottom of thy Soul: the inmost thing thou can
find in thy self is He; nor can thou look upon any thing without or within
thee, but He is to be found and seen in it, if thou have Eyes turned toward
him, and a Mind to discern him. Thou can never want his light, but by thine
own fault; never be excluded from his Presence, but when thou turnest thy back
to him; which yet can be but from his favors, not from his Power. With all
this, is he wise? The Device of the World is His, He contrived the Order of
Heaven and Earth. The Planets roll by his measures: Night and Day proceed by
his direction: the Waters in the Sea expect his beck, turning and winding just
as he pleases. He joynted the Beasts, every one to his peculiar motion; and
frames the Little-ones in the Damm's Wombes. He prevents and casts the counsels
of Men, catching those who think themselves crafty, in their own snares, and
overreaching them in their most premeditated projects. He changes Kingdoms
and States, making Tyrants the instruments of their own ruin. In a word, He
governs the Fates of Men and Angels, and brings them to those Ends he thinks
fittest. Is He Bountiful and magnificent? Behold the Earth we walk on; all
this he gave to One Man. Alas, we but trample on the outside, and fill a small
part of it; there is a thousand times more we never come to see: and of this
surface we inhabit, what vast Deserts are possessed only by Beasts and Birds,
whilst all the Sea covers is stored only with Fishes? Think what abundance of
Plants, Beasts, Birds, and Fishes live and die without the knowledge of Men:
yet all bestowed on them, and created for them. Remember what a heap of
Benefits thou found'st laden upon thy self, and know that Others have no less.
See the Sun and Moon lighted like Torches to wait upon us; one far greater,
the other not much less then the whole Earth. See in a fair night how the huge
world about us is bestudded with glorious Gemms that serve for nothing but
witnesses of his great Magnificence, and unbounded Prodigality to us. But, Is
He Purely Loving, and has no Ends in all He does? When no Creature had a Being,
He was brim-full of Glory, and infinitely satiated with his own happiness:
being Essentially Joy and Pleasure to Himself: to Himself Honor and Praise,
and all He could wish; He could desire nothing, nor aim at obtaining any thing.
Now He has made Creatures, He Is never the better for them: his Heart is not
touched with their praises or good-works, no more then it is molested with their
dispraises or mis-deeds; nor can any possible Creature have force to move his
Will, more then my weakness has to change the course of the Sun and Moon. He
made all Creatures therefore, not for any good in them, or love conceived from
them; but merely out of the Intrinsecall Goodness of His Own Nature, and the
strong Inclination which Himself is to do Good, because He is what He is; an
Inclination stronger and more natural then any Lover in this world can have,
with as much advantage as God's Nature has over a Creatures. So not without
reason is His Love, but totally Reason; as not kindled by thinking or casting
to obtain any End, but perfectly from Nature and Essence; and no more to be
wrested from Him, then can His own Being: yet nevertheless, most perfectly
free and rational. This is much. But He Loves a great many; so that I fear I
shall have a small portion in His Affection. O no; His Heart is whole where it
is: and as He comprehends perfectly all things with so high an eminency, that
he knows every one as well as if there were nothing else to be known; so He
loves every one as dearly as if there were no other. He is with one, without
parting from another: He fills one, without emptying another; and (as a Rainbow
in a Multitudes Eyes, or Thunder in all the Worlds Ears) He is Whole in All,
and Whole in Every one. His Affection, his Care, his Tenderness is entire,
indivisible to every one: the Multitude of those He loves, improves and raises
every ones happiness to a far higher degree, in that it makes all them love
one another, and publishes his particular Love of thee, to be known and
esteemed by all the loves. Nor is there the least subject of any Envy or
Jealousy: He can wait on All, entertain All, fill All, content All, bless and
beatifie All at once.

And now, my glorious Lord, having sifted and racked my brains to find some
exception against Thee, some excuse to palliate my withholding the Duty I owe
Thee, some Cross-knot to dull the piercing of thy two-edged sword, dividing my
Soul and Spirit: behold, nothing imaginable; but all sweetness, all heat, all
light. O then let me turn my course, and joy at my missing desired misfortune.
Let me sit with the happy Spouse, so pleased with every part of her Lover. Let
me delight my self to consider the Greatness of every Perfection in Thee, and
the Infiniteness of All. Let me compare Thy Eternity to the weak imitation of
humane Nobility; and scorning This, joy in the immense eminency of That. Let
the vast extent of thy Power (in wideness and profundity to all effects, and
to Huge ones) make me laugh at the narrow-compass'd and beggarly ends which the
ambitious Hearts of this world aim at. O the poor Treasures that can be hoarded
in caves, in houses, or towers! what proportion do they bear to Thy wealth? O
the scant presence and jealous absence of Lovers in this world! the
outwardnesse of them, and hearts to-be-guess'd-at! what bitter-sweets must they
of necessity cause? Besides, their shallow wits and short reaches, in no other
respect to be esteemed, but because we find no better: their hungry benefits
and pinching prodigalities, proportioned to their petty affections: their
by-ends and base aims, in their most real and truest professions: their weak
and impertinent passions: their fond and changeable inclinations, easily
consumed in a few trivial disgusts. What miserable penurious blasts are these
to blow the coals of Love? And yet have these so long moved my Heart, whilst it
has lain so heavy and restiff to lift it self up and follow thee. O my only
Good, henceforth for ever make me run like the blessed Magdalen, without care
or consideraton, after the Odours of thy Perfumes. Make it all my pleasure to
sit hours, and days, and nights, weighing every Excellency of thine, and
considering how good it is for all Creatures, and particularly for me, that
Thou art so rich in glory, so full of perfections; but above all, how thy
adorable Attributes become Thy self, how bright and beautiful they sit upon
Thee. Make me spend all my forces in blessing Thee that Thou art such, in
rejoicing at it, in protesting that it is all reason, all fitness, all justice
it should be so; that it is the bliss of thy Creatures, but yet a greater good
and far more excellent in it self. Make me vapor away into Acts and Wills to
have it so; to render it such (were it not so, and in my power to procure it)
and that for what it is to me, but much more for what it is to Thee. But oh for
that day, when this knowledge of mine (now childish, darksome, partial, and
Enigmaticall) shall be turned into manly, noon-like, full and clear Vision. O
how unmeasurably must my Love be there increased, where the Object cannot fail
to deserve infinitely more then I can employ! yet shall I then employ
infinitely more then I can now imagine: and as the degrees of Love are
multiplied, the degrees of Joy must still grow higher; and the more the Joy is,
so much more must the Love be redoubled: thus raising still one the other, to
the very breaking in pieces the Adamantine sinews of my Soul; whilst the
Object ever stretches by its infinite perfection the bounds of a capacity ever
yielding to embrace it. O how shall I cling to, and incorporate with him! not
for fear of losing, but for eager desire of more enjoying. O how shall I melt
into esteemings and praisings, and Love-breathing Dittyes! how shall I
inessence my self into that Fountain of Goodness! Oh come, oh come, that happy
day: come even now. I fear neither Hell nor Judgment; for I know Thou can
bear no wrath against those that love Thee. Come then, come while these sweet
sighs call on Thee: wrest my soul from this loading, this loathsome body: skrew
up even these very aspirations to such a pitch, that they become the happy
instrument to break my heart strings (those fetters and bonds of my imprisoned
Soul, which keep it from the sight of my so-beloved Spouse and Master) and set
me at liberty in the eternal freedom of thy Palace, and everlasting glory of
thy celestial Presence. Fiat, Fiat.

BReath a while, my Soul, and recall a little thy Spirits. This Stupendous
Palace of Love still deserves a more curious search: it is not impertinent here
to be humbly inquisitive. Let Us see whether there be not yet some farther
secret worthy our discovery. And behold a Lock and little Door. Oh, it is Loves
Cabinet! Certainly He there reserves some rare Jewel to enrich and adorn thee.
Knock, call aloud: and if he delay to open, at least peep through the keyhole,
and see what is within. O Glory! it is the very Quintessence of Loves Object. I
see how, because God is sole Eternal, all things must be made by Him: and
since nothing can give, but what it has, nor make, but what it is, I see the
whole frame of all that is or can be must be in Him; with all their joints and
intriques, wherewith they are entangled in their flowing from Him. Whence I
plainly discern that by knowing Him, I shall know all things, and all causes of
all things. O vast and spacious Wisdom! O incredible content! For since my
Soul is nothing else but a Vessel and capacity of knowledge, and This alone is
the knowledge of all things, by their proper Causes too, and those resolved
into theirs, even to the very highest cause (not ascending backward, but
beginning at the Springhead, and most knowing it; and from it descending even
to the lowest, the most impartible grain of Sand or Dust:) what can my Soul
wish more? what can it imagine greater? Yes, my prospect opens it self farther,
and I see that, since all created things are in themselves dispersed and
multiplied with infinite variety, and sometimes incompossibility and
contradiction, but in God refined and resumed into a most simple and
indivisible Being; they must infinitely be better in Him then in themselves;
and He yet infinitely better then they. For as four cannot be different from
three, but because it has somewhat that three has not; so God must have
something that is not in Creatures, to be different from them: and this being
of a higher order and more eminent rank, must of it self be better then all
they put together, and of a far nobler and richer glorious possession. I see
yet more, that since God is cause of all other things out of Himself, He
himself can have no cause; and that they having their being from Him, may be
and not be, as composed of being and what is; only God has no such composition:
wherefore since He cannot be what is, without being, He is being without what
is; whereas all Creatures Substance is what is, and being an Accident to them.
This I find that God is not only none of these things we see, but nothing like
any of them: of a higher and super-excellent strain, not agreeing with them in
any name that can signify Substance; infinitely above our utmost conceptions,
incomparably sublimer, nobler, more wonderful, more deserving knowledge, and
more stirring and straining an appetite of it. Beyond all this, I see that God
is not such an Existence and being, as we apprehend by this name we give it,
and which we exalt above what is by it; but as far retired above it, as that is
above what is. He is not a being by which a thing is, but a being which is a
thing, a Substance. He is a being redoubled upon it self, giving and receiving
being to and from it self, and yet neither (for this is impossible;) but a
higher inexpressible force, implying both without their contradiction. I see
that all I have said and can say, are pure follyes, not expressing, in the
smallest degree, the thing which I see is: and the more I force my self to
understand it, the farther I am from it, (one abyss still calling upon
another) because it is infinite and unsoundable, but only to God himself. O
happy darkness, if once to become lightsome! the more hidden thou art now, the
greater bliss will thou be then. Oh that my heavy thoughts had the wings of an
Angel to soar aloft and tower height upon height, till I came within view of
these celestial Quires! not to discern Thee, my dread Lord, (for I should be
never the nearer) but to quicken my desire, and increase my longing. O how
fixed would mine eyes stare upon Thee, when thou should be pleased to remove
the skreen of my mortal body, that now intercepts the view of thy glory, and
demolish the strong-wall that as yet unhappily detains me from thy Presence!
Methinks I see that no violence of nature, no falling weight, no bent of forced
steel, no earth-bursting vapor, no tower-shivering thunder, or bulwark-tossing
mines could express the eagerness of my Souls embracing Thee. Methinks I see
Eternity too short to enjoy Thee in; and that my Soul would sooner wane to
nothing, then part from Thee. Methinks there is no possibility of Pleasure which
is not in Thee, nor any out of Thee; no faculty in my Soul to wish or think of
any other thing but Thee: Thee, my only, my eternal, incomprehensible All, my
dear, dearest Lord, and my God.

If the good God has reserved for his Friends be so immense, and the joy and
bliss it brings the Soul so extreme; who can doubt but the loss must be
proportionable, and the grief and anguish of missing it be measured by the same
weights? what then must thou do, my poor Soul, wavering yet betwixt hope and
fear of these so important contraryes? what must thou do to assure thy chief
interest, and make thy self secure Mistress of so great, so glorious
pretensions? Peradventure, spend thy time in wishes and flashing thoughts, like
the Northern Fire-drakes, or the lightning breathings of fair Summer nights,
which but vent their own heat without firing any thing. No, no; these goads
pierce too deep to be contented with palliating and superficial remedies.
Adieu then those so charming warbles of Father, Friend, Spouse, another self,
and whatever else the Wit of Man, or even the Spirit of God has invented to
tickle material fancy, and to revive Tara^^nteliz'd Souls. These are Milk for
beginners; Lenitives to take away the angrinesse of their festring hearts, when
they first tear off from worldly toys; Metaphorical expressions, which have
no proper and solid meaning to feed the truth-hungry mind. The affections
growing out of these are grounded upon love to our selves; even then when we
wish more good to another then to our selves; even when in comparison we wish
harm to our selves. But, that God is our Good and final End, is as true as
that He is our Maker: and the very Essence of our Soul is nothing else but a
pure capacity and emptiness of Him; all its strength by nature or grace,
nothing but an inclination to apply it self to Him, and be replenished by Him.
Here all the sinews of nature are racked to their height: to this the Soul's
more strongly bent then to its own being; since we see our thoughts are first
driven outward, and from the Objects return to make us reflect on our selves;
only at this Object we aim not to make it ours, but to make us its. All other
knowledges are but as it were diverse figurations and dispositions of our Soul:
this is an adhering and union of our Soul to another thing. All Ends are
Masters of our wills (as far as they are Ends) the Medium's only mastered by
us; the last End therefore must be the absolute commander and forcer of the
very Essence of our Will. And as the basis of a Statue (had it an appetite
proportioned to its nature) would not wish to be above, but to lie under and
support the Statue; or as the motion and way toward a form and term would wish
to perish, in bringing the thing altered or moved to that state whereto its
Essence imployes its service: so our Soul, rightly affected, can wish no other
then to be most subject, most conformable, and most entirely fitted to its last
End. That then, my Soul, which thou have to do, is (in the greatest peace and
discretion and quiet of thy Heart) to cast about and seriously consider in what
course of life (all things maturely pondered) thou art likeliest to cultivate
and improve thy self best, and render thy thoughts most apprehensive of this
only, this eternal Good: which having once found, with thy whole strength,
with the neglect of all other things (as far as they avail not to this) be sure
to prosecute vigorously, never sitting down, or so much as looking back; and in
all considerable actions (even in this chosen way) still have a pure eye open
to discern what most conduces to this only necessary work, or least deviates
thee from it.

O Gregory Lopez, Thou (after the Apostles) unparalleled Master of Christian
life! who will give me that prodigious unheard of constancy of thine, in every
breath, for months and years, continually to fix my thoughts upon this main
aim of my being; till I had made it hard and almost impossible for me to
restrain them from it? But since this is more Angelical then Humane, obtain me
grace, at least, from our General (thy immediate Master) every day to spend
some competent space of time, in framing a lively view of this Great truth, and
settling a strong resolution to continue in it for ever. Still may I strive by
the following Act to surpass the precedent, as thou did: still may I pursue
the perfect Conquest of my self, till there remain in me no affection able to
show its head, no passion daring to rebel against this heaven-born Principle;
but it become sole Lord and absolute possessour of my Soul, as it was of thine.
Then shall I not fear to sing a happy Nunc dimittis, when ere our just and
glorious Judge shall send His warning rod, to cite me to that great to weak
men, but no secret to such piercing spirits as thine; who enjoyedst a high
noonday in this world, to break into a sevenfold light, when the welcome hand
of death drew the thin and already half-transparent curtain of thy mortality.
Amen.

A DESCANT ON THE Prayer in the GARDEN.
OBtain for me, ye beloved Disciples of our LORD Peter, James, and John, you
happy favorites of the World's Redeemer, who by especial prerogative of love
are still let in to his greatest secrets, obtain for me permission to wait on
you into the Garden of Gethsemani, and with an humble silence to observe what
passes there. Grief has already, I see, seized on your hearts, and raising
drowsy humors into your heads, may suddenly perhaps surprise your eyes, and
seal them up in their own tears. My heart is too stony to admit so deep an
impression, my head too full of vanity to be oppressed with so rational, so
religious a sadness: I Will watch and try to improve my levity into virtue,
whilst you relieve your sorrows with the short comfort of an hour's repose.

But while I speak, behold my Lord whirled away by the vehemence of his Spirit,
like a ship rent from its shore and anchors, with a strong and sudden tempest:
Behold him cast on the ground, his knees bent, his eyes o'reflown, his hands
stretched up toward heaven, all covered with gloomy clouds and darkness, his
heart swollen, his lips ready to break into some loud and doleful complaint
against man's ingratitude. Oh, my Lord! what means this unusual strife and
contention in thy own breast? Thou wept'st indeed over Jerusalem, and the pious
Magdalen drew tears from thy eyes, but there was no such astonishment as this.
Thou discoursedst of thy Passion in Mount Thabor, but with a glory that ravished
the hearts of all that beheld it, and received from Heaven it self an
attestation of thy Eternal Father. Often have thou professed a great desire to
see this hour, often complained that the time was so long deferred; and when
thou came this last voyage toward the Town, thou advancedst with so quick a
courage, that thy swiftest followers could not equal thy pace. And now thou
art arrived at the place of thy wishes, and the day thou have so impatiently
expected approches near: horror seizes thee, grief surrounds* thee, cold and
stupifying fears oppress thee, and that strong and resolute heart seems wholly
overcome with the apprehension of this sad Tragedy. Art thou daunted at the
sight of danger? is the face of Death so frightfull to thee? O no: but thy kind
design is to be tempted in all things without sin, that we may be comforted in
the faintings and tremblings of our heart. To fear, to be perplexed, to grieve,
is an imperfection and weakness in humane nature, which might, and therefore
ought to be assumed for our salvation and example; that we may learn of thee
this great and difficult lesson, how to comport our selves at the full tide of
anguish and tribulation.

But now the trembling air warns us of some ringing cry that is streaming
toward our ears. Father let this cup pass from me. O my God, my Creator, my
hope, and author of all my good, to thee it is he addresses his petition,
before thee and thy merciful eyes he humbly unbinds and lays open all his
wounds, too deep to be cured by any but thy almighty hand, too near his heart
to find remedy, but from him who is in the center of his heart, the only
searcher and perfect healer of all hearts. Hear him, most gracious and
bountiful God, hear him, who so justly calls thee Father. Remember it is he
whom thou do essentially and eternally generate. Remember that Soul-ravishing
delight of God and Man wherewith thou art his Beginner. Remember thy Divinity
is as truly and fully his as thine: thou have it but to give, and it is his to
receive. Remember he is that right hand with which thou twice did strike the
barren rock of Nothing, and the plentiful fountain of All things gushed out,
to refresh the desa^t of thine elect. Remember he is the light of thy eyes,
that pure eternal light that rises from thy own bright bosom, and shines
perpetually in thy glorious Presence.

Nor can thou allege the exorbitancy of this request, to justify the
unkindnesse of thy refusal. He asks not a Hecatombe of men and Angels to be
offered in sacrifice to his great name; which yet thy Justice could not deny
the Dignity of his Person. He demands not that the world's fabric should
crack, and its sinews be strained in pieces, to change all Fates and Destinyes
for his pleasure; yet were not this too great a boldness for him that supports
their poise with his power, and cements them together with his wisdom. He
pretends not to honor, wealth or long life; yet all these thou bestowedst on
Solomon, as a voluntary excess of thy bounty, and supererogation to what he
ask't thee; and behold a greater then Solomon is here. He seeks not the blood
of his Enemies, in revenge of their unjust and malicious persecution: his
prayers are confined to his own afflicted person, for one poor life he offers
up all his sighs, all his tears; nay, not so much, for the only deferring of
death; and if that be yet too high, he humbles his petition to this low
request, only a les^e cruel, a less intolerable death, not a whole deluge of
bitterness, not all the torments and affronts that a cursed synagogue of
desperate Hypocrites could maliciously suggest, or an enraged rabble of a
debauched and insolent multitude furiously execute. Can there be a more
reasonable desire? a more clear and confident subject of hope? can there be a
more unquestionable plea? a more violent and enforcing cry to heaven?

And hark how it tears its way through the shivered Elements in those strong
and piercing words; All things are possible to Thee. Excuse not thy self; lay
not the fault on others; say not it is the wicked Judas betrayed him, when Thy
own hands delivered him to his Enemy. Say not the hearts of the Jews are
hard, since if thou please, thy Grace can instantly mollify them. Say not
Herod is a proud and libertine King, Pilate an unbelieving Pagan, whose fear of
Caesar was above his love to Justice: for the hearts of Kings are in thy hand,
and out of stones thou art able to make start up Sons of Abraham. And though
the dismal hour be come, and the Kingdom of darkness encroach upon thy
confines; yet have thou more then twelve legions of Angels, to countermand the
course of time, and scourge the powers of Hell. Since then all things are thus
at thy dispose, see how he conjures thy Almighty compassion. If it be possible,
let this Cup pass from me. He that can command thy whole power, summons it all
to his assistance. He whose absolute will is absolutely irresistible, with his
whole strength and utmost affections solicites thy Omnipotency to rescue him
from this dismal period. Behold this meek and humble heart swollen high with
sighs, and running over with the vehemence of his passions. Behold thy own
thoughts divided, betwixt granting what seems so unjust in it self, and denying
what is so necessary to us, the final sentence of death against an Innocent:
if thou yieldest to his deliverance, Mankind is unavoidably ruined forever; if
thou refusest, thou seem to destroy at once all the hopes that even Angels
and Seraphims can pretend to have their prayers admitted, since thou declin'st
to hear the voice of thy Son, thy beloved, eternal and only Son.

The afflicted Father in the Gospel soon received his cheerful dispatch, thy
Son is well. The importune Cananean for a confident answer was doubly
recompensed, both with the commendation, and fruit of her faith, her Daughters
recovery. The mourning Sisters of Lazarus, by once repeating this short Charm
thy friend is sick, drew this thy Son into the midst of his Enemies, who
watched continually all occasions to oppress him: and with one sorrowful cast
of their eyes, moved in his heart so deep a compassion, that immediately he
broke the fetters of death, and opened the prison of the Grave to restore them
their lost Brother, whom they only wished for, and barely represented their
condition, not thinking it necessary to ask any thing in direct terms of so
noble a Benefactour. And yet (O Father of pity) He told us he did nothing but
what he saw thee do before him. Where is then the God of Elias? are thy bowels
of mercy petrifyed into Adamant? are the eternal springs of Libanus dried up?
are the Heavens become of Iron, that no drop of dew can distill down to refresh
a languishing Soul? O no; it is only to set before our eyes a glorious lesson of
perfect patience for us to copy out and be happy: for, though thou killest him,
still will he hope in thee, still cry and call on this sweet Persecuter to
death. Bend but thine ear to those sacred words he speaks, Not my will but
thine be fulfilled. True it is my God, thou art the Author and Conserver, the
absolute and supreme Governor of all Things; and therefore it is just and
necessary all c^eated wills be subject to thy dominion. But whence comes it (my
dearest Lord) that those, whom thou scourgest with greatest severity, are most
obedient to thy commands? I hear thy servant Job (the liveliest pattern of
this thy afflicted Son) cry from the depth of his Soul, Who may have so much
favor with God to obtain for me, that he will be pleased to loose his hand and
cut me off, lest I fall into impatience, and contradict the judgments of the
most holy? For my flesh is not of beasts, and I extremely apprehend my
weakness. Yet was he but an imperfect draught of this great Sample of misery,
wholly wrought over and through by the sharp needles of all sorts of
affliction: from whom we hear no such fears, no such complaints; but a strong
and generous denial of himself, abridg'd into this short and cordial
protestation, Thy will be done.

Ah, sweet SAVIOR! does not the excess of thy griefs disturb a little thy
memory? have thou deliberately reflected on the force and consequence of those
strange engaging words? Let me represent to thee the meaning of thy severe
Father, and in his own threatening expressions, which thou will soon find to be
too rigourous truth. I have prepared Clubs and Lanterns, Soldiers and
Officers, the flatterers of thy enemies, to lay hands on thee, and with loud
cries and scorns carry thee to the City of Jerusalem: Jerusalem, where thy
Miracles have rendered thee so famous; Jerusalem, where thou so lately entredst
with loud acclamations of joy and Triumph. Thy will be done. I have prepared
Judges of all sorts, Priests and Divines, and Religious men, that daily
minister at the holy Altar, grave and solemn persons, highly esteemed upon the
opinion of their extraordinary piety and learning, to discredit and accuse
thee: Kings and Presidents, Jews and Gentiles, and an infinite multitude of
people, assembled at this great Feast to scorn and condemn thee. Thy will be
done. I have prepared Whips and Scourges, and Buffets and Thorns to afflict
thee* Fools coats and a mock-Purple, and the ridiculous Scepter of a Reed to
vilify and abuse thee; a heavy Cross and tearing Nails, unmercifull Hands
and ungrateful Hearts to torment and affront thee. Thy will be done. I have
prepared a Murderer to be preferred before thee, to be begged in thy place by
thy beloved people, on whom thou have spent thy life; two other Thieves for thy
Companions and Fellow Sufferers, and a shameful Title of Treason to be imposed
on thy Cross. Thy will be done. I have prepared multitudes of strangers to
stand by unconcerned, and with dry eyes behold all thy miseryes, and tell the
whole world thy seeming crimes: nay I have found thee out a Judas amongst thy
own Disciples to betray thee with the base hypocrisy of a Kiss; the best of
them to deny thee, all to forsake thee, and even now thy three choice friends
lie sleeping by thee, little solicitous of their own duty to thee, or thy
Sufferings for them. Thy will be done. I have prepared thee a desolate Mother to
stand at the foot of thy Cross, and afflict thy departing Soul with the sight
of her grief, and the disconsolate condition thou leavest her in: and above all
(to verify thy prophesied title, of Man of Sorrows) I will be a rigid and
austere Father to thee, abandoning thee into the hands of the powers of
darkness, and strictly charging them not to spare so much as thy life's last
breath. Even so, Thy will be done, not mine.

O invincible courage! O admirable fortitude! which neither life nor death, nor
things present, nor to come, nor fears, nor torments can shake or stir one
inch from its settled resolution. Pardon me, my dearest SAVIOR, I cannot weep,
I cannot pity thy Sufferings, nor contain my heart from singing Alleluia, in
the midst of the strongest throes and bitterest pangs of thy Agony: For this
one act makes thee more happy, more amiable, more glorious, then all the world
can give, then all thy miracles can deserve. Not Mount Thabor's glory, not
Palm-sunday's acclamations, not the true and hearty praises of the people fed
with thy bread, and resolved to force thee to be their King; not the Wisdom to
confute thy adversaries, not the Power to change, at pleasure, the course of
Nature; no, not the sitting at the right hand of thy eternal Father, to
command the Virtues of the Heavens, and absolutely govern the Fates of Men and
Angels, can render thee so rich and contented in thy self, so beautiful and
adorable to the redeemed by thy Cross, as this immovable Constancy, this
admirable Resignation, this unparalleled Tranquillity and evennesse of Mind.

But beware, my Soul, thou be not mistaken; for his words import that his
will be not fulfilled: it is not then His will that is so constant and fixed:
yet His it is, for were it His Fathers will, by which he speaks, he could not
call it thine; since he that speaks is to himself I, and not thou, and the will
by which he delivers his Speech, mine and not thine. But how then can he say
not mine, of that which he will have done? It Is therefore His; and more his,
then what he calls his: yet he calls it not His, and the opposite His. And were
it not His, it would do us no good, for whom he does what he does. For we have
also contrary wills; and yet we have not two wills, following two natures, as
he had: therefore even in him, these two wills, with one whereof he speaks and
concerning the other, are both of his humane nature; that by them we might cure
the contrariety we find in ours. Why then is one of them his, the other his
Fathers? why? if not because the one he had from infirmity, the other from
strength; the one from flesh and blood, the other from heavenly inspirations:
what proceeds from weakness, from defect, from the odor of nothing, is our
own; but what comes from virtue, from strength, from Being, all that is Gods,
and to be acknowledged totally from him, as Beginner and Perfecter of all
things.

But is there no remedy for this distressed Soul? must he alone tread the
winepresse of sour grapes, alone drink of this bitter Cup? Ah! dearest SAVIOR,
leave no means unattempted that possibly may bring thee at least some small
refreshment: arise and try whether thy old friends can afford thee any comfort;
those who were so delighted with thy glory on Mount Thabor; who sung so
cheerfully but five days since at thy triumphant entrance into Jerusalem; who
just now solemnly protested their readiness to die with thee. Alas! they are
all asleep; so fast, so dead asleep, that neither chiding, nor shame, nor
compassion on their dear Masters desolate condition can awake them, to say so
much as one short prayer for themselves. O weak foundation of humane
Friendship! unhappy and already deceived is he that builds on so false a
bottom: how far better is it to trust in God then Man, in the Maker of
Princes then the mouldring hand-work? O ill-requited Master? is this the fruit
of all thy teachings? is this the reward for all thy benefits? is this the
profit of all those stupendous wonders thou have done before them? At least
Judas was tempted by the glistering shine of silver, that dazzles the eyes of
all the world; he was exasperated by the loss of the price of the Ointment,
and by the public reproach of his treason: whereas these thy beloved, thy
cherished Disciples, have no plea to excuse them, but their dullness, but their
coldness and want of love to their Master.

Though Earth fail, Heaven may be true. Renew thy complaints, and let the
fervor of thy prayers melt those azure floors the Angels tread. And already
behold a bright and sudden dawning from the East, and the visible shape of a
heavenly Messenger. Come down thou long expected Ambassador of peace, and fill
this horrid desert with the charming music of thy celestial voice. But oh! he
stays at the gates of heaven, and only looks down afar off, as if earth now
were become an abomination, and unworthy to be approacht by sanctified persons:
no glory to God, no peace to Men, no harmonious note, not so much as a cup of
cold water to refresh the fainting bowels of this afflicted Sufferer. O strange
mutation! how undutifull a disobedience is this, in respect of the obsequious
service tendered him at his baptism? Are heavenly affections subject to
change? do Stars increase and wane like sublunary meteors? O no: gladly would
this Spirit of happiness stoop low as Earth, to raise the head, and support
the weak members of his Lord: but that severe Fathers commands, and narrow
limited permissions allow only so far to relieve the oppressed heart, that
it may be able to drink up the very dregs of that bitter potion he has tempered
for him. O Heaven, now more cruel then Earth! which charitably stupifies the
sense, and takes away the pain by increasing the torment; whilst tyrannical
heaven sends fresh supplies of strength, only to heap on a greater load of
grief.

O my dear Lord, all thy troubled thoughts seemed wholly restored to their
usual calmnesse; and, by that noble act of Resignation, all thy affections ran
smoothly in their own channels: but now again the storm is raised, and louder
and fiercer then before. See how it beats against that strong barrier of Thy
will be done. See how the broken waves return with doubled fury to invade this
Rock of patience, whose firmness, the more violently it is assaulted, the more
steddily it is fixed, and his prayer more extended to his eternal Father. Hear
him, hear him, fountain of Pity; if not for thy own goodness, if not for
respect to him, at least that we may be encouraged to call on thee, that we may
hope to be heard by thee. Thou invitest us to come to thee, shall this be our
entertainment? thou chid'st us for asking nothing in thy SON'S name, yet
shut'st thine ears against His voice, begging for his own Soul. Undutifull and
wicked Reuben, that had abominably defiled his Fathers bed, found compassion
for his little Brother, seeing the anguish of his heart, when he humbled
himself before them, and after reproacht his brethren, that his life was justly
demanded at their hands; and will not the cry of this innocent Abel's blood
reach up to heaven, and mollify the rigidnesse of those severe decrees?

But whither am I straid? here on earth is subject enough to require my whole
application. Behold how his blood boyles in his veins; his flesh grows red and
swells all over his body; his sinews and arteries stretch, as on a rack; the
pores of his skin open like a sive; and, in a moment, more fountains then feed
the Ocean, break from this source of misery. What Is this I see on that
once-comely visage? not crystal tears, not a gentle and trickling dew, but
whole drops of ruddy and blackish sweat. Woe is me, they are ^^^^ed and knotty
berries of blood: Unfortunate fruit of this fair Tree. Physicians and
Naturalists, you say thick humors cannot be purged by transpiration; study me
then how this is come to pass. O the most beautiful and gracious among the
sons of men! Was it for this thy body was fitted to thee of Virgin-bloud,
untoucht by men and Angels? Was it for this thou were made the Top and Crown of
Mankind; thy senses the most quick and delicate that could be sifted from the
finest dust of Adam? Was it for this thou were nursed by the purest of Women,
and carried in the hands of Angels, lest thou should at any time offend thy
tender feet? Were all these diligences used, all these privileges bestowed,
only to prepare thee a body for the rack; a subject to practice on a thousand
intolerable affronts; a person to be made the unparalleled example of
prodigious calamities? Such ought the Lamb to be that is brought to the Altar
for sacrifice, without blemish, without spot. A just and reasonable Law, but
here too severely interpreted, too cruelly applied.

O unfortunate Adam! now the effects of thy fond disobedience are become too
sadly evident; now thou art clearly convinced the unnatural murderer of thy
Posterity; now that mortal wound thou gave mankind is rendered incurable.
Rise up, with all thy numerous children about thee, whose repentance expects a
blessed eternity: force the gates of Limbo with your sighs, and let your strong
groans tear the bowels of the earth; that opening a wide passage toward
heaven, and this Garden, fruitful in miseries, your cries and exclamations may
be heard. Protest to God, and Angels, and Men, and all creatures, that Hell is
too gentle a pain, eternity too short a time to punish your misdemeanors. Let
the Devils invent some more exquisite torture then their wits and malice have
yet devised, and stretch the measure of time beyond infinity, that you may pay
your debts, and dis-engage this immaculate Lamb of God, this inestimable pearl
of the Deity. Contest the Judge of righteousness to lay the punishment where
he finds the fault: charge him with his word, that it is not his part to
chastise the innocent with the wicked, but every one bear his own burden. But
why do I cry and murmr? I hear my complaints contradicted by Him they most
concern: I hear him, in that weak voice is left him, humbly say, How then shall
the Scripture be fulfilled? My Father has promised, can he deny himself? my
Father is all Truth, dare I offer to falsify his Word? my Father is
essentially Goodness, can I make him go less? No, no, let us march on
confidently toward my Passion, for behold him at hand who is to betray me.

And now, my Soul, Thou who have been a witness of this great spectacle, a
searcher of this profound mystery: Thou who have discovered the source of this
impenetrable secret, and know God had no need of us, took not our nature on
him to please himself; but we, and I in particular, were the chief mark he
aimed at, and all these excesses and heights of incomparable goodness contrived
to exalt our affections toward him; nor this, because our loves refresh or
better him, but purely for this sole motive, that they are our good, and
contain in them our eternal felicity: If thou art able to look at so glorious
a light, to balance so great a weight, to judge of and value so infinite a
Charity; tell me what I have to do. After this can I love any thing but my Lord
JESUS CHRIST? can I love any thing but the Love of my blessed SAVIOR? Father
and Mother, Brothers and Sisters, Kinsfolk and Friends, what is it you have done
for me? what goods have you wished me? what wishes can you make to deserve the
least share in my Affection? Health and Pleasure, Riches and Honor, what
charms have you comparable to this ravishing object of love? dull and fleeting
appearances, take away your deceitful flatteries. Turn thou thy face to me,
sweet JESUS, that I may every day still more and more understand and admire thy
love: Make it the business and delight of my life to study how much thou
love me: Set me in solitude to consider thy works upon me, to repeat thy
benefits to me: Let nothing but desires and affections toward thee entertain
my thoughts, nothing but strains and tunes of thy Bounty and Goodness sound in
my Ears.

The End.
ERRATA.
Page 115. line ult. for set set, read only set. p. 132. l. 1. for -rishes read
-rishest.

The STATIONER to the READER.
THough the equality and strength not-to-be-counterfeited, which evidently
shines in what ever proceeds from this prodigious Brain, will sufficiently
secure all considering persons (that is, all that deserve to read him) against
mistaking for His, any of those less generous Issues, born frequently into the
world of Parents honored with the same name: yet as well to render that
security both more easy and universal, as readily to address those, whom a
happy familiarity with this tempting* Branch may have raised to the ambition of
a farther acquaintance with the numerous rest of its Family and Blood (by a
singular prerogative, all perfectly agreeing together, all worthy such a
Father) I have thought it a duty of civil Charity to subjoin this Catalogue,
which both the learned and devout World longs and hopes to see much enlarged.

A Catalogue of the several Books written by Mr. THO. WHITE.
THe learned Dialogues DE MUNDO, in Latin, printed at Paris, 4o. The elaborate
Preface before Sir Kenelm Digbyes DEMONSTRATIO IMMORTALITATIS ANIMAE, printed
also at Paris, in Folio. INSTITUTIONES PERIPATETICAE, etc. first printed at
Paris, and afterward at London, in 8o. INSTITUTIONES SACRAE, etc. in 2. Tom.
printed at Paris, in 8o. QUAESTIO PRAEVIA and Men's Augustini de Gratia, in 12o.
Villicationis suae de MEDIO ANIMARUM STATU Ratio, at Paris, in 12o.
MEDITATIONES in Gratiam Sacerdotum Cleri Anglicani, etc. in 16o. RICHWORTH'S
DIALOGUES, or the judgment of Common sense in the choice of Religion, two
Editions at Paris, in 12o. A CATECHISM in English, etc. in 24o. MEDITATIONS in
English, in 12o.

