A Call from GOD OUT OF EGYPT, By His SON CHRIST THE Light of Life; And this
from the Movings of the Holy Power, is sent for a VISITATION unto the SEED of
GOD in all Professors, Teachers and People through this Nation and Land of
ENGLAND.

From a Follower of the Lamb, D. W.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1662.

A Call from GOD out of Egypt, etc.
THe Day is dawned, and Light is risen and broken forth of darkness, and
Immortality and Life is brought again to light, and the Day from on high has
springed, and is come to visit you who are sitting in darkness, and in the
region and shadow of death, that you may come forth and walk in the Light.
Whilst you have the Light believe in it, that you may become the Children of
the Day of God. And now is the Spirit of Truth come, according to the Promise
of the Father; in the fullness of time he is come, to convince the world of Sin,
of Righteousness and of Judgment: So all must come to the manifestation of the
Spirit of Truth within them, to be convinced thereby of their Judgment: And as
all turn to the manifestation of the Light of Life, which has long shined in
darkness, but the darkness could not comprehend it, this Light is given for a
Leader, and for a Savior unto all that are saved: This is the Gospel that is
now to be preached unto all Nations. The Day Star is risen, and the Light of
the Day is come, and the Gentiles must be gathered into the Light of the Day of
God; and this is the Day of gathering, wherein all Nations shall flock into the
Fold of God's Everlasting Rest, as Doves into the windows: And blessed are all
who hear and obey the Call of the Shepherd of Israel, who calls his Sheep by
name; and other Sheep have I, says Christ, that are not of this Fold; and them
will I bring also, and they shall be of one Fold, and have one Shepherd. And
now is God gathering his Seed from the four winds of the Earth; so this is the
mighty Day of God's Power, wherein he is bringing Deliverance to his Captives by
a mighty Hand, and by an outstretched Arm is the Lord God bringing Salvation
to the lost Sheep of the house of Israel, which he is coming to gather home:
For all Nations have sinned, and come short of the Glory of God; and darkness
has reigned from Adam until Moses, and all Nations have been veiled under the
clouds of the Night of Apostasy; although there has been a profession of God
and Christ, and a form of Worship has been set up, yet the Power of God has
been wanting, and the Life of Jesus Christ has not been known amongst them;
such have had the Form of Godliness, but have denied the Power of God, which
makes able to overcome all things contrary unto God: But the reason why the
Power of God has not been known, to the overcoming of Sin and Uncleaness
amongst Professors, they have not been in that in which Power is given from
God, and so their Faith has not been wrought by that Power which raised up
Jesus from the dead, and exalted him on the top of all Principalities and
Powers, and Spiritual wickedness in high places; so the same Eternal Power
which brought up Jesus out of the Grave, the same Power all must feel to work
effectually for the raising up and quickening of the soul which has been dead;
and as the Spirit quickens and raises to Life, so comes the soul to live in
God, and to be upheld by the same Word of his Power; so that Word gives Life.
All are to come unto the Word, which is near, in the heart, and in the mouth:
this is the Word of Faith, which we preach; the Word which created all things
in the beginning. And the Word is Light, and in it is the life of men: the same
Word was in the beginning with God, and God was the Word, and the Word became
flesh, and dwelt in the sons of men; and they beheld the glory of it, as the
Glory of the only begotten Son of God, full of Grace, and full of Truth. So
they that were Saints indeed, who were born of the Word, who came to be
sanctified thereby, such came to the purifying by Faith, to the washing of
Regeneration, and to be renewed again by the renewing Power, into the Image and
likeness of God. And all Professors at this day must come unto the
Cornerstone, to be fitted and squared thereby for the building up of the
Spiritual house; and every stone of the building of God must be living, like
unto the Cornerstone; and all must come unto the Light of the perfect day,
that the perfection of Beauty they may come to behold, that the Glory of all
Nations may shine amongst you. So into the Power God is gathering, out of all
Forms he is bringing into the life and substance of all Professions: and this
is the day wherein the cry of the Spirit of Life is gone forth into thy Street,
O England, saying to thy Inhabitants, Prepare unto the Day of God which is
dawned, the Light of which is rising over the Nations, and the Bridegroom is
come; therefore prepare a way: for this is the Voice that is gone forth, The
Bridegroom is come, therefore make ready, trim your Lamps, and come away, while
there is a door of hope opened; stand not out, neither tarry behind in Sodom,
lest you be destroyed in her: for God will burn her walls with fire, and
Babylons destruction is determined, and God is come down to confound her many
Languages, her Builders and Daubers; God is bringing all to Truth in the inner
parts, which is the one true Language which must remain for ever. And now is
the Bridegroom's Voice heard in the Land of the living, amongst the Church of
the firstborn, who are come again out of Egypt, to walk in the Light of the
Day of God: for now has the Glory of all Nations appeared in the beauty of his
Holiness, in excellency of his Brightness he is now shining forth unto the
Nations, and all that are saved must be gathered in unto the Light of the
Covenant of Life, in which is perfect Peace, and Joy, and fellowship with the
Father is known by all who dwell and walk in the Light; and here stands the
Unity of the Saints in Light: But he that says he has fellowship with God,
and walks in darkness, he is a liar, and the Truth is not in him: but if we
walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, then have we fellowship one with
another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses from all sin. So people must
come into that which cleanses, which purifieth, which purges from all dross:
and this is known in the Faith of Gods Covenant, which Faith gives dominion:
And here is our victory, even our Faith, by which we overcome the world. But
they that are out of this Faith, they want power, and such are complainers; but
he that comes to the Light, and therein does believe, he shall have the Light
of Life: for unto him is given all Power of the Father, to rule and to govern
both things in Heaven, and things in Earth, and all things, and every knee
shall bow before him; and the Day of his Reign is come, and his Government is
known that it is upon his shoulders; So all that profess Christ, must come to
know his Power to create them anew into his heavenly Image and Divine Majesty,
and all must know the Newcreation of God brought forth in them, according to
his Promise, who says, I will create new Heavens, and a new Earth, wherein
shall dwell Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy; and all must know the shakings
of the former Heavens at the passing away of them, with their noises, and with
great trembling and fear, and astonishment of heart; for the Walls of Jerico,
and the old Buildings of Babylon must be thundered down by threshing Instruments
of the Lord God Almighty, whose two-edged Sword is in his hand, by which he is
threshing and cutting down the Mountains, in which there has been a Worship
pretended unto God; but now the Day is come wherein our God will not be
worshipped in the Mountains, neither at Jerusalem, but he will now be
worshipped in the Spirit and in the Truth, and such Worshippers is the Lord our
God seeking; for the Spirit of Truth is come, according to the Promise of the
Father, which has also appeared unto us, by which we know the Son of God is
risen, and this we are faithful Witnesses of his Resurrection, who is ascended
up on high, and has given gifts unto men; and therefore we preach Christ and
his Resurrection unto all, for he is come again with great Power, and in great
Glory; and he has given us an understanding, by which we know him that is
true, and so the Foundation of God, we preach unto the World, which is JESUS
CHRIST the Son of the living God; and no other foundation can any man lay than
that which is already laid in people: for the Light has appeared in the hearts
of all, the Grace of God which brings Salvation (I say) has appeared unto
all men: and so it is no new thing to preach the Foundation of God, the Light
of the World, the Life of Men, the Son of the living God, which has
enlightened every man that comes into the world: so the same Foundation which
the Prophets preached, who received the Power of God, who were anointed with
the holy Anointing from above; these preached what from God they had received;
so they preached the Resurrection and the Life, and they preached Christ
revealed in them; and so from the Revelations of God they spoke from the
movings of his holy Spirit: but all, before they come unto this, must come unto
silence, and so learn of Christ, the husband, the head of the Woman, which is
to keep silence: in the Church all flesh ought to be silenced, but he or she
that is born of God, who are Members of the same Body which was raised by the
eternal Power of the Father, such as are Witnesses of his Resurrection, in whom
he is come; and as this Prophet speaks, here the Man speaks, which is
Christ in all: but all who speak, and not from the Power of the living God,
ought to keep silence in the Church of Christ: But now is the Lord God bringing
of a People unto the Everlasting Teacher, the High Priest, the Leader of
Israel, the Light, the Salvation of God unto the ends of the Earth: So the
People of the Lord are now come to be taught of the Lord, and in Righteousness
they come to be established. So unto the holy Anointing which is able to teach
and to direct in the way to everlasting Life, unto the same we direct all
people now, as the Prophets did, in whom the Anointing dwelt plentifully; and
so let the Word of Life dwell plentifully in all who come to learn of the
Father, who come to obey the Truth, the Gospel of Christ, the Power of God to
Salvation: And now is the Glory of all Nations risen, and the Light of the
Gentiles is come, and the Glory of the Day has appeared, and God is bringing
and gathering People into Covenant with himself: And this is his Covenant, the
Light of his Son, which has enlightened All Men, and God is bringing People
into the Light, out of the Darkness into the Glory of the Day: For the day is
come that it shall be no more said, The Lord lives that brought the Children
of Israel out of the Land of Egypt; but it shall be said, The Lord lives that
brought up the Seed of the house of Israel to reign on the tops of the
Mountains. And this Day is God exalting the Kingdom of his Son in the hearts of
the sons of men: and that which we have heard from the beginning; that which we
have looked upon with our eyes; that which our hands have handled of the Word
of Life, of the same do we declare freely, that all may come freely, and drink,
of the Fountain of Life, which is now set open for Judah and for Jerusalem: and
now the day is come wherein the Wells of Salvation overflow, and the Springs of
the holy Fountain run freely: therefore all that are athirst, come; for the
Spirit says, Come; and the Bride says, Come: for the Feast of fat things is
prepared, and the Supper of the great King is making ready, and the sons and
daughters of men are invited to the Marriage of the Lamb, which is now come:
Therefore be awakened ye dead, Arise, shake off the dust of the Earth, and
Christ shall give you Life. And this is the Day of God's Visitation, and of
free Love and everlasting Consolation, wherein Salvation is founded unto the
Inhabitants of the Earth.

Great is the Sea, whose blessed bounds are Love,
Whose Compassions unto her own does move.
Great is his Love that now has led us home,
To sit again upon our Father's Throne.
Great is the Light by which now we do see
The Glory of our Father Abrah'ms day:
Great is the Love by which we overcome;
Our Victory stands in the beloved Son.
And in the Love and Fullness of his Power
In us, is shining in this glorious hour.
And all must come within unto the Light,
T'live in that Power, which gives the blind their sight.
Yea, all must come to the Eternal Love,
And by it must be joined to God above.
And by the same Love all must be led home
To sit again on David's holy Throne.
And in this Day of Light is shining forth
God's Covenant, which is his performed Oath,
Which is his Promise; and is come again
For to redeem from sorrow, and from pain.
And to set free all such as do believe,
Who his Light and his Love come to receive:
Such by the Truth do come to be set free,
Who dwell in Power that works effectually.
Those he redeems, and brings from the grave
All such, who by his Power an Interest have.
This quickens, and brings up again
The Soul of man that has been dead and slain.
All must come to the Light o'th holy Day,
To know the Life that leads the narrow way,
Unto the Rest, the Kingdom, and the Crown,
And in God's Rest at last for to lie down.
And the Way is the Light, the Life, the Truth,
The same will lead to thy Creator in thy days of youth.
And all must come unto the Light,
To be led in the Way that is right.
And all must come unto the blessed Seed,
By which God's My'stries they must come to read*
And this is made known in the greatest deep,
Where his Blood is drink, and his Life is meat,
On which the living do delight to (...).
Which is their heavenly Bre^^ in time of need.
And all who feed on this shall never hung^^ more;
For them the Cup of Blessing is laid up in store.
And in CHRIST the Head is the hidden Life
Of all the Brides Children, who are the Lamb's Wife:
Who are now come to be redeemed again;
And in the Lamb's Power over the World do R^ign,
As Conquerors over both Hell and Death:
This in the Seed is known, born of the Royal Birth;
By which all Sions Children are set free,
Sounding forth Praise in this Gods Holy Day.
And this my Solutation is unto the Seed in all,
Which yet remain in Darkness, Death and Fall.
And God is come his Seed for to ^^deem,
And bringing it to light that is glory may be seen.
And the worm Jacob, who has been under all,
Shall now arise, triumphing over Death and Fall.
The second Adam that by transgression has been slain,
Now by Gods quickening Power shall be revived again.
And by our God's most holy living breath
All souls shall rise that have been under death,
And at God's Voice open the graves shall fly
When his Trump blows from's holy Majesty.
H^ his Power the Cords of Sin shall break;
Nor Death nor Hell no more the Seed shall keep
Under; but it shall rise it Majesty,
Reigning in Glory on his Mountain hie.
Ah! we are come unto the Holy Day,
Where th'Scepter of Sions King now bears sway;
Unto whose Government all Kings most bend,
When in his Glory from Heaven he does descend.
Then all their Crowns must cast before his Throne:
For he will reign on Earth as King alone.
Christ's Government on Earth is now begun,
Over all he will reign; and to that end is come.
Glorious is that Power that redeems from sinning*
That restores man, even (...) in the beginning:
Glorious is that Life which reigns over all,
Which conq^^^s Death and Hell, and brings from th'Fall.
The Seed is blessed, and its Rest, is in God's own Breast.
A Tender Visitation from the Fountain of Love, sent unto all the
Suffering-Seed, from the melting bowels of compassions from the Father of Life,
unto all the Chosen, Called and Elect; who are this day found faithful
followers of the Lamb through the Tribulation, and so through the washing of
Regeneration; who by suffering come attain the Victory, which stands alone in
the Faith, which purifies and makes white. And now is the Day come, wherein a
clear and through-separation will be made betwixt the faithful Followers of the
Lamb, from them that backslide, and have a name to live, and are dead, as to
the Life of God. And although there were many that came out of the Land of
Egypt, who were also Followers of the Lamb for a time, whose eyes also beheld
the miracles, and wonderful works which Christ did: yet, after this, many
returned, insomuch that Christ said unto his Disciples, when he looked back and
beheld the little number, Will ye also forsake me? this was the Answer of the
faithful Followers; Nay, whither shall we go? Thou have the Word of Eternal
Life. But many took offense at him, and so in the Winter fled from him, and
also denied him, although they came once to receive the gift of God, and to
taste of the powers of the world to come; yet such as kept not their first
estate, who dwelt not in their first love, became like unto the Angels the, who
were reserved under the chains of darkness unto the Judgment of the great Day.
Therefore Brethren, and Beloved in the bowels of the Lord Jesus, is this tender
Visitation sent unto you, and amongst you all, who at this day profess the
Truth of the living God, for the stirring up of your pure minds, to be more
diligent and more faithful in watching always, and waiting for the appearance
and coming of the Lord Jesus Christ, who will appear the second time without
sin unto Salvation: whose Reward is with him; and he that shall come, will
come, and will not tarry: And he will reward all the Faithful for their
Faithfulness, a thousand fold in this life, and Eternal Life for ever. So
blessed for ever are all the honest-hearted, who singly wait for the appearance
of the Bridegroom. Such are the Virgins that slumber not, whose Oil is burning;
and so if he should come at midnight, such will be found ready to enter within
the Gates of Paradise.

But verily, this I have to declare from the Lord God of Life, who has sealed
it. It will be hard for many to enter at this day, who once had a taste of the
precious Truth, who are now growing cold; such will be spued out in the Day of
the Lord. But this I have to say for your encouragement, who are faithful and
single-hearted, The Lord God everlasting will reward you the doers of his Will,
and your reward will be Everlasting Joy, Everlasting-Peace and Consolation and
Joy shall be heaped upon Joy, and Glory upon Glory shall be revealed in the
habitations of the Righteous. What shall I say to express the endless Love of
the Father? whose Fullness is come, whose Fountain is open? how he is become a
place of broad Rivers. Blessed be the Day that now is dawned, the Day which
Abraham saw is now come unto Abraham's Seed, and rejoicing is known by the
Redeemed, who are returning again unto Sion with songs of Rejoicing and
everlasting Joy upon their heads; such know the New Songs who are come unto the
Day; such have entered into the City where the Lamb is the light thereof, where
Praises are returned to God who lives for ever; and unto the Lamb, who is
worthy to reign over all: To whom be Hallelujahs given, Honor and Praise world
without end.

So this is my Salutation unto the Suffering-Seed, who am a Sufferer for the
Name of JESUS, and for the Testimony of his Truth.

Dorothy White.

To all the Elect of God, who are called and chosen, faithful and true:
Greetings of Peace, Mercy and Love, from the Father, is sent unto all the
Upright in heart.
THe Rest; the Life, the Power, the Fullness of all Professions, wait all to
possess the very substance and the end of all Declarations, the Heavenly Life
of God made manifest in your mortal flesh: And so let (...) lord of his Grace
dwell plentifully in you, that ye may behold the ^^ory thereof, as the Glory of
the only begotten of the Father, full of Grace and Truth; that ye may all be
overshadowed with his beautiful Brighteness, so that ye may be filled with the
Glory of his Majesty, so that ye may come to say in your hearts, Oh! how goodly
are thy Tents, O Seed of Jacob! how glorious, how excellent is the Beauty of
the Habitation of Isreal's God! who is now broken forth, as the Sun in the
morning, whose shining is clearer and clearer unto the perfect day. And now God
is bringing forth the perfection of Beauty in and among his chosen Generation,
and He shall become the Glory of all Nations, a wise Counselor, a King and
Lawgiver, a Royal Priesthood, the unchangeable Prophet. And so Friends, and
Brethren, in the fellowship of the Gospel of Eternal Peace, Joy and Unity in
the holy Spirit of Love and Life, Solace your selves in the Grace and Faith
which gives the perfect knowledge of God in the face of his Son, in whom ye
have believed, in whom stands the New Covenant, which God has made with the
Seed of Abraham, whom he is now calling and gathering from the ends of the
Earth; and this is his Covenant with him, even the sure Mercies of David, which
are renewed through the Seed of Promise; and this Seed God is raising, which
shall inherit his Blessing and Mercy for evermore. So all you dear and
wel-beloved Children of your Father Abraham, who was blessed, whose Faith
justified him, and was accounted unto him for Righteousness: So grow ye in the
same word of Faith, until God perfect his own Image in you: for this is the
work of our Father in this the day of his Power, and of his glorious
Appearance, to bring forth his Children after his own Likeness and Image, Form
and Beauty; and so the Followers of the Lamb must bear the Mark of the Lamb,
and by it they must be known. So in the Unity of the holy Spirit of Peace, feel
the Blessings daily multiplied from the God of Mercies and tender Compassions,
whose Bowels of Love yearn unto his own. And so my dear and beloved Friends, in
the Eternal Welfare of God, I bid you all Farewell.

D. W.

THE END.

