The GROUNDS OF OBEDIENCE AND GOVERNMENT.

BY Thomas White, Gentleman.

Salus populi, suprema lex esto.

Tullius de legibus, lib. 3. LONDON, Printed by J. Flesher, for Laurence
Chapman next door to the Fountain Tavern in the Strand. 1655.

TO My most honored, and best Friend, Sir KENELME DIGBY.
Sir,
THe many attempts you have this long time made upon me, to declare a point of
Philosophy, wherein partly I was ignorant, and partly loath to meddle (being
mindful of the Poets admonition, Incedis per ignes suppositos cineri doloso)
have at the last beaten out of my resistance, this little spark of fire, or
rather light; borne by the Authors intention, to shine, not to burn. For,
having by experience of many our debates upon single points, found that such
skirmishes were not like to gain the victory of satisfaction upon your so
solid understanding; I saw my self forced to lay before your eyes, in one
Platform or design, the most intimate and bottom principles of Obedience and
Government. The which, I have strived to do in the most short and summary
manner I was able: not willing to be overcurious in so awful a subject. I
play therefore the pure Philosopher. I deliver the abstract notions only:
leaving to the prudence of particulars, to draw such consequences, as every
ones circumstances shall make necessary and evident unto him by the short hints
I give. And as for your self, I doubt not but my time is well employed. As for
others, I fear the fortune of my other Writings, may prove constant also to
this; that it will find, those who read it not, or who cannot judge of it,
severe Censurers: and those who like it, fearful to oppose so loud and
clamorous a multitude; or at least, stonned with the adverse noise. But for
this, let the eternal Providence care. To me such clamours will be no
novelties: But the content of having given you satisfaction, an abundant reward
of the endeavors of

Sir, Your true friend, and most obliged Servant, THOMAS WHITE.

The CONTENTS.
GRound 1. Wherein consists the Perfection of Government. Page 1 Ground 2.
That the Nature of Man reaches not to the Perfection of Government. p. 9
Ground 3. That a Rational belief is necessary to Humane Action. p. 12 Ground
4. Of the virtue of Obedience, and wherein it consists. p. 19 Ground 5. That
Fidelity is different from Obedience; and in what it consists. p. 27 Ground
6. In what consists Right or Due. p. 34 Ground 7. Why men desire to live in
Community; and of the necessity of Government. p. 40 Ground 8. Of the
Authority given to an absolute Governor; and of under-sorts of Government. p.
48 Ground 9. Of Slavery and the lawfulness of it. p. 53 Ground 10. Why a man
is to hazard himself for the common good. p. 67 Ground 11. The Quality and
Rational power of a supreme Governor. p. 78 Ground 12. Who is such a
Governor, and the Subjects duty toward him. p. 94 Ground 13. Of the Qualities
of Laws and Commands, in respect to Obedience. p. 101 Ground 14. In what
conditions the Subject may resist Government. p. 109 Ground 15. Wherein
consists the power and liberty of the Subject. p. 120 Ground 16. Of the
dispossession of a supreme former Governor, and of his right. p. 131 Ground
17. Of a supreme Governor dispossessed. p. 144 Ground 18. The Objection of
Divines answered. p. 158 Ground 19. The Authority of Lawyers insufficient in
this Question. p. 172
THE GROUNDS OF OBEDIENCE And GOVERNMENT.
The first GROUND.
Wherein consists the Perfection of Government.
XEnophon, in his excellent Book of the instruction of Cyrus, moves this
Question, Why, of all other living Creatures, which are of different Natures
from Man, we easily attain to the mastery and rule; but few men are so
intelligent as to be fit to govern Men; and those few are the highest and
worthiest part of Mankind? But, to me, the very Question seems to bear the
solution in its own bowels. For, when one asks, why Man is hard to be
governed since he governes other Creatures; he asks, why one, who has the
power to rule others, is himself so difficult to be mastered: and the answer
is, because the powers, by which he reduces others to his obedience, makes him
apter to resist them who seek the conquest of himself; and so renders it a
higher task to weild and manage him, then those Creatures which he has power
over.

For, we need not look into Philosophy, nor study learned Books, to know that
the nature of Man is inclined to have its own will, and casts all things
which are under his consideration to compass and effect it: as also, that
every ordinary man's knowledge and consideration is far beyond any we find in
other living Creatures; and, by consequence, is far less easily masterable
then any of them.

Whence we may plainly collect, that were it possible for a Governor to make
every single person in his Dominion particularly understand, that what was
ordered by the Government was his own truest interest; such an one would be
the most absolute and perfect Governor; and infallibly would find the charge
of governing most easy and sweet, as well to himself as to his Subjects.

This Case is clear both in Reason and in Experience. Reason shows us, that
to draw any thing to Action, according to its own fitness and inclination, is
both easier to the attempter, and makes the action it self more efficaciously
and thoroughly performed. He that will drive a wedge into a hard piece of wood,
strives, as far as the situation gives him leave, to make his hammer fall
downwards, because a weight has, of it self, an inclination that way, and so
both the impression is stronger and the arm less strained, knocking and the
very fall of a weight increasing by motion downwards: Therefore Black-smithes,
whose continual labor is to use the hammer, lay their iron upon their anvile,
that is, in such a situation below their heads, as is most fitting to gain
the best advantage of the descent of their hammers, which they first raise to
give them scope of a descent.

Upon this principle it is, That they who tutour Dogs, Horses, Elephants and
Hawks, knowing the ordinary attractive of Beasts to be meat and some kind of
Flattery, make them understand, to the proportion of their capacity, that to do
the action they breed them for, gains them food; to which they join also
certain motions of stroking and gentle words, that make an impression in the
Beast of its own excellency, and that it pleases its master. In like manner,
to deter them from certain actions, cudgels, whips, and harsh words are used;
which have a notabler efficacy then one would easily imagine, if he saw it not
by experience.

This, now, being applied to Mankind, drives the effect home. For Man, being a
rational creature, (whose inclination it is to work according to knowledge)
desires to know that the work prescribed him is good, that is, good for him,
or his good. And because if two actions be proposed, whereof the one is better
for him then the other, the less good action deprives him of some good which
the more good had brought him; his inclination leads him to do the better, and
by consequence to know and dispute which is the better; which is as much as to
choose betwixt them; and this we call being free, or having natural Liberty to
do one and not the other. So that, the Nature of Man is to be free; and to act
what ever he does, because it seems to him the best.

Whence it is evidently concluded, that the perfectest way and most connaturall
for governing men is, by making them determine themselves to their actions, and
to proceed freely, and act, as it were, by their own inclinations. This if the
Governor can effect, he shall find both his intent generally performed,
because the Subject proceeds with much affection and courage; and seldom or
never will his Commands be resisted, or their obedience repented: For, men are
not wont to repine often at what themselves choose and judge best for
themselves; especially if, even after the action performed and peradventure the
attempt failed, yet the Subject remains satisfied, that it was best for him,
in those circumstances, to do what he did: Now, if the reasons were solid when
the Governor proposed them, such must of necessity be, for the most part, the
sequel.

Experience makes this same as manifest as Reason concludes it. What Mother
or Nurse does not seek to persuade and win the yet sucking child with gay
things, with Flattery and such demonstrations of Love (that is, of the child's
good) as the child is capable of? What Master or Father draws not his Boys
to school and sitting exercises, by promises and proposalls of good, as play,
goodcheere, fine clothes, and any other toys suitable to their tempers? The
stronger ages have stronger Motives; as, of Honor, Lands, Offices, and the
like: by which we see the most part of men led, not only to Labor, but even
to hazard their lives and those very goods which are proposed them for motives
of their actions.

On the contrary side, how ill do those enterprises thrive, where the Actors
conceive themselves either not concerned or wronged? How diligently are excuses
sought out and easily found, and every cause of delay judged sufficient? How
readily (if the Actours be in great multitudes (as Soldiers or Scholars) do
seditions and mutinies spring up, and all disorders grow bold and spread
themselves, the Commander of the action hated and esteemed an oppressor and a
Tyrant, his Officers scorned and disobeyed?

This then is, of all hands, concluded, that the proper and natural way of
Government is, by making the obeyer understand that it is his own profit
which the action aims at; so to make him work out of the inclination of his
own will, and the dictamen of his own understanding.

The Second GROUND.
That the Nature of Man reaches not to the perfection of Government.
NOtwithstanding this inclination be so natural to us, yet Nature is not able
to make it perfect in most both persons and actions. Children are not come to
the ability of judgeing; some others are so gross of capacity, they cannot be
brought to understand their own good, at least in that time and circumstances
which Nature has provided them; Most spend so much of their day in some one
Business, which they have chosen either for their Livelihood or pastime, that
they have not sufficient Leisure to attain the Knowledge necessary for other
occurrences of their life: Even the greatest Wits are not capable to understand
the nature of all things necessary to their own private conditions. The Prince
himself must trust the Physician, the Lawyer, the Mariner, the Soldier, the
Merchant, the Cook, the Brewer, the Baker, and diverse other Trades and
Knowledges, which he has no possibility to understand so perfectly as to be a
Master in them.

Nevertheless, Nature does not recede wholly from her Principle, in thus
subjecting one man's understanding to another, and the greater most times to
the lesser. For it does not this, otherwise then by making the party subjected
see, it is his own good to trust another's skill. Wherefore, it is true, that
he follows his own inclination, and is ruled by his own understanding; and
so governes himself; only, he is a degree higher, not busying his thoughts
about the particular work, but only about choosing the master of the work, or
about his own submission, that is, his own action, as he is a man, and his
action as that of a man, and not of a Physician or Pilot, or such other
particular discipline or Quality. It remains therefore still that he is free,
and Master of his own action and the commanding part of it.

The Third GROUND.
That a Rational belief is necessary to Humane Action.
OF those things to whose knowledge we cannot our selves arrive, but must rely
on the credit of others, there are two kinds; some purely to be believed,
others to be also acted. As, when we inform our selves of what passed in some
foreign Country, or of the nature of Trees or Beasts we never have use of;
we are barely to assent to what is delivered: But, when a Physician tells us
we must take a Purge or keep such a Diet; we do not only believe him but
act according to our belief. Now, though in truth this second sort belongs
properly to our discourse apart, because the nature of pure belief is
intrinsecally included in it, as a part in the whole; yet we must first note
the Errors to be avoided in a mere speculative assent: And these are two;
one of defect, and one of excess.

The vice by defect, warnes you to believe no thing but what your self
understand, that is, indeed to believe nothing at all. But, were these men
bound to their own Law, that they should take no Physic till they knew it
would do them good, at least as well as the Physician does; nor trust their
cause to a Lawyer till they understood the subtleties as perfectly as he; and
so in other vocations; I doubt they would have neither health nor wealth for
Physician or Lawyer to work upon.

But, because those who advance this proposition are persons of wit, I must not
think they stumble at so notorious a block: Therefore, their meaning is only,
that we ought not to believe, but what we are able to understand if we had
will and leisure to study. But, even so explicated, it is a most wilful
proposition, reason being quite on the opposite side: For, let the Authority
which denounces me a Truth, be sufficient to make it credible, and overvalue
the mysteriousnesse of the object; and the higher it is above my knowledge, the
more necessity there is of believing it. What is but a little above me, I may
easily come to know; and so need not believe but take pains and see it:
Belief is ordained for Truths whose direct and immediate evidence we cannot
compass; and therefore is more proper, more due, more requisite for such as
are above our knowledge.

But, peradventure these smart persons do suppose that all things which have a
possibility to be known, are the subject of man's wit; and so take these two to
signify the same sense, that the object is such as we are able to understand,
and that it is understandable, or does not couch a contradiction in its terms:
and peradventure conceive themselves able to show contradiction in whatever
they refuse to believe. If this be their meaning, the maxim they go upon is
safe; but they must be very careful not to subsume or apply it to particular
instances without much consideration: For, ordinarily, the authority is very
great which by understanding men, is alleged for remote and high truths; and
so is dangerously neglected, without an exact perusal and anatomy of the truths
maintained by it.

There are others so prodigal of our natural endowments, that they will
teach us a kind of contempt of reason and understanding. In a word, their
position is, That, though you be certain the proposition made (for ought you
know) is false, nevertheless, you may and ought to think it true: which how to
excuse, from being an irrational act and a pure folly, is beyond my skill; at
the same time to be assured it is uncertain, and to hold it for certain is,
to me, an impossibility. Do I not hold that which I am certain of? that is,
that this truth is uncertain? How then can I hold it is certain? Put this in
the mouth of a witness in any Court of Justice, and teach him that, though he
know certainly he does not perfectly remember whether he saw the man killed,
yet he may swear he saw it; what Justice will remain uncorrupted?

Passion and Precipitation may prevail with us, to judge that clear and
evident which is not so, and carry us to believe and affirm it; but that reason
should make us believe what it tells us it sees no ground for, or not
sufficient, is to me, an assertion the most unworthy, the most contrary to
reason, and the most biassed by interest that can be imagined. If our nature be
rational, if all our actions should be conformable to our nature, and governed
by reason; there cannot be a more pernicious proposition, then to tell us we
must assent, when there is no proportioned motive think we ought to assent.

Thus much I thought fit to say concerning the errors of belief in
speculation; because belief in practical things, and which concerns our
actions, depends of it, and includes it, and is, in part, regulated by the same
rules. The believing of practical things begins to trench upon the subject of
our main discourse: for it is the first and most simple or uncomposed degree of
government and obedience, and so the very roots of both are dependent from and
to be discovered out of it.

For, we experience by our ordinary apprehensions, that we esteem a
Physician, a Lawyer, a Schoolmasters ought to be obeyed, though we do not
acknowledge in them the power of a Lord or Magistrate. And so we say, the
Scholar will never profit, because he will not do what his Master would have
him: The client loses his cause, because he would not obey his Counsel: The
Patient recovers not, because he follows not the advice of his Physician. And
though we do not say the Doctor or Counselor commands his Patient or
Client, yet, if we look into it, he both rewards and punishes, which are the
concomitants of commanding. For who obeys is rewarded with learning, health,
and prosperity, and who disobeyeth is punished with Ignorance, sickness, and
losses.

The Fourth GROUND.
Of the virtue of obedience, and wherein it consists.
OUt of this we may easily understand what nature intends by the virtue of
obedience, and what are the limits and Laws of it. For it is plain, the
immediate end is that our works and all that concerns us may be well done,
even as to those things wherein our selves have no skill, or not enough, and
the more remote end to be achieved by this is, that our life may be good and
happy, and the end of Nature arrived to by us. The conditions likewise are
clear: First, that the matter of our action be such as our selves are not
sufficiently skillful in; the second, that our Commander be a master in that
art; the third, that he be a good and honorable person, in whom we may rest
confidently he will deal with us conformably to his skill, and not wilfully or
for his own pleasure, or interest, do any thing against our good and profit.

If the first be wanting, we also our selves are wanting to our selves; for
Nature has endowed us with reason to provide for our own good by this power:
again, it is nonsense and folly to expect another man should be more careful
of our good, then our selves: And suppose it were so, it were either our fault
or his, and for ought to be mended on one side; our fault if we be not so
sollicitous as we ought to be, that is, as much as the weight of the affair
requires; His if he be more sollicitous of our good then the same demands,
and so he who professes such a care may be feared to be a busy fellow,
and one who aims at his own profit under color of love, unless it be in an
evident neglect of ours, which cannot well be imagined of one who is ready to
obey another.

If the second condition be wanting, there can be no virtue in obedience,
since it will nothing mend but rather impair our life, and to the import of
that action, destroy our pretense to happiness, to submit our selves to one
who has no more skill then we, nor can be rationally supposed to bear us
more love and care, or that he will or ought to employ himself in our
particular business more attentively then we our selves.

As for the last condition, without it obedience is a plain precipitation of
our selves into misguidance and absolute ruin, and therefore a pernicious and
wicked practice.

By this discourse we may understand, it is a fallacious principle, though
maintained by many, that obedience is one of the most eminent virtues, and that
it is the greatest sacrifice we can offer to God, to renounce our own wills,
because our will is the chiefest good we have. For, not denying that obedience
is a great virtue; it being, truly in it self, the affection to moderate the
pride of our understanding, which is subject to make us think too well of our
own opinions without having evidence of the truth of them, and so hinder us
from heartily seeing and acknowledging the truth (an inclination of all others
most deeply rooted in our nature, and both most hard to be conquered, and most
pernicious to be followed) and therefore, the virtue which tempers and
moderates this passion must needs be very excellent: yet I cannot give it so
high a rank, as to prefer it before all.

For, I see it is only a virtue in case of imperfection, as Penance and some
others are; it being grounded on this, that a man is ignorant in those matters
wherein he ought to be obedient. But, the reason displeases me more then the
conclusion: For what signifies this, that it is the greatest good we have and
can renounce for Gods sake? If it be a great good, it is no vice, no excess,
but a natural power or exercise of a power given us by Almighty God; and then
would I know, why to renounce such a thing is pleasing to him. Can we think it
were pleasing to God for any one to bind up his arms or legs, or cut off
his hands, pretending to do it for his sake? He that made them gave them us
to use; and there by commanded us to use them according to the manner intended
by nature; and, if we do not so, we offend him.

There is a story of Origin, that he exsected his virility, thinking to Please
God; but the same story says, he was reproved by the whole Church, and
excommunicated for the fact: Simeon Styletes is reported to have chained
himself upon a hill, that he might not go thence; but he was taught that such
impotency was fit for beasts, not men. So that, to renounce any natural faculty
or the legitimate and fitting use of it, under pretense of pleasing God, is a
folly, not a virtue.

But, let us see what power it is that we must renounce; our Will: and this
word does not, in this place, signify any interessed affection or malicious
resolution; but that will which follows and is guided by our understanding,
and that truth which God has made us capable of: Therefore the renouncing of
this will, is, withal, the renouncing of our understanding; that is, of our
wits and manhood; so that it is in effect to renounce our rationality, and that
by which we are the image of God. If any man should take a fancy to go upon
all four like a beast, or subject himself to be led in a string like a Bear
about the Country; would not all wise men cry out on him for bestiality, and
think him unworthy the conversation of men? How much greater is the indignity
of him who permits himself to be carried in his whole course of life, and
those actions that most concern him without using that wit or understanding
which he has, and by the sole direction of another?

He can be accounted so far no better then a clock or watch, which tells
the hour by the wit and industry of the maker, not by any sense or worth of
its own. If therefore, to renounce our wills for Gods sake be to be
accounted a sacrifice; as far as my understanding reaches, it is no other
then that the Scripture expresses upon another occasion, to wit, one by which
the sons are sacrificed to the father, the image of God defaced to the glory of
him whose image he is.

The Fifth GROUND.
That Fidelity is different from Obedience; and in what it consists.
BUt leaving this mistake of simple devotion; of which we needed not have
spoken so much, had there not depended on it some matter of greater consequence
(as the following discourse will manifest in its due place:) we are to take
notice of an equivocation which may draw on some error if not prevented. We
use to say servingmen and waiting-maids ought to be obedient to their Masters
and Mistresses, whereas indeed, the virtue by which they serve is not that of
obedience, but of fidelity and truth, which is manifest to him that looks into
the nature of hirelings. For, none think a husbandman, who is hired to till or
fence a piece of ground, obeys the hirer more then he that sells a piece
of cloth or other merchandise obeys the buyer, because he takes his moneys;
but they are said to contract and perform their part of the bargain
faithfully and truly. So servants pay their duties, perform their bargains:
and Fidelity is their proper virtue; to do it carefully, and uprightly; not
Obedience.

For, Obedience is in such actions as are the proper actions of the obeyer,
which concern his life, and by which he may derive good if well done, and
harm if amiss. Now in servants the good success pertains to the Master,
the servant has his livelihood and wages, whether the event go right or
wrong, so he do what his Master commands. And hence it follows, that
neither ought he be ignorant in the action he does, nor sollicitous whether
his Master be either skillful or honest: For, since what is done concerns
not him but his Master, his duty is to seek to do what he is commanded in the
best way he can, without interessing himself about the success. This I say, as
far as he is a serving-man; but as he is also an honest man, it may belong
to him to suggest to his Master what he thinks best; and, sometimes, when it
lies happily in his way, to help such errors of his Master as he can: without
trenching on his Masters credit; still providing for his own indemnity: that
he be not involved in his Masters either imprudence or iniquity; for by his
bargain with his Master, he did not renounce the care of his own preservation.

The reason of this equivocation is because we ordinarily call obeying the
doing another man's will: and distinguish not how, sometimes, this is done with
renouncing our own wills, which is in those actions whereof we are Masters,
that is, our own actions; and, sometimes, without such renunciation, as in the
actions which belong to others, in which we have no will to renounce. Now
Obedience as it is a virtue especially attending on the renouncing of our
wills, is properly confined to the former sense, not to the other; with which
it only has an alliance in the name, and which truly is Fidelity, as we have
already declared.

But, although Fidelity be a distinct virtue from Obedience, yet is it not
such a stranger as not to demand a place in this Treatise: especially because
the kind of Obedience we desire to look into, which is that by which
Commonwealths and Communities subsist, is founded generally on Fidelity or the
matter thereof which we call promise, and in that virtue it binds to
observance. After which discourse we shall be prepared to venture on the
matter it self of Government, and to our power, declare the force of it
amongst men.

Man therefore being by his nature and definition a reasonable, that is, an
understanding Creature, or one whose primary and principal inclination is to
truth or true knowledge; and the outward carriage and action of man being
naturally proportionable to his inward substance; it is clear his chief
property, by which he behaves himself outwardly like a man, is to speak truth,
and to do as he says, when his words have action following them. Hence it
is, that though honesty (which in a Courtlyer term is called Honor, when
applied to a rational carriage, and in a more spiritual language, Conscience)
be extended to many other qualities, yet it is most frequently and principally
expected in his keeping his word; in so much that though he have other faults,
either spiritual or carnal, yet if he be true of his word, he, often and in
ordinary conversation, passes for an honest man.

Again, this virtue of Truth is the principal and first engine of humane
conversation, and he that has it not is unfit to be admitted to treat amongst
men, but is to be rejected and banished from all Negotiation. Thus you see what
engagement every one has, both by nature and necessity of conversation, to
stand upon his word or fidelity: For so we call the virtue by which we speak
our mind in reference to action, and are constant to perform what we say.

Yet, since malice is grown to such a height, all nations, who pretend to the
fear of any Deity, have used to make men confirm their faith and promise by
the invocation of the Deity they worship; hoping Religion may work in them
what Nature is not strong enough to effect. This confirmation is performed in
two sorts: One, when we only call God to witness; as when we say, God, who
sees my heart, knows this to be truth, or that I mean as I speak: The other,
when we pledge our trust in God for a security; as when we wish God may punish
us, or never do us good, if we break our promise. And this is properly an
execration, as the other an oath; yet both called oaths, and agree in this,
that we pledge our belief and fear of God, to another, for his security.

By which it is evident, that men generally esteem Religion the thing which
should pierce deepest into a man's heart and affection; and the strongest Bond
and tie of Faith and honesty; and that he, who sets little by his Religion,
has neither honor nor honesty in him; or at least wants the greatest and
strongest part of them, and that which ought to rivet in and fix the natural
inclination which we have to truth and fidelity.

The Sixth GROUND.
In what consists Right or Due.
THE next consideration may appear too Metaphysicall a subtlety for a Moral
treatise: yet such it is, that the ignorance of it is mother of many mistakes
and quarrels. We ought therefore, to know that a man, considered in pure
Nature, looks on all other things, Men and Beasts, and insensible creatures,
as his subjects to work on; his only rule being Reason, which takes nothing
to be good but what is good to himself; and makes the rule of his actions, to
do what is fitting for him or conformable to his, that is, to a rational
nature. By this rule he treats another Man, otherwise then a horse or a dog,
and them otherwise then a tree or stone: For Reason is a faculty to use every
thing suitably to their natures; as, to take a knife to cut, a horse to ride
on, a man to read or write or be his Counselor. And this runs through all his
actions.

But as, though a Tailor or Mariner govern himself by this rule, even when he
plays the Tailor or Pilot, yet none can doubt but the rules of Taylorship or
Steerage are different from this seeking his own good and applying all things
to that end: So, neither can any justly doubt but the art of a Lawyer or
Counselor is different from this principle which belongs to all men.

And to find out the difference, we are to reflect, that he who makes a
promise to another, so it be a perfect one (which we add to decline the
question of what promises oblige, what not) puts himself and his Promissary
into a rank of agency and patiency, on a new score, to wit, that of fidelity
and negotiating: So that now, not the nature of the two men, but their words,
and what follows out of them, ground their being active and passive. This
power of activity is, in Latin, called Jus or Justum, in English, Right or Due.

The difference of these two Arts is, One considers only what is noble, and
manly, and Conscience; the other, what is according to promise and consent of
parties. Whence we find, by the virtue of a promise, a new order grown
amongst men following out of promise: Wherein three things are to be
considered; The engagement of nature and honesty; The confirmation by oath; and
lastly, This right and duty which arises from the promise: For, whoever
promises, submits himself to his promissary, and becomes his Subject, as far
as the contract reaches.

The first mistake that springs from the ignorance of this difference is, the
great noise we hear of the Law of Nature and the Law of Nations. For, we are
made imagine that Nature has bound us to certain Laws, and not left us to
the Liberty of Reason, where no pacts or agreements intervene: As, that men
ought to give free Trade to leave the Seas open, to give immunities to
Ambassadors, and the like: For these either depend on Custom and Consent, or
are free for every man to dispose of, according to his own profit, necessity,
or convenience of his affairs.

It is true, there is an inclination in man, from reason, to do another any
good I can without my own prejudice, and to have a desire to keep peace with
all men: But if I do not, it follows not that I wrong him, even though I do
him harm or seek his ruin; But I wrong my self, nature binding me to make
my carriage to every one rational and becoming a man: For he is no otherwise
to me then a piece of cloth or wood, which I cut and shape after my own will,
fittingly for my use. And, on the contrary side, the party prejudiced or
refused a Courtesy, gets no right over me to revenge himself: But Nature and
Reason teaches him, peradventure, that it is good and prudent for him to hurt
me, to prevent a greater mischief to himself; and he does right to himself
in harming me, because he does an action rational and suitable to manhood.

The different consequents of the two positions, will appear in this: That, if
there be, in nature, radicated such an order of right and naturally just or due
(as many hold) it is a thing that reason can never infringe nor can any thing
justify what God has showed us by example, and we see wise Politicians
practice sometimes, when, without crime or offense offered, they make
themselves Masters of convenient places: But, if there be no such right by
Nature, then Reason is left Mistress to judge whether it be conformable to the
nobility of man to do such an action or no.

The Seventh GROUND.
Why men desire to live in Community; and of the necessity of Government.
NOt to make the foundations or underground works bigger then our building;
It is time to enter upon our pretended subject of Government and Obedience,
and examine what it is makes Government necessary to Mankind. And, because
the Government we look upon is that of a multitude; first it is fit to
understand why men desire to live in flocks or multitudes. Neither can any who
has never so little skill in nature doubt, but, as pleasure masters and heads
all our actions, so likewise does it this of living in society.

The first community is of Man and Wife. Who sees not the power of pleasure in
their mutual society? Aristotle, out of experience, teaches us that we take
pleasure in conversing with handsome persons. And if we consider pleasure to
be nothing but the knowledge or sense of our being well or receiving some good;
and, that the immediate cause of pleasure is the impression which some natural
or apprehended good makes of its own presence; and that good signifies
connaturall or fitting for us; we shall perceive that Handsomeness in our
own kind must of necessity cause pleasure in us; the impression it makes by
our eyes being of the features and color due to the perfection of our Nature;
a gracefulness, not only of gesture and voice, but even of wit and discourse
being regularly the ground of the outward beauty. So that (if Nature has not
miscarried) all the parts and actions of a beautiful body are graceful to
nature, and breed pleasure in others who enjoy them by conversation and, as it
were, communication.

This then is the first origin of meeting and living together; as, whosoever
looks into experience will easily discover: For, he will find most men
burdensome to themselves when they are alone, and to seek company to divert
themselves, so to elude the length of time. I remember to have heard a Country
fellow complain of the loss of a Dog which was stolen from him; and gave for
his reason, that he was to travel a whole night alone, and the Dog would have
been an excellent companion to him. Bees also, we know, love company. Horses
not only labor, but even eat better amongst their fellows: and we often
hear sickly stomachs thank those that visit them for the good meal they have
made, as if the company helped down their meat. Pleasure therefore and Love is
the first combiner of men into Society.

The next is, that God and Nature have so managed mankind, that no one has of
himself, as much as he desires; but regularly abounds in one kind of goods
and wants some other which his neighbor has: Hence, they mutually affect
Society; to be accommodated with such necessaries, as they cannot have but by
communication one with another.

In the third place comes Fear: for he that finds himself stored with
those things which he and others love, is subject to fear those whom he
suspecteth able to bereave him of them; and so seeks company of friends for
protection. Nor does any one fear to lose but what he affects to have; so
that first love marches in the van, and fear follows in the rear. Besides,
it is against all generosity, and embases Nature it self, to set the Throne of
Fear above that of Love; and agrees neither with Philosophy nor Morality.

To make a step farther: Granting once men to be desirous to live together, and
taking notice of the passions they are subject to, and how self-love corrupts
the judgment of almost all in their own case; it is evident they can never
live in quiet and content, unless there be some way contrived of agreement,
when passion stirs contention. They must therefore, necessarily, give
consent, to end their controversies by some means. And since reason is our
nature; and every ones reason freer to see the truth in another case then in
his own; and a wise and good man fitter then a fool or knave, the most
natural way for a multitude to live in peace is to have some man or men,
accounted wise and good, chosen, to whose arbitrament all the rest ought to
stand; the stronger part combining to force the weaker, in case of resistance;
that is, the disinteressed part, which is the multitude, to force the
interessed, which generally are but particulars if compared to the body of the
people.

Here you see the nature of Government begin to appear. But, to make it
perfect, we must farther consider, That many commodities are necessary to a
multitude, which are to be furnished by common consent: That likewise there are
many foreign enviers to a multitude which lives handsomely and happily: And
in conclusion, that to provide for goods and prevent evils in common, is a
matter of so great weight and difficulty, that it takethup the whole life of
one or more men; and by consequence, these businesses cannot be carried on by
the whole body of the community, whose work and aim is to enjoy themselves to
their proportion, in getting by their labor, those accommodations of humane
life, which they esteem necessary or conducing to their happiness. It
solloweth therefore, they must entrust some more or fewer to take care of the
common concernements.

Such Trustees are called Governors, and the commnnity is said to obey them;
and according to the principles forelaid, you see the people are supposed
ignorant of what ought to be done for the public, this being a business
requiring a man's whole time; which they neither can spare, nor do desire to
employ in this: way: You see they entrust others in whose prudence and
goodness they confide; and themselves execute what their Trustees think
fitting, either by practicing when they are commanded, or giving a sufficient
force to their Governors to master such restif parties as will not obey: In
conclusion, you see Government is, naturally, a power or right of directing
the common affairs of a multitude, by a voluntary submission of the
communities wills to the will of the Governors; whom they trust, upon opinion
that they are understanding and honest, and will administer the Commonalty by
the rules of wisdom and goodness, as is most convenient and advantageous for
the people.

It seems to me no moderate and discreet person can doubt but a Government so
ordered is both necessary and connaturall to a rational multitude, and, in a
word, such as humane nature requires; and is the best, if not the only, that
suits to the disposition of free men and prudent.

The eighth GROUND.
Of the Authority given to an absolute Governor; and of undersorts of
Government.
BY this resignation of the Peoples will, it is also evident, the Magistracy
receives such an activity and power as, we have explicated before, did arise
out of a man's promise to his neighbor: and by consequence, that the people as
far as they have renounced their own will, so far they have no power left
in them to contradict or resist the orders of the Magistracy.

I say, as far as the People have submitted their wills: for since this power
is in the Magistrate in virtue of their wills, it cannot extend farther then
the peoples promise: So that if the people bind their Magistrates to certain
Laws and Limits; he has no right to transgress such Laws, or extend
himself beyond the prefixed limits by his installment, and the original power
given him: but above all, he cannot dispose of one chip or dispense in one the
least law; farther then he apprehends it as fit and necessary to the good of
the Commonwealth: and, if he does, he exceeds his Patent and power. True
it is, there is a great discretion to be used in such limits, and the prudent
Governor will see that the good of the Community requires many of those
dispensations, which careless Governors use out of an overweening of their
own height and power.

Having thus declared the nature and conditions of natural Government; it is
not amiss to see whether there be any other Government; and wherein
distinguished from this. And casting our eyes round about us we quickly
perceive certain communities which pretend to a defective Government: as
Companies of Merchants or Tradesmen; Universities and Colleges of Scholars;
and Cloisters of men and women, who pretend to employ themselves wholly to
perfect their souls toward eternal beatitude. All these have a participation
of Government; but have not the universal administration of humane goods and
evils: For, power of life and death, generally, they have none; and are
subject, for the most part, to appeals from their judgments, in matters of
great consequence: neither have they any power of peace and war: And if
sometimes any of these royalties belong to them; it is not as they are heads of
such Communities, but as they participate of Sovereignty by privilege, or
accident.

These therefore are distinguished from the Government we pretend to declare;
as being slight imitations of it, and certain likenesses, not the power it
self; or as some Art or Trade is different from Moral Philosophy, which is
Mistress of the will, and all her actions; the others being but Ushers to the
particular, as it were forms or ranks in which petty things are taught. In
fine, these others are to our Government, as particulars to the universal.
The Government therefore which we explicate is that which has power, either
of all things belonging to the people it governs; or at least, of all
comprehensible by Nature and falling under Sense and Experience. The first of
these we see in the Pope and such Bishops as are withal Secular Princes; the
second, in other Christian Governements either of Princes or Commonwealths,
where the Spiritual jurisdiction is acknowledged to be higher and greater,
though not commander of the Temporal.

But we seek farther, whether there be any supreme Government different
from this we explicate, or no: And the occasion is from what we see in
certain instances, that there is a kind of command or rather subjection,
which we call Slavery, exercised, not only amongst Heathens, but even
Christians, who have more conformity to nature.

The Ninth GROUND.
Of Slavery and the lawfulness of it.
ANd first, we must look into the notion of Slavery; which signifies a
subjection to command in all things; and that merely for the Masters profit.
This all things may either reach to the hindering him from those actions which
are necessary to obtain Beatitude; or only to corporal services, with that
moderation, that the Master hinders him not from such exercises as concern the
procurement of future happiness.

And clearly, it is against nature for any to submit his will so far as to
renounce eternal bliss. There cannot, then, be any Obedience due to such an
extremity; and, by consequence, there cannot be any power of commanding such
enormities in the compass of nature. The like I conceive of a subjection to be
killed or maimed causlessely and without desert, or even tormented; nay, or so
penuriously abused as to have no content in life; but perpetually to suffer
sickness, hunger, cold, or any other notably afflictive condition, so that his
life is rather a punishment then a content to him. For since life is our
being, and since being is the thing most deeply recommended to us by nature;
it is evidently against the inclination of nature, to consent to the loss
either of life or of the profit of life, which is, either to be well in this
world or in the next: therefore it cannot be conformable to nature to renounce
either; especially, the Quiet in this world being the means to gain bliss in
the other.

Neither does it scare me to cast my eyes upon so many holy men and women, as
have put themselves, voluntarily, upon penurious and painful lives. For, I can
easily answer, that they had not displeasing lives; enjoying the fruit of
contemplation, and the sweetness of Conscience in expecting a great reward for
what they did: So that, they only refused the pleasures of this world, to
gain those of the next; which is very rational. But, for a man to renounce
the content of this world, who either think not of another, or, at least,
hops nothing out of his renunciation: this must of necessity be extremely
irrational and against Nature; whose universal aims are, to be well, either
in the next or this present life. But if there be no such subjection natural,
there can as little be any power of command gotten either by promise and
submission of the subject, or violence of the Commander; who may perforce do
what he list, but can never make it conformable to nature, to use an other with
such inhumane severity.

There follows yet another kind of Slavery; which consists in being bound
to do what his Master commands, while his Master affords him a convenient
livelihood; and being subject to due punishment, without farther appeal, when
he deserves it. And this has no apparent opposition to Nature; why, in
circumstances, a man may not bind himself to it, and be obliged to maintain
and make good his word to his dying day. And, of such a kind of Slavery, we may
question, Whether nature allows a whole people to be involved in it, or it be
a thing that only can happen accidentally in nature.

And Aristotle is the first man whom we are engaged to offend in this matter;
who says or seems to say, That some Nations are naturally Masters and
Commanders, others, Slaves and Subjects: To which conceit Virgil seems also to
incline; Tu regere imperio populos Roman memento etc.
Hae tibi erunt arts --
As if it were proper to that Country to command. Neither do I think
Aristotle's meaning was any more, then that there was a greater fitness in
some Nations to command, then in others: for, himself teaches, the Barbarous
prisoners, whose education had been noble, should not be put to servile
offices. So that, it was but a little selfe-pleasing in these two great
Authors, and affection toward their Countries, which made them fall into this
extremity, of thinking it fit that other nations should submit to theirs:
Whereas, had they lived in our days, long experience would have taught them
that, in every nation, there are men fit to Govern, if Education and
Discipline be not wanting; And again, any nation may prove a Slave, even
through too much wit, if they have not goodness to temper it. But we must not
be angry, even with great ones, if they flatter a little their Country: but
take warning it be not our own case, either for our Country, or, which is
more absurd, for our selves.

Leaving then this question, Whether any nation be, by nature, borne and
designed to slavery? let us see whether, within the Latitude of Nature, it
consists that any nation can enslave it self in the sense propounded. I do not
here intend to engage in that question; Whether one nation may oppress
another, and, by force of Garrisons and Armies, keep them quiet in a
Legitimate course of Government and Subjection? a question much different from
ours, which is only, Whether a whole Nation may voluntarily submit it self to
a Government, by which it shall have nothing of its own, nor be able to
deserve or get any thing; but be entirely at the disposition of the Magistrate
it chooses, without right or property?

That we may not walk too much in the dark, the holy Scripture holds us out a
Lantern, in the example of Joseph; who bought up the whole nation of Egypt
for Pharaoh their King, so that he rendered him not only the Governor as
before, but also absolute Lord and Master, and them his slaves; and this by
their consent. Nevertheless, I am not able to understand reason in it. To put
therefore the case clearly, the meaning is; Whether a whole nation can ty it
self so by any promise to one Magistrate, as afterward to be bound, they and
their Children, in force of their words, not to have or dispose of their
Labors and goods of fortune but at the pleasure of the Magistrate; and that he
has power, arbitrarily and without any farther reason then his own will, to
give what one man possesses to another, and make any one work and obey
another, merely because such is his pleasure.

That which induces me to declare for the Negative is the Nature of man; whose
first and maine operation, is judgment and choice; and the matter of this is
his outward action: So that, who univer^ally renounceth his judgment in
externe action, truly renounceth nature it self, in renouncing the end and
action for which it was made. Now, that a single man may be forced to this, I
make no difficulty: For, if force can take away a single man's life, much more
may it take away his outward action. But, when I speak of a Nation, me thinks
I speak of Nature it self: For, I understand a Nation to signify a thing in
nothing different from humane Nature, except in greatness; as a bit of bread
from a loaf or a paile of water from the pond out of which it was taken; and
so, Reason cannot teach us to do that to a nation, which ought not be done to
all humane kind. Now, who abhorres not to think that the use of judgment and
will should be banished out of Mankind? Were not that quite to unman us and
be-beast our whole nature? On the other side, it being the property of reason
to use every thing it knows, according as it is fitting to the respective
nature of the thing; and nothing being more fitting for man in common and every
one in particular, then to judge and govern in his little sphere of activity;
reason can never demand or approve of the contrary to be practiced universally;
as is employed in this Position, that it may be done to a whole nation.

I look not into the inconvenience of such proceeding: How base and unworthy
it renders the subjects; how unfit for the service of the Magistrate; how ready
to accept of any occasion to better themselves; and the like; which are
sufficient to dehort any wise Governor from attempting or desiring it: Because
my Theme is only upon the contracting an obligation of obedience, out of the
force of their promise; and extends no further. And, I suppose, the showing
that such a promise invalidateth the principle upon which a promise grounds its
constancy, is enough, to show that no promise so made can be constant and
firm; since a man stands to his word, because he is a man and has a principle
of judgment or choice upon judgment, by which and according to which he is
and ought to be governed: Now then, such a promise being a renouncing and
bereaving him of this his manliness; it cannot assuredly be maintained by
manliness which is the only or chief strength of a promise.

But, what must we reply to Joseph? what to many thousands of eminent
Christians, who seem to profess and observe, in virtue of a vow, this very
kind of subjection? As for Joseph, he justifies himself, in renouncing the
Vassalage of his People for one fifth part of their lands and fruits. 1. And,
not to make an estimate, how proportionable the fifth of a Kingdom is to the
furnishing of necessaries for governing; so much at least is plain that, by his
remission of four parts absolutely, that is, for ever, he did not execute what
he pretended by the bargain; but, by the formality of acquiring all, he
obtained what he aimed at, That the People should willingly contribute the
fifth part of their Labor and goods generally, and, in case of necessity,
willingly obey their Governor.

As for the special obedience vowed by some Christians of exemplary life, it
is professedly only, concerning spiritual instruction or exercise, even then
when it is applied to the Knights champions of Christendom: And this is
expressed by the greatest Divine the School ever had, in his 22^. Qu. 104.
Art. 5. ad tertium. So that, neither of these objections prejudice the
conclusion we have settled; However the outward undiscerned show may make an
appearance to the contrary.

Out of this conclusion it is easily seen, that the Turkish, Moscoviticall,
Tartarian and other whatsoever Governements, settled upon this principle, that
the Goods and Lives of the Subjects are the Princes, not to defend (as our
Laws go) but to dispose of at will, without contradiction or limitation, more
then of his pleasure; neither do nor can ever breed any obligation of Obedience
in the Subject, farther then out of fear or present utility.

It is not amiss to add this consideration, that those Tyrannical Governors
exact of their Subjects no less then to forgo all that is dear in this
world, at their pleasures, life and means, wife and children, and whatsoever
has made impression upon them: So that, truly, there is no protection or
security from them; and if they rob you not, it is because they have no
occasion, not because they conceive any unworthiness in it. Whence, no good
nor profit does, regularly and according to the intention of the pact and
agreement, result to the particular; but all is the high Masters, and the
Subjects portion is only to share those scraps he shall cast down to him, as
to a Dog, to make him fit to hunt for his master.

The tenth GROUND.
Why a man is to hazard himself for the common good.
IT is true, this debt in the subject, of hazarding life and limbs and all that
is estimable in this world, is exacted, as well in just and legitimate
Governements as in those hideous Tyrannies; But, there is a recompense for it,
and the good of the whole reflecteth on the part; and if one lose his life, his
children and relations at last feel the sweetness of it; and this makes men
hazard with courage, and die with comfort. And clearly, were there not this
obligation, no Commonwealth could stand. What City could be defended, if the
Citizens would not venture their lives upon the walls? What Army could be
managed, if the Soldier would never be brought into the danger of death, or
would fly as soon as the bullets began to play about his ears? all wrongs must
be suffered at their hands who would expose their own lives to hurt others; and
no justice maintained, or innocence defended. Nature therefore makes it most
clear that such an obligation is unavoidable, and the daily necessity of it
beats it out so flat and plain, that we can no way escape so manifest an
evidence.

But if it be by the direction of nature, certainly it is also rational, and
has some principles of its truth and reasonableness. Now, in Morality the
reason of all action is the good obtaineable by it; which if less or not
greater then what we hazard and, peradventure, lose in the attempt, it is no
good nor can be a rational motive of such an action. We ought therefore to
seek out this great good.

Aristotle proceeds as cunningly in this business as became so wise a Master;
and, according to his fashion, where his skill reached not to explicate the
particulars, remained in common terms: telling us, that Bonum commune divinius
est quam particulare: But, in what this Divinity consists, he no where
expresses. Truly, if there were a Platonic Idea of the particular's goods,
which might be termed the common good, I could understand that there were a
Divinity in it; but himself has extinguished that flash of Plato's, beyond
reviving. I understand also, that the notion of common, compared to the notion
of individual, has a kind of excellency by its universality, which renders
it very august and lustrous, and of a higher degree then the particular. I know
again the perpetuity a Commonwealth pretends to, compared to the mortality
of a single person, vesteth it self with a kind of infinity, which gives it
a glorious appearance. Nay, when I see the same man work for a Commonwealth,
in a free way of doing it good; and again, for a private friend: I see a vast
distance between his pretended ends; and an eminent generosity in one over the
other: Whence, I believe, it comes that Heroes and heroical virtues are
chiefly taken in respect of doing good to whole Countries or Cities.

But when, on the other side, I see the same great Master teach us, that Good
is the same with Desirable; and every ones good, what is desirable to him; I
find it is an intricate labyrinth of equivocation wherein we endlessely err,
while we thtnk that Good taken in common, should be accounted Good, truly and
properly. As, who would be so wild as to bend any strong labor here in
England to profit the King of Persia or Siam, if he expected no good to
reflect on himself by it? Much less would any account it good to be robbed
or maimed, because it was good to another who possessed his money or was afraid
of him: and yet if we stick upon the common Notion of good, without
determining to whom it is good, ^oth these must be esteemed not only goods
but great ones; for, so they are to some body, though nothing or harm to the
esteemer. Then, to cry, The Common good, is a mere deceit and flattery of
words; unless we can show that the common good is as great to us as we make
it sound.

Neither can the authority of learned Nations and the many endeavors of worthy
men persuade us the contrary. For these Nations generally were of Popular
governements, where plainly the common good was the good of them who were to
reward the causes of it: so that, it was no wonder the Common good should be so
highly exalted and cried up; where it was the particular good, both to them to
whom it was commended, as also the commenders themselves were to arrive to
their own private pretenses through that notion of the common good. The like is
of all Princes and Governors; who if they be wise, conceive the common good
in most circumstances, to be compared to them as their own proper good.

It remains therefore, to see what may be the ground on which an
understanding man ought to value so highly the common good; and expose his life
and all that is dear to him, upon the score of the Public. Clear it is,
that he who ventures his life, ventures all this world: For if he dies, what
reward remains there in this world? Fame is a slender recompense, when the
fruit of it (which chiefly consists in being respected in company, and having a
power amongst his associates) is once passed. The good of his wife and
children; that may rejoice a dying man; but if there rest nothing after death,
it is a comfort which soon expires; being indeed nothing but a flash. It is
then past dispute, that for him, who expects nothing in the next world, there
can be no rational motive of voluntarily endangering his life for the common
cause; if himself be not particularly interessed in it.

I know Philosophers reply, that there is no harm in death, nor pain after it,
and we are but as if we never had been; so they dispute to take away the
fear of death. But first, I would ask them, why, even in such a case, the fear
of death should be taken away? What signifies this to a sound Philosopher, to
take away the love of his Summum Bonum? of the end for which he is to do all
his actions? Again if he must embrace death, upon what motive must he make
his onset? shall he propose to himself none? or a less good then he loses?
or entertain frantic apprehensions of glory after he is nothing? These are
not answers for Philosophers and considerate persons; but for some harebrained
foolhardy flashes or doting Orators, who, with a multitude of fine words,
can plausibly dress up contradictions and nonsense.

This therefore remains certain, that there is no good to be expected here
equivalent to the hazard of death; and consequently, none can be rationally
valiant, who sets not his hopes upon the next world: And as, before, we made
it apparent, that he who was not constant to his Religion, could have no
rooted Honor or Honesty in him; so, now it is likewise evident, he cannot
rationally be either valiant himself or trusted by others in danger, farther
then he is a fool. Since then, on the contrary side, the nature of
Commonwealths makes it beyond dispute that hazarding is necessary; it is both
evident there is another life to be expected, and that it imports good
Government to plant deeply in the breast of the subjects a rational
apprehension of it. The cause therefore, and solid reason why men ought to be
valiant, is the hope of reward hereafter for doing good to our neighbor here:
and the Commonwealth being our nearest and greatest Neighbor, as including
our Friends, Parents, Acquaintance, and all of Mankind that our knowledge
reaches to; to perform service to It is, certainly, the greatest act of
charity toward our Neighbor; that is the highest externe act which God has
granted to us, and, consequently, to be preferred before all others; and, as
such, to expect a profit and recompense in the next life.

I know, it may be objected, that in beasts also is to be found a kind of
valor, even to the hazard of their lives for their Mates and little ones, and
yet no reward of the next world can be pretended for them. But, we are to
reflect, that beasts are not governed by any reason given them to govern
themselves by; but like Clocks and other Engines, by the wit of their Makers:
and therefore it ought not to be expected they should be addressed to that
which is their individual greatest good, as Man is by his Reason; but only to
what is fittest for their Creators intention; which being only to continue
them for the use of Man; and this passion of audacity which we see in them,
being fit for that, we are not to seek a further reason for them to hazard
their lives, nor to draw any consequence from them to Mankind, whose propriety
is to govern himself by the knowledge of his own good, and not to be forced
out of that for the good of any other, so the notion of good be rightly taken.

By this we, in part, understand wherein consists the worth and excellency of
a Magistrate and his Office: to wit, that all others ends being purely for the
good of their private persons or family; the Magistrates aim is at the
universal good of the whole eternal body of the Commonwealth, the extent of
the persons, the long and farre-sighted care, and the abstraction from his
private good, manifestly exalt this function, beyond comparison, above that of
private men and their intentions; and places it, as it were, in an orb of
honor proper to its dignity.

The eleventh GROUND.
The Quality and Rational power of a supreme Governor.
THus is our supreme Magistrate or Governor mounted on his Throne of Justice
and Sovereignty. He has for his strength, that right the People have bestowed
on him; devesting themselves, by this submission, from interposing in Common
affairs. He has besides, the strength of the People; both their Wealth and
Swords being delivered up to him; so that, if he be wise, he can make himself
and his Laws obeyed. But chiefly he has his own Prudence and Goodness,
which is supposed to be the choicest that could be found in that people; and
the Credit of it to be his strength and support.

For, if we look into it; As we see that, in the natural generation of
Government, the people truly intend to be governed by one whom they esteem
the Wisest and Best amongst them: so afterward, when they apprehend their
Magistrate no Solomon, yet they still conceive he is the best they can obtain
or prudently aim at; That is, if they should attempt to change, it would bring
greater inconveniences then their continuance under this weaker Magistrate. So
that, as it were, the Essence and Form of his power to govern, is Wisdom and
Goodness; at least, such a degree of both as is supposed and apprehended the
greatest possible, according to the circumstances wherein they are. His End we
find to be The common good: and to that is he wholly and adequately bound, by
his own Goodness, by the peoples Intention, by his own Acceptance, by the
nature of the Charge it self, and by the very form of his life and
Profession: In so much that, he fails from his Duty, from the expectation of
his Subjects, and his own Goodness, if he does the least action for his
private interest, or otherwise then out of his esteem that it is for the
greatest good of the Commonwealth.

And truly, if it be duly considered, we may plainly see that his private
interest is not distinguished from the public. For, how can it be? First for
Honor, it is plain, the welfare of his Subjects is his highest honor; Their
knowing they are well by him, and so their love to him, his strongest security;
Their expressing still on all occasions content with his actions, and esteem
of his person, his greatest pleasure; and in fine, the more wealth they have,
the greater Commander is he: so that really, this private interest (if he be
indeed a good Governor) is the true felicity of his People. I do not, by
this, intend to cut off from Supreme Magistrates that promise and magnificence
we see usually in persons of that quality: But, whereas it may be practiced
either for pride and vanity, that is, to procure an esteem of the private merit
of the Magistrate, or else, to facilitate the government by the awe and
reverence it printeth in the Subject; I expect the supreme Magistrate to be so
discreet, as to understand the former is merely a shadow or faint and fading
color, the other a real profit and necessary instrument, and so to be
embraced for the good of the people.

Neither must we leave our Magistrate here, but transplant our discourse into
a new consideration. For, if he has gotten a Commission, he has not, by that,
lost the quality of a rational, wise, and good man; but joined to that a new
obligation of being new fixed upon the Common good, as the effect and scope of
the actions of his whole life: Insomuch that, to determine the quality of his
action, we must make one complexe of the whole person; and ask, What a wise
and noble mind, having such limitations upon him, by word or oath engaged in
his installment, may or ought to do concerning the limitations?

And first, it is undoubted on both sides, that neither may he, without great
cause, make a breach in those hedges his way is fenced with; nor, if he make
some small and inconsiderable breaches, that he violates therefore his oath.
For, the nature of humane action is such, as not to consist in an indivisible;
but, of it self, to have a moral Latitude* our understandings not being able
to reach to such small and petty differences as nature makes and our
operations contain, as far as they depend from nature.

But, the Question comes, When some great fault discovers it self in the
limitations, and the end of Government is prejudiced by such a defect; and
nevertheless it is no doubt but it is the intention of the people or the
Trustees of the people to bind their Magistrate to such conditions; Whether,
in such a case, he be bound to his orders and oath, or whether the duty of a
wise and good man does enfranchise him to do what is truly best for the
people, though it be against their wills?

The question seems hard: and therefore it is not amiss to note, that truly
best signifies that it be not only best, if it had been fore-ordered or if it
were in practice; but that it be best to be brought into practice; and that,
notwithstanding all damages and dangers which are to be incurred in the
settling of it; Otherwise, it is clear, he ought to stand to his oath. Another
caution is, that the Magistrate do not only think it so best, but know it by
certainty and science; otherwise, he proceeds not wisely, to hazard a
disturbance of the Commonwealth upon slight and weak appearances.

These two suppositions premised, we are to consider what it is that engages
the Magistrate on both sides. And, for his promise, it is above declared, that
he is engaged to it by the connaturality and beauty of Truth in Man's nature:
Now not Truth only is conformable to man's nature, but also that Nobleness and
Goodness that binds man to man; which in its highest pitch, that is, as it
looks upon a Commonwealth or a little Mankind, is the beauty and virtue of
a Governor.

Again, I see a Governor has in himself, as it were, two Truths, or degrees
of truth belonging to his person: One, which is the public Honesty, either
considered betwixt him and his subject or some aliens; and this forfeited
makes his public credit weak and unfit for the use of Government: the other
is but a splendor reflecting on his own person, by which he appears in the
face of honor and a man of his word. For this latter it is very evident, the
affection to the public ought to oversway it; because being but a private
good it should do homage to those virtues which carry a man to the common
interest. For the former, the damage ensueing is to be esteemed and poised
against the profit or necessity of the Commonwealth: For, if it be evident,
that the good of the change openly and vastly exceeds the damage proceeding
from the discredit; clearly he is bound to admit of the discredit, to purchase
the advantage accrewing by the change: But, where there is none or little
difference, there the balance hangs upon quietness side, and change is not to
be ventured on.

This seems so plainly and evidently concluded, that a rational man cannot
resist it. But, to those who are used to maintain their credit by custom more
then by reason, it is a bolus of hard digestion, to tell them they must break
their word for the common good: and seems to be of the same nature, with
that famous definition of an Ambassador, witty in England, harsh in other
Nations, that He is sent ad peregre mentiendum pro patria, which where the
equivocation of lying abroad is not understood, is, in verity, a scandal to
Statesmen, whose negotiation hangs so tenderly on their credit, that, it once
being broken, they have lost a principal instrument to penetrate the hearts on
which they are to work.

Therefore, let us see whether the high Magistrate (in proceeding as we have
declared) does truly force the rampart of veracity so necessary for a
Government. Let us first begin with his promise, and consider what it is. He
is entrusted to do for the common good: and the reason why he is entrusted
is, because the entrusters conceive themselves either through their incapacity
or attendance to other employments, ignorant of what is truly the common good.
They entrust him, therefore, with more then they understand; and so his power
is to proceed, according to his understanding, though it cross theirs: He
then of necessity, must be false to his Oath, if he do not, according to his
trust, act for the common good what he evidently sees in a high degree to
import it. Further, because we know, in moral businesses, the end aimed at,
is more principal then the means ordered to it, and has such a command over
them that they are to be or not to be, according as is fitting for the end:
And in the Oath or Promise of our high Magistrate, if he observe his
limitations, he destroys the end for which they were put: He offends against
both his Oath and Fidelity to his people, if he maintain such limitations,
when he is obliged, for the public good, that is, when he ought to break
them.

Yes but (replieth the man who thinks himself wedded to an outward and
seeming honesty in this cause) howsoever, at least he breaks that part of
his Oath, in which he swore directly, to those limitations. Let us therefore
see even that point, and ask, what was the peoples will in exacting his Oath or
Promise? Does any one will what he understands and knows not? If one
should say to another, I give thee what is in that trunk; in which himself had
put a suit of apparel, and, without his knowledge, his servant had taken that
out and put in bags of gold to the same bulk; would any Divine, or Chancery
Judge, or prudent person assert he were bound to bestow on that promissary all
his gold, which was in the trunk? I think not; and the reason is, because it
is the will and understanding which has the power to give strength to a
promise or contract; and here the will is wanting; for he knew not what he
said, nor intended to give any thing but a suit of clothes.

How many promises do Divines and Lawyers pronounce null, though they were
good and valid when they were made, by reason of the change of accidents
following, which could not be foreseen? If one promise his Daughter in
marriage to his neighbor, and she dies; is he bound to fulfill his
engagement, or seek his neighbor another wife? Nay, if the neighbor be
discovered not to be the man he was taken for; not to have a competent estate
and such like conditions; he may justify the disperformance of his promise;
nor shall he forfeit his credit if he does not keep his word, but rather, if
he do, be accounted a weak man.

Now, to come to our purpose, let it be supposed the people were made
understand, when they exact the promise from their Magistrate, that such
limitations would destroy their peace, and contentment: does any one think they
would bind their Governor to maintain them? If they would not, it is evident,
howsoever their mouths pronounced the words, their hearts were ignorant and
inculpable of such an exaction; for they knew not what they did, they
understood not nor meant what they spoke.

But suppose that truly they knew the incommodities that were to follow, and
yet they would have them observed: For, this happens often in this our
subject, that some (especially great men, and sometimes the populace)
understand the inconvenience of a Law, and yet for private interest will have
it maintained: What then is the duty of the supreme Magistrate, who is sworn
to maintain the said Laws? The question is clearly answered by the
condemnation of Jephthe; who, when he had rashly vowed to sacrifice the first
thing that met him from home, did impiously murder his daughter. All
understanding men know, a wicked oath is not to be observed. He that should
give a mad mana sword, because he had vowed or sworn it, deserved to be hanged
for the murders by him committed: Now, an ignorant and wilful man, what is he
but a mad man? Or what is madness but a wilfulness in doing evil? If the
action be naught and such as the exactor cannot, with reason, desire, he cannot
by any oath bind a swearer to it: Now to observe conditions which shall ruin
the Government and destroy the end for which they were instituted, is an
action contrary to all reason, and to which the promissary cannot bind the
promiser, in any wisdom and goodness: He is therefore bound, rather to the
destroying then fulfilling such conditions; neither is he therefore perjured,
but were rather unjust and wicked, if he observed them. This so resolved, it
appears plainly, that no supreme Magistrate can be bound to any Laws
contrary to good Government; farther then either the danger of changing them,
or the not clearly seeing them to be such, may hold his hand.

The Twelfth GROUND.
Who is such a Governor, and the Subjects duty toward him.
WE have long talked of a Supreme Governor; it is time we should point him
out, that he may be known. And, since all agree that there are three sorts of
Government, Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy; when they are simple, there
can be no doubt who is the supreme magistrate. Now, mingled they may be, all
together, or some two of them: And again, their mixing may be either
continually, as when all parts mixed are so often engaged that their
Authorities run jointly, or else some are continual, others but at certain
terms.

If Monarchy be mixed, either with Aristocracy or Democracy, so that they be
continually joint actors; the Monarch is but a Servant, and the other part the
Master: as is to be seen i^ the Italian Doges, and the Lacedaemonian Kings; for
his force is nothing, compared to his consort.

If Democracy and Aristocracy be so mixed, the quarrel is more balanced; and
because it is a Government divided in it self, and therefore dangerous; no
doubt but, if the Aristocracy get power enough, she is in the posture of
supreme Authority. The example of this we have in the Roman Commonwealth, in
the time, specially, of Sylla's conquest; when, if he had settled the State in
the Senate, there had been no fear of Caesar and Pompeyes mangling that
Commonwealth, as afterward fell out.

Monarchy and Democracy can hardly be so mixed, that Democracy be perpetual,
and Monarchy by spurts: For that is not Monarchy; the said Monarch being not
long enough in power to be accounted a settled Magistrate; as we see in the
Decemvirs, Tribunes and Dictators amongst the Romans: So that, the Monarch has
not the power in his hand to change any thing, which is the case we aim at.
And the like is of Aristocracy; when its employment is the ordinary and
continual, and Monarchy only by turns and seasons.

There remains only Monarchy in continuance, compared to Aristocracy and
Democracy at certain turns. And in both, it is clear, the Monarch is the
supreme Governor in ordinary; and so the Magistrate of whom we speak, who
may alter the inconveniences, if occasion serve. As for the People, they are
but a weak part, if the Governor be wise: So that he is, by this posture, in
the state of doing that good to the Commonwealth which his judgment and
conscience dictate to him to be necessary. The comparison to Aristocracy is
much harder; every one of the Aristocracy being, generally and regularly
speaking, a petty Monarch; and the whole of them easily assembled; and, when
so, having the power in their hands: So that the Monarch is not (by virtue of
his ordinary condition) in a posture to be able to rectify what he sees
necessary to be altered; therefore he is not the man we call the supreme
Magistrate, but the assembly of the Nobility, whereof he is but an eminent and
considerable one.

The Subject, being correlative to the Magistrate, requires upon that title,
to be reflected on; but much more because the nature of the Magistrate cannot
be well understood, unless the duty of the Subject be jointly declared. We
must therefore declare, or seek out at least, what Honor and Conscience
obliges the Subject to: and, to perform this, we must reflect upon his
motive of Obedience; which, as is before insinuated, was grounded on the love
and necessity of living in Community, that, from it, he may receive good, and,
by its protection, secure himself against evil. To this end he entrusteth the
charge of the common administration to the Magistrate; taking himself as one
unskilful or unable for such employment. We see therefore, the end of the
Subject in his obedience, immediately, is the public good or the good of the
Commonwealth: a farther though more cordial and deep in the subject, is the
good he is to receive out of the Commonwealth being well; which is nothing else
but that the particulars of the Commonwealth be so. Evident then it is, that
the immediate motive which the Subject is to propose before his eyes, in his
obedience, is the good of the Commonwealth; that is, the very same motive the
Magistrate ought to have in administering, and which he had when first, in his
own person or in his forefathers, he submitted himself to this rule.

We know, by consequence, how excellent a virtue this act of Obedience is;
having a motive of so great a price and high elevation above other ordinary
employments, which reach no farther then to his private good. But, herein the
same virtue is less in the Subject then in the Commander; that, because the
common good is the very private good of the Commander, therefore it is not
related to any private good of the same nature; and so not commanded or limited
by any other, as in the subject it is by the end of his idioticall good.

The next thing that occurreth is the Subjects fact by making this trust; and
that is, that he has made away all power of judgeing and caring for the common
good, farther then by the eyes and hands of the Magistrate, his Trustee,
otherwise they have not made him Supreme Governor: So that, if he thinks or
judges any thing to go amiss, or interpose his opinion, in any real and
effective way, even so far as to disgust himself or any other against the
Government; he breaks his promise and engagement to his Governor: Much
less is it in his power to recall the trust and seek any way to take it out
of the hands of his Sovereign. As for his oath of Allegiance, I believe every
man sees, it takes its strength from these two; and, by consequence, is to be
understood to reach whither they carry it, and strengthen the obligation that
they ground: but, not to extend it self to what they do not; only what they
begin and, as it were, make, the oath does, by Religion and reverence to God,
enholy and consecrate, and so give it the greatest strength that falls upon
humane Liberty.

By this discourse, we learn, that the Magistrates security, from honesty and
conscience, is the greatest that humane nature can frame; being grounded upon
the noblest virtue, fortified by the virtue of veracity so natural and
principal as is above signified; the subject having made as great an
alienation of his propriety to Government as will can ratify; and lastly,
elevated it above his cwne soul by the invocation of him who is master both of
soul and body, of time and eternity. Whence, nothing but the frailty of humane
condition can prejudice a Governor once estated legitimately in his seat of
Justice; nothing can make a Subject more delinquent, then to work against this
duty of obedience; no wonder, therefore, if Rebellion be connumerated with
Soothsaying and Idolatry. and Obedience preferred before sacrifice, even in the
sight of God.

The thirteenth GROUND.
Of the Qualities of Laws and Commands, in respect to Obedience.
OUt of what has been said concerning the Subject's Obligation to Obedience,
we may understand a distinction made by many, of the validity and lawfulness
of commands. For, the lawfulness to a Sovereign Commander, is no other then
that he truly thinks it to be for the good of the common; that is, for the
greatest good, all things considered: which if he does, it is, by the former
discourse, lawful for him to command, what he pleases, without reproach of
conscience or honor to him; and on the other side, if he swerve never so
little, he so far breaks his trust: and the greater the abuse is, the
greater also his fault and shame. But, the subject is to remember that he has
put his confidence in his Governor; as being himself ignorant and not having
leisure to look into the depth of the policy: and therefore he is to think and
judge well of his Magistrates counsels, and make account he does not
understand the bottom of them; and so be prompt and forward to obey.

The validity of the command consists in the obligation the subject has to
perform it: And this may fail in two degrees; One to the not fulfilling the
command, by avoiding it; the other, by resisting it. This latter is no ways in
the Subjects hands, unless it be in such a case as his oath of Allegiance and
Obligation to the good of the Community, cease or bind not: The former can
never happen as long as it can be presumed to be the Commanders will this
Subject, in these circumstances, should perform this command; For, so long, his
trust obliges him not to fail. But, because a Governor many times is not
rightly informed, nor can a Law reach home to all particular accidents; it is
very incident that; in some special cases, the Subject may presume it is not
the Magistrates will he should be bound to this particular service. And this is
so ordinary that, among us, there is a particular and highest Court, to declare
when we are not bound to the written laws.

Yet is it necessary to believe that even that Court is able to satisfy all
cases, or that private men are bound not to avoid a law without having recourse
to that Court, or to obey all decrees of that Court if they can prudently avoid
it: because no Court (especially amongst refined pleaders) can be without many
formalities; which are not the substance of Justice, and therefore may
prudently be declined, neither honor nor conscience obliging to such
proceedings. But they must ever have for their rule, that the Lawmaker intended
not to include them, in these circumstances, within the compass of his Law.

Some make us a threefold division of Laws; the first absolute or commanding;
the second permissive; the third they call penal Laws: The first they aver
to be obligatory, because directly intended by the Lawgiver; and of this sort
is verified what we have newly discoursed.

The second (were it expressly the sense of the Law to permit a thing) is also
of the former kind and only distinguished in the matter: For it would make
the thing permitted truly lawful. But this is not the Writers meaning: For
they do not conceive it was the Lawmakers intention to allow of the practice;
but only not to punish it, or to ordain somewhat in supposition of the case.
As when usury is limited to such a rate, that greater is forbidden; but to such
a rate is so permitted, that he that has borrowed is bound and compellable to
pay so many in the hundred; but no man is bound to borrow; nor as they say,
allowed to take Interest, though the Law constrain the borrower to pay. But,
how the Law can forc^ the one to give, and yet not allow the other to take, is
to me, a hard proposition and like a riddle; and therefore, I believe, the law
it self is to be condemned or the practice to be justified; and that truly
there neither is nor can be such a kind of Law, as shall compel a thing to
be done and not approve of the doing.

The third sort also seems to me no less contradictory: for though I
confess there are penal Laws unquestionably, that is, such as constitute
punishments for offenses; yet these Masters mean not such, but under the
cloak of the name, teach disobedience to certain Laws, persuading us the
Lawgivers intention is indefinite, that either a man should do such a thing,
or suffer such a punishment if he be discovered to have committed the fault:
which is directly against all goodness. For first we are to consider whether
the thing commanded be useful to the Commonwealth; if so, it clearly argues
it is the direct will of the Lawmaker. Again, it is to be looked into, if it
be universally neglected, what damage accreweth to the Common; and this also
will assure us, by the necessity of it, that it is intended for the common
good, and therefore to be executed to the possibility of the Subject. Again,
how unworthy a thing is it of a Governor, who is sapposed to be all equity and
goodness, to ly at the catch with his Subjects, to entrap them for a thing he
does not aim to have done? Besides, the name of punishment supposes a fault;
so that, the law must be supposed to speak improperly; which, in its
dogmaticall way of proceeding, is absurd.

Yet do I not deny but Laws may be made indefinitely; as, to command every
Townesman to march or pay so much moneys, leaving it to his Liberty to do which
he lists: But this is no penal Law, nor has it any likely hood of one; but
is merely a disjunctive Command. Neither likewise do I entrench upon such
orders in Communities, which being almost impossible to be rigorously
observed, have some other obligation annexed to the failing; to be performed by
the conscience of the Delinquent, whether discovered or no. For, this clearly
remains voluntary, and is ordered to make the failing rare, and to
acknowledge a defect and fault in the not observing; and so has not that
crossing of the will, and that force which one feels when he is discovered
and, by authority, chastised. So that, in conclusion, there is but one sort of
Law in all these; and that binding the Subject, in force of his promise and
oath, to the proportion of his concurrence to the Common good, by his act of
Obedience.

The Fourteenth GROUND.
In what conditions the Subject may resist Government.
NOw, to return to the former part; it is evident, if it be rational to
resist the Government, it will be lawful also to break and remove it: For,
these two actions are of the same nature; and, in truth, pure resistance and
disobedience is the annulling it. For, Government, consisting in the power of
commanding, that is, of having no resistance; to resist is not to acknowledge
it, but maintain there is no such power, at least, in this case; that is, to
take it away in this case; that is, to set another Judge or knower when
obedience is due and when not; that is, not to keep the Subject in the nature
of ignorance, in which is grounded his being a Subject. This being the nature
of this disobedience or resisting, the Magistrate is bound with all his
strength to crush and break it; and, by consequence, it draws along the
concussion of the whole state, if the Subject be able to make good his
resistance. Out of this it is clear, that a Subject may not use this
resistance; but in case when it is fitting to attempt the dissolving of the
Government.

It follows first, that it cannot be done, but when the occass^on is greater
then the value of the public peace and good of the Commonwealth. No man
therefore can justly attempt such a disobedience, to save his own life and
goods, or the life and goods of his own family, how great soever, if contained
within the bounds of a private family, or but a part of the Commonwealth. Now,
how far this extends, I dare not subtilize; it being a kind of moral
consideration and a prudentiall esteem to weigh it in particular; the common
notion reaching no farther, then that it be not so notorious a part of the
Commonwealth, that it be a homogeneall part of it, such as is fit to make a
Commonwealth of it self, to determine whose nature, is not the intent of our
present embarquement.

The next consideration is, that neither an universal harm, if moderate and
such as may be supported with less damage then follows out of the State, is
a sufficient cause of resistance to the Sovereign Magistrates command. As for
example, an enormous Tax (such as was thought to be that which revolted
Guienne from Edward the third of England, or the Low Countries from Philip the
second of Spain:) as both their wars may well testify; in which the taking of
any one Town was of more consequence then all such a Tax would have been. How
far this also reaches is not for me to esteem; Who should ask me, if the
Governor exacted for one time all the Subject had, so there remained a ground
to work upon of new, and within a little time to live contentedly; I should be
troubled to confess it were a sufficient injury to take up arms against him,
because I cannot judge which were the greater mischief to the Subject.

Thirdly, if the wrong be of that nature as to ruin the whole Commonwealth,
yet not suddenly but after many years, if often repeated; I cannot allow it a
sufficient cause of open resistance. The reason is clear; for, on the one side
there is no inconvenience so small but (in process of time) may grow to be
the ruin of the Commonwealth, if it be often repeated and so excessively
multiplied; and on the other side, long time breeds so great changes or, at
least, is subject to them, that the pure nature of the offense is not able to
justify a rebellion and breach of unity in a Commonwealth, and so, not the
resistance to the Governor. How much the time in which the ruin would follow
should be, to make it a sufficient cause, who can judge? Only this we see,
that what will not ruin in a set time, will never do it; and I have seen
people live happily, where it was said, they paid the value of their whole
subsistence to their Magistrate once in seven years. Nor do I pretend, by
these instances, to set any rule for enfranchising the subject; more then this,
When evidently the tyranny of the Governor is greater then the mischief
hazarded. When ever this happens, be the material conditions what they
will, the subject is free: And if this be not, whatsoever the circumstances
be, the subject ought not to stir. For, this and this only is the final
cause measuring all attempts, What is best for the People; and known it is
that, if it be not evident to be better to stir, it is evidently better to
remain quiet: for, not-a-cause is sufficient for not changing; but, for a
change and such a change, it ought to be a clear and evident abbetterment.

There is further to be looked into what part of the Commonwealth it ought to
be that is sufficient to justify such a quarrel. For, as there is no doubt,
but the whole Commonwealth, that is, such a portion of it as makes the
Governors party inconsiderable, is sufficient: so, there will be less doubt
on the other extreme, if the number resisting be a pure single part, it is not
sufficient to proceed to this extremity. The question then is, whether the
party rising ought to be the major or equal or, at least, inconsiderably
less then those who side with the Magistrate. But here we must observe the
greatness of the Commonwealth divided. For if such parts be of themselves,
fit to make Commonwealths, nothing considered but the quantity or the number;
it cannot be doubted but that will susfice: now what that quantity is,
belongs to another science.

Besides all these considerations, there remains another; that it can be
effected: For who is to attempt an action, ought as well to weigh the cost of
compassing, as the worth and recompense when it is compassed: so that, unless
the hazard of missing and the labor of obtaining, being both added into the
balance with the present quiet, be all overswayed; it cannot be prudently
done to engage for a change.

Some will tell me, never did people expect with so much patience as I
require: And your Gallants, who pretend to generosity, will exclaim, it is
better to dye in the field then suffer such indignities: Nay, some will think
or, at least, vaunt it fitter to lie in prison or rot in a dungeon, or seek
his fortune in Barbary, then to be under such a slavery. My answer to these
last Gallants is, that they should first try what it is to rot in a Dungeon, or
to wander amongst Barbarians; before they engage themselves and other ignorant
persons in such adventures. To the second, that I understand not those
spurgalls of honor, which disquiet their fiery humors: I only discourse of
what is fitting to make a sweet and contented life, to them who think it
consists in enjoying natural goods of Science and Virtue for our minds, and
the accommodation of our senses for our bodies: Those high and aereall goods of
honor, and vapouring words I esteem as Ajax (when his eyes were open) at his
death; Virtue (said he, meaning honor) I followed thee as a thing, but I
find thou art but words. To the foremost, I answer, I do not aver men either
have been wise or will be so wise; only endeavor to lay before them what it
is to be so; let them look to the exercise. Neither on the other side do I
justify the Prince who puts his subject to such extremities, or think it
prudence in him to do it, or that he does not deserve all the mischief which
may light upon him for it: I leave both to the force of nature, to their wit or
folly, and to the force of reason or passion which governes in persons and
present circumstances; keeping my self in the common notions which belong to
Science.

Still there remains one difficulty, which may breed great variety in the
resolution; and it is, who is to be Judge, Whether the neglect of the
Magistrate be so great, as to deserve resistance? For, if the Magistrate
himself be endowed with that power, it is a folly to think that circumstance
will ever come; and, if it belong to the people, such hot-spurres, as we spoke
of, will make it come long before the season be ripe for it. But, the truth
is, this question seems in a manner superfluous: For it supposes, there is a
question and ambiquity to be decided; and by the conditions put, it is clear
there can be no question of the necessity of the resistance; for they are such
as to put the question beyond all ambiguity in the very conscience of the
Magistrate, the objects beating on the subject in every ones particular beyond
denial and dispute. And besides, as long as truly there is any
disputablenesse, the trust reposed in the Magistrate makes him Judge; For,
being entrusted as a man both knowing and good, and the people taking
themselves as ignorant in what they trust him; clearly he remains sole Judge,
as long as there remains a case to be judged. And therefore his either
ignorance, or carelessenesse, or Tyranny ought to be so evident, that it be
beyond all question; or else the subject must have patience for his own good,
which is his aim in putting himself under government.

The Fifteenth GROUND.
Wherein consists the power and liberty of the Subject.
YEt may some think, on the other side, that the doctrine delivered contradicts
it self. For, it being before determined, that the people has alienated all
right of judging or meddling in government; how can it ever happen that they
should have a right to interpose again, or that such circumstances can
possibly fall out in which they may resist the Magistrate? And this objection
is so much the stronger, by acknowledging so great a power in the Magistrate of
breaking all Laws and limitations of Government, by the force of reason
placed in the circumstances of power and authority, as has been declared:
whence it seems, since that authority in the Magistrate cannot consist with an
opposite authority in the subject, to bridle and curb him; they can never have
this power to resist.

And the truth is, the people acts not what it does in such a case, by any
authority acquired, but by the force of nature; that same force by which the
Magistrate overswayes the Laws, but in other circumstances. And first that the
people has no authority to oppose their superior is manifest: For, authority
is a thing instituted by consent and depending on promise; but here is no need
of consent nor any thought of it; here is no public meetings or Ligues; and
if there were, they would be of no value against a former tradition of their
wills to their Magistrate: It cannot be therefore, that the people proceed by
any such contract.

Whence is it then that the people come to any such power? The answer is, As,
when they first instituted Government, they did it in the force of Nature;
without having any other Power then the pure force of Rationality: so, if, by
any circumstance they be devolved into the same state of Anarchy that their
promise made binds no more; then Rationality teaches them and gives them, by
force of nature, to institute another Government. Now, the excessive
disorders, expressed in the forementioned conditions, make it evident they are
not in a Government, that is, in a conspiracy to the common good, which is the
offense of Government; but in an Anarchy, and therefore remitted, by the evil
managing or insufficiency of their Governor, to the force of nature to provide
for themselves, and not bound by any promise made to their Governor: the whole
end and intention of their promise being, purely, to submit to Government,
that is, conduce to the common good and safety; which having failed, there is
no more obligation in their oath or promise, then if they had never made them.
This is, therefore, the ground of the peoples opposition, and only
circumstance to justify their breaking their oath and promise: so that, in
truth, the Magistrate, first, by his miscarriages, abdicateth himself from
being a Magistrate, and proves a Brigand and robber in stead of a Defender;
and the people, in the way of natural preservation of themselves, make
resistance against him.

I should pass farther to the change of Government, did not the loud and
universal cry of all common people, especially of our Northern Countries,
diverting my pen, force me to attend their importunity. They say, this Doctrine
delivered ruineth their Liberty; and people are but a knot of slaves and
Galley-birds, if this be the course of Government. They must be satisfied, or,
at least, their courage allayed, by reason, if it be possible. For this word
Liberty prints it self in such a letter, that it leaves unstudied no man, as
one speaks. The Pelagian thinks he has lost his natural liberty, if it may
be commanded by Gods omnipotency. The worldly man accounts himself a slave, if
rational government be conserved: he must have license to commit wickedness
and ruin Government, or else he is in chains. Let us then repeat the nature
of Government, and see wherein consists the Liberty of the Subject, that we
may know when he has it, and what belongs to it.

The people (we said) to fall to their own business, and the improving of
nature, choose one or more to manage the common interests; holding them wise
and capable, and themselves unskilful; and this with a great deal of reason:
for nothing but experience, and much debating is able to beget a sufficient art
or knowledge, in such subtle points and turnings. Besides, they esteemed a few
fitter for resolution, and easier to agree then their own multitude; where so
many private aims are hard to be avoided, and if not prejudicial to the
common. Upon these grounds, it is plain, out of the very nature of
Government, that they reserve no power in themselves to consult of common
businesses. For, how absurd is it that he who has no skill shall give
counsel, or sway the resolutions of those whose art and profession it is? Or,
what wise man could undertake a Government with truth and honor, if, in his
greatest difficulties, he must depend on the advice, or rather wilfulness of
an ignorant rabble?

Let us look now what is left for the obeying party; and we shall find, it is
to govern their private affairs, as far forth as they fall not within the
verge of the common good or harm. But, once put that the private man's business
either hinders, or is necessary to help the common designs: and, as evident as
it is that the common is to be preferred before the particular; so evident it
is, that even his proper business is not to be managed, so far, by his private
understanding and liberty. If the Soldier, when he is commanded to stand
Perdue, should have his private considerations allowed him, what could the Army
do? If the Citizen, being commanded to watch his turn upon the walls, might
bring an excuse that he had no body to look to his shop, the City would soon
fall to the enemies prey. Private interest, then, must yield, when the public
is concerned, or else no Government can be hoped for: and, he that will leave
matters of great consequence to the resolution of the governed party, must make
them the Governors.

Wherein then consists the Liberty of every Subject? In not being controlled in
his private affairs. If there be not justice administered both against Robbers
and Riotous oppressors, the Citizen is not free: if he be molested in his
domestic manage, otherwise Men when the common demands his assistance, he is
not free. But, for serving the common, it is the freest act he has: It was his
choice to elect it, it is his good to conserve it, and will be his destruction
to infringe it. As it is no liberty to have an immunity to hang or maime
himself, or his wife and children, or to commit any other unnatural act; no
more is it to be esteemed Liberty, to have the privilege to substract himself
from the service of the Commonwealth. They are therefore seditious spirits,
who, using the name of Liberty, provoke the Subject against the Magistrate; and
in themselves, ordinarily, it is either ignorance or faction, which is the true
Mistress of such attempts. Nor can it be feared, that Government, carried
connaturally and as it ought to be, does any way prejudice the Liberty of the
Subject, what seisures soever it makes either upon goods or persons.

Yes, but Governors will exceed the moderation of the true Laws of
Government. First, the Commonwealth has a presumption of their goodness to
the contrary. Secondly, admit they do, must we seek to remedy it by a greater
wound which is, by taking away the life and soul of Government? Again, the
oppression is either in common upon all, or in particular upon some few: If in
common, it is almost impossible to be heavy upon every one; for, many little
sums easily rise to a great one, and many hands make light work: If the
wrong be done to particulars, we ought to consider that accidental harms
cannot be prevented neither in nature nor in humane affairs; and so are
objects of pity rather then of hope to be amended, and to be tolerated rather,
in respect of the great good which is in the common peace, then expose all to
such confusion as must be, and ever has been where the Government is, in
part, placed in unexperient hands.

This, therefore, is resolved, that the plenitude of power in the Governor
hinders not the liberty of the Subject: which is to be contained within an
inferior sphere, and the sphere it self within the sphere of Government; and
to be carried by it, as the private good by the common, when the necessity of
the public requires. Likewise, the propriety of right of the Subject is to be
taken, not against the Governor or common right, but against the encroaching
of another party: as, whoever understands what common and particular signify,
easily understands that the common and particular are not two; as the part and
the whole make not two, because the part is included in the whole; but part and
part make two, because one has no community with the other. Therefore, it
stands not with reason, that any private person should claim a right against
the Commonwealth, or the Governor, which is all one; for, so he makes the
Commonwealth a part distinguished from himself.

The Sixteenth GROUND.
Of the dispossession of a supreme former Governor, and of his right.
THis rubb being taken away, our march is free to consider the action of the
change of Government; by what it is effected that the former Governor
remains no longer in his authority, and the new one begins to have the
power. For, we speak of a supreme Governor whose power is sworn to; and so
fortified, by an allegiance due from the people, and a right obtained by
himself. And, we may presently reflect, that our former discourse, Of the
Peoples resistance to a Sovereign Magistrate, reached not to the resolution of
this. For, there we supposed the Magistrate to have behaved himself so
unworthily, that he was truly no Governor but a Tyrant and Robber; and so had
really deposed himself, and disannulled the Subjects oath and obligation by
renouncing, in deeds and practice, the nature of a Governor. Now, our Question
supposes the Governor not to have come to that extremity: but, either to have
been good or innocent: or that it is doubtful whether his excesses deserved
expulsion: or, at least, if they did deserve it of themselves, yet the
circumstances were not fitting for it; but the expulsion happened either by the
invasion of a stranger, or the ambition of a Subject, or some popular headless
tumult; for, these three ways a Magistrate comes, forcibly and unjustly, to be
outed of his power.

And first, if the Magistrate have truly deserved to be dispossessed; or it be
rationally doubted that he has deserved it, and he be actually out of
possession: In the former case, it is certain, the subject has no obligation
to hazard for his restitution, but rather to hinder it: For, since it is the
common good that both the Magistrate and the Subject are to aim at; and
clearly, out of what is expressed, it is the common harm, to admit again of
such a Magistrate; every one, to his power, is bound to resist him. If you say,
he may or will repent and amend, that imports not our Question, or Whether he
be to be restored? but, Whether he be to be chosen of new? For, since it was
merely his possession and the interest of not changing or troubling the
Commonwealth which obliged the Subject to maintain him; it being supposed his
own desert did condemn him, this change and trouble of the Commonwealth
being now turned on the other side and another in possession, clearly neither
he has any right left, nor the Subject any obligation to maintain but rather
oppose him. Now, if his desert be doubtful, then is it also doubtful whether
he has right or no: and certain, that the common good is not to be disturbed
for it; Nature teaching that we need no reason to be quiet and remain where
we are, but that to make a change we must see a strong cause and motive.

The next case is, if he be innocent and wrongfully deposed, nay, let us add,
One who had governed well and deserved much of the Commonwealth: yet he is
totally dispossessed; and so, that, it is plain, in these circumstances, it
were better for the common good to stay as they are, then to venture the
restoring him, because of the public hazard. It is clear, in this case,
there is a comparison between the general good of the Commonwealth, on the
one side, and the particular of this man or family on the other. Let us, then,
put the case on his part; and see, If he be generous, if he has settled in his
heart that every single man ought to prefer the common Interest before his
particular safety, profit, or honor; if he be fit for a Governor, that is,
one that is to espouse the common good as his own individual; what he will,
in honor and conscience, resolve: whether he be not obliged absolutely to
renounce all right and claim to Government; and, if he does not, he be not
worse then an Infidel: For, if he that has no care of his Domestics, be
reputed so; with how much more reason, he that is ready to plunge a whole
Nation in blood, for his own Interest?

Let us cast the accounts on the other side; and see, that the Subjects aim
ought to be the public peace, and quiet enjoyment of their lives and
interests: It will appear that, if he be bound to renounce his claim, they
cannot be obliged to maintain it: and besides, that they are wilfully blind,
if, where the whole concernements of themselves, their wives and children lie
at the stake, they will venture all for an aereall fancy, without regard to the
end of Government, public peace; merely for the means, this man's
Government, without whom the end may be obtained. It cannot, therefore, be
rational on either side, for a dispossessed Governor to be restored with
hazard: unless it be certain the succeeding Government be a pure Tyranny,
and so the dispossessed person necessary for the quiet and peace of the
Commonwealth; and therefore, that both sides pretend the good of the
Commonwealth, as well he that is to be restored, as those who seek to restore
him.

But some cry, he had right; he has not deserved to lose it; Justice must be
done whatever follows on it; happy they that are unfortunate in so good a
Cause, they shall not lose their reward, however it fares with them now. Well
for them, if this plea will serve them in the next world; nor will I dispute
whether the evidence of what I deliver be so great as that ignorance may not
excuse them: That question belongs to the Tribunal of God only: I must say
that, before men, who are clad with flesh, and whole hearts cannot be pierced
by other men's guesses, the Law is, that not only the intention be good, but
also the action be intelligent and prudent; otherwise, we are subject to
believe, that some vanity or secret hopes do bias the actor and make his
proceeding irrational. I must also tell them, that this principle, Fiat
Justitia and ruat coelum, is seldom practiced amongst the wise; who all agree
that Charity and Prudence ought still to moderate the rigor of Justice. It is
also too metaphysicall for a moral way, to think that Justice is a Platonic
Idea in the concave of the Moon; no ways to be changed by circumstantiall
occurrences: Whereas, the truth is, Justice is but a partial and commanded
virtue; and that which governes in man, is reason or his own nature and
inclination to make all his actions connaturall and fit for a rational
Creature; and so may consult whether Justice be in some to be administered, and
pronounce that Summum jus est summa injuria.

But, the capital in this matter is, that truly there is no justice on either
the Magistrates or Peoples side, to bind to the restoring him: both these
depending on the promise made, and the force of the promise being none, since
the ground of it is changed. For, the substance of the promise made to a
Magistrate, is, To obey him as a Magistrate, that is, as far as is fitting
for the Commonwealth and peace; he being nothing but the instrument of the
common good: Now, take away that fitness for the Commonwealth, and that which
gave strength to the promise is gone, and the promise it self is no more a
promise, nor can any obligation arise from it. Who knows not, that the promise
of any man depends on his intention, his intention on his knowledge, his
knowledge reaches no farther then his consideration and present memory when he
makes the promise? So that, in nature, a promise reaches only to presupposed
and thought on circumstances: and who, when he swears to a Magistrate,
expects to see him dispossessed and turned off?

Nature annulleth promises: as, when we promise to come such a day, and either
die or are imprisoned before. Morality annulleth them: as if we promise to run
such a horse against another a month hence, and the horse in the mean time
falls lame; who will condemn the master for not venturing on such a race? Is
not the man better then his word? If then the man himself be less then the
common good, which he must violate by keeping his word; can his word be
greater? But a promise must many times be kept even with loss of life? I deny
it not: But, first, I must be assured it is a promise; which before I have
declared to be none: For, our case is case of Nature not of Law, we admit no
presumptions; nothing what he meant to do or should have done, we only
regard what was done. Secondly, if it were intended to be so promised, it was
wicked and irrational; for, to promise to regard a private man's good against
the common, is unnatural and wicked; therefore, it never was a promise, can
never bind as such, nor be professed with honor, either to be made, or, if
made, to be kept. I need not insist upon the confirmation by oath: for, every
one understands, if the Oath be but a confirmation of a precedent promise, and
there were no promise, there can be no oath, to have the nature and force of an
oath.

So that, this is manifest, a Magistrate actually dispossessed has no right to
be restored, nor the Subject any obligation to seek to restore, but oppose him.
For, what is man, or rather mankind (for, so we have styled a nation) better
then a herd of sheep or oxen, if it be to be owned, like them, by masters?
What difference is there between their Masters selling them to the Butcher,
and obliging them to venture their lives and livelihoods for his private
Interest? We know it is natural, that the part should venture for the whole;
but that the whole should venture the loss of it self to save the part, I
cannot understand. The Governor is the highest and noblest part, yet but a
part; the People is the whole, the End, (though not by office, yet by worth and
dignity) the Master and Lord, for whom those who are Lords by office are to be
vested and divested in Lordship, when it is necessary for the common good: who
thinks otherwise, deserves not the name of a man.

The Seventeenth GROUND.
Of a supreme Governor dispossessed.
BUt one will object, if he were wrongfully dispossessed, he suffered wrong;
it cannot then but be reason he should have reparation. And this cannot be
denied. But beside the Government taken from him, he was peradventure injured
in his reputation and spoiled of such aliments as are fit to maintain him
according to the quality of his birth and education: And, for these, he may,
as a private man, demand reparation; but so, as still to remember he is a
Denizen of that Country, a member of that people, and compared to it as a
particular to its universal; and may demand his share, yet so that if it
cannot be obtained without the concussion of the public, he is to renounce
it and sacrifice that interest to the good of his Country.

Likewise, on the opposite side, the Commonwealth may demand reparations
against the dispossessed Magistrate, who abused it or his subjects during his
government: Not touching any thing he did upon intention of the public good,
though it were breaking of known Laws or any injurious violence offered, with
pretense of serving the Commonwealth; For, the trust put in his hands
vindicates him from all such actions, as long as they bear the face of any
intention of the Common good. But, if, for private men's satisfaction, or his
own lust, or covetousness he did any wrong, of that he may be asked an
account: not while he is in Government but after the dispossession, when now
the common distemper follows not the prosecution of such riots, and so, his
public protection being gone, he is but a private man, and consequently, by
the force of nature, subject to a stronger; obligations of common good and
former promises being now faded away, and he left in the condition of a
stranger, saving that his demerits follow and pursue him, if other merits do
not counterballance them and exempt him.

Again, when he is to be judged, he cannot be proceeded against by Law;
which can judge none but the offenders against it. Now we have had often
occasion to declare that the chief Magistrate is not under the Law; the common
good for which the Laws themselves were made, being committed to his trust,
and the end he is to look after being higher then the Laws, which are but a
part of the means to arrive at that end, and therefore inferior and
subordinate to it. But those who could put their own agreements, that is, the
Laws under his feet, could not put Nature under them, nor authorize him to do
any irrational or unhandsome action: Therefore, when the structure of the
Commonwealth is dissolved, that is, disjointed from him, then any who has
suffered wrong in the fore-declared manner may be party against him and
proceed as if there were no Common-weath; by the Law which, in a Wilderness,
warranteth us to kill a Tiger or Robber that seeks to kill us, not pretending
Law for our action, but that it is manlike and rational. Neither ought it be
called punishment that is done against a dispossessed Magistrate, but rather
revenge, or some other name that includes no order to Law.

By this we understand the truth of that famous question; Whether a Sovereign
be under the Laws? to which is ordinarily answered, that he is, as far as
his example and direction is necessary to his subjects; but not so, that the
Law, as such, has any superiority or force upon him. To declare this more
plainly, we must remember, the Rule of his actions is, To do what reason
teaches a man in his posture ought to do, that is, what is fitting for the
public: Now generally speaking, the common good requires that the Laws be
observed betwixt fellows of the same Commonwealth; wherefore Nature teaches
him to give example of that observance, as far as his public office permits.

Besides, in the very person of the Sovereign are to be distinguished, his
being one of the Commonwealth, and being the head or Magistrate: So that,
though his being a Magistrate exempts his public actions and also his person
and private actions from the inquisition of the Law; yet it does not exempt his
private actions from the proportion to those of the subjects, that is, from
being good or bad, because like or dislike to the actions which the Law
commands or forbids. So that, he is not, even in his private actions,
subject to the Laws at his rule; for that is only reason; but, as they are a
kind of way chalked out to him for the material part of his action; as the
Architect frames his house for him; or the Gardener his walks: That is, the
Laws are to him as an art under him, an art to show him what is to be done,
not to command or punish him for not doing; nay, not so much as necessitating
him to do, at least, universally, whether the business be purely betwixt
subjects, or betwixt himself as a private person, and his subjects.

For, the principle of common good being higher then the art of making Laws,
may, nay ought in some cases, differ from the prescriptions of the Law. Yet
this must not authorize him to dispense frequently with the Law; the
Government being not possible to be good in which there is no constancy:
But, if the circumstances require any Law to be often forced; the Law it self
ought to be limited, that the practice of the subject may be firm and
customary, which is that makes the Lawe-please. Thus in conclusion, though the
Magistrate be not commanded by the Laws, nor personally subject to them, yet
reason (which is his rule) binds him to observe them as the good of his
people; and (ordinarily speaking) essential to his end, which is the common
good. The Laws therefore are his matter to work on, or instruments necessary
to work by, not his rule or Mastering directions.

There remains yet untouched the question that seems most troublesome to
many, When the change of the Government is valid, and such as the subjects
obedience is due to the new Magistrate and to be subtracted from the old, how
unjustly soever he were bereaved of it. And, others have sought by term of
years to decide the difficulty: among whom, one was Pope Urban the eight, an
intelligent and generous Prince and well versed in politic Government. He
published a decision that after five years quiet possession of an estate, the
Church was not bound to take notice whether the title were lawful or no; but
acknowledge the possessour, in Ecclesiastical businesses. So much he said for
aims sake. But, we must proceed upon other principles, that is, the forelaid
and main basis of our discourse, that the common good ought to be the rule of
the Magistrates title, and the subjects obedience.

Out of which this follows, that when ever (considering all things) the
common good is clearly on the possessors side, then the dispossessed has no
claim. Neither ought we expect till we have assurance, that it will not be
better for the subject if the late owner (after great dangers, gains his
former power: For, first, this it self is uncertain; secondly, the success
of endeavors to restore him must be hazardous; thirdly, many and great
mischiefs, during the time of the attempt, are altogether unavoidable; and all
this to be balanced against those uncertain hopes. Nor, again, must we
expect that the wills of all the subjects concur, actually, to the acceptance
of the new Governor: For that is either impossible or of so long expectation,
as to ruin all dissensions and jealousies in the mean time: Nay, the vulgar
sort are so easily led by fancy, that they understand not the common good, nor
what they should wish.

But you may demand, How shall it be known when the common good holds it
self on the possessour's hand? I answer, we must first see who are the
common, whose welfare is to be preferred before private interests. And
presently it appears that, dividing the whole people into Governors and
governed; the governed part is the Public to whose good the Governors are to
direct their pains: And that these are they that spend their lives in seeking
their own profits, either by improving the Land, or in Arts and Handicrafts:
Whence, it follows, when their good stands on the possessours side, then
clearly he begins to gain right and power; and this is plain to be, when
the Merchant, the Husbandman, and Tradesman, with their appendices, are in an
undisturbed practice of their functions, and begin to be afraid of change upon
the noise of an invasion.

This resolution could not be doubted, were it not that one might object, that
what is said seems true, abstracting from circumstances; but it ought to be
considered, that such men see nothing but the outward appearances of what
passes in humane negotiations, and so there may many circumstances lie hidden
from them, which would make them think or wish otherwise if they knew them:
As, for example, home-discontents, and foreign conspiracies; which if
understood, would make these honest men prefer a war, after which there is
to follow a peace far exceeding the present quiet and such a one as deserves
the intervening disturbance and damages.

And indeed, I allow these men understand not such mysteries of State, nor
penetrate the value of the hazard: But, if they do not, why are they not also
exempted from engaging on those motives? and then the rest of the Commonwealth
will be but so many private men, who must follow the common* Again, if they
think themselves well, they manifestly consent to the present Government, and
therefore cut off the title of the dispossessed Governor. Besides, who can
answer they shall be better by the return of the dispossessed party? surely,
by common presumption, the gainer is like to defend them better then he who
lost it.

But, let us overslip this opportunity and end of the common Good: how long
must we expect, till it shall be supposed the right of the former Magistrate is
extinct? Some Ages? as we kept our title to France, and France did to Sicily
and Naples: Or at least some generations? as the durance of the Spaniards
wars upon Holland: Or, till the former Magistrate declares the relinquishment
of his right? Or, till his followers are weary of inventing new devices, to
blind, and ruin their unwary friends? All these are soon discerned to be
mere uncertainties; and rather nets to catch fools and bring them to the
ambitious desires of some few men, then any grounded reason. But, what if an
open Enemy should come, could or ought the Subjects join against him with
their new Magistrate? If not, the whole public must perish: If they may, then
the case is the same against their old Magistrate; since his right stood upon
the common peace, and that is transferred from him to his rival by the title
of quiet possession.

The Eighteenth GROUND:
The Objection of Divines answered.
REason has played its part; but Authority cannot be silenced unheard. Let us
therefore hearken to what it says. And, first steps up the Divine to preach
us, out of Scripture, the duty we owe to Priests and Kings; no less then
death and damnation being the guerdons of rebellion and disobedience. The
Lawyers come yoaked from the Popes and Emperors Court, taking for maxim,
Tempus non occurrit Ecclesiae and Regi. The practice seems to confirm the
same; we seeing both some Noble men and diverse Cities make protestations
against the possession of others for many years and ages. But, which is more,
they will speak reason too at least, by the Divines mouth; who tells us, that
God, by nature, is high Lord and Master of all; That whoever is in power
receives his right from him; That Obedience consists in doing the will of him
who commands; and concludes that this will ought to be obeyed till God
takes away the obligation, that is, till he who is to be obeyed himself
releaseth his right.

The Authorities they cite out of Holy Writ are, for the most part, mere
commands to obey where obedience is due, without specifying what or when it is
due. This command is extended to wicked and evil Governors as well as good.
One place there is, where Samuel denounces to the people the evils that will
come to them by the power of the King; and calls them Jus Regis, or, as the
Hebrew text, Judicium Regis, or, Legem Regis, and afterward, Regni. And these
words are, in two senses, true; one, that the King would do the wrongs there
mentioned, by force; the other, that the people, since they would have a King,
ought not to resist him when he did such things. Yet do I not deny but, if
the particulars there mentioned, be interpreted gently, all that is there
recited might, with justice, be practiced by a King: As, when it is said he
should take away their Vineyards and Olive-gardens; it may be understood, upon
confiscation and by other lawful ways. Besides, they may peradventure allege
that God, by his special command, transferred the Kingdom from Saul to David,
from Roboam to Jeroboam, and some others. But, they should also let us know,
what they deduce from hence: For in such changes, God gave no new Authority or
Power to such Kings, but the same their predecessors had: So that, in fine, all
that is brought out of Scripture falls short of proving that no time can make
void the right of a King once given him from the hand of God.

The reason of this weak way of alleging Scripture is, that when they read
that God commands or does this, they look not into nature to know what this
commanding or doing is; but presently imagine God commands it by express and
direct words, and does it by an immediate position of the things said to be
done; whereas in nature the commands are nothing but the natural light God
has bestowed on mankind, and which is therefore frequently called the Law of
nature. Likewise, Gods doing a thing is many times only the course of natural
second causes, to which because God gives the direction and motion, he both
does and is said to do all that is done by them; as truly as the weight of a
Jack turns the meat upon the spit, and the spring of a Watch makes the clock
of it strike: A notion not only of a large extent and usefulness in it self,
but, which gives me just occasion of complaining against these verbal and
winde-blowne Divines, as the bane of Christendom and Christian doctrine. For,
whereas the Scripture is a book enriched with all Science and depth of
learning; this sort of Grammar Divines, without either Logic, Philosophy, or
Morality, merely by the virtue of their Dictionary, and such like lip-learning,
undertake to be interpreters of the sacred Bible, and in stead of the sense of
the letter, obtrude to the Readers their own low and many times phreneticall
fancies.

Let us instance in our present question. The first position they take is, That
God is Lord and Master of all things. What seems, nay truly is more conformable
to Scripture and Reason then this assertion, as it lies in words? And yet many
not looking into the nature of God and rational and intelligent substances,
make a shift to pervert it into a mere blasphemy: For, if the sense be only
this, that God is omnipotent and no resistance possible in any creature to his
absolute will; nothing is more certain, nothing more holy. But, this is not
the meaning of the Divines; but, that there is an Attribute or notion in God of
being Lord and Master, to which they do not say we cannot, but, ought not
resist, and rather admit that we can. And herein is the first faltring, that,
in effect, they deny the Omnipotency, and reduce that which is a true physical
power to a Moral obligation. But this is not all.

The next point is, that, if even this Morality were founded in that great
nature of Being, and being intelligent, which is in God almighty; and that
they also held his commands were to be obeyed, because they proceed from an
understanding which cannot err, and which is essentially the very order and
well being of all creatures; the former would seem pardonable: But, they will
have it quite contrary, that therefore things amongst creatures go well,
because not reason, not the eminentiall being of themselves in God is their
offspring, but because a high and overpowering will or voice commands it so.
A position in respect of God, absolutely blasphemous; as far as it makes him
work without the guidance of his understanding, that is, like the lowest order
of creatures, as stocks and stones etc. It is again afflictive and vexatious
to Mankind; taking away that sweetness of obeying, which consists in the
persuasion that because creatures are the participation of Gods own nature,
every one in its degree and mankind in the first and highest place, therefore
all Gods command and government, are most conformable to their good, as it
were salves to their sores, and allurements to the bringing them to their final
end and perfection.

But, that which is more to our purpose is, that, upon this blasphemy against
God, they build the greatest inconvenience that, peradventure, is to be found
in man's nature; to wit, That God gives to all in Power the likeness and
participation of this irrational Dominion which they conceive in him; and that
truly there is in Superiors a kind of dote or free gift of Mastery derived
from God, in virtue whereof he is Master of the inferiors and what belongs to
them, either wholly or in a certain measure, according to the extent of the
power given; that, lawfully and validly, he may dispose of all or a certain
part of the things under his charge, merely because such is his will and
pleasure, and that the subject ought to be content to let him do his will,
upon this score, Because it is Gods will that this man's will should be
fulfilled. Which doctrine, though it be manifestly against Christ's directions
left to his disciples, and the practice of all good men; yet, because this
Treatise does not pretend to Divinity, I will only insist upon its natural
inconveniences.

As first, that it is not connaturall to Mankind: which, consisting, for its
better part, in understanding, is not governed conformably to its disposition,
unless it be so guided that the understanding be principal and satisfied in
it self and leader to the will and action; which course of proceeding when it
is observed, then is a man truly a man and his action goes on with sweetness,
as is before declared. Again, it makes the Governor proud, insolent, and
careless. Proud, because he takes himself to be of another orb then his
Subjects; that they are all slaves and beasts, himself only Master, himself
only intelligent and a man. Infolent, because fully persuaded, by this
doctrine, that he can do them no wrong; that they are bound to suffer what he
lays on them; that his pleasure is and must be their content and rule.
Careless, because he thinks he has no account to make, either to God or Man:
not to God, since he has submitted the people to his will and disposition; and
therefore he being incapable of doing them any wrong, cannot be charged with
any crime: Much less is he sollicitous to content his Subjects, in whom he
takes it for an insolency to repine at any thing, and esteems it their duty
to commend all he does, and to have his authority for their rule to judge all
things by.

On the other side, the Subject becomes base, restive, ambitious. For, the
worth and dignity of man, which is his Liberty or guidance of himself, being
taken away, it follows, he must be servile and flattering, a slave, a body
without soul and understanding. The more worldly and rustic part must, of
necessity, grumble and feel it harsh to see their labors disposed on to
people, of whom they have opinion that they are idle, vicious, and unworthy:
and therefore, desire liberty from such a yoke, and to become masters of their
own goods and labors; and are easily susceptible of propositions tending to
that purpose, when they come from fair tongues. Lastly, the higher Spirits
have Government in admiration, and take it for the only happiness; and
therefore have their hearts wholly bent, how, by flattery, by cunning, by
force, to arrive to this power to depose him that is in possession, and sit
down themselves in his seat of glory. If their hopes mount not so high, for
the impossibility of the fact and the remoteness of their quality; then their
aim is, by adulation and compliances, to come near the highest, to be
participant of his authority, and have the like power to rob and oppress,
which they esteem virtuous and glorious in him, and not unjust but fitting in
themselves, as far as they can do it by the participation of that dote which
God has bestowed upon the highest Magistrate.

Lastly, we must look into the lame proceeding of the common good and public
actions of such a Government; where the Subject, by the consequence of this
doctrine, is set eagerly upon his own interest, thinks all lost that is done
for his, not Governor or Protector, but Lord and Master, and therefore
alienated from him. Whence, it must come to pass that, what he can cosen,
what he can excuse, what he can delay, he is still forward to; and, by a
secret instinct of nature which abhors such a Government, thinks it well
done, though he cannot give an account to justify his action. In a word, who
sees not this Commonwealth to be a Kingdom divided in it self always in
affection, and very near in outward action; wanting thereunto nothing but an
occasion, and some head to manage the sedition? who sees not that the whole
Government is violent; and so may indeed continue whilst actual force hangs
over it, but has not the possibility of a natural duration and length.

The nineteenth GROUND.
The Authority of Lawyers insufficient in this Question.
THE Divines error being thus discovered, our plea against the Lawyers will be
of less either debate or consequence: for, this question belongs not to
their science or employment. The maxims, the rule, the highest Tribunal of
their Judgments is the text of the Law, the agreements of men, and, at most,
to declare the Lawmakers intention: But, to judge whether the Lawmakers
intention be conformable to nature and such as it ought, whether he exceeds
his power, whether he be Master of the Laws, and the like, is beyond the
verge of their jurisdiction. Therefore, nothing is more absurd, then to demand
that Lawyers should plead cases between the Sovereign Magistrate and the
Subject, where the common good and Government is interessed: For, there,
things are not to be carried by the Dictates of Justinian or Lancelotus, or the
command of Caesar or Peter's Successors, but either by the Science of
Politics, or the certitude of Faith and Tradition; which are the only two
rules a high Governor has. If the Divine finds any thing contrary to the
known Law of God, he may speak: If the Philosopher find any thing against
the Nature of Man, his mouth is not to be stopped: The Lawyer, what can he
say? It is against the agreement heretofore made by the Government of the
Country? The Governor may reply, Yes; but what you say is against the present
good of the Country, with which I am entrusted. Is the Country made for the
Laws, or the Laws for the Country? The Laws therefore must give place,
where the good of the People is against the former Resolutions. If any Law be
repealed by the Authority which made it, or by another equal; is it the Lawyers
part to plead what was Law before, or what is now? when a supreme Governor
speaks as such, as declaring what the present necessity requires; if any
former Law be against it, it is by his declaration annulled; it was Law
before, but it is not now. But the Lawyer will reply, There is no Law in the
Land which gives such authority: It is easily answered; it is not a case for
which a Law is to be made. See the Roman Government: when there came an
exigence of desperation, all their Magistrates, all their forms ceased; a
Dictatour was made, whose word was Law, nor could any man appeal to Law. Such
is the Case when the high Governor pronounces against the Law: for he ought
not to do it, but when the Law stands not with the good and safety of the
Subject; and when he does, Law is not to be pleaded against him.

Again can any Law be enacted of what shall be done in case of a conversion
of the Government? It is clearly a folly to pretend it. The ordering of the
Commonwealth is, then, in new hands: The former's power is expired: and to
prescribe rules to them who will assuredly be their own Judges, is a piece of
great simplicity. The Lawyer may peradventure reply, There is no power in the
Land to repeal the former Laws or to oppose them. I think he will be
wiser; yet, if he does say it, I ask him, Who made the former Laws? was it
not the People, by themselves or their deputies? and which is the stronger, if
they make them by their deputies, or by themselves? Certainly, it will be
answered, By themselves; for the deputies have no power but what they impart to
them. Is it then possible to put a Case, in which there is no power in a
Country to repeal Laws? Evidently, who says so must say there is no People
in the Country? For, if there be People, there is in them a power to dispose
of themselves, more strong then in Deputies.

But the Lawyer may say, the People cannot speak their minds freely. I
answer, certainly, they not only can, but cannot choose but speak their
minds, in the case we put. Who knows not that Liberty and speaking of ones
mind belongs to all circumstances a man can be put in? The Merchant that, in
a Tempest, throws the precious fruits of his venture and labor into the Sea,
does not he do it freely and willingly? The Hollanders of late made a peace
with the Spaniard; we, both with the Hollander and the Dane, and are
pretending to others: In any of these, were all parts pleased? Did no party
agree to somewhat which he would not have done, but in consideration of his
present circumstances? Or, was there ever peace made after a war, but one
part grudged at somewhat? must none of these be accounted freely done? must
none of these promises bind, and be kept, upon Honor and Veracity? This is to
destroy all commerce of mankind; nay, not to allow man so much wit as to know
what is fit for him to do in time of necessity. If then the People speak, in
one circumstance, something that they would not in another; it is not to be
said they speak not their minds, but that, according to circumstances, they
alter their minds, as all wife men do. They agree and submit to the present
conjunctures, not because they are not free, now as before, but because
circumstances are changed, and now render it fitting. But, I said that, in the
case I put, they could not choose but speak. My case was, that Then a
Governor is acknowledged, when the People casting off the care and thoughts of
innovation, fall to their trades and manufactures: Can it be denied that by so
doing they acquiesce to the present Government? which if they do, can it be
questioned whether they consent or not to the repealing of all such Laws as
cannot stand with the present Government? Such Laws therefore are repealed,
not by deputies, but by the Deputants and Masters of the Deputies. The Lawyer,
therefore, must either proclaim the present Government none, or not plead Law
against it: for it is pure folly to admit both, that is, fair and full
contradiction. In a new Government, all Laws prejudicial to it are annulled,
by the pure admission of it: Other indifferent Laws so go on, as to be
subject to its judgment, whether and how far to stand; but a wise Governor
will continue them as far as he can with prudence, because innovation is
contrary to the sweetness which is in custom, as in a kind of nature.

The Conclusion.
BE this then so resolved, That God himself has no irrational and dead
title of Lordship over his Creatures, but only his all-right-setled
Understanding, and irresistible Omnipotency. And, as he has none in himself,
so likewise not given any to those he has put in Authority; but, that their
power is either in the submission of the Subject by promise and agreement, or
in the rational disposition of the Magistrate, which makes him work what is
conformable to humane nature; and the obedience or obligation to obey in the
Subject is out of this, That he has entrusted the Magistrate with the
Government, and is, by that, to suppose he does regularly what is best (all
things considered) for the common good.

That, by consequence, the title of the Magistrate begins and dies with the
good of the Commonwealth; and holds purely so long as it is good for the
people. That, no Laws made by the power or agreement of men, can judge betwixt
Subject and Sovereign, in dispute of the common good and Government; but
only the Tribunalls of God and Nature, or Divinity and the science of
Politics: And therefore, the maxims of Law have no force in these questions;
Now, if Princes lose their pretenses by the force of Nature, it is ridiculous
for private men to build hopes, upon rotten titles of ages long passed, upon
weak maxims of Law, after Nature, by her revolutions, has cast all Law and
mortal acts and agreements.

And so is finished this small Treatise, to the profit of them who are able and
willing to make use of it. Some, by the method I have used, something new in
moral discourses, may imagine the Doctrine I deliver, to be more subtle in
explication then solid in practice: But, let them either look into the Causes
of Governements, or the Effects; they will see nature and practice both
conspire to give testimony to the truth. The cause of all moral effects, if
morally carried, are the end and intention for which they are sought and
endeavored after; This is manifest to be the well-being of particulars under
a Government. The practices, which are the Effects, will show, That
Governements break when it is not well with the Subjects, but they are
oppressed by the Governor; That wise and good Governors are forced sometimes
to break disordered rules which hinder their free administration; That people,
as it were, forced by natural changes, violate the promises made to their
Governors, cast them off when they think them pernicious, and proceed against
them, per viam facti, as they speak in the Schools, not by Laws, which
cannot be made for such matters. These are, in a manner, the whole subject of
the precedent Discourse.

FINIS.

