THYSA INESEOS, OR A THANK-OFFERING To the LORD, For the happy Recall of Our
dread SOVEREIGN CHARLES, BY The Grace of God, King of England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. to His Kingdoms and People.

Delivered in a Sermon at Rougham in Suffolk, May 24, 1660. A day (as we heard)
set apart for that purpose.

God save King CHARLES the II.

LONDON: Printed for William Frankling, Bookseller at Norwich, in the Year,
1660.

To the worshipful JEFFERY BURWEL OF ROUGHAM in the County of Suffolk Esquire.
SIR,
You having heard a Sermon publicly delivered on the 24 of May, 1660, a day
set apart (as we heard) for thanksgiving to God for the happy recall of his
Majesty King CHARLES to his Kingdoms and people, were pleased to request a
copy thereof, which I not knowing how to deny to a Gentleman so well deserving,
and so much of him who has no greater ambition then to be responsal to that
goodness which in this age is grown so rare a dainty; In obsequiousness to your
demand I have here made that a Present to your Eye, which you formerly tasted
by the Ear, not expecting that the Pen should express the lively Energy of the
Voice; yet as Pictures sometimes please where the lively Motions are not found:
so my hope is you will favorably accept in writing what you approved when
vocally delivered. The danger of fawning we are not ignorant of, the breath of
palpon's is infectious, a taint to the receiver, treasonable in the speaker.
Yet may we not refuse to give just praise, thereby to avoid the suspicion of
Parasitisme. Your religious mind is manifest in your actions, in your public
attendances, and private duties, exemplar in both, to your neighbors abroad, to
your family at home. Your love to distressed Ministers in the late stormy
times, though you had not a Cave to hide them in, yet you wanted not an House
to entertain them, nor a munificent hand to relieve their necessities, which
howsoever they be resented by some, will be no less then Aromates in heaven.
Your cordial and constant loyalty to his MAjESTY has been sufficiently known
to those that know you, and as much may be said of your sincere affection to
the Church of England, which speak for you to all not misled in a distracted
and confused generation. What these might do with others I know not, they are
strong motives to me to prize your worth, and prosecute your person with
respect. May it please you to accept what I have done, and what my desire is to
do to serve you, that shall more oblige him who is, and resolves to be,

Sir, Yours in all humble observance, and daily Orator at the throne of grace,
HEN. WHITE.

A THANK-OFFERING TO the LORD for the KINGS happy return to his People.
MATTHEW. 21.42. Jesus says unto them, Did you never read in the Scriptures, The
stone which the builders refused, the same is become the head of the corner?
This is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes.


THis is manifest to all that these words are a reply of Christ to some men
concerning something formerly discoursed, by the knowledge whereof we are
lighted into the present business. In his preaching our Savior had proposed the
parable of the vineyard from verse. 33. and so on. In which he had presented the
immense bounty and benignity of God toward the Jews, his unwearied patience,
and expectance of fruit, his great care of continual supply by sending
messenger after messenger, and last of all his Son to whom all reverence was
due, and ready submission supposed; but we find in them unparalled
insolency, horrid cruelty, and detestable ingratitude in beating and butchering
the servants, by a continued course in wickedness murdering the Son the true
and lawful heir of the vineyard, not for any evil that he had done, but that
they might get the inheritance to themselves. They dispossessed him, that they
might take possession, made him away, that they might make way to their own
advancement. Too sad a story for this joyful day, nor would I have soured your
thoughts with the least remembrance of it, did not the dependence of the
present words exact it at my hands. In the 40. verse, our LORD does rather ask
a sentence then pronounce one, as choosing rather to make them their own Judges
then to judge them, When the Lord therefore of the vineyard comes, what will
he do unto those husbandmen? To this they roundly answer, verse 41. He will
miserably destroy those wicked men, etc: Full little thinking that they were
concerned in it, but taking it as a business remote, they spoke plainly; that
if God were just, he would not suffer so great iniquity to go unpunished, and
though he came late, yet he would smite sure at last, returning the full
measure of their demerits upon their heads. Evil they were, and evil punishment
they must look for, to be handled as severely by divine justice, as their
inhumane wickedness required. So favorable are men in their own case, so loath
to be found guilty, so ready to put it off, so forward to lay it home to
others, whilst they hope the blow shall not hit them.

In the words of the Text we have Christ's return to them, by which they might
understand that they were meant in all that had been said, the very men who had
acted so great villainy, and were yet to act more. Did you never read in the
Scriptures, The stone which the builders refused, etc.

The words are cited out of the 118. Psalm, verse. 22, 23. They are Erotematical
or Interrogatory. The Interrogation is not simple, but figurate, and has here
the force of an Asseveration. You have read the Scriptures, and in them these
words also. He does not question what he had a desire to know, but speaks as
of a thing known to them, as men studied, John 5.39.
well versed in holy Writ, not to seek in that book, in which they sought
Eternal life.

His speech is directed to the Jews, men within the pale and Pomery of the
Church, who acknowledged the Scripture to be, 2 Timothy 3.16.
(...), given by divine inspiration, and (...), of it self creditable and
unquestionable. These men no more doubted of the divine authority thereof, then
of the Divinity it self. They were fully persuaded that God spoke here, whose
Authority is Supreme, from which there is no Appeal. It was enough to them,
there needed no more, the evidence of the Word had with them the force of all
arguments, they could no more refuse to submit to this, then to refuse their
God. It is in vain to quarrel or dispute in a case determined by the great
Moderator of heaven and earth. There we search, but having found it there, we
look no further, in this we acquiesce.

In the words we have two parts, 1. An Instance, The stone which the builders
refused, the same is become the head of the corner. 2. An Inference, This is
the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes.


1. The Instance is a Tropical speech, or Metaphorical; when a name or thing is
transferred from its proper signification to another, or not proper, by some
similitude. In Rhetoric none is held more elegant, or of a more frequent use.
The holy Scripture is full of them, not abhorring from those Schemes which the
Plebeans are forward to censure and condemn in those that use them, as smelling
too much of art, to which they are strangers. Here the state of Gods Church, or
people, whether we regard the Ecclesiastical, or Political frame, is likened to
a building; they which have the government, or be in power, to the builders;
choice men, or designed of God, to the stones, the materials and strength of
the whole fabric; such as those by the Architects are refused, or laid by as
useless; yet though wilfully rejected by men, are against their wills, by the
divine providence, advanced to the Supremacy, or head of the corner. This is
the sum of the Metaphor, whose sense I shall endeavor more particularly to
inquire after, which that I may the b^tter do, let us in this first part of the
Text observe two things, 1. A Rej^ction by man, The stone which the builders
refused. 2. An Exaltation from God, The same is become the head of the corner.


Which together may be expounded three ways, 1. Historically of David. 2.
Prophetically of Christ. 3. Analogically of Kings.


My care shall be to avoid wringing and wresting, that is a spiritual tyranny
to rack and torment a text, to force it to say what we would have it; I shall
strive for no more then dilucidly to deliver what the words put into my hand,
carrying on the Rejection and Exaltation, according to the order laid before us.

1. The Historical sense.
Though Christ were before David in dignity, yet was David before Christ in
time in his sufferings, we will ever give Christ the priority of honor, yet
without injury to Christ take David first in order, for the Historical sense.

1. And order wills us to begin with his Rejection by men, David was a stone
which the builders refused. Called a stone (say some) because he killed Goliath
with a stone. The man he was whom God had designed for government, anointed by
his Prophet, confirmed by his promise; yet despised and refused, thrown away as
good for nothing, and that by the builders, Saul and his Courtiers. An hard
time he had of it, he met with hard terms, course usage, driven into straights,
put to his shifts, and that for many years together. Saul persued him with
deadly hatred, and would suffer him to rest no where, 1 Samuel 26.21. 1 Samuel
26.19.
but dogs him in the wilderness, hunts him as a Partridge on the mountains,
drives him out of his kingdom from among the inheritance of the Lord, saying,
Go serve other Gods. Forced he was to live amongst the idolatrous heathen, thus
thrust into temptation, either to lose his life at home, or change his religion
abroad to the loss of his Soul. 2 Samuel 3.6.
He was refused by Abner a great Commander Ishbosheths General, who made
himself strong for the house of Saul. What was done for Ishbosheth, was the
undoing of David, purposed to keep him out of the kingdom. 1 Samuel 23.16.
The men of Keilah refused him, and would have betrayed him, that he might fall
into the hands of Saul. The misery of great ones was seldom unattended by
treachery, they might sooner find an whole tribe of disloyalists, then one
person that were faithful. The Ziphites refused him, 1 Samuel 23.19.
and discovered him to Saul, Does not David hide himself with us in the strong
holds of the wood, etc. The woods were willing to cover him, but there were men
found ready to lay him open to destruction. Thus was David refused on all
hands, made contemptible as a stone which we tread upon, spurn away as good for
nothing, in repute a triobular, a mere gregaring, held unfit to supply the
place of a man. He was the stone which the builders refused.

2. You have now heard of his rejection, have a little patience, and you shall
hear of his exaltation, The same is become the head of the corner.

Even he that was debased, despised, and rejected of men, is notwithstanding
all that exalted by God, whom they thrust to the threshold, the Lord placed on
the throne, made him the head or chief of his people, like a corner stone that
joined all together, or a bottom stone that sustained the whole weight of the
building, and bare up the body politic. Calvin. Har.
Hoc in Davide actum est, This was done in David. When his enemies had done
what they could to undo him, all would not do, In fumum abiit, their work
vanished into smoke, and David sits enthroned among the people of God. The
Chaldee expounds it of David, The builders despised the young man, which
among the sons of Jesse was worthy to be made King and ruler. At the first he
was Ejectus in exilium, driven into banishment, at the last, Evectus ad
dignitatem, lifted up to dignity, or constituted King. Moller. in Psalm 118. 2 Samuel 5.3.
So Moller of David. All the Elders of Israel came to the King to Hebron, and
King David made a league with them in Hebron before the Lord: and they anointed
David King over Israel.

Power may do much, might overcomes right, the strongest sword has often cut
asunder the most just title. Policy may do more, there was more danger in
Achitophels brain then in Absaloms power. Malice is held unmatchable if armed
with power, yet has that been overreached by subtilty. There is more done by
the hand then the hammer with which it works. Where all these can do nothing,
treachery has prevailed; an army in array may meet that restistance which
hidden fraud never feels of. Yet could neither power, nor policy, nor malice,
nor treachery hinder David from his kingdom. How vain is it for man to strive
against God! Nimrod is permitted to build a Tower, Psalm. 2.1. Non impleverunt
quod volverunt. August. tom. 8. Enarr. in Psalm. 2.
it proves but a Babel. Why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain
thing? Their purposes came to no purpose, their will was good, but their hands
were weak. Were it not better for men to be quiet, then to storm them selves
into a frenzy, or swell till they break? All buildings against God are upon a
sandy foundation, which the next gust of his dispeasure levelleth with the
earth. Gamaliel told the Jews, Acts 5.39.
that if the work were of God, they could not overthrow it. The providential
works of the Highest are so firmly cemented, that the whole power of the
creature is not able to dissolve them. Let the man whom God will raise be
confident, let his enemies keep off their hands, which they lift not up but to
their own destruction.

2. The Prophetical sense.
These words which are expounded Historically of David, are meant Prophetically
of Christ. He was the stone which the builders refused, yet became the head of
the corner.

That this is so, (...), etc. Chrysostom. 3. in Psalm. 117. In Matt. Homil. 69.
is manifest to every one, says St. Chrysostom. He calls himself the stone,
and the masters in Israel the builders; so the same Author. What was done in
David, was but a preamble and figure of Christ. I shall not need to tell you
that Interpreters, both ancient and modern, are in here, in with Christ, and
for him. In the Text we have Christ himself alleging the words of the Psalmist
for himself, we need no more witnesses. He that was typified by many other
things, is found also under the Metaphor of a stone. 1 Cor. 10.4.
The rock was Christ. Not the natural and signifying, but spiritual and
signified. Christ the substance was shadowed by it. Isai. 28.16.
Behold, I lay in Sion for a foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a precious
corner stone, etc. Not hay, or stuble, such combustible matter; not clay, or
earth, such crumbling stuff; nor wood, which may rot; but a stone, firm and
durable; no common or ordinary stone; but a precious or sumptuous stone, more
worth then the world. Were my intent to follow the Metaphor in relation to a
building, it were easy to show the firmness, fitness, fastness, the aptness to
bear the weight laid upon it, the durability and stability of this precious
stone; but it shall suffice me to follow the Method of my Text, which minds
us of the rejection and exaltation of this stone.

1. Christ was refused by the builders. John 11.50.
Caiaphas the high Priest, the Priests and Elders, the great Sanedrim or
Senate, who took the care both of Church and State, of the service of God, and
safety of men, they all refused him, and stirred up the people to do the like.
It is expedient for us that one man should die for the people. That was
Caiaphas his opinion, who spoke the sense of the great Politicians, it is for
the public profit, let him die whatsoever he be, though never so just, or
innocent. Unum pro cunctis dabitur caput. Virg.
One head shall go for many, said the Poet. If it be for the turn, Christ
himself shall be turned to death. Luke 19.14. Stat pro ratione voluntas.
We will not have this man reign over us. They say not why, they give no reason
for it, their will was their Law, and by the Law of their wills they refused
him, then which nothing is more illegal or tyrannical. John 18.38, 39, 40.
When Pilate had professed openly that he found no fault in him, and asked them
if they would have him released, they cried all again, saying, not this man,
but Barabbas. Now Barabbas was a robber. What rejection could be with more
scorn and contempt, then to prefer a robber before him, the ringleader of cruel
sedition Grotius in John 18.
(so Grotius expounds the word (...)) before him that was Heir of all? Act.
3.14, 15.
But ye denied the holy One, and the just, and desired a murderer to be granted
unto you, and killed the Prince of life. The head they rejected, not from
headship only, but from all use, they did not only deny him the chief place,
but allowed him no place, not so much as to live in the world. B. Andrews.
It is rightly observed by a most learned and godly Bishop of ours, that it is
not Improbaverunt, they disliked, but Reprobaverunt, they rejected as a
reprobate, and indeed they could not use a reprobate worse. Matthew. 27.20.
But the chief Priests and Elders persuaded the multitude that they should ask
Barabbas, and destroy Jesus. It was a custom among them to have a prisoner
delivered unto them at the feast, the choice of the man was left to the people,
who must be wrought to serve the turn, and such vertiginous spirits are soon
wheeled about by their great masters, their concurrence conducing to color the
business, to take off much from the great ones, by the intervention of their
votes which carried it, and cast our Savior to destruction. (...); Chrysostom. in
Matthew. 21. Homil. 69.
The question is moved by St. Chrysostom, How did they reject him? To which
his answer is, by saying that he was not of God, that he seduced the people,
that he was a Samarian, and had a devil. That is the way of the slily wicked,
first to accuse, though never so falsely, to render the person odious, then to
close up all by an outcry against him, Luke 23.21. John 19.15.
Crucify him, crucify him. Away with him, away with him, crucify him. You
have now heard the rejection of Christ, he was the stone which they refused.

2. His exaltation follows, The same is become the head of the corner.

Whom they marred, God made; whom they depressed, he advanced; whom they
killed, he raised; whom they vilified, he glorified. Post reprobationem
assumptus, and sublimatus in consummationem. Tertull. advers. Jud. cap. 14. 1
Pet. 2.4.
After his refusal he was assumed to honor, and lifted up to the highest
perfection. Disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God, and precious. Their
reprobate, but his elect. They threw him away as a peble, but God esteemed him
above pearls. He indeed was the pearl of great price, though undervalued by men
of corrupt minds. They thought him unfit for any place in the building, but
God gives him the best place, makes him the head of the corner. He is the
foundation of the building, though the builders refused him, Ephesians. 2.20.
(...), which with some is Angularis imus, the bottom-stone, upon which all is
built; with others Angularis summus, the top-stone by which all were fastened.
Christ was both, the foundation of the whole building. 1 Cor. 3.11.
For other foundation can no man lay, then that is laid, which is Jesus Christ.
Ut duos parietes. i.e. populum utrumque consociet. Hier. in Matthew. 21.
The coupling or fastening of the whole building together, that he might join two
walls together, that is, either people, both Jews and Gentiles. This the
ancients concur in, and in their judgment those words of the Apostle are for
it, Ephesians. 2.14.
For he is our peace, who has made both one. He brake down the partition, made
the union. The Jews and Gentiles were divided, not in Nation only, but in
Religion, in Rites, Laws, Ordinances, and for them by animosities and enmities,
by contempt and hatred each of other, these Christ removed by dying for both,
by communicating to both the same word and spirit, that they which are at the
utmost distance and defiance, are by the same faith knit together in Jesus
Christ. Act. 2.36.
Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly that God has made the
same Jesus, whom ye crucified, both Lord and Christ. The object of your
contempt is now in the greatest honor; he whose name you did execrate, has now
a name above all names; he whom you contumeliously abused, God has crowned
with Glory; you brought him to the grave, but he is risen from the dead, Romans
1.4.
and thereby declared to be the Son of God, with power according to the spirit
of holiness; the same Christ whom you hanged upon the cross, now sits on the
right hand of God. Herein appeared the power and wisdom, or the powerful wisdom
of God, which overwrought all the malice of Christ's enemies, and in despite of
them has made, or advanced the stone by them refused the head of the corner,
the fundamental, and principal of all.

3. The Analogical sense.
Having taken into consideration the Historical sense as meant of David, the
Prophetical sense as pertaining to Christ, give me leave to say something of
the Analogical sense in reference to Kings.

The building being of stone, the materials firm and solid, which the Text in a
borrowed sense speaks it to be, Kings and Princes go along with the
resemblance, being a part of the Political edifice, a principal part, of the
foundation amongst us, our Lawyers telling us that Monarchy, or government by
Kings, is one of the fundamental Laws of this Nation, it will not be denied but
they may be taken in by proportion or likeness. Sure we are that in the holy
Scriptures we find them such, and though our translation turns it, The chief
of all the people, yet the Original has it, Pinneth cal-hagnam, the corners of
all the People, the supporters of the Commonwealth, and the most eminent of
all. Number. 24.17.
Balaam prophesying of the Star that should come out of Jacob, and the Scepter
that should arise out of Israel, says, that he should smite the corners of
Moab, where our margent has it, the Princes of Moab. Princes are called the
stay of the tribes. Isai. 19.13.
The Hebrew is Pinneth the corner of the tribes. The old Latin turns it
Angulum populorum, the corner of the people. To be understood of Princes as the
firmament and ornament of the Commonwealth. We have found them corners, we may
find them Heads or Chiefs also by their usual appellation, Number. 1.16.
Heads of the thousands of Israel. The Elders of Israel said unto Jeptha, that
they came unto him that he might be their head. Judge. 11.17.
Lerosch, which the Seventy turn (...), for a Prince. Hosh. 1.11.
Then shall the children of Judah, and the children of Israel be gathered
together, and appoint themselves one head. The Thargum reads, They shall
appoint themselves one Prince of the house of David. Let the place be meant of
Christ, yet is Christ as King called the head, which is to my purpose: Kings
and Princes are called heads not only for their eminent place or power; but for
the great profit they should bring unto the people, by ordering and governing
them in a way most conducing for their good; which is of import against the
Acephalists, the men of an headless way, and the Polycephalists, which are for
many heads, both being monstrous and unnatural.

Kings being found to be Corner-stones and heads, in reference to the public
State, or Government, we may proceed to their Rejection and Exaltation, which
are the parts of the Instance. Here I might show how this has been verified in
other Nations, as amongst the Macedonians, Epirots, Danes, and in later times
among the Turks; but this time calling for it, I shall only run the parallel
in our present Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second, as a stone refused by
man, yet exalted by God, and made the head of the corner.

His rejection is first offered unto us, The stone which the builders refused.

By builders or architects here we are not forced to understand them to whom
the government was legally committed, not the Archi-gubernists, but mere
Archimagoes, which by crafty and cruel devices took upon them the government,
which snatched the reigns into their hands, and forced to themselves the Title
of the Trustees of the Nation, who under pretense of keeping, utterly ruined
the liberties of the People, who in stead of holding forth a Scepter of safety,
held over their heads a Sword of terror. By these our true and lawful King was
refused, or reprobated, (as the word in the Text has it) used most basely and
unworthily, as the refuse, recrement, or retriment, that I say not, as the
excrement of men. Here he was to three Kingdoms, lawful heir, and apparent, yet
not suffered to enjoy one of them, not a corner in any one, not to rule, but
not to live in any one of his Dominions, but driven as a miserable exile to
shift as well as he could in the wide world. After the fight at Worcester there
was a thousand pounds promised to any that could bring him into the hands of
his enemies, that the price of his head, as we have cause enough to think. When
he had found shelter among the Low Dutch, he was soon driven from thence by
those here, which had the better of that nation by sea. His next remove was
into France, where having found an umbrello with his allies and royal
relatives, he was upon compact to be removed from thence as soon as the men
here had closed with that Monarch, and driven to hunt abroad for another
covert, which for a small time he found amongst the Protestant Princes in high
Germany, where he met not only with civil usage, but remarkable honor. When
our workmen had concluded a peace with France and the Low Countries, and a war
begun with Spain, he was by that King taken into protection, which sounds much
to his honor with all true-hearted Carolists, under that wing he remained till
of late. Here have been two or three Parliaments (so called) which made it
their first work to renounce his interest, and you are not ignorant that some
(who called themselves a Parliament) abjured him, and decreed that he should be
abjured and utterly renounced by all others. What our most gracious King
suffered in all the time of his absence, what dangers he was in, in what
straights, with what temptations assaulted, with what difficulties he wrastled,
is not easily conceived, nor can by me be delivered, yet let me think enough to
have been said to warrant the applying of these words to him, Lapidem qu^m
reprobaverunt adificantes, The stone which the builders refused.

2. Blessed be God, we are now come to his Exaltation, The same is become the
head of the corner.

After so long rejection, no appearance of help, not a spark of hope visible,
his enemies triumphing, his friends at the dead lift, no reviver to sense, the
strength of humane reason at a loss, this stone cast down is raised, our King
restored, advanced to his native right, the inheritance of his royal
Predecessors, to the height of honor, and what is more, enthroned in the hearts
of his People, holding as strong residence in their affection, as presidence
over the Nations. Not to speak of the way and means, the happy instruments, a
small army from the North, the scattering of an opposite army without a stroke
striking, the forwardness of Englands Metropolis, the noble City of London, the
sudden concurrence of the whole Nation in the several parts of it, and by the
principal men, remonstrating, and declaring for a free Parliament, their
countenancing and encouragement from the Lord General, such a Parliament
called, assembled, and unanimously assenting and avowing to recall their King,
the dispatch of their Proclamations to declare His Right, to protest their
loyalty and subjection, to persuade all to entertain Him as their Sovereign, to
the exceeding joy and super-abounding gladness of the People, which has rung
through the Nation, mounted up in multiplied flames like the Stars in number,
the air rent with acclamations, and all these persued with public thankfulness
to God, every good heart being a prepared altar for such an offering. These
considered, not felt with the hand, but poised in the balance of a devout
estimation, we cannot doubt of the convenience of the Textual instance to our
gracious King, and dread Sovereign, the same stone which the builders refused,
is become the head of the corner.

2. I can stay no longer in the Instance, the fore-wind of my Text fills the
sails of affection, and drive on to the Inference, which is a part of
application, This is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes.

Two things here offer themselves unto us, 1. An Adscription to the worker,
This is the Lords doing, 2. The Admiration of the work, And it is mavelous in
our eyes.


1. An Adscription to the worker, This is the Lords doing.

1. God is owned in it, and he has owned his servants, whose prayers went up
for a memorial unto him, who has returned a gracious answer never to be
forgotten. He has signed their petitions with the broad Seal of his mercy,
which must be engraven upon our hearts with the indeleble characters of love
and gratitude. (...). Chrysostom. in Psalm. 117.
That which was done was not by man, or men. What hands soever were in it,
there was an hand above all which produced the blessed effect. We exclude not
the means, though God needs them not. Where the cooperation of second causes is
allowed, the main work is attributed to the first cause. Let me be understood
of what is truly and properly good; The Lord is of purer eyes then to behold
that which is evil, and certain I am that he looks not favorably on them that
entitle him to it. This work was great and good, greatly good, such as became
the great God to do, and with all willingness we acknowledge him the doer of
it. Non humanis viribus, sed Dei potentia. Hiero. in loc. Psalm. 44.3.
Done it was, not by humane force, but by Divine power, so St. Herome. They gat
not the land in possession by their own sword, neither did their own arm save
them: but thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance,
because thou had a favor unto them. Their arms were not idle, nor their
swords useless, we may well think that their hearts set their hands on work,
yet there was something above all these; without the concurse whereof the
victory had not been attained. Let us leave men's sins upon their own score, but
give the Lord his due in all that is good. What good is done by man, be the
instruments who you will, it is the Lord that by them does the good that is
done. This denies not an acknowledgement to the hand by which the benefit is
conveyed; we may kiss the cup out of which we drink, but our thanks must be
carried to another. The widow of Sarepta's kindness was gratefully received by
the Prophet, so was his entertainment by the Shunamite. All the help we receive
by the hands of others ought to reside with us, and be requited, if in our
power. Let them wear the robe that won the fleece, let the Crown be ever set
upon the right head, let God have the glory.

2. When the Lord has done his work, his great work, he has determined, all
ought to acquiesce in it. Yet let me have leave to think that in works of this
kind all have not resented his goodness, nor thankfully approved the operation
of his hands. The Critical humorists want not a black tooth to bite, nor a
bitter tongue to inveigh against the best performances. Gods deliverance of
Israel out of Egypt was not attested with thankfulness from the Egyptians, but
persued by hatred to his people, so far were they from resting in it, that they
armed against it. When God had chosen Saul to be King, 1 Samuel 10.27.
there were children of Belial, who said, How shall this man save us? and they
despised him, and brought him no presents. Homines nequam, (so Tremellius and
Junius turn it) men of perverse spirits, who dislike that with which all others
are pleased, who adore no images, but those of their own imaginations, who
arragate all to themselves, but derogate from all others, even from them whom
God will have honored. 1 King. 1.40.
When Solomon was advanced to the kingdom, the people piped with pipes, and
rejoiced with great joy, so that the earth rent with the sound of them. This
was harsh music in the ears of Adonijak and his followers, extremely
disrelished, the bit they gaped for fell into another mouth, they were
distasted because deprived of their expected sweetness. Let the Lords doing be
never so great, or glorious, malcontents, self-seekers, such as are sharp set
upon their own emolument, full of hope to have their turns served in their own
way, have still in them a contrary humor to the Lords doing. They which see the
hand of the Lord in it, his right hand, and that reaching forth a rich blessing
to his Church and people, are otherwise affected, they magnify the Lord, their
souls bless him for the benefit, Psalm. 5.11.
they rejoice in it, and shout for joy. (...). Chrysostom. in Psalm. 117.
St. Chrysostom has four words to express the joy of the people for the
exaltation of the stone refused, to rejoice, to leap for joy, to be affected
with cheerfulness, to entertain with delight or pleasure. These he would have
spiritual, of the mind and heart. That is ever best, and without that all other
joy is but froth and scum. Yet it may not be denied but the inward joy of the
soul may have it out-lets, the full heart will find a vent, it cannot forbear
the discovery of it self. David danced before the Ark. Moses sung his
thankfulness to the Lord. Psalm. 68.25.
The singers went before, the players on instruments followed after: amongst
them were the damsels playing with timbrels. Where there is an impression of a
great work of God upon the some, a work of mercy, such expressions as disagree
not from reason and religion are imitable and commendable, in which pious men
are not to be blamed if they seem to forget themselves in remembering the great
work of the Lord.

3. The Lord puts much honor upon them whom he makes instruments of his
peoples good, yet it concerns them to remember, Hoc factum a Domino, This was
the Lords doing, and to tremble at the least defaulkment from his glory by
assuming to themselves the least part of his due. He is very tender in point of
honor, and will not endure his Crown upon the head of a creature; it is well
that they may partake of his mercy, to cloud his Majesty is unsufferable. Acts
12.23.
Herod was smitten by on Angel, because he gave not God the glory: Epiphanius
affirms it, that there were none of the Sect of the Herodians left in his time.
Has there been any time without such haughty spirits that from the love of
self-excellence, have challenged the whole glory of their actions to
themselves? Dan. 4.30.
Is not this great Babylon, that I have built for the house of my kingdom, by
the might of my power, and for the honor of my Majesty? Here is a voice of
pride beyond the common stature of men, but he was un-man'd for it, and turned
out to common with the beasts, the fittest company for such who lose God in the
gaze of themselves. That of the Psalmist does best become the thoughts and
mouths of the servants of God, Psalm. 115.1. Non nobis, quib non a nobis.
Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory. Not to us,
because it was not of us. It was thy doing, not ours, it is enough for us to
have the fruit and comfort, to thee only, O Lord, be all the glory for ever.

2. I may not omit what the Text subjoyneth, to the adscription to the worker,
the admiration of the work, It is mavelous in our eyes.

It was thy work, and our wonder. We have had factum a Domino, The Lords work,
here factum mirabile, His wonderful work; Psalm. 111.4.
He has made his wonderful works to be remembered. Remembered they may be,
comprehended they cannot be. Were they not transcendent to the bounds of
reason, our knowledge would prevent admiration. We admire: what we understand
not: though something be seen, yet there is more then we can see. In David's
Exaltation after his rejection, in Christ's, in our Kings, all wonderful, and
appliable to all. But the business of this day, will license me to look to the
last, the Lords making our King that was refused, the Head and Ruler of His
People. Romans 11.33.
O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! (...). Chrysostom.
in Romans 11. Hom. 19.
That there was a depth he knew, how deep it was he knew not; The speech is of
one admiring, not of him that knew all. We are not ignorant of what the Lord
has done, yet we are to seek in all that he has done, and must make
admiration our refuge, as his people did after a great deliverance, Number. 23.23.
Quid operatus sit Deus? What has the Lord wrought? If we fix our eyes upon
the Sun in his brightness, they are dazeled, if we wade in the Ocean, our feet
fail us; if we muse upon things too high for us, our thoughts are puzzled. As
creatures of the greatest sagacity sometimes lose the sent, and are at cold
hunting: so the most sublimate wits are foundred in the great works of God.

Let the means be considered by which the Lord did this great work: that help
came from whence it was least looked for; from a party not comparable to their
adversaries in power; in such a juncture of time, when the pretended builders
were past fear, being fleshed with fresh victory; the people past hope, looking
for no better then to be devoured by Publicans and Sinners; to which if we add
the way in which it was done, without noise, without bloodshed, so many
recovered without the loss of any, a strong army scattered without conflict;
the wonderful providence, power, wisdom, and mercy of God appeared in it, even
to astonishment. That poor we, unworthy we should live to see our gracious King
by them despised, refused, cast off with insulting, recalled, restored,
enthroned with honor, prosecuted with abundant love, and redundant acclamations
of joy: To see the almost ruined Walls of our Nation; our good Laws repaired;
our lost Liberty recovered; our Rights and Properties assured; and that which
is more dearest, our withered Religion to flourish once again; to meet a gale
of good hope to see the Church raised out of her grave, restored, not to life
only, but to health and beauty; this, this I say, is wonderful in our eyes,
there is a (...) in it, a depth not to be fathomed by the plumbline of our
understanding, yet ever acknowledged with admiration, published with grateful
confession, and though it cannot be thoroughly uttered, yet it shall never be
smothered, but as a beacon upon an hill perpetually burning to the glory of our
God. Here was a wonderful wonder, (...). Chrysostom. in Mat. 21. Homil. 69.
(as the Father has it) This in our eyes, in the eyes of the receivers, not of
the refusers: they look upon it with regret, we with love and joy.

Psalm. 126.3.
The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we are glad. What shall we
render unto the Lord? You know what the Prophet said concerning the Shunamite
from whose hand he had received benefits, 2 King. 4.13.
Behold, thou have been careful for us with all this care; what is to be done
for thee? We that have been so great receivers, cannot but be sollicitous of a
return, unless incapable of gratitude. Nolo vos Judaico notari opprobrio, etc.
Bern. tom. 1. super Cantic. Sermon. 13.
I would not have you branded with the reproach of the Jews, (says Bernard) of
whom the Scripture testifies that they were unmindeful of the benefits of the
Lord, and the wonders that he had showed them. WE cannot recompense, but we
ought to recount; we cannot pay, but we ought to publish; Psalm. 26.7.
That I may publish with the voice of thanksgiving, and tell of all thy
wondrous works. He honoreth the giver that publishes his own receipts, he
begets a good opinion of his benefactor in others that tells abroad all the
good that has been done for him. New mercies call for renewed thankfulness,
Psalm. 98.1.
O sing unto the Lord a new song, for he has done mavelous things. Gods
works are never old whilst their memory is fresh with us. If we take new for
excellent, exquisite, not vulgar, but such as may be suitable to that which he
has done for us, our words will be too low, let us therefore borrow of others
what our poverty cannot supply. Let us borrow that Trisagium of the Seraphims,
Isai. 6.3.
Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts, the earth is full of his glory. That
Doxology of the heavenly Militia; Luke 2.14.
Glory to God in the highest, in earth peace, good will toward men. That
Adoration of the four and twenty Elders, Revel. 4.11.
Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power, etc. That
Hallelujah of the heavenly Chorus, Revel. 19.1.
Salvation, and glory, and honor, and power unto the Lord our God. Let our
hearts warm the blessing, let our tongues declare the work, let the worker be
hallowed in our lives, that our greatest care being to walk worthy of his
bounty, it may please him to perpetuate his loving kindness toward us, through
Jesus Christ our Lord; to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all
honor, glory, praise and thanksgiving, now and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

