D. D. AN ADVERTISEMENT, Anent the Reading of the Books of Antonia Borignion.

By GEORGE WHITE Minister at Mary-Culter near ABERDEEN.

They have a Zeal of GOD, but not according to Knowledge. Romans 10.2. All
Heretics diminish the Authority of the Holy Scriptures. Tert. de praesc. c.
49. Enthusiasm is an Impiety, whereby a Person hardily bent for the Inward
Worship of GOD, does boldly violat and despise His Commands, as to outward.
Mr. Henry Scougall P: D: in Aeth: l: 4: c: 8: de justitia. ABERDEEN, Printed by
JOHN FORBES, Printer to the TOWN and UNIVERSITY. Anno Dom. 1700.

The TABLE or INDEX.
SECTIONS. SUBSECTION 1. NUMBER. POINTS. SUBS. 2. SECTIONS.

Sect. 1. The Occasion and Purpose of the Advertisement. page 1 Sect. 2. How I
have read her Books and the Rules of Arguing. p. 3 Sect. 3. Q. If A. B. was
Divinely Inspired? p. 7 and Sect. 4. Subs. 2. N. 2. p. 83
Sect. 4. Q. If her Doctrine be conform to the Holy Scriptures? p. 23 Subs. 1.
Of the Essentials of Religion. p. 24 N. 1. Concerning GOD and the Blessed
Trinity. p. 25 N. 2. Of CHRIST and his Satisfaction for Us. p. 31 N. 3. Of Man's
future State. p. 40 N. 4. Anent the Love of GOD. p. 45 N. 5. Of the Holy
Scriptures. p. 51 N. 6. Miscelanies relating to the Essentials of Religion. p.
53 Whereof the 1. Point is, Of GOD'S Decrees and the Doctrines depending
thereupon. p. 54

2. Of the Image of GOD in Man. p. 60 3. If Man sinned before he sinned. p. 61
4. Of Perfection. p. 62 5. Of Perseverance. p. 64 6. Anent the Sacraments. p.
66 7. Of Pastors and Church Government. p. 69 N. 1. Of Accessories in the
general. p. 73 N. 2. Of A. Bs. Accessories in particular. p. 77 N. 3. Of her
Contradictions. p. 89

Sect. 5. How Errors in Books shall be discerned? p. 92 Sect. 6. If any should
read the Books of A. B.? p. 94 Sect. 7. If Borignianists be a New Sect. p. 96
Information to the Reader.
LEt the Reader of this little Book remember, that (for brevities sake) the two
Letters A. B. Signisie Antonia Borignion.

Ap. the Apology for her.

S. V. Solid Virtue.

L. W. Light of the World.

Pt. the Part of the Book that is cited.

P. the Page thereof.

And (according to the Table) Sect. the Section.

Subs. the Subsection.

N. the Number of the Subsection.

And Po. the Point of it.

Q. Question. A. Answer.

Obj. Objection.

SECTION I. The Occasion and Purpose of this Advertisement.
HAving observed with Regrate, for several Years bygone, sundry well-meaning
Persons, (and some of them not Unlearned) to have vented many Errors,
concerning the Holy Scriptures, the Gospell-Sacraments, Church Government, the
Pastorall-Office, and other most Sacred Establishments of the Christian
Religion, which they had picked out of the Pamphlets that are said to be
written be A. B. a Flandrian: Yea some young men of good expectation, by
reading these books inadvertently, had their Melancholy height'ned to an
excessive degree, therefore it seemed good, for the Truths sake (which we ought
to contend for Jude 3) and for preventing, by the LORD's Blessing, further
inconvenience that way; to write a seasonable Advertisement, in meekness and
love, Ephesians. 4.14. That we be no more children tossed to and fro, and carried
about with every wind of Doctrine by the sleight of men and cunning
craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive. That Christian People may not
through blind zeal snatch up any pretense of piety without due examination; and
it often falls out, that some out of a Capricious fancy of defending
Innovations, leave the high and trodden way to Heaven, and so wander in a
Wilderness of Errors.

It is here proposed, that all who tender their Souls Interest, may in this
case observe the Divine Oracle Romans 16.17 18. To mark them which cause
divisions and offenses contrary to the Doctrine which they have received, and
avoid them, who with good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the
Simple.

This Tractat shall be short, and so not tedious to any Reader; because in a
late Apology for A. B. printed at London Anno 1699, two pious and learned men
(to wit) Dr. John Cockburn and the Author of the Snake in the Grass, and the
History of Sin and Herefie are fiercely attaucked, for writting against her;
who doubtless (if alive) will answer for themselves; which yet will require a
considerable time for them to answer all the Defenses which the Ap. has
alleged for A. B. and her Abetters, her whole Life, Actions and Writtings: So
my present undertaking is only to act the pairt of their forerunner, as one
who does what he can to stop the progress of devouring Fire, till greater power
arrive to extinguish it.

SECTION II. How I have read her Books, and the Rules of Arguing.
BEfore I come to adduce the Rules of Disputing, it is to be noticed how the
Ap. in his Preface declares that he is persuaded in his Conscience, that the
Writtings of A. B. tend to the reviving of the Spirit of Christianity; Which
can have no more force to persuade others to be of his Opinion, than the
Canting Insinuations of the Bygots of all Parties, declaring, assevering and
swearing, that themselves only are in the Right, and their Opposites in the
wrong. A man's erring Conscience cannot oblidge himself to believe a Lie, or to
do ill things, it only binds him for to use the means to get it better
informed, and far less should such a vehement Protestation of his Conscientious
Persuasion of the goodness of such rare Teneds, as are here questioned, procure
the Assent of Rational men, but the solidity of his Reasons (if he has any)
according to the Scripture, 1 Pet. 3.15.16.

There are four Rules of reading Books aright, and judging of the Authors
Sentiments, or there are so many Postulats pre-required to the right disputing
of any matter, as they are set down in the Ap. Pt. 4, p. 334.

1 To be well acquainted with what we censure.

2. If the Scope of A. Bs. Writtings be good and agreeable to the main end of
Religion, in that case to bear with little escapes.

3. To read her Books without prejudice, or an evil eye.

4. To narrate and interpret faithfully.

All which Rules (he alleges) these gentlmen have transgressed, who did
write against A. B. And to obviat such an Objection against my self, I have
observed and shall firmly adhere unto the third and fourth of these Rules
without exception; being so far from having a Prejudice against A. B. and her
Abetters, that I wish with meek Moses, Numb. 11.29. That all the Lords People
were Prophets, and that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them. And the Teneds
or Sentiments which I intend to examine shall be truly narrated, either in the
express words of A. B. and her Ap. or the import thereof, without distortion.

The second Rule, needs some Qualifications, for a good Purpose does not
justify an evil Action, no more than Saul's sparing the Cattle of the Amalekits
contrary to GOD's command, pretending that he did so, For the good purpose of
Sacrificeing 1 Samuel 15.21.22. Neither should Books be approven, in which
Errors are mixed with Verities, since evil is through any defect, but good,
from the entire cause. So I distinguish this Rule, if a Writter having a good
design mistake in a few things of no great moment, and upon sound Advice will
revoke his Errors, I grant this should be favorably interpreted; but if the
Errors be gross and many, and the Author boasting of being Divinely inspired
in writting them, and to have had more Light and Piety then all men, in that
case, I deny that such mistakes should pass uncensured.

Lastly, as to the first of the four Pre-concessions for disputing, that we
should be well acquainted with what we censure, that is a very good Rule, and
by it the Ap. seems to insult his Opponents, that either they did not well know
the French Language in which A. B. wrote, or had not read all her Twenty two
Books. So not only the Ap. but likewise all that own A. B. whenever her
Errors are mentioned, they answer warmly, that whatsoever seems hard in some
of her Writtings is explained in others, which the censurers either have not
read, or will not be at the pains to compare places together.

Now to ward of this thrust, the Reader shall be judge, if I censure any thing
of A. Bs. Writtings, but what I understand well enough, having had sufficient
means for it, by reading sundry of her writtings, and particularly, The Light
of the World, which is held for the chiefest of them all, and the standard of
all, both be herself and Poiret; see the admonition prefaced thereto by P. P.
p. 36. And now I have read the Ap. which is aequivalent to the reading of all
her Books, since the Author has read them all, and defends all, and if I
quarrel nothing but what he mantains, it were a frivolous shift to bid me go
and search any of A. Bs. Books for any explication of her Opinions. And if
there be real Errors and Contradictions found in her writtings, what
explications can remove them?

To conclude this Section, I shall to the foresaid four, add other three rules
of arguing, and especially anent Points of Divinity.

1. To explain the Terms and state the Question aright.

2. To reason and answer heartily without Sophistry or Deceit.

3. To seek Verity rather than victory, and therefore though we may justly
commend some good things in any Person or his writtings, not to mantain their
Errors and Evtravagancies, which if through fondness we have failed in, upon
second thoughts to do so no more.

SECTION III. If A. B. was Divinely inspired.
A. THis Question cannot be well resolved, until the Terms thereof be cleared
in the first place, and the Question be rightly stated according to my first
Rule; for unless this be done, all abrupt disputs turn to a mere Logomachie, or
a proud and ignorant doting about Questions and strife of words which God
expressly forbids, 1 Timothy 6.4.

Divine Inspiration is taken in very different Senses, for,

First, in a large sense, every man may be said to be Divinely Inspired,
because of his Rational Soul, which was made after the Image of God Genesis 2.7.
God breathed into Man's Nosethirls the Breath of Life, and Gods breathing into
Man is a Divine Inspiration.

2ly. One is said to be Divinely Inspired, to whom God gives a capacity,
Genius or fitness for an Office or Employment, as it is written Judge. 3.10. The
Spirit of the Lord came upon Othniel, and he judged Israel and went out to
War; so it is a necessary Qualification of a Bishop that he be Apt to teach,
1. Tim. 3 2. and the Holy Ghost makes Bishops, Acts 20.28. Yea this is
ascribed to men of Manuary Callings, as to Bezalcel and with him Aholiab, Exodus
31.3. I have filled him with the Spirit of God, in Wisdom, and in all manner of
workmanship for the tabernacle.

3ly. A Spiritual man judges not of Divine things by carnal reason, Church
Authority only, Tradition or Custom, but according to the Truth and Mind of
God, revealed in the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 2.14.15. But the Spiritual man judges
all things, etc. Job 32.8. The Inspiration of the Almighty gives man
Knowledge. Which Apothegme may also be referred to the former sense, that God
qualifies and fitteth every person whom he commissioneth for any Employment,
as, to teach others: Yea, persons unregenerated may have something like to this
Orthodoxie, as that understanding Scribe, who in Conference with the Lord, did
give the true and Spiritual sense of the Law, upon whom it was accordingly
pronounced, That he was not far from the Kingdom of God. Mark, 12.34. Yet being
at a distance from true Conversion, all the knowledge he had, was only by the
common illumination of the Spirit, which and other common gifts of the
unconverted, whether they differ specifically or gradually only, from the
saving knowledge and graces of the Godly, I shall not here abide to determine.

4ly. Every Pious Person, is led by the Spirit of God, both in his Conversion,
when Gods Spirit enlightneth the Understanding and renews their Will, and
likewise afterward, directing and quickening to all Duty, which Light and Grace
he bestows in such measures as fitteth the work wherein He in his Infinite
Wisdom imployes them; as, reading the Scriptures, Praying, Preaching, Writting,
doing of good Works, and suffering, (when called thereto:) Of this the Holy
Spirit is the efficient cause, he bids us do well, Yet it is God who works in
us both to will and to do, of his good pleasure. Phil. 2.12.13. so 1 John,
2.20. Ye have an unction from the Holy One, and ye know all things. And this
Illumination is by Divines called Subjective Revelation, because of the
agreement betwixt our Souls and the Divine assistance, and to distinguish it
from the pretended Enthusiasm of deluded. Persons, who boast of new
Revelations, as the chief Rule of their Faith and Manners. And in this sense
Luther, Zuinglius and other Divines, who are cited in Quakerism no Popery, from
page 19. are to be understood, when they write that the inward word of God, and
the dictats of the Holy Spirit are the true word of God, which profit unto
Salvation: which is also the Sense and meaning of the ancient Holy Fathers,
when they speak of the leading of the Spirit of God; as S. Chrysostom. upon John
6.63. Christ's words are to be heard according to the Spirit, And whosoever hears
them after a carnal manner profits nothing. And S. Cypr. de S. sancto. p.
485. edit. Par. cum Annot. Ja. Pamel. Suspiration, Inspiration, and Aspiration
in the Godly, they have from the Holy Spirit the cause and effect, Matter and
Increase.

5ly. The Prophets and Penmen of the Holy Scriptures were in a strict sense
Divinely inspired, 2 Pet. 1.21. They spoke as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost, 2. Tim. 16.17. All Scriptures is given by the Inspiration of God etc.
The Prophets and Apostles were without any previous Ratiocination of
themselves, powerfully moved by God both to Teach and Write the Rule of Faith
and Manners, and that infallibly both as to Matter and Words; which they proved
to be immediate Objective Revelation, or rather Gods word than their own, (1 Thessalonians. 2.13.) by the gift of Tongues, Miracles, Oracles, Visions, discovering
of Secrets, foretelling things to come, and the conversion of men to God,
beyond and above the ordinary Humane Means. The phrase thus explained, I come
to state and answer the Question, to wit, if A. B. was Divinely inspired. The
Ap. spends the third part of his Treatise (being 38 leaves) aiming to prove,
that A. B. was led by the Spirit of God, or (what is the same on the matter)
divinely inspired, but never showing, in what sense or meaning, he would have
the World believe that she was so; and therefore all discoursing to that
purpose, looks too like a continued Sophism, commonly called Ignorantio
Elenchi, or a Fallacious way of arguing, seeming to prove the thing intended,
by an hudle of pretended Arguments, which yet conclude nothing as to the main
point under Debate. Viz. In what sense or respect he alleges his A. B. to
have been Divinely inspired.

1. Which now to examine particularly, I grant, that she was Divinely Inspired,
in the first of the five respects forementioned i. e. She had a Rational Soul,
if ever there was such a person as A. B. (which some doubt of, who lived in
Flanders about the time she is said to have been at Lisle, and yet heard
nothing of her) but this is not all which the party means by her being Divinely
inspired, since she pretends to more than an ordinary Spirit.

2. It is more to be doubted, if she was divinely inspired in the second sense,
(to wit) if she was fitted and well qualified for the condition and employment
that she set out for in the World, which was three fold, the Mistress of a
Family, a School-Mistris, and a Prophetess or a Teacher to reform all Mankind.
There is but little evidence given in her own writtings of he Discretion and
far less of Divine inspiration in guiding either her School or Family; (tho she
pretended to the knowledge of discerning Spirits, and the very thoughts of
peoples hearts Pref. to L. W. p. 41) for she testifies of her self, S. V pt.
1. p. 196. how all her 32 Scholars at Lisle were in Actual compact with the
Devil, and yet did very well what she taught them. Also the Ap. writes of her,
pt. 4. p. 323. that all her Servants were Witches and for a long time designed
to murder her for her Riches; yet mentions nothing that ever she dismissed
them before her Death.

And if she had a Prophetical Spirit that shall be tried anon.

3. The third and fourth Respects may be considered together, whereanent I
charitably think that A. B. was a pious person, and so was led by the Spirit of
God, as any other godly person is, Romans 8.1.

But this concession will not satisfy the Ap. who holds her to have been
incomparably holy, and to have exceeded in knowledge the greatest Divines, pt.
3. p. 240.241. And therefore her pretension must be tried in another sense.

Obj. How can she be called pious, who wrote many Errors, and was very proud
and Uncharitable?

A. 1. She spoke aright of Religion in sundry things, which might have been by
Divine Conduct, but in her Mistakes and Errors, she was led by her own spirit.
Ap. p. 216.217. As she confesses in another Case, when she was deluded by St.
Saulien p. 239. And it is probable, that she intended not to have written Lies
or Fopperies, which happened either through her want of the means of true
Knowledge, or the neglecting thereof; as the Reading of the Holy Spriptures,
and Systems of Divinity, and meddling with things too high for her, Ps 131.1.

She might have been Pious tho not pefect, and persons ought to be charactered
from their better pairt, and not from the worst; from the set of their Spirit
and tract of their Life, rather than from particular Actions or Escapes, and
especially, if they endeavor to discover and mortify all Sins in themselves.

2. This Obj. might be easily answered in the opinion of A. B. that Saints may
apostatise totally and finally, even they who have attained to perfection, and
could keep all the Commandments of God. Which is defended be the Ap. pt. 2. p
136. (which yet is a gross Error, as shall afterward be shown) for according
to her Hypothesis, it might follow, that she wrote only Truth, she was Humble
and Charitable, so long as she continued in the state of Grace, but wrote her
Errors, became Proud and Uncharitable, how soon she lost the Grace of God and
fell into the estate of Damnation.

4. As to the fifth Sense or Consideration of the Conduct of the Spirit of God,
which is the public and ordinary acceptance of it, namely, a Prophetic
infallible Spirit.

This I positively affirm, A. B. had not in her writtings, and so the Question
is answered Negativly, in Oposition to the affirmation of A. B. and her Ap. and
it is thus proved.

1. The Holy Scriptures which were written by the Holy Prophets and Apostles,
have a self Evidence in them, showing themselves to be the Word of God, or the
Dictats of the Holy Spirit; to wit, the matchless Sublimity of the matter, the
Holiness, Purity, and Harmony of the whole; the Efficacy or effectual working
for converting Souls to God, besides their confirmation from the Pen-mens
speaking of all Languages which they had never heard nor learned, and other
Miracles accompanying them, extraordinary Visions, sure Prophecies, the
Antiquity and preservation of the samen, and the Confession of Adversaries.

But A. Bs. writtings have nothing the like Confirmation, and therefore she had
no Divine Inspiration in writting them.

The Major is granted by all Christians, and the Minor is also clear, since
neither A. B. nor her Ap. pretend to such Testimonys tho their pretense be very
high.

2. The Scriptures written be men Divinely inspired, are a perfect Rule in
Religion, teaching us how to glorify God and be saved our selves 2 Timothy 3
16.17. That the man of God may be prrfect. And we are to hold them accursed,
who would add to this Canon Gal. 1.8. Rev. 22 18. Therefore A. B. dare not
pretend to such inspiration under pain of the curse.

Obj. You have wronged A. B. by mistateing the Question, for she did not
pretend to Prophecy, or to write by an Infallible Spirit, as the Prophets and
Apostles did; but only to interpret the Scriptures, to live well and to teach
others to do so, L W. pt. 1. p. 133. There she promises to write a Commentary
upon the whole Scriptures, tho she never performed it.

A. First, denying the Charge, for she is not wronged by me, nor the Question
mistated, since it is the ordinary and received Sense of the Phrase, to be
Divinely Inspired, or to be led by the Spirit of God in writting, to write by
an Infallible Spirit, as the Prophets and Apostles did, who were the Amanuenses
of the Holy Ghost.

2. Though she durst not speak it out in plain Terms, that she acclaimed no
less than such a Spirit as the Prophets and Apostles had (lest the Readers at
the first sight, had cried fie upon her, for Blasphemy,) but goes on in Clouds
and Darkness, never declaring in what Sense she was Divinely inspired, yet, I
say, on the matter she acclaimed no less, for these Reasons.

1. First because, when it was objected to her by Divines, that she had not
such Knowledge as the Prophets had, and wrought no Miracles; she shifted to
give any direct answer, but slily strived to diminish their Credit, and of the
Holy Scriptures, also, alleging that the Prophets knew not all things which
they wrote, that all of them wrought not Miracles, that the Devil had opened
the eyes of the blind and raised the Dead, and that the Lord himself was
mistaken, (I tremble relating it) anent the Fig Tree Mat. 11.19. L. W. pt. 1.
p. 136. Ap. p. 168.203.204.205.206. and 222.223. All which Calumnies might be
easily refuted, but I leave that Task to those who are writting against them
more Copiously.

2. The very Title of her Book is Blasphemous, to wit, The Light of the World,
which is the Epithet given to CHRIST, and his Apostles, and in assuming that
Title she equaliseth her self to them, tho injuriously.

3. It is evident, that she pretended to such a Spirit as the Apostles had,
when she affirmed, that she could write such a Book as the New Testament, L. W.
pt. 1 p 133. Now if she could have so written, then she could have done it
either by a fallible or infallible Spirit, if only by a fallible Spirit, then
it could not have been such a Book, but if by an infallible Spirit, then she
acclaimed such a Spirit as the Apostles had, which the Objector denies.

Many more Instances might be adduced to this purpose, but these may suffice.

3. Thirdly, I answer to the grand Objection, that she pretended not to write a
New Canon or Rule of Faith, but only to expound the Scriptures; giving but not
granting, that her pretensions did run no higher, that same is too high. The
Quakers acknowledge, that their Spirit is somewhat inferior to the Prophets;
Quakerism no Popery p. 32.33 Mr. G. K. The learned Author whereof is no Quaker
now) Yea the Roman Church it self would be offended, if any man should say,
that they coin new Tenets in Religion, or that they did more by their
Dogmatising, then to expound the Scriptures and dispense the Churches
Traditions (but by a Prophetical Light and Divine influence) as their doctrine
in this point is well collected by Amyrald in These. Salmur: de aut Script: n.
15.16.

So for A. B. to pretend Divine Conduct to expound the Scriptures better than
all others, is too great Arrogancy.

Q. Will you not allow, A. B. to have had more of Divine Conduct than you have
done already, that possibly she had it only in some things, which she did and
taught, as ordinarily every Godly Person has in what he does aright?

A. I have granted enough in the said Terms, and more I cannot, because, it is
sufficiently proved, that she was not Divinely inspired, as the Penmen of the
Holy Scriptures were; either to add to the Canonical Books or to interpret
Scripture infallibly, as they did, neither was she led by the Divine Spirit, as
an ordinary Officer in the Church, to interpret and apply the Scriptures (which
is Preaching) since she was not fitted for that end, by the means of Gods
appointment, nor yet observed the Rules thereof Neh. 8.8. Ezra the Scribe, with
the Priests and Levits, read in the Book of the Law distinctly, and gave the
sense, and made the People to understand the reading. Timothy the Evangelist
was enjoined Reading 1 Timothy 4.13. and since his Days, all Holy and Wise Men who
interpret the Scriptures pray to God for the Direction of his Spirit, which
indyted them, that they may Prophecy, according to the Proportion of Faith
Romans 12.6. They compare Scripture with Scripture, and look to the Scope of the
place, they study the Languages in which the Scriptures were first written,
Histories likewise and Customs of several Countries, Proverbial Speeches, and
famous Writters of them, which are often cited, and frequent Allusions made
thereto in the Holy Scriptures, they read the Creeds, Confessions of Faith,
Catechisms and Systems of Divinity of the Orthodox Churches both Ancient and
Modern; they search for Truth by the Literal Sense of the whole Scriptures,
pondering well whether or no, the speech be in Terms proper to the things
treated of, or borrowed from other things which is called a figurative Speech.

By these and the like means the settled and ordinary Teachers, and Expositors
of the Scriptures do, begging the blessing of God, Humbly and Assiduously
endeavor, to be fitted for the great and Sacred function, of laboring in the
Word and Doctrine.

But A. B. does not so much as pretend to use these means, nor yet to expound
the Scriptures, by the true Rules, but on the Contrary, she laid by the
Scriptures and contemned all Systems of Divinity and other helps of Learning.

Therefore she was not fit or qualified to expound the Scriptures, even as an
ordinary Teacher. So since A. B. was not led by the Spirit of God, to write her
Books, and expound the Scriptures, either in an Ordinary, or Extraordinary way:
It remains then, that she performed these things by no other Faculty, but by
Guessing and vain Divination, nor can I add a Fourth Member to this Tripartite
Division; tho possibly the fertile Brain of a new Ap. will gender one, showing
how one can be led by the Spirit of God to write, not by an Infallible Spirit,
nor as an Ordinary Teacher, nor yet to be a Mere Guesser or pretender to it,
which (as the Roman Proverb was) Let the credulous Jew believe, not I.)

To put a Period to this long Section, I shall produce all the pretended
Reasons, which the Ap pt. 3. p. 240 and 241. Alleges, for proving A. B. to
have been Divinely Inspired, and shall answer them severally, as if they had
been Objected against my Conclusion on this Head.

Obj. 1. Her Doctrine was conform to the Scriptures, therefore she was Divinely
Inspired.

A. 1. Denying the Antecedent, for her Doctrine was mostly contrary to the
Scriptures, as (God willing) shall be Manifested in the next Section.

2. I deny likewise the Consequence, because a persons Doctrine may be conform
to the Scriptures, who had no extraordinary Inspiration.

Obj. 2. She was Unlearned and yet exceeded the greatest Divines.

A. 1. She exceeded them only in Vanity.

2. George Fox was unlearned, so he gave it out, that all his Divinity was
revealed to him among the Hills of Lancaster. And Jacob Bhemen, the pretended
illuminated Suitor wrote seventeen Books like A. Bs. yet none of them was
Divinely Inspired.

Q. Instance. How could an unlearned Person write as she did without Divine
Inspiration?

A. 1. It is much doubted, if Poiret or some other man wrote not these Books,
that are said to be hers.

2. It is very conceavable, how one Unlearned, but of a Melancholy Temper, and
Luxuriant Fancy; might write such Books, getting Terms of Art by Converse with
Learned Men, and a Schem and Copy of their Fancies and high flown Notions, by
reading some of these called Mystiches, such as Theular, and Joannes a Cruce,
yet without Divine Inspiration.

Obj 3. She wrote without premeditation, and did neither correct nor read over
what she once wrote?

A. That is not like to be true, yet if it was indeed so, then her writtings
are so much the worse.

Obj 4. She had no Worldly aim, therefore etc.

A. Many pretended Enthusiasts seemed to have as little, who yet were not
Divinely Inspired.

Obj. 5. She reached the Consciences of Others, therefore etc.

A. All Sectaries and Shismaticks have the like pretension, accounting the
People of their persuasion, the only Enlightened and Godly Party, having the Old
Gnostics for their Patrons, in Monopolising Godliness to themselves, Iren. L.
1. G. 1. see Corse, instr. L. 1. C. 37. and L. 14.2.1. whereas, the truly
Orthodox rather make one Christian, than an hundred of their Opinion.

Obj. 6. Her Writtings had no contradiction in them, therefore etc.

A. It shall be shown she had, in the next Section, as for Example, on this
present Subject. She affirmed that one might know by his Natural Spirit, her
self to be Divinely Inspired, Ap. pt. 3. p. 197 But against that p. 200. None
can discern her to be Divinely Inspired, who is not so himself; now to know a
certain thing by the Natural Spirit, and not to know it thereby, is a
Contradiction, but to know by the Natural, and not to know but by the Divine
Spirit, is to know and not to know by the Natural Spirit, which is a clear
Contradiction of her self, whereas GOD's Spirit cannot contradict Himself, He
being Truth it self.

Obj. 7. She had a Pious Life and taught rare Penitence, therefore etc.

A. St. Aug. Epis. 106. accounts that Pelagius the Arch Heretic, deceived many
by the strictness of his Life and Doctrine; so he taught the Doctrine, revived
now by A. B. That riches should be abandoned, and that we can by a strict
penitence merit remission of sins, etc.

Obj. 8. A. B. affirmed, that she was Divinely Inspired, therefore etc.

A. But I have proven the contrary, therefore, she was not Divinely Inspired.

SECTION. IV. Q. If the Doctrine of A. B. be conform to the Holy Scriptures.
A. THis is the second Material Head in this Tractate, for if it be true which
is often written be A. B. and her Ap. That her Doctrine is agreeable to the
Holy Scriptures (which are the only Public Standard of Truth) then it would be
most injurious, for any man to offer to give Chek unto it: Therefore I hope, it
will be no less profitable than pleasant to the Readers, that this be fairly
put to the Test, and if it appear, upon an impartial inquiry, that (not a
little) but very much of A. Bs. Doctrine, be alien from and contrary to the
Scriptures, it may happily prove an Antidote for ingenuous People that they
swallow not down her Poisonous Errors, together with her Varnisht Pretensions
to Devotion and Piety, for to write Errors pretending to be Divinely Inspired,
makes the sin the more heinous, to father Untruths upon the Spirit of Truth.

SUBSECTION I. Anent the Essentials of Religion.
THe essence of any thing is, that which we conceive in the first place, as the
definitive Idea, or formal Notion of it, and without which, it could not be
such a being; as the Soul and Body are the Essential Parts of Man; so the
Essentials of Religion are these most necessary and fundamental Truths, which
if any Person disown, he is accounted an Atheist or Heretic, and none of the
True Religion.

In the beginning of the next Subsection I purpose ((...)) to consider the Aps.
distinction, of Essential and Accessory Verities, and at the present (for
dispatching's sake) shall admit of his Definition of the Essentials of Religion
p. 1. p. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. that they are such Truths without the Express
Knowledge and Belief of which, none can be eternally saved.

A. B. and the Ap profess that they own the Apostles Creed, and that they are
content, that her Doctrine be entirely tried by the Holy Scriptures, L. W.
Pref. to the English Reader, now their Knowledge and Ingenuity in that main
Point (whether or no their Doctrine be agreeable to the Scripture and the Creed
which is collected therefrom) shall be brought to the trial distinctly in the
subsequent part of this Section.

SECTION. IV. SUBS. I. N. I. Concerning GOD and the Blessed Trinity.
THe word Religion is taken from a Latin word Religando, Binding, for it is an
Holy Law or Doctrine binding or obliedging Man to worship and serve GOD, and
binding us to Him for our own Salvation.

It is the Chief thing in Religion to have true Knowledge of GOD in order to
the glorifying of Him, and next to that, how we shall be happy by Him. John
17.3. This is Life Eternal, that they may know Thee, the only true GOD, and
JESUS CHRIST whom thou have sent. Heb. 11.6. For he that comes to GOD must
believe that He is, and that He is a rewarder of them that diligently seek Him.

But A. B. had not a right notion of GOD Almighty, when she wrote, that man is
made as a little God in his Divine nature enclosed in his humanity. Our Souls
are little Divinities. The Soul is GOD, and GOD is the Soul. We are not to seek
GOD without us. GOD made us Deities depending upon Him. The Church is an
invisible Spirit, and the Church is GOD himself. S. V. pt. 1. p. 54.75. L. W.
pt. 1. p. 42.53 110.111.113. and pt. 3 p. 92. Such Doctrine cannot abide the
Test of the Holy Scriptures, which teach us, that GOD is the most perfect
Being, most Simple, Infinite, Immense, Immutable, Independent, and Eternal,
whereof the contrary properties are in the Creatures, Deuteronomy. 6.4 The LORD our
GOD is one LORD. But if the Church or the Soul of man be GOD, then there must
be more Gods then One, which to affirm, were blasphemous and heretical.

The Ap. p. 52. attempts to answer this, citing John 17.21. and thence
infering, that seeing man may have some sort of union with GOD, A. Bs. words
may be favorably Interpreted.

That is but a weak subterfuge, for the Learned Author doubtless knows, that
the Text John 17.21. and its Parallels, do not excuse A. Bs. foresaid language,
for CHRIST'S praying, That Believers might be one in Him, and one among
themselves, imports only, their being Members of His Mystical Body, that,
thereby they might recover the Image of GOD, Knowledge and Holiness, and be
cemented one with another in love; but from this, no Scripture language, nor
any Christian Commentator, neither any wise man did ever infer, that men should
be called GOD; Unless he would vouch the Manichees for his Authors, who were
vile Heretics, and held that there were two Gods, one good and another evil;
they, indeed taught That the Soul of man was of the substance of GOD; As did
other blasphemous Heretics, to wit, Cerdonians, Marcionites, and
Priscillianists which we have faithfully accounted by a most trusty and
diligent, antiquary: Forbes of Corse in his Instr. hist. Theol. Li. 4. C. 5. N.
12. Citing also the Orthodox, who refuted them. Namely St. Ambrose, Aug.
Theodoret etc.

And how can the unlearned Readers of A. Bs. writtings distinguish her Opinion
from theirs in this prime and essential part of Religion?

Likewise A. B. denies GOD'S Attribute of Omniscience (tho to deny any of his
Attributes, be to deny GOD himself) when she taught, that GOD does not foresee
all future Actions of a free agent which is defended by the Ap. pt. 2. p. 127.
128. 129.

This is contrary to the Scriptures, John 21.17. LORD thou know all things.
Psalm. 139.2. Thou know my down sitting and mine uprising, thou
understandest my thought a far off: Are not these the Actions of a free Agent?

Moreover, A. B. denies the Justice of GOD, which she learned from the
pestiferous Socinus, L. de Serve. p. 1. C. 1. etc. Where he Sophistically
argues, because GOD is Love, 1. John 4 8 Therefore there is no vindicative
Justice in him, which is defended by the Ap. pt. 1. p. 22 where he affirms that
the Scriptures which speak of GOD'S Justice and displeasure in threatening and
punishing of sin, are to be understood, as these which attribute humane parts
and passions to him.

All this contradicts the Scriptures, which teach, that hatred of sin and
vindicative Justice are of the nature of GOD as he is Simple, Pure, Holy and
Righteous, even as Love and Mercy, are of his Nature and Essence as He is good.
Habb. 1.13. HE is of purer Eyes than to behold Evil and cannot look upon
Iniquity. GOD has no parts at all, nor passions, and when they are ascribed to
Him in the Scriptures such as Love, Anger, Hatred etc. It is spoken by Us, not
for the infirmity of affections, but for some likeness of His works and ours,
as St. Aug. wordeth it. De Civ. D. L. 9. C. 5. And the effect has produced the
word Revenge which truth of the vindicative Justice of GOD, is clearly
vindicated from all the Objections of Socinus by John Owen Diatr. de Just. Div.
where he proves, that the application or exercise of GOD's essential Justice
is to be understood when he punishes sin, as our sovereign LORD and Judge, and
likewise he removes the mistakes of Rutherford and Twisse, thereanent, and the
satisfaction of CHRIST, wherein yet they were not of the mind of A. B. and the
Socinians.

Then for the Blessed Trinity in the Godhead, Head, her Doctrine is plainly
Heretical, writting that it is a Romish Error, to say, there are three Persons
in the GODHEAD; that there are in Him only three Powers, Attributes or
Properties of Truth, Righteousness and Goodness, and that her self had these
three Properties. L. W. pt. 2, p. 109, and pt. 3. p. 166 Lavie continue, p.
553, 554, L. W. pt. 3, p. 80, Ap. pt. 2, p. 84, 85.

These Sentiments (so called by the Ap.) are contrary to the Essentials of
Religion, to the Creed, and to the constant Doctrine of the Catholic Church.
See some of many Scriptures, 1 John 5.7. There are three that bear record in
Heaven, the FATHER, the WORD and the HOLY GHOST, and these three are One. Heb.
1, 3. CHRIST is the express Image of His FATHERS Person, see also how the
Trinity was manifested at Christ's Baptism Mat: 3, 16, 17. The Father speaking
from Heaven, the Son present in Person, and the Holy Ghost by a Dove. So
Preaching and Baptising are enjoined in the express naming of the Trinity or
three Persons, Mat: 28, 19. And thus the blessing is still pronounced 2 Cor:
13, 14.

The Primitive Church still condemned all Antitrinitarians, for Heretics, and
particularly Sabellius and Samosatenus, were accursed by the great Council of
Nice, Anno 325 Theodoret Eccl. hist. L. 5. c. 9. Epiph. haer. 6. For the very
Doctrine now revived by A. B. That there were not three Persons, but three
Names, and three Powers in the GODHEAD. Whereas to exclude all Heretics, and
to mantain the Unity of Faith in the Catholic Church, it was expressed in all
the approven Creeds, which are Exegetick or Explicatory of the Apostles Creed,
To wit, the Creeds of the Councills of Antioch, Nice and Constantinople and of
St. Athanasius. That there are in the GODHEAD three Persons or Subsistencies,
having Incommunicable Personal Properties, the Father begetting the Son, the
Son begotten, and the Holy Ghost proceeding from them both, three in One, and
One in three, undivided in Essence or Substance, with much more which is to be
seen in them to this purpose.

So that it is evident. A. Bs. Doctrine is inconsistent with the Scriptures,
and many Articles of the Creed.

NUMBER II. Of CHRIST, and His Satisfaction for Us.
IT is worthy the noticeing in the first place, anent this foundation of
Religion, that A. B. in all her Books never once gives CHRIST his due Tittles,
as it is in the Creed, His only SON Our LORD, or, the LORD, 1 Cor. 11, 23. The
Ap: is guilty of the same omission, till p: 406. Some approver of A. B. in a
Letter to the Ap. does it.

And no marvel, that they shift to speak of Christ's Divinity, since they write,
that He had a sinful Nature, corrupt and rebellious to the Superior part of
His Soul, produceing inclinations and temptations to sin, though He consented
not thereto, S. V. pt: 1, p: 198. Ap: pt: 2, from p: 198, to 143.

This contradicts the Holy Scriptures, which show clearly, that he took to
Himself our Nature, but without sin, which could not have been, if any sin had
been in His Nature; for the very first motions or inclinations in Us to sin,
(which Schoolmen call Primoprimi) they are sins, because of our sinful Nature,
even before we deliberatly consent thereto, Jam: 1, 15. Lust when it is
conceived brings forth sin. Gen 6.5. Every Imagination of the thoughts of
Man's Heart is only evil continually. Whereas it was impossible, that the Lord
Jesus Christ could have had a sinful Nature, otherwise the Divinity, (which is
Holiness and Purity it self) could not have been Hypostatically united to his
Humane Nature, neither could the Holy One, Immanuel, GOD with us, have any
inclination or temptation to sin in his Nature or proceeding from any thing in
Himself, as the Scriptures teach us, 2 Cor. 5.21. He was made sin for us, who
knew no sin. Heb. 4.15. He was in all Points tempted like as we are; yet
without sin.

The foresaid Error of A. B. is a great one but behold a greater! Against the
Satisfaction which Christ the Redeemer made to Divine Justice for us. That
there was no need for Christ to become Man to suffer or die for our Redemption,
that He had been Incarnat tho Man had never sinned, to converse with us visibly
upon Earth, that GOD was not honored by His sufferings, and that he suffered
only by accident, for the instruction of Men and their relief, and to give them
a good example L. W. pt. 1. p. 139. 140. 141. 142. and pt. 3. p. 53.

This Heretical Doctrine is caught from Photinus, and from Socinus L. de Serve.
c. 3.4 and per tot. That Arch-Heretick, and Heir of Arrius, who denied the
Divinity of Christ, and is the Father of the Atheists that now infest many
places in Europe, whether they call themselves Deists, Theists, Unitarians, or
under whatsoever Denomination they pass at the Time.

The foresaid Doctrine is no less Absurd and Heretical, when it proceeds from
A. B. and her adherents, than as it is disseminated be the Socinians, who
pretend to be Christians as well as they, for they all strick at the root of
Christianity, teaching, that Christ suffered for our behoof, but not in our
stead; that it is enough to say, He set Captives free, whereas Redemption
imports, paying of the Ransom also for us, both of them, deny the Vindicative
Justice of GOD, pretending to cry up his Love, and though they pretend to the
highest Reason, yet how unreasonable is it to say, that the SON of GOD,
suffered as He did without a necessity of satisfying the Justice of GOD
thereby, and suffering of the greatest of Punishments due to Us for Sin: And
without which all Mankind had perished eternally, as well as the Devils.

It was the admirable free Love of GOD, which made the Difference, and it is
the great Foundation of Saving Faith, That when we were sinners, outlaws and
rebels, Christ dyed for Us, Romans 5.8.

Now I shall cite the Scriptures for the Satisfaction of Christ, whereby I am
persuaded, that the Impartial Reader will easily perceive, that the foresaid
Doctrine of the Socinians and A. B. is inconsistent therewith; and so
inconsistent with the Creed and the Essentials of Religion, notwithstanding of
her Profession, and her Ap. to the contrary.

John 10.25. I lay down my Life for my Sheep. Mat: 20, 28. The Son of Man came,
to give his Life a Ransom for many. Acts 4, 12. There is none other name under
Heaven given whereby we must be saved. Gal: 3, 13. Christ has Rdeemed us from
the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us. Ephesians 5, 2. Christ has given
himself for us, an Offering and a Sacrifice to GOD: 1 John 2, 2. He is the
Propitiation for our sins. Rev. 5, 9. Thou have Redeemed us to GOD by thy
Blood. These Texts pondered. It may probably seem strange, to some who rashly
were taken with A. Bs. Books, how any Christian could have written so
perversely of Christ as is forementioned, but they may marvel the less, when
they find her writting very often liker to an Infidel than a Christian, as
when she asserts that Mahometans and Gentiles may be saved, by resigning their
wills to GOD, without mentioning Faith in Christ, that the Jews are yet the
People of GOD, that they love GOD more than any other People, that their being
despised may perhaps satisfy for putting Him (GOD) to Death, and that their
hopes of the Messiah yet to come is well founded on the Word of GOD. L. W. pt
2. p. 127, 131, and pt. 3, p. 3. 168.

How can the Jews be the People of GOD, who were cast off for their Infidelity
in S. Paul's days? Romans 11.15. If the Love of GOD which A. B. boasts of so much
be of that kind with the Jews love to GOD, then it is but a lifeless Fancy
instead of the true Love of GOD, since the Jews have not Faith in Christ, and
True Faith works by Love. Gal. 5.6. (of which in a number a part afterward)
neither Jews, Gentiles, Mahometans, or any Infidels, can resign their will to
GOD, (remaining Infidels) so it is nonsense and repugnancie in the adject, to
write, that they do; for none can be Accepted of GOD but by Faith in his
beloved Son the only Mediator. Ephesians. 1.6.

What a rare piece of confidence is it for A. B. and the Ap. to aver that they
own the Creed and the essentials of Religion, and to mantain the direct
contradiction thereof? for if the Jews expectation of the Messiah yet to come
be well founded on the Word of GOD (as she says in the fore cited place) then
the Christian Belief is not well founded thereupon, that in the fullness of time
(as Gal: 4.4.5.) he was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin
Mary, and the rest of the Articles of the Creed concerning Him are false, if A.
B. speak Truth. For the Messiah to have already come, according to the
Prophecies in the Scripture, and performed the work of our Redemption in the
exercise of His three fold Office, and to be yet to come, as the Jews vainly
expect, is a flat contradiction: nor can I conjecture, what the wit, or cunning
of any Ap. can answer for A. B. in these things, unless it be said, that A. B.
is generally misunderstood, for her Christ is not our Christ, mentioned in the
Belief, who was Prophesied of in the Old Testament, and of whom the New
Testament is an History. But her Christ, is an imaginary Christ, which
proceeded from Adam before the Woman was made, and came not of the Seed of the
Woman, L. Etoile dumatin p. 32.33. and Ap. pt. 1. p. 47. And to evite a very
strong Argument against her fantastical Christianity, taken from Gen: 3 15.
which is the first promise of Christ, importing the very tenor of the Covenant
of Grace, she brings forth a rare sort of new coined blasphemy (like John of
Leyden, or Nailour the Quaker, who called themselves the Messiah) so she
affirms, that she is That Woman's Seed, which should bruise the Head of the
Serpent, L W. pt 3. p. 47. This is that A. B. of whom De Cort. her admirer
says, Pref. to the L. W. p. 41. That no Body since the Creation of the World
Explaines the Scriptures so well as she does, but behold what it comes to!

The Ap. pt. 2. from p. 90. to the 100 uses much Art to smooth the Doctrine of
A. B. against the Satisfaction of Christ. He distinguishes a man's being
substituted to suffer for another, and declares, that A. B. held such a
substitution to be false and diabolical, as procures a discharge to the Party
offending, but granted a substitution of love, whereby Christ merited, that we
should by our penitence merit Salvation, adding our own merits to Christ's
Sacrifice, to satisfy the Justice of GOD, and mockes at a man who declares, he
is but a frail creature, and hopes to be saved by faith in Christ; whereas it
is manifest by the Scriptures already cited, and many more which could be
shown that Christ's suffering in our stead, and thereby procuring to us
remission of sin, and freedom from the Punishment due to us therefore, is a
most true and Divine substitution, and not false and Diabolical, as A. B.
says. 2 Cor. 5.19 GOD in Christ reconcileth the World to himself, not imputing
their trespasses unto them, and not to impute to us our trespasses, is to
procure a discharge of the samen.

A wise man should not be ridiculed for his wisdom, but this is the wisest
Course, that a sinner can take, to confess his own frailty, and believe to be
saved by the free Mercy of GOD, for the sake of Christ's Merits. We do not deny
a substitution of love (as he calls it) that of GOD'S free love in Christ
Jesus, whereby we are both Justified and Sanctified, but neither Penitence, nor
any other Grace bestowed upon us can be called our Merit; nor can there be any
addition made to the Sacrifice of Christ, which satisfied the Justice of GOD,
and is the only meritorious cause of our Justification.

The Ap. insists, saying, that we carp at the words Merit and Satisfaction,
while we grant the thing imported thereby, that Christ by his Merits has
procured to us to do penitence and to imitat himself, without which non can be
saved by faith in Him.

This is the substance of all his suppositions, or imperfect sort of Argument,
in the foresaid place, which in the Schools is called, a Sorites.

To which I answer briefly, that the Orthodox have good reason to quarrel both
at the words and the thing which he understands thereby, for it is simply
impossible, that sinners can either satisfy the Justice of GOD or merit their
own Salvation: because there is no commutative Justice betwixt GOD and Man, as
there is in Contracts between man and man, so that it were injustice not to
remit sin, upon all the penitence or good works that we can do, He being
infinitely Holy: and we but frail Creatures, who at the best are but
Unprofitable Servants Luke 17.10. We ought indeed to evidence our Faith by a
good life, but to call our penitence or love to GOD, or imitation of Christ our
own merit, is but a vain gloriation, and derogatory from the satisfactory
Merits of Christ; for which I remit him to Bellarmin, who is a great Orator for
humane merits, but confesses, that for the uncertainty of our own
Righteousness, and the danger of vain Glory, it is most safe, to place our
whole confidence in GOD'S Mercy alone, and his Goodness, and a few lines after,
he says, that without a Revelation no man can know assuredly himself to have
true Merits; or that he shall persevere in them to the end. Likewise because
nothing is more easy in this place of tentation, than pride to arise from the
consideration of good works. R. Bell. Card. Jesu. de Justi. L. 5. c. 7. p. 1266
in 80.

SECTION IV. SUBS. I. N. III. Of Man's future State.
IN the Seventh and two last Articles of the Apostles Creed, sundry great
Truths are included, anent Man's future State, which are clearly taught in the
Scriptures, and are of the essentials of Religion; namely, that after Death
neither Soul nor Body perish, but they shall be joined again by the power of
GOD, through Jesus Christ at the General Resurrection, and set day of
Judgment, when He shall pronounce a righteous Sentence upon all Mankind, giving
unto those who have done well, Eternal. Life in Heaven, and to the wicked,
E^nal Damnation. But A. B. makes a ludicrous Scene of all this, writting, that
the World shall not be consumed by fire, there shall be no judgment after
Death, nor a set and appointed day of Judgment nor any other sort of judgment,
than what is begun thirty Years ago, that good People shall not go to Heaven,
but Christ (coming with men and not with Angels) shall dwell with them visibly
for ever on Earth, where they shall propagate their kind Eternally, being
retired into a safe Corner of the Earth, or rather to the Center of their Soul,
to live in all pleasure, and the Wicked to another Corner of it, to be
afflicted by Serpents and all evil things.

And she believes all this better than all the other Mysteries of our Faith. L.
W. pt. 1. from p. 143. to 148. and from 150. to 159. and from 168. to 170. and
pt. 2. p. 131. 132. and pt. 3. p. 146. And all the foresaid Heretical rapsodie
is approved be the Ap. pt. 2. p. 180. to 184. the Mysteries of Faith which she
does not so well believe as these her own whimsies are, the Unity and Trinity
in GOD, the Incarnation and Satisfaction of Christ, the efficacy of Grace,
with the free will of Man, the Resurrection of the Dead, the Day of Judgment,
and Men's then being mandated to Heaven or Hell. These Opinions of A. B. are
worse than the Old Millenar^^ who yet were still condemned, by the Orthodox and
Catholic Church, which held that the Scriptures in no place promised Christ's
dwelling on Earth Bodily again, but rather the contrary, as Acts 3.21. Tit.
1.2. GOD that cannot lie, has in his Holy word assured us, of the Truths which
I have rehearsed on this head, which also demonstrates the falsitie of A. Bs.
Tenets lastly repeated.

John 5.28.29. The hour is coming in the which, all that are in the Graves
shall hear His Voice, and shall come forth, they that have done good unto the
Resurrection of Life, and they that have done evil unto the Resurrection of
damnation. Heb. 9.27. It is appointed unto men once to die, but after this the
Judgment. Acts 17.31. He has appointed a Day in which he will judge the World
in Righteousness by that man whom He has ordained 1 Cor. 15.15.16. For if the
Dead rise not then is not Christ raised, and if Christ be not raised your Faith
is vain. 2 Pet. 3.12. Hasting to the coming of the Day of God, wherein the
Heavens being on fire, shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall melt with
fervent heat, there are many parallel places of Scriptures, as John 14.3. Mat.
25.46. 1 These. 4.16.

The Sophistical shifts that are made be A. B. and her Ap. in the fore cited
places, for excusing their Errors shall be easily discussed.

Obj. 1. First, Heaven is where GOD is, therefore, when Christ reigns with his
Saints on Earth, there needs no other Heaven.

A. Its answered, neither GOD 'S essential Immensity, nor His diffused Grace,
takes away the nature of things, or confounds distinct places, so Heaven is
still His Thron and the place of the Blessed, and the Earth his Foot Stool.

Obj. 2. If Christ do not reign with His Saints Eternally on Earth, then the
Earth was made only for Wicked Men and Devils.

A. The Earth was made for GODS People, who serve Him on it now in the Land of
the living, tho imperfectly, but afterward they shall serve Him perfectly in
Heaven.

Obj. 3. Angels propagate their kind and so shall Men do, when the Body shall
be made Spiritual.

A. That whimsie of Angels propagation, has been started by some of the
wildest of Schoolmen, but was rejected by the most Learned and Solid of them,
as Aquinas, Sum. p. 3.75.7. c. Where he proves that Angels are of different
Species. and Swares. Metaph. p. 120.121. That they cannot produce a Substance.

Neither is there need of propagation nor of a new Creation of Angels, there
being so many of them made at first, Dan, 7.10. Thousand thousands, and ten
thous and times ten thousand.

Obj. 4. GODS works abide for ever and therefore all living Creatures must
propagate their kind for ever.

A. 1. These words, For Ever do often signify, no more than a long time.

2. GODS Works abide according to his Appointment, some for a lesser, and
others for a longer time, some materially endure for ay, though changed in the
qualities, as our Bodies after the Resurrection, and other Creatures once made
never come to an end, as all Spirits.

3. There is no Marriage in Heaven and so no propagation, as Christ coargued
the Saducees Mat. 22.30.

4 If Devils and Wicked Men should propagate for ever, then their Posterity
should never be judged, contrary to the Scriptures which Teach that all shall
finally be judged, by GOD, Eccles. 12.14. Jude 6.

SECTION IV. SUBS. I. N. IV. Anent the Love of GOD.
IT is the high pretension of A. B. throughout all her writtings to reduce men
to the Love of GOD, and values her self upon it, as if she had been the first
in her Age, who had taught that sin consists in a privation of the Love of GOD,
S. V. pt. 1. p. 52. That all Christian Writters, and particularly the reformers
did not teach the Love of GOD, or they did it dryly and confounded the matter,
and her advancing the Love of GOD, is the distinguishing mark of her writtings
from all Systems of Divinity, and that all Church Councills were of the Devil,
drawing men from the Love of GOD, L. W. 3. Pref. to the 3. pts. and pt. 3. p.
45. and Ap. pt. 1. Car. 1.5. from p. 14. to 25. and p. 78. n. 42.

Is it not a pitiful Error in any Christian, to applaud such writters? who
under a vain pretense of advancing the Love of GOD, do rail at the highest
rate, against all Christian writters without exception, is not that to do what
they can to destroy all Christianity?

Herein they are like the Sea Monsters called Sirens, who by a sweet voice
allure passengers, till they get near to destroy them,; or like enemies, who
set out the colors of Friends, to render us the more secure till they fall on
with deadly weapons. So it is an usual trick for all, Heretics and
Enthusiasts, to set out for some true Hypothesis, as Jacob Bhemen did, by
resignation to GOD, as much as A. B. does by the Love of GOD: But let us
observe them well, and it will soon be apparent, that their color is but
fairding, and their canting deceiving, and that they run from one extreme to
another, and so loss the Truth which is in the midst; as Eutyches refuting
Nestorius, did in opposition to him, fall into a new Heresy, anent the Natures
of Christ, so it is exactly in the present case, the infamous Gnostics of Old,
and Antinomians of late, depraved the Law of GOD, pretending to exalt Faith,
and A. B. runs to the other extreme, out of a pretense to advance the Love of
GOD, penitence and imitation of Christ, as the means of attaining it, she
cries up humane Merit and undervalues the Doctrine of Salvation by Faith in
Christ Jesus. Ap. pt. 1. p. 25. Car. 5.6. Her Doctrine is very unsound and
erroneous, anent this essential Point of Religion; nor did she know what it is
to love GOD, whereof she vaunteth so much, and reproacheth all others, not only
as ignorant thereof, and neglecting that which is the chief thing in Religion,
but even as if they were enemies to the Love of GOD, and her self only the
defender of it.

And for the instruction, or making good this my Charge against her, I shall
not insist upon omissions, as the not describing the nature of the thing she
writes of, showing what is meaned by Love, either as it is a chief passion, or
Theological virtue, how Faith and Love are compared together, and sometimes one
of them gets the preference, and sometimes the other, whether love of gratitude
to GOD, or complacencie in GOD be recommended, or what are the true tokens of
it, viz. love to GODS Truth, to his public Service, to His People and many the
like, which she does not touch, but shall instance a few of her many mistakes,
anent the Love of GOD, after that I have intimated to the Reader how the last
Year, I noted some things which I found amiss in a Latin Pamphlet, entitled,
A College discourse of Comparative Theology. which seems to be a masked
abstract of Borignianism and particularly in the second note disclosed, the
Authors Error in affirming that the Love of GOD is the chief end of Religion,
in every state of Man, and all other things but the means of attaining it,
which is not true, either in this Life or that which is to come.

For the Chief and ultimate end of all Religion is GODS Glory and subordinat
thereunto, is Man's Eternal Salvation. There are three special Heads of
Religion, containing our duty in this Life, things to be believed, things to be
done, and things to be prayed for: 1. In order to things to be believed, Faith
is the chief Virtue. 2. As of things to be done, Love is the Spring. 3. And
true Grace may be called Devotion, in respect of things to be asked of GOD, and
has its degree accordingly. Neither is Love only the chief end of Religion, in
Man's future State of Blessedness, which consists, not only in the love of GOD,
but also in the Intuition and Fruition of Him, with suitable exercises to be
known hereafter. 1. Cor. 2.9.

Now to prove A. Bs. ignorance, of the Love of GOD, it is manifest, 1. First in
that she said, the Jews have the true love of GOD, who are Infidels denying
the LORD that bought them. 2. That all Systems of Divinity teach nothing of the
Love of GOD, that is, all the Creeds, Catechisms, Confessions of Faith,
Expositions of Scripture, and all other Books that have been written by
Christians, Theoretical or Practical, since the Apostles Days, are to be thus
taxed; who could have written so? but either a person grossly ignorant of the
love of GOD, or else extremely impudent, in belying all the Christian writters,
seeing it is as notour, as that the Sun brings light, that thousands of
Christian writters, and some in all Ages (which if need were, could be easily
named and produced) have written excellently of the Love of GOD, and far better
than this roving person has done. Nor is it like, that a Preacher wrote the
Ap. for else he had not accused all others of dryness. 3. As the pretended
inspired A. B. is most vain glorious, that she only had discovered the Love of
GOD to be the great end of Religion, so is she no less proud of the means that
she had attained to obtain it, namely, such a penitence, and self denial as
merited remission of sins, and which should be added to the Sacrifice of Christ
Lae. Temoing de verite pt. 1.59.61.64. and Ap. pt. 2. p. 91.99. But we have not
so learned Christ Romans 6.23. Pardon of sin and eternal Life are none of our
merit but GOD 'S free Gifts procured by Christ's merits. Ephesians. 2.8. whereof
possibly more afterward.

4. You have hitherto narrated such instances as convince my self of her
ignorance in the main point of Religion, whereto a fourth shall be added, which
probably will abait the fondness of her admirers, if it does not altogether
break her party, if they consider it aright, who noticed not before what
doctrine she taught; and that is, that every good Christian must abandon Riches
and Honor, and take no more of them but what is simply needful for the
sustenance of Nature, and that of the least and meanest sort, for the strain of
the Doctrine which her Party cries up runeth thus.

A good Christian seeks to attain to the Love of GOD in perfection, which to do
we must renounce self love, and love of the Creatures, and none can do that
but they who renounce Riches, and take meat and clothing only to sustain
Nature. S. V. pt. 1. p. 58. 59. L. W. pt. 1. p. 121. Ap pt. 1. p. 66. 67.

Now let all that have doted upon Borignianism, prove themselves to be her true
Proselites, by this plat form of her levelling, which ere they do, I am of
Opinion, she will have but a very small Train of either Sex; As Henry Martin
said in the Rump Parliament in England when it was proposed, to purge it quite
of Immoral Men, purge it also said Martin, of all Knaves and Fools, and then we
shall have but a thin House.

NUMBER V. Of the Holy Scriptures.
IT is doubtless of the Essence of Religion, to have right Sentiments of the
Holy Scriptures, which are the word of GOD, and the Rule of Religion. But many
of A. Bs. and the Aps. Sentiments, are wrong in this matter, for First, she
perverts most of the Texts, which are cited in her Books, whereof one pregnant
instance is already shown anent Genesis 3.15. N. 2. another is, of Mat 5.45. He
makes his Sun to shine on the Evil and on the Good, from which A. B.
infers, that the Wicked have the true Grace of GOD, L. W. pt. 1. p. 43.
whereas the words import only, that Worldly things (such as the Suns light) are
common both to good and evil People. 2ly. They derogate from the Authority of
the Holy Scriptures, which is altogether Divine and Infallible, the Ap. pt 2.
p. 179 Approves Teresa a Spainard, a pretended inspired Teacher, who when she
was urged with that Text 1 Timothy 2.12. I suffer not a Woman to Teach; did
answer, that GOD bid her, not to be directed by one passage of Scripture, for
there was a twofold falsehood (if not rather a lie) in the answer of Terese,
for there is a parallel Text to the foresaid purpose 1 Cor. 14.34. And GOD bids
us be directed by his Word, as well as when it is found in one passage of
Scripture, as if it were in twenty, so it was the Devil and not GOD, that
suggested such an answer to her. As Tertul long since wrote, that all Heretics
Strive to derogate from the Scriptures, and whosoever does deprave any part of
the Scriptures, he rejects all, because they are all from the same Authority,
Adversus Here Is. de prescrip. c. 49. 3ly. They disregard and contemn the Holy
Scriptures.

Diod. Sic. L. 14. reports, that Theopompus a Pagan Historian, when he had
inserted some part of the Holy Scriptures, into his profane writtings, did run
mad. I shall not say that A. B. was mad, but probably she was Hypocondriack,
for writting as she did anent the Scriptures, exhorting people to imitat
herself, in not reading the New Testament for twenty Years, and affirming, that
she could write such a Book as it, that it was not hitherto understood by any,
and only slightly allowing people to read the BIBLE that are not otherwise
taught. S. V. pt. 1. p. 120. Ap. p. 347. L. W. pt. 1. p. 120. Whereas, the Holy
Spirit, teaches us, to search the Scriptures daily. Acts 17.11. The truly
Divinely Inspired take their warrant from the Scriptures 2 Pet. 1.19. Though
they were immediately taught of God.

And it was a thing more impossible for A. B. for to write such a Book as the
New Testament, than to have joined the land of Flanders to England, for she
could have written such a Book, either by a fallible or an infallible Spirit,
if by a fallible Spirit only, then it could not have been such a Book, which
was written by men infallibly inspired; and not by an infallible Spirit,
because she had it not, as is proven Sect. 3. Hence may be espied a piece of
very goodly confidence in the Ap. pt. 2. p. 179. affirming, that none could
vilify A. Bs. way of handling Scriptures, but they who have a secret disgust
at it, whereas on the contrary, out of love to the Scripture, I openly disgust
her abusing it.

NUMBER VI. Miscellanies, relating to the Essentials of Religion.
THere are many other heads of Doctrine nearly relating to the Essentials of
Religion ill treated of in the writings of the Authors whom I deal with; and
abruptly brought in by them, without any Logical order: some of which shall be
noticed in this last Number together, as they have occurred to my observation
in seven distinct points, that this Subsection concerning A. Bs. Essentials,
may terminate in a certain method.

POINT I. Of GOD'S Decrees, and the Doctrines depending thereupon.
AS A. B. has not written right things of GOD, about the Essentials of
Religion, so, nor of the integrals thereof, though there be sundry of the
samen, which have so near a relation to and connection with the Essentials,
that by sound Divines they are truly called Circa Fundamentals; For her Tenets
anent the high and mysterious Decrees of GOD, and many Doctrines depending
thereupon (such as the Operation of Divine Grace, upon the Will of Man, and the
Perseverance of the Saints) they are (in my Judgment) both contrary to the
express Letter of the Holy Scriptures, and the interpretation thereof, by the
Orthodox Church.

For she frequently affirms, in the general, that GOD had no Eternal Decrees,
nor praescience of the Actions of free Agents; and in special, that He had no
Eternal Decree of Predestination L. W. pt; 3. p. 154. which is contrary to
Psalm. 33.11. The Counsel of the Lord stands for ever, the thoughts of His
Heart to all Generations. Acts 15.18. Known unto GOD are all His Works from the
beginning of the World. Ephesians. 1.4. Having chosen us in Christ before the
foundation of the World. Verse. 5. Having Predestined us to the Adoption of
Children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of His
Will. and Verse 11. Who works all things, after the Counsel of His own Will.

Again A. B. writes, that man has liberty to resist the Will of GOD, L. W. pt.
1. p. 192. which plainly contradicts the Divine Oracle, Romans 9.19. Who has
resisted His Will. And linked with these Tenets she asserts that gracious
persons may apostatise, and be eternally damned, L. W. pt. 3. p. 136. 137.
which assertion is inconsistent with our LORD's most gracious promise John
10.28. My Sheep shall never perish.

In fine; There are disseminated throughout all her Books the whole Arminian
Tenets concerning the Quin quarticular Question, excepting that of universal
Redemption, which why she omitted (embracing all the rest) it is not easy to
conjecture, unless it be for her want of Charity to the generality of
Christians.

And as A. Bs. Doctrine in the foresaid Tenets is contrary to the Scriptures,
so it is contrary to the Exposition of these and the parallel Texts of
Scripture received in the Orthodox Church. For it was condemned by the Synod of
Dort, Anno 1618, both in the complex and in all the 5 heads thereof. Which
Council was conveened purposely to put a Stop to the contagious Errors, which
were spread abroad in the Belgick-neather-lands by Episcopius, Corvinus,
Grevinchovius and other followers of Jacobus Arminius; Unto which chosen men
were delegated from many reformed Churches, who were well versed in the
Doctrine of the Primitive Church, and every way able Ministers of the Gospel,
who also after conference with the offending Party, upon mature debate and
deliberation finding the Arminian Doctrine inconsistent with the Holy
Scriptures, and the Confessions of Faith of the Respective Churches, and
tending to the reviving of the Pelagian and Semi Pelagian Heresies, and not a
little symbolizing with the pestiferous Socinians, did condemn it altogether,
as said is.

Neither can it be justly thought, that these worthy men were ignorant of the
sense of the Confessions of Faith of the Respective Churches to which they
belonged, who were all approved and commended at their return home, both by
their Constituents, and the King, Princes and States which sent them, for their
actings in that Assembly. Nor have the representatives of any Protestant
Church, ever since disallowed the Acts of the Synod at Dort; and although some
particular men, have vented some flights and fancies too favorable to the
Doctrine of the Remonstrants, that is not to be imputed to any National Church,
which by their public Doctrine and Actings, rather disapproves than allows
the samen.

Scotland had only at that Synod Mr. Bacanquell (a Pious and Learned Man) to
represent it, but England had four at first, George Bishop of Landaff, Joseph
Hall Dean of Worcester and John Davenant, afterward Bishops, who are and will
be still famous in the Church of Christ, for their labors in the work of the
Gospel; and particularly, for their excellent writtings, Dr. Ward was the
fourth, and Dr. Goad was sent over in stead of Joseph Hall, when he came home
sick.

Yet I own, that it was both Piously and Prudently done by the Church of
England with the consent and authority of our Wise and Learned King James the
6. to prohibit all rash Preaching or Writting, (excepting such as should be
authorized thereto) on these abstruse and intricat questions, raised be the
Arminians upon the heads aforesaid, and whenever they might be obliedged to
touch upon them, in explaining a Text of Scripture to a popular auditory, to
hold to Scripture language, and the words of the 39 Articles and the approved
homilies of the Church.

Many judicious People marvel, how any man could have been at the pains, to
write so large a Book (being tedious to be read) as the Ap. for A. B. is; but I
find that his plea for Arminianism, in sundry parts thereof has very much
conduced to swell it to the bigness, that it has accresced to under his pen;
as pt. 2. from p. 104. to 127. and pt. 4. p. 386. 387. and often in other
places thereof.

Wherein he has studied, to represent the positions and Arguments of the
Arminians in behalf of A. B. in a taking popular dress; yet in all his
pleadings to that purpose, I have not been able to discover any Argument which
is new, but what has been often tossed heretofore, and solidly answered and
discussed by the Orthodox Writters: which to repeat from them, consists not
with my Scope in this place.

But to show, that his arguing can be rationally answered, I shall only at this
time deal with one of his most plausible Topics which pt. 2. p. 112. is
propounded thus.

GOD knows all things only according to their nature; but the Will of Man
being made a free faculty to choose, or not to choose, or to reject any object
propounded unto it by the Understanding, GOD does not foreknow what it shall
determine, ever as a man who gives the power of his goods to his Wife, cannot
foreknow how she will dispose of them.

This is but a mere fallacy from the homonomie or different significations of
the words Knowing and Nature, For GOD sees not as Man sees, 1 Samuel 16.7. And
He is Nature natureing, Man's Knowledge of things is but finite and limited, as
himself is, apprehending things to be of such and such a nature, by the
properties figure, habitudes and effects, which he discerns them to have, and
were it not for these means of Knowledge they would define things otherwise,
whereas the omniscient GOD, in whose eternal Idea all things had their first
determinations, knows all things comprehensively, even all the possible
causes, effects and contrariety of things, so of all Agents whether necessary
or free, HE knows our thoughts afar off. Ps. 139.2. GOD who Inspired the
Prophet Elisha to tell Hazael, what his free will would determine, long ere he
knew so much himself 2 Kings 8.12.13. He that teaches man knowledge shall he
not know? Ps. 94.10.

Neither does his simile hold, for a wife is her Husbands equal, to whom he may
give power of his goods, either prudently or imprudently but the alwise GOD,
has not exempted any of His Creatures from the reach of His Omnipotency or
Omniscience. The due consideration of the infinite difference between GODS
Omniscience and Omnipotence, and the Faculties of sinful man serves also to
disclose the grand Arminian Error, in suspending his Grace upon Man's free
Will, against the Essentials of Religion.

POINT II. Of the Image of GOD in Man.
A. B. asserts that the Image of GOD after which Man was created, consists only
in Man's free will, and nothing else. L. W. pt. 1. p. 42. which is contrary both
to Scripture and Reason, for the Soul of Man being Spiritual and immortal,
imports as much of the Image of GOD, as free Will does, and the Scriptures show
plainly, that it consisted in Knowledge, Righteousness, Holiness and dominion
over the Creatures. Genesis 1.26. Let Us make Man after our own Image, and let him
have dominion etc. Ephesians. 4.24. Put on the new man, which after GOD is created in
Righteousness and true Holiness. Col 3.10. Renewed in Knowledge after the Image
of HIM that created Him.

POINT III. Q. If Man sinned before he sinned.
AS the Prophet Elijah mocked the Prophets of Baal, for their ridiculous
Religion 1 Kings 18.27. So it is excusable, that having read many ridiculous
things in the Books of A. B. to state the Question in this point Ironically
against her, which according to her Doctrine, must be answered positively, that
Man sinned before he sinned, that is, that he sinned before GOD gave out the
Law, which he transgressed, since the adequate definition of sin is,
transgression of the Law of GOD, Romans 4.15. Where no Law is, there is no
transgression, but behold what A. B. teaches, against this fundamental truth!
L. W. pt. 3. p. 2. That Adam inclined to sin before the Law was given, and
before the woman was made (which was not on the sixth day) which absurd
Doctrine the Ap. commends pt. 1. p. 59. Saying that GOD did not give Man a Law,
till he saw him depart from the Love of GOD to the love of the Creatures, and
follow his own will. All which false Sentiments the Discursor Academicus
affirms to be most probable, p. 5. But I am certain, that it is not only
improbable, but also most untrue, for every inclination in us to sin is sin, as
contrary to the rectitude and entire Holiness and Obedience, which GOD requires
of us.

Moreover, their foresaid Tenet contradicts the historical account of the first
sin, and Man's fall from the estate of Innocence, given by GOD himself, that it
was by transgressing that Sacramental or trying Commandment, conform to the
Covenant of works, Not to eat of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil upon
pain of Death, Genesis 2.17.

POINT IV. Of Perfection.
THere is nothing more readily to be read in the Books of those that are
swelled with Spiritual pride, Uncharitablness, Malice, and Hypocrisy, than the
pretended Perfection of themselves and their Party; and among the rest A. B.
and the Ap. pt. 2. p. 131. to 137. and p. 4.32. Avouch, that they can be
perfect; keeping all the Commandments of GOD, because all his Commands are
prestable, or GOD has given no Commands, but what its possible for man to
fulfill. I shall not gainsay, but A. B. might fancy her self to be perfect, in
her notion of perfectness, by culling out some Commands of GOD, and neglecting
the rest L. W. pt. 3. p. 205. (contrary to Jam. 2.10.) and imagined, that they
might be sound Believers, who observed none of the Articles of Faith. L. W. pt.
3. p. 173.

All which pretended perfectionists make an unanimous outcry, against the
Assemblies Catechism, which we use, for affirming, that no mere Man since the
fall, is able in this life perfectly to keep the Commandments of GOD.

But their Clamor is groundless, because, the plain and sound sense of the
foresaid answer in the Catechism is, that GOD in the ordinary dispensation of
his Graces, has never given such a meafure of Grace to any man, nor promised
to free him of sin, altogether in this life, so that he can perfectly and
absolutely fulfill his Law, but through Christ who fulfills it in and for us, 1
John 1.7.8, 9. The Law shows our duty, which we should still endeavor to
fulfill, aiming at Perfection, and what we cannot do, to lippen to GODS free
Mercy, and Christ's merits, to perfect it for us, as if we had attained to
Perfection our selves.

For the Question is nor, what GOD may do in this matter, but what he is
pleased to do; He might (if He had pleased) have kept Lazarus still alive on
Earth, who probably was perfect, when Christ raised him from the Dead, and so
were the Saints who arose Mat. 27.52. But we cannot expect the like, but pray
by Faith for what the Law requires, as St. Bernard writteth in Began. Sermon. 50

POINT V. Of Perseverance.
ONE of A. Bs. Sentiments is, that the most Perfect Saints, may apostatise, or
fall from the estate of Grace, and be eternally damned L. W. pt. 3. p. 136.137.
which her Ap. Homologateth pt. 2. p. 136.

And albeit this be one of their doctrines, which depends upon another Error,
of their denying all the Eternal Decrees of GOD formerly noticed, ( po. 1.) yet
it seemed neeessary, to observe it here by it self, because the absurdity
thereof may be more easily discerned by the Unlearned than sundry others of the
Arminian Chain, which are more abstruse.

It is indeed lamentable, that the best of Saints, through negligence, when
tempted to Sin, and the Infirmity of their nature, may sometimes fall into
sinful acts, and remain so a space, without effectual Repentance, yet it is
manifest by Divine Light, from the Holy Scriptures, that the truly Godly do not
fall away totally and finally, from the estate of Grace, But the foundation of
GOD stands sure, the LORD knows who are His, 2 Timothy 2.19. His by
Predestination, or an Eternal Decree of Election in Christ Jesus, who are given
to Him in the unalterable Covenant of Redemption, and are Cleansed from all
sins by His Blood. 1 John. 1.7. Of whom it is written, Rom; 8.29.30. Whom He
did fore know, them He also Predestined, Called, Justified and Glorified. And
of all these the LORD promises John 10.28. My Sheep shall never perish, I will
give unto them Eternal Life.

Perseverance is an unseperable effect of Sanctifying Grace, the habit whereof,
being once planted by the gracious hand of GOD in a Man's Soul, never dies,
although it may so appear by some sinful acts, as Herbs and Trees which are
bereaved both of fruit and flourishing in the Winter season, this is called,
The Root of the matter, which remained in the Gracious and Patient (tho under
sharp trials, sometimes repining) Job, ch 19.28. And to this purpose the
Prophet Micah 7.8. Rejoice not against me O my Enemy when I fall, I shall
arise.

How inconsistent with this foundation of Religion, are the writtings of A. B.
and her Ap.?

POINT VI. Anent the Sacraments.
ANent the Sacraments, A. B. is as Erroneous as in the Points forementioned,
writting, that to obtain Salvation we need not pray, nor go to Church, nor take
the Sacraments, but only be Passive, L. W. pt. 3. p. 102. Protestants go about
the LORDS Supper without Devotion, L. W. Pref. to pt. 3. p. 4. To baptize
Children is from the Devil, L. W. pt. 2. p. 31.

Did ever the practice of any person contradict his profession; more plainly,
than the Ap. and his Virgin Patroness do, who solemnly protest, that they shall
own the Scriptures, for the Test of their Doctrine, which yet is against them,
almost in every point, as for this in hand, concerning the Sacraments, have we
not as luculent Precepts for the constant use of them as of any other duties?
Mat. 28.19. Go teach all Nations baptising them etc. 1 Cor. 11.23. I have
received of the LORD, that which also I delivered unto you, and V. 26. As often
as ye eat this Bread and drink this Cup etc. A. B did snatch the Objection,
against the baptising of Infants, from the Socinians and Anabaptists, which is
most frivolous, that it is not commanded in express terms in the Scriptures.
Origin who lived in the second Centurie writting on Mat. 6.5.6.7. Assures us,
that the Church had it always, and that by tradition from the Apostles, Yet are
we more sure, that it is a clear consequence from the Scriptures. which being
natural from the Text, and undistorted, does ever import a Scriptural truth, As
we read, Mat. 22.29. Our Savior charged the Saducees, anent the great Article
of the Resurrection, That they did err not knowing the Scriptures, albeit, not
the express words of the Text, ( Exodus 3.6.) which he cited, were directly
against them, but the consequence thereof, so upon this sound foundation,
Infant Baptism is firmly grounded, for the Sacraments are not only Signs, but
likewise Seals of the New Covenant, and they to whom the gracious promises and
conditions of the Heavenly Charter belong, have a right also to the Seals
appended thereunto, Genesis 17.7.10 The Promise is to Thee and thy Children said
GOD to Abraham. Baptism comes in the place of Circumcision, which was
administered to Children, when eight days old. The right Preaching of the Word
and Administration of the Sacraments, are the ordinary means of our Salvation,
and undoubted marks of the true Church.

The Ap. pt. 2 p. 154. to 159. Alleges what he can, to justify A. B. in
this, which does not satisfy.

1 That she was above Ordinances. Which is a vain boasting and contrary to GODS
direction Gant. 1.8.

2 That she durst not go to the Popish Churches, for fear of her life; She
could not be in alike hazard every where, and how does that excuse her, for
teaching, that no Body needs go to Church, or partake of the Sacraments!

3 That she wrote a Book in defense of the Sacraments, against the Quakers. The
Quaker who offended her was rebuked therefore by his Party, and they were
reconciled with A. B.

And at the best she contradicts her self in this Point.

POINT VII. Of Pastors and Church Government.
THe supposed Gentlewoman, and pretended Illuminated A. B. and her Defender or
Ap. (transforming themselves into Angels of Light S. V. pt. 1. p. 112) in all
their writtings about Religion, have indulged the swing of their absolut and
independent free will in nothing more, than in their ranting and railing, at
the Pastors of CHRIST'S Flock and the Church Government. For, thus they write,
that it is unlawful, for any to make it a trade (or office) to teach others. S.
V. pt. 1. p. 115. L. W. pt. 3 p. 90. The office of a Priest is an enemy to the
resignation of Souls to GOD, and Ap. pt. 1. p. 53. All the evils of Christendom
comes from the Pastors, and all the Peoples degeneracie, from their Guides. I
could adduce many more passages to the purpose, but it is needless, when the
Ap. pt. 2. p. 158. declares that the L. W. (which is the chief of A. Bs. Books,
the Key and Rule of all the rest) was written on purpose against the Pastors,
because of the degeneracie of the Roman Church. Hereupon it may be reflected
without debaiting, if she was not injurious, to write so against all the
Pastors of the Church of Rome, without exception of any, how can it be thought
true, that she wrote against the Pastors of that Church only, since she
declares the Pastoral-Office it self to be unlawful, and declaims as much
against Protestants as Papists and besides them, all Pastors in Christendom,
not excepting any, either in the Greek or Abassine Churches, or any where else
in the World! But on the matter it self, how contrary is their Doctrine to the
Holy Scriptures. Whereby we are well instructed, that the Alwise GOD (who made
Man a social Creature, naturally inclined to society, and thereby needing both
Laws and Government) did always prescribe Laws to Mankind, and for the benefit
thereof, positively appointed, the Government both Civil and Ecclesiastic, and
by a special designation, Pastors and Church Officers for his own immediate
service, and the Salvation of Peoples Souls. Ephesians. 4.11.12.13 He gave Pastors
and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry,
for the edifying of the Body of CHRIST, till we all come in the unity of the
Faith, and of the knowledge of the SON of GOD, unto a perfect Man, unto the
measure of the stature of the fullness of CHRIST. Heb 5.4. No man takes this
honor upon himself, but he that i^ called of GOD, as was Aaron. Where the true
Pastor is, there the true Church is; and when the Shepherd is smitten, the
Sheep are scattered abroad, Mat. 26.31. So it is one of the main Policies of
Satan, for destroying the Church altogether, to endeavor to bring all the
Pastors under contempt, as a fit mean for subverting the office it self, and
consequently to ruin the Church of CHRIST. Such railing against all Pastors,
and the Sacred Function it self, is as A flood of water cast out of the mouth
of the Old Serpent, the accuser of the Brethren, for To drown (if he could) the
Woman who is clothed with the Sun, that is the Church of GOD. Rev. 12.9.10.15.

The accute Ap. when he reads this part of the Advertisement, may possibly
say, that the language savours of too much passion, and the inference is too
hard; for, may not A. Bs. words bear a more favorable interpretation? such as
that of the Disc. Academ p. 16. and 23. That Pastors and Church Government,
Sacraments and the public Worship of GOD, have no certain connection with Man's
Salvation, nor are they certain necessary and infallible means of recovering
the love of GOD, and A. B. one where or another, of her writtings, mentions
the Office of Pastors, as a thing that may be reformed, and to say, that Sacred
Offices or means ordained by GOD for his own Glory, and Man's Salvation, may be
reformed, is a more moderat Sentiment (to hold their phrase) than that they are
simply unlawful, and should be quite abolished.

Hereto it is answered, that I designed in this Censure, to evite all hard
words, as much as possible could be, without prejudice of truth, which is
herein defended; yet it is allowed as a maxim among moralists, either in
speaking, writting, or other actions to sharpen reason, not by our own passions
or affections, but by these which the cause requires.

I called her writting on this point against the Pastoral Office, Ranting,
because her language to that purpose, is the same with that of the wild Sect of
the Ranters; and railing which is calumniating, or a wrongous caracterising,
and ascribing undue epithites to good things.

I have noted on Discursus Academicus, his errors in this matter, neither have
I read in any Book of A. B. where she retracteth the foresaid errors, and if
the Ap. has done it, he should have told us of it.

Now to put a period to the first Subsection, anent the essentials of Religion,
it is manifest, I hope, by what I have written (to the impartial Reader) that
A. B. had no good skill of Religion, were it but for one reason that she
preferred Heathenism to Christianity, by assirming, that Heathens, Turks and
Jews, had more reason and Religion than Christians, Pref. L W. p. 9.10. And
that not one Christian, is so much resigned to GOD, or did understand true
virtue so well, as the Heathens did. pt. 3. p. 129. And since her Sentiments,
are against the Holy Scriptures, and the essentials of Religion, she has not
represented the same aright, nor revived the Spirit of Christianity, neither
was she Divinely Inspired to publish the Gospel to the World; which was the
thing thus to be demostrated.

SECTION IV. SUBSECTION II.
NUMBER I. Of Accessories in the General.
THe Ap. pt. 1. p. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. and 9. comprehends all the Doctrine of A.
B. in the two general heads, of the Essentials of Religion, and her
accessories, which distinction I promised to examine in this place. Sect. 4.
Subs. 1. Initio.

The word Accessory, which is taken from the Latin word Accedo, signifies,
ordinarily, to come to, to follow, or add to any thing, but in the English (for
the most part) it sounds ill, to be accessory importing, the abetting or
partaking of a Crime.

In the civil Law it signifies an Adminicle or Addition to a statute of which
it is required, that it be not alien from or contrary, but that it follow the
nature of the principal to which it is an Appendix. De regulis juris in sexto
reg. 42.

But in Divinity few or none sound writters use the term Accessory, in
comparing points of Religion among themselves, the ordinary distinctions are,
of Essentials and Integrals, of things necessary and expedient.

Essential or fundamental points are the Doctrines clearly revealed in
Scripture, and upon which the Holy Ghost (the Revealer) has put the caracter
of necessity to be believed for Salvation, as the sum of the Creed is; The
Integrals, are other Doctrines taught by GOD to make up the whole, as the
several parts of Man's Body, make the composition of Man entire, so the uniform
obeying all the Commandments of GOD, make up the whole of Religion. Again the
Articles of Religion, are either the necessary and indispensable means of
obtaining the chief ends thereof, to wit, GODS Glory and Man's Salvation, such
as Faith, Hope, Love, and Repentance, or they are necessary by Reason of the
Precept, because commanded by GOD, such as the Sacraments, and the public and
ordinary Worship of GOD.

And further, all things commanded by GOD, are called necessary, and things
injoined by the Church for Edification, Order and Decency, are said to be of
positive right and expedience.

And some things not fundamental which are but darkly revealed in Scripture,
Christians may keep Peace, and have communion together, albeit they have
different Opinions thereanent, as in points of Discipline, concerning which
whosoever would be fully informed, he may read Isaak Causabon, on the Epistle of
King James the 6th to Cardinal Perron anent the Peace of the Church.

But A. Bs. Accessories can no ways be reduced, to any of the foresaid
branches of the points of Religion, as being either necessary, true, lawful or
expedient, which shall be manifested in the next number. Neither is it obvious
(viewing all Christian Churches) to find out a parallel to A. Bs. notion of
Accessories, but that which it mostly resembles, is the decretals, wherewith
the modern Romanists have stuffed the Canon Law, of which it is truly said,
that the Old Decrees had been good, if they had wanted the Alae, Wings, and new
additions forced upon them; So her representing the Essentials of Religion, and
pressing of Piety had been good if she had understood them well, and done it
without diminution of any, or adding extravagant flights and fancies, to wing
them throughout the whole World in her own conceit.

There remains yet to be discussed another sense of the word Accessories, and
that is, in military terms, Auxiliaries or additional forces are called
Accessories, but there can be no reasonable translation, of this to A. Bs.
purpose, for the Truths of Religion contained in the Holy Scriptures, are
perfect and sufficiently able to serve their turn, to defend themselves, and to
make the man of GOD perfect unto Salvation, without such additions or
auxiliari^es as she proposes.

For they are but mere intruders, coming uncalled, over which a vigilant eye
should be had, lest (if entertained or let alone) they prove, such auxiliaries
as the Mammaluks did in Egypt, and the Saxons in England, who betrayed and
subverted the Natives whom they came to aid, because, both their Principles and
Interests, were contrary to each other.

Obj. O but (says the Ap. pt. 1. p. 45. There is no such evil to be feared from
A. Bs, Accessories, for they tend to advance the main ends of Religion, and tho
they be not warranded in the Scriptures, yet they are neither hurtful nor
damnable.

A. To answer which Objection shall be the subject of the following Number of
this second Subsection anent her Doctrines.

NUMBER II. Of A. Bs. Accessories in particular.
IN this inquest all the Doctrines of A. B. relating to and depending upon the
Essentials of Religion might be reviewed, since the Ap. comprehends the whole
of her Doctrine in these two, Essentials and Accessories, without noticing the
third branch of the division, namely Doctrines, which (tho not Fundamental or
Essential) yet may either further or prejudge the Essentials of Religion, as
they are either true or false, proper to Religion or improperly mustered
therewith; but that being in a good part done already, Subs. 1. n. 6. wherein
it is proven in seven Points, that many of A. Bs. Doctrines, which are nearly
related to the Essentials of Religion, are very erroneous and disproven of the
Holy Scriptures. I proceed now to examine other Doctrines which she reckons
not among the Essentials of Religion and so they must be indeed her Accessories.

1. That Man before he sinned did feed, upon the quintescence of things (being
altogether Spiritual) he could flee in the Air, and go to the Center of the
Earth, and so it shall be with Man afterward, when Christ reigns upon Earth
with the Saints. This Doctrine is disseminated throughout all A. Bs. writtings,
and approven be the Ap. pt. 1. p. 46. 47. which is not so innocent, as he
represents it, but is both hurtful and damnable.

For it contradicts the truth of the History of the Creation of the World,
written by Moses in the Book of Genesis, be the dictating of the Holy Ghost,
which (accomodating to Vulgar Capacities, mentions not as other Scriptures
do, the Creation of Angels or Spiritual beings) assure us that Man's Body was
material, Formed of the Dust of the Ground, Genesis 2.7. His food was material,
and the forbidden fruit was also such, Good for food and pleasant in the Eyes.
Genesis 3.6.

Which could not have been, if Man had been altogether Spiritual, and in the
future State of Glory Man will need no material food, whether, we call it the
essence or quintescence of things material, but he will be as the Angels of
GOD.

2. That all Men may forsake the Truth, L. W. pt. 1. p. 33. This is a false
Doctrine, for if all Men should forsake the Truth, the Church might fail, which
is impossible, It being built upon the Rock of Ages, against which the gates of
Hell shall never prevail. Mat. 16.18. And wherewith our LORD JESUS CHRIST, will
be present to the end of the World. Mat. 28.20.

3. That Infants dying before they come to the exercise of Reason, are either
good or bad, and consequently must be saved, or damned, according to the will
of their Parents. L. W. pt. 2. p. 6.7.8.9. and pt. 3. p. 155. This is against
the Principles of Religion, of GODS Election, and the tenor of the Covenant of
Grace.

4. Antichrist is the Devil, L. W. pt. 1. p. 32. and the Devil is nothing. S.
V. pt. 1. p. 94. These Tenets are overthrown by the Scriptures which teach us
plainly that Antichrist is a man or a set of men sitting in the Temple of GOD.
2 These. 2.4.

5. That persons resigned to GOD return to such an estate of perfect
innocence, as Adam was in before the fall, L. W. pt. 3. p. 138. Which is an
unsound Doctrine, since Adam at first was altogether free of Sin, which can be
said of no Saint in this Life, Jam. 3.2.

It is manifest by what is already written on this subject, how easy it were
to expose the absurdity of all A. Bs. Accessories, but they are so many, that
to go through them all particularly (even according to the present method)
adding a short refutation to every one of them, would require as much writting,
as was designed for this whole Tractate. Therefore having excerpted, from the
Books of A. B. and the Ap. some scores of Accessories, like these
forementioned, equally hurtful to Religion, and noted exactly in a paper,
apart, the places where they are to be found; I shall here (for brevities sake)
produce Twenty of them as a swatch of the rest, reasonably hoping, that every
Christian Reader, who is acquainted with the Holy Scriptures, and being thereby
instructed, that Hay and Stuble, are not fit materials for the building of GOD.
1 Cor. 3.11.12.13. Will be able at the very recitation thereof to confute them
himself, without my help, which GOD willing afterward shall (if it be needful)
not be wanting, in the behalf of Truth, or it will be done by abler Pens, which
the Church will never be destitute of.

And these Accessories are.

1. That there are no true Christians now in the World.

2. The ordinary sins of Papists are the sins against the Holy Ghost.

3. Protestants disown the civil Magistrate.

4. A Spiritual Man is never melancholy.

5. A Spiritual Man will not take a walk for recreation.

6. Mental Prayer should be omitted.

7 Sin is only a disorder of the five Senses.

8. All the advantages that Men reap from others serves but for their damnation.

9. The Devil at first moved men to posses their own Goods.

10. It had been good there had never been Schools nor Learning in the World.

11. GOD'S cursing the Earth made man's returning to GOD the more easy.

12. GOD calls no man to any place of Honor or Power.

13. CHRIST'S Kingdom comes not according to the second Petition in the LORD'S
Prayer.

14. GOD does not permit sin.

15. Good motions incite always to suffering.

16. Physicians and Divines do ordinarily more ill than good.

17. The Devil inlightneth our Uunderstanding, and makes us conceive deep
Divine Mysteries.

18. We should not commend good things because the Devil can do so.

19. We should not instruct others but when they desire it.

20. A. B. was Divinely Inspired in all things to reform the World.

It is no less than a spectrous piece of goodly confidence, which shows it
self in all the writtings of A. B. and the Ap. to affright people into the
belief of their visionary Doctrines (in stead of giving solid reasons for them)
still to cry, that she was Divinely Inspired.

Obj. 1. For how (say they) could it otherwise be, that she who was unlearned,
did write of so many things, and rare verities, and in such a ravishing strain,
beyond the reach of the chiefest Divines? So that to offer to correct her
Doctrine, is no less presumptuous, than to dare, to correct the Spirit of GOD,
and whoever opposes her Sentiments, are like Jannes and Jambres, that
withstood Moses, like the Scribes and Pharisees, who opposed CHRIST himself, or
like the Jews, Atheists, and Heretics, that contradicted and persecuted the
Apostles and primitive Christians.

A. 1. That is sufficiently already answered, in the third Section, where it is
proved at large, that she was not Divinely Inspired; but since they ingeminat
it so often, some more shall be said to it here.

2. To discover, oppose and confute Errors in any persons Books is not to
oppose the Spirit of GOD, but rather to be led by the famen, for GOD is Truth,
and whosoever defends the Truth is on his side.

3. Good words and a zealous strain of writting are only good, when Truths and
no falsities are thereby expressed, for the most pernicious writters that ever
existed in the World, seemed to affect a pious strain, and mixed many Heavenly
like words with their poisonous positions, to cover from the unadvertent the
Venom thereof, such as Gelsus, Porphyrie, Julian, Vaninus, and in fine,
Heretics, Shismaticks, Sectarians, and Enthusiasts, in all their writtings.

4. For A. Bs. pretending to have been unlearned, and her crying down all
Schools and Learning, she had many (infamously) famous impostors for
Precedents, who to impose their damnable Doctrines and delusions on the World,
declaimed loudly against all Learning as their most deadly enemy, such as the
Gnostics, Montanus, Manes and Mahomet.

5. CHRIST and his faithful Servants were opposed by many, in all Ages,
slighted and persecuted for holding the Truth; but it is an undue thing, for A.
B. to compare her self to them, and her Opposers to their persecutors, when she
is confuted and contemned only, for teaching Errors; 1 Pet. 2.20. For what
glory is it, if when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye shall take it patiently?

6. The Cabine of A. Bs. rarities can be disclosed, without a miracle, or
flying so high as to Divine Inspiration, for a key to open it.

For most of her extravagant flights, anent Man's primitive Estate of
Innocence, and the future state after the day of Judgment, have been caught
(with little variation) from the Jewish Cabala.

It was formerly showen Sect. 4. Subs. 1. n. 3. how the exotic opinions of
some Schoolmen, gave her wrong Sentiments of Angels, in like manner hearing of
some nice points debated among School men and Philosophers, she was apt to
adopt the worst side of the Problem, which being once made hers, out it flies
into the World, as a new revealed verity, for example, A. B teaches S. V. pt.
1. p. 96. And the Ap. homologates, pt. 1. p. 62. That both our Souls and Bodies
are propogated, from Adam. Contrary to Heb. 12.9. where GOD is called the
Father of Spirits, or the creator of our Souls, in contradistinction to our
natural parents, who are there termed the Fathers of our flesh.

And many other of her Accessories, she might have learned by ordinary
discourse, as that the Heretic, Eunomius, and generally the Gnostics, out of
a pretense of magnifying Faith, said, that good works were not necessary. This
false and odious opinion her La. (after her charitable manner) does most
frequently father upon all Protestants, without due consideration, that St.
Aug. confuted it. L. de fide and oper. Whose orthodox strain is followed by
Calvin and all Proteslant writters, and Billarmine himself, de Justif. L. 3 c,
6. Vindicats Protestants of the foresaid imputation.

Obj. 2. It was asserted in my hearing by some, whom the Borignianists had
mistuned, that there are more than two thousand verities, (speaking of these
Accessories) set out in the Books of A. B. which are not to be read in all the
writtings either of Papists or Protestants.

A. I have discovered in her Books more than an hundredth falsities, but have
seen none of these new disclosed verities; and if any favorite of hers, shall
be at the pains to number them, let him take heed that he make not a false
muster, or rather such -- an appearance, as drunken -- men see of great armies
in the Air, which instantly, and quite disappear, when sober people are curious
to view them. And if Accessories be called New Verities, they should be
rejected on that very head, by reason, that no truth can be new, and all Truths
are older than Errors.

Obj. 3. Have there not been some persons Divinely Inspired Teachers in all
Ages, such as Antonie, and Paul the Anachorets, St. Terese, St. Briget, and St.
Katharine, Theular, and Thomas a Kempeis. And were it not for fear of your
Pastoral Office, A. B. would be respected as one of these, and her Books held
worthy of all acceptance.

A. 1. There should be no ground to fear, the falling of the Pastoral Office,
although many now living were inspired, in the measure of the Prophets and
Apostles (which will never be, seeing the Canon of the Scriptures is complete)
because the Pastoral Office is appointed of GOD, for his especial Service, and
his perpetual presence is promised to be therewith, even as if a King should
reveal his will secretly to some special favorits, it would no ways follow
from thence, that the standing Laws should not be the peoples Rule, and be
expounded, and executed by the settled Judges.

2. None of these were infallibly inspired, and no more was A. B. neither do I
read, that Paul and Anthony the Egyptian Monks spoke against the established
Offices in the Church, though they chused a Monastic Life, in time of
Persecution.

If A. B. had any Precedent, it was the Spanish Nun Teresa, who yet pretended
not to be the singular or sole Doctrix of the whole World, as A. B. did.

Thomas a Kempis and Teular, were good men, but why does not the Ap. call St.
Aug. Bernard, and many more eminent men as well inspired as they?

Obj. 4. To what purpose is all this reasoning against A. Bs. Accessorie
Doctrines? Since the Ap. did premonish pt. 1. Car. 13. p. 38. That if any
person did not relish the Accessories, he might let them alone, that is to say,
he shall not be bound to believe them, and let him forbear to dispute against
them, how much soever he be dipleased therewith.

A. That is a shift put into the mouths of all who are become ra^hly fond of
all A. Bs. writtings, but it is such a silly shift, that I marvel to hear, any
rational person, pronounce it for a defense, when he is pressed with good
Arguments, against her Errors from Scripture and Reason.

In the common use of the phrase, to let a thing alone, is to forbear or to
meddle or concern with it, on such an occasion, as when a Boy is to be chastised
for a fault, he cries, let me alone, but let us examine the Aps own gloss of
the expression.

1. First, he says the meaning is, you need not believe A. Bs. Accessories to
be true, unless you please. Here he enjoins a rare thing! Did ever any other
persons pretending to be Divinely Inspired, in all their writtings, leave the
Readers at liberty, to believe the half of them to be true or no! Why did she
mix and confound them in all her twenty two Books, with the Essentials of
Religion, which ought to be believed, and how can unlearned people separate the
Gold from the dross?

2. He says, dispute not against them; so says Mahomet in his Alcaron c. 5.
and elsewhere; If Truth be in them, it should be believed, if falsehood it
ought to be confuted, or disputed against, and many of them are such, as is
already proven.

Obj. 5. It has been said to me, that whosoever writes against A. B. will be
answered, even as the writtings of Le. Clerk at Amsterdam and all Socinian
Books are still defended by some persons, tho they give much offense to the
Church men; were it not better then, to forbear disputing in matters of
Theology, than to increase it?

A. I aprove not A. Bs. Sentiments in this case, who declares, that the
writtings of Luther, Calvin, and all the Reformers, (whom she accounts
Heretics) should have been quite despised, and not answered, or themselves cut
off. L. W. pt. 1. p. 27. It is our duty to dispute for the Truth, and although
Errors have Abetters and defenders, yet the Truth which is stronger than
Errors, will at last prevail.

Obj. 6. The harmony or consent of all the parts of the Holy Scriptures, is
one evidence that they were given by Divine inspiration, so A.B. never
contradicts herself, which shows that she was led by the Spirit of GOD in
all her writtings.

A. If she was led by the Spirit of GOD in all her writtings, then she should
not be opposed, but there is one thing said and another thing seen, and her
deeds in writting falsities proves her saying the contrary to be untrue, one
may write Books without contradicting himself therein, and yet without Divine
Inspiration, but the trial of that point anent A. B. shall bring the fourth
Section, anent her Doctrines to an end.

NUMBER III. Of her Contradictions.
IF one proposition be true, then the contradictory assertion must be false,
and no palliating or favorable interpretation can reconcile them; as for
Instance. That is a most true saying which also is written sometimes be A. B.
that, Man can only be saved and justified by the merits of CHRIST, but the
contradiction of it is false, which she likewise writes, that we must add our
own merits to CHRIST'S Sacrifice. This contradiction is not taken away by the
subterfuge of the Ap. pt. 2. p. 98. 99. Where he says, her meaning was, that we
cannot be saved without mortification, for mortification is our duty and not
our merit, for Man's merit with GOD is Chimerical, a thing impossible.

In the end of the third Section it was shown how A. B. contradicts her self,
anent the faculty of knowing Divine Inspiration. And another of her
contradictions, was hinted in the former Number, in answering the fourth
Objection, namly, she says, that she was Divinely Inspired, to write all her
Books, if that saying be true then the contradiction of it must be false, that
she wrote the most part of them without Divine Inspiration, which clearly
follows, from her bidding us let alone her Accessories, which fill most of her
Books.

To believe and not to believe a Doctrine, is a contradiction, but A. B.
requires the belief of her Doctrine, that fills all her Books, because written
by Divine Inspiration, and yet requires us not to believe her Accessories, or
the most part of her Doctrines, because she wrote them not by Divine
Inspiration, which is a contradiction.

I shall adduce two or three more of A. Bs. contradictions, and then (for the
time) let them alone.

1. It is affirmed, that many Heathens resigned their wills to God, and were
faithful to Him, tho they had no laws whereby to know Him. L W pt. 3. p. 123.
but herein she contradicts her self in the very next page, viz. 124. by
affirming, that those Heathens had Laws from GOD, with the Doctrine of Jesus
Christ.

2. Man of himself is more inclined to Good than to Evil, L. W. pt. 2. p. 2.
And yet she writes, that our self-will is capable to move it self only to evil,
L. W. pt. 2. p. 76. which is a flat contradiction.

3. The Ap. approves A. Bs. crying down all Schools and Learning, Pastors and
Church Government, and that GOD calls no Man to a place in the Church, and yet
he says, that he would not separate from a lawful Bishop. p. 349.

Where are abundance of contradictions for to have no Church Government, and
yet to join with it is a contradiction, so to separate from those whom GOD has
not called and not to separate, how contradictious is it?

SECTION V. How Errors in Books shall be discerned.
IT is somewhat difficult, to give certain Rules, whereby any person not well
versed in Divinity, can distinguish Truth from Error, in reading Books, except
the Holy Scriptures, in which there is no Error at all, but infallible Truth
only.

Yet I shall give some helps to know what Truths are written in other Books.

1. Consider well, if what is written be Conform to the proportion of Faith
Romans 12.6.

For false Prophets are known by their fruits, that is, their Doctrine and
Actions. Mat. 7.15. Luke 6.45. If they contemn, wrest or gainsay the Holy
Scriptures, in the least, they are Erroneous.

2. We are likewise premonished from the unerring Canon of the Holy Scriptures,
that the teachers of false Doctrine are very proud, overveening of themselves,
and undervaluing all others in comparison of themselves and their party.
Isaiah. 65.5. Who say, stand by thy self, come not near to me, for I am holier
than thou, these are a smoke in my nose, and a fire that burns all the day. 2 Timothy 3.2.4. They are proud, boasters, headie and high minded. so 1 Timothy 1.7.
Desiring to be Teachers of the Law, understanding neither what they say, nor
whereof they affirm.

Thus Simon Magus gave himself out that he was Some great one. Acts 8.9. and
the following Histories of the Church have narrated, that both Heretics and
Schismatics still vented intolerable spiritual pride, such as, Manes, Arrius,
Pelagius, Novatus and Donatus.

And albeit St. Paul declared, that he was not inferior to the chiefest
Apostles, in vindication of his Office against the contempt cast upon it by
false Teachers; it were most impertinent arrogancy, for any now to pretend to
such praise, since they have not St. Paul's infallible Spirit, and an immediate
call from GOD to preach and write Books.

3. It is a good Rule, which is written by Sir Thomas Brown, in his Book of
Vulgar Errors. c. 1. That all deceivers write Sophistically, so that any man
who is acquainted, with the Rules of Logic, when he reads erroneous arguing,
let him try and he will find it captious and peccant against the Rules of true
reasoning, either in the matter or the form, or in them both; where he also
proves clearly, by instances from the Scriptures that the first Sophisms or
fallacious way of argumenting had the Devil for the Author.

4. All erroneous writters usually hyperbolize too much, through ignorance or
self conceit, still running unto extremes, either praising or dispraising, to
an excessive degree; as in dispraising avarice, they commend Prodigality, and
contrariwise, they cannot reprove Prodigality, without persuading to
penuriousness, but liberality is the virtue in the midst.

So the Circumcellions of old, thought that the only way to Heaven was by
suffering, therefore they wandered unwisely to and fro like madmen, seeking
people to kill them, and many writters have fallen into grievous Errors,
splitting on these Rocks, or Shelfs unwarily, like the Ships which steering too
far off from the hazardous Shylla, fall into Charybdis, whereas the safest
sailing is in the midst, betwixt the two. In like manner we see some writters,
in commending the Love of GOD to derogate from Faith, and good works, they call
them merit, whereas the writters of Truth, aim always to give every thing its
due praise or dispraise without declining from the just measure, either to the
extreme of the excess or the defect.

SECTION VI. Q. If any should read the Books of A. B.
An. THey who are well studied in the Systems of Divinity, may profitably read
some good things in very ill Books, such as the Turks Alcaron, Socinian-Books,
Hobs Laeviathan, and the Pamphlets of Enthusiasts, and still confuting Errors,
as they meet with them; but I think that none can safely read the Books of A.
B. excepting only those who can distinguish Truth from Error, according to the
Rules given in the last Section, because of the snake lurking in the Grass.

Obj. 1. You despise the writtings of A. B. because she was a Woman. Ap. p. 146.

A. I honor the Sex, but am not bound to approve a Woman's Erroneous doctrine,
such excessive respect is not due to an Angel from Heaven. Gal. 1.8.

Obj. 2. A. Bs. Books are carped at, as Philo the Jew, and Celsus did with the
BIBLE, censuring half Sentences in sundry places, not heeding the Scope, or
looking to what is said before, or what follows after, or is explained in
other parts of her writtings.

A. That Challenge says nothing to one who Censures A. Bs. Books thoroughly,
has taken to task her whose Hypothesis, and proved that she was not Divinely
Inspired, and erred egregiously in her writtings, both anent the Essentials of
Religion, and all the points thereof.

Obj. 3. She wrote well of Love to GOD.

A. You may read other Books on that subject, who have written far better, and
are free of errors.

Neither knew she well the Love of GOD who had not Charity to Man. 1 John 4.20

SECTION VII. If Borignianists be a New Sect.
THe Ap. p. 349. denies, that they are a New Sect, because they provide no
Orders for a new Society, forbidding to join with any other.

I grant they have not done it formally, but doubtless they have designed it,
(when their number should increase) since they defame all Christian Churches,
yet they would think it too severe a Censure, to compare their pride to
Erostratus, who since he could not do any great thing that was good, did burn
the Temple of Diana at Ephesus, only to get himself a name in the World.

I am of opinion, that the followers of A. B. shall ere long vanish away as the
Bhemanists have done, whom I have known to make as great a figure, as the
Borignianists do now, as St. Athanasius said of the Arrians (a far more
dreadful Party) it will be but a little Cloud, which will soon pass over, (in
Latin) Nubecula cito transitura.

AMEN.

