THREE SERMONS PREACHED AT SALISBURY.

The First, A. D. 1680. and again before the Militia, at their going against
the late Duke of Monmouth: In which the Doctrine of not resisting the Higher
Powers, on any Pretense whatsoever, taught by the Church of England, is
established from Scripture, Reason, and Antiquity. The Second, preached before
the Right Reverend Father in God, SETH, Lord Bishop of Sarum, A. D. 1681. and
published by his Command. In which the Formality and Hypocrisy of our
Phanatical Pretenders to the Power of Godliness is discovered. The Third,
preached, A. D. 1683, at the Election of the Mayor, and published with some
enlargement, upon Occasion of a Discourse with Mr. Nelthrop in the Goal of
Sarum. In which the Doctrine of the Author of Julian the Apostate, viz. That
where the true Religion is by Law established, Subjects are not obliged to
suffer for it, but may, if persecuted for it, defend themselves against their
Lawful Sovereign, is proved to be contrary to Scripture, Reason, and Antiquity,
and pernicious to the Government.
By Daniel Whitby, D.D. and Chantor of the Cathedral Church of Sarum.

LONDON, Printed for T. Basset, at the George in Fleetstreet, 1685.

To the Honorable Colonel JOHN WYNDAM Coll. Tho. Penrudduk, AND The rest of
the Officers belonging to their Regiments.
Honored Sirs,
WHen I had the honor to preach one of these Sermons to your Regiments before
your Expedition against Monmouth, I was so happy as to obtain Your Approbation
and good Opinion of the Author of it; And since, upon a late Occasion, have
received such Expressions of your Kindness to me as cannot be forgotten without
great Ingratitude. Being therefore desirous to give some public Testimony of
the great Obligations you have laid upon me, and of my due resentment of them;
I humbly entreat you to accept this small Expression of my Gratitude, which I
am the more encouraged to offer, because it asserts the Old Church of England
Loyalty, which You, to Your immortal Honor, have practiced in the worst of
Times, and signalized of late by that Cheerfulness and Bravery with which you
ventured your Lives for the best of Princes and Governments: In Obedience to
which, I shall always endeavor so to live, that you may never be ashamed to
own,

Honored Sirs, Your most obliged and very Humble Servant, D. W.

ERRATA.
Sermon. 1. p. 3. l. 22. God, r. quod. p. 6. l. 10. dele and. p. 9. l. 20. daily,
r. duly. p. 17. l. 5. natural, r. external. Sermon. 2. p. 20. l. 37. acknowledge,
r. acknowledgment. Sermon. 3. p. 31. l. 11. equalty, r. equal tie.

A SERMON PREACHED At the Cathedral Church of Sarum.
2 TIMOTHY 3.5. Having a Form of Godliness, but denying the Power thereof.


THere are some common Notions and Inclinations to Devotion planted in the
minds of men, which prompt them to the exercise of that which they esteem
Religion; and these, in the Professors of Christianity, are very much improved
by Education and Instruction, by the Ministry of the Word and public
Ordinances, by the common workings of the Spirit of God and the Examples of
good men; so that as many of them as are not Atheistical in heart, can never
satisfy the workings of their Conscience, without performance of some things
which carry in them the appearance of a Religious Conversation, and from which
they conclude themselves devout and truly pious. But yet, alas, it does too
often happen, through the blindness of our Understandings, and the averseness
of our corrupt Wills to the severer Duties of Christianity, through the
subtilty of Satan, and the deceitfulness of our own Hearts, through the strong
affection which we bear to our beloved Lusts, and through the prevalency of our
Passions over the Reason and the Convictions of the Soul; I say it does too
often happen upon these accounts, that men delude themselves with a fair
semblance of Religion, without the Substance of it, Having a form of Godliness,
etc.

Which, being in the experience of all Ages, and more especially of this, a
very common thing, and yet most certainly destructive to our precious Souls, it
is both very necessary, and very profitable to deal plainly with you in this
important Subject, by showing,

1. Wherein consists the Form of Godliness, and how far we may go in the
Profession of Religion, and in the Practice of some Religious Duties, and not
exceed that Form. And,

2. Wherein consists the Truth and Power of it.

Now the Word Godliness in Scripture is sometimes used in a strict Sense, to
signify that Service which is immediately paid to God, and is comprised in the
first Table of the Decalogue. As, v. g. When the Scripture does exhort so
follow after Righteousness, 1 Timothy 6.11. 2 Pet. 1.7.
Godliness, Faith, Love, Patience, Meekness, to add to Godliness, Brotherly
Kindness, and Charity; Tit. 2.12. 1 Timothy 2.2.
when it does teach us to live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present
World, to lead a peaceable and quiet Life in all Godliness and Honesty. Here,
because Godliness is put in oppostion to Righteousness, Sobriety, and Charity,
which comprehend the Duties of the second Table, it seems apparent that the
Word Godliness does in these places only signify that Duty which we owe to God.

But when the Gospel is styled the Mystery of Godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16.6.3.
the Truth, and Doctrine which is after Godliness; when Godliness is said to be
profitable for all things, Tit. 1.1.
having the Promise of this Life and that which is to come, there Godliness
must signify all that Obedience which is required by the Gospel, that Love and
Righteousness which it prescribes toward our Neighbor, that Temperance which
it enjoins toward our selves, as well as that immediate Worship which we owe
to God; the Gospel Grace being revealed, not only to teach us to live godly,
but also righteously and soberly, and making us no Promise either of present or
of future Blessings, without the practice of these Duties.

2. That Greek Word (...) which we here render Form, and answers to the
Hebrew (...) and (...) imports an outward show, appearance, shape, or likeness,
as v. g. Jesus appeared (...), in another Form, Mark 16.12. He took upon him
(...), the Form of a Servant, being made in the likeness of a Man, Phil. 2.7.
When therefore Persons outwardly appear to be religious, when they are found in
fashion of the pious Man, doing outwardly as he does, speaking as he speaks,
making the same Profession which he does; then may they properly be said to
have the form of Godliness.

Now for the Resolution of that important Question, How far a Man may go in the
Profession of Christianity and the performance of some religious Duties, and
yet have only a bare form of Godliness? I answer in these six Particulars.

1. Men may be frequent in the Performance of the outward Acts of Worship, they
may be much in Prayer, may appear very zealous in their Addresses to the Throne
of Grace, very sensible of, and very tenderly affected with the Sins they do
confess; they may frequent the public Ordinances, and seem to take Delight in
hearing and in reading of the Word, they may be much in Fasting, and costly and
magnificent in their Oblations to God, and yet, tho they discover so much of
the Form, may want the Power of Godliness. This will be evident from the
Example of the ancient Jews, and of the Pharisees; for of the Jews it is
recorded, That they were very free in their Oblations, witness that Question of
the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 1.11.
To what purpose is the multitude of your Sacrifices? The Prophet Micah plainly
tells them, That the Lord had a Controversy with his People, and would plead
with Israel. Being made sensible of this, they presently enquire of the Prophet
what they should do to please him, as Men who did prefer his Favor before all
other things: Wherewith, say they, shall we come before him, Mic. 6.6, 7.
and bow our selves before the High God? Will the Lord be pleased with
thousands of Rams, or with ten thousand Rivers of Oil? Shall I give my first
born for my Transgression, the fruit of my Body for the Sin of my Soul? Where
are large Offers made, says Drusius, ad exprimendum Hypocritarum in rebus
externu studium, but nor one word of doing Justice, loving Mercy, or walking
humbly before God, which were the things that he especially delighted in.
Moreover, they were still treading in his Courts, they sought him daily there,
Isa. 1.12. Isa. 58.2.
as Persons who took pleasure in his Presence, and being there, they multiplied
their Supplications to God with the appearance of great Zeal and Fervor,
expanding, or stretching forth their Hands, which was the gesture used in
fervent Prayer; witness that Passage of the same Prophet Isaiah, chap. 1.15.
When you spread forth your hands I will hide mine Eyes from you; and when you
multiply your Prayers I will not hear. They also were frequent Hearers of the
Word; they said one to another, Come, I pray you, Eze. 33.30, 31.
and hear what it the Word that comes forth from the Lord; they sat before the
Prophets as God's People, and they heard his Words; they expressed a great
desire to be acquainted with the Will of God, asking of him the Ordinances of
Justice. Isa. 58.2.
They were much exercised in Fastings; for besides the second and filth day of
the Week, which were their ordinary Fasting days, the Hebrew Calendar informs
us, there was not any Month in the whole Year in which some stated Fasts were
not observed for the Remembrance of some Calamity which did in former times
afflict that Nation. Zach. 8.19.
The Prophet Zachary does, in one Verse, inform us of the Fast of the fourth,
fifth, seventh, and the tenth Month; and in these times of solemn Fasting it
was their Custom to make large Confessions of their Sins, according to the good
Examples of Daniel, Ezra, and Nehemiah; and these Confessions were attended
with many Tears and grievous Lamentations; witness that Question which they put
to the Prophet Zachary, Chap. 7.3.
Shall we weep in the fifth Month as we have done so many Years? These Duties
they performed with Delight; for, as the Prophet Isaiah witnesses, they took
delight in approaching to God; Isa. 58.2. Matt. 13.20.
they heard the Word with Joy, as did the stony ground, delighting in the
Knowledge of God's ways. And lastly, upon these Accounts, though they were very
hypocritical, yet were they very confident of Favor and Acceptance with God,
and that they were the very Darlings of his Providence, they called themselves
of the holy City, and staid themselves upon the God of Israel, Isa. 48.1, 2.
Jer. 7.4.
and they made mention of his Name, though not in Truth and Righteousness. They
trusted in lying Words, saying, The Temple of the Lord, Jer. 5.12.
the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are these. And hence they gave
the Lie to God's own Prophets, saying, Neither shall Evil come upon us, neither
shall we see Sword nor Famine. And though the Heads of the People judged for
Reward, and the Priests thereof taught for Hire, and the Prophets thereof
divined for Money, yet did they lean upon the Lord, and say, Mic. 3.11.
Is not the Lord among us, none Evil can come upon us? In a word, they
foolishly presumed that their Diligence in the performance of these Acts of
outward Worship, would atone for their neglect of Mercy, Righteousness, and
Justice. But notwithstanding this their Confidence, the Lord pronounces their
Oblations vain, Isa. 1.13. Ezekiel. 33.32. Zach. 7.5. Isa. 58.5. Isa. 1.15.
their Incense an Abomination to him; he declares, that though they heard his
Words they would not do them, that they did never fast or mourn to him, that
none of all their Fastings were an acceptable day unto the Lord, or such a Fast
as he had chosen, nor would he lend an Ear unto their Prayers; and therefore we
may rest assured, that, notwithstanding all this outward show of Piety, their
Hearts were not sincere and upright with him.

Again, the Pharisees were so renowned for Piety among the Jews, that, in the
Language of their Talmud, Buxtorf. in verbo (...)
a Pharisee does signify a pious Person, and that which did beget such an
Opinion of their Saintship in the Jews, was their Exactness in the outward
parts of Divine Worship; for they were much in Prayer, and often repaired to the
House of God to offer up this public Sacrifice; and they had one good Rule to
this effect, which I could wish that out Pretenders to great Piety would
practice; viz. That every Man should go to Morning and Evening Prayer in the
Synagogue, Maimon. in Tephillah. per. 8.
for that his Prayer is not constantly heard but in the Synagogue; and that
every one who had a Synagogue in his City, and prayed not in it with the
Congregation, Matt. 6.5. Leightf. in locum.
was (...), an evil Neighbor. Upon their Festivals and fasting days they
prayed in the Marketplace, and in the Corners of the streets, perhaps that
they might be the more exemplary pious, and others might observe how much they
were concerned to worship God. They also made long Prayers, perpetual Prayers,
says (...), Epiph. Resp. ad Epist. Acacii.
Epiphanius; their Religious men, say their Traditions, spent Leightf. in 23.
Matt. 14.
nine Hours every day in Prayer; and they invented diverse ways, says
Epiphanius, Haeres. 16. p. 34 Leightf. ibid. Jerus. Taanith. fol. 67.3. Matt.
6.7. Matt. 9.14. Luke 18.12.
(...), to keep themselves awake by force, that they might watch unto Prayer;
and this they did, because, according to their Maxims, Long Prayer prolongeth
Life, and (...), every one that multiplieth Prayer shall be heard. Our Savior
also seems to intimate, that they did frequently repeat the same Expressions,
using Battology, after the manner of the Heathens, to signify the Vehemence
and Ardour of their Prayers. They fasted often, says St. Matthew. They fasted
twice a Week, says Luke, and they continued their Fastings Leightf. in locum.
till the Sun went down, and in these days of Fasting they employed themselves
in public Leightf. in 9. Matt. 14.
reading of the Law. And lastly, they were somewhat costly and expensive in
their Service, for, they would beautify and garnish the Sepulchers of the
Prophets, Mat. 23.29.
to testify their great Respect to him who sent them; and yet these Pharisees
are charged, by our Lord, with gross Hytocrisie: he plainly tells them, Luke
18.14.
That all their Fastings would not justify them, and their long Prayers would
only add to their Damnation.

2. Men may be frequently possessed with a great Zeal for God, for the
Concernments of his Glory, the Purity of his Worship, the Observation of his
Day, and of his Ordinances; they may be zealous and stiff Contenders for what
they call the Truth, and by so doing may demonstrate that they have a form of
Godliness, that in appearance they are great Promoters of his Glory, and strict
Observers of his Will; and yet these very Men may want the Power of Godliness,
and be the greatest Violaters of those Laws they seem so zealous to maintain.
St. Paul professes, That it was Zeal which moved him to persecute the Church
of Christ, Philip. 3.6.
and that he was, (...), a Zealot for his God, when he bound, imprisoned, and
persecuted to the Death his dearest Servants, Acts 22.3.9.1.
and breathed forth Threatenings and Slaughters against the Disciples of the
Lord. When above measure he did persecute the Church, and waste it, Gal. 1.14.
Act. 26.9, 10, 11.
then was he (...), superlatively zealous: when he shut Christians up in
Prison, compelled them to blaspheme, persecuted them to strange Cities, and, by
his Testimony against them, did procure their Death, he only did what he
conceived himself in Conscience bound to do against the Name of Jesus; and yet
on the account of this his Zeal, he styles himself the chiefest of Sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. 1 Cor. 15.9. (...). Acts 26.11. Romans 10.2. Acts 22.3.
and the least of the Apostles. He calls his Zeal excess of Madness, and says,
that he obtained Pardon of so great a Crime only because he did it ignorantly.
And of the unbelieving Jews in general the same Apostle testifies, that they
had a Zeal for God, that they were all zealous for God as he was, that they
were zealous for the Law, and stiffly did contend for Moses, and could not hear
with Patience that any one should teach, (...), Acts 21.21.
Apostasy from Moses: and yet these Zealots, as he himself declares, Romans 11.8.
were given up by God unto the Spirit of Slumber; and though they boasted of
the Law, yet they blasphemed the Name of God by frequent Violations of it;
they, Romans 2.23.
notwithstanding all their Zeal for God, were by himself rejected from being
any more his People, and Wrath came upon them to the uttermost; and though they
did profess the greatest Reverence for Moses, John 5.45.
yet did they not believe his Words. Their Zeal against the Christian Faith
caused them to send some chosen Men throughout the World to blaspheme, Justin.
Mar. p. 234, 335. Idem Dial. cum Tryph. p. 235. Ibid. p. 234, 323, 335.
and represent Christianity (...), as a wicked Atheistick Sect; and from these
Men, says Justin Martyr, all those vile Stories took their rise which Heathens
did object against the Christians. Their Zeal provoked them in their Synagogues
to curse all that believed in Jesus, and add unto their other Prayers, one for
the Leight. Harm. part 3. p. 217.
destruction of the Heretics, for so, after the Romish Mode, they called
Christians. They had a Sect of Zealots, who in their Writings are styled, good
Men, possessed with a Zeal for God, who took upon them, Leightf. in Joh. 16.2.
in imitation of the Zeal of Phinehas, to kill all such as they esteemed
Transgressors who deserved Death, without judicial Sencence passed upon them;
and these Men did employ their Zeal in killing Christians as often as they had
opportunity to do it; Just. Mar. 16. p. 234. 363. Apol. p. 72. John 16.2.
and in so doing they conceived, that they offered (...), the most acceptable
Service to God. The Pharisees were, of all Jews, the greatest Zealots: they
were possessed with this Opinion, That no Man could be saved who owned not
their Religion, and therefore, to promote their Faith, Matt. 23.15.
and make one Proselyte unto it, they compassed Sea and Land. Pocock Not.
Miscel. p. 354.
Among the seven kinds of Pharisees they had one styled (...), a Pharisee who
served God purely out of Love, as they pretended; but then this Love was only,
Rashi ibid.
says another, (...), the Love of Reward or Reputation among others. So
careful were they to have God's Laws observed, that they by their Traditions
made (...) an Hedge unto the Law, Leightf. Harm. part 3. p. 216.
i. e. They would do more, that so they might be sure to do as much as God
required. Mark 7.2.
They were so zealous for the Observation of the Sabbath Day, that they would
not permit our Savior to do the greatest Works of Charity or Mercy, Matt. 12.2.
or his Disciples to satisfy their Hunger on that day: and yet our Lord
declares, that notwithstanding all this Zeal, they were but gilded Hypocrites,
Matt. 23.33.
a Generation of Vipers, who could not possibly escape Damnation. Sciant omnes
socii speciali voto se adstringi, ita ut quicquid Modernus and alii R.
Pontifices, pro tempore existentes, jusserint ad profectum animarum, and fidei
propagationem pertinens, sine ulla tergiversatione aut excusatione illico,
quantum in nobis fuerit, exequl teneamur: sive nos miserit ad Turcas, sive ad
quoscunque alios Infideles, sive ad quoscunque Haereticos. Paul 3. constable. 25.
6. Bullar. R. to 1. p. 739. Voveant singuli, se in omnibus quae ad Regulae
hujus nostrae observationem faciunt, obedientes fore, societatis praeposito. 8.
ed. A. D. 1540. vid. Jul. tertium constable. 9. ed. A. D. 1550. 5, 7, 8. Greg. 13.
constable. 89. ed. A. D. 1584. 12. to 2. p. 472.


I could proceed to tell you of some Men amongst us, whose Circumcellian Zeal
has prompted them to murder Bishops; and of some Scottish Zealots, Scots
Declaration put upon the Market Cross at Rugland.
who in their printed Declarations profess to have turned Rebels out of pure
Zeal, for the promotion of Christ's Kingdom, and for the purity of his Worship;
and yet, of such Despisers of Dominion, and Resisters of Authority, St. Jude
declares, that they are (...), ungodly Men, v. 4. And although others may
embrace them as their beloved Brethren, from such, says the Apostle, turn
away. Wherefore, that Zeal for God, which, as you see, is common both to the
unbelieving Jew and to the true Believer, to the proud formal Pharisee as well
as to the humble and sincerest Christian, to the heady fierce high-minded
Traitor as well as to the peaceable obedient Subject, can be no certain
Indication of the Power of Godliness; no Argument that we are Saints. Which
will be further evident, if we consider That this Zeal proceeds not always from
a true Love to God, and a sincere Respect unto his Glory; but oftentimes from
Education; whence Men of every Sect and Party are zealous for those Principles
and Practices which they received from Education, and Custom has inured them
to. It may proceed from carnal Motives, as did the Zeal of Jehu, which yet he
styled Zeal for God. Now that which may proceed from Motives common to the good
and bad, can be no Evidence that we are good.

3. Men also may pretend to bear a great Affection to the Godly Party, and show
great Opposition to those whom they are pleased to call Profane; they may be
strict in separation of themselves from those whose Conversation, or whose way
of Worship they dislike, and by these things may seem to others, and (...)
themselves, that they are very much in Love with Piety, and bear a perfect
hatred to all Iniquity, and that they are extremely cautious of having any
Fellowship with the unfruitful Works of Darkness; and yet may only have a Form
of Godliness. The Pharisees styled all that were not of their Sect (...),
Lightf. in Mart. c. 3. v. 7. p. 53.
vile People of the Earth, but they forsooth were the Religious and Godly
Party. Hence they usurped to themselves two Names; that of Pharisee, which
signifies, One who does separate from other People, as impure; Pocock Not.
Miscell. p. 352. Leightf. ib. p. 56. (...) Psalm. 119.63. Leightf. p. 55.
this being one of their avowed Rules, That it was Piety and (...),
superabundant Sanctity, to separate from common People of the Earth: and
secondly, they called themselves (...), or the Companions or Associates, from
that Expression of the Psalmist, I am a Companion of all them that fear thee;
intimating, that they desired only to converse with godly Men. On this Account
they do so often quarrel with our Savior, because he did converse with
Publicans and Sinners, and suffered them to touch him, Mark 2.16.
and would not be one of their Cheborim, i. e. one of their Separation and
Association: this to them seemed very strange, and unaccountable, and therefore
they enquire, Matt. 9.11.
How is it that your Master eats with Publicans and Sinners? and peremptorily
conclude he was no Prophet, because he suffered a sinful Woman to embrace his
Feet. Luke 7.39.
The Gnostics also did separate themselves from other Christians, as being
both more knowing, and more spiritual than others were, stiling themselves,
(...). Iren. l. 1. c. 1. p. 26. C. D.
(...), by Nature spiritual, and looking on all others as mere animal and
carnal Men; and yet they were, says the Apostle Jude, ungodly Men, v. 4, 8, 19.
turning the Grace of God into Lasciviousness; they were sensual having not the
Spirit; they despised Dominions, and spoke evil of Dignities; they held, That
Men were justified by Grace, excluding the Necessity of doing Righteousness, As
being Vessels of Election (...). Iren. l. 1. p. 28.
and that they could not be polluted by the Sins they did commit. Novatus, qui
primum apud nos discordiae and schismatis incendium seminavit, qui quosdam ex
fratribus ab Episcopo segregavit, etc. Cypr. Ep. 49. 3.
Novatus first departed from the Unity of the Church, and drew away the
Brethren from Communion with their Bishop, out of pretense of Purity; on which
Account, his Followers obtained the Name of (...). Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 6.
cap. 43.
Cathari, or Puritans, declaring, That it was unlawful to (...), Epiph. Haere.
59. 1. (...). Theod. Har. sab. l. 3. c. 5.
communicate with those who lapsed in the time of Persecution, or to receive
them into the Bosom of the Church upon Repentance: and yet this hypocritical
Pretender to the greatest Purity, (...). Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 6. cap. 43. p.
244. Theod Haer. fab. ibid.
in the time of Persecution did renounce his Priesthood, and became guilty of
such enormous Crimes, says Peopter hoc se non de Presbyterio excitari tantum,
sed and communicatione prohiberi pro certo tenebat. Cypr. Ep. 49. 4. vid. 2, 3.
Cyprian, for which he had deserved, and would, (...) continued in it, have
suffered the Censures of the Church. The Donatists did also separate, lest they
should be defiled by their Communion with Traditors; for this Cause having
first departed from Cecilian, their Bishop, they afterward departed from the
Communion of the Ad omnibus populis separatos vos esse gratulamini. Optat. l.
2. p. 47. Vnitatem cum toto orb terrarum habere noluistis. l. 3. p. 69.
Catholic Church, affirming that they only were the true Apud vos solos esse
ecclesiam dicitis. Optatus lib. 2. p. 47. Se solos Christianos esse jactant.
August. contra Crescon. l. 4. cap. 59.
Church of Christ, and that all others were Postea totam Ecclesiam periisse,
and in sola Donati part Reliquias ejus mansisse contendunt. August. de Agone
Christi, cap. 29. Totus mundus apostatavit, nos autem tanquam duae illae tribus
permansunus in Templo Dei, i. e. in Ecclesia, ait Petilianus apud August. l. de
Unitate, cap. 12. Vid. Brevic. collat. p. 578.
Apostates, because they did communicate with wicked Persons; for they imagined
that the Ostendere tentaverunt quod Ecclesia Dei non cum malorum hominum
commixtione futura praedicta est. August. Brevic. collat. p. 573.
Church only did consist of Saints, and Persons undefiled; and thought it a
Pollution not only to communicate, but even sit with others. Hence in the
Conference recorded, or epitomized by St. Austin, the Catholici consederunt,
Donatistae autem recusarunt, in qua recusatione, inter caetera, id quoque
dixerunt, Quod scriptum sibi esset cum talibus non sedere. Ib. p. 566, and post
Collat. Carthag. cap. 5.
Bishops of the Party of Donatus would not sit with the Catholic Bishops,
because it was written, I will not sit with the ungodly. They likewise did
pretend to greater Purity, and to severer Discipline, than could be showed
among the Catholics, declaring, that they were the Church without all
Donatistae in nostra collatione dixerunt in ea se esse Ecclesia quae non habet
maculam aut rugam. August. Ep. 50. ad Bonifacium. Optat. l. 2. p. 55.
Spot and Wrinkle, Ephesians. 5.27.
of which St. Paul makes mention in his Epistle to the Church of Ephesus, and
that they would permit no Astruebant non esse malos tolerandos in Ecclesia
propter contagium peccatorum. Aug. Brevic. Collat. p. 575.
wicked Men among them. They falsely carped at the Catholics, as using
superstitious Worship to something placed upon their Dicebatur illo tempore
venturos esse Paulum and Macarium, qui sacrificio interessent, and cum altaria
aptarentur, proferrent illi imaginem quam priun in altari ponerent, sic
sacrificium offerretur, at nihil tale visum est ex eo quod fuerat mentita fama.
Optat. l. 3. p. 75.
Altars: and yet the Leaders of these Men were themselves Traditionis reos
principes vestros fuisse monstratum est. Optat. l. 1. p. 39, 40. August. lib.
3. contra Crescon. cap. 27.
Traditors, who had absolved one another from that Crime. They were Men who
spoke evil of the Convitia Constanti, quanta potuit, dixit. Optat. l. 3. p. 67.
Jam tunc meditabatur Donatus contrd praecepta Apostoli Pauli, Potestatibus and
Regibus injuriam facere. Ibid. p. 64.
Emperor, and opposed his Officers; they denied the Quid est Imperatori cum
Ecclesia. Optat. l. 1. p. 43. l. 3. p. 64. August. l. 2. contra Petilian. cap.
92.
Authority of Civil Magistrates in sacred matters; they were, Contumaces, and
legibus hostili modo repugnantes, contumacious Resisters of the Laws after an
hostile manner. They had their Cum Maxido and Fasir ab ipsis insanientibus
sanctorum Duces appellarentur, nulli licuit securum esse in suis
possessionibus; terrebantur omnes literis eorum qui se sanctorum Duces fuisse
jactabant. Optat. l. 3. p. 68. Eece Ecclesia vestra, Episcopis Ducibus,
cruentis morsibus pasta est, l. 2. p. 55. Ducibus Clericis. August. Brevic.
Collat. p. 579.
Duces Sanctorum, Captains of the Saints, under whose Conduct they often did
resist the Civil Magistrate: and they were of the Clergy too; they carried on
their work, per insanas querelas and vana mendacia, by furious Complaints and
vain Lies; they were Murderers of Catholic Venistis Rabidi, membra laniantes
Ecclesiae, in caedibus immanes multi ex numero vestro per loca plurima cruentas
operati sunt caedes, Oprat. l. 2. p. 54. Et cum altar defenderent. Diaconi
Catholici tegulis, plurimi cruentati sunt, duo occisi. p. 55. De Episcopis vide
August. Epist. 50. p. 220. de Presbyteris Ep. 148, 149.
Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, August. contra Donatist. post Collat. cap.
35.
yea they destroyed themselves by falling down from Ex ultorum montium
cacuminibus viles animas projicientes se praecipites dabant, and percussores
sibi, sub cupiditate falsi Martyrii, in suam perniciem conducebant. Optat. l.
3. p. 68. August. p. 580. Brevic. Collat.
Precipices, or causing others to dispatch them, that they might have the
Honor of Martyrdom; so far were they, after their confident Pretenses, from
being free from Sin. A Form of Godliness, of the same stamp, is visible in many
among us who call themselves Reformed Protestants, consisting in a great Zeal
for the Promotion of that Religion which they have espoused, and a strong
Outcry against Antichrist, and his Adherents, and all that they are pleased to
call a Rag of Popery; in doing this they are so hot, that they can venture
their Estates and Lives in the espousal of this Quarrel; and yet too many of
them are so far from the Power of Godliness, that they retain the very Spirit
and the Marks of the great Antichrist, whilst they declare so much against him,
walking in all deceivableness of Unrighteousness, 2 These. 2.4, 10.
and lifting up themselves against the Lord's Vicegerents, who are in Scripture
called Gods, being in this too like the Pharisees of old, who stirred up the
People, says Josephus, against Hyrcanus the King, Antiq. l. 13.18. cap. 23. l.
17. cap. 3.
and afterward against King Alexander, and of whom that Historian, who was one
of them, gives this Character, (...), the Pharisees are exceeding strong to
oppose Kings, (...), and very forward to make open War, and to do hurt. Nor can
we easily forget how much Religion was once placed in opposition to the
malignant Party, and siding with those Men who called themselves the Saints,
and the Reformers of Religion, and how much still some think themselves obliged
to show their Piety by being greater Separatists than were the Pharisees of
old; for albeit they would not mix with the People of the Earth, or the profane
in civil Conversation, yet as our Lord and his Apostles did not, so neither did
the Pharisees refuse to go to the same Temple with them; this Separation being
opposite to their own Rules, Maimon in Tephillah per. 8. Bab. Berac. fol. 30.1.
That the Prayer of the Congregation is always heard, though Sinners be among
them, and that whosoever prays, should, when he prays, join with the
Church. But it is not now my Business to show how groundless are these
Separations, but only to conclude, from these plain Instances of Hypocrites and
profane Persons, That these things are no certain marks of real Godliness. And
evident it is, both to our Reason and Experience, that this Affection to, or
Aversion from a Sect or Party, may, and too often does, proceed from an
inferior Principle. Our Love to any Sect, or our Concernment for them, may be
wholly owing to the Education we have had among them, or to the Profit we get
by them, or to the outward show of Piety they make to the good Words and the
fair Speeches by which they do deceive the Hearts of the simple; on which
account the Pharisee and Scribe gained such a Reputation with the Jews, that
'twas proverbial with them, That if two Persons only were to go to Heaven, the
one would be a Scribe, the other a Pharisee. And that Antipathy we bear to
others may arise from those Invectives and odd Representations of them we have
read in Characters and Pamphlets, the Pests of Charity, and the Inflamers of
our Heats, or else received from the Mouths of their back-friends, the Injuries
or Persecutions we have suffered from them, the Fears and Jealousies we have
within us, that we may suffer in our Estates, Lives, or Religion, by them; or
lastly, from some hopes of Booty or Advantage to be got by opposition to them.
Now that which may arise from other base and evil Motives, can be no certain
Evidence that we are acted in it by the Power of Godliness.

4. Men may express a Form of Godliness in being very nice and scrupulous, in
seeming very strict and conscientious in lesser Matters, and yet be Strangers
to the Power of Godliness. This Niceness in these little matters seems to
evidence great tenderness of Conscience, great fear of doing any thing which
may offend our gracious God, great exactness of Conversation, and hatred of all
kinds, and all Appearances of evil, especially when men are grown so stiff in
these Punctilio's, that they will rather suffer from the hand of Man than act
against the little Scruples-they have entertained: and yet we find none more
precise in these Particulars than were the Scribe and Pharisee, even when they
did neglect the more substantial Duties of Religion. Our Savior tells them in
the general, that they would strain at Gnats, Matt. 23.24. Mats. 7.3, 4.
and swallow Camels; they could not bear a little Mote spied in their Brother's
Eye, but they must presently rebuke him for it, and be earnest with him to pull
it out, whilst yet they overlooked the Beam in their own Eye. John 18.28. Mat.
26.59, 60.
They could seek false Witness against Christ, and condemn the Innocent, but
even then They would not enter into the Governors Hall, lest they should be
defiled: They would pay Tithe of Mint and Cummin to the Priest, which thing
seems not required by the Letter of the Law, and at the same time would neglect
the weighty Matters of that Law, Matt. 23.23. Luke 11.42. Maimon de Idol. sect.
3. cap. 10. apud Vossium.
Judgment, Mercy, and the Love of God. Their own Traditions tell us, that they
were so careful to avoid Idolatry, that they would rather perish than drink of
any Water which ran through a Statue: yet these tender conscienc'd Persons who
so abhorred Idols, would commit Sacrilege, and be notoriously guilty of that
Covetousness which is Idolatry. The ancient Jews, after the burning of the
Temple by Nebuzaradan, Jer. 52.12, 13.
on the tenth Day of the fifth Month, were wont to fast upon that day for the
Remembrance of that Desolation; and when the Temple was rebuilt, they were so
scrupulous, that although the Occasion of this Fast was now removed, they durst
not cease to fast till they had first consulted with the Priests that were of
the House of the Lord, and with the Prophets. Hence they enquire of them,
saying, Should we weep in the fifth Month, Zach. 7.3.
separating our selves as we have done so many Years? And yet these Persons, so
scrupulous in this particular, could without all regret neglect the Duties of
the second Table. They were guilty of oppressing the Widow, Poor, and
Fatherless, Zach. 7.10. They wanted Mercy and Compassion to their Brother, v.
9. They were deficient in executing the Judgment of Truth and Peace in their
gates; they would speak Lies, swear falsely, and imagine Evil in their Hearts
against their Neighbor, v. 9, (...). Antiq. l. 18. c. 4. Halos. l. 2. c. 14.
vid. c. 17.
10. About our Savior's time, and after, they were so nice and superstitious
in the case of Images, as scarcely to permit the Roman Eagle quietly to pass
their Country, or to continue in their Cities. When Pilate introduced those
little Images of Caesar, which were annexed to the Military Standards, they
presently cried out, that this was done (...), to the dissolution of the Jewish
Laws, and they would rather dye than suffer it. And when Herod, Son of
Antipater, brought into Judea the Trophies of the Nations he had conquered,
they, thinking they were Images of Men, did with one Voice cry out, (...).
Antiq. l. 18. c. 7. l. 15. c. 11. Mark 8.38.
that whatsoever they endured they would not suffer the Images of Men within
their City. And yet the Scripture does declare them to be a very wicked and
adulterous Generation; and their Historian adds, That (...), de Bello Jud. l.
5. c. 27. Heb. 13.4.
never Generation was more wicked. And happy were it if we could not instance
in some other Persons who will not stand up at the Recital of the Creed,
observe an Holy Day, or hear Common Prayer, receive the Sacrament upon their
Knees, which, being things no where forbidden in the Word of God, cannot be
evil in themselves; but they will cheat their Brother, be guilty of Rebellion,
Sacrilege, and Schism, will cause Divisions in the Church of God, and Factions
in the State, and by so doing weaken the Interest of Protestants, blaspheme
their holy Calling, and gratify the common Enemy of our Religion.

5. Men may express a Form of Godliness in being outwardly conformable to the
whole Law of God, so that they who can only judge by outward Actions shall be
obliged in Charity to think them truly pious, when yet they want the inward
Life and Power of Godliness. This seems to have been the Case of the
Young Man who told our Savior, he had observed all the Commandments of the
second Table Mat. 19.20.
from his Youth, that is, he had abstained from the outward Acts forbidden in
those Laws, but yet he had not purged the inward Man from Covetousness, or an
immoderate Love of Riches; and therefore he is called by Christ to the
performance of this Duty, that he might be perfect. v. 21.
This was the Righteousness of which the Pharisees did boast, and by which they
obtained so great a Reputation among Men; for so our Savior plainly tells
them, saying, Woe to you Scribes and Pharisees, for you are like to whited
Sepulchers, which indeed appear beautiful outward, Mat. 23.27.
but inwardly are full of dead Men's Bones, and all Uncleanness; even so ye
outwardly appear righteous to men, but within you are full of Hypocrisy and
Iniquity. And again, Luke 16.15.
You are they that justify your selves before men, or seem to carry a fair
outside to the World, but God knows your Hearts; for, that which is highly
esteemed among Men is abominable in the sight of God. And this is also that
which passes for Religion in our days, That Men come orderly to Church, and so
behave themselves, that the World cannot charge them with any scandalous
Offenses, whereas perhaps these men may be condemned for their Omissions; for
though they have not robbed others, they may have been close fisted, Matt.
25.41, 42, 43.
and uncharitable to Christ's needy Members, neglecting both to cloth the
Naked, feed the Hungry, and visit his sick Members; and this, our Savior tells
them, is sufficient to place them in a left hand Station. Thou may not go
beyond the rigor of the Law, but yet thou may be cruel and unmerciful in
dealing with thy Brother according to the utmost of it, casting him into Prison
for a Debt he cannot pay, or there discharge; whereas our Savior plainly calls
the Man who dealt thus with his Brother, Mat. 18.32, 34.
a wicked Servant, and does pronounce him fit to be delivered up to the
Tormentors. Thou may not dare to murder thy offending Brother, 1 John 3.15.
as the Hectors of our Age will do, but thou may hate him in thy Heart,
which, in St. John's Account, is Murder. Thou may not steal, but yet thou
may be coveting thy Neighbor's Goods, and so may have a Will to rob him
of them. Thou may abstain from Fornication and Adultery, and yet have the
Adulterous Eye, and a Heart full of Lustings after the forbidden Fruit, Matt.
5.28.
which, says our Savior, is Adultery. If therefore we would be secure that we
are truly good, we must add inward Purity of Heart to our Conformity in outward
Actions.

Thus have I finished my Discourse touching the Form of Godliness; to which I
think it needful to adjoyn this Caution: Viz.

Gal. 4.18.
Practice; and to his Hearing, Doing. To have a Zeal for God, is doubtless very
laudable, provided we be zealous for good things, and that impartially, and
regularly. To bear a passionate Affection to the living Members of Christ's
Body, and love them fervently, is a plain Christian Duty, which he that does
not practice has no true Love to God; only we must be careful, that this Love
be general, and not confined to that Sect or Party we affect; that it express
it self in Deeds, not in Words only. 2 These. 3.6.
It is our Duty to separate from every Brother that walks disorderly, provided
that on this Account we do not separate from the Assemblies of God's public
Worship; and we may hate his Vices, provided that we love his Person. It does
become us to be fearful to offend even in lesser matters, 1 These. 5.22.
and to alstain from all appearances of Evil, provided that we do not swallow
Camels, whilst we strain at Gnats, that we neglect not the more weighty matters
of Love, Peace, Unity, by reason of our stiffness in these things. Romans 12.17.
We lastly are commanded to provide things honest in the sight of all Men;
Matt. 5.16.
and let the Light of our good Works still shine before them, provided that we
be as careful that the inward Man be upright in the Sight of God, and that we
do these things not to be seen of Men, or to obtain a Reputation from them, but
to approve our hearts to God: so that you may perceive it is not less, but more
than such a Form of Godliness which is required. These things you ought to do,
excepting only the Separations, Scrupulosities, and the Austerities
forementioned, and not to leave the other undone.

Again, I hope that none who hear me will be so profane as to make use of any
thing now said, to the discredit of Religion, to the defaming of any pious
Persons of what sort soever; that none will take occasion hence to call them
Pharisees, or only formal Christians, who pray much in their Families, hear
Sermons frequently, and perform other pious Duties, provided they do nothing
repugnant to the Power of Godliness. It Is chiefly they who bear a Hatred to
both the Power and the Form, that do so: and in their Language, as well as in
the jewish Talmud, a Pharisee is a devout and pious Man; a Hypocrite is any one
who will not be profane, and all must be Fanatics who will not run with them
into the same Excess of Riot. That therefore they may have their Portion too,

2. Hence we may learn the sad Estate of those who have not yet attained to a
Form of Godliness. If Men may pray and fast, frequent all public Ordinances,
be full of seeming Zeal for God, and hatred to Profaneness; if they may be
exceeding scrupulous, and fearful to offend in little matters; if they may
separate from the ungodly, and exercise much self-denial and severity toward
the Body, and yet advance no further than a Form of Godliness; what will become
of them who make no Conscience of attending on these means of Grace? who do not
think themselves obliged to pray, fast, weep, for their own or for the Nations
Sins? who are not in the least concerned for the Glory of God, or troubled at
those crying Sins by which the Name and Doctrine of our Lord is so exceedingly
blasphemed? who are so far from being fearful to offend in lesser matters, that
they do run into excess of Riot without Fear, and rush into Iniquity as the
Horse does into the Battle? who are so far from saying with the Royal Psalmist,
Depart from me ye Wicked, that their continual Delight is in the Company of men
of most debauched and vicious Lives? and lastly, who instead of laying a
Restraint upon, do make Provisions for the Flesh? If scoffing at Religion and
religious things, if Atheistical Discourses, if swearing, cursing, damning of
themselves and others, if scandalous Neglect and Profanation of God's Day and
Ordinances, if Drunkenness and revelling, if Whoredom and Uncleanness, can
evidence that Men have lost even the Form of Godliness, we need not light a
Candle to find a Multitude of such who are concerned in this Reproof. These are
the Men who are so fierce against, so ready to condemn, all those who make a
show of Godliness; whereas, were they as bad as such profane ungodly Wretches
represent them to the World, God's Providence may more befriend them than
Persons openly profane, and void even of the form of Godliness, since by this
Form they bring some Glory to God, by owning him as worthy of all the Homage
they can pay unto him, and by their great Concernment for the Honor of his
Name, his Day, his Ordinances. They, by their outward Worship, give God the
Honor of his Sovereignty and of his Greatness; they, by their Prayers,
acknowledge his Omnipotence and his Ability to help us, his kindness and his
readiness to hear and give a gracious Answer to the Prayers of his humble
Supplicants; by their Addresses to him in their Streights and Exigencies they
own his overruling Providence; and by their public Praises they acknowledge
him to be their noble Benefactor, and the sole Author of all the Mercies they
enjoy; they bring some credit to Religion by keeping up the Reputation and
Profession of it, and seeming so concerned to promote it; whereas God and
Religion are exceedingly dishonored by the profane and wicked Man. And
therefore it is not to be wondered, that Providence should rather choose to
countenance even this Form of Godliness, than to permit that profane Spirit to
reign, which does so horribly blaspheme the Name and Doctrine of our Lord and
Savior. And if our Church and Kingdom be still in danger from the Scribe and
Pharisee, they are as much in danger from the Publican and Sinner.

3. What has been said will be sufficient to convince us of the Hypocrisy of
some among us, who have past for very Godly and Religious Persons. The Context
clearly does pronounce this Sentence upon the covetous, the proud, 2 Timothy 3.2,
3, 4.
and the high-minded; on the Blasphemer or evil-speaker, and the false Accuser;
on the incontinent, unholy, and despiser of them that are good; on the fierce,
heady, cruel, and on the Lovers of themselves, or of their Pleasures more than
God; and if these Men in this our Nation were excluded from the number of
sincere upright Christians, as at the last day they will be, how small would be
the remnant of the true Israelites? This Sentence is particularly denounced
against those Godly Traitors, v. 4. and those Religious Rebels, v. 3. whose
Zeal for God, and the Advancement of Christ's Kingdom, as they blasphemously
pretended, engaged them in that Resistance of the Higher Powers, on which the
Scriptures does pronounce Damnation. I know not any Persons who more pretended
Godliness than they; they had their monthly Fasts to beg a Blessing on their
Rebellious Enterprises, and their Thansgivings that they were prosperous
Rebels; they would pray long, and preach long, and would be very scrupulous in
lesser matters, but being Traitors, and disobedient both to their sacred and
civil Governors, being Truce Breakers, and Violaters of the Oaths of their
Allegiance; they had, says the Apostle, only a Form of Godliness, but they
denied the Power thereof.

Now the Power of Godliness, as it here stands opposed to the Form, does
signify the Virtue and the Efficacy of it to produce within us those Actions
and Dispositions which evidence that we are truly godly, and which the
Scripture calls the Fruits of Righteousness: for as the Power of Fire, or of
the Sun, denotes the Virtue which these Creatures have to scorch, burn, melt,
or to perform any other Action suitable unto the nature of those Powers; even
so the Power of Godliness must be supposed to import the Efficacy of it, to
produce within us those Effects wherein the Truth of Godliness consists. Now,

1. The Power of Godliness consists in the due Regulation of our Passions and
Affections, and the Subjection of them to the Rules of Reason enlightened by the
Word of God. For, first, What is the ground of all that Atheism and Irreligion
which is in the World, but an irregularity of these our fleshly Appetites and
Passions? a dissolute and sensual Life being the Cause as well as the Result of
Atheism; it being that which does provoke the righteous God to give men up to
strong Delusions, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. 2 Cor. 4.4.
or to the Power of the Prince of Darkness, and that which renders it their
Interest that there should be, and therefore causes it to be their Judgment,
that there is no future Punishments. What are all sinful Lusts, but, Ephesians. 2.3.
Gal. 5.24. Romans 8.7.
in the Scripture Language, (...), the Lustings of the Flesh, (...), the
Passions, the Desires, the Wisdom of the Flesh, or sensual Appetite, exalting
of it self against the Wisdom of the Spirit, or the prescriptions of right
Reason? What are those fleshly Lusts which we are called to mortify that we
may live, but those Irregularities of our concupiscible Passions, which move us
to pursue what seems grateful to our Senses; viz. Adultery, Fornication,
Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Drunkenness, Intemperance, Revelling, Gal. 5.19,
21. Theft, Covetousness, Rapaciousness, 1 Cor. 6.9. and the extravagances of
our irascible Passions, viz. Hatred, and Envy, Emulation, Wrath, Anger, and
Bitterness of Spirit, Gal. 5.19, 21. Ephesians. 4.31.
with their intemperate Effects, Strife, Variance, Schism, Sedition, Murder,
reviling, clamorous, blaspheming Speeches, and Pride, which, says the Wiseman,
Prove. 13.10.
do provoke us to them? Whence is it that the wicked Man is still in Scripture
called the Fool? whence is he said to sin against the Dictatesof his
Conscience, but that he acts in Contradiction to his enlightened Reason? And, on
the other hand, what is the business of Religion, as it is represented by St.
Paul, but to instruct us to perform (...), a reasonable Service? Romans 12.1.
What is the difference betwixt that Wisdom which is from above, and that
which, says St. James, is eacthly, sensual, Jam. 3.15. v. 14.
and devilish, but that this last is still attended with bitter Zeal, and a
contentious Spirit; whereas the heavenly Wisdom is chaste and peaceable,
gentle, and easy to be entreated? v. 17.
The power of Godliness is often said in Scripture to express it self in the
Purification of the Heart; The Fear of the Lord is pure, Psalm. 19.9. The
Circumcision of the Heart is that which does alone commend us to God, and make
us truly what we do outwardly profess to be, Romans 2.29. This is of absolute
Necessity to our Enjoyment of the God of Purity; for (...), without
Purification none shall see the Lord: Heb. 12.14. Matthew. 5.8. Matt. 12.34.
and of that Beatifick Vision none, who have purity of Heart, can fail. And
seeing, as our Savior says, out of the abundance of the Heart the Mouth
speaks, and out of that defiled Fountain the Streams of evil Actions flow,
the pure Heart must produce purity of Life and Conversation, and the impure
Heart must sometimes show it self in Actions suitable to its nature. Now what
is it that does defile the Heart, Matthew. 5.8. Mark 7.27.
but those corrupt Affections which are in it? What is it therefore to be pure
in heart, but to be free from those inordinate Affections and unbridled
Passions? Again, what is it to live godly, but to be Men of upright, perfect
Hearts toward God, to keep a good and honest Conscience? And what is this but
to act suitably to the Convictions of our Reasons, enlightened by the Word of
God? Lastly, What is it to live godly, but so to live as that we crucify the
Flesh with the Affections and Lusts? Romans 8.13.
for, If we live after the Flesh, we shall die; but if through the Spirit we
mortify the deeds of the Flesh, we shall live. Now what is it to mortify
these Lusts, but to curb their irrational Extravagances, or keep them in due
mein, or in subjection to the Laws of Prudence. Man, Aristot. Moral. Eudsin. l.
7. c. 15.
say the Ancients, does consist, (...), of something in him which must be ruled
and moderated; and that, say they, is, (...), the sensual Appetite, and
something which is given him to be, (...), the Guide and Moderator of that
Appetite; viz. that Reason which the Wiseman styles the Candle of the Lord.
Prove. 20.27.
When therefore we do act according to the Directions of this Guide; when we
permit the inward Principle to govern all our Appetites and Passions, we must
act regularly, or in the Language of the Ancients, (...). But when we follow
the Inclinations of our blind Affections and ungoverned Passions, our Actions
must be sinful and irregular: and therefore Virtue is by the great Philosopher
defined to be, the observing of the mein in all our Passions according to the
Rules of Prudence. When therefore our Religion has prevailed over our
irascible Passions, and made us meek, sedate, and peaceable, patient,
long-suffering, and ready to forgive; when it will not permit us to retain Envy
and Malice, Hatred and Anger in our Breasts, or vent our Choler in reviling,
clamorous, calumniating, or bitter Words, which are all fleshly Lusts, or their
Productions; when it has filled our Souls with Love, Gal. 5.22.
Kindness, Goodness, Bowels of Mercy and Compassion toward all Mankind, which
are the Fruits of the good Spirit; when it has so far moderated our
concupiscible Passions that we love nothing but in subordination to God, have
no great zeal or hatred against any thing, but as it tends to his Dishonor,
and our Souls Estrangement from him, desire and hope for nothing in the World
but with Submission to him, and fear nothing so much as to offend him; when we
can readily abstain from any sensual Pleasure, quit any outward Comforts
without excess of Sorrow, and be content to want, or to enjoy all worldly
things, as seems best to Providence to give or to deny them; then have we the
true Power of Godliness. That this was anciently esteemed the genuine effect of
true Religion, we learn from that Expression of Lactantius; Da mihi virum qui
sit iracundus, etc. l. 3. c. 26.
Give me an angry, fierce, and foul-mouthed Person, with a few Words of God he
shall become as mild and gentle as a Lamb. Give me a covetous, griping Person,
this Word will make him liberal and open handed; 'twill make him who once
trembled at the Thoughts of Death and Pain, to contemn both the Cross and
Flames; 'twill make the lustful and adulterous Ruffian to become sober, chaste,
and continent; the cruel bloody Man be kind and merciful; and the unjust to
give every one his due, Tanta divinae sapientiae vis est, ut in hominis pectus
infusa, matrem delictorum stultitiam uno semel impetu expellat. Of such a Power
is this heavenly Wisdom, that, being once embraced, it instantly expels that
Folly which is the Mother of all Vice.

2. The Power of Godliness consists in self-denial and the entire Subjection of
our Wills unto the Will of God. If any Man will come after me, Mark 8.34.
says Christ, he must deny himself, take up his Cross, and follow me. i. e. If
he would be indeed a Christian, he must put on a steadfast Resolution to quit
all the Enjoyments, Honors, and Pleasures of the World, his dearest Relatives,
and even Life it self, if it be needful, for my sake; he must take up his
Cross, submitting his own Will unto the Will of Providence, and being ready
patiently to suffer any fiery Trials for the sake of Christ, and he must follow
me, yielding Obedience to my Will of Precept. The Weapons of our Warfare, says
St. Paul, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5.
are powerful to the pulling down of strong Holds, removing all that opposition
which is in our Hearts, Wills, and Affections to a holy Life, and casting down,
(...), all pride of Soul which will not suffer it to yield, all carnal
Reasonings which Flesh and Blood suggest against Obedience to the Laws of God.
And what is all Impiety, but the opposing of our Wills unto the Will of God?
and wherein does consist the substance of Religion, but in Obedience to, and in
Compliance with his Precepts, which are the Indications of his Will? What
therefore can true Piety import, but the surrendering up our Wills unto the
Conduct of the Will of God? What is that self-denial which the Scripture calls
for as the great Duty of Christianity, but the submission of our Wills unto our
Master's Pleasure in those things which seem most grievous to Flesh and Blood,
and most to thwart our Pleasures and our worldly Appetites? And what is it to
mortify our fleshly Lusts, but to reduce all these Desires and Affections to a
compliance with God's Will of Precept? And this is in effect the same with
placing Godliness in a prevailing Love to God, which Love to God with all our
Hearts, and all our Souls, Mat. 22.37, 38.
is, says our Lord, the greatest, and the first Commandment. It Is that from
which all other Duties which we owe to God will naturally flow; for, what can
be more natural than cheerfully to serve the Person whom we chiefly love, and
carefully avoid what we conceive displeasing to him? If we love Pleasure more
than God, says our Apostle here, 2 Timothy 3.4.
we only have the Form of Godliness; and what he says of Pleasures, may with
like reason be affirmed of Honors and Enjoyments, Friends and Relatives, or
any other worldly thing; we do but hypocritically profess to love God, 1 John
2.15.
if we love any of them more than him; and therefore, by the Rule of
Contraries, then must we have the Power of Godliness when our Affection to God
is greater than our Love to any of these things. Now, when is Love to God so
prevalent, but when it does effectually move us to part with our beloved
Dalilahs, to cut off Hands, and pluck out Eyes? i. e. to quit those Pleasures
and Enjoyments for his sake which seem as useful and desirable as an Hand or
Eye. When therefore we so live, that in the general Course or Tenor of our
Lives we seek not our own Honor, but the Honor of God, we do not study how to
please our selves in worldly matters, but rather do endeavor to walk before
God unto all well-pleasing; when we engage as well in Duties which are
prejudicial to our worldly Interests, and full of Hazards, as those which
minister unto our Pleasure and Advantage, and are entirely resolved, whether it
be good, or whether it be bad, easy or difficult, pleasing or irksome unto
Flesh and Blood, we will obey the Voice of the Lord, and act up to that
Resolution; then do we in our Lives express the Power of Godliness.

3. As Godliness does, in the larger acceptance of the Word, include Justice
and Charity toward our Neighbors, so where the Power of it does reside, it
will express it self in conscientious performance of these Duties to him; it
will possess us with a fervent Love to all Mankind, to Friend and Foe, to those
who hate, as well as those who do respect us. This, says our Savior, John
13.35. Matthew. 5.45.
is the Badge by which my true Disciples may be known; it is this Love to
Enemies, this doing good to all, which will alone declare us to be the Children
of the God of Love: this is proposed by Christ as a considerable part of our
whole Duty, Matthew. 22.39. 1 Cor. 13. ult.
and pronounced like unto the first and great Commandment. St. Paul does
represent this Charity as the most excellent of Christian Graces, and therefore
does exhort us above all things, to put on Charity; Col. 3.14. 1 Timothy 1.5. Romans
13.8. 1 John 3.11.
he says it is, (...), the end, or the perfection, of the whole Gospel
Declaration; the fulfilling of the Law, and the very Bond of Perfection. St.
John informs us, that it is Christ's new Commandment, the very Message which he
came to deliver to the World, and the best Evidence that we are in a state of
Grace; for hereby may we know that we are passed from Death to Life, v. 14.
because we love the Brethren. All which must be abundantly sufficient to
assure us, that where this Charity and Mercy is, there is the Power of
Godliness. But without this we can have no true Love to God; 1 John 4.20.
for he who loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom
he has not seen? and all our specious Pretenses and high Seize, 1 Cor.
13.2. Gal. 5.6.
without this Charity, are nothing worth; for in Christ Jesus nothing avails
but that Faith which works by Love. A Form of Godliness may be sufficient to
produce within us a strong Affection to a Sect or Party, this being visible in
Jew, Dissenter, Papist, yea in Publicans and Heathens, says our Savior, for
do not even Publicans do so? Mat. 5.46. But it is the Power of Godliness alone
which will enable us to love our Enemies, to be sweet and kind in our Behavior
toward all men, to rejoice in their Prosperity, sympathize with them in their
Miseries, relieve their Wants, redress their Evils, and contribute as much as
in us lies unto their Happiness, to be patient toward our offending Brother,
ready to forgive, and easy to be reconciled to him.

Again, the Power of Godliness, where it resides, will certainly express it
self in Acts of Righteousness and Justice, 'twill make us honest, upright, and
fair-dealing men; careful to do no Injury to any, and ready still to deal with
others as we would be dealt with. So that in reference to the fifth
Commandment, to be a just and upright Person is to give due Respect and Honor
to my Superiors, both natural, civil, and spiritual; not to permit my Heart to
curse, or causlesly to judge or censure them, or my Tongue to speak Evil of
Dignities. In reference to the sixth Commandment, it is to preserve the Life of
others as much as in me lies, and to do nothing that may render it
uncomfortable, when it is in my Power to avoid so doing; to bear no Envy,
Hatred, or Malice to my Neighbor, nor to indulge to any thought of doing
mischief to him. In reference to the seventh, it is to preserve our selves and
others from Impurity, not to desire any lustful Converse with them, or cause
the Violation of that Faith which they have pledged to others. In reference to
the eighth, it is to preserve my Neighbors Goods, not to defraud him of any
thing which he possesses, either by Words, as Lying, and false Swearing,
Collusions, or Equivocations; or by our Deeds, as Stealing, Robbing,
Overreaching, Taking advantage of his Ignorance, or any other way; not to
withold from any man his due, whether what we withold be due by Virtue of
our Promise, or his Labor, his Trust reposed in us, or our Trespass committed
against him. In reference to the ninth Commandment, to be a righteous honest
man, is to be careful to preserve our Brothers Credit and good Name, not to
defame him either by raising or spreading scandalous Reports against him, or
willingly receiving them from others. Lastly, in reference to the tenth
Commandment, it is to moderate our Desires, so that we do not envy others that
Good which they enjoy, or long to have it in our own Possession; this being
that Injustice of the Heart, which prompts us to proceed to the Injustice of
the Hand. And albeit this honest Man has been of late decry'd as a mere moral
Man, by those who too much wanted Honesty themselves, yet is the practice of it
represented, both in the Old and the New Testament, Jer. 22.16.
as a thing highly acceptable to God, and a sure Evidence of real Piety. Thus
to do Justice is indeed to know God; this is the whole of that which he
requires, Micah 6.8. Ephesians. 5.9.
even to do Justice, and love Mercy, and to walk humbly with our God; this is
one of the weighty matters of the Law, says Christ: it is a Fruit of the good
Spirit; it is that in which Christ's Kingdom does consist, Romans 14.18. Psalm.
15.1, 2.
and which will render us approved of God; this will procure our Admission into
God's holy Hill; into which he that walks uprightly and works Righteousness
shall surely enter; whilst the dissembling, lying, dishonest, and false hearted
Saint, and Godly Knave, 1 Thessalonians. 4.6.
will be most certainly excluded from these happy Mansions; for God is the
Avenger of all such. The Violations of the Rules of Justice is a thing very
hateful to him: These, says he, Zech. 8.16, 17. Prove. 6.16, 19.
are the things that you shall do, Speak every Man the truth to his Neighbor,
execute the Judgment of Truth and Peace in your Gates, and let none of you
imagine Evil in your Hearts against his Neighbor, and love no false Oath, R.
Josua apud D. Pocock. Not. Miscell. p. 353.
for all these are things that I hate, says the Lord. One of the Jewish
Rabbis reckons the religious Villain and the holy Cheat among those Persons
which bring Destruction on the World. And truly he is one who carries a
contradiction in his very Name to real Piety; he is a Scandal and Reproach to
that Religion he professes; he tempts Men to believe, that either his Religion
does allow such things, or to suspect that all Religion is but Policy, or a
design to serve some worldly end; what Favor then can he expect from him whose
Name and Doctrine he does so horribly blaspheme? As therefore, my Beloved, you
desire to avoid the dishonor of God, the scandal of that excellent Religion
you profess; as you would not reproach the practice of true Piety, nor cast an
Odium upon that Party which you most affect, or give occasion to that
proverbial Saying, You will not swear, but you will lie and cheat; as you
desire to be indeed, and be esteemed by God what you profess your selves to be,
true godly men, or to avoid his Hatred here, and his eternal Wrath hereafter,
provide things honest in the sight of all men.

Now, that true Godliness consists not in the outward Acts of Worship, or any
of those things in which I placed the Form of Godliness, but in the Regulation
of our Passions, the Resignation of our Wills unto the Will of God, in Purity
of Heart, and a prevailing Love to God, and in the Acts of Charity and Justice
to our Brother, will be farther evident,

1. From our Lord's Sermon in the Mount, which does most fully press upon us
the Performance of the highest Acts of Charity and Justice, Mercy, and Doing
unto others as we would be dealt with, but is not so sollicitous in pressing
outward Acts of Worship, which it does only teach us to perform in a due
manner, and so as to prevent that great Hypocrisy which was committed by the
Jewish Rabbis in their Prayers and Fastings. Moreover, among all the Blessings
with which our Lord begins that Sermon, we find not one pronounced upon the Man
that prays, or hears, or fasts or offers a large Sacrifice, or that is nice,
and zealous, but only on the pure in Heart, Mat. 7.21, 24.
the merciful, and the Peacemaker, the man that thirsts after Righteousness,
that hearing does the Will of God. The Precepts of the Moral Law, which in that
Sermon Christ interprets, and rescues from the false Glosses of the Scribes and
Pharisees, are chiefly those which do concern the Duties of the second Table,
and do prescribe the Offices of Love and Justice to our Neighbor; the things
which he there cautions us against, and chiefly labors to prevent, are
causless Anger, fleshly Lusts, Vainglory and Revenge, censorious Judging,
worldly Cares, and covetous Desires. And lastly, in that very Sermon he informs
us, That he will certainly renounce at the last day some eminent Professors,
Mat. 7.22.
who did often call him Lord, preach often in his Name, and performed many
Miracles for the Advancement of his Glory, as being Workers of Iniquity.

2. When any Man consulted him touching the things required to the obtainment
of eternal Life, he never did direct them to make long Prayers, to offer costly
Sacrifices, or to be much in fasting, but to be diligent in the performance of
Love to God, and of the Duties of the second Table; Luke 10.38.
This do, says he, and thou shall live: and when a Scribe had made this frank
Acknowledge, that to love God with all our Hearts, and love our Neighbor as
our selves, Mark 12.34.
was more than all burnt Offerings and Sacrifices, our Savior represents him
as a Person of good Understanding, who was not far from the Kingdom of God.

3. If we consider all those things in which we are in Scripture called to
imitate our Lord's Example, and to learn of him, we do not in the Scripture
find any express Command to imitate him in his fasting forty days, his praying
a whole Night, or in his Zeal showed to his Fathers House. But we expressly are
required to imitate his Meekness and Humility, Mat. 11. ult.
his Self-denial and Contempt of worldly things, his Love, Kindness, and
Tender-heartedness, his Bowels of Mercy, and readiness to forgive, Ephesians.
4.32.5.2. 1 Pet. 2.21. 1 John 3.3.
his Patience under Sufferings, his Purity and Righteousness, and his
Submission to the Will of God.

4. If we enquire into the Fruits of the good Spirit, who is the Spring of all
true Godliness, we shall not find that Prayer or Fasting, Preaching or Hearing,
or any other Acts of outward Worship, are mentioned among them, tho by this
Spirit alone we are enabled to perform them acceptably; but they are Love, Joy,
Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, Gal.
5.22. Truth, Goodness, Righteousness, Ephesians. 5.9. Nor does the Scripture promise
the Blessings of a better Life unto our praying, hearing, reading, fasting, but
to our doing of the Will of God, to the humble, meek, righteous, charitable
Person. It is the adding to our Faith, Virtue, Godliness, Knowledge,
Temperance, Patience, brotherly Kindness, Charity, 2 Pet. 1.6, 11
which will administer to us an abundant Entrance into the heavenly Kingdom of
our Lord and Savior. In a word, what are these outward Duties at the best but
means of Grace? for what were they appointed but to be Helps, Assistances, and
Motives unto Piety? to what end do we pray, and read, and hear, but to obtain
Grace to serve God acceptably? and that by the Assistance of it we may be
enabled to mortify the Flesh, and purify the Heart? Now means are all
inferior to, and only good as they conduce unto the end. When we once come to
Heaven, we shall pray, fast, and attend upon the outward Ordinances no more,
but then our Passions will be all regular, our Charity and our Obedience will
be perfect; and therefore, by St. 1 Cor. 13.8.13.
Paul's way of reasoning touching the Grace of Charity, these must be Duties of
an higher nature. Lastly, could we advance to those Perfections in which I
place the Power of Godliness, without these outward means, they would be both
accepted and rewarded by God; whereas without these Dispositions all our
praying, hearing, reading, fasting, are an Abomination to God, and only tend to
aggravate our future doom. 'Twill be the Aggravation of our future Misery,
that, having been so well acquainted, by hearing, and by reading, with our
Master's Will, we have not done it, our Prayers and Fastings will be sad
Indications of our great Hypocrisy; they will accuse us of mocking the
Almighty, when by them we professed our great desire to have strength for the
performance of his Will, our willingness to be revenged upon our selves for the
Omission of it, and yet when Grace sufficient was vouchsafed did not improve
it. This will convince us of our insincerity in our pretended Zeal for the
promotion of God's Glory, and fear in lesser matters to offend him, that we had
no true Zeal against those Sins which reigned in us, nor did make Conscience of
observing the more essential and weighty matters of the Law.

To conclude, We have seen the Exactness of the Scribes and Pharisees in the
performance of these outward things, and how exceeding confident they were on
these Accounts of Favor and Acceptance with God; and we have also seen with
what great sharpness our Lord rebukes their Confidence, still representing
these renowned Rabbis as the vilest Hypocrites, the Children of the Devil, a
Generation of Vipers, that could not escape the Damnation of Hell; and that the
thing which so incensed this Lamb of God against them, and made him almost to
forget his Meekness, was their want of Charity and Justice, purity of Heart and
Life, whilst they preserved a fair outside toward men; whence he so
vehemently exhorts them to purisie the inward Man. In the Records of the Holy
Prophets we have found that this was the Disease of God's own People; they had
the Temple of the Lord, the place of his peculiar Residence among them, thither
they daily went to offer up their Prayers, their Sacrifices, their Oblations,
and Thanksgivings for his peculiar Mercies to them; and whilst they constantly
performed these things, they thought God could not but be pleased with their
Persons, and that their Sacrifices would be a full Atonement for their Sins,
when they had bowed down their Heads like a Bulrush, when they had wept, and
fasted before God, although they did not loose the Bands of Wickedness: they
take upon them the Boldness to expostulate the case with God, and murmur that
their Services were not accepted; Isa. 58.3.
for wherefore, say they, have we fasted, and thou see not? wherefore have we
afflicted our Souls, and thou take no knowledge? To such a height of
Confidence were they arrived from the Performance of these Duties. And
therefore God seems much concerned to let them know that he delighted not in
their Oblations, Amos 5.21.
that he hated and despised their Feast-days, and would not smell in their
solemn Assemblies; that their burnt Offerings were not acceptable, Jer. 6.20.
Isa. 66.3.
nor their Sacrifices sweet unto him; that he that killed an Oxewas as if he
slew a Man; he that sacrificed a Lamb, as if he cut off a Dogs Neck; he that
offered an Oblation, as if he offered Swines Blood; and he that burned Incense,
as if he blessed an Idol. Hence does he call upon them with great earnestness
to put away the evil of their doings, to loose the bands of Wickedness, Isa.
58.6. Mi^. 6.10, 11.
to undo the heavy Burdens, to let the oppressed go free, and to break every
Yoke, to put away the Treasures of Wickedness kept in the Houses of the wicked,
the scant Measure, the wicked Balance, and the Bag of deceitful Weights; not to
oppress the Widow, nor the Fatherless, the Stranger or the Poor, nor to imagine
evil in their Hearts against their Neighbor. To learn to do well, Isa. 1.17.
to seek Judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the Fatherless, plead for the
Widow, Amos 5.24.
to let Judgment run down as Waters, and Righteousness as a mighty Stream; to
deal their Bread to the hungry, and bring the Poor, that are cast out, Isa.
58.7.
into their Houses; when they see the naked to cover him, and not to hide
themselves from their own Flesh; Zech. 7.9.
to execute true Judgment, and show Mercy and Compassion every Man to his
Brother. Whence we may learn these three Particulars;

1. That we are very prone to rest in the performance of these outward Duties,
and to be confident that they will purchase for us the Favor of the God of
Heaven, although we do not add unto them those inward Fruits of Righteousness
in which the Power of true Godliness consists: for wherefore was our Lord and
all these holy Prophets so concerned to warn men of this great Mistake, were
they not very prone to fall into it?

2. That we are naturally averse from those spiritual Duties in which the Life
and Power of true Godliness consists; for were it otherwise, why do the Holy
Prophets and our dear Lord so often inculcate, and with such Vehemence exhort men
to perform them? And,

3. That the Form of Godliness, without the Power of it, will be so far from
ministering to our Acceptance here, or Happiness hereafter, that it will be
thrown back as Dung into our Faces, and be the greatest Aggravation of our
future doom: for if God so despised, and with so great Abomination did reject
the Service of the Jews when 'twas not joined with Obedience and inward Purity,
with Acts of Charity and Justice, albeit their Religion was full of Shadows and
of outward Ceremonies; how much more will he loath the Service of the formal
Christian, from whom he chiefly does require a spiritual Worship, and an inward
Holiness? And oh! what pity is it that we who do so much to go to Heaven,
should do it to so bad or little purpose, that we should wholly lose the
benefit and comfort of all our Prayers and Fastings, Hearing and Reading, for
want of Care to do what we do hear and read, and by our Prayers and Fastings
seem desirous to do! or, that for want of doing more, we should provoke God to
reject with Hatred and Abomination what we have already done.

We being therefore apt to lie under these sad Mistakes which tend to the
destruction of our precious Souls, can any of us take it ill that we are thus
forewarned of them? Is it not reasonable to press us to perform those things
which are so necessary to our Salvation and Acceptance with God, and from which
we are naturally so averse?

Wherefore, Beloved, let me beseech you not to rest in any outward Form of
Godliness, but to advance unto the Power of it, by the subjection of your Wills
unto the Will of God, and a prevailing Love unto him, by the due Moderation of
your Passions and Affections, and the Purification of your Hearts from Anger,
Malice, Envy, uncharitable Censures, Pride and Self-conceit, unclean and wicked
Thoughts. Let us be careful that our Piety express it self in constant Acts of
universal Charity, and Mercy, Justice, and upright Conversation toward Men,
and in a peaceable Frame of Spirit: for if we only do express it by listing of
our selves to such a Party or Persuasion, or being zealous for it, by going to
the Church, hearing a Sermon there, repeating it at home, fasting, receiving of
the Sacrament, and leave these greater things undone, we only mock God with an
outward Show; but if unto this Form we add those things in which the Life of
Piety consists, we have obtained that Godliness which has the Promise of this
Life, and that which is to come.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the Militia of the County of Wilts, at their marching
against MONMOUTH.
TITUS 3.1. Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, and
obey Magistrates.


WE read in Suidas, that the Cretians, concerning whom St. Paul gives this
Command to Titus, were prone to stir up one another to Sedition, and that the
Preservation of their Liberties was the Pretense for their seditious Practices;
moreover, in that Island dwelt swarms of Jews and judaizing Christians, who
were, Titus 1.9.
says the Apostle, (...), Men of a Refractory and Seditious Spirit. One of
their wicked and seditious Principles was this, Vide 1 Timothy 6.1, 3. 1 Pet. 2.18.
That Servants were exempted from all Obligations of Obedience to their wicked
Masters: on which Account, St. Peter, in his Epistle to the dispersed Jews,
says thus, Servants, 1 Pet. 2.18.
be subject to your Masters in all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but
also to the froward. Another of their Rebellious Principles was this, That
Christians were not obliged to submit, or yield Obedience to Heathen
Governors, for such they deemed unworthy of that Honor, who were the Enemies
of the true God, and his Religion. To cure this Distemper which tended to
reproach Christianity, and represent it as destructive to the Peace and Quiet
of all earthly Kingdoms, the Apostle here prescribes two Duties:

1. (...), to yield Subjection to the Higher Powers, not daring to resist, or
to rise up in Opposition to them, when their Commands did thwart the Rules of
Christian Faith, and when they used their Authority to punish Christians for
the performance of their Duty toward God.

2. (...), to yield a cheerful and sincere Obedience to them in all lawful
matters.

The Persons whom they are here commanded to obey, and to be subject to, are,
(...), Principalities and Powers. Now because here the Words are in the
Abstract, and in the 13th Chapter to the Romans, run in the same manner, let
every Soul be subject to the Higher Powers; Hence our late Rebels took occasion
to separate the Power from the Person in whom that Power does reside,
decla^ing, That they were indeed obliged to preserve a Magistracy, and to be
subject to some Government or other, but not to yield Subjection to the wicked
Mugistrate, or be obedient to the Commands of any Higher Powers in particular,
unless they were the Ministers of God for good unto them; which in plain
English does import, That they are only then obliged to be subject to, or yield
Obedience to the Civil Magistrate, when they themselves do like, or do approve
of his Commands. And truly it must be confessed, that some Great Fathers seem
to hint a like Distinction; for (...), quae leguntur in Graeco magic
Principatus quam principes sonant, and ipsam significant potestatem, (...) cos
qui in potestate sunt homines. Hieron. in Tit. cap. 3.
Jerome, on my Text, speaks thus; The Apostle here commands Obedience to the
Power, not to the Men who are invested with it: (...), Chrysostom. Hom. 23. in Romans
To. 3. p. 189. (...). Occum. in Romans 13. p. 353. Gr.
St. Chrysostom, Occumenius, and Theophylact, say the same. To govern and be
governed is of God, In Iocum.
says Theodoret, but not the Government of wicked Persons; for the Power of
wicked Men is not God's Ordinance. But tho this of And therefore other Fathers
tell us, That etiam nocentium potestas non est nisi a Deo. August. lib. de
natura boni adv. Manich. c. 32. That he who gave the Government to Augustus,
ipse and Neront; qui Constantino Christiano, ipse Apostutae Juliano. Idem de
Civitat. Dei, l. 5. c. 21. That bona malaque potestas a Deo ordinatur, Isidor.
Hispal. Sentent. l. 3. c. 48.
Usurpers may be true, yet is it undeniable, that here, and in the 13th of the
Romans, the Apostle speaks not of the Power in the Abstract, but of the
Governors invested with it: for, 1. We are here bid to yield Obedience, and to
be subject to these Principalities and Powers. Now no Subjection can be paid to
any Office in the general, but only to the Persons who do execute that Office.
And this is still more evident in the forementioned Chapter to the Romans, for
there the Powers, v. 3. are the Rulers; Let every Soul be subject to the Higher
Powers; for Rulers are not a terror to good Works. The Power is the Minister of
God, v. 3, 4. Will thou not be afraid of the Power? Do that which is good, for
he is the Minister of God to thee for good. Nor indeed can the Power abstracted
from the Person of the Magistrate perform what is ascribed by St. Paul unto the
Higher Powers; it neither can commend, encourage, avenge, or punish; it cannot
receive Custom, bear the Sword, or still attend upon the very thing. Lastly,
St. Peter plainly does enjoin Obedience to the Prince who is invested with this
Power, 2 Pet. 2.13, etc.
saying, Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake; to
the King as Supreme, etc. And therefore to assert that it is lawful to resist
the Person who does execute this Wrath, provided we do own some Government, or
some Authority to be God's Ordinance, is only to be subtly Rebellions, and to
distinguish to our own Damnation.

Farther, Observe that the Subjection and Obedience required in my Text is due,
1. to the Supreme, or Highest Magistrate; to the Higher Powers, says St. Paul;
to the King as supreme, says Peter; and that according to a known Rule in
Logic, that Analogum per se positum, etc. What is affirmed of a thing in
general, is chiefly to be understood of that which is the best and highest in
that kind: it being therefore in my Text affirmed, that Subjection and
Obedience is due to Principalities and Powers, it must be chiefly due to
Supreme Princes and the Higher Powers. Now he alone can be Supreme who has
none equal or superior in Power to him, and therefore who cannot be judged, or
called to account, and much less punished for what he does by any Power upon
Earth, according to these Words of the Wiseman, Where the Word of a King is
there is Power, Eccles. 3.4. Prove. 30.3^.
and who can say unto him, What do thou? And again, A King is one against
whom no Man can rise up: now because he who is thus supreme is but a Man, and
therefore is confined to a certain place, so that his Eyes cannot discern, not
can his Hands reach all Offenders, nor can he be sufficient, in his own Person,
to perform all that is requisite to be done for Preservation of his Subjects,
and for the Punishment of Evildoers; it follows that he must commissionate
inferior Magistrates to do these things by an Authority derived from him, and
therefore by just consequence we are obliged to yield Subjection and Obedience
to all inferior Magistrates who legally receive Commission from him, for God
quis facit per alium, id ipse facere judicatur; that therefore must be deemed
the King's Command which his inferior Magistrates, by good Authority derived
from him, lay upon us; according to that plain Expression of St. Peter, Submit
your selves to the King as supreme, and unto them who are commissionated by
him, for so is the Will of God.

3. Observe that the Higher Powers then in Being when our Lord said Render to
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, Matt. 22.21. Matt. 26.52.
and He that takes the Sword shall perish by it, were Tiberius, and Men
commissionated by him; and that when Paul and Peter wrote these Exhortations to
Obedience, and did declate it was Damnation to resist, the Government was in
the hands of Claudius and Nero. Sueton. c. 42, 43, 44, 45, 49, 50, 61.
Now this Tiberius was a Man unnaturally cruel to his most near Relations,
infamous for Drunkenness; his Lusts were so excessive, that Suetonius says,
they were incredible, and were scarce fit to be related. He was so far from
being an Assertor of the Religion of the Jews, c. 36.
the only true Religion then in being, that he would not allow the Exercise
thereof at Rome, but did inflict great Penalties on the Professors of it; under
his Government the Images of Caesar were brought into Jerusalem by Pilate, as
an Affront to their Religion, and the Treasures of the Temple were seized upon.
He, by his President, did crucify the Holy Jesus, and killed with the Sword
St. James, the first of Christian Bishops there, so great an Adversary was he
to the Christian Faith; and yet our Savior owns that his Authority, even
against himself, was from above, John 19.11.
and that it was not lawful, in defense of his own Person, to take up the Sword
against him. Claudius was a debauched and vicious Person, and barbarously
cruel; Suetonius declares, that he was a very Prodigy of Lust, that he was of a
most salvage, c. 33, 34, 37. c. 25.
bloody Temper: he was so great an Enemy to the right Worship of the only true
God, that under the Name of Jews he banished the Christians from Rome. Suet. c.
16. Tacit. l. 15. p. 363.
At the Command of Nero the Christians were exposed to the most exquisite
Punishments, says Tacitus: they were torn in pieces of Dogs, and nailed to the
Cross, or being roul'd in Pitch, were so committed to the Flames, and made to
serve the use of Torches in the Night. These were the Persons which the
Christians of that Age in Scripture are forbidden to resist, and were commanded
to obey in all things lawful to be done. So that from hence these two
Conclusions will arise;

First, That Christians must be subject to their Civil Magistrates, and in no
Cases are allowed or authorized forcibly to resist, or to bear Arms against
them.

Secondly, That in all lawful Matters they stand bound to yield active
Obedience to the Commands of their Superiors. And,

First, That Christians must be subject to their Civil Magistrates, and in no
Cases are allowed or authorized forcibly to resist, or take up Arms against
them, may be evident,

1. From those Expressions of the Old Testament, which reprehend and positively
condemn all evil Speeches of the Higher Powers, which say, Thou shall not
revile the Gods, Exodus 22.28.
nor speak Evil of the Ruler of thy People; against which Text St. Paul
confesses he offended, when he said to the High Priest, God shall smite thee,
thou whited Wall, although that High Priest even then commanded that St. Paul
should be smitten contrary to the Law, Acts 23.3.
and so was an unrighteous Judge. And seeing by occasion of the Misgovernment
of evil Princes, Men, through impatience of Spirit, might be apt to break forth
into disloyal Thoughts and undutiful Affections to them, even when Fear
restrains them from seditious Speeches or rebellious Practices, the Wiseman
strictly does prohibit even these Risings of the Heart against them, saying,
Eccles. 10.20.
Curse not the King, no not in thy Thoughts; do not wish any Evil to his
Person, Crown, or Government, no not in thy most secret and inward Thoughts.
Now hence I argue thus; If we may not speak Evil of the Ruler of the People,
much less may we act Evil against him; if we may not revile him with the
Tongue, we may not smite him with the Fist; if we may not say unto him thou art
wicked, Job 34.18.
we cannot surely judge, or pass the Sentence on him as a wicked Person, and
much less may we punish him as such; if we may not have an undutiful or
disloyal Thought of him, much less may we do an undutiful or disloyal Act
toward him.

2. This will be farther evident from the Deportment of the Man after God's own
Heart toward King Saul; for God himself had stablished this Law, Deuteronomy. 17.15.
Thou shall in any wise set him King over thee whom the Lord thy God shall
choose; he also had rejected Saul and his whole Family from ruling over Israel,
1 Samuel 15.26.16.12.
The Lord has rejected thee, says Samuel to Saul, from being King, he has
rent the Kingdom from thee, and has given it to a Neighbor of thine that is
better than thou: he says not that hereafter he would rend it from him, 1 Samuel
15.28, 30.
but more expressly, this day the Lord has done it. All this is said by the
same Prophet, in the Name of the same God who chose Saul King, and before all
the People. Again God says to Samuel, not only that he had rejected Saul from
reigning over Israel, but also that he had provided for himself another King,
whom instantly he sends him to anoint, without any Expressions of Reservation
for the Life of Saul; and instantly upon this Unction, the Spirit of the Lord,
the Spirit of Wisdom, 1 Samuel 16.13, 14.
Counsel and Government, came upon David from that day forward, and departed
from Saul. He also was accepted in the sight of all the People; and what more
plausible Pretenses could be offered of Failure on the part of Saul, or of the
actual investing of David in the Kingly Government? After all this, Saul
persecutes him out of his Dominions, and drove him out from abiding in the
Inheritance of the Lord, saying, Go serve other Gods. 1 Samuel ^6.19. chapter 18.11.
chapter 19.11. chapter 20.31. chapter 24.11. Ibid. (...).
He casts a Javelin at him to smite him to the Wall; sends Messengers to his
House to watch him, and slay him in the Morning. He declares that he shall
surely die: and in pursuance of that bloody Resolution, he hunted him as a
Partridge in the Wilderness, and pursued his Life to take it away: all this he
did against him, tho there was neither Evil, nor Transgression, nor Rebellion
in his hand. So that no subject in the World could have a better Plea for
self-defence, or taking up the Sword on the Account of the tyrannical
Deportment of a King, than he had against Saul; and yet behold with what This
is an Instance on which the Fathers much insist, and often urge for the
Suppression of all Rebellious Attempts and Practices: (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 1.
in David and Soul. to 8. p. 16. lin. 27, 38. Basil of Sileucia introduces David
speaking thus, (...). Orat. 16. Optatus makes him speak thus; Sine causa me
victoria provo^^s, frustra me occasio in triumphos invitas, volebam hostem
vincere, sed prius est divina praecepta servare; non inquit, mittam manus in
unctum domini, repressit cum gladio manum, and dum timuit oleum, servavit
inimicum. adv. Parmen. l. 2. p. 60.
Abhorrence and Detestation he looks upon the stretching forth his hand against
him. Chalilah li Mejehovah, 1 Sa. 24.6.
Abomination will be charged upon me from the Lord, if I stretch forth my Hand
against the Lord's Anointed; and again, chapter 26.11. chapter 24.5.
The Lord forbid that I should stretch forth my Hand against the Lord's
Anointed: yea, no sooner had he cut off the Skirt of Readiness Robe, but his Heart
smote him for it. When Providence seemed twice to have delivered Saul into his
Hands, and Abishai offered to smite him to the Earth, his Answer to Abishai
was, Destroy him not, chapter 26.9.
for who can stretch forth his Hand against the Lord's Anointed, and be
guiltless. And lastly, when the Amalakite did at Readiness own Request, when he
was mortally wounded, and ready to be seized by his Enemies, stretch forth his
Hand against him, David revenged that Action by the Death of the Amalakite; nor
is he ever charged in Scripture with Murder or In justice for that Act: so
that no Provocations, no Advantages, no Color or Pretense of Right from God,
or Failure on the part of Saul, could prevail with him to one Rebellious
Attempt against the Lord's Anointed. Now that which made it thus unlawful to
rise up against him, could only be, that he received his Authority from God:
since then all other lawful Sovereigns are by St. Paul declared to be, the
Ordinance and Ministers of God, it must be as unlawful, in such Cases, to rise
up against them.

Jeroboam, and the ten Tribes who openly revolted from Rehoboam, who being Heir
to Solomon was legally their King:

Rebellion; for the People having said, 1 Kings 12.19.
What Portion have we in David, neither have we Inheritance in the Son of
Jesse, and it follows, So Israel rebelled against the House of David to this
Day. Now what the God of Truth does style Rebellion, that is, the rising up
against that Person to whom they owe Allegiance, must certainly deserve that
Character; so that God by calling that which the ten Tribes did, a Rebellion,
does thereby declare that Rehoboam was still their lawful Sovereign; for
otherwise, their renouncing of him, and setting up another in his stead, would
not have been a Rebellion. And therefore, when God declares, that this thing
was from him, we must thus understand it, that it was permissively from him,
that he left Rehoboam thus to his own Pride, he suffered Satan to incline him
to hearken to the Counsel of his Young Men, and to despise the sage Advice of
the Elders, and also to alienate the Hearts of Israel from him, that so he
might fulfill his Threatenings against Solomon for his Idolatry, which he
pronounced in these Words; Forasmuch as this is done of thee, and thou have not
kept my Covenant and my Statutes, 1 Kings 11.11, 12.
which I have commanded thee, I will surely rend the Kingdom from thee, and
will give it to thy Servant; notwithstanding in thy days I will not do it, but
I will rend it out of thy Sons hand: I will for this afflict the Seed of David.
v. 39.
Now what is thus from God, may yet be Sin in him, or them, unto an high
degree, who are the Executioners of his Punishments, and do accomplish his
Decrees; as in the Instance of those Heathen Kings who vexed Israel, tho God
permitted them to do so for his Peoples Punishment, for God delivered them up
into the hands of the Spoilers that spoiled them, Judge. 2.14.
and sold them into the hands of their Enemies round about, and yet he was
resolved to punish all that oppressed them. Jer. 30.20. 2 Samuel 24.
In the Case of David, whom the Lord moved to say, Go number Israel and Judah,
because his Wrath was kindled against Israel, and yet he does severely punish
him on that Account; and in the instance of our Savior's Passion, for the
People of Israel and the Gentiles did only to him what God's Hand and Counsel
determined before to be done, Act. 4.28.
and yet they suffer severely for it to this day.

If it be still objected, That God by his Prophet Ahijah promised, that he
would rend the Kingdom out of the hands of Solomon, 1 Kings 11.31, 35.
and give ten Tribes to Jeroboam; and again, that he would take the Kingdom out
of his Sons hands, and give it unto him, (...) 37, 38.
even ten Tribes, and said, I will take thee, and thou shall reign according to
all that thy Soul desires, and shall be King over Israel: and that this must
of necessity be done during the Reign of one of the Posterity and Seed of
David, to whom the Government of these ten Tribes belonged by Right of
Succession, God having promised that to his Son he would give one Tribe, 1 Kin.
11.^^.^^.
that David his Servant might have a Light before him always in Jerusalem; and
again, I will not take the whole Kingdom out of his hand. And therefore that
this could not be Rebellion in Jeroboam to take the Government of these ten
Tribes upon him, whilst there was still surviving any Heir of David and
Solomon, since otherwise he never could have had it, and so God's Promise could
not have been fulfilled. And again, for the same reason that it could not be
Rebellion in the ten Tribes to quit the Government of Rehoboam and embrace that
of Jeroboam, because that Rehoboam was the Legal Heir of Solomon, since God had
promised that he should have a Legal Heir for ever, and so they never could
have submitted to Jeroboam without Rebellion, and so God's Promise could not
have been fulfilled. And lastly, if it be objected, that had this been
Rebellion on the foresaid Account they must have been under a constant
Obligation to revolt from Jeroboam and his Posterity to the House of David,
which yet God never calls them to do, nor condemns them for not doing; and
then the Gift God promised and performed to Jeroboam must be a Gift he was
obliged in Conscience not to receive, because he could not do it without
keeping another man's Subjects from that Allegiance they owed unto him, and
therefore being instrumental to their continual Sin. I say, if it be thus
objected, to confess ingeniously, quo me vertam nescio, I find it very
difficult to avoid the strength of these Objections, which make some rather
choose to say this Action, tho very peccant upon various Accounts, was yet not
formally Rebellion, because performed by a special Commission from God who gave
to Jeroboam these ten Tribes, and by so doing transferred their Duty of
Allegiance from Rehoboam unto him; which he might with good reason do, seeing
he is the King of Kings, from whom all carthly Powers hold their Dominions,
Durante ejus beneplacito, Dan. 4.17.
who rules in the Kingdoms of Men, and gives them to whomsoever he will; and
seeing, secondly, he was the Judge and Governor of Rehoboam, who had a Right
to punish him and his Forefathers, how, and by whom, and unto what Degree he
pleased, and therefore to the deprivation of all, or of the greater part of his
whole Kingdom if he pleased: But then to argue, That because this Great
Sovereign may do it to his Subjects, that therefore Subjects may do the like to
their Superiors; That because Jeroboam might do this by an especial and
particular Grant and Commission from the God of Heaven, That therefore others
may do the like, tho they have no Commission of like nature from God, is as
absurd as it would be for us to rob and spoil our Neighbors, and keep what we
have borrowed of them without Restitution, because upon a special and
particular Commission from the great Lord of all things, the Israelites did
innocently deal so with the Egyptians; or salvagely to butcher, or to cut off
all Papists that do dwell among us, because they were commanded to do thus to
the Idolaters in the Land of Canaan.

2. I answer, 1 Kings 12.19.
It is not said in Scripture that Jeroboam rebelled against the House of David,
but that Israel did so: their Action plainly seems to have been Rebellion,
because it was an actual renouncing of their lawful Sovereign, without God's
Warrant to them so to do; for they do with one Voice cry out, What Portion have
we in David, and what Inheritance have we in the Son of Jesse, and thereupon
depart from Rehoboam, and appoint Jeroboam to be their King, without any
Commission from God to do so. Moreover, they do this not out of any pretense of
God's rejecting Rehoboam, but only for this Cause, That he refused to make
their Yoke easy, and to remove the pretended Burdens which his Father had
laid upon them; and therefore they revolted upon Rebellious Principles. For, as
a Father does not forfeit his Authority over his Children, nor are they freed
from that Obedience which they owe unto him by virtue of the Fifth Commandment,
because he deals severely with them, and is not to indulgent to, or careful of
them as he ought to be; so neither can the King, i. e. the Father of his
Country, lose his Authority over his Subjects, because he governs them
severely, or lays afflicting Burdens on them; nor can their Subjects be
disobliged from that Obedience which they owe unto them upon those Accounts;
for if Servants, as St. Peter says, are to obey such Masters who are froward
and perverse, i. e. severe in their Commands, 1 Pet. 2.18, 19.
and cruel in chastising them; if they with Patience were to endure Grief, and
suffer wrongfully for Conscience toward God; if the Angel commanded Hagar even
when her Mistress afflicted her, Genesis 16.6, 9.
and dealt hardly with her, to return and submit her self unto her Hands; much
more are Subjects to obey, and to continue in Obedience to their Sovereign, tho
they be never so severely dealt with by them. But as for Jeroboam, he only took
what God had promised to give him, by rending of ten Tribes out of the hands of
Rehoboam, and in that very method in which it pleased God to make good his
Promise; for the Text does expressly say, this matter was from God, that he
might perform the Saying which the Lord spoke by Ah^jah the Shilonite unto
Jeroboam the Son of Nebat: 1 Kings 12.15.
and when the Subjects of Rehoboam assembled to fight with the Children of
Israel, God, by his Prophet, does forbid them, saying, v. 24.
Ye shall not go up, nor fight against your Brethren the Children of Israel,
for this thing is from me. I therefore think of this whole matter thus; That
Jeroboam was not guilty of any Usurpation which might render him a Rebel
against Rehoboam; that the People were Rebellious in the Principle which moved
them to revolt, and in revolting without Commission from God; but that upon
this Declaration made by God's Prophet it became their Duty to own, and to
submit to Jeroboam as their King.

Now seeing Christ came not to take away, or to diminish any of the Rights of
Princes, but rather to establish and confirm them: Hence I infer, That the
Resistance, whether in Word or Deed, which was forbidden in the Old, cannot be
rationally thought to be approved in the New Testament; but rather we may
rationally judge, that as our Savior came to advance the other Duties of the
Moral Law; so much more, by his suffering Religion, to advance this moral
Precept of Honor and Submission to our Superiors. To which effect it is
excellently observed by a very Learned Prelate, The Lord Bishop of Sarum.
That we find Christ and his Apostles frequently laboring to settle in the
Consciences of men their Obligations to Obedience, and patient suffering where
they cannot actively obey, but no where restraining, limiting, or particularly
regulating the Office of Sovereign Powers (much less permitting, or giving
Power to their Subjects to limit or restrain their Power) but leaving them to
those general Rules which concern the Account and Duty of all Men in their
several Stations, and to the terms whereupon the Providence of God was wont to
settle the Princes and Governors of the World. Let the Rights of Caesar be
what they will in reference to Tribute, Christ will not determine them: this he
will, Those things which belong to Caesar, according to Jus gentium, must be
reudred to him. He does not examine Pilate 's Power in case of Blasphemy and
Treasen, but acknowledges it to be of God, and submits. And so likewise the
Apostles seem to be unconcerned, as it were, in the governing part of Civil
Policy. No word is found in all their Writings, enquiring into the Rights of
the Roman Emperors, who were Sovereign, or limiting the exercise of their
Power: only thus much they take for certain, such as they were, they were
ordained of God, and they spend all their labor in founding deeply, and firmly
establishing that other part which concerns Obedience. For the Scriptures of
the New Testament do most expressly call for our Subjection to, and as expressly
do forbid resistance of the Higher Powers. Romans 13.1, 2.
Let every Soul be subject to them, says St. Paul: so let him yield Subjection
to them as never to resist on any Provocation, Temptation, or specious Pretense
whatsoever; for, Whosoever does resist the Power, resists the Ordinance of God,
and they that resist (his Ordinance) shall receive to themselves Damnation. 1
Pet. 2.13, 14, 15, 16.
Be subject to every Ordinance of Man, says Peter, (i. e. to every Power daily
ordained among men) for the Lord's sake, (or for the sake of him whose
Ordinance they are) whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto them that are
sent by him; for this is the Will of God, this is well-doing, this is acting as
the Servants of God. And though their Government should be unjust, and they
should punish you only for keeping a good Conscience, do you bear it patiently,
for this is thank worthy, v. 19.
if a Man for Conscience toward God endure Grief, suffering wrongfully. v. 20.
If when we do well, and suffer for it, we take it patiently, this is
acceptable with God; this is to act according to our Christian Calling, v. 21.
and the Example of that Lord whom we are bound to imitate: For even hereunto
were we called, because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an Example that
we should follow his Steps, who when he was reviled, reviled not again, when he
suffered, he did not so much as threaten.

1. Where in the first place note what has already been made good, that the
then present Governors were cruel and tyrannical. And,

2. The Christians, to whom St. Paul and Peter directed these Commands, were
Men of spotless Innocence, Men groaning under the Pressures of the Cross, 1
Cor. 15.9.
and laboring under most heavy Persecutions for the Gospel's sake. They were,
says the Apostle Paul, obnoxious to such Afflictions as would have rendered
them of all Men the most miserable, v. 30.
had they not been supported by their future Hopes. 2 Cor. 4.11. 1 Thessalonians.
1.6.3.4. 2 Thessalonians. 1.4. Heb. 10.32. 1 Pet. 1.6.4.12.
They were in Jeopardy every Hour, always delivered to Death for Jesus sake.
They received the Word of God with much Affliction, great Tribulations, and
Persecutions, and they endured a great fight of Afflictions. They were, says
Peter, subject to manifold Temptations, and fiery Trials. But notwithstanding
all these Sufferings, their Master strictly has obliged them not to take up
the Sword, not to resist their cruel persecuting Magistrates; but when they
suffer wrongfully, for doing well, for Conscience toward God to take it
patiently. Whence it is clear, that by the Christian Doctrine, it is unlawful
to resist the Higher Powers upon pretense of Maladministration, Tyranny,
Injustice, or to rebel, for the Defense of our Religion, against the worst of
Persecuting Princes. For if Resistance, in the forementioned Cases, was a
damning Sin, when can it be excusable? and if it is the Will of God, that when
his Servants suffer purely for Conscience toward God, and are delivered to
Death for Jesus sake, they should then bear it patiently, when can it be
supposed, agreeable unto his Will, that Christians should resist the Higher
Powers?

2. Observe, that when these Precepts were delivered, there was then, in the
Imperial City, a Senate (somewhat like our Parliament, or House of Commons) yea
such a Senate by whom the Emperors or Higher Powers, then in being, were
elected, and by whose Election they became the Ordinance of God, having no
Right unto that Character till they were thus elected; De Jure Belli, l. 2. c.
9.. 11.
for as Grotius truly notes, and proves, Electio Imperatoris ad populum
pertinebat, and aliquoties a populo per se, aut per Senatum facta est, quae
autem a Legionibus modo his, modo illis, fiebant Electiones, non erant ratae ex
jure Legionum (nam in vago nomine jus certum esse non poterat) sed ex
approbatione populi. Examples of which Elections made or approved by the
Senate, he gives many in his Notes upon that Section. And yet the Scripture
takes no notice of this Senate, it does not limit the Obedience of the
Christians or those times to things commanded by the Emperors and not
forbidden by the Roman Senate; it does not say, Obey them till that Senate,
which at first chose them, or approved of them, do again reject them; but
plainly, and without exception, does enjoin us not to resist the Higher Powers.
The Taxing, Luke 2.1.
or Enrolling, at the Birth of Christ, was by the Decree, not of the Senate,
but Augustus; the Tribute-money had Caesar's Image and Inscription on it, and
therefore, by our Savior's Argument, did show that Caesar was to be obeyed.
St. Paul's Appeal was made not to the Roman Senate, Acts 20.10, 11.
but to Caesar, at whose Judgment Seat, says he, I ought to be judged. The
Submission which St. Peter speaks of, is to the King as Supreme. So that the
Spirit of God seems plainly to condemn those specious Pleas and politic
Pretenses which our late Rebels made to Justify their Insurrection against our
Caesar and his Imperial Crown, by virtue of a pretended Power derived from
Lords or Commons, who neither do elect nor approve of our Kings before they
have a Right unto their Government, and who are most apparently inferior to
him, since he gives being to both those Houses by his Writ, continues them at
his own Pleasure, adjourns, prorogueth, and dissolves them pro Imperio.

Higher Powers because they cannot do it without Resistance of the Ordinance of
God. That Magistracy is God's Ordinance, that Supreme Powers are the Ministers
of God, and not of Men, that they do act by an Authority derived from him, and
not from men, even when by the Election of Man they become the Higher Powers,
is evident from Scripture, and from Reason. From Scripture, which does often
style them Gods, Exodus 21.6. Exodus 22.28. 1 Samuel 2.25. Psalm. 82.6. 1 Samuel 24.6,
10.26.9, 11, 16, 23. 2 Samuel 1.14, 16.
and the Children of the Mest High. His Servants, his Anointed, as Saul is
often styled, even after that God's Spirit was departed from him, and David by
his Prophet was anointed King. Now as no Man can be Vicegerent to an earthly
Prince, but by his Order and Commission; so can no Sovereign Prince be God's
Vicegerent without the Ordinance, or the Commission of the God of Heaven to act
as his Immediate Officer on Earth. And suitably to this Assertion, the Apostle
has declared of the Supreme Authority in being then, what is as true, by
parity of Reason, of those in being now, that they were all the Ordinance of
God, the Ministers of God, the Officers of God; Romans 13.2, 4, 6.
that there is no Power but of God, and that the Powers that be are ordained of
God. And even that Power which Pontius Pilate did abuse to the condemning of
our Savior, was, by our Lord's Confession, from above; Joh. 19.11.
for thou, says he, could have no Power at all against me, unless it were
given thee from above. It also is extremely evident from Reason; for what is
more unlikely, than that he, who is the God of Order, should, Faulkn. Christian
Loyalty, p. 416.
for the peace and good of lesser Societies in private Families, ordain the
Authority of Parents over their Children, and the Headship of the Husband over
the Wife; and yet should leave the more general and public state of Mankind,
which is of greatest Concernment, without any Government, which truly can be
styled his Ordinance. It would moreover reflect unduly on Divine Goodness, to
conceive, that it was not his Will that Justice, Righteousness, and Peace,
should be preserved, and Goodness countenanced and rewarded by Men; that
Evildoers should be punished, and the Destroyers of his Image should suffer by
the hand of Justice: and yet it cannot be conceived that he has made Provision
for these things, unless this Governor of all the Earth, this Lord of Life, to
whom Vengeance does primarily belong, has constituted and ordained, that this
his Government and Power should be committed to some Persons who thereupon
should act as his Vicegerents here on Earth, and should be owned as his
Ordinance. This therefore being true of all Supreme Authority, that it is
Potestas Dei vicaria, a Ray of divine Majesty, that it is entrusted with that
Power only which is from above, and represents none but God, whosoever
lifts up his Hands against it must be a Fighter against God; for if a cruel
and blood-thirsty Nero is, as St. Paul asserts, the Ordinance of God, whosoever
does resist him must resist God's Ordinance; and if there is no Power, whether
of Nero or Domitian, but from God, there can be no Resistance but from Satan.
If even that Power which condemned the Savior of the World, commenced from
Heaven, all Insurrections against such Powers must certainly derive from Hell.
In a word, If Government be the Constitution of God, to make forcible
Opposition against it, Faulkn. ib. p. 427.
must either be in design to have God's Authority subject to them who so act,
or at least, that themselves may not be subject unto it; both which things are
unreasonable, and include a resisting the Ordinance of God.

Christian Subjects must resist the Higher Powers, because they cannot do it
without taking of the Sword, avenging of themselves, and claiming of the Power
of Life and Death, and passing Judgment on their Fellow Subjects; all which
Prerogatives belong immediately to God, and by his Ordinance alone, or Grant to
any Humane Powers. Romans 12.19. Matt. 5.39.
For God expressly says, Vengeance is mine, I will repay it, and has commanded
us, (...), not to resist when we do suffer Evil. The Injury we do against our
Fellow Subjects is done to one of God's own Subjects, it is a Violation of his
Law, and so it properly belongs to him to punish it. God also being Judge of
all the Earth, 2 Chronicles. 19.6.
all Acts of Judgment are declared to be not for Man, but for the Lord, because
they are performed by an Authority derived from him. Act. 17.25, 28.
Moreover, it is by God we live, and move, and have our Beings; he gives to us
Life and Breath, and all things. No man can therefore wield the Sword of
Justice, or use that Sword to take away his Brothers Life, but by Authority
from the God of our Lives, by whom the Higher Powers are commissioned, and who
are therefore said by his Authority to bear the Sword, and be his Ministers in
executing Vengeance on the Evil-doer. And therefore when St. Peter did attempt
to wield the Sword even in Christ's Cause, our Lord rebukes him, Matt. 26.52.
saying, Put up thy Sword into its place, for all that take the Sword shall
perish by it. This is, says Musculus, Locus notandus omnibus subditis, a place
to be well noted by all Subjects: for,

1. This was a Cause wherein Religion and Civil Justice were both much
concerned: for, the malicious Jews were now pursuing their Design to put the
blessed Jesus to an ignominious Death, to crucify the true Messiah, and to
extirpate his holy Doctrine from the Earth; and Justice never was more highly
violated than in the Methods which they used to destroy the Lord of Life. And
yet, when upon this occasion his Disciples said, Luke 22.49.
Master, shall we smite with the Sword? he peremptorily forbids it, and checks
St. Peter's hasty use thereof; and this he does, partly because, John 18.36.
as he declared, his Kingdom was not of this World, and so his Servants should
not fight for its Defense against Authority; partly because they could not do
it in opposition to Authority, without the taking of the Sword; Contra Faust^m
Manich. lib. 22. c. 70.
for he, says Austin truly, takes the Sword, who, when no lawful Power does
command, or authorize him so to do, uses Force of Arms to shed the Blood of
others.

Secondly, Observe, that they who came to apprehend our Savior were only some
Inferior Officers, commissionated by the Supreme Authority, and yet they must
not be resisted, says our Lord.

Thirdly, If we consider the Intention of the Person smiting, we shall find
that he had no design, or purpose to rebel against, or to turn Casar out of his
Dominions, but only to preserve his Master; it therefore may be fairly pleaded
in behalf of Peter, that be kept the Laws inculpatae tutelae, of Self-defence,
that what he did was of a sudden without deliberation, and that he did not kill
outright, but only wounded the High Priests Servant; and yet our Savior not
only does dislike the Action, but thinks it necessary to work a Miracle for
reparation of the Injury done by it. If therefore to unsheath the Sword in
Christ's own Cause against the meanest Officer commissionated by the Higher
Powers, be to usurp it, what must it be to take it in our own? If to avenge our
selves upon our Equals, be to usurp on God's Prerogative, what must it be to
offer to avenge our selves on our Superiors? If lastly, it be murder to shed
our Brother's blood without commission from God, or his Vicegerent, then all,
who fight against Authority, must become guilty of that sin, and it will much
concern them to consider what St. John has said, viz. 1 John. 3.15.
that no Murderer has Eternal Life abiding in him.

And suitable unto these Principles of our Religion, is the Constitution of our
present Government, which does acknowledge, that the whole Power of the Sword,
or the Militia, is in the King, and, 13 Car. 2.1.
that it is Treason to levy War against him within the Realm, or without, that
justice regularly must be executed, and Vengeance recompensed by Judges who
receive commission from him to do it For our Sovereign Lord the King, which is
the current style both of our Statutes, and of their Commissions. That the
Crown of England has been so free at all times, that it has been in no
earthly Subjection, 16 R. 2.
but immediately subject to God in all things touching the Regality of the same
Crown, and to no other. That the Realm of England is an Empire governed by one
Supreme Head and King, 24 H. 8.12.
to whom a Body Politic of Spiritualty and Temporalty be bounden, and ought to
bear, next to God, a natural, and humble obedience. That both, or either Houses
of Parliament cannot, 13 Car. 2.6.14.2, 3.
nor lawfully may raise or levy any War, offensive or defensive against his
Majesty, his Heirs, and lawful Successors, and lastly, that it is unlawful upon
any pretense whatsoever, to take up Arms against him, or against those who are
commissionated by him.

Fourthly, The Christian ought not to resist Superiors, because He, by so
doing, will cast a great reproach upon the Name and Doctrine of our Lord, and
give occasion to renew that Calumny of Jews and Heathens, that our Lord was no
Friend to Caesar, that his Disciples were the men, who by their Doctrine turned
the world upside down, and that Christianity was instrumental to promote
Rebellions, and give disturbance to the Civil Government; and for this Cause
St. Peter is so earnest in his Exhortation to submit to every Ordinance of man
for the Lords Sake, that by so doing Christians might put to silence the
ignorance of foolish men, who knowing nothing of the peaceable and loyal
Principles of Christian Faith, did represent it as destructive to the Civil
Government, and prejudicial to the Higher Powers. And surely to pretend that
our Religion does allow such horrid Crimes, is most effectually to blaspheme
our Holy Calling, and cast upon it an indelible Reproach. For if those Jews who
gloried in the privilege of Circumcision, and yet were guilty of Adultery, Romans
2.24.
Theft, Sacrilege, blasphemed the name of God among the Gentiles, he must
assuredly blaspheme it, who, being guilty of Sedition, Faction, and Resistance
of the Higher Powers, does glory in the name of Christian. And if the Name and
Doctrine of our Lord is then blasphemed, Tit. 2.6.
when the Wife does not yield Subjection to the Husband, and when the Christian
Servant does not yield Obedience to his Master in all things, must they not be
blasphemed much more, when Subjects do not yield Obedience to their Prince?

Add to this, that all the Pleas and specious Pretenses which were used to
justify our late Rebellions, do cast on the Apostles and Penmen of the Holy
Scriptures, the Reproach of gross Dissimulation and Hypocrisy. For were it
lawful to take up Arms against our Governors, when we conceived them guilty of
Tyrannical abuse of Power, when they became a terror to good works, and not to
evil only, when they did seem to us to act against the good and welfare of the
Kingdom, or against their Coronation Oaths, or when they did not rule according
to Justice, or established Laws, or were it lawful to resist them in behalf of
God, or to preserve the true Religion, or the Public Exercise thereof; I say,
were it in all, or any of these cases lawful for Subjects to resist the Higher
Powers, the Apostles must dissemble, and deal hypocritically, when they,
without all limitation or exception of any of these cases, do command Obedience
for the Lord's sake, and do forbid resistance of the Higher Powers, even when
they persecute us for the sake of Righteousness. Had they believed, intended,
or secretly taught, that Christians, upon all, or any of the forementioned
accounts, might be exempted from Subjection and Obedience to them, it is plain
they acted not with that simplicity which might have reasonably been expected
from the Dispensers of the Gospel. For if they verily believed, and knew that
Christianity in any of these cases, did approve of the resistance of the Higher
Powers, they plainly went about to deceive Heathen Princes with fair words, and
sought, by making them believe that their Religion called men to suffer
peaceably under their Government, and never to resist, to win them to receive,
and own that Faith, which when they had embraced, they by experience should
find that it taught no such matter. They said indeed in words, as plain as they
could utter, That Kings were Higher Powers, who could not be resisted without
the peril of Damnation, and that this was the will of God, That all should
yield subjection to them; but yet it seems, they knew, that this was not the
will of God, but that he did permit Christians to resist, as often as they
conceived their Rulers guilty of maladministration, or Enemies to their
Religion, or Persecutors of them for the Cause of Christ. So plainly do the
Patrons of Resistance cause the Name and Doctrine of our Lord to be blasphemed.

Fifthly, All Christians are obliged to suffer patiently, and not resist when
they are persecuted, when their Religion, which is dearer to them than their
lives, does suffer with them, and men endeavor to suppress, and utterly
extirpate the Profession of it from the Nation where they live, because our
Lord expressly has declared, that his Kingdom is not of this World; whence his
own inserence is this, That his Disciples must not fight, no not in the defense
of their dear Lord. He plainly tells them, that they must bear the Cross, and
willingly must take it up; whereas, if Christian Faith did give a right to its
Professors to defend themselves by Arms against the Higher Powers, it rather
would oblige the Christian to take up the Sword, than to take up the Cross.
Again, Christianity assures all the Professors of it, that they are called to
suffer, that it is acceptable to God for them to suffer patiently for doing
well, to suffer for the sake of Conscience, That it is their Duty to follow the
Example of their Savior, who, when he suffered, threatened not, but did commit
himself to him that judges righteously. Nor, were it lawful for Christians to
resist Authority, when their Religion was opposed, and they were punished for
the Profession of it, they could not be obliged to suffer, but only when they
wanted power to resist, and so it never could be said, that their Religion, but
only that their weakness caused them to suffer. It could not truly be affirmed
that they were called, but rather that they were necessitated to suffer; nor
could they be true Imitators of that Jesus, who, when he could have summoned
twelve Legions of Angels to his aid, chose rather to endure the Cross.

To these things I might add the Oath of God, by which we have been many of us
bound not only to bear true Allegiance to the Government we now live under, but
also to defend it, as far as we are able, against all Conspiracies, and
Insurrections. I might remind you of the fierce wrath of God, not only against
Corah, and his Accomplices, whom the Earth swallowed up for their Rebellion
against Moses, but against Zedekiah, Prince of his own People, who having sworn
Allegiance to an Heathen King, did violate that Covenant he had confirmed with
the Oath of God. For this God does expressly call Rebellion, Ezekiel. 12.15.
expressing his great detestation of the Fact, and swearing twice by his own
Life, that he would recompense this sin upon his head; He made a Covenant with
him, and took an Oath of him, but he rebelled against him -- shall he prosper?
shall he escape that does such things? or shall he break the Covenant, and be
delivered? As I live, says the Lord God, surely in the place where the King
dwells that made him King, whose Oath he despised, and whose Covenant he
brake, with him, in the midst of Babylon, shall he dye. Seeing he despised the
Oath by breaking the Covenant -- he shall not escape. As I live, says the Lord
God, surely mine Oath that he has despised, my Covenant that he has broken,
even it will I recompense upon his own head: And lastly, I might add, that this
has been the constant Doctrine of the most Primitive, and Purest Ages of the
Church, That Lawful Powers were God's Ordinances, and in no cases, or upon no
pretenses were to be resisted by their Subjects. And throughout all the times
of the ten Persecutions their Practice was agreeable to their Doctrine, there
being found among them, Ad Scap. c. 2. contr. c^sum, l. 3. p. 115.
says Tertullian, not one Rebel; (...), not one Seditious Action, says
Origin. But to omit these things, what has been thus established by the
Authority of Scripture, may farther be confirmed from the clear Principles of
Reason, and from the Nature of Societies. For,

First, All Government is for mutual Defense; and for this end it is, that
being free, they find it necessary to unite themselves into Societies, that by
united Forces they may defend themselves, and their concerns from the Invasions
of other men.

Secondly, Men cannot thus defend themselves, or thus agree to do it, but by
consenting, that they shall be bound to follow the judgment or direction of
some Person, or Persons in order to that Defense.

Thirdly, Men cannot be obliged to follow the directions of others, unless they
be obliged to give up, or subject their wills unto the will of their Superiors;
so that the will of their Superiors shall be accounted as the will of all; and
unless He, or They who are entrusted with the Government, have an undoubted
Right to use the Strength and Power of them all, as He or They conceit is most
conducing to the preservation of the Common Good. And,

Fourthly, They who are thus obliged to give up their Wills and Power to
another, and have consented so to do, must be deprived of any Right to revenge
themselves, or to repel their Injuries without the Power of the Magistrate, and
so they cannot take up Arms without his Power or Authority.

Higher Powers, or the Civil Government, that by endeavoring to rebel against,
or overturn it, that Right is also overturned, and the Foundations of it are
removed. For, if we rightly understand the Phrase, it only signifies a right of
entering into Societies for mutual Defense of seeking our own Preservation, by
flying to the Justice or Protection of the Government, or using any other means
which Nature does allow, and from the use of which the Government does not
restrain us. And whosoever pleads, That every individual Person, though joined
in Society, has still a natural right of Self-defence and Preservation, by
repelling Force with Force, and that this is a Right inseparable, of which he
cannot possibly divest himself by any Promise or Engagement, does plainly give
to every man a license to resist Superiors whenever he conceives it needful
for his own Preservation so to do, and armeth every Malefactor against that
Ordinarce of God, which is appointed to be a Terror to the Evil Doer.

in all Civil Governments the (...) must be a Supreme, from whose Authority
lies no Appeal; for if there be no last Appeal fixed in some Person, or
Persons, mischief will be infinite, nor can our Controversies about Civil
Matters ever be decided. That Power, from which we cannot lawfully appeal, we
cannot judge, we therefore cannot punish, we cannot be Avengers of it, and when
we have no power to avenge our selves, we must be quiet.

Moreover they in vain unite for mutual defense under a Governor, who, when
they have done this, cannot defend themselves against Natural Force; they
cannot thus defend themselves, whose Strength is not united; whence it does
clearly follow, That there must be a Power in the Supremacy, wheresoever that
is lodged, to unite as many of his Subjects for the defense of the Community,
as shall seem necessary to him for that end. He cannot thus unite them who has
not power to compel them by punishments to such an Union: He cannot have just
power to punish, whom it is lawful to resist: And therefore he who is Supreme,
or bears the Sword in any Government, cannot be lawfully resisted.

Lastly, A Supreme Governor must be invested with that Power which is necessary
for the administration of Justice, the securing Property, and the preserving
peace and quiet in his own Dominions. No Government can make provision for
these things, provided it be lawful for Subjects, in any case, to take up Arms
against it; for then these Subjects must be Judges when this case does happen.
Now to assert a Right in Subjects to judge when they may lawfully resist, is
plainly to assert, That they are only bound to yield Subjection as long as they
themselves think fit, and that they may resist whenever they shall think it
requisite and needful so to do. Now, who can promise that the Giddy Multitude
shall never judge amiss, and think it needful to resist when it is no such
matter? what security can be had, upon this Supposition, against the passion,
interest, ambition, and madness of such Reformers of the Higher Powers? Are not
the judgments of the Common people apt to be imposed upon by the intrigues of
an Achitophel? by the insinuating words, and popular deportment of a Goodly
Absdlom? May they not easily persuade the people, that they are greatly injured
under the Government of a most upright David, and that no justice can be had,
and therefore that it is requisite that they should right themselves by force of
Arms? Thus would this plea reduce all Governments into Confusion and Anarchy,
and turn the world into one great Akeldama, and make it vain for us to pray for
Kings, that under them we may lead peaceably and quiet lives; for if the
Subject has a Right to judge when his Prince is guilty of maladministration
in Church or State, and also to resist him as often as he does so judge, in
such a multitude of contrary Persuasions as do now abound, and such a number of
half-witted Politicians as are now sprung up amongst us, what expectation can
we have of any thing but tumults and confusion? But against this Assertion it
is objected,

That to sit still and see our selves inslaved, and robbed of our Liberties, is
to be wanting to that natural affection which we owe unto our Country, and our
selves, and that Self-preservation is the prime Law of nature; and therefore
that resistance which is requisite unto Self-preservation must be natural,
whence it must follow that all other Laws of equity and nature must give place
unto it.



First, That this plea might have more plausibly been used by Christ, and by
the Primitive Professors of Christianity, than it can now be used by any
Nation, seeing their Persecutions were more heavy, the numbers of their
slaughtered Martyrs greater than can be parallelled by any sufferings of like
nature from the severity of any Higher Powers now in being, and it was clearly
the design of all their cruel Persecutors, to blot out their memorial from the
Earth, and yet they patiently suffered, and were commanded so to do. And sure
no Christian can be tempted to believe, that our Dear Lord, by his Religion,
did subvert the fundamental Laws of nature, when he required his Disciples to
take up the Cross, and suffer patiently for doing well; or that the Primitive
Martyrs did violate the Laws of Nature in not resisting of their Persecutors.

Secondly, If evil may not be done that Good may follow, then must we not
endeavor to vindicate our Country from those evils which Providence may bring
upon it by that resistance which is evil, but must, says Peter, when we thus
suffer, 1 Pet. 4.19. 2 Pet. 2.9.
commit the keeping of our lives to him in well doing who knows best how to
deliver the Righteous, and to dispose of all things for his Childrens Good, and
make the wrath of man to praise him. And,

Thirdly, If our Souls welfare be our highest interest, and these our
Sufferings do cooperate to it, if our Afflictions for the sake of Christ, work
for us an Eternal weight of Glory, much better than our temporal concerns, and
even life it self; if to resist will bring Damnation, and it be better to die
once, than die eternally; then, in these cases, to refuse the Cross, must be to
labor to preserve our bodies by the destruction of our souls, and so
apparently to thwart the Preservation of our selves.

Fourthly, Experience will instruct us, that patient suffering is the best
method of Self-preservation, and that the Public will be greater sufferers by
Civil Wars, than the severest Persecution; for this Nation has suffered more,
and lost more blood by one Rebellion upon pretense of Religion, than the whole
Church did in all the ten famous Persecutions.



God with all our hearts, and our Neighbor as our selves; and this we may
still do whatsoever may befall us, whereas by our Rebellion our Religion is
blasphemed and truly lost, 2. Tim. 3.4.
it being a plain contradiction, to be a Religious Rebel, a Christian that will
not take up his Cross. The Traitor, says St. Paul, may have the form, but he
denies the Power of Godliness.

Secondly, If our Religion be of God, as we have little cause to doubt, he will
assuredly protect it; whereas by our attempts to keep and to promote it by
unlawful means, we but provoke God to be angry with us.

Thirdly, It pleased God at first to propogate the Christian Faith, not by the
Sword, but Christian patience, and things are best preserved by those means by
which they were at first established. Had God thought fit thus to promote the
Christian Faith, he could have armed the Apostles with sufficient power to
confound their adversaries, which because he refused to do, it is evident he
did not like that method of proceeding.

And now from what has been delivered we may learn how reasonable is the
injunction of my text; Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and
Powers: Prove. 24.21.
how much it does concern us to comply with that advice of Solomon, My Son fear
thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change,
will be farther evident, if we consider,

First. How they in Scripture are represented who resist Authority, and be come
Rebels against Gods Vicegerents. Number. 16.26. Psalm. 106.18. Number. 16.28.
The Holy Ghost brands them as wicked men, ungodly men, sinners against their
own Souls. All this is spoken of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram when they rebelled
against Moses: Where it deserves to be considered, that these men did pretend
to stand up for their civil privileges, and their Religious Rights, and only
pleaded against the Usurpations of their Superiors, who, in their Judgments,
took too much upon them. They had both Lords and Commons on their sides, Number.
16.2. Verse. 19.
for presently 250 Princes of the Congregation took part with them, and the
whole body of the people were gathered against Moses and Aaron; and yet this
would not sanctify their Rebellion, nor preserve them from a most wonderful and
dreadful ruin. Elsewhere the Scripture styles them, sons of Belial, 1 Sim.
10.27.
as in these words, the men of Belial despised Saul. 2 Samuel 20.1.
Sheba a man of Belial has blown a Trumpet against David. They who despise
Dominions, and speak evil of Dignities, are by St. Peter, and St. Jude
pronounced filthy Dreamers, unjust, presumptuous, self-willed, audacious
Persons: and surely they who have regard to their own credit, or to these
censures of the Holy Ghost, will carefully avoid those things, on which the
Spirit of truth has fixed such black and odious Characters: Especially if they
consider,

Secondly, That this resistance will certainly expose the Rebel to the severest
of Gods judgments; for (1) the God of truth has by the Wiseman threatened a
swift destruction to them, in these words, Fear thou the Lord and the King, and
meddle not with them that are given to change, for their destruction shall come
suddenly: This threat we find severely executed on Corah, and his Company, the
first of Rebels that we read of against Gods Vicegerents, for they were all
consumed in the very fact, Number. 16.33.
they went down quick into Hell, and the Earth closed upon them, and so they
perished from among the Congregation. God did destroy them by an unusual death
to render their iniquity more dreadful to the world. Accordingly St. Jude
informs us of the first Christian Rebels, those filthy Dreamers, Verse. 11.
who despised Dominions, that they did perish in the gainsaying of Core; in
which words the Apostle uses the Aorist for the future Tense, speaking of
their destruction as a thing past already, because he knew that Vengeance would
not suffer them to live, for those impure Gnostics and Carpocratians, of whom
St. Jude is by some thought there to speak, rebelled with Barcho Cheba, and
with him they perished, says the learned Grotius. They who despise Dominions
are by St. Peter and St. Jude declared to be men of old ordained to
condemnation, that is, God has of old declared his resolution to condemn such
men. Woe unto them, says St. Jude, for God will execute his judgments on them
for their ungodly deeds; Their judgment, says St. Peter, does not linger, and
their damnation slumbers not; so that if they escape the hand of Justice here,
they have just reason to conclude they are reserved for condemnation in the
world to come, for as St Paul declares, He that resists shall receive
damnation.

FINIS.
A SERMON Preached AT THE ELECTION OF THE MAYOR OF SARUM, ANNO DOMINI, 1683.

September. 11. 1685.

Imprimatur. Henry Maurice, Reverend. Archiep. Cant. a Sacris.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1685.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THe two former Sermons were committea to the Press chiefly with a Design of
doing Good to those deluded Souls, who, by the Pharisaical Opinions, and the
false Characters, and Signs of Godliness, which are too frequent in the
Writings of our late Dissenters, were gulled into a fond conception, that they
had the Power of Godliness, when they had scarce attained to the Form; and who
were leavened with, and were encouraged by their Rebellious Principles to that
Resistance of the Higher Powers, to which Damnation is most plainly threatened
in the Holy Scripture; finding therefore by Discourse with Mr. Nelthrop, who
sent for me when he was in our County Prison, that the Ringleaders of the late
Rebellion chiefly relied upon the Principles of the late Author of Julian the
Apostate, for the Justificatian of their Treasonable Practices against His
present Majesty, whom God preserve; I thought it proper in pursuance of the
Design aforesaid, to add this Sermon to them, though it contains somethings
already handled in the second, because it fully, and I hope convincingly
refuteth that Pernicious Principle slyly suggested by the Author of that Book.
Viz. That Christian Subjects may defend by Force of Arms their Religion by Law
established, p. 68.71.
against their Lawful Sovereign. And that when their Religion is once thus
Established, they may pursue a persecuting Julian, even when He is their Lawful
Sovereign, as if he were a Midnight Thief, or a Highway Robber. p. 73.
Now though these Rebels cannot without great Falsehood and Hypocrisy take
Sanctuary here, seeing they had through the rich Goodness of our gracious
Sovereign as great freedom in the exercise of the Religion by Law Established,
as ever they enjoyed; yet since this is become their chief Plea, and their last
refuge, and seeing the plain consequences of this Doctrine are most unchristian
and pernicious, I subjoin this Sermon, where you will find this Proposition
opposed to it, (viz.) It is not lawful for any Subjects to take the Sword, and
by it to Resist the Higher Powers in the Defense of a Religion Established by
the Law of the Land, and I hope Established upon Firm Principles of Reason, by

Your Friend and Servant, D. W.

ROMANS 13.1. The Powers that be are ordained of God.


SInce this is a most certain truth which shines with the brightest evidence
of Reason, and of Revelation, That God is naturally the Sovereign Lord, and
Emperor of the whole world, (...)
the King of a^^he Earth; The King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; Seeing he is
ex^l (...) as head above all, and Reigns over all, and has decreed that all
Dominions shall obey, and serve him: Seeing he is the only Potentate, and the
most High, who Rules in the Kingdom of men, it follows by the clearest
Consequence, that all Authority, and all the Power of Humane Governors must be
subordinate unto him; and imparted by him, that they are all the Delegates,
(...)
Vicegerents, or, as St. Paul here styles them, the Officers, and Ministers of
God. And seeing no man can lay claim to an Inferior and Dependant Office and
Jurisdiction, or regularly exercise that Power but by Commission, and
Appointment of a Superior Power in whom that Jurisdiction does originally
reside, it follows that no Earthly Potentates, who in the exercise of the
supremest of their jurisdictions must be Inferior to, and Dependant on the King
of Kings, can be invested with Power over other men but by Commission from, and
by appointment of that God who is the King of all the Earth; and that they all
have Reason to confess with David, Thine, O Lord, 1 Chr. 29.
is the Kingdom. Now because the acknowledgment, and firm belief, that this is
the true Fountain and Original of Humane Power, does most effectually tend to
enforce that due Subjection and Obedience to it, which is so necessary to be
pressed in this Age of Factions and Rebellions, that We knowing whose Authority
our Rulers have, may faithfully serve, honor, and humbly obey them in him, and
for him; and that the Minister of God may also be engaged to exercise that
Power with which by God he is entrusted, as most conduces to Gods Glory, That
knowing whose Minister he is, he may above all things seek his Honor and
Glory. I therefore judge it proper to insist upon this Subject, which I shall
prosecute with plainness and Sincerity; endeavoring to show,

I. What are the Powers mentioned in my Text.

II. In what Sense they are said to be ordained by God.

III. What Evidence there is from Reason and from Scripture, that they are his
Ordinance. And,

IV. What improvement may be made of this Doctrine.

And First, Men willing to dispute themselves into Rebellion, have been so
Critical, and Nice as to distinguish here betwixt the Power, and the Person who
is invested with it, confessing that indeed the Office of Magistracy is the
Ordinance of God, but denying that the Magistrate or Person who does execute
the Office, is his Ordinance. Fond and Absurd! For it is as if I should
distinguish the Office of the Majoralty of Sarum from the Mayor of Sarum, which
Office neither is nor can be exercised but by a Mayor, and must be a bare name
without him, and should say, that the Majoralty of Sarum is the Kings
Ordinance, but that the Mayor of Sarum is not so. Moreover,

Secondly, The word here used is Powers, not Power in the singular, whereas no
instance can be given in Scripture, and no propriety of Speech allows, that the
Authority abstractly taken should be so spoken off. And,

Thirdly, The Authority, abstracted from the person Authorized, can never be
the subject of what is here ascribed to the Powers; for we cannot resist, or
yield obedience to the Magistracy, but by resisting, or obeying him who is a
Magistrate. Authority in the abstract, where there is none to exercise it,
cannot be feared, nor can it give us praise for doing well, nor be a terror, or
an Avenger of wrath to him that does evil; it cannot receive Custom, Tribute,
or challenge fear, or honor; it therefore cannot be the bare Authority, but
only Authorized persons to whom these duties are enjoined, and these effects
ascribed.

Fourthly, As if, St. Paul had actually designed to obviate this sond evasion,
he himself thus interprets the Powers to be the Rulers, and the Ministers in
whom the Power is lodged; for thus he speaks, Let every soul be subject to the
higher powers, for Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil. And
again, Will thou not be afraid of the Power, do that which is good, and thou
shall have praise of the same, for he is the Minister of God to thee for Good.

Fifthly, St. Peter plainly does enjoin obedience to the Prince, who is
invested with this power for the Lords sake, whose Minister he is; saying, Be
subject unto every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake: -- to the King as
Supreme. And,

Lastly, The design of the Sacred Writers of the Gospel was undoubtedly to
secure the peace and quiet of the world, to forbid all Resistance of the Higher
Powers, and to stop the mouths of those ignorant and foolish men, who
represented Christianity as prejudicial unto the Powers then in being, and apt
to make disturbance in the State; but if they laid no obligation on the
Christian to own the Powers then in being as Gods Ordinance, but only to
acknowledge in the General, that Civil Government is from God, how could their
Doctrine answer these designs, seeing it leaves men at liberty to resist all
who are invested with Authority, and by so doing to disturb continually the
peace and quiet of the world? That therefore men should struggle against such
shining evidence of truth, may tempt us to suspect, that they were as averse
from yielding due subjection to the word of God, as they were from conplying
with the Commands of their Superiors.

Secondly, For explication of the first particular, I add, that the Powers here
mentioned must not be extended to Usurped Powers, or such as have no Legal
Title, in opposition unto those who have Just Title, though by the prevalence
of an Usurper they are unjustly kept from the enjoyment of their Right. For
were this so, Might would give Right, and every prosperous Rebel would by that
very Act commence God's Ordinance, and so be both a Rebel against God, and yet
be his Vicegerent too; nor would men rule because they are the Higher Powers,
but be the Higher Powers because they rule.

Moreover, what is Usurpation but the assuming of a Power, to which, he that
usurps it, has no lawful call, and no just title; since then the ordination of
that God, who is the Sovereign of the world, must be a lawful call, and give
the person thus ordained, a Legal Title to be his Vicegerent, it follows from
the very nature of the act, that the Usurper can not be Gods Ordinance. When
the Usurper does begin his Usurpation by taking of the Sword, or wresting it
out of the hands of him who bears it by Commission from God, he must
unquestionably be the Resister of Gods Ordinance; how therefore can success in
his resistance render him the Power? Is it not strange that he who purchases
damnation by resisting, by the same act, and by the highest aggravation of it,
even the deposing of his lawful Prince, should purchase a just title to
Dominion?

Thirdly, Could an Usurped Possession create a Right to Government, were it
sufficient to render the Vsuper Gods Vicegerent and his Ordinance, though he
does justle out the lawful Successor, then must all Laws and Constitutions to
preserve the Government in the Right Line, and to condemn all Usurpations made
upon it, become void, as being Laws enacted to disapprove, condemn and to
resist Gods Ordinance, and all our Oaths of yielding Faith and True Allegiance
to the Kings Heirs, and Lawful Successors, and of defending them unto the
outmost of our Powers against all Usurpers whatsoever, must be unlawful oaths.
So plainly does this Doctrine tend unto the dissolution of our Government.

Fourthly, A man may possibly usurp Dominion against Gods own appointment, and
designation of another person to be the Ruler of his people. Thus was it in the
case of Absalom, 2 Samuel 16.18. Chap. 19.10.
for all the men of Israel chose him in opposition to David; they anointed him
over them, and yet the Holy Ghost does forty times style David King, during the
Usurpation of his Son, but never does vouchsafe that title to Rebellious
Absalom; whereas, if such an Usurpation could have rendered him Gods Ordinance,
then must He Reign at the same time against, and yet according to Gods
Ordinance.

Fifthly, Certain it is the Pope did long Vsurp, and actually possess, and
exercise a power over most of the European Kings and Kingdoms: If then bare
Usurpation would render any man the Ordinance of God, I know not how we could
divest him of that Title, or throw of his Yoke without resisting of the Higher
Powers. And therefore to conclude this first particular, we by the Higher
Powers, are to understand, The Persons lawfully entitled to their Government.

To the next enquiry viz. Head.
In what sense are these persons said to be ordained by God, I answer
negatively that they cannot be supposed to be here styled his Ordinance, only
by virtue of Gods eventual, and permissive providence, for so all things must
be acknowledged to be of Gods appointment, which were foreseen, but not
prevented by him: The Rebel who Resists Gods Ordinance, as well as the
Superior Powers which are here styled his Ordinance, the Usurper and the Legal
Prince must in this sense be equally ordained of God. These Higher Powers,
therefore must be called (...), Gods Edict, Constitution, Ordinance, as being
by his Institution invested in their Dignity, and Office, and as being men who
act by virtue of his Commission, Word, and Precept. Which will be farther
evident, if we consider,

1. That every Soul is here commanded to be subject to the Higher Powers, i. e.
to yield a free, entire, active obedience to them in all lawful things; now as
no Subject can be obliged to yield obedience to an Inferior Magistrate, but as
he is by virtue of Commission from his Prince empowered to be a Magistrate; so
neither can the Subjects of the King of Kings, which we all naturally are, be
bound to yield Subjection to any as his Ministers, unless they have received
Commission from him so to be.

2. The Higher Powers must be obeyed, says our Apostle, for Conscience Sake:
Now nothing but a Law of God can bind the Conscience, and therefore there must
be some Law of God investing the Superior with that Authority we are commanded
to obey for Conscience sake.

3. The Higher Powers are here said to be the Ministers of God to us for Good,
and to be terrors to the Evil Doer: Now by experience we find the Providence of
God does not so order matters as to make them at all times and in all places,
actually so; the Persecuting Emperors, to omit many others, being a Terror to
the best of men, and even those Higher Powers, which then obtained, when this
Epistle was indicted, being Promoters, and Encouragers of the most Barbarous
Impieties, they must be therefore styled the Ministers of God for Good, etc.
because by him they are ordained, and positively appointed for that end.

But yet it still remains a question, Question, how (...) Higher ^^wers become
Gids Ordinance?
how these Higher Powers do become Gods Ordinance, how his Commission is
derived, his Ordination does descend upon the Individual Person, so as to
render him the Person by God ordained to exercise that power which is here said
to be of God. To which enquiry I answer negatively,

First, Answer to it, negatively not by Gods immediate designment.
That I cannot say that God does now, as in the case of Saul and David, and
other Rulers of his people Israel, appoint, and nominate the Person who shall
sway the Scepter in any Nation of the World. I know no Christian Princes who
pretend to hold their Empires by this claim. We see by plain experience God
does not interpose in this extraordinary manner in the Election or Constitution
of Superiors. The Powers then in being, when these words were written had no
such appointment, but were elected by the Roman Army, or chosen, and confirmed
by the S^ate, and yet they are expressly styled Gods Ordinance, and therefore an
immediate appointment or designation of the Person by God cannot be necessary
to render any Prince Gods Ordinance. Nor,

Secondly, Can I affirm that God has plainly determined in his word, or by the
light of nature, what species, or kind of Government shall be set up in any
Nation: Whether the Government shall be administered by one, or more, be that of
Monarchy, or Aristocracy. This only I aver, (1) That in the Scriptures, and in
the History of Gods own people, we find no other kind of Government approved
of, or thought fit to be set up by God, but that of Monarchy, which is a great
presumption that, generally speaking, this of all other species is the best, as
well as the most Ancient form of Government; and (2.) That by the Providence of
God in making the first Government Paternal, and establishing the Succession in
the line of David, it seems highly probable, that He approved not so well of an
Elective, as a Successive Monarchy, and therefore when the people mutinously
asked a King, God suffered not them to choose him, but the Lord anointed Saul, 1 Samuel 9.17.10.1.
and said this same shall reign over my people. In Judah never was a popular
Election, and when in the disturbed times of Israel the people took upon them
to make Kings, God complains of it by his Prophet saying, They have set up
Kings, Hos. 8.4.
but not by me, They have made Princes and I knew it not. But positively I
answer, 2. Answer, That 1. God in general has ordained Government.


First, That it is God who has in General ordained Government, He has made
man a sociable creature, and has endowed him with Inclinations to preserve
himself, and all that does belong unto him, and so has laid upon him a
necessity of his Submission to some Power which shall govern, and shall
preserve him from Injustice, or shall revenge the Injuries which he receives
from others.

Moreover we cannot doubt, but that the Just and Righteous God would have all
injuries and wrongs repressed and curbed, that the God of Peace would have his
Creatures live in Peace and Quietness; 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3.
and therefore the Apostle having exhorted, that Supplications, Prayers, and
Intercessions be made for Kings, and all that are in Authority, that we may
lead a quiet, and peaceable life in all Godliness and honesty, he adds that
(...), this is good, this is naturally Honest, and this is acceptable in the
sight of God our Savior. Now such a peaceable and quiet life, such a redress
and restraint of injuries committed, cannot be expected without a Keeper of the
Peace, and an Avenger of wrongs, that is, a Magistrate, without whom we must
all be Ismaels to one another, and have Each man his hand against his Brother,
and every man must be Accuser, Judge, and Executioner in his own cause.

Again, God in his Wisdom so contrived the Production of Mankind that all who
came into the world by derivation from our Father Adam, should not come
absolutely free into it, but subject, when Paternal Government obtained, to
that, and when it was advanced to Regal, should be born subjects to some Prince
or other; and hence all Nations have by the light of Nature been guided to
admit of Government, and God does in his Moral Law command Inferiors to honor
and obey Superiors, and therefore does suppose them under such an Order and
Constitution by the Law of Nature.

Secondly, That God in Scripture has declared what power shall belong to
Governors.
God has declared in Scripture, and with sufficient evidence even from the
Light of Nature, what Power shall belong to this his Ordinance, that his
immediate Vicegerents upon Earth shall have (...), Nazianz. Orat. p. 17. (...),
Epiphan. Haer 40. Sect. 4. p. 294. c.
the Power of the Sword. Romans 13 4.
He bears the Sword, says our Apostle, nor without this can he become the
Minister of Wrath, or Executioner of Vengeance upon Evil Doers: To be Supreme,
and have the Sword of Justice, must therefore be acknowledged to be terms
Synonymous; hence naturally slows the Power of Executing Justice for the
repairing of the Injured Person, and the avenging of the wicked, for the
preserving of the Public Peace, for the Protection of the Innocent; on which
accounts the Ruler is here called, The Minister of God to us for Good; the
Terror of the wicked, is said to be appointed, and commissionated for the
Avenging Evil Doers, 1 Pet. 2.14.
and for the praise of them that do well. Hence in him must reside the Power of
making War and Peace, that being only Power of weilding, and of putting up the
Sword. Hence also is it that no man justly can resist this Ordinance, because
he cannot do it, but by taking of that Sword which is peculiar to the Higher
Powers. Whence Suidas from an In verbo (...).
Heathen Dio does inform us, that (...), Royal Sovereignty, is Orat. 3. de
Regno.
(...), a Government without Control, it is (...), an independent Government
says In Antiq. v. 11.7.
Sophocles; it is absolute, and uncontrollable says Apud Ziphilin. 1 Pet. 2.14.
Marcus Aurclius. Moreover

God also has ordained, that all Inferior Powers in his Realm should be
commissionated by the King, and act in a dependence on him; hence are they said
to be (...), men sent by him. And what can be more evident than that all
Streams must Issue from the Fountain of Authority, and all Inferior Powers
derive from the Superior?

Thirdly, He has ordained, that his Immediate Vicegerent should (...),
Plutarch ad princip. indoctum.
give being to all Laws which do obtain within his Kingdom, and that his
Subjects should yield Obedience to him in all Lawful Matters, according to the
Tenor of these Precepts, Let every Soul be subject to the Higher Powers; Be
subject to every Ordinance of man for the Lord's sake; Put them in mind to be
subject to Principalities and Powers. And since a Law, according to the truest
definition of it, is the declared will of the Superior, obliging Subjects to
Obedience, the Power of making Laws must ultimately reside in the Superior, and
every Subject must owe Obedience to his commanding Power in all Lawful Matters.
Psalm. 60.7.
Judah is my Lawgiver, says God; he is my King, say both the Vulgar, and the
Seventy; insinuating that he alone who is a King can have the Power to make
Laws, though others may assist him to consult about them, when it is his
pleasure to convene them for that End; and therefore he is by the Gloss upon
the In Novel. 12. c. 4.
Novels styled, The Father of the Laws; and though he be obliged in Conscience
to yield Obedience to the Laws of God and Nature, yet seeing no man can impose
a Law upon himself, that must be true which the (...), Basilic. l. 2. Tit. 6 c.
1 princeps legibus solutus est. Ulpian apud Cujac. l. 15. observe. 30.
Civilians declare, That the King cannot be subject to his own Laws, or be
obliged to observe them on any other score than that of Equity, or promise, or
of engaging others to observe them by his own Example.

Fourthly, God has ordained that his Vicegerent, acting by his Power, should
be seared and honored, and that he may be able to discharge his Office, he
has declared Custom, and Tribute to be due unto him, for therefore pay we
Tribute, says St. Paul, because they are the Ministers of God, attending on
this very thing. Render therefore unto all their dues, Tribute to whom Tribute
is due, Custom to whom Custom, Fear to whom Fear, Honor to whom Honor: So
that when any man obtains a Legal Title to Supremacy of Power he is by virtue
of Gods Ordinance, and his Appointment invested with all these Prerogatives of
Power, and our subjection to him does imply our Obligation to perform those
duties.

Thirdly, God having in the General appointed Government, 3. The Governors
should be constituted in and by all Nations, or being constituted should be
owned by them.
annexing to it these Prerogatives, that this his Ordinance may not be vain and
fruitless, as it would necessarily be, should no particular Person or Persons
be elected to it, or be invested with that Government, he must have
consequently ordained, that every Nation or Kingdom should admit of, pitch
upon, or constitute some Person or Persons to exercise his Government among
them, because by virtue of this General Rule or Command given to all States,
that there shall be a Government among them, no man can claim to be the Power
more than others, nor are the people by it tied to yield subjection to this man
rather than to that; wherefore that this appointment concerning Magistracy may
not be fruitless but obtain its end, God must have laid an Obligation on
people, who are to be governed, to do those actions which will appropriate unto
some Person or Persons the Superior Power, and give to him, or them, a
Property, and a peculiarity in that Relation. Where therefore there is none who
antecedently can claim a Title, as in Elective Kingdoms, he must oblige them to
the choice of such; and where there is, as in Successive Kingdoms, he must
oblige them to yield him actual Possession of his Right and due Subjection. For
as our Lords appointment in the General immediately by himself, or mediately by
his Apostles, that Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons should preside within his
Church, and perform all the Ecclesiastical Offices belonging to it, is an
appointment that others should, upon their failing, be chosen and advanced unto
those Offices, so must Gods General Appointment of a standing Civil Government
be virtually an appointment, that when these Mortal Governors do fail by
death, or by extinction of the succeeding Line, there should be others to
succeed them.

Fourthly, the Person thus appointed, though by the act or the consent of men
that such a Person shall be their Lawful Prince, as in Elective Kingdoms; or
that his Heirs, and Lawful Successors shall sway the Scepter to all future
Generations, as in Successive Kingdoms, is really Gods Ordinance, and not the
peoples, because this their consent is given by virtue of a Rule and Warrant
from God, and therefore has the stamp of his Authority upon it. And because it
is God, and not the people, who consers the Privileges and the Prerogatives
upon him which follow from that act, they only name the Person, as a
Corporation does the Mayor, but he receives his Authority from God, as does
the Mayor from the King. Thus is it in the case of Bishops, they are named by
the King, and he appoints the bounds and limits of their Diocese, which
notwithstanding their Authority of ruling over their Respective Diocese, and of
ordaining Presbyters, and Deacons is entirely Gods Ordinance, and they derive
it not from the King or People, but from Christ. And thus it is more fully in
the case of Matrimony: For though God does not in an immediate way appoint who
shall be Husband unto such a woman, or Wife to such a man, but leaves them to
their liberty to choose with whom they will unite in Conjugal Society, yet has
he solemnly ordained this as the only lawful way for propogation of our kind,
and as the proper remedy for our incontinence; he also has ordained what
Privilege, Authority, and Duty, shall ensue upon the matrimonial Contract, and
has not left us free, after these Contracts are once made, to violate them;
and so these Duties, and these Privileges do arise, not so much from their
Contract, as from Gods Ordinance concerning Matrimony, and upon this account it
duly is esteemed a Divine, not Humane Ordinance. And having thus explained this
Second General, for farther confirmation of it let it be considered,

First, That this was the Constant Doctrine of the Ancient Heathens: for
Append. (...), a Joh. Leanclavio edit. p 176.
Manuel Comnenus tells us that (...), the Wisdom of the Ancients taught that
Regal Power was Divine; Theogn. v. 96.
(...), Kings are from God, says Hesiod: II B.v. 197.
(...), their Honor springs from him, says Homer: their Scepter is the Gift
of Jove, (...), to them he has committed his own Government says (...), v.
80. (...).
Callimachus. Whence they are often styled the Sons of Jove, not as deriving
their Original, but Kingly honor from him, says In locum jam citatum, er. in.
Il.^. p. 738.
Eustachius, their Scepter and their Jurisdiction. The Regal Power, says
Plutarch, is (...), the Ministry of God: God, says Orat. 5. de Imp Theod.
humanitate.
Themistius, sent it from Heaven to the Earth, 'twas (...), says Apud Synes.
orat. de Regno.
Plato. He who exerts it bears Gods Image, says Apud Stob. Ser. 46. orat. 3.
de Regno ad Trajanum.
Diotogenes; and Dio Chrysostom does almost in the words of St. Paul, declare
that he is, (...), ordained by the Great God unto this very work.

Secondly, This also was the professed Tenet of the Jews. The Book of Wisdom
dogmatically does assert, Wisd. 6.3.
That Power is given them from the Lord, and Sovereignty from the most High,
and that they are Ministers of his Kingdom, which Doctrine is so plainly and
frequently delivered in the Old Testament, that they who owned those Sacred
Records could not doubt the truth thereof. For there the Higher Powers are
honored with the very name of God, John 10.35.
I have said ye are Gods, Psalm. 82.1. which name they bore, says Christ,
because the Word of the Lord came unto them, i. e. because by his appointment
and Commandment they ruled, and by his Word did act; they are said to be Kings
for the Lord, to be anointed to the Lord, or to his service, 2 Chronicles. 9.8. 1 Chronicles. 29.22. 1 Samuel 2.10. 2 Samuel 22.5. Esa. 45.2. 1 Kings 2.12. 1 Chronicles.
29.23. 1 Kings 10.9.
to be his Kings, and his Anointed; and this is also said even of Cyrus, an
Heathen Emperor. Their Thrones of Majesty are styled the Lords Throne, for
whereas in the History of the Kings we read that Solomon sat upon the Throne of
David his Father, in the Book of Chronicles we read thus, Then Solomon sat upon
the Throne of the Lord; whereas the Queen of Sheba is introduced thus speaking
in the Book of Kings, Blessed be the Lord God, who delights in thee to set
thee on the Throne of Israel. Her speech is thus related in the book of
Chronicles, Blessed be the Lord God, who delights in thee to set thee on his
Throne; their Kingdom is styled the Kingdom of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 9.8. 2 Chronicles.
13.8. 1 Chronicles. 28.5.17.14. Jer. 43.10. Dan. 5.18. Dent. 1.15, 17.
the Throne of the Kingdom of the Lord, his Kingdom. God does expressly style
Nabuchadonosor his Servant, declares that he gave him his Kingdom, that he was
King of Kings, because the God of Heaven had given him a Kingdom, Power,
Strength, and Glory. Moreover the Judgment exercised by men appointed for that
work by Moses, is said to be Gods Judgment; and they who were commissionated by
the Higher Powers, as were the Judges by Jehosophat, 2 Chronicles. 19.5.
are said to judge not for man, but for the Lord. Psalm. 82.1.
And he is said not only to be with them in the Judgment, but even to stand in
their Congregations, and to judge among them. If then these Higher Powers bear
the name of God because he has appointed them to rule, if they are Kings for
the Lord, and anointed to do his Service, if both their Thrones, Kingdoms, and
Judgments are the Lords, if he does rule and judge amongst, and by them, they
must undoubtedly be his Vicegerents, and his Ordinance.

Thirdly, This Doctrine is established with a more shining evidence in the New
Testament: for First, my Text in express words declares concerning the then
present Powers elected by the people, or the Roman Army, confirmed by the
Senate, that they were Powers ordained by Gods, and yet this being their
Original and Title to the Government, they could not otherwise be styled Gods
Ordinance than as all other Higher Powers do deserve that name. Moreover the
Apostle here affirming, that there is no Power, and consequently that the then
present Governors enjoyed no Power, but of God, sufficiently insinuates that
even these Roman Emperors derived not their Power from the Election of the
people, or from the Confirmation of the Senate, but from the Ordinance of God;
and were it otherwise, how could resistance of their Power be the resistance of
Gods Ordinance, as is declared v. 2? Secondly, In the administration of their
Government they are declared to be the Officers, and Ministers of God, which
Title must demonstrate God to be the Author of their Mission, and Deputation to
their Office: for the same dependence that a Subordinate Magistrate of State
has on his Sovereign for being his Minister, the Supreme Magistrate must have
upon God for being Gods Minister: Now we all know that he alone can be the
Minister of a Prince, or State, who has received a Commission from them to act
in their names, and therefore must confess that he who is indeed Gods Minister,
must have received a Commission from God to act in his name.

Fourthly, This Doctrine has the concurrent suffrage of all the Fathers of the
Christian Church, and has been handed down unto us through the purest Ages of
it. (...), l. 7. c. 17.
Thou shall fear the King, say the Apostles Constitutions, because he is the
Ordinance of God; And honor those who are commissionated by him as the
Ministers of God.

L. 5. c. 241.
Irenaeus in the Second Century, having been very copious in proving this
assertion from the Holy Scriptures, concludes his whole discourse with this
expression, By whose Command they are born men, by his Command they likewise
are ordained Kings.

Ad Autolycun. l. 1. p. 76. E.
Theophilus speaks thus, I adore the true God, knowing that by him the King is
ordained; he is a man (...), appointed by God, being in a manner entrusted with
the Government of God. You have received the Kingdom from above, says (...),
p. 17. Lit. D.
Athenagoras in his Oration to Aurelius, and his Son Commodus. We adore that
God, says Apud Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 7. c. 11.
Dionysius of Alexandria, who has committed the Government unto Valerian and
Galienus. Thence is the Emperor, says Apol. 30.33. ad Scap. c. 2.
Tertullian, whence is the Man, and from him he derives his Power from whom he
has received his Breath; he is the man whom our God chooses, and so must be
beloved by the Christian, who knows he is appointed by God, and that he makes
them Governors over the Nations.

Constantius the Emperor, although an Arian, was owned by Apud Athanas. Epist.
ad solit. vitam agentes, p. 840.
Hosius, Ib. p. 831.
Athanasius, and four other Bishops, as one who had received from God the
Empire. The High God has committed unto you the Empire, says Firmicus: There
is no Power but what is ordained of God, says Basil. in Psalm. 32. and De
errore profan. Relig. now, c. 17.
Epiphanius: from this Doctrine thus confirmed such inferences do naturally
flow as lay immovable foundations of Loyalty, Subjection, and Obedience to the
Higher Powers, and cut off all pretenses of Phanatick Spirits to disturb the
peace. And,

Are Magistrates the Ordinance of God, do they derive their Power and Authority
from him, and act as his Vicegerents? then evident it is that they do not
derive their Power from the People, or act by virtue of any Power entrusted in
them, or conferred upon them by the People, but by the Power of that God who is
the Fountain of all Government. Which will be further evident, if we consider,

First, That the Magistrate is here expressly styled, the Avenger of Wrath, and
by St Peter is declared to be the man who does commission others for the
avenging of the Evil Doer; now seeing God expressly challenges the right of
executing recompense and vengeance to himself, Deuteronomy. 32.35. Romans 12.19.
saying, to me belongs recompense and vengeance; vengeance is mine, I will
repay it; no man can be invested with that Power but by Commission, Deputation,
and Warrant from the God of Vengeance, and so the Higher Powers can only
exercise it by virtue of a right derived from him. Again, seeing all private
Persons are forbidden to avenge themselves, seeing they are commanded to
recompense to no man evil for evil, they cannot give that Power to another
which they have not received from God, and which they are not Authorized by
him, but rather are forbidden to exert; and so the Magistrate cannot be
rationally supposed to receive this Power from them; and this seems written
with a Sun beam in those words of our Apostle, where of the Magistrate, he
says, He is the Minister of God; the Avenger of wrath to him that does evil;
behold, He is the Minister of God, not of the People, and his Vindictive
Justice upon evil doers, is therefore to be feared, (...), because He, in the
execution of it, is the Minister of God. If it be said in Answer to this
Argument, that every man has a Natural Right to defend his own Life, by taking
away the Life of any man who does injuriously assault it, this therefore he may
part with to his Prince, and by so doing give him the Power of Life and Death.
I Answer, that it is exceeding evident, that no man does make over such a Right
unto his Prince; for had he done it by owning himself subject to his
Government, no Subject could defend his Life from the Assaults of Thieves, and
Robbers, or other bloody Persons, without assuming what they had given to their
Sovereigns; since therefore Subjects do retain this Right as fully under Civil
Governments, as in a state of nature, they cannot be supposed by submission to
their Governors to have abandoned, or parted with that Right, which does so
sundamentally destroy the vain pretense, that it is needless to add more in
confutation of it.

Secondly, The Supreme Governor, says the Apostle, bears the Sword, that is,
he has the Power of Life and Death. Now, seeing God has said to every private
man, thou shall not kill, and since he has not given to any man the Power to
dispose of his own Life, or to commit self-murder, or to consent that any one
that will shall murder him; seeing it is evident from Reason that no man can
confer that Power on another which he has not received, it follows, that the
People, who never had this Power over their own Lives, cannot impart it to the
Magistrate. He therefore must receive it wholly from that God who gives unto
all men Life and Breath, Acts 17.25.
and therefore has the Sovereign Right to be the sole disposer of them. And
sure that God who breaths into man the Breath of Life, must have the sole
Dominion over his own Production; this Dominion consequently can be
communicated to none, but those to whom by him it is communicated; to the
Magistrate it is committed by that Law of God which puts the Sword into his
hand to cut off evil doers; and if the People, or any others will challenge the
like Power, they must show the like Charter; and if they cannot do so, as
without doubt they cannot, this is sufficient to disprove all their pretenses
to give this Power to another. And sure I am that St. Paul knew of no Sword
Bearer, besides the Minister of God; nor did St. Peter know of any who could
wield it, (...), 1 Pet. 2.13, 14.
for the avenging evil doers, but (...); those who were sent by the Commission
of the Supreme Power so to do.

Peter it is objected against this inference, That even the King, or Supreme
Power is by him styled an Humane Ordinance, 1 Pet. 2.13.
or Humane Creature; and hence it is concluded, that he is the Ordinance of
man, derives his Power from the People, and therefore is accountable to them if
he abuse the Power so received from them.

Peter cannot be rationally deemed by this expression to deny the Higher Powers
to be the Ordinance of God, for then he must assert what is the plainest
contradiction to St. Paul, who, as you have already heard, expressly says they
are God's Ordinance, the Ministers of God, the Officers of God, and whosoever
does resist these Powers resists the Ordinance of God. He also must expressly
contradict the Doctrine of the Old Testament, which has as fully, and more
frequently declared, not only of the Kings of Israel and Judah, but of an
Heathen Cyrus, and Nabuchodonosor, that they did rule by his Commission and
Appointment, and that their Thrones, Kingdoms, and Judgments were the Lords.
(2.) He by immediate consequence must contradict his own avowed Doctrine in
this very place, where he requires all Christians to be subject to this Humane
Ordinance for the Lords Sake, and out of Conscience toward God; for where the
Power we submit to is not the Ordinance of God, there can be no Subjection due
unto it from Conscience toward God; where he has given no Authority to
govern, there can be no Subjection for the Lords Sake; and where he gives an
Authority to govern, the Government derived from his Authority must be his
Ordinance.

Higher Powers deriving from the people, must be accountable to them, if they
abuse the Power so received, this Inference makes the Apostle like an unskilful
Builder, pull down that very Fabric which he intended to erect: for his
designis clearly this, To teach all Christians, by Subjection to the Higher
Powers, even when they suffered from them wrongfully, and for the Sake of
Righteousness, to approve themselves the Servants of God, and by well doing to
put to silence the Ignorance of Foolish Men, and wipe off the aspersions of
Rebellious Principles, or practices which they had cast upon them, and for
which they were wont to speak against them as Evil Doers. Now can it be
supposed, that whilst he was in Prosecution of this good design he should tell
these Christians, that though he called the King (...), the Supreme Power, yet
they were above him; though he required their Subjection to him, yet he thought
fit at the same time to let them know he was their Creature, and if he did not
rule, as they would have him, must be accountable, and therefore subject to
them. Was such a Doctrine as this likely to silence the Clamours raised against
Christianity? and therefore,

Ordinance may be styled Humane, with respect unto the subject, as being
exercised by; man or with respect unto the object, as being conversant about
men; or with respect unto the end, as being for the good and benefit of man, as
is the Office of the Ministry, and yet, as well as that, may be ordained of
God, and be of a Divine Original.

Nation of the world at present; that by Gods General Ordinance concerning
Government, and the Prerogatives annexed to it, no man can claim to be the
Higher Power over such, or such a Nation, but that in all Elective Kingdoms it
is the choice of those who are concerned to choose a Governor, which gives to
any man a property, and a peculiarity in that Relation. (1.) It is acknowledged
that they are also in this sense an Humane Ordinance, as being the Superior
Powers in those Elective Kingdoms by virtue of the Peoples Choice, and that it
actually was thus in the Roman Empire, when these Epistles were endited, the
Emperors being then chosen by the People, or the Roman Army, and confirmed by
the Senate, and therefore being in that sense an Humane Ordinance; but then it
is as certain, that, being lawfully elected, they became the Ordinance of God,
and in the sense explained, acted by Divine Authority.

Sovereign, or wrest it from his hands, when he is legally invested with it,
because they cannot take that from him, which not they, but God has given him:
For as it is in case of Matrimony, the Woman by her own consent becomes
subject to her Husband, and gives him the command over her Body, and yet she by
the Ordinance of Matrimony is bound, Romans 7.2.
says the Apostle, to her Husband so long as he lives; so though the People
in an Elective Kingdom, do become subject to such a Governor by their consent,
yet by the Ordinance of God concerning Government, they are bound to be subject
to their Prince, so long as he lives; and in Successive Governments to Him and
his Heirs, so long as they live. And since the Power cannot be wrested from
him, but by that Sword which he receives, not from the People, but from God, he
must be very well secured from all attempts of taking of this Power from him,
without invading of that Power God has given him.

(...), Xiphilin. excerpt. ex Dionis M. Aurelio.
that none but God can judge the King, or call the Higher Powers to account,
for what they do; for as no Person can pass judgment on the King's Viceroy, or
question him for what he does, but he from whom he did receive that Character;
so can no Person judge, or pass sentence upon God's Vicegerents, but he by whom
they are ordained to that Office: The reason is, because par in parem non habet
potestatem; he therefore only can pass Judgment, and inslict punishment on any
Person who is his Superior: It being then a contradiction to assert that any
upon Earth can be Superior to the Supreme, it must be also a contradiction to
assirm, that any upon Earth can judge, or inslict punishment upon him, or that
the Highest Powers should be obnoxious to coercion. Hence have the Fathers
still acknowledged that the Solo Deo minor, Tertul. ad Scap. c. 2 post quem
primus, Apol. c. 30.
Emperor is less than God alone, that there is Super Imperatorem non est nisi
solus Deus. Optat l. 3 p. 65.
none above him besides God, that he is the head of all men upon Earth, that
when the King offends he is guilty before Tibi soli peccavi. Rex utique erat,
nullis ipse legibus tenebatur, quia liberi sunt Reges a vinculis delictorum
neque enim ullis ad poenam vocantur legibus, t^ti imperii pote^ate. Ambros
Apol. David. Tom. 4. p 349. c. 10. Chrys^st. in eundem locum, Tom. 1. p. 709.
Cassiador. Arnobius Junior. Euthymius in eundem locum, and Didyn us, and
Nicephorus Lat. Gr. in locum.
God alone, and by him only can be judged, (...). G. Nyssen. l. 1. contra
Eunom. p. 400. (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 2. ad Pop. Antioch. Tom. 6. p. 463. l. 41.
Hieron. Ep. 22. adEustachium, and 46. ad Rusticum. Isidor. Sentent. l. 3. c.
50. Nefas est in dubium deducere ejus potestatem cui omnium Gubernatio supremo
constat delegata Judicio. Council. Tolet. 6. c. 14.
according to that saying of King David, against thee only have I sinned. So
Ambrose, Cassiodorus, Didymus, Arnobius, Euthymius, and St. Jerome, and G.
Nyssen.

Governors the Ministers of God, the Ordinance of God? then they who do resist
their Government must be Resisters of God's Ordinance, and fighters against
God; they must be takers of that Sword, which by God's Ordinance is put into
the hands of their Superiors, and therefore may expect, according to our
Savior's Aphorism, that they should perish by it: This our Apostle here
expressly teaches, saying, He that resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of
God; and if it never can be lawful to resist the Higher Powers, because they
are the Ordinance of God, it of necessity must follow, That in all cases we
must suffer patiently, even when we suffer the most wrongfully. And here to
meet with, and ba^^le all the Cavils of those who plead for the Resistance of
the Higher Powers, I shall lay down these following Propositions.

That it is not lawful to resist, on the account of any hardships or severities
that Governors may use toward their Subjects: For,

First, No Governors were more severe and cruel toward any Subjects than were
the Roman Emperors toward the Christians, as the ten Persecutions may inform
us; and yet these are the very men, whom to resist, says the Apostle, is
damnation.

Secondly, The Apostle does command all Servants to be obedient, not only to
their kind and gentle Masters, 1 Pet. 2.18.
but also Quod dixitde Domino and Servo, hoc in telligite de Potestatibus and
Regibus August. in Psalm. 124.
(...), to the perverse and froward, because it is thank worthy thus to endure
Grief, and suffer wrongfully for Conscience toward God; nor is the Child
discharged from his obedience to his Parents, by any hardships which he suffers
from them; and therefore by just consequence the Subject cannot upon the like
accounts be freed from that subjection, which he owes unto the Sovereign Lord
and Father of his Country; for certainly there is as much subjection due to a
Sovereign Prince, who is more eminently Gods Minister, and his Vieegerent, than
any Master is with respect unto his Servants; since when the Master does
command that which the King forbids, the Servant may be punished for his
obedience to his Master, that is for not preferring the King's Will before his
Masters. And if it be thank worthy with patience to endure Grief when we do
suffer wrongfully from our Superiors; sure it must be blame worthy in all such
cases to resist, and to rebel against them.

Thirdly, The contrary Doctrine would expose the Government to endless Troubles
and Confusions; for had God granted to Inferiors a liberty thus to resist the
Higher Powers upon presumptions of severity and hardships, when imposed upon
them, he must have left it in the power of Subjects to judge when they are thus
severely dealt with, and to act suitably unto that judgment, since otherwise
that liberty would be in vain allowed. Now what is this in the Result, but to
allow them to be Accusers, Judges, and Executioners in their own Cause, against
their Sovereigns, and God's Vicegerents? How easy is it for popular men, with
the Assistance of their Agents, and with the help of their seditious and lying
Pamphlets, to make the multitude believe they are too hardly and severely dealt
with, the case of Absalom, and of our Royal Martyr, too fully will inform us:
We therefore may for ever bid adieu to Peace and Quietness, if such surmises or
pretenses will authorize men to resist Authority.

Fourthly, In opposition to this vain pretense, it is observable, that when by
Haman's Policy Letters were sent through all the Provinces of Ahasuerus to
destroy, kill, and cause to perish, all Jews both young and old, little
Children and Women, in one day; though by this Butcherly Decree, as Mordecai
complains, (...), Esth. 4.1. (...), a Nation was to be destroyed which had done
nothing to deserve destruction, which was most barbarous injustice; and
although, as the sequel of the Story shows, they had sufficient strength both
to defend themselves, Esth. 8.11.
and vanquish those who did assault them, yet neither Mordecai, nor Esther
thought it sit, that they should thus endeavor to preserve themselves from
Ruin without Commission from the King, and his Reversion of the Decree
procured by Haman. Exodus 1.14.
And though God's People during their abode in Egypt were kept under the
greatest slavery, and the most cruel bondage; and though, when they went out
from Egypt they were six hundred thousand sighting men, a number sure
sufficient to have made their way by force to their desired liberty; and though
God stood obliged by promise to deliver his own People out of Captivity after
their seventy years of Bondage were accomplished, yet did he not encourage, or
permit them to procure their liberty by rising up in Arms against the Kings of
Egypt, or of Babylon, but either did accomplish their deliverance by his own
mighty Arm, as in the case of their departure out of Egypt, or by procuring to
them favor in the eyes of their Superiors, Cyrus and Artaxerxes, Kings of
Persia, as in the case of their return, from Babylon, that there might not be
found on Record in his word any allowance of the Rebellion of his own beloved
People against the worst of Tyrants, to justify, or to encourage it in others
on the like pretenses, though to be sure God wanted no affection to his chosen
people, nor power to assist them in their Lawful Wars. If therefore this had
been a method of deliverance agreeable to his Sacred Will, no doubt but that he
would have given them permission thus to obtain their freedom, and would have
assisted, them in these endeavors. Since then he did not do it, we may rest
assured that it was not according to his will that they should thus exempt
themselves from their Captivity, and Bondage to their Heathen Governors. And
(...). Christ. ad Rom Hom. 23. Prop. 2.
much less can it be according to his will that Christians should thus exempt
themselves from their Obedience to Governors professing the same Christian
Faith.

It is not lawful to resist the Higher Powers on the account of our Religion,
or from pretenses of laboring to preserve it to our selves, or to transmit it
to Posterity. For though it is the Duty of all good Christians, and will for
ever be their practice, manfully to profess the true Religion, as occasion
serves, and firmly to adhere unto it, to pray heartily unto the Author of it,
that he would stablish and preserve it to us and our Posterity for ever, and in
his station to do all that lawfully a private Person can, by pleading, and by
acting for it, and above all by living so as that his Conversation may commend
it to the good liking of all those who see the blessed Fruits it does produce
in the Professors of it; yet must he not take up the Sword, without Commission
from the King, or Supreme Governor, much less against him for the defense or
preservation of it, but must yield due Subjection even to those Superiors who
persecute the true Religion, and suffer patiently for it, without attempting to
resist. For,

Christian Faith, than the Believers of the Apostles Age, and yet you see the
Precept given to them runs thus without exception, Let every Soul be subject to
the Higher Powers; and Christians are still charged, upon the Highest
Penalties, not to resist their persecuting Emperors, but in this very case to
suffer patiently for conscience toward God.

Peter drew his Sword for the defense of Christ, and in him of Christianity it
self, when Christ was under condemnation on the account of his Religion, and
yet his Lord does peremptorily command him to put it up again; and that; First,
because he could not use it even in the Cause of Christ, but he must take it,
i. e. must wrest it from the hand of that Superior to whom by God, it was
committed: Put up thy Sword, says Christ, for all that take the Sword shall
perish by it; from which words it appears that Contra Faust. Mar. l. 22. c. 70.
Matt. 26.52.
Austins Rule is an eternal Truth; He takes the Sword, qui nulla superiori ac
legitima potestate, vel jubente vel concedente, in sanguinem alicujus armatur,
who is armed with it to shed blood without Commission from his lawful Governor.

Secondly, Put up thy Sword, says Christ, because by taking of it thou wilst
deserve to perish by it, or wilst be guilty of that Rebellion which deserves
death, which reason equally concerns all Christian Subjects; for albeit this
special reason, that Christ was then to suffer might cause our Savior to
refuse the assistance of St. Peter's Sword, yet could it not induce him to
denounce such a Judgment generally against all takers of it, or to produce this
Text against Man-slayers, to condemn his Action; and therefore Musculus says
truly, that this is, Locus notandus omnibus subditis, a place well to be noted
by all Subjects.

Thirdly, The Example of our Lord in suffering patiently, is by the Holy Ghost
proposed as that Example which all Christians stand obliged to imitate. 1 Pet.
2.21, 24.
For the Apostle having enjoined all Christians to submit to every Ordinance of
man, and in particular to the King, as Supreme, he adds, That this Subjection,
though it might expose them unto suffering, yet was it that which both the will
of God, the nature of Christianity, and the Example of our Lord required, for
if you do well and suffer for it, this is acceptable to God, for hereunto are
you called, for Christ suffered for you leaving you an example that you might
follow his steps, who suffering did not so much as threaten, but committed
himself to him that judges righteously. Here therefore note, 1. That our Lord
suffered for Religion, for preaching the most Holy Doctrine, and for revealing
from his Father the most important Truths; and the design which the malicious
Jews pursued in putting him to death, was the extirpating his Doctrine from the
Earth, and the stiffling those important truths which he delivered for the
benefit and the Salvation of all Future Ages; so that no man can have a
stronger Plea for his resistance on a Religious Score. 2. No man can doubt but
that this Jesus, who was the Maker and the Sustainer of all things, who at this
very season, did, with one question, Joh. 18.6.
cast the whole Band that came to apprehend him to the Ground, and who as he
himself declares could have obtained of his Father more than twelve Legions of
Angels to assist him: Matt. 26.53.
I say no man can doubt but that this Jesus had sufficient Power, had he been
willing to resist those Soldiers which came to apprehend him: If therefore
having such a cause, and such sufficiency of Strength, he was so far from
making any opposition to them, that he did not so much as threaten; and if all
Christians stand obliged to follow the example of his patient Suffering, they,
when they suffer for Religion, must commit themselves to him that judges
Righteously, and be so far from taking of the Sword, as that being reviled they
must not revile again, and suffering they must not threaten.

Fourthly, That this pretense of the preserving or the promoting of Religion
should warrant our resistance of the Higher Powers will appear still more
unreasonable, if we consider; First, That we do not owe Subjection to Superiors
in regard of their Religion, but of their Dignity, and of the Power God has
given them, and therefore we cannot deny it to them upon the score of our
Religion; for if Nero, Claudius, Caligula bear the Sword which the Apostle here
declares, as well as Constantine and Theodosius, you cannot take it without
Commission from the first, more than the latter, without Resisting of Gods
Ordinance; and if you cannot take it, then can you never use it for the defense
of your Religion without such Commission. Secondly, The unreasonableness of
Resistance upon this pretense will be still more apparent, if we consider that
Color of Religion is so wide, and unlimited a thing in these our days, that no
man who is never so much in the wrong in any opinion, but pretends that his
Religion is the truth, for did he think it were an Error he would not continue
in it, so that this Color will be of equal force to engage all Pretenders to
resist. And even he who has no error in Religion, because he inwardly
believes none, may yet have so much wit as to make use of that Apology for his
Sedition, and plead Religion as sti^^y as the most Zealous, and the most
Orthodox Professor; and so if that will serve the turn, whosoever shall pretend
to believe contrary to the Religion Established in any Kingdom, shall Ipso
facto be absolved from all Bonds of Allegiance: So plainly does this Principle
destroy the Peace, and tend to the Subversion of all Christian Governments. If
Erroneous, Heretical, Idolatrous Magistrates may be resisted, says our most
Reverend Diocesan, how can any Kingdom stand? Since these are matters wherein
every man makes himself a Judge; and it is not material whether he judge
Righeous or Unrighteous Judgment, the matter being once stated in these, that
in such cases men may resist, the Hypothesis is easily made, and men let loose
to act according to their proper Apprehensions, or the pretenses of those that
have Power with them.

Lastly, The Primitive Christians under the hottest Persecutions, did still
conceive themselves obliged to suffer patiently, and say that their Religion
did oblige them not to resist, but bear the Cross, and by well doing to commit
their cause to him that judges righteously. L. 3. p. 115.
Origin in his discourse against Celsus, who had boldly said, (...), that the
Hebrews had their Beginning from Sedition, answers thus, (...), that neither
Celsus, nor any of his Party could show that Christians ever had been guilty of
one Factious or Seditious work. Tertullian in his answer to that Calumny, That
Christians were Enemies to Caesar, speaks thus; Ad Scap. c. ^.
Circa Majestatem Imperatoris defamamur, sed nunquam Albiniani, vel Nigriani,
vel Cassiani inveniri potuerunt Christiani, no Christian was ever found a
Rebel; as for Pescennius Niger, and Clodius Albinus, who rebelled against
Severus; and Cassius, who conspired against Lucius Verus, they were Apol. c. 30.
de Romany, de non Christianis, all Romans, but none of them Christians. Here
then is a plain declaration to the very faces of their Greatest Enemies, that
for three hundred years together no Christian was Rebellious, or Seditious,
with a free challenge to them to give one instance to the contrary. And
suitable to this Declaration was their practice; for as De Civ. Dei, l. 22.
St. Austin well observes of these Primitive Christians, The City of Christ,
though it had in it great Troops of people to oppose their wicked Persecutors,
did not sight for their temporal Safety, sed potius ut obtineret aeternam non
repugnavit, but abstained from resisting that it might obtain Eternal Life.
They were Bound, Imprisoned, Tormented, Burnt, Killed, and torn in pieces; and
yet, non erat eis pro salute pugnare nisi salutem pro salute contemnere, they
would not fight for their Preservation, but contemned this Life to obtain
Salvation. Of which the instance of the Thebaean Legion, is a pregnant
evidence, for being 6666 well armed, and condemned to die by Maximianus, the
Emperor, because they would not join with him in Pagan Worship; they answer
thus; Eucher. Lugd. in Act. Martyr. Agaunens. Tom. 5. Sept. 22.
behold we have Arms and will not resist, because we had rather die than
conquer; et innocents interire, quam noxii vivere, praeoptamus, and would
rather die Innocents than live Criminals.

De Romans Pont. l. 5 c. 7.
Bellarmin, That if the Ancient Christians did not depose a Persecuting Nero, a
Dioclesian or a Julian, Id fuit, quia vires temporales deerant Christianis, It
was because they wanted Strength to do so. Is,



St. Paul, that Christianity obliged them thus to suffer only for Wrath, and
not for Conscience Sake.

Peter, who does expressly teach, That thus to suffer, is to suffer for the
Lords Sake, according to the Will of God, for Conscience toward God. It is a
Suffering, says he, which is praise worthy and very acceptable to God, (which
suffering out of necessity cannot be) who calls us so to suffer that we may put
to silence the Ignorance of Foolish Men, and shame them who do accuse
Christianity, as that which tends to Sedition; whereas did it indeed oblige
them only to suffer when they could not help it, and authorize them to rebel
when they had Power so to do, surely it could not stop, but rather open and
justify the Mouths of them who represented it as dangerous to humane
Government, and apt to stir up Tumults in the World.

Dear Savior left for the imitation of all Christians, seeing he patiently
suffered when he could have commanded Myriads of Angels to assist him.

Christian Principles, the Apostles must have imposed on Princes a most heinous
cheat: For in the name of their Great Master, they did assure the Princes of
the world, that Christianity required all its Professors, how ill soever they
were treated, how cruelly soever they were persecuted, how wrongfully soever
they did suffer from them, to suffer with the Greatest Patience, and never to
take up the Sword for their Defense against them, or to resist their Power,
but, after the example of their Lord, when they thus suffer not to revile or
threaten, and much less to resist their Persecutors, but only to commit
themselves to him that judges righteously; and that whosoever did represent
them otherwise were Ignorant and Foolish Men, and false Accusers of their Good
Conversation in Christ. And if after these Declarations they secretly allowed
all Christians, when they were able, to resist, and to revenge themselves upon
their Persecuting Princes, and only disallowed this when the Christians were
too weak to grapple with them, what must these Holy Men deserve to be esteemed,
but, Legatiad mentiendum missi, Ambassadors sent to impose upon the Princes of
the World with Falsehood, and Deceit, or lying Artifices?

Lastly, this Plea is fully bassled by the plain assertions of the Primitive
Professors of Christianity: for they declared,

First, That they had Deesset nobis vis numerorum et copiarum, etc.
Power sufficient to resist, if their Religion would have permitted such
resistance of the Higher Powers. Would we be open Enemies, says Apol. c. 37.
Tertullian; could we want Numbers, or store of Forces, who have filled your
Cities, Islands, Councils, Armies, Regiments, and Companies, the Palace, and
the Senate, and the Courts of Judicature? Cui Bello non Idonei, etc. None of
us, says St. Ep. ad Demetr. p. 192.
Cyprian, defends himself against their unjust Violence, quamvis nimius et
copiosus noster sit populus, although our People be copious and more than
enough to do it, almost the greater part of every City, says ad Scap. c. 5.
Tertullian. In the Reign of Dioclesian, l. 8. c. 1.
(...), almost all men had left the Heathen Worship, and joined themselves to
the Society of Christians says c. 4.
Eusebius; It is not easy to describe those Myriads of Christians which
assembled together, and the Multitudes that convened in every City, says the
same Author.

Secondly, They add that notwithstanding their Force and Multitude, they did
not resist, because their Legislator had forbidden Murder, and had established
such meek Laws Contr. Cells. 3. p. 115.
(...), by which they were to be killed like Sheep, and not to resist their
Persecutors, how bad soever they might be. So Origin because the Discipline of
Christ makes it more lawful to be killed than kill, commands us to love our
Enemies, and forbids us to render evil for evil, says Apol. c 37.
Tertullian; because we are forbidden to revenge our selves, and are commanded
to expect the Judgment of the Lord, Ep. ad De^etr.
says Cyprian.

Lastly, Because this is forbidden by Christ, who by the Command of his own
Mouth would have that Sword which his Apostle had drawn to be put up, says
Eueher. ^ugd. Epist. ad ^ylves. Surii ^o. 5. Sept. 22.
Mauritius.

It is not Lawful for any Subject to take the Sword, and to resist the Higher
Powers in the Defense of a Religion established by the Law of the Land.
Rebellious Doctrine of Julian the Apostate, That though it be the Duty of the
Christian to suffer patiently when his Religion is not established by Law, he
may defend it by the Sword, against the Higher Powers, when it is so
established; which Doctrine,

1. Does plainly overthrow the Kings Supremacy, by setting up others invested
with the Power of the Sword. For unless I can take the Sword, I cannot possibly
defend Religion, though it be never so established by Law, and if I can, I must
be then the Higher Power, since it is he, says our Apostle, who does bear the
Sword: v. 4.
It therefore,

2. Asserts, in contradiction to our Lord, that men may take the Sword, without
Commission from him who is by God invested with it in defense of a Religion by
Law established.

3. It contradicts those General Rules of Scripture which, without any such
exception say, that to resist the Higher Power is to resist Gods Ordinance, and
to incurr Damnation.

4. It is exceeding evident, that Gods own People had no such liberty allowed
them, no such directions in like cases from his Holy Prophets; that they were
not instructed, or encouraged by them to rebel, when their Superiors did act in
contradiction to the Laws established by God, and by his Servant Moses, and by
the Pious Kings and people of the Jews, or when they were not suffered to
worship God according to those Laws. We know that from the time that Jereboam
reigned over Israel the Calves of Dan and Bethel were set up to be worshipped;
2 Kings 17.16.
that they left all the Commandments of the Lord their God, and made them
molten Images, even two Calves. That Jereboam cast out the Priests of the Lord,
2 Chronicles. 13.9.
the S^ns of Aaron and the Levites, and made them Priests after the manner of
the Nations of other Lands. That he drove Israel from serving the Lord, 2 Kings
17.21. 2 Chr. XI. 14, 16. 1 Kings 15.17.
and made them sin a Great Sin; and caused all those who set their hearts to
seek the Lord God of Israel, to desert their Habitation. That Beasha King of
Israel built Ramah that he might not suffer any to go out, or to come in to Asa
King of Judah, to worship God according to the Law of Moses.

Secondly, We know that all these things were done in opposition to the Law of
the Land, i.e. the Law of Moses, established not only by consent and Covenant
of all the Tribes of Israel, and Judah; but also by the Prescript and Authority
of the Great God of Heaven, God having made a Covenant with them, which never
could be disannulled by any Law of man, and charged them saying, Ye shall not
fear other Gods, 2 Kings 17.35.
nor bow your selves to them, nor serve them, yet the ten Tribes continued this
Idolatrous Worship till they were carried Captive. 2 Kings 18.11, 12.
For the King of Assyria did carry away Israel into Assyria, because they
obeyed not the Voice of the Lord their God, but transgressed his Covenant, and
all that Moses the Servant of the Lord commanded, and would not hear them, nor
do them.

Thirdly, Observe that God sent many Prophets to warn both Jeroboam, 1 Kings
13.14.7.
and his people, of this great defection from him, and to denounce his heavy
Judgments against him, and his Successors in that Kingdom for it. For the Lord
testified against Israel, and against Judah by all the Prophets, 2 Kings 17.13.
and by all the Seers, saying, turn you from your evil ways, and keep my
Commandments and my Statutes according to all the Law that I commanded your
Fathers. That in his Providence he frequently chastised them for it; (1.) 2
Chr. 13.17. 1 Kings 15.27, 29.17.2.
By Abijah King of Judah, who slew 500000 of Jeroboam's men. (2) By Baasha, the
Son of Ahijah, who conspired against Nadab, the Son of Jeroboam, and smote all
the House of Jeroboam. (3.) By the Dearth foretold by Elijah. (4.) By the very
bitter Affliction which befell them in the days of Jehu. 2 Kings 10.32.
For in those days the Lord began to cut Israel short, and Hazael smote them in
all the Coasts of Israel, and in the days of Jeroboam the Son of Joash, when
they were few, 2 Kings 14.26. Vide 70 Interp. 2 Kings 15.29.17.6.
shut up, and had no Helper. And Lastly by delivering them up into the hands of
Tiglath Pileser, and Shalmaneser Kings of Assyria. But all this while we never
find that any of Gods Prophets uttered the least word for the encouragement of
any of their Subjects to rebel against them upon this account; or to engage
them to sight for the Religion established in their Kingdoms, and made the
National Religion by the unalterable Laws of God; or to rise up in Arms because
they were not suffered to go up to Jerusalem to worship as God had commanded,
and as they had Covenanted; they never minded them that Jeroboam, when he came
unto the Crown, Jul. p. 69.
found them in full and quiet possession of their Religion, which was a
blessing so inestimable that they should plainly undervalue it, if they did not
do their utmost to keep it; That he seduced them from it in an Illegal Way,
against a Precept of their Decalogue, and did it only by a Pretense that the
two Calves he had set up in Dan, and Bethel, 1 Kings 12.24.
were the Gods that brought them up out of the Land of Egypt. And yet it is
not to be doubted but that these Prophets were truly jealous for the Lord of
Hosts, for the purity of his Worship, and for the observation of the Law of
Moses; what therefore could have hindered them from calling on the People, as
our Phanatick Preachers did, to help the Lord against the Mighty, and sight for
the Defense, or for the Reformation of their Religion, but their dislike of
such Proceedings, and the Conviction of their Consciences, that such
miscarriages in Princes would never warrant the Insurrection of their Subjects
upon pretense of violation of the Religion established by Law, or to cut off
Idolatrous and Persecuting Princes without Express Commission, and Authority
from that God who removes Kings, Dan. 2.21. 2 Kings 9.6, 7.
and sets up Kings, as it was in the case of Jehu, who by Gods Prophet was
anointed actual King over Israel, 2 Kings 10.30.
and was commanded by him to smite the house of Ahab his Master, and of whom
God declared that he had done well in executing Vengeance on the House of Ahab?

And this may very probably be gathered from the deportment of Elijah under
that King who had none like him in iniquity. 1 Kings 21.25. Ahabsent and
gathered them. 1 Kings 18.20. Deuteronomy. 13.5.17.2. 1 Kings 18.13. v. 18.
For having once obtained the Kings Authority to convene the Priests of Baal,
he, in his presence and donotless with his permission, slew them all, according
to the tenor of the Law of Moses. He also shut up Heaven that there was no Rain
until these Baalites were destroyed. But although his accursed Wife, at least
by his connivance, and the abuse of his Authority, had slain the Prophets of
the Lord, and though the Prophet tells him to his Face that he, and his Fathers
house had troubled Israel, in that they had forsaken the Lord, and followed
Baalim; and lastly though Elijah had the people at his Devotion at Mount
Carmel, yet notwithstanding all his jealousy for God, he gives them no
encouragment to attempt any thing against their King; he sets up no person
to oppose him till by express Command from God he had been authorized to anoint
Jehu King over Israel. 1 Kings 19.16.


Moreover when Baasha conspired against Nadab and slew him, tho he did only
that which the Lord had spoken by his Servant Ahijah the Shilonite, 1 Kings
14.14.
as the just punishment of the revolt of Jeroboam from his Law, and though God
does acknowledge that he exalted Baasha from the dust, 1 Kings 16.2.
and made him Prince over his people Israel, yet came the word of the Lord
against Baasha, and against his house -- because he killed him; whence we may
rationally conclude, Quod ille dominum suum Nadab interfecisset ut imperium
assequeretun. Munst. Vatab. clarius in locum.
that though Gods Providence permitted Baasha to conspire against the Son of
Jeroboam, and though he ordered matters so as that he was Gods Instrument in
doing execution on the house of Jeroboam according to the Sentence of his
Prophet, Hoc crimen poenam a deo merebatur, cum nullo dei jussu idfecisset.
Grot.
yet was not this his action acceptable in the sight of God, because he here
resolves to punish him, 1 Kings 16.7.
(...), because he slew him. Again the instances of the Idolatrous King of
Judah from the days of Rehoboam till the time of their Captivity, afford a
further confutation of this new Apology, for Treason and Rebellion.

For First, it cannot be denied but that the Law of Moses, and the Religion
prescribed by it was the Religion established in the Kingdom of Judah.

Secondly, The Scripture notwithstanding does inform us that when Rehoboam had
established his Kingdom, 2 Chr. 12.1. 1 Kings 15.3.
he forsook the Law of the Lord, and all Israel with him; That Abiiah, who
succeeded him, walked in all the sins of his Father which he had done before
him; 2 Chr. 21.11.
That Jehoram made High Places in the Mountains of Judah, 2 Chr. 24.16, 17.
and caused the Inhabitants of Judah to commit Fornication, and compelled Judah
thereto; That Jehojada, and the Princes of Judah left the House of the Lord God
of their Fathers, and served Groves and Idols; 2 Chronicles. 28.24, 25.
That Ahaz did shut up the doors of the House of the Lord, and he made him
Altars in every Corner of Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 33.5, 6.
and in every several City of Judah he made High places to burn Incense unto
other Gods; That Manasseh built Altars in the house of the Lord, whereof the
Lord had said in Jerusalem shall my name be for ever; and he built Altars for
all the Host of Heaven in the two Courts of the house of the Lord; That
Hezekiah, with relation to some of these Enormities, confessed after this
manner, Our Fathers have trespassed, 2 Chronicles. 29.6, 7.
and done that which was evil in the Sight of the Lord, and have forsaken him,
and have turned away their faces from the Habitation of the Lord, and turned
their Backs; also they have shut up the Doors of the Porch, and put out the
Lamps, and have not burnt Incense, nor offered burnt Offerings in the Holy
place unto the God of Israel; by all which sayings it is evident that the
exercise of the established Religion wholly was obstructed, and the people were
compelled not only to neglect, but act in opposition to it.

Thirdly, 2 Kings 17.13. 2 Kings 14.25, 26. 2 Chronicles. 12.4, 8, 9.
It Is further evident that God testified against these Abominations done in
Judah, by all his Prophets and his Seers, that he chastised them for it, (1.)
by Shisak King of Egypt, who in the days of Rehoboam took the fenced Cities of
Judah, and came up against Jerusalem, and took away the Treasures of the house
of the Lord, and of the King's house, and the Shields of Gold which Solomon had
made, and caused Judah to be tributaries to him, because they had transgressed
against the Lord. (2.) By the revolt of Edom and of Libnah, because Jehoram had
forsaken the Lord God of his Fathers. And (3.) 2 Chronicles. 21.10. Verse. 16, 17.
by stirring up against Jehoram, the Spirit of the Philistines, and of the
Arabiams that were near the Aethiopians, who came up into Judah, and brake into
it, and carried away all the Substance that was found in the King's house, and
his Sons also, and his Wives. (4.) By the Host of Syria which came to Judah and
Jerusalem, and destroyed all the Princes of the People from among the People,
and sent all the Spoil of them to the King of Damascus, 2 Chronicles. 24.24, 25.
Zach. 14.5. Joel. 1.2, 3.
a Great Host of Judah being delivered into the hands of their small Company,
because they had forsaken the Lord God of their Fathers. (5.) By a terrible
Earthquake in the days of Vzziah. (6) By the dreadful plague of Locusts,
Caterpillars, and Cankerworms. (7.) By sending against Judah, Rezin the King of
Syria, 2 Chronicles. 28.6.
and Pekah Son of Remaliah, who slew in Judah 120000 valiant men in one day,
because they had for saken the Lord God of their Fathers; and the King of
Israel who carried away captive two hundred thousand Women, Sons and Daughters.
Verse 8.
And yet we read not of any Prophet stirring up these People to Rebel on the
account of the Religion by Law established, or on the account of all the
miseries they suffered by the neglect of God's true Worship, and by the
introduction of Idolatry; whence it is evident that private Persons or Subjects
were then thought to have done their Duty, when they had sighed and mourned for
these abominations, and kept themselves from any fellowship with these
iniquities.

We find indeed, 2 Chronicles 25.27.
that after the time that Amaziah turned away from following the Lord, they
made a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem, and he fled to Lachish, but they
sent to Lachish after him, and slew him there. But who made this Conspiracy the
Text does not inform us: (...). Antiq. Jud. lib. 9. c. 10.
Josephus says, that some of his own Friends were the Contrivers of it, the
Syriack and Arabic Version, that his Servants thus conspired against him, as
did the Servants of his Father Joash against him, 2 Chr. 25.3.
and as the Servants of Ammon did afterward against their Lord; and if so no
doubt these Servants of Amaziah deserved the same punishment those other
Murderers received, 2 Chronicles. 33.25.
though by reason of the infancy of Vzziah, who was then but four years old, as
good Interpreters conjecture, and by reason of the interregnum of eleven years,
they escaped their condign punishment. Moreover the word (...) which imports
Conspiracy, and Treason, being generally used in an ill sense, gives us just
reason to believe the Holy Ghost did not approve this Treachery, and much less
the ensuing Murder.

Fifthly, Christians might lawfully rebel against those Arian Emperors who
succeeded Constantine the Great, viz. against Constantius and Valens: for
evident it is,

(1.) That the Nicene Faith was fully established by Constantine the Great.
(...). Eusebius. de vit. Constable. l. 3. c. 23. (...). lib. 2. c. 32.
Eusebius informs us that He confirmed the Doctrine of the Nicene Synod, and
made Laws against Arius, and those of his Persuasion. (...). l. 1. c. 8. p. 31.
(...). c. 9.
Socrates says the same, and (...). Soz. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 20.
Sozomen adds, that he condemned to banishment those who did contradict the
Suffrage of the Nicene Council, and that He made a Law against all Heresies,
not suffering them to Assemble any where but in the Catholic Church, and
declaring that the Privilegia quae contemplatione Religionis indulta sunt
Catholicae tantum legis observatoribus prodesse oportet, Haereticos autem atque
Schismaticos non tantum ab his privilegiis alienos esse volumus, sed etiam
diversis muneribus constringi and subjici. Imperator Constantinus A. ad
Drucilianum Cod. Theodos. l. 16. Tit. 5. l. 1.
Privileges He granted to the Clergy, should belong only to the Catholics, not
to the Heretics or Schismatics, i. e. the Arians or Meletians.

(2.) It Is also evident, that notwithstanding all these Edicts, the Arian
Emperors did often persecute the Orthodox Professors of the Faith. For Socr.
Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c. 7.13. Soz. l. 3. c. 4, 7.
Constantius expelled Paulus Bishop of Constantinople, and appointed Eusebius
Bishop of Nicomedia to succeed him: yea he afterward Socr. l. 2. c. 16.
banished him, and placed Macedonius in his room. He threatened Socr. l. 2. c.
17. Soz. l. 3. c. 9.
death to Athanasius, and when both Paul and Athanasius were restored to their
Sees by the Council of Sardica, though whilst his Brother Constans lived he
durst not gainsay that Decree, after his death He Socr. l. 2. c. 24. (...). Ib.
c. 27.
again expelled them. He was, says Socrates, persuaded by Macedonius to assist
him in wasting of the Churches, at least as (...). Soz. l. 4. c. 20.
Sozomen informs us, Macedonius pretended his Commission so to do, whereupon
all the Oratories of the (...). Soz. l. 4 c. 20.
Catholics were taken away, and they were expelled both from their Churches
and their Cities who held the (...) -- (...). Socr. lib. 2. c. 27.
Son to be of the same Substance with the Father, and were persecuted in like
manner as the Heathen Emperors had persecuted Christians, and with equal
cruelty. These Persecutions did prevail (...). ibid. c. 28
throughout the East, in Alexandria also, in Egypt, and in both the Libya's,
some of the Bishops were exiled, some manacled, and others did by Socr. l. 2.
c. 28.
slight endeavor to consult their fafety; all this was done before the Council
of Ariminum, and so before any Decree was made for the establishment of the
Faith there propounded.

The next Emperors infected with the Arian Heresy, were, Valens and
Valentinian, who as (...). Eccl. Hist. l 4. c. 8.
Theodoret informs us, at first asserted, (...), a Consubstantial Trinity, and
by their Edict commanded all men to profess it, and by so doing made that to be
the Established Religion of the Empire. But afterward we learn from (...). l.
4. c. 1.
Socrates that Valens did grievously treat those who consented not unto the
Arians, that he raised an (...). c. 2.
implacable War against the Orthodox, that he Socr. l. 4. c. 3.
persecuted them in the East, and (...). c. 6.
showed his inclinations that all Christians should arianize, that he (...).
Soz. l. 6. c. 9.
persecuted the Novatians because they were Orthodox, and deprived them and
others of the like judgment with them of their Churches, that the (...). Socr.
l. 4. c. 15.
Arians did beat, reproach, imprison, and committed intolerable outrages upon
them, and these, or at least many of these things were done before any new
Edict was set forth for the establishment of the faith taught by the Council of
Ariminum, or for reversing of the forementioned Decree.

(3.) The Christians who lived under these Arian Emperors and suffered so much
by them did constantly declare, They thought themselves obliged in Conscience
to be subject to them, that they could not lawfully resist them, and therefore
were content to suffer Martyrdom: thus when Constantius the Emperor did
persecute the Christians of Alexandria, Pop. Alex. protestuo apud Athan. Tom.
1. p. 868.
they never thought of fighting for the established Religion, but only of
patient suffering for it; for say they if it be the Emperors Command we should
be persecuted (...), we are all in a readiness to suffer Martyrdom; so well
instructed in that Doctrine of passive obedience were the Ancient Christians,
which this late Author does Burlesque. And though Socr. l. 2. c. 25.
Vetranio, Magnentius, and Gallus, rebelled against Constantius, and Socr. l.
4. c. 5. Soz. l. 6. c. 8.
Procopius against Valens, none of them were assisted, or countenanced by the
Orthodox Professors, but they were still reputed by them Tyrants and Rebellious
persons.

Sixthly, Consider the Absurdities which do attend this Doctrine, It makes that
Treason and Damnation, after an humane constitution, a Law, or Act of
Parliament, which before was a Christian Duty; for surely insurrections are
never things indifferent, they never can be lawful but when they by some Law of
God, or nature, become necessary, and they are wanting in their duty who do not
rebel. Now though a Humane Law or Act of Parliament, may make that sinful in
its exercise which was before indifferent, it is not easy to conceive how it
should turn a necessary duty into the worst of sins, and transform the Glorious
Martyr into the damned Rebel. 2. What Conviction so ever any Prince may have
that the established Religion is New and Schismatical, or justly charged with
Superstition and Idolatry, he cannot, by this Doctrine, attempt to change it,
and to establish true Religion in its place by any penalties imposed upon the
Superstitious, or Schismatical, but he must be in danger of an Insurrection,
and by this very Act must authorize his Subjects to enquire with Sword and
Pistol in their hand, By what law must we suffer for professing the established
Religion? 3. This strange Assertion justifies those Rebels who endeavored to
hinder Queen Mary, whose inclinations, and disaffection to the then established
Religion they well knew, from coming to the Crown and it condemns the
Reformation both in this, and in all other Kingdoms, as being that by which the
Roman Catholics did suffer in their estates and Persons for professing of the
established Religion: if then this be sufficient Ground for any Subjects to
rebel against their lawful Sovereign, that their Religion is established by
Law, and they are like to suffer by his attempt to change it, Jul. p. 69.
and that 'twill be too late for them to help themselves should they be quiet
till there Reformers strengthen their Innovations by a Law, there must have
been sufficient cause for the Rebellion of Roman Catholics in all those
Countries; and if the introduction of the Reformation, by which they suffered,
could warrant their Rebellion, the Reformation must be an evil thing, that
being evil with a Witness which can make Rebellion good. So evident is it that
this Doctrine tends more to turn a Nation into Shambles, than that of being
passively obedient. And Lastly this Assertion is destructive of it self, and
never can contribute to the end for which it does pretend to be designed, viz.
The preservation of the established Religion against the pleasure of the
Sovereign; for by What Laws are We authorized to resist for Religions Sake, the
Laws of God expressly forbid it; By the Laws of the Land, but these Laws deprive
all Subjects of any power to resist the King by taking Arms against him? Since
both by Common, 25 Ed. 3. c. 2.
and by Statute Law it is plain Treason to levy War against our Lord the King
in the Realm, or be adherent to the Kings Enemies. Since our Law plainly says
that neither Houses of Parliament jointly or severally, 13 Car. 2. c. 6.
(and much less any other Subjects) can lawfully raise, or levy any War
Offensive, or Defensive against his Majesty, his Heirs, and Lawful Successors;
and That it is not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever to take up Arms against
the King; our hands are therefore tied up by our own, as well as by Gods Law,
for where it is Treason to resist, there remains nothing to be done, P. 92.
but to be passively obedient. If therefore, as this Author grants, when it is
made death by the Law of the Land, to be a good Christian, we must lay down our
lives for Christ's Sake, and the Gospel requires passive obedience, when the
Laws are against a man, must it not require the same obedience when it is made
death by the Law of the Land to take up Arms against our Lawful Sovereign?

When then this Author so pertly puts the Question, P. 81.
By what Law must we dye for being of that Religion which God approves, and
would have all the world embrace, and hold fast to the end? It Is evident that
the first Christians might with equal reason have put this question to St. Paul
and Peter, By what Law must we suffer for our obedience to the Laws of God?
does he ask, By what Law must we suffer for professing that Religion which is
by Law established, let him but grant this reasonable Postulatum, that the Laws
of God are as sacred and inviolable as the Laws of men, and lay an equalty upon
the hands of Princes, and then the question will again return upon him: and
unto both these questions the answer is most plainly this, That we must do it
by virtue of that Law of God which does enjoin us for Conscience toward God to
endure Grief suffering wrongfully, and when we do well, and suffer for it, 1
Pet. 2.19, 20.
to take it patiently, and by that Law of God, and of the Land, which does
forbid resistance of the Higher Powers by taking up the Sword; for when I
cannot lawfully resist that power which will punish, I of necessity must suffer
or transgress. When he adds, That no such power is lodged in the Prerogative as
to destroy men contrary to Law, it is as true that no such power is lodged in
the Supremacy as to destroy men contrary to Gods Law, or even to make a Law
which contradicts the Divine Law, and therefore no such Power is given them
from God as to destroy the Christian for the Profession of Christianity, or for
obeying Gods revealed will, or for not sacrificing unto Heathen Idols: And yet
God did enjoin all Christians, when they did suffer upon these accounts, to
suffer patiently, and not resist. It is not therefore any Authority, which God
has given to the Prince to punish men for doing well, that binds the Christian
thus to suffer, but the plain Law of God, and of the Land, both which forbid
them that resistance which alone can hinder it. No Master has Authority from
God to deal perversely with his Servant, no Parent to deal unnaturally and
unjustly with his Child, but yet I hope this will not authorize them to resist,
and to rebel against Master, or Parent, when they thus suffer by them; and what
can then remain, but that they quietly do suffer wrongfully?

FINIS.

