title surrounded by images of (clockwise from top center) a globe, Diana,
Jupiter, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Saturn, and Apollo IANUA DIVORUM or
THE-LIVES-AND Histories of the HEATHEN Gods and Goddesses

Printed for Francis Kirkman



JANVA DIVORVM: OR THE LIVES and HISTORIES OF The HEATHEN GODS, The GODDESSES,
and The DEMIGODS.


With Divine and Moral Observations upon their most remarkable Actions,

Adorned with 25 Copper Cuts proper to each Deity, and put into Verse.

By ROBERT WHITCOMBE.

(...). Hom. LONDON, Printed by W. Downing for Francis Kirkman, and are to be
sold by most Booksellers, 1677.

JANVA DIVORVM: OR THE LIVES and HISTORIES OF The HEATHEN GODS, The GODDESSES,
and The DEMIGODS.


With Divine and Moral Observations upon their most remarkable Actions,

Adorned with 25 Copper Cuts proper to each Deity, and put into Verse.

By ROBERT WHITCOMBE.

(...). Hom. LONDON, Printed for Francis Kirkman, and are to be sold by most
Booksellers, 1678.

TO THE GENEROUS AND ACCOMPLISHED ROBERT CHENEY Esquire;
SIR,
WHen I had finished this small Poem, I threw my lavish eyes with heedful care
about the World in quest of a Gentleman, equally accomplished with Knowledge and
Candor, that he might be as able to judge, as willing to excuse, the trips and
failings of my Virgin Muse. I had not bin long in this search, when your tall
Worth, like the Hebrew King, outstript the dwarfish Crowd, and presented it
self so obviously to my View, that I must have bin as blind in not discerning
it, as unjust in not preferring it before others. So that Sir, like the Roman
Gallant, it was your own perfumes, I mean the natural endowments, and envied
acquirements of your wealthy mind, which alone have betrayed you: Had a lazy
merit still suffered you with the drowsy Herd, to wallow in the common
Puddle, like them, you might yet have slumber'd away your life in a brutish
obscurity; and when age and succession had pusht you into immortality, you need
not have undergone the wrack of having your name severed from your Body, but
both might have layn quietly together, huddl'd up, and forgotten in the common
dust.

But you Sir, by accumulating new virtues to those of your renowned Ancestors,
have run though a more noble, yet a more dangerous fate: For as by this means
you have purchased an immortal reputation, so you have laid your self open and
obnoxious to the applauses, or rather persecutions, not only of the ingenious,
but of mere pretenders to ingenuity also; who so fit to Patronize the more
accurate works of the best Authors, or to encourage the more incorrect
endeavors of the meaner, as your self? who by a double tenure of Birth, and
acquirements, may justly lay claim to those scatterd Dividuums, which go to the
composition of a complete Gentleman: For as indulgent Nature seemed to take a
particular care to ennoble your Blood, in deriving you from an Ancient Family,
so you have shown as great a Circumspection, in deporting your self as a worthy
stem of so honorable a Stock: For besides those Hereditary Virtues of
Generosity, Clemency, Affability and Charity, which have bin the constant
Concomitants of your renowned Progenitors, and so descend to you, like your
Estate, by Succession; your Nature love to ingenuity, as it adapted you in your
youth to a Literate Education, so it has prompted you since to a large
proficiency in all the Sciences, which being seasoned with the necessary
experience of a Genteel and Generous Conversation, has rendered you no less
admirable, then acceptable to all the Lovers of Wit or Learning.

It was these Glittering Accomplishments which lighted the Heathen Gods to take
Sanctuary under the secure umbrage of your happy protection, where they hope
for a more certain immortality then they could expect from the minute
Reputation of the inconsiderable Author. I cannot commend to you their Garb,
whether you consider them either in Verse or Sculpture; the Epistle to the
Reader will more fully inform you of the misfortune that happened to them in
their Rigging. Only thus much I shall say for my self, that were I assured they
were Decked in all the Gayest habiliments of Poesy, I could not be prouder of
so correct a Composition, then I am of any opportunity wherein I may subscribe
my self

Your Humble and Devoted Servant, ROB. WHITCOMBE.

TO THE ILLUSTRIOUS Madam ELLEN GUIN.
Madam,
HE who has so much arrogance as to make his Address to a Person of your
Ladyships Eminence, ought also to have so much humility, as to acknowledge that
he derives a greater honor from the Dedication, than he can expect from the
Composition, of the most perfect Poem; your Favor is more creditable than
Ingenuity it self, and an Author need not fear the harsh attaques of Time, and
Oblivion, whose Works have the Honor to wear you in their Frontispiece. Next to
the Ambition of being known to your Ladyship, this consideration was the
greatest inducement that led me to this boldness; or as I think, I may rather
term it Ambition, since the minutest of your incomparable Perfections could
never make so swift an incursion into my thoughts, as not to find them
sufficiently prepared with a Reverence, and Adoration agreeable to so glorious
a Reception. I knew that tho Curious Nature had extended her endeavors in the
formation of your delicate Body, enjoined both it and every Limb about you to
an exact Symitry, and pleasing Proportion: Tho she had been lavish of her
Allurements in wantonly strewing them about your Wealthy Face, and to complete
the Fabric, had enobled it with that brisk air and graceful mien, which
certainly she has given you a Patent for, since none could ever acquire it but
your Self, yet you could not be content with this her bounty, or think your
Self perfect with the additional Blessings of Liberal Fate; you never rated
your Self by your Grandeur, or took the Dimentions of your worth as others do,
by the gilded Coach, gaudie Retinue, and snorting Six -- These are trifles
incident to the most empty Darlings of Impartial Fate. But you are more nobly
attended with an illustrious Troop of Sublime Thoughts, and fair Idea's which
tacitly invading your Great Mind, fill it with that Satisfaction and Delight,
which none but a Soul as large as your own, is capable to conceive.

It was this brave Elevation above the unthinking Crowd; which induced me
amongst the rest of your Admirers to think such extraordinary parts worthy of
more than a common adoration, and therefore I have presumed to bring the
HEATHEN GODS to do you Homage; they lie prostrate at your feet, entreating your
acceptance, and protest they shall live longer and happier under your
Protection, in these poor Robes, than they can expect to do under any others,
tho adorned with all the gayest Habilements of Poesy. I, conscious to their
Infirmities, quarrelled at their Ambition for imploring so Judicious a
Patroness; but they would hear of no denial: replying, that as you had
Judgment, you had Candor likewise; and were more addicted to forgive than
censure. Apollo told me, that in you only he should meet with his Primitive
Wisdom. Mercury with his Pristine Wit. Juno with her old Sovereignty or
greatness of Mind. Venus with her delicate Beauty. And Alcides with his Godlike
Courage and brave Spirit. And in short, they affirmed, that all those Noble
Qualifications for which they were formerly Deify'd, were only Concentered in
your Self, and therefore humbly desired the Honor of your Patronage, tho
Presented by so mean a Hand as that of

Madam, Your most humble and Devoted Servant ROBERT WHITCOMBE.

TO THE READER.
I Remember the Incomparable Author of PARTHENISSA, tells us in one of his
Epistles, that for a long time he had an unusual aversness to Reading, till
being called upon occasion into France, and conversing there with the
accomplished Ladies of those times, he found it as absolutely necessary to be
skilled in Romance, as in any other part of Conversation whatsoever: Whereupon
he betook himself to Books, and what Proficiency he has made therein, is best
known by those Excellent Poems wherewith he has since obliged the World at so
large a Rate, that it will be her greatest Prudence to plead Poverty, since she
is not able to render him a Requital. That a Competent knowledge of the Laws
and Grounds of Poesy in general is as absolutely requisite amongst the
English-Gentry now, as that of Romance only was among the French then, is so
easy a Problem, that he who has ventured but as far as Charing Cross; or
attempted to come within the perfume of a Courtier, can deside it on the
Affirmative. It Is thought as necessary to the Complement of a Courtier, as the
knowledge of the Compass to the Composition of a Seaman; neither Man nor Woman
can safely Sail in the Courts dangerous Ocean without it, unless they are
resolved to expose themselves to those Impetuous Storms of Scorn and Neglect,
which Augmented by Envy and Interest, will immediately hurry them into one of
those Dangerous Gulphs, Ruin or Disgrace.

How necessary the Knowledge of the Lives and Histories of the Heathen Gods will
be to those Ingenious Spirits, who design to make an inspection into this Noble
Science, will most evidently appear if we but turn our heads over our
shoulders, to look back into the infancy of Poesy; where we shall find Homer
so inquisitive after their Offices and Dispositions, that at length he is able
to give us an account of both their Nature and Affections, and to complete his
Poem, was forced to divide them into almost as many Sects and Factions as we
have now in England. There was no Battle but some God or Goddess was partial in
the event. And since by the severe Mandates of Imperious Fate, Troy was to be
Conquered, it was no small Comfort unto the declining Glory of the defeated
Trojans, that their Deities rather than their Armies were overcome in the
Contest. Lofty Virgil lays hold of the same assistance, and that Italian
Shakesphear, Ovid, Tho miraculously thronged with those Poetical Blessings,
Judgment and Fancy, durst not hazard his Reputation on their Bottoms; but
discreetly laid the steady foundation of his Immortal Poem on the same Basis,
and cemented it with the like Ligaments as his Two famous Predecessors had done
before.

So that the question will not be so much whether the knowledge of the Heathen
Gods be necessary to Poesy, as why I attempted their Lives in Verse, since
they were so excellently Written in Prose. The truth is, I must needs submit to
the Learning of several Authors who have writ of this Subject, I only pretend
to be a gleaner in their wealthy fields, and acknowledge the Wheat in my little
Mow ows its Original to their labors. I began this small Piece for my own
Satisfaction; But (I know not how) some of the sheets being scattered abroad,
at last came to a Stationers hand, who was pleased to think them worthy of
Public View, and had intended to adorn them with all Copper Cuts, like those
of Venus, Mercury, and Diana; but being prevented by a tedious fit of sickness,
they were forced to take up with such as you see. I can say little as to the
Book, and only thus much for my self, that it was writ in the Country about 18
Months ago, and has ever since lain in the Printers hands, who by reason of my
absence, has misplaced several of the Histories, and not being acquainted with
my hand, has likewise made many gross Errors, some whereof he has directed you
to in the Errata, and the rest leaves to the Correction of the Judicious
Reader. I might farther excuse my Circumlocutions, or large Exordiums, which I
make many times to take up more room than the Histories themselves; which I
know is contrary to Art, and can only say, I was in most places forced to it,
for being by Reason of the Sculptures obliged to make every History almost
equal in number of Lines, I thought it to supply someof those Nigardly Stories,
(which I might have comprised in half a Page) with useful Observations, which
naturally arising from the most remarkable Actions of that Deity treat of, will
I hope prove more grateful to any ^ntelligent Reader, than an accumulated
bundle ^f invented Fables, which I must otherwise have ^lapt in their room.

But all these Apologies with many others, which I might reasonably add, could
not have prevailed with me to appear in Print, had I not considered that there
are many excellent Wits of both Sexes, whom cruel Custom or incroaching
Business has debarred the benefit of the Greek and Latin Tongues, to whom I
thought this small Poem illustrated with Cuts proper to every God and Goddess,
etc. might not be altogether insignificant, nor any thing the less acceptable
because in Verse, whose Chiming Periods seem at once to strike both the Fancies
and Memories of the illiterate. To whom, if this Contributes any assistance, it
has effected the intention of Thy loving Friend.

R. W.

SATVRNE.

The Poetical History of Saturn.
WHen the great Fabric of the world was wrought,
And all things newly started out of Naught.
Ran into form, and made a goodly show,
None could immagin whence they came, or how.
Sudden the appeared, and pleasing to the Eye,
As gaudy Rainbows in a Cloudy Sky;
Formed, as it is thought, by some Superior Good,
Who the first Elements well understood;
Knew their composures, and with Artful hand,
Made 'em obedient to his loud Command.
The which down hither, he so neatly hurled,
That in their fall, they dropped into a World.
Within whose spacious Confines there was none
But Coelus found to Rule the Empty Throne;
Who as he walked his Boundless Empire, spide
The Goddess Terra, whom he took for Bride.
Out of whose Firtil Womb, he soon begot
Tytan and Saturn, Gods of wondrous Note,
And Monstrous Cyclops, Born but with one Eye
Amidst their Front; at which Deformity
The Throbing Breast of Coelus did so swell,
That Furiously he hurled them down to Hell;
Condemned them there, Eternally to Fry,
In forming bolts for Jove's Artillery:
Which dismal News, when it approacht the Ears
Of Virtuous Terra, set her all in Tears;
Who soon that Passion for a Nobler Changed,
And stead of Sighing, sought to be Revenged
Of her too cruel Husband. Straight she goes,
To both her Sons, to whom she does Disclose
Their Fathers horrid Fact at such a rate,
As gave them cause to fear Resembling Fate.
Adventerous Saturn had no sooner heard
The Impious Story, but without regard
To filial Duty, or that Reverent fear
Which Children to their Parents ought to bear,
With his keen Sith to Coelus straight he flies,
And Cruelly cuts off his Privities:
Commits them to the foaming Sea for Tomb,
Where yet they found a favorable Womb,
Ingendring with that froth, from which Dame Venus sprung.
The mighty Emp'ror of the World thus Dead,
Tytan as Elder brother should succeed;
But him, his Mother, and his Sister too,
Slyly persuaded to Resign his Due
(For Life) to Saturn, who ascends the Throne
He was to hold, on this Condition,
What ever Children Male, Saturn should have
By his Sybelle, none of them must Live,
That so no Heirs might possibly succeed,
But Tytans Lineage Reign when he was Dead.
The Bloody contract thus agreed upon,
When Saturns Wise, Sybelle, was far gone
In anxious Travel of a Lusty Boy,
Which soon as Born, his Father did Destroy
With open Mouth, tearing it Limb from Limb,
A Cannibal appeared a Saint to him.
The new Congealed Flesh, like Gravy run
Out of both sides his Mouth, and ere he had done,
The offended Blood, be smeer'd his Graceless Cheeks,
Who stopped his Ears against the Infants Shrieks
And spotless Innocence, which might have moved
A Tygar to repent his Rage, and Loved.
The grieved Sybelle, mightily dismayed,
To see that all her Sons must be destroyed,
By virtuous Subtilty, resolved to strive
The best she could to keep an Heir a Live,
Which thus she brought to pass, within a while,
With forward swins her Womb began to swell;
Her time expired, and she did safely Bear
Two Lusty Babes, Juno and Jupiter;
The first a Female, was to Saturn sent,
Who nothing Jealous of the good event,
Was well content, and certainly Believed
That she was all his Wife had then Conceived.
To Curetes or Corybantes care,
She recommends the helpless Jupiter
To Nurse him privately, and so to Free
Him from his Fathers Bloody Cruelty.
Diverse more Sons did fruitful Terra bear,
Whose Lives she Ransomed with resembling Care,
Inventing Tinking Games, of happy noise
Which drowned both her little Infants voice,
And stopped their Fathers Rage, and filled their Mothers Joys.
In this soft Calm of state, began that Age
Which all the Pens of Poets did engage
To Celebrate. That Golden Age, when Man,
Stranger to wasting Grief and fretful pain,
In cool green shades, made up a blessed abode,
Rich as a Miser, happy as a God.
Ere simple Nature was by art Debaucht,
Or Luxury his Inclination reached,
Whilst homely Plenty with sharp appetite,
Imparted satisfaction and delight:
His food was such as Nature did impart,
Ere with the vicious eating grew an Art,
And Chaste cold Springs did kindly squench his Thirst,
Which by no Fevourish surfeit was increast.
When only needful things he aimed to know,
And calm content set simpering on his Brow.
These were the blessings of wise Saturns Days,
To which succeeding Ages gave such prays.
Saturn, the God of time, whose mighty hand
An endless Serpent grasping did command;
Who her sharp Tail into her mouth did Twine,
As a fit Emblem of Reverting Time.
Years end in Years, and Seasons steal upon us
At unawares, In cese virtitur Annus.
When Creeping time with man-like years had filled
Young Jupiter, whom Saturn would have Killed,
And given him Wit and Courage, such a store,
As did forbid his silence any more.
Wherefore, when he had heard the full design,
How his own Father sought to Murder him;
Studying by all his Cunning to prevent
That horrid Death which to himself was meant,
From Heaven, by force, he made his Father fly
To seek a Residence in Italy.
JUPITER.

The Poetical History of Jupiter.
SAturn thus Vanquished, Jupiter his Son,
Betwixt himself and's Brethren shared his Throne.
Heaven to himself he kept; the Waters he
Commits to's Brother Neptunes Sov'raigntie;
Whilst to his Brother (Pluto's) Lot it fell
To Rule the large Dominions of Hell.
Great Jupiter had scarcely warmed his Throne,
But an Intestine Dangerous War begun
To Reel his Title, for the angry Earth
Seeing her Sons, the Titans bruised to Death;
Brought forth strange Monsters of a Hideous hew,
Mighty in strength, and terrible to veiw:
Which horrid Army, she forthwith commands
To Randesvouz in the Thessalean strands,
Amidst the fair Plegrean Fields; where she
Points them the likelyest way to Victory.
Hills upon Hills, and Rocks on Rocks they throw,
Mountains and Trees, and all they found below
That great or bulky seemed, thereby to Raise
A Piramid, whose head might reach the Skies.
From whence they meant to brave the Gods, and then
To hurl their Emperor to Earth again.
Amongst the rest, who threatened Heaven thus,
Were stout Aegeon and Enceladus,
With brave Bryarius, and more than these,
All born with full a hundred Hands a Piece;
Which in hard Service, every one did Join
Toward the accomplishing the bold design.
The vast Sicilian Typhon, who could stand
With His Feet on the Earth, and scratch the Sky with his Hand,
Whose outstretcht Arms, could all the world Control,
And touch at once the North and Southern Pole:
Half Man, half Serpent too, he did appear,
(As did the most of all th^se Monsters there,)
A scortching Breath from out his Body came,
And Fiery Belches Flashing into Flame;
Gilded with so much horror, that the fright
Caused some young Gods to make a shameful flight;
Who dastardly to wealthy Egypt ran
Assuming there some Leek or Onyan's Name:
Causing by so unworthy a Disguise,
The sond Egyptians to Idolatrize.
But still the Seidge bold Jupiter withstands,
Hurling great Thunderbolts from his dire hands;
Which thick as Hailstones, on the Giants Lighted,
Who at so strange Artillery affrighted;
No longer durst the Heavenly force engage,
But took their heels, and basely fled the Siedge.
Yet still his anger on these Monsters fell,
Which overtook them sending some to Hell;
Others by hideous Death's to end he brought,
Loading their Graves with mighty Aetna's weight,
That they as endless Monuments might Lie,
And tell his Fame to long Eternity.
These Giants thus distroy'd, that very year,
The Heavenly Thief Prometheus did appear,
Who taking Earth and Water, then began
To Form and shape the Hapless Creature Man;
Whom he endowed with an Immortal Soul
Of Heavenly fire, which he from thence had stole.
When all the powerful Jupiter enraged,
Sends to his Uncle Vulcan, and engaged
Him upon honor, not to let this pass;
So that a mighty Chain provided was
To bind him to mount Caucacus for ever,
And deathless Vultures to Devour his Liver;
Which every Night encreast, that so the pain
By them next day might be renewed again:
But valliant Hercules disturbed to see
Him tortured thus for's Ingenuitie,
With pearless strength, plucks of the weighty Chain,
And freed him from Imprisonment and pain.
Whereat great Jupiter incensed to see
Prometheus so soon at Liberty,
Whom he a sad and endless Hell designed,
He recontracts the fury of his mind,
Doubles his Rage, and with a frowning Brow,
And fiery Eyes, begins to study how
Prometheus his pain he might so change,
As to Inflict on him a worse Revenge.
And therefore to the fair Pandora sent,
As the most likely fatal instrument,
To work the black resolves of his vexed mind,
(Beauty corrupted, is to vice most kind.)
To her he calls, and hastily Commands,
To take into her fair and beauteous hands,
A falal Box of Deadly Poisons, which
To Epemetheus as a Present Rich,
And sent from Gods, she must deliver to him,
Who hoping some great rarity therein,
Hastily opened it, at which there flew,
A Nest of Evils and disseases too;
Who expeditiously themselves disperse,
And sadly tainted all the Universe.
Thus Fame and Triumph seemed every where,
To weight upon victorious Jupiter,
Who having crushed the Giants, and subdued
Rebellious Mortals; softer ease persu'd.
VVarm Luxury began to make her Nest
In the Meridian of his Royal breast;
And Love and Lust, blowed up such glowing fires,
As prompted him to ease -- those lewd desires.
To virtue now he had but small regard,
When Incest but a little Sin appeared.
His Native Sister June he did Wed,
And forced her to his rude Incestious Bed.
Then Tros's Son, young Ganimedes, he
Did force to an unknown Debaucherie.
The fair Europa, she from whose bright fame,
The best part of the World has taken its Name,
Was the next victin to his raging Lust.
By reason of whose virtue, he was forced
To change his Godlike, for a Beastlike shape,
Wherein by force he did that wicked Rape.
The next was Dena^ in her brazen Tower,
Wherein he got and rained a golden shower,
Which lighted on such animated Earth,
As gave renowned Perseus happy birth.
Thus Jupiter before his last retreat,
Was grown to men as infamous as great.
MARS.

The Poetical History of Mars.
A Long adeiw to all the Sweets of Ease,
To all the pleasing softs of downy Peace;
To all my silent sighs and lonely grief,
Which to my Laboring mind have brought Relief;
When all my startled friends, my help did fly,
Fearing the infection of my misery;
And every frowning storm, Heaven Combined,
To storm the requiems of my happy mind.
Farewell each silent spring, and shady grove,
Ye kind repeaters of my slighted Love;
How often have you a temperate Solstice made
For my reception, sweetly stained with shade:
Where 'neath the umbrage of some willow, I,
Melted to Tears, and breathed into a sigh:
To beauteous Sylvia for a Smile did sue,
When your kind. Echo nimbly answers, do.
But she, ah cruel she! with scornful Eye
And frowning Brow, commanded me to Dye
Farewell my Study, where I used to find,
Jems to enrich my soon exhausted mind,
Which without the assistance of that wealthy ore,
Would soon turn Bankrupt, and indite no more.
Glutted with pleasure, often have I read,
Those sweet communications of the Dead;
With such delight, and Rapsody of Mind,
With thoughts so settled, and a Soul sublimed,
That grief nor Care, withal their sublest Art,
Could find no Room nor Lodging in my heart.
Contentment Reigned, and during its short stay,
Locked up the Door, and kept it self the Key.
The Liberal Sciences, like various Dishes
Besieged me round, and pleased my highest wishes.
Sometimes I did my hungry Stomach try,
With the first course of sound Philosophy:
The strong'st and solid'st Viends to sustain
The light Mercurial Junkets of the Brain.
Sometimes my thoughts were much sublimer given,
And strove to trace the Motions of the Heaven;
Where I beheld each Planet in Seat
Regent, was King, and Carved human fate.
Then with a curious, but declined Eye,
I read the small Aenigma's of the Sky.
Sometimes to look, my Fancy did incline,
In the dark backward, and abiss of time;
Where it solac'd me infin'tely to learn,
The Humor of the world e're I was born.
But then I must confess, I grieved to know
How wise men then were, and how foolish now.
Then like a Laden Be, I Would homeward fly.
To my own Native Study, Poesy:
And wind up all in Measure and in Form,
Which I from other Sciences did Learn.
This was the business of my Ease, but now
Such downy thoughts, alas, I must forego,
And naught but those of fighting, noys of Drum,
And clashing Swords, must in my Fancy come;
The Trumpets Clangor, and the warlike fife,
The desperate Soldier, prodigal of Life,
Conjoined Battles, which incorporate seem,
Chorust with ditmal groans of dying Men,
Are thoughts most fit for him, who dares to be
So bold, brave Mar^, as write thy History.
Thou Son of Jupiter, and Juno's bed,
Who in the warlike Northern Climes wast bred;
Taught by wild Furious Lions, how to Dare,
And how to suffer, by the Ruged Bear.
On whom a Northern blast no more Prevails,
That does on us warm Zypherus gentle Gales.
About the world thou undisturbed would go,
When all the Earth was mantled up in Snow;
And Fiercest Tygars from their Dens did Chase,
Who to thy hotter Fury soon gave place,
Leaving thee their, warm Coverts for to be,
A Magazin to hold thy Arms and thee.
This thy prodigious valor, when 'twas hurld,
B'officious same, to this our Southern world;
Made Jealous Jupiter a fraid to fee,
Thus threatening stem of his own Proginie.
Born on triumphant Chariot, thou did Ride,
With frightful Sprights, attending at thy side:
Clamor, Contention, and thin Meagre fear,
Dressed in their proper garbs, thy Servants were.
Terror and apprehension too, with long
And grisly locks, went stalking in the throng
Before the loud tongued fame in gaudy Clothes,
(Stuck full of Eyes, as Orenges with Cloves.)
In Antic garb, as Ancient Poets say,
Sat as Postilian all thy flower strow'd way.
In this Heroic posture did thou come,
Displaying Colors, striding on a Drum,
Halbeart in hand, and trunchion on thy hip,
With Fair Bellona, flourishing her whip.
When Limping Vulcans light new Married Dame,
Came to entrap thee with her wanton Flame.
And now ye Sons of War, some of ye do,
Tell me what all your mighty strength can do?
You who have watched a Siedge both day and night,
Till your Numbed Limbs have Frozen where you sit:
You who can Laugh, when the Ominous Canon bauls,
And crowds of Soldiers to Elysium calls.
You, in whose countenance no change appears,
Though whistling Bullets fly about your Ears.
Or you, who from a Rampter dare to expose
Your Selves and Friends amongst your deadly Foes;
Tell me how meanly should you these things prize,
Who have no Armor against a woman's Eyes.
Behold and see your all-commanding Mars,
The mighty Stickler in the Roman Wars:
He who did all their Enemies Resist,
And dealt out Crowns to whom, and where he list.
When he beholds fair Venus on his Knee,
Poorly Entreating his Captivity:
Changing the Title due to Martial Cares,
For a Common Soldier in Venerial Wars.
The coming Goddess presently was won,
And freely grants an assignation;
Which prively, without the least regard
Of those two Cumbitants, was over heard
By Yellow Vulcan, who a Net prepared,
Wherein the Naked Lovers were ensnared.
Just in the time of Action, all the Gods
At News hereof came from their bright Aboads,
To see 'em both in Loves Embraces Ly,
Exposed to view, and barred from Liberty;
Some Laughed, some Blushed, some gave him heavy Doom,
But others Smiled, and wished 'um in his Room.
APOLLO.

The Poetical History of Apollo.
LUxurious Jupiter at length bring Cloyd,
With the nauceous pleasures of a Marriage Bed;
His wanton Eyes on fair Latona placed,
(A ruddy Nymph with wondrous Beauty graced.)
Her he affected, and with pain he strove,
To let her know the greatness of his Love.
The Pretty Nymph, as other Maidens do,
At first replied the usual answer -- No.
But when the God-like Lover pressed her home,
Like full ripe Fruit, she gently tumbel'd Down;
And with enclosed Eyes, that bliss enjoyed,
Which against her Conscience she so long denied.
But their Embraces could not be so close,
But Jealous Juno heard the Echoing Noys,
Which through the Mouth of Prattling Gods was sent.
So Loud, it sounded through the Continent.
By grand experience Married Folks may Ghess,
How Juno brook't her Rivals happiness.
When she was told, her Husband did confer
On Fair Latona, what was due to her.
Great Gods! Methinks I hear her tear and Fling,
And Swear so loud, she makes the Heaven's Ring;
Upbraided Jupiter with the horrid Sin,
And threatening she will do as much for him.
Then on a sudden, into silence change,
With bended Brows contriving this revenge.
The Serpent Python which in former time,
Sprang from the famed Deucaleans Muddy slime.
Him she engaged by her strict command,
To drive Latona from that fertile Land,
And Bribed the Earth, to let her have no room
In all the world, but Delos for her home;
Delos which might as well have served her for a Tomb.
Had not kind Neptune for Latona's sake,
Both fixed and raised it bove the brinish Lake
Wherein it sunk. There as she walked a while,
Admiring at th'uninhabited Isle,
She chanced to find a spreading Palmtree Leaf,
(The sheet which caught the burden of her Grief,)
VVhereon her body was no sooner laid,
But out alas! In vain for help she cried:
No friendly Midwife to her Groans was near,
There was no Husband, nor kind Neighbors there,
Nor none to pity with a wishing Tear.
But by and by a recompense appeared
For all her pains, when two fair Twins she heard.
With Infant shrieks, endeav'ring to bemone,
Those throws and Pangs which she had undergone;
These were Diana and Apollo. He
Soon as Arrived at full Maturitie,
Remembering Pythons Rudeness to his Mother,
No longer could his Noble Vengeance Smother:
With Bow and Quiver to that VVood he hy'd,
Where Monstrous Typhon Custom'd to reside;
Who made a strong resistance but in vain,
For all the Gods the Quarrel did maintain.
And Heaven it self with an unused delight,
Echoed, go Paean all the time of Fight.
Hartning Apollo, who to let him know
The strength and sureness of his well bent Bow,
From out his Quiver took that fatal Dart,
Which forced its Lodging in the Monsters heart.
Thus fell great Typhon, and this War b'ing done,
Apollo Married, and begot a Son,
Named him Esculapius, whom he
Committed to the Centaurs Costodie.
In The helpful Art of Physic to be trained;
Where in such strange Proficiency he gained,
That both by all at home, and those abroad,
That were Physicians, he was thought a God.
Him Jove with Thunderbolts destroyed, because
He from the Dead, Hypolitus did raise;
Whom by his Chariot horses Jove had willed,
First to be dragged about, and after Killed.
Enraged Apollo on the Cyclops flew,
Whom cause they made those Thunderbolts, he slew.
Leaving great Jupiter at Forge, no hands
To work him bolts, to serve his dire commands.
The mighty Grandfather enraged to see
His Servants thus destroyed, resolved to be
Revenged, for the affront his Son had given,
Whom for a time he Banished out of Heaven;
Forced him seek a Living amongst the Rocks,
And afterward to feed Admeta's Flocks;
In which employ, so bravely he behaved
Himself, that all the Neighboring Shepherds craved
His Pleasing friendship. Graceful was his Men,
Softer then Down his words, his thoughts sublime,
Which in Extemp'ry Eclogues came so free,
Gods might have Patronized his Poetry;
And barren strands before their Heaven Esteem,
So that they might have been but praised by him.
The Rustic Shepherds who did rudely roar,
By him reclaimed were, and would baul no more;
But practicing his sweet Authentic Notes,
Unprison'd Music from their Warbling Throats.
To every Ode, he set a Tune a part,
On purpose to betray some Virgins heart;
Who as she trickt up to have caught his come,
Without her own was forced 't go sighing home.
So much respect the Nimphs and Shepherds owed,
That as a God, to him they Kneeled and Bowed;
To him they sung, and did each other prize,
According as their Notes came nearest his:
But yet for all Apollo's Wisdom, he
Could find no fence against Loves Artillery:
The Charming Beauties of fair Daphne's eyes,
For all his Godhead did his heart surprise:
Her looks at once so modest and so fair,
As if she bid him hope, and then despair.
This Nymph Apollo courted -- but in Vain,
A Vicious thought she would not entertain:
But with severe corrections did remove,
The urgent Motions of his lustful Love;
At whose neglect disdained Apollo Mourned,
And to a Laurel the fair Maid transformed:
Which done, his time b'ing out, which he should stay
On Earth, to Heaven he made his hasty way:
From whence each day he does those beams disperse,
Which guild the surface of our Universe.
NEPTUNE

The Poetical History of Neptune.
When from the sumit of some towering Rock,
Down to those surges which thou make, I look.
Behold the enraged Ocean fret and foam,
And hear her Roar at thy too cruel doom.
See waves encounter waves at such a rate,
I feared their Blows would reach me as I sat.
Then casting down my discontented Eye,
The very intrels of deep Hell I spy,
From whose dark Bottom by and by arise,
Such Clouds of waves as threatened all the Skys.
And Rools of Floods in true gradations sent,
To fall a Deluge on the Continent.
Ah Mighty Neptune (to my self said I)
How 'unfit am I to write thy History.
When thou so lowdly thy own fame do raise,
The humble Poets Drowned in the Noise.
Yet, though to write thy prays I will not try,
I Will give the world thy Geonalogy.
To the Immortal Seed of Saturn, thou,
Thy Watery Kingdom, and thy Life do owe.
For when thy Father with Paternal care
Distributed the Earth, the Sea, and Air,
Amongst his Sons, it was his great design,
That all the watery Empire should be thine;
He put a Trydent in thy Princely hand,
To show instead of Scepter, thy command;
And for a Chariot, a vast Shell he gave,
Plucked off the Liquid back of some rude wave;
Thy Coach-Horses, Sea Monsters were, and Whales,
Which drew thee gently as soft VVestern Gales;
When they come Sliding over a Calmy Sea,
And leave no frowns nor wrinckles in their way.
Thy Wife Amphytrite (whose spreading breadth,
Gave her that name because she loves the Earth.)
With watery Arms which she does round disperse,
And bravely searches all the Universe.
Her thou did Love, and to thy bed prefer,
(The which thou ow'st a friendly Dolphin for.
Who on his back did kindly save her Life,
And gave her to thee for a Virtuous Wife.
Which Dolphin after to the Skies was born,
And turned into a Star near Capricorn.
After this the rumor of thy Name abroad
Did fly, and thou were thought a mighty God
By wretched heathens, who amazed stood,
To see how still thou bind'st the Ravenous Flood;
Which when by winds into contention born,
Thou check'st, and made it sorry for the Storm:
Nor this alone did thou, but much beside,
Thou taught'st succeeding Mankind how to Ride;
Striking the Teeming Earth with such a force,
That at thy pleasure out there Leapt a horse,
Which thou could Check and Curb, command with Ease,
And make obedient as the calmy Seas.
This thou did do, and from the Earth did bring,
A stately Steed at Athens Christening:
When great Minerva and thy self did strive,
Who should that Famous Citys Title give;
Then thou were mighty Neptune; but alas,
Thy growing fame sustained a sad decrease;
When thou, too proud of thy vast power, did raise
A heard of lean Sectarians, to blaze
Abroad the vices of great Jupiter,
To whose great power thou did thy own prefer,
But found'st thy self deceived, when after driven,
By his Victorious Army out of Heaven,
And forced on Earth a wandering Life to live,
Amongst the barren woods, where thou did strive,
With anxious labor and with sweaty brow,
For lives necessities (as we do now)
At length no longer able to Endure,
The faint subsistence there thou did procure.
To Lemadon thou took'st thy hasty way,
In hopes to help him build renowned Troy:
But he responding thy desire with scorn,
To lonely woods again thou did return,
And there in after times begat'st a Race
Of Monstrous Trytons, only Men In The Face:
But from the Girdle downward, to the Toe,
Were perfect Dolphins, these were wont to go
With certain shells, which made a pleasant sound
Before him, as he walked the Wood a round.
But in succeeding time, when Infant Room,
Had heard that Neptune to their world was come;
And well considering all their Care and Cost
To Build that City, threatened to be lost,
For want of that fair Sex which Chiefly be,
The Ground or basis of Posterity.
They went to Neptune, and to him complained
Of that strange Famine they had long sustained;
Told him their case, how they were like to be
For want of Heirs, forgot to Memory.
To let 'em know he once had been a God,
Neptune returned their homage with a Nod;
And when within himself had paused a while,
Return them this as sacred Oracle.
To the Sabinian Plains, your Roman games
Will easily entice the Sabine Dames.
Who with their Daughters Joyfully will come,
To see brave Actions by the Romans done.
Then in the midst or Center of your Mirth,
When you have seen a now of young ones forth.
See that each Roman on the Sabines Runs,
Sease them for Wives, and so beget ye Sons.
After from's billows London Neptune spide,
Brought proudly thither by a high Springtide.
As through a floating VVood he stear'd along,
And Dancing Castles clustered in a throng.
When he beheld a mighty bridge give Law
Unto his surges, and their fury Aw.
When such a shelf of Cataracts did roar,
As if the Thames with Nice had changed her Shore.
When he such Massy walls, with Towers did Eye,
Such Posts, such Irons, on his back to lie.
When the Caerulian God these things surveyed,
He shook his Trydent, and Astonished said,
Let the whole Earth now all her wonders Count,
This Bridge of wonders is the Paramount.
MERCURY

The Poetical History of Mercury.
Often has my pondering Muse with laboring thought
Urged me to write, when to my view was brought
The Drifts and Errors of mistaken men,
Who to the common Herd would Cato's seem:
But to the learned and wise are nothing less,
Then Retrograders from true happiness.
Often in an uncooth Grove, from clamor free,
None but my Muse to bare me Company,
I Have worn out Ev'nings as I sighing sat,
Thinking on all the various hits of Fate:
Revolving in my mind with no small grief,
The irksome fooleries of humane life.
Ah! give me Pen, said I, for now I Am forced
To write, or else my laboring Soul will burst.
These thoughts the conclave of my mind so fill,
That nothing can unlade it but my Quill:
In such a Rapture, and in such a strain,
Great Mercury let me thy Fame proclaim.
Thou most renowned God, as well for birth,
As Ingennitie; whose sacred worth,
And great esteem, the other Gods declare,
By those great Offices which they confer
On the great Atlas Grandchild, when vast bones,
Covered with Moss, and crusted over with stones.
Up to a mighty bulk do shouldering rise,
And bare the ponderous burden of the Skys.
He with one only Daughter being blessed,
Maia by name, who as she took her Rest,
Slumbring on top of Mount Cylene's hill,
Perceived her Royal Womb begin to fill.
Her body Barnish, so that out of hand,
With thy great birth she blessed the Arcadean Land.
The Morning of thy Life in silence wasted,
Thy forward genius to Discretion hasted;
Which the discerning Heavens did so prefer,
They all proclaimed thee their Ambassador.
VVings to thy tender hands and heels they tyd,
That thou at their commands might swiftly glide
Through Liquid Floods, or cut the softer Air,
And in a trice to Heaven again Repair,
Leaving no sign or Trach behind the seen,
How thou had gone, or whither thou had been.
A pair of Serpents which did peace portend,
Twisting about a Rod held in thy hand;
By their so mild embraces did proclaim,
That unity which thou would fain maintain.
Nor do thou only Sea and Air insest,
But make thy way to every humane breast;
Which thou imploy'st in chalking out new draughts
Of fresh Idea's, and of unborn thoughts,
Which by thy inquisition there do find,
Lodged in some duskish corner of the mind.
These thou inform, and Method put'st together,
Till well conceived, thou make the Tongue deliver.
But when the immortal Soul of Man grows weary,
And in the body will no longer tarry,
It was thy Office (Mercury!) to come
And hand her kindly to Elyzium.
Where when the Soul in Melancholy Groves,
(The dark retriments of deceased Loves)
Had wearied out a year or two in plaint
Of its obscurity, and close restraint.
Thou like a mighty all-commanding God,
By virtue of thy never failing Rod,
Would beckon from that Hypocondriack Bliss,
And force 'em to a Metempsucosis.
The jolly Deities in former time,
Raised by the Spirits of Ambrosian Wine;
And sprightly Necter at a Feast brought forth,
Or else to cellebrate some Goddess birth;
With which, in rousing bouls, they would Confound
Their senses, till they thought the Heavens turned roun
Then like some Bloated Bully, who has sat
Till Bacchus gets possession of his Pate:
And Landlord like, with an Ejective Writ,
Turns out the little Rubbish of his Wit;
Placing such sumes instead, as naught dispense,
But those cursed Plagues desire and Impotence.
Frought with them both, he tumbles up and down,
Swears he will Hector all the trembling Town;
Spare neither Man nor Woman he can catch,
Nor leave his VVench for Cunstable nor VVatch.
But if they oppose such Airy sreaks as these,
Possessed the brains of wandering Deities.
When warmed with Wine from Heaven they used to Rove
To Cool themselves in some Terenian Grove.
Blessed by the happy Furniture of Beauteous Maids,
Who with loud Shrieks invoke their Shepherds Aids,
But all in vain, each God his Love will Feast
In his own shape, or for that Love turn beast.
Or Bird, or Tree, or golden shower,
Or any thing to reap the Virgins Flower.
Once when the wanton Gods had revel'd thus,
They needs would go to visit Tantalus
The Son of Jupiter, whose empty board
A well becoming Feast could not afford
For such unusual Strangers, wherefore he,
Urged thereto by mere necessity,
With hands inhumane, caused his Son to bleed,
Whose Limbs b'ing neatly Hasht and Fygazeed;
In mighty Dishes to the board were brought
By him, who kindly all the Gods besought
IN accept that little Treat, which humbly showed
In part, the sign of his Large gratitude.
The enraged Deities affronted all,
To see an Act so Damned unnatural.
First laid their heads together, to invent
For Tantolus befiting Punishment;
And then entreated Mercury to go
Down to the dwellings of the Dead below.
The Soul of Murdered Pelops to Redeem,
And instantly to bring him back to them.
Which Mighty Mercury alone could do,
Who adventrously among the Damned flew;
And by his power, regained that Soul from Hell,
Which otherwise had been impossible.
Thus, or through Heaven or Hell, where e're he wen^
This mighty God was still Omnipotent.
DIANA

The Poetical History of Diana.
THe Chaste Diana as before was sed,
Was the Fair Issue of Latona's Bed.
When Jupiter enraged at's scolding wife,
Left her to lead a rambling Bully's Life.
Meeting bechance this fair complying Mai'd,
Whom easily he to his Bed betrayed.
With Heavenly Seed he filled her until'd Womb,
From which in 10 Months time Diana sprung.
The Glittering Morning of whose Age was spent
In rural Sports; whereby a calm content
Which she enjoyed in that serene retreat,
She might have guest the tortures of the Great.
But after she to Riper Years was grown,
And filled the world with her deserved renown.
Which kindly added to her infant Name,
A trine of Titles to Enhance her Fame.
Luna thy called her as belonged to Heaven,
But hear on Earth another Name was given.
[Fair Cynthia] who amongst the woods did dwell,
And Proserpina when she went to Hell.
Calm was the Seria's of her happy Life,
Whilst freed from greatness, void of Care and Strife
And fell ambition; 'bout the Groves she walked,
And often of Heaven, and often of Love she talked.
To a fair Train of 60. Virgins she,
Had to attend her in that privacie;
Who every one officiously did wait
On her soft words, as the Oracle of fate.
With Bow in hand, and Quiver by her side,
She walked Commandress of that Beauteous Tribe,
Beating each Thicket as they Marched to find,
A game proportioned to her Noble Mind.
Sometimes a Royal Stag they gently Rouse,
As he was browsing in his shady house;
Who unacquainted with such beauteous Foes,
Stretches and looks about him as he goes;
At length being Charmed -- Stands gazing at h^ Eye^
Whilst by her Treacherous Dart he falls and Dies.
A silly Pheasant next (perhaps) they Perch
On an adjacent Tree within their Reach;
Who from his secure bough does leering spy,
Unusual Glories in Dyana's Eye;
Gazing with such intentness as did seem,
He aimed at her direct as she at him;
Till by an Arrow from her Fatal Sheath,
She sends him tidings of untimely Death.
Who not unkindly does the Message greet,
But trembling falls obedient at her feet.
The Timorous Hare at Melancholy Quat,
From her fair hands received unhappy Fate.
And Passant Birds so suddenly do dye
By her swift shaft, it would puzle one to spy
Whether her Arrow killed them, or her Eye.
In fine, she was the only Goddess of the VVood,
Who Hunting, Hawking, Shooting understood:
But yet so modest, careful, and so Shy,
To keep unblemisht her Virginity.
That bold Acteon, as he gazing stood,
To see her Bathing in a Neighboring Flood;
Whilst lib'rally without reserve or fear,
She openly exposed her Beauties there
So long, till casting up her Curious Eye,
Upon a Neighboring bank, she might Espy
The Rash beholder of her Stolen recess,
Who for that rude intrution of his,
She changed into a Stags Similitude,
Whom his mistaken Dogs with have Persu'd.
Through bushes, brambles, over hills and downs,
Through watery Thickets, and Damp Marshy Grounds
Deaf to his Noys, though Name by Name he calls,
Each heedless Hound who minds not what he bauls;
But eagerly their wearyed game pursue,
On whom over taken, so furiously they flew
With open Mouth, tearing him Limb from Limb,
That there the sad spectator might have seen,
By a Revenge so cruel and so Strickt,
Which she on poor Acteon did Inflict,
That nothing was so precious or so dear,
As an unspoted Modesty to her.
Admireing Ephesus had hardly heard
The rumor of her Fame, but up they reared
A Stately Temple, where with Reverence she
Was to be worshipped as their Deity.
No Beardless Priests, her Grandeur could suffice,
But Ancient, Grave, Religious, and Wise;
Such whose deportments and aspects might be
A grace to Burnish her Divinity.
Nor common Sacrifice would serve the turn,
But humane Flesh must on her Alters burn.
I fear Precarious Scythians meant to have
The mighty Boons which they were used to crave.
A helpless Greek fallen on the Scythian shore,
Cut into Quarters, Pickel'd in his Gore.
The humble Tauris must surely bring,
If they would please her with an offering.
Of which a famed Historian has writ,
A pleasant story full of Blood and wit.
When wild Orestes had his Mother killed,
The Act his Conscience with such horror filled,
That he grew restless, and dispair'd to find
Means to aswage the terror of his mind:
But b'ing adviz'd by own who loved him well,
To go ask Council of the Oracle.
It straight commanded, he should Greece forsake,
And Scythia Taurica with speed attacque;
Where near the Shore, in an adjacent Wood,
The Famous Temple of Diana stood;
In it her Statue, which if he by slight,
Whilst all lay slumbring in the Arms of Night,
Could but convey unto the Greecian-shore,
His Lunacie should trouble him no more.
Orestes Ships, and reached the Scythian Land,
Where he had scarcely quit him of the Sand;
But he was Seas'd on by a Crew of Spies,
And brought to Taurica for Sacrifice:
And that same Night before he was to dye,
Put into Ephigenias Custody.
The Priests of Diana, whose loose Eye,
Beholding bound Orestes Majesty.
The true proportion of each brawny Limb,
His spreading Shoulders and Majestic Mien --
She him within her self began to prize,
Fitter for Loves, than D'ana's Sacrifice;
Which soon as the accute Orestes knew,
He got both Mayden-head and Statue too.
VENUS

The Poetical History of Venus.
When impious Saturn harbored in his Breast
A Jealosie of being dispossessed
Of the longed for Glory of his Fathers Crown,
By the Intrusion of another Son.
With Graceless Sith he to his Father ran,
And robbed him of that part which termed him Man.
Which when dissected from his body, he
Carelessly flung into the Foaming Sea.
This Neptune viewing, with indulgent Eyes,
Strove to preserve the sacred Privaties.
Which first he Mantled in a bed of Foam,
Where agitating Waves were used to come;
And by their Active Motion heat beget,
These when with drops of Viril blood they met,
Comixt and Curdl'd, then congealed to form,
And afterward enlivened by a Storm;
Which from it is Nest the Beauteous substance tore
And left an Amorous Venus on the Shore;
Whose pearless Charms did neighboring Shepherds move
With Flowers to Crown her Deity of Love;
To whom each Evening every Nymph resorts,
As the sole Goddess of their wanton Sports.
And if at any time, she chanced to be
Too Lavish in her Shepherds Company,
Offered in sacrifice a Letcherous Dove,
Served to atone the rudeness of her Love.
Drawn by Lacivious Birds, in Chariot she
Tryumphant Rod through famous Chythere:
And stately Amathus, which she inclined
To wanton Sports and Levity of mind,
Both Paphos and the Cyprian Issands rung,
With loud Encomiums to Fair Venus Sung;
Whose boundless beauties often did surprise
The Guardless Souls of Curious Deities.
Who as they prying came her Beams to spy,
Their hearts were intercepted by her Eye.
But as to other Gods, whose wiser Care,
Did court her Smiles, she was not so severe:
For when plump Bacchus was to India sent,
In his Return from that rich Continent.
Venus hot Love could brook no longer stay,
But up she got and met him half the way;
Composed a Garland of the Cyprian Rose,
Wherewith she kindly Crowned his struting Brows;
Kissed her Plump Cheeks, and with soft sighs did move
The Jolly God, by wanton signs, to Love --
He who no dull ingratitude did know,
(As in this kind few Bacchanalians do)
In just requital of so kind a deed,
Impregnated her Womb with Heavenly Seed;
Which jealous Juno then in heat of Youth,
Thinking all lost that fell besides her Mouth,
Bewitched, before it any shape did know,
Whilst it was Curdling into Embrio;
That with contempt she might the Parents scorn,
When the ill shaped Pryapus was Born;
Whose crooked form put Venus in a fright,
Who banished him for ever from her sight.
Scarce was she from this ponderous burden freed,
But with another God she had agreed.
Who by her Captivating beams was led,
To seek the Pleasures of her happy bed.
The wanton Intrigue did so well succeed,
That from their close embraces did proceed
Young Hymenaeus, who did after prove
The only God of Conjugated Love.
The graces were her Daughters too, whom she
Always enjoined to keep her Company:
And Hood-winckt Cupid, who could never see,
The dire affects of his Artillery.
That little Boy with wings upon his back,
And Quiver by his side, which never did lack,
Showers of burning Arrows to inflame,
With rageing Love, the hearts wherein they came.
This wanton Youth by Poets too is sed,
To be oblieg'd for Life to Venus's bed:
And bold Aeneas he, whose pious Care,
Through Trojon flames did old Anchyses bear
Upon his back, whilst in his Face were sent,
Affrontive flashes every step he went.
He of whose Virtue Lofty Virgil Sung
So Lowed, that all the World has Rung
With the Enchanting Noise of his sweet Fame,
Which into every petty Island came;
And never will be extinguished, till the World,
Into its first obscurity be hurled.
He who in all this fame and splendor Lived,
Owns from fair Venus bed to be derived.
Thus loosely Venus Lived, Ranging abroad,
Free to the embraces of each willing God;
Who in her Arms were frequently delighted,
So often that she at length by all was slighted.
Excepting Vulcan, who durst never be
So impudent, to prove her Levitie.
This bashful homely God, had often sed,
He could have wished her in his sooty Bed;
And thither had invited her, but that
His Limping Leg was it she muttered at
So often to other Gods, that he dispair'd
Of having any light Petition heard.
Wherefore one evening as from Hell he came,
Sweating, and Panting, Collowy and Lame:
Thinking to cool him on the Cyprian shore,
He saw bright Venus, whom he did implore.
(After had made from her a small retreat,
To clear his grymed Chops of foot and sweat,)
At once to save his Longing and his Life,
By a submission to become his Wife.
The crafty Beauty, conscious she had been
Too light to keep the other Gods Esteem.
Like a declining Harlot, strove to engage
A Fond admirer of her wrinckled Age,
Admitted silly Vulcan to her Bed,
Who seeking for a long lost Maidenhead,
Was loaded so by other Gods with Scorns,
That all the Heavens Echoed Vulcans Horns.
PERSEUS

The Poetical History of Perseus.
WHen Men, from Oracles, the News did bring
To Famed Acrisius, Argos wealthy King;
That to a Child his Daughter should give breath,
Who afterward must cause her Fathers Death:
In hopes that rigorous Fortune to withstand,
Which Heaven had threatened by a Grand-childs hand;
The Young Presaged Mother, (who as yet,
With Man in warm embraces had not met,
Nor the delights of Lovers ever sought,
Unless by Proxy of a Dream or thought --)
Was by her Fathers harsh Commission sent
To a Tower of Brass for close imprisonment;
There from the sight of Man or Child confined,
To calm the Billows of his fearful mind.
Where, by the way, the Reader may behold,
How vainly man contest with Heaven does hold!
What little pains it takes to undermine
The shallow projects of our deep'st Design!
What matters all our Plots and Cares, alas!
What signifies a Tower of Massy Brass?
Tho mighty Alps should to those Walls condence,
They Would seem but Nets to piercing Providence;
Which does through Pores, as swift as Mashes fly,
Till it attains it is wished Ubiquity.
Resembling Recreation we procure,
Pond'ring the Reasons of the Men secure,
Who sit in their contrivances so close,
As if no other Fate could interpose:
Whom often we see by that same Clue they have spun,
Run tumbling headlong to the fate they would shun!
Thus by his care, Acrisius did but fly
The nearer way, to meet his destiny;
Which like a Thief perhaps, had by him past,
But that it Judged the Booty by its have.
For mighty Jupiter, whose tender Ear
Was always open to a Virgins Prayer;
Could by his high Prerogative invade
The sad complaints which Fair Danae made.
He heard her Sigh, and saw her weep and vex,
To be denied the Freedom of her Sex.
He daily saw her mourn her dismal Fate,
And heard her wish -- she knew not well for what;
But thought he could the right construction find,
And satisfy her discontented Mind;
Forcing his passage through the Brazen Tower,
In her warm Lap he reigned a Golden Shower;
Which ten Months after such rich Fruit did yield,
That Perseus sprouted from the Milky Field:
Whom with his Mother, grim Acrisius he
Locked in a Chest, and threw into the Sea:
But wandering Fishermen the Chest retrieve,
Whilst yet both Child and Mother were alive;
In whose great looks the honest men discry,
Unusual signs of Sacred Majesty:
By which they held themselves obliged to bear
Them both to Seriphus's Island; where
Young Polydectes largely did engage
Them both, till Valiant Perseus came to age.
Who by brave Actions in his Youth, made known
That Glory which his riper Years did Crown.
His Fame too bulky for this lower world,
By Ecchoing Plaudits to the Gods was hurled.
Who to divulge, they did his Deeds approve,
Sent him such presents as bespoke their Love.
Minerva, cause she would his Valor grace,
Kindly obliged him with her Looking-glass.
And Mercury, his liking to declare,
Gave him both plumed Wings and Semiter;
Wherewith so many Battles he obtained,
That from his Conquests Persia so was named.
His Sinuy Arm the Nereids did command,
Andromeda was Frenchiz'd by his hand.
When strange Sea Monsters were designed to Eat
The harmless Daughter for the Mothers sake,
The horrible Medusa's crawling Head,
Where twisting Serpents every moment bred,
Which who so looked on, into Stones were shrunk.
His hand dissected from the hideous Trunk,
Whose Reeking Blood ingendring with the Earth,
Gave winged Pegasus a happy Birth.
That mighty Beast, which with one lucky strok^
The hidden fount of Hypocrene broke;
And after that Immortal honor won,
In his assisting young Bellerophon
Against Chimaera; having done those Wars,
He Mounts the Skies, and lodged amongst the Stars.
Nor was brave Perseus only Famed in War,
The Sciences his private hours did share;
Those who were Learned, he held in near Esteem,
And came not but with open hand to them.
He knew in populous Kingdoms Letters are
As requisite as Instruments of War;
And that those Wars success does often Crown,
Which first are well debated by the Gown.
When Conquest to a Nation Peace does give,
It Is Learning tells the People how to live:
VVarns them that Valor which their Foe withstood,
Not to Experience in Domestic Blood;
But to their callings each Man's Arms resign
As quietly, as no such thing had been.
These and more noble Notions did procure
Perseus so much to favor Literature,
That on that celebrated mountains Brow,
To which the proudest Poets reverence owe.
[Immortal Helicon] Perseus Erected
A famous School, where Youth was well instructed
In all that Learning which the Generous find
Fit to accomplish an Heroic Mind:
For which brave Action (worthy endless Praise)
Ancient Poets raised him to the Skies.
So their Successors would ungrateful be
Not to applaud him to Eternity.
PAN.

The Poetical History of Pan.
YE Hural Gods, who amongst the Fields resort,
And wisely shun the Busle of the Court;
Where dwindled Parts, with discontents lie mute,
Under the luster of a Gaudy shute:
Where words obliging, and smiles forced (to please)
Are but the treacherous minds Antipodes:
And cringes, by Antithesis, proclaim,
What you request, you are not like to obtain.
Where, though the Peacock Treats you with a smile,
Read but his mind, there is Dam ye all the while.
(Why does this Credulous half-witted Bubble,
With His vain Petition give me thus much trouble.)
But You the noys of Courts discreetly shun,
You hate the Hums -- and Buzes -- of the Town.
Where busy men, like Bees together crowd,
And in their Convocations baul so loud.
(Each silly Speaker, fond of what he says,)
That all the Musicks drowned in the noise.
Whilst you in gaudy Lawns and gilded Fields,
Enjoy that simple good which Nature yields;
Pure and unmixt as it at first does come
From the vast Treas'ry of her Teeming Womb.
As are your Meats, so are your Pastimes free
From the strong tatch of Arts Debauchery.
The lust of honor fell Ambition here,
Does only in dim Metaphors appear.
Pride and Revenge, and softer Luxury,
Corroding sorrow, and that Gloomy Fry.
Of other Passions which infest the mind
Of those to dangerous greatness are inclined;
To Nymphs and Satyrs, and Field Gods are known,
Only by Tracks of Dark Tradition.
Their Innocence I envy, and implore
From all their Genius's a lusty store
Of sprightly wit, that I thereby may be
Aptly accomplished to discourse of thee
Great Pan! The Fields and VVoods sole Emperor.
Give me at least a Sidneys Soul or more
That in an untrod path my Muse may fly,
To give thy Story Immortality.
Thou Grandchild to great Jupiters strong Brain,
From whence thy Father Mercury was taken;
Who ravished with the Beauty of a Maid,
Whose Cruelty his Amorous Suit denied;
Resolved by Subtlety to undermine
That Fort which had withstood Loves Discipline:
It Is so in Martial, well as Loves affair,
When the Besieged unterrified appear;
Maugre the fruitless onsets of the Foe,
Who from their Canons Fiery blasts do blow
On the Imperious walls, which scorn to shake,
For all the Storms and Batteries they can make.
The wise Besieger, who perceives at length,
Nothing can be accomplished by his strength.
Close in his Tent shut up, does Studying try,
To gain by's Wit, what Valor did deny.
Sometimes a Band of stoutest Men he calls,
To bid adieu to those unhappy VValls,
As if some greater business of import,
Called their assistance to a distant Fort.
These by his Order in a week return
With the Besieged's colors, old and worn.
And by a feigned Combat with their Friends,
Shortly accomplish their desired Ends.
For the Besieged, who with Seamens Eyes,
Ken at a distance signs of fresh supplies,
VVilling to credit what they wished to have,
Hope for assistance, where they find a Grave:
Hasten their Ruin, more for want of care,
Than could their Foe, with all the Toyls of war.
And thus did Mercury, by cunning Gain,
That Virgin Fort which he had Stormed in Vain.
Who hearing all the pleasure which she took,
Was in attendance of her little Flock,
On which she seemed excessively to dote.
He therefore in the likeness of a Goat,
Which used to make a Bolster of her Thigh,
Did do the like; and when he was so Nigh --
No longer able to refrain, he ran
Upon his Bliss -- and so begot God Pan:
So much the Fathers shape the Son resumed,
That Goatish Horns his hairy Temples Crowned.
A Reverend Beard his pickit Chin adorned,
His Buttocks shaggy, and his Feet were horned
With glittering Hoofs, like Gum-work did appear,
His feet were cloven as the Devils are:
The strangeness of his Shape made Nymphs admire,
And listening Satyrs from their Grots retire.
The wondering Shepherd on his Thigh so strike
His Mutton Fist, and swear by his old Dike,
In all his Born he never saw the like.
But Pan, as he assumed his Fathers shape,
So did he of his Wit participate.
His form was not so duskish, but was seen
Through it, that glittering Soul which dwelt within,
Whose blessed Effects, the Rural Sports refined,
Both Satyrs, Nymphs, and Shepherds he inclined
To Poesy, the Glory of the Mind.
What others with long studious Toil attain,
By Nature flowed from his capacious Brain;
From out his Pipe Music distilled as clear,
As if he had cond his Gamuth forty Year.
His daily Practice Judgment did impart,
And made him so conceited of his Art,
That swelled with Pride, he so irreverend grows,
To snatch at Laurels on Apollo's brows:
Dares his sweet Harp, with Pans rude Pipe, to try
On open Stage, for Musicks Victory.
Mydas was Umpire in the grand Contest,
To give the Prize to him deserved it best.
A silly Judge Pan knew gives most applause,
And best success to a Resembling Cause,
And so it proved. Him Error did misguide,
To bear the Laurel from Apollo's side,
Which Mydas as his due on Pan bestows,
And thought he Crowned the most deserving brows.
Which injury Apollo soon repairs,
Who to his Woodcocks Brains sent Asses Ears.
BACCHUS

The Poetical History of Bacchus.
It Is not the meanest Title did Adorn
Renowned Thebes, that Bacchus there was born;
That Jolly God, whose Fame was after hurled
Through every corner of this Lower world.
Never by Oblivions cloud to be over cast,
So'long as Men, or Grapes, or Wines do last:
Or Sols refulgent Beams from far appear,
Or mirth inhabits in this Hemesphere.
So long as clambering Vines do upward thrive,
Or Men know how the happiest way to live
By Bacchanalian Antidotes, to drive
From their depressed Souls corroding grief,
Which every humane Error home does press,
And worm-like gnaws our goard of Happiness.
So long may Jupiter expect his Son,
Free from the Grave of dark Oblivion,
Or the more fierce Attaques of Hungry Time
Will live, and by the World be thought Divine.
Nor need his Fair, though hapless Mother fear,
But by his means to be remembered here;
Though of her Life revengeful J^^o did
By craft cut off the unextended Thread.
The Stories thus, Juno, who never at Peace
With any of her Husbands Mistresses,
In an old Matrons habit came disguised
To Semele, whom slily she adviz'd
As she her Interest or Honor prized,
To suffer Jupiters most close Embrace
When Armed with Thunder, as before he was.
When first he entered Juno's Virgins Bed,
And Crowned his Labors with her Maidenhead,
Semele consented to the fault,
But b'ing too weak to bare the fierce assault,
Was inth' Encounter by his Thunder Killed,
Just as her Virgin Womb by him was filled.
E're from the Boisterous God he could retire,
(According to Vexed Juno's wished desire;)
But Jupiter with Tears her Death bemoaned,
And after he a while had sighed and groaned,
With such Excess, as did to pity move
The other Gods for his unhappy Love.
He piously bestowed his God-like care,
The Embroy'd Infant in her Womb to spare;
Which soon he severed from its reeking Bed,
And by a deep Incision which he made
Into the Center of his Brawny Thigh
(An Artificial Matrix to the Eye)
He caused it there for nourishment to lie,
Till its Birth-time should force its Liberty;
For which great Jupiter much honor gained,
And Bacchus after was Bimater Named.
Ten Moons had scarcely filled their Monthly course,
When thriving Bacchus by Dame Natures force,
Scorning the Prison of his Fathers Thigh,
Got strength to force his safe Delivery.
His Youthful days in learning Arts he spent,
Under the wise and prosperous Government
Of grave Silenus, who with Wit sublimed,
Stockt and Imbellisht his Heroic Mind.
Which made him prompt to Actions brave and high,
Whereby he purchased Immortality.
His Virgin Valor amongst the Indians flew,
From whose black swelling Veins he often drew Shore,
Hot reeking streams of putrifyed Gore,
Which Died their Seas, and stained the neighboring
Leaving those Fields wherein he Battles wone,
With blushing Cheeks to tell what he had done:
And Hills of breathless Indians heaped on high
To Monument his Bloody Victory.
The Blacks at length no longer would dispute,
But rendr'd all his Conquests Absolute,
By their discreet Electing him to be,
There Foe no longer, but their Deity.
There, Triumph in its Infancy was seen,
Which owes its first Original to him:
Which he from vanquished Indians did procure,
As a just Tribute to their Conqueror.
A Royal Diadem adorned his brow,
And Libian Tishsue covered all below
In an Imperial Chariot where he sat,
Were all the Rich Hibiliments of State
Drawn by fierce Tygars, who their rage suspended,
To do him Honor till the Triumph ended.
A Lance instead of Scepter filled his hand,
As the Monarchique sign of his command:
Whilst Noblest Indians round about him throng,
To do him Honor as he Marched along;
With so much Glory, and a Train so great,
That after Romans did but Ape his State.
When Bacchus saw the Indians had bestowed
On him the Praise, and homage of a God;
Erecting several Temples to his Name,
Wherein each day were Goats and Asses slain
With fiery Dragons, and the chattering Pie,
To Appease (forsooth) his angry Deity.
To show him worthy of that large respect
To Arts and Sciences, he did direct
The search and study of his curious Brain,
Wherein he did to that degree attain,
That many wholesome Laws had thence their Rise,
Which curbed and checked the Brutish Indians vice:
And many Arts and Sciences were made
Assistant to them in their way of Trade:
But that which gratefulest acceptance found
Of all his Deeds, and all his Studies crowned,
That which such vast engagement did contract,
As to obliege the world in one sole Act;
And makes the Indian, and the Christian too,
Think all their Praise comes short of what is his due,
Was the Invention of the fruitful Vine,
Whose plotting Clusters seemingly combine
To give Man (like himself) a Soul Divine.
To heave his fleeting Thoughts to such a pitch,
As they with ease the Crystal Heaven may reach,
And from its glittering Capital behold,
Hells dark Transactions through this Mask of Mould
What boundless Ocean's able to confine
The active thought, tossed by a ghust of wine?
JUNO

The Poetical History of Juno.
YOu friendly Muses, I Will be Judge by you,
If I have often troubled you or no,
Not but I Have wanted your assistance much,
But my respect to you was always such,
That like some bolder Poets of the Time,
I durst not trouble you with every Rhyme;
Your steep Parnassus I never ventured on,
Nor ever asked a drop of Hellicon;
Which I forbore, both in respect of you,
And complaisance to better Poets too;
Nor e're could think it fit such thoughts as mine
Should often disturb ye, You most Sacred Nine!
When such as Dreydons, and sweet Flatmans, be
The happy Subjects of your Privacie,
What reason can induce, methinks I should
Be heard or minded amongst that Learned crowd.
No Thelia, I have still dispair'd, and Vow
By all the Gods, I had not begged as now
Your blessed assistance, but the Truth to tell,
This Hect'ring Goddess, if I write not well,
With such loud Peals, I fear mine Ears will storm,
That what with Scolding, and revengeful scorn,
I shall account it Policy to die,
On purpose to evade her Cruelty:
For she who could over top great Jupiter
In Heaven, and often wore the Breeches there.
She, who the fair Latona at her will
Could cause confined in Delos floating Isle,
And by some unjust Quarrel did engage
Each Junior God to undergo her Rage,
Which undeservedly upon them fell,
And made their Heaven as Anxious as a Hell.
She, who amongst the Gods could Cruel be,
If I offend, what will become of me?
Thus much to you in Private, but beware
(Let me beseech ye) Juno does not hear,
Till your assistance my low Fancy raise,
And she commends, and checkles at her praise.
Heavens mighty Empress! thou, who still have bin
To us a Goddess, and to Gods a Queen.
Who think it their Prerogative to be
Preferred, and governed by thy wise decree;
And round about thy Thrown do listening stand,
To catch the unworded Breath of thy Command
Ere it be coin in Language; who do try
To intercept thy meaning at thy Eye;
And thy Important Business run about
So fast, they stay not till thy words be out.
Thou, who with slackned thoughts art pleased, Bow
Thy mind to Rule this triffling Orb below;
Whilst careless Jupiter his senses Drowns
In Luxury, which Heaven and Earth confounds.
Thou mighty Empress, from thy Heavenly Seat,
Art thou for us contriving humane Fate;
Which thou like Sunbeams kindly do disperse
Amongst the poor Insects of this Universe.
Sparta, and Argos, and Mycenae too,
Gave thee these Appellations as thy due;
And firtil Samos, where thy Youth was spent
In harmless sports, and decent Meriment:
Where crowds of Virgins, in a neighboring Plain,
By sportive slights thy Favor strove to gain.
Some with their well strung Timbrels in their hand,
In perfect time would tread the even strand.
Some with a Sonnet Song to Oaten Pipe,
In well tuned Noats, would court thy wished delight,
Whilst others with more hard, but pleasing toil,
By well run Races, gained thy happy smile;
But the result of all, was, which should be
To a good Husband first preferred by Thee.
Thus did thy growing Worth, whilst Young, presage
The envied Glories of thy riper Age
For to complete you, which great Jupiter,
Whose chance it was at first to see Thee there,
No sooner viewed thy Majesty and Grace,
Those crowds of Beauties which adorn thy Face.
The peerless whiteness of thy Snowye skin,
Thy Nature Greatness, and thy Royal Mien;
But he was conquered by a strange surprise,
And forced a Captive to thy Regal Eyes;
Whom thou with much entreaty did approve,
As the only God deserving of thy Love.
And in requital of his pains, service Wed,
And Crownd'st his wishes with thy Maidenhead.
From whose warm Nuptial pleasures were derived
Vulcan, whose Ugliness his Parents grieved.
With Hebe, Arge, and Renowned Mars,
The Heavenly General in the Earthly Wars.
This Goddess Romes Protectress chose to be,
But unto Thebes an utter Enemy.
Who when Polibius out of Phocis came,
Where he had ign'rantly his Father slain;
Hoping within that Learned Town to find
Balm to assuage the Horrors of his mind.
Juno before the City Gates had raised
A Hideous Serpent, whose strange Form amazed
The sad Inhabitants; A Girls Face,
And a Dogs Body, did it is Form disgrace:
With wings on's Back, and a fell Dragons Tail,
It did it is hapless Enemies assail.
Juno had given it this Injurious Power,
That all those Passengers it should devour.
Whom want of wit, disabled to unfold
His dark Aenygma which was thus wise told.
That Creature (Mortal) I of thee must know,
Which in the Morning on four Feet does go,
At Noon on two, but in the Evening he
Calls for another, and makes use of Three;
Which wise Oedipus did thoroughly Scan,
And boldly answered, That it was a Man,
Who in the Morning of his Age did creep
With the assistance both of Hands and Feet;
And at his Noon, or Prime, did boldly Run
By the supportage of his Feet alone;
But in the Evening of his Age debarred
Of Strength, requires a Staff, which makes the third,
Which said, The Serpent gave a hideous Groan,
And at that Instant fled the joyful Town.
MINERVA

The Poetical History of Minerva.
THy self Minerva only I implore,
Lend me the assistance, and I crave no more.
Thou wondrous Product of a Head Divine,
Infuse some Wit into these Brains of mine;
That all thy Acts I nobly may rehearse,
And Sing thy Story to the Universe;
That all the yet unknowing World may be,
Thoroughly convinced of thy Divinity.
When glorious Jupiter had ruled the Throne
Of Heaven so long, that equal there were none
That durst be so presumptuous, to compare
With those blessed Attributes his mind did share.
Methinks I see him in his splendour sit,
Swaying the Empires of the World and Wit.
Those boundless Notions which enriched his mind,
Were grown too Bulky now to be confined;
And Cross-grained Juno at this time b'ing sed,
To be unwilling to partake his Bed;
Denying him thereby the means to obtain
A God-like Heir, which after him might Reign,
He to revenge the unkindness of his Queen,
Who then was causlesly unkind to him,
To limping Vulcan went (his Brain b'ing full)
Prays him with Hatchet to dissect his Skull,
Which strange command the Sooty God obeyed,
And out there leapt a pretty Armed Maid
Frisking about; in her right hand a Lance,
Wherewith she trod the Warlike Phirrhick Dance,
Which in the Trojan wars was first begun
By Active Pyrrhus, great Achillis Son.
This Martial Nymph, who strangely did appear,
Was Named Minerva, Deity of War:
War was her Province, and she took delight
To hear of Quarrels, and to see Men Fight;
Sought out for Battles, and where e're they were,
Besure Minerva always would be there.
When mighty Pompeys Fate was forced to yield
To Caesar's Fortune in the Pharsalian Field,
Minerva grieved, and would have turned the Scale,
But that fierce Juno against her did prevail
With greater Power, reverting the blessed tide
Of dear bought Victory to Caesar's side.
So when in Latiums Bowels did appear
The Carthaginian waging Dreadful War:
Minerva saw his Valor and his Wit,
And with her presence daily honored it;
She smiled to see the sprightly Youth all gore
Of Roman Veins, which never had Bled before;
And Crowned his Acts with happy Victory
Over those who never before were taught to fly;
She viewed his flights and Stratagems of War,
Whereby he made two Hannibals appear;
One in the Fields, retreating Romans own,
Another the Sennat Swore was in a Gown:
It gave Minerva heavenly content,
To see the Present was to Carthage sent,
And none so simply looked (to Heaven she Sings)
As dying Romans when they would lost their Rings.
She shook her sides to the Dons of Rome,
(They who an Empire over the world did own)
Confined Prisoners in their Native Town.
In fine, where Innate Valor did Reside,
The over poured Minerva chose that side,
And when hot Passion sat in Valors place,
She did her best to bring it to disgrace.
When from great Jupiter Vropa fled,
(Having before by him been Ravished)
Grieved Agenor, her Father, gave command
That his Son Cadmus seek her through the Land;
And if not there, to search the world about,
On pain of Death, till he had found her out.
But Cadmus, after he with pain had gone
Through many deserts, and through Lands unknown,
VVearied with Travel, and dispairing too
Of ever finding her he did Pursue.
Considering too, if he returned again,
Death was to be the wages of his pain.
Loaded with grief, and Anxious discontent,
To Delphos famous Oracle he went,
And of the Amphibious Nymph desired to know,
What in this Exigent he had best to do:
The Oracle the Prince did kindly greet,
And had him the next Ox he chanced to meet,
To seize him for himself, as Lawful Prize,
And offer to the best of Deities
Minerva, who his Case best understood,
And was most able to advise his good.
Cadmus obeys, and on his Journey went
Through Warlike Greece, where on a small ascent,
Beneath the umbrage of a gloomy VVood,
He found the expected Beast which grazing stood.
Whom joyful Cadmus and his Men surpised,
And to Minerva would have Sacrificed,
But that in order to that Pious Care
Which in such Sacred Actions usual are,
Cadmus for water had dismissed his Train,
To Dirc's Fountain, where they all were slain
By a fierce Dragon, which was use to abide
In a thick Break, hard by the Forest side;
So that Young Cadmus's self was left alone,
To do the work of his Devotion.
With pain the Sacrifice b'ing killed and ended,
For Cadmus course, Minerva was recommended,
That first he should that dreadful Draggon flay,
And sow his Teeth where his own dead Friends lay.
From which strange Seed an Army should arise
Able to guard him from his Enemies;
And likewise to assist him to Erect
Structures impregnable, as might protect
Him and his Companions wholly free
From his Unnat'ral Fathers harsh Decree.
This Cadmus did, and with no small surprise
To see an Army from the Teeth arise
Which Ranckt and Mustered, all before him stand
Ready to work or March, at his Command:
The Soldiers by Minerva's wise advice,
Were carried to the place of Sacrifice,
(Where the Prophetic Oxes blood was spilt,)
On which famed Spot Renowned Thebes was built;
Whose spacious Forum to a Temple led,
Where by Learned Thaebans she was worshipped.
CYBELE

The Poetical History of Cybele.
YOu Vestal Virgins, who do watch that Fire,
which like your Chastities, must never expire.
You who of Noblest Romans were descended,
Whose fames did rival those bright Beams you tended.
Lend me a Spark, my groveling Muse to raise
To a fit pitch, to write Cybele's Praise.
Menoes Fair Daughter, Phrygia's mighty King,
In whose loud applause Athenian Quills did Sing,
'Till for some weighty Fatal cause, unknown,
He was so cruel to Cybele grown,
That Maugre all that Dearness, Love, and Care,
That Parents to their Children ought to bare.
Far from his Throne, amidst a Desert wild,
Which naught but with wild Beasts was stockt and filled,
Midst bleakish winds, and in a place forlorn,
He left the Fair Cybele to be torn
By Tygars, Panthars, or what else thought fit
To Bait his Stomach with that Royal bit,
Who had no other guard for her defense
But swaddling clothes and Infant Innocence:
But whatsoever we think, -- those Heavenly Powers,
Who Register each word and Act of ours,
Who Rule the world, and by Experience see
What homage 'longs to Sacred Majesty.
Put down a Mighty blot, when they behold
We wave our Loyalty for drossy Gold:
This, by this Story may be understood,
Where Brutes turn Guardians unto Royal Blood;
Renounce their Ravenous Natures, and become
To Majesty a safe Palladium.
For vexed Cleone had not left behind
The Child an hour, to be exposed toth' wind,
But from a neigbouring VVood to seek for Prey,
A hungry Lion made his hasty way,
Directly toward the place the Infant lay.
The Beast Surveys her with a Tail reclined,
And haughty look, as towering as his Mind;
Then by a sudden start did seem to spy
Unusual Greatness dawning in her Eye,
Which he Admired by Natural simpathy.
In this Amaze, a Ravenous Tygar comes
With open Mouth, and at the Infant Runs,
Whom doubtless she had made her wretched Prey,
Had not the Kingly Lion stopped her way;
So that each Beast at other b'ing enraged,
In a fierce Combat strongly were engaged;
Which from a far, a straggling Shepherd spies,
And whilst they strugled, snatched away the Prize.
Cybele's Beauty did the Swain engage,
To Educate her till she came to Age;
And then so bright she seemed, her Beauty could
Outshine the Sun, and make it seem a Cloud.
As Goddess of the Woods she daily walked,
To whom Young Shepherds at a distance talked;
Gathering those Roses were most fresh and gay,
To strew before her in her happy way;
Striving by little services, to move
The Beauteous Shepherd to requite their Love:
But she neglected all, till she had seen
A sprightful Shepherd of a graceful Mien,
To whom such kindnesses she did impart,
That all immagin'd he had gained her heart;
And so its like he had, for by his Suit
He gained both heart and Maidenhead to boot,
At the dear purchase of his dearest Life,
For whom Cybela after died of Grief.
Which doleful News to Italy was brought,
When mighty Hannibal had newly Fought
That Cannae's Battle, where the Fields he strow'd
With mighty Deluges of Roman Blood;
And Posting toward the trembling Capital,
Threatened both it, and all the Senats fall:
In which strange Exegence, the Senate sent
Of those sad Wars, to learn the dire Event
From famed Cybeles Books, where future Fate
In obscure Characters was darkly Writ.
Which thus informed; the Carthaginians may
From Romes proud Gates with ease be driven away,
Provided some bold Roman Consul come,
And take Cybele's Statue into Rome;
Which by Pompilius was no sooner done,
But Scipio Africa a Conquest wone;
And by six Thousand Carthaginians fall,
Forced them to send for Conquering Hanibal.
After the Conquering Romans raised her Fame,
(Both Vesta and Cybele b'ing the same)
And her with strange and endless Fire adored,
To whom instead of Sprites they did afford
A Flock of Virgins, who alternate came
To watch and manage that Aeternal Flame.
A Fire so strange, it curiously would try
That Virgin, who had stained her Chastity:
Who ever after, if she dare to come
To stir those Embers, they would her consume.
Some Ancient Poets in their Books discover,
Cybele was the Gods great Grandmother.
Who when Eternity had grunting layn
So long, till she was brought to Bed of Time.
Cybele too in torturing Pangs was hurled,
Laboring in Travel of an unborn World:
From whose large Soul derived in after time,
Were all those Deities they termed Divine.
As Mistress of the Earth she now Infuses
That genial heat which Herbs and Flowers produces,
And by the Suns embraces, yet does bring
Into the world each Year a lusty Spring;
For which the grateful Painters do bestow
Small Towns, like Laurels, circling round her Brow.
In a low Vale a fertile Hill does rise,
Whose Fruit does bound the Prospect of her Eyes;
Whilst in a stately Chariot she o'relooks
Fair Landskips Laced with glittering Silver Brooks,
Which 'twixt their flowery Banks do gently fly,
Rend'ring their Beauty double to the Eye:
Thus was this Reverend Goddess use to Ride,
With crowds of Shepherds Lacquing by her side.
PLUTO

The Poetical History of Pluto.
BEyond the utmost Limits of the Earth,
In a vast space which gave young Time its Birth;
Where dancing Atoms silently do Mourn,
Because they cannot Jumble into Form.
A piece of that old Vacuum or Shade,
Where Eldest Spirits their first Revels made,
And frisking Demons afterward were hurled,
Free from the croudings of this Bulky World,
Which pushed and should 'em up to lesser Room,
Making encroachments on their Vacuum.
There wrapped in Flames a dreadful Throne does stand,
Over which Infernal Pluto bears command,
Stretching his Fiery Scepter out so far,
As loudly speaks him Hells great Emperor.
Burning Grannadoes 'stead of Jems appear,
Like blazing studds on his supported Chair,
Which over remoter shades large prospects takes
From the strong Atlas of grim Spirits backs:
His shrill Command the silent Grott invades,
Which caught by Eccho's, bandy'd through the shades
Till startled Ghosts from out their Bushes run,
Like frighted Hares about the Elyzium.
And fleshless Skeletons surprised so,
They leave their Brakes, and wrattle as they go.
Departing Souls to this Infernal Court,
When they forsake their lifeless Trunks resort,
Where correspondent toth' deeds they have done,
They trembling sit to hear deserved doom,
From Minos, Radamanthus, and the rest,
Whose spotless Lives deserved that power best,
Whom to that Office Pluto did prefer
For their unbyas'd Justice practiced here.
At the poor Souls approach, the Judges call
For their Diurnal, or that hideous Scrall
Carefully kept in Heavens great Capital,
All to be daubed with wretched Sinners names,
Which all their close and open Sins proclaims,
In Letters Capital, so plain toth' Eye,
That when the trembling Sinner comes to die,
Like Boys in Horn-Books, h'reads em through the Sky.
Judgment according to their Crimes b'ing past,
The wicked Souls to Tartarus were cast;
That by a certain time of suffering there,
They might Atone those Sins they acted here.
The first thing there, the amazed Souls beheld,
Was mighty Giants, under Mountains quel'd;
Down to hot flames, because before they strove
From Heavens bright Throne, to pull the Powers above.
The next which begged attention from the Eye
Was wretched Ixion, whose Love soared so high,
To court compliance in stern Juno's will,
For which attempt she bound him to a wheel,
Which in a swift unseasant pace did move,
To give him Torture for his saucy Love.
But that which admiration most obtains,
Was Sysiphus his unsuccessful pains
Condemned for Theft, to Roll a mighty Stone
Up a steep Hill, which faster tumbled down,
And by the force of it is prevailing weight,
Renders him hopeless of a milder Fate.
In hellish Tartarus to stay their Times,
Appointed were according to their Crimes;
Some small, some great, which soon as e're expired,
The now confined Soul with joy retired
To those cool shades, where lavish Blessings run
Frequent as Air, and make Elyzium.
The shape of Ghosts they now retain no more,
But each resumes his Form as heretofore.
There Lovers, which this peevish World denied
Their wished Conjunction, happily reside,
Free from disturbance amongst those shady Groves,
Reaping the utmost wishes of their Loves.
Some wast their happy Minutes, to declare
The affronts and crosses which they meet with here;
And then with thoughts renewed, those griefs destroy,
Pond'ring the freedom which they now enjoy.
Here mighty Love does all his charms disclose,
Here Friends, nor Law, nor Im'rest interpose,
But every Lover to his Mate is given,
With whom he lives, and makes a perfect Heaven.
Here lovely Chen --! when the obliging Gods
Shall call us to them in these Green aboads,
Beneath some pensive Willow, thou and I,
Condemned here, alas! to Gaze and Sigh,
Shall their those Powers themselves to Envy move,
When we com^leat our long suspended Love.
Gods will (...) their Essences, and wish
To be like us, when they behold our Bliss.
And envious Lovers at their Fates repine,
When thy warm Arms shall cling as close as mine:
When of thy Beauties I shall be possessed,
And Love and Youth make up an endless Feast;
And if at any time our fervor shall
Admit an hour or two of Interval,
Resembling Recreation I shall find,
When I contemplate thy Illustrious mind;
Thou have a Soul so noble, and refined,
And so transcending silly Woman kind!
That when in blessed Elyzium it appears,
The wondering Gods will think it one of their;
Treat it accordingly, till I do prove
Thee mine alone, by Tenure of my Love.
Ah! whilst I think on thee, my Pen does write
With so much satisfaction and delight,
That common Lovers, in their sweetest Joys,
May wish my Pleasures, whilst I write thy Praise.
Pardon great Pluto, that so long I Rove,
I left my Theme a while to meet my Love:
So once with Amorous thoughts thy Breast did swell,
When Proserpina thou Redeemd'st from Hell.
Furies nor Fire, could not then remove
The wild Excursion of thy Frantic Love.
But thou to Heaven, through both, did her convey,
As Old Archises rid through Flames of Troy.
PROSERPINA

The Poetical History of Prosperpina
WHat Mighty Mines of hidden Magic lie
In the small Circle of a Woman's Eye;
When Statemens Policies, and Heroes Arms,
Are fain to stoop to its prevailing Charms,
And on this score concede to mighty Love,
[VVhat conquered them has done the same by Jove]
Who first his Godhead as a Victim lays
Down to the Mercy of Latona's Eyes,
And then divests himself of all his Power
To young Denae in the Brazen Tower;
To tell the various Intrigues of his Love,
Would but a Herculean labor prove:
It is enough the Courteous Reader knows,
That Jove at length to Ceres Beauty bows,
On whom his Promises such Credence gain,
She yields the Fort which never before was taken;
And Proserpina, (Heavens Imperial Queen)
Her being owes to the Lascivious Sin;
The dauning Glories of whose Morning years,
A Prodigee to neighboring Gods appears;
Who by those Seeds of Beauty fate had sow'n
In her fair cheeks, presaged the Cropp when grown.
Each Amorous Deity attempts t'engage
In Youth her Love, against she comes to Age,
Whilst she as coyly does their Flames disown,
And scorns a Present lesser than a Crown.
Her Native Grandeur, and her Courtlike Mien,
Disposed her only fit to be a Queen;
Nor can in Heaven her young Ambition find
Ought but a Throne to stop her greedy Mind.
When ripe Maturity had Crowned her years,
And warmed her Brain with strange ambitious cares.
Her envious Eyes to Heavens bright Thrown she cast,
And mourned to see that Seat before possessed.
Then with a haughty and Imperious Eye,
She viewed and scorned Earths brittle Sov'raignty.
Where Men over night like Demigods appear,
And in the Morning want a Sepulcher.
Next to great Neptunes Throne her thoughts did soar,
But he was furnished with a Queen before;
So that at last she knew not where to find
An empty Throne to satisfy her Mind;
Just at this juncture, Pluto, whose grim Face,
Had formerly procured him much disgrace
Amongst other Goddesses, who viewed with scorn
The Infernal King, by reason of his Form.
Great flaming Eyes, with Skin as dark as Night,
And bloated Cheeks, made not to tempt, but fright:
The dreadful Horror of his looks, did move
The Heavenly Goddesses to Fear, not Love.
At whose approach, they always used to fly
His Hellish Courtship, and his company:
Fearful from Hell, that he was rather sent,
Not as a Courtier, but a Punishment.
But when untamed Ambition gapes for Power,
What nauceous Goblets will it not devour?
Trampling over all the Passions of the Mind
With as much ease, as wind through Chaff does find.
Fear and distrust, their Trepidations shun,
Thrust by Ambition, both to Courage Run.
Unmanly Cowardice, and dark Despair;
Leave the low Rooms, and to the Heart repair,
Where finding close Caballs of Passions met,
Ambitions grand design to Propagate;
They frankly close, and as they had forgot
Their Names, become the desperat'st in the Plot.
Whilst Envy, Anger, with bold courage tied,
And all the lesser Faculties beside;
With all the Power, and art they have, conspire
The sure compleatment of the wild desire;
Nay, mighty Love, which will no homage own,
To ought inferior, stoops unto a Crown;
And will by Proxy of a Picture Guess,
(In hopes of that) at other happiness.
The Bait of a Monarchick fate appears
So charming to the Ambitious Purchasers.
(To whom the inlay'd troubles of a Crown
B'ing Hiv'd in Gold, are utterly unknown,)
That they the grounds of Love but light esteem,
When it opposes hopes of Diadem.
Thus Proserpina, Pluto's Love does own,
She over looks his Face, to see his Crown;
From whose bright Pearls, such glittering dawns arise,
As drowned the Horror of her Lovers Eyes.
She not at him, but at his Throne does gaze,
Runs to his Arms, but never beholds his Face;
Where locked in forced Embraces, she derives
Not Loves warm joys, but those Ambition gives;
Whilst thoughts of glory do that loss redeem,
As subtle Women think on other Men. --
To Aetna's Flaming Mountain Pluto brought
The Ambitious Goddess, where with care he sought
In Loves great management, to show such skill,
By Wit and Language, as might gain her will.
But both b'ing ineffectual, he was fain
By force to Ravish what he begged in vain.
We most Eversion find in willing Mis --
Whose feigned resistance but indears the Bliss;
Which else by Foolish Lovers would be thought
Not worth enjoying, 'twas so cheaply bought.
Pluto the gloomy Emperor of Hell,
Behaved himself in Loves Caress so well,
That Proserpina now insults no more,
But seems to Sigh, she did not yield before.
Such strange unlanguag'd Joys does Love dispense,
It makes the Lover hate his Continence:
And (where Religions wanting) hugg the Sin
To which he grieves he launcht no sooner in.
Thus mighty Pluto, scaled the Virgin Fort,
And now he thinks he need no longer Court:
When that is once lost, the Woman Raigns no more,
But Courts the Man, as he did her before:
Without more words, she Vows to be his Queen,
And down hot Aetna's Entrils follows him,
To those dull Shades where injured Lovers keep:
There Pluto Crowned her Empress of the Deep.
Whose Story thus much of her Sex does tell,
They will be Ruling, though it be in Hell.
HERCULES

The Poetical History of Hercules.
WHen we discourse of brave Alcides Fame,
Wonders grow common, and forget their name!
Faith cannot comprize those Truths the Author tells,
And Reason startles at the Miracles:
Our Modern Hero's of the best esteem,
Seem Dwarfish Infants when compared with him;
Whose tall Gigantick Worth, their pitch out flew,
And is too great for most of them to View.
When to his height, the largest thought's sublimed,
It finds no room for Glory left behind:
But like the curious searches of the Eye,
Returns, and Settles, bounded by the Sky.
As were his Actions of Unvalu'd worth,
So, wondrous was the manner of his Birth;
When Jupiter Al'mena to Enjoy,
Three Nights conjoined without a Glimp's of Day,
That in her Husbands Shape he might (by stealth)
Beget a Hero worthy of himself.
But jealous Juno who with rage was filled,
At the presageing Beauties of the Child.
A pair of Dreadful Serpents sent to be,
Of his new Life the sad Catastrophe.
Then with unusual Courage he assails,
And by his Infant strength so far prevails;
That by the Early conquest, men begun
To Ghess what Race his Valor was to run.
Whilst Alimena in Travel went with him,
Mycene's Wife was Big at the same time;
And Jupiter had Swore that which of them
First should be born, should wear the Diadem,
And over the other bare entire Command.
Which soon as Juno came to understand,
Two Months before the usual time of Birth,
She caused young Euristheus to come forth,
And leave the dangerous Lodging of the Womb,
To be successor to his Fathers Throne.
Whilst slumbering there, did young Alcides lie,
Little suspecting the Captivity,
And Vassalage he was to undergo,
When jealous Euristheus came to know
That dangerous Valor which adorned his mind,
Of stout Alcides, who to Arms inclined,
Did his green Youth with such brave Actions Crown,
As no contempor'ry Monarch dared to own,
And Euristheus forced, by such commands,
As scorned accomplishment by other hands,
In dire full tasks of Valor to expose
That Life, which scared him more than all his Foes.
But all the toyls this Tyrant could invent,
Served but Alcides Glory to augment.
Whose dauntless Courage near his Strength forsook,
And power accomplished what he undertook.
To whom the greatest Perils seemed but small,
And common dangers looked like none at all.
Both which he grappl'd with Victorious hands,
And wearied Euristheus's harsh cammands.
From whom he would have parted; but the powers,
Who often offlict this wretched Life of ours.
Proclaimed by Oracle it was the will,
Of all the Gods that he should serve him still.
Till his bright fame by twelve brave Actions more,
Were made more glorious than it was before.
Which thus successively the youth Obeys,
And crowned his labor with Immortal prays.
Out of the hollow Conclave of the Moon,
To Nemea's gloomy Forest tumbling down;
A mighty Lion came, who seeking out
For Pray, Devoured the Country round about.
Him, brave Alcides, in his Den Surpised,
And with strong hands, his knotty windpipe seized
With such successive strength, that wanting Breath,
The Lion paid his valor with his Death.
Then from his back, his ponderous skin he tore,
And wore it himself in sign of Conqueror.
Next he was sent to Lerna's fulsome Lake,
The many headed Hydra to attaque;
Who loosing one, its wondrous Nature was,
To sprout out many others in the place;
Nor likely was Mortallity to know,
If all were not dissected at one Blow:
And afterward his hateful Body burned,
Both which Alcides happily performed.
About that time, the huge Arcadian Boar,
On Erimanthus Mountain did appear;
Which young Alcides took, and out of Sport,
Dragged him along to Eurystheus Court;
Whose shape was horrid, and so prone to fright,
The timorous Tyrant Swooned at the sight.
He Vanquished Menalus's Stagg in Fight,
And after put Stymphalus Birds to Flight;
But that which most his peerless Valor Crowns,
Was Conquest over the Scythian Amazons.
When joined with Theseus in that Glorious strife,
(To whom he gave Hypolite for Wife)
The next Injunction which enhaunc't his Fame,
Was, making King Augias Stables Clean;
Forcing old Alpleus to forget her Stream,
And drive her Channel through the midst of them;
And so performed his promise, in one day,
Cleansing of Dung, ten Thousand Tuns away.
From thence the Thracian Tyrant he persu'd,
(Grim Diomedes) with a mind endu'd.
So Barbarous, and full of Cruelty,
That by wild Horses, he made strangers Dye.
Him brave Alcides by excess of power,
Forced to that Fate which he imposed before.
And made the strange Three-body'd Gerion feel,
The fatal weight of his Victorious Steel.
Alcides in his next adventure Killed
The horrid Guardian of the Hesperian Field;
Though some say Atlas eased him of that Toil;
And left him shouldring up the World the while.
But that which brought the largest share of Fame
To make immortal his Heroic Name,
Was when with unresisted strength he Fell
On Cerberus and dragged him out of Hell,
And set young Theseus (there imprisoned) Free
From the vast Pains of Hells Captivity.
This Chain of brave Atcheivments moved the Gods
To take him to them in their blessed Aboads,
And 'twas no doubt, for such bright Acts as these,
Apollo's Priest Surnamed him Hercules.
HEBE

The Poetical History of Hebe.
LIke Murders, breaches of the Marriage Bed,
May sleep a while, but cannot long ly hid.
Let the most subtle Letcher, wrapped in Night,
Tread nere so softly to his Damm'd delight;
Find out the privat'st Allies, secret'st ways,
To creep obscurely to his brutish joys;
Himself disfigure, in a Cloak or Gown
So strangely that he thinks he cannot be known:
The blazing Sin appears through all these shrow'ds
As perfectly, as does the Sun through Clouds.
When secret Jupiter in silence had
Enjoyed the pleasures of Latonas Bed.
Though he appeared most innocent in show,
He quickly found this Maxim very True.
'Like Gunpowder, those loud Adulterate joys,
'Bear with them still a hid and sudden Noys;
For Jupiter had hardly done the Sin,
But Cursed Juno twits him with the Crime;
Upbraids him before the Gods, and threats to be
No more confined to the Marriage Bed than he,
Which when vexed women swear, we need not doubt
To save their Souls, they will surely bring about.
Neptune the nick observed, and did invite
The discontented Juno to delight
Her self by walking to a Neighboring Field,
Which wholesome herbs, and fragrant flowers did yield.
But most of all to treat her curious Palate,
With the small Present of a sav'ry Sallet.
To tell you what the Poets said of old,
Sprung from a treat so unnourishing and cold,
Would but impose upon your better Senses,
Who purchase knowledge by your large expenses.
And yet are forced to bribe the Nymph you have wone,
Not to declare how faintly you have done.
Yet thus those Poets say, that Juno, filled
With that strange Sallet, after proved with Child;
And Modern Authors for a truth relate,
That Hebe was begotten by the Treat.
Whose Beauty did prefer her to the Care
Of her believing Father Jupiter.
By whose decree, she was each meal to stand,
With flowing Bowls of wine at his Right hand.
Ready for other Gods, at his express,
To fill full Cups to drink his Happiness,
Nor was she graced by Jupiter alone,
Who, as his Darling, kept her near his Throne.
But Heaven throughout her prattling beauty fled,
And here on Earth her Name was honored.
The Learned Athenians whose great parts best knew
What Homage to Joves Cup Bearer was due:
Her perfect beauty, and her power did prize
Above the Rate of common Deities:
Terming her Youths Fair Goddess, and each Year
About her spacious Temple did appear
The flower of all their beauteous Virgins; who
To her guilt Alter for success did sue
In choosing Husbands; wise and aptly bred,
To reap the Pleasures of their happy bed;
Some a young Chicken, some a Kid would bring,
And some a Pullet for their Offering.
Some a streakt Apple, newly plucked from Tree,
The Ruddy Emblem of Virginity.
Some who were poorer, by their wits would try
To frame such sports as pleased their Deity.
Some to the Ball would run, some the Hays,
Some to the Keets, and some to Prison-beys.
VVasting the day with sports which Youth delight
And then with Reverence wished her all, -- Goodnight.
Thus Hebe buoyed by a respect from Jove,
Was praised by men, and Loved by those above.
It Is so with Men; when Royal Beams dispense,
On humble shrubs their powerful Influence.
How soon they sprout? and up toward Heaven do soar
Who mingled were with common Trees before!
How fast they grow? how far their branches stretch?
How soon they scorn their former Dwarfish pitch?
With what contempt does their exalted bow,
Look down and scorn their fellow shrubs below?
How proudly wave they their surmounted heads?
Benighting all the woods with Gloomy shades.
Which wondering at their greatness, murmuring stays
At it is old stature, wanting those warm Rays. --
But when the Tempest of a Monarchs Frown,
What he had raised, designs to tumble down:
When he retracts those Beams, whose friendly heat
Has warmed and nursed them to that dangerous sat;
And from their tottering heads his help recalls,
Their desperate height adds tortures to their falls.
Makes the bruise worse, and their degraded power,
By them is scorned whom it had scared before.
Hebe supported by the Smiles of Jove,
Received from Gods and Men respect and Love.
But when the sad disaster of a fall,
Before the Gods where she discovered all --
Those Naked beauties whose strange natures be,
To make Men blush, and yet desire to see.
Those fertile smiles converted to a frown,
The temporizing Gods their love disown.
Grudg the assistance of a worded breath,
To speak to Jove, who hurld her to the Earth;
Where brave Alcides whose large Soul well knew
What dangerous falls the Great are subject to.
And could discern through all the Clouds of Fate,
Untainted Virtue in its low estate;
Entreats her Love, and his great Virtue sped
So well, that she admits him to her bed.
From whose glad Nuptials (much for Revel's famed)
Youths Frollick sports are yet Hebetria Named.
JASON

The Poetical History of Jason.
HOw many Evils Humane Life surround,
When 'sides those common ones by all men found,
Each man within himself does bear about
Far greater Mischiefs than he fights without.
In all the Pop'lous Land, from farthest West,
To the Remoter Islands of the East,
Find me but one, who certainly does know,
What Is truly Good, from what is so in show;
Without mistake, for what is it we desire,
Or fear discreetly? what would we require
To make us blessed? but ever as we speed,
Repentance seals the very Act and Deed.
The easy Gods moved by no other sat,
Than our own Prayers, whole Kingdoms Ruinate.
With things distructive we would often be blessed,
And so grow wretched by our own request.
When by false reasons Man's affections moved,
No wonder that he hates the thing he Loved;
And through the Vail, the Cheat b'ing understood,
Perceives an Evil, where he hoped for Good.
Thus the Thessalian Monarch Pelius, drawn
(In Jasons mind when he beheld the Dawn
Of morning Valor, which did daily swell,
And threatened to become remarkable)
To dotage; whilst his Nephews youth did last,
Nothing was wanting, or, for Care, or Cost.
No art which did Heroic tempers suit,
But's Nephew Jason must be trained up to it.
Athens was not to dear, nor Greece too far,
To learn him all the Stratagem, of War.
Nor all the Learning either did afford,
To teach him Rule, as well as weild the Sword.
But when this prodigy of Valor had,
In The School of War a fair progression made;
Leaving his Fellows by a brisk advance,
To praise his Skill, and Curse their Ignorance.
When in the Fields by single Combats he,
Had told the World what he designed to be;
And all who had for Virtue an esteem,
As her Disciple 'gan to honor him.
Then Pelias whom the wondering world believed,
Would have with joy his Kinsmans fame received,
Suffered his Love to make a cold retreat,
And heard his prays with jealousy, and hate,
Which in his mind a secret longing bred,
To blast that worth which he had fostered
With so much Pain, and Cost, and aching Cares,
It seemed the business of his latter Years.
Thus blind mortality, who wish by ghess,
With Sweaty Brows attain unhappiness.
Which wrapped in spacious Colors does remain,
Unknown to them until they feel the pain.
Jason had such undoubted Valor shown,
That Pelias grows suspicious of his Thrown:
Feels himself totter in the Regal seat,
Till's Nephew's Ruin has secured his fate,
And as a means to work that black design,
To Colchos famous Kingdom orders him
With an injunction not to return to Greece,
But with the Conquest of the Golden Fleece;
Which Phrixus to that Ancient City brought,
When shelter from his Mothers rage he sought
Of great Aeetha, Colchos mighty King,
Who tender of so rich and rare a thing,
In Mars his Guarden lodged it; where a guard
Of dreadful Beasts from Men approach debarred,
Strange sulpherous Bulls with legs of hardened Brass;
From whose hot Nostrils dreadful Flames did pass:
With Dragons, such as great Alcides slew,
From whose large Tushes mighty Armies grew:
Were the opposers daign'd to be of him
Who that Rich Conquest made his bold design.
Undaunted Jason had no sooner heard
The news; but for the Voyage straight prepared:
Of firm Dodonean wood, a Ship both strong;
(And could discourse him as she rid a long.)
Nor were the youth of Greece so stupid grown
But that they thursted likewise for Renown;
Each Fathers blood did in his Son create
Desire to share with Jason in his Fate.
Theseus nor Castor could not sit at home
Whilst his Young youth Minopoliz'd renown;
But Pollux, Orpheus, Lynceus, and a Score
Of young Ambitious Valiant Grecians more,
Who would no opportunity decline
Of gaining Honor, went along with him.
To dauntless minds, which Dangerous Glory court,
The turbulent fury of the Waves were sport;
They only learnt by Calms, and Storms, to know
The various Fate the Great must undergo.
Thus whilst Heroic thoughts had entertained
Their Minds; the fleeting Ship had Colchos gained;
Where Jason by a Visit made at Court,
To Fair Medea parted with his Heart,
Which she above her own so far prefers,
That in exchange, she kindly sent him hers;
Which fair return of Love did help to bring
To quick perfection Jasons grand design.
Medea skilled in Magic Art did prove,
Whom Jason soon obliged by his Love:
Her sire Eetha's Interest to despise,
When it in competition stood with his;
By Virtue of her Art, he caused her keep
Those Horrid Bull; and Dragons fast asleep;
Which bound in strong Enchantments silent lay,
Whilst a subtle Jason stole the Fleece away.
Which with Medea, (by the help of Night)
Toward Thessaly he made his hasty flight;
But was by Eetha persu'd so far,
That Maugre both the Lovers speed and care
They had been taken; had not Media's Sin
By butchering his Son Prevented him:
Whose reeking Limbs, about the Road she flung,
Which Eetha viewing as he ran along,
Gathering them up; bemoaned the Infants Fate,
Whilst both the Lovers made their safe retreat.
Thus what for Jasons Ruin, Pelius sought,
Has to his Fame immortal Glory brought.
'The Man whose Actions Virtue recommends,
'Is more Obliged to his Foes, than Friends.
'Their Sensures force him to unusual Good,
'VVhilst these embrace him in the common Road.
THESEUS

The Poetical History of Theseus.
REnouned Theseus of Aegeus came,
From whom the Aegean Sea derives her Name.
When Theseus came to age, the Athenian World
He found, by Vices in Confusion hurled,
The Great, (he saw) others goods did boast,
Which their unequal strength had rudely forced
From helpless subjects; who were fain to Lie
Silent beneath their ponderous Tyranny.
Instead of Virtue, black Injustice Reigned,
And rude Extortion overspread the Land.
Princes turned Robers, and then greatness prized,
According as they had the poor dispiz'd.
The Widows cries Chorust with Orphans Tears,
Was the best Music could salute their Ears;
And him the Laurel others did bequeath,
Who to his Subjects gave the painful'st Death.
But when young Theseus came to understand
The Sins and Horrors which besmeer'd the Land,
His Virtuous anger did no courage lack
To give their Tyranies an harsh attaque.
The brutish Scyron who with grateful care,
Did plung into the Sea Each passenger;
Was the first victim glory did afford
To this young Princes unexperienced Sword.
The next Procrustes was, who took delight,
With His Knife, his subjects Limbs to disunite,
Whose happy Death too, did such same afford,
As double gilded Conquering Theseus's Sword.
But that which filled the Sails of Fame more full,
Was the Destruction of Marathons Bull;
Which with the assistance of a mighty Boar,
Had vanquished Meleager just before.
But that which through the world did farthest fly,
And gave his Sword the deepest Purple Dye,
Was that immortal honor he obtained,
When Conquest over the Monitor he gained.
The manner thus. King Minos having lost
His Son Androgius on the Attick Coast;
(Who as he to his Native Country Fled,
Was by those Natives basely Massacred)
Bears his proud Standarts before Megara's walls,
And there for satisfaction loudly calls:
Threatens, if once denied, that noise to change,
And make his Cannons Bellow hot revenge.
The Tremb'ling Megarites afraid appear,
And by no means will bear the brunts of war:
But rather than their ang'ry Foe withstand,
Proffer him Peace upon his own demand.
Which was to this effect, the Athenians were
A thousand Men to send him every year;
Which by the Kings command were destined for
To be devoured by this huge Monitor,
(Whom Pasiphea, Minos Lustful wife,
By the embraces of a Bull gave Life)
Amongst those Youths, who this hard fate did run,
Theseus entreats the Athenians to be one;
That from that strange inhuman tribute he,
Might be the means to set his Country free;
Ingageing he the Nation would Exempt
From that sad Debt, or Perish in the attempt.
Aegeus and his Statesmen both professed,
With much remorse they granted his request.
And caused his Ship in Sable Flags to Mourn,
To speak their Sorrow till his safe Return.
Which Theseus promised to supply with White,
If Conquest Crowned him in the unequal Fight.
But if with wind those gloomy Sails were Filled,
In her return, they might conclude him Killed,
With this adieu, they cut the Liquid main,
And with success the Isle of Crete obtain;
At whose arrival, Mino's seems over joy'd,
The Athenians had so brave a tribute paid
Of Lusty Youths, whom he secured for
The daily Viends of his Monitor;
Which monstrous Creature Mino's had bestowed,
(As the most inaccessable abode)
In famed Dadalus Laberinth; which did
With various windings all return forbid
To those whom business or diversion led,
The elaborate turnings of the Maze to tread.
But nature Theseus such attractments lent,
As he with ease, this danger did prevent:
By his good features he familiar grew
With Ariadne who retained the Clew,
Which to the hideous Monster gave access,
And freed the invader from the fatal Maze.
On promise Theseus would this fair one Wed,
She kindly lent him the assisting Thread;
By which conducted to the Monitor,
Whom he attempted with such art and power,
That all the indulgence Theseus could afford,
Was, that he died by so Renoun'd a Sword.
When the brave Conquest Theseus had obtained,
Which nobly drew him from his Native Land;
And no atchievment else was left, which could,
By his attempting do his Country Good.
He fled with Ariadne to that Shore,
Where he had Landed not a week before;
And where his Fellows, with his Ship had lain
With much impatience, since expecting him,
Who when they Loaded, saw with that fair prize
Unusual Joy their drooping spirits seize,
They then no longer doubted his success,
Conquest sat smileing in his princely Face;
Besides, his beauteous Plunder looked so fair,
They knew she was the just reward of war;
Nothing but Valor could such Riches buy,
Beauty's a prize for glorious Victory;
With joyful Triumph, they their Sails display,
And with strong Oars assist the Leasy Sea --
But dismal grief shall over their joy prevail;
Theseus forgets to shift the Gloomy Sail,
Which as a sign of Death Egeus Viewed
From off the Shore, and jumpt into the Flood.
So careful of his Fame the Monarch was,
He would not live to hear his Sons disgrace;
But left him on his error to reflect,
Who lost a Father by his gross neglect.
CERES

The Poetical History of Ceres.
WHat strange Chimaera's in the time to come,
Does man conceit, to drag him to his doom.
Who could he but his certain Ills discry,
Would baulk his Fate, and bravely choose to dye.
In humane Life it is as Seas decreed,
The frequent Storms do much the Calmes exceed.
Our Griefs, continued as the Earth appear,
Whilst Mushroom joys sprout out but here and there.
And by their Fetch-fire Stay, so useless grow,
Like Ghosts they leave us, and we know not how:
As well in his short Grasp may man surprise.
Those flashes Thunder frightens from the Skies,
Lay hold of Lightning, and say here it is,
As, here is an hour of undisturbed Bliss.
And yet this silly, huffing, Creature Man,
Who startles the Creation with his Name.
Whose unjust force, spoils Natures Commonwealth,
Feeding on Creatures happier than himself,
Who only wanting Reasons, helps to guide
Their Nobler parts, lie subject to his Pride;
This silly thing, I say, who hectors here,
And will admit of no Competitor,
Nor holds with other Creatures kind commerce,
But Proudly Lords it over the Universe.
How tame and basely does he bear the weight
And gross affronts of his Injurious Fate!
How like a sordid Ass he groaning Lies,
Under the Burden of his Miseries!
How unconcerned the wondrous Thing appears,
Maugre the influence of his envious Stars!
Fate, like a Hectoring Gamster gives the wrong,
And after Kicks him till he holds his tongue.
Silent as Night, the reasoning Bubble stands,
And mildly takes the Buffets at her Hands:
Which Sans Resistance he does still sustain,
Blinded by hope she will let him play again;
Then with a distant Joy she charms his Eyes,
Which, like his Shadow, he persuing flies,
As distant Foggs which before us thick appear,
But vanish when we travel where they are.
Thus whilst in quest of Bliss he vainly stays,
She rudely cheats him of his Youth, and days.
And after all his Lifetime b'ing her slave,
Sends him a Bonkrupt to his Dampish Grave.
Ah! who (that wares his Pastport by his side)
Would thus be subject to her boundless Pride;
That had but Wit, and Soul, enough to try,
To thwart her Rage, and bravely choose to Dye;
What Alps of Ills she makes him melt his way
Through, to obtain but one poor glimps of joy;
And then what Wells of Grief he falls into,
Loosing the pleasure which he did pursue.
Thus careful Ceres, her proposed bliss,
Placed in her wilful Daughters happiness.
And Proserpina's Beauty seemed t'ingage
Her Mothers wishes when she came to Age.
The admiting Gods, with all their cunning, strove
Who should be most officious in his Love:
Whilst her perfections Guarded by her Pride,
First bid them sue, and then their fuit denied.
Each Heavenly Lover by his ghesses sought,
Who could anticipate her happy thought.
And put into accepted Act the same,
Before her words had given it any Name;
Nor common Gods alone, but mighty Jove
As well as they, adorned her with his Love;
And all the other Deities by him,
Taking example, gave her great esteem.
VVhereat contented Ceres simp'ring sat,
Almost assured of her Daughters Fate;
That it must glorious be since a respect
So great as hers would brook no ill effect;
But whose presages can foretell the hit,
Which often happens 'twixt the Cup and Lip.
Or who so prudent is to truly Ghess,
In threatening Goods, or Ills, their right success.
In whose is it, but mighty Joves great power?
To tell the product of a short lived Hour;
Or when big bellied Time affords a Birth,
To one poor Minute what it shall bring forth?
Alas! our short Inspections are confined,
We judge the Apple by its glorious Rhind,
Pleased with the outside, we no farther look,
We only read the Cover of the Book,
Which if but wrapped up in a gaudy skin,
We think it Good and mind not what is within.
Fate, like a Curious Clock-work we discern,
The motion we behold, but cannot learn
The manner how it makes its wound'rous flight,
The Working-Springs alas! are barred our sight,
By its past motion we suppose it will
Run on, and keep it self in Action still;
But then the wisest of us does not know
The pace it tends to, whither fast, or slow,
Our earnest wishes cannot its stay persuade,
It may stand still for Us, or Retrograde.
As well the VVeather, we may hope control;
We must endure it whether Fair, or Foul --
But when Injurious Fate designs to show
How great the Ills are which she can bestow;
When she grows wanton, and intends to be
Esteemed witty by her Cruelty.
Up to the highest Hill of Hope she heaves
The poor condemned wretch, who thence perceives,
Almost within his reach the wished for Joy,
Which as he goes to grasp -- she plucks away;
And from the summit of a hope so fair,
Tumbles him headlong into black despair.
Thus careful Ceres with glad Eyes beheld,
The prosperous progress of her Beauteous Child:
From whose past Fortunes she did more than Ghess
At her dear Daughters future happiness.
She now shakes hands with all her pains and Care,
And lets brisk Joy supply the place of fear.
But amorous Pluto soon this Calm distroys,
He ravished both her Daughter, and her Joys;
Teaching us all (at her excessive Cost)
To make no Reconings there where Fate's the Host.
SALACIA

The Poetical History of Salacia.
TO what wild Actions do our phancies Move,
When tossed and hurried by a storm of Love!
Hudwinckt by it, we take our full Carreer,
Leap at adventure, though we know not where;
Like Fear, it makes us Jump in so much have,
We mind no danger till it is fully past;
But in our calm return do wondering find,
Those mighty Ditches which we left behind:
We then amazed stand to see Loves Power,
And start at what we undertook before.
When Love like some great Monarch, is inclined
To sit at Helm and steer the Laboring Mind;
Whether he guides the Vessel right, or wrong,
The other passions almost hold their Tongue.
Like common Seamen they must all stand still,
To be conducted by his potent will.
Though Heaven does know how often on Rocks we split,
When Love's the Pilot of our Creasie Ship,
Sometimes to Northern Coasts he makes his way,
And Freezes Lovers in an Icy Sea
Of deep despair, where they complaining lie,
Till Death Redeems them from the slavery.
Sometimes on Calmy Seas he seems to float,
And Ruins Lovers in the midst of Hope.
Sometimes t'ward Home he kindly does resort,
And gives 'um Shipwreck in their wished for Port;
Such various Ruins hapless Lovers weight,
'Twould reel an Atlass to sustain their Fate,
And make him think (could he their sorrows view)
The World the lighter burden of the two,
Misterious Love his subjects does engage
To run to miseries themselves presage,
Their Minds like his, with frantic valor filled,
Who stabs himself for fear of being killed.
Thus fair Salacia having seen what grace
And God like luster shown in Neptunes face,
By Reasons help endeavored to refrain
From that fierce Love which she opposed in Vain;
But blinking Cupid struck the fiery Dart
With so much force in her unguarded Heart,
That startled Reason, her Old stage forsook,
Fearing to bear the burden -- of the shock.
And in her absence mighty Love possessed,
The happy Mansion of Salacia's Breast.
Ah Love! how many sleep-obstructing Cares!
How many Tortures, bloody Massacres!
How many dancing Tides, of Hope and Fear!
How many Groans! what Gulphs of deep despair!
May that unhappy wretch expect to bear,
In whose warm breast thou sit'st as Emperior.
Salacia's dismal story will discry
In part the Rigor of thy Tyranny.
The beauteous Maid unable to sustain
The frequent pressures of her growing flame,
Repaired with speed to those Cool shady bowers,
Where Neptune spent his Melancholy hours.
When freindly Calms had kindly set him free,
From the tuition of the Rageing Sea,
Covered with blushes, there Salatia spoke
To surly Neptune, whom she did invoke
(By all those dearest things poor Lovers name)
To mind and pity her increasing flame.
She told him how at first the pleasing sight
Of his perfection gave her great delight,
That she had often stole to that blessed place,
And worn out evenings, Gazing at his face:
From whence she did behold such glories come,
As does through Boughs, invaded by the Sun.
When shivering Leaves the warm assaults abide,
And make a Checquer on the other side.
She told him that from looking, her strange thought
To likeing first, and thence to Love was brought:
That Love did all her former quiet seize,
Before she could immagine what he was.
He robbed her days of business, and Delights,
Of sleep, she said, he rudely robbed her Nights:
And now of late so insolent was grown,
He often spoiled her high Devotion.
She told him farther that she once designed
To blow the Embers of her restless mind,
To such a scorching blaze as might consume,
The Oil of life, and so prevent her doom.
Before the story of her love should fly
About the World, to Preach her infamy.
Lastly she told him (and a Pearly Due
Of trickling Tears affirmed it to be true)
That that same instant he contemned her Love,
She would to some unheard of Desert rove,
There to remain, till strong Corroding grief
Should put a period to her wretched life.
The imperious God, swelled with that vast renown,
Which he derived from his watery Throne,
With thoughts of Glory so his mind employed,
That there was room for nothing else beside.
The pitteous story from the Nymph he heard,
With some small silence, but much less reguard.
And then as unconcerned made hasty way
To his old home, and Jumpt into the Sea.
Ah Love! what wondrous dangers do thou make,
Thy poor neglected Captives undertake!
Disdainful Neptune, could not make such have
But greiv'd Salatia could pursue as fast.
And from the very banck where on he stood
When he jumpt off, she leapt into the flood,
Where, from her beauties, such bright beams did scatter,
As do from Glittering torches under water.
The joyful fish about the solstice play,
Thinking the Sun is dropped into the Sea. --
At length a freindly Dolphin, who with grief,
Had seen what pains Salacia took for life;
Presents his scaly Back, whereon the Maid,
By his assistance, and her own conveyed;
Is born to Neptunes Court: the wondering King,
Amazed and troubled at her suffering,
Admits a noble Gratitude, to find
Afair reception in his Princely Mind.
Which made him all his former pride disown,
And Crown her Empress of his watery Throne.
VULCAN

The Poetical History of Vulcan.
TO Form and Beauty, what rash Pen dare strive
To attribute their just prerogative.
In things inanimate they charm as well,
As in Those Rational, or sensible.
Beauty still pleases, and retains its force,
Though Lavish nature wastes it on a Horse.
Which often she does, on every Limb throughout,
Whilst Hump-Back Mortals murmuring, go without.
But it is Antipodes Monstrosity,
Contracts a hateful Glance from every Eye.
We see it often such an Odium draws,
As interrupts the Course of Natures Laws.
Makes startled Fathers from their Children run,
The trembling Mother curse her teeming Womb.
Makes blushing Gods from their dear Issue fly,
And Goddesses disown their Progeny.
It made great Jupiter from his high Thrown,
To Earths Low seat, cast homely Vulcan down.
Nature with all her wheedlings could not make,
A full atonement for his ugly shape.
Though with her usual pressures she could plead,
He was the offspring of his Marriage Bed.
And helpless Infancy one would have thought,
Might in a Father much Compassion wrought,
Yet these were arguments too weak t'engage
The angry Father, to suspend his Rage;
Who by a fall so great as from his Thrown,
Thought to have ended his detasted Son.
But Juno to God Aeolus did call
To raise such winds, as might abate his fall:
Which interpossing 'twixt the Earth and him,
Hindered his Father of his harsh design.
Born on the downy back of some soft Gale,
Secured of Life, the tumbling Infant fell
With one Leg under him, which being two small
To bear his weight, was broken in the fall;
Of which he after Limpt, But by the fame
Which by his parts the abused Child did gain;
When Manly years, like the approaching day,
Had Chased his Night of Infancy away:
I Would have the Reader and my self beware
Of slighting Noble parts, where e're they are.
What if unburnisht walls thy Soul embrace,
Thy Glittering mind will lighten all the Case,
What though thy Body's in a Suit that is torn,
Thy self neglected, and thy state forlorn;
What if misfortunes hurry thee to dwell
In some low Cottage, or some moldy Cell;
Wit like the purest mettels which are found,
Will still keep precious, though 't be under ground.
And time may come, when they thy parts may crave,
Who now deride thee whilst you are Fortunes slave.
What though the killing thunder, from a brow
Of some Great Monarch, stoop to cut thee low,
Thou may with saftey (if you are truly wise,)
The obstreperous bussle of the storm despise.
Stay till its over --; and thou shall surely find,
When threatening dangers do infest his mind.
He will revoke his rage, and Court thee more
Than he disdained, or envied the before.
Thus Jove, whilst Rolling in a peace secure,
Could not the presence of his Son endure.
But cause he homly seemed, must him abhor:
(A fault the child might thank his Parents for.)
When prosperous Greatness swells the faded mind,
In things most perfect, men will errors find.
But when misfortune makes her Rude assaults,
They chose the good, and over look the faults.
When Tytans Injured seed did take up Arms,
And frighted Heaven with their loud Allarms.
Threw Hills, on Hills, till Mountains grew so high,
That thence they reached the Rampires of the Sky.
And urged by wrongs, so insolent were grown,
To threaten Jove, to pull him from his Thrown.
The Heavenly Emperor his rage to show,
At first Salutes them with a frowning brow,
But that Alas! was in signif'cant now.
Then hastily he calls the other Gods,
But they were frighted to their dark abodes,
And from their Monarch in his danger run,
Then he bethinks him of his injured Son:
Who readily to his assistance flies,
And drives the threatening Giants from the skies.
Rallies the Timorous Gods, and chides them so,
He made 'em Valiant if they would or no.
Thus from a private sword a Prince may gain
The help he hopes from's General in vain.
A poor D'Amboys with a noble Soul,
Could all the factious men in France Control.
And from her threatened Crown, those dangers Chase,
Which boldly star'd whole Armies in the face.
This brave assault neglected Vulcan gave
The Dairing Giants, made the Gods perceive
Through the Dark Lantern of his gloomy skin,
A brave Heroic spirit lodged within.
Such as not only Warlike actions Grace,
But might be useful in the time of Peace.
To dangerous Valor needful Art conjoined,
To the completing of his noble mind;
Which made great Jove (when bold Prometheus stole
From Heavens warm Alter; the immortal Coal;
To move his forms, which wanted but a Soul.
Great Vulcan in the punishment employ,
Who by his Black-Smiths art found out away
On top of Mount Caucasus bleakish Rift,
To bind him fast, for his ambitious Thieft.
The Gods to Vulcan now gave great regard,
In whose hot forge their Armor was prepared:
But that which gave Heavens Blacksmith most renown,
He forged the Glittering Chariot of the Sun:
With his own hands he wrought that wondrous steel,
Which shut out Death from all parts but the heel.
Tempered by him with so much care and Art,
It scorned the fury of Strong Hectors Dart.
And made the wondering Trojans Stare to see,
A Grecian clad in Immortality.
VESTA

The Poetical History of Vesta.
AS it is with Salvage Nations, who descent
Amongst themselves, for want of Government:
Some Learned Heathen wiser then the rest,
Greiving to fee his native Land oppressed,
Urged by a generous inclination, tryes
To heal the Breach, by firm laid Policies.
Which to effect, he from the Crowd withdraws,
And there Invents such sound and wholesome Laws,
As by observance, probably might be,
The certain means to their prosperity.
Which when h' has done, he tells them that he finds
Monarchick Government best suits their minds.
Which in ambitions Road too high do soar,
TO admit of more than one Superior.
The Gaping crow'd with patience thus far hear;
But when he comes to a particular,
And ask them who of all the Land they 'steem
Worthy'st to wear the Royal Diadem.
A thousand different votes invade the air,
Some for respect do choose, and some for fear.
Some Glittering Interest makes to vote a loud,
And others only bawl amongst the Crowd.
Till by a Differing strange Confused cry,
They quite confound their dull laid Monarchy.
So he who Backward casts his careful eye.
And traces Atheism to its infancy:
Who by the strength of boundless fancy, can
Conceit he sees the world as it began.
I mean those parts of it, which yet had layn
Barren for want of great Jehovahs Name)
May well immagine e're their first advance
From Atheism, and brutish Ignorance,
How sordidly, and like the common Herd,
Those wretches lived, without the least regard
To different good, or evil, which did lie
Obscure from them, as thoughts of Deity;
Till some brave Heathen, who with care had hurld,
His watchful eyes about this wondrous world;
Veiw'd this well ordered Mass of earth, and the
Restrained Limits of the threatening Sea.
The swift paced year, and the alternate course
Of Radient Day, and sable Night, by force
Of some EXISTANCE, which refused to appear,
But was indeed Dame Natures Taskmaster.
Which he concluded must immortal Be,
Omnicient too, and so a Deity.
Which verdict after him the Brethren pass,
Though none knew what, or who, or where he was.
So that for want of Scriptures faithful Clue,
So they adored, they cared not what, nor who.
Some as the only God, great Saturn follow,
Some worship Mars, and some Divine Apollo.
Some Jupiter, some Venus most Esteem,
And some the Horned Blacksmith took for him.
Nay some in fragrant Feilds, and Gardens seek,
In hopes to find them in their Rue, or Leek.
Whilst others more remote, adored by fame,
And nicknam'd one God with another name.
Thus that high thought which first did nobly soar,
In eager quest of the Aeternal power,
Was clipped or Pinnion'd by the grovling crow'd:
Who nothing of its Vallew understood:
But ranckt in Sects, to such confusion fled,
As quite destroyed their Deities indeed.
Leaving it difficult for us to give,
Each God or Goddess, just Derivetive.
Thus from great Saturn, and fair Rhea's womb,
The Goddess Vesta is deduced by some.
Whilst others searching out her doubtful birth,
Mother to Saturn called her, and the Earth.
How e're the fame of her chaste life was hurld
In that rude age, about the listening world.
And noble Romans (who with watchful Eyes,
Did mind young Virtue in her spring or rise.
In Infant Vesta saw so larg a store,
As made them fall from loving, to adore
Her peerless Chastity, which did incline
Them to believe its owner was Divine.
Then in respect of beauty, wit, and birth,
They Goddess termed her, both of fire and Earth.
And raised her such a Temple, as did prove
The Romish Piety as well as Love:
The glorious outside of it did appear
August to sight, in shape Orbicular.
The carved inside Gorgious to behold;
The Pavement, marble Pillars, clothed in gold.
Whilst glittering Flames her sacred Alters Crown,
(Fired with no other Taper but the Sun.)
A thousand untouched Virgins round her stand,
To hear the dictates of her chaste command.
Which by a secret instinct they embrace,
And by their best endeavors bring to pass.
"Such charms are Coucht in real virtue, that
"It can at worst command a happy fate.
"Men in the hot meridian of their Time,
"Bubbel'd by Hell, uncleanness may design.
"And urged by blood, and youth, together may,
"To their dear cost that trivial bliss enjoy.
"But when tyrannick age shall rudely throw
"Her hands abroad, and dredg their heads with snow;
"When to their grief their streaked Locks they see,
"(The startling TOKENS of mortality.)
"A Strange remorse shall strike through all their Limbs
"Their quivering knees shall sink beneath their sins.
"And they when it is too late be forced to own,
"No life's so happy as the Pious one.
FINIS.

