A Visitation OF LOVE, Sent unto All: that those that do not see, may see, and
return out of the FALL.

By Dorothy White.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1684.

A Visitation of Love, Sent unto All: that they that do not see, may see, and
return out of the FALL.
THAT which is upon my Mind, is to open the Eyes of the Blind: Moses, unto whom
the Complaint came concerning Medod and Eldod, how that they were Prophesying
in Israel: at which some were troubled, and busied themselves, complaining to
him: to whom he meekly answered, I would that all the Lord's People were
Prophets. And indeed, all People are the Lord's, as well as Baalam's Ass, by
whom the Lord spoke.

One thing more; which is this; the Disciples of Christ, being too busy, came
unto him with their Complaint, saying,

There are such that Prophecy, and work Miracles in the Name, and in thy Name
cast out Devils, and follow not us; will thou that we command Fire to come down
from Heaven to destroy them. Here you may see how busy they were; but mark the
answer of that meek Lamb, who came to destroy nothing but Sin; and to save the
Life of all; None can work Miracles in my Name, and speak slightly of me: he
that is not against us is with us. He did not say, Prepare Watchmen to keep
them down. Neither did I ever read, throughout all the Scriptures, of any
outward Watchmen, that the Church or Saints of God did ever set, or prepare to
defend them: but these Watchmen which the Priests set, and gave large Money to
belie the Resurrection of Christ: so for Money all the Devil's Watchmen are
hired.

GOD who inhabits Eternity, and dwells in the Light,
Is coming to Judge the Watchmen of the Night:
Long it was I did you behold,
Till the Spirit said to me, do thee unfold.
And you blind Watchmen, I cannot let you alone.
Seeing upon you must fall the little Stone:
Therefore unto you I give this Call,
For upon you that little Stone must fall.
And of these blind Watchmen I must say something more,
They are as blind as Sodomites: that cannot find the Door:
[The Door is Christ]
This to the Watchmen may prove sad News,
They are such Watchmen as God did never choose;
This I have seen for twenty years and more;
Watchm^ were not set to stand without the Door;
But such things we did our selves disown,
When Light and Perfection we to the World made known.
When that singly we did stand
We said we were protected by God's Right hand,
We amazed the World, we put them to a stand.
What shall I say! but this I must conclude,
The Saying true of the Apostle Jude.
Wells without Water, Clouds without Rain,
Carried about with the Tempest.
Such are craftily crept in among us.
It Is neither gallant Ship, nor Glley with its Owers,
Neither the Watchmen that stands at the Doors,
Neither of them all ever shall prevail,
Neither Ship, nor Maste, nor its gallant Sail;
Nothing shall prevail but that little Stone,
Let him work, and do his Work alone.
David made use of this little Stone,
And afterward became a King to sit upon the Throne.
So the little stone is come, cut out of the Mountain without hands,
To try all Building that are built upon the Sands.
And this I say, with this Allusion;
He Will turn the Wisdom of the Wise into Confusion;
The little Stone, the stumbling Block,
Against wise Builders now is come to knock,
Who have not their Foundation on the Rock.
If thou would know who these things do write,
And who it is that does this indite,
I am one that is hidden in the Rock,
That sweetly feeds with the Shepherds little Flock:
And if that thou do thus enquire;
I am one that have often be^n through the Fire;
Which Fire thou must also come ^o feel,
To destroy both thy Wit and Skill;
And then God's Word thou will surely feel.
I have been one have met the Watchmen of the Night,
Inquiring after my Beloved, but they gave me a Smi^e:
So this I say to Watchmen of all sorts,
You that are gathered into Outward Courts;
Your Work it was, first to watch within,
To feel God's power, to destroy the Devil and Sin,
That you may find Christ the Door,
Who came to give Life, and Men to restore.
I feel the Fountain, that is my Life and Peace,
Which does flow, and is shall never cease;
I feel the Well, the which is dug deep,
From which flows waters most pleasant and sweet:
Yea, the Honey that flows out of the Rock,
Which does sweetly satisfy the Shepherd's little Flock;
Yea, the hidden Manna, and the Bread at home,
Yea the Springs that are overflown;
Yea the Desert come^h to rejoice,
To hear the Turtle with its pleasant voice;
Now I am come to hear him si^g at home,
And to sing Praise before God's holy Throne.
Arise, O Zion, and shine, for the day of thy shining is come: put on thy
beautiful Garments, for the Glory of the Lord is arising to shine upon thee; O
Zion, behold thy King comes unto thee, shining in his Glory and his Majesty;
behold he rides meekly on; he will get the Victory before that he has done:
he is coming to prepare thy waste Places, and to raise the Desolations of
Jerusalem, and to make her a Fenced City, with Walls on every side, and to
prepare and bring her up, that she may be known to be his Bride. So I have glad
Tidings to preach unto the Poor, and Liberty to the Captive, and the opening
the Prison Doors unto them that are bound; and to say to the Prisoner of Hope,
come forth, and arise in the Shining of the Son of Righteousness; who is
arising this day with true Healing under his Wings; and how beautiful is the
Feet of him that brings glad Tidings upon the Mountains of Israel; who
publishes Peace and Salvation upon the Hills; behold thy Beloved comes,
skipping over the Mountains, and leaping over the Hills: behold the Comforter
of Zion's Mourners is come, he is hastening on his way for their Deliverance,
and everlasting Redemption is drawing nigh; the day of the Redeemed is come:
they shall walk up to his holy Mountain with Joy and everlasting rejoicing upon
their Heads; yea, Mourning and Sorrow and Sighing shall fly away; He will wipe
all tears away from their eyes, and they shall sorrow no more, because all old
things are passed away, and all things are become new.

There is that within this Lamp of Gold,
Which to man was never yet unfold.
Therefore hear what the Spirit says; And he that has an Ear to hear, let him
hear what the Spirit says, and signifies unto you. Hear, that your Souls may
live; for by hearing comes Life and Immortality to be brought to light, by
hearing of his Voice within; so every one must come home, and stand upon their
Watchtower, and hear what the Lord faith unto them: He that speaks from
Heaven unto thee, is thy Soul's Beloved, in whom thou will come to rejoice with
unspeakable Joy, full of Glory.

He fills the Hungry with good things,
He has made a Feast for his Priests and Kings;
Yea, a Feast of Fat Things.
[A Feast within his holy Mountain]
I have glad-tydings to declare; I Am filled with more than I can bear.
To you I must glad-tidings bring; for now is the pleasant time of Spring.
I hear such pleasant Melody: I tell you now that Summer's nigh.
The Turtle's Voice is heard within our Land;
His Voice I hear, I do it understand.
I hear him now to sing at home: Where Lov's Fountain's overstown.
And when the Winter's gone and past: The Redeemed shall sing Hallelujah at
last.
And to him that overcomes I will give a new Name in the white Stone.
And none shall know it but him, that it is his own.
And he shall reign as King, and sit upon the Throne.
And to him that overcomes, I will give unto him the Key of David, that
opens, and none can shut; and shuts, and none can open: He will give unto
them his spirit: The Spirit searcherb all Things, even the deep Things of God.
His Spirit speaks expressly therefore, He that has an Ear to hear, let him
hear what the Spirit faith, and the Bridegroom says unto the Churches; and
more especially in the Church of the First Born, whose Names are written in
Heaven; who are come to the Word of God written in their Hearts: these must
speak, as the Spirit gives Utterance; there is no limit, nor tie to them: The
Children of the Kingdom are free, being born of the Free Spirit; and as the
Wind blows where it lists, and on whom it lists; even so is the Spirit,
descending as lightuing upon whom he pleases; there is no time nor place
appointed for him; how, or when, or where he shall appear; and in whom, or by
whom he shall speak, or he shall not speak; seeing the Holy Men of God, ought
to speak as the Holy Ghost moves in them, and as the Spirit gave them
utterance; each one particularly as they had received, so they ministered of the
Manifold Graces of God: None is to be tied up from this, for this is the
Worshipping God in Spirit; neither at this Mountain, nor at Jerusalem is the
Father worshiped; but at all times, and at all Places, the Father of all
Spirits is worshiped where the Spirit draws and leads them thereto: and you
have an Ointing which is in you, which is able to teach you all things; which
is Truth, the Spirit of Truth, the holy anointing of the Father, the Son from
Heaven, whom all are commanded to hear; and the Voice that was heard out of the
excellent Glory, faith on this wise; This is my well beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased, hear ye him in all Things: He is King and Lawgiver, High Priest,
and Prophet; and all that shall refuse to hear him wherever he speaks, they
shall be c^^ off: the Mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken it: He is a
Spirit, and all must bow, and worship him in Spirit; yea, Angels and Spirits,
Pincipalities and Powers, Dominions and Kingdoms he will rule by the Word of
his Eternal Power; and when he brings his First Begotten into the World, he
says, Let all the Holy Angels worship Him: So there is nothing to be bowed
unto but him alone, who sits upon the Throne; so all the Israelites, who are
so indeed, who are born of the holy right Seed, they are to follow the Lord
fully, and the Lamb that leads them, as Caleb and Joshua did, who were the
valiant hearted of Israel, against whom the Evil Spies cast their Stones, Numb
14. They could not enter themselves for the Giants, and the Anakins, and the
many things that lied in the way; but the Faithful, full of Faith, followed the
Lord fully, he led them by the right hand; he rebuked the Waters, and made them
at a stand; these, through Faith, became more than Conquerours and conquered
Death, and obtained the Crown, and R^surrection, and holy Life: Say to the
Righteous, It shall go well with them; but woe to the wicked, the proud, and the
Oppressors, it shall go ill with them: woe unto them that are at ease in Sion
this day, who are stretching themselves upon their Beds of Ivory and Ease; who
are drinking their Wine in Bowls: these have not considered the Afflictions of
Joseph, and have not been acquainted with the day of Jacob's Trouble: but now
their Beds shall be too short to stretch themselves at ease upon; their
Covering shall be too narrow to hide them under. Behold ^h^s says the Lord of
Hosts, the God of Israel; I will kindle a Fire in Si^n, I will plow Zion as a
Field, and search Jerusalem as with Candles, And blessed are all the wise
Virgins, who have Oil in their Lamps, whose Lights are burning: those who took
not only their Lamps, the outside Profession; but took Oil with them; who were
gathered by the Lord into and under the Profession and Form of Christ Jesus;
not the Outside Form, or Out*si^e Court but in Spirit and in Life were drawn
to the Lord; no man can call Jesus Lord, but by the Spirit: he is the Lord of
all the Spiri^ual-Worship, but not of all the Forms: so many Forms many have
been making and decking for the Son of God, and graving and im^gi^g out; but he
has hitherto worked beyond them all; he ascended above all Heavens, above all
the Comprehensions of men, and at last shined in his Glory, and he will ag^in
be lifted up, and draw all men after him; though the Gazers and Wonder^rs do
not see his ascending into-the Clouds of Heaven; but the single hearted sees
it, whose Eyes are single to God; but those that were garnishing the Sepulchers
of the Prophets, and the Tombs of the Prophets in the days past, they did not
know the coming of Christ the Lord; neither did they receive him when he cam^;
and therefore he says, Blessed are they that shall not be offended in me
Behold I lay in Zion for a Stone of Stumbling, and a Rock of Offense, for the
Rising and Falling of many in Israel; but a sure Foundation for all that have
built upon it an unmovable Rock; which the Persecutors of all sorts shall
never be able to move, or lift him out of the way. That which I have seen and
tasted, and heard with my ears, and my hands have handled of the good Word of
God, on which all the sincere hearted feed on, that grow alive unto God, and of
the Milk thereof; and by it they are nourished as lively Branches growing in
the Vine; growing in Christ Jesus according to their degree and measure of the
Spirit of Grace which they have received; such speak as the Spirit gives
utterance; they speak with the Spirit and with the Understanding; they pray
with the Spirit and with the Understanding; they sing with the Spirit and with
the Understanding also, as it pleases the Spirit to reveal unto them and to
prepare that Offering; such are with their eyes unto him to please him, as the
Eyes of the Maid is to her Mistress; suc^ are not Men-pleasers, neither can
they daub with untempered Mortar; and the Ax is laid to the Root of the Tree of
Corruption; and the Fire is burning and undermining all Building, and every
man's Works shall be tried by the Eternal Fire and Consumption of God; and what
work will not endure, by the Fire-Consumption and Eternal Judgment, shall be
burnt up; Before him goes a Consuming Fire ^o burn up his Enemies round about,
and he will sit as Refiners Fire and as Fuller's Soap, and a Purifier of
Silver, to take away the Dross and the Tin; all must feel the Fire burn within
their own hearts; all that are walking in the right way (as says the true
Disciples) when Jesus was in the way with them, though unknown to them, Did not
our hearts burn within us. So the day of burning, of burning like an Oven of
Fire, and of much Fire; many must yet feel, and be Baptized with the Holy Ghost
and with Fire; and feel the Fan which he has in his hand, to purge away all
the Filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit; for there is no reprobate Silver, nor
whited Walls, nor painted Sepulchers shall stand; but the Lord will thunder out
of Zion, and utter his Voice out of his Holy Mountain, he will shake the
Foundations of the Earth and the Heavens also he will overturn until he Reign
himself, who says, I will set my King upon my holy Hill of Zion, And who
amongst us shall dwell with everlasting Burning; and who shall abide with
Devouring Fire; behold the day of the Lord comes, that will try all, and every
one, and none will abide the day of his coming, but they that have known the
DAY of his coming within, that have known their Temples washed and cleansed,
and prepared, and made a sit Habitation, through the Spirit, for the Living God
to dwell, and walk in them; such can say of a truth, The Tabernacle of God is
with men, and Grace and Truth is come by Jesus Christ the Righteous, who has
brought with him everlasting Righteousness: And this was that the Prophet cried
for, Ob send out thy Light and thy Truth, that i^ may lead me to thy Holy Hill
of Zion. And this is the true Leader, the New Covenant, the Law, which God
said, He will write in the Table of their Hearts, and I will put my Spirit in
their Inward Parts. And this is the New Covenant, and the New-Law, which the
Lord said he would give forth in the last days, and the old is to pass away:
Through the Law came by Moses, it was to pass away; but Grace and Truth came by
Jesus Christ, which was to be increased: and his Government should increase,
and it shall be upon his Shoulders: and his Kingdom is to be Established; and
his Government, which is everlasting, from generation to generation in all the
Line of the Righteous: and he is his Church-Governour, that Governs his own
Church: Behold it shall come to pass (says the Lord of Hosts) I will raise up
the Righteous Branch of David, whose King shall bear Rule, and prosper; of
whose Kingdom and Government there shall be no end. Yea, many shall come from
the East, and the West, the North and South, and shall flock as Doves to the
Windows of the Ark, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the
Heavenly Places in Christ Jesus, in the Munishonal Rock; where their Bread
shall be sure, and their Water shall not fall; and the Inhabitants of the Rock
shall sing and shout for Joy, for a wiser than Solomon is here, and to us he
does appear; this is the Prince of our Peace, this is our Counselor, the
Wonderful, the great Jehova.

The great King: and unto him all the Saints Praises shall sing,
For unto us he will Deliverance bring.
And of it we have no cause to doubt,
For he will work, and bring it so about,
That his Enemies at last he will tire out.
Some say, Seal him down; others say, Make it sure,
Prepare Watchmen to stand without the Door.
But his Redeemed he will to Mount Zion bring,
Where they shall shout for Joy, and Praises they shall sing.
Having their Harps ready in their hand,
Clothed in white then they shall stand.
Singing that Song, which none shall ever know,
But they that have the Fountain in them sweetly flow:
These follow the Lamb wheresoever he does go.
Yea, through the great Tribulation; through the washing of Regeneration
Therefore are they crowned with Life and everlasting Salvation.
And in God's Rest these come to lie down,
Where he sets on their Heads an everlasting Crown.
But woe to the proud Oppressors, and Professors of all sorts,
That are only gathered into Outward Courts.
[I am that I am, says Cry Aloud]
If any think that God's Spirit they will silent keep,
You do but dream while you are asleep:
And when you Work you think that you have done,
You have it as much to do, as when you first begun;
No more than you can pluck the Sun out of the Firmament;
When you have all done, your Labor is vainly spent.
God at sundry times, and after diverse manners, in the days that are past; he
then spoke to our Fathers by the Prophets; but in these latter days he now
speaks unto us by his own Son; whom he has made Heir of all things, by whom
also he made the World, and laid the Foundations thereof by his Eternal Word,
and this is one of his Names: his Name is called, The Word of God: And upon his
Vesture it is written, He is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings; and, By him
Kings Reign, and Princes decree Justice. And all just things come from him, and
all righteous Laws and Decrees are made by him, and there is no Unrighteousness
with him, nor in him. So in the days that are past, the People of the Lord God
had a Lawgiver outwardly; which Law was given from the Lord through his
Servant Moses, which the People were then under that Dispensation of the Law,
and obedient thereunto they were then required: but that Dispensation is passed
away, and the Gospel Dispensation is come forth; and he is come that fulfilled
the Law and the Prophets, and puts an end to all Laws outwardly, and only
directs and points at the Gospel Dispensation, an inward intelligible Teaching,
with this Saying, You have a more surer Word of Prophesy: Unto which you do
well, if you take good heed, and go not out from it, after any thing that is
made or prescribed by the Invention of Man; but keep to the anointing the holy
Unction which you have already received of the Father: you that have received
this, let the Word of Life dwell plentifully in you, that ingrafted Word which
is able to save you, lead you, guide and direct you, move not without it; awake
not your Beloyed until he please to move and rise in you, wait for the coming
down of the Angel, for the moving and stirring of the Waters, and then put
forth, and not before. Behold I send my Angel to testify these things to the
Churches: I am the bright and Morning Star, the Root and Offspring of David:
The Day Star is come; He makes his Angels Chariots, his Ministers as a Flame
of Fire. He has touched their tongues with a Coal from his burning Altar, and
for Zion's sake, such cannot hold their peace, and for Jerusalem's sake, they
cannot cease, but their Leader they must obey, neither move without him nor go
before him: these are led by him, who is their Captain, who leads them forward:
these cannot go back to the Law, nor go back to that which is past, we are no
more D^bters to the Law but under the teachings of Free Grace: so our Eyes are
looking forward, and eying the Lord, who is leading of us to Mount Sion, unto
the New Jerusalem, where Perfection will be known, where Hallelujah, we shall
sing before his Throne, who is faithful and true; the Alpha and Omega, and
Beginning and the End. Behold I come quickly (says the First and the Last) I
will give unto every Man a Reward as his Works shall be.

This was the Harmony the Angels did sing,
At the Birth of Zion's King,
And such glad Tidings they did bring,
Peace on Earth, and good Will toward all Men.
We knowing the Author of these Things to be one that truly fears the Lord;
and also to be of a blameless Life and Conversation, could not be satisfied
till we had it to the Press.

The 20th. of the 3d. Month, 1684.
FINIS.

