THE PASTORS CHARGE and CURE. OR, A Sermon at first preached in Latin at
Oxford, and afterward translated by the Author.

The preaching of which created the Author much trouble, and in the winding up
of all, suspension from his Ministry, and thereupon inforcement to leave his
native Country.

2 Chronicles. 36. verse. 14, 15.16. Moreover, all the chief of the Priests and the
people transgressed very much, and polluted the house of the Lord, which he had
hallowed in Jerusalem.

And the Lord God of their fathers sent to them by his Messengers, rising up
betimes, and sending; because he had compassion on his people, and on his
dwelling place.

But they mocked the Messengers of the Lord, and despised his words, and
misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord rose against his people,
till there was no remedy.

1 Thessalonians. 2.15, 16. The Jews killed the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets,
and they have persecuted us: and they please not God, and are contrary to all
men.

Forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles, that they might be saved, to fill up
their sin always; for the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost.

Non est delicata in Deum, and secura confessio: qui in me credit, debet
sanguinem suum fundere. Hieron.

By Nath. White, Pastor of a Congregation at Summer Islands.

Published according to Order.

London printed by Matthew. Simmons in Aldersgate street. 1645.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL CORNELIUS HOLLAND, Esquire, A worthy member of the
Honorable House of Commons, Grace and Peace be multiplied.
RIght honored Sir, I have but two things to say unto you, and I have done:
The first is, why I published this Sermon: The second, why I dedicated it to
your self. For the first, the Reasons are of two sorts; some negative, others
affirmative. Negative, 1. It is not any exalted thought of its worth or
excellency that has pricked me on to publish it: For, I look upon it as the
offspring of the weakest and unworthiest of those that keep watch upon the
walls of Jerusalem. Nor is it that I may uncover the Sepulchers of the dead,
and represent their exorbitancies unto the eye of the world, which have already
come under the strict examination, and severe censure of the righteous Judge of
all the world. Pascitur, tavivis liv^^ post fata quiescit. --
Affirmative; But, 1. that this present, and succeeding Ages may see, that the
corruptions of Church government, and Governors, upholden then in our land,
and the corruptions of Ministers too much connived at, have been witnessed to
be unlawful, by which it shall appear, that the servants of the Lord have not
(through base cowardice) betrayed the cause of Christ, but witnessed the truth
against his adversaries. 2. That it may appear how dangerous a thing it is to
persecute any for some small deviation from the path paved by Authority: For,
was not the chief thing for which I suffered, the confounding of Bishops and
Presbyters? Was it not for affirming that they were ejusdem dignitatis and
potestatis, of the same dignity and power? which was at that time contrary to
Law, though consonant to truth Ordinis and politiae quidem causa inte^eos qui^^
docend mun^^ iniunctum (...) unus aliis pr^ tree potest. -- S^d dignita^^ aut
potestat^^ gradum, an^ (...) i^^^^ Ministros (...) gamus esse^^ 1. quia pri^^^
matum Ch^^stus ex profess impugn^t, Luke 22.25. Joh. 13.13^ 2. Quia (...) ius
concess^^^ est a Chri^^^ omnibus, Matthew. 18. Joh. 20 21. 3. Quia superioritatis
invectio primum (...) mox Tyranni^^^ pe^^ pseudoepiscopos, pseudarchiepiscopos,
and pseudopatriarchas omnem Ecclesiasticam (...), ac tandem ipsant Eclesiam
labefactavit, Bucan. Instit. Theolog. de Minist. Loc. 42. p 507.
.

Yet, who now sees it not, who now confesses it not to be a truth? so that
innocent truth was then enforced to put on the hateful garments of falsehood,
and as such to suffer: And may it not be so again, if caution be not used? O!
that the consideration of this very particular might be a means of rendering our
honorable and renowned Patriots (one of which you are) abundantly tender in
such cases, and sedulously circumspect that such persecution be avoided; lest
this Age and Government insisting in the crooked paths of the former, they both
partake of the same, if not worse plagues and judgments. 3. That I might
vindicate mine innocence from the vulnerating talons of such greedy Harpies as
had seized on it at their will: For some there are Insigne Christopher Pits,
and Mr. Barough.
in Summer Islands, where now the Lord has stretched the line of my
habitation, who having transported themselves from our Islands hither to
negotiate their affairs, and returning back to us again, reported me to be a
troubler of the place where I formerly lived. Now certain I am, I never gave
any just cause to be so accouted of any, so reported of by them: for I neither
have lent on usury, nor have men lent to me on usury, as the Prophet spoke of
himself Ier. 15.10.
. True it is, this Sermon I preached, which I verily believe did trouble some,
and for which I was troubled; but whether this will amount to so much as to
render me obnoxious to such a report, or worthy to be accounted a man of
strife, and a man of contention, I shall desire your Worship to judge when you
have read it.

The second thing is, why I dedicated it to your self: Reasons there are many;
some are of public, others are of private concernment. Those of public
concernment are such as these: 1. You are one of those Worthies of whom it may
be truly said as it was of good Jonathan, You have wrought with God at this
time, and you have wrought great salvation in our Israel Sam. 14.4, 5 par^^
sunt (...) soris n^si (...) confilium (...).
, which renders you, with them, honored in the hearts of my self, and of all
those that fear the Lord: And you with them, are the more emine at in this,
that you have sat out the Apostasies and unhappy fallings of so many
(preserved by the power of Christ) of whom it may be said as the Apostle says
in another case, They went out from you, but they were not of you: for if they
had been of you, they would no doubt have continued with you: but they went out
that they might be made manifest that they were not all of you 1 Ioh. 2.19.
. Ride on (worthy Sir, with the residue of those renowned Senators)
prosperously, because of truth, and meekness, and righteousness; remembering and
believing, that when the great work of God is finished, the names of those
shall be sought for, that have acted for him, and it shall be said, What honor
and dignity has been done to Mordecai for this Hest. 6.3.
? You that work both for God and the Country, shall be recorded both in the
Chronicle of heaven and earth. 2. Let it not be offensive (I pray) if I add
this humble request, as a second reason of public concernment: You with them,
have been famous for your wisdom, courage, justice, mercy, in the vindicating
your Civil laws, liberties, etc. yet let it not be grievous to yours and
their thoughts to ponder a little, why all the prayers, tears, and fastings in
this nation, have not pierced the heavens, and quenched these flames, which yet
who knows how far they will spread, and when they will out? You with them have broke
the jaws of the oppressors, and taken the prey out of their teeth; for which
act (I believe) it has pleased the most high God to set a guard (not only of
trained men, but) of mighty Angels, to secure your sitting and the City. Oh!
that there may be a lengthening of Londons tranquillity, of Parliaments safety,
by mercy to the ^oore Dan.
. Oh! or the Lords sake, take heed of soul yoaks, soul-oppressions, lest the
poor cry, and the Lord hear. ^he saying of the holy Prophet is worthy your
sad lest and most serious deliberation. For the oppr^ssion of the poor, for
the sighing of the needy, now will I arise (s^ith the Lord) I will let him in
safety from him that puffs at him Psalm. 12.5.
. And if for the oppression of the outward man, how much more for the
oppression of the inward man, the soul and conscience? I have done with public
reasons. Private are such as co^cern mine own particular enoagements, and they
are, 1. To testify my gratitude and thankful acknowledgement not only of
many (more then merited) favors, conferred on me Beneficiorum memor^a
senescer^ non ^bet Sen lib de Benefic.
, which the great God will recompense into your bosom with advantage, I
question not: for God is not unrighteous to forget your work and labor of love
which you have showed toward his Name, in that you have ministered to the
Saints, and do minister Heb. 6.10.
; but also for that countenance which you were pleased to show unto me, even
then when I was (for the preaching of this Sermon only, and for no other cause)
under a black cloud grates pers^^vere dignas, Non opis est nostrae, Dido -- ^ii
tibi, siqua pios respespectant Numina, si quid usquam justitiae, and men's sibi
conscia recti, praemia digna ferant. Virg. Aeneid.
T^mpora si fuerini nubila, solus eris, Ovid de Trist.
: then and since, though the world has looked upon me obliquely, and with a
squint eye, as we use to say: yet have you (ever since I had the happiness to
be acquainted with you) retained (as better knowing me) candid and respectfull
thoughts of me; and though you have of late been (in a kind) upbraided with it
Mr Prinnes fresh discovery in B. letter.
, yet I verily believe you shall never repent you, nor be ashamed that you have
owned me, no not before men. And when you shall appear in the upper world at
the Tribunal of God the Judge of all, you are not ignorant that the spirit of
glory shall rest upon you, in that you have not been ashamed of the chains and
bonds of Christ in his Members, in his Messengers Tim. 1.16, 17, 18. Matthew. 25.
, 2. And because there were in the world, not only Critical censurers, but
malicious detractors, who fear not to speak evil of good, (though a woe be
denounced against it Isa. 5.
) I have assumed boldness to shelter this Opusculum, (which (though little)
may be of some use in the house of God; Etiam capillus unus habet umbram suam,
one hair casts its own shadow) under your worships patronage; beseeching you
(as Ruth did Boaz in another case Ruth. 3 9.
) to spread your skirt over it. I have said what I have to say touching my
publishing this Sermon, and my dedicating it to your Worship. My prayer is for
you, and your worthy consort, and your hopeful progeny, what Paul's was for the
house of Onesiphorus 2 Timothy 1.16.
, that the Lord would grant unto you that you may find mercy in that day: for
ye often refreshed me. And in the interim, that you may be steadfast and
unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, knewing that your labor
shall not be in vain in the Lord.

Yours humbly devoted in him who is our all in all, NATH. WHITE.

TO THE CANDID and Ingenuous Reader.
READER,
MY business with thee (at this present) is not so much to Court thy favor,
as to admonish thee: First, read, and then judge; Si judicas cognosce. Sen.
read serioussy, and then judge uprightly: It is the voice of Heaven, of Christ
himself, judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous judgment
John 7 24.
. And this I desire for thine own good; for rash and unadvised judgment
oftentimes more hurts the person judging, then the person judg^d Temerarium
jud^cium ^erumqucnibil no^^t ei de quo tem^re jud^catur, etau^em qu^, temere
judidut, ^sa^^emer^as ^e cesse est u^ nos^at Aug. de Sermon Dom. in mont.
. Now that thou moist judge whether my (pretended) crime were answerable to the
great cry; and, what I merited, to what I suffered: I shall present thee with
these ensuing considerations.

First, consider the place where I preached this Sermon, it was at Oxford in
the Universitie, in corona doctis erud risque viris stipa^a, in an Ass^mbly of
learned and skillful men, which will somewhat Apologize for some p^ssages and
expressions otherwise liable to censure.

Secondly, consider he ground of my preaching it there: It was required by the
Statutes of the University, and therefore I may say of all the ensuing
troubles, they were not unnecessarily drawn upon my self, what I did was in
discharge of my duty, when called unto it, which meliorates my cause and
aggravates their sin who ^e ^^d that trouble unto me. The punishing the
servants of the LORD for speaking truly, though boldly, when called unto it
lawfully is a provoking sin, a sin of a deeper die then they were, or would
be aware of 2 Chronicles. 36.14, 15.


Thirdly, consider the subject matter of it, it is the P^stors Care or Charge,
that he should take ^eed to himself first, to his Flock next; to himself,
that is to his life, that it be pure; to his Doctrine, that it be sincere and
incorrupt: To his flock, that is the Church of God, that he first, feed it;
secondly, govern it; thirdly, defend it from such devouring Wolves as would
otherwise prey upon it. And all this, first, because they are Bishops, or
Overseers: secondly made such by the holy Ghost: thirdly, because of the
excellency of the duty, it is to Feed: fourthly, because of the dignity of the
flock, it is the Church of God purchased with his own blood. These things did
flow (as I conceive) naturally and without straining, from the Text; these
things were suitable to the quality of the Audience, these things I pressed
(according to my tenuity) upon the conscience; the white at which I aimed, was
Gods glory, the discharge of my duty, the information, reformation, and
edification of those that were before me.

Fourthly, consider what was the issue and event of my preaching; first, in
regard of the chief of them: secondly, in regard of my self. First, in regard
of the chief of them, even the same with that of holy Steven: When they heard
these things they were cut to the heart, and they gnashed on me with their
teeth Acts 7.58.
: that is, they were filled with indignation, and so impatient, that no sooner
was I come amongst them, but they ran upon me with one accord: which verifies
that of the Apostle: Ye see your calling, brethren, how that not many wise men
after the flesh -- are called 1 Cor. 1.26.
. Secondly, in regard of my seife, they demanded my Sermon, commanded my stay
in the University; about four days after, they (having thoroughly scanned each
part and parcel of it, sif^ed my proofs, compared my quotations, to try if by
any mean^ possible they could find occasion against me) convented me before
them again in their Pharus, or high Tower, where were present Mr.
Vice Chancellor, and six Dr. Pynck. D. Wilki^son. D. Telson. D. Baily. D. Page.
D. Potter. D. Wentworth. D. Wilkinson only was a friend unto me.
other Doctors of Divinity, who having questioned with me about the space of;
hours, and received such answers as the Lord graciously (according to his
promise) put into my mouth; they (for a while) dismissed me: And when they had
commanded me to go aside out of the Council, they conferred amongst
themselves (as afterward it appeared) saying, What shall we do to this man?
And being convinced in their conscience (as the issue plainly spoke) that I had
spoken nothing worthy of death or of bonds, nor ought else, that indeed did
deserve censure, but rather thanks and encouragement from them; yet that they
might keep up their reputation, and that they might not blemish their
judgments, so far, as to be thought that they had questioned me de nugis,
they resolved (it should seem by the sequel) to require me palinodiam cane^e,
that is, in plain English, to recant, or retract what I had said (an old
stratagem of Satan, if he cannot mischief the fervants of the most High God,
by keeping them from speaking the truth, he will endeavor to destroy them by
retracting it) or otherwise to suspend me from preaching within the precincts
of the University. Was not this learnedly resolved? If I would not unsay what I
had said, to please them, I should speak no more (within their jurisdiction) to
offend them. The snare being thus laid, the Beadle rowseth me once again to try
if I would fall therein; but blessed be the Name of the most high, God, who
stood by me, and gave me power, retinendi animum mentemque, base fear and
cowardice flew quite away, and I was as bold as a Lion.

When I was brought into their presence the second time, the Vice Chancellor
asked me if I were not convinced of my error? I replied, In what? I told them
that they had scanned every page and line of my Sermon, if they could show me
wherein I had prevaricated, I would confess it Confoundding of Bishops and
Presbyters had been before objected, to which I had answered, that it was not
I, but the Spirit of God that confounded them.
. Their answer was, that I might err in point of discretion, and to that they
came at last (that I do not nauseam movere) that if I would depart, and within
the space of a fournight send it under my hand, that I had erred in point of
discretion, it would have satissied them. Was not mine offense (think thou
Christian Reader) capital, which such a sacrifice as this would have expiated?
My answer was, That if they could evince me to have erred in point of
discretion, I would confess it, not otherwise. You (said I) think it to be a
point of indiscretion to reprove sin, being called thereunto, my judgment was
otherwise. Hereupon they suspended me from preaching within the precincts of
the University.

Thus far (good Reader) thou have heard how the learned Rabbis of Oxford
have acted their parts; and how with the Pole axe of Suspension they have
knocked a man on the head to kill a Fly lighting on his beard. But was this
all? sure it was enough, and more then enough: But, sic fata serchant, so it
came to pass, that was not all: For the little man, great in power, but
greater in iniquity, being Chancellor of Oxford, and having my Sermon sent him
up for a present, with certificate what they of Oxford had done in it, (as Dr.
Pinck afterward assured me) he forthwith dispatched one of his Emissaries with
a Citation to summon me to appear before the high Commissioners, who having
apprehended me, he carries me away, keeps me prisoner, (though bail was
tendered) until his Lords pleasure (forsooth) was known: which after the
expiation of three days was signified to be, that I should stand bound with
two Subsidy men, to answer to such things as by their Interrogatories they
could pump out of me (for that was their righteous proceeding) in the high
Commission Court. High it was indeed, and swollen exceedingly, yea monstrously,
carrying in its very front the Image of the beast; But its pride has caught a
fall, and they who in it exalted themselves, are brought low, and the chief of
them are brought to the ground, even to the dust; the Lord has stained its and
their glory, blessed be his holy Name for ever. The Lord (blessed for ever)
has begun to effect the great work of salvation promised to his Church and
people by the Prophet Isaiah: In the Lords Mountain, viz. the Church, has the
Lords hand rested, and Moab is trodden down under him, even as straw is trodden
down for the dunghill. The Lord has spread out his hands in the midst of
them, as he that swimmeth spreads forth his hands to swim; he has brought
down their pride together with the spoils of their lands. And the Fortress of
the high Fort of Moabs walls, has he brought down, laid low, brought to the
ground, even to the dust Isa. 26.10, 11, 12.
: So that now the people of the Lord may say, (yea shall sin if they say it
not) Lo, this is our God, we have waited for him, and he has saved us: this is
the Lord, we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation.

But it may be (Reader) thou will desire to hear the proceedings of this
grande Court, whose Motto was the same with that of the Lions Den -- Nulla
retrorsum. In brief, it was after this manner: At my first appearing no
interrogatories were tendered unto me; whether it was because the Spiders web
was not yet woven, the Cockatrice her egg was not yet hatched; or whether it
was that they might weary me out by dilatory proceedings, as their manner was,
that so they might the better bring me to their bow, I know not: But at the
second time of my appearing, certain Interrogatories were tendered, their
number I have now forgotten, for their nature I may thus divide them; some were
formal, and of course; some were real, and to the matter; to both sorts, my
answer was short, yet succinct, answering the Interrogatories as face answers
face in water. I answered the formal Interrogatories formally, and the
material Interrogatories substantially, viz. that they were extractions out of
a Sermon which I had preached in the University, for which I had been convented
and censured there; and therefore was not, as I conceived, to give any further
answer, the 122. Canon of our Church providing, that no man was to be troubled
in two Courts for one and the self-same Themistocles postulants a se Simonidi,
ut sententiam quandam injustam ferret: neque tu, inquit, Poeta bonus esses, si
praetea numerumcaneres, neque ego princeps probus, si contra leges judicarem.
Plut. in Apo.
crime: for this was the cry, how justly, I leave it to thee to judge when thou
have seriously read the Sermon.

This answer, Reader, was very short, yet thou would wonder to imagine how
it troubled the little-great man; Oh! he was chafed even as a Bear robbed of
her Whelps, to see his strength turned against himself, viz. those Canons
which were at the first cast, and after mounted for the defense of the power
Hierarchicall, to be discharged now against it, and him who strenuously fought
for it. Therefore the Kings Advocate, by his advice (as the issue will probably
suggest) pressed a larger answer, that so by it they might have entangled me:
But in vain was the snare spread before the bird, this at no hand I would be
brought unto: and therefore the Arch-prelat, before ever my Nec visum bominem
nec auditum damnare nefas ultimum est, Am. Marcel. lib. 15.
cause was heard, solus and per se, in the face of the whole Court suspended me
ab officio and Beneficio: Was not this to judge before the time? Was not this
to bury a man before he was dead? And were not the rest that were with him in a
confederacy? And were they not guilty of his injustice Non quod ipse nihil
injuste facias, justus er is propterea, si cos qui ab aliis injuriam patiuntur,
ubi tibi potestas erit, non defendas. Procop. de bell. perg. lib. 2.
?

Add to this, that I had tendered to the little-great man, a privilege of the
University with a petition, the purport of with privilege was this, that
whosoever of the University should in it commit any crime worthy either
questioning or censuring, unless it were for Treason, Felony, Mahem, and one
other thing, which is now forgotten, he should be questioned in the University,
and that no Court should call him forth to answer; and if he were called, he
should not appear nor answer, under penalty of degradation, with other mulcts
to be inflicted.

After suspension thou would think, Reader, they would have been quiet; but
alas! that of the Prophet was verified in them, Isal. 57.20.
The wicked are like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast
up mire and dirt. The very next Court day (as I remember) or very shortly after
my suspension, they pressed me to give a larger answer, they well perceived, that
as yet they were beside the Cushion, as the Proverb has it, and therefore that
they might have made sure work, and might have gained by a larger answer some
advantage, they thus haled it on. But I still remaining constant and immovable
from my first answer, and withal pleading the privilege of the University, I
was doomed for my contempt, (so Reader they were pleased to term it, which was
no other then to make the Hares ears horns) to the custody of the Pursevant;
which I refusing, rather choosing the prision then his house, as less
devouring, I had my choice easily granted me, and thither I was going: But
before I went, I desired liberty to speak a few words in their cares; which
being granted, I spoke unto them after this manner: Paul pleaded his privilege
before heathens, and obtained it; and shall I plead mine before Christians and
be denied it? Then I appeal to God Almighty. Which having said, I took my
leave, and was departing: But it pleased the good and gracious Lord God to
carry this appeal so home, and to rivet it so fast, that D. Duck cried out in
the audience of them all, Stay, Sir, if you go to prison, you will say you go
thither for defending the privileges Men's conscia recti.
of the University, do not we know what belongs to the privileges of the
University as well as you, and better too? Whereupon they sell into a new
debate, and by this means (through the goodness of the most high God) I
escaped the prison, as Paul did the whip upon the same plea Acts 22.25.
. A great mercy it was, and I must acknowledge it: for the season was hot, and
the plague rife at that time. Thus this cruel generation having slain me
civilly, they were in the high way of murdering me corporally also, by shutting
me up in a close prison, in a hot and contagious time; but the Lord graciously
prevented it, blessed be his holy Name for ever. Yet still I remained
suspended, slain civilly, and thereby at once my self, my dear wife, and poor
children, deprived of all manner of subsistency, and the Church of my
Ministry, and I at length enforced to leave my dear and native Country, and
to betake my self into the remote parts of the world, where the Lord was
pleased (no thank at all to them) graciously to make provision for me and mine:
yet have I seen the Lord powerfully causing light to shine out of that
darkness, which is enough at once to encourage his servants, and to deter the
adversary. Reader, thou have the History, if after the due consideration of
these things, thou esteem me worthy of what I suffered, I shall not quarrel
thee, though I think otherwise, desiring to afford thee what I desire of thee
and others, a latitude of judgment, and liberty of diffenting, as we see
cause, only requesting thee, though we be two in judgment, yet we may be one
in affection. If thou shall conceive that I was injuriously dealt withal, and
suffered as an innocent, I shall humbly beseech thee to conceive I may do so
in other things: and therefore that thou would (when occasion presents it
self) stand for him by vindicating his innocence, who will not cease to pray
for thee and thy prosperity.

THE PASTORS CHARGE AND CVRE: OR, A Sermon at first preached in Latin at
Oxford, and afterward translated by the Author.
TEXT ACTS 20. VERSE. 28. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the
flock over which the holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to feed the Church of
God, which he has purchased with his own Blood.


THIS excellent and plainly divine Precept, of which we are (by Gods gracious
assistance) this day to speak, O ye Fathers much to be reverenced, and O ye
my Brethren much to be respected in Christ Jesus, is a part of that heavenly
Sermon of St. Paul's, which he made to the Elders of Ephesus, being assembled at
Miletus. But before I come to the particular Explication of it, it is necessary
that I set before your eyes the occasion of the words. And (because nothing can
be found to have been uttered rashly and unadvisedly by an Apostle so eminently
gifted, so thoroughly sanctified) with the good leave of this learned Assembly,
that I tip up from the bottom the History, that so the cause which moved the
Apostle to utter these words, may show it self as resplendently as the Sun
from under a cloud.

This blessed Apostle, the up-roare being ceased, which Demetrius had raised at
Ephesus, having gone over Macedonia, and some Cities of Greece, having also
left behind him Troas, where he raised to life Eutychus, and Assos, and
Mitylene, and Samos, and Trogillium, at last came to Miletus, whither the
Elders of Ephesus being called, he admonishing them of his doctrine, and
proposing unto them his own example for imitation, and commending unto them the
care and administration of the Churches, with a vehement attestation after this
manner spoke unto them:

It is not needful, my beloved Brethren, that I rehearse unto you my candid
sincerity in the business of the Gospel, ye your selves are luculent and
approved witnesses of my conversation amongst you, and after what manner I have
been with you at all seasons from the first day that I came into Asia, that I
have not hunted after popular applause and vain glory, neither in any thing
have I sought mine own profit, but serving the will of the Lord Jesus with all
modesty, and obeying his precepts with all integrity: I have purely preached
the Gospel of Christ to all both publicly and privately: and that I might tread
in the holy steps of my blessed Lord and Master (who that he might redeem and
cleanse his Church, and establish it against the gates of hell, emptied
himself, and humbled himself, and suffered sharp afflictions, and a most bitter
and shameful death) have suffered many and grievous things of the Jews my
Countrymen and Kinsmen, the sworn enemies of the name of a Christian; which
Jews that they might hinder the course of the gloriou^ Gospel, and that the
grace of Christ might in no wise be communicated to the Genriles by my
Ministry, these laid ginnes and snares to entrap me, and with diverse and
manifold tribulations and afflictions, they afflicted me. All which things
notwithstanding are so far unable to hinder me in my course of preaching the
Gospel, or to beat me off from my purpose of making known the name of Christ,
that now, however free in body, yet bound in spirit, I will go to Jerusalem,
being altogether ignorant of those things which will befall me in that City,
but that being informed by the public testimony of the holy Spirit, I
beforehand perceive that bonds and afflictions do abide me.

This I am certainly persuaded of, this I confidently believe, notwithstanding
I am not only ready willingly to undergo bands, but also to lay down my life,
so that I may finish my course, and the Ministry which I have received of the
Lord Jesus. And now behold I know, that ye all among whom I have gone
preaching, shall see my face no more; wherefore I take you to record this day,
that I am pure from the blood of all men, for I have showed to all, the true
way which leads to life. And (that no man might plead ignorance) I have made
known all the counsel of God, viz. by what means it seemed good unto him to
save mankind, and in like manner what is to be performed by those who do
desire to persevere in sincere affiance toward the Lord Jesus.

Moreover, I have set my self before you as an example, by doing and suffering
all things, that you might continue constantly in the purity of the Gospel, and
therefore the destruction of none can justly be charged upon me.

Neither do I willingly, and of mine own accord, suffer my self to be plucked
from you at this present, neither for fear of persecution do I withdraw my
self, but I follow the guidance of the Spirit of God, albeit it be into
certain and manifest danger of my life: That therefore (my Brethren) which
cannot be performed by my presence, it is necessary that it be recompensed by
your diligence.

Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the Flock, etc.] that is,
take heed that you be not wanting to your selves, look to it, you having put
your hands to the Plough, that you look not back; but you that are Elders, to
whom the care and charge of a multitude is concredited, beware ye that the
false Apostles do not corrupt your selves, and poison the Flock which you have
solemnly undertaken to foster and nourish, and that in the presence of God and
his holy Angels.

I have with great sincerity discharged that duty which was delegated to me by
the Lord, do ye with the like diligence, and with the like integrity, pursue
the care of that flock over which the holy Ghost has made you Bishops, i. e.
Overseers, that you minister unto the sheep of Christ wholesome food in due
season, and that you show yourselves to be true Shepherds, careful Pastors
toward the Congregation of God, not hirelings, not devouring Wolves; which
congregation, since it has been so dear to God, that he has redeemed it with
the precious blood of his only begotten Son, it is not negligently to be
cared for of you, neither should any such fact at any time be committed by you,
that a Merchandise of so great price should perish through your carelessness
and negligence.

Ye see (welbeloved Fathers and Brethren) whither the words (at the first
blush) look, what the drift and scope of them is, viz. that the Guardians of
the Church should with all possible care take heed both to themselves, and to
all the flock of Christ. This is that which I could wish from the very ground
of my heart might take place in our age, in which a very evil custom of
neglecting of themselves and the Church of God, has gotten footing, and from
day to day, like a Gangrene; spreads further and further: would to God (as
Bernard has it in his Sermon to the Ministry of his time) that the Pastors of
the Church could be found as diligent to eye their Charge, as they are prompt
and ready to make have to the Chair: likewise, that they would watch
diligently and carefully, keeping the Church committed unto, them, yea verily,
that they would watch for themselves, and that they would not suffer that to be
said of them which the Psalmist long since has said, My lovers and my friends
stand aloof from my soar, Psalm. 38.11.
this is a most just complaint, neither can it more justly be applied to any
age, then to ours. Thus he, which, would to God my weak labors might be
available to persuade this venerable Assembly to avoid, and to yield obedience
to the charge of the Apostle; which if it shall come to pass, (suffer me, O ye
my Brethren, to entreat this at your hands) I shall obtain my desire: But if it
shall fall out otherwise, (but far be it from me that I should be fore-stal'd
in my opinion concerning you) I shall bewail my labor and travel spent in
vain. But to the purpose.

This Text may worthily be styled, Division of the Text.
The Pastors Charge and Care, in which you may observe these ensuing parts.

The first of which is the Charge it self, Attendite, be ye attentive, or
heedfull, Take ye heed.

The second is the extent of this Charge, how far it reaches, and to whom,
To your selves, and to all the Flock.

The third is the intention of this Charge,

The first is that bond and tie that is upon them in respect of the Flock which
they have the charge and oversight of,

The second is, Over which the holy Ghost has made you Overseers.

The third is, To feed the Church of God.

The fourth is, He has redeemed it with his own blood. These are the parts.

Now, should I peak of all these things at large, a river of Tullies eloquence
would not suffice, I will therefore with Hierome imitate those who do delineate
the vast circumference of the earth in a little Table: I will present unto you
things shadowed, not expressed, which whilst (according to my ability) I do
endeavor to perform, do thou who sit upon the Throne, and thou, O Lamb,
the Offspring of David, who only wast worthy to take the sealed Book, and to
open it, open the eyes of the servant, stretch forth thy hand unto him, direct
his mind, that he may see something in these mysteries, and may draw it forth
to the glory of thy Name, and to the profit of thy Church. Amen.

Attend vee, or take ye heed, etc.] Who are these Ye that are here meant?
They are the Bishops or the Presbyters, that must be thus attentive: for those
whom he calls Elders in the 17. verse of this Chapter, he calls the very
same persons Bishops in this verse, (as Lorinus Lor. upon this Text.
has observed) and Oecumenius In four several places in his Comments upon
this chapter. As also in his Comments upon the Epistle of Timothy, Tuns, and
the Phil.
teaches, that in the New Testament the names of Bishops and Presbyters are
taken promiscuously, to whom Hierome, Chrysostom, Lyranus, Carthusianus, Hugo,
and many others give their consent. So then ye see by this, that none are
exempted from this care, whosoever they be that are Pastors of the Church of
God, they must attend, they must take heed, whether they be Bishops or
Presbyters, to feed the Flock of Christ.

Here is great need of attention, that we may understand what the Apostle
intends (says Lorinus) and most truly does he say so, because there is
hardly a verse interceding, in which he does not inculcate and ingeminate the
same thing. In the 31. verse, he says therefore, Be ye watchful, which is,
as if he should have said, I do give you to understand again and again, that
the business you have taken upon you, is a business hard and difficult, a
business that does require attentive ears, watchful eyes; attentive ears,
and therefore attend ye; vigilant eyes, and therefore watch ye: Neither,
without doubt, were these things uttered rashly and inconsideratly: the Apostle
saw, without peradventure, some such in Asia, as we may see not a few in
England, who waited on their office either very remissly, or not with that
cheerfulness and alacrity as they should have done; therefore he exhorts
them to attend, or give heed, Take heed.

But (to speak the truth, and as the thing is) the Latin word Attendite, which
signifies to attend, does not satisfy me in all things, the word in the
original is more full (...), which sounds as much in Latin as Adhibite, lay
to, or apply, apply to your selves, to your Flock. But what must they apply?
Why, doubtless, seeing there is nothing concluded, certainly the Apostle would
be understood to speak indefinitly, (...), that is, apply your ears, and eyes,
your minds and soul, all your care and diligence. From whence does arise the
first consectary, or doctrinall conclusion, which is this:

That an idle and sluggish life does no way become the Pastors of the Church of
God.

The Apostle affirms thus much in the word attendite, attend ye, or take ye
heed; for this word attend, is an operative word (as the Lawyers speak) a word
that imports labor and industry; whence it is most clear and conspicuous, that
it becomes not the Shepherds of Gods flock to live supinely, or to pass away
their days unfruitfully and unprofitably; but to apply themselves with all
care and diligence to the discharging of their duty: When Christ sent out his
Disciples, what did he say unto them, go, sleep, play, take your ease; live
delicately? nothing less, but Go, Matthew. 28.19, 2.
teach ye, teach all nations, and baptize them: And again, teach them to
observe all things that I have commanded you, (...), it is a faithful saying,
says the Apostle, He that desires the 1 Timothy 3.1.
office of a Bishop, desires a good work; if the office of a Bishop be a good
work, then the Bishops ought to be laborers, not loyterers; how therefore
(says In cundem locum.
Beza upon this place) can slow bellies, idle droans usurp the name of Bishops
without shame and blushing? Let them hear, yea, I would to God they could
hear Bernard thundering against the idle Pastors of his time; In Epist. ad Hen.
Senecensem.
Si quis ludat in Cathedra, lugebit in Gehema, if any will play in the chair in
his charge, he shall weep and wail in hell. But I proceed, he that will read
Paul's Epistles to Timothy, shall find abundantly this truth confirmed in 2 Timothy 4. v. 5. he thus says, Watch thou in all things, endure afflictions, do
the work of an Evangelist, make full proof of thy Ministry: And again, 2 Timothy
2.15.
Study to show thy self approved unto God; a workman that needs not to be
ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of truth.

But did not St Paul (as it is reported of the Scribes and Pharisees) bind
grievous burdens, and hard to be born, and lay them on the shoulders of
Timothy, he himself refusing to touch them with the least of his singers? No
verily, he was 2 Cor. 11.23.26, 27.
in labors more abundant, in journeying often, in weariness, and painfulness,
in watchings often; he went from city to city, from country to country,
laboring and sweating in the promulgation of the Gospel; so that from Romans
15.19.
Jerusalem round about unto Hydicun he fully preached the Gospel of Christ: But
what do I speak of Paul? when as the great Shepherd, the Prince of Pastors,
long since, breathed forth this notable saying, Oportet me operari, Joh. 9.4.
I must work the work of him that sent me, whilst it is day: If then there be
a necessity of the Lords working, it is a thing altogether unbeseeming the
servant to be idle.

Would to God you would seriously ponder and weigh this doctrinall conclusion,
ye flourishing and renowned Academians; I am deceived if it would not somewhat
retard your winged posting to the vertical point of Ecclesiastical honor and
preferment, ye would not hasten with so much boldness and alacrity to
honors, if ye were sensible that they were burdens, truly you would be
afraid of being pressed above measure, neither would you with such labor, and
so great danger affect the ornaments of honor and dignity. If thou had
known, says Chrysostom in his third Homily upon the Acts of the Apostles,
that a Bishop ought to carry the burdens of all, without doubt you would not at
any time make such have to the Primacy, or to any place of rule and authority.
But woe and alas, the meditation of this burden slips out of men's minds, whilst
every one (as Augustine eloquently speaks) thus discourses with himself, What
does this appertain unto me? Let every one do what he will, so long as I shall
enjoy the profit, reap the benefit, this is enough for me, let the Church go
whither it will. May it please you to hear what that pious and devout reformer
of manners wittily though tartly cast in the teeth of his own age, Men eye the
glory only (says he) but look not at the penalty: In the Clergy (says he) in
every place, men of all sorts, young and old, learned and unlearned, make haste
to the cares of the Church, as if every one of them should live without care,
when he is come to a place of the greatest care.

Do you mark what the Oracle of his time, Bernard, says? would to God this
were not the disease of our age, there is a sort of dainty delicate Pastors who
will seek and sue for fat Benefices, that they may attire themselves
gorgeously, live idly; there is a ^ort also, who being consecrated to God,
do devote themselves to Bacchus, the pot and the pipe are oftener in their
hands then their books, and it is far more pleasure unto them to pipe then to
preach. There is a sort of lazy Shepherds, who have more regard to their own
skin, then to the souls of their own Flock. I speak the truth plainly
without glozing, as heretofore that faithful Counselor did above mentioned.

Nevertheless, my Brethren and Fathers, I beseech you suffer your selves to be
somewhat wrought upon, to be somewhat stirred and moved by this that I have
spoken, how ever mean and simple it may seem to be; the Lions themselves
sleeping, are wont to be excited by the stinging of the little Gnats. Is this
the attention (think you) that God requires? It Is a God truly, but it is the
Belly their God, a most filthy and dishonest Deity; I tremble to speak the
rest, notwithstanding I must speak it, those who make their belly their God,
they glory in their shame, and their Phil. 3.19.
end is destruction, says the Apostle. Is this a time (Men, Brethren, and
Fathers) of sporting and playing, of living in delight and pleasure? Behold two
cruel enemies are at hand, even at the door, rushing in upon us; namely,
Impiety and Superstition, and do we sit still together with folded hands? or
rising, do we through our carelessness and negligence open the gate to an
enemy rushing in upon us? Our great Lord and Master, that great Householder of
the world, being to go far away, and to seek an eternal Country, and
everlasting Kingdom for himself and us, he gave unto every one of us one
Talent at the least, and said, Negotiamini dum venio, occupy till I come; he
has commanded us to occupy, not to live riotously, and wantonly. But is this
(according to the command of our Lord and Master) to occupy, to seek our own
profits, our own pleasure, to give our minds to ease and rest, to fancy and
favor silence? These are foul filthy Napkings in which we have slothfully
laid up these Talents, which should rather have been hired out to the Bankers.

But thus much let us know, the Judge of Heaven and Earth will one day come
again, and will call us to an account: for if we shall give an account for
every idle word, then why not for idle silence? as Ambrose has acutely spoken:
what then, miserable wretches, shall we regest or answer? where shall we
appear? [Ungracious servant] is a terrible word, but [bring him and slay him
before my face] ^s far more terrible: Wherefore my beloved brethren, let it
be lawful for me to entreat you, yea, to adjure you by your own souls, by
the bowels and wounds of Christ, by the terrible judgment feat before which
one day we must all appear, to be willing to adorn and perfect your
Ministeries with holy labourings and workings. Take heed to your selves and to
the Flock, preach the Word, be instant in season, out of season, reprove,
rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering and doctrine, let every man study to
show himself to God a work man that needs not to be ashamed, rightly dividing
the word of truth. O most sweet and soul-ravishing voice, in comparison of
which the heavenly harmony it self is harsh and unt^nable, We done thou good
and faithful servant, thou have been faithful in a little. I will make thee
ruler over much, enter thou into the joy of thy Master. O my brethren, let us
seek to be partakers of this voice, let us sue for it importunately, let us
work the things which God commands, and God will crown the things which we
have wrought.

And this shall suffice to have been spoken as concerning the Pastors care,
namely his Attention: It follows now that we pass to the Extent of this
Attention, to whom and how far it reaches.

Take heed to your selves, take heed to the Flock: To the Flock, that it be not
seduced; to your selves, that ye be not punished: both to your selves and the
Flock, that ye fail not, that ye fall not from the sound and right way, says
Aretius most excellently upon this place: Aretius in locum.
A simple and single care is sufficient for others, a double care is required
of you. The holy Apostle would have you to be attentive to your selves as you
are Christians, to the Flock as you are Pastors, to both as you are Overseers;
but first to your selves: to your selves, for unless you take heed to your
selves, who shall take heed unto you? For who shall keep the Keepers? Or, if
the salt have lost its savor, wherewith shall it be seasoned? To your selves,
because he that will not take heed to himself, will never take care for the
Flock of Christ; and who will commit another man's to him that is not faithful
in his own? Christ said unto Peter watching, When thou art converted,
strengthen thy brethren. This is Christ's order, first he would have him to take
care of himself, and to his own conversion; When thou art converted, afterward
he would have this his care to extend it self to others also, strengthen thy
brethren. A little after Christ says to Peter, being half asleep, Simon,
sleep thou? namely thou, whose duty it is to give heed to others, to awaken
others, do thou sleep? do thou not take heed unto thy self? This seemed to
Christ to be absurd and foolish; and truly so it is.

Wherefore first of all, let it be your care to take heed to your selves; but
how to your selves? First, to your life, and then to your Doctrine: To your
life, that it be undefiled, to your Doctrine, that it be uncorrupted, to both,
that they be sincere and no way polluted.

Hence there arises a second Consectary, or Doctrinall Conclusion, which is
this:

That abundance of care and circumspection is to be had, that the Pastors of
the Church of God do keep themselves holy and undefiled, as well in their
lives as in their Doctrine; in their life, that it be not contaminated and
defiled with the blots of sin and wickedness; in their Doctrine, that it be
not corrupted with errors, or any deceitful impostures.

We have here a large field to walk in, but I will run over it with as much
brevity as possibly I can.

First of all, the Pastors of the Church of God must take heed with all care
and watchfulness, that their life be holy, and without blame, which the
Scripture requires in every Pastor. He that will but read St. Paul's Epistles
to Timothy, shall find this sufficiently confirmed 1 Epist 3.2.3.
. A Bishop then must be blameless, sober, of good behavior, not given to
wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy lucre, but patient, not a brawler, not
covetous. Moreover (says the Apostle in the 7, 8) he must have a good report
of them which are without, lest he fall into reproach, and the snare of the
Devil. And in Chap. 4. v. 12 of the same Epistle, he says, Be thou an example
of the believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in
purity. And in his Epistle to Titus he thus speaks: For a Bishop Titus 1.7.
must be blameless, as the Steward of God, not self-willed, not proud, not
given to wine not soon angry, etc. But what should I dwell any longer on a
Doctrine so clear and perspicuous? God when he did forbid any of the seed of
Aaron having any blemish, to Lev. 21.17.
approach near to offer the bread of the Lord: And when the Lord did command
that Exo. 28.36.
Holiness to the Lord should be engraven on the forefront of the Mitre, that
it might be upon Aarons forehead; and when that he did strictly charge that
they should be Isai. 52.11.
clean who did bear the vessels of the Lord: he did then and there clearly
demonstrate that sanctimony and holiness of life which ought to shine in the
Pastors of the Church, as the Sun in the firmament.

Neither does this truth want reason, Habakkuk speaks Hab. 1.13.
: therefore the life of Pastors ought to be purged from all the filth and
pollution of sin, otherwise it will be impossible for them to appear before
the Lord with acceptance; for which cause the Apostle exhorts to Heb. 12.14.
follow holiness, without which no man shall see the face of the Lord. The
office of a Pastor requires holiness, yea an Angelical purity and
perfection, says In Admonit. ad Nep.
Bellarmine excellently.

Furthermore, Esaias 52.11.
Be ye clean who do bear the vessels of the Lord. For they bear the vessels
of the Lord, who do take upon them to bring the souls of their neighbors to
the everlasting holy habitations in the trust and credit of their own
conversation. Let them therefore seriously perpend and consider with themselves
(says Past. Cura. part. 2.
Gregory notably) how clean and holy they ought to be who do carry the living
vessels of the Lord unto the Temple of eternity in the bosom of their own
stipulation.

In the last place, Hierome.
says Hierome. Lux gregis est flamma Pastoris, the bright burning of the
Shepherd is the light of the flock (says Gregory.) Gregory.
Ye are the Matthew. 5.14.
light of the world, a City set upon a hill, says our Savior to his
Disciples. It is as much as if Christ had said, Since that you are clearly and
plainly to be seen, and that afar off, (like a stately and well built
Pyramid, or as a Candle burning in a Candlestick) a great necessity lies upon
you that you be serviceable as well to the eyes of all that shall flow unto you
for imitation, as to their ears for instruction. When the Pillar Exodus 13.
of the Cloud went right forward, the people of Israel went forward; but when
that did again stand still, the Congregation rested: so at the beck and rebeck
of every active Christian, all things are done by those that are his subjects
and followers: This was the cause why God commanded that the Captains and
Leaders of the people should go forth to the battle at the first sound of the
Trumpet, that so the Troops of the mixed multitude might follow after them (as
their forerunners)

Therefore ye see (my beloved brethren) that abundance of care and
circumspection must be had, that the Pastors (being the Captains and Leaders of
the people) may lead a sincere and undefiled life, lest that they drive them
that wander into bypath, and deadly precipices, and so make themselves guilty
of their blood, which they should reduce from their wandering, with their
Shepherds Staff and Crook, into the Kings high way, the way of life and
salvation. To this purpose speaks Gregory excellently, Past. Cura. part. 3.
Admo^it.
Let the Pastors learn to give themselves examples of living well, to those
that are committed to them: for they ought to know, that if at any time they
shall perpetrate corrupt and filthy things, they are worthy of so many deaths
as they do give examples of destruction and perdition to those that are their
followers; from whence there is a necessity that Pastors and Ministers should
keep themselves so much the more warily from trespasses and sins, in so much
as they do not only die themselves by the evil things which they do commit,
but also are guilty of the death of their souls, which by their evil examples
they have destroyed.

If then the matter be so (my reverend Fathers and Brethren in Christ) hence
first we may learn how unworthy they are of the Office and honor of a Pastor,
who live wickedly, and who do tumble and wallow in the filth and mire of sin
and wickedness, in surfeiting and drunkenness, in chambering and wantonness,
in strife and envying; how dare such men as these take upon them to declare the
righteousness of the Lord? How dare they take his word into their impure
mouths, when as they have hated to be reformed, and have cast his words behind
their backs? With what face do men of this stamp rashly set upon the holy
things of God, and handle them (as they say) with unwashed hands? when as David
a most holy Prophet of God, would not compass the Altar of Jehovah, before he
had washed his hands in Psalm. 24.
innocence, that is, (as Calvin interprets it) before in the common use of holy
things, he had separated himself from wicked things. Are these meet successors
of the Prophets and Apostles, who are called Holy men of God, not only by
reason of divine inspiration, but also for the holiness and integrity of life,
by which they shined as gloriously in the Orb of the Church, (as the Sun in
its proper O^b) expressing by their unblameable manners, and by their holy
conversation, the life of true and pure religion in which they had instructed
others? Alas! in no wise ought these to be esteemed fit to take the places, or
fill up the rooms of such holy men of God. If any of this sort do hear me
this day (Men, Brethren, and Fathers) which God forbid, I will (with your good
leave) propose a few Considerations, to which if they will lend a diligent
ear, they shall be able (the grace of God helping and assisting) to renounce
and to bid farewell for ever to their old and wicked course of life.

The first of which is this, Thou which teach another, teach thou not thy
self? Thou which preachest a man should not steal, do thou steal? Thou
that say a man should not commit adultery, do thou commit adultery? Thou
that make a boast of the Law, through breaking of the Law dishonorest thou
God? Romans 2.21, 22, 23, 24.
What follows? For the name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through
you, as it is written. Thus holy Paul, in his Epistle to the Romans. Hearken to
this Men, Brethren, and Fathers, the Ministers of the Gospel wallowing in the
mire of sins, do pollute the glorious Name of God, and shall these escape
unpunished? No, by no means, unless they repent they shall perish for ever.
Who ever shall escape the present or future wrath of God almighty, they most
assuredly shall undergo the same. Truly, this is a terrible conclusion; yet
has it in it no more terror then truth: For God will be sanctified in those
that come nigh him, that is, either actively or passively, as he has witnessed
of himself, I will be sanctified (says he) in them that come nigh me, Levit.
10.3. that is, I will openly declare and make known the glory and holiness of
my name, by sharply punishing those Ministers that do transgress my
commandments.

A second consideration is this, Eli, gave occasion to the people to 1 Samuel
2.17.
abhor the sacrifices of the Lord; so the impious and nefarious lives of our
Ministers, give occasion to the malignant of scandalizing Religion. Wherefore
for Religions sake, let it never be told in Gath, nor published in the streets
of Ascalon, that the Ministers of the Gospel do live unholily, lest
peradventure the daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest peradventure the
daughters of the uncircumcised triumph, and by this means at length conceive
some hope in their minds, that our Religion by this deadly blow being shrewdly
wounded, it may in short time languish and die, and that out of its ashes
Phoenix-like, the Roman Monster may again arise.

The third consideration is this, Ser. ad Pastor.
Hence excellently Bernard in his Sermon to Pastors, That which Heretics do
by their corrupt doctrines, the same do many now adays by their wicked
examples, namely, they seduce the people, and lead them into error; and by so
much the more pernicious are they then heretics, by how much works are of
more value then words, and men are more led by practice then by precepts. To
this purpose speaks Leo: teaching by example and practice, is a more full
teaching then teaching by precepts. Nazianzen, He which teaches holy things
and lives filthily, he builds with one hand that which he pluckes down with
another.

The Greek Scholia to this purpose wittily has concluded, that as (...), so
(...) is used not actively only, but passively also; would to God you would
diligently consider this (Fathers and Brethren) ye are Bishops actively, that
is, Overseers; and passively, that is, spectacles, at once to be Overseers of
others, and to be seen of others; for the eyes and faces of all are toward
you, all, in your Doctrine, listen well unto you; all, in your life, have their
eyes fixed on you, so that if any amongst you does give any example of evil,
if any among you be a curser, a swearer, if any be a false speaker, a perjured
person, if any be a riotous person, an Usurer, if any of you be a dicer, or a
huckster of Benefices, the example spreads far, and presently it is in the
mouths of the people, too apt to be imitators of such things, this our Bishop
frequently does, this our Minister commonly practices, certainly any the least
offense committed by you, will wonderfully encourage the hearts, and strengthen
the hands of wicked men in their evil courses.

The fourth is this, Bid thus speaks, Beda De Temple Sol. Chrysostom.
They which endeavor to teach others a rule which they have not learned
themselves, do not prepare a sanctuary for the Lord, but ruin and destruction
for themselves. And Chrysostom says, A Doctor of the Church by preaching well
and living ill, teaches the people how they ought to live, teaches God how he
ought to condemn him. A certain Pope says, That those that do not live, but
teach savingly, they are like to the water in baptism, which washing them,
sends them to heaven, but it self afterward descends into the channel. To me
they seem not unlike to a plaster, which when it has cured the wound,
together with the matter or corruption, is cast into the fire. But why do I
relate unto you the opinion of the Fathers, or of my self? Hearken what Christ
says, who shall be the Judge of quick and dead, Matthew. 7.22.23.
Many shall say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy
Name? But what will Christ answer them? Depart from me ye workers of iniquity.
A terrible answer, and such an one as ought to wrest tears of blood from those
that are guilty. Would to God (my Brethren) that these Considerations were so
deeply recorded in the hearts of all Pastors, but especially in the hearts of
those that live wickedly, that they might never slip out of their memory.

Secondly, hence they are to be admonished, who do slight this holiness, and
esteem it either in Pastors, or in people, to be a vain curiosity, and
Puritanisme, that they would acknowledge their error, and at last seriously
repent: for if they shall not see the Lord, who do want holiness, much less
shall they ever see him who mock and scoff at holiness. That God whom we
serve, is a God of Hab. 1.1.
pure eyes, who has pronounced them blessed Matthew 5.8.
that are pure in heart; and has threatened that Dogs, and Sorcerers, and
Whoremongers, and Murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a
lie, shall be Rev. 22.15.
without, such shall be without, they shall never enter into the holy City: Woe
is me; who, whilst he speaks these things, can abstain from tears? For now
impudence is grown to that height, that it is a crime to be holy, so that many
men are compelled to be evil, that they may not be accounted evil, Salvian
heretofore complaiued of his times, He that will not now swear and forswear,
he that will not now drink and play the glutton, he that will not turn
topsie-turvie the Laws of God and Man, he presently is branded with the name
of a Puritan, and forthwith is vexed with the hatred of all, yea even amongst
some of the University.

I know what these haters of good men will say to these things, they will say
that they never hated any good thing, or any good man, only they cannot endure
that foolish curiosity which commonly is called Puritanisme; of whom I desire
to know this one thing, Whether they do believe or think that it is possible
to be too curious and precise in keeping Gods commandments, when as the
Apostle commands us to walk Ephesians. 5.15.
precisely? And God commands us to keep his commandementss diligently Psalm.
119.4
(says David) yea with all thy might Deuteronomy. 6.5.
; or as Buxtorfius has it, with all thy vehemency, when as our Savior
exhorts to be perfect as our heavenly Father is perfect Matthew. 5.48.
, I am not ignorant that this Sicut, this as, is a sicut similitudinis, non
aequalitatis, an as of likeness, not of equality, as Gorran Gorranin 1 Epist.
Ioh.
has well distinguished; notwithstanding I dare affirm this without blushing,
that when men have strained themselves to the uttermost, and scrued themselves
to the highest pegge of their endeavors, that they may imitate this pattern,
they shall never be able to attain to the riches of Gods perfection: and
therefore it is not possible for men to be too strict and accurate in their
walking with God. That therefore which these haters of good men call vain
curiosity, is true piety; and according to that way which they call
Puritanisme, must we serve the living God, and obey his divine Laws. If this
shall seem infam ous to any, he is to be esteemed wicked and ungodly, and the
sacred Scripture brands such a man with a black Character, and wheresoever he
goes, he shall always be known by this mark to be a very Cain, who slew his
brother, because his own works were 1 Ioh. 3.12.
evil and his brothers righteous.

Last of all, from this conclusion does flow this admonition unto us (Fathers
and Brethren) who by the blessing of our most benign God are advanced to this
so high honor, that our doctrine may flow in more powerifully, may allure more
effectually, may adhere more firmly, may grow up more fruitfully, and may
attain its blessed end more expeditiously, let us diligently take heed that we
do not at any time commit any thing unworthy of so great an honor, as that to
which God has called us, let us take heed (I say) that our name agree with our
actions, and that our actions answer to our name, that so there be not a
sublimity of honor, with a deformity of life, that we do not counterfeit
Dovelike locution, and Sheep-like profession, and yet retain and keep a Crow
like affection, and a Wolfe-like disposition. So Ambrose Lib. de dig. sacerd.
cap. 3.
.

Let us in no wise be like unto Husbandmen, who do till and trim the ground,
being squalid and untrim themselves, and whilst they endeavor to diminish the
thorns, they so grow into bushes that they do involve and overwhelme
themselves with those thorns from which they free the field: But let us be like
boys going before in the night with burning Torches; or rather let us be like
to forerunners, whose paces and footsteps those that are our hearers and
followers treading in, they may prepare themselves more cheerfully, more
firmly, more earnestly to a perpetual course in the race of godliness; which
that we may all, both to the salvation of our selves, as also to the glory of
his name, not unwillingly perform, the great and good God grant. Amen.

Hitherto have we spoken of the life of a Pastor, let us now in a word speak of
the Doctrine, that so we may hasten with as much speed as possible, to the
things which are remaining.

Pastors must take heed that their Doctrine be true and sound: True, that is,
not corrupted with the leven of error or heresy: Sound, that is, not stained
with the doctrines of men, or with traditions, or with brainsick and phanatick
questions.

There is no need that we should travel from the sacred Scripture for the
confirmation of this truth, he that will but consult with S. Paul in his
Epistles, shall find it plentifully confirmed, It behooves a Bishop (says he)
to hold fast the faithful word, as he has been taught, that he may be able by
sound Doctrine both to exhort and convine the gainsayers, in his Epistle to
Titus Tit. 1.9.
. The same he commands to Timothy, Take heed unto thy self, and to thy
doctrine 1 Timothy 4.16.
: to thy self, that thou be holy; to thy doctrine, that it be sound. Neither
does he teach any other lesson to Titus: Tit. 2.1.
But speak thou the things which beseem sound doctrine. Neither truly is S.
Paul like to the Cock of a Dial, the shadow of which points out the hour
and flies; or like to a statue in the way, which shows the right way to
others, but it never stirs it self; but he does that himself, which he
enjoynes to others, as he openly witnesses of himself 2 Cor. 2.17
, We are not as many which corrupt the word of God, but as of sincerity, but as
of God in the sight of God speak we in Christ. St. Paul did not play the
huckster with the word of God that is, he did not handle it crastily, or
covetously, or to conclude less sincerely, that by that means he might get
gain; but as of sincerity, but as of God in the ^ight of God, spoke he in
Christ. Hence it is as clear as the light, that the Doctrine of Ministers ought
to be hedged in on every side, with abundance of circumspection. Neither ought
we to admire at it, for from hence much profit will redound to themselves, and
to their flock; and on the contrary, much detriment and damage will accrue unto
them both.

First of all, great advantage will redound to themselves, and to their flock:
What greater good can come to the sons of men, then life and glory? But this
shall be the reward and recompense of them and theirs that are faithful. Those
that be wise, shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and they that
turn many to righteousness, (that is, by their faithful preaching,) as the
stars for ever and ever, says the Prophet Daniel Dan. 12.3.
. And St. Paul writing to Timothy, says, Take heed to 2 Timothy 4.16.
thy self, and to thy Doctrine, continue in them: for by this means thou shall
save thy self, and those that hear thee. On the contrary, corrupt doctrine
does bring much hurt and loss unto the Flock and Pastor. First, to the Flock,
corrupt and impure Doctrine may deservedly be compared to deadly poison; for as
that is hurtful to the body, so this especially to the soul: therefore that
Preacher that preaches deadly soule-destroying doctrine, deserves to be
punished with the same punishment, and with the same death with which a
Physician is to be punished, who gives his sick Patient poison to drink in
stead of wholesome Physic: for he kills the body, but the other destroys the
soul.

Secondly, that quick and lively saying of Christ, Matthew. 5.19. threatens at
the first sight, unutterable punishment to themselves; Whosoever (says he)
shall break one of the least of these commandments, and teach men so, (that
is, to break them,) he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of heaven,
that is, he shall be none, (for those that are there are great all) he shall
have no place in the heavenly Paradise: now he that falls from heaven, with one
and the same fall he falls into hell irrecoverably, and most justly and
deservedly is he esteemed worthy of eternal death, who has seduced others,
and led them into deadly errors, because he endeavors to destroy his
Christian brethren, for whom Christ has shed his most precious heart-bloud,
then the which a greater, and more truculent sin, cannot be thought on, or
imagined.

What therefore will become of those grand Impostors of the world, the Jesuits
and Romish Massing-priests, who compass Sea and Land that they may make one
Proselyte, and when he is made, they make him twofold more the child of he then
they themselves?

Yea, what will become of some Ministers of the Gospel, who tooth and nail
endeavor not only in their Sermons, but also in written books, to make that
holy time consecrated unto God, common and profane, and to change the divine
institution of the Lords day into humane, that so they might cut in sunder the
very nerves of the solemn worship of God, and so utterly overturn all Religion?

What will become of our Ministers of the Gospel, who in their preaching
publish to the world doctrine strongly savouring of Pelagianisme, and who teach
other heterodox tenets?

What will become of others, who use painting and false coloring, whereby
their doctrine is adulterated, so that it cannot keep and retain its native
simplicity and integrity? for either they join with it the traditions of men,
and mingle men's decrees with Gods, which is to mingle Chafe with Wheat; or
else they most dishonestly flatter men, especially great men, of whom they
expect profit and preferment, and taking away as it were the salt of the
Gospel, with which they ought to suppress and keep down the petulancy of men's
itching and lusting flesh, they connive and wink at the naughty and unlawful
actions of the sons of men. There are some such Preachers in this exulcerate
Age, who like the Heliotrope, or Lupine, are carried about together with the
Sun; whithersoever the inclinations or dispositions of the great ones bend,
thither do they bend and incline their heads also, so that you would not think
they were two, but one that spoke (like to one and the same accord in music:)
these with the Cameleon do change themselves into any color besides red and
white, that is, they can turn themselves into any form or shape besides that
which is honest and good. Hence it was that Seneca does so tax that unhappy
delicateness and niceness of his Age, and not much unlike to this of ours, I
will show thee (says he) with what poverty and scarcity great States are
pestered, and what is wanting to them that possess all things, scilicet qui
verum dicat, namely one who will tell the truth.

What will become of others who speak evil of good, and good of evil, who
put darkness for light, and light for darkness, who put bitter for sweet, and
sweet for bitter? Most assuredly a fearful woe does wait upon, and that close
at the heels of every one of these: Woe unto them (says the Apostle Jude,)
Jude 11.
for they have gone in the way of Cain, and ran greedily after the error of
Balaam for reward. This woe is a short word, a little particle, but it is of a
horrid and dreadful signification, denouncing eternal vengeance to them on
whom it shall fall as lightning from-heaven. Men, Brethren, and Fathers, I
heartily pray that this woe may not fall upon the heads of any of us, but upon
the heads of our enemies, upon the heads of the impious and impure Ministry of
the Church of Rome, who do remain in the clippings and embracings of the
Babylonish strumpet; of whose number that we may not be, it behooves us to
speak those things that become sound Doctrine, not playing the hucksters with
the word of God, as do some, but as of sincerity, but as of God in the sight
of God, speak we in Christ, and let us firmly abide in them: If we shall do
this, we shall save our selves, and those that hear us, as St. Paul told
Timothy 1 Epist. 4.16.
.

And thus I pass from the first degree of the extent, the first object of
their attention to the second Attend, or give heed to yourselves, and then to
the whole Flock, (...) Now by the word Flock the Apostle does signify the
Church, imitating therein the Prophets, and Christ himself, who have often used
the same Allegory: and indeed the use of the word in this kind is not improper,
because that it significantly comprehends all men of all sorts, as the words
House and Family, by which the Church is elsewhere pointed out. For these words
do admonish both Mlnisters and people together of their duty: Hence the
Ministers may learn, that the care and charge of all sorts of men in their
flock, do appertain unto them, neither is it lawful for them to neglect any
one, whether learned or unlearned, whether noble or ignoble, whether rich or
poor, whether bond or free. In a great house there are various and diverse
sorts of vessels; now it is not the pleasure of the Householder that his
servants should cast off the care of any of them. Again, hence the people may
learn, that all men, of what place, rank, or condition soever they be, that
they ought to be subject to the Ministry and Discipline of the Word, neither
can any one be free from this yoke, who will be accounted a sheep of the divine
flock, or one of Gods household: for that which God speaks to Ier. 1.18.
Jeremy the Prophet, is not unknown: Behold I have made thee this day a
defenced City, and an Iron pillar, and a brazen wall against the whole land,
against the Kings of Judah, against the Princes thereof, against the Priests
thereof, and against the people of the Land. Therefore their sottishnes is too
gross, and their stubborn rebellion too unbridled, who challenging a certain
immunity to themselves, do utterly deny the care of these things to appertain
to the Ministers of the Gospel.

But to what end must the Bishops or Presbyters of Ephesus attend the whole
flock? (...), says the Apostle, to feed it, which many have translated to rule
or govern the Church of God, but that interpretation is too lofty for this
Text, (says Bullinger in locum.
Bullinger) especially in our times, in which the Bishops do think the Office
of a Bishop to be naught else then unlawful desire of domineering: (...)
therefore is to Barth. Petrus Lynt. in locum.
govern after the manner of Pastors, (says Bartholomeus Petrus Lyntriensis)
neither does the Apostle darkly point at this himself, he continues that
Metaphor by which he had called the Church (...), a Flock, here he uses the
word (...), to feed. But here we must diligently observe that there is a
Synecdoche in the word feed, for that word does set forth the whole care of a
Pastor, namely, to feed with word, to govern with discipline, to defend and
keep with the rod of jurisdiction. In the same sense the word is used, Joh 20.
John 20.
, where Christ three times repeating to Peter, Feed my sheep, does exhort him
to discharge all the offices and duties of a Pastor, from whence we conclude in
the third place,

That the Church of God,

She is to be fed with food that she languish not, and through famine pine
away; she is to be governed with discipline, lest she err and wander from the
right way; she is to be defended with the rod of jurisdiction and power, that
the ravenous Wolves, and cruel wild beasts, do not violently seize upon her,
tear her, and devour her. In a word, all care by all means is to be had of her
by them, that not any the least sheep be neglected or perish through their
default.

It would be too tedious but only to point at every particular duty of a
Pastor in its order: wherefore I desiring to be brief, will content my self
with two places only, which notwithstanding shall be like unto a most clear
glass, in which every one present may see what he ought to be, and so may
conform himself accordingly. The first of which is taken out of the first
Epistle of Peter, Chapt. 5. verse. 1, 2. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2.
The Elders which are among you I exhort, who am also an Elder, feed the flock
of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but
willingly, not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind. The second is taken out
of the Ezekiel. 34.
Prophecy of the Prophet Ezekiel, Chap. 34. where the care of a good Shepherd
is notably set forth unto us, Like a faithful guide he goes before, does lead
his flock into, and does feed it in a good pasture, and in a fat pasture, he
does cause his flock to lie down also, he does seek that which was lost, he
does bring again that which was driven away, and does bind up that which was
broken, and does strengthen that which was sick, but he does destroy the fat
and the strong: and all these things he does do circumspectly and with
judgment. From which places it clearly appears, that the office and duty of
a Pastor is to feed, govern, and defend the flock of Christ, and diligently to
take care that not any the least and poorest sheep of Christ's flock be
neglected or perish through his sloth and negligence.

From hence first of all we may learn (Fathers and Brethren in Christ) that it
is most necessary that Pastors should reside with their flocks, and that it is
not lawful for them to be wanting, unless it be for a time, and that upon
great and weighty causes: because they ought (by themselves, not by their
substitutes) to feed the flock of Christ, and to keep it, and to watch over it,
and to give an account to God of every one committed to their charge which
perishes. That Pastor does not deserve the name of a Pastor, (says Cajetan)
if he do not personally attend on his slock. Cajet.
And not every master of sheep is to be called a Pastor, but he only (says
Bell ad Nep.
Bellarmine) that does feed his own sheep. And believe me (my brethren) we
should not (as many Pastors are wont to do) leave the sheep of Christ
committed to our charge, wandering in the wilderness, as the Ostridge mentioned
by Job. 39.17.
Job, leaves her Eggs in the sand; much less should we deliver them over to
ignorant hirelings, to men of no reputation, taken sometimes as it were from
the highway side, to be miserably cared for by them (as he in Gellius did his
horse to his servant Statius) to the end that we may more freely apply our
selves to idleness and to pleasure, to the gathering together of riches, and
to the heaping up of honors. Neither verily should we imagine that we have
sufficiently discharged our duty, if, as the high Priest who once every year
under the Law, entered into the Holy place; so we once (or twice at the most)
every year with geat edification (as Surius Comment. rer. in orb. gest.
speaks of the perambulation of Pius quintus) do visit our flocks here and
there scattered and dispersed, nothing fearing lest we hear that which Mary
spoke to our Savior after the death of Lazarus, from some one, at least from
our own conscience, Master, if thou had been present, my brother had not been
dead; this or that of thy flock had not perished in his sins (at least by thy
fault, and with danger of thy blood.)

Secondly, hence we may learn, that it is not sufficient for Bishops and
Pastors to reside in their Church, and with their flock, but there is a
necessity that they should watch and labor in the word and doctrine, the
Church is to be fed, (says the Apostle in this place) A necessity is laid upon
me; yea, woe is unto me if I preach not the Gospel (says he in another place)
1 Cor. 9.16.
: so also Ambrose imitating St. Paul thus imprecates: Amb. lib. de d^g sacerd.
c. 1.
Woe will be unto me (says he) if I shall not preach, or if I shall hide in the
earth the heavenly treasure received, and shall keep the light of Gods word
hidden under a bushel, and shall not manifest it unto the eyes of all men, it
being placed on a Candlestick, that afterward I may hear, Well done thou good
and faithful servant, thou have been faithful in a little, I will make thee
ruler of much, enter thou into the joy of thy Master. And Bernard breaks forth
into a complaint not much unlike it, Sermon. 30. Advent.
Hei mihi, etc. Woe is me (says he) a portion of the blood of Christ is
committed unto me, what therefore shall I do unhappy man? whither shall I turn
my self? if it shall happen that I shall negligently keep a treasure so great,
a pledge so precious, that Christ set more by it then by his own blood. Bernard.
There was a woe abiding St. Paul, Ambrose, Bernard, if they did not preach the
Gospel, and will not a woe wait upon me? will not a woe diligently attend upon
you, if ye preach not the Gospel? Yes most assuredly: wherefore suffer me (my
brethren) to exhort you in the words of Bernard, Whosoever among you have been
allotted or appointed to the work of the Ministry, take heed unto your selves,
and to the precious pledge concredite^ unto you; it is a City, watch ye, that
ye may keep and defend it; i^ is a Bride, study to deck and adorn it; it is a
flock, be ye careful to seed it.

But because there is great need in difficult and dangerous functions, that our
dull and lingering flesh should be urged and pressed with reasons, give me leave
(I beseech you) to dispatch the intention of this attention in few words, which
was the third thing observed by us in the Text, that is, the Arguments which
the Apostle does use, that so he might make the Elders of Ephesus more
attentive to, and more intent upon the charge committed unto them.

The first of which is drawn from the office, Bishops, that is, Overseers, or
Watchmen, or Superintendents, this calls you to attention: for Augustine
ingenuously confesses a Bishop to be Aug. lib. de Civit. Dei.
nomen oneris, non bonoris, a name of labor, not of honor, and being moved
with that spirit, he does after this sort exhort his fellow Bishops: Homil. 4.
A Bishop ought continually to ponder with himself what a weighty and heavy
charge lies upon him, and what an account he shall give of it to his Lord and
Master; and lest that by any means a Bishop should abate or diminish his
labor, Christ does compare a Preacher both to a Fisher, and also to a Pastor,
whose life as it is painful and full of labor, so is it a life (above others)
subject to storms and tempests.

The second Argument is taken from the Author of the Office, holy Ghost: for
the holy Ghost has made you Bishops, or Presbyters, he is the Ordainer,
Consecrator, and Metropolitan of you all. For if you be Bishops indeed, and not
in name only, not Man but the holy Ghost has made you Bishops, and therefore
you sin against him, that has made you Bishops, viz. the holy Ghost, if you
attend not to that which he has appointed you. And who, or what is he that
shall escape scotfree, who does sin against God, and does neglect the
vocation of the holy Ghost? If one man sin against another, the Judge shall
judge him: but if a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him?
says Eli to his sons 1 Samuel 2.25.
. O let this very cogitation as a whetstone more and more sharpen and provoke
your attention.

The third Argument is taken from the excellency of this duty, neither shall
they be excuseable whom God has made chief Stewards of his family, unless by
how much higher the degree of honor is, they shall answer to so great dignity
and honor, that is, unless they shall diligently and valiantly act their
parts.

The fourth Argument is taken from the dignity of the Church; Dei, the facture
or workmanship of God without any price or cost, he spoke the word and all
these things were made; yea verily, it is more, nempe (...), it is the purchase
or merchandise of God, it cost him a price; neither did God purchase it with
any price, it was not with corruptible things, with gold or silver, the Church
cost more, much more, he purchased it with blood; neither was it the blood of a
whole Hecatomb, it was not with the blood of beasts, nor of mere man, nor
(that I may speak it in a word) with another blood, but with his own Hoc
quidem certum est expl^canda haec esse per (...): quod dicendi genus non ita
est (...), neque est reprobandum (ut post Eutychetem impic quidam dicere ac
scribere audent) sed summam nostrae consolationis continet, illud nimirum
diserte explicans quod ait Johannes, Verbum factum esse carnem: Ita ut qui vere
Deus est, vere and Deus and home sit factus. Beza in locum.
proper and most precious blood, has he purchased it, from whence it appears
how precious the Church is to God.

And truly there is nothing that ought to urge Pastors with more cheerfulness
and alacrity to apply themselves to their duty, then if they consider that the
price of Christ's blood is committed unto them: for hence it follows, unless
they faithfully employ their labor and travel for the Churches good, that
they will not only be found guilty of the destruction and ruin of souls, but
also of sacrilege, because they have profaned the sacred blood of the Son
of God, and as much as in them lies, have made void the redemption purchased by
him. These words (my beloved brethren) unless you have drunk a potion composed
of Mandrakes, will stir you up, these words will make you attentive, these
words will awaken your attention, unless it be altogether dead: for all care of
a thing so dear and precious, will fall short of its worth and dignity.

Last of all, speaks to the Hebrews. Bone Deus! Good God, how great, Heb.
13.17.
how great is the labor that must be undergone by you in the discharge of this
duty, what watchings are to be endured, how many troubles to be fustained, how
many difficulties to be swallowed by you, who must at last give an account to
God himself for the reasonable flock (as Chrysostom calls it) redeemed with
the blood of Christ the Son of God, the souls of men, and that a far more
exact accouat then ever Jacob did to Laban as concerning his lost sheep? and
must expect from him either a Crown of immarcescible glory, the reward of your
attention, or else torture and torment intolerable to him that feels it, and
interminable to him that sustaineth it: torment (I say) no way to be endured,
nor never to be ended, as a punishment of your negligence and sloathfulnesse.
He that has separated you to this office, will lay up for you in that day,
either a portion with the Saints if ye shall be diligent, or with the
hypocrites if ye shall be remiss and negligent.

And what does now remain? Behold life and death, behold heaven and hell,
behold either eternally to weep, or eternally to rejoice, is in the hands of
your attention. Attend therefore that the consideration if not of your duty, at
least of this your danger, may make you solicitous.

And these at length are the things (Men, Fathers, i. e. to your life, to your
doctrine; to your life, that it be blameless, to your doctrine, that it be
sound and saving, to all the flock to feed it, govern it, defend it; of the
intention of this attention, to wit, with what arguments the Apostle does
intend, i. e. make this attention more attentive, and intentive, 1. from the
Office it self: 2. from the Author of this office: 3. from the Excellency of
this office: 4. from the dignity of the Church: 5. and lastly, from the account
that you are to give unto God.

Which if I have not handled so fully as might have been expected, I desire
that this may be imputed to the fertility of the Argument, which has made me
poor by its plenty. If by the prolixity of my speech I have been offensive, I
hope your candid clemency will easily pardon me, whilst with it self it does
thoroughly and exactly weigh the rich and ample vein of this sacrrd Text, and
that St. Paul the author of these words, being to take his last farewell of the
Elders of Ephesus and Miletus, he did spinne them forth in length, with long
sighs, and showers of tears.

The Lord bless you, and keep you, the Lord make his face to shine upon you,
and be gracious unto you; the Lord lift up his countenance upon you, and give
you peace.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God, the communion of of the
holy Spirit be always with you all. Amen.

Glory to God alone.
FINIS.

