CONTROVERSY* LOGIC* Or The Method to come to truth in debates of Religion.

Written by THOMAS WHITE, GENTLEMAN.

ANNO 1659.

THE INTRODUCTION.
MR. John Biddle (who is represented to me, as one of the most learned and most
rational, among the enemies of the Roman Church) wrote a book wherein he
declared what opinion he had framed to himself out of Scripture, concerning
the blessed Trinity. And that, not out of Scripture alone; but also out of the
Fathers of the first three Centuries; smoothly skipping over (according to the
usual actiuity of a Protestant Doctor) above a thousand years at a leave. By
which proceeding he pretends, that neither the Caluinist; nor any other who
sticks to pure Scripture; nay, not the Protestant himself, who extends his
authority to the Fathers of the first three hundred years, and no further;
have any law or right to censure him, seeing he maintains all the Principles
of both these sorts of persons, and offers to justify out of them by
disputation whatsoever he has written. Excepting which two pretended
authorities (namely, of Scripture, and of the Fathers of the first three
Centuries: both of them, privately interpreted) there is nothing but mere
willfulness to move any of the forementioned persons, to believe firmly any
conclusion of faith and Religion, or to censure rationally any who hold the
contrary opinions.

This man (not withstanding his so conformable plea, and the maine position of
liberty of Prophesying; which is the Basis of all those who refuse the judgment
of a speaking Church) we see detained prisoner by public authority, and his
book burned by the hand of the public Executioner.

This begott in me (as I conceive it did the like in sundry others) a desire
and curiosity of speaking with him. Which not being able to compass by my
slender power; My next work, was to read his book. After which, I must not
deny him this commendation, that, supposing the principle of every man's
choosing his Religion out of Scripture Grammatically intrepreted (at is the
manner of all those who recede from the authority of tradition) he proceeds
very rationally and consequently. Neither do I imagine that any of his
persecutors is able to give a satisfactory answer to what he has written. And
this has bin confirmed in me, since I have understood, that some have set out
works against him, which have not afforded the discreeter part even of their
own followers, the content they expected from them; And that others have
attempted to do the like, but have bin so discreet as to suppress their
endeavors, upon their finding the success did not correspond to their wishes.

This has made the book be esteemed exceeding dangerous to Christian
Religion, by those who thought they have no rule to know what is solid and
what is not in Matters of Religion, yet are by the force of custom and consent
of the greatest part of the Christian name, detained from renouncing the
Godhead of the whole Trynity; as esteeming it the maine foundation (for a
material point) of Christian belief, and that which has brought forth during
to many ages those heroyke actions and noble effects, wherewith the Christian
world is enriched, above the neglected times of Paganism.

Now, this consideration, or rather experiment; as it convinced clearly, that
disputations between all such as adhere solely to Scripture, are for the most
part merely vain and fruitless; (for, witty men will never commit too great
a folly, as to maintain by Scripture what is palpably and vngloseably against
it) so, it made me reflect, that even the disputations which we Catholics do
use against Protestants, are seldom, and only by accident, profitable: And by
farther rumination, my thoughts sprunge out the ensuing treabise.

I may not conclude this preamble, without reflecting upon Mr. Biddles appeal
to the Fathers of the first three Ages; which exclusion of those of the
following Ages: Not because it is his; but because it is common to him and to
the Protestants; and ever to the learnedest Caluinists, as may be seen in the
works of Chamier and Daille. Truly, to my thinking, it is a most ridiculous
and unreasonable proposition. For, I would feign know how it can fall into the
brains of any indifferently discoursine man, to doubt whiter the Fathers of
the fourth Age did not know what the Fathers of the former Ages held, better
then we can discover it out of their writings that remain to us. Then, more of
them were extant; Neither was there any cauils (or at least very few) which of
them were true, which suppositions: The style, the phrase, the circumstances,
the practices of the times wherein those Fathers wrote, were then better
understood: And (which is the chief o fall) there were yet witnesses alive,
who either had known them, or at least knew others that had known them and
had conuersed with them so that, by being acquainted with the opinions of the
men, they could not doubt of the sense and interpretation of such hard passages
as by inaduertence (natural, even to the most diligent and most wary writers)
could not chose but sometimes fall from their pens.

These were the advantages of the 4.th Age, over this wherein we now live. And
consequently, if we can ask the 4.th Age what it was that these fathers held;
and may have their assured answer to our question; There can be no comparison
between that evidence, and what we can guess at out of those scrappes and
remnants of dark expressions, which in many cases must be the subject of our
enquiry, if we examine their writings. I will give you for an example, this
book of Master Biddle, that has occasioned the following discourse. Read
the testimomyes he alleges: they will seem to you, the very contexture of
the treatises out of which he has drawn them; so large in some places; so
continuedly, page after page: (whereas, generally, our Protestant citations,
are bur of a line or two, spoken upon the by, whiles the Authors discourse
concerns an other business:) And yet never the less, nothing can be more
manifest, then that the doctrine he pretends to abett by those testimonies,
was not the opinion of the fathers he alleges for it. The council of Nice,
called the Great; that is, the Universal Christian world, with open mouth and
one consent, condemning the Arrians of nouelty; And St. Athanasius, so many
times vpbraiding them to their faces, that their progenitors were only Caiphas
and Artemas and such like, and that their Clergy men were feign to learn how
to profess their faith and how to speak; a certain token of their having bin
formerly taught the contrary. The like, in effect, is in all other
controversies between Protestants and us. for, in any of them, the 4.th Age
does testify that the doctrine it holds, is descended from their
Forefathers, and is in quiet possession of belief in the Church, and that the
opinion they dispute against is a nouuelty: they do thereby declare the
doctrine of the precedent age, more efficaciously, then any testimonies we can
draw out of the writings of that precedent age, are able to convince.

Thus (rational Reader) thou see what has bin my motive to spinne this
thridde, for thee to work thy self out of the ambiguities and labirinths
wherein our country is at present so perplexed in matters concerning Religion:
the design of it is, to make thee discern, that disputation at large, as it
is commonly managed, is Needelesse, Vselesse and dangerous. Needelesse; because
there are other means; Easy, for those who are otherwise busied, and need
believing, and clear, for those who will take the pain and employ the time
requisite for their instruction. Vselesse, because neither the ouercommer, does
gain his cause, nor does the weaker loose it: since in such a disputation,
nothing is compared, but what the two Antagonists did say, or (at most) could
have said, which is little or nothing, to the maine cause it self. Besides;
such a running discourse, may well fill the auditors heads, but can hardly ever
clear them, there wanting, time, rest, and quiet, to settle a mature and
solid judgment. And lastly, such disputation is dangerous, because in
encounters of that natures wit, tongue, and chance, do for the most part bear
a great sway, and have a maine stroke, and oftentimes, do break and disorder
the better cause; and the weaker sort of hearers (apt to judge by the event) do
take sinister impressions, and receive damage, at the indiscretion or
misfortune of an ouersett disputant. In a word, the scope of this short
discourse, is to show, that quietness and solitude; in which, our brain is
serene, and our spirits are calm, and a man has his best wits present to
him: Not, public disputes, wherein usually, is nothing but wrangling, and
provoking one another into distempers and mutual animosities: Is the most
proper means to discern truth, and especially in matters of Religion. And I
dare confidently say, that whosoever shall take this course, will find the
fruit of it: which I heartily wish to all those who stand in need of it.

As for Mr. Biddles book: If those of his adversaries who are separated from
the Catholic Church, are able to confute it by their principles, that is to
say, if they can show, not only that the truth which they maintain is more
plain in scripture then his errors are, but that it is so evident that the
explications which may be brought for his party are not receiuable; and so,
that his errors may be condemned out of the force of scripture alone: Then,
Catholic writers will not need to engage their pens against him. But (if I
am not much mistaken) whosoever shall go about it, will find it a hard task,
the question being of such a nature as requires a seeming contradiction in
words to express it; and so, the knott of it lies in determining, which part
of the seeming contradictory passages, ought to be explicated by the other.
Now, how such a controversy can be decided by bare words, I can not
comprehend. If then, those adversaries do prove to weak too maintain this
cause; and the inefficaciousnesse of single scripture, in this so maine a
point, do become evident; It may be necessary to use Catholic arguments for
the defense of Christian truth. Unto which, the following considerations may
prepare thee.

The first REFLECTION. What, Religion is.
TO understand a right, the nature of disputation about Religion; we must first
know, what Religion it self is. We due not here take it in the sense of
Schoole-diuines, for a special virtue, by which we perform the honors due to
almighty God, to his friends the Saints, and to what ever holy things do
belong to him and his. But, Religion, in our present treaty, signifies a
skill or art of doctrine coming to aeternall bliss. To understand this the
better, we are to remember, that it has ever bin received as an undoubted
truth among the true-beleeuers both in the law of nature and in that of Moses,
as also more evidently among Christians, that man has two life's: The one, in
this state of mortality and corruption, while we live under the laws of change
and of necessity in this world: the other, which we expect after the end of
this, to dure for ever, in great bliss and happiness if we behave our selfs
here as we ought to do; or in great miseries and torments, if we neglect our
duties in this world.

Now, the life of the next world, being to last for ever; and the consequences
of it for good and bad, being so highly exalted above the contentments and
afflictions of our present life; it follows, that the art or skill of
steering a right course toward it, is incomparably more necessary and more
esteemable, then any art or learning whatsoever belonging to the affairs of
this world. Beyond the skill of trading and of gaining wealth, in which the
Eastern and Arabian wizardes place their wisdom: Beyond the out witting and
the over powering glory of the Potentats and State. Masters of the Earth; whose
felicity, is to ensnare the world into the necessily of a wilful bondage to
their unlimited ambition; beyond the selfe-pleasing contentment of those who
settling in their own nest, do laugh at the restless negotiations of such as
turmoile in the waves of fortune, and to satisfy themselves with the enjoying
of homebred and easily-compassed delights of body and of mind. So that, the
skill designed by the name of Religion, in our proposed discourse, is of an
excellency, and of a necessity, not to be paralleled by any other whatsoever;
and being compared to all others, it outweigheth their worth, beyond all
measure and proportion; and at that rate deserves to be esteemed by us; and to
be sought after with our whole force, and with our utmost endeavors.

Besides what we hitherto said; Philosophers do offer us yet another
consideration, not to be neglected. They make a general division of man's
actions, into two kinds: whereof the one, they seem to say are the actions of
man as he is man But that the others, do proceed from him as he is endowed
with some particular quality; yet withal, that such quality is proper only to
humane nature. As for example; no living creature but man, ca^ be a smith, a
carpenter, a Pilot, a musician, a Philosopher: And yet, none of the actions
peculiar to these persons, are in themselves considered to be the Actions of
Man as he is Man. But if any Action be prudently, valiantly, justly, or
temperately, performed; they say that action proceeds from him who does it,
as he is Man. But truly, according to my judgment, this is not properly a
division of Actions as Actions; but rather, of the degrees or of the qualities
of the same kind of actions. For, the smith and the Pilot cannot exercise their
respective trades, but that their working must needs be either in convenient
measure and circumstances, or out of such; and accordingly, what they do must
be either prudent or imprudent, just or unjust, etc: So that, to be virtuous or
vicious, is a quality common to all sorts of Actions; not a special kind of
Action: And yet, an Action is said to proceed from Man as Man, as far as it
is virtuous or vicious. Neither is there any Action so proper to virtue and
vice, as not to include some other nature within it self. Fortitude, requires
some action or passion to gouverne, and wherein to exercise courage and
stoutness; temperance, has pleasures to moderate, as in meat and drink,
which belong so an other faculty; Justice, has civil actions to regulate,
which are determined by laws and by customs: And Prudence, is a common eye
over all. Yet possibily, though the actions be the same, the sciences wherein
they are concerned may never the less be diverse: As, the skill of Music or of
Logike, is very different from the science which teaches to make use of them
with moderation in due time and place, So, Philosophers assign Arts to the
one; and the science of Moral to the other. Wherefore it is apparent, that
what in Christian language we call Religion, is correspondent to that which the
heathen wizards termed Moral Philosophy. Correspondent, I say, or rather
proportionable; with the imparity of pagan darkness, to the light of truth
delivered us by almighty God. For, as the next world was altogether obscure and
unknown to those old Philosophers; So was also by consequence, the true end of
humane life and action: And therefore, all their skill and study, fell short,
and was notable to bring them to the least action perfect in the way of nature;
since it was not possible for any action to be perfect in respect of nature,
which not only missed but not so much as aimed at her true End; and
consequently, was incapable of reaching to the circumstances due thereunto.

Now, that which I draw from the mention I have made of these Philosophers, is,
that Reigion is in proportion to Christian life, what they did esteem Moral
Philosophy to be toward a good or happy life in naeure.

The second REFLECTION. How, Religion is naturally to be bred in mankind.
FRom these premises, it follows clearly, that if Man's nature were in its
due perfection, Religion would be as well known and with as much security
assented to, as are now the common principles of nature and of natural living.
For, since according to the maxim of Philosophers, no one action can be
performed by man as man, but that it must be either virtuous or vicious; and by
consequence, in every passage of his life, a rule is necessary for him, by which
to square and regulate his proceeding, that it may be virtuous: It is manifest,
that if he be not very secure and perfect in this discipline, he must
unavoidably fail and swerue from virtue and nature, and consequently, he would
not be complete in the course of nature nor enjoy that perfect State which is
conformable to his nature. Therefore, enjoy the perfection of human nature, it
is necessary that he have all security of his belief, and a complete rule for
his actions: and consequently, the principles of Religion, ought to be as
evident to him as the principles of nature.

No less is evident out of the former part of our discourse. For, if Religion
be the skill of obtaining beatitude or heavenly glory; and if this be the end
of our birth and of our living in this world; It follows, that our very life
here, can not be so directed as it ought to be, unless we have the science
and rule of Religion. And because the right direction of our life to aeternall
Beatitude, is of greater value and worth then our continuation in this world,
It is evident that the science of attaining Beatitude, ought to be more clear
unto us, then the skill of guiding our selfs in our corporal life Wherefore,
seeing that we find, Religion is not now so clear and certain unto us, as
are the Principles of our natural and civil life, we may easily gather that
we are not in the right temper which human nature requires.

And from hence one may argue, that if the happy state in which our first
Parents were created, had continued till their multiplication had fills the
earth, the knowledge of God, and other principles for gaining so celestial
bliss, would have bin as natural to them, as the providing of meat, clothes,
houses, and such natural accommodations are to us now; and would have bin
derived from Parents to children with the same connaturallnes, and would have
bin embraced by the children with a like or greater heat of affection: And
that the unhappy apple, was the cause it is not now so; as it likewise was, of
all other disorders in mankind, whereof this is not the least, if not the
source of most of them, as they who look into the matter, will easily discern.

The due way therefore to attain the knowledge of Religion, is by nature. Such
nature I mean, as we may obscure to work in children when they learn their
first languages; which, as it is not effected without the delivering of them by
their mothers and nurses, so neither is it without the endeauours of the little
souls laboring to express their thoughts and minds. And nature has in her
such principles, that neither the one party nor the other, can give over the
pains, till they have brought the effect to pass. Afther the same; manner in
that happy state of innocence, children would have bin trained up in Codlinesse
as perfectly as in natural qualities, without any violent straining of them
thereunto; and as it were, even before they should have bin awarie of it. And
this is clearly deduced out of an axiom that Philosophers do use in the
beginning of Logic, where they teach us Logic ought to be learned before
other sciences, because it is an instrument or method to obtain sciences by,
and consequently, ought to be possessed before one sets himself to the
gaining of science. So, Religion being the instrument and method to guide us
for the well acting of our life's, when once we are come to the use of reason. It
is clear that it ought to be planted in us, before we come to the age and use
of discretion. Again since no action ought to be exempt from the direction of
Religion; not, even the very first, It can not be doubted but that Religion
ought to take possession of our hearts, even before Reason* Neither do I speak
this as a thing that should have bin only in the state of Paradise, but as
what is connaturall to us here, and is practiced by many pious Mothers, who
teach their children their prayers, and stamp in their minds a deep conceit
of God and of heaven, before they are capable of judging in matters concerning
temporal commodities. So that it is plain, that it belongs truly to the
nature of Religion, to be propagated in man kind by discipline and by delivery
over from father to son, and to be embraced in the mere virtue of such a
reception through the natural credulity of children to their parents and
teachers. Yet I do not hereby exclude, but that as riper years come on, so
they ought to gain stronger grounds and maxims to confirm what they first
accepted of in a more simple manner.

But here peradventure it will be expected; that, since we say we mean not in
this discourse by the term Religion, the virtue so named by Divines but the
skill of attaining to eternal bliss; we should give the reason why we call
this Religion. The answer hereunto is not difficult; for, since the end we
ought to aim at in this life, belongs to the next; And since we know so very
little of that; (even the great Clerks; much less, the ordinary sort of
Christians, whose chief endeavors are bestowed upon their temporal
concernements;) It was requisite for our nature, that this science should be
delivered us from God himself: And coming from him, the most conf^rmable
course was that it should be done by way of command; that only, becoming his
greatness, and taking away all possibility of dispute in us. Which being so
effected, you see, the art of obtaining happiness, was now become a matter of
obedience to Almighty God.

Besides; the object of our Beatitude being the divine essence; the way to
attain it, must consequently be an ardent affection to Almighty God: And such
affection, proceeding from a high esteem of him: And the performance of
duties, and the acknowledgements of the greatenesse of him we honor, flowing
naturally from such esteem: It follows, that the chief, if not the whole
skill of acquiring bliss; must consist, in making due acknowledgements, and in
framing vehement affections toward the Godhead. And thus you see, that the
skill which before we seemed to make different from the virtue of Religion, as
preceding and directing it; is now found to be coincident or convertible with
it. And though the name of Religion seemed to be spoken aequivocally of the
two; and in truth, is so, seeing the notions are quite diverse: Yet, because the
things that are executed by both, are the same; the name, is justly and fitly
derived from the one to the other; and so necessarily, that without due
consideration, we can not find in what one signification differs from the
other.

The third REFLECTION. That the Religion, without which there is no salvation,
is but one.
OUt of what we have hitherto discoursed, it is evident, that, if according to
the course of all other arts and sciences, and according to the custom and
rule of nature in all her other proceedings, the way of conquering the high
walls of heaven by our violent affections, be but one: That is to say, that as
our nature and her acts and her defects are proportionable one to another, and
of one kind in all men; so the happiness all men aim at being but one; also
the best way unto it ought to be but one; and the defects from the best, one
proportionate to an other, that is, the way of all men to bliss proportionably
considered; ought to be but one then; it follows clearly, that if God
intends to direct us wisely, and conformably to our Nature, toward the End
he created us for (which he must of necessity do, under forfeiture of his great
wisdom and goodness; should he make nature, and us in it, with design to
bring us to our eternal well-being, and not use the means for it) his
commandes to us, can be no other then of such things as by their essences do
integrate the straight and direct way, in which (did we know the causes of
things) we should, of our own inclinations, and by the skill of moral
Philosophy, both march our selves, and guide others in our charge. And out of
this, we may conclude manifestly, that Religion is but one only: which if we
hit on and put in execution, we become happy; but if we miss of it, we become
unhappy; whether the fault of missing it, be ours or no. Not, that I suppose
the missing can happen without our fault (which is an other disputation) But,
that this rule is universally true, that whosoever has not the true Religion,
miscarrieth and fails of obtaining bliss.

By this we see how dangerous the rock is, to which so many seek for refuge
of their shippe-wracked consciences, solacing themselves with such discourses
as these: God is good and merciful, and therefore commands not
impossibilities, but is content if I do my endeavor to fulfill his precepts.
I, for my part, am very ready if I knew them: Nay, I labor and study to find
them out, and yet can not: Therefore why should I trouble my self any further?
Rather let me cast away all anxiousnesse, and trust to the mercies of so
unlimited a goodness.

For, if what we have hither to labored to evince, be true; namely, that Gods
commands are not mere voluntary ones; but of such actions as do naturally
breed the effect for which they are commanded; then, labor as much as you
will, if you do not that which is commanded, that is, if you take not the true
way of going to heaven, you shall never come there. The prescriptions of the
Doctor to the Apothecary, are commandes: But if the Apothecary (though he
endeavor never so much) do not mingle the right drugges, and temper them
according to the Doctors prescriptio^s, the Physic will not prove healthful
to the Patient. The husbandmans prescriptions to his kind, are commands; Yet
if his servant (though he work by his greatest wits) should sow pease
instead of wheat, the croppe will not come up fit for the Masters table. So in
all other trades and arts; It is not enough to do our endeavor; But the
things themselves must be really performed; or else the desired effects will
not follow. Then assuredly, those who content themselves with this cold
comfort, that God is merciful, do make less account of that so important
business of their salvation, then they do of those meaner profits which arise
out of vulgar arts and occupations.

These two then do stand very well together* that the same thing may be a
command, and withal, a natural action toward the end for which it is
commanded. Nay, ordinarily and regularly it is always so; and no command is
otherwise unless where there is some fault, either in the commander or in the
subject. The Generals commandes, are of doing such things as are ordered to
safety and victory; the Statesmans for keeping peace, and for procuring plenty;
the Bishops, of those actions which breed virtue and good life in the people;
Yet, all these are commands; and have therefore power of forcing obedience,
because they are (or at least ought to be supposed) such as of themselves are
necessary for the common good; in respect of which one man subjecteth himself
to another. And from hence, the sillyness of this excuse is more evident. For,
if it be natural to all good commands, that they be of actions conformable to
the end for which they are given; and, that the command be made for the action,
as the action is for the end (which must be in Gods commands; by which he
orders us to eternal life: his commanding, being the Idea to all actions;
and this matter, being the principal on which he exercises that power) it is
evidently convincing, that whether the command be possible or impossible,
known or unknown; if it be not fullfilled, the action is not done, without
which the end can not be obtained: And consequently, the party becomes damned;
Not because he did not obey the command; but because he did not the action, nor
followed the way, necessary to salvation: which if he had done without command,
it would have saved him; for it is in virtue of doing the action, that the
fullfilling of the command saves all those whom it does save; and without it,
none are saved.

The fourth REFLECTION. That, Religion is certain: And the means to attain
unto it.
THe case standing thus, that either we must do what God has commanded us in
this world, or else must suffer his indignation in the next; And, that there is
no excuse for ignorance: I need not urge to any one who is sensible of their
souls interest, that the knowledge of the law of God ought to be certain, and
undoubted, both in it self, and to us: That is, that every one, according to
his particular circumstances ought to have a constant and immutable assurance,
that it is Gods law in which he walks: And, that in the Church, there are
means left by our blessed Savior to secure us of this truth, (for every one,
according to his capacity) if the execution be conformable to the principles.

The first part is so clear, that time were spent in vain to declare it. For,
since the end of our faith and knowledge, is the observing in fact, and not
only in will, the commandments of God; with the loss of bliss, and
incurring eternal damnation, if it be not done in effect. And since on the
other side, it is impossible that he who is uncertain whither he be in the
truth or no, and has but a changeable opinion concerning the law of God,
should constantly and firmly in all his works perform that law: It is
evident that such a man is not fit for Christian life; but is like one that
whilst he holds the plough, is still looking back; nor can he hope for any
thing from God, because his faith is wavering and unstable: In his practice he
can not choose but be carried too and fro with every wind of opinion; Now
forwards, now backewardes, and never steer any constant course toward
heaven and bliss: Whereas this rule of good life (as is before declared) is of
a nature that it comprehends all our actions, the highest and the lowest, the
first and the last, and all that are comprised between these extremes.

As for the second part of what we have above said; Namely, that God has left
in his Church, means for all sorts of people to come to this degree of
certainty; for every one, according to his growth: It is of it self manifest
to all such as have so reverent a conceit of God, as to think he does not his
works by halfes, nor leaves mankind (for whom he made the world) destitute in
the chief point, and in that for which (as for his sole end) he created man
himself; to wit, for bringing him to bliss and eternal happiness. For,
since man's nature is made, in the most excellent part of it, to require
evidence; and that it is so laudable, in matters of Geometry, Astronomy,
Physics, Metaphysics, and whatsoever is of great importance, not to be
satisfied without evidence and certainty, and to aim at it with all our
strength; and that truly our understanding were abused, if it should be forced
to accept of what it does not clearly see, and is not certainly assured of
(its nature, being made to see, and its essence being a power of seeing) How
can any rational discourser think that God has failed us in this so
material and principal concernement? Certainly, no man of judgment, can
suspect it.

But, to satisfy even hard believers, let us look into particulars: And
presently we find that men, in respect of knowledge, are of two sorts; some,
who by themselves are capable of understanding truths, others who live upon
trust of the former kind of knowing men. Of this latter sort, are all they whom
we call scholars: who at the first, do trust their masters, till themselves
grow up to the ripeness and ability of knowing and of teaching others. And
much more, all those who arrive not so forward as to be scholars; which, in
some respect or other, are the greatest part of mankind. The Physician,
trusts the Pilot when he is at sea, the Soldier, when he is in an army, the
baker for his bread, and the brewer for his drink; the Gentleman, trusts his
husbandman for his corn, the Physician for his health, the Lawyer for his
suites, and every master in his kind. Now, in matter of Religion, God has
given us an advantage, which is not in any of the trades or sciences necessary
to our temporal life. For, he has provided us, not some one man, or some
meeting of a dozen or twenty (which is a great co^sult, in other affairs) but
he has given us a whole world of men to consult withal, and that at one
meeting. Consider how vast the Church is, which holds communion with the Sea
of Rome. All that, at once, is your warrant. You can not imagine they will tell
you a lie for they speak to you, not in words, but in their lives; and
therefore they must be cosened themselves, or else they can not cose^ you;
there, you have a fidelity pledged unto you, beyond the certainty that Euclide
or Archimedes could afforded you. For, it is more impossible, that so great a
part of mankind should live in a continual hypocrisy and dissembling, then
that the surest consequences Geometry can make should be false. If you seek
skill; that Church is full of learned men in all kinds of Sciences that any
other can pretend unto. Search but the Booksellers shoppes, and you shall find
a hundred Catholic Authors, for one of any other Communion; thousands,
continually studying in Colleges and Religious houses, whose perpetual search
may justly challenge the probability of knowing truth. If you look after
outward piety, and the means of preserving and increasing of learning, you
shall find it there in a higher degree then in all the communities of other
sects. So that if one may rely upon outward signs, there is no comparison
between any other company of men, and that Church. And consequently, it is
beyond all doubt or question, unto what authority, a discreet person who can
not, or will not take the pains to look himself into particular points,
ought to adhere under pain of forfeiting his judgment. If he be never so
little conversant in the learning of the world, he must needs be a madman if
in the way of modern authority he follows any other, or so much as
misdoubteth there can be any other comparable to this.

As for the other sort of men, who of themselves are able and curious to look
into the veins in which the roots of Religion do run: Let them but reflect
on the change that has been made in the world since Christian Religion began
to flourish, that is, since Constantines time, and since the first 300. years
after Christ, and they may demonstratiuely conclude, that seeing the long space
of 4. or 5 thousand years of nature, was not able to produce those great and
noble effects, which we evidently see have sprung up so abundantly in so
far shorter a time; the finger of God must necessarily be in this time; and
that Protestants; by rejecting it as Papisticall, do confess plainly that all
the great effects of Christian Religion, are proper to those whom they term
Papists. And seeing that the Ages since the first three after Christ, are the
whole flourishing time of the Christian Church, this their disclayming them,
will appear unto any understanding man, to be the very renouncing of
Christianity it self.

Now, if he who pretends to knowledge, be able to manage humane nature, and
to see how a freedom of heart from the pleasures and cares of this world, is
that which brings all good to man, both in temporal and in spiritual
considerations: And that this freedom can not be introduced, without a settled
assurance of the goods of the next world; nor that persuasion, be wrought by
any other means then by faith and by the course which Christ took for it: He
will, not only forbear admiring, that the world, though fraught with arts in
the first 2000. years, should deserve the just revenge of the deluge-waters;
But will also discern, that as in the latter 2000. years before Christ, it
had advanced nothing at all; So, had it endured 4000. years more without the
light that Christ brought into it, it would never have grown better; The love
of worldly goods, exalting arts and civility to a certain pitch; and then by
its increase into immoderation, reducing all back to barbarism; Or at least,
floating mankind in a certain compass too and fro, and never permitting it
to grow into any height of perfection.

The fifth REFLECTION. How, Christian Religion has been propagated and
conserved.
THe threade of our discourse, has by this time woven us into the
consideration of the means where by one may come to the true Religion. In
which, two inquiries occur unto us: the one, concerning the beginning and
first publication of Religion: the other, concerning the circumstances that
belong unto it, now, in the present age wherein we live. As for the former,
we, having our Saviors command to express that it ought to be done by
preaching, and having the testimony of all Christians ever since, that it was
so performed, there remains no place to question, how Christian Religion came
first into the hearts of mankind. The Apostles, had (by Gods special gift)
the knowledge of all languages. By this, they could speak to all natitions:
And so, it is generally understood, they did, and that by word of mouth, they
propagated through all the world, that faith which themselves had learned from
Jesus Christ. But, that they carried any books about with them; or, that they
did set the nations they preached unto, on learning those languages in which
the scripture was written, there is no mention at all: Nor is it either
probable, or possible, that they did so, it is well known, that many of the
Nations which at that time became Christian, had no writing or reading in many
ages after. And so, it is evident that the general propagation of Christian
faith was by vocal preaching, and by vocal tradition, from father to son,
of the doctrine first planted among them by the Apostles. And indeed, supposing
Nations to be unlearned, it is clear that there can be no other ordinary way
of conueying this necessary discipline to posterity.

No doubt but the method of the first institution, is in a manner Ideall to
the following continuation: which is but a kind of repetition of the beginning.
And so, we might justly conclude without any further pains, that the
conservation of Religion ought to be likewise effected by original delivery;
that is to say, by Tradition. But, the very thing it self, affords us more
light to see evidently the truth of our Conclusion. For, looking into the
nature of that which is to be done, we shall see plainly that it is impossible
it should be effected by any other way. What is it we mean by planting
Religion in a Country, but that the People of it should have the knowledge of
the way how to go to Heaven?

Let us then examine what signifies this word People. There are two Notions
of it. The first is, that it signifies the men, the women, and the Children of
a common wealth or nation; so comprising all the individuals of humane Nature,
that live in that nation. Now of these it is the property of children to
believe what is told them, without doubting wheter it be true or no, or ever
judging of the thing proposed. As for women; a great part of them,
participateth of the same quality; And the most of them are governed by their
husbands, esteeming them (if they have any worth in them) the best of men. The
third member of this division, falls under the second notion of the word
People, and single, is the whole subject of it: for it signifies a multitude
of men, employed in seeking and in attending to their livelihoods and
subsistence, not looking after learning, or applying themselves to study; for
which the greatest part of them wants either leisure, or capacity, or
inclination. Now, in which sense soever this word is taken, I^ appears
manifestly, that Tradition is the necessary and only means to establish faith
in the people. For, the Maxim is well known, that he who is not of an art,
must (in what belongs to that) trust those whose particular skill and
profession that art is. And thus it is evident, that the People taken according
to the explication given, must rely upon an Authority, for knowing what is the
true Religion, and what is not.

But when we once come to Authority; there is no pretense for any, but for that
of the Catholic Church, she only can speak authoritatiuely, all others
speaking from their own heads; and she only, professing to speak from the
mouth of Christ and of his Apostles; she only, having had the sense and
meaning of the Apostles delivered to her; because she only has continued
ever since their times, all the rest, having nothing but dead words, and the
killing letter delivered to them, whiles for the sense of those words, they
have no further recourses them to their own imaginations and discourses.

In the next place, let us consider, what is the knowledge of heaven* And our
first remarke will tell us, that it is such a knowledge, as God himself was
forced to take man's flesh upon him to teach it us; because it was so high and
transcendent beyond all that our eyes had ever seen, or that our ears had
ever heard, or that our imaginations had ever conceived or fancyed: that a
less authority then Gods essential verity, was not enough to settle our
belief upon so sublime and so admirable mysteries. Now, this being so, can we
imagine, that the discussion of ambiguous words, in which such incomprehensible
mysteries are hidden, should be left to the fancyfull changeableness of human
apprehensions? Who sees not, that man's understanding must of necessity always
incline the balance toward those things he uses to be conversant with,
that he is wont to see, to hear, and to conceive? Which is in effect directly
contrary to the reason of our Saviors coming. And accordingly, we daily meet
with some that laugh at the doctrine of the real presence of Christ's Body in
the blessed Sacrament, some at the blessed Trinity; every one, framing grounds
to himself, according as his fancy drives him, or as the company he
co^verseth with, draws him. Now, if the scanning of ambiguous words will not
serve to settle the belief of Christian doctrine in the hearts of mankind. It
is clear, that nothing but Tradition can perform that work, since there
remains nothing else that can pretend there to: And consequently, nothing but
Tradition can be the means to plant and continue Religion in the world.

Lastly, let us look into the quality of this doctrine. And presently it
appears to us, that it ought to comprehend all our actions; and consequently
ought to precede the very first of them, while as yet there is no judgment in
us: and when we are grown to the ripeness of judging, it ought to Master our
very judgment it self; since the exercising of that, is also one of our
actions. How then can it be supposed, that Religion ought to be studied and
learned like a science or skill, when as, it ought to be possessed even then
when we begin to study; and, that our very study ought to be regulated by it?

The sixth REFLECTION. That the Scripture, duly read; will bring a man to the
truth of Religion.
SEeing it is agreed on by all parties, that the Scriptures were written by the
same spirit, which guided the Apostles in their preaching: There can be no
doubt, but that the doctrines contained in their witings, must needs be
conformable to what they delivered in their sermons, and in other vocal
instructions; with this difference, that there could he no dispute about their
meaning in what they preached and catechized, by reason of their often
inculcating and plain expressing it: Whereas nothing can be more clear, then
that in what they have written, their sense is oftentimes obscure and very
difficult to be discovered and penetrated into. And therefore, the Scriptures
are to be interpreted by the law written in the heart of that Church, which
has always adhered to the doctrine that from time to time they have received
from their predecessors: though withal, I have no scruple but that if the
Scripture be read in such sort as it ought to be, it will of it self, bring
the man who so reads it, to the true Religion.

The conditions that I require for the due reading of Scripture, are these:
First, that he have a sincere intention and affection to submitt his own mind
and judgment to the Scriptures, and not strain them to his opinion. Secondly,
that he have a sound understanding, not apt to be carried away lightly.
Thirdly, that he meddle with no commenter or interpreter that is more cunning
then himself; nor rely upon any thing for the mind and sense of the
Scripture, but what the Scripture it self affords him. Fourthly, that he
read it long and attentively. And Lastly, that what he understands by
reading of the Scripture, he endeavor to put it in practice, and govern his
life accordingly: For, practice does wonderfully enlighten any Book which
gives rules in any kind of operation. These things observed, I doubt not but
who takes Scripture for his rule, will not fail of becoming a Catholic, at
the last. For, both the reason before delivered, in the beginning of the
reflection, and experience, and the instances of doctrines, whereof part follow
and more might be brought, do manifestly declare, that this effect must of
necessity follow.

To see what the Scriptures will direct us, in order to Catholic doctrine; Let
us begin with this very question concerning the interpretation, of the
Scriptures themselves. It is planely set down, that it ought not to be by the
private spirit, Pet. 2. c. 1. That Christ set in his Church, Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Doctors, for the of building his body; that the
faithful may not be turned round by every blast of doctrine; Ephesians. 4. That
the Church is the Pillar and strength of our faith. These and many more texts
he shall find to show him that the interpretation of Scripture, ought to depend
on the Church. In other places he may read, that the Scripture is useful for
our comfort, for preaching and for exhorting, etc. But, not one word of looking
in it for our faith, unless when it self is taken into the question; That is
to say, when the question is, whether the new Gospel be conformable to the
old; which is the sole matter of controversy; wherein the Scripture (that is to
say, our Savior in the 5. of St. John, and St. Paul in the 17 of the Acts)
directs the searching and looking into Scriptures. For, in both these places,
this only was the point they spoke unto.

If the question be of the Popes supremacy; (that is to say, of St. Peter's
Primacy among the Apostles: For, only so much, can belong to Scripture) We
have it expressly in the 10. of St. Matthew, Simon, the first: And so he is
counted by the other two Evangelists; Whereas, the order of the other Apostles
is not kept. We have tribute paid for Christ and for him as a special
officer, Matthew. 17. We have him forwardest in the confession of Christ, Matt.
16. The Church promised to be built upon him, and the keys in a special
manner to be delivered to him: So that, it is not to be wondered at, if
presently after, the tribute was particularly paid for him. We have the sheep
of Christ, in a special wise recommended unto him; John the last. We have
Christ's prayer personally for him, and a charge given him to confirm the rest,
Luc. 22. We have him ordering the Church in the election of St. Matthias, Acts
the first* Him first preaching to the Jews, Acts the 2. Him first receiving
the Gentiles, by Gods special order, Acts the 10. Acts the 12. the Church
praying for him. He first gives the Holy Ghost, Acts the 8. Acts the 16* he
in the Council is the first that resolves the question. So that, if the
Scripture be sincerely consulted in this point, there is all appareance, or
rather evidence, of St. Peter's Primacy, both in word and in deed.

If the question be, of the Churches infallibility or indeficiency: The
Scripture will tell us, that Christ promised to be with his Preachers for ever,
Matt. 28. That the gates of hell should not prevail against his Church, Matthew.
16. That the Holy Ghost should stay with his Disciples for ever, John the 14.
That there should be of the Elect at the end of the world, Matthew. 24. Mark 13.
Luke 17. That persecution should not end in the Church, until the coming of
Christ, Matthew. 10. Nay, that after the beginning of the Resurrection, some
shall yet remain, 1 Thessalonians. 4.

If the question be of the real presence* that is to say, that our saviors
body is truly in the blessed Sacrament; We shall read, this is my body, Matthew.
26. Mark 14. This is my body which is given for you, Luke 22. This is my body
which shall be delivered for you, 1. Cor. 11. And in the former Chapter he
presses it; Is not the chalice we bless, the participation of the blood of
Christ? And the bread we break, is it not the participation of our lords
body? What can a sincere heart that believes the Scripture, reply to this?

If the question be, of Remission of sins in the Church: Do we not read, the
power of binding and of losing, given to men, Matthew. 18? Of forgiving and of
retaining, John the 20? We read, that the Apostles received the ministry of
Reconciliation, the word of Reconciliation, 2. Cor. 5. James 5. Confess your
sins, one to the other. Also Matthew. 9. The people glorified God, for having
given unto men, the power of remitting sins.

If Confirmation (that is to say, the giving of the Holy Ghost) be in question:
We read St. John Baptist testifying, that he who sent him to baptize in water
told him that Christ baptized in the Holy Ghost, Mark 1. and John 1. But in
John 3. That he who is not newborn of water and the Holy Ghost, cannot enter
into the kingdom of heaven. And, that this was meaned of that descent of the
Holy Ghost which is after Baptism, is our Saviors own declaration, who in the
1. of the Acts says. You shall be baptized in the Holy Ghost after not many
days: Whereof, the whole story is told at length in the 2. Chapter; And in the
8. the Apostles were sent to Samaria, to impart there this giving of the Holy
Ghost. In the 11. St. Peter remembered in the saying of our savior in the same
sense. And in the 15. St. Paul uses the same Ceremony to 12. Persons after
they were baptized, with the same reflection on Saint John Baptist.

As for the Sacrament of Order; there are two parts in it; the Mission; and the
outward Ceremony: Both which, are largely expressed in the Consecration of
Aaron, and of his sons. Levitic. 8. The designation and Mission, Matthew. 10.
Mark 3. Luke 6. and again 22. when he gave them command to consecrate the
blessed Sacrament for the faithful. Luke 10. He designed the 72. Disciples.
Hebr. 5. The Law is established in general; As also Romans 10. How shall they
preach, unless they be sent? As for the outward Ceremony, though we can not
doubt but it was performed by our savior, when he sent his Apostles and
Disciples; Yet we have expressed also in the 20. of St. John, where we are told
of insufflation, with these words receive the Holy Ghost. In the 13. of the
Acts, we are told of fasting and of imposition of hands; and in is it
specifyed, that they who were so sent, were sent by the Holy Ghost. And in the
1. to Tim. 4. We have the imposition of the hands of the Presbytery by
Prophecy.

For Matrimonies being a Sacrament: We read every where, that the conjunction
of Man and Wife is from God. Genesis 2. He brought her to Adam. 1. Cor. 11.
Neither Man without woman, nor woman without man, in our Lord, Matthew. 19. And
Mark 10. What God has coonjoyned; let not man separate. Nature, gives to all
cultiuated Nations, to do this with an outward ceremony; and therefore, surely,
among those who hold it a special action of God, it is most fit to be
performed by the minister of God. Now, that sanctification is due to it: We
read 1. Cor. 7. The unbelieving man, is sanctified by the faithful woman; and
the unbelieving woman, by the faithful man (to wit, in their common operation)
otherwise your children would be unclean; whereas now they are holy.

Of extreme Unction, there is not so frequent mention; But, most manifest, and
undenyably obvious. We are told in the 6. of St. Mark, that the Apostles
anointed the sick with oil, and cured them. Ja. 5. Is any man sick among
you; Let him bring in the Priests of the Church; and let them pray over him,
anointing him with oil in the name of our lord: And the prayer of faith shall
save the sick man: and our lord will ease him; and if he be in sin, his
sins shall be forgiven him.

I doubt not, but if what I have already alleged out of Scripture, do light
into an even soul, not by assed by interest or prejudice to the contrary
party; It will be sufficient to satisfy him fully that the out side and letter
of Scripture, is clearly on the side of antiquity and of the Catholic Church.
Yet I can not leave this subject, till I have mentioned one point more, because
it is so much vaunted by our Adversaries, though with very little reason. The
Catholic Church administreth the holy Eucharist, sometimes in one kind, some
times in both: Protestants, always in both kinds. The question arises, which
of these practices is favored by Scripture. It is evident that the Scripture
speaks sometimes of receiving both the bread and the cup* But much oftener,
of one alone. Jo. 6. This is a bread coming down from heaven; that whosoever
eats of it, may not dye. I am the bread of life, which descended from heaven.
If any one eat of this bread, he shall live for ever. He that eats this
bread, shall live for ever. Luke the last, he took bread, and blessed, and
brake it, and gave it to them; and their eyes were opened, and they knew him;
and he vanished out of their sight. Acts 2. And they were persevering in the
doctrine of the Apostles, and the communion of breaking of bread, and prayer.
Acts 20. When they were assembled to break bread. So that, if we distinguish
between the time of giving the communion, and the time of the Priests
consecration (in which the Catholic Church, observes inviolably the doing it
in both kinds) we shall find more places in Scripture for communicating in
one kind, then for doing it in both. But what shall we say to this speech of
St. Paul 1. Cor. 11. Therefore, whosoever shall eat this bread, Or drink this
cup, unworthily; he shall be guilty of the body, and blood of our savior?
what means this Or, but that some, even then, took the one without the oher?
Else, there had been no place for that disjunctive Syllable.

I easily believe, that many a pert batchellour will be ready to tell us, that
he can find ways to salve all these places of Scripture, and many more if they
were urged. But that concerns not me. I enquire only, what the outward face
of Scripture is; and to what belief it will lead an honest heart, left to its
own strength. For if those queinte disputants do encounter with a person that
is not enured to the Sophistry; they will turn black into white, make two
eggs three (as the tale goes of the impertinent forward scholar) and bring
to pass whatsoever they undertake. Therefore it was necessary to impose among
the conditions of reading the Bible, this for a principal one; That they, who
by Scripture, aim at coming to the truth, should admit of no Interpreter. And
this, because of the danger in lighting upon a false one, instead of a true
one, before one, has grounds to discern which is a false one and which a
true one. For, the case is very indifferent between a Catholic Interpreter,
and any other. The Catholic, knows the doctrine of Christ (that is to say,
the sense of the Scripture) independently from the words of the Scripture. And
therefore, in substantial points which concern Christ's doctrine he cannot
teach or interpret amiss, without swerving from his own faith. But it is
evident that every other, who has no rule for his belief, besides the bare
letter and words of Scripture, is subject to error, through every passion and
prejudice, which hiddenly swayeth his heart awry and corrupts his judgment,
by pride or other affection: So that he may be rightly compared to a rotten
cane; that being leaned upon, will break, and with its splinters, wound and
gore him that expected support from it.

The seventh REFLECTION. That, the reading of the Fathers, will bring a man to
the truth of Religion: And, that natural reason, will greatly advance a man
thereunto.
IT seems strange to me, that any man who acknowledges Scripture, should
reject the Fathers: since he can not renounce them; without professing at the
same time by so doing, that he believes himself to be able (with his little
wit, and generally less study and learning) to penetrate deeper into the
intelligence of Scripture, then so many ages eminent for industry, science, and
holiness, could reach unto. And all this, upon no other pretense, but because
they were men; and consequently, liable to erring: As if himself were not a
man; but something else, so far beyond comparison with all other men, that we
ought rather to confide in his ability and honesty, then in all mankind that
went before him. Which is so unworthy and so intolerable a pride, that I admire
how any auditory can endure it.

But to come more closely to the point. I say, that seeing the Holy Fathers,
did, both receive the prevaching of the Apostles nearer hand then we do; and
did hold the truth of Scripture as strongly as we do; and did spend much time
in the earnest study of it, and proceeded therein with as sincere hearts as we
can: It may in no wise be doubted, but that they had the means and the wills
of having the true faith; and consequently, that they had it.

Therefore, what was their universal Tenet in Matters of faith, can not be
false nor ought to be rejected; Or, with any color of reason, be questioned by
us as disagreeing with Scripture. Besides; their writings being large and
numerous, (in which, upon several occasions and in differing circumstances,
they repeat and inculcate the same things by different words and
expressions) it must needs thence follow, that their sense and meaning, in
most things of importance, can not choose but be sufficiently explicated. So as
who ever shall read them with candor, ingenuity, and judgment, can not
possibly doubt of it.

And accordingly, experience has showed us, that the judicious Protestants who
gave themselves to the reading of the Fathers, were in judgment near unto
Catholics, in most of their opinions: And that which detained them from being
absolutely Catholics, was (besides the chains of interest) nothing but a
secret pride of not submitting themselves to the Tradition of the Church, in
some particular points in which Tradition was not so clear to them. Though
withal I deny not, but that a wrong apprehension of some Catholic Tenets
(presumed upon the explication of some particular Doctors) might unhappily
contribute to this their obstinacy. No doubt then, but if any indifferent
person, not preimbibed with any wrong maxim, shall bestow competent pains in
reading the Fathers, he will infallibly become Catholic. Especially, if he
take this rule along with him; to compare the practice of Protestants, with the
practice of the Fathers and of the former Church. By which he will see, that
this which they call Reformation, has cut away under pretense of abuses, not
the abuses, but the very things themselves in which the abuses were; like
unskillfull Chirurgians, that cut of a leg, to cure a small sore in it; or like
Mahomet, who took away all use of wine, to cure drunkenness. And in the mean
while, they cavil at petty questions, in which they strive to show that the
Church has erred.

As for natural reason; No man will expect that it should be an entire means
of attaining to the knowledge of the supernatural truths which are contained
in Christian Religion; But only, that it may be a help thereunto; by showing,
that they are so far from contradicting reason, as indeed nothing can be more
conformable to true reason, then the whole economy of them is. And I dare
promise whosoever shall seek this; that, if he come unto it, armed with true
and sound Philosophy, he may arrive to a full contentment of his understanding
and heart, in all that concerns so noble an enquiry. Now, since Catholic
Religion has been so intelligibly divulged in the world. St. Augustine makes
mention, that he found the Mystery of the Trinity, in the Platonists Books.
Now, if you ask me how this came to pass; I answer, that God provided in
Alexandria (a City much addicted to learning) one Ammonius Hermias, a great
Philosopher and a Christian. He, to make Christian Religion more acceptable,
sought to join it with Platonicke Philosophy: Which was no hard matter to do;
Plato having bing been (as Numenius says of him) Moses speaking Greek; that
is to say, one who having lighted upon the Hebrew learning, had sucked much out
of it. Now, this Ammonius; finding in Plato the Ideas of Being, and of Unity,
and of Life, and such other ayery notions, easy to be wrought upon to what he
designed; endeavored by these, to instill into his Scholars the Mystery of
the Trinity. Which he did with such happy success, that of the three prime
wits of his School, the one ( Origin) became so great and eminent a Doctor
of the Church, as antiquity has acknowledged him.

The other two, Amelius and Plotinus, prooved two Conductours of the Platonicke
School; and brought into it the imitation of the Trinity which is found in
their discourses and in the writings of their followers: So amiable is truth,
that the very likeness of it enamoureth the understanding: How much more,
would the substance do so, were it rightly pursued and truly discovered? Which
without question, it may be, even in this very particular; the terms, in which
this sublime Mystery is delivered, being so natural; and the thing it self,
being the connaturall substance of Almighty God, that depends not upon any
chance or free disposition; and the intention of revelation, being (generally)
to bring us to the knowledge of the thing that is revealed.

And therefore (you will say) the wonder is not so great, that since Christian
Religion was known and voyced about in the world, these Mysteries should be
treated of by Philosophers in their Schools and writings: But if in any of
them before the coming of Christ, there shoud have sprung, out of pure nature,
the least intimation of any of these supernatural Mysteries; That, would be a
strong confirmation of what we have here said.

Certainly, if this may be expected from any, it must be from Aristotele; He
being of the only person amongst the Heathens that has written with solidity.
Of him then it is reported, that as he lay upon his deathbed, considering the
miseries that poor mankind falls daily into through Errors, and that it is
not in the power of Nature to deliver Man from them, he pronunced this great
sentence. That Homer had much reason to make the Gods take human shapes upon
them, to draw by that means poor Men out of Errors. Behold the Incarnation
of the son of God 'as so lively grounded, as any Christian can speak of it;
And this, by the mere strength of reason. And is it possible, that now, after
so glorious publication of the Christian faith through the whole earth, there
should be found any Christians so unreasonable, as to think it unreasonable
that God should become man, to save us from our sins; which are the true
root of all our miseries?

The like is of the holy Eucharist. Did but men understand so much of
Metaphysickes, as to know the Nature of their own growth or augmentation, they
would find no difficulty, in that, now by many so disbelieved and decryed,
though in it self so heavenly and needful a Mystery. But, ignorance and
pride, makes that to be held for absurd, which in truth is most conformable to
Nature.

I will add but one word more upon this occasion, for their sakes who are
affected with reason, and are best satisfied with discourses built upon that
foundation. This Principle being supposed, that all things are governed in the
perfectest manner that may be, in conformity to the general rules of nature
(which Divines use to express in these words, that God, ever does that which
is best) then presently; All the Mysteries of Christian Religion. Namely, the
creation of Man; the fall, the economy, or conduct of the world until the
coming of Christ; since Christ; the end of the world; the last Judgment; the
Resurrection; the several States of souls before it, and of men after it.
Beatitude; Damnation; And whatsoever else is in Catholic belief, as, the
Doctrine concerning the Church, Church-gouvernement, the Sacraments; and
whatsoever else belongs of necessity to credulity and obedience. All these (I
say) will appear so mainely evident and reasonable, that no man of a just
capacity and unpassionate mind, can take any exception against it. Whosoever
will employ his time and endeavors in this search; and shall begin it with a
right understanding of Nature; will find, with unspeakable comfort and
satisfaction to himself, that what I have here said, is true. I confess, some
pains are required to know these things; as also there are some necessary to
comprehend the demonstrations of Archimedes and the Cronickes of Apollonius
Pergeus; about which we see so many strain their wits to understand them,
for the delight that is in them, when they are once mastered; And yet, the
importance ad consequence of them, is not comparable to the knowledge of these
truths; which looked after with a like attention, in a due progress, will
become as evident as they. But we must not expect to attain to the depth of
all these points, by only discoursing of them in familiar conversation, for
our divertisement and recreation; or by reading some treatise of them, in such
sort as one would do a Romance, only for entertainment or passe-time and
delight. They who are skilled in Geometry or Algebra, do well know they never
purchased those sciences so cheap. Seeing then that this is of so much higher
a strain in it self, and of so far greater a concernment toward the
government of their life's: Let them, if they can not be satisfied with simply
believing these truths, use industry to find Masters able to instruct them,
and employ a competency of labor in pursuit of them.

The eighth REFLECTION. Of conference and Disputation, in common.
AFter the way of reading; there offers it self to our consideration, that
of personal discoursing or Dialogising. This may be performed, in two Manners.
The one; when he who is to learn, contributeth on his side; bearing himself
with a desire to come to truth; and helping it on, by acknowledging heartily,
what seems to him true out of his former persuasion; and proposing, wherein
he finds difficulty; and asking no more, then to have that opened unto him,
which some preoccupation has obstruted. This Manner of treating is called
Conference. And no doubt but it is a far shorter and more efficacious way to
come to knowledge, then reading. Provided, the teacher be an able Man and
Master of his profession. For, a writer can speak but in common; whereas such
a teacher, knows by the answers of his opposer, wherein particularly lies
the difficulty he is to to remove; and accordingly, spares and contracteth
many discourses wihch the writer is forced to deliver at aim and at hazard.
Besides; the very orall delivery, is far more intelligible, and gives a
singular energy to what is so taught.

The other Manner of Dialogising, is, when the Auditour stands upon his
guard, and yields nothing upon foreknowledge; but will be co^vinced, and
see evidence, for every thing he is to allow: And this, is properley called
Disputation. The parties in this, are clearly two; and no third to moderate
the Disputation: though oftentimes one be necessary to moderate the Disputants,
Who otherwise, through contention and earnestness, may be apt to neglect the
rules of Disputation* whereof the first or chief is, that the one, meddle not
with the others office, as long as he holds to the rules of Disputation.

The parties being two; a disputa^t, and a respondent. The first thing the
disputant is to do, is to state the question; or rather, to require of the
respondent to do it, if it be necessary: That is, if he suspecteth the terms
of the Thesis to be equivocall. Then, is he to oblige the respondent to
explicate his meaning in the position: For, that belongs to the respondent;
who can not be forced, to hold by the words of his Thesis, any more then
himself means by them, He may also oblige him to yield the reason of his
Tenet, if it be such a one, that the opposite is the more common, or of Authors
that he is bound not to forsake without great reason. For, as in truth it is an
impudence to maintain any thing without a reason; So, the reason failing, the
maintainer is putt from his position; though peradventure, the position it
self be not confuted. Neither ought there to be required more reasons then
one, for one truth. Not, but that many arguments may be framed to prove the
same conclusion; but because, among them, one at the least, ought to be
irrefragable, and which ca^ not be co^vinced of defect. For, if none be such,
the respondent ought not to maintain his assertion for true* since he himself
must needs think that peradventure it is false, not having evidence or
knowledge that it can not be otherwise then as he affirms it.

The second duty of the disputant, (in a serious disputation intended for the
finding out of truth) is, to propose no argument but such as in his opinion is
convincing. We can not oblige a man to know so much; For, all of us are
fallible in particulars; and even Geometricians themselves, do sometimes
mistake a truth for demonstrated, when really it is not so. But that which we
may exact of our disputant, is, that he esteem his argument convictive, and
propound it for such and he is to make account that himself is overcome, if
(fair law being give^ him) he do not overcome, For, his part being to prove; if
he do not that, fails of his end; which is, to lose the day: and if before he
begin, he does not expect to do this, he comes not to dispute, but to mock the
Auditory, and to persuade them or to make a show of that which in reality he
knows he can not perform.

His third duty is to proceed in form. Now, by true and rigorous form, is
meaned Syllogisticall form. So that, in rigor, every attempt of his should be
a Syllogism. But among expert and ingenuous Logitians, This is not exacted;
unless it be upon a pinch, where there is a controversy upon the consequence:
For then, the rigor of form concludes the question. Otherwise, to go (as
they call it) by Enthymemes (that is, by putting one only Antecedent, whence
the denied proposition is averred to follow) is the shorter and the clearer
way. For, it takes away both lenghth and confusion from the respondent.

And because, if the Antecedent be false, it is but one; and so the denial or
distinction of it puts the arguer in his ready way; and if the consequence
be naught, that is to be proved, the Disputation goes the more smoothly on.

His fourth duty is, to prove what is immediately denied him, and to bring that
in his consequent; whether it be a proposition, or a sequel he ought to make
good.

These are the necessary and maine duties of the disputant. For, although
anciently he was allowed to make what demandes he pleased of things pertinent
to his proof, before the respondent could discern what he aimed at by his
questions: Yet our latter Schoole-practise has cut of this liberty, as being
very subject to circumvent the respondent; and rather captious, then a solid
means to arrive at truth.

As for the Answerer: His first duty is, to remember his name; that is to say,
that he sits there to answer; and therefore, ought to speak no more then
he is asked. His solemn words, are known to be, I grant, I deny, I
distinguish. As for granting, it is at his danger. As for denying; he ought
not to deny any proposition, that of it self is known to be true. As for
distinguishing; he must show that the Arguers words do bear more senses then
one; or else he gives no distinction. He must also show, that the parts of
his distinction, are to the purpose of the argument; otherwise, his distinction
is frivolous. This he must do, when the Actour requires it. Otherwise, he must
only give his distinction, and grant the one part, and deny the other; to the
end, the arguer may choose, whether he will accept of that which is granted, or
prove that which is denied. If he grant a proposition formerly denied; or if he
deny a proposition formerly granted; he has lost the day. Whether he may
distinguish a proposition, that he has before simply granted or denied, is a
question touching the honor of the defendant. But without doubt, in rigor it
is lawful to be done: For, no proposition can be supposed to be granted or
denied in all senses possible; And therefore, upon further occasion, it may be
declared in what sense it was formerly allowed or denied.

The ninth REFLECTION. Of the Application of the same to Religion.
BUt, to apply these observations to our present subject, we must cast our eyes
upon the aim and scope of our disputation. Other disputations, that are not of
Religion, we see are sometimes done for the exercise of young Scholars, to
inure them to a subtle and rigorous Manner of discoursing, and to make them
perfect in the consequences to their Tenets: which is a laudable course,
according to the worth of the sciences they are about. Other whiles, men meet
to dispute, either for recreation sake, or for ostentation of their wits. The
latter is pardonable in young men; and the former, is a commendable Manner of
passing their time, for those who have no better means of spending it.

But when all this is applied to Religion, it takes an other hew. For, here,
we look for truth in the most necessary part and business of our life; in
which, to be deceived, is the greatest mischief that can befall us. Beyond the
ruin of our estate: Beyond the taking away of our life; Beyond the
extinguishing of our family; And beyond the loss of all that is dear to us in
this world. Wherefore, he that in this Matter maintains any position, merely
for ostentation of his wit is guilty of a most Sacrilegious action; and
commits upon the party he seduceth, the worst sort of murder that Man's
Nature is capable of. in like Manner, to make a mere recreation of such
disputing; Is a high contempt of God, of eternal Beatitude, and of Divinity.
For exercise, it may be necessary, so it be known to before that end; and, that
under color of exercise, no wrong persuasion be induced into the Auditory.

Yet is all this, from our present business. For, the Disputation, for which
these rules are intended, is a kind of trial of the truth of Religion; By
which, the Auditory may take an Apprehension of what they are to follow during
their whole life. So that it is not to be allowed, without just security from
both parties: From the Arguent, for his disputing, and from the Defendant, for
his answering. And accordingly, since it is well known, that nothing but
Demonstration, can give security of a disputable truth: He who in a Disputation
of this nature undertaketh to prove an assertion, ought first to engage his
credit that in his conscience he esteems the argument he intends to
propose, to be Demonstrative: How ever he may apprehend a failing on his part
in pressing it, either through want of sufficient skill, or through the over
proportion of his adversaries abilities, or through the difficulty of well
opening the Matter and making the truth appear. If he refuse to do this, he
is to be protested against for a thief and a robber (as our Savior himself
styleth such) who has a design to abuse his hearers, and to draw their souls
(for some private interest of his own) into eternal damnation: And the
Auditory is to be contested, that such a disputation as the Arguer intends,
is a mere juggle and imposture; a brabbling, base, counterscuffle, not fit
for a grave Man to have a share in; but a mere scolding, loss of time, and
vexation, both to the hearers and to the actours.

The Respondents task, is not so rigorous. It is enough for him to maintain,
that his adversary can not convince his Tenet of falsity: He being, for this
passage, but a defendant; not a prover.

Thus far, for Opponents and Defendants in common; But now, to apply this to
Catholics, and to those who have parted from them; Let us begin with
considering, how their maine difference consists in this, that the Catholic
holds his doctrine, because it came to him by his forefathers from Christ;
and relyeth upon his forefathers for the truth of this: The Adversaries,
Universally, do rely upon, either Scripture, or reason. As for reason, it is
evident that it can not be a sufficient ground of a doctrine that is held by
authority. And as for Scripture, the Catholic maintains it as strongly as
they. Neither have they it, but upon the credit of Catholics: And therefore
all the arguments they can bring out of Scripture against Catholics, do bear
in their forehead a prejudice of being either false, or at least uncertain.

The tienth REFLECTION. Of some particulars belonging to Catholics; Others, to
their Adversaries.
OUt of these premises, there follow some very considerable differences
between Catholics and Protestants, in point of Disputation. The first is:
That a Catholic, ought not, for his own satisfaction, to admit of any
disputation at all, in Matters of Religion. For, he relyeth upon a better
ground, then any his Adversary can offer to him: Namely, an infallible and
irrefragable Authority. He takes reason for an insufficient Judge in
controversies of this Nature. And against disputing out of Scripture, he has
two prejudices: The one, that he holds his faith by the same rule by which
he receives the Scripture, and therefore, if Scripture should prove any
thing against his faith (which is impossible) it would make him believe
neither; and so, would not change him to be of a new Religion, but cause him to
be of none.

The other prejudice is, That he who argues out of Scripture, proceeds Texts
whose sense is disputable in the words themselves: Whereas the Catholic, is
beforehand assured of the sense, as far as concerns faith; Therefore, it
were in vain for him to search, in an uncertain instructor, the knowledge of
that which he already knows certainly.

Yet further: If any Catholic do admit Disputation for his own sake and
satisfaction; he leaves being a Catholic. For, the end of Disputation, is to
clear a doubt: And therefore, where is no doubt, there is no need of
disputing. Neither can a Catholic have any doubt in any Matter of faith,
unless he suspecteth his rule: Which if he once do, he is no longer a
Catholic. On the other side; The Protestant, building all his faith upon the
ambiguous words of Scripture (so loud disputed, and eternally disputable) must
necessarily, if he be a rational man, live in perpetual doubt. For, the very
oppositio^ of so many wise and learned men as affirm that the words he
alleges do not signify that which is necessary for his position: is
sufficient to make any rational man be in doubt of an exposition of words
that may bear several senses, which he sees is so obvious and ordinary a
rock of mistaking. Therefore, a Protestant were not rational, if he should not
always demand searching and disputing until experience shall have taught him,
there is no End of it, or by it. He must resolve, either to be ignorant and to
trust, or else to dispute without end. And in very truth, his disputing is to
no end. For, suppose he be the arguent, and do convince his adversary; yet
after all his pains, he has gained no more then only to perceive that his
adversary is a weaker disputant then he; or that peradve^ture he was at that
time surprised; so that when he shall be in his better wits, he may happily
be able to salve his arguments. And if he be the Defendant, and chance to
maintain his positio^, yet it follows not, that a better Opponent then he had
to deal withal, might not have convinced him. So that, on neither side,
there is any security to him, because he brings no Demonstration, but only
the bare appearance of ambiguous words.

There is an other impurity between Catholics and their adversaries, in this,
that if the Catholic be the Opponent, he can dispute but of one point; namely,
of the Infalliblity of the Church, because his adversary is obliged to no
other. For, take what point you will besides; and one may be a perfect
Protestant, whether he hold it, or deny it. The authority of Bishops, is the
maine point of Protesta^cy, by which it is distinguished from all other
Sestaries: Yet, when it is for their turn, the French Presbyterians (so great
enemies to that government of the Church) are their dear brethren. The Greeks,
the Lutherans, the Socinians, the Anabaptists; how many positions, do they
maintain different from the Protestants? Nevertheless, when it pleases a
Protestant to make his boasts of the large extent of the Reformed Churches; all
these are of this communion. Nay,

Nay, when he talks of the Universal Church: No Arrian, Eutychian,
Nestorian, or other Professor of whatsoever damned Heresy that has a share
against Popery, is excluded by him from being an Orthodoxe Member of the
Catholic Church; but all are registered in his Calendar, as Professors of the
only true faith, and as witnesses of Christ's doctrine. So that, if a Catholic
be to argue, he loses his labor in disputing of any point but of the
Infallibility of the Church; because he advances nothing by having the victory
in any other. For though he should reduce his adversary to be of his mind, in
all other articles: yet not being so in this too, he is as far as ever from
being a Catholic; since the not believing of any one article of faith, makes
a man no Catholic, or (which is all one) a Protestant.

On the other side; If it be the Catholics share to be the Defendant: He is
bound to make good, many points; That is to say, all that doctrine which we
maintain to be of faith, and to have received by Tradition.

The Conclusion therefore is, that the Catholic has much to maintain, and
little to oppose: The Protestant has great choice of what to oppose, and
little to maintain. So that his advantage, on this hand, is very great, in
regard of disputation. Since, if he receive a wound in any limb of that great
body he is to defend, it is a mortal one to his cause: And his adversary is
invulnerable to him, every where but in one point. The reason of this
difference, depends of the known Axiom, Bonum, ex integra causa,
Malum, ex quolibet defectu.
The Catholic Party, has a Religion; has an Art and skill of living well,
and of going to heaven. Such a thing, must have a body: And a body, can not
consist without many members and parts: Every one of which, must be defended
and made good.

All other Sects, are but deficiencies, more or less, from this rule: Those,
more; who cleave fastest to the rule of deficiency; that is to say, to the
rejecting of all that cannot be convinced out of Scripture: Those less; who
perceiving the inconveniences this brings upon them, do soonest recede, in
practice, from this crooked rule, and to contradict their maine ground of all
being fallible, by forcing their subjects to hold their Tenets; that they have
no authority for; themselves having forsaken the legitimate authority, by which
the Catholic Church sticks to Tradition.

The eleventh REFLECTION. Of some particular Caveats for Catholics.
THe Catholic defendant, having so hard a task; some few notes will be
necessary for him. As first; that he should not ofter to maintain, against
arguments drawn out of nature, such positions as he is not able to satisfy
himself in: for example; against an Arrian or Sabellian, let him not
undertake to dispute and argue, in reason, how the same thing can be one and
three; unless he be first sure that he understands it well, and that
himself rests satisfied with reason in that point. For, it is impossible to
give the Auditory satisfaction, if he has it not himself; Especially, if the
disputant be subtle, and able to manage his Argument.

The like is of the blessed Sacrament, to show how one body can at the same
time be im more places then one.

In this case therefore, the Defendant is to keep himself upon the general
defense, that we believe Mysteries of faith, whether we can answer Arguments
against them, or no; That the word of God, is able to give us certitude, above
all demonstration, and above all that we can understand. Neither are we
without the example of our Adversaries themselves, when we do thus. For, in
this very Mystery of the Eucharist, they will tell us that Christ is really and
truly present in it. But that the Manner how he is there, is not
understandable. In the Trinity, and in the Incarnation, Protestants do the
like; acknowledging these Mysteries to be true, but withal professing them to
be above their understanding.

Yet, this rule is not so peremptory, but that by discretion it may admit
exception. For, our Adversaries are so weak; that they ground most of their
Axioms and proofs, rather upon confidence we will not deny them, then that
themselves are able to make them good. So, in the Mystery of the Eucharist;
when they insist upon the Maxim, that the same body can not be at the same
time in two places; If you putt them to prove it, you shall find that their
word will be to say that even our own Doctors confess it, or that experience
assures us of it: Whereas, experience is no Argument against Gods Omnipotency:
And as to what private Doctors affirm, it is at every Man's pleasure to grant
or deny it. So that, if you understand your Adversaries strength, you may
non-sute him by putting him to prove what you know he can not. But this is a
hazard: And you are shamed, if you fail.

An other Caveat for our defendant, is; Not to engage himself in a
Controversy, upon the opinion of one party of Devines; Nor undertake to defend
against his Adversary a position which some of our own Devines do oppose; and
so, is rather a question of Scholasticall Divinity, then a Controversy of
faith. To this purpose it is to be noted, that some opinions are of a greater
latitude, then others; establishing faith upon that, whereof others confine it
but to some one part.

As, in the Matter of Infallibility; some place it in the Pope, some, in a
general Council; some, in both; some, in the whole Church; which contains
all these, and more. Here, the cautious Controvertist that has care of his
Safety, will be sure to choose that which is most ample; and so quitteth
himself from the trouble and danger of answering Arguments made against the
single parts; and keeps himself to the strong hold of Christianity, wherein
all parties agree. True it is, that if the defendant be putt to declare his
position: and an Argument do press him: He may sometimes be obliged to choose
one opinion of Divines before an other; or rather, is forced to follow that
which he is best acquainted with. But the rule I give, must serve where, and
when there is place for it. And besides the already mentioned advantages that
this course gives; It causes a great narrowness or brevity in controversies;
which brings the dissenting parties, far nearer to agreement; and setleth
more stablenesse in Religion, by making men dicerne what belongs to faith,
and what does not; but is the opinions of particular Doctors.

The twelfth REFLECTION. Of the qualities of some sort of Arguments drawn out
of Scripture.
THe next thing we are to look into, Is, the quality of the Arguments which are
to be used in those Disputations. By ^he precedent discourse, it is evident,
that they are of three kinds; Out of Scripture, out of Fathers, and out of
reason. To begin with Scripture; It is again^ clear, that arguments may be
thence deduced, two ways, The one, out of the pure force of the words: The
other, out of the connection of the sense and discourse acknowledged ^n the
words: With the conclusion that i^ to be proved.

In the former way, Arguents, either press the words of one single sentence
which they bring, thinking to make it evident that their assertion is the very
meaning of those words: Or else, they bring a conglobation of sundry places,
of which the one fortifyeth the other; so as to make it evident, that the
plain sense of words so often reiterated, cannot choose but be the true
meaning of the Scripture.

To begin with the first branch of the Manner of drawing arguments out of
single Texts of Scripture; we may divide into two kinds, the Texts that are
produced for this purpose. For they are either such as say, or are pretended to
say, in express terms (or equivalent ones) the proponents Conclusion; so that
the outward face of the words is plain for his Tenet: As when Catholics
produce the following Texts; this is my body; Simon the first; The Gates of
hell shall not prevail against my Church: whose sins you forgive, shall be
forgiven, and any the like (upon which occasion, I may not forbear to note,
that Protestants have not any one text of this kind, against Catholics unless
they make use of the precept of not making graven images, which concerns
Christians no more, then does the sacrificing of a Lamb at Easter: Both of
them being commands given singly to the Jews.) Or else they are such Texts, as
though they do not contain the proponents conclusion in express words, yet
he pretends that it follows out of the sense of them.

Now in these Texts, there may be a double incertitude; First, whether the
place alleged, do signify what the proponent pretends; Secondly, whether his
conclusion would follow, though that were granted.

Now in both these kinds of Texts; When the Argument is drawn out of the
force of the words; and their force, no other then from the Grammatical or
Dictionary-sense of those words; it is ordinarily a pitiful weak Argument,
and the whole Disputation is no better then boyes-play, and but like a
construing of Terence: It being, almost, if not altogether impossible, in our
controversies to find a Text of Scripture absolutely convincing, and
consequently fit to be insisted upon.

The reason whereof is, that the down right signification of a word
(especially, in discourses when, the Author does not deliver his mind in a
Dogmaticall way) is more wavering and changeable then the Aspin leaf.

I remember how, as I once pressed to a disputant, this which I now say, he
immediately objected this Text to me, Abraham genuit Isaac; which he took to be
unexplicable in any other sense, then that Abraham was Isaacs Father.

I was not at the present furnished with the diverse explicationse of the word
Genuit: But God provided me an answer out of the first of St. Matthew, where it
is said, Ioras genuit Oziam; and yet there were some intermediate generations
between Ioras and Ozias.

Whence it was clear, that out of the bare words, Abraham genuit Isaac, it
could not be Demonstratively inferred that Abraham was Isaacs Father.

Now, after such an instance, what evidence can be expected out of the simple
signification of words? Besides; who can be so shallow as to imagine that a
Sect which has men of any wit in it, should maintain a position against that
sense of the letter which every Boy can penetrate; but that it has armed it
self with some subterfuge; which (ordinarily speaking) can not be weaker then
the argument that depends upon so variable a ground as the use of words in
human speech? Nevertheless, this kind of arguing, is the most used, and much
vaunted of.

As for example: The Lutherans and the Calvinists agree, in saying there is
bread in the blessed Sacrament. Their argument against Catholics (who allow it
not to be so) is, that Christ called it bread after Consecration. If you answer
them, that he does not call it barely Bread, but this bread, or bread of life;
or with some other character to distinguish it from ordinary Bread; They
presently cry out, that the worcester Bread signifies bread made of wheat; and
turn to their Dictionary to justify that signification; and sing victory, as
if nothing were answered. So, when they press these words out of the English
translation, He took bread, blessed it, broke it, and gave it: If you desire,
instead of the word blessed it, to putt in turned it into his body; telling
them, that the blessing, was the saying, this is my body: and the saying so,
was the very turning of the bread into his body: If you reply thus, they will
grow impatient, as if you committed an intolerable absurdity, and ask you in
what Dictionary, or in what Author, to bless signifies to turn into ones
body* and will not hear that since in this case blessing was the pronouncing
of such words, it must of necessity signify the turning into his body. Is it
possible, that otherwise witty men, should be so overweaned of their own side,
as to believe there is any force in such allegations, which every Schoole-boy
that construeth (not by rote, but understands what he says) is able to
discover?

The reason (as I conceive) of this low and shallow impertinency, is, that this
disputative kind of men, never raised their understanding to Geometrical
Demonstrations, or to any solid discourse; and indeed, not beyond the practice
of Grammar rules in Scripture, and some quainte Criticisme of the same pitch:
and therefore, may be of a fit cise to talk in a pulpit to a vulgar auditory,
or to cavil about words before unlearned persons, who were never present at
a solid Disputation, nor are capable of the rigor or strict laws of such a
one: But they are not strong enough to frame an argument that may bear water
and endure the touch, among judicious examiners; Though, like junior
Sophisters, they can pop out a great many slight objections, and ruin a large
course from one to an other, to make a show of learning without any substance
of it.

Such a kind of Argument (in the last mentioned question of the Eucharist) is
their great Achilles out of Theodoret, and an obscute writer called Gelasius,
who say, the nature of bread remains after consecration. If you answer them,
that the word Nature signifies Quality, even in our ordinary Manner of speech;
and that so they have gained nothing by the allegation of these authorities,
since we acknowledge and se that the Quality of bread remains after
Consecration; They again cry Victory as before, as if the most Grammatical
signification of one single word must cawy the bays, without any consideration
of the circumstant words or of the connection of the sense. Which if any
Schoole-boy of an upperforme should do, he could not but expect a smarte
reward from his Master. And yet these petty, slight, arguments out of
Scripture, are in a Manner the stro^gest they have, by which they endeavor to
overthrow the Religion of their forefathers.

An other kind of argument is frequent with them, which is, yet weaker the^
this. It is when from some superficial sound of words, that signify no such
thing as the conclusion they are to prove they take occasion to allege a
sentence of Scripture, that in effect is nothing to the question in hand; and
yet they will make a noise that Scripture is clear against you. As when ( Esaias
58.) they cite, your wills are found in your fastings, to prove that voluntary
fasts are unlawful; or ( Matt. 15) That which enters into the mouth,
defiles not the soul: But that which comes out from the heart. And against
works of super errogation ( Luke 17.) When you have done all that is commanded
you, say, you are unprofitable Servants. In all which Texts: Neither is that
said (so much as by the outward words) which they intend by alleging them;
nor is there any show of connection with what they pretend. But rather, for the
most part, such places do favor the adverse party. As, the first reprehendeth
the fastinges of the wicked Jews, because they continued their impieties,
notwithstanding their afflicting themselves: Which signifies, that the fasts
themselves, were good; but that the Manner and circumstances in which they were
done, were naught. The second, clearly concludes, that seeing the
disobedience in eating forbidden meats flows from the heart, it is sin not
to abstain from them.

The third, supposes evidently, that the commandments may be fullfilled
(which is denied by Protestants) and implies that more may be done; and
consequently, admits works of super errogation.

I deny not, but that both these sorts of arguments, are common to both
parties. Yet it is with this difference; that the Catholic relyeth not upon
them; as being fixed upon his own firm and solid basis, of having received
his faith by succession from Christ: And therefore, in his mouth, such are
condesciences to the weakness of his auditory: Whom he hops, by this milk,
to make capable of a stronger settlement. But among Protestants, such arguments
and conjecturall inferences, are the very foundation of their Religion; Unto
which sandy ground, they strive to bring their auditory, hindering them from
settling upon the rock of the Church.

The thirteenth REFLECTION. Of other sorts of Arguments drawn out of Scripture.
BUt, leaving these shuttle-cocke arguments, which are easily bandyed from
either side; Let us look upon the next kind of argument, which makes use of a
heap of Texts, to prove the Conclusion intended.

I do not deny but that this is a strong proceeding; If it find, either an
able Logician to manage it, or an Auditory capable of it; both which, are very
rare; And therefore, this course is fitter for writing, and for reading with
deliberation; then for a sudden conflict upon the place.

There are two ways of using this weapon. The one, simply accumulateth many
Texts; giving every one its force, in short; and overwhelming the Auditour by
their multitude.

This does well in an Oration or Sermon, and carries a great resemblance of
strength in it.

But if the whole discourse comes to be anatomised by the adversary, and the
wakenesse of every e text showed in particular: Then, the conclusion stands
naked and ashamed: and the author Amazed a see his own opinion so unexpectedly
changed. And therefore, in a Disputation, where the adversary has his law to
answer only one, this accumulation of Texts serves to little purpose, more
then to spend time.

The other way of employing a conglobation of Texts, is to pretend to bring all
the Texts that may be found in Scripture favorable to either side, and by
comparing them, to show which party stands with Scripture, which against it.

But first, it is evident that this proceeding is not proper for a regular
combat. For, the adversary will have right to claim the planting of his own
batterye himself; and may refuse to accept it from his enemy. Again, to do
this thing well, and to make this comparison in due Manner: So many things are
to be considered, that it is rather the subject of a Book, then fit for the
proposal of one party, to which the other is to answer immediately upon the
place. For, the Texts ought to be examined, that it may be determined, which of
them do formally contain the position that is to be proved; And which, only
some verity connexed to it, from whence it may be drawn; and the degrees of
such connection. Again, what speeches are proper, what Metaphorical, and the
degrees of translation in them. Likewise, the occasions of the speaking those
words, and their coherence with actions or words, precedent and subsequent.
All which considerations, are so manifold, and so tedious to be well performed,
that they can by no means be brought into the brevity of a Dialogisticall
opposition: But will require the making of long speeches, like whole sermons,
on each side: Which can not choose but be irksome and displeasing to the
Auditory: And in conclusion, must necessarily be without effect, seeing that it
is impossible, ordinary memories should bear away such a multitude of notions,
so perfectly as to be capable of framing an exact judgment of them. Besides,
if any one Text of these were absolutely convincing, the rest would be
burdensome, and but hinder and embroile the evidence of the Conclusion: And if
none of them do prove it clearly: Then, all of them together, can but make one
side more probable then the other: Which signifies no more, then that, since
the best of them is but probable, you can rely on neither of them, as true and
certain: And consequently, all that is said, is of no effect toward the
ending of controversies; but is purely a superfluous labor and a trial of
wits; not a deciding of questions, or a settling of the auditory in the right
way to heaven.

It now remains only (in order to Scripture-disputation) that we speak of
such arguments as are drawn from places of Scripture, which do plainly
contain such verities, as are known and agreed upon by both parties, without
the authority of Scripture to prove them: So that, the sense and meaning of
those places is not at all ambiguous, or controverted by either side: And out
of these, you make your way, to your conclusion, or to other truths that are as
yet unknown to you, but that you desire to have certainty of.

Now clear it is, that, it would avail as much, to take the naked Truths in
themselves, without the words of Scripture; as to allege the words in this
case. For, the Truths themselves being acknowledged by both parties, it is
needelesse to bring any proof of them, And therefore, Scripture serves but
for an ornament in this discourse: And the whole force of the argument, is
drawn from the confessed Truths* And consequently, it is clear that this is a
discourse of reason not of authority: however, a far off, it may in some sort
depend on Scripture. Therefore, we need not trouble our selves at present
with discussing this sort of arguments; but shall remitt it to the examination
of reason, where on it depends.

I should here end speaking of arguing out of Scripture. But because it is that
which our adversaries do use most (at least, the Protestants and Calvinists,
and the Sects of their growth) and because some persons are so maddely
careless of their own salvation, that they will content themselves with
probability for their Religion; especially if Scripture be made the pretense of
it: I am forced to add yet a few lines, in regard of such persons as making
Scripture the only ground of their Religion, and judge their Controversies, do
not so much as aim at convincing arguments by the allegations that are
brought out of Holy Writ; Nor whether the point proposed, be true or false:
But whether side is the more probable or plausible, purely in relation to
Scripture.

Clearly, he who in any point will proceed according to conscience and
prudence in this way of arguing, is obliged to consider all that is contained
in the whole Scripture concerning that point; Weighing what he puts in each
side of the balance, with the best judgment God affords him; that so he may
judiciously pronounce sentence. For the doing of which, he ought to consider,
not only the number of places that concern his purpose, but their qualities
also; and be able to compare those, one with an other. Now this is so hard a
task, that the learned and ablest man a live, may despair of ever being
able to effect it. For, how can he, or any Man, with reason persuade himself,
that either he, or any other, has ever produced, or ever can produce, out of
Scripture, all that may from thence be alleged for any point in controversy;
since our Savior himself, has given us a clear example that arguments may be
drawn (and those, efficacious ones) from Texts where we least dream of any
such sense? As, when disputing against the Sadduces, he made this argument:
God, is God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. But he is not God of nothing:
Therefore Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, shall rise again, or do remain in soul,
hoping for their body and resurrection: who can be confident of saying or
knowing all that is in Scripture, concerning any point, when the proofs of
truths may lie in such unlikely places? Surely it must be, either a great
ignorance, or a great temerity, to undertake it. And therefore we may conclude,
that it is impossible we should ever arrive so far in this way of search, as
to know really what is more, or less probable out of Scripture. But all that
we may hope to attain unto, is, only to be able to judge what is more or
less probable, out of those places which well our selves do know; or at most,
out of those places which the Authors we have seen, do bring. And so, it is
evident, that they who rely on Scripture, or rather that profess to do so; do
not in truth rely upon it; but upon their own, or their Teachers diligence,
whom they suppose to know the whole latitude of Scripture-proofe. Which is not
only false, but impossible for any man to do.

The fourteenth REFLECTION. On the Arguments drawn out of the Fathers.
THe second nest of Authority, out of which, Arguments take wing. Is the
copious library of Fathers. Wherein it is to be considered, that whether
Catholic or Protestant be to argue, the Text he alleges has a double remove
from the conclusion he would prove, For, whereas in allegations of Scripture,
both sides agree, that what it says is certainly true (and so, all the
difficulty consists in knowing what is true meaning of the place alleged) it
is otherwise allegations of Fathers: For, in them, there arise two questions;
The one, whether that which the argugent pretends, be the Fathers opinion;
the other, whether that which the Father says be true, after it is agreed to
be his opinion.

For, neither Catholic nor Protestant, does agree to all things that one or
two Fathers may hold. But, indeed, Protestants do defy them all, And
Catholics require an universality in them, to make them infallible. So that,
if either Catholic or Protestant be the Arguer, he ought to settle beforehand
with his adversary, that such a Father or Fathers, as he intends to produce,
be of unquestionable authority between them; Or else, not to meddle with them;
for it were but labor lost, and breath cast away.

The Protestants use to make two comparisons in Fathers: The one, in Age or
Antiquity; the other, in learning or reputation. As for the former; they insist
much upon the three first Ages; supposing them to be purer then the rest. In
doing of which, it is evident that their aim is to reject all: For, when they
list, and that it concerns them, they will tell you that the impurity of
doctrine began as soon as the Apostles were dead. Now, if by this Impurity, they
mean damnable errors; then, by saying so they evacuate all the authority of
Fathers: For, they allow it no further, then as it pleases every disputant or
Minister to declare the point controverted, to be, or not to be, a damnable
error. And thus, even the three first Ages, are blown away with the rest. But
if the point in Controversy, be no damnable error, then the Fathers authority
imports little; erring being but of small consequence in such Matters as do
not concern salvation, and there being no obligation upon a Christian to know
unnecessary truths.

In a word; If the Church can err, and has erred these thousand years; it is
but courtesy, to say she did not so, in the former six hundred: And so, in
truth, the Fathers have no authority at all. But if it can not err; nor has
erred; Then, the Fathers of the latter Ages, own as good witnesses, as those
of the former, so they be induced with Universality.

The other comparison or distinction, that Protestants use to make of the
Fathers, concerning their learning and reputation; is as little to the purpose
as that of their Antiquity. For, we do not cite Fathers, as Doctors (whose
opinion, is no better then the reason they bring for it) but as witnesses;
whose authority consists in a grave and moderate knowledge of what is
believed and practiced by the Church, in the ages respectively wherein they
lived. And out of this it follows, that for wittnessing of Christian faith,
no one Father is to be preferred before an other. It is true, in some sense the
testimony of a more ancient Father, may be said to be preferred before a more
modern one; because the formal witnessing of it, is of more neerenesse to
Christ, and of longer durance toward us. But in regard of learning: No Father
has more authority, nor is more to be valued then an other, for what
concerns faith; though in other respects it be very considerable. For, a
less learned Father, is as credible a witness as the learned, of what is
the present practice and belief of Christians; so he have learning sufficient
to warrant his understanding and knowing so much.

And in reality, any Father whose authority carries us beyond the apparent
memory of mankind at present living, is as good as the best, for declaring the
faith of the Church in the time he lived in. Which because it received its
doctrine by entaile from age to age; every Fathers testimony (in such Matters
of faith) is firm and irrefragable.

To conclude therefore; The Catholic makes no difference of the quality of
Fathers, nor much of their Antiquity; but admits all, so they come with
universality.

The Protestant; though he will a little simper at it, yet in Conclusion he
rejects all; setting his own judgment (which he calls Scripture) for high
Umpire of what in them is right, what wrong. Therefore it is fruitelesse to
dispute against a Protestant out of the Fathers; unless you first settle what
proof of Fathers he will admit. Neither is it easy for a Protestant to argue
strongly against a Catholic out of the Fathers. For, if the Catholic will
bind him to it, he must bring an universality of them; or else, the Catholic
is not obliged to receive them: And how can he go about to do this, I
understand not. I mean, in a private disputation; where a Matter of three or
four testimonies, are capable of spinning out the whole time, that people
generally are willing to lend unto such an entertainment. Nevertheless the
presumptuous and vain Sophisters, are forward to cry out that all the Fathers
are on their side; as their Patriarche Jewel began the tune to them, so
shamefully, that his own Chaplain forsook him for his impudent falsehood.

But, concerning this point, It is to be noted, that although they break
(avowedly and confessedly) from the universal face of antiquity in all
Church-practise (as, in the Liturgies, Letanies, Mass, praying to Saints,
praying for the dead, most of the Sacraments, Relikes, Altars, Pilgrimages,
Fastings, Processions, Cochibate of Priests, religious men and women, and
almost all things of that nature) yet have they so little ingenuity, or rather
they are so impudent, as before women and ignorant persons, to boast themselves
Sectators of antiquity: and they undertake to prove it by certain broken ends
of Texts, concerning some special circumstance or nice point, in which they
have found some dark place in some Father.

I therefore putt these questions to any juditious person, who is curious to
hear disputation in Religion: Whether, in so large a Book as the Scripture,
it be possible (morally speaknig) that there should not be diverse hard and
obscure passages. And then; whether an eloquent Sophister may not make use of
such places, to circumvent and delude weak souls, unable to remember or mark
the contrary Texts, and to judge between them. Which if he also grant (as he
can not choose but do) I ask him again, what security he has or can have,
that his disputant is not such a one; or at least may not be such a one. And
what I say of Scripture, may be with much more force transferred to the works
of the Fathers, which are much more ample; and besides that, may contain
errors in them. So that in conclusion, all disputation out of Fathers, is but
beating the air; unless the parties be first agreed, what Fathers authorities
shall be allowed sufficient to decide and terminate their differences.

Yet after all this; the Protestant that is carried away with a belief of his
disputants abilities; will be still apt to reply, that at the least it can not
be denied, but that he who has studied the Fathers so well, as to be able to
make out of them, against Catholics, a ranged battle of such obscure places,
must needs be an able and a learned Man: and therefore he is not to be blamed
for following such a guide, who has read so much, and is conversant in the
Fathers; Seeing that they who are unlearned, and cannot upon their own stock
judge of such Matters, must rely upon those who have made them their long and
serious study. To him who shall make such an objection, it ought to be
represented; How mean and pitiful a change it is, to fall from the sple^dide
authority of the whole Church, to the obscure authority of a private Doctor, be
he what he will. As also, that to retire from the authority of few, or but of
one, were a, great imprudence in an unlearned man; Who because he is not able
to judge of the quality of Doctors, has reason to adhere to the quantity and
number of them. Besides, in all likelihood, this great Doctor (especially, if
he be young) has not read the Fathers themselves; but has taken out of other
Authors, that write of controversies, such places as he has found cited in
them for his purpose. And this argues but a small Modicum portion of learning;
though happily he may make a great show with it, among unlearned persons; like
one who can recite three verses of Homer, in a country School.

The Fifteenth REFLECTION. On Arguments drawn from reason, for Religion.
THere remains yet to be discoursed of, the last kind of arguments that may
be employed in disputations of Religion; whose store house, from whence they
may be drawn, is reason. For the performance whereof, let us consider; how
Religion is apprehended generally to be a knowledge above nature, and to be
derived by authority from a source of higher understanding then ours is. Yet on
the other side, It is evident that it can not be planted in us, otherwise then
that the root of it must of necessity be in Reason, seeing that Reason is our
nature. Now then, the root and basis of believing, is manifestly from this,
that we are persuaded we ought to believe; which imports as much, as that it
is reasonable we should believe. And therefore, the arguments, which in Matter
of Religion, ought chiefly to be managed out of Reason, should be in common,
whether it be Reasonable to believe what is proposed unto us. And because no
man can doubt whether it be reasonable to believe what God proposes; the whole
question is reduced to this point, whether it be reasonable to believe what the
Church or our forefathers deliver unto us, as the doctrine which Jesus Christ
(whose authority, no Christian excepteth against) did teach and deliver to the
world, from his eternal Father. In which question, the affirmative reasons,
belong only to Catholics; the negative, to all others.

Here, the Catholic disputant, has two ways to proceed: The one, is in a
manner Metaphysicall, and of a rigorous consequence; by showing that this
principle, of Adhering to our forefathers doctrine, in the way that the
Catholic Church relyeth upon it, could not have been taken up in any middle
age; but must of necessity have been continued from the beginning. And then, by
proving, that if this Principle has continued from the beginning, it is
impossible that any error should have crept into the Church.

After the doing of which; It is as evidently demonstrated, that Catholic
faith, is the sole true Christian faith, as that the three Angels of a
Triangle, are equal to two right Angels, or any other verity in Euclide or
Archimedes.

The other way is, to assume, to prudent moral men, that whosoever sees a
like evidence for Religion, as he judges, sufficient to venture his life, or
his estate, or his honor upon (and not be excused) neither in prudence, nor in
conscience, nor in honor, if he does not embrace it. For, if he sees the same
advantage in two several cases; and will venture in the one, and not in the
other: It is evident, he proceeds not according to Reason in one of them.

And in our case, whatsoever he may say to justifye himself, he cannot be
excused from making (in truth) no real and serious apprehension of the future
life, and of the goods of it. But, that sense prevayleth in him above reason.

Now, that the Catholic faith, has all the advantages, upon which wise men,
do use to adventure their lives, estates, and honors, will easily and clearly
appear, if the right way be taken to show it; the authority of the Church,
being so far beyond all witnesses used in judgments, and all probabilities
men use to rely upon in war and in marchandising, that there is no comparison
between them.

And the objections which Heretics use to bring, to hinder their clients from
embracing the Catholic faith; are for the most part but authorities of the
nature of those we have discoursed of before: Which, in such abundance of
writings as are in Scripture, and in the Fathers, cannot fail of being easily
met with, by those who purposely seek them; there being in them so many
sayings delivered upon the by, whiles the Author is attentive to some other
question, or in circumstances not well known to us: In fine, such difficulties
as is impossible to be avoided in much speaking; and that neither convince the
Authors mind, nor (much less) the verity of the question debated.

The Arguments which are drawn from reason, for the proof or disproofe of
particular points, are chiefly about Mysteries difficult in nature; against
which, Heretics use to frame the ordinary obvious objections. As, against the
blessed Trinity, how the same thing, can be one and three? against the
Incarnation, how the same person, can be God and Man? and against the Holy
Eucharist, how can Christ's body, be divided like a homogeneall body; or be at
the same time in different places? such kind of arguments, Universally, are
hard to be answered; because, neither the propounder, nor the auditory, have
(usually) Philosophy enough to understand the solution: and sometimes, the
answerer himself falls short. For, not every Catholic, nor yet every
Catholic disputant, is necessarily a great Philosopher. At the least, if the
Catholic disputant suspecteth his adversaries subtility in questions of this
nature, he ought either to be provided for him, or abstain from disputing, or
profess himself no Master in such speculations, and so rather wave them with
his own disparagement, then attempt them with the dishonor of the cause.

In other points, the objections against Catholic Truths, are generally very
trivial ones. As, against the Popes authority, that there cannot be more heads
or foundations then one; and that Christ, is that one. Against satisfaction for
sins, that Christ satisfied sufficiently for all mankind. Against praying to
Saints, that there is but one Mediator, or, that Saints have no ears, and
therefore can not hear: And the like; which are pitiful pulpit-bables, to
fill the mouths of weak persons; as soon as with one of these they have
troubled some simple person, that themselves are fit to dispute with the Pope
of Rome. Such toys, are obvious against any thing: And an exercised disputant,
can not be ignorant of the answers to them; though he may soon be weary of
the employement in answering them, and ashamed of having suffered himself to
be drawn unto it.

As for arguments from reason, to prove Catholic Truths: They may have as
much strength, as the disputant is capable of. For, no argument is so strong,
but that if it be shot from a weak hand, it may prove wholly blunt and
impenetrant.

And therefore, I leave the Catholic disputant to his own discretion in this
part: Which will tell him, that he ought not to engage himself in it, unless
he be assured, both that his dart is a good one, and that he has the dexterity
to aim it right, and the strength to throw it home.

Out of this short survey of the nature of arguments; a good Logician will
easily discern, that it is mere loss of time to fall on disputing with one
who is not able, or will not so much as profess, to bring a demonstration for
what he intends to prove: It being indeed to no more purpose, then the
tossing of balls in a tennis court.

So that the reason, why we answer, or at least ought to answer Heretics
arguments is; because they think them demonstrative, which are not for want of
sufficiency in Logic; and we make oppositions which are not demonstrative,
because they are not able to judge what a demonstration is, for to please them
with apples, whose stomachs loaht strong food.

The sixteenth REFLECTION. On the Qualities requisite in the Auditory, that is
present at the Disputation.
HAving said thus much of the disputants; It is reasonable to say a word or two
of the Auditory. Those then, before whom you are to dispute, are either
favorable to you, or contrary, or indifferent. And because these qualities,
arise either out of the understanding, or out of the will, we will take a
survey of these two faculties. To begin with the understanding: It is clear,
that in order to that, nothing rendereth a man unfitt to be at such a
disputation, but incapacity. And this, is either natural, or for want of study
and art, or by custom. The incapacity of nature, is helped by much
explication, and so is that which proceeds from want of study: with this
difference: that natural incapacity, is taken away by explicating the
particular Matter in hand (which is tolerable, because it does not draw the
disputation out of its own bounds. But when the incapacity is through want of
study: It is because the disputation supposes some principles, whereof the
Auditory is ignorant. And these are of two kinds. The one, Logical: the
other, Theological.

The first, happens chiefly in the use of disputation. As, if the Auditory
be ignorant of the form that ought to be used in disputing: and so, will have
the disputant play the defendants part: or contrariwise, the defendant act the
disputants part: or desires, that instead of rigorous form, they fall on
discoursing or preaching at large. Likewise, if he be ignorant of the right use
of distinction: And so, either hinders the defendant from distinguishing,
when it is necessary he should, or permits it him, when there are not truly
two senses in the words, the disputant speaks: But the defendant, by adding
some words of his own, seems to find two senses, where indeed there is but
one. As for example: If the disputant should assume that it is the nature of a
man, to have two legs: And the answerer should distinguish, allowing it to be
the nature of white men, but not of black men; or the nature of Europeans, but
not Africans.

Now if this be allowed, the disputant is wronged: For, taking his rise from
this, that to have two legs is the nature of a Man; he might prove that
Africans have two legs, because they are men.

So, for want of Logcik in the respondent, and in the Auditory, the defendant
is not allowed to take the nature of Man in common, but is confined to the
nature of an European, and so is putt beside his argument.

The second happens, when the Auditory is ignorant of some Theological
point, with is out of the listes of the Matter; So that the debate is drawn to
an other business: And the Auditory remains unsatisfyed and discontented,
thinking it is the disputants fault, whereas it is their own*

After the Incapacity which arriveth by nature, and that which proceeds from
want of study: The third is, that which accrueth out of Custom. And this is
likewise twofold. The one general, the other particular.

The first is, when the Auditor has been used to slight discourses in Matters
of study or learning; and so never bends himself to penetrate deeply into
the proposed question, but takes his resolution by fancy, who speaks well,
who does not.

The particular incapacity of the Auditor proceeding from Custom, is when he is
meanly versed in the question it self; and has been used to hear certain
terms for the final solution of it; unto which when the disputants are
arrived, he takes it for granted that all is said that can be said; and never
considers, whether the solution be solid, or the reply upon it be
efficacious, or no.

This incapacity, is proper to halfe-witted men, and to that kind of science
which is called Inflans; That is, a portion great enough to make one talk, and
think himself wise, but not able to make him know any thing solidely.

Thus having gone through what concerns the understanding; We are now to
consider what imperfections springing from the will, may render an Auditory
unfitt to assist at a disputation.

Let the first be, a Vanity or secret pride, which makes some men come to it,
not to see the truth of the thing in question (for, they suppose they are
already perfect in that; as thinking themselves to know more then any man else
does; and esteeming all knowledge to be but flashes of wit) but merely for
passe-time, or to censure the disputants.

Now these Men, having no aim or desire to improve themselves in any truth; If
any good happen to them, by being present at a disputation, it is against
their will: For they seek none.

There is an other sort of Auditors, faulty through the contrary disposition.
For, they are so diffident of themselves, that they dare not judge of any
thing: Or (which is worse, though possibly, themselves know it not) they have
their opinions and beliefes, absolutely tied, either to the repute of wisdom
ad learning, or to the Eloquence, of some particular person they passionately
esteem.

Now clearly, it were labor lost, to dispute for their sakes, who dare not
trust themselves to see the evidence of what you say; But either, confer
afterward with your adversary about it, and have not an equal recourse to
you; Or will not hear you speak, unless they have some body by, toblott out
the notions you endeavor to imprint in their understandings, before they can
settle in them.

So that it is in vain to cast your seed into such high ways; Where the
birds of the air, are continually picking it up, before it can take root.

A third, (and that, the most Universal) imperfection of the Will in an
Auditour; consists in some affection or interest; which he who has it,
either can not, or does not see.

Some are in awe of their Parents, or some powerful Friends; others, apprehend
their wife, or some familiar acquaintance; some, are afraid of perscription;
some have pretenses and hopes of rising in the world; some, of marrying
themselves, or their children; some, are carried away with the esteem of other
persons, either for their learning, or for their wisdom: Every one of them,
is biased by some respect, or other.

Yet if you tell them so; they are ready to protest, that were the truth
evident unto them, they would value none of these things, more then the dirt
of their shoes.

God forbid, I should think they counterfeit when they say so: For, you may
often perceive in them, evident tokens that their hearts go along with their
words; So that they deceive themselves, more then they do others.

And (which is their greatest unhappiness) they never suspect that these
interests, do prevent their seeing the truth, and hinder them from penetrating
and sticking, to what they hear and weakly apprehend.

The seventeenth REFLECTION. What is the best Manner, to find the truth of
Religion, by Conference.
OUt of what has been hitherto said, it follows, that Disputation seldom
happens to be the means of advancing any man in the truth of Religion. For,
laying for your foundation, that disputes in Religion between contrary
parties, are not to be instituted, but for the finding out of truth; you
presently discern, that all such arguments, as pretend not certainly, ought to
be excluded: Else, Religion is not to be taken for a speculative truth. This
being done, disputation is in a Manner cut off. All Grammatical arguments are
taken away and laid aside: as a laudable exercise for boys, but unworthy of
grave Men.

All such arguments as are called probable, are likewise banished the lists.
And these two being taken away, there remains little, worth the noise of
Disputation.

On the other side, in relation to the Auditory; It is not to be undertaken,
but before such a one as is able to judge of the due form and laws of
disputation; that can determine what is pertinacy, what well replied; and can
moderate the heat of the disputants.

Now, such a one, where may we hope to find? Surely, men endued with parts fit
for such a purpose, are not to be met with in multitudes.

Therefore, to have any good proceed from such a conference; the Auditors
should not be above two or three, or some very small company. For, as it is not
easy to find many, so qualifyed, as is necessary, for such an Action: So
likewise, if they were found and assembled, they would not easily concur to
the right governing of it; some of them, understanding things one way; some,
another.

After the manner of disputing; and the qualities requisite in the Auditory,
that is, to be present at the disputation; there remains a third thing to be
considered: Which is the subject or Matter to be disputed of. This ought to be
confined to such points as are necessary to be believed. Though in very deed,
this caution is only for Catholics: all others being free to what ever they
can defend, does not contradict Scripture. So that, being bound to maintain
nothing at all, they have (in their own behalfes) no occasion to dispute. And
when they do it; it is merely for the unsettling of others; especially, of
Catholics: who only, have a settled rule, and are bound to a known doctrine.
Wherein, if Catholics would hold themselves to such Tenets, as are truly
necessary, without engaging themselves in others that are not so; they would
mainely disappoint the large objections of their Adversaries.

But, to approach to our Conclusion. If disputation do carry in it such
difficulties, as it can scarce ever be either necessary or profitable; And yet,
the work of drawing to the true Religion^ those who are gone astray from it,
be so important and perpetual as it is. What shall we determine to be the best
course, to deal with erring people, to reduce them into the path of Salvation?
The answer is not hard, for either their will, or their understanding is faulty.
If the will, you are to consider, what be the particular obstructions of it;
whether, some love of temporal things; or merely tepidity. Of the former, the
common remedy is to inculcate the vanities of this world, and to represent what
will become of us in the next. Tepidity, proceeds from not being sufficiently
acquainted (as I may say) with the affairs of Religion, and the next life, or
out of a dullness of nature. The first is to becured, by engaging the party in
familiar conversation with good compa^y, where he may hear such spiritual
Matters often handled and discussed (whether it be by sermons, or by
discourses, or by colloquies and conferences) whereby, in pr^cesse of time, the
fire may kindle of it self, and break out into a quick flame. But, the
second is to be wrought upon with fears; as, by frequent commemoratio^, and of
hellfire. For, by any other course, nothing will be gained of such a temper;
especially, if the dullness be of that nature, that allurements have little
force upon it.

If the fault be in the understanding: It is, because the true motives of
Christianity, do not sink deeply into his soul. Now seeing that both
experience and reason do teach us, how the soul judges best. When it is most
at rest and in quiet; you are to draw your patient, what you can, into a kind
of solitude. That is; to choose the seasons, when least turmoyle, either of
business or of pleasures, does infest him: procuring also, that there be no
adversary, at that time, to hinder your reasons from taking root in him. For it
is cerraine, that he who will hear nothing but in opposition; and under
contestation; shall never, or but very slowly, come to understand truth: his
soul being like a Cistrne, into which the water runs by a spoute at one
end, and emptieth it self as fast by a hole at the other end. For, if as soon
as one makes a proposition or short discourse to enlighten the hearers
understanding, that he may see the truth of what is laid before him; an other
at his elbow presently crosses it, saying it is false, or raising
difficulties, before it be rightly apprehended; such a man shall never come to
understand what is said to him. Not but that happily he may get some glimpse
of it: But it will be like a flying vision; which permits not the judgment
to work upon it.

Let him therefore weigh deliberatly with himself, how Religion is the
seriousest, the severest, and the most important affair we have, or can have
in our whole lives: That it contains many propositions or parts; that every
one of them, requires a quiet and a settled judgment to determine it: That
this judgment can not be made by him, but in a calm, serene, and quiet
position and state of his brain: And after all this, he will clearly see, that
it is impossible, he should be able to perform that duty of Assent which is
required in so grave a concernement; whiles two adversaries do disquiet and
importune him with their earnestness and wrangling; in which their sayings do
slide by with great violence, and multiply themselves, before any one of them
can be quietly possessed.

But, what then? Must he not hear oppositions, and the conflict of both
parties? Yes, by all means. But in doing so; he must be sure, first, to make
himself Master of what one party says: And when he finds himself able to
propose his difficulty to the bottom; then, in the name of God, let them
encounter the adverse party. For, when only two rational men discourse of a
point, it will not be hard for him who seeks truth, to penetrate so far as
to see whether or no the adverse party is able to give satisfaction to the
argument proposed.

If he can salve it; then no change ought to be made in the inquirers opinion
and judgment; seeing both sides are equal.

But if he can not, then it is apparent on which side the truth lies; as far
as may be discerned, out of the learning of these two men.

So that, we may conclude there is no solid way but this, of arriving to truth
in matters of Religion: To converse first with the maintainer of one opinion:
Afterward, with the maintainer of the contrary opinion: with both of them, as
much without passion, as is possible: But never to bring them to conflict
together; when, both animosity, and shame of being overcome, shall debauch
their endeavors; and their quick replies, and many ambayes, shall leave the
auditour unable to judge solidely of what they say; though there were nothing
besides, to obscure and hinder the clear sight of Truth.

The eighteenth REFLECTION. On what is learning: And how mistaken.
I find still remaining, a disadvantage to the disputant of either side: which
I must strive to remove, if it be possible. It is a certain pre-possession,
settled in the belief of the Auditory, or of him that is to be persuaded; of
the learning and goodness of some private person or Doctor; upon whose
authority, truly, depends the belief of the party; though perhaps he
pretends the authority of Scripture, or of Fathers, or some other rule for
his assent. This enforced by custom (as impetuous a cause, almost, as nature it
self) lies like a great load upon the heart of him, who has a long time
(either by his own judgment, or by the constant cry of his neighbors, and of
those with whom he converseth) fixed and redoubled in himself a deep
apprehension of such a persons ability and honesty.

I shall therefore add here, some few marks, or rather distinctions, of
learning; to hinder men from erring in their judgments concerning it.

And first I must note, that there are diverse sorts of learning: And that it
does not follow, that he who is eminent in one sort, must therefore (of
necessity) excel in another. Geometry, Physic, Law, Philosophy, Metaphysikes,
and Divinity; are all of them different sorts of learning; all, so independent
of one another, that he who is excellent in one of them, may have but a small
share in any of the rest. Nevertheless, I often see that, if a man has any of
these in such a measure as to deserve reputation for it; the common sort of
people thinks he knows all things, and has recourse to him for what
belongs to another science: As if all learning were but one, because the name
is but one. Nor is this proper to the vulgar alone; but even they of better
rank, do often mistake the true kind of learning that concerns their present
occasion and purpose; expecting to find it in him, who has somewhat like it:
as will appear by further discourse.

The next observation then which we have to make, is, That not every ability
which is oftentimes taken for learning, is truly such; though it be a
commendable quality, and such a one as peradventure belongs properly to
learned men; however others acquire it, and there by gain the opinion of being
learned men. Of this kind, is the knowledge of languages. The which, are
divided into two sorts; some of them being termed vulgar tongues others
learned. The name of vulgar imparted ordinarily, that such a language is spoken
naturally in some country, and is proper to the people of that place, or to
some part of it. That language is generally accounted learned, which requires
books to the leaving of it, and has grammers and dictionaries to Study it by.
Though indeed, the term of a learned language has a higher signification; to
wit, a language necessary to the attaining of learning; or, in which learning
was or is delivered. For, learning generally being brought into our Northern
climates from the Eastern ones; and being first written in the languages of
those parts they have gotten the prerogative among us to be esteemed the learnd
ones. First, the Latin came out of Italy; then the Greeck, then the Hebrew and
consequently, the Arabic, the Syriack, the Chaldaick, even the Persian, the
Cophtick, and the Abyssive: though the principal ones, are the three first; in
which, the Chief of sciences, Divinity, is originally delivered unto us. Out
of which it is clear, that the knowledge of these languages in themselves, is
not true learning; but that it is the knowledge of things delivered in them,
which deserves truly to be esteemed so: and the knowledge of languages, only
instrume^tall to true knowledge or learning, so that, as we do not account a
man who is expert in French, Spanish, and Italien (properly speaking) to be a
learned man for having them, but a well-qualifyed Gentleman

In like manner, we should also say of him who is expert in the Oriental, or
learned languages, that by such excellency alone, he does not deserve the title
of a learned man; but of a well-qualifyed man; ranking this quality (in its due
degree) with the arts of Music, designing, Painting, Fencing, Dancing, ^iding,
and such other innocent employments of unbusied persons. Yet, because they are
as it were a step to learning, and do belong to learned persons, they have a
higher rank then those low and merely fancyfull exercises, both in
themselves, and in their claim to the attribute of learning.

This mistake of the term learning, in applying it to the knowledge of words;
is of so great consequence, that it forces me to look further into the nature
of learning. Learning then, is that which is made and begotten in a Man by
teaching. A teacher, is a master and an instructour. Now, seeing that the
exercise of both these qualities, is proper to men, and not to beasts; he is
truly a teacher, who teaches those things which belong to Man as Man: That is
to say, such things as make him more man, or more perfect in the nature of
man; which are, those on which depends the government of himself. The doing
of this, depends first and principally, of Divinity among Christians, as of
Metaphysikes and Morals, in the way of pure nature. It depends in the next
place, on the knowledge of the world, the which is taught us by the science of
Physikes or of natural Philosophy: And to this, Arithmetic and Geometry are
necessary: though peradventure these two may also have an other claim, upon
their own right for admittance, to a share of informing our soul of nature,
seeing that Quantity is the highest condition of natural things or bodies.

After these, the notion of learning, is derived to the science of Medicine or
Physike, by which we govern our bodies. Lastly, and of all the rest most
weakly, to the knowledge of Law, by which we govern our fortunes: our
disordinate affections, having made it necessary to us, and in a manner a part
of the Government of our selves.

These then, and only these knowledges do make a learned man. What besides
these, is called learning, is through mistake of the name: All other
knowledges, belonging only to some accidental action, or circumstance of man's
life; not to the governing of him as he is man. Not that I will quarrel about
the use of the word: But I endeavor to prevent the abuse of the things,
arising from the aequivocation of the word. For, it imports not how the name
is used; as being at the will of the Speakers: but it imports, that the
well-meaning auditor be not abused by the mistaking of that for real and true
learning, which is not so, nor can avail him for his pretended use and
behoof. Let this then be concluded, that no knowledge of words, makes a
learned man; but only the knowledge of those things which belong to the
Government of man's life.

There is yet an other quality, which more seemingly, though peradventure not
with so good ground, pretends to the appellation of learning. It is a faculty
of talking of those things which sciences or true learning do profess and
teach. And because true teaching consists in a verbal, and that chiefly
orall delivery of the teachers mind; this has a strange force (mong persons,
not well able to judge of the matter it self) to persuade that such talkers
are truly learned. He needs have a strong judgment, to be able to avoyde the
snares these men use to lay. The knottes of their aequivocations, are to close;
the thread of their discourse, is so subtle; the smoothness of their words,
and the well-ordering of their pathetick expressions, is to penetrant; that no
ordinary Auditor can escape them. He who is to cope with such agamester, must
either be truly learned, or beyond measure cautions. And yet (as I said before)
this plausible speaker, has not so fair a claim to learning, as the
Grammarian has, against whom we lately discoursed.

For, the Grammarian, truly knows what he professes: But this man, after he
has made a discourse of an hour long, after he has quite persuaded you: If
after all this you have access to the cabinet of his soul, and there enquire
of him, what opinion himself has, of what he has so handsomely spoken, and
that he will ingeniously disclose his heart to you: he will tell you, that he
knows not whether what he has said be true or no, but at the most, that of
any thing he knows, it is the likeliest to be true. Some ages passed, there
was in one of our Universities a man, who having made a long speech in defense
of Christian religion, with exceeding great applause of all his auditory, who
were ravished and fully satisfied with what he had said, did, through excess
of vanity (the predominant humor of such falters) break out into this horride
blasphemy. Little Jesus! how much art thou beholding to me? For if I would have
spoken against thee, how far more efficaciously could I have declaymed? The
story says, that he was suddenly stricken with such a loss of memory, that he
was feign to learn of new to read. Deservedly he: But what I deduce out of
this relation, is, first, that his reasons, though in his own judgment they
were not efficacious, yet they convinced the whole auditory; and that, of no
common persons. By which we may understand, that the reasons he brought, were
not demonstrations; nor were the best that might have been alleged for that
subject; Celse better could not have been opposed.) And nevertheless they
carried so great an Auditory. From whence we may infer, how violent a power,
the force of this art of talking must necessarily have upon the ordinary sort
of men, to make them take their Master for a great Doctor. An other note that I
make upon this occasion, is that all the talking of such men, is not, or ought
not to be, sufficient to persuade us, not only, that they speak the truth,
but even, that they speak their own minds. And after all their earnestness,
we may suspect their discourse is framed but to comply with the humor of the
times, or to promote their present interest, or to please their auditors. Tully
professes the same of his Orators; and says he also practiced it himself.
But here I may not omit the story of that expert general and understanding
man, Hanniball the Carthaginian. Antiochus having furnished him with a puissant
and flourishing army, would entertain him also with an Oration, concerning the
art of war, and the manner how he ought to proceed in it, made by a famous
and long-practised Orator, Phormio: who in the presence of Antiochus and his
Captains, discoursed to Hannibal of this subject, to the great applause and
admiration of all that heard him, excepting Hannibal; who being asked how he
liked him, answered that in all his lifetime he had never heard such an old
dotardly fool prate. A strange censure, one would think, on a man so
generally exacted and cried up. Yet if we consider, that Phormio had learned
his skill of war, only in written discourses and Histories; but Hannibal, in
the field and in action it self; we may easily conceive that Phormios Oration
talked of things in the air, and formed his adversary in his fancy: whereas
Hannibal had studied the things in themselves; and so, knew groundedly what he
spoke; and saw that all the Orators glorious speech, was but a painted
pageant, not any effectual exhibition of truth. Hence we may conclude, that
the ability of discoursing in a high strain and in a pathetike manner, is no
argument of true learning in him that exercises it; unless juggling and folly
in impertinency, may pass for learning. Who were better talkers, or better
discoursers then the Academikes? Yet their profession was, that they had no
truth; and that (indeed) there was none to be found.

The nineteenth REFLECTION. On what Divinity; And who is a Divine.
Let us now apply this to practice, and to our present subject. Religion (as
we have already said) is the most important and the most necessary business,
that belongs to Man's nature and action. It is so precisely one, that if a man
chance to mistake in it, be the cause what it will, he is lost for ever. For,
as he that misseth his way, comes not to his journeyes end; whether it be his
fault, or others misguidance, that has made him miss his way. So, who
treads not in the true path of Religion, never arriveth at eternal
happiness; let the fault lie where it will. Now, if learning in Religion, be
the skill of showing the path to heaven; and if all the great noise that these
talkers make, helps one never a step thitherwards, as not delivering any
point of truth that may be relied upon: It is evident, that the pretended
learning of such persons, is much further from the notion of true learning,
then the Grammar learning we spoke of before. For though learning be low ad
mean, as being only of words; yet, of them at least the Grammarian has
knowledge. Whereas this prating, this parrate-vertue; though it be of things;
yet is it not a science of them; but all is mere words and wind. I hear
them reply (as they want neither words, nor impudence to dispute against
evidence,) that though it is true they promise no certainty, because none can
be had; yet they make out high probability; which is the Princess that
governs humane affairs. I will not at present discuss whether there be any
certainty or no. It is enough that the Catholic Church professes certainty,
and ever has done so: and nature forces even the denyers of this truth, to
act as if they had certainty, in persuading and forcing others to their
opinions. But I wish that these men would speak plain English; and that in
lieu of this quaint term High probability, they would tell us the meaning of
it in words, that honest men may understand.

Let me see if I can help them. That which they mean by prohability, must
either be, some access toward truth, on the objects side; Or a strong
persuasion made in the Auditor. If it be a persuasion In the Auditory, without
any approach to the object; clearly, it signifies nothing else but a high
cheat, or an excellent juggle, with praise, neither may I deny, nor do I envy,
to such men. Then, for the objects side; If there be no fixednesse or certainty
of the object, by all the arguments of this high Orator: I can not comprehend,
there is more in all he says, then peradventure it is true, peradventure not.

So that, High Probability, signifies High Peradventure. Which how great a
Nonsense it is, if applied to fixed verities, that are not subject to the
mutability of change and chance (that is, how ridiculously it is applied to
Religion, and to truths of faith) is evident to every sensible man. If now, men
will needs have one termed a Divine, because he can thus finely talk in the
air, of God, and of things belonging to him; he must be a Divine of blind
Tiresias his tribe, who in the Poet professes his Divinity in these terms; O
Laertiade!
Quicquid dicam; aut erit, aut non:
Divinare etenim, magnus mihi donat Apollo.


The last part of the reply, tells us, that Probabiliry governs all human
action, I deny it not. But withal, I take notice, that Action, is one thing;
Belief, an other.

Human action, is about the gaining of a future End, which depends on
fallible principles; as all mortal things do; Which are continually involved
in a thousand uncertainties and changes.

But faith, is of unchangeable verities; which nothing has power to make
otherwise, then it is already settled. It is a parallel to science; I mean, to
true science; such as we se exercised in Geometry: for which, no man looks
into probabilities. And to expect that faith should depend on probabilities, is
no less ridiculous then to think the like of Geometry; since it is more
necessary, and more important then Geometry; and the way to heaven is missed
with greater danger and loss, then Geometry is neglected. Therefore it were a
great folly to imagine, that faith should not be as certain, and as easy to
arrive unto, as Geometry is: But that, whiles there are certain and infallible
rules for the measuring of lines and angles; there should be no certainer
course to secure ones eternal happiness and, avoyde endelesse woe, then to
venture it upon the hazard of the dice, or to play it at cross and pile: For,
his condition is no better then so, that takes his faith and Religion, upon
the recommendations of Probability.

But, when ones affection is once engaged, it makes his ears flow, and his
understanding dull, to any thing that can be said in opposition to what it is
set upon. And so, me thinks I hear these men redouble their complaint, and
ask me with indignation; what can we think? that one who has spent 30. or
40. years so well, should after so long earnest study be still accounted an
unlearned man? To this question, I dare scarce reply what is fitting. Yet with
their leave, I shall ask again of them, whether he that should have spent 30.
or 40. years in gathering rags out of the kennels, to furnish the paper
milles, or had cried card-matches as long; must of necessity, be thought worth
a thousand pound a year at the end of his labor; though no exceptions could
be made against him, either for diligence in getting, or frugality in
conserving what he had gained. In like manner; he that will judge a right of a
scholar or learned man; must, not only reckon up the years of his study, and
the pains and industry he has employed in it; but consider also in what he
has bestowed it. For, if it were applied, only to seek out the proprieties
of Latin, and Greek words; if only in Criticismes, whether of Grammar, or of
History; It will avayle him no more toward the attaining of true learning,
then the selling of Card-matches, toward the purchasing a Manor of a
thousand pounds a year.

But peradventure some may object, that the comparison holds not in these two
cases. For, the Student here spoken of, is supposed to have spent his age, not
in turning over tryffling books; but much of it, in reading the holy
Scriptures and Fathers; in which, by our own confession, true learning is
contained. Therefore how can he be suspected of ignorance and want of learning?
Nevertheless, even this objection shakes not my resolution. Only, it
obliges me to take new information, of what it was he looks for, all this
while, in those learned books. It is said of the Kings of Narsinga and of
Pegu, that in their prosperities, they gathered such vast treasures, both of
precious metals and stones, that they were feign to let them lie heaped up in
great courts, because chambers were not able to contain them; the Successor
ever vying to out do his Predecessor. Now I ask if a dunghill cock had been
turned into these courts, how much richer would he have come out then he went
in? Certainly, nothing at all: Because he looked not there for the heads of
Gold or Diamonds; but searched about for some grains of wheat or barley, or
scratched the ground for some worms, and such things fit for his stomach.

In like manner; when a young Gentleman that travelleth into foreign countries
upon pretense of endeavoring thereby to enable himself; if during his abode
in any great city, as Paris or Rome, his enquiry is after nothing, but where
the best Tavernes and entertainments are; Can it be expected, that at his
return home, he should be able to give a good account in substantial matters
of the places he has been in? So, if these great Students look into the
scriptures or Fathers, to find out what a Metreta, or a Corris, or an Ephod is,
or in fine, sift out Genealogies or Chronologies, and spend there forty years
in such peddling divinity; can it be imagined that at the end of them, they
should be any nearer the true quality of Divines, then when they began?

Besides, though they should seek for true knowledge; yet if they take not the
right way, it is impossible they should ever acquire it. As those pictures
which are contrived by the ingeniousnesse of Mathematicians, to be looked upon,
either through some kind of glass, or purely by choosing a certain position,
do require some one determinate Situation for the eye to be placed in; else
they appear not: so, is the nature of all words and their objects, as far
as the truths are dependent from the clothing of the words.

Especially, there is a degree of attention belonging to them: which if it be
too little, the words are not understood: If too great; that which before was
clear to you, becomes dim by equivocations of words and their
constructions: And the more you look upon them without passion, the more
changeable is their aspect to you, and you grow less certain of what they
mean. Whereas, with Reason it fares contrary wise. The more, and the more
impartially, you look upon a demonstration; the more clear, and the more
certain it becomes to you. Therefore in a text where Reason and the nature of
the words, do concur to the explication of those words; they will be better
understood by arguments from Reason, then the sense and reason from the words:
And when ever it happens, that the sense and meaning is certain by reason,
but the text or letter ambiguous, it is evident, that the latter ought to be
governed by the former. And accordingly, they who in matter of Religion, do
receive knowledge of the truths belonging to it, by a way not depending on a
certain form of words; have a mighty advantage in the explication of
scripture, over those who do but, as it were, shake the words together like
lottes in a bag: which is the condition of those who have nothing but the
bare words of scripture to rely upon, to understand the true meaning of them.
It is not the^ the number of years, that a man has spent in turning over the
bible, or that he has employed in reading greek and latin authors, which can
justify him to be a great Divine: but there must be considered also, what he
sought there, and how he sought it; and with what freedom from passion and
partiality; which alone has a huge stroke in making a man understand rightly
or erroneously what he reads.

Upon this occasion, there comes into my mind a truth; which peradventure may
seem a Paradox; but being looked into, will appear evident of it self: and it
is, that a boy, who can neither write nor read, may be a greater Divine them
some man who has studied scripture his 40. years. He who doubts of this;
let him remember, that divinity has for its End, the knowledge of these
truths which are to guide us to heaven; and that the knowledge of them is so
necessary that without it, no excuse of that ignorance can hinder our perishing
eternally; and therefore, that the knowledge of them ought to be as certain,
as any demonstration can be. Then, let him consider, that 40. years study may
be employed, without arriving (by the force of such study) to demonstration
sufficient to assure a man of all points necessary; as the hundred years
debate between Catholics and Protestants, (without being one foot further
advanced, then the first day) does amply make manifest. The conclusion then is
evident, for as much as concerns the students part, that 40. years study
does noth necessarily make a man a Divine. Now let us turn to the other side,
and consider a child of a dozen years old, never putt to School, further
then in the Church to be taught in a Catechisticall way the sum of Christian
doctrine; and to know that it is to be held because it is descended from
Christ, by the perpetual handing it from age to age in the whole Catholic
Church. And let us enquire whether this child be a Divine or no. If the
question be of the matter: He knows what is sufficient for him, to bring him
to heaven; to breed in him the love of God, and obedience to the Church, set
by God to direct us in doing our duties for the attaining eternal salvation.

Again, this child has that ground for his belief, which is more certain
then any demonstration in Euclide or Archimedes. Why then should we doubt but
that this boy has all that is necessary for the being a Divine; and much more,
then the long studied pretender to divinity can show for himself? One may
object, that he does not penetrate the force of succession, which is the
foundation upon which his divinity is built.

But whether that be or no, this is certain; that he holds it upon that rule
and Principle. And if we should oblige a science, or any kind of certitude, to
understand thoroughly all its principles, we must take away all sciences but
Metaphysikes, and blotte out of Logike, the distinction of sciences
subalternative and subalternated, and deny Geometry and Arithmetike to be
sciences because the most of Mathematicians do not understand, nor teach the
force of those Maxims, by which a syllogism necessitateth our assent.

Peradventure, some may reply that divinity, properly, signifies a science
drawn out of articles of faith, either alone, or joined with certainties of
Philosophy: And that this boy can not pretend to such a science. To this we
answer, that speaking rigorously in the use and phrase of the School,
Theology or divinity signifies indeed such a quality as the objecter says.
But in ancient writers, it is also taken for the knowledge of faith; And that
when we speak of a boys being a Divine, we mean it in this latter sense.
Nevertheless, if the comparison be made in the former sense of the science of
divinity, (which is properly such; and which neither of them has) the boy is
nearer to it, then this Doctor. For, as it is true, that he who knows never a
demonstration in Euclide, can not be called a Geometrician, though he have
learned the Axioms and Petitions and definitions premised before the
demonstrations: so, neither is he a Divine that knows only faith yet (to
continue the same comparison) as he who acknowledges the definitions and other
prerequisite truths, is nearer being a Geometrician, then he who doubts of
them: so, the boy, who believes all the articles of Christian faith which he
already knows; and has the rule by which to be certain of any other, when
they are proposed to him; is nearer being a Divine, then he who calls
himself a Divine; because for 40. years together he has doubted and disputed
of the Principles of divinity; which must be agreed unto, before divinity it
self can be so much as commenced. And out of this, may easily be understood,
how great a cheat and imposture is put upon well-meaning people, when such
teachers are termed Divines, and pass for Doctors; who truly are but petty
sophisters and wranglers in that noble and holy science.

The twentieth REFLECTION. On the Civilities to be used, in treating of
Controversies.
BUt it is no easy Matter to allay a passion once raised. One objection cannot
be so soon quelled, as an other boyleth up and breaks forth. And so the same
men press, that be their Masters learned or ignorant; however, they are good
moral men, and that civility at least is due to them, and that they ought to
be treated with honor and respect. Far be it from me to deny it. For,
civility is a duty between man and man, upon the score of manhood; not upon
any spiritual account: and therefore, every one who makes not himself
unworthy, is the object of it. But least, out of general sayings, there should
grow mistakes in particular; it is fit we should a little unfold the common
Axiom.

The name of Civility, comes from that of a City: because, both first, and
most generally, the sweetness of behavior expressed in this term, is seen
and practiced in Cities. It extends it self no further then to
conversation; those virtues, which bear a man to goodnesses of more serious
considerations, purchasing to themselves nobler denominations. It consists of
two parts: The one negative, to prevent offense; the other positive, to afford
content and satisfaction. It dwells (as most virtues do) between two
contrary vices; being infested with rudeness below, and with flattery above.
Its matter, is both in Action and in words. Rusticity, is in action,
boisterous; in words, offensive. Adulation, is in action, Apish, in words,
hyperbolicall and lying. Now Civility* in all actions, bewareth giving offense,
and is prompt to any convenient service. In words, as far as it can, it
takes no notice of others defects, and gives the true poise to their
perfections. And human actions are so ordered by God and Nature, that there are
very few, which lie not open to reprehension on some side or other; and none,
but may deserve to be commended for something, so that it is in the power of a
judicious man, to commend or to discommend, with truth, the actions of any man
whatsoever: And much more, the actions of those persons, unto whom a great
variety both of actions and of qualities, must necessarily appertain.

Prudence therefore ought to govern Civility (as it does other virtues) and
instruct a man, when, and how far, in particular circumstances, any Action is
to be blamed or commended. And as it governs the language that belongs to
civility, so it ought to do the like in the action relating to it, which are
apt to fall into excess or defect, unless the bridle of Prudence do guide
them to march in the straight middle path. Out of all which it is apparent to
the discreet Reader, that the moderation of Civility, is a task hard enough to
describe; and many times disputable both sides, how far the duty of it
obliges.

To apply this doctrine to our particular use, we must add one little note
with it, that the civility exhibited, may be in respect of the present action
or quality out of which the action formally is considered; or else, in respect
of some other quality of the same person.

To speak more clearly. A Catholic, who writes or disputes against a
Protestant, or conferreth with him, may defer to him, either in his very
argument, or in other things not concerning it, as, he may acknowledge him an
eloquent man, a good Linguist, a subtle Critike, or some other commendation
belonging to either his understanding or his will:

Or else, that his argument is good, or hard to be solved, or that his skill in
divinity, is extraordinary, or the like. Now as for this last commendation; It
is evident that it can not be given him without prejudice to the cause the
Catholic maintains.

And therefore, even if it should prove true (which it is impossible it shoud)
Prudence would advise his adversary to wave taking notice of it, as far as
ingenuity will allow him. But he needs not apprehe^d being reduced to
streights upon this account. For, Protestant arguments out of authority, are
easily answered: And if some drawn from reason, be difficult and intricate; it
is, because that nature upon which the question depends, is obscure and
unknown; not because the Divinity part has any special difficulty in it.
What the pitch of Divinity is, that a Protestant may arrive unto, we have
already declared. As for other qualities both humanity requires we should
afford them a friendly esteem of their good parts; and the very aim we have
in discoursing with them, (which is, to change their judgments, to agree with
ours) makes it no small part of our business, to proceed with a fair and
just difference toward them; if we understand, how much the will conferreth
to incline the judgment, and how powerful courtesy is over the will.

As for the arguments themselves; it is necessary (especially in writing, which
allows descending to many particulars) to show that they are but slight ones,
and that they proceed out of ignorance, and that they imply a great distortion
in the will of him that makes them (which only causes them to be well
esteemed of) and the like, according as there shall be cause. It is necessary
also to display, how the producer of such arguments, is not a man to be replied
upon; nor has those qualities which are requisite in a teacher. For, either
his brain is weak; or the will of maintaining an evil cause, works upon
him to throw out pitiful and trivial objections, instead of framing strong
and solid ones, which is the worse condition of the two. Now, with what
justice, may one give the commendations of an honest man, to one that for his
own honor or interest, will maintain a proposition himself knows to be
false; especially, of that nature, that the salvation or damnation of the
hearer (as well as his own) depends on it.

Were it not better, he cheated me of my purse, robbed me of my credit, took
away my life; then to bring my soul into the hazard of perpetual damnation?
How then can he who does this, be esteemed an honest man, and worthy of such
civil testimonies, as shall enable him the more to ensnare poor souls; who
will rely the more upon him for his receiving such applause?

He may peradventure defend himself, by saying, that if he seduceth others, he
is first seduced himself; and so, ignorance excuses him, at least from being
malicious and wicked.

But, he mendeth his cause very little by this plea: since, he who undertaketh
to be a Master of others, (especially, in matters of so great consequence and
hazard) must not be admitted to allege ignorance for an excuse. Why does he
undergo the office of a teacher, if he understands not what he undertaketh
to teach? He who will affirm any thing, must first know it: Else, he is a
liar; and if it be in a matter of great prejudice, a knave. Perhaps he will
again answer for himself, that there is no means to come to certainty in
Religion; and that therefore he is not more faulty for being a teacher, then
every one else is that does the like. In saying thus; first, he blasphemeth
against God; as not having provided mankind of that, which far beyond all
other things, is most necessary to it. Secondly, he proceeds very rashly;
for, how does he know, or what demonstration has he made, or can he make, that
he knows all that can be said to the contrary? Thirdly, he knows (with out
the least doubt) that either himself or his very late predecessors, did leave
the way they were bred in. Now if it were but for likelihoods, and that there
be no certainty in Religion, how was it honestly done by the first that made
the breach; or is now, by him who maintains it, only upon peradventures.

But to make it appear more evident, that they who have left the Catholic
Church, or that still keep out of it, are unexcusable; and to take away their
mis-understa^ding of some points, wherein their mis-taking of what we believe,
may seem to justify (in some sort) their deserting us: I will set down a
short explication of Catholic doctrine, as far as it is controverted by
judicious and sensible men on both sides: Against which, I scarcely believe
that any prudent person will think it fit to make an objection: unless it
be, out of natural reason, where the Mystery is difficult; not for it self,
but because we understand not nature. As he who perfectly understands
Logic, will have no difficulty to believe the Trynity: who knows the
composition of body and soul in Man, will easily admit the Incarnation. And
who comprehends how living Creatures do nourish themselves, will not stick
at the Mystery of the Eucharist.

I pretend not to set down all: For, as there is no All, of those
demonstrations (for example) which may be made of the natures of a Triangle or
of a circle; So far less, of the dependencies of the Mysteries of our faith;
which the opposition of Adversaries may make necessary to be known and
professed. Therefore I content my self with those, which I apprehend to be the
most troublesome, among the points in controversy now at present.

A brief Explication of Catholic faith, in order to modern Controversies.
We believe, that from all Eternity there was a Thing not made by any other,
but having its being from ^^selfe, without beginning or springing That this
thing is unchangeable an^ immortal: Having neither parts no^ composition, and
so, is perfectly indivisible and spiritual. That this same Thing, is
Substantially and Essentially knowing and loving it self: And so, is a
substance known, a substance knowing, and a substance loving the Thing known.
That, as a thing known, it is from which the thing knowing is, and as a Thing
known and knowing, it is from which the substance or Thing loving is.

That, as it is a substance knowing or knowledge, we explicate it well by a
name taken out of our natural considerations, that is, by the word son: and
likewise, as it is a substance known, by the word Father: But, as it is a
substance love, it is not well expressed by either ^f these names; but by the
common ^ame of an Holy Spirit or Ghost, made proper by want of a proper
expression. And this is that we mean, when we ^ay there are in God three
Persons: Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

This indivisible thing, we call God: and profess, that he made time; and in,
or with, the beginning of time, all other things: Whether, spiritual and
indivisible, or bodily and subject to division and corruption or mortality.
Among the rest, and as the principal of these Creatures which we know by our
sense and conversation, he made Man: that is, one man and one woman. He made
them such, that by the corruption they were subject unto, they should not be
extinguished like the other Creatures set round about them: but should
remain, spiritual things, capable seeing him, and of eternal happiness.

These two, he created in such state, that reason was in them more powerful
then sense: And could, with ease, have kept them from all unreasonable actions,
and from the unhappy effects of them; had not the Envy of an other
Intellectual creature (whom we call the Devil) seduced the woman, and by her
means, made the man also eat of fruits, which they were forewarned would
bring them death and misery.

By this means, disorder being brought into the two first men, both in body
and soul; all their progeny became vicious; every child drawing from his
parents, disorderly inclinations, which avert him from the love and care of
true Bliss; and which, strengthened by custom and opinion, were able to carry
the whole mass of Mankind to eternal infelicity, the just and deserved
punishment of this default and its evil consequents.

This slavery of Man kind to sin, was so strong, that God Almighty was
forced to let great raines destroy it all; reserving (by his mercy) only 8.
persons to people the world a new; making the world it self much less
distractive or inveighing with the pleasures of it, by making it fuller of
miseries. And after a while again, he was forced to pitch upon one man and his
seed, (neglecting the rest) to conserve in them (though weakly) by laws and
special government, the seeds of virtue; often strengthening them by
extraordinary means, and increasing their knowledge. Yet for all that, virtue
faded much in them. This people, he governed first in Republike, afterward in
Royalty; and lastly by Priests, until, notwithstanding all his care and their
science, the people was grown into an extremity of perverseness.

Then he came to the last remedy; and taking, or as it were, grafting into his
own substance, the nature of Man; became the teacher and example to Mankind,
of all virtuous actions and good life. And because man's nature was grafted by
its noblest part; that is, by his Meus, or root of understanding; to which
God, as a substance knowledge, has proportion; It is rightly delivered unto
us, that the son of God took flesh upon him, to be our guide and rule; and
not, the Father or Holy Ghost; though they, (both of them) are inseparably in
him.

So, God; who by his Ministers had hitherto instructed mankind by Allegories
and similitudes, proportionable to their carnal imbecility; Now, in his own
person opened the way to heaven in as plain terms as man's nature is capable
of; teaching to abstract our selves from the love of creatures and to adhere to
him by love of future bliss of our souls.

Having completed the course of his teaching by word and example; and having
showed us how to bear, not fear, the miseries of this world, even death it
self; he thought good to give us a scantling of our future bliss of body,
being raised to life the third day after his death, and during 40. days showing
us a new Nature which our bodies are to obtain in the last resurrection, if so
we deserve it.

During his abode upon earth, he chose certain believers, called Apostles, and
under them, did set a number of disciples: gave them authority to preach; and
practiced them in it, even during his own life; but ordered them more
especially toward his departure, how they should behave themselves in the
conversion of Jews and Gentiles, and how they should govern the people they
converted and brought to his belief.

After this, he left them; ascending in their sight above the clouds. And
after 10. days (according to his promise) he so replenished them with faith
and charity, that he made them fit Executors of his commands, and instruments
of building the Church, he intended to spread over all nations. He gave them
fervor of heart, knowledge of tongues, and power of miracles; together with
discretion to use all, to the end for which he designed them.

This Church, being to consist of all mankind, as one Body-Politike; He
thought fit to set universal rules of certain external actions and
practices common to all; by, and in which they should communicate together and
know one another.

And, the maine scope of this instruction being to bring Men to the honor and
service of God, He made likewise for the principal of our eternal actions,
one to be a public testimony and recognisance that God is the sole Author of
good to us, and absolute Master of Life and death, of Being and of Not-Being.
Such a ceremony, is called a Sacrifice.

This he did immediately before his death, taking bread and wine; and after
imposition of his hands or blessing them, he assured us that the thing he then
gave, was, that very body which was to be wounded, and that very Blood which
was to be shed, for us. And so, against all prejudice of sense, we believe
that the substances of bread and wine, were changed really into the substance
of this body and blood; notwithstanding that the Natures (that is, all the
operations and resemblances) of bread and wine, do remain as before.

This he commanded his Apostles to do; and by mediation of this sacrifice or
obtestation or highest Prayer, to obtain for the quick and the dead, what
ever is fit to be impetrated for them. He commanded also that doing this, we
should remember, or rather commemorate, (that is, offer in a human phrase to
Gods remembrance) his death and passion.

For, as it is a true sacrifice by the real and local parting of his body and
blood; so, this being done under the shapes of bread and wine, becomes a
figure and allegory of the real and blondy separation of them made upon the
holy Cross. This sacrifice, performed which convenient ceremonies, we usually
call the Mass.

This incorporation of all Christians into the body of Christ, by participation
of this sacrifice; is the highest motive of love to Christ and to one another;
that can fall into man's heart; and therefore has ever been a symbol or token
of peace among Christians; and is esteemed, the Mystery or sacrament of
Charity. But because Christian life, consists of seven virtues; three,
Theological; and four, Cardinal) Christ delivered other six Sanctifications
or Initiations, to enter us in the other six virtues.

Baptism, for faith: Confirmation, for hope: Penance, to redress the wrongs
we do to God, and to our neigh-bour: Matrimony, and Extreme-Unction, to injure
us to temperance, and to fortify us against the terrors of death.

Prudence, because it eminently belongs to commanders, received its proper
initiation in the installing of Spiritual Gouvernours; which are, Priests and
Bishops. Who being more eminent in Science and Charity, have power to govern
the flock o^ Christ.

And to the end that emulation might not break unity among them; Christ, by
his own practice and mouth, gave the Primacy to Saint Peter: to whose see and
successor, inferior Bishops were to have recourse, in all public necessities
or dissentions of the Church: And who at this day is commonly called the Pope.

It is incredible, how great increase of devotion and Charity, accrueth to
Christian people by the reverent administration, and faithful reception, of
these sacraments. What respect and awe toward to what adhesion their
teachers; their doctrine; what obedience to their directions; in fine, how
great a life to the Church, and eminency above such synagogues as are destitute
of these holy institutions.

The Apostles therefore, armed with these and the aforesaid powers, dispersed
themselves into all the quarters of the earth; planting this common doctrine
and practice through the universe; and dying, left the inheritance of the same
to their successors: Who, in debates about doctrines, and in other dissentions,
meeting together, and finding what the Apostles had left to the Churches they
had planted, did cast out such as would not conform themselves to the received
Tradition.

And so, Christians were divided: The parties cast out, being denominated from
their Masters or particular doctrines; The part adhering to the Apostles
Tradition, retaining the name of the Apostolic Church. Which because it was,
as it were, the whole of Christians, was therefore termed Catholic or
Universal.

These Apostles and Disciples, left certain writings: But, neither by command
nor with design, to deliver in any or all of them, a summary of our faith;
but, occasionally teaching what they thought requisite for some certain place
or company; which the Holy Ghost intended for the comfort of the Church. In
which, as we profess, there is nothing false or uncertain; so we know the
unwritten Preaching, ought to be the rule of their interpretation; at least
negatively.

Neither can we vindicate those books from the corruption of transscribers,
and much less of Interpretours: whose labors can not pretend to the authority
of scripture, otherwise then by a known conformity to the Originals.

Tradition therefore, became the rule of faith: and Counsels and Apostolical
Sees, became the infallible depositaries of Tradition. The other Sees failing,
either by the destruction of Christian Religion in those quarters, or by a
voluntary discession from the rule of faith, the Roman See, first instructed by
the two chief Apostles, and afterward by perpetual correspondence with all
Christian countries, and their recourse to it, in matters of faith and
discipline; remained the only single Church, which was able, in virtue of
perpetual succession, to testify what was the Apostles doctrine.

Afterward, Heretics confounding, equivocally, the names of Apostolic and
Cathlick, by an impudence of saying what they list, without show of reason; the
Catholic party has been forced, for distinction sake, to add to their Church
the surname of Roman: Declaring there by, that the Roman particular Church, is
the Head and Mistress, and cause of Unity, to all those Churches that have
share in the Catholic.

By this link of truth, namely, of receiving doctrine by succession; and by
the link of Unity, in the Roman head of the Church; as the Church has
hitherto stood in Persecutions, Heresies, and Schisms; so, we are assured, it
will never fail until the second coming of Christ; but do hope it will
increase into an universal kingdom of his; to dure an unknown extent of
Ages, (designed in the Apocolypse by the number of a thousand years) in great
prosperity; and in freedom, both from Pagans without, and from Heretics with
in; and in great abundance, of Charity and good life.

This being evidently the effect of Christ's coming; we see, that the general
good life of Mankind (which proceeds from the knowledge of the End, to which
we are created; and from other motives and means delivered by Christ's
doctrine) was the great and only design for which he took flesh; that is, to
be the cause to us of a happy life, both in this world, and in the next.

The which, having been the main advantage of the State of Paradise, or of our
nature before corruption; It is clear, that Christ has repaired the fault of
Adam, by making whole Mankind, capable of attaining everlasting bliss; unto
which, before his coming, one only family had means to arrive.

The settling of Mankind in this repair; restored it to such a condition in
respect of God, that from thenceforth, he resolved to bestow his greatest
benefits upon it; that is, eternal felicity: Whereas before, as long as it was
in the state of sin, his decrees were for its Universal Damnation,

By which, it is clear, that Christ appeased his Fathers wrath, and made him a
friend, of a foe he had formerly been, unto us.

So that, because eternal bliss follows out of a good life, and out of a
constant habit or inclination to it: as likewise, damnation, out of the state
of a sinful inclination: formal justification and sanctity, do consist, in
the habit of good life, and the state of damnation, consists in an habitual
inclination to sin: Neither the one, nor the other, in an extrinsecall
acceptance or refusal of the Divine Will, or its arbitrary Election or
dislike: which are only the efficient causes, from whence (proportionably to
their natures) they depend.

Further, because Mankind was not able, of it self, to get out of the State
of sin, and by consequence, lay in subjection and slavery to it: And seeing
that Christ by the explicated means and actions did set it free, and gave it
power to come out of that subjection and misery, he did clearly Redeem
Mankind from this servitude of sin, and of sins Master the Devil; and
gave it the liberty wherein it was created at the first.

And because Christ did this by his death, and by the penal actions of his
life, he is rightly said to have by them paid a ransom for mankind.

Notwithstanding this general preparation, by which Mankind was enabled to
well-doing, no particular man arriveth to any action of virtue, without the
special providence and benevolence of Almighty God: By which, (by convenient
circumstances, both external and internal) he prepares the heart of that man
unto whom he is gracious and favorable, to receive these common impressions,
and makes it good earth fit for the seed of his eternal cultinatour; who
without any respect to former merits, planteth faith and charity, and all that
is good in him, merely of his own benignity and gratiousnesse.

This he does; not, by immediately determining the man; but by so sweetning the
proposals, that they overcome his heart, and make it determine it self
according to the will of God.

For, Divinity teaches, that the power of God, after it has given Being unto
creatures, does nothing immediately by it self; but all, by the mediation of the
second causes, only setting them on work. So that, if (as some Philosophers
held) and is yet the manner, by which many apprehend creatures to work, they
could work of themselves, and did so, without being pushed on by him, just the
very same things would happen, as now they do. So that, neither Predestination
nor Reprobation, by being what they are purely in God, do bring any change at
all in our wills determinations: Nor ought there any mention to be made of
them, further then to show Gods wisdom and goodness, who foresaw and
fore-willed, and so caused (like an universal, not like a particular cause)
all our actions, as far as they are good.

Only, where something occurreth, wherein it is fitting that the course of
material causes should be moderated, and directed above their own line, to
the right government of Mankind; there, the Allmighty goodness has other
instruments to perform his will. These, we call Angels; incorporall and
spiritual substances. The which, being created with the beginning of time, but
not subjected to time, were, independently of time, perfected for their own
Bliss or Misery: Those who envyed man's felicity in becoming God, remaining in
such darkness and torments, as extremity of willfulness causes in natures
of that kind, which are, beyond all that we can imagine: the purer part of
them by adhesion to Gods disposal, becoming participant of his sight, with an
unconceivable bliss and happiness.

These, under his divine Majesty, do govern humane actions, and their
negotiation for Bliss: the blessed Party of them, being ready to furnish us
with all goods, as far as the course of Providence requires and permits:
The bad being prompt to inflict upon men, all harms of soul and body, when
ever the hand of Providence does not hold the reins.

This, each sort of them does, in common and in particular, when the ordinary
course is to be inverted, for the sweeter bringing of Mankind to the intended
Bliss. And such of them, as are specially intent to particular persons, are
used to be called, their Guardian Angels, if they be good; Devils or Accusers,
if they be wicked Spirits.

By these ways and Instruments, Christ planted his Church, and governs it,
and will conserve it as long us this world (which was made for it) shall
continue: keeping it free from Error, and in the quality of a Teacher, a
Commander, and a visible Tribunal unto which all may repair who seek
salvation.

But when the fore-designed work shall be finished, and the number of our
brethren be completed, then, shall the world be consumed by fire, Mankind
rise, and appear before Christ, their Judge, and receive their eternal dome,
and all time and motion be ended and turned into a constant state for all
Eternity.

The good, shall receive the full reward of their virtue, which in this life,
is but inchoated in their souls. If they went out of their bodies, perfect in
charity, they enjoyed immediately the sight of God, and do assist us now by
their prayers, as they did, living, by their merits, that is, by their good
example and profitable labors for their posterity.

And so, we invocate them, and desire God, that both their prayers and merits
may be beneficial to us.

And because we account them Persons highly worthy, and in the favor of God,
we therefore testify so much, by keeping their dying-days Festival, for the
encouragement of others to imitate them: And we bear a respect to their
Relikes, such as we do to holy instruments, as the Bible, chalices, consecrated
oils, and the like: And as we kiss the hand of a Prince, or the garment of a
Prelate, intending it as a ceremony of honor to him, so, we kiss the relikes
or pictures of Saints, and especially crosses, (which we take for the pictures
of Christ crucified) making that kissing, the ceremony of expressing honor to
the Person represented. This, in the Greek and Latin expressions, is called
Adoration, which signifies, kissing: That, being the most ancient and natural
ceremony of protesting a loving honor.

And, the words reaching, in a diverse sense and meaning, to the thing
immediately touched, and to the Person to whom the honor is done; It is said,
that both of them are adored by the same act of adoration; but, the one
materially and corporally; the other, with the heart and mind: We submitting
our selves to the one as to our better, and making the other the means by
which we express it.

The absolutely wicked, confounded and terrifyed by the sight of their Judge,
will be confined to perpetual Darkness of spirit, and gnawing of their
conscience, and to the anguishes of their raging thoughts and desires, for all
eternity.

The middle sort, consisting of those, who according to the course of all
corporal, deficient, and mortal goods, do go out of this world,
substantially in Charity and love of God, but not without some weaknesses and
sickenesses of their soul; cannot, before they are purged, be admitted to the
sight of God.

And so, they expect in Darkness and grief, that happy change, to which, the
prayers of the living do much avayle them.

These, are the Heads of the Christian profession of that Church, which being
in the communion of the Church of Rome, pretends to have received her
doctrine from Christ, and his Apostles, in a perpetual public exercise and
profession; handed down, without interruption, to this our presentage. And out
of which, have issued all particular congregations, which (in their several
seasons) separating themselves from her, have been denominated by several
Appellations; the name of Catholic, ever remaining to her, inspight of all
invasions.

Divines, may find many more Articles of faith, and Heretics may daily
occasion more and more. But, all are only explications of the here proposed
doctrine.

Now, the oppositions which Heretics make against the Catholic Church; are
only, the breaking down, of all Christianity and good life, either in it
self, or in its outworkes.

As, the Socinians, by denying the Godhead of the the blessed Trinity, and of
Jesus Christ; the Pelagians, by denying the fable of Man, and the necessity and
efficacy of Grace; the Puritans or Presbiterians, by denying the necessity of
good life to justification; do destroy the very Essence of Christianity and
virtue. Diverse, denying the solemn and holy sacrifice of the Altar, which is
the highest externe act of our Religious duty to God; by cutting of most of the
sacraments, by rejecting prayers to the saints and angels, and all devotion for
the dead, by abolishing Holy Days and public fasts; by pulling down the
pictures of Christ and his saints, which our pious ancestors did set up, to
renew the memory of their examples and to excite us to follow them; do
demolish the fences and bullwarckes of the same Christianity and good life.

But all they who deserve the name of heretics, do agree to charge the Church
of Christ with corruption and adultery: and do deny in her, both infallibility
to know Christ's doctrine, and power to govern: And consequently, they destroy
external unity and the essence of it. Which, as it is not formally to ruin
good life, so it is more then to break down her outworkes; since it
entrencheth upon the very substance in common, and leaves no means, but mere
chance and hazard, to come to the knowledge of Christ's law; and consequently,
to eternal salvation.

Whence we may understand, what this name Popery signyfyeth: to wit, An
affection or resolution to maintain faith and good life; and, the causes of
conserving them.

There are diverse other points, controverted between Catholics and Sectaries.
But they are such, as for the most part, require no explication, but, a flatt
denial. As, when they accuse us, to have deprived the Laiety of half the
Communion; we deny it. For, besides that, the general practice of Christians
has bin from the beginning, to give the sacrament, sometimes in one kind,
ometimes in both; the Church has always believed, that the entire communion
was perfectly administered in either. We likewise deny, that ever the Church
held the necessity of communicating Infants: The Popes personal infallibility;
that Indulgences can draw souls out of Purgatory: that Prayers ought, of
necessity be in an unknown tongue to though we may think it fitting in some
circumstances, that the public service, for reverence and Majesty, be so
performed: that faith is not to be kept with Heretics: that the Pope can
dispense with the subjection to Princes: And many such other Tenets; which are
injuriously imposed upon Catholics by Sectaries; and are flatly denied by us;
and therefore require no further explication or discourse about them.

A Sampler of Protestants Shuffling in there Disputes of Religion.
COntroversy Logic, or the art of discoursing in matter of Religion; between
those who profess the Law of Christ, can not be complete, unless, as Aristotle
made a Book of fallacies to avoid cavills in his Organe, or instrument of
science, so we also discover the common fallacies used in controversies: Not
all, but the chiefest, and most ordinarily in this business. This then is the
scope of my present work. For which the first note I make, is that owre
Ancients have taught us, and by experience we daily find, that Heresy is in
a manner as soon overthrown as laid open, falsehood like turpitude being
ashamed of nakedness. Therefore 't is falsehoods game to vest it self like an
Angel of light, in the skin of the lamb, and to seem to wear the Robes of
truth. I mean by words, like those of the Catholic party, to delude the
simplicity of the Innocent and welwishing People. And now must it be our theme
to unvaile their Shufflings.

The first Shuffle. Of the Word Scripture.
And first, If we ask them what they rely upon, they braggingly answer on Gods
word, upbraiding Catholics to rely upon men when they fly to the churches
witness; but if we press the^ to declare what they mea^ by Gods word, to wit,
the Book of the Bible, or the meaning of it, they are forced to answer the
sense, for even beasts can convince them, that we have the Book as well as
they. Marching on another step, and pressing to know by what instruments or
means they have the sense, there is no subterfuge from confessing it is by
reading, and their own judging or thinking the sense of the Scripture, is that
which they affirm, though all Catholics affirm the contrary. And although
even in this they are cosened, following, for the most part, the explication of
their preacher, Yet I press not that, for they know not that they do so: But I
conclude, see what you mean, when you say you rely upon Scripture or Gods
word, to wit, that you rely upon your own opinion or guessing that this is
Gods word. So that this glorious profession of relying upon Gods word, is in
substance and reality, to rely upon the opinion or guessing, of a Cobbler, or
Tinker, or some house-wife, when the answerers are such; or at most of a
Minister, who for his own interest, is bound to maintain, this is the meaning
of Gods word.

The second Shuffle. Of General Councils.
SOme Protestants are so bold, as to profess they will stand to General
Councils. Now a General Council, in the language of Catholics, is a general
meeting of the Christian World, by the Bishops and Deputies of it, to testify
the Doctrine of the Christian Church: And is accounted inerrable in such
determinations, and therefore to have power to command the faith of Christians,
and to cast out of the Church al who do not yield to such their determinations
and agreements, and by consequence to have a supreme Authority in the Church,
in matters of faith. The Protestants loath to leave the shadow, though they
care not for the substance, use the name, but to no effect. For the intention
being to manifest the Doctrine of the Christian World. They first agree not
upon the notion of what a Council is, Requiring sometimes that al Bishops
should be present, sometimes that all Patriarks, though known to be professed
Heretics, and under the Turk, sometimes objecting want of liberty, and mainly
that they decide not by disputation out of only scripture, or that they taught
false Doctrine. So that to the Protestant a Council signifies an indefinite and
uncertain (when, and what it is) meeting of men, going upon the scripture:
Which (as it is before declared) signifies every cobbler or Ministers fancy:
which has no authority to bind men to believe, and is to be judged by the
Doctrine or agreement in faith with the Protestants.

The third Shuffle, Of the consent of Fathers.
THe consent of the Fathers, or Doctors of Christians before our age and
controversies, bears so Venerable an aspect as that few Heretics dare (at
least before honest understanding Christians) give it flatly the lie. Therefore
the discreeter part of Protestants acknowledge it, yet with a salve that they
were all men and might be deceived, which in effect is to say, that it is no
convincing or binding Authority, as Catholics hold it to be, nay to be a
stronger authority then that of Councils, as being the judgment of the
Catholic Church, or the learned part of it, which is al one as to faith. The
Protestant first, at one clap cutts of a thousand or 13. hundred years, nay
some 15. hundred. The one saying S. Gregory the great was the last Father and
first Papistrie; the more ordinary course being to acknowledge, only the
Fathers of the Persecution time before Constantine, finding Popery (as they
call it) to public afterward; some pressing, that ever since the decease of
the Apostles, the Church has been corrupted: So that they neither give any
authority to the consent of Fathers, nor do acknowledge the thing the Catholics
call the Fathers, accepting thereof commonly (that is the two latter opinants)
no considerable part of them, and the larger opinion nothing near the half. So
that the consent of the Fathers, in the sense of the Protestants, signifies
nothing but the opnio^ of some few, who have written either nothing, or little
and obscurely of the points in co^troversy

The fourth Shuffle, Of this Word Catholic Church.
TO the Catholic Church all plead, the Apostles Creed forcing them to the
name: And Catholics, by this word, understand a Church which has endured from
Father to Son from Christ's time to ours, still teaching the same Doctrine, and
living under an outward Visible government, the head of which, is in the Church
of Rome, and is the Pope. And so acknowledge and obey a Visible and determinate
authority, to which recourse for Doctrine may in every moment be made, by
looking into their Catechismes and lives, which are public (as those which
were made by the order of the Council of Trent) and in great ocasions to
General meetings, and in the mean while to the particular Church of Rome. But
the Protestant, by this name, pretends to a Church, made of all whom they
account good Christians, which has no other Rule then of the scripture, that
is, of the fancy of every particular Congregation, for their opinions, no
common government, no bounds or limits to be known by, but such as the
particular fancy of the Protestant shall upon occasion, set to include or
exclude whom he pleases. So that plainly what they mean by the name of the
Catholic Church is no determinate Congregation of men, nor can have any
influence to govern either faith or behavior.

The fifth Shuffle, Of consent, with the Greeck Church.
SOme Protestants highly brag of their communion with the Greek Church, or
rather of their consent of Doctrine with it, for I have not heard of any
communion unless with the Patriarch Cyril, who for that cause was put out as an
Heretik) a business though of no consequence now, yet for the name of what it
has been anciently of a colorable credit to them. Let us therefore see what
the Protestant means, by this communion or consent. Two points there are (and
only two of moment) of dissension betwixt the Greek and Latin Church. The one
about the Procession of the Holy Ghost, in which the 39. Articles men agree
with the Latin Church against the Graecians, and yet these are the men who
most pretend to the Greek Union. The other of obedience to the Pope, in the
which the Greeks freely acknowledge the Popes Primacy (which is the stumbling
block to the Protestants) and confess he were to be obeyed, if he made just
commands, and only except against his oppression (as they call it) and
clayming of more then his right.. And in this which is no matter of faith, but
of Schism, and (if unjust) confessed (if doubtful) suspected rebellion. So that
this glorious consent they boast of, is not in Doctrine or sacraments the life
of Christians, but in a case of schism and disobedience which is common to all
Heretics.

The sixth Shuffle, Of Roman Church.
Nay some of the^ being ashamed of their own orphanage, and that they can not
name their Father or Mother, will in spite of the Roman Church and her defying
them, intrude themselves into heroff spring, saying she is substantially a
true Church, though she coucheth insufferable errors in her faith, which
force them not to communicate with her: let us therefore see what these mean,
by this Word the Roman Church. Catholics Mean by the name of Church a
Congregation of men, joined with Rome in an obligation of Government, for the
maintaining faith, sacraments, and good life, taking this obligation to be
that, which makes the mean bound together by it, to be a Church: The
Protestant takes this obligation to be an unsufferable Tyranny, will have no
rule of faith, but such an one as he can turn which way he thinks best for
his interest or fancy, sacraments and government no other, then what he cannot
avoid out of his proposed rule of faith, or at most, without the shame of the
world. So that he means nothing that belongs to the making a multitude of men
a Church, but only the multitude of men, of which a Church may be made, as if
a man, should call a house or Palace the ruins of one lying in a heap where
it was fallen.

The seventh Shuffle, Of the Word Mission.
THese are some, but Generally the Prelatick party engages, in deriving
themselves by Mission from the Roman Church. Let us see then what they intend
by this word Mission. The Catholic interpretation is, that Mission signifies a
command give^ to the party, sent, to deliver a Message to them to whom he is
sent, which makes the Apostles question good; How can they preach if they are
not sent? That is, if no body deliver them an Errand to carry: and God is
said, to put his own Words in the Mouths of those he sends, and Christ, when
he sent his Apostles, bad them preach or deliver to the world, what he had
taught them. Now because this command, or commission, is delegated in the
Catholic Church, by a certain ceremony which is called ordination, or the
sacrament of Order. The Protestant grew ambitious of this outside, and so
pretends his first Prelates had an Ordination from the Catholic Bishops, whom
they had deposed, or at least violently cast out, from their sees. And this
they call to have a Mission from the Roman Church. So that they do not as much
as pretend to the substance of the thing called truly Mission, but to an
outside and shadow good enough to serve their turns, who love the Glory of men
and seek not after Gods honor.

The eighth Shuffle, Of being like to the Primitive Church.
Another thing in which they insult over Catholics, is Antiquity, the which
because it has a venerable awfulness in it self, they (specially the
Presbyterian party) much presume upon, professing their Church, to be more like
the Ancient Christian Church, the^ the Catholics is, asking whether S. Peter
were the Prince of Rome? Bishops in such great Pomp, had such Courts, Altars,
Churches, pictures in such abundance, and so richly attired, Ceremonies and
Sacraments, performed with so great magnificence and Order? By which we see,
wherein these men place the Antiquity they pretend to, to wit, that the Church
had not those means to draw weak hearts, which need the helps of bodily
appareances, to raise themselves to the conceit of invisible goods; Whereas the
Catholic pretends to Antiquity, and to be like the primitive times, in the
substa^tial means of Christian life, as in Church government, and power of
Bishops, their accommodating of the quarrels of the faithful, by the order of
the Apostles, Performing the mass, Baptism, Ordination, and other Sacraments
with exactness and diligence, the Relics and Holy Burialls, having Feasts,
Fasts, Penitential Canons, flocks of People of both Sexes dedicated to God,
Religious Ceremonies, and all sorts of enticements to love heaven and follow
good life. So that the Antiquity the Protestant pretends to, is of wanting
wilfully those means of helping souls, which the primitive Church wanted by
the Violence of Persecution; and the Antiquity meaned by Catholics, is of
being like the Ancient Church, in all things that promote virtue inwardly and
outwardly.

The ninth Shuffle. Of the Word Tradition.
TO Antiquity hangs Tradition, that is, the receiving of Doctrine and Customs
from the Ancient Church. The which Catholics place in this, that it is derived
fom the Apostles, to us, by the continual and immediate delivery of one Age to
another: the sons continuing their Fathers, both belief and conversation in
Christian life, and treading the same paths of Salvation. This was a bit of too
sour a digestion, for Protestants being not able to show any Masters from
whom they had received their belief. Yet a Tradition they must have, not to
be openly convinced of having forged their doctrine: Some of them therefore
said they received their doctrine, by the Tradition of the Bible, made unto
them by the Churches continuing since the Apostles time: Wherein you see an
open equivocating, in the word of Tradition, Catholics taking it for the
delivery of doctrine, that is of sense and meaning, the Protestants for the
delivery of a mute book or killing letter. Others call Tradition the Testimony
of the Fathers of all Ages, and so at least divert the Question, Turning the
proof of Religion (which is plain and easy to every ordinary understanding)
into a business of learning and long study, in which though they be worstted,
yet the People cannot see it, nor descry their falsehood.

The tenth Shuffle. Of the word Really.
TO descend from the Universality or defense of their whole Religion, to
special articles of it, we shall find them there like themselves. As for
example, those who bear an outward respect to the Fathers, finding them
concurring so thick to testify Christ's Body to be in the Holy Eucharist, will
see me to say the same, and use the word of Christ being Really, and verily,
and truly, in the Sacrament: and that they only question, the manner how he
is there, which is lawful amongst Catholics to do. So that you cannot almost
distinguish them from Catholics, Until you come to explication. There the
Catholic says, that Christ's Body is in the sacrament, as the substance of
Bread was in the thing, which before we called Bread, and now is no more, but
turned into that body which was hanged on the Cross, by an entitative and real
mutation. The Protestant will tell you, that it is still Bread, and naturally and
entitatively the same thing, which it was before consecration, but that by faith
(which is a real actio^) it is Christ's true body to us. How to justify these
words, that by Faith it is Christ's true body, is impossible, unless they will
have us believe by faith, what they tell us is false. Therefore others say it
is an assurance of Christ's Body, as a bond is of money: Peradventure of enjoying
Christ in Heaven. But how different both senses be from the Catholic, which
they seek to be thought theirs, and from the natural meaning of the words every
man ca^ see. So that the manner of being Christ's Body, which they question,
signifies whether it be truly there, or no, but only by a false apprehension
they call Faith.

The eleventh Suffle, Of the Word Sacrifice.
The like is of the word Sacrifice, and Altar, and such other. In which the
Catholic position makes these words proper, and that the Mass is as, or more
properly signified by the word sacrifice, as the sacrifice of the old law. That
there is a true and real separation of the body of our Savior from his blood,
and more proper to the names then nature can make, which can not make a true
body when the blood is separated, nor true blood when the body is left out,
which in this sacrament is performed, and nevertheless Christ entire and
untouched. But a Protestant will tell you that when the Holy offering is called a
sacrifice, it is meaned a sacrifice of praise or thanks giving, that is, in
reality no sacrifice but an outward ceremony of praise or thanks giving, others
that it is a resembla^ce or represe^tatio^ of a sacrifice, to wit, of that of
the holy Cross; so that you see the difference of the two significatio^s is no
less the^ when by the same word (as of Christ's) one means Christ's Person
another, a Crucifix or the picture of Christ.

The twelfth Shuffle. Of the Word Priesthood.
In consequence and conformity to this, they abuse the Word of Priesthood. For
finding al Antiquity gloriously full of this name, they must also use it, and
finding St. Paul had too expressly taught us, that a Priest was a public
Officer, ordained to offer to God gifts and sacrifices, and that he ought to
be legitimately called to the office; and that Catholics take Priesthood in
this meaning: And how, on the other side, themselves had taken out of the
Church, all solemn offerings, and sacrifice the business of a Priest: and
nevertheless shame on one side, and ambition on the other, egged them on to
call themselves Priests, they were forced to corrupt the Word sacrifice; first
as is declared to come to the name Priesthood. So that Priesthood in the
Protestant meaning, is an officer chosen to sing Psalms, in the sight of the
People. The which how different it is from the Catholic explication, of being
the public Officer of the eternal sacrifice, is too plain to be declared.
Only I must add, that who takes ordination, with the intention, only to
become the chief or high singer of the Parish, receives not Priesthood, as it
is meaned, and used in the Catholic Church.

The thirteenth Shuffle. Of the word Faith.
THe abuse of this name Faith, must not be omitted, which Catholics taking
for a persuasion of such truths, as are necessary to bring us to good life and
salvation, which persuasion we settle upon Christ's doctrine delivered unto us
by Tradition of the Church. The which meaning is clear in the Apostle, who
expresses himself to speak of faith that works by Charity. The first
Protestants took the word Faith, as excluding Charity, and cried down good
works as improfitable; the latter ashamed of this, as destroying good life, and
plainly contrary to the whole design of Scripture and Fathets, took it for the
same faith that Catholics do, but would have it have force, precisely out of
its being a persuasion, and the working to follow to no effect; but as a hanger
on without any End; whereas Catholics make the persuasion to be chiefly or
wholly to breed Charity, which is the true cause of salvation. But the
presbiterian party, and the plainer dealing Protestants, have quite changed and
destroyed faith: saying, faith is a Persuasion that the believer must have,
that he in Person is one of the Predestinate, and shall be saved, by this
persuasion, through the merits, of Christ, without any regard to his works and
life. Of which sense, seeing there is no revelation, there can be no relying
upon the word of God for any such effect, and so it is clear, these people
have nothing like Faith, the former Protestants having at least the Carcass,
but renounce the soul, life, and being of it.

A bundle of diverse Shuffles.
If we should, as thus, pass over all the points controverted between
Catholics, and all that have separated the^selfs from the Catholic Church; we
should find very few freely disputed, but that either they calo^niate the
Catholic position or counterfeyt it. As concerning images and Saints, they
pretend we worship them as Gods: As for marriage, they report we disallow it.
For the merits of Christ, they say we rely not upon them, because we
understand them otherwise then they do. For the Catholic Church understands,
that Christ, by his life and passion procured the Establishment of the Holy
Church, the preaching of the Gospel over the whole earth, a settled means to
continue, and increase, what he by himself and his Apostles begun, a seed and
root of good life, planted by the sending of the Holy Ghost to remain in the
Church for ever, a Government of Bishops and Doctors for ever, sacraments to
be Universally administered, Extraordinary Examples of Heroic virtues in
Martyrs, Confessors, Monks and Nuns: and in a Word, all that was necessary to
bring the Universality of Mankind, to heavenly bliss, and these means to be
derived to single Persons, according to Gods all good providence and the
connatural suite of causes. The protestant understands, that Christ in his
private prayer, spoke to his Father in particular for every one of the
predestinate, to save him for his and his passions sake, and so infer, that the
belief that he is one of those for whom Christ specially prayed is that
which must apply the grace granted by Christ's eternal Father to his soul, and
thinks the Catholic relyes not upon Christ's merits, because he does it not so
sillily as he does, In penance the Catholic holds it a sacrament, in form
of a judgment, in which the penitent is absolved or condemned, according to his
desert. The Protestant holds only, as it were a complement of ones
acknowledging himself a sinner and asking of mercy, and that the preacher
without farther ceremony absolve him. Those who believe not the mysteries of
the Trinity and Incarnation; nevertheless use the words of one God and three
Persons; and profess, that though they hold the son and Holy Ghost to be
creatures, yet that they are to be called each of them God, and likewise though
some hold Christ, to have no other nature then of a Man, yet that he is justly
called God, for his great perfections and Unity in Charity with God. It were
superfluous to multiply more examples to show how it is not the zeal of truth,
but either ignorance, in them who do not understand the true difference,
betwixt the Catholic Church and its deserters; or malice in them who disguise,
either their own tenets, or those of the Catholic party. God prosper the
labors of those who seek Unity, and by his sweet conduct, bring all who
profess the name of Christ into perfect concord, in one flock, by the Unity in
faith, and charity.

Page 3. l. 16. Leap. p. 6. l. 8.50. l. 18. so. p. 7. l. 4. with. l. 7. even l.
27. of all p. 13. l. 6. too weak to. p. 14. l. 14. of coming p. 17. l. 22. a
quality. p. 18. l. 7. to p. 21. l. 1. to p. 21 l. 1. to p. 22 l. 23. observe p.
23. l. 7. same manner l. 9. Godliness p. 27. l. 23. and 4. one; then it p. 30.
l. 6. hynde p. 52. l. 1. be turned p. 58. l. 3. cultivated p. 59. l. 5.
biased p. 51. l. 27. different p. 74. l. 7. preaching p. 66. l. 18. cure
drunkeness p. 69. l. 23. bring the p. 70. l. 9. God as solidly p. 72. l. 15.
Conicks p. 74. l. 18. obstructed p. 76. l. 10. be forced p. 82. l. 22. before
to be for p. 87. l. 4. proceeds upon l. 2.5. long. p. 88. l. 24. solve p 89.
l. 7. imparity p. 92. l. 8. and contradict p. 93. l. 8. offer p. 103. l. 22.
overweened p. 104. l. 21. run p. 105. l. 8. see l. 13. carry p. 107. l. 19.
condescendences p. 109. l. 10. to see p. 117. l. 17. of allegations p. 119. l.
22. are as good p. 122. l. 25. Coelibate p. 128. l. 10. Angles l. 17. upon, can
l. 28. excused neither p. 131. l. 25. who as soon l. 26. think that p. 133. l.
9. not, for l. loath p. 136. l. 21. which is out p. 140. l. 12. persecution p.
142. l. 15. certainty p. 146. l 4. of death and of l. 13. best when p. 148. l.
24. solue it p. 152. l. 16. imports p. 153. l. 13. Abyssine p. 154. l. 9.
singing and p. 157. l. 16. are so close l. 19. is so p. 158. l. 21 of such
talkers p. 159. l. 12. (else p. 160. l 24. exalted p. 163. l. 6. though their
p. 164. l. 14. which praise p. 169. l. 14. heaps p. 170. l. 5. a Corus p. 182.
l. 25. just indifference p. 184. l. 4. on it? p. 189. l. 2^. capable of p. 190.
l. 18. default p. 195. l. 18. with p. 1*6. l. 11. inure us p. 197. l. 10.11.
toward their teachers, what adhesion to p. 198. l. 23.24. profess there p.
203. l. 21. cultivatour p. 206. l. 14. long as l. 201. l. 20. the fall p. 202.
l. 25. tongue though.


