A TREATISE OF TRADITIONS.

PART I.

Imprimatur, Liber cui titulus [A Treatise of Traditions. Part I.]

June 5. 1688. Guil. Needham, R R. in Christo P. ac D. D. Wilhelmo Archiep.
Cant. a Sacr. Domest.

A TREATISE OF TRADITIONS.

PART I.

Where it is proved, That we have Evidence sufficient from TRADITION;

I. That the Scriptures are the Word of God. II. That the Church of England
owns the true Canon of the Books of the Old Testament. III. That the Copies of
the Scripture have not been corrupted. IV. That the Romanists have no such
Evidence for their Traditions. V. That the Testimony of the present Church of
Rome can be no sure Evidence of Apostolical Tradition. VI. What Traditions may
securely be relied upon, and what not.
LONDON, Printed by J. Leake, for Awnsham Churchill at the Black Swan in
Ave-Mary Lane, MDCLXXXVIII.

THE PREFACE.
The Contents.
This Proposition, That the Doctrines and pretended Traditions of the Western
Church could not be introduced by her Members in following Ages, but must be
derived to them from the Fountain of Tradition, is proved false, 1. By plain
Instances of matters of Fact,. 1. 2ly. From the false Doctrines and Traditions
which generally obtained in the Jewish Church,. 2. 3ly. From the Prediction of
a general Defection from the Faith in the times of Antichrist,. 3. 4ly. Because
this Assertion does oblige us to account the Fathers of the primitive Ages
either Knaves or Fools,. 4. 5ly. Because it renders all our Search into
Antiquity, not only superfluous but dangerous,. 5. Corruptions in Doctrine or
Practice might take their Rise, 1st. From Mistakes touching the Sense of
Scripture,. 6. 2ly. By leaving of the Scripture and setting up the Fathers as
the Rule of Faith,. 7. 3ly. By flying to Miracles and Visions for the
establishment of Doctrines and Opinions,. 8. 4ly. By reason of the great
Authority and Reputation of those Men who first began, or else gave Countenance
unto them,. 9. 5ly. By reason of the corrupt Manners of the Clergy,. 10. 6ly.
By reason of the great Ignorance both of the Clergy and the People,. 11. 7ly.
By reason of the Violence and Persecution used to force Men to a Compliance
with the prevailing Doctrines, or a concealment of their Sentiments to the
contrary,. 12. This Corruption confessed by the Writers of the dark Ages of the
Church,. 13.

THAT which the Romanists of late have chiefly urged in favor of their present
Doctrines and Traditions, is, That the Traditions which they now embrace as
such, the Doctrines which they own as Articles of Christian Faith, could never
have obtained such Credit in the Church, or been so generally received
throughout the Western Churches as they were before the Reformation, had they
not been from the Beginning handed down to them as Apostolical Traditions and
Doctrines received by the Universal Church of Christ.

Now the Vanity and Falsehood of this Presumption is here showed by many
Instances of plain matter of Fact, Rome at present hold for Apostolical
Tradition, or as an Article of Christian Faith, was generally rejected in
former Ages by the whole Church of Christ, or at the least by the prevailing,
and the major part of her Church Guides: And whereas it is represented by them
as a thing impossible, That the Western Church, or the prevailing Body of it,
should in one Age embrace what they in the foregoing did reject; or in this Age
reject, what in the former they embraced, Examples are produced here,
demonstrating that this has actually happened in the Instance of eating things
strangled, and Blood, Chap. 2.. 6.
which the whole Western Church abominated in the Eleventh Century, and yet did
practice in the Twelfth and following Ages. In the Instance of the immaculate
Conception denied by the Western Church till the Thirteenth Century, Ibid.. 9.
and almost generally received in the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centuries. In the
Instance of the Canonical and Apocryphal Books of the Old Testament in which
the Learned of the Western Church accorded with us in the Fourteenth and
Fifteenth Centuries, Chap. 3.. 2.11.
and yet did Anathematize our Doctrine in the Sixteenth. In the Instance of the
Angels falling in love with Women, Chap. 12.. 8.
asserted generally in the first Four Centuries, and rejected in the Fifth, to
omit many other Instances sufficient to convince us that what the Romanists so
confidently offer to prove their Church, could not be guilty of such
Innovations, is only like to the Attempt of Zeno to prove, against plain matter
of Fact, that there could be no Motion.

But for the farther manifestation of the Vanity of this new way of Arguing a
facto ad jus, from what they do at present practice and believe, to what they
ought to do and practice, or from their present Faith, to an Assurance that the
same Faith was always held in all preceding Ages of the Church: I shall,

First, Show the evil and pernicious Consequences of this way of arguing.

Secondly, I shall point out the Ways and Methods by which these Doctrines and
Practices might have prevailed in the Church, and yet be nothing less than
Apostolical, or truly Primitive.

The evil Consequences of this way of Arguing, are,

First, That it gives the Jews a great Advantage against the Truth, and
certainty of Christian Faith; for they might have then argued, and still may,
with as much Plausibility against our Lord 's Disciples, and the first
Christian Converts, from this very Topic, as do the Romanists against the
Protestants.

For might they not say of the very Doctrines and Traditions which they had
generally received at our Savior 's Advent, and which he did so peremptorily
condemn, and caution his Disciples to beware of, That they received them from
their Forefathers, who received them from theirs, and who must either have
joined in mistaking their Ancestors, or in intending to deceive their
Posterity, of which two things neither is credible? Might not they say, That
the Traditions which they had then embraced, were derived from Moses, and that
their Forefathers handed them down from him to them, and that the then present
general Reception of them was a sufficient Evidence that they were not
Inventions of that, or any of the preceding Ages, but Doctrines and Practices
derived to them from the first Fountain of Tradition? Might they not have asked
in what Year and Age those false Traditions and Doctrines entered first among
them, and whether then their whole Church must not have conspired to tell a
lie? Might they not have bid them consider the Notoriousness of the Lie, and
the Damage ensuing from it to themselves and their dearest Pledges, and how
rare a thing it is to find a Man, much less a considerable Number of them, who
would venture upon such a Wickedness? Might they not have added, that their
Church and People were scattered about, almost through every Nation under
Heaven, Act. 2.5.
and all received the same Traditions and Doctrines which were condemned by our
Lord and his Disciples, and that it was incredible that Churches so dispersed
through many Countries and Nations should agree together to affirm a Falsehood
for a Truth? Now to this way of Arguing, I desire to know what Answer can be
given, but by showing by what ways such Opinions actually might have spread
among them, though not originally received, and proving from their own
Scriptures and Writers, That these Opinions were not always held among them;
and if this way be good when used by Christians against them, it must be as
good when used by Protestants against Papists, if this Plea be sophistical,
when put into the Mouth of an unbelieving Jew, it must be as sophistical when
it proceeds from the Mouth of Papists.

I have not been so fortunate as to meet with any direct Answer to this
Argument, only to the Argument urged from the actual Condemnation of our Lord
as an Impostor by the Sanhedrim, That no Submission, no blind Obedience, could
be due to the Church Guides, then ruling in the Jewish Church. The Guide of
Controversies, Disc. of the necessity of Chapter Guides, c. 3.. 25. p. 17. Confer
avec M. Claude, p. 183, 184, 185.
and the Bishop of Meaux, thus answer, That the Messiah coming with Miracles,
and manifested by the other Two Persons of the Trinity; by the Father, with a
Voice from Heaven commanding to hear him, and by the Holy Ghost seen descending
on him, as also by the Baptist, was now from henceforth to be received as the
supreme Legislator, and nothing to be admitted from others, or from the
Sanhedrim it self, contradictory to what he taught; which high Court therefore
now, for the Accomplishment of his necessary Sufferings, was permitted by God
to be the greatest Enemy of Truth, and guided therein, not by Gods, but a
Satanical Spirit, of whose Doctrines therefore our Lord often warned the People
to beware. The Bishop of Meaux, adds nothing considerable to this Answer, and
is plainly baffled by his learned Adversary Mr. Claude, to whose Works I remit
the Reader. Now,

First, Is it not wonderful to see how these Men say and unsay, pronounce a
thing impossible in one Case, and in another, like unto it, confess it actually
done? We show them, That in the Jewish Church such false Traditions had
generally prevailed, as tended to evacuate the Law of God, render his Worship
vain, and to engage them to reject the true Messiah; and yet they were received
as Doctrines of their great Prophet Moses, handed down to them by oral
Tradition, that infallible Preserver of Truth: True, say they, the Church
Guides were then permitted by God to be the greatest Enemies of Truth, and
guided therein, not by Gods, but a Satanical Spirit; add now to this, That the
Doctrines and Traditions of these Men found general Reception in the Jewish
Church: And will it not hence follow, That Doctrines taught, Traditions
introduced by the greatest Enemies of Truth, and by Men acted, not by the
Spirit of God, but that of Satan, may generally prevail to be received as true
Doctrines and Traditions, derived from prophetical Authority, and fit to be
assented to, received and practiced by all?

Secondly, Did these Traditions and false Doctrines, against which our Savior
cautioned them, begin then only to spring up among them when our Savior
appeared with his Miracles, when, at his Baptism the Holy Ghost descended
visibly upon him, and God gave Testimony to him by a Voice from Heaven? If so,
you see that even the whole Jewish Church, though scattered throughout the
World, might all at once embrace Traditions of such evil and pernicious
Consequences, though they before had never heard one tittle of them; and so not
only in the Compass of one Age, but of Three Years at farthest, new and
pernicious Doctrines might generally obtain in the whole Jewish Church; and why
not also in the Western Churches within the compass of Eight hundred Years?

But that these Doctrines of the Scribes and Pharisees, these Traditions which
they had received touching Christ's temporal Kingdom, and touching the personal
Appearance of the Tisbite to be his Forerunner, and touching the Expositions
of the Law condemned by Christ, were not of so late Date as our Lord's Baptism
and Entrance upon his prophetic Office, is evident beyond Dispute, from what I
have discoursed already from Josephus, Chapter 11.. 7.
asserting that they were received from the most ancient Jews, from Epiphanius,
that they derived them from Moses, from the mention of them in our Savior 's
time, as (...), Act. xxviij. 17. Gal. i. 14.
Customs and Traditions received from their Fathers, and from the great
Incredibility, that these things should so generally obtain to be received as
Traditions in so short a time. Besides, we know the Expectation of their
temporal King had alarmed all the East before; and their Tradition, that Elias
the Tisbite should come in Person to anoint him, and be his Forerunner, must
be as old as the Translation of the Septuagint: These Doctrines and Traditions
must be therefore taught whilst these Church Guides and Rulers were infallible
in the Interpretation of the Scriptures, and were true Judges of what they had
received by Tradition, if ever they were so; or rather it must be apparent that
they were not so; because they generally had prevailed upon the People to
receive Doctrines and Traditions of such fatal and pernicious Consequences, and
therefore all the specious Harangues the Papists make concerning the
Impossibility that false Traditions and corrupt Doctrines should prevail
amongst them, must be as plausible, when uttered by the Jew against the
Christian, as by the Papist against Protestants. For, v. g. where, may they
say, will you produce the Men of former Ages who taxed the Jewish Church with
such corrupt Traditions as your Jesus taxed them with, or bid Men beware of the
Doctrine of them who sat in Moses Chair, or of those Scribes and Pharisees who
had obtained so great Credit on the Account of Piety and Learning? Do not you
Christians own that we were once a right Vine, the true and only Church of God,
till the Appearance and Baptism of your Jesus? Who therefore can believe that
God would suffer such dangerous Doctrines to prevail in his own Church, and
raise up no Church Guides, except the Sadducees, to contradict them, until your
Jesus and his Disciples undertook to be Reformers of it? Where then had God a
true Church in the World, if not among the People of the Jews? What other
Church could Christ and his Disciples mention besides that whose Governors he
taxed with voiding the Commandments of God, and rendering his Worship vain,
because of some Traditions which they had received from their Forefathers? If
then God suffered his Church to be all overrun with such a fatal Leprosy,
where was the watchful Eye of Providence? Yea, where the Care or Conscience of
those Guides of Souls he had set over them? Did all our Pastors fall asleep at
once, or could they all conspire to deceive Posterity?

Thirdly, R. H. The Guide of Controversies cannot be ignorant, That, as he
says, God then permitted the Sanhedrim to be the greatest Enemies of Truth for
the Accomplishment of the Prophecies of the Old Testament; so do we also say,
That God permitted these pernicious Doctrines to obtain in the Church of Rome
for the Accomplishment of those Prophecies of the New Testament touching a
great, and almost general Apostasy, which was to happen in the Days of the
great Antichrist, and in the time when all Tongues and Nations were to worship
the Beast.

Now hence arises a Second Demonstration of the Falsehood of this vain
Presumption, Church of Christ, as we pretend to, for the Testimony of the Holy
Scriptures, the Doctrine of the Fathers, and the Confessions of many learned
Catholics, assure us, that this shall actually happen in the times of
Antichrist, and what will then become of all the pretended Demonstrations, That
this cannot happen, or can never happen. And,

First, Rev. xj. 7-xij. 6.
The Scripture speaks expressly of the Slaughter of the Two Witnesses, the
Flight of the Women into the Desert, and of the Worship which the whole World
shall pay unto the Beast: Where note, That the Witnesses which represent the
Church, or her true Pastors, are but Two, and they at last are slain, and that
the Dominion of Antichrist is represented as over all Kingdoms, Tongues and
Nations; and he is said to cause the Earth, Chap. xiij. 7, v. 16.
and him that dwells therein, to worship him, and both small and great, rich
and poor, bond and free, to receive his Mark.

The Fathers also assert that the Apostasy will then be so great, Basil Ep. 71.
p. 115.
That the Lord will seem (...), wholly to have left his Churches; That there
shall be then, Totius mundi seductio, Hippol. de Consum. mundi, p. 4.
a Seduction of the whole World; That, Cuncti accedent, P. 41.
atque adorabunt eum, all shall come and worship the Beast; That the Saints
shall hide themselves, P. 43, 49, 59.
in montibus, speluncis and cavernis Terrae, in the mountains, dens and caverns
of the Earth; That all shall fall off from God, and believe that Impostor; That
there shall be nec oblatio, P. 48.
nec suffitus, nec cultus Deo gratus, neither Oblation, nor Incense, nor any
Worship acceptable to God; no Eucharist, no Liturgy, no singing of Psalms, or
reading of the Scripture; That there shall be (...), Theodor. Tom 3. Ep. 63. p.
937. Hieron. in Sophon. c. 2. f. 97. F.
a general Apostasy; That, Regnante Antichristo redigenda sit Ecclesia in
solitudinem, in the Reign of Antichrist the Church will be brought to Solitude,
so that Christ coming shall scarce find Faith upon the Earth: That in the time
of Antichrist, ecclesia non apparebit, Aust. Ep. 80. ad Hesyc. p. 364.
the Church shall not appear, being eclipsed by the Persecutions of ungodly
Men: That Men shall ask whether the Gospel does any where continue upon Earth,
Ephr. Sir. de consum. S^eculi and Antichristo Col. An. 1603. p. 219.
responsumque iri, nusquam, and it shall be answered, no where. And in this
Assertion the Fathers are generally followed by the Romish Doctors; De Pontif.
Romans l. 3. c. 7.. denique.
let one Bellarmine speak for them all, saying that Daniel plainly says, That
in the times of Antichrist, by reason of the Severity of Persecutions, the
public and daily Sacrifice of the Church shall cease, ubi omnium consensu
loquitur de tempore Antichristi, where by the consent of all he speaks of the
time of Antichrist. This being then so clear a Revelation, or Prediction of the
Holy Ghost, and our great Prophet, must some time or other happen, or both our
Savior and the Holy Spirit must be charged with lying Prophecies: And being so
unanimously, and without control delivered by the Holy Fathers, the constant
Tradition, and the received Doctrine of the Church of Christ throughout all
those Ages, must be a constant Refutation of this idle Dream, and their
Pretenses to Tradition must evidently be confuted by Tradition.

Thirdly, This Method and Proceeding of the Romanists, for finding out, and
judging of primitive Doctrines and Traditions, were it admitted, would force us
to condemn the Writers of the Church from the beginning to the Tenth, Twelfth
or Fourteenth Centuries, as the worst of Fools or Knaves; for seeing it is
manifest from their plain Words, produced in great Plenty throughout those
Ages, that they speak as plainly in Condemnation of the Latin Service,
Communion in one Kind, the Veneration of Images, the Seven Sacraments, the
Trent Canon of the Books of the Old Testament, and of many other Articles of
Romish Faith, which they pretend to have received from Tradition, as any
Protestant can do; either they must have spoken all these things unwittingly,
for want of knowledge of what the Church maintained to the contrary throughout
those Ages, and then it cannot be avoided, but they must pass for the most
ignorant of Men, and such as did not know the necessary Articles of Christian
Faith received in their Times; or else they must have taught and conveyed to
Posterity those things against their Knowledge, and the conviction of their
Consciences, and then it cannot be denied, but that they were the worst of
Knaves; and whichsoever of these things be said, it cannot be denied, but they,
of all Men, were the most unfit to convey down Tradition to Posterity. For to
render any Person a credible Testator, or Witness of the Churches Faith and
Practice, Two things seem absolutely necessary. 1. That he should have
sufficient Knowledge of the Truth of what he testifies. And, 2ly. That he
should have Honesty sufficient to assure us that he would not wittingly deceive
us in his Testimony; for if we have just Reason to suspect either his want of
Knowledge or Sincerity, we must have reason to suspect his Testimony: So that
if either such Simplicity and Folly, or such apparent Knavery, as has been
mentioned, can justly be imputed to the Authors of the Testimonies cited
against the Doctrines fornamed of the Church of Rome, it is extremely manifest
we have just Reason to suspect the Truth of all they might deliver to future
Ages, either as Doctrines or Practices received from their Predecessors.

Fourthly, This Method of proceeding must render it a vain and fruitless thing
to search into Antiquity to find what was the Doctrine of preceding Ages,
Sexta nota est conspiratio in doctrina cum ecclesia antiqua. De notis Eccles.
cap. 9. Bellarm. de eccl. milit. l. 4 c. 9.
and consequently it must assure us that the Church of Rome does only trifle
with us, or impose upon us when she makes Agreement either in Doctrine or
Practice with Antiquity, a Note or Character by which we may discern the true
Church from all who falsely do pretend unto that glorious Title; for how can
this be done? Yea how is it attempted to be done by Roman Catholics, but by
producing the Testimonies of all former Ages for such a Doctrine or Practice as
they at present do maintain? If therefore a like Number of plain Testimonies
produced by us, in all the Instances forenamed, for the Antiquity of our
Doctrines and Practices, be not a Proof sufficient on our side, why should it
be on theirs? If notwithstanding all these Evidences, we must believe the
contrary to what they clearly do import, to have been still the Doctrine and
Practice of all Ages past, because it is at present the Doctrine of the Church
of Rome, to what end do we read Antiquity? What Service can it do us, unless to
make us Heretics or Scepticks? For of what can we be certain or assured by the
reading of it, if that may be false and heretical, which through so many Ages
is so plainly, fully, and frequently delivered as the clearest Truth?

To proceed then to my second Undertaking, viz. To show how such a Change in
Doctrine and in Practice might happen in the Western Church as well as in the
East, or other places.

First, Corruptions in Doctrine, or in Practice, Scripture: This Account Origin
gives of the diversity of Opinions and Sects which sprang up early among
Christians, and multiplied together with them, In Celsum l. 3. p. 118.
viz. That they had their Original from hence, That Men did (...), diversely
interpret those Scriptures which they all held to be Divine. Vigilius ascribes
these Sects, L 2. contra Eutych.
and this diversity of Opinions to the same Original, viz. That the Virtue of
the heavenly Words was defiled, vitio malae intelligentiae, by a
misunderstanding of them, and by taking them, non secundum qualitatem sui
sensus, not according to the tenor of their Sense, as Truth required, but by
diverting them to other Matters. To this the Fathers do ascribe not only the
Miscarriage of Heretics, but even the Slips and Errors of those pious Persons
who had gone before them, which, say they, happened to them by reading of the
Scriptures carelessly, and not with so much Diligence and Circumspection as they
should have used. Thus Theodoret, upon occasion of that Mistake of almost all
the Fathers of the Four first Centuries, imagining that the Sons of God which
went in to the Daughters of Men, were Angels, says, Qu. 47. in Genesis
(...), That it was their careless reading of the holy Scriptures which made
many thus to err; and all the Fathers, with one Voice, ascribe the Heresies of
their times, partly to their perverting, and partly to their deserting of the
Holy Scriptures; and therefore for preventing of the like Mistakes, they do not
send them to an infallible Interpreter, nor do they hence conclude him
necessary, as some others do, but only do advise them to read the Scriptures
with more Care, Exactness and Scrutiny, with Prayer, Chrysostom. Hom. 17. in Matthew.
p. 124. Basil. Tom. 1. l. 2. de Bapt. q. 4. Orig. dial. contr. Marc. p. 70.
Athan. de incar. verbi. T. 1. p. 110.
Love and Desire of the Truth, with a pure Soul, and care to walk according to
the Rules of Christian Virtue, assuring those who do thus seek, That according
to our Lord's Promise, Theodoret in 3. Romans 8.
they shall find the Truth, Chrysostom. Hom. 35. in Joh. T. 2. P. 799. vid. T. 3.
P. 1. Tom. 5. p. 829.
it being not the Obscurity, but the Ignorance of Scripture, which makes men
obnoxious to Heresies, as shall, by God's Assistance be fully proved elsewhere.

And whosoever does consider that many of the Fathers came immediately from
Heathenism to read the Scriptures, That they insisted most on the Old
Testament, of which they did not understand the Language, and of which they had
only an imperfect, or corrupt Translation, and that they took the liberty to
allegorize, and to give mystical Interpretations of them, as their luxuriant
Phancies led them to it, will not think it strange that so many extravagant
Interpretations of the holy Scriptures should drop from their Pens; Cypr. Ep.
63. p. 149.
That they should tell us that Noah 's being drunk with Wine was, Sacramentum
and figura Dominicae passionis, A Sacrament and Figure of our Savior's
Passion; That Just. M. Dial. cum Tryph. p. 349. Clem. Alex. Strom. 6. p. 669.
Orig. in Cells. l. 5. p. 236. Com. in Joh. To. 2. Ed. Huet. p. 48. Eusebius.
demonstr. l. 4. c. 9. p. 157.
God not only permitted the Gentiles to worship the Sun, Moon and Stars, but
(...), Gave them the Sun, Moon and Stars to be worshipped, that they might not
be wholly Atheists; That when our Lord threatened to the disobedient Jews, Iren.
l. 4. c. 23. Tertull adv. Jud. c. 11, and 13. Cypr. adv. Jud. l. 2. c. 20.
Lactant. l. 4. c. 18. Epiphan. Haer. 24.. 9. Athanas. de incarn. verbi p. 47,
and 90. Orat. 3. contr. Arian p. 386. Ruffin. apud Hieron. T. 4. F. 49 Non
video cur dubitare debeamus id illum de Christo scripsisse. August. contr.
Faust. Manich. l. 16. c. 22.23. Deuteronomy. 28.66.
thy Life shall hang in doubt before thee -- And thou shall have no Assurance
of thy Life, he meant that Jesus Christ should be crucified before their Eyes;
That they should from those Words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 45.1.
Quidam superstitiose magis quam vere ex persona patris arbitrantur intelligi;
Hieron. ep. ad. Damasum Tom. 3. F. 45. B. Quidam ex persona patris dictum
intelligi volunt; Ep. ad Principium Virg. ibid. F. 37. A. viz. Alexander Episc.
Alex. Socr. Hist. Eccl. l. 1 c. 6. Athanas. To. 1. p. 134, 170. c. 427. D. 510.
c. 517. D. 538 c. 549, 550, 565. D. Marcellus apud Epiph. Haer. 72.. 2.
My Heart has indicted a good Matter, (...), infer the eternal Generation of
the Son; That some of them, so early, Mal. 3.1.
should imagine that the Orig. in Joh. Tom. 5. ed. Huet. p. 77. Cyril com. in 1 John 6.
Baptist was an Angel, not a Man, because the Prophet Malachi said, Behold I
send my Angel before his Face: And that when John the Baptist sent this Manda
mihi, ad infernum descensurus sum, utrum te Inferis debeam nunciare, qui
nunciavi superis; Hieron. in loc. and Ep. T. 3. F. 54. (...); Orig. com. in
Reg. p. 34. and l. contr. Marcion. p. 37. Chrysostom. Hom. in Matthew. 37. p. 247.
Ruffin. apud Hieron. To. 4. p. 49. Theophyl. in 11. Matthew. p. 58. and in luc.
7. p. 351. Nazianzen in Orat. Funebr. Basil. in hanc sententiam, Meliori non
inventa, maxima pars Veterum Auctorum concesserunt. Maldonate in Matthew. xi. 2.
viz. Ambrosius, Eusebius Emissenus, Julianus Pomerius, Venantius, Gregorius.
Question to our Lord, Matthew. 11.3.
Art thou he that shall come, or look we for another, they should thus
interpret it, That St. John being to go down to Hell, or Hades, should send to
ask whether he should go before him thither, and preach him there, as he had
done on Earth; Matthew. 16.23.
That when Christ said to Peter, Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an Offense
to me, they, out of a Reverence to St. Peter, should make him say to Multi
putant quod non Petrus correptus est; sed adversarius Spiritus qui haec dicere
Apostolum suggerebat; Hieron. in Matthew. xvj. 23. Hilarious in locum.
Theophylact. in Marc. 8. p. 232.
Peter only, come thou after me, and to the Devil, Satan, thou art an Offense
unto me; That when the same St. Peter denied his Master, Matthew. 26.72.
saying, I know not the Man, they should excuse and bring him off with this
quaint Equivocation, Scio quosdam pij affectus erga Petrum, locum hunc ita
interpretatos, ut dicerent Petrum non Deum negasse, sed hominem, and
esse-sensum, nescio hominem, quia scio Deum, Hieron. in locum. Vide Maldonatum
ibid.
Nescio hominem, quia scio Deum, I know not the Man, for I know him to be God,
not considering with St. Jerome, That by thus attempting to excuse the Disciple,
they gave the lie to his Master, who had foretold his Denial; That from those
Words of Christ, Joh. 8.44.
Vide Origin. in Joh. Tom. 23. ed. Huet. T. 2. p. 308. and Huetii notas p. 34.
Epiph. Haer. 40. n. 5, 6. and Haer. 38.. 4, 5. Ammon. caten. in c. 8. Joh. p.
238. Cyril. Alex. in locum p 559. Author quaest V. and. N. Test. apud August.
c. 90, 98. Hieron. in Isa. c. 14 F. 36 e.
The Devil is a Liar and the Father of it, (...), they should conclude that the
Devil had a Father, and that he was either Cain or Judas; That to avoid the
vain Cavils of the Marcionites and Manichees, they should say, That Iren. l. 3.
c. 7. Tertul. l. 5. adv. Marcion. c. xj. Chrysostom. Theod. Photius apud Oecum.
and Theophylact in locum. August. contr. Faust. Manichaeum l. 22. c. 2. and 9.
the God of this World, mentioned 2 Cor. iv. 4. was not the Devil, but the true
God: And from these Words of the Apostle Illud dici potest -- quod Paulus non
tam maledixerit eis, quam oraverit pro illis ut eas parts corporis perderent,
per quas delinquere cogebantur. Hieron. in locum. (...), Chrysostom. (...),
Theodoret. and Oecum. (...), Theoph. in locum. Gal. 5.12.
I wish they were cut off that trouble you, they should gather that the Apostle
desired that the Abettors of the legal Ceremonies and Circumcision might be
gelt: To omit infinite Passages of the like Nature.

Nor can it reasonably be doubted that the Doctrine of the Millennium, of the
necessity of communicating Infants, of the Appearance of Enoch and the Tisbite
at our Lord's Second coming, of the nearness of the End of the World, of our
Lord's Preaching but one Year after his Baptism, of the Angels conversing with
Women, had all their Rise from the mistaken Interpretations of the Holy
Scripture; why therefore might not the Mistake of that Passage of St. 1 Cor.
3.15.
Paul, They shall be saved, but so as by Fire, give the rise to Purgatory? That
of the same Apostle, Magnum Sacramentum, Ephesians. 5.32.
This is a great Mystery, but I speak of Christ, and the Church, advance
Marriage into a Sacrament; the mistake of that Promise of an happy Resurrection
to the true Members of Christ's Church, Matthew. 16.18.
The Gates of Hades shall not prevail against it, be made to countenance her
Infallibility, and so in other Cases of like Nature? Sure I am, that Communion
in one Kind, the Latin Service, the Veneration of Images, could never have
obtained in the Church, had not those Scriptures, which so plainly do condemn
them, been miserably wrested by late Ages from their proper Sense, and the
received Interpretation which the whole Christian World had put upon them for
Six hundred, or a Thousand Years, and why they might not as well wrest the
Scriptures to establish some of their Doctrines, as they have done it for the
avoiding that Condemnation of them, which is so clear in other Scriptures, that
he who runs may read it, I am not able to discern.

Secondly, Corruptions in Doctrine and Practice might easily prevail by
altering, or leaving of that Rule of Faith and Manners God had given them, and
acting by other Rules or Principles, which in themselves are insufficient to
establish any Article of Christian Faith, for a false Rule must of necessity
give false Directions, both in Faith and Manners; where the Principle is false
the Conclusion from it must be so, and where the Foundation is corrupted the
Building cannot be firm; now this we find done,

1. By setting up the Fathers as the Rules of Faith, the Basil. Ep.
62.67.70.349. Nazianz. Orat. 19, 21, 23, 29.
Pillars and the Grounds of Faith, as some of them are often styled. This
Method of proceeding, as it is expressly contrary to our Lord 's Injunction, to
call no Man Father upon Earth, in that presumptuous Sense in which the Jewish
Rabbi's did affect that Title, Matthew. xxiij. 6, 10. John vj. 45.
because one is our Father in Heaven, and all that come to Christ are (...),
taught of God the Father; and one is our Guide and Master, Christ, 1 John ij.
27.
from whom we Christians have received an Unction, and need not that any one
should teach us, but as that Spirit (in the Word) does teach us all things. So
is it as repugnant to the Mind and the Prescriptions of those Holy Men, who
frequently declare, That both they and their Brethren were subject to Error,
That, Errarunt in fide tam Graeci, quam Latini, Hieron. Ep. ad Pam. and Ocean.
To. 2 F. 69.
Both the Greek and the Latin Fathers erred in the Faith; That therefore others
were Aug. l. 11. Contr. Faust. c. 5.
at liberty when they read or heard them, to approve what they liked, and to
reject what they conceived not to be right in them; and warn us Cyril. Hieros.
Catech. 4. p. 30.
not to believe what they say, unless we find it demonstrated out of the Holy
Scriptures; To Orig. Hom. 2. in Ezekiel. F. 135. B.
observe diligently when the Pastor deceived them, and when he spoke things
true and pious, there being, say they, in our writings Aug. de Orig an. l. 4.
c. 1. and l. de bono persev. c. 21.
many things, quae possent justo judicio culpari, which justly may be blamed,
so that we would have no man so to embrace all our Sayings as to follow them,
save only in those things in which they do perceive they have not erred; if
then their sayings be of any credit, and Authority, it is evident, from their
assertions, that they ought not to be admitted as the Rule of faith, as being
men subject unto like ignorance, and errors with us, and if their sayings be of
no credit, much less can they be owned as the pillars, and the ground of truth,
and yet I find this doctrine laid down expressly by a concealed Heretic,
Sergius the Patriarch of Constantinople, in his Epistle to Cyril, where he
says that (...), Council. Sexto Ep. ad Cyrum episcop. Council. To. 6. p. 918.
the doctrines of the Fathers are a Law to the universal Church, and that we
are bound to follow them, and to hold all that they have written to the least
tittle; and evident it is, That even from the Fifth Century, the sayings of the
Fathers began to be had in great Reputation, and about the Eighth, to be as it
were Authentic; and Articles of Faith were canvassed, and determined both in
the Second Nicene Council, and in that of Florence, chiefly by the pretended
Sayings of the Holy Fathers, to whose Testimony you very rarely, if at all,
shall find this just Exception made, That they were Men of like Infirmities,
and subject to like Errors as we are. One Athanasius or Basil, one Nazianzen or
Nyssen, one Chrysostom, and Theodoret in the Eastern Church; one Hilary, and
Ambrose, St. Austin, Jerome, and St. Gregory in the Western Churches have for
these six last Centuries signified as much, or more, than a St. Peter, or St.
Paul, an Apostle or Evangelist; and a sed contra Augustinus, or sed contra est
quod Augustinus dicit, through the whole Sums and the whole Body of the
Schoolmen has passed for the Decision of a Question touching Faith, or
Manners. How easy was it then for Errors to come in under the Vmbrage of these
venerable Names; especially if we consider how many spurious Pieces had usurped
their Names, which the great Ignorance of latter Ages could not distinguish
from their genuine Works; how many of their genuine works were horribly
corrupted, and how fruitful many of those Fathers were in there inventions, and
how positive they sometimes are in delivering that as the doctrine of the whole
Church which was nothing less. For instance who that reads St. Austin disputing
against the Pelagians could doubt, if he believed him, that the Doctrine of the
Imputation of Original Sin was universally received by all Christians, and that
on this account the whole Church Baptized Infants; and yet Petavius iuforms us,
Dogm. Theol. To. 4. pt. 2. l. 14. c. 2. Haeret. Fabul. l. 5. c. 18. p. 292.
Quid festinat innocens aetas ad remissionem peccatorum? Tertul. de Bapt. c. 18.
that the Greek Fathers scarcely spoke any thing about it; yea in that very Age
Theodoret expressly denies it, putting the Question thus, If this be the only
work of Baptism to cleanse from Sin, (...); why do we Baptize Children who are
not guilty of it? and in his Comment on Romans 5.13. He adds, (...), That every
one dies for his own Sin, and not for that of his Fore fathers. Chrysostom on
the same place says, In v. 19. To. 3. Hom. 10. p. 73.
That for us to be mortal on the occasion of the Sin of Adam, is no absurdity;
(...); but how can it be, that by his Transgression another should become a
Sinner; for if he did not personally sin, Cap. 1.
neither could he deserve Punishment. Gennadius in his Book of Ecclesiastical
Doctrines, which passes still among the Works of St. Austin, places this as
one, That that Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and Son. Michael Psellus
on the contrary says, (...) -- (...), Cap. Theol. c. 10. p. 157.
the Holy Catholic Church teaches that the Spirit proceeds only from the
Father, L. 2. c. 1.
but not from the Son. To omit many other Instances collected by the learned
Dally in that elaborate Treatise of the Use of the Fathers, which makes it
needless to discourse further on this Head: For if the true Fathers were not
only subject to many and great Errors in their private Sentiments, but also
unto manifold Mistakes touching the Doctrine of the Catholic Church; if many
of their Works have been unhappily corrupted, and many spurious Pieces have
been imposed upon them; so that, instead of their Authority, Men often have
relied on an Impostor, an ignorant Monk, or perhaps an Heretic, how easy was
it in the dark Ages of the Church for Errors to come in at this Door, when too
much Veneration was by all given to them, and their Dictates passed for Oracles?

Again, Scriptures to Miracles and Visions, for the Establishment of Doctrines
and Opinions in the Church; That a prevailing Power does attend these
miraculous Operations, even when they are performed only by Satan and his
Ministers, we shall be fully convinced if we consider that our Lord foretold of
the false Prophets, and false Christ's that should come after him; they should
work Signs and Miracles, so great as to deceive, Matthew. 24.23.
if it were posible, the very Elect. St. 2 These. 2.9.
Paul that the Apostasy of the Great Antichrist, and his Followers, should be
effected by the coming of Satan with all power, Signs, Rev. 13.13, 14.
and lying Wonders. St. John of the Apocalyptick beast, that he should do great
Signs, and deceive the Inhabitants of the Earth by the Signs given him to do;
that at the first appearance of Christianity the Heathens did oppose it from
this topic, viz. The Signs and Wonders which had been performed by their
Heathen Deities, saying, Frustra tantum arrogas Christo, In vain you arrogate
so much to Christ, for we have often known that other Gods have given Medicines
to, and healed the Infirmities of many; so the Heathen in Arnob. l. 1. p. 28.
Arnobius, so Apud Orig. l. 8. p. 407, 416, 417.
Celsus, so Apud Minut. p. 7.
Caelius; and comparing the Miracles of Apollonius Tyanaeus, and of Apuleus
with those of Christ Lact. l. 5 c. 3. Aug. Ep. 4. Hieronim. apud Eusebius. p. 512.
, Quorum majora contendunt esse opera, And contending they were greater than
any done by him: That Acts 8.9, 10. Just. in Apol 2. p. 69. Cyril. Hier. cat.
6. p. 53, 54, etc.
Simon Magus mightily prevailed by them, and obtained almost, wherever he
came, to be worshipped as a God, or the great Power of God: That even the
Arians in the Fourth Century appealed to them for Confirmation of their Faith,
declaring that the Miracles of their Philostorg. l. 3.. 4. p. 27.
Theophilus were so great Confirmations of the Christian Faith, as to constrain
the Obstinacy of the Jews, and silence all their Contradictions; and that their
L. 2.. 8. p. 14.
Agapetus did (...), raise the Dead, heal many that were sick, and convert many
to the Christian Faith. To these convincing Demonstrations of the
Fallaciousness of this Argument, when new Miracles come after a true Doctrine
sufficiently confirmed by them already, and contradict that very Doctrine, or
teach things contrary to Piety, it may be useful to observe these things out of
the Holy Fathers.

First, That some of them do expressly say, That Miracles had ceased in their
Days; and others, That they were not necessary. Tom. 5. Hom. 88 p. 606.
St. Chrysostom has a set Discourse upon this Subject, (...), why Miracles
were ceased, which had they then been common in the Christian World, had been
an idle Question. To this Discourse he seems to have been necessitated by the
Importunity of his Auditors, who were still crying out (...); Why are not Signs
wrought now? To this Enquiry he answers, 1. That Signs were intended only
(...), for the Confirmation of Unbelievers, and that they were not needful for
the Faithful; and then concluding (...), this therefore is the Cause why
Miracles are now ceased. In his Thirty second Homily on Matthew he repeats the
same things, To. 2. p. 223.
saying (...), But you seek for Signs, such as the Apostles did, you would see
the Lepers cleansed, the Devils cast out, the Dead raised; but this is the
greatest Demonstration of our Generosity and Love, to believe God without those
Pledges, and (...) for this and other Reasons, God has caused Miracles to
cease. Ibid. p. 650.
In his Twenty forth Homily on St. John, he says that (...), it is a tempting
of God now to ask for Signs; and this, says he, I speak, because there are now
Men seeking them, and saying (...), Why are not Miracles now done? Whereas if
thou art a faithful Man, as thou ought to be, and love Christ, as thou
ought to do, (...), thou have no need of Signs, for these things are given
for Unbelievers.

Secondly, To. 5. Hom. 88. p. 606.
To this Enquiry he answers by way of Distinction, That though (...), or such
Miracles as were the Objects of our Senses were then ceased, yet God did still
vouchsafe, (...), his efficacious Workings on the Souls of Christians, in their
Baptismal Regeneration, and in the Mystical Sacrifice. This he explains more
fully in his Sixth Tome and Sixty ninth Homily; P. 713.
for if any Man says (...), but we see not now these Signs done, nor have we
such Power of working them. To this, says he, I answer, That the Church is not
wholly destitute of Miracles, 1. Because a miraculous Change was wrought in
Baptism, by giving spiritual Life to a dead Soul. 2ly. Because we enjoy the
Mysteries, and in them the Grace of the Spirit, (...), for the Elements could
not be made the mystical Body and Blood of Christ without the Grace of the
Spirit. Where, by the way, we learn that Chrysostom did not believe that the
Sacrament contained Christ's natural Body, but only his mystical Body, which
Phrase is often used by the Fathers, with Relation to Christ's Word, his
Church, his Sacrament, but never is applied to his natural Body: We also learn
that Chrysostom knew nothing of the miraculous Conversion of the Bread into
Christ's Body natural; for should a Romanist go about to prove that Miracles
were not ceased, from the Consideration of what was done in the Sacrament,
would he not urge, That the Bread was miraculously converted into Christ's
Body, that the Figure and Color of the Elements did subsist without a Subject,
that Christ's whole natural Body was in less Space than the smallest Crumb of
Bread; yea, that being only one, it was entirely in many Thousand Places at one
and the same time: Seeing then Chrysostom, upon the like Occasion, gives not
the least hint of any thing of this kind, but only says that the Bread and
Wine are not made Christ's mystical Body and Blood without the Grace of the
Spirit; adding immediately, for his last Instance of this Kind, That Priests
are not made Priests by Ordination (...), without the same Advent of the Holy
Spirit upon them, is it not reasonable to conceive, that he knew and believed
nothing of those great and many Miracles, which are now thought to be performed
in Celebration of the Mass? Pope Gregory gives for the Substance, the same
Answer to this Objection or Enquiry: For descanting on those Words, These Signs
shall follow them that believe, Hom. 39. in Evang. Ed. Par. 1523. f. 320. h.
etc. He says, Nunquid nam Fratres mei, quia ista signa non facitis, minime
creditis, What my Brethren, will you not believe because you do not do now
those Signs? But these were necessary in the beginning of the Church, for the
increase of Faith, but now that it is planted and rooted, they are not so;
whence St. Paul says, Signs are not for the Faithful, but the Unbeliever.
Moreover the Holy Church does that now spiritually which the Apostles did then
corporally; for her Priests by Exorcism cast evil Spirits out of the Minds of
Men: When the Faithful chant the Holy Mysteries, and sing forth the Praises and
the Power of God with all their Strength, what do they do, but speak with new
Tongues? Whilst they strengthen the Infirm in Spirit, and hold up them that
stumble, what do they but lay their Hands upon the Sick that they may be
healed? Haec itaque signa, Fratres Charissimi, Auctore Deo, si vultis vos
facitis; These Signs, dear Brethren, you may do, if you please, by God's help.
And this is all that they return to this Enquiry and Objection, which makes it
reasonable to conceive they were so far from thinking Miracles a necessary Mark
and Concomitant of the true Church, that they knew of none performed by her,
besides the spiritual Operations on the Soul of Men, or if they did, betrayed
the Churches Cause by being so profoundly silent upon this Occasion, and
flying, as their only Refuge, to those intellectual Operations, which doubtless
were not the Signs and Miracles enquired after.

Thirdly, Chrysostom adds that Miracles were profitably done then, and now
(...), Hom. 6. in 1. ad Cer. p. 276.
they are as profitably not done, for then the Apostles were (...), laying the
first Foundations of Christianity, and so they needed Miracles to prove what
they pretended to receive from God; but as for us now, (...), We introduce
nothing of our selves, but only speak those things which we received from them,
and we go not about to persuade Men by our own Reasonings, (...), but from the
Holy Scriptures, and afford Men assurance of the things that we say, from the
Miracles that were then done by those who did indite the Scriptures, (...), and
for this Cause Miracles are not now done. Now this is the very Answer of the
Protestants, when, by the Romanists, they are called upon to show their
Miracles, and it strikes Confusion upon this Pretense of that Church, accusing
them of new Doctrines, if they have any which are now to be confirmed by
Miracles.

2ly. The Fathers add that Miracles having thus ceased, the Devil was to set up
by them to draw Men off from the true Faith to Infidelity, or to corrupt that
Truth God had already stablished by sufficient Miracles. Hom. in Matthew. ad
Huet. p. 265. 266.
Thus Origin declares of the Man of Sin, That he was to appear for the
Deception of those that should perish, with all Power, Signs and lying Wonders,
and all deceivableness of Unrighteousness, (...), immitating all the Miracles
done for the confirmation of the Truth. The Author of the imperfect Commentary
on St. Matthew, says, That at the beginning of Christianity true Prophets were
known from false by this, That the Signs done by the First were profitable,
those done by the other were unprofitable; but seeing now the time will come,
ut etiam ex part bona faciendorum Signorum Diabolo detur potestas, Hom. 19 p.
75.
That the Power of working good Signs shall be given to the Devil, we must
enquire whether the Sign be necessary, or unnecessary, as to the time; for if
Christ did his Miracles, propter confirmationem infidelium, for Confirmation of
Unbelievers, manifestum est quia modo, cum nullus sit infidelis, faciendorum
miraculorum necessitas non est, it is manifest that, now that there is no
Unbeliever amongst us, there is no Necessity of doing Miracles. And again,
Formerly, says he, Christians did Miracles full, not of Admiration only, but
Advantage; and by these true Christians were known from false; Hom. 49 p. 173.
nunc autem signorum operatio omnino levata est, magis autem and apud eos
invenitur qui falsi sunt Christiani, fieri ficta, But now the working of
Miracles is wholly minished, and the doing of feigned ones is chiefly found
amongst false Christians; as St. Peter in Clement says, Antichristo enim plena
signorum faciendorum est danda potestas, for the full Power of doing Miracles
is to be given to Antichrist. And a third time upon those Words, False Christ's
and Prophets shall arise, and work great Signs, he Comments thus, P. 178.
They shall work not vain and unprofitable Signs, as the Ministers of Satan
were wont to do, but great, full and profitable Signs, quae sancti facere
solent, which the Saints used to do; for whilst, says he, there was a calling
Men from Infidelity to Faith, the Servants of Christ did Miracles because these
Testimonies were a sign of their divine Vocation, that the Truth of their
Doctrine might be commended by Miracles; but this Calling ceasing, the
Seduction calling Men back from Faith to Infidelity, will begin; and then,
says he, tradenda sunt Seductionis adjutoria Diabolo, id est, potestas
faciendorum signorum, the Instruments of Seduction, that is, the Power of
working Signs, is to be given up to the Devil, that by Signs and Prodigies he
may commend his Lies for Truth. And therefore now we must not take notice of
Men's Miracles, but their Fruits, a good Conversation, Hom. 19. p. 74, 77.
and a true Confession, and enquire si confessio ejus conveniat cum Scripturis,
if his Confession agree with the Scriptures; for if so, he is a good Christian,
otherwise he is a false one. In Deuteronomy. q. 12. Quaecunquetalia fiunt, ideo sunt
approbanda quia in Catholica fiunt, non ideo ipsa manifestatur Catholica quia
haec in ea fiunt? de. Unit. Eccl. c. 16.
And in like manner Theodoret instructs us, Not to regard the Miracles of Men,
when they teach (...), things contrary to Godliness: And St. Austin frequently
appeals from them to the Scripture for finding out the true Church, saying,
These Wonders do not manifest the Church is Catholic wherein they are
performed, but the Holy Scriptures; let then the Donatists show us their
Scriptures, for these are the Strength and Firmness of our Cause.

3ly. They teach that therefore God had forewarned us not to regard, and not to
be deceived by them, or to look upon them as sufficient to establish any new
Doctrine: For, says St. Austin, if some Miracles be wrought by Heretics,
magis cavere debemus, we ought to be the more cautious, because our Lord Christ
having said, that there should come Deceivers who should work such Miracles as
to deceive, if it were possible, Lib. de Unit. Eccl. c. 16.
the very Elect, he adds, by way of vehement Commendation, this, Behold I have
foretold you, whence the Apostle admonishing us says, now the Spirit
manifestly teaches, that in the later times some shall depart from the Faith,
giving heed to seducing Spirits, and doctrinis Daemoniorum, and to Doctrines of
Demons. The same St. Austin in his Thirteenth Treatise upon the Gospel of St.
John, brings in the Donatists objecting thus, Pontius wrought a Miracle,
Donatus prayed, and God answered him from Heaven: And his Reply to it is this,
Contra istos, To. 9. p. 122.
ut sic loquar, mirabilarios cautum me fecit Deus meus, My God has cautioned
me against those Miracle-Mongers, by saying in the later times false Prophets
shall arise, doing Signs and Wonders. -- Behold I have foretold you, therefore
our Bridegroom has warned us, quia and Miraculis decipi non debemus, that we
ought not to be deceived by Miracles. And in his Second Book on the Sermon of
our Lord upon the Mount, he says, Our Lord has admonished us not to be
deceived with such things; conceiving the invisible Wisdom to be there, where
we see a visible Miracle; saying, many shall say in that Day, Lord, have we not
in thy Name cast out Devils, and done many wondrous Works: Let such a one read
what the Magicians of Egypt did against Moses, To. 4. p. 1172, 1173.
or what our Lord says of the false Prophets; If any one shall say unto you,
here is Christ, believe him not; for many false Christ's and false Prophets
shall arise, and do mighty Signs.

And yet that Miracles pretended to be done after these times, are urged to
countenance, and have been used to introduce and promote Romish Doctrines and
Practices, is evident from History, and the Confessions of the Romish Doctors:
Com in Dan. 14.
That as Lyranus says, In Ecclesia aliquando sit deceptio populi in Miraculis
factis a Sacerdotibus, The Priests of that Church sometimes deceived the People
with Miracles, Non obscurum est quot opiniones invectae sunt in Orbem per
homines ad suum quaestum callidos confictorum miraculorum praesidio. p. 188.

Cap. 11.. 11. De purg. l. 1. c. 11. quarta Ratio.

De Sanctorum Beat. l. 1. c. 19. accedant l. 2. c. 12. Argument. quartum.

De Sacr. Euch. l. 3. c. 8. postremum de poenit. l. 3. c. 12. quarta Ratio.


done by them for temporal Advantage. That according to the Passage cited by
the Lord Faulkland from Erasmus, or Sr. Thomas Moor, many Opinions have been
brought into the World by Men cunning to promote their Profit by the means of
feigned Miracles, I have already proved from the Testimonies of Romish Writers:
That by such Miracles they do endeavor to confirm their Doctrines, we need no
other Witness than their Bellarmine, who proves Purgatory from the Apparition
of Souls, declaring they were in that Place: That Saints are to be invoked, and
Images to be worshipped, from the Miracles performed upon the Invocation of the
First, and the Worship of the Second: The corporeal Presence of our Lord in the
Sacrament, and the jus divinum of Auricular Confession, from the same Topic.

And yet some of their Writers have seen just Reason to confess, that some of
the Miracles produced to confirm these Articles, In sum. part. 4. qu. 11. Art.
4.. 3.
were either humane or diabolical Impostures. Thus Alexander of Hales says,
That Flesh appeared in the Sacrament, interdum humana procuratione, interdum
operatione Diabolica, sometimes by humane Procurement, and sometimes by
Procurement of the Devil. In Can. Miss. lect. 49. f. 127. b.
And Gabriel Biel does acknowledge that Miracles are done to Men who run to
Images, sometimes by the Operation of Devils, to deceive those inordinate
Worshippers, God permitting it, and their Infidelity exacting it. And the same
Verdict, may, with great Reason, be passed upon all the rest, they appearing in
the World, not only after that time when the Fathers tell us Miracles were
ceased, or not to be regarded, and when they said the Power of working Miracles
was to be given up to Satan, but also after that the Goths, the Vandals,
Longobards, Franks and Saxons, and other barbarous Nations had overrun the
West, and brought in a Deluge of most horrid Ignorance, this dark and dubious
Conjuncture was the very Season when these Romish Miracles began to swarm and
fly abroad: Then do we hear from Pope Gregory, Gregory of Tours, Bid, and
others, of the Apparitions of sad Souls, to acquaint others with their sad
Condition underneath, craving for Help from the Prayers, Pilgrimages and Masses
of the Living; a Charity which neither Moses nor the Prophets, Jesus Christ, or
his Apostles ever thought fit to mention or prescribe: Then do we hear from the
Second Nicene Council, from Gregory of Tours, and other later Writers, of
Images bleeding, smiling, or mourning, as Occasion required: Then do we read in
Paulus Diaconus, Paschasius, and other Patrons of Transubstantiation, of Flesh
and Blood, and of a little Child, appearing in the consecrated Elements.

Now had such Miracles been truly wrought by divine Power and Assistance, upon
these Occasions, they would have more especially been then performed, when the
Gift of Miracles continued in the Church, and was confessedly common among
Christians, and done for Confirmation of the Faith, and for Conviction of the
Unbeliever, they being then more necessary for those great Ends for which they
were at first designed; nor would the Writers of the first Four Ages have been
less careful to mention, and appeal unto them, than are the Romanists at
present, whose Histories are stuffed up with them; especially they would have
mentioned them in those Discourses and Apologies, which were designed on
purpose to confirm the Christian Faith from the miraculous Operations done by
Christians, they being not less zealous to promote the Glory of their Lord, the
Interests of Christianity, the Credit of their Institutions, and the true
Honor of their Saints, than Romish Priests: Whereas, from the beginning of
Christianity to the Days of Constantine, we do not find in all the genuine
Records of Antiquity, one tittle of this Nature. They are indeed very copious
in relating the miraculous Cures and Operations then performed Clem. Recogn. l.
5.. 36. Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 13 p. 34. Iren. l. 2. c. 57.
by Imposition of Hands, Tertull. ad Scap. c. 4.
by anointing of the Sick with Oil, Just. M. Apol. 1. p. 45. Dial. 247. Iren.
l. 2. c. 56, 57. Orig. in Cells. l. 1. p. 7, 20.
by Prayer and invocation of the Name of Jesus, Just. M. Dial. p. 302. Orig. l.
7. p. 334. Lact. l. 4. c. 27.
by adjuration of evil Spirits by his Name; but of miraculous Apparitions of
Souls from Purgatory, of Flesh and Blood appearing visibly in the Eucharist, of
Miracles performed at the Adoration of Images, or at auricular Confession, they
speak not one Word, these being Miracles designed for other Ends, and reserved
for times more worthy of them.

Thirdly, Errors in Doctrine, or in Practice, Authority, the Vogue and
Reputation of those Men, who either first began, or else gave Countenance to
them, when begun by others: St. Paul well understood what an Inlet to Schisms,
Contentions and Divisions it would be, for Men to cry up Paul, Apollo, Cephas,
1 Cor. i. 12. iv. 6.
and to be puffed up for one against another, and therefore he endeavors to
prevent that Evil in the Church of Corinth; and in most of his Epistles he is
constrained to magnify his Office, 2 Cor. c. 10, 11, 12.
and to commend himself in opposition to those false Apostles, and deceitful
Workers, who made it their Business to depress his Authority, and to procure
Credit and Admiration to themselves: It was the great Opinion which the Jews
had, both of the Scribes and Pharisees, which caused them so readily to
embrace, and superstitiously to Reverence, and stiffly to retain those
Superstitions and Traditions by which they rendered vain God's: Worship, and
made void his Law. Vide Cap. 11.. 7.
They, says Josephus, had the popular Applause, as being (...), most worthy of
Credit in the Peoples Judgment, and the best Interpreters of their Laws. Mr.
Wake's Second Def. Part 1. p. 81.
And we at present see how great a Grief it is to some, that our Ministers are
in the best Sense popular, by living so as to deserve the good Opinion, and
preaching so as to deserve Attention from the People, and gaining Reputation to
their Doctrine by their Sincerity, as well as Learning; or in St. Paul 's
Expression, by commending themselves and their Doctrine to the Consciences of
all Men. To show the Prevalence of Men of Reputation in Matters of this Nature:
If, as the Romanists do generally confess, the Doctrine of the Millennium
obtained almost generally in the Church from the Relation of one Papias, a Man
of very slender Intellectuals: If, as Eusebius informs us (...), Eccl. Hist. l.
3. c. 39.
most of the Churchmen embraced that Sentiment by his Authority, pleading
(...), the great Antiquity of the Man: If one Agrippinus, as they also tell us,
could prevail over all Africa to receive Heretics by Baptism: If Origin could
deserve to be condemned in the Fifth and the Sixth Synods, as an Heretic, and
yet, whilst he lived, Hieron. in Verbo Origenes. Socrat. Hist. Eccl. l. 4. c.
26. Hieron. Prolog. in l. 2. com. in Micham. Pamphil. Apol. Orig. praefat. in
libr. nom. Hebr. T. 3. f. 12.
could by his Learning and his Piety prevail to be had summo in honor, in the
highest Reputation, to obtain after his Death (...), great Glory throughout all
the Christian World, insomuch that he was very grateful, cunctis prudentibus,
to all wise Men; and did for many Years obtain the Title of Magister Ecclesiae,
The Master or Teacher of the Church: If the Authority of Jerome could prevail to
have his Translation of the Old Testament received against the Judgment of the
Universal Church: If one St. Austin could introduce into the Church the Belief
of the Ascension of the Blessed Virgin, though none of the Fathers, who had as
good Opportunity to know, and as much Reason to believe it, spoke one Tittle of
it: I say, if all these things are so, how can it be conceived a thing
incredible, That Popes, Patriarchs and Councils, and other Persons of great
Authority and Vogue in their respective Ages, should have had like Influence to
introduce new Doctrines and Practices into the Church, under pretense of Piety,
or the Authority of Scriptures, or the Holy Fathers, or some like plausible
Account. Theodor. Lector. l. 2. p 566. Niceph. Hist. Eccl. l. 15. c. 18.
Why might not Petrus Gnaphaeus, Patriarch of Antioch, bring Invocation of
Saints into the Prayers of the Church in the Fifth Century; Pope Gregory
introduce Purgatory in the Sixth; Boniface the Third, Paulus Diac. de Gest.
Longobard. l. 4. c. 11.
obtain from Phocas the Title of, Caput omnium Ecclesiarum, The Head of the
Universal Church, in the Seventh; The Second Nicene Council introduce
Image Worship in the Eighth; Paschasius give Rise to Transubstantiation in the
Ninth; Lombard, and Hugo de Sto Victore fix the Number of Seven Sacraments in
the Twelfth; And Pope Hadrian the Third, introduce the Adoration of the Host in
the Thirteenth Century.

Again, (...). Socr. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 12. Soz. H. Eccl. l. 1. c. 23.
If one Paphnutius could by his Reason and Authority, prevail with the First
Nicene Council to rescind their intended Decree touching the Celibacy of
Priests; If Nectarius, Bishop of Constantinople, could abolish the Custom of
repairing to an established Penitentiary for the disclosing secret Sins, and
that with the ensuing Approbation of almost all the Catholic Bishops of the
Church: In a Word, if so many Practices and Customs, relating to the
Discipline, and to the Sacraments of the Church, could be entirely altered and
rejected in the following Ages, as is here partly proved, and by the Learned on
both sides confessed, why might not other Practices and Doctrines, which
obtained in the more pure and early Ages of the Church, run the same Fate, and
by the same Authority and Methods be discarded? For, as it is judiciously
observed by the Lord Faulkland, when the Reasons offered for or against a
Practice, have in them some Appearance of Truth or Probability, as they may
have to many Persons, though they be not valid, when the Persons Authorizing or
Approving them are of great Authority or Credit in the Church, as they may be,
especially in darker Ages, and yet be subject to great Errors; and when the
People, upon whom these Doctrines or Practices are pressed, have either a great
Veneration and Esteem for those that press them, or a great Dread of them, then
meet together most of those things which tend to work Persuasion, or prevail
for an Assent unto the Doctrine, and a Compliance with the Practice
recommended. Seeing then, Not. in Council. Clar. Can. 28. conc. To. 10. p. 582.
as Petrus de Marca does inform us, the Approbation of the half Communion by
Thomas Aquinas, made others, certatim, amplecti hanc sententiam, to embrace
greedily the same Opinion, why might not others of as good Authority and Credit
be instrumental to produce like Changes in other Constitutions of the Church?

Fourthly, Old Doctrines and Practices might easily be changed, and new obtain,
by reason of the corrupt Manners of the Clergy, and by their Example, of the
People: And that,

1. Because such evil Practices deprive the Clergy of that Spiritual Wisdom and
Divine Assistance, which is their best Conducter into the Way of Truth, and is
their chief Preservative from dangerous Delusions and pernicious Errors. Wisd.
1.4.
For as the Book of Wisdom says, Into a malicious Soul Wisdom will not enter,
nor dwell in the Body that is subject unto Sin. St. De Judicio dei To. 2. p.
393.
Basil grievously laments the Discords and Contentions, the perverse Doctrines
and Opinions which had prevailed in his time amongst (...), the Rulers of the
Church of God, by which they verified the Prediction of St. Paul, Acts 20.30.
That from Christians themselves should proceed Men speaking perverse things to
draw away Disciples after them. And this he does resolve into their Rejection
of God, their true and only King; their Departure from the Laws of Christ, and
choosing rather to rule others, in contradiction to the Commands of Christ, than
to be ruled by him: By which things, says he, they have rendered themselves
(...), P. 394.
unworthy of the Government of the Lord. Clemangis is still more express and
Argumentative in this Particular, Super Materia Conc. Genesis p. 71.
For with them, says he, is the Spirit; those he directs and brings to a
salutary End, who have prepared for him, within themselves, an Habitation
worthy of him; and by good Works have rendered themselves worthy of his
Inspiration and Visitation; but how can he hear, visit and enlighten them who
are Adversaries to him, and when they cannot do it in themselves endeavor to
extinguish him in others, and are inflamed, not with the Fire of Love, but with
the Ardor of Ambition? For with Hypocrites and self-Seekers the Holy Spirit is
not wont to be present, but to fly from them as his Enemies, according to that
saying of the Book of Wisdom, the Holy Spirit of Discipline will flee Deceit,
Wisd. 1.5.
and from Thoughts that are without Understanding, and will not abide when
Unrighteousness comes in. Now, says he, P. 72.
if according to the Testimony of the Lord, the Holy Spirit rests only upon the
Humble and the Meek, the Man who trembles at God's Word, Et secundum mores
hodiernos pauci admodum tales verisimiliter in conciliis sunt, and according to
the Manners of our Times, it is very likely that few such are in our Councils;
but of carnal, worldly, ambitious and contentious Men, and of Men having that
Knowledge which puffs up, turba solet adesse copiosa, the Number usually is
very great; what necessity is there to believe that the Holy Spirit does
prevail in those Councils, and move the Minds of them who always do resist, and
do oppose his Motions to those things which are most sound and salutary? P. 73.
If it be not from humane Infirmity, but from the Guidance of the Holy Spirit,
that Councils cannot be deceived, who can be sure this Holy Spirit will be
present with the major part of an Assembly of such Men, they being, though in
Profession Christians, ye in reallity Men of the World, who, Joh. 14.17.
says St. John, cannot receive the Spirit of Truth.

2ly. Because such corrupt Manners do provoke God in his righteous Judgment to
give Men up to strong Delusions, and to permit the great Deceiver to prevail
upon them, according to that Expression of St. Paul, That evil Men and Seducers
will grow worse and worse, 2 Timothy 3.13.
deceiving and being deceived: Thus of the Times of Antichrist he has
foretold, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9, 10.
That because Men received not the Truth in the Love of it, therefore God
should send among them strong Delusions, that they should believe a Lie. And
this Account St. Basil also gives of the forementioned Miscarriages of the
Church Governors of his Time, Ibid. p. 394.
viz. That they befell them because being corrupt and abominable in their
doings, they had deserved the Punishment which the Apostle speaks of, saying,
because they liked not to retain God in their Knowledge, therefore he gave them
up to a reprobate Sense, and which our Lord inflicted on the wicked Jews, to
whom he therefore spoke in Parables, (...), that they might not perceive the
Divine Mysteries of the Gospel, because they first had shut their Eyes, made
their Ears heavy, and their foolish Heart was waxed gross; that is; (...), That
by way of Punishment they might be subject unto Blindness in greater Matters.
Clemangis in this also follows the Sentiments of St. Basil, For after he had
abundantly declared the great Corruptions of their Manners who usually then met
in Councils, he puts this Question, Ibid. p. 73.
Quis certo possit scire an major pars concilij sit digna decipi? who therefore
can know surely whether the major Part of a Council be not worthy to be
deceived?

3ly. Men's evil Lives, had they no other Tempter, do naturally incline them to
cast off those Principles and Practices which contradict, and do condemn their
Actions, and hinder their Pursuit and free Enjoyment of their sensual
Appetites; this they must be inclined to do, partly to free themselves from the
continual Gripings of an evil and condemning Conscience; For, as Theodoret
observes, They who have put away the upright Conscience, do afterward cast off
the Faith, (...), because they cannot bear the Accusations of a guilty
Conscience: And partly, that they may exert more freely that natural Opposition
that is in them to that Law of Holiness and Light, by which their Actions are
reproved, according to that saying of our Lord, Every one that does Evil hates
the Light, John 3.20.
neither comes he unto the Light, least his Deeds should be reproved: It Is
this Corruption of Manners which seems to have turned all the Severities of
ancient Penance, and all the wholesome Methods of Church Discipline into
Formalities and Superstition; into fruitless Pilgrimages, the going barefoot,
the carrying wax Tapers, the mumbling over a few Pater Noster's, Ave Maria's,
or penitential Psalms, which either the penitent does not, or at the least, is
not obliged to attend to, and which have very little Tendency to the Conversion
and Reformation of a Sinner, but rather do encourage him to sin at such an easy
rate.

It Is this has introduced so many easy Ways of Pardon and Justification,
Attritio ex turpitudinis peccati Consideratione, vel ex Gehennae and poenarum
metu communiter concipitur. Council. Trid. Sess. 14. c. 4. Et eum ad gratiam dei
in Sacramento poenitentiae impetrandam dispoint Ibid. vid. Catechism. Romans
Part. 2. c. 5.. 37, 38.
without the bringing forth Fruits meet for Repentance, and taught even
Councils to determine that Attrition, or Sorrow out of apprehension of the
Foulness of Sin, or the fear of Punishment, will dispose Men to obtain the
Favor of God in the Sacrament of Penance: So that if the vilest Wretch, when
going out of that World, in which he has lived most lewdly all his Life, be
afraid of Punishment for his Enormities, or apprehensive of the Foulness of
them, as the more wicked he has been the likelier he is, and the greater
Reason he still has to be; provided he be absolved by a Priest, he must go out
of the World in the Favor of God, and in a justified Estate. And if so, what
necessity is there of adding to our Faith Virtue, and of patient Continuance in
well doing, that we may seek for Honor and Immortality, or of following after
Holiness and Purity of Life, that we may see God?

Moreover Men by their wicked Conversations will be disposed to introduce, and
cherish such Doctrines as best comply with their impure Inclinations, that they
may have the greater Freedom in the Pursuit of their Ambition, Covetousness,
and all their other sensual Appetities, and may the better gratify those
Inclinations: And here we have a wide Door open, at which the Innovations of
the Church of Rome might enter, seeing most of them have an apparent Tendance
to the gratification of Pride, and love of Empire, of Covetousness and
Ambition, of Ease and Freedom from restraint in the Ecclesiastics and Church
Governors, and give them Opportunity to Lord it over Men's Consciences, to
engross the Wealth and the Conveniences of the World, to live at ease, and to
be uncontrollable by any but themselves. For do not the Doctrines of Purgatory,
Pardons, and Indulgences, directly tend to make them Masters of Men's eternal,
and by that of their temporal Estates? Is not the Treasury of the Saints, and
of our Savior 's Merits, a way of driving Trade for the enriching their own
Treasuries? Do not their Masses and Oblations of true propitiatory Sacrifices
for the Dead, tend to engage all dying Persons to sacrifice their Estates unto
them, and leave them lumping Sums of Money for that end? Are not their Priests
well paid for saying private Masses? Do they not get well by the Shrines, the
Images, the Relics of the Saints they keep, and show to others, and the
Oblations offered by the People! And must not therefore all these Doctrines be
very grateful to Men of covetous and greedy Minds? Must not such Persons
strongly be inclined to broach, abet, and to promote them?

Do not the Doctrines of the Pope's Supremacy, of the Priest's Power to make
his God, of the necessity of Priestly Absolution, and Confession to him, and of
entire Obedience due to their Injunctions, plainly tend to advance their Power
and Reputation, and to engage all Men to have them in the greatest Reverence?
Do not the Doctrines of the Necessity of the Priest's Intention to the Validity
of a Sacrament, of auricular Confession in order to Absolution, and of the
Power of this Absolution to procure Pardon for the Person who is only attrite,
tend most apparently to make the People think that their Salvation does
entirely depend on them, and so create as great an Awe within them of such
Priests, as either the Hopes of their Salvation, or the fear of everlasting
Misery is able to produce?

Lastly, Does not the Doctrine of Infallibility give them full Opportunity to
lord it over all Men's Consciences and keep them in an absolute Subjection to
their Wills? And can they not upon the pretense of being the sole Judges of the
Sense of Scripture, and of authentical Traditions, obtrude upon the World
whatsoever Doctrines will best suit with their Designs and Interests? And must
not Men be forced to submit to their Decisions, and blindly follow their
Directions, as agreeable to Sacred Writ, whilst it is kept with so great Care
from their Perusal? He must be blind who sees not that all those Doctrines must
be very acceptable to Men of Pride, and covetous Desires, and who affect
Dominion and Empire over the Consciences of others. Let us see then whether
from the Eighth Century, when the Veneration of Images was first established,
to the Sixteen, in which the Trent Council confirmed all these Doctrines, we
have not too much Reason to suspect the generality, or the prevailing part of
their Church Guides, were Men strongly addicted to those corrupt Affections
which render them unworthy of the Assistance of the Holy Spirit, worthy to be
given up to Delusions, and very much disposed to broach, maintain, and to
establish such Doctrines as directly tend to gratify their Ambition and their
Avarice.

Whether such Changes might not reasonably be expected in the Eighth Century,
Carol. Magn. Praefat. ad libr. de imag.
when the Second Nicene Council met, seeing the Priests then had laid aside all
sound and wholesome Doctrine, transgressed the Commandments of the Fathers, and
brought into the Church such Doctrines as were never known to Christ, or his
Apostles.

In the Ninth Century, when Paschasius began to vent the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation; seeing then they buried in Contempt and Oblivion the Word
of God, Paulus Diac.
made the Temple a Den of Thieves, and instead of sweet Melody, Luitpert. Arch.
Mogunt. Epist. ad Ludov. Regem Germ.
sounded forth Blasphemy against God himself; and the Captains and Rulers of
the People endeavored to prefer humane to divine things; and the Governors
of the Church having left the way of Salvation, ran headlong, opening the Pit
of Perdition to those that followed them.

In the Tenth Century, when as Baronius complains, Ad A. D. 912. Art. 8.
the Canons were silent, the Decrees of Popes suppressed, the ancient
Traditions proscribed, Lust armed with the secular Power, challenged all things
to it self, when Christ was fast asleep in the Ship, and, which seemed worse,
all snorted with him, and there were no Disciples to awaken their sleepy Lord
with their Cries.

In the Eleventh Century, when the Councils held at Rome, Varseilles, and
Tours, condemned Berengarius, Ad An. 1001. Art. 1. and 7.
and decreed for the corporeal Presence of our Lord's Body in the Sacrament;
This being, says Baronius, styled that Iron Age in which Iniquity abounded,
and many discoursed, and believed that Antichrist was come, and the Corruption
of Manners, which then was very great, especially among the Ecclesiastics,
might easily persuade Men that it would be so. When, says the same Baronius,
unhappy Brambles, Thorns, and Nettles, which grew out of the Stench of the
Flesh, and the Dung of Corruption, had wonderfully filled the Field of the
Church, Ad An. 1049. Art. 10.
for all Flesh had corrupted their Ways, so that not only the Flood seemed
unsufficient to wash away this Filth, but those horrid Wickednesses seemed to
call for that Fire which destroyed Sodom and Gomorrha, When, says Hugo
Flaviniacensis, almost all the Clergy, rather sought their own than the Things
of Jesus Christ, Council. T. 10. p. 375.
and chose rather to adhere to the Discipleship of Simon than keep the Poverty
of Christ, Apol. An. 1066. apud Morn. Mist. iniq. page 245.
in the Unity of the Faith. When, say the Clergy of Liege, corrupt Manners,
through Ambition and Avarice, prevailed -- Religion was dissembled, and a Show
of Piety brought in. When the Traffic of Holy Things crept in, and the Holy
Philosophy, by the subtle Interpretation of Sycophants, began to be corrupted,
polluted, violated with humane Inventions, and old Wives Fables.

In the Twelfth Century, when first we hear of the fixed Number of Seven
Sacraments, which, in another Sense, were till then Mysteries. Since then the
Popes, Cardinals, and Prelates, were all the Day intent on Evil, and ever
occupied, without Satiety, in the Works of Iniquity; they made Port-sale of
things sacred, and labored with all their Might that they might not descend to
Hell alone: The Clergy neglected God's Service, were Slaves to filthy Lucre,
defiled their Priesthood by Uncleanness, De praedest. and lib. Arbitr. l. 2.
versus finem. Sermon. 6. in Ps. 90. p. 73. c.
seduced the People by Hypocrisy, and laid Snares by all manner of ways to ruin
them, says Honorius Augustodunensis, then the Offices of Ecclesiastical
Dignity were turned into filthy Lucre, and a Work of Darkness; nor was the
Welfare of Souls, but the Luxury of Riches sought after in performance of them,
and the whole Race of Christians, from the least to the greatest, seemed to
have conspired against God; so that from the Sole of the Foot to the Crown of
the Head there was no Soundness in them; nor could Men say, As is the People so
is the Priest, Sermon. 1. de conv. B. Pauli. F. 2. d.
for the People were not so bad as the Priest, Says St. Bernard.

In the Thirteenth Century, when Transubstantiation was established in the
Fourth Council of Lateran. Since then Simony was committed without Shame, In
Hen. 3. A. 1237. p. 438.
the Churches Liberty decayed, Charity expired, Religion was trod under Foot,
and the Daughter of Sion was made like a brazen faced Whore, that has no
Shame, says Matthew Paris: Then the Pride, Haughtiness, Perfidiousness, Fraud,
Wickedness, Luxury, Avarice of the Clergy was not to be endured, they being
worse than Turks, Saracens, Tartars and Jews, Apud Aventin. l. 7. p. 720, 721.
and did more offend against Christian Simplicity than they, says Meinardus.

In the Fourteenth Century, De planctu Eccl. l 2. c. 15.
when Alvarus Pelagius complained of the Popes, That many of them came into
their Sees by Simony, that they were exceedingly Covetous, that they savoured
of the things of the Flesh, but were very careless of the good of Souls. C. 16.
Of the Cardinals, That by their pernicious Examples they were commonly the
Odor of Death unto Death, that many of them were unworthily promoted, and that
they were insatiable Thirsters after Benefices. C. 20.
Of the Bishops, That they were notoriously guilty of Simony, Fraud,
Uncleanness, Pride, Envy, Covetousness, That the Prelates of the Church were an
Army of Devils, Companions of Thieves, C. 5.
and did nothing but for Gifts and Rewards. Of the Priests, C. 27.
That they were commonly promoted by Simony, lived incontinently, and committed
Fornication with the Women that came to Confession. Of the Clergy in general,
C. 28.
That they entered into Orders not out of Love to God, but temporal Advantage;
that Drunkenness, Gluttony, and Incontineney, were their common Vices; that
many of them were Sodomites; that they gave ill Example to the Laity, and
commonly were worse than they.

In the Fifteenth Century, when the Cup was taken away from the Laity by the
Decrees of the Councils of Constance and Basil, and Purgatory was established
in the Council of Florence. Ep. Synod. de Con. Author Super Papam Bin. To. 8 p.
124. Bin. To. 9. p. 10.
Since then all Ecclesiastical and Christian Discipline was in a manner
extinguished in every Place, says the Council of Basil, Then Oppression,
Rapine, Adultery, and Incest, and all pestilent Vices did confound all sacred
and profane things, says Aegidius in the Fifth Council of Lateran, to omit
the Treatises written in this Age by Clemangis, of the corrupt State of the
Church, by Gerson of the Defect of worthy Persons; and by the Cardinal of
Cambray, of the Filthiness of the Church of Rome.

In the Sixteenth Century, in which the Council of Trent was held, when amongst
the Primates of Religion there was either none, or very little Service of God,
no good Life, no Shame, no Modesty: Justice declined into Hatred or Favor;
Piety was turned into Superstition, and by all Orders of Men Sin was openly
committed, and very often, the Virtue of an honest Man was made his Crime,
Orat. ad Leon. 10. in Council. Lat.
says Picus Mirandula. When all Flesh had corrupted their Ways, and were
become Citizens, not of Rome, but of Babylon, says Staphilaeus: Orat. hab. ad
Auditores Rotae. Council. To. 14. p. 993, 994.
When the Bishop of Bitonto in the Trent Council cries out, with what Monsters
of Filthiness, what Sinks of Uncleanness, what pestiferous Contagion is not
both Priest and People defiled? Begin at the Sanctuary of God, and see if there
be any Shamefacedness, any Charity, any Hope or Help of honest Life, if there
be not unbridled Lust, notorious Boldness, incredible Wickedness, that the more
powerful proceeded from the Worship of God to Impiety, from the Defense of the
Church to the Excision of it, and fell with one Consent from Religion to
Superstition, from Faith to Infidelity, from Christ to Antichrist, from God to
Epicurism.

I say, in Ages, and in times, in which such Floods of all Impiety had
overwhelmed the Clergy, such Pride, Ambition, Covetousness, and Luxury reigned
uncontrolledly among them; it is easy to discern how Practices and Doctrines, so
well comporting with their vicious Inclinations, might easily be introduced by
them, and difficult to believe it could be otherwise: For if in the Fourth
Century so great Defection was caused by the wicked Arians, notwithstanding all
the Opposition which the virtuous and learned Bishops made against them; if
then by reason of the abounding of Iniquity, the Orthodox declared their
Expectations, (...), of an entire Apostasy: Theodoret Ep. 63. Epist. 10.
If St. Basil 's Complaint, That the Office of the Bishop was sunk down, (...),
to miserable Men, Servants of Servants, who reproached the Name of Bishop, was
attended with another that concerned (...), the corruption of the Faith. If
Isidore Peleusiota 's, Epist. l. 3. Epist. 223, 259, 408, 410.
sad and manifold Complaints of the Tyranny, Soul-Murther, Luxury,
Covetousness, the Ignorance, the Enmity to Virtue, which reigned in the Clergy
of his Age, concludes in this, These are the Men (...), by whom the Affairs of
the Church are turned topsy turvey. If when Theodoret, Ep. 134, 135, 142.
says the Clergy, did (...), labor under a general Impiety, he also speaks
more fully of their Declension from the Faith, and their establishing a new
Heresy; what might not be expected in these last and worst of Ages, which were
the very Sinks of Wickedness, the non ultra of Impiety? Sure if ever Religion
was, or can be made to trucle unto Interest, and Faith to Faction, and
Government to degenerate into Empire and Tyranny, it must be in those Ages,
when Men were so unworthy of the Assistance or Direction of the Holy Spirit,
and were so worthy to be given up unto the Spirit of Delusion.

Fifthly, These novel Practices and Doctrines might easily prevail, by reason
of the gross Ignorance and Negligence of Christian Knowledge, both in the
Clergy and the People: For who sees not that Ignorance in the Clergy must
render them unable to discern betwixt Truth and Falsehood; to choose the Good,
and refuse the Evil, and make it easy to impose upon them in those Matters by
any specious Pretenses whatsoever? Thus when the Prophets erred in Vision, Esa.
28.7, 15.
and stumbled in Judgment, then was it that they made Lies their Refuge, and
under Falsehood hid themselves: When the Watchmen of Israel were all blind, and
could not understand, then did the People become a Seed of Adulterers, Esa.
56.10.57.3, 4.
inflaming themselves under every green Tree, with Idols. When the Priests said
not where is the Lord, and they that handled the Law knew him not, Jer. 2.8, 13.
then did the People commit two Evils, forsaking the Fountain of living Waters,
and hewing them out Cisterns which can hold no Waters: When the Pastors were
become brutish and knew not the Lord, Jer. 10.21.
then was it that their Flocks were scattered: When the Scribes and Pharisees
had got the Government of Religion, and religious things into their Hands,
Matthew. 15.14.
our Savior informs us that the blind led the Blind, and both were in the
greatest Danger of falling down into the Ditch; That the Key of Knowledge was
then taken away, and the People left as Sheep without a Shepherd, Luke 11.52.
Mark 6.34.
and then did vain Traditions, and corrupt Interpretations of the Scriptures
mightily prevail.

St. Basil in his Epistle to Gregory the Divine, tells him there was little
Help to be expected from the Pride of the Western Church, (...), who neither
knew the Truth, nor will endure to learn it, but being prepossessed with Lies
and false Suspicions, they do now, as they did before, in the Case of
Marcellus, (...), contending with those who show them the Truth, and
stablishing Heresy by themselves: And again, I would write, says he, (...), to
their Head, but only enigmatically touching Ecclesiastical Affairs, Ep. 10. p.
54.
(...), for they neither know the Truth of our Affairs, nor do they take the
Way to learn it. And agreeably to this Complaint we find the Arians in the
Council of Ariminum, (...), Theodoret. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 16.
deceiving the Western Bishops, because of their Simpleness; and the Historians
telling us, That (...), they were bubbled by them into a Subscription. Sozomen
informs us of the Three hundred Western Bishops met at Milan, Hist. Eccles. l
4. c. 9.
that they consented to the Deposition of Athanasius, through Fear, (...), or
Fraud, or Ignorance of what they were about. And in the general Theodoret
informs us that the Arians made it their Business, Hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 15.
(...), to gull the Western Bishops by reason of their Simplicity. Again, That
Ignorance in the People, renders them easy to receive any thing which is
imposed upon them as Matter of Revelation or Devotion, or under the venerable
Name of a Tradition of the Church, a Doctrine of the Holy Fathers, or a
Definition of a Council, will be evident, if we consider that being once bereft
of the Assistance of the Holy Scriptures, they have no Principle left them by
which they can examine, no Judgment to discern the Truth, or Falsehood of any
thing which comes proposed to them under these specious Colors, and so they
are not qualified to judge of, or in Capacity to discover the Cheats thus put
upon them. Accordingly we find, that in the Times of Ignorance, the People were
carried away after dumb Idols, 1 Cor. 12.2.
even as they were led, and were cajoled into the most superstitious, vile,
unnatural and cruel Practices, under the semblance of paying their religious
Worship to their Heathen Deities.

Now of the prodigious Ignorance of those Ages in which most of the Romish
Doctrines were introduced, or else conciliarly were established, and so
advanced from Opinions and Practices permitted in some places, to Articles of
Faith and Rules of Manners, we cannot reasonably doubt, when we find the Second
Nicene Council making a Canon, That he who was promoted to a Bishopric should
be well acquainted with his Psalter, that so he might be able to instruct his
Clergy in it, and that the Metropolitan should strictly examine whether he were
sufficient to read the Canons, Conc. Nic. 2. Can. 2.
the Gospel, the Epistle, and the rest of the Scriptures discreetly, and not
imperfectly; Cent. 9.
when the Enquiry made by the Bishops in their Visitations was,

1. Regino de Eccl. Discipl. p. 28, 29.
Whether the Priest did, pleniter intelligere, fully understand the Exposition
of the Creed and the Lords Prayer.

2. Si been intelligat, Whether he well understood the Prayers, the Preface,
and the Canon of the Mass.

Si Epistolam and Evangelium been legere possit, Whether he could well read the
Epistle and Gospel: And when Baluzius says, ea erat saeculi istius
infelicitas, Not. in Regin. p. 540.
ut necesse erat Presbyteros ab Episcopis interrogari utrum been legere
possent, the Infelicity of that Age made it necessary for the Bishop to ask
whether the Priests knew how to read well; and that this happened not only to
the inferior Clergy, sed etiam in illis interdum qui ad summum Sacerdotium
eligebantur, but sometimes also to them who were chosen to the Office of
Bishops, as Carolus Calvus, and the Bishops of the Council of Valence complain;
when good Learning perished almost throughout Europe, Cent. 11. p. 152. Cent.
12.
Barbarity prevailing every where, says Balaeus: When all the Priests had
abandoned the Scriptures, appointed for Man's Salvation, and were blind Guides,
De Praedest. and lib. Arbitrio. l. 2.
going before the Blind to Perdition, says Honorius Augustodunensis: When the
Bishops, Priests, and Ministers of the Church were ignorant almost of all
things, and the Waldenses carried the Vogue among the People by their Learning,
and were admitted by the Priests to preach publicly, In Collect. de vrb.
Tolos. Cent. 13.
not that they approved their Opinions, but because they were inferior to them
in Learning, says Jacobus de Riberia: When he that had learned nothing became
a Teacher of others, and though he were like the sounding Brass, and tinkling
Cymbal, usurped the Office of a Teacher, being an unprofitable Trunk, and a
dumb Idol, and they who were ignorant of the Holy Scriptures, usurped that
Burden of Dignity which they could not bear, says Petrus Blesensis: Ep. 23.
When there neither appeared Piety or Learning in the Clergy, says William,
Bishop of Paris: Lib. de Collat. benefic. Cent. 14.
When the Pope appointed to almost all ecclesiastical Dignities, Men ignorant
of the Holy Scriptures, Idiots, and Unlearned, who knew not the Language of the
People over whom they presided: Defensor pacis l. 2. c. 24. p. 354, 355, 356.
When not one among Ten of the Bishops, Archbishops, Patriarchs of Provinces,
were sufficiently instructed in Divinity, says Marsilius of Padua: When the
Church was eclipsed with the black Mist of Ignorance: De planctu Eccl. l. 2.
cap. 5. and 20. Cent. 15.
When the Bishops ordained Men whom they knew to be unlearned, and unfit, and
being Idiots suffered themselves to be made Bishops, says Alvarus: When it
often happened through the Defect, Negligence, and deceit of them, to whom, by
the Bishops, A. D. 1473. apud Bin. To. 8. p. 1053. cap. 3.
was committed the Examination of Persons to be ordained, that Men Unlearned,
and altogether Ignorant, were presented as fit to the Bishops, and so ordained
by them, says the Council of Toledo: When such Men were admitted to the
Priesthood, and other Holy Orders, as were Idiots, Unlearned, and scarce able
to read though way wardly, and without Understanding, not knowing when they
read or prayed, whether they blessed God or blasphemed him: When the Church was
stocked with ignorant and wicked Men, De corrupto statu Eccl. c. 11, 12, 13, 25.
and no Man learned in the Scriptures was advanced to great Dignities: When the
Parish Priests could not read, and scarce knew A from B, and knew not the
Words, much less the Things they read, says Clemangis: Declarat. de defect.
virorum Eccles. q. 1. vid. etiam q. 22, 74. Cent. 16.
When Bishops of good Life and Doctrine were not chosen any where, but carnal
Men, and ignorant of spiritual Things, says Gerson: When ignorance of Tongues,
and all parts of good Language, and neglect of the Study of Scriptures, Epist.
ad Leo 10th.
were the Vices of the Age, says Mirandula: When every where there was so
great a Neglect of the Word, as made it necessary that Faith should Perish, In
2. Ep. ad Tim. c. 3. p. 116.
says Espencaeus: When neither Greek nor Hebrew, the only Languages in which
the Scriptures were indicted, were understood by the Divines, and the Disputers
of Four Centuries, Loc. com. l. 2. c. 13.
says Canus: When it was the Custom of the Age to make Priests and Bishops out
of the most unlearned and irreligious Persons, and the Bishops generally were
more ignorant of the Scriptures than the People, says Duarenus: De Sacr. Eccl.
Ministr. and Benef. l. 1. c. 11 q. P. 153, 168. Hist. of the Trent Council p.
784.
When the Bishops assembled in the Trent Council had but little Understanding
in Religion: When few of them had any Knowledge in Theology, says F. Paul:
When the prevailing part were both unlearned and simple, says Dudithius.

If therefore false Traditions might so easily prevail, Apud Eusebius. Hist. Eccl.
l. 5. c. 24.
even in the first and purest Ages of the Church, as Irenaeus does inform us,
(...), by reason of the Simplicity and Ignorance of the Governors, how much
more might they carry all before them in those times of Egyptian Darkness? If
two or three hundred Bishops, in the more learned Ages of the Church, could be
so tamely bubbled by a few cunning Arians, how easy might it be for Men of
Credit, in the thick Darkness of those times, to lead the Blind into the Pit of
Error? Act. 2. p. 102.
If the pretended Donation of Constantine, though so gross a Cheat, Did. 96.
c. 14. Constable. Imperator.
could obtain so long and generally, as to be urged in the Second Nicene
Council, and put into the Decretals? If the decretal Epistles, now generally
acknowledged to be Forgeries, were received as genuine for Eight hundred Years,
Sess. 45. and Sess. 8.
insomuch that the General Council of Constance condemns them as Heretics
who reject them, why might not many other spurious Pieces, as useful to promote
Popish Doctrines, as these were to establish the Pope's Supremacy and the
Veneration of Images, prevail as generally in those darker Ages? If the Credit
of one Marianus Scotus made the whole West, even for Five Centuries, believe
the Story of Pope Joan, which cast so great an Infamy on St. Peter 's Chair,
why might not other things, in favor of the Church of Rome, Manual. c. 11. n.
22.
obtain an equal Credit by like Means? If, as Navar declares, throughout the
whole Church of Christ, Multos passim invenias nihil magis and explicit de
hisce (Symboli Articulis quos Ecclesia solemnizat) credere, quam Ethnicum
philosophum, you may find every where many who explicitly believe nothing more
of the Articles of the Creed, than a Heathen Philosopher, must not such Men be
ready to receive any thing suggested as an Article of Faith? Is it to be
expected, that they should rise up with great Zeal in opposition to new
Doctrines, or conveigh them by oral Tradition to Posterity? Lastly, If
Doctrines of Faith, and Rules of Manners be to be decided, even in General
Councils, by Scripture and Tradition, is it impossible for Men so ignorant, and
void of any Knowledge of what the Scriptures, or Tradition teach, should pass
wrong Judgment in these Matters?

Sixthly, New Doctrines and Practices might easily prevail, and silence all
that Opposition which was, or would have otherwise been made against them, when
Force and Violence was used to promote them, and to suppress the contrary
Doctrines and Traditions: For though Force can do nothing to the Conviction of
the Conscience, or to clear up the Understanding; nor can the Fire or the
Faggot give new Light unto it, yet have those things a very powerful Influence
upon the Fearful, the Lovers of the World, and of the Comforts of it, to engage
them outwardly and hypocritically to profess what they do not believe, and to
deny, conceal, or not profess what really they do believe; hence does the
Scripture so often teach us, that when Persecution did arise for the Truths
Sake, Matthew. 13.21.
the stony Ground would be offended, that because Trouble would abound, the
Love of many would wax cold. Matthew. 24.12.
Hence the Apostles were so sollicitous to arm their Proselytes against these
fiery Trials, so frequent in their Exhortations to Patience and Perseverance,
Hebr. 11.32-36. 1 Thessalonians. 3.3, 5.
so desirous to know the Constancy of their Faith, so careful that they might
not be moved by their Afflictions: Hence also, under the Heathen Persecutions,
we find such sad and numerous Examples of Apostasy. St. Cyprian complains, that
by the Fury of the Decian Persecution Christianity was much weakened, Ep. 11.
p. 23, 26. Ep. 10. p. 22.
that they were very few who then stood firm, but they who languished were very
numerous, De lapsis. 3. and. 5. p. 123, 124. ed. Oxon.
that the Church then with Tears lamented the Fall of very many, that there was
then a manifold Decay of that once numerous People which professed the
Christian Faith; yea, that even at the first Onset of the threatening Enemy the
greatest Number of the Brethren betrayed their Faith. Dionysius of Alexandria
informs us, That when the Edict of the Emperor came forth, all the Christians
were wonderfully terrified; that presently through this Fear, (...), many of
the most celebrated Christians came in to the impure and profane Sacrifices,
some being called by Name, some brought thither by their Friends, some by their
Office, or the Example of others; some of them so pale and trembling, as if
they had not come to sacrifice but to be sacrificed; some came boldly, denying
they had ever been Christians; some fled, and others being caught, clapped into
Prisons and into Irons, Apud. Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 41.
presently abjured the Faith; others, as soon as they were brought before the
Judges: And, Lastly, others when they had suffered Torment valiantly for a
while, at length grew weary and renounced. In the Persecution under Dioclesian,
Ibid. l. 8. c. 3.
Eusebius says that (...), Myriads out of Fear fell presently (...) at the
first Assault; and what then may not be expected of this Nature in the
declining Ages of the Church, when that strict Discipline and self-denial,
which prepared the Christians of that Age for Sufferings, was laid aside: That
Love of God, which then was fervent, waxed very cold; and that Iniquity, which
renders it impossible Men should be willing to depart this World, and to appear
before their righteous Judge, so much abounded.

This was the Method which the Arians used for Propagation of their Heresy.
Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 27 p. 118.
For Socrates informs us, that in the Reign of Constantius the Persecution fell
upon the Orthodox, (...), through all the Cities of the East, that they were
banished from their Churches, and were afflicted with all kinds of Torments,
and that the Force then used was no less than formerly was exercised by Heathen
Emperors to compel Christians to worship Idols. And when after the Death of
Constantine, the Empire of the West fell into his Hands, he used the like
Severity there also. Now the direful Effects of this Persecution appeared not
only in the Fall of the great Hosius, Ib. c. 31. p. 127.
who by this Violence was constrained to subscribe the Decrees of the Council
of Sirmium, but even in the generality of the Church Governors; Theodoret
Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 13. Soz. l. 4. c. 9.
for when Constantius, the more effectually to move Pope Liberius to consent to
the Condemnation of Athanasius, tells him, That (...), the whole Empire had
condemned him as a wicked Man, Liberius answers that they had done this, (...),
Sozom. ibid.
out of Fear of him, and the Dishonor which he threatened to them, and the same
Motive, after a little Exile, prevailed with him also. Moreover a great part of
the Bishops who met at Ariminum declared for the Nicene Faith, as being that
which they could not alter unless they would prove themselves spurious
Children, and Accusers of the Fathers; and yet they being carried thence to
Nica in Thracia, (...), Theodoret Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 15, 16, 18.
they being terrified, consented to expunge the Words of Substance and
Consubstantial, and only to assert (...), that Christ was like in Substance to
the Father, and (...), some out of Fear, and others out of Ignorance,
subscribed. St. Hilary informs us, Fragm. p. 482.
that the Bishops met at Ariminum, being tired out with long Delays, and minis
imperatoris perterriti, damnarunt integram fidem quam antea defendebant, and
susceperunt perfidiam quam antea damnaverant, and terrified with the Threats of
the Emperor, condemned that Faith they had before defended, and received that
Falsehood which they had before condemned. Sozomen also tells us of Three
hundred Western Bishops met at Milan, who (...), Hist. Eccles. l. 4. cap. 9.
either out of Fear, or Fraud, or Ignorance, consented to the Deposition of
Athanasius. And this doubtless, Commonit. c. 6.
gave Oceasion to Vincentius Lirinensis to say that, cuncti prope Latini
Sermonis Episcopi, Epist. ad Pam. adv Error. Joh. Hieros. F. 59.
almost all the Western Bishops were by Fraud or Force deceived, and that the
Poison of Arianism, pene orbem totum contaminaverat, had defiled almost the
whole World; to Jerome to complain, that it had possessed all the East, and that
the whole World, Arianum, se esse miratus est, admired that it was become Arian
(...) to Nazionzen to confess that, Orat. in Athan. quae est Or. 21. p. 387.
(...), except a very few, which either because of their Virtue resisted, or
for their Obscurity were contemned, all obeyed the times, some being
Ringleaders in the Impiety, some being circumvented by Fear or Gain, Flattery
or Ignorance. And to omit the Complaint of Theodoret, Ep. 142.
That in the Ephesine Council, styled (...), most of the Bishops (...), were
moved to consent by Force, and by their Subscriptions confirmed a new Heresy:
Socr. Hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 17.
To omit the Persecution of Valens, which expelled, says Socrates, almost all
the Bishops of the East out of their Sees, and where the Bishops were not
valiant, had such ill Influence upon the People, that they all turned (...),
Lib. 6. c. 21.
from their former Sentiments to Arianism: to omit I say, these Instances,

It is a wonder to conceive what Force the Edicts of Basiliscus had to engage
the Patriarchs, and Bishops of that Age to renounce, and Anathematize the
General Council of Chalcedon. Basiliscus in his Encyclical Epistle commands all
Bishops to be content with the Nicene Faith, and to Anathematize, (...), Evagr.
Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 4. p. 336, 487.
all things done and spoken in the Synod of Chalcedon about the Definition of
Faith, or Exposition of the Symbols; to subscribe to his Epistle, and wholly to
reject the Council of Chalcedon; threatening Deposition to the Bishops and
Clergy who should refuse Obedience to his Commands; Ibid. c. 5. p. 338.
whereupon Five hundred Bishops presently subscribe, (...), condemning the
Epistle of Pope Leo, and the Synod of Chalcedon. Among them were the Bishops of
Asia, professing to the Emperor, Ibid.
that they subscribed (...), with all Readiness and Gladness; and yet, quickly
after the Death of Basiliscus, they beg Pardon for so doing of Acacius,
alleging that they subscribed (...), Ibid. cap. 9.
not willingly, but of Necessity, consenting by their Words and Writings, but
not with their Hearts.

And as this Force and Violence has had this fatal Influence on many to deny
the Truth, and to embrace, or at the least profess the contrary, so has it as
effectually prevailed on others to conceal the Truth, or not appear in its
Defense, when they were inwardly convinced of it, least they should pull a
Storm upon their Heads, and should expose themselves unto the Censures of
prevailing Persons, and to the Fury of their Enemies. Thus Sozomen informs us,
Hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 10.
that (...), for fear of the Emperor Constantius, both the East and West seemed
to agree in the Faith. Theodoret informs that there were some in his time who
held the Truth of Apostolical Doctrine, Ep. 135.
(...), but, fearing the Power of their Governors, they durst not publish it,
they sigh, and groan for the increase of Evils, but yet they are carried away
with the Authors of them. Thus, says he, I believe it is with thee, O Bishop
Romulus, thou art sound in the Faith, but only out of Fear thou servest the
Times.

Isidore Peleusiota, also tells us, that there were some who lived (...), L. 5.
Ep. and. Ep. 126.
according to the Apostolic Rule, but they durst not open their Mouths, (...),
being afraid of the Multitude of the Wicked. Monotessaron p. 309.
Zacharias Chrysopolitanus, says, sunt nonnulli, imo forsitan multi, there are
some, yea, perhaps many, who are of the same Opinion with Berengarius, and yet
condemn him with the Church; which, without doubt, they did through Fear of
running his Fate; Paralip. ad Abbat. Vrsperg. p. 448. Ed. Bas. 1569.
whence one of their Writers tells us they were wont to say, Sic dicerem in
Scholis, sed tamen maneat inter nos, diversum sentio, Thus would I speak in the
Schools, but, keep it secret, I think otherwise.

Let us then seriously consider how much the Church of Rome, for these Five
last Centuries, has outdone all that ever Heathen or Arian Persecutors have
attempted in her Severities toward those whom she is pleased to call
Heretics. That,

1. She has taken the greatest Care for the Discovering and apprehending them,
authorizing by her papal Bulls, Constable. Innocent. 4. c. 19. Clem 4. Cons. 13. l.
18. Council. To. 11. p. 606.
imperial Constitutions, her canon Law, and her conciliar Definitions,
Inquisitors, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, etc. to require the Magistrates
Assistance in enquiring after, and apprehending Heretics, and enabling these
Inquisitors, etc. Consil. Constable. Sess. 45. Bin. To. 7. p. 1121.
to tender a corporeal Oath to all suspect of Heresy, that is, of holding any
thing in Contradiction to the Doctrine of the Roman Church, to answer to such
Questions as they shall propose, for clearing of themselves, and to condemn
them as Heretics, if they do not thus purge themselves: Decretal. l. 5. Tit.
7. c. 5. Council. Lat. 4. Can. 3
That she gives them Power to require the Magistrates Assistance in enquiring
after, and apprehending Heretics, and to engage by Oath all Earls, Barons,
Rectors and Consuls, and the whole Neighborhood efficaciously to assist the
Church according to their Power in this Work, and to endeavor to give Notice
of such Persons and secure them.

2ly. Constable. Fred. 2. Council. T. 11. p 622. Ludov. 7. Ib. p. 423. Council. Lat.
4. Can. 3. lat. 3. cap. 23.
That she obliges all secular Powers to extirpate them, and all their
Favorites, upon the pain of Excommunication, loss of their Dominions, and being
deemed Favorers of Heretics, and does encourage all Men to fight against, and
labor to destroy them, by the Promise of Remission of Sins, and a great Reward
hereafter.

3ly. That she has decreed, Council. lat. 3. c. 27. Quartum can. 3. Constan.
Sess. 45. Bin. T. 7. p. 1121. Constable. Freder. 2. Council. T. 11. p. 619, 621.
Ludov. 7. p. 423.
That they shall suffer Excommunication, with all the Consequences of it, loss
of Goods, and when imprisoned, any Punishment which does not diminish their
Members, or endanger their Death, and that after Sentence passed upon them,
they shall be punished with Death, and want of Christian Burial.

4ly. That for the Execution of these Punishments, Constable. Innocent. 4. Clem. 4.
Alex. 4. decretal. l. 5. T. 2. c. 9, 11. Council. Tolos. c. 7. Albiens. c. 7.
Council. T. 11. p. 428, 723. vide ibid. p 698, 726, 727.
without Delay or Relaxation, or enquiry into the Justice of them, all
Governors shall have a Copy of those Laws, and shall abolish all that
contradict them, and at their Entrance on their Government, shall swear to
execute them; and such as will not execute them, or are remiss in doing it,
shall lose their Office, have their Jurisdiction interdicted, and be proceeded
against as Favorers of Heretics.

Again let us seriously consider farther.

1. That it was in those Ages deemed Heresy, to contradict the Doctrine of the
Roman Church; Sess. 45. Edit. 1499.
or in the Language of the Council of Constance, de fidei Articulis aliter
sentire aut docere quam Sancta Romana Ecclesia and Vniversalis praedicat, to
think or teach otherwise of the Articles of Faith than the Holy Roman or
universal Church preaches and observes.

2ly. That when Transubstantiation was established in the Fourth Council of
Lateran, then were also made the severe and sanguinary Decrees now mentioned
against Heretics, to force Men against all the Evidence of Sense and Reason to
profess that Article.

3ly. That the Council of Constance having established the Practice of
Communion in one kind for a Law, Sess. 45.
it concludes with a Decree, enacting all the aforesaid Punishments against
Heretics, viz. Against those who believe not the Supreme Authority of the Pope
over the Church, the Infallibility of general Councils, the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, the Lawfulness of Communion in one kind, the necessity of
auricular Confession, the Power of the Pope to conferr Indulgences, the
lawfulness of venerating Relics, and the Images of Saints, etc.

4ly. That in these persecuting Ages Men were afraid to profess what they
believed, or to oppose themselves against the Torrent of their Adversaries;
Libro sine Tirulo Epist. 11. Epist. de Egressu ex Babylone p. 177.
thus Petrarch declares, That he durst scarcely speak the Truth for fear of
Enemies: Clemangis, That Men followed the erring Herd, willingly embracing
false things for true, and desiring rather to be mad with the multitude, than
to be wise alone with danger and derision. Erasmus confesses, That there were
some things received in the Church, quae magno Religionis Christianae bono
mutarentur, which to have changed would tend to the great good of the Church;
but being desired to put his helping Hand to the Work, he says, per alios ego
fieri malim, quam per me; I had rather others should do this than my self: And
that, 1. Out of fear that by attempting it he might create a Tumult and
Sedition in the Church, which, says he, I so much abhor, ut veritas etiam
displiceat seditiosa, that even Truth purchased by Sedition is displeasing to
me. 2. Out of the sense of the great hazard he should run, and the little
hopes he had of good success: I should be more free, says he, Apud Hottinger.
Hist. Eccl. Sect. 16. Part. 2 p. 24, 25, 29
could I see hopes of success; but, dementiae est tibi perniciem accersire si
nulli prosis, it is madness to destroy my self, when I cannot profit any by it.

I say whosoever weighs these things will be convinced, that by these cruel
methods great Errors might prevail without much contradiction; and many
Ancient, but decryed Truths might lie concealed, and stifled in the breasts of
Learned Men, expecting a more favorable opportunity to bring them forth. For
if the severity of Heathen and Arian Persecutions had such sad Effects upon so
many in the most pious and learned Ages of the Church, whilst they continued to
be exercised; these R. Cruelties being confessedly exercised for almost Five
whole Centuries, might easily engage the generality of Men, in the more
Ignorant and Vicious Ages of the Church, to own the corrupt Doctrines and
Practices her Governors had introduced, or to abstain at least from making any
free and public opposition to them.

To conclude: These being the chief Causes which naturally tend to the
Introduction of new Practices and Doctrines, viz. 1. False Rules and Measures
used for Disquisition of the Truth; from which it is not to be wondered that
false Conclusions should arise: Or 2. True Rules misapplied and misconstrued,
and therefore actually false to them who thus mistake the Purpose of them. 3.
The Admiration of the Persons, and the Reverence of the Authority of Men
subject to like Mistakes and Errors with us. 4. The Advantages we may obtain by
the promoting of some Doctrines, the Tendency they have to the gratifications
of our Avarice, our Pride and love of Empire and other sinful lusts. 5. The
Corruptions in our Manners which dispose and fit us for Delusions. 6. That
Ignorance and Negligence in reference to Sacred things which rendereth us an
easy prey to the Deluders subtilty. 7. Lastly, The Force, and Terror, and
Torments, and Punishments which may be used to affright us into an outward, and
Hypocritical profession of what we do not from our hearts believe, or a
concealment of our inward Sentiments; I Say, these being the chief inducements
to a change in Doctrine, or in Practice, and all these things so palpably, and
frequently concurring to the establishment of the New Doctrines, and the
supposed Traditions of the Church of Rome, what wonder is it that they should
so mightily obtain in the dark Ages of the World, and by those methods carry
all before them?

And truly it is so evident that upon the concurrence of those circumstances,
the true Faith might decay; and Error might be introduced in the Western
Churches, that the Historians, Carol. Mag. Cent. 8.
and Writers of those dark and evil Ages do confess it actually was so: That
the Priests brought into the Church such Doctrines as were never known to
Christ and his Apostles; Rolwink. ad A. Christi 884.
That this was tempus pessimum, in quo defecit sanctus, and veritates diminutae
sunt a filiis hominum, the worst of times, in which the Holy man failed, and
Truth was diminished from the sons of men; Baron. A. D. 912. Carthus. fasciculo
temporum ad A. 1000.
That the Ancient Traditions were then proscribed; That the Christian Faith
extremely did begin to fail, and decline from its former vigor; neither the
Sacraments nor Ecclesiastical Rites being observed; Apol. Clerus Leod. A.D.
1066 Matthew. Paris in Hen. 3. ad A.D. 1237. p. 438. Alvar. Pelag. de. planctu
Eccl. l. 2. c. 5. Cent. 14.
That the Holy Philosophy by the subtle interpretation of Sycophants began to
be corrupted, poluted, violated with human Inventions, and old wives Fables;
That the spark of Faith began to wax exceeding cold, and was almost reduced to
ashes, so that it scarce did sparkle; That the Church was eclipsed with the
black mist of Ignorance, Iniquity and Error; That they did not only not receive
sound Doctrine, but bitterly persecuted all that resisted the madness of their
wills; Clemang. de Egressu ex Bab. p. 177. Cent. 15.
And that following the erring herd, men willingly embraced false things for
true; That the variety of Pictures and Images occasioned Idolatry in the
Simple; That Apocryphal Scriptures, Gerson de defect. Eccles. Virorum 30. idem
de direct. Cordis. Consid. 16.
Hymns and Prayers were brought into the Church to the great hurt of Christian
faith; That there was much Superstition in the Worship of Saints, and many
Observations without all ground or reason; Credulity in believing things
concerning the Saints reported in the uncertain Legends of their Lives, Ibid.
Consid. 29, 30.
dubious opinions of obtaining Pardon, and Remission of Sins by saying so many
Pater Nosters in such a Church before such an Image, as if in the Scripture,
and Authentic Writings of Holy Men, there were not sufficient directions for
all Acts of Piety, and Devotion, without these fabulous and frivolous
additaments; That sundry lewd assertions, Dial. Apol. Judicium de Can. Constable.
prejudicial to the States of Kings and Princes, could not be condemned in the
Council of Constance, though many great ones much urged their condemnation, by
reason of a mighty Faction which prevailed in it; Ibid.
That exorbitant Abuses and Errors which were crept into the Church found no
amendment, nor was a Reformation in things concerning Faith, Card. Camer. de
Squal. Ecoles. p. 34.
and Religion, Doctrine, and Manners to be expected till the Secular Powers
took it in hand; That Pagan Abuses, and Diabolical Superstitions were so many
at Rome that they could not well be imagined; Cent. 16.
That they were fallen with one consent from Religion to Superstition, Bishop
of Bitonto and Espencaeus Vide Supra.
from Faith to Infidelity, from Christ to Antichrist; That there was such a
neglect of the Word, as made it necessary that Faith should perish; That the
Faith and Religion Preached by Christ, and settled afterward by his Apostles
and cultivated by their Epistles, is so different a thing from that
Christianity that is now professed, and taught at Rome, that if these Holy Men
should be sent again by God into the world, they would take more pains to
confute this Gallimaufry, than ever they did to preach down the Traditions of
the Pharisees, Machiavil Epist. ad Zanob. Buon Delmont before his works in
English.
or the Fables, and Idolatry of the Gentiles, and would in probability suffer a
New Martyrdom under the Vicar of Christ for the same Doctrine which once
animated the Heathen Tyrants against them. He that desires to read more of the
Confessions made by the few comparatively learned of these Ages of the
corruptions both in doctrine and manners, and the prodigious ignorance which
then obtained, may find more than enough in a book Styled, Catalogus testium
veritatis, and Morney 's Mystery of Iniquity.

OF TRADITION. The State of the Question.
CHAP. I.
1. It is acknowledged, that a Doctrine is neither more or less the Word of God
for being written or unwritten,. 1. 2dly. It is proved, That the assurance
which we have that Scripture is the Word of God, is greater than can be
produced for any pretended Traditions of the Church of Rome. The Grounds of
this assurance are, 1. The necessity that the Word of God should be preserved
in some Records, and the certainty we have that actually it was so. 2. That the
Records of the New Testament averr, That they were written by the Servants and
Apostles of our Lord, whose Names they by a general and uncontrouled Tradition
bear, and so by Men assisted with the Holy Ghost, and writing the Commandments
of the Lord. 3. That the matter of them is worthy of the God of Heaven to
reveal. 4. That they were owned, read, and appealed to as such by all
Christians. 5. The Jews and Heathens made their Objections against Christianity
out of them, and attempted the ruin of the Christian Faith by destroying them;
and that none of these particulars agree to the Traditions of the Church of
Rome rejected by us,. 2. For farther Explication of the Question observe, 2dly.
That our Dispute with the Church of Rome is chiefly about doctrinal, and not
historical Traditions,. 3. The uncertainty of historical Traditions, showed, 1.
In the Instance of our Lord's Birth, Clauso utero,. 4. Of his Age,. 5. Of the
penetration of his Body through the Doors and the Stone of the Sepulcher,. 6.
Of the Story of the Phoenix,. 7. And of the Cells of the Seventy Interpreters,.
8. Observe 3dly. That we contend not with the Church of Rome touching
Ecclesiastical Traditions concerning Ceremonials and unnecessary Observations,
but only touching necessary Rules of Faith and Manners,. 9.

FOR the right stating of this Question, let it be considered,

1. a Doctrine is neither more or less the Word of God for being written or
unwritten, for that Word which our Savior spoke unto the Jews, was for a time
unwritten, and yet was nevertheless the Word of God, because not written: We
also say there is no reason to dispute, Whether the written or unwritten Word
of God, when equally known to be so, is most to be relied on: For the Word of
God being therefore believed, because known to us to be the Word of God, must
equally be believed in that Case, whether it be written or unwritten. Council.
Trid. Sess. 4.
We do not therefore quarrel with the Church of Rome for saying, That the
Traditions which proceeded from the Mouth of Christ, or his Apostles speaking
by the Holy Spirit, and preserved by a continual Succession in the Catholic
Church, are with the same Reverence and pious Affection to be received as what
they writ. But only desire them to prove the things which they affirm, and we
deny to have been thus delivered, and then we promise to receive them as the
Truths of Christ. And because Mr. M. has the Confidence to say, P. 397, 398.
That our Ministers usually so confound the Business, that they make their
Auditors even to startle when they tell them that we hold Tradition equal to
Scripture, whereas if they meant to deal really they should say what the Truth
is, that we do indeed equalize Tradition to Scripture, and that we have all
reason to do so. To let him see how little reason he had to accuse us of
corrupt Dealing in this Matter, I will faithfully transcribe the Assertions of
our most able Writers touching this Point. Sect. 16. n. 20.
Archbishop Laud declares, That the Voice and Tradition of that Church which
included in it Apostles, Disciples, and such as had immediate Revelation from
Heaven, was Divine; and the Word of God from them is of like validity written
or delivered. Bishop Tailor owns, Duct. Dubit.. 2. c. 3. p. 484.
That Tradition would be of the same use as Scripture is, if the Tradition were
from Christ and his Apostles, and were as Certain as Universal, as Credible as
that is by which we are told that Scripture is the Word of God.

We willingly grant, says Mr. Chillingworth, Chap. 3.. 45. vid. Chap. 2.. 53,
88.
the Church to be as Infallible in her Traditions as the Scripture is, if they
be as Universal as the Tradition of the undoubted Books of Scripture is. And
again, The Tradition of the Church you say must teach us what is Scripture, and
we are willing to believe it; Answer to the Jes. p. 35. Rat. p. 168, 210, 216.
and now if you make it good unto us that the same Tradition down from the
Apostles has delivered from Age to Age, and from Hand to Hand any
Interpretation of any Scripture, we are ready to embrace that also.

So also Bishop Usher and Doctor Stillingfleet in his Rational Account
frequently. And therefore R. H. Guide. Disc. 3. c. 11. p. 157.
who was better acquainted with our Writings than Mr. M. declares, That
Protestants acknowledge a sufficient certainty of the Tradition concerning
Scripture, and consequently concerning all the Articles of Christian Faith that
are built on Scripture, upon which ground also they freely grant, N. B. That if
any other point wherein they dissent from Catholics can be proved by as
Universal a Tradition as that of the Scriptures, they will subscribe to it. We
therefore manifestly do agree with Chrysostom, Oecumenius and Theophylact, when
they say, That the things delivered by the Mouth of the Apostles, Oecum. in 2 Thessalonians. ij. 15. Chrysostom. ibid. and Theophylact.
and by their Writings are, (...), both worthy of Observation. That, (...),
both equally deserve to be credited, when we have equal certainty of both, and
therefore these passages are vainly cited against us by Mr. M. Let him once
prove that the same Tradition tells us, That the Apostles delivered the Points
in Controversy betwixt us and the Church of Rome as Divine Verities by word of
Mouth only, and we are all his Humble Servants.

But alas he knows how vain and how impossible an attempt this would be, P. 399.
That our best and only assurance that the Scripture is the Word of God, is
that all the Christian world says so; but the same Tradition which tells us
this tells us also, that the Apostles delivered these, and these Points to us
as Divine Verities by word of Mouth; viz. All the Traditions received as
Apostolical in the Roman Church. Now to reflect a little on this false
Assertion, and to expose this way of Arguing.

1. Put it into the Mouth of a Jew, and it thus pleads for those Traditions
which our Lord condemned, and by which they condemned him. The best and only
Assurance which you Jewish Christians can have, that the Scripture of the Old
Testament is the Word of God, is that all the Jews say so; but the same
Tradition which tells us this, tells us also, That Moses and the Prophets
delivered these, and these Points to us as Divine Verities by word of Mouth,
which your Jesus rejected as vain Worship, and as the Doctrines of Men; 1 Pet.
1.18.
and your St. Peter mentions, as Traditions received from our Fathers; though
he styles them vain; you therefore must have equal Reason to receive those
Traditions which condemn your Jesus, and show he could not be the true Messiah,
as to own those Scriptures of the Old Testament, which, say you, Prophesied of
him.

2. Though we grant the Attestation of the whole Christian World to be a very
good assurance of any necessary Article of Christian Faith, yet have we more
assurance that the Scriptures are the Word of God than so. As,

1. The necessity that the Christian Revelation should be preserved in some
Records, and the assurance that we have that it has been preserved to us in no
other. The necessity, I say, that the Christian Revelation should be preserved
in some Records, for if St. Paul thought it necessary to write to the Church of
Rome, Romans xv. 15. 2 Cor. i. 13.
to put them in remembrance of the Grace given to him, as also to send in
writing to his Corinthians the things which they already read and did
acknowledge; and to write the same things which he had taught to his
Philippians. Phil. iij. 1:
If St. Peter thought it needful to write unto the Jewish Converts, to testify
to them, 1 Pet. v. 12. 2 Pet. iij. 1. 1 Jo. v. 13.
that was the true Grace of God in which they stood, and to stir up their
sincere minds by way of Remembrance. St. John, that they might know they had
eternal Life, and might believe in the Son of God. Ver. 3.
St. Jude, to mind them of the Common Salvation. If the Evangelist closes his
Gospel with these words, -- These things were written that you might believe,
Joh. xx. 31.
and believing might have Life through his Name; surely these persons would not
but think it necessary that the essential Doctrines of Christianity should be
written? And who can think the Holy Spirit of God would have assisted them to
indite these Gospels and Epistles, had he conceived it needless that they
should be written?

2. We have the plain Assertions of the Authors of the New Testament, that they
were written by the Servants and the Apostles of the Lord, by Men who declared
that the things they writ were the Commandments of the Lord; 1 Cor. xiv. 37. 1
Pet. i. 18.
by Men who preached the Gospel to them by the Assistance of the Holy Ghost
sent down from Heaven, and proved the Truth of what they said by mighty Signs
and Miracles, owned even by Jews and Heathens, as well as by their Christian
Converts.

3. We find the matter of them worthy of the God of Heaven to reveal.

4. We find them generally received as such by those who bore the Name of
Christians, however differing in other matters; read daily in their Assemblies,
cited in all their Homilies and Sermons, called their Digests, and their
God-making Books, by appealing to which they confirmed their Doctrines, and
confuted their Adversaries, and which they offered to be perused to the very
Heathens: And hence we have just reason to presume, that they had Cause
sufficient to believe them such.

5. We also have the concurrent Testimony of Jews and Heathens citing them as
such, and thence making Objections against the Christian Faith, and attempting
to wrest them out of the Hands of Christians, that so Christianity might be
destroyed out of the World.

And lastly, We have good reason to suppose that Providence of God which was so
highly interested in propagation of the Christian Faith, and making of it known
unto the World, would not permit false Records of that Faith to be so early and
generally imposed upon the Christian World.

Let us then see it proved by Mr. M. that the matter of those Roman Traditions
contained in their new Creed, is worthy the God of Heaven to reveal, and that
we have like reason to suppose his Providence concerned about them; let us see
plain Assertions of the like Primitive Authority, that they were delivered by
Men assisted by the Holy Ghost, and equal Miracles performed in confirmation of
that Assertion; let us see a like necessity that Christian Revelations should
be handed down by word of Mouth; a like general Reception of these Traditions
throughout all Ages, a like appearance of them in the Christian Writings, or
Citation of them by Jews or Heathens, and when this Evidence has been produced
by Mr. M. we shall be ready to Embrace and own them also as the unwritten Word
of God.

But whosoever undertakes this Task will find some of these things imply a
contradiction, viz. That an Oral Tradition should be necessary to be Recorded,
or daily read in the Assemblies of Christians.

That it is upon the Matter confessed by Du Pin in his Abridgment of the
Doctrine and Discipline of the Three first Centuries, P. 605.613.
that scarcely any mention of these supposed Traditions can be found in the
Homilies or Writings of those Ages.

Moreover we find not in those Primitive Ages any mention of the Divine
Original of these Traditions, any appeal to them as such, any confirmation of
Christian Doctrine, or confutation of their Adversaries by them, nor any thing
objected from them either by Jew or Gentile against the Christian Faith, though
since the time that we confess they came into the Church, both Jew and Gentiles
have been very forward to object, as against other things, so especially
against Transubstantiation, and the Veneration of Images, and the Adoration of
the Host.

Lastly, there appears no such real Excellency in them, no such tendency to the
advancement of true Holiness and Goodness as may convince us they are things
worthy of the God of Heaven to reveal, and which his Providence should be
concerned to preserve, and propagate throughout all Ages.

Moreover we distinguish betwixt Historical Traditions of the Primitive and
succeeding Churches, Did. 2.
such as are the Tradition concerning the perpetual Virginity of the Blessed
Virgin, the Birth of our Lord, or his coming forth out of her Womb, Clauso
Vtero; his coming to his Disciples the Doors being shut; his Age; the time of
his preaching upon Earth and the like, and Traditions touching Articles of
Faith, and Doctrines to be believed in Order to our being either sound
Believers or good Christians.

Touching the first we say;

1. That we have no occasion to dispute with them about some of these things;
and therefore what St. Basil says of the perpetual Virginity of the Blessed
Virgin, [That though it would not be offensive unto Piety to say, That
afterward she did the works of Matrimony, her Virginity being only necessary
till the Birth of Christ, yet the Mystery being not concerned in it, we leave
it unregarded and unsearched into.] We say of other matters of this nature,
(...), De humana Christi Gener. Tom. 1. p. 509. In Matthew. Ed. Huet. p. 223.
we think it best not to search curiously into them; though that of Origin,
(...), They who say these things would preserve the perpetual Virginity of
Mary, seems to insinuate that this was once but the Opinion of some Men. And
they who were most zealous for it, as was St. Jerome against Helvidius, Ut haec
quae scripta sunt non negamus, ita ea quae non sunt scripta renuimus, natum
deum esse de virgin credimus quia legimus, Mariam nupsisse post partum non
credimus quia non legimus, Tom. 2. f. 6. a.
do it upon this Ground, because the contrary is not written, for thus he
speaks, As we deny not those things which are written, so we refuse those
things which are not written; we believe our Lord to be Born of a Virgin,
because we read it; we believe not that Mary was Married after her delivery,
because we read it not.

2dly. We add, That as for the pretended Tradition, Blessed Virgin, without
opening of it, though it seems generally to have prevailed in the Fourth and
Fifth Centuries, yet does it plainly seem to contradict the Testimony of the
Holy Scriptures, which teach, That when the days of her Purification were
accomplished, Luke ij. 22, 23, Puram aperiens vulvam.
according to the Law of Moses, they brought him to Jerusalem to present him to
the Lord, as it is written in the Law of the Lord, Every Male that opens the
Womb shall be called holy to the Lord. L. 4. c. 66. In partu suo nupsit ipsa
patefacti corp. lege. Lib. de Carne Christi c. 23. vid. etiam c. 4. and 20.
Hom. 14. in Lucam Tom. 2. f. 101.


According to the import of which Scripture, Irenaeus does expressly teach, That
our Lord at his Birth opened the Womb of the Virgin.

Tertullian adds, That she was a Virgin as not having known Man, but was no
Virgin, quantum a partu, at her teeming, her Womb being then opened, according
to that saying, Every Male that opens the Womb, etc. Origin, That Matris
domini to tempore vulva reserata est quo partus editus, the Womb of the Mother
of our Lord was opened when she brought forth her Son. Clemens of Alexandria
evidently shows that this was in his time only the saying of some Men,
attending to the Fable of the false Gospel of St. James, That the Midwives
after her delivery found by Inspection, that she was a Virgin, and that others
held the contrary; for, says he, It seemed to many, and yet seems, that Mary
was by the Birth of her Son a Woman properly delivered of a Child, though she
was not, Strom. l. 7. p. 756.
(...), a Woman properly delivered; (...); for some say that being inspected by
the Midwives after the Birth of her Son, she was found a Virgin. De Incarn. l.
14 cap. 6.. 1.
He respects, says Petavius, the Old Wife's Tale, invented by some idle
Trifler, which we find in Suidas, and in the Proto-Evangelium S. Jacobi, which
I could wish he had no otherwise related than by way of Contempt and Derision.
Thus we learn upon what Grounds this was believed by him against the Opinion of
many others. St. Basil grounds this Opinion upon another Story of like nature:
De human. Christi Gener. Tom. 1. p. 509.
The Story of Zacharias, says he, proves that the Virgin Mary was, (...), an
entire Virgin; for it is derived to us, (...), from Tradition, that Zacharias
was slain between the Porch and the Altar for saying, Qui hujusmodi Traditioni
non credunt.
that Mary was a Virgin, (...), after the Birth of our Lord.

Origin delivers the same thing in the like words, In Matt. Hom. 26. f. 49. b.
In Matthew. 23.35.
Venit ad nos Traditio quaedam, Such a Tradition has come down to us. And
Theophylact, (...), We have it from Tradition; and yet Origin in the same place
confesses that this Tradition was not believed by others; In locum.
and Jerome says, That it came, Ex Apocryphorum Somniis, From apocryphal
Dreams; and adds, That Quia de scripturis non habet autoritatem eadem
facilitate contemnitur qua probatur, Because it has no Authority from
Scripture, it is as easily condemned as approved of.

And thus we see the rise of this Tradition, which afterward prevailed over
the Christian World.

3ly. Lord lived above Forty if not to Fifty Years, Sicut Evangelium and omues
seniores testantur qui in Asia apud Joannem Discipulum Domini, convenerunt, id
ipsum tradidisse eis Joannem. L. 2. c. 39.
is the express Assertion of Irenaeus, and for this he produces the Testimony
of the Gospel, and of all the Elders of the Church, who met S. John the beloved
Disciple of our Lord, in Asia, and declared that he delivered to them the same
thing, yea, says he, some of them saw not only John, but the rest of the
Apostles, and heard the same things from them, and testantur de hujusmodi
Relatione, and testify the truth of the Relation.

To say with Feuardentius upon the place, that he might have had this from
Papias, is a very unlikely thing, for he speaks not of the Testimony of one
Man, but of all the Seniors; not of Men who had never seen the Apostles, as
Papias had not, but of them who had; he cites not Papias, as in the Case of the
Millennium he did; here therefore is a solemn Declaration of a Tradition
received from the Mouth of the Apostles, and attested by all the Seniors, and
yet so far from being in the Gospel, as is pretended, that by the Gospel it may
be evidently confuted; so far from being owned as such in after Ages, that upon
a very slight Ground, even the saying of the Prophet Isaiah, Vid. Feuard. in
Iren. p. 46. and 188.
That Christ was sent to Preach the Acceptable Year of the Lord; many of the
Fathers took up a contrary Opinion, that our Lord Suffered in the Fifteenth
Year of Tiberius, and preached One Year only. When Jesus came to his Baptism,
says Clemens of Alexandria, (...). Strom. 1. p. 340.
he was about Thirty Years old, and that he was to Preach but One Year, is thus
written, He sent me to Preach the Acceptable Year of the Lord; this both the
Prophet and the Gospel, according to the plain meaning of the Words averr, say
some in Origin, Hom. 32. in Luke f. 111.
That our Lord Preached the Gospel but one Year, and that on this account it
was said, Cap. 8.
that he was sent to Preach the Acceptable Year of the Lord. (...). L 1. c. 1.
p. 16.
Tertullian in his Book against the Jews says, That Christ suffered, annos
habens quasi triginta, being about Thirty Years Old.

Lactantius, Africanus, and others, cited by Feuardentius, say the same. And
yet this was no better than an Opinion first invented by the Gnostics, as we
learn from Irenaeus, and for which they produced the same Text; and it is as
easily confuted by the Enumeration of the Passovers our Savior Celebrated
after his Baptism and before his Death.

Now if a Tradition could so generally obtain in the Fifth Century which had
its rise from Fabulous Legends, and Apocryphal Dreams, against plain Words of
Scripture, and plain Assertions of the Fathers living in the former Centuries,
as that of our Lords coming out of the Womb of the Virgin without opening of it
did, why might not other Traditions pretended by some later Councils and the
Church of Rome be of like nature? Why may we not credit the Council of
Frankford, In lib. Carol. p. 3. c. 30.
declaring that the Second Nicene Council for their pretended Tradition of
Image Worship, had recourse, ad Apocryphas quasdam and risu dignas naenias, to
Apocryphal and Ridiculous Tales. Comment. in 2. ad Tim. p. 155.
Or Espencaeus a Romanist, confessing, that they defended it, daemonum Spectris
and muliebribus Somniis, with diabolical Apparitions and old Wife's Dreams;
especially when, as he there says, this we see in the very Synod, which
approves and urges in confirmation of it, the Tale of Constantine's Leprosy,
and of his Baptism by Pope Sylvester, Def. Constant. contr. Baril. c. 10, 11.
adversus Spalat. c. 65. p. 458, 459.
and of the Images of Paul and Peter produced then to him; the Tale of the
Image sent to Agbarus, of the Passion of the Image of Christ at Beryth, and
that infamous Tale of the old Fornicating Monk, all confuted and exposed by
Learned Crakanthorp, and a late Cap. 5. p. 22, 23.
excellent Discourse of the Second Nicene Council.

If Irenaeus could so early pretend to a Testimony of all the Elders of the
Church of Asia, for a matter of apparent falsehood, if others in the Second and
Third Century could frame a contrary Doctrine, from such a weak allusion to a
Prophetic Saying, I hope the saying of One or Two Doctors in the following
Ages, cannot be reasonably supposed to amount to any certain proof of the
Traditions or Doctrines derived from the Apostles. And if their Testimonies in
such Cases in which they are most properly Testators, or Relaters of Church
History and of Traditions received from the Elders of the Church, prove so
uncertain, and so alien from Truth, less Credit must be given to them in those
Articles of Faith, or Doctrines of Manners, in which they only give their
Judgment, without pretending to Apostolical Tradition for the Truth of what
they say: The Patrons of Oral Tradition confessing and declaring that they rely
not on them as Doctors and Divines, but as Witnesses of Tradition only.

Moreover it is the constant Opinion of the Fathers, Century that our Savior
twice penetrated with his Body through the Doors where the Disciples were
assembled, Joh. 20.19, 26. Vid, Maldonat, in locum.
because he came twice to them, says St. John, The Doors being shut, and stood
in the midst of them.

Whereas it is evident that this Phrase does not infer this Penetration, any
more than my saying, I came into the College the Gates being shut, imports,
that with my Body I pierced through the College Gates. It does not in the least
enforce us to conclude, that our Lord did not by his power open the Doors, or
come in any other way.

And whosoever seriously considers the circumstances of the Text, will find
good Reason to believe, that Christ did not thus penetrate through the Doors as
they imagined, for the Apostle does inform us, ver. 20. that Christ when he was
come among them showed them his Hands and his Feet; he therefore purposely
appeared to convince them that he was risen in the same Body in which he
Suffered, and which he laid down in the Sepulcher. They, says St. Luke, were
troubled at his Appearance, Luke xxiv. 38, 39.
and thought that they had seen a Spirit; to remove which Imagination, our Lord
speaks to them thus, Why are ye troubled, and why do such Reasonings rise up in
your Hearts, see my Hands and my Feet, that it is I my self, handle me, and
see, for a Spirit has not Flesh and Bones, as you see I have. St. John informs
us, that his second Appearance, when the Doors were shut, was designed
particularly to convince St. Thomas of the same Truth, and to confirm the
Resurrection of his proper Body to him. He speaks thus, Reach hither thy
Finger, Joh. ^x. 27.
and behold my Hands, and reach hither thy Hand, and thrust it into my Side,
and be not faithless but believing; whereas had Christ penetrated with his Body
through the Doors at both these Appearances, and so had entered in to them after
the manner, not of a Body, but a Spirit, he had done that which must have
staggered their Faith at the same time that he designed to confirm them in it.
For, notwithstanding any thing they seemed to see or feel, they could not well
believe he had true Flesh and Bones, and was no Spirit, had they believed and
known, he even then had thus penetrated through their Doors, and therefore had
done that which only Spirits, and no true Flesh and Bones could do. And if you
here referr this Action with the Fathers to Christ's Almighty Power, why might
not his Disciples, if they did the like, mistrust that by the self-same power,
he, who did this, might make that Body which appeared to them, seem to have
Flesh and Bones, and Prints of Wounds, when it had not?

When our Roman Doctors shall have answered this Scruple, Pseudo-Justin,
Nazianz. Chrysostom, St. Jerome, Austin, Euthymius. Apud Maldonatum in Matthew.
xxviij. 2.
I shall pay greater Reverence to the Authority of the Fathers of the Fourth
and the ensuing Centuries touching this matter, but till then I shall continue
as much to Scruple Christ's penetration with his Body through the Doors, as I
do that other fine Invention of some of the same Fathers, that our Lord's Body
at his Resurrection, penetrated through the Stone of the Sepulcher.

But besides all these Instances there are two celebrated in Church History,
which are abundantly sufficient to discover the uncertainty of the pretenses to
Tradition in such Cases, even according to the Judgment of most Learned
Romanists.

The First is the known Story of the Phoenix, P. 34, 35. De Resur. Carn. c. 13.
Catech. 18. p. 213, 214. Ancorat. c. 85.
as is related in the first Century by Clemens Romanus in his Epistle to the
Corinthians, which used to be publicly read in the Church. By Tertullian in
the Third Century. In the Fourth Century by Cyril of Jerusalem, who says,
(...), Clemens and many others did relate it, and bids us not disbelive it.
Epiphanius not only introduces it as a thing whose Fame had come to many of
the Faithful, but he triumphs over the Jews with this Question, Physic. c. 11.
Why should you not believe our Lord's Resurrection in Three days, (...), when
a Bird was restored to Life in Three Days? St. Ambrose says, De fide Resur. p.
39. vide etiam Hexam. l. 5. c. 23. and in Ps. 118. p. 565.
Hoc relatione crebra, and Scripturarum Authoritate cognovimus, We know this by
frequent Relation, and by the Authority of the Scriptures, which he says, as
being of the number of those Fathers, who applied that Saying of the Psalmist,
(...), The Just shall flourish as a Palm Tree, Ps. xcij. 12.
to this Bird, because the same Greek word signifies both a Palm Tree and a
Phoenix. Dion. p. 49. Renasci Constat, apud Hieron. Tom. 4. f. 47. b. L. 5. c.
7. p. 246. Carmen de Phoen. Tom. 4. f. 54.
Synesius says, That by the coming of this Bird, the Egyptians measured,
(...), the Circuit of their Times, he coming, as the Story says, once only in
Five hundred Years. Ruffinus in his Symbol mentions this as a thing certain.

The Constitutions styled Apostolical, -- The Verses which pass under the Name
of Lactantius, -- The Epistle under the Name of Jerome to Praesidius say the
same thing. And yet this Story is deservedly now rejected by the best Writers
of the Church of Rome. Constable. Apost. and Lact. ubi sup. Epiph. and Hieron. ibid.
And whosoever considers the Heathenism mixed with it; viz. That this Bird
comes, (...), to the Altar of the Sun, and does, (...), pray to the Sun; and
when she is to be consumed, she goes to the Priest of Heliopolis, and enters
with him into the Temple; that the new Bird which arises out of her Ashes,
Epiph. Phys. c. 11.
(...), saluteth the same Pagan Priest, and taking up the Bones of her Consumed
Parent, (...), lays them upon the Altar of the Sun.

I say, Whosoever well considers of these things, Not. in Clem. P. 90.
will find sufficient cause to say with Cotelerius, Mirum cunctis Christianis
non suboluisse fraudem ob Paganismum fabellae permistum, It is to be wondered
that the Paganism mixed with this Fable, discovered not the Cheat unto all
Christians.

The Second is the Story of the Cells of the Septuagint, Old Testament from the
Hebrew into Greek, and yet to have performed this Translation all in the same
words. This Justin Martyr having related, uses these words, Exhort. ad Graec.
p. 13, 14.
(...); These things we report to you Gentiles not as Fables, or as seigned
Stories, but as a received Tradition, delivered to us by the Inhabitants of the
Place. L. 3. c. 25.
Irenaeus having told the same History, concludes thus, Firma est, and non
ficta quae secundum nos est sides, manifestam ostensionem habens ex his
Scripturis, Our Faith is firm, and not seigned, having manifest demonstration
from these Scriptures. Strom. 1. P. 342. Catech. 4. p. 37. De Mensur. p. 160,
161, 163.


Clemens Alexandrinus, St. Cyril of Jerusalem, and Epiphanius among the Greek
Fathers, expressly affirm the same thing touching these Cells, or their
Interpretation of Scripture, in the very same words, though separated one from
the other. Tertullian speaks, De sententiae Communione, Apol. c. 18.
Of this conspiring in their Sentiments, as an Evidence of a divine Providence
assisting them. And St. De C.D. l. 18. c. 42, 43.
Austin is express both for their separate Interpretation, and their exact
Agreement in the words. And all these Fathers hence conclude, that this
Interpretation was performed, (...), Ibid.
Spiritu codem assistente qui in Prophetis erat quando illa dixerunt, by divine
Power and Inspiration, by the same Holy Spirit which enabled the Prophets to
indite these Scriptures. And they who do not speak expressly of these
Circumstances, do notwithstanding generally acknowledge that their
Interpretation was Prophetical and Divine.

Eusebius says, Praepar. Evan. L. 8. c. 1.
That it was, (...), an Interpretation ordered by God; it was done by them,
says St. Hilary, Prolog. in Psalm. p. 635.
Spirituali and Coelesti scientia, with Spiritual and Heavenly Knowledge,
Praefat. in Psalm.
-- (...), not without Divine Inspiration, says Theodoret, and that by reason
of the great Symphony, which was in their Interpretations.

And yet these things delivered with so great consent of Ancient Fathers, and
contradicted only by Saint Jerome, who upon that account hardly escaped their
Censure, are now rejected by the most learned Romanists as false and
incredible. De verbo Dei l. 2. c. 6.. haec sententia.
For, as for the Story of the Cells, Bellarmine says, That the Jews might
easily impose on Justin Martyr, Fabulam a se confictam, a Fable feigned by
themselves; and it might as easily happen, that aliqui posteriores fidem
habuerint Justino, Notae in Epiph. de Men's. and Pond. p. 378.
That some succeeding Fathers should give credit unto Justin: That Story of the
Cells, says Petavius, aegre admodum fidem obtinet, is scarcely credible. Mr.
Du Pin declares, Nov. Biblioth. part. 1. dissert. praelim. p. 82, 88.
This is une fiction des Juifs, to which the Fathers abovenamed yielded their
assent. F. Simon says, That all which the Fathers have said of the Seventy
Interpreters, excepting some few things seigned afterward by the Jews, were
taken out of Aristaeus, Disq. Crit. c. 15. p. 109.
whom all judicious Critics now judge Spurious; and having objected against
himself, Patrum omnium Autoritatem the Authority of all the Fathers, he
answers, That we are not so much in this matter to consider, Ibid.
quid a Patribus dictum fuerit, what the Fathers said, as what Reasons they had
to say so; and that Jerome did not scruple to oppose himself, contra communem
Patrum sententiam, against the common Opinion of the Fathers about the Cells,
to Laugh at Justin for it, as a simple Man, and to say roundly, Nescio quis
primus auctor Septuaginta Cellulas mendacio suo exstruxit, I know not who was
the first Author of the Lie.

As for the Second Point touching their Inspiration, Parum abfuit quin ab
Ecclesia tanquam Novator ejiceretur. C. 16. p. 129, 130.
or Divine Assistance in this work; he confesses that Vossius in that
Assertion, that they were thus inspired, Sibi consentientes habet Patres omnes,
si unum exceperis Hieronymum, Had all the Fathers on his side, excepting Jerome,
and as for him, he narrowly escaped being cast out of the Church as an
Innovator for denying it; and yet, says he, the Judgment of St. Jerome, and the
Grave Authors of our Age is to be preferred; C. 14. p. 115.
for the Fathers being only skilled in Greek and Latin, de rebus sibi
incognitis quidquam certi definire non potuerunt, could say nothing certain of
things unknown to themselves; indeed, says he, in matters of Faith, the
consent of the Doctors of the Church has in it something of Divine; C. 16. p.
130.
at ille cordatus non est, nec religiosus, but he is not sincere or Religious,
who in things which are not of Faith, fears to depart from the Sentence of the
Fathers, and had rather believe other Men's Writings, than his own Eyes and
Experience. And he concludes with these remarkable Words, C. 14. p. 116.
Censurae Hieronymi Patronam se praebuit Ecclesia Romana, dum relicta
Septuaginta Interpretum Versione, quae per tot annos universum orbem catholicum
sola occupaverat, Hieronymianam, recens cusam ad Judaeorum codices, amplexata
est; The Church of Rome has given Patronage to the Censure of Jerome, by
leaving the Version of the Septuagint which had obtained in the whole Church
Catholic, and Embracing the Version of Jerome made new according to the Books
of the Jews.

If then the Heathenish Story of the Phoenix could obtain such Credit among the
Primitive Fathers, as to be gainsaid by none but Maximus: If the Jewish
Fiction of the Cells obtained still greater Credit, being only questioned by
St. Jerome, what Security can we have that other Stories of like Nature are of
unquestionable Credit? If the sole Assertion of St. Jerome is patronized by the
Church of Rome, against the constant Judgment of the whole Catholic World, if
his Translation from the Hebrew, which when he made it first was generally
Condemned and Censured, and for which some charged him with Heresy, and all
with Innovation, Ruffinus ei notam Haereseos impingebat. Erasm. Arg. Apol.
Hierom. adv. Ruff. Ep. Tom. 2. f. 82. b.
is now made Canonical, must not the Church of Rome have changed her Judgment?
Must she not have rejected the Sentence of the whole Church Catholic of the
Five first Ages, and given us just Reason to use the same Liberty, if we were
minded so to do, in any other Instance of like Nature.

For further Explication of this Question, Church of Rome about Ecclesiastical
Traditions, touching Ceremonials, Qu. 4. Did. 3.
unnecessary Observations and Constitutions Ecclesiastical, such as are the
Cross in Baptism, Trine Immersion, the Renunciation of Satan and his Pomps, the
Unction of the Baptized Persons, the Words used at the Consecration of that,
and of the other Sacrament, the Kiss of Charity, the Lent Fast, the Worship of
God toward the East, Prayer standing on the Lord's Day, etc. but only touching
necessary Rules of Faith and Manners. In matters of the first kind we say in
the words imposed upon St. De Spiritu Sancto, c. 27.
Basil, That the Practice of the Church is sufficient, though we cannot tell
(...), from what Scripture we derive these practices; but in Matters of Faith,
we say with the true St. Basil, De vera and pia fide, p. 386.
treating upon the Articles of Christian Faith: That it is the property of a
faithful Steward to deliver nothing to his fellow Servants, as part of holy
Faith, but what is committed to him by his good Lord: i. e. what he has
learned from the Holy Scriptures. That it is a manifest falling from the Faith,
and an argument of Pride either to reject any thing that is written, or to
superinduce any thing that is not written; our Lord having said, My Sheep hear
my Voice. Vid. Chap. 10.
That the Apostle vehemently forbids, that any thing should be added to,

Of matters of the first kind we say with Tertullian, De Cor. Milit. cap. 2.
that they are such as we think fit to be received and observed in any Church
which shall enjoin them, sine ullius scripturae instrumento, solius traditionis
titulo, and exinde consuetudinis patrocinio; Upon the sole account of Tradition
and Custom, though Scripture has said nothing of them. In matters of the
second kind we say with the same Tertullian, L. de praescript. c. 15. Cap. 38.
Adv. Hermog. c. 22. Ep. 118. ad Jan. cap. 5. p. 558.
None can discourse of the things of Faith but from the Holy Scriptures; That
none can have the Integrity of Doctrine without the integrity of those
Instruments; that what the Scriptures are, we are; and that we adore the
fullness of the Scriptures. If the Question were of the first, as v. g. Whether
on Holy Thursday we should offer in the Morning, and after Supper too, or fast
the Evening, and then offer; we answer to that Question with St. Austin; Si
quid horum totum per orbem frequentat Ecclesia; If the whole Church does any
thing of this nature, it is insolent madness to dispute whether it ought to be
done; for this is to dispute and trouble the Church, about a thing of naught,
and so to discover an unpeaceable, and ungovernable temper of mind. Or if the
Question were, Whether the Sacrament is to be received fasting, or not, we
think it fit to be concluded by the practice of the Universal Church, Ep. 118.
ad Jan. c. 6. p. 559.
not contradicted by our Lord's Precepts, nor repugnant to Faith, or Manners.
For in such cases St. Austin says, Emendari oportet quod perperam fiebat; That
which was ill done, ought to be amended; Cap. 5. ibid.
and that none should vary from our Lord's Command. But if the Question be of
Articles of Faith, and necessary Rules of Manners, we say with the same St.
Austin, De Bono Vid. cap. 1. Tom. 4. p. 1018.
Wherefore should I teach thee any thing more than that we read in the Apostle;
for the Holy Scripture fixes the Rule of our Doctrine, lest we should attempt
to known more; and again, If any one, I will not say if we, Sive de Christo,
five de ejus Ecclesia, sive de quacunque alia re quae pertinet ad fidem
vitamque nostram, si Angelus de coelo vobis annunciaverit praeterquam quod in
Scripturis legalibus and evangelicis accepistis, Anathema sit. De lit. Petil l.
3. c. 6.
(no way to be compared to him who said, Though we,) but if an Angel from
Heaven should preach unto you, either concerning Christ or his Church, or any
other thing which belongs to our Faith, or Life, besides what you have received
in the Legal, and Evangelical Scriptures, let him be accursed. In a word, the
Kiss of Charity, the Office of the Diaconess, the breaking of the Bread
distributed, and Baptism by immersion, (...). Cap. 20.
which are all Ceremonies, and Constitutions mentioned in Holy Scripture;
Prayer standing on the Lord's Day, commanded by the first General Council of
Nice, Prayer toward the East, the Consecration of one Loaf for all the
Communicants, carrying home the Eucharist, to omit many things of a like
nature, were all of them Customs received generally in the next Age to the
Apostles, and yet now generally disused by the present Church of Rome, which
therefore cannot justly blame others for disuse of any Customs of like nature.

CHAP. II.
Fourthly, For Explication of the Question observe, That the Tradition we admit
is the Tradition of all past Ages, and not that of the present Church, and much
less of the Church of Rome,. 1. This also is the Tradition pleaded by Origin,
St. Basil and St. Austin, and which it is suitable to Reason to allow, Ibid. The
Testimony of the present Church of Rome, and her Adherents, can be no sure
Evidence of true Apostolical Tradition, 1. Because she actually has imposed
false Doctrines and Practices as Apostolical Tradition. 2. Because she has no
better Right to testify in this Matter than the Eastern Churches,. 2.3.
Because her present Testimony contradicts the Testimony of the whole Church in
general, and of the Roman Church in particular, in former Ages,. 3. 1. Touching
the number of the Canonical Books of the Old Testament. 2. Of the Authority of
the Epistle to the Hebrews. 3. Of the number of the Sacraments. 4. Of
Concomitance. 5. Of pronouncing part of the Mass in a low Voice. 6. Of the
Veneration of Images. 7. Of Communion in one Kind. 8. Of her Twelve new
Articles. 9. Of the no necessity of giving the Eucharist to Infants, Ibid. 4.
Because this Doctrine makes Scripture, Reason and Antiquity not only useless
but pernicious to us,. 4. More Instances of the Contradiction betwixt the
Decrees of the Ancient Catholic Church, and of the present Church of Rome,
1st. In the Decree of the Trent Council, touching the Freedom of the Blessed
Virgin from Actual Sin,. 5. 2dly. In the permission that Church gives to eat
things Strangled and Blood,. 6. In punishing Men with Death for their
Religion,. 7. In not breaking the Bread they distribute; not permitting the
Communicants to carry it home; not Consecrating it with a loud Voice,. 8. In
the Matter of the Immaculate Conception, though not conciliarly defined,. 9.
Seven Corollaries from this Instance,. 10.

MOreover, Question, let it be noted, Did. 4.
That by the word Tradition, when we allow what can be proved by it, to be in
Matters of Faith a Doctrine, or a Revelation derived from the Apostles, in
matters of Government, of Discipline, or practice an Apostolical Ordinance or
Institution; we mean not the Tradition of the present Church, and much less the
Tradition of the Church of Rome, and her Adherents, Charity Maint. chapter 2.. 14.
but we mean with Mr. Knot, Such a Tradition which involves an evidence of
Fact, and from Hand to Hand, from Age to Age, bringing us up to the Times and
Persons of the Apostles, Id quod in Ecclesia Universa, and omnibus retro
temporibus, servatum est, merito ab Apostolis creditur institutum. De verbo Dei
non scripto, l. 4 c. 9.
and our Savior himself, comes to be confirmed by all those Miracles and
other Arguments, by which they proved their Doctrine to be true, or such a
Practice as the Church has observed in all past Ages, according to the Third
Rule of Bellarmine, for the discerning Apostolical Traditions, and such an
Article of Faith as all the Doctors of the Church, by common consent, have
always testified to have descended from Apostolical Tradition.

Such is the Tradition which St. Basil insists upon for the use of the Words,
(...), with the Spirit, in the Doxology of the Church, viz. That (...), L. de
Spiritu Sancto, c. 29.
which was customarily used in the Churches from the first Preaching of the
Gospel to that very time; and of such Traditions we say with him, Ibid.
That it is (...), suitable to the Apostles Doctrine to continue in them.
Praefat. in libr. (...).
Such is the Tradition of which Origin speaks when he says, That only is to be
believed as Truth, which in nothing disagreeth from the Tradition
Ecclesiastical, that is, The, praedicatio per successionis ordinem ab Apostolis
tradita, and usque ad praesens in Ecclesiis permanens, preaching delivered down
by order of Succession from the Apostles, and to this present time continued in
the Churches. This is the Tradition of which St. Cap. 8.
Austin speaks in his Book De utilitate credendi, viz. of the Tradition, quae
ab ipso Christo per Apostolos ad nos usque manavit, Cap. 10.
which came down from Christ by his Apostles to that present time, which, a
Majoribus nostris tradita ad nos usque servata est, being delivered by our
Ancestors, has been preserved to our times, and which is, Cap. 14.
celebritate, consensione, vetustate roborata, strengthened with a general
Fame, Consent and Antiquity. And this is also the Authority he means when he
says, I should not have believed the Gospel, nisi me Catholicae Ecclesiae
moveret Authoritas, unless the Authority of the Catholic Church had moved me.
For he informs us, That he speaks of that Authority which was, Contr. Epist.
Man. quam vocant Fundament. c. 4.
Miraculis inchoata, vetustate firmata, begun by Miracles and confirmed by
Antiquity: And this must of necessity be meant by that Tradition which is the
Foundation of an Article of Faith, for Faith must be a matter of Divine
Revelation, and therefore must proceed from Christ or his Apostles, from whom
alone all Revelations of the Christian Faith have issued, the Churches Business
being to Believe, to Preach and Testify, not to enlarge or shorten, to alter
or diversisie the Faith by them delivered to her, and what they taught her as a
thing necessary to be believed, or practiced by all Christians, must
consequently be so believed, taught and practiced through all future Ages,
provided that they walk according to their Rule. Common. c. ^.
Hence says Vincentius Lirinensis, Hoc est vere, proprieque Catholicum, quod
ubique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus, That is truly Catholic Doctrine which
was held in all places, all times, and by all Persons. Sess. 4.
And accordingly the Trent Council, and the Roman Doctors pretend to have
received those Doctrines in which they differ from us, partly from Scripture,
and partly from Tradition, derived from the Apostles to their days.

But here begins the difference betwixt us, Church to be an Evidence sufficient
of the Tradition of the Church of former Ages, and will maintain this way of
Arguing to be good. The present Church of Rome, and they who hold Communion
with her, deliver such and such Doctrines as Traditions received from the
Apostles, and handed down from them thoughout all Ages, and by all true
Christian Churches to this present Age, and therefore they undoubtedly are such.

We on the contrary say, That we have clear unquestionable Evidence from
Scripture and Church History, that many of the Doctrines imposed upon us by the
Church of Rome as Apostolic Doctrines and Traditions, were not received, but
rather were condemned and abhorred by the former Ages of the Church of Christ
in general, and in particular by that of Rome, and this has been already
proved in the instance of their Latin Service, the Veneration of Images, and
Communion in one Kind; whence it demonstratively follows, that this proposition
is contrary to plain matter of Fact.

Again, What better reason can be given for this Consequence, viz. The present
Church of Rome, with her Adherents, deliver such a Doctrine for Apostolical
Tradition, and therefore so it is, than of this other which plainly contradicts
it, The Greek and Eastern Churches with their Adherents, teach such and such
Doctrines opposite to the pretended Traditions of the Church of Rome, as
Doctrines delivered to them from the Apostles, and from the former Ages of the
Church of Christ, and therefore they are truly such: For these Churches never
pretended to have made any Reformation, but that they, since the days of the
Apostles, have kept safe and sound, as Barlaam says, (...), the Traditions of
the Catholic Church. The Oriental Patriarchs in the Council of Florence allow,
(...). Hist. Council. Flor.. 3. c. 3.
that others should be their Vicars, and that they would assent to what was
done in that Council, provided that they acted, (...), according to the
Traditions of the Holy Ecumenical Synods, and the Holy Doctors of the Church,
and that nothing were added to, or taken from, (...), or was innovated in the
Faith.

The Legates of Iberia in the same Council speak thus to the Pope, (...), etc.
Hist. Council. Flor. S. 9. c. 12.
Our Church preserves whatsoever she has received from the Doctrine of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and the Tradition of the Holy Apostles, and the Ecumenical
Synods and the Holy Doctors of the Church; (...); and she has not at all
deviated from their Doctrine, nor added to, or taken away any thing from it.
The Greeks in the Florentine Council show their zeal, Sess. 5. apud Bin. Tom.
8. p. 589.
that nothing should be added to, or taken from the Faith, because they were
not to change the Old Landmarks which their Fathers had set. P. 596.
And they approve that Decree of the Second Nicene Council, (...), If any Man
make void any Ecclesiastical Tradition, written or unwritten, let him be
Anathema: Such Reason had Barlaam to say, That among them, (...), nothing (by
them) was more esteemed than the Tradition of the Catholic Church.

Thirdly, If the belief, Church of Rome, and her adherents be a sufficient
Evidence of the Tradition of all former Ages, and what she now averrs to be
Tradition Apostolical, must always have been so, and what she now denies to be
Tradition, must never have been so, then many things must be derived from
Primitive, and Apostolical Tradition, and yet must not be so; for the Church of
Rome cannot be more infallible in declaring, in this present Age, what is
Tradition, than she was in all past Ages, they being once the present Age. And
yet it is exceeding certain, that the present Church of Rome, with her
Adherents, holds many things to be Traditions Apostolical which in the former
Ages were by her, and by the whole Church Catholic declared to be no such
matter, and that she holds many things to be no Traditions truly Primitive
and Apostolical, which she, and others, who consented with her, formerly
declared to be true Primitive and Apostolical Traditions, as will be evident by
these ensuing Instances.

1. She holds at present all the Books of the Old Testament, enumerated in the
Fourth Session of the Trent Council, to have been handed down as Canonical
Scriptures, continua Successione in Catholica Ecclesia, by continual Succession
of the Catholic Church; whereas, I shall hereafter prove, that for the Four
first Centuries, and from the Sixth to the Fourteenth she and all other
Churches held some of them to be Apocryphal or Vncanonical.

2. Ibid. Sess. 4.
She holds at present, That it is a Tradition preserved by continual Succession
in the Church Catholic, that the Canonical Epistles of St. Paul are
Quatuordecem, Fourteen, and that the Epistle to the Hebrews is Canonical, See
Chap. 3. Sect. 16.
whereas formerly she, and other Western Churches, agreeing with her in that
matter, did not receive the Epistle to the Hebrews as Canonical, and
consequently could not believe that the Church Catholic did by continual
Succession hold, that the number of St. Paul's Canonical Epistles were Fourteen.

3. Council. Trid. Sess. 7. Can. 1.
She pretends at present, Apostolicis Traditionibus, atque aliorum consiliorum,
and patrum consensui inhaerendo, Adhering to Apostolical Tradition, and the
Consent of Fathers and of Councils, to define, That the Sacraments of the New
Law instituted by Christ Jesus, and truly and properly so called, are neither
more nor less than Seven; Treat. of Latin Serve. praef. p. 5, 6, 7, 8. Sess. 13.
cap. 3.
and yet it has been lately proved, that from the days of Gregory the Great,
or from the Sixth to the Twelfth Century she declared the contrary.

4. She holds at present, That semper haec fides in Ecclesia Dei fuit, This was
the Faith perpetually received in the Church, that, by virtue of Concomitance,
the Body of Christ in the Sacrament is under the Species of Wine, and his Blood
under the Species of Bread, and his Soul under both; and that this is the
Doctrine, quam semper Catholica Ecclesia retinuit, which the Catholic Church
being taught by Christ and his Apostles, Treat. of Com. in one Kind, c. 7.. 5,
6, 7.
and the Holy Spirit has always retained; and yet it has been fully proved,
that to the Tenth Century she taught the contrary.

5. She holds at present, That the Roman Institution, to pronounce some things
in the Mass with a low, and others with a loud voice, Ibid. c. 5.. 1. Tr. of
Lat. Serve. c. 16. p. 69.
proceeded, ex Apostolica Doctrina and Traditione, from the Apostolical
Tradition and Discipline, whereas it has been proved that formerly she taught
the contrary.

6. It is the present Tradition of the Romish Church, Council. Trid. Sess. 25.
and her Adherents, That the Veneration, and Honorary Worship of Images is
suitable to the Tradition, Catholicae and Apostolicae Ecclesiae, of the
Catholic and Apostolic Church, Treat. of the Veneration of Images.
whereas this has been proved contrary to the Ancient Tradition of the whole
Church of Christ in general, and of that of Rome in particular.

7. The present Church of Rome pretends, following ipsius Ecclesiae judicium
and consuetudinem, Sess. 21. c. 1.
the Custom and Judgment of the Church, to declare and teach, That Laics, and
Clerks not consecrating, are not obliged to receive the Sacrament in both
Kinds, whereas it has been proved that for a Thousand Years the contrary was
both the Judgment and Custom of the whole Church in general, Treat. of Com. in
one Kind.
and of that of Rome in particular.

8. The present Church of Rome declares, touching her new Creed, containing
Twelve New Articles, neither comprised in, nor deducible from the Apostles or
the Nicene Creed, that it contains, Chapter 7.. 4.10.
veram Catholicam fidem extra quam nemo salvus esse potest, the true Catholic
Faith without which no man can be saved, whereas it is here proved, that the
whole Church of Christ in general, and in particular the Roman Church, believed
that the Apostles and the Nicene Creed contained all the Articles of the
Christian Faith.

9. Council. Trid. Sess. 21. can. 4.
The present Roman Church pronounces an Anathema on those who say the
Eucharist is necessary to Children before they come to Years of Discretion,
that is on Pope Innocent, Chap. 12. Sect. 3, 4, 5.
Pope Pelagius, and the whole Church of Christ for Six hundred Years.

And truly if the Tradition or the Doctrine of the present Church of Rome,
Tradition, Practice, and Doctrines of the whole Church of Christ throughout all
Ages; if we lie under any Obligation to determine thus, That this is the
Practice, the Tradition, the Doctrine of the present Roman Church, therefore
this was the Doctrine, the Practice, the Tradition of all former Ages of the
Christian Church, then all the Reason God has given us, and all the Learning
which we can, with all our industry acquire from Scripture, and all the
Testimonies of the Fathers and Church Writers, could we show them throughout
Fifteen Centuries, Canon of Script.
as Dr. Cousins has done, declaring themselves fully in opposition to the
Church of Rome: I say, if the Declarations of the Church of Rome must wholly
overruled us in these matters, all the knowledge we can acquire from Scripture,
Reason, or the Fathers, is not worth one Straw; we may even burn all our Books
of Antiquity, our Fathers, and Church History, yea, and our Bibles too, and lay
aside our useless Reason; for whatsoever service these things may do to Holy
Church, they can do none to us. The reading of these Authors, the use of Reason
to discern betwixt good and evil, right and wrong, true and false in Christian
Practices and Doctrines, must be the most pernicious things in which we can be
exercised; for, sure I am, no Man of honest Conscience and sound Judgment can
read the Scriptures and the Fathers carefully, but he must very strongly be
tempted by his Reason to suspect, and must in many things seem absolutely
certain, that Apostolical Tradition cannot be known by the Tradition of the
present Church of Rome, yea that many of her present Traditions, Doctrines and
Practices, are evidently and unquestionably repugnant to the Traditions,
Practices, and Doctrines of the Apostles, and the whole Church of Christ, for
Six, Eight, Ten, Twelve or Fourteen Centuries.

To add some farther Instances to these, Sess. 6. can. 23.
Ecclesia tenet de Beata Virgin quod ex speciali Dei privilegio in tota vita
peccata omnia etiam venialia vitaverit, The Church of Rome now holds, says the
Trent Council, that the Blessed Virgin was, through her whole Life, free from
venial Sin; and yet such is the Evidence of Truth to the contrary, that many
Doctors of the Roman Church are even forced to confess, that this Determination
is contrary to the common Judgment of the Fathers. In John ij.
Maldonate speaks thus, Among the Ancient Fathers I find very few who either do
not openly say, or obscurely signify that the Blessed Virgin was guilty of
some Fault or Error. And though some have endeavored, says Petavius, to
mollify the Sayings of the Fathers, De Incar. l. 14. c. 1. sect. 7.
yet their endeavor is vain; Nam adeo disertam continent cujusque modi delicti
significationem, ut aliorsum detorqueri se minime patiuntur, For their Sayings
do so expressly import the signification of some guilt, that they cannot be
wrested to another sense; and that they had good reason to make these
Confessions, will be apparent from these Citations following.

Our Lord, says Irenaeus, L. 3. c. 18. p. 277.
repellens ejus intempestivam festinationem, repelling her unseasonable
hastiness, said to her, Woman, what have I to do with thee?

In the Third Century Tertullian expressly charges her with incredulity, for he
declares, L. de came Christi cap. 7.
That our Lord Christ therefore denied his Mother and his Brethren, saying, Who
is my Mother and my Brethren? because his Brethren did not believe in him, and
because Matter non adhaesit illi, his Mother did not cleave unto him. In this
place, says he, appears incredulitas eorum, the unbelief of them, that when he
was Preaching the Word of Life, and healing of Diseases and Sins, his Relations
stood without, and were so far from harkening to him, that they did rather
interrupt, and call him from so good a Work; and will Apelles say, That Christ
unworthily used these words, Ad percutiendam infidelitatem foris stantium? To
smite the incredulity of them who stood without? Origin, upon Luke, asks what
that Sword was which Simeon foretold of, saying, it should pass through her
Heart, and answers, that it is manifestly written, Hom. 17. s. 102. b.
That in the time of our Lord's Passion all the Apostles should be scandalized,
and, says he, can we think that the Apostles being Scandalized, Matter Domini a
scandalo fuerit immunis, the Mother of our Lord could be free from Scandal? If
she suffered no Scandal, Jesus did not suffer, pro peccatis ejus, for her Sins;
but if all sinned and fell short of the Glory of God, being justified freely by
his Grace, utique and Maria illo tempore scandalizata est, then doubtless Mary
also at that time was scandalized. And this is that which Simeon here
Prophesies, saying, Tuam ipsius animam pertransibit infidelitatis gladius, and
ambiguitatis mucrone serieris, the Sword of Infidelity shall pass through thy
own Soul, and thou shall be smitten with the Sword of doubtfulness.

In the Fourth Century St. Basil says, That Simeon here prophesies, (...), of
Mary her self, thus, Tom. 3. Ep. 317. p. 310. 311.
(...), There shall be some fluctuation even in thy Soul, (...), some doubting
touching the Lord, this is the Sword, but after this Scandal which shall happen
to Mary and the Disciples of our Lord, he presently will minister a Medicine
and confirm their Hearts in the Faith of Christ. Moveover he makes this Scandal
of the Blessed Virgin necessary upon this account, That Christ was to taste
Death for all, to be the propitiation for the World, and to justify all Men by
his Blood. In Psalm. 118.
St. Hilary declares, That at the Day of Judgment that incessant Fire is to be
endured in, quo subeunda sunt gravia illa expiandae a peccatis animae
supplicia, in which are to be suffered those heavy Punishments designed for the
expiating of the Soul from Sin; and that then the Sword shall go through the
Soul of Mary, and if, says he, even Dei virgo illa in judicii severitatem
ventura est, that Virgin Mother of God must come into the Severity of Judgment,
who dares wish to be judged by God.

In the Fifth Century St. Chrysostom informs us, That both our Lord's Brethren,
In Matt. Hom. 27. p. 191. (...). Hom. 44. p. 287.
and his Mother, (...), labored under some humane infirmity being desirous of
vain Glory, that she was guilty of vain Glory, that both She and his Brethren
were guilty, (...), of an excessive Love of Honor, and that therefore our Lord
blamed them; and that because they came to him as a mere Man, and out of vain
Glory, (...), he casts out the Disease, not reproaching, but correcting them,
and that he gave her a reproof very becoming him, P. 639.
(...), and profitable to her. In his Twenty first Homily on St. John he
charges her with being guilty of hindering the things of God, and interrupting
of her Son in Spiritual things; Consider, says he, what a thing it was for
her, when the People stood about him, and were desirous to hear him, and his
Instructions were propounded to them, (...). Ibid.
for her to come to draw him from his Exhortations, to speak in private with
him; and not so much as to vouchsafe to come in to him, therefore he says, who
is my Mother not dispising her that begat him, but doing her much profit, and
not permitting her to think so meanly of him.

Cyril of Alexandria says, That the Passion of our Lord which happened so
unexpectedly, Tom 4. p. 1064, 1065, 1066.

Vid. eundem orat. in occursum Domini, p. 391.

(...), p. 1064.


(...), did likely scandalize her, and put her somewhat besides her self into
indecent Passions; For doubt not, says he, but she had some such reasonings
within her self as these, I conceived him who is now laughed at on the Cross,
perhaps he was deceived in saying he was the true Son of God. He saying I am
the Life, how should he then be Crucified? How was he taken in the Snares of
his Murderers? How is it that he prevailed not against the Machinations of his
Persecutors? Why does not he who restored Lazarus to Life, and filled all
Judaea with his Miracles descend now from the Cross? It Is very probable that
the Women kind, being ignorant of the Mystery, might fall into such
apprehensions as these were. We speak not these things out of vain Conjectures,
as it may seem to some, but we are moved to suspect these things of the Mother
of our Lord by what is written, for that sharp brunt of Passion, which cast her
mind into absurd Imaginations, is that which Simeon calls a Sword. Nor, says
he, is it to be wondered, (...), P. 1065.
if a Woman should thus slide, at the apprehension of our Lords Passion, seeing
St. Peter, who was preferred before the rest of the Apostles, was scandalized
at it. And lastly he declares, P. 1066.
That Christ did therefore commit her to the care of the Evangelist St. John,
because he saw that she had fallen by scandal at his Passion, and was filled
with disorder in her Apprehensions, that he might rightly declare unto her the
profoundness of the Mystery.

The Author of the Questions of the Old and New Testament which passes under
the Name of Austin, says, Qu. 73.
That Simeon spoke unto her thus, A Sword shall pass through thy own Soul, to
signify this to her, that even she, in morte Domini dubitaret, should doubt
when she saw the Death of Christ, though she should be confirmed by his
Resurrection.

Here therefore is a Tradition of the Church built upon the received Sense of
Scripture for three whole Centuries, no Father contradicting in the least what
was so fully and perspicuously delivered in those Ages; and yet if we must
credit the present Church of Rome, the contrary to this Tradition, and to this
received Interpretation of those Scriptures, on which they grounded this
Tradition, must be an Article of Faith received throughout all Ages of the
Church.

Again, the Decree of the Apostles, Gentiles to abstain from things strangled,
and from Blood, Act. 15.
was conceived by the generality of Christians for a Thousand Years to be
obliging to all Christians.

The Canon of the Apostles says, Can, 63.
That if any Bishop, Presbyter or Deacon, or any other of the Clergy, (...),
does eat Flesh with the Lifeblood in it, or what is killed by a Beast, or
dies of it self, let him be deposed; (...); for this the Law has forbidden;
if he be a Layman, let him be separated from Communion.

In the Second Century the Christians were accused of eating Infants, and
Feasting upon humane Flesh and Blood; now to this Accusation the constant
Answer of the Christians was that of Blandina in Eusebius, Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c.
1. p. 159.
How should they eat such things, (...), who do not think it lawful to eat the
Blood of Beasts? Paedag. l. 2. c. 1. p. 149.
And Clemens of Alexandria declares, That God forbad things strangled or dying
of themselves, (...), L. 3. c. 3. p. 228.
for it is not lawful to touch them, and that it is not lawful for Men, (...),
to touch Blood.

In the Third Century, to the like Accusation of the Heathens, Tertullian
returns this Answer, Apol. c. 9.
That they might be ashamed to object to them the eating humane Blood, qui nec
Animalium quidem sanguinem in Epulis esculentis habemus, who used not to eat
the Blood of Beasts, least they should be defiled with any Blood received into
their Bowels. P. 34.
Octavius says, We Christians are so far from eating humane Blood, ut nec
edulium pecorum sanguinem in cibis noverimus, Contra Celsum l. 8. p. 396, 397.
that we eat not the Blood of Beasts; we are forbid to eat things strangled,
(...), The Blood being not separated from them, says Origin, that we may not
be fed with the Food of Demons; and hence we learn the reason of the precept,
(...), concerning abstinence from Blood.

In the Fourth Century was held the Council of Gangra against the Eustathians,
(some of whom held cibos carnium tanquam illicitos repudiandos esse, that Flesh
was to be refused as unlawful) where they pronounce Anathema to any person who
condemns those that eat Flesh, Can. 2.
(...), excepting only such as ate Blood, or things offered to Idols, or
strangled; from which Exception it is evident, that they held it sit to condemn
them who did taste of Blood, or of things strangled. Now this Canon is in the
Code of the Universal Church, and is one of them which were Confirmed in the
General Council of Chalcedon, Can, 1.
Can. 2.
and afterward by that in Trullo, and therefore was allowed by the whole
Church of God. St. Cyril of Jerusalem instructs his Catecumen, That the
Apostles and James the Bishop of Jerusalem had writ a Catholic Epistle to the
Gentiles, to teach them to abstain from things offered to Idols, things
strangled, and from Blood, and then he adds, Catech. 4. p. 34. c. de cibis.
That they who licked up the Blood of Beast, and spared not to eat things
strangled, were like to wild Beasts and Dogs; these, says he, are the, (...),
Institutions touching Meats, which it behooves you to observe.

In the Fifth Century St. Jerome declares, In Ezekiel. 45. p. 245.
That according to the Letter, the Decree contained in the Fifteenth of the
Acts obliges every Christian not to eat the Flesh of any dead Sheep or Cattle,
quorum nequaquam sanguis effusus est, whose Blood is not poured forth. And
Chrysostom on the place says, These Constitutions, (...), though they concern
the Body, yet are they necessary to be kept.

In the Sixth Century the Second Council of Orleans declares, A. D. 536. can.
20.
That they who eat of that which is choked by any Disease or Chance, or killed
by the bitings of Beasts, shall be excluded from the Communion of the Church,
and if any person, after this diligent Sanction, Can. 22.
does not observe these things, reos se divinitatis pariter and fraternitatis
judicio futuros esse cognoscant, let them know they shall be guilty both in the
Judgment of God, and of the Brotherhood.

In the Seventh Century this was Decreed by the Sixth General Council held in
Trullo in these words, Can. 67.
(...), The Holy Scripture has commanded us to abstain from Blood, things
strangled, and from Fornication; he therefore who attempts to eat the Blood of
any Creature any way, if he be a Clerk, let him be deposed; Cap. 18, 19.
if he be a Layman, let him be Excommunicated. In the Penitential of Theodorus
Archbishop of Canterbury, we have this Rule prescribed, Have thou eaten that
which died of it self, or was torn by Beasts, thou must do penance Forty Days;
if thou have eaten Blood, thou must do likewise. Now of this Theodorus, Rabanus
does inform us, Ep. ad Humbert apud Regin. de discip. Eccl. l. 2. c. 200.
That he was fully instructed in the Customs both of the Eastern and the
Western Churches, and that he could be ignorant of nothing which was then
observed by the Greeks or Romans, and therefore we may rationally conclude,
that what he thus prescribed, was only that which was observed both in the East
and Western Churches.

In the Eigth Century Gregory the Third, who was made Pope A. Can. poenit. c.
30.
D. 731. puts this among his penitential Canons, That he who has eaten that
which died of it self, if he did this ignorantly, shall do Penance Twenty Days;
if knowingly, Forty Days. And Bid informs us, That he who comes to penance
must be asked, Can. de diversis causis, c. 14.
Whether he had eaten that which died of it self, or was torn by Beasts; and if
so, he must do Penance Forty Days; and the like must be done by him who has
eaten Blood. Novel. 58. Bals. in Syn. Trull. can. 67.
Leo the Emperor made a Law to punish, (...), those who did eat any kind of
Blood.

In the Ninth Century Regino does not only produce out of the Penitentials the
same Canons against eating things strangled and Blood, De discipl. Eccles. l.
2. c. 369, 373. De discipl. Eccles. l. 2. c. 374.
but adds moreover, that admonendi sunt fideles, ut nullus praesumat sanguinem
manducare, the Faithful are to be admonished that none of them do presume to
eat Blood, for this was forbidden in the beginning, when first God gave Men
liberty to eat Flesh, and it is also forbidden in the New Testament, where
things strangled and Blood, are compared with Fornication and Idolatry, to
teach us, quantum piaculum sit sanguinem comedere, what an heinous thing it is
to eat Blood.

In the Eleventh Century Humbertus plainly shows that this was then esteemed
unlawful both in the Eastern and the Western Churches; Apud Baron. Tom. 11. p.
986.
For we, says he of the West, do not defend against you Greeks, the eating of
things strangled and Blood, Antiquam enim consuetudinem, seu traditionem
Majorum retinentes, nos quoque haec abominamur, For retaining the ancient
Custom or Tradition of our Ancestors, we also do abominate these things,
imposing grievous Penance upon them who do this without great peril of Life;
and this we do especially, quia antiquas consuetudines, and traditiones
Majorum, quae non sunt contra fidem, leges Apostolicas arbitramur, because we
judge the Ancient Customs and Traditions of our Ancestors, which are not
opposite to the Faith, to be Apostolical Laws. And yet when Transubstantiation
was once fully established in the West, as it was in the Twelfth and the
beginning of the Thirteenth Centuries, then they perceived they could no
longer, with any truth, assert, as did the Ancient Fathers, that they did, ab
humano sanguine cavere, abstain from eating humane Blood, but believing they
did eat Blood with the Flesh in the Sacrament, they gave all Men liberty to do
it elsewhere. Whence Balsamon in the Twelfth Century speaks thus, In Can. 67.
Council. Trull.
(...) The Latins do indifferently eat things strangled, and if in this
instance that which in the Eleventh Century was by the Western Churches held in
abomination, and worthy of most grievous Penances, as being opposite both to
the Laws of the Apostles, and the Traditions of the Ancients, might in the next
Century be generally allowed and practiced as a thing indifferent, why might
not a like change happen in the same Church in a like space of time, touching
the Doctrine of the corporeal Presence, or any other Article of Christian Faith.

Thirdly, Ancient Church unanimously and constantly declared it was a thing
plainly repugnant to Scripture, and to true Religion, and proper unto
Heretics, to punish any man with death for his Religion or his Heresy, and
she refused Communion with them that did so. And,

1. They declared this practice opposite to our Lord's precept, Not to gather
up the Tares by themselves, Matthew. xiij. 29, 30.
but let them both grow together till the Harvest. He introduces his Servants,
saying, Will thou that we pluck up the Tares, that he might tell them, says
St. Chrysostom, (...), In Locum.
that it was unlawful to cut them off. He forbids Wars and Blood, and
Slaughters to be made, (...), for it is not lawful to cut off the Heretic.
Christ here forbids not to stop their Mouths, restrain, and hinder their
boldness of Discourse, dissolve their Synods and Confederacies, (...), Quaest.
ex Mat. lib. un. cap. 12. Tom. 4. p. 366, 367.
but he forbids us to kill and cut them off. Truth it self Answers to them,
says St. Austin, non esse tales auferendos de hac vita, that such Men are not
to be taken out of the World, least whilst Men endeavor to kill the bad, they
also kill the good, or such as perhaps would be such.

2. They declared this practice was contrary to the true Religion, and to the
Judgment of the Doctors of the Catholic Church. For our Religion, says
Lactantius, is to be defended, L. 5. c. 20.
non occidendo, sed moriendo; non saevitia, sed patientia, not by killing
others, but by dying for it; so good men do defend it, but wicked Men by
Cruelty and Murder. Apud Athanas. Tom. 1. p. 724.
The Synod of Alexandria declares, That (...), Bands and Slaughters were things
alien from their Church. Contra Crescon. l. 3. cap. 50.
When Cresconius had objected to the Orthodox that they were instrumental to
procure the Death of the Three Donatists, St. Austin answers, That nullis tamen
bonis, in Ecclesia Catholica, hoc placet, si usque ad mortem in quenquam, licet
Haereticum, saeviatur; No good Man in the Catholic Church allowed of the
punishment of Heretics with Death; haec omnia displicent nobis, all these
things displease us, De fide and oper. cap. 4.
we judge them not laudable but damnable. And again, They, who being blinded
with this Error, endeavor before the time to separate the Tares, ipsi potius a
Christi unitate separantur, are themselves rather separated from the unity of
the Church. He has Four several Epistles writ to the Magistrates or Ministers
of Justice on this Subject, Ep. 107, 158, 159, 160. Ep. 127, 158, 160.
in which he earnestly requests, ne occidantur, that they might not be killed,
that the Sword of Justice might not spill their Blood; beseeching them for the
Name, and for the Mercy of Christ Jesus, ut hoc nec faciant, nec sieri omnino
permittant, that they would neither do this thing, nor permit it to be done by
others; Ep. 127.
and telling them, the Orthodox had rather die themselves, than bring them to
their Judicatories to be killed. And this he does entreat with so great
importunity, Ibib.
1. Because of the command of Christ which did oblige them to love their
Enemies. Ep. 158, 159.
2. Because it was suitable to that meekness which Christianity required them
to make known to all. 3. Ep. 158, 160. Ep. 127.
Because it was against their Conscience to allow of such proceedings against
Heretics. 4. Because this harsh proceeding would deterr the Catholics from
seeking the protection of the Magistrate against Heretics. 5. Because the
Person who inflicts, and the Church who permits these Punishments to be
inflicted, would both have cause to fear the Judgment of God for this Cruelty,
quod enim tu facis, Ep. 160. Ep. 50. p. 220.
Ecclesia facit, propter quam facis, and cujus silius facis, for what the
Magistrate, who was a Son of the Church, did for her Sake, that the Church did.
And this he tells us was the Judgment of a whole Council of his Brethren.

3. This, say they, is alien from Catholics, and proper unto Heretics and
Heathens. The Synod of Alexandria consisting of the Bishops of Egypt, Thebes,
Lybia and Pentapolis, lament the practice of the Arians, Apud Athanas. Apol. ad
Imperat. p. 723.
(...), who in their Epistle to the Emperors stirred them up to kill and
inflict death on Athanasius and others; For, say they, we conceive the
Conscience of you Christians, see that these things are not the works of the
meanest Christians, much less of them who seem to be Bishops, and to teach
others what is just. We must fight against them, says Nazianzen, with Reasons,
not with Arms; Orat. 3. pro pace, p. 220, 221.
(...); for to lift up our Hands against them, is wholly contrary to our
Profession, and must be left to them that hate us.

4. When this was done by Instigation of any of the Clergy, the Orthodox not
only did condemn it, but refused Communion with them that moved the Magistrate
to do it. Thus when Idacius and Ithacius, two Bishops, Sulpit. Hist. 1. 2.. 64.
moved Maximus the Emperor to this severity against the Priscillians, St.
Martin not only reproved Ithacius, but entreated Maximus, ut sanguine
infoelicium abstineret, to abstain from their Blood, and obtained a Promise
from him, nihil cruentum in reos constituendum, that nothing Bloody should be
decreed against them; though afterward, says Sulpitius, this was done,
pessimo exemplo, Dial. 3.. 15.
by a most vile Example. The same Sulpitius informs us, That this good Man was
piously sollicitous to preserve the Heretics from Death; that for
accomplishing this Work, having for a while consented to hold Communion with
Ithacius, and his Party, he afterward was troubled at it, and was by an Angel
admonished that he had just Cause to be so, and that he should reassume his
Constancy, ne jam non periculum gloriae, sed salutis incurreret, least he
incurred the loss, not only of his Honor, but Salvation; and that, from that
time he never would Communicate with the Ithacian Party. 1 Baron. ad A. 386..
27.
Pope Syricius also, and St. 2 Ep. 27.
Ambrose refused Communion with them; and the 3 Council. Taurin. cap. 5.
French Bishops refused Communion with Foelix, as being made a Bishop by them.
4 Bin. Not. in Council. Trevir. A. D. 386.
Theognostus also, and other Bishops of the Catholic Communion, did
excommunicate Ithacius, and his Companions on this account, as sanguinary,
bloody and unworthy of the Priesthood. And yet after so many 1 Council. Lat.
3um. cap. 27. 4tum. can. 3. Constan. Sess. 45. Senon. c. 2, 3.
Decrees of General Councils, for the Extirpation of Heretics, the calling in
of the Secular Arm against them, and the animating of Princes and their
Subjects, 2 Council. Lat. 3. c. 27. 4tum. Conc. Tom. 11. p. 149. Senon. Tom. 12.
p 368, 369. app. ad Con. Basil. apud Bin. Tom. 8. p 200. p 267.
to make War against them under the Banner of the Cross; after Examples of
burning Heretics by their Authority and Instigation, during their sitting,
after so many Constitutions of 3 Council. Tom. 11. p. 619, 621. p. 423. part. 2.
p. 2101. Decretal. l. 5. Tit. 7. c. 13.
Kings and Emperors, confirmed by so many Popes, to take them away by a
damnable Death; after so many Inquisitions set up for the destruction of them;
after so many Thousands of them burnt in Roman Catholic Dominions, by virtue
of the Sentence past upon them in Ecclesiastical Courts; after so many great
Massacres of them, by Men of that Communion, without any Censure past upon them
by that Church, or any refusal of Communion with them upon that account; I say,
after all this, surely it cannot be denied, but that the Church of Rome is of a
contrary Opinion in this matter, to the Ancient Church of Christ; that she
cannot, agreeably to her Decrees and Practice, say, That it is unlawful to cut
off the Heretic; that it is a thing alien from the Church, and from the
meanest Christian; that it is matter of Lamentation, that any one should stir
up King or Emperor to do it; that Christ has taught, that such Men ought not
to be taken away by Death; that no good Catholics allow it; that they judge it
Damnable; that they who act thus against Heretics are Disturbers of the
Church's Peace, and separate themselves from her Unity; that they may expect
their Judge should require the Lives of these Heretics at their Hands, and
should inflict his Judgments on them; that if the Church permits any of her
Sons to do this, she is Guilty of the Fact; or, that such Persons who are
Guilty of it, or Instrumental to it, are to be excluded from Catholic
Communion; that is, she cannot say that she is now of the avowed Judgment of
the Ancient Church of Christ in this Affair.

It were easy to give many other Instances in which the present practice of
the Church of Rome, Church Catholic of old. For,

It was the Custom of the Ancient Church to permit the People to carry home the
Eucharist to their Houses, and reserve it there to be received, as they had
occasion; this, says St. Basil, Ep. 289. Ad Ux. l. 2. c. 5. de orat. c. 14.
Cypr. de laps. p. 132.
was confirmed, (...), by Custom of a long continuance, of which Tertullian and
Cyprian are Witnesses. But now this surely would be esteemed a great
Profanation of the Holy Mystery by them, who now will not permit the Laity
even to touch the Sacrament with their Hands.

Anciently, In Liturg. c. 26.
says Cassander, the Prayer used at the Consecration of the Eucharist was read
out with a loud Voice, and so as that all the People might be able to hear it,
Vid. Treat. of Latin Serve. c. 5. P. 75, 76.
and say Amen to it. Justinian's Novel commands all Christian Bishops, subject
to his Empire, so to read it, and that by virtue of an Apostolical command to
do so: Nor did any Christian, that we read of in those Ages, gainsay, oppose,
or contradict either this Edict, or the reason of it; whereas now the Church of
Rome commands, that the words of Consecration should be pronounced, voce
submissa, Council. Trid. Sess. 22. can. 9.
with a low Voice, and Anathematizeth all who condemn that Custom.

3. The Fathers generally take notice of, and lay great stress upon the
breaking of the Bread distributed to the People; (...), Ep. ad Philad.. 4.

Fractus panis fit Eucharistia corporis Christi, l. 5. c. 2.

Caten. in Matthew. xxvi. 28.


One Loaf was broken for all, says Ignatius: The broken Bread is made the
Eucharist of the Body of Christ, says Irenaeus. Christ, says Cyril of
Alexandria, gives us an example first to give Thanks, (...), and so to break
the Bread, and to distribute it. Frangimus in Sanctificationem nostram, We
break it for our Sanctification, Ep. Paschal. 1. Hom. 24. in 1. ad Cor. p. 256.
says Theophilus of Alexandria. In the Eucharist he suffers himself to be
broken, says Chrysostom, that he may fill all. Ad distribuendum comminuitur,
It is broken in pieces that it may be distributed, Ep. 59. qu. 5.
says St. Austin. The Flesh of Christ, in populi salutem partitur, is divided
for the Salvation of the People, says P. Gregory. Dial. l. 4. c. 58.
By taking a whole Loaf, and breaking it, and giving a part of it to his
Disciples, he signified without doubt, quod nos in posterum facturos edocuit,
that which he taught us to do afterward, says the Sixteenth Council of
Toledo. The Action of the Mass, A.D. 693. c. 6. Apud Baron. Tom. 11. p. 1008.
and contr. Graec. ibid. p. 971.
says Humbert, is not complete without the breaking of the Bread, and the
communication of it; for our Lord gave a perfect commemoration to his
Disciples, pane fracto, and distributo, by the Bread broken, and distributed:
He blessed a whole Loaf, and dristributed the broken particles of it to every
one, sicut Sancta R. Ecclesia usque nunc observat, as the Holy Roman Church
even now does. The Interpreter of the Roman Order says, Apud. Cass. Lit. c.
29. p. 67.
Some of late times think it strange this Order enjoins the Bread to be broken,
as if they had not read that Christ brake it, and gave it to his Disciples, or
that the Primitive Church continued in the Apostles Doctrine, and in
communicatione fractionis panis, and in the Communication of broken Bread. But
though all the Evangelists take especial notice of this Action, though St.
Luke, according to many Commentators, thought it of so great moment, as to
express the whole Eucharist by breaking of Bread, yet is this Action, though of
our Lord's own practice and Institution, wholly laid aside by the Roman Church,
which distributes whole Wafers, and not broken Bread.

But to omit innumerable Instances of this nature, Blessed Virgin from the
guilt of Original Sin; for it was doubtless the Tradition of the Universal
Church from the Second to the Fourteenth Century, that Christ alone was
conceived without Sin, and consequently that the Blessed Virgin was not so
conceived: For even A. D. 1368. it was determined by the Council of Vaur,
Council. Gallic. edit Baluz. c. 1. p. 140.
That Baptism was the Remedy appointed for Original Sin, contra vulnus
originale, sinc quo, secundum sanctos, in filiis hominum nemo unquam conceptus
est praeter Christum, without which, according to the Holy Fathers, no person
besides Christ was ever conceived. It were easy to prove this Assertion by
plain Testimonies through every Century to this very Age; but the full and
numerous Confessions of the Romanists and their own Writings, have rendered
this Work needless. For when the Feast of her Immaculate Conception was first
introduced at Lions, Ep. 174.
St. Bernard thus confutes it, This is a new Festival, quam ritus Ecclesiae
nescit, non probat ratio, non commendat Antiqua Traditio, which the Custom of
the Church knows not, Reason does not prove, and no Ancient Tradition does
commend. Johannes Poza confesses, Elucidar. Deipar. l. 4.
That Blandellus and Cajetan have produced against it the general Sayings of
Irenaeus, Origin, St. Cyprian, Theophilus Alexandrinus, G. Nazianzen, Nyssen,
and St. Basil, St. Jerome, and Fulgentius, and in a manner all the Ancient
Fathers, exempting Christ alone from, and consequently concluding the Virgin
Mary under Original Sin; which Argument must needs conclude, if the Virgin Mary
be not Christ. Cardinal Turrecremata affirms, De Consecrat. did. 4 firmissime,
n. 11.
That all the Doctors in a manner maintain the contrary to the Immaculate
Conception, and that he had gathered together the Testimonies of One hundred to
that Effect, noting the very places and words wherein they affirm it. Dominicus
Bannes says, Part. 1. qu. 1. Art. 8. dub. 5.
It is the general Opinion of the Holy Fathers, that she was conceived in Sin.
Becanus acknowledges, That the ancient Schoolmen, L. de Incarn. Christi, cap.
28. qu. 1. n. 1.
who were before Scotus, held the Opinion of the Latin Fathers, viz. That the
Blessed, Virgin was conceived in Original Sin. Estius says, It was the common,
and almost unanimous Opinion of the Schools; for Thomas Bonaventure, caeterique
omnes hanc quaestionis partem, In Sent. l. 3. did. 3. Sect. 3.
sine ambiguitate, amplectuntur, and all the rest held it without doubting.
Canus declares, Loc. com. l. 7. c. 1. p. 412.
That Sancti omnes qui in ejus rei mentionem incidere, uno ore asseverarunt B.
Virginem in peccato originali conceptam, all the Holy Fathers, who had occasion
to speak of this matter, do with one Voice assert, that the Blessed Virgin was
conceived in Original Sin; and then he cites them from the Fourth to the
Thirteenth Century. Disp. 51. in Epist. ad Romans
Cajetan brings for it Fifteen Fathers in his Judgment irrefragable; others
produce 200. Blandellus almost 300, says Salmeron. Dogm. Theolog. Tom 4. part.
2. l. 14. cap. 2.
Petavius begins this Dispute with this Observation, that Graeci originalis
fere criminis raram, nec disertam mentionem scriptis suis attigerunt, the Greek
Fathers scarce ever speak plainly of Original Sin; Sect. 1. Sect. 2, -- 7.
and therefore undertakes only to tell us the Judgment of the Latin Fathers in
this matter, which he does by producing them from St. Austin to St. Bernard,
that is, from the Fifth to the Twelfth Century, plainly asserting, That the
Virgin Mary was conceived in Original Sin. But, says he, quamvis antiquioribus
opinio illa placuit, per totam Ecclesiam, by the whole Church, for celebration
of the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin, viz. the Eight of December,
which Sixtus the Fourth confirmed by his Authority, and Apostolical Decree, A.
D. 1476, in which, universos Christi fideles invitat, ut omnipotenti Deo, de
Immaculatae Virginis mira Conceptione gratias, and lauds referant, he invites
all Christians to give Thanks and Praises to Almighty God, for the Immaculate
Virgin's wonderful Conception, appointing a Mass, and proper Canonical Office
for it, with the same Indulgences which Urban the Fourth had given to the
Observers of the Feast of Corpus Christi. He adds, That he was the more
inclined to this Opinion, because it had, communem consensum omnium sidelium,
the common consent of all the Faithful, upon whose concurrent Judgment it
behooves us, says Paulinus Nolanus, to depend, quia in omnem fidelem Spiritus
Dei spirat, because the Spirit of God breaths upon all the Faithful. And lastly
he concludes, That after this manner, Credendus est Deus Christianis integrum
illum immaculatae Virginis Conceptum revelasse, it is to be believed that God
has revealed to Christians, this pure Conception of the immaculate Virgin;
that is, he has inspired into them the Knowledge, and given them (...), the
full assurance of it, though it has not yet passed into a Catholic Doctrine.
In which last words he speaks agreeably to the judgment of their Doctors; for
though the Council of Basil expressly decreed, Sess. 36.
That the Doctrine of the immaculate Conception should be held and embraced,
tanquam pia, and consona cultui Ecclesiastico, fidei Catholicae, rectae
rationi, and sacrae Scripturae, as Pious, and consonant to Ecclesiastical
Worship, the Catholic Faith, right Reason, and the Holy Scriptures; though the
University of Paris, as Salmeron informs us, admits none to their Degrees who
do not take an Oath to defend it: Apud Council. Trid. p. 19.
Though the Bull of Paul the V. forbids any one in public Sermons, Lectures,
Conclusions, and any public Acts whatsoever, to affirm, that the Blessed
Virgin was Conceived in Original Sin. And the Bull of Gregory the XV. to assert
it in any private Conference, or Writing; yet the Bulls of Sixtus the IV. and
Pius the V. having given liberty to all Men to hold or maintain either part;
Sess. 5.
the Trent Council has decreed for the observation of the said Constitution
made by Sixtus.

Hence then we learn,

1. That a Doctrine never heard of in precedent Ages, yea fully contradicted,
and declared against by Eight whole Centuries, may become afterward the
Doctrine of all, or almost all the Faithful. De gestis Scot. l. 3. c. 12.
For Joannes Major does inform us, That Richardus de Sancto Victore, who
flourished in the middle of the Twelfth Century, was omnium express primus
(qui) Christiferam Virginem Originalis noxae expertem tenuit, expressly the
first, who held the Virgin Mary free from Original Sin: And in the Thirteenth
Century, In Sent. 3. did. 3. p. 1. A. 1. q. 1. In tertiam D. Th. did. 117. p.
148. P. 57.
Bonaventure says, That almost all held the contrary. But now, says Vasquez,
not only the unskillful Vulgar, but the Doctors and Divines, and all Catholics
with one consent, fight for the immaculate Conception. Now, says Petavius, it
has obtained, Consensum omnium fidelium, The consent of all the Faithful. Now,
says Waddingus, it is manifest, that the oppugners of it do, sentire aliter
quam universa docet Ecclesia, differ from the Doctrine of the Universal Church.
Whence,

2. It follows, that it is so far from being impossible, that it is actually
certain, That what was never heard of, yea what was generally contradicted in
the former Ages of the Church, may afterward be owned by the general consent
of learned, and unlearned Romanists; in spite of all the Treatises of the
perpetuity of the Faith, and of the lawful prejudices against the Calvinists.

3. Hence it is evident, that the Church of Rome does not in all things follow
the Doctrine of the Ancient Catholic Church; for if so, then would not they
have given liberty to all their Members to oppose a Doctrine generally
Believed, and Taught in the whole Catholic Church, and more assuredly in the
whole Western Church, for Eight whole Centuries.

4. Hence it appears, that all the Doctrines of the Church of Rome are not
received by Tradition from Father to Son, since in this matter the Sons have
generally entertained a Doctrine their Fathers either knew nothing of, or
plainly contradicted; and that is now become pious, and consonant to
Ecclesiastical Worship, which in St. Bernard's time was, Ep. 174.
praesumpta novitas, Matter temeritatis, soror superstitionis, filia levitatis;
A bold Novelty, the Mother of Rashness, the Sister of Superstition, the
Daughter of Levity.

5. Hence does it follow, that even by the Authority of the heads of the
Universal Church, men may be forbidden under pain of Damnation, to Assert the
Ancient Doctrine of the Church, and may have liberty to contradict it. Yea,
that in the judgment of a great R. Council, received by the French as General,
and bearing that title in all Editions of the Councils, that may be agreeable
to the Catholic Faith, to Reason, and to Holy Scripture, which is repugnant to
the Ancient Doctrine of the Church Catholic, for Eight whole Centuries.

6. Hence is it manifest, that the Trent Council has given liberty to all her
Members to hold that which is opposite to an universal, constant, unopposed
Tradition of the Church for many Ages; that is, that she has left them at
their liberty to hold the Ancient Faith, or hold the contrary.

7. Hence it appears, that in the Church of Rome Feasts may be instituted in
which all men shall be exhorted to praise God for a thing which perhaps never
was; and of the truth of which none of her Members can be certain, certitudine
fidei; with the certainty of Faith, all of them being by this Church permitted
to believe the contrary.

CHAP. III.
Fifthly, We distinguish betwixt Traditions, which, though not written in
Scripture, are left on Record in the Ecclesiastical writings of the first and
purest Ages of the Church, and such as are so purely Oral Traditions, as that
we find no footsteps of them in the Three first Centuries, much less any
assurance they had then any general Reception; of the first kind is the Canon
of Scripture of the Old Testament mentioned in our Sixth Article,. 1. This is
proved from the Jews,. 2. From the Christians of the Second Century,. 3. Of the
Third Century,. 4. From almost all the celebrated Writers of the Fourth
Century,. 5. Where also it is observed, 1. That these Fathers profess to
deliver that Catalogue of them, which they had received from Tradition,. 6. And
that the Books which they rejected as Apocryphal were so reputed by the
Church,. 7. That the Catalogue they produced was that received not only by the
Jews but Christians,. 8. That they made it to prevent mistakes,. 9. That they
represent the Books contained in their Catalogue as the Fountain of Salvation,
the rest as insufficient to confirm Articles of Faith,. 10. The same Tradition
still continued to the Sixteenth Century,. 11. What the Roman Doctors must do
if they would show a like Tradition for any of their Tenets,. 12. The
unreasonableness of their pretenses to Tradition in this Article, Ibid. The
Attempts of Mr. M. and J. L. to prove their Canon from the Council of Carthage;
the Testimony of St. Austin, the Decrees of Pope Innocent and Gelasius are
Answered,. 13. The Tradition touching the Books of the New Testament, where it
is proved, 1. That the Four Evangelists, the Acts, the Thirteen Epistles of St.
Paul, the First of Peter and of John were always owned as Canonical by all
Orthodox Christians,. 14. 2. That it cannot be necessary to Salvation to be
assured that the Books formerly controverted belong to the Canon,. 15. 3. That
we cannot be assured of the true Canon of the New Testament from the Testimony
of the Latin Church,. 16. 4. That there is not the like necessity that the
controverted Books should have been generally received from the beginning, as
that all necessary Articles of Christian Faith and Manners, should be then
generally received,. 17. That we have cause sufficient to own as Canonical the
Books once controverted is proved, 1. in the General,. 18. 2. In Particular,
touching the Apocalypse,. 19. And the Epistle to the Hebrews,. 20. Touching the
Epistle of St. James, the Second of Peter, the Second and Third of John, the
Epistle of St. Jude,. 21. No Orthodox Persons dobuted of them after the Fourth
Century,. 22. The Romanists cannot prove their Doctrines by any like
Traditions, and in particular not by such a Tradition as proves the Apocalypse
Canonical,. 23. The Objection of Mr. M. Answered,. 24.

AGain, Tradition may be applied to signify either such things as are not
written in the Scripture, Did. 5.
though they are left on Record in the Ecclesiastical writings of the first and
purest Ages, Vocatur Doctrina non scripta, non ea quae nusquam scripta est, sed
quae non est scripta a primo Autore. Bellarm. de verbo Dei non scripto, l. 4.
c. 2.
and from them handed down unto us in the writings of succeeding Ages; or else
to signify such things as are said only to be delivered by word of Mouth, but
cannot by the Records of preceding Ages be proved to have been received as
Doctrines generally maintained, or practices always observed in the Church of
Christ; of the first sort is the Tradition of the Canon of Scripture, of the
Apostles Symbol, as a perfect Summary of Doctrines necessary to be believed,
the Observation of the Lord's Day, the Superiority of Bishops over Presbyters,
the Ordination of Presbyters and Deacons by Bishops only, and the like; we
having full and pregnant evidence from the first Records of Antiquity unto this
present time, of all these things, and whatsoever can be proved by a like
Tradition touching a necessary Article of Christian Faith, we are all ready to
receive; but those pretended Traditions of the Roman Church, which by no
Records of Antiquity can be made appear to have been constantly received by the
Church as Apostolical Traditions, we have just Reason to reject as being
without Ground so styled. For Instance,

First, We receive the Canon of the Scriptures of the Old Testament mentioned
in our Sixth Article, because it is by written Tradition handed down unto us
from the Jews, from Christ and his Apostles, and from their Successors in the
Church, and we reject the Canon of the Old Testament imposed upon us by the
Fourth Session of the Trent Council, partly because we find a clear Tradition
both virtually by all who say the Canon of the Old Testament is only that we
own, and expressly by those who say the others which we style Apocrypha, belong
not to the Canon. And,

1. Canon from the Ancient Jews, to whom were committed the Oracles of God; for
their Josephus says, (...), L. 1. contra Apion, Eusebius. H. Eccl. l. 3. c. 10.
We have only Twenty two Books which deserve belief among us, and then he
reckons them up as does our Article, adding that the Books written from the
time of Artaxerxes to their days, were, (...), not so worthy to be credited.

From Christ and his Apostles; Luke xxiv. 27.
for the Gospel of St. Luke informs us, That Christ beginning from Moses
expounded to two of his Disciples in all the Scriptures the things concerning
him, and also, that all things concerning him were written in the Law of Moses,
verse. 44.
and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms, that is, in those Books which by the
Jews are styled Hagiographa. The Apostles in their Epistles teach, 2 Timothy iij.
15.
That all Scripture is of Divine Inspiration, and that Timothy from a Child had
known them; and yet he doubtless only knew the Canon then received by the Jews;
2 Pet. i. 21.
they add, That the whole Scripture was a word of Prophecy, (...), Apud Eusebius.
l. 3. c. 10.

Genebrard. Chron. ad An. 3640. Jansen. ad cap. 48. Ecclus.


the Prophecy of Men moved by the Holy Ghost. Now Josephus does inform us, That
after the Days of Artaxerxes the Jews had no certain Succession of Prophets,
and it is confessed by many Romanists, That from Malachy to John they had no
Prophets.

In the Second Century Onesimus requesteth of Melito, (...). Eusebius. Eccl. Hist.
l. 4. cap. 26. (...), Ibid.
Bishop of Sardis, a perfect Catalogue of the Books of the Old Testament;
whereupon this Bishop, being to take a Journey into the East, went to the place
where those things were done and preached, (...), etc. ibid.
and learning thence the exact number of them, he sent their Names to Onesimus,
numbering them just as our Sixth Article does. And of this Catalogue Eusebius
says, That it contained all the Books of the Old Testament which the Church
owned, (...). Ibid.
and that he thought it necessary to preserve this Catalogue of them in writing
to Posterity. Here then we find upon the first enquiry, after the Death of the
Apostles, a Catalogue exactly formed from the East, and from Jerusalem,
agreeing with the Judgment of the whole Church of God, and as exactly with the
judgment of the Church of England.

In the Third Century Origin informs us, we must not be ignorant, (...), In
Psalm. 1. Ed. Huet. T. 1. p. 40, 41.
that the Canonical Books of the Old Testament are Twenty two, according to the
number of the Jewish Letters; and then he reckons them exactly as we do,
adding, That as these Letters are an Introduction to knowledge, and divine
Wisdom; so these Twenty two Books, are an Introduction to the Wisdom of God;
this, says he, is the Tradition of the Jews.

The Tradition of the Church in the Fourth Century unanimously concurrs with
the Article of the Church of England in all the Catalogues then given of the
Books of the Old Testament.

Eusebius of Caesarea, the Metropolis of Palestine, who not only has preserved
the Catalogues of Melito and Origin, but also does approve them, and says,
They were the Books of the Old Testament received by the consent of all, and of
which he thought necessary to preserve the Catalogue in writing to posterity,
L. 4. c. 6.
elsewhere says, That he is not able exactly to reckon the Governors of the
Tribe of Judah that ruled the Jewish Nation after Zorobabel, Demonst. Evang. l.
8. c. 2. p. 368.
(...), because that from his time, to that of our Savior's, there was no
divine Book written.

Athanasius in his Festival Epistle gives the same Catalogue which we receive,
and having finished it he says, Ad Ruffinum, Tom. 2. p. 39.
(...), In these are comprehended the Books of the Old Testament. The same
Archbishop of Alexandria in his Book, styled, a Synopsis of the Holy
Scriptures, tells us the number of the Books of the Old Testament are Twenty
two, Ibid. p. 58.
and he there reckons them up according to our Article.

St. Cyril Bishop of Jerusalem speaks to his Catechumen, thus, Know thou
studiously, (...), from the Church, the Books of the Old Testament; read the
divine Scriptures, the Twenty two Books of the Old Testament, interpreted by
the Seventy Interpreters, Catech. 4. cap. (...), p. 36, 37.
(...), and by all confessed to be divine. Meditate upon these Twenty two Books
of the Old Testament, and be careful to remember them, as I name them; and then
he reckons them up exactly as we do.

Epiphanius Bishop of Salamine in the Island of Cyprus, in his Book of Weights
and Measures, Tom. 2. p. 161, 162.
does in like manner inform us, That the number, (...), of the Canonical Books
of the Old Testament is Twenty two; and then he reckons them up, as our Article
does.

St. Cap. 3.
Basil Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, in his Philocalia, puts this Question,
(...); Why are the divine Books Twenty two? and answers it as Origin had done
before him.

Gregory Nazianzen in his Treatise upon this very subject of the true genuine
Books of Scripture, Council. Oxon. Tom. 2. part. 1. p. 179.
declares, That the Historical Books of the Old Testament are Twelve, and the
Metrical are Five, and the Prophetical Five; and then he names them all
according to our Article.

Amphilochius in his Canonical Epistle to Selcucus gives us the same account of
them, Apud Balsamon, p. 1083.
with this only difference, that the Book of Esther is said to be not so
generally received for Canonical as the rest.

St. Jerome in several places of his works is so clearly for us, that our
Article is founded on his Judgment; who often tells us, That the Canonical
Books of the Old Testament are Twenty two, or, if you will reckon Ruth and the
Lamentations, as distinct Books, Tom. 3. f. 6. a. Ibid. f. 3. a. T. 1. f. 41.
a. Apud Hieron. Tom. 4. f. 51.
they are Four and twenty. In his Preface to the Book of Kings, in his Epistle
to Paulinus, to Laeta, and in diverse places of his other works, he is expressly
of the same Judgment.

Ruffinus having numbered the Books of the Old Testament as we do, adds, That
in these Books the Fathers did comprize tha^ number of the Books of the Old
Testament.

St. Hilary says, Prolog. Expla. in Psalmos.
That the number of the Books of the Old Testament are Twenty two, according to
the number of the Hebrew Letters; and having reckoned them up as we do, says,
These complete the number of the Twenty two Books.

The Council of Laodicea Decrees, Can. 59.
That only the Canonical Books shall be read in the Church; and then this
Council reckons up the Canonical Books as we do, leaving out of their account
those which we call Apocryphal. Now this Canon being received into the Codex
Canonum-Ecclesiae universalis, or the Code of the Canons received by the whole
Church, it must have the force of an Ecumenical Synod, and give us the
concurring judgment of the whole Church of God on our side. And, yet for
farther confirmation of this matter, let these few things be noted.

First, That these Fathers generally say, Catalogues as they received them by
Tradition, and as they were delivered to them by the Fathers, and as they were
received by the whole Church of Christ. (...).
Athanasius in his Pascal Epistle speaks thus, Because some dare to mix
Apocryphal Books with the divine Scriptures, of which we are fully assured from
the Tradition of them to the Fathers, by them who were Eyewitnesses, and
Ministers of the Word. It seemed good to me, being exhorted to it by the
Orthodox Brethren, and having learnt them from the beginning, in order to
declare which are the Canonical Books delivered as such by Tradition, and
believed to be of divine Inspiration. St. Hilary says, Prolog. Expla. in
Psalmos.
That they were thus computed, secundum Traditiones veterum, according to the
Traditions of the Ancients. These, says St. Cyril, are the Books you learn,
(...), from the Church, and which we read publicly in the Church. (...).
Catech. 4. p. 37.
The Apostles and the ancient Bishops, and Governors of the Church who
delivered these, as the Canonical Books, were much wiser than you; thou
therefore being a Son of the Church, do not transgress her Laws, or go beyond
her Rules. Quae secundum majorum Traditionem Ecclesiis Christitradita.
What are the Volumes of the Old and the New Testament, which, according to the
Tradition of the Ancients, are believed to be inspired by the Holy Ghost, and
delivered to the Churches of Christ. It seems convenient, says Russinus, here
evidently to declare, as we have received them from the Monuments of the
Fathers; and having reckoned up the Books of the Old Testament, proceeding to
the Books of the New Testament, he adds, Haec nobis a patribus tradita sunt.
Apud Hieron. Tom. 4. f. 51. a.
These are the Books which the Fathers comprised in the Canon, these things are
delivered to us by the Fathers.

Note, Secondly, That of the Books which we reject, and call Apocryphal, they
also teach that as such they were rejected by the Church, that though the
Church permitted them to be read, yet did she not receive them into the
Catalogue of the Holy Scriptures, or use them to confirm any Article of
Christian Faith, and that they spoke of them as Books without the Canon. Thus
Athanasius in his Paschal Epistle, says, That (...), for more exactness sake,
Apud Balsam. p. 921.
I add this necessary advertisement, (...), That besides these Books of the Old
and New Testament, now mentioned as divine Scripture, there be other Books
which are not put into the Canon, which are yet appointed by the Fathers to be
read to those who first come to be Catechized in the way of Piety, to wit, The
Wisdom of Solomon, the Wisdom of Syrach, and Esther, and Judith, and Tobias,
and the Book called the Doctrine of the Apostles and Pastor, these are read,
and not to be despised, the others are put into the Canon. Tom 2. p. 58, 59.
The very same words he repeats in his Compendium of the Holy Scripture; where
also afterward he reckons the Four Books of Macchabees, and the History of
Susanna among the Books contradicted; Baruch and the additions to Daniel among
the (...), or the Apocryphal Books of the Old Testament. Catech. 4. p. 38.
St. Cyril having cited the Canon we receive, as that which was delivered to
the Church by the Apostles, and ancient Governors of the Church, adds, (...),
Let all the rest which are extro-canonical, be placed in a second Order.
Gregory Nazianzen, having given an account of Twenty two Books of the Old
Testament, says, You have them all, Ubi Supra.
(...), and that, all besides them are not Genuine. After his Catalogue
delivered from the Tradition of the Fathers, Sunt alii libri non Canonici, sed
Ecclesiastici a majoribus appellati. -- Quae omnia legi quidem in Ecclesia
voluerunt, non tamen proferriad authoritatem ex his fidei confirmandam. Apud
Hieron. Tom. 4. f. 51.
Ruffinus says, You must know that there be other Books which are not
Canonical, but called by our Ancestors Ecclesiastical, as the Wisdom of
Solomon, the Wisdom of the Son of Syrach, Tobit, Judith, and the Books of
Macchabees, which they were willing to have read in the Church, but not to have
produced to confirm Doctrines of Faith; the rest they called Apocryphal, and
would not have read in the Church. These things are delivered to us by the
Fathers. Praefat. in librum Regum. Tom 3. f. 6.
St. Jerome says, he made his Catalogue, ut scire valeamus quicquid extra hos
est inter Apocrypha esse ponendum, that we might know that all besides these
Twenty two are to be deemed Apocryphal. He adds, Praef. in Esdr. and Neh. ibid.
f. 7, 8.
That the Books which are not received by the Hebrews, are to be rejected by us
Christians; and that the Church indeed Reads them, but receives them not into
the Canons.

Note, Thirdly, Canon by the Jews, but by the Christians also; that they are,
(...), Synops. Tom. 2. p. 55.
the entire Scripture of us Christians, says Athanasius. All the Books
delivered by the Apostles, and ancient Governors of the Church, and by the
Church to others, says St. Cyril. Ubi Supra.
All the Books delivered to the Church of Christ, says Ruffinus. That as for
others, which we style Apocryphal, Ecclesia nescit Apocrypha, Tom. 3. f. 7. a.
f. 9. a.
the Church owns them not: Ecclesia inter Canonicas Scripturas non recipit, The
Church receives them not among the Canonical Scriptures, says St. Jerome.

Note, Fourthly, out of necessity to prevent mistakes in this Matter, and for
the good of the Church, and that Men might know out of what Fountains they were
to draw the Waters of Life. Having made mention of the Heretics, says
Athanasius, as of Dead persons, Apud Balsam. p. 920, 921.
and of our selves, (...), as having the Holy Scriptures for Life, and because
I fear least some harmless Men, through their Simplicity and Ignorance, may be
deceived by the subtle Craftiness of Men, and being deceived, (...), by the
ambiguity of the word true Books, (which signifies either only such as are read
in the Church, or such as also are put into the Canon) may begin to be
conversant in others; therefore I entreat you to bear with me, if, by way of
remembrance, I write of those things which you know already, because of the
necessity of so doing, and the Benefit of it to the Church. Amphilochius and
Nazianzen say, Ubi Supra.
It behooves the Christian to learn this, that, (...), every Book is not safe,
which has the venerable Name of Scripture; for some are False and Adulterate,
some of a middle Nature, and some Canonical; and therefore, say they, will we
number every one of the inspired Books, (...), that you may clearly learn which
they are. These, says Ruffinus, are the Traditions of the Fathers touching the
Canonical Books; Ad instructionem eorum qui prima sibi Ecclesiae ac fidei
Elementa suscipiunt, ut sciant ex quibus sibi fontibus verbi dei haurienda sunt
pocula. Apud Hieron. Tom. 4. f. 51.
those are the Books which are read in the Church, though not Canonical, nor
sufficient to confirm any Doctrine of Faith, and the other are Apocryphal
Scriptures, which she would not have read, and these things I thought fit in
this place to signify for the instruction of those who receive the first
Rudiments of Faith, Ut scire valeamus quicquid extra hos est inter Apocrypha
esse ponendum. Tom. 3. f 6. a.
that they may know out of what Fountains they must receive the word of God.
This Catalogue I have made, says Jerome, that you may be able to know that the
rest are Apocryphal.

Note, Fithly, That they represent these as the Fountains of Salvation, which
are diligently to be read and studied by all, and as for the rest, some of them
say, that though they were read in the Church, not for confirmation of Faith,
but instruction of Manners; yet private Persons should not read them. Thus
Athanasius having given us the Protestants Canon, both of the Old and New
Testament, he adds, These are the Fountains of Salvation, so that he who
thirsts, let him be satiated with the Oracles contained in them; Apud Balsam.
p. 922.
(...); in these alone is contained the Doctrine of Godliness, let no Man add
any thing to them, nor take any thing from them; of these our Lord spoke when
he said to the Pharisees, You err, not knowing the Scriptures, and when he
exhorted the Jews to search the Scriptures. P. 36, 37.
Learn of the Church, says Cyril to his Catechumen, which are the Books of the
Old and the New Testament, and read none of the Apocrypha, for why should
thou trouble thy self, (...), about controverted Books, who know not those
which are by all acknowledged; read these Twenty two Books of the Old
Testament, study them only, (...), and have nothing to do with the Apocrypha;
and having given us the same Catalogue of the Books of the New Testament,
excepting only the Revelations, he says, Whatsoever is not read in the Church
do not thou read.

St. Jerome in his Epistle to Paulinus, having reckoned up the Books of the Old
and the New Testament, as we do (saving that he says, The Epistle to the
Hebrews is by many not reckoned as St. Paul's,) says, I entreat thee, dear
Brother, Tom. 3. f. 3. b.
to be conversant among these, to meditate of them, nihil aliud nosse, nihil
quaerere, to know, to enquire after nothing else. In his Epistle to Laeta,
touching the Education of her Daughter, he gives this Admonition: let her shun
all Apocryphal Books, Caveat omnia Apocrypha, etc. Tom. 1. f. 21.
and if at any time she will read them, not for the truth of Doctrine, but for
Reverence of the Signs, let her know they are not their Books whose Titles they
bear, that there be many ill things in them, that it requires great Wisdom to
seek Gold among Dirt.

Thus have we in one Century Eusebius of Caesarea the Metropolis of Palaestine,
Cyril Bishop of Jerusalem, of Iconium the Metropolis of Lycaonia, Nazianzen and
St. Basil in Cappadocia, Athanasius Patriarch of Alexandria, Ruffinus Priest of
Aquileia in Italy, Hilary of Poictiers in France, Jerome, who lived in Rome,
France, Dalmatia, Syria, Palaestine, who traveled into Cyprus, Egypt,
Alexandria, conversed with all the learned Persons of his Age; and lastly the
Council of Laodicea, received generally through the Christian World, deposing
their plain Testimonies for the Canon of the Old Testament received by
Protestants, and as unanimously condemning that of the Trent Council, since
owned by the Church of Rome. And confident I am that the greatest searchers
into Ecclesiastical Antiquity cannot produce one Council, nor one Testimony of
any Father throughout these Four Centuries, who purposely treating of, or
declaring the exact number of the Canonical Books of the Old Testament, does
not either expressly exclude; or at least omit all, or most of all those Books
which we style Apocryphal, and which by the New Canon made at Trent, Sess. 4.
are pronounced Canonical, and that with an Anathema to every Christian who,
pro sacris and Canonicis non susceperit, receives them not as Sacred and
Canonical. And if all this be not sufficient, whosoever will peruse Doctor
Cousin's Canon of Scripture, will find the same Tradition still continued to
future Ages.

And that the number of the Books of the Old Testament were either expressly or
equivalently declared to be those, and those only which we receive. (...). Hom.
4. in Genesis p. 20.
For Century the Fifth, St. Chrysostom lays it down as a thing confessed by
lla, that all the divine Books of the Old Testament were from the beginning
writ in the Hebrew Tongue. Theodoret twice mentions the sacred and saving
Scriptures of the Old Testament, In Cant. Cantic. p. 985, 1077. Cous. p. 132.
P. 142. P. 145. P. 151, 152. P. 154. P. 158, 159, 161, 163.
without addition of one of the Apocryphal: The number of them is declared to
be Twenty two. Century the Sixth, by Anastasius; in the Seventh Century by
Isidore; in the Eighth Century by Damasus; in the Ninth Century by Nicephorus
and Agobardus; in the Eleventh Century by Giselbertus; in the Twelfth Century
by Hugo de Sancto Victore, Richardus de Sancto Victore, by Petrus Comestor,
John Belith, and by John of Salisbury; P. 166. P. 174, 178. P. 179, 188, 192,
197.
in the Thirteenth Century by the Ordinary Gloss; in the Fourteenth Century by
Nicephorus, Calistus, and Joannes Armachanus; in the Fifteenth Century by
Thomas Waldensis, Dionysius Carthusianus, and Erasmus.

Others, numbering Ruth and Lamentations as Two Books, distinct from Judges and
Jeremy, Prol. Gal. in libr. Regum, Tom. 3. f. 6. a.
say, That the Canonical Books of the Old Testament are Twenty four, which say
they, from St. Jerome, St. John in his Revelations introduces under the Name of
the Twenty four Elders: Dr. Cous. p. 131, 133. P. 147. P. 152. P. 164, 178, 196.
so in the Sixth Century Primasius and Leontius; in the Eighth Century
Venerable Bede; in the Ninth Century Ambrosius Ausbertus; in the Twelfth
Century Peter Abbot of Celle; in the Fifteenth Century Thomas Anglicus; and in
the Sixteenth Frances Georgius. Now manifest it is, even from the very number
here assigned of Twenty two or Twenty four Canonical Books, that all these
Authors must exclude those Books we call Apocrypha from the Canon, and it is
still more evident from their own Words, in which they expressly say, P. 133.
These are the Books received, the Books put into the Canon by the Church; P.
151. P. 157, 194. P. 197.
the Books received by the Church, and Canonized. The whole Canon which the
Church receives, and which was handed down unto them by the Authority of the
Ancients.

And of those which we style Apocryphal they say, Ibid. P. 151.
These are the Books which are contradicted, and not received by the Church.
The Books of the Old Testament which are not received by the Church; P. 152,
162, 177. P. 158, 159, 163, 169, 175
The Books which are read indeed, sed non scribuntur, non habentur in Canone,
sed leguntur, ut scripta patrum, as are the Writings of the Fathers, but are
not put into the Canon; non reputantur in Canone, are not reputed to belong
unto it. The Books which the Church reads, and permits for Devotion, and the
instruction of Manners, but thinks not their Authority sufficient, ad
confirmandam Ecclesiasticorum dogmatum Authoritatem, P. 166, 173, 176, 191, 193.
to confirm the Authority of Ecclesiastical Doctrines. The Books which are not
to be received ad confirmandum aliquid in fide, to confirm any Article of
Faith. The Contents of which she obliges no man to believe, P. 189, 190.
nor does she judge him guilty of disobedience or infidelity who receives them
not. Concerning which the Church receives the Testimony of St. Jerome, as most
Sacred, P. 194.
who did undoubtedly exclude them from the Canon. To whom, say they, the Church
Catholic is much indebted upon this account, P. 199.
and to whose sense the sayings both of Councils and Fathers are to be reduced:
Books with whose Authority no Man was pressed: Books, P. 202. P. 174, 188.
Lastly, which were not genuine, but (...), Spurious, and Apocryphal, which the
Christian Church does not receive, P. 166, 201.
pari Authoritate, or pari veneratione, with the like Authority or Veneration
with which she does receive the Holy Scriptures.

Now hence the Doctors of the Church of Rome may learn what it is they are to
do, Canonical Books of the Old Testament, viz. they must prove they were owned
in the New Testament, were delivered as Traditions by the Apostles, and all the
Ancient Bishops, and Governors of the Church: They must produce express
Testimonies of Christian Writers in all Ages asserting, That the Church
received such a Doctrine, and that they in delivering of it followed the
Tradition of the Church, and their Forefathers; and saying, That the contrary
Doctrine was not received by the Church. They must show, That, even from the
first Ages of the Church, Christians were solicitous to enquire what were the
Apostolical Traditions not left in writing to the Church; that upon this
enquiry they found that these Traditions were of such a certain number, neither
more, nor less; that they thought it necessary to preserve them by writing
Catalogues of all such Traditions, as were received, or owned as such by
Christians. That this Catalogue of Traditions was delivered to them by the
Primitive Fathers, as they had been received by the whole Church, and that they
had received them from Eyewitnesses, and Ministers of the Word. That they took
care to leave this Catalogue of Traditions, because some persons dared to mix
Apocryphal Traditions with Divine, and that they made it out of necessity to
prevent mistakes in this matter, and for the Instruction of those who received
the first Rudiments of the Faith, that they might know out of what Fountains to
draw the Waters of Tradition. They must produce from the first Four Centuries
Testimonies of this nature, from Fathers living in most places where there were
any Christians, and Testimonies uncontrouled throughout those Centuries.

And seeing one of these Traditions, viz. that which concerns the Canonical
Books of the Old Testament, is expressly contrary to a Tradition delivered, and
handed down to us with all these circumstances, they must prove, that in this
matter Tradition has plainly delivered Contradictions, throughout Four whole
Centuries, which being done, we cannot choose but think her Testimony is
Infallible.

Hence also we may see what an unparalleled confidence they show, when in
their Disputations the Romanists are bold to say, and lay the stress of their
whole certainty of Faith upon this Proposition, That they hold the same
Doctrine to day which was delivered yesterday, and so up to the time of our
Savior; seeing it is as clear as the Sun, that the Books of the Old Testament,
which they now hold for Sacred and Canonical, were for Fifteen whole Centuries
together, declared not to belong unto the Canon, but excluded from it by the
Church.

And this will be still more apparent by considering what the Authors of the
Question of Questions, Papist Misrepresented, and Represented say, touching
this matter. Mr. M. says, Sect. 19. n. 6. p. 410.
That when it was grown doubtful in the Church, whether such and such Books
were part of the Canon of Scripture, the Tradition which recommended these
Books was examined in the Third Council of Carthage, and there all the Books of
the R. Canon were found to be recommended to the Church by a true, and
Authentical Tradition, and therefore we embrace them as the Word of God.

And again, Sect. 3. n. 12. p. 84, 85, 86.
As yet the Church of Christ had not defined which Books were God's true word,
which not; wherefore then it was free to doubt of such Books us were not
admitted by such a Tradition of the Church as was evidently so universal, that
it was clearly sufficient to ground an infallible belief; but in the days of
St. Austin the Third Council of Carthage, A. 397. examined how sufficient the
Tradition of the Church was which recommended these Books for Scripture, about
which there was so much doubt and contrariety of Opinion; and they found all
the Books contained in our Canon (of which you account so many Apocryphal) to
have been recommended by a Tradition sufficient to ground Faith upon. For on
this ground they proceeded in defining all the Books in our Canon to be
Canonical. Pope Innocent the First, A. D. 402. St. Austin, P. Gelasius A. D.
492. confirm the same Canon, and the Sixth General Council celebrated A. D.
680. confirms the Council of Carthage, and the true Canon is again set forth in
the Council of Florence A. 1438. And after these Declarations of the Council of
Carthage and Pope Innocent, no one pertinaciously dissented from the Canon, but
such as Protestants themselves confess to be Heretics.

J. L. adds, That Gregory Nazianzen acknowledged them Canonical, and St.
Ambrose, Lib. de Jacob and vita beata, and that since the Churches Declaration
no Catholic ever doubted of them.

Now for Answer to these things, let it be noted,

First, That whereas they are pleased to say, that it was till the time of the
Third Council of Carthage, that is, till the Fifth Century, doubtful, and
undetermined in the Church, whether these Books were Canonical or not, because
the Church had not then declared them so; they by just consequence must grant
that the Apostles, and all the Ancient Bishops of the Church for Four
Centuries, knew nothing of the Roman Canon, for had they known the Books
contested to be Canonical, we cannot doubt but they would have delivered them
to the Church as such, as well as those which we receive, and which, says
Eusebius, were received by the consent of all. Lib. 4. c. 26.
We therefore are contented to be no wiser than they were, and rather choose to
hearken to that advice of Cyril of Jerusalem, Read the Twenty two Books of the
Old Testament, and have nothing to do with the Apocrypha; (...); For the
Apostles and ancient Bishops, the Rulers of the Church, who delivered these
Twenty two Books as the Canon, were wiser than those that came after them; we
therefore being Sons of the Church, in compliance with his advice, will not,
(...), break over the bounds which they have set us, especially considering
they so expressly have informed us, that they delivered this Catalogue of the
Twenty two Canonical Books of the Old Testament, as they received them from
Tradition, Obs. 1. That they made this Enumeration of them to prevent mistakes
in this matter, for the good of the Church, and that Men might know out of what
Fountains to draw the Water of Life, and might clearly learn which were
Canonical, Obs. 4. And as the Canon received, and owned not only by the Jewish,
but the Christian Church, Obs. 3.

Secondly, The falsehood of these bold Assertions has been showed sufficiently
in what has been discoursed upon this subject; for had the Authority of the
Books we style Apocryphal been undetermined, had the true Canon of the Books of
the Old Testament been doubtful in the Church till the Fifth Century; why did
Athanasius think it necessary to advertise Christians, that the Books which we
reject were not Canonical? St. Cyril, That they were out of the Canon:
Nazianzen, That they were not Genuine: Ruffinus, That our Ancestors held them
not Canonical, not sufficient to confirm Doctrines of Faith: St. Jerome, That
the Church deemed them Apocryphal, and received them not into the Canon: Why do
they add, that these things we delivered to them by the Fathers, and by them
recorded, (...), for more exactness sake, and to prevent mistakes? Had the
Canon of the Books of the Old Testament been till then doubtful, and
undetermined in the Church, why was the Canon produced by Melito Bishop of
Sardis, judged so exact a Canon of the Books of the Old Testament? why do the
Fathers of the four first Centuries, with one accord, declare, that the number
of the Canonical Books of the Old Testament, if Ruth were added to Judges, and
the Lamentations to Jeremiah, Can. 59.
were but Twenty two, if reckoned separately, Twenty four? why is it that the
Council of Laodicea having said, that Christians in the Church ought to read,
(...), only the Canonical Books of the Old and the New Testament, reckons up
the Cononical Books of the Old Testament as we do, excluding all that we call
Apocrypha, as (...), books not contained in the Canon.

Moreover, this Canon was received into the Code of Canons of the Universal
Church both by the East and West, the Canons of this Council were confirmed by
the fourth General Council of Chalcedon, Can. 1. Can. 2. Novel. 131.
by the Sixth General Council of Trullo, by the Imperial Law of the Emperor
Justinian, and so must give us the Sense and Definition of the whole Church
touching this matter.

Thirdly, If that may be doubtful and undetermined in the Church, which is so
positively asserted, so expressly and frequently declared in a matter of Fact,
as this has been for the first Four Centuries, then I hope we may be permitted
to pronounce all those New Articles which the Church of Rome has added to the
Creed, doubtful and undetermined in the first Four Centuries, at least, till
they can give us better proof that they were then received, than has been here
produced for this Canon, and then I think they will be no great Gainers by this
false Assertion. And, sure I am, they cannot here pretend Tradition handed down
from Father to Son, from all the Christians of one Age to all the Christians of
the next, unless it be asserted, that all those Fathers, and this whole Council
spoke these things in a flat opposition to what they had been taught by their
Forefathers touching the Canonical Books of the Old Testament, so that this
instance is a full confutation of that idle Dream.

Fourthly, Whereas these Authors have produced some few Testimonies from the
Fifth Century in favor of their Canon: Let it be noted, first, That J. L. has
been told already, Answ. p. 82, 83.
that neither Gregory nor St. Ambrose have any thing pertinent to his purpose
in the places cited, and this he by his silence seems to confess. As for the
pretended Definition of Pope Innocent the First; (made, says J. L. A. D. 370.
Cap. 11. p. 22. Schol. Hist. p. 118, 180, 188.
though he was only made Bishop of Rome A. D. 402.) Bishop Cousins has proved
it to be Spurious, as he has also fully proved the pretended Decree of the
Council of Florence to be. Bishop Pearson Vindiciae Epist. Ignat. part. 1. c.
4. a p. 44. ad p. 54.
And another Bishop of our Church, of unquestionable Credit among all learned
Men, has proved beyond all possibility of Contradiction, that the Decree
ascribed to Gelasius, is also Spurious; so that we have nothing left to
consider but the judgment of St. Austin, the Council of Carthage, and the
pretended confirmation of it. Now to these I say,

Fifthly, That were these Testimonies exactly for the Canon of the Church of
Rome, yet here is neither a Decree of any General Council, nor a Decree
received into the Code of Canons by the Universal Church, as was the contrary
Decree of the Council of Laodicea; nor were the men that made it likely to
judge better what were the Books of the Old Testament received as Canonical,
than all the Writers now produced for our Canon; they whom we have produced, as
our Witnesses, being either men who lived upon, or near the place where the
Canon of the Old Testament was published and known, or traveled many of them
thither, and one of them on purpose to learn exactly the number of those Books:
And surely it is too ridiculous to imagine that it should in the Fifth Century
be better known in Africa what Books of the Old Testament were Canonical than
at Jerusalem, Caesarea, Alexandria, or any of the Eastern Churches. Moreover,
This Canon of the Council of Carthage in the Roman Code, lately set forth by
Paschasius Quesnel, has only Tobit and Judith, and two Books of Esdras of all
the Apocryphal Books now Canonized at Rome, nor in the Collection of
Cresconius, Can. 299.
an African Bishop, is there any mention of the Books of Macchabees or Baruch,
nor in the Edition of it by Balsamon, so that this cannot be a proof that the
Trent Canon was received then. And lastly, it is true they style the Books there
mentioned Canonical, but this may only, be in that large Sense in which those
Books were sometimes called so which were read in the Church, though they were
not sufficient to confirm matters of Faith, as may be argued from the Reason
which they give us, why they styled them Canonical, (...). Balsam. in can. 27.
Council. Carthag.
viz. (...), Because we have from the Fathers received these Books to be read
in the Church; and from the Gloss of Balsamon upon it, who to know what Books
were Canonical in the strict Sense, sends us to the Council of Laodicea,
Athanasius, Nazianzen, and Amphilochius, who all declared against the
Apocrypha, and to the last Canon of the Apostles which leaves out most of them.

And whereas it is added, that the Canons of the Council of Carthage were
established in the Sixth General Council held in Trullo; let it be noted,

First, That at other times the Romanists will by no means admit this Council,
Can. 36. Can. 13. Can. 55.
because it equals the Bishop of Constantinople with him of Rome, forbids
Priests to be separated from their Wives, condemns the received Customs of the
Church of Rome, and prescribes contrary Laws to her; but now, because they hope
their Forlorn Cause may have some small advantage by it, they give it the Title
of a General Council. Note,

2. (...), -- (...). Can. 2.
That this Synod in the same Canon in which it confirms the Council of
Carthage, confirms also the Canons of the Council of Laodicea, together with
the Canonical Epistles of Athanasius, Nazianzen and Amphilochius, which number
the Canonical Books of the Old Testament as we do, rejecting the rest with us
as Apocryphal; when therefore the Fathers in the Synod confirm the Canons of
the Council of Carthage, they must either contradict themselves by
contradicting the Council of Laodicea, and these Canonical Epistles now
mentioned, and by them equally confirmed, or else they must believe that this
Canon of the Council of Carthage, did not declare these controverted Books to
be properly Canonical, or divine Scripture, but only in that larger sense, in
which that Name was given to Ecclesiastical Books, thought worthy to be read in
the Church.

Fifthly, Whereas Mr. M. and J. L. farther assert, That after these Books were
declared Canonical by Pope Innocent, and the Council of Carthage, all cited
these Books as Scripture, none pertinaciously dissented from this Decree, no
Catholic ever doubted of them; we are bound to thank them for their kindness
to us in these words, in which they plainly have renounced their Title to
almost all the best Writers of the Christian World, who, as the Reverend Dr.
Cousins has demonstrated through every Century, till the very Year of the
Session of the Trent Council, not only doubted of, but plainly did reject these
Books as uncanonical in the strict acceptance of the Word, declaring that they
read and cited them indeed as Books containing good instruction, but not as
properly Canonical, or as sufficient to confirm any Article of Christian Faith.

Lastly, The Testimony of St. Austin in his Book of Christian Doctrine, is so
inconsistent with his other works, and so fully answered by the Reverend Dr.
Consins, Can. 7.
that it is needless to say any thing distinctly to it.

To proceed therefore to the Books of the New Testament,

First, That the four Gospels, the Acts of the Apostles, (...), Eusebius. Eccl.
Hist. l. 3. c. 25. l. 6. c. 25.
the Thirteen Epistles of St. Paul, the First Epistle of St. Peter, and the
First of St. John, were always, (...), confessed by all true Christians to be
sacred Books of the New Testament, and their Authority was never questioned by
any person of the whole Church of God. Now sure we have unquestionable
certainty of such Books as have been handed down to us by the Tradition of all
Ages of the Church, inserted into all her Catalogues, cited by all her Writers
as Books of a Divine Authority, and of which never any doubt was made by any
Member of the Church of God.

Secondly, new Testament, which have been formerly Controverted by whole
Churches, as well as private Doctors of the Church; for either these Churches
had sufficient certainty, that the Books which they rejected were Canonical, or
they had not; if they had, how could they be true Churches who rejected part of
their Rule of Faith, when known to be so? If they had not, it seems not
necessary that we at present should be certain of them; for why may not we go
to Heaven without this assurance, as well as they of former Ages?

Thirdly, Canon of the Books of the New Testament from the Testimony of the
Romish or the Latin Church in any Age, because she in some Ages has rejected
from the Canon that Epistle to the Hebrews, Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 20.
which she now receives. It was rejected in the Third Century by Cajus
Presbyter of Rome; by Tertullian in the same Century, who also in his Book,
Cap. 20.
de pudicitia, insinuates, that it was not received as Canonical by some other
Churches. Origin in his Epistle to Africanus having cited a passage from the
Eleventh Chapter of this Epistle, adds, That it is probable, some being pressed
with it, Page 232.
may, (...), embrace the Sentence of them who reject this Epistle, as being not
writ by Paul. Now who they were, who in this Century did upon this account
reject it, we learn more plainly from the Writers of the following Century. For
Eusebius informs us, that, (...), Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 20.
even in his time some of the Romans did reject it, as being none of the
Apostles. Upon which place Valesius notes, That it was the Custom of Eusebius
to call all the Latins, Romans, and observes, that Ruffinus thus Interprets
this very passage, Scio apud Latinos de ea quae ad Hebraeos inscribitur haberi
dubitationem, L. 3. c. 3.
I know that the Latins doubt of the Epistle to the Hebrews. The same Eusebius
informs us, Ep. ad Dard. Ep. Tom. 3. f. 24. a.
that others did reject it with the Roman Church. St. Jerome frequently affirms,
That eam Latina consuetudo non recipit, the Latin Church did not receive it
among the Canonical Scriptures. Here then we see that they rejected for Two
Centuries, what afterward they did unanimously receive as part of the Canon of
the New Testament; and so her Judgment alone can give us no assurance of the
Books of the New Testament, because through two whole Centuries she actually
erred in her Judgment of them. Hence also I infer, that the Church of Christ
knew of no Obligation laid upon her, in a division of Church Rulers, touching
any matter, Exhort. ad Martyr. p. 232.
to adhere to the Pope and Church of Rome, and those which sided with them. For
in this very Case Origin in the Third Century offers to demonstrate against
her, that this was truly the Epistle of St. Paul, And Jerome bluntly says,
Although the Latins do reject it, yet do I receive it, Tom. 3. f. 24.
(with the Greeks) nequaquam hujus temporis consuetudinem, sed veterum
Scriptorum authoritatem sequens, not following the Custom of this time, (among
the Latins) but the Authority of ancient Writers.

Fourthly, I add, Christians as Canonical, as that the necessary Articles of
Christian Faith and Manners, should be received by all Christians. For, 1. The
necessary Articles of Christian Faith, and Rules of Christian Life were
preached universally to all; and so there was no time when any Christian could
be ignorant of them without his own fault, but the Epistles controverted were
only sent to private Christians, as the Second and Third Epistles of St. John;
or to the Churches of the Jews, and therefore might with reason for some time
be doubted of by other Churches of the Gentiles, this being not a weakening,
but confirmation of our Faith, that the first Christians were so careful to see
sufficient Evidence before they would receive even the least Epistle into the
Canon of the Scripture. 2. No Christian Church could need to be told by any
other what were the necessary Articles of Christian Faith, or Rules of Life,
since they must always know the Christian Faith, and be obliged to practice the
Rules of Christian Piety, and must be taught them by their Church Guides; but
it is not thus with reference to these Epistles, for being writ to a particular
Society of Christians, it was sufficient that this Society could show, De
praescript. c. 36.
as says Tertullian, Authenticas literas little, the Authentic Letters of
those Apostles, which indicted them, and could testify to those who doubted, as
St. Austin says, De Doctrine. Christian. l. 2. c. 8.
quod ab ipsis Epistolas accipere meruerunt, that they received these Epistles
from them, and read, and owned them as their genuine Works; whenever this was
done, they, who before did question them, must have sufficient ground to own
them as parts of the true Canon, and till they had this Evidence, they
reasonably might continue to doubt of them. 3. It is evident from the second
Observation, that the assured knowledge that these Epistles are Canonical,
cannot be necessary to Salvation, the necessary Doctrines of Christian Faith
being according to the general Tradition of the whole Church of Christ, Chap.
7.. 4, 5, 6, etc. Ibid., 2, 3.
comprised in the Apostles Creed, and all the necessary Rules of Christian
Piety, being according to the same Tradition, fully comprised in the Four
Evangelists; whereas the actual knowledge of all necessary Articles of
Christian Faith, and Rules of Christian Conversation, must be always necessary,
there being no possibility of knowing, or of doing acceptably the Will of God
without them. It will not therefore follow, because such matters of Fact may
for a time be doubtful in the Church, matters of Faith may be so, that because
Churches may be Orthodox and reject some part of the Canon for a Season, they
may be Orthodox, though they reject some necessary Article of Christian Faith.
The Romanist I hope will not admit of these Conclusions. The Greek Church might
reject the Apocalypse, and yet be Orthodox, ergo, she might reject the Trinity,
and yet be Orthodox. The Latin Churches for a Season might reject the Epistle
to the Hebrews without blame, ergo, they might reject the Resurrection of the
Body without blame. The whole Church did not formerly receive those Books into
the Canon of the New Testament, she now receives; Ergo the whole Church did not
formerly embrace those Articles of Faith which now she holds; and yet all these
conclusions are as good as those the Roman Doctors usually make for receiving
all the Articles of Faith imposed, at present, by the Church of Rome, as the
Conditions of Communion, upon her Testimony that they are such; because we do
receive the Canon of the New Testament, from the Tradition of the Church.

Fifthly, We shall see cause sufficient to embrace as certain, Canon of the New
Testament we now receive, notwithstanding any doubts some of the Ancients had,
touching some lesser portions of it, if we consider,

1. That most of the Fathers of the Fourth Century, who give us Catalogues of
the Scripture Canon, and they especially who tell us, they, in making of it,
followed the suffrage of the Church, and the Tradition of the Fathers, do
accord in giving of that very Catalogue we now receive, and owning all those
Catholic Epistles which were sometime controverted; thus, for instance, Apud
Balsamon, p. 922.
Athanasius reckons the Books of the New Testament as we do, numbering, as
appertaining to the Canon, Fourteen Epistles of. St. Paul, Seven Catholic
Epistles, and the Apocalypse; and saying, These are the Fountains of Salvation,
let no man add unto them, or take from them. And yet he does profess to reckon
them as they delivered them who were Eyewitnesses, and Ministers of the Word,
and as they by Tradition came down to him. In his Synopsis he undertakes to
reckon up (...), the Canonical Books of the New Testament, defined to be such.
And amongst these he reckons the Seven Catholic Epistles of the Apostles, Page
59.
comprised in one Volume, which he calls the Sixth Volume of the New Testament,
Fourteen Epistles of St. Paul, comprised in the Seventh Volume, and in the
Eighth the Revelation of St. John, of which he testisieth, that it is (...),
Page 60.
showed and judged to be his by the Ancient, and holy Fathers led by the Spirit
of God: And then concludes, Page 61.
These are the Canonical Books of the New Testament, (...), or as it were the
first fruits, Anchors and supports of our Faith. St. Cyril is another who
professes to write his Catalogue from the Church, and to hand down the
Canonical Books as she received them from the Apostles, the Ancient Bishops,
and Governors of the Church; and he among the Canonical Books of the New
Testament reckons the Seven Catholic Epistles, and Fourteen Epistles of St.
Paul, leaving out only the Apocalypse. The Council of Laodicea reckons them
exactly as St. Cyril does, leaving out with him the Apocalypse; not that they
question its Authority, but because they reckon up only the Books, (...), which
ought to be read in the Churches; Cyril. Catech. 4. p. 38. Council. Laod. Can.
60.
among which the Apocalypse was not, because it is so very Mystical; and
accordingly the Council concludes their Canon thus, (...), These Books we have
received from the Fathers to be read in the Church; and yet they do command,
that nothing should be read there but Canonical Scripture. Apud Hieron. Tom. 4.
f. 51.
Ruffinus declares, he reckoned the Volumes of the New Testament as they were
delivered to the Church of Christ, and secundum majorum Traditionem, and
according to the Tradition of the Ancients; and then he accounts Fourteen
Epistles of St. Paul, Seven Catholic Epistles, and the Apocalypse; saying,
Haec sunt quae patres intra Canonem concluserunt; These are the Books which the
Fathers put into the Canon. Can. 27.
The Council of Carthage undertaking to reckon up the Canonical Books of the
New Testament enumerates Fourteen Epistles of St. Paul, Two of Peter, Three of
John, One of James, and One of Jude, and the Apocalypse of St. John, as
received from the Fathers. St. Jerome reckons the Canonical Books of the New
Testament after the same manner, only saying, That the Epistle to the Hebrews
was by most shut out of the number of the Epistles written by St. Paul; (that
is, some in his time conceived St. Barnabas, others St. Clemens, either did
interpret it from the Hebrew, or write it either from the Mouth, or from the
Notions of St. Paul;) but then he adds, Ep. Tom. 3. f. 13.
That the whole Greek Church, and some of the Latins did receive it; That all
the Eastern Churches, and all the Churches which used the Greek Tongue, did
Anciently own it as the Epistle of St. Paul; and that he also owned both that
and the Apocalypse, not respecting the Custom of his present Age, but following
the Authority of the Ancient Writers, who cited Testimonies from both, not as
sometimes they are wont to do, from Apocryphal Books, but as from Canonical
Scripture. And good reason had he to say,

1. Lib. 3. c. 24.
That he received the Apocalypse on the Authority of the Ancients, when
Eusebius expressly declares, That a judgment might easily be passed of it,
(...), from the Testimony of the Ancients: Athanasius, that it was determined,
Synop. p. 60.
and demonstrated to be his by the Ancient and Holy Fathers, led by the Spirit
of God. And indeed, Ep. ad C.. 34. Dial. cum Tryph p. 308. Page 373, 477, 128,
347, 376, 480, 486, 500, 503. Lib. 5. c. 30. p. 485. Page 201. 528. Tom. 5. in
Joh. Hom. 7. in Jos. page 269, 270, 411, 510, etc. De opere and Elem p. 202. de
bono pat. p. 219. Hist. Eccl. l. 4.24. Ibid. c. 26. Lib. 5. c. 18. p. 186. Lib.
7. c. 25.
it is cited in the First Century by Clemens Romanus, as a Prophetical Writing.
In the Second Century by Justin Martyr, as a Book writ by John, one of Christ's
Twelve Apostles. By Irenaeus, in the same Century, as the Revelation of John
the Disciple of the Lord, the Revelation of St. John; and he declares it was
written by him, pene sub nostro saeculo, almost in our Age, at the end of the
Reign of Domitian. It is mentioned in the Third Century as holy Scripture, and
a Prophetic Vision by Clemens of Alexandria; as the Revelation of that John
who lay in the bosom of our Lord, by Origin; it is mentioned by Tertullian, as
the Prophecy, the Revelation, the Vision of the Apostle John, in above Twenty
places; by St. Cyprian, as that Revelation in which we hear our Savior's
Voice, and in which he speaks to us. Eusebius informs us, That Melito, Bishop
of Sardis, writ upon the Revelation of St. John; that Theophilus, Bishop of
Antioch owned it, and cited from it many Testimonies. Now both these flourished
in the middle of the Second Century: That Hippolitus, the Disciple of Irenaeus
did the same: And that Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria professed, That he durst
not reject it by reason of the multitude of Christians who had a veneration for
it, and that he owned it, (...), to be the work of an holy Man, inspired of
God. And judge now whether he had not sufficient ground to say, this matter
might be decided by the Testimonies of the Ancients.

That this Book was refused by Marcion the Heretic, Contra Marcion. l. 4. c.
5. Haer. 51, 54. Haer. 30.
we learn from Tertullian; that it was rejected by the Alogians and Theodosian
Heretics, we learn from Epiphanius and St. Austin; and that when some Orthodox
Christians began to dislike the Doctrine of the Millennium, they began also to
dispute, some the Author of this Book, ascribing it to another John, Presbyter
at Ephesus; and others the Authority of it, because they could not answer the
Testimony produced from the Twentieth Chapter, in favor of the Saints Reign on
Earth a Thousand Years. But then their Arguments against it are only taken from
some vain, and weak Imaginations of their own Brains, as, v. g. That St. John
here names himself, which in his Gospel and Epistles he never does; by which
Argument we must reject either the Lamentations, or the Book of Jeremy. 2.
Because he does not use the same Expressions here, as he did there, that is, in
a Prophetic Style as in a Doctrinal, on which account Ecclesiastes and the
Canticles cannot be writ by the same Author. And, 3. Because he writes here
better Greek than elsewhere, which if so, may be, because he writes not to the
Jews, but to the Asiaticks; or after he had more conversed with them who spoke
that Language in its Purity. As for those who ascribe this Revelation to an
unknown Presbyter whose Name was John, rather than to that Apostle who
conversed so long among these Churches, they may be easily confuted from this
peculiar description of that John who was the Author of this Book, Rev. i. 9.
he being that John who was banished into the Isle of Patmos for the Word of
God, Verse 2.
and the Testimony of the Truth, and who bare record of the Word of God, and
the Testimony of Jesus Christ, and of all things which he saw, which are
peculiar to this Apostle of our Lord.

2. Jerome also had good reason to own the Epistle to the Hebrews to be written,
or at the least composed, or indicted by St. Paul on the Authority of the
Ancient Writers. Apud Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 25. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 3.
Sect. 12, 17, 36, 43. L. 3 c. 38. Catalo. Script. verbo Paulus. Page 247, 439.
Page 53, 362, 384, 514, 515, 645. Lib. 3. p. 143. Lib. 7. p. 351. Philocal. p
10, 17. Dial. contra Marc. p. 114. Ep. ad Afric. p 232.
Seeing, as Origin informs us, the ancient Christians did not rashly, when they
delivered it as the Epistle of St. Paul; and as Eusebius says, Saint Paul's
Fourteen Epistles were, (...), known, and manifest to the whole Christian
World. We find it very often cited by Clemens Romanus the Companion, and
co-worker of St. Paul, in his Epistle to the Church of Corinth, in which, as
Eusebius and St. Jerome Note, he has put many notions which are in that
Epistle, and used many Expressions word for word taken thence. In the Second
Century it is cited by Irenaeus as a Book written by the Spirit of God, and in
the close of that Century, or the beginning of the next, it is Six times cited
by Clemens Alexandrinus, under the Name of the Apostle Paul, or of Divine
Scripture. Origin says, That the Apostle Paul writ Fourteen Epistles; he cites
it as the Epistle of St. Paul in his Third and Seventh Book against Celsus, in
his Philocalia, in his Dialogue, against Marcian, in his Exhortation to
Martyrdom, in his Epistle to Africanus he undertakes to demonstrate, that it
was his against such as doubted of it; and in his Fifth Tome upon John, he
declares, That the things contained in it are admirable, Vid. Eusebius. Hist.
Eccl. l. 6. c. 25.
and no whit inserior to those which were confessedly writ by the Apostles, and
that whatsoever Church received it as such, was upon that account to be
commended. That this is the Epistle of St. Paul was in the Fourth Century
denied by the Arians, because they were not able to resist the Conviction it
affords in the First Chapter of our Lord's Divinity. On which account Theodoret
speaks thus, Proem. in Hebr.

(...).


They ought at least to revere the length of time in which the Children of the
Church have read this Epistle in the Churches; for from the time that the
Churches of God have enjoyed the writings of the Apostles, they have reaped the
Benefit of this Epistle to the Hebrews; or if this be not sufficient to
persuade them, they should hearken to Eusebius of whom they boast, as of the
Patron of their Doctrines, for he confessed this was St. Paul's Epistle; Proem.
in Ep. ad Hebr.
(...), and he declared that all the Ancients had the same Opinion of it.

That they of Rome, and other Latins did for a while reject this Epistle, will
not much weaken this Tradition, if we consider, 1. That this Epistle was not
writ to them, but to the Hebrews, who, as we are informed by Eusebius, Embraced
it with delight. 2. (...). Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 25.
That it was rejected by them, not that they had any thing to say against it,
but because they could not answer the Arguments which the Novatian Schismatics
among them produced from the Sixth and Tenth Chapter of this Epistle, against
receiving lapsed Penitents into the Church; whence, as Philastrius informs us,
they rejected it, Haer. 88.
as thinking it was depraved by the Heretics; or, 3. Because it wants his
Name, which he concealed says Jerome, (...), Catal. Script. Eccl. verbo Paulus.
because his Name would render it less acceptable to the Hebrew Converts who
were offended at his Doctrine of the Exemption of the Gentile Converts from
Circumcision, and the Observation of the Law, says Theodoret, (...), Proem. in
Ep. ad Hebr.
because he was made an Apostle, not of the Circumcision, but of the Gentiles.
4. Because it differs in style from the rest of his Epistles, as indeed it
ought to do, being writ to the Hebrews, accustomed to the Hellenistick Style;
but of this the Ancients give this double reason, That it was writ by St. Paul
in Hebrew, translated by others into Greek; or because St. Clemens, Barnabas,
or St. Luke did, Ibid. Apud Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 25.
sententias Pauli proprio ornare sermon, write down the the Sentences of Paul
in their own Words, says Jerome, and gave (...), the Phrase, and the
Contexture, says Origin, to to the things spoken by St. Paul.

The Second and Third Epistles of Saint John, Jude are so short, that it is
needless to insist upon it; that the Second Epistle of Saint John is cited by
Irenaeus and Clemens Alexandrinus in the Second; L. 1. c. 13. p. 94. Strom. 2.

De carne Christi, c. 24. Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 24.

Apud Cypr. p. 242. De cultu foeminar. p. 151.


by Tertullian, Dionysius of Alexandria, and the Council of Carthage in the
Third Century, and the Epistle of Jude under his Name by Tertullian.

Concerning the Epistle of St. James, the Second Epistle of Peter, and the
Epistle of St. Jude, let it be noted in the general that Eusebus informs us,
they were, (...), Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 25.

Petrus duabus Epistolarum suarum personat tubis, Jacobus quoque and Judas, f.
156.


know to most of the Ancients. That they are all expressly owned by Origin in
his Seventh Honily upon Joshua. Of the Epistle of Jude in particular St. Jerome
says, That though it was rejected for a while, because it cited a passage from
the Apocryphal Book of Enoch, Catal. Script. Eccl. verbo Judas.
tamen authoritatem vetustate jam, and usu meruit, and inter sanctas Scripturas
computatur, it deserved Authority from its Antiquity, and constant use in the
Church, and is reckoned among the holy Scriptures. Sect. 10, 12, 17, 30. Sess.
5.
The Catholic Epistle of James is cited by Clemens Romanus four several times,
by Ignatius in his Genuine Epistle to the Ephesians, by Origin in his
Thirteenth Homily upon Genesis. Lib. 3. c. 25. Lib. 2. c. 22.
Eusebius says, It was known to most; and publicly read in most Christian
Churches. Saint Jerome, that in process of time it obtained Authority. Estius
notes, That they who before doubted of it, in the Fourth Century embraced the
Opinion of them who received it, Praefat. in Epist. Jacobi.
and that from thence, no Church, no Ecclesiastical Writer is found who ever
doubted of it, but on the contrary, all the Catalogues of the Books of Holy
Scripture published by General or Provincial Councils, Roman Bishops, or other
Orthodox Writers, number it among Canonical Scriptures, quae probatio ad certam
fidem faciendam cuique Catholico sufficere debet, which proof must give
sufficient certainty of it to any Catholic.

The Second Epistle of St. Peter, Page 58. Apud Cypr. Ep. 75. p. 220.
is cited by Origin against Marcian under the Name of Peter. Firmilion says,
That both Paul and Peter, in suis Epistolis Haereticos execrati sunt, and ut
eos evitemus, monuerunt, in their Epistles condemned Heretics, and admonished
us to avoid them, which is done by Saint Peter only in this Epistle. Eusebius
says, That it was commemorated by many; and that they who did not reckon it
Canonical, yet held it very useful; on which account, Lib. 3. c. 3.
(...), it was much studied with other Scriptures. The same Eusebius informs
us, That his First Epistle was always owned by all Christians, and thence we
may have full assurance of the Truth of this Epistle; for there are not, says
the Reverend Doctor Hammond, greater Evidences of any Epistles being written by
the acknowledged Author of it, than these, Cap. 1. v. 1.
The Title of Simon Peter, an Apostle of Jesus Christ. The Voice which came
from Heaven (saying, verse. 17, 18.
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased) we heard when we (Peter, and
John, and James) were with him in the Holy Mount; this second Epistle beloved I
write unto you, -- that you may be mindful -- of the Commandments of us the
Apostles of the Lord and Savior. Cap. 3. v. 1, 2.
All which are certain Demonstrations, That Simon Peter, the Apostle of our
Lord, who was with him in Mount-Tabor, and there heard the Voice forementioned,
and who writ the First Epistle to the Twelve Tribes dispersed, writ this also.

Note, Lastly, That after the Fourth Century, Orthodox Professor of the
Christian Faith, they being all received, and reckoned as Canonical, by the
Councils and Fathers who mentioned the Canon of the New Testament.

Now from these premises there is just ground to make this Inference, and
Conclusion, That seeing most of the Catalogues of the Fourth Century given by
Councils or by Fathers, and all the Catalogues of the Fifth Century,
unquestionably assure us, that what was once controverted by some few, was
afterward unanimously received by all the Church of God, we are sufficiently
assured of the true Canon of the Books of the New Testament. The evidence now
produced, even of these controverted Books; being sufficient both in the
judgment of all Catholics, and of all Christians, who on these grounds alone
receive them as such, to assure us, that they are Canonical Scripture; for by
what reason can any Man evince that ought to be rejected from the Canon, which
always was received as Canonical by the greatest part of the Church Catholic,
and being accurately enquired into by those who once were Doubters, found such
an uncontroulled reception through the whole Church diffused, as stifled,
through all future Ages, the least appearance of a doubt?

Hence then the Roman. may discern what it is they have to do, if they do
undertake to show us such a Tradition for those Roman Doctrines we reject, as
has been showed for the Controverted Books of the New Testament. And,

1. It must be owned by them, that it cannot be necessary to Salvation to
believe, or have an absolute assurance that these are true, and Apostolical
Traditions; and therefore, Haec est fides extra quam salus esse non potest;
This is the Catholic Faith, without which there is no Salvation, must be
excluded from the Roman Creed.

2. It must be also owned, that the pretented Traditions of the present R.
Church were for some Centuries controverted, and rejected by whole Churches,
Orthodox and Apostolical, and which were as such owned, and embraced by all
Christians; and that some of them were, or at least might have been, for the
first Four Centuries, disowned by the Church of Rome, as was one of these
controverted Books; and consequently it must be owned, that she could not then
be received as Matter and Magistra omnium Ecclesiarum; the Mother, and Mistress
of all Churches.

3. It must be proved, that there was the same necessity that these
controverted Books should be known, and received from the beginning by all
Christians, as that the necessary Traditions, and Articles of Christian Faith
should be so.

4. It must be proved, that these Traditions were always owned, and mentioned
as Divine, and Apostolical Traditions, by many Orthodox Churches and Fathers;
and even when controverted, were, (...), acknowledged by most of the Church
Guides. To instance in the Apocalypse, which Mr. M. on all occasions singles
out as a Book whose Authenticalness cannot be better proved, than their
Traditions, let him show us any such Testimonies from the First, Second and
Third Centuries, for the pretended Traditions of the Church of Rome, as we have
showed for the Apocalypse; any one that says of them as Denis of Alexandria
does of the Apocalypse, That he durst not reject it by reason of the multitude
of Christians who had a veneration for it; let him produce the plain
Testimonies of the Fathers, that the Truth of these Traditions may be decided
by the Testimonies of the Ancients; that they owned them as Apostolical by
virtue of their Testimony; that the Ancient and Holy Fathers, led by the Spirit
of God, gave Testimony to them; and that they were the Traditions of holy Men
inspired by God: All these things have been said of the Apocalypse in the Four
first Centuries; and when Mr. M. can produce any thing of the like nature,
evidence and strength for any one of his Traditions, we will own it as Divine
and Apostolical.

Here then we see the greatest and the plainest difference betwixt the
Traditions we receive and own, and those pretended Traditions of the Church of
Rome, which we reject. For,

1. The Traditions we receive are Traditions handed down in writing to us,
throughout all Ages of the Church unto this present time; the Traditions we
reject are only presumptive Traditions, such as the Church of Rome presumes to
be so, but yet they have no Footsteps in the Ancient Records of the Church of
Christ, which is a demonstration that they falsely do presume they are
Traditions; for as we could have no just reason to believe those which we own
to be Traditions, did we not find them thus handed down to us in these
Writings; so can we have no reason to receive the pretended Traditions of the
Church of Rome, because they are not handed down unto us in this manner.

But says Mr. M. Before we can know true Books, P. 407, 408.
we must first know true Tradition from false, that we assuredly may say, these
are the true Books of Scripture, these are the true Copies of those Books,
because true Tradition commends them for such; these be false Books, or false
Copies of true Books, because the Tradition which commends these is false; tell
me the means by which infallibly the true Tradition in this point may be known
from the false, and that very means I will assign in other points to know true
Tradition from false.

This Objection I retort thus, Tradition from false, we must know true Faith
from false; for true Tradition is only the Tradition of the Faithful, that is,
of those who do entirely believe all the necessary Articles of Christian Faith,
and if I must first know this Faith, before I can know true Tradition, I cannot
need Tradition to instruct me in the Christian Faith. Again, tell me the means
by which I may know true Faith antecedently to Tradition, and the very same
means will I assign to know the Faith of Protestants without it.

2. This Argument in the Mouth of an unbelieving Jew that lived in the Days of
Christ and his Apostles pleads as strongly for the vain Traditions of the
Scribes and Pharisees, and the whole Jewish Nation, rejected by our Lord and
his Apostles; as for the pretended Traditions of the Church of Rome, v. g. you
send us to Moses and the Prophets to learn the true Messiah, and from these
Scriptures you attempt to prove your Jesus is the Messiah promised to the Jews,
but before you can know whether the Books you cite be the true Books of Moses
and the Prophets, and the Copies you have of them be true Copies, you must know
true Tradition from false; tell me then the means by which infallibly the true
Tradition in this Point may be known from the false, and that very means will I
assign to prove the Traditions of the Jewish Church, rejected by your Lord, and
his Apostles to be true. Whatsoever Answer Mr. M. can return to this Objection,
will be as applicable to his own.

3. To this demand I answer, That where the Tradition deriveth from the
Fountain of Tradition, and can be proved by written Testimonies to have done
so: And, 2ly. that where it is a Tradition not of a matter of Fact, but Faith,
and passes down without control, and contradiction of any that were then and
after owned by other Churches as true Christian Brethren. And, 3ly. where it
can be proved irrational and absurd, that the Tradition could have so long and
generally obtained without just ground of being owned as such, there the
Tradition ought to be embraced as true.

When therefore Mr. M. has proved the pretended Traditions of the Church of
Rome to have these Three Characters of true Tradition, we shall have equal
reason to admire his Parts, as we have now to wonder at his Confidence; but
they who can believe Impossibilities, may be allowed to undertake them.

CHAP. IV.
Sixthly, We distinguish betwixt Traditions touching purely Doctrinals, or
divine Revelations, touching Articles of Faith and Matters of Practice; in the
first, the Fathers have been subject to mistake in Doctrines not Fundamental,
as appears, 1. From the Doctrine of the Mellennium delivered in the Second and
Third Centuries, as a Tradition received from Christ and his Apostles,. 1. As a
thing of which they were certain, Ibid. 2. As a Doctrine proved from variety of
Scriptures, both of the Old and New Testament, which could, say they, receive
no other sense,. 2.3. As a Doctrine denied only by Heretics, or such as were
deceived by them,. 3. It was embraced by the greatest number of Christians and
Church Guides, delivering it not as Doctors only but Testators,. 4. Hence the
uncertainty of such Traditions is demonstrated, and the falsehood of the
pretended Tradition for Invocation of Saints,. 5. 2ly. A like mistake is proved
from the general Doctrine of the Fathers of the four first Centuries that the
Day of Judgment was nigh at hand,. 6. And that the time of Antichrists coming
was at hand,. 7. That the World should end after Six thousand Years, that is,
according to their computation, Five hundred Years after our Savior's Advent,.
8. The Inferences hence, Ibid. In matters of practice we distinguish,
Seventhly, betwixt such as have been generally received without contest in the
purest Ages of the Church, and such as have been contested and disowned by
Orthodox Churches or Members of the Church; and that we cannot depend with
certainty on the latter is proved, 1. From the Contest betwixt P. Victor and
the Asiaticks, touching the Easter Festival, in which it is observed, 1. That
the greatest part of the Christian World, consented in judgment with Victor and
his Synod,. 9.2. That they who with him kept this Feast on the Lord's Day,
pleaded an Apostolical Tradition for that Practice,. 10. 3. That they who kept
it with the Jews pleaded the same Tradition, and with greater Evidence,. 11. 4.
That when the Pope endeavored by terrifying Letters to affright them from
their practice, all the Asiaticks and Neighboring Provinces refused to hearken
to him, and condemned him for it,. 12. 5. That hereupon Victor attempted to
Excommunicate them, and commanded others to have no Communion with them,. 13.
6. That notwithstanding this injunction, all the other Churches held Communion
with them, and sharply reprehended Victor as a disturber of the Church's
Peace,. 14. Inferences hence showing the Falsehood of the Fundamental Rule of
the Guide of Controversies, and the uncertainty of Tradition,. 15. Which is
farther proved from the Contest betwixt P. Stephen and St. Cyprian, and the
Asiaticks, touching the Baptizing of Heretics; where it is observed, 1. That
the Opinion of Stephen was for the Baptizing of no Heretics, no not those who
were not Baptized in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost; that of St.
Cyprian for the Baptizing of all Heretics and Schismatics,. 16. 2. That Pope
Stephen proceeded to an Excommunication of his Brethren upon this account, and
a refusal of Communion with them, and so did Pope Xystus and Dionysius after
him; whereas they of Africa judged no Man who differed from them,. 17. 3.
Observe, that the Opinion of the Africans and other Eastern Churches was
asserted by many Christian Doctors, Churches and Councils, and was of long
continuance after this dispute,. 18. 4. Observe, that as Pope Stephen pretended
to Apostolical and Original Tradition for his Opinion, so did the contrary
Party for their Opinion,. 19. 5. That the Africans passed a severe Judgment on
the Assertors of the contrary Opinion, though they refused not Communion with
them,. 20. 6. That neither Stephen 's Opinion nor Saint Cyprian 's prevailed,
but the Church went a middle Way betwixt both,. 21. Inferences, 1. Hence it
appears, that the Doctors of the Western Churches are no good Judges of the
Practices of the East,. 22. 2. That in Matters of this obscurity the Custom of
each Church, is to be followed without breach of Peace,. 23. 3. That in those
Ages, they knew nothing of the Pope's Supremacy, or the Rule of the Guide of
Controversies,. 24. 4. That they belived what passed for Apostolical Tradition
in the Church of Rome might be no such thing,. 25. And, Lastly, That even in
those early times Tradition Apostolical must falsely be pretended by great and
many Churches,. 26.

FUrthermore we distinguish betwixt Traditions touching Points purely
Doctrinal, Did. 6th.
or Divine Revelations which concern matters of mere Belief, as the Doctrine of
the Millennium, of the time of the Day of Judgment, of Antichrist, and what did
hinder his Appearance, and the like, and Traditions touching points of
Practice, such as were the Observation of the Lord's Day, the Superiority of
Bishops over Presbyters, the Ordination of Presbyters and Deacons by Bishops,
etc. Touching the first kind we say, That it is no sufficient evidence that
they were Doctrines received from the Apostles, that they have been asserted by
after-Ages to be such, it being evident both from Church History, and the
Confessions both of Protestants and Papists; that in these matters the Fathers
have been subject to mistakes in Doctrines not belonging to the Fundamentals of
the Christian Faith; but touching matters of Practice we say, That we are ready
to receive all such Traditions as have that Evidence, that they were generally
practiced from the first and purest Ages of the Church, which we are able to
produce for observation of the first Day of the Week, the Superiority of
Bishops over Presbyters, the Ordination of Presbyters and Deacons by Bishops,
and the like. To give some Instances of the first kind.

First, The Doctrine of the Millennium, Roman Catholics; and by the greatest
part of Protestants, and yet it passed amongst the best of Christians for Two
hundred and Fifty Years for a Tradition Apostolical, and as such is delivered
by many Fathers of the Second and Third Century, who speak of it as the
Tradition of our Lord and his Apostles, and of all the Ancients that lived
before them, who tell us the very words in which it was delivered, the
Scriptures which were then so Interpreted, and say, that it was held by all
Christians that were, (...), exactly Orthodox.

And, 1. this is delivered by the Fathers of the Second and Third Centuries as
a Tradition received from the Mouth of Christ and his Apostles. (...). L. 3. c.
39.
Eusebius confesses, That Papias declared it to be the Doctrine of our Savior
handed down to him by unwritten Tradition. Lib. 5. c. 33. Eusebius. H. Eccl. lib.
3. c. 39.
Now of this Papias, Irenaeus says, That he was an Hearer of St. John, the
Author of the Revelations. He himself professes, that he only followed, (...),
them who taught the Truth, and who related, (...), the Commands given by Christ
himself, and coming from the Truth it self. (...). Ibid.
That he received, (...), the words of the Apostles from those who followed
them, or conversed with them, and only writ the things he had well learned, and
well remembered. Eusebius moreover adds, That his Relation, touching the
Tradition of the Millennium, prevailed, (...), with most of the Clergy that
lived after him to entertain it. (...), Dial. cum Tryph. p. 308.
Justin Martyr speaking of the same Doctrine, premiseth, That he chose not to
follow the Doctrines of Men, but of God, and the Doctrines delivered by him;
and then he adds, That there was a Man among them named John, one of Christ's
Twelve Apostles, who in his Revelations had foretold that the Faithful should
reign with Christ a Thousand Years in Jerusalem, Lib. 5. cap. 33.
and that our Lord Christ said the same thing. Presbyteri meminerunt qui
Joannem Discipulum Domini viderunt, audisse se ab illo quemadmodum de
temporibus illis docebat Dominus, Ibid.
Irenaeus adds, That the Seniors who saw St. John, the Disciple of the Lord,
remembered how they had heard him say, that he had heard our Lord Christ teach
this Doctrine; and then he does repeat the very words in which Christ taught
thus, and tells us that he had them also from Papias the Friend of Polycarp,
Cap. 36.

Hanc esse ad ordinationem and dispositionem eorum qui salvuntur dicunt
Presbyteri Apostolorum Discipuli, ibid.


adding, That this, according to the Seniors the Disciples of the Apostles, is
the Ordinance and the appointment concerning those that shall be saved, and
that our Lord taught this when he promised to drink New Wine with his Disciples
in the Kingdom of God; Hanc and Ezechiel novit, and Apostolus Joannes vidit,
and qui apud fidem nostram est novae Prophetiae sermo testatur. Adv. Marcion.
l. 3. c. 24.
and St. Paul when he said, That the Creature should be freed from the Bondage
of Corruption, into the liberty of the Sons of God. As for the Kingdom promised
to us after the Resurrection for a Thousand Years, Ezechiel knew it, says
Tertullian, the Apostle John saw it, and the new Word of Prophecy, which we
believe, gives Testimony of it. And if Gelasius Cyzicenus may be credited, this
was the Doctrine delivered by the Nicene Council in these words, We expect new
Heavens and new Earth, (...), etc. Hist. Council. Nic. l. 2. c. 30.
according to the Scriptures, at the Appearance of the Kingdom of our Great God
and Savior Jesus Christ; and then, as Daniel says, the Saints of the most
High shall receive a Kingdom, and the Earth shall be pure and holy, which David
by the Eye of Faith foreseeing, (...) -- (...), Ibid.

(...).


says, I believe to see the Goodness of the Lord in the Land of the Living;
and the Son of David, Blessed are the Meek, for they shall inherit the Earth.
These things we have established from the Ecclesiastical Constitutions, most
diligently framed by the Holy Fathers.

2. They speak of this, not as a probable Opinion, but as a thing which they
were certainly assured of. We know, says Justin Martyr, Dial. cum Trypk. p.
307.
the Resurrection of the Flesh, and the Thousand Years in Jerusalem. Predicta
benedictio sine contradictione ad tempora regni pertinet. Lib. 5. c. 33.

Manifestissime, cap. 34.


The Benediction does without contradiction belong to the times of the Kingdom,
says Irenaeus. And again, These promises do most manifestly signify the
Banquet of the Creature, which God has promised to give them in the Kingdom of
the just. And a third time, Sine Controversia dicta sunt, c. 35.
These and other things are without Controversy spoken as things which are to
happen in the Resurrection of the Just.

3. They confidently cite, Prophets of the Old Testament, (...), p. 307. Lib.
5. c. 34. Lib. 7. c. 26.
and the Sayings of our Lord and his Apostles in the New. This Thousand Years,
says Justin Martyr, the Prophets, Esaias and Ezekiel, and others do confess.
Esaias manifestly declares, says Irenaeus, that there shall be such joy in the
Resurrection of the Just; Ezekiel says the same thing, and so does Daniel. The
Testimony of the Prophets touching this matter are so many, says Lactantius,
that it would be infinite to collect them. Propter hoc beatus dicebat miles, l.
5. c. 32.
That our Lord referred to it when he promised that the meek should inherit the
Earth, is the Assertion of Irenaeus, and the forementioned Testimony of the
Nicene Council; and also when he said Thou shall be recompensed at the
Resurrection of the Just, Cap. 33.
says the same Irenaeus; and when he promised to them who left Lands, Houses,
Parents, Brethren, and Children for his sake, That they should have an hundred
fold now in this life; Lib. 5. c. 33. Ibid.
so Irenaeus and St. Cyprian, when he said to his Disciples, I will not
henceforth drink of the Fruit of the Vine, till I drink it new, with you in my
Father's Kingdom. When to that Question of St. Peter's, Ex occasion hujus
sententiae quidam introducunt mill annos post resurrectionem. Hierom. in
Matthew. 19.28.
Peter's, We have left all and followed thee, what shall we have? he answers,
(...), In the new, and Second State, the Resurrection of the Just, when the Son
of Man sits on the Throne of his Glory; you also shall sit upon Twelve
Thrones judging the Twelve Tribes of Israel: And when, having corrected their
mistakes about this matter, he adds, Ye are they who have continued with me in
my Temptation, and I appoint to you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed to
me; that you may eat and drink at my Table in my Kingdom: this, says Justin
Martyr, Page 312.
is the (...), The Mystery of our Regeneration.

They cite to the same purpose that testimony of St. Paul, Romans 8.21.
saying, That the creature shall be delivered from the bondage of Corruption
into the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God; which Liberty is in the next
Verse styled (...), Iren. l. 5.32, 34.
the Redemption of the Body, from that Death to which it was subject through
the disobedience of Adam; and with which will be also a Redemption of the
creature from that Curse which the Earth suffered for his sake. (...). p. 308.
Page 307. Lib. 5. c. 35.
They cite, to the same purpose that passage of St. Peter, who says, One day
is with the Lord as a thousand years; and a thousand years as one day; and this
we know, says Justin M. that these words do relate to the Millennium. Again
when Esaias says, We look for new Heavens, and new Earth; hemeans, says
Justin M. the Promise of the Millennium. These things, says Irenaeus, are
without controversy, spoken of the Resurrection, in qua regnabunt justi in
terra; in which the Just shall reign on Earth.

Lastly, As for the Author of the Revelations, they all with one consent
declare he speaks expressly of it; and indeed he seems to do it so expressly,
that when in the Third Century some Christians began to dislike this Opinion,
they began also to question the Authority of this Book which never was before
doubted of by any Christian.

Fourthly, Observe, that these Fathers do expressly teach, Millennium was denied
chiefly by Heretics and such as were deceived by them; Quoniam transferuntur
quorundam sententiae ab Haereticis sermonibus. Lib. 5. c. 32.

Haeretici enim despicientes psalmationem Dei, and non suscipientes salutem
carnis suae. Lib. 5 c. 31.


thus Irenaeus in the Preface of his Discourse upon this Subject says, he
found it necessary to speak of it, Because some Men's Opinions were perverted by
the Speeches of the Heretics, and they understood not the appointment of God,
and the Mystery of the Resurrection of the Just, and of the Kingdom. And again,
he says, That some of those who are thought to have believed aright do go
beyond the order of the promotion of the Just, and know not the methods of
their training up, or being exercised to incorruption, having in themselves
Heretical senses (of this matter.) For the Heretics despising the formation of
God, ( i. e. the Body framed by him) and not receiving the Salvation of their
Flesh, (or not believing that it shall be saved) say, That as soon as they are
dead they transcend the Heavens, and the Maker of them, and go to that Mother
or Father which they have feigned to themselves; they therefore who reject, as
much as in them lies, all Resurrection of the Flesh, what wonder is it if they
know not the order of the Resurrection; which order, with the method by which
we are exercised to incorruption, and the enjoyment of God he afterward
declares to be this, Cap. 32.
That our first Resurrection is principium incorruptelae per quod Regnum qui
digni fuerint assuescunt capere deum, the beginning of incorruption, by living
in which Kingdom they who are worthy so to do, by little and little do accustom
themselves to enjoy God. Cap. 35.
And that the Just Man thus raised vere praemeditabitur incorruptelam, and
augebitur, and vigebit in Regni temporibus, ut fiat capax Gloriae Patris; shall
truly exercise, or fit himself for incorruptibility, and increase, and flourish
in the times of that Kingdom, Cap. 36.
that he may be made capable of the Glory of the Father. And a third time, That
Man being renewed, and vigente ad incorruptelam, ut non possit jam veterascere;
and making such progress to incorruption, that he cannot now wax Old; tunc qui
digni fuerint coelorum conversatione illuc transibunt, id est, in Coelos; then
they who are worthy shall ascend to Heaven.

Justin M. being asked by Trypho, whether he believed That Jerusalem should be
rebuilt, Page 306.
and the Christians should be gathered together there with Christ, and the
Patriarchs and Prophets? Answers thus, (...), I have before confessed unto thee
that I and many others are of this judgment; adding that he therefore embraced
this Doctrine, Because he chose not to follow Men or their Doctrines, Page 306.
but God; and telling Trypho, That if the Jews had met with any who did not
confess this, Page 307.
but blasphemed the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, he was not to esteem them
Christians though they were (...), called Christians: (...), etc. For I, and
all Christians that are entirely Orthodox do know there will be a Resurrection
of the Flesh, and a thousand Years in Jerusalem, built, adorned and enlarged,
as the Prophets Ezekiel, Esaias, and others have confessed. Now by comparing of
these words with what before was spoken by him of the Gnostics, and the
following branches of that Heresy the Marcionites, the Valentinians,
Basilidians and Saturnilians, p. 253. it will be evident that Justin M. speaks
here especially of them. For,

1. There you will find him saying of those Heretics, That they taught Men to
Blaspheme the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. And here, That some of them who
did not own the Millennium were Men who dared to Blaspheme the God of Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob.

2. There you will find them expressly styled the Marcionites, Valentinians,
Basilidians and Saturnilians: Here you will find them generally described by
this character, That (...), they say there is no Resurrection of the Dead; but
that as soon as they die, (...), their Souls were received into Heaven, as
Irenaeus before noted of those deniers of the Millennium, and as is certainly
true of all the Heretics here mentioned; Danaeus in Aug. de Haeres. c. 22. f.
100. b. Dan. ibid. c. 4. f. 60. b. Ibid. cap. 11. f. 79. a.
for the Marcionites denied the Resurrection of the Flesh, and held, That the
Soul only should be saved. Basilides denied The Resurrection of the Flesh. The
Saturnilians said, That there would be no Resurrection of the Flesh; because
the Body would not be saved. The Valentinians denied the Resurrection of the
Flesh, saying, That our Souls only, not our Bodies were redeemed by Christ.
Moreover he promises to write a Book against these Deniers of the Millennium,
which what it should be, except his Book against Heresy in general, or against
Marcion in particular, I would gladly know.

3. There he declares, that true Christians did (...), in nothing Communicate
with these Men, as knowing they were Atheists, ( i. e. wicked) ungodly and
unjust; and here he forbids Trypho, (...), to account them Christians; saying,
they no more deserved that Name, than the Sadducees, and other Heretics
amongst the Israelites deserved the Name of Jews. Now let it be considered,

1. Ages of the Church, by the greatest number of the Christian Clergy, (...).
H. Eccl. l. 3 c. 39. In Jer. 19. Proem. in lib. 18. Com. in Esa.
as is confessed by Euscbius, that by the confession of St. Jerome, Multi
Ecclesiasticorum virorum, and Martyrum, ista dixerunt; Many Ecclesiastical Men,
and Martyrs had asserted it before his time; and that even in his days it was
the Doctrine, quam nostrorum plurima sequitur multitudo; which a great
multitude of Christians followed; that it was received not only in the Eastern
parts of the Church by Papias, Justin, Irenaeus, Nepos, Apollinaris, Methodius,
but also in the West and South by Tertullian, Cyprian, Victorinus, Lactantius
and Severus, and, if we may credit Gelasius Cyzicenus, by the first Nicene
Council.

2. That these Men taught this Doctrine, not as Doctors only, but as Witnesses
of the Tradition which they had received from Christ and his Apostles, and
which was taught them by the Elders the Disciples of Christ, which pass among
the Romanists for Authentic marks of Apostolical Tradition.

3. That they pretend to ground it upon numerous and manifest Testimonies both
of the Old and New Testament, and speak of them as Texts which could admit no
other meaning, and which they knew to have this meaning; and then let any
Romanist show any thing of a like nature for any Article pretended by the
Church of Rome to be derived from Tradition to them.

Now if the Scriptures thus Interpreted for these Two Centuries with so much
confidence and assurance; Tradition of this early date, delivered by Men of
such great Reputation, from the Disciples of our Lord, and from the Seniors of
the Church, may yet be Scriptures falsely Interpreted, Traditions falsely said to
be received from the Apostles, or the Rulers of the Church; Semijudaei. Hier.
in Esa. 60. f. 100. b. Praefat. in lib. 18. f. 107. Ridiculi (...) in cap. 66.
v. 22.
and they who thus Interpreted them might be looked upon as Judaizing, as Men
whose God was their Belly, as Men who loved their Belly, and their Lusts, and
as Ridiculous; which Epithetes St. Jerome freely does bestow upon the Assertors
of the Millennary Doctrine, how much more reason must we have to doubt of those
Interpretations of Scripture, and those Traditions which are now represented as
true Traditions and true Interpretations of the Scripture by the Roman Church.
If that which once passed for the Doctrine of all Christians that were
Orthodox, A. D. 373. n. 14. Vitanda est istiusmodi explanatio, imo Haeresis. In
Jer. 19. f. 137. b.
may pass in after Ages for Heresy, as says Baronius; the Doctrine of the
Millennium was pronounced by Damasus, and as St. Jerome seems in his invective
style to call it; and that which Heretics then chiefly held, must be now held
of all who would not be accounted Heretics; sure what is Orthodox in one Age,
may become Heresy in the succeeding Ages, or else the Church of Rome can be no
certain judge either of what is Orthodox or Heretical. Sure they may be ashamed
to ask us any more how Errors could come into their Church, and no beginning of
them known, till they can tell us the beginning of this Error. And lastly, if
the Fathers of the purest Ages could be so easily cozened by Papias, a Man of
no Judgment in this Matter, as some of them assert, why might they not be
cheated by such half witted Men in Twenty other Matters, why not by Twenty
other Men of as weak Parts? And what assurance can we have of any other thing
in which Tradition is pretended on the account of Testimonies less Primitive,
less plain, less numerous than these were? If they who had matters at
Second-hand from the Apostles could be thus mistaken in a Tradition on which
they founded their future Hopes and Expectations, must they not much more be
subject to like mistakes, in matters of mere Speculation and Opinion?

Moreover, hence we have a demonstration of the Falsehood of the pretended
Tradition of the Church of Rome, touching the Invocation of Saints; Sess. 25.
for that, according to the Trent Council, depends upon this Supposition; That
as to their Souls they are at present, una cum Christo regnantes, and aeterna
felicitate in Coelo fruentes, now reigning with Christ, and enjoying eternal
felicity in Heaven, and so admitted already to the Beatifick Vision; whereas
both Justin Martyr and Irenaeus assert, this Doctrine was proper to the
formentioned Heretics; they were the Men who said, that when Men died, Page
307.
(...), that, Iren. l. 5. c. 31.
simulatque mortui fuerint dicunt se supergredi coelos, and ire ad eum qui ab
ipsis affingitur patrem, their Souls went directly to Heaven, and passed above
the material Heavens to the Father. These Fathers also add, That men were first
to reign with Christ on Earth, Tertullian, Origin, Ambrose, Clem. Romanus,
Chrysoftom, Theodoret, Oecumenius, Theophylact, St. Bernard, Stapleton, Defens.
Eccl. Author. lib. 1. c. 2.

Lactantius, Victorinus, Prudentius, Aretas, Euthymius, Fr. Pegna. direct.
inquis. part. 2. c. 21.


and so to accustom and fit themselves to reign with Him in Heaven, to receive
first their Bodies, and sic venire in conspectum Dei, and so to be admitted
into the Presence of God; and that this was the Doctrine of most of the
Ancients, is confirmed by their own Writers; how therefore could they have any
received Tradition, that the Saints were to be invoked, as reigning now with
Christ, and being admitted into Heaven, and enjoying the Vision of God?

Moreover, Ages next to the Apostles, or of the four first Centures, that the
Day of Judgment was near at Hand, and that the World should only last till the
destruction of the Roman Empire. Lib. 1. vis. 3.
Thus Hermas to that Question, Whether the consummation of all things were at
hand? the end should be when the Tower was Built and perfected, sed and cito
consummabitur, and that this would quickly be. In proximo est Adventus Domini,
The coming of our Lord draws nigh, says Tertullian; De Spectac. c. 30.
upon which place De la Cerde notes, That all the Fathers spoke thus of the Day
of Judgment. We pray, says the same Tertullian, for the Emperors, Vim maximam
vniverso orbi imminentem. Apol. c. 32.
and for the State, i. e. continuance of the Empire, because we know the
conflagration of the World, which is now imminent, and the close of it which
threatens the worst of Evils, is retarded by the continuance of the Roman
Empire. And again, we pray for the Emperor, Cap. 39.
pro statu saeculi, pro rerum queite, pro mora finis, for the continuance of
the Age, for the quiet posture of Affairs, and the delay of the end of the
World; which shows they thought it was then near. And a third time, Ad Scap. c.
2.
We wish well to the Roman Empire, for while the World continues it shall
stand. St. Cyprian tells Pope Cornelius, That Christi cito approquinquabit
adventus, Ep. 57. Ed. Ox. Ep. 63. p. 157.
Christ's coming would soon draw nigh. In his Epistle to Caecilius he declares,
that secundus ejus adventus nobis appropinquat, Quoniam in fine atque
consummatione mundi Antichristi tempus infestum appropinquare nunc coepit.
Praefat. de Exhort. Martyr.
his second coming to us was near: and in his Book of Exhortation to Martyrdom,
he gives this account of his Writing, viz. That he did it because now in the
end of the World the time of Antichrist began to approach, and Fortunatus, had
defired him to write something to strengthen the Brethren.

It also was the general Opinion of the Church, Antichrist was to come at the
close of the World; and it was also generally believed, that Antichrist was at
hand. Tertullian declares, De fuga in persecut. c. 12.

(...). Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 7.

Ep. 59. p. 139.

Ep. 58. p. 120.

Scire debetis, and pro certo credere and tenere, occasum faeculi, atque
Antichristi tempus appropinquasse. Ibid.


Antichristum jam instare, that Antichrist was even then ready to appear. Judas
a Christian Writer, That he was to come in the time of the Emperor Severus: St.
Cyprian says, That he was now appearing, that his Advent was at hand, that
Christians ought to know, and certainly believe and hold, that the Day of
Trouble mentioned Matthew the 24th. began to fall upon their Heads, that the
end of the World, and the time of Antichrist drew near.

It also was the general Opinion of the Fathers that our Lord was born in the
Year of the World 5500, Greeks commonly compute, Apud Phot. Cod. 202. p. 525.
you may learn from Hippolytus, who as Photius notes, placed the coming of
Antichrist, (...), Five hundred Years after Christ, because then the Six
thousand years from the Creation of the World being expired, the World would
end. The Fathers who were of this Opinion were very many, and * Petav. in
Epiph. Haer. 66. n. 50.

Feuardentius in Iren. l. 5. c. 28.


magni nominis, of great repute, say Petavius and Sixtus Senensis, l. 5. Annot.
190.

And they pretended to derive this from plain Texts of Scripture, (...) Pseudo
Just. q. 71.

Ambros. in Gal. 4.4. Oecum. in 1 John 2.18. Hier. in Mich. 4. Epiph. Haer.
66.. 50.


such, as When the fullness of time was come, In the last Days he spoke to us by
his Son, On whom the ends of the Ages are come, Now is the last hour; which,
says St. Jerome, if you divide the whole Six thousand Years of the worlds
duration into Twelve parts, according to the Twelve hours of the Day, must be
the last Five hundred Years of them.

It also was a Doctrine almost generally received among the most Ancient
Fathers that the World should end, or be renewed after 6000 years. (...) Sect.
15.
This Barnabas expressly teaches in his Epistle, saying, Attend my Children
what he says, that expression, he finished in Six Days, signifies this, That
God will finish all things in Six thousand Years; for, that a Day with him is a
Thousands Years, he himself testifies, saying, A Day shall be as a Thousand
Years. Wherefore Children, in Six days, that is, in Six thousand years, shall
all things be Consummated. In as many Days as the World was made, Quotquot enim
diebus hic factus est mundus tot and millenis annis consummatur: si enim dies
Domini quase mill anni, etc. lib. 5. c. 28.
in so many Thousand Years it is consummated; for if, as the Prophecy says,
the Day of the Lord is as a Thousand Years; and in six Days were all things
made which were made, it is manifest, that the consummation of them will be the
Six thousandth Year: so Irenaeus. His Scholar Hyppolitus in the forecited
passage says the same thing. Vide Sixth. Senen. Bibl. Sanctae l. 5. annot. 190.
Lib. 7. c. 25.
Eustathius in his Hexaemeron, and the Author of the Question and Answers,
passing under the Name of Justin Martyr, Lactantius, Hilary and Jerome are all
of the same mind; and hence Lactantius took the confidence to say in his time,
It could not be above Two hundred Years before the World would have an end. St.
Cyprian, De Exhort. Mart. p. 168.
That Sex millia annorum jam fere complentur, the Six thousand Years are almost
completed. And St. Jerome, Ep. ad Gerontium de Monogamia, Tom. 1. f. 33. b.
when he heard of the taking of Rome by Alaricus the Goth, cries out, Qui
tenebat de medio fit, and non intelligimus Antichristum appropinquare? He who
hindered is taken out of the way, and do we not consider that Antichrist is at
hand? And this Opinion, Disert. de Mart fortitud.. 21.24.
as it is well noted by the Learned Mr. Dodwell, they collected from the
Prophetic writings, and from the Phrase of the last Days, so frequent in the
Scripture, and from those Expressions which mention our Lord's coming to
destroy Jerusalem as at hand. And yet we have already lived long enough to see
the falseness of this Doctrine, and so to be convinced that in these matters
the Church Guides were not Infallible Interpreters of Scripture, nor A^thentick
derivers of Tradition down to future Ages. And which is in this matter more
observable, 2 These. ij. 6.
the Apostle plainly had foretold them what it was that hindered this
appearance of the Man of Sin, and yet it is manifest, that they retained not
what he told them: Nor has the Church of future Ages been able to inform us;
nor can our pretenders to Infallibility tell us, with any certainty, (...). V.
6.
what was the hindrance which St. Paul there meant, and his Thessalonians then
knew; for that they did know it we are sure, because it is written, But what it
was none of them knew, because it was unwriten. The Church, that infallible
Oracle, and excellent keeper of Tradition, has lost this and many more
Traditions; that is, discourses of our Lord and his Apostles by word of mouth,
because they were not written. And therefore blessed be the goodness of that
God, who, seeing what an unfaithful keeper of Traditions the Church was, took
order that what his wisdom saw necessary for us to know and practice, should be
written.

2. Practice, we distinguish betwixt such practices as have been generally
received, and owned without contest from the first, and purest Ages of the
Church, as the Observation of the Lord's Day, the Ordination of Presbyters by
Bishops, and such as have been matter of long contest, and in which the
Tradition pleaded by some, has been as evidently disowned by others as good
Members of the Church as they; and that we have no sufficient Reason to depend
much on such pretenses to Tradition will appear from the dispute betwixt Pope
Victor and the Asiatick Bishops, about the observation of the Easter Festival;
of which let it be Noted,

First, Pope Victor and the R. Church kept the Easter Festival on the Lord's
Day only; whereas the Asiaticks, and some few Churches with them, did celebrate
that Festival on the Fourteenth Day of March, on whatsoever Day of the Week
that happend; whence sometimes it fell out that some Christians were Feasting,
and rejoicing when others were observing their Lent Fast. For this cause Synods
met in diverse places, and particularly a R. Synod which decreed with Victor,
(...).
That all with one consent should keep the Easter Festival on the Lord's Day.
And consonant to this was the Practice and Judgment of many other Churches; for
that this Festival should be by them observed on the same day, was determined
by St. Irenaeus, who presided in France; by Theophilus, Bishop of Caesarea; by
Narcissus, Bishop of Jerusal^m, and the Priests subject to them; by the Bishops
of Pontus, in a Synod where Palma presided, and by the Churches of the Province
of Osdroena. And the same, (...). Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 23.
says Eusebius, was the Eunanimous determination of most other Bishops and
Churches of the Christian World. And though the Asiatick Churches kept this
Feast upon the Fourteenth Day of March; yet was the contrary practice observed,
says the same Eusebus, (...), through the whole World beside. So that it is
evident the much major part of the Church concurred in practice with the Pope,
and judged it reasonable and expedient to observe this Festival upon the Lord's
Day only. And of this their determination, they sent Letters to all the
Churches round about, and consequently to all the Asiatick Churches.

Secondly, Observe, That, according to Eusebius, Lord's Day did it (...), from
a Tradition Apostolical. Eccl. Hist. l. 5. c. 23.

(...). Ibid. c. 25.

(...). Lib. 5. c. 17. p. 258.

(...).


And the Bishops of Palestine spoke much of the Tradition touching the Paschal
Feast descending down unto them by succession from the Apostles. The
Constitutions styled Apostolical command all Christians to take especial care
that they observe the Paschal Feast only on the Lord's Day, and forbid them to
celebrate it any longer with the Jews. And the Fifth and Sixty second of those
Canons which pass under the same style, forbid all Bishops, Priests or Deacons
under the penalty of deposition to celebrate the Paschal Feast before the
vernal Equinox, or to Feast with the Jews.

Thirdly, Observe, That notwithstanding these Assertions, Festival when the
Jews celebrated their Paschal Feast followed the Practice and Tradition of the
Apostles, seems more strong and cogent. For even Eusebius confesses, that they
who celebrated this Festival with the Jews, Lib. 5. cap. 24.

(...). Ibid.


told the very names of the Apostles from whom they received this Tradition,
and of their Successors, who handed down this practice to them, declaring that
it was thus celebrated before them by Philip, and John the Apostles of our
Lord, by Polycarp Bishop of Smyrna, Thraseas Bishop of Eumenia, by Papirius,
Melito and Sagaris, and by seven Bishops, Predecessors to Polycrates, who all
observed it as they did. All these who in the first or second Centuries did
very laudably perform the office of a Bishop, and who had, many of them,
extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost, (...), kept the Paschal Feast, says
Polycrates, upon the Fourteenth Day, according to the Gospel, in nothing
varying from what they had received. (...). Ibid. p. 193.
Moreover Irenaeus adds, That Polycarp who conversed with the Apostle John and
the other Apostles, always observed the same Rite. Since therefore he was,
Eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 36.
says Eusebius, (...), a Man familiar with the Apostles, and made Bishop of
Smyrna by the Servants and Eyewitnesses of our Lord; (...). Ibid.
it is more than probable that he derived this Custom from St. John, and from
those Eyewitnesses of Christ, from whom he received his Office. Epiphanius not
only does informs us, That all Christians did celebrate the Paschal Feast with
the Jews whilst the Bishops of Jerusalem were of the Circumcision, that is, for
One hundred and thirty Years, Haer. 70.. 9.
but also says, That, (...), the whole world ought then to follow their
Example, and celebrate the Feast with them; and, to this Effect, he often cites
a Canon of the Apostles, requiring them to keep it when their Brethren of the
Circumcision did so.

Fourthly, Pope Victor writ a Letter to Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus upon this
Subject, (...). Eusebius. ibid. c. 24 p. 192.
desiring him to call a Synod of the Asiatick Bishops, and endeavoring in it
to terrify them by his Threats, to a compliance with his Custom, and the
determination of his Roman Synods.

Fifthly, Observe, (...). Ibid, page 191.
That Polycrates having received this Letter, writes back to Victor and the
Church of Rome after this manner, That they had a contrary Tradition from which
they never did nor would recede, that he was not at all moved with their
Threats, as knowing it was better to obey God than Man; that he had, (...). p.
192.
according to their desire called together his fellow Bishops, and found them
all, (...), of the same mind with him, and all consenting to his Letter.

Whence note, That all the Asiatick Bishops and Churches, (...). Ibid.
and the neighboring Provinces, did judge the Pope and Church of Rome guilty
of doing themselves, and of imposing upon others, that which was contrary to
Apostolical Tradition, and to that Obedience they owed to God, and do not only
refuse compliance with their Determinations and Customs, but also add, That
they regard not what they threaten. They therefore then knew nothing of the
Pope's Superiority over them, or his Supremacy over the whole Church, or of any
Obligation lying on them, to comply with the Constitutions of that Church; nor
did they think it such a dreadful thing, as is now imagined, to be separated
from their Communion. Yea since they do so stiffly refuse compliance with that
Determination of the Pope, in which he had the suffrage and concurrence of most
other Churches, it is demonstratively evident that they knew nothing of R. H.'s
feigned Rule of Universal Church Practice, Disc. 2. c. 3.. 23.
That in Judges subordinate dissenting, all Christians must adhere to the
Superior, in those of the same Order and Dignity, to the major part, for this
Rule, had they known it, must have convinced or confounded them.

Sixthly, Observe, Pope Victor having received this Letter from the Asiatick
Churches, (...). Hieron. in verbo Victor.
and the Neighboring Provinces, he tried, says Eusebius, to separate them
from the common Unity, and writ invective Letters against them to other
Churches, declaring that all the Brethren of those Churches were by him wholly
separated from Communion, or Men not at all to be Communicated with; and,
(...), commanding them to have no fellowship with them. He tried to do this by
these means, says Eusebius; he therefore did not think it in his power to
separate them from the common Unity without the consent of other Churches, nor
was his act esteemed then sufficient for this work.

Seventhly, Observe, That Victor in this angry mood does not attempt to
Excommunicate them (...), as men disobedient to the commands of his Holiness,
or the decisions of the Church of Rome; but only (...), as Men of Heterodox
Opinions; on which account it did belong to any Church, as well as that of
Rome, to move for their exclusion from Communion: Pope Victor therefore was not
then acquainted with that Arcanum of the Romish See, that she had power over
all other Churches, and that whosoever did not comply with the injunctions of
his Holiness, deserved the censure of Excommunication for his disobedience, nor
did the Churches of those times believe any such matter. For,

Eighthly, Victor sent his invective Letters to other Churches, exhorting, or
requiring them to renounce Communion with these Asiaticks, (...). Ibid.
(...), they return him a contrary Exhortation, with equal vehemence requesting
him to mind the things which did belong unto the Peace, the Unity, and Love
which ought to be preserved among Brethren. They therefore clearly do
insinuate, that he did not mind the Peace, and Unity of the Church, i. e. he
was Schismatical in that Action, and could they then conceive he was the Head,
and his Church the principle of Unity. They also writ back Letters in which
they did (...), Eccl. Hist. l. 5. c. 24.
sharply reprehend him upon this account; they therefore did not think
themselves, and others obliged to submit to the decisions of the Pope, and his
Council, unless perhaps they thought themselves obliged by their Example to do
things opposite unto the Peace and Union of the Church of Christ, and to that
Charity which was to be preserved among Christian Brethren. St. Jerome not only
Notes, that the other Bishops did not consent to Victor's Excommunication; In
qua sententia his qui discrepabunt ab illis Victori non dederunt manus. Ibid.
Haec posui ut ingenium and Authoritatem viri demonstrarem. In verbo Polycrates.
but commends Polycrates as a Brave Stout Man in this affair.

Ninthly, Observe, That Iraeneus in his Letter, (...). Lib. 5. c. 24.
writ to Victor, in the name of all the Brethren under his jurisdiction in
France, that he should not reject whole Churches of God, observing their
Ancient Tradition, says Eusebius; their Apostolical Tradition, says
Nicephorus. Niceph. l. 4. c. 37.
In pursuance of which design he minds the Pope, that long before there were,
and still continued other differences in the Church, touching the observation
of the Lent Fast; and that notwithstanding, they who thus differed, all
preserved Peace, and were at present all in Peace one with the other. He adds,
That his predecessors in the Sea of Rome, who observed the Feast as he did,
(...), nevertheless kept Peace with them who observed the Feast after the
manner of the Asiaticks, Eusebius Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 24. P. 198.
and never cast out any from the Church who practiced as they did; particularly
that Polycarp coming to Rome in the time of Anicetus, acted like Polycrates,
and would not be persuaded to comply with the custom of the Church of Rome in
this particular, yet they communicated, and Received the Sacrament together,
departed in Peace, without contention about this matter; and both of them
preserved peace with all the Churches which differed from them in this
observation. From all which it is evident, that Irenaeus charged Victor as
(...), a lover of Contention, a breaker of the Church's Peace, one who denied
Communion with, and did attempt the rejection of the Asiatick Churches without
cause; and therefore must necessarily judge him to be the Schismatic, and so
he could not possibly conceive, that by Victor's Excommunication the Asiaticks
could be separated from the common Union; but rather that the Pope, and his
Church (if they concurred with him in the second Letter, as in the first they
did, and as it was the custom of those times to do) must be the Schismatics.
And therefore whereas Pope Victor writ Letters to engage all Churches to break
off Communion with the Asiaticks, (...). Ibid. p. 193, 194.
Irenaeus writes Letters, of the same import with this to Victor, to the
Bishops of most other Churches to engage them to preserve Peace, and Communion
with the Asiaticks. So opposite is he in all things to the proceedings of the
Pope and Church of Rome; and yet in all this, he is commended as a Man who in
this matter acted (...), fittingly, as a true Irenaeus or Peacemaker, that is,
as one who answered his name by his endeavor to preserve the Church's Peace,
which Victor labored to disturb. And it is observable, that all the Churches of
God complied with the Desire of Irenaeus; for though they differed, Eccl Hist.
l. 1. c. 8.
says Socrates, about this Feast, (...), yet did they not separate from
Communion one with another, on that account. Now the Inferences which naturally
flow from this Relation in favor of the Protestants, against the Doctrine of
the Pope's Supremacy, the necessity of Union to, and Communion with the Church
of Rome, and other Articles of like nature, I shall not farther insist upon,
only hence note.

First, Rule forementioned, which is the Ground and Foundation of the Guide of
Controversies; for here we find the Pope deciding of a Controversy, E
Cathedra, and with his Roman Synod; we also find that most other Bishops and
Churches of the Christian World, (...), pass the same Judgment of the
Controversy with the Pope and his Roman Council; and yet by no means will they
allow that they who were of another Judgment, and acted contrary to their
determination, should be molested for it, or treated otherwise than Christian
Brethren, it is therefore imposible they should have held, that all Christians
were obliged either to adhere, in any matter of dissent, to the decision of the
major part, or to the decision of the Pope and Church of Rome, for then they
must have held the Asiaticks, and others who agreed with them to be
Schismatics, and to deserve exclusion from the Communion of the Church, for
acting in opposition to her Great and only Rule of Peace and Unity; yea, it is
impossible that should have always been, as he pretends, an universal Rule of
Church Practice, according to which so many Churches do refuse to practice, and
yet are by their fellow Christians owned as Brethren, and persons not to be
molested upon that account.

Secondly, Hence note, How difficult a thing it is to know, even in a matter of
the constant practice of all Christians in the Second Century, what the
Tradition of the Apostles was; a Tradition being pretended on one side to
derive from Peter and to be Apostolical, (...). De Syn. Arim. p. 872. Ep. ad
Page 933. (...). Chrysostom. Tom. 6. Hom. 28. p. 379. l. 33.
and yet all the Churches of Asia, Syria, Mesopotamia, Cilicia, says
Athanasius; of Antioch, says Chrysostom, having a contrary Tradition which,
say they, derived from Philip and St. John, and so undoubtedly was Apostolical,
and Canons as from these Apostles being produced on both sides; if then they
were so divided about Tradition when the Apostles was scarce cold in their
Graves, and that in matters of their daily practice; what assurance can we have
of any Traditions contested in this present Age? If a Custom might then arise,
and be delivered to Posterity with great variety in the Lent Fast, so that some
Christians thought they were to keep it but One day, some Two, some more, some
Forty, (...), etc. Iren. apud Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 24. p. 192, 193.
and all this through the negligence of the then present Rulers of the Church,
how may the practice of the whole Church of Rome now vary from what it was in
the beginning? Or why should that be judged impossible with them, which by
their own confession has actually happened for this last Seven hundred Years
to the whole Eastern Church? Or what certainty can be had of contested
Traditions subject to such variety and change in a short time, and in a matter
of continual practice, when we are distant from the Fountain of them One
thousand six hundred Years?

A Second Instance of like nature is that of the dispute betwixt Pope Stephen
and St. Cyprian, touching the Rebaptizing of those Persons who only were
Baptized by Heretics, as will be evident from these ensuing Observations, viz.

First, That the Opinion of Pope Stephen was professedly this, That whatsoever
Heretics did take upon them to Baptize, the Persons so Baptized were to be
admitted into Church Communion without farther Baptism; so his Opinion is
propounded in his own words by Cyprian, viz. Si quis a quacunque N.B. Haerest
venerit ad nos manus illi imponantur ad poenitentiam. Ep. 74. p. 211.
That from whatsoever Heresy a Person did return into the Church, he was to be
admitted only by imposition of Hands, and not by Baptism. Eusebius infroms us,
that the Controversy which arose betwixt them was this, (...). Eccl. Hist. l.
7. c. 2.
Whether they who returned from any kind of Heresy were to be purged by
Baptism, or only by imposition of Hands with Prayer. St. Cyprian adds, De
Marcionis Baptismo, item Valentini, and Apelletis, contendit filios deo nasci.
Ep. 74. p. 214. 73. p. 199, 200.
That he declared the Baptism of Valentinus, Marcion and Apelles to be valid,
and beget Sons to God, although it was the Baptism of Men who did Blaspheme the
Father and the Son, August de Haer. c. 11, 22, 23. vide Danaeum. Ibid.
which certainly they did, for they asserted, That there were two Gods, and
that the God of Israel was an evil God, and not the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ; and they denied the truth of our Savior's Manhood, and the
Resurrection of the Flesh.

Secondly, Observe, That the Opinion of St. Cyprian, and those who in Africa
and elsewhere adhered to him, Dicimus omnes omnino Haereticos and Schismaticos,
etc. Ep. 69. p. 180.
was this, That all Persons, who only were Baptized by Heretics, were to be
admitted into the Church by Baptism. St Cyprian Bishop of Carthage thought,
Hist. Eccl. lib. 7. cap. 3. Apud Cypr. Ep. 75. page 221.

Omnes Schismaticos and Haereticos qui ad Ecclesiam conversi sunt Baptizari.
Apud Cypr. p. 231.


says Eusebius, that being first purged from their Error, they ought to be
admitted, (...), no otherwise than by Baptism. Not only the Cataphrygae, says
Firmilian, but, caeteri quique Haeretici, all other Heretics whatsoever are
deprived of the Power of Baptism. In the Council of Carthage consisting of
Eighty five Bishops assembled out of Africa, Numidia and Mauritania, Novatus a
Thamugade defines according to the Testimony of the Scriptures, and the Decree
of our Collegs of Blessed Memory, That all Schismatics and Heretics, who are
converted to the Church, should be Baptized. Januarius a Lambese says,
According to the Authority of the Holy Scriptures I decree, Haereticos omnes
Baptizandos, that all Heretics shall be Baptized, and so admitted into the
Church. Repudiandum esse omne omnino Baptisma quod sit extra Ecclesiam
constitutum. Firm. apud Cypr. Ep. 75. page 226.
The Council of Iconium decreed, That all Baptism was to be rejected that was
celebrated out of the Church. That of Synnada, That no Baptism was to be found
amongst Heretics which were out of the Church, Apud Haereticos nullum Baptisma
reperiri.
and that therefore returning to the Church, they ought to be Baptized in it.

Thirdly, Observe, That Pope Stephen, Brethren, both in the Southern and the
Eastern Churches, who declared for the Baptism of Heretics returning to the
Bosom of the Church. Pope Stephen, says Dionysius to Pope Xystus, writ to me,
Apud Eusebium Hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 5.
as you do, and for the same Cause, (...), as one who would not communicate
with Helin, Firmilian, or any of the Bishops of Cilicia, Cappadocia, Galatia,
or of the Neighboring Regions, because they Rebaptized Heretics. In many
other Provinces, says Firmilian, many things do vary, Rumpens adversus vos
pacem, Ep. 75. apud Cypr. p. 228.
but yet for these things they do not depart from the Peace and Unity, which
yet Pope Stephen has been bold to do, breaking that Peace which all his
Ancestors have preserved with you in mutual Love and Honor. And turning his
Discourse to him he speaks thus, How great Sin have thou heaped upon thy self,
quando te a tot gregibus scidisti, by cutting off thy self from so many Flocks?
Siquidem ille est vere Schismaticus qui sea Communione Ecclesiasticae unitatis
Apostatum fecerit. Ibid.

Sacerdotes Dei abstinendos putat.


Deceive not thy self, for thou have cut thy self off from them, he being
indeed the Schismatic who makes himself an Apostate from the Communion of
Ecclesiastical Unity, and whilst thou think thy self able to separate all
from thee, thou only have separated thy self from all. St. Cyprian says, Ep.
74. Page 214.
That he had passed his Judgment for the Excommunication of the Priests of God,
who kept the Truth of Christ, and the Unity of the Church. St. Austin also does
affirm, Stephanus non solum non rebaptizabat Haereticos, verum etiam hoc
facientes Excommunicandos fore decernebat. Libr. de Baptismo contra Petil. cap.
14. page 504.
That Pope Stephen judged they should be Excommunicated who endeavored to pull
down the Ancient Custom of receiving Heretics without Baptism.

Fourthly, Observe, That after the Death of Stephen, Pope Xystus, his immediate
Successor, asserted the same Doctrine, and was as vehement as he for the
Exclusion of all those from Church Communion who did oppose it. For Xystus with
Philemon and Dionysius two Roman Presbyters, wrote Letters to Dionysius of
Alexandria, declaring, That they would not communicate with them, who held that
Heretics were to be admitted into the Church by Baptism. Apud Eusebius. Ibid.
This will appear from the Letter of Dionysius to Pope Xystus, where having
told him, that his Predecessor Pope Stephen had written to him, that he would
not Communicate with them for this very reason; he adds, That he had written
formerly both to Philemon and Dionysius of Rome, (...). Eusebius. H. Eccl. l. 7.
c. 5.
(...), who were before of the same judgment with Pope Stephen, as they were
now of the same mind with Xystus, and who writ to him about the same things.
Whence it is evident, that Xystus the succeeding Pope, Philemon and Dionysius,
Presbyters of Rome, persisted in this Resolution not to Communicate with those
who held, That Heretics were to be received into the Church by Baptism; and
seeing Dionysius, who was of the same judgment, succeeded Xystus, it follows,
that three Succeeding Popes had then defined that Article.

Fifthly, Africans, and many Eastern Churches was asserted by very many
Christian Doctors, Churches and Councils. It was the Opinion of Tertullian,
Sine dubio non habent. De Baptism. c. 15. Apud nos -- Haereticus etiam per
Baptisma veritatis utroque homine purgatus admittitur. De pudicitia, Cap. 19.
that Heretics had no Baptism, and this says he is without doubt. It was the
Doctrine of Agrippinus, and of St. Cyprian in the same Century. In Egypt it
was the Doctrine of Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria: In Asia of Firmilian Bishop
of Caesarea: In Cilicia, of Helen Bishop of Tarsis. In the Fourth Century it
was the Doctrine of Optatus, Lib. 4, and 5.
who frequently asserts, Apud ipsos non esse Sacramenta; That the Heretics had
no Sacraments. Orat. 3. Contr. Arian. p. 413.
Of Athanasius, who declares the Arians Baptism, (...), wholly vain and
unprofitable. That the Baptism given by them was, (...), alien from the Truth;
though they used the name of the Father and the Son, because they found them
written; Ibid. 13.
for not he who simply calls him Lord, gives true Baptism; (...), (...).
but he who, with the names, holds the true Faith. Hence our Savior gave not
commission to Baptize any how; but first to Teach, that by teaching aright,
Faith might be obtained, (...), (...). Ibid.
and with Faith might be added the Consecration of Baptism; and of other
Heretics he faith, That he who was sprinkled by them was rather defiled than
washed. It was confirmed by Four African Councils, one under Agrippinus, Cypr.
Ep. 71. p. 196. Plurimi Coepiscopi. Ibid. p. 193. Ep. 73. p. 198.
consisting of the Bishops of Africa and of Numidia; one at Carthage, under St.
Cyprian; another under the same St. Cyprian, of Seventy one Bishops, Anno. Dom.
256. and lastly, by a Synod of Eighty seven Bishops, convened from Africa,
Numidia and Mauritania. It was confirmed by a Council of Fifty Bishops, met at
Iconium, August. contra Crescon. Gram. l. 3. c. 3.

Quod totum nos jampridem in Iconio confirmavimus tenendum firmiter, and
vindicandum.

Ep. 75. apud Cypr. p. 221.

Apud Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 5.

Ibid. c. 7.


where also were present the Bishops of Galatia, Cilicia, Cappadocia, and the
neighboring Provinces; and where it was decreed, says Firmilian, That this
Doctrine should be firmly held, and vindicated; it was confirmed by a Synod
held at the same time at Synnada in Phrygia; it was determined, says Dionysius
of Alexandria, (...), in the greatest Synods of Bishops, and by many Synods
besides those now mentioned of Iconium and Synnada. It was observed, says the
forementioned Dionysius, (...), in the most populous Churches. Cyril of
Jerusalem speaks of it as of the practice of the Church in his time; saying,
there is one Baptism, Praefat. p. 4. (...). Ad Amphil. Can. 47. Lib. 6. c. 15.
(...), for only Heretics are rebaptized; because their Baptism is no
Baptism. St. Basil says, That they received not such Heretics without
Baptism, as the Encratites, the Saccophori and Apotactites. The Constitutions
of the Apostles declare the same thing, their Forty sixth Canon commands, That
the Bishops, Presbyters or Deacon should be deposed, (...).
who admits the Baptism of Heretics, because there is no Communion betwixt
Christ and Belial; and the Forty seventh determines, That the Bishop shall be
deposed, who neglects to Baptize them who have been defiled, (...), by the
wicked; that is, says Zonaras, by the Heretics, their Baptism being
represented in the forecited Constitutions, as a Pollution, not a washing of
the Baptized person. In a word, Vallesius confesses, Not. in Eusebius, l. 7. c.
5. p. 141.
that it appears from the Council of Arles, That the Africans retained their
Custom till the time of Constantine. And from the Epistle of St. Basil to
Amphilochius, That the Cappadocians, and other Orientals, retained their Custom
till the Council of Constantinople.

Sixthly, Observe, Pope Stephen pretended to a Tradition from the beginning; a
Tradition derived from the Apostles. Lib. 7. c. 3.
That, says Eusebius, which moved Stephen to be so stiff in this Opinion was,
that he conceived nothing was to be done by innovation, (...), against the
Tradition which had prevailed from the beginning, Nihil innovetur nisi quod
traditum est; let nothing be innovated, but that observed which was delivered
was his plea, Ep. 74. p. 210.
says Cyprian. And again, Quod accepimus ab Apostolis hoc sequimur; Ep. 73. p.
204.
their saying was, What we have received from the Apostles, that we follow.
Stephen asserteth, says Firmilian, Ep. 75. p. 219.
That the Apostles forbad the Baptizing of those who return to the Church from
Heresy, and hoc custodiendum posteris tradiderint, and delivered this to be
observed by Posterity.

Seventhly, Observe, That the Asserters of the contrary Opinion pretended also
to Tradition, and some of them to a Tradition from the beginning, and which
derived it self from the Apostles. Our Assertion, That they who only were
Baptized by Heretics, should be Baptized when they return to the Church, Ep.
70. p. 189.
is, says St. Cyprian, no new Opinion, but long ago established by our
Predecessors; and accordingly observed by us. And again, it is many Years, and
a long Age since many Bishops, Ep. 73. p. 199.

Non novam sententiam neque nunc fundatam asserimus, sed quae olim ab
Antiquioribus accuratissime and diligentissime fuit examinata.

Council. Oxon. Tom. 1. p. 366.

Apud. Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 7.


meeting under Agrippinus, established the same Practice, and many thousand
Heretics have been since Baptized in our Provinces. This Practice, says the
Carthaginian Synod, is that quod semper, fortiter, stabiliterque tenuimus,
which we have always stoutly and firmly held. It is not the Africans alone,
says Dionysius of Alexandria, who have now introduced this Custom, but it was
practiced (...), long before, by the preceding Bishops in most populous
Churches, and established in the Synods of Iconium and Synnada, (...), and in
many others, whom I dare not provoke to Contention by subverting their Decrees;
it being written thou shall not remove the bounds which thy Fathers have placed
of old time. We, says Firmilian, to the Truth join Custom; and to the Custom
of the Romans, we oppose the Custom of the Truth; Ep. 75. apud Cypr. p. 226.
Ab initio hoc tenentes, quod a Christo and ab Apostolo traditum est; Holding
that from the beginning which was delivered by Christ and his Apostle. Nor do
we remember, that this Custom had a beginning among us. Can. 1.
St. Basil says expressly, (...), it seemed good to them who were from the
beginning wholly to null the Baptism of Heretics.

Eighthly, Africans and Orientals judged of the contrary Opinion, that Heretics
were to be received into the Bosom of the Church without Baptism; Cyp. Ep. 69.
ad Mag. p. 185. Cypr. Ep. 73. p. 207, 210. Conc. Carth. p. 234, 239.
they style the Assertors of it, Praevaricatores fidei and veritatis, atque
Ecclesiae proditores, Men who betrayed the Church, and did prevaricate in
matters which belonged to Faith and Truth; Suffragatores and Fautores
Haereticorum, Men who did cherish and abett Heretics, were Friends to them,
and Enemies to Christians. They add, That they who allowed their Baptism did
null and evacuate that of the Church, and destroyed their own; Council. Carth.
apud Cypr. p. 230, 234, 237, 238, 239, 240.
that they made themselves partakers with blaspheming Heretics, and did
Communicate with them; that they did Communicate with other Men's Sins; that
they were Patrons of Heretics; did plead their Cause against the Church of
Christ; that they defiled Christians, betrayed the Faith and Truth, gave up the
Spouse of Christ to Adulterers, and did act the Judas to her.

As for their own Doctrine they confidently say, Council. Carth. Ibid. p. 230,
231, 232, 241. Cypr. Ep. 73. p. 205. 74. p. 214. That it was Catholicae
Ecclesiae Canon. Syn. Carthag. apud Balsam. page 588.
That it was every where declared in the Holy Scriptures, that it was proved by
the Divine Law, from the Deifying Scriptures, from Evangelical Authority, and
Apostolical Tradition; that they decreed for it according to the Testimony,
Authority, and Commands of the Holy and Divine Scriptures.

Ninthly, Observe, That these Africans and Orientals differed from their
Brethren without condemning or censuring of them, or breaking of the Peace or
Unity of the Church on this account, or separating from Communion with those
Christian Bishops who thought fit to do otherwise. We, says St. Propter
Haereticos cum Collegis. and Coepiscopis nostris non contendimus, cum quibus
divinam concordiam and dominicam pacem tenemus. Ep. 73. p. 210.
Cyprian, as much as in us lies, do not contend with our Colleages and Fellow
Bishops about Heretics, we hold a sacred Concord, and the Lord's Peace with
them, Qua in re nec nos vim cuiquam facimus nec legem damus. Ep. 72. p. 198.
we prescribe to no Body, we prejudge no Man, but leave every Bishop to the
Liberty of his Will, to do what he thinks best in this matter; we force no Man,
Ep. 69. p. 188.
we give Law to no Man. The Preface of the Council of Carthage assembled under
Cyprian runs thus, It remains that every one of us speak his judgment in this
Matter, judging no Man, nor a jure communionis aliquem, Apud Cypr. p. 229.
si diversum senserit amoventes, separating any Man from our Communion who
thinks otherwise. St. Basil excellently declares himself in the matter of the
Cathari, that because there were different Opinions in the Church concerning
the validity of their Baptism; (...), Can. 1.
the custom of every Region was to be followed. And of the Encratites he says,
that it was his Opinion that they ought to be Baptized; but then he adds, That
if this would be any impediment to the Order of the Church in that Matter;
(...), (...). Eusebius. H. Eccl. l. 7. c. 5.
the Custom which had obtained any where was to be observed. This excellent
Temper then prevailed in all the Churches of God; for Dionysius of Alexandria
in his Epistle to Pope Stephen, says, That all the Churches, notwithstanding
this difference, were at Peace and Concord, and thence entreats him to consider
the weight of the Affair he had begun, (...), by refusing to Communicate with
them who admitted Heretics into the Church by Baptism, praying him to disist
from it, and telling him, that for his part he durst not provoke so many
Churches, Ibid. c. 7.
(...), to strife and contention, by subverting their Decrees. The Council of
Carthage, Apud Cypr. p. 229.

Neque enim quisquam nostrum Episcopum se Episcoporum constituit, aut Tyrannico
terrore ad obsequendi necessitatem collegas suos adigit. Ibid.


in reference to this Action of Pope Stephen, speaks thus, We pass our Sentence
in this matter, judging no Man, or separating no Man from our Communion who
thinks otherwise; for none of us makes himself a Bishop of Bishops, nor
endeavors by tyrannical Terror to compel his Colleages to a necessity of
Obedience. Ep. 74. p. 210, 214.
St. Cyprian accuses him of Pride, or Vnadvisedness, and acting as a Friend of
Heretics, and an Enemy of Christians, for thinking it fit to Excommunicate
God's Priests on this account. Firmilian declares, That he acted inhumanely,
Per illius inhumanitatem effectum est, etc. Apud Cypr. Ep. 75. page 225.

Cum tot Episcopis per totum mundum diffensisse, pacem cum singulis vario
discordiae, genere rumpentem, modo cum orientalibus, modo vobiscum qui in
meridie. Ep. 75. p. 228.


by being at Dissension with so many Bishops throughout the World, and breaking
the Peace with every one of them by various kinds of Discord, with those of the
East (by pronouncing them Excommunicate) and with those of the South, by not
vouchsasing to speak with the Bishops sent to him, nor permitting others to
receive them into their Houses, and by dividing the Fraternity for the sake of
Heretieks; which various kind of Discord had Valesius well observed, he would
not against so great evidence have denied that Stephen did as much as in him
lay separate, or in the Language of the Council of Carthage, amovere a jure
communionis, expel from right of Communion, those who differed from him; it
being hence evident, that he Excommunicated the one, and vouchsafed not to
speak with the other.

Tenthly, Roman Doctors usually say that Stephen's traditum est prevailed
against the opposite Opinion of the Eastern and the Southern Churches, and that
the case was after by the Church determined for Pope Stephen against Cyprian,
this is a great mistake; for neither the Opinion of P. Stephen, nor of St.
Cyprian prevailed, but they were both rejected by the Church of Christ, and
that which was the mean betwixt them was embraced. For,

1. Whereas Pope Stephen with his Church determined, That no Heretics should
be Baptized from whatsoever Heresy they came into the Bosom of the Church, or,
Contra Petil. de unico Baptismo, c. 14.
as St. Austin says, Baptismum Christi in nullo iterandum esse censebat, He
held that the Baptism of Christ was to be repeated on no Heretic whatsoever.
The Ninteenth Canon of the Nicene Council says, That if the Paulianists do fly
into the Bosom of the Church, we will, (...), that they by all means be
Baptized again. The Council of Laodicea commands Bishops and Presbyters to
Baptize, Can. 8.
(...), them who returned from the Heresy of the Cataphrygae, or the
Montanists. Can. 7.
The General Council of Constantinople speaks thus, Them who come to us from
Heretics we admit after this manner, the Arians, Macedonians, Sabbatians,
Novatians, Quartodecimans, the Cathari and Apollinarians without Baptism, but
the Eunomians, the Montanists, Sabellians, (...), and all other Heretics, we
receive as Gentiles, we Catechize them, and for a long time make them hear the
Scripture, Can. 95.
(...), and then we Baptize them. The General Council in Trullo repeats the
same Decree in the same words, and then adds, That we admit by Baptism likewise
the Manichees, Valentinians and Marcionites, and other Heretics of like
nature. Ad Amphil. Can. 47.
St. Basil determines, That the Encratitae, the Saccaphori, and the Apotactites
were to be rebaptized. Now all these Canons are approved by the following
Synods, Can. 1.
that of the Second Nicene Council, and the Eighth Council of Constantinople;
and so we cannot doubt, but that they both believed and practiced accordingly.
Since then we are assured from so many Testimonies, that Pope Stephen would
have all Heretics whatsoever admitted, at their return into the Church without
Baptism, and in particular from the Testimony of St. Ep. 74. p. 214.
that he admitted of the Baptism of Marcion, Valentinus and Apelles, it is
exceeding evident that his Opinion was by the Church of God condemned both in
General and in Particular.

Moreover, it was the Judgment of Pope Stephen, That the Baptism of Heretics,
though administered only in the name of Christ, and not of the whole Sacred
Trinity, was valid, and not to be reiterated when they returned into the Bosom
of the Church. This is apparent from these words of Cyprian, No Man, to
circumvent the Christian Truth, should oppose the Name of Christ, and say, in
nomine Jesu Christi ubicunque, quomodocunque Baptizati gratiam Baptismi sunt
consecuti, Ep. 73. p. 205.
that wheresoever, howsoever Men are Baptized in the Name of Christ, they
obtain the Grace of Baptism. And again, Since after the Resurrection the
Apostles being sent by our Lord to the Gentiles, are commanded to Baptize them
in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; how do some say,
That out of the Church, yea against the Church, a Gentile may obtain Remission
of Sins; Ibid. p. 206.
modo in nomine Jesu Christi ubicunque, and quomodocunque, Baptizatum,
wheresoever, and howsoever he be Baptized provided it be done in the name of
the Lord Jesus, when Christ himself commands the Gentiles to be Baptized, in
plena, and adunata Trinitate, into the whole and united Trinity? If then that
be the Truth which usually is affirmed, that the Ancients did admit the Baptism
of those Heretics, who Baptized in the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
and nulled their Baptism who Baptized not into the Sacred Trinity, then must
they plainly have condemned the Doctrine of Pope Stephen and his Abettors. But
though some of the Ancients seem to speak after this manner, and to assert this
Doctrine, as is evident from the Apology made for the Baptism of the Novatians
in St. Cyprian, That they did, Ep. 69. p. 183.
eandem legem tenere quam Catholica Ecclesia teneat, eodem Symbolo, quo and
nos, Baptizare, eundem nosse deum patrem, eundem filium Christum, eundem
Spiritum Sanctum, use the same Symbol with Catholics in Baptism, and Baptized
into the same Sacred Trinity: And from the Canon of the first Council of Arles
which Decrees, That they should be admitted by Imposition of Hands only, who
were Baptized in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost; yet the Opinion of
the Ancient Church seems rather to have been this, that their Baptism alone was
to be admitted, who both Baptized into, and believed aright touching the Sacred
Trinity, as the Novatians did. This St. Basil does expressly teach, saying, Ad
Amphil. can. 1.
(...), The Ancients judged that Baptism valid which in nothing differed from
the Faith. And therefore having told us, That the Baptism of the Encratitae,
the Saccophori and Apotactites was rejected by the Church, he adds, And let
them not say, we are Baptized into the Father, Can. 47.
Son and Holy Ghost, (...), who make God the Author of Evil. (...). Orat. 3.
contr. Arian. p. 413.
And Athanasius condemns the Baptism of the Arians, though they named the
Father and Son, because they saw them in the Form of Baptism delivered in the
Scripture, seeing they did not conceive aright of them, nor retain the right
Faith; adding, That as the Manichees, the Phrygae, the Samosatenians pronounced
the right Names, and yet were Heretics, so the Arians, though they recited the
Names and Words of Baptism, deluded them who received Baptism from them. Again,
St. Cyprian and his party in Africa held the Baptism, not only of Heretics but
Schismatics to be void, and in particular of the Novatians; his words are
these, Ep. 69. p. 180.
Dicimus omnes omnino Haereticos and Schismaticos nihil habere potestatis ac
juris, propter quod Novatianus nec debet, nec potest excipi, We say that no
Heretic or Schismatic has any power, or right to Baptize, and therefore
Novatian should not, and cannot be excepted. And again, Ibid. p. 183.
Audet quisquam dicere aquam Baptismi salutarem communem cum Schismaticis esse
posse, Ep. 72. p. 196.
Dares any one say, That Schismatics can have the salutary Water of Baptism?
The same he Asserts in several other places, and the Fathers of the Council
held under him, do often say, Baptisma quod dant Haeretici and Schismatici non
est verum, Page 231. ter. 232. bis. 236. bis.
that the Baptism of Heretics and Schismatics is not true; and that both
returning to the Church were to be admitted by Baptism, Now in this indeed he
differed from the received Opinion of the Church, (...) Amphil. can. 1.
to whom it seemed good, says Basil, to reject the Baptism of Heretics,
(...), but to receive that of Schismatics. 2dly, Whereas St. Cyprian and his
party held the Baptism of all Heretics to be void; we find the Church did
afterward judge that some Heretics should be admitted into the Church by
Baptism, and that others should be received only by Imposition of Hands. It Is
therefore evident, That the Church equally disallowed both their Assertions,
and decided the Controversy against them both, and did as much condemn Pope
Stephen's Traditum est as St. Cyprian's Scriptum est, the Pope's Appeal to
Tradition, as the Bishop of Carthage's to Scripture.

Now the Corollaries which naturally do result from these Ten Observations are
as follow:

First, Latins, though comparatively Ancient, are not much to be relied upon in
giving an account of matters in which their Church is concerned, and in which
they differed from the Eastern Churches. For, to omit St. Commen. c. 9.
Austin, the Account Vincentius Lirinensis gives of this matter, is as full of
Errors as of Sentences; for he averrs that Agrippinus was the first of 1 all
Men, who, against the 2 Divine Canon, against the 3 Rule of the Universal
Church, against the 4 Sense of all his own fellow Priests, against the 5
Customs and 6 Institutions of the Ancients, Rebaptizandum esse censebat, judged
for Rebaptization, and that 7 all men disclaimed the novelty of the thing, and
8 all the Priests every were resisted it, but above all Pope Stephen, who said,
Nihil innovandum, nisi quod traditum est, Nothing must be innovated but that
which was delivered us to be retained; that, retenta est igitur Antiquitas,
explosa novitas, hereupon Antiquity was retained, and novelty exploded. In
which few words are no less than Eight gross mistakes, as will appear by
comparing these words with the Testimonies above cited. In Ep. 70. p. ^89.
And as it is truly observed by the Oxford Commentator upon Cyprian, That the
Eastern Writers were, in rebus Occidentalium Hospites, Strangers in things
which concerned the West, so is it as true, that the Western Writers were many
of them Strangers to the true State of Matters in the East.

Secondly, Church declared against Pope Stephen, That in this matter of the
Rebaptizing Heretics, the various Customs which had obtained were to be
permitted without breach of Communion, and Christian Peace; that the Custom of
every Region was to be followed, and the obtaining practice to be submitted to,
(...), for Orders sake; that it was to be done, or left undone suitably, (...),
to what should generally be ordered concerning it. Hence in all matters of this
indifferency and obscurity, Ad Amphil. can. 1. De unit. fidei, c. 19.
in which, says Basil, (...), nothing plainly is declared, we admit that
saying of St. Austin, That Heretics must be received as the Church receives
them, there being, as he adds, no clear Example to be produced from Scripture
either way; and with him we acknowledge, Contr. Crescon. l. 1. c. 33.
That the Truth of Scripture is held by us, when we do that which does please
the Church; because we know from Scripture that God is the God of Order, not of
Confusion, and that in matters of this indifferency, that of the Apostle, 1
Cor. xiv. 33. 1. Cor. xi. 16.
We have no such Custom neither the Churches of God, must cut off farther
matter of Contention; but then in Articles of Christian Faith, we with the same
St. Austin say, De peccat. mer. and remiss. l. 2. c. 36.
Credo quod hinc divinorum eloquiorum clarissima Authoritas fuisset, si homo
illud, sine dispendio salutis, ignorare non possit, We believe that the
Authority of the Divine Oracles would have been most clear, had the matter been
such of which we could not have been ignorant without loss of Salvation.

Moreover, though St. Austin does acknowledge that no Example could be produced
from Scripture in this Case, yet he pretends Scripture for the right and
lawfulness of the said Practice: For, says he, That I may not seem, De Bapt.
contr. Donatistas, l. 10. c. 6. Tom. 7. p. 379.
humanis Argumentis id agere, to prove the Right of receiving Heretics without
Baptism, only by humane Arguments, ex Evangelio profero certa documenta, I
produce certain proofs out of the Gospel, to show how rightly this was
determined by the Church. And again, having said, Ibid. l. 4. c. 7. p. 419.
We follow that which the Custom of the Church always held, and a plenary
Council has confirmed; he adds, That been perspectis ex utroque latere
Scripturarum Testimoniis, potest etiam dici, quod veritas declaravit, Tot
tantisque S. Scripturarum testimoniis, l. 5. c. 4. Divinarum Scripturarum d^
cumentis, l. 6. c. 1.
hoc sequimur, weighing well the Testimonies of Scripture on both sides, it may
also be said, that we follow that which Truth has declared. From whence, and
many other places of his works, it is evident, that even in, hae obscurissima
quaestione, in this most obscure Question, as he often styles it, he recurrs
for matter of Right to Scripture, and weighs it in the Balance of the Sanctuary.

Thirdly, Church of that Age in which this Controversy happened, knew nothing,
or at least believed nothing of the New Rule of R. H. That in Judges
subordinate dissenting, all Christians must adhere to the Superior, in those of
the same Order, and Dignity to the major part; since all these Africans, and
Orientals not only take the liberty to dissent from what the Pope, and all the
Churches which adhered to him, held as Apostolical Tradition; but also to
condemn it as a thing contrary to the plain evidence of Scripture, and to
decree the contrary should be observed and practiced. For had such a Rule been
then received, and owned by the Church of Christ, could all the Christian
Churches, besides that of Rome, have still maintained Communion with those
Southern, and those Eastern Churches who did so resolutely oppose, and flatly
contradict this Rule? Could they have thus condemned Pope Stephen of violating
the Churches Peace and unity, for acting consonantly to this Rule by renouncing
Communion with them who were, provided that this Rule be true, manifest
Schismatics? Could St. Denis of Alexandria have told the Pope he durst not, by
acting contrary to the Decrees made at Iconium and Synnada, provoke those
Churches to Contention, if doing so had only been to act according to a Rule
always received, and owned by the Church of Christ? Could St. Basil have judged
it best for every one to follow herein the Custom of their own Country in
opposition to this Rule? Could Firmilian have charged the Pope with Schism?
Could Cyprian, and the Council of Carthage have charged him with Tyranny for
pressing a received Rule in the whole Church? These sure are demonstrations
that this pretended Rule is like the rest of Popish Doctrines; a Rule with
which the Ancient Church of Christ was not acquainted.

Fourthly, Hence evident it is, That all the Churches of that Age knew nothing
of the Pope's Supremacy, nothing of any Obligation laid upon them to conform to
the Doctrines, Decrees and Customs of the Roman Church and her adherents; and
lastly nothing of that pretended Law that Synods were not to assemble, and make
Canons without consulting of his Holiness. Since all these Synods made these
Canons, either without his Knowledge, or else in opposition to, Unusquisque
Episcoporum quod putat faciat, etc. Ep. 73. p. 210.
and condemnation of the Decrees and Customs both of the Pope and Church of
Rome; and others told him, They thought themselves obliged, notwithstanding all
his Threats, to act according to their Sentence, and durst not rescind it. Had
they believed the Pope's Supremacy in that Age, would they have declared so
freely as St. Cyprian does, Neque enim quisquam nostrum Episcopum se
Episcoporum constituit, aut tyrannico terrore ad obsequendi necessitatem
collegas suos adigit. Apud Cypr. p. 229. Apud Cypr. Ep. 75. p. 217, 218, 225,
227, 228.
for the Liberty of every Bishop to act as he saw fit in this matter, and said,
that he was only to give account to God of his proceedings? Could they with the
Council of Carthage have esteemed it such a tyrannical Matter for the Pope to
act as Bishop of Bishops? Could Firmilian have accused him so pertly of
Inhumanity, Insolence and Boldness in this Case? Could he have judged him a
downright Schismatic for acting as he did? Could all the forementioned Bishops
so freely have reproved him, and dissented from him, and judged it their Duty
rather to adhere to the decisions of Provincial Synods, than to his
Determination?

Could they have thought themselves obliged to adhere to the Decrees, Ubique a
S. Scripturis declaratum est Baptisma Haereticorum non esse verum, Ep. 7.
the Doctrines or Customs of the Roman Church, and yet declare, as does St.
Cyprian and his Africans, That the Decrees and Practice of the Roman Church
were in this case opposite to Scripture and the plainest Reason. And, as St.
Basil does to Amphilochius in the same case, Can. 47.

Eos qui Romae sunt non ea in omnibus observare quae sunt ab origin tradita,
Ep. 75. p. 220.


Though you and the Romans hold the contrary, (...), yet ought our Sentence to
take place, And, as Firmilian expressly does, That it is usual with them of Rome
to vary from Apostolical Tradition? Could so many Fathers, so many Churches, so
many Councils have not only practiced in opposition to the Doctrines and
Customs of that Church, but also have condemned them in such opprobrious Terms
as they have done, Cyp. Ep. 69. p. 185. Ep. 73. p. 206, 208, 210. Ep. 74. p
212, etc.
pronouncing the Assertors of them Prevaricators in matters both of Faith and
Truth, Betrayers of the Church, Enemies to Christians, Friends and Abettors of
Heretics, Men who did plead their Cause, and partake with them in their Sins,
Men who did null, evacuate, destroy the Baptism of the Church, and give up the
Spouse of Christ to Adulterers.

Fifthly, Apostolical Tradition in the Church of Rome, and her Adherents, might
be no such matter; that both that Church and her Abettors might impose upon
their fellow Christians, in pretending to it; and that there lay no Obligation
on other Churches to comply with them in such matters as they delivered for
Apostolical Tradition. For otherwise how could it happen that so many populous
Churches, so many Councils, so many famous Bishops; that Athanasius, Optatus,
St. Basil, Cyril of Jerusalem, all great Assertors of true Apostolical
Tradition, should declare so plainly and expressly against this practice of the
Church of Rome; that Firmilian should declare, Neminem tam stultum esse qui hoc
credat Apostolos tradidisse, Ep. 75. p. 219.

Nemo infamare Apostolos debeat quasi illi Haereticorum Baptisinata
probaverint, Ep. 74. p. 211.


No Man could be so Foolish as to believe the Apostles had delivered any such
thing; that St. Cyprian should say, That this pretense of Romanists was
manifestly false, and tended to blaspheme the Reputation of the Blessed
Apostles; that the Africans should not only reject this pretended Apostolical
Tradition in the opprobrious Terms forementioned, but should declare so often in
Council that the contrary Doctrine descended from Evangelical Authority and
Apostolical Tradition, Vid. Supra.
and was confirmed by the Divine Law, and the Holy Scriptures? How, lastly,
could it happen that all the other Churches, excepting that of Rome, were all
at Peace, and still maintained Communion with these Opposers, and Traducers of
this pretended Tradition, and did not blame them in the least on this account,
but rather interceded with the Roman Bishop to lay aside his Fury, and
entertain Communion and Friendship with these Churches as they did?

Sixthly, Hence it appears that in that Age they thought not Custom or
Tradition, though practiced by the Church of Rome, and by the major part of
Christians, any certain Rule of Manners, but thought themselves obliged
sometimes to vary from it, and that they might have Truth, and Reason, and
Scripture on their sides against it; that it concerned them to examine then
whether the Custom they were required to follow, had its rise from Christ and
his Apostles, and could be proved from their Writings, and if not to reject it.
For in this matter they declare, Non esse consuetudine praescribendum, Cypr.
Ep. 71. p. 194.
sed ratione vincendum, Their Adversaries were not to prescribe to them from
Custom, but to convince them by reason, St. Paul having taught every one not to
adhere pertinaciously to what he had once imbibed, Page 195.
but willingly to embrace any thing which he found better, or more profitable.
That 'twas in vain, when Men were overcome by reason, Ep. 73. p. 203.
to oppose Custom to it, as if Custom were better than Truth, and that were not
rather to be followed which was revealed for the better by the Holy Spirit;
that, Non semper errandum, Ibid. p. 208.
quia aliquando erratum est, We must not always err because we once have done
so; Ep. 74. p. 215.
that Custom without Truth was only old Error, and vainly was preferred before
it; that the Truth being manifested, Council. Carth. apud Cypr. p. 236, 240, 241.
Custom was to yield to it; that no Man ought to prefer Custom to Reason and
Truth; that Christ being Truth, we ought rather to follow that than Custom;
that it was obstinacy and presumption, Cypr. Ep. 74. p. 212.
humanam traditionem divinae dispositioni anteponere, to prefer humane
Tradition to divine Orders, and not to consider that God is angry when humane
Tradition evacuates divine Precepts; that when it was said to them, let nothing
be innovated, Ibid. p. 211.
but that which was delivered be observed; it was to be enquired, unde est ista
traditio, whence is that Tradition? Whether from the Authority of Christ and
the Gospel, the commands and Epistles of the Apostles; and if, in Evangelio
praecipitur, Ib. p. 215.
aut in Apostolorum Epistolis aut Actubus continetur, it were commanded in the
Gospel, or contained in the Acts, or Epistles of the Apostles, then was it to
be observed, and that when Truth shook and staggered, we were to have recourse
to the Head and Original of Divine Tradition, ad originem dominicam and
Evangelicam and Apostolicam Traditionem, to the Gospel, and Apostolical
Tradition.

Lastly, Hence it is evident, Tradition Apostolical, and from the beginning,
must falsely be pretended by Great Men and Churches, even in a matter of
continual practice and occurrence in the Church of God; for here you see it was
pretended for the Admission of Heretics without Baptism by Pope Stephen and
his Church, and the fame Tradition Apostolical, and from the beginning was
pretended for the opposite Doctrine by Firmilian and St. Basil, and their
Party; and yet the Church did in the following Ages declare against the
Pretenses of them both. If then in these plain matters of Fact, and of
continual practice, Tradition did so fail both the Pretenders to it, must it
not be more apt to fail in matters of mere Speculation: If by Tradition these
Churches could not truly tell what their Forefathers did, how should they by it
tell assuredly in all things what they held, since that could only be made
known unto them by their Words and Actions? if actually they handed down unto
posterity for a traditionary Practice, that which was not truly so, why might
they not also hand that down to them as a traditionary Doctrine, which was
nothing less than so?

CHAP. V.
Eighthly, We distinguish also betwixt Traditions which appear from Reason to be
such as ought to be received, and such as want the Evidence of Reason to assure
us of their Truth; of the latter kind is the Tradition that Enoch and Elias are
to appear as Christ's Forerunners at the Day of Judgment,. 1. This Tradition
is very ancient, and found no Contradiction in the Church,. 2. It was also the
general Tradition of the Jews, that Elias was to come in Person before the
first coming of their Messiah, Ibid. And yet this is not countenanced, but
plainly is confuted by the Scriptures,. 3. The promise in Malachy belongs not
to Christ's Second, but to his first Advent, Ibid. The Elias there promised was
not Elias in Person, but John the Baptist,. 4. The Objections against this
Assertion answered, Ibid. Two Corollaries, 1. That Tradition is not always a
sure Interpreter of Scripture. 2. That Oral Tradition is not of absolute
certainty in matters of Speculation,. 5, 6. The Tradition of the Superiority of
Bishops over Presbbyters may be relied upon, because it is strengthened by
Reason,. 7. So also is the Tradition of the true Copies of Scripture; where
note, 1. That we cannot know the Scriptures are not corrupted from the
Infallibility of the Jewish or the Christian Church,. 8, 9. But we may know
from Reason grounded upon Scripture, 1st. That the Scriptures were committed
pure to the Christian Church,. 10. 2dly. That the immediate succeeding Age
could want no assurance of their Purity, whilst the Autographae were extant,.
11. 3dly. That these Records being so generally dispersed, could not be then
corrupted,. 11. 4ly. That the whole Church would not, and part of them could
not corrupt them,. 13. 5ly. That the Providence of God would not permit them to
be corrupted in Substantials,. 14. No like proof can be given, that the
pretended Traditions of the Church of Rome have been thus handed down unto us,.
15. The Objection of Mr. Mumford is answered,. 16.

WE distinguish betwixt Traditions which can be made appear by Reason to be
such as ought to be received, Did. 8.
and which we therefore think our selves obliged to receive, and such as cannot
by Reason be proved to have derived from the Apostles, though they appeared
very early in the Church. Of the first Nature are the Traditions of the Canon
of Scripture, of the Copies handed down to us without Corruption, in any
necessary Articles of Christian Faith; of the Observation of the Lord's Day,
etc. Of the Second Order are the Traditions of the Millennary Doctrine; of the
Appearance of Enoch and Elias the Tisbite, as the Forerunners of the Day of
Judgment. And of Traditions of this Nature we say we have no Ground sufficient
to receive them as Articles of Christian Faith, or Apostolical Traditions.

The Appearance of Enoch and Elias, Antichrist, and to be slain by him, is
delivered thus, De Resur. Carnis, c. 22.
Enoch and Helias are, says Tertullian, Translated, caeterum morituri
reservantur ut Antichristum sanguine suo extinguant, but they are reserved to
die, and shed their Blood for the Extinction of Antichrist.

This, says Petrus Alexandrinus, is, In Chronico.

(...).

In Apoc. 11.


(...), the Tradition of the Church, That Enoch is to come in the last Days
with Helias to resist Antichrist. It is, says Aretas, unanimously received by
the Church from Tradition, that Enoch and Elias the Tisbite are to come.

The Tradition of the Advent of the Tisbite is as old as Justin Martyr, Dial.
cum Tryph. p. 268.
and has been constantly believed in the Church from that time till the
Reformation; that of Enoch's coming with him, is as old as Tertullian, it
generally obtained in the following Centuries, and found no Contradiction from
any of the Writers of those times; and yet I find no ground at all for this
Tradition concerning Enoch: For the Two Witnesses in the Revelations are not
described like Enoch and Elias, but like Moses and Elias, Rev. xi. 6.
it being said, They have Power to shut Heaven, that it Rain not in the Days of
their Prophecy, which Elijah did, and have Power over Waters to turn them into
Blood, and to smite the Earth with all Plagues as often as they will, which we
know Moses did; but there is nothing in the description of these Witnesses,
relating in the least to Enoch.

As for Elias let it be considered.

First, That it was the general Tradition of the Jewish Nation, that Elias the
Tisbite was to come in Person, as the Forerunner of the Messiah of the Jews,
that he in Person was to Anoint him, and make him known unto the People, that
before the Advent of the Son of David, Elias was to come to Preach concerning
him. This is the Import of the Question of St. Joh. i. 21. Matt. xvij. 10. Mal.
iv. 5.
John, Art thou Elias? and of the Saying of the Scribes, Elias must first come
and restore all things; of the Interpretation of the Seventy, Behold I send
unto you, (...), Elias the Tisbite; -- and of that Saying of the Son of Syrach,
Elias was ordained for reproofs in their times, Ecclus. xliij. 10.
to pacify the wrath of the Lord's Judgment before it break into fury, and to
turn the Heart of the Father to the Son, and to restore the Tribes of Jacob.
And suitably to these Assertions Trypho the Jew declares, That, (...), Dial. p.
268.
all we Jews expect Elias to Anoint Christ at his coming.

Secondly, Observe, That it was the general Tradition of the Writers of the
Christian Church, even from the Second Century, that Elias the Tisbite is to
come in person before our Lord's Second Advent, to prepare Men for it. This
Opinion of the coming of Elias, In Tetull. de resur. carn. c. 22. Not. in Orig.
p. 41. c. 1.
tradit tota Patrum antiquitas, all the ancient Fathers have delivered, says
De la Cerda. Constans est patrum, omniumque consensu receptissima Ecclesiae
opinio, It is the constant and most received Opinion of the Church, and all the
Fathers, says Huetius. Constantissima semper fuit Christianorum opinio, It was
always the most constant Opinion of Christians, In Mat. xi. 14.
That Elias was to come before the Day of Judgment, says Maldonate. It is,
says Mr. Mede, well known, Disc. 25. p. 48.
that all the Fathers were of this Opinion. He is to come, says Petrus
Alexandrinus, (...), according to the Tradition of the Church; says Arethas
Caesariensis, In Apoc. 11.
According to the unanimously received Opinion of the Church.

And yet if we may credit either the Angel or our Blessed Lord, Prophecy on
which the Jews built this Tradition was fulfilled in John the Baptist: And if
we may believe the Ancient Fathers, they built their Tradition on those words
of Christ, Elias comes first, and restores all things, which words do not
establish, but with the greatest Evidence destroy this vain Tradition. And,

First, That the words of Malachy, Mal. iv. 5, 6.
Behold I will send you Elijah the Prophet, etc. cannot be understood of our
Lord's Second Coming to pass Judgment on the World, will be exceeding Evident
from these considerations, 1. That this Forerunner was to come, the Lord, there
mentioned, to follow, before the Ruin of the Jewish Temple; this is evident
from these words, Behold I will send my Messenger, Mal. iij. 1, 2.
and he shall prepare my way before me; and the Lord, whom ye seek, shall
suddenly come to his Temple: For that the Messenger in this Third Chapter, is
the same with Elijah the Prophet in the Fourth Chapter, will be apparent, 1.
From the Office of this Messenger, which was to come before the Face of the
Lord, or to be his Forerunner; as the Elijah mentioned Chapter the ourth was to
be, and as John Baptist was. 2. From the Consideration of the work he was to
do, Mal. iij. 1.
This Messenger being to prepare the way before him, as the Elijah promised
also was to do, by turning the Hearts of the Fathers to the Children, and of
the Disobedient to the Wisdom of the Just. And as the Angel does inform us that
the Baptist should do, for says the Angel, He shall go before him in the
Spirit and Power of Elias, to turn the Hearts of the Fathers to the Children,
and of the Disobedient to the Wisdom of the Just, to make ready a People
prepared for the Lord. 3. Luke i. 17.
From the consideration of the Day of his Coming mentioned Chapter the Third,
as a Day so dreadful that few could abide it, or stand when he appears, by
reason of the Severity of the Judgments which should then befall them. verse. 2.
And Chapter the Fourth, as a Day great and terrible. Since then the Lord here
mentioned was to come suddenly, seeing he was to come to hi^ Temple; it is
certain that the Day of his coming was to be before the Temple was destroyed,
and therefore could not be the Day of Judgment. 4. This will be further evident
from the Consideration of the persons to whom this Messenger and this Elijah
were both sent, Chap. iij. 1.
for the Messenger was sent to them who then sought for the Lord, and delighted
in the Messenger of the Covenant; verse. 3. verse. 4.
he was to be his Messenger who was to purify the Sons of Levi, to make the
Offerings of Judah and Jesusalem pleasant to the Lord. He therefore was a
Messenger peculiarly sent to them, to reprove them for their Sins, and to
declare unto them such things as concerned them, and not such things as were
common to the whole World. Accordingly Elijah the Prophet was sent to them that
feared his name, Chap. iv. v. 2.
to them who were obliged to remember the Law of Moses, verse. 4.
which he commanded to him in Horeb for all Israel.

This Day of Terror therefore must be chiefly that which did concern that
Nation. And lastly, This Elias was to come to call Men to Conversion and
Repentance, for which was a fit Season at our Lord's first coming, whereas at
his second coming, there will be no time for Repentance, but for the
Destribution of Rewards and Punishments. He was to come to turn the Hearts of
the Fathers, etc, least God should smite the Earth, Becherem, i. e. the
Inhabitants of Judah with Destruction, so that the Ruin threatened here, might
be prevented by Repentance and Conversion; whereas the general Day of Judgment
cannot be thus prevented, but will certainly come in the appointed time.

The only Objection that is considerable against this Assertion, Chapter iv.
verse. 5. is represented as a dreadful Day, which seems proper to the Day of
Judgment, whereas the Day of Christ's first coming is not so called, but rather
an Acceptable Day, and a Day of Salvation.

To this I Answer, Jerusalem was indeed a very dreadful and terrible Day. Thus
in the Prophet Joel we read of a Day of the Lord described in the same
Expressions, Joel ij. 31.
The Sun shall be turned into Darkness, and the Moon into Blood, before the
great and terrible Day of the Lord come; and yet St. Peter, speaking of what
was done after our Lord's Ascension, and citing these very words, says, Acts
ij. 16.
This was that which was spoken by the Prophet Joel. Moreover our Blessed Lord
speaking of the destruction of Jerusalem, and of the miseries that should befall
that very Generation, says, Luke xxi. 22. Mat. xxiv. 21.
These shall be the days of Vengeance, such days of Tribulation as never were
from the beginning of the World, and never shall be afterward. Yea, Vid Dr.
Pocock in Mal. 3. v. 2.
the Tradition of the Jews does in their Talmud make mention of such great
Afflictions which should happen in the days of their Messiah unto Israel, that
happy should he be who did not see them. Which, notwithstanding, this day might
well be styled an Acceptable Day, a Day of Salvation to them who received our
Jesus as their Savior, believed in him, and obeyed his Sayings, according to
the words of the Prophet Malachy, Behold the Day comes which shall burn as an
Oven, etc. Mal. iv. 1, 2.
but to you that fear my name shall the Sun of Righteousness arise with healing
in his Wings. Whence, after this most terrible description our Lord speaks thus
to his Disciples, Luke xxi. 18, 19. verse. 28.
Be not ye terrified when these things shall happen, in Patience possess your
Spirits, for there shall not one Hair of your Heads perish; when these things
come to pass, then look up, and lift up your Heads, for your Redemption draws
nigh.

Secondly, That the Elias of whom the Prophet Malachy speaks, Tisbite, or, that
it is not there asserted, that he, who in the Reign of Ahab, was carried into
Heaven, should be in person, sent as the Forerunner of our Lord's second
Advent, will be evident from these Considerations:

1. Because Elias the Tisbite came not upon the Errands mentioned there, to
prepare the way of the Lord, or turn the Hearts of the Disobedient to the
Wisdom of the Just, before the ruin of Jurusalem, and the destruction of the
Temple, as the Elijah promised by the Prophet was to do, and did.

2. It Is certain that the Messenger described by the Prophet as the Forerunner
of the Lord, and of his Day, was John the Baptist; for so our Savior does
expressly teach us, saying, This John is he of whom it is written, Matthew. xi.
10. Luke vij. 27, 28.
Behold I send my Messeger before thy Face to prepare thy way before thee.
There has not risen among Men a greater Prophet than this John. Since then it
is already proved that Elijah the Prophet in Malachy is the same person with
the Messenger here mentioned, it follows that he can beno other than the
Baptist.

3. Our Lord himself declares expressly, that John the Baptist was that Elias
who was for to come; for, when descending from the Mount, Matthew. xvij. 9.
he says to his Disciples, Tell no Man of the Vision, till the Son of Man is
risen from the dead; they thinking, suitably to their Tradition, that this
Elias, who appeared in the Mount, was visibly to appear among them to Anoint
the Messiah in the sight of all the People, and order all things belonging to
his Advent, ask this Question, Seeing, according to the Doctrine of the
Scribes, verse. 10.
Elias must first come, and do these things, why is it thou forbiddest us to
speak of his Appearance? To this Enquiry our Savior Answers, that it is very
true there is a promise of an Elias to come, and restore all things. verse. 11.
But I say unto you, the Elias promised, (...), has come already, and the
Scribes knew him not, but did unto him whatsoever they would. verse. 12, 13.
And then it follows, that his Disciples understood that he spoke to them of
John the Baptist. They therefore understood what the Fathers did not, and
others will not learn from Christ's plain words, that John the Baptist was the
Elias promised, as the Forerunner of the great and terrible Day of the Lord;
whence it does plainly follow, that they who do not think John Baptist, and he
only, was the Elias mentioned by the Prophet, must mistake; for our Lord
plainly saying, That that Elias of whom the Scribes made mention as the
Forerunner of his Advent, was already come, and giving them no intimation that
any other was to be expected after the coming of this one, there can be no
pretense from the Tradition of the Scribes, or from the Saying of the Prophet
to expect any other. Moreover our Lord, as if he had foreseen, and had designed
to confute this Jewish Fable, speaks still more plainly, thus, Matthew. xi. 14.
All the Prophets and the Law Prophesied until John, and if you will receive,
i. e. attend to, and believe it, this is that Elias which was for to come; by
which words he most plainly teaches that that Elias of whom the Prophets spoke
as of one for to come, Vid. Pocock in locum.
was come already, and makes it manifest, that all that was in Malachy, or any
other Prophet spoken of Elias, Luke i. 16.
was made good in the Baptist, who came in the Power and Spirit of Elias, and
was to be understood of him alone, as muchas if he had in express words
asserted, that he only was the Elias that was to come, and they were not, by
virtue of any Prophecy, to look for or expect another. For thus our Savior
speaks, The Prophet Malachy says, Matthew. xi. 10.
Behold I send my Messenger before my Face; now, I assure you, the Baptist is
the very Person of whom this is written. The same Prophet says, Behold I will
send you Elias the Prophet, etc. whence your Scribes teach you to expect the
personal Appearance of Elias the Tisbite, as the Forerunner of your Messiah;
but if you will receive the true Interpretation of those words from me, St.
verse 14.
John the Baptist is that Elias, which according to that Prophecy was to be his
Forerunner.

But against this plain Assertion of our Lord it is objected, Behold I will
send you, (...), Elias the Tisbite, which denotes Elias in person, and cannot
be applied to St. John the Baptist.

To this I answer, That this Argument is of no force, Original, but only on a
Translation which is not Authentic. 2. From this Translation it may be
probably collected that this Imagination of the Appearance of the Tisbite,
obtained among the Jews; but hence it will not follow that it was true, any
more than that the Doctrine of the Millennium, and of Christ's Temporal Kingdom
must be true, because they where received by that Nation as such. 3. Pocock, p.
99.
By the same Reason and Figurative way of speaking, the Baptist may as well be
called Elijah the Tisbite as Elijah the Prophet; that only showing the Country
of that Prophet, as the other does his Office; so that if the Baptist deserved
to be called Elijah the Prophet, because he came in the Spirit and Power of
Elijah, he must deserve to be called Elijah the Tisbite on the same account,
seeing Elijah the Prophet was Elijah the Tisbite.

It further is Objected, John expressly denies that he was Elias, for when the
Jews from Jerusalem, and the Priests and Levites sent to him saying, Art thou
Elias? He said, John i. 21.
I am not.

If this Objection be of any force, John the Baptist was no Prophet; for to the
following Enquiry, Art thou a Prophet? he still answers, No; whereas our
Savior attested, That he was a Prophet, yea, and more than a Prophet, Matthew.
xi. 9.
and all the People so accounted of him: Dr. Pocock, Ibid.
His meaning therefore only is, I am not that Elias in person whom you expect,
nor am I such a Prophet, as in the days of the Messiah you expect to rise from
the Dead. And thus Expositors tell us, he chose to answer out of Modesty, that
he might not commend, or bear witness of himself, thinking it more convenient
that Christ should thus bear witness of him, than that he should ascribe so
great a Dignity to himself.

Thirdly, John was Beheaded, our Savior says, Elias truly shall first come,
and restore all things, now how, say they, can this be spoken as a thing future
of John Baptist then? This therefore must be understood of some other Elias to
come hereafter. This is the Ground on which this Doctrine is established by
Justin M. Dial. cum Tryph. p. 268.
That our Lord taught it, saying, (...), That Elias shall come. And in this he
is followed by Theodoret, and many of the Ancients.

After that our Lord had uttered these words, future, Matthew. xvij. 11. Mark ix.
11.
as the vulgar reads them, but in the present Tense, Elias comes, or Elias
coming first restores all things. He adds immediately of the same Elias,
Matthew. xvij. 12.
of whom he had said, He comes, or he shall come first; that, (...), he is now
come, (...), that he indeed was come. And again, if you will receive it, this
Baptist is the Elias, Matthew xi 14.
(...), who is for to come; and when he had said these words, then his
Disciples understood that he spoke of John the Baptist, that he meant him and
no other, when he speak of an Elias who was for to come.

So that the meaning of our Lord's words is plainly this, true it is, as the
Scribes say, Elias is to come before the Messiah, and it is also true, that
John is that Elias which was, when Malachy spoke those words, to come
afterward, but was not yet to come when our Savior spoke of him, but as he
says expressly, Was already come, though they who said Elias must first come,
knew him not when he was come. And truly had our Lord spoken of one Elias, viz.
John the Baptist, and the Prophet Malachy of another; had Christ spoken of an
Elias to come at his first Advent, and the Prophet and the Scribes of one to
come at his second Advent, He had not answered his Disciples Question, but
deluded them. And that the Elias here spoken of was to appear at our Lord's
first coming, is apparent from the Enquiry of the Disciples; Why, say the
Scribes, Elias must first come, before the Son of Man; for the Tradition of the
Scribes was, that Elias was to Anoint the Messiah, and make him known unto the
People.

And it is as evident from our Lord's answer, Elias comes first, i. e. before
my Resurrection of which I now speak; from this place therefore it never can be
proved, that any other, under that Character, is to appear before his second
coming.

It further is Objected, Elias mentioned by Malachy, was, To turn the Hearts of
the Fathers to the Children, and was, according to our Savior's
acknowledgment, to restore, or set all things in Order, which seems not to
have been done by the Ministry of the Baptist, who continued but a short time,
and did no such things as these words seem to imply; it remains therefore, that
these words should be fulfilled by an Elias, who shall be the Forerunner of
Christ's second Advent.

To this I Answer, Angel sent to Zachary, must be obliged to confess the
Baptist did fulfill the Prophecy of Malachy; for of the Baptist he thus speaks,
He shall be great before the Lord, Luke i. 15, 16, 17.
and many of the Sons of Israel shall he turn unto the Lord, for he shall go
before him in the Spirit and Power of Elias, to turn the Hearts of the Fathers
to the Children, and the Disobedient to the Wisdom of the Just, to make ready a
People prepared for the Lord: If then John Baptist did not fulfill the words
spoken by the Angel, we must confess the Angel was deceived, and Zachary
deserved not the punishment he suffered for disbelieving of his Testimony. But
if he did fulfill these Sayings of the Angel, he also must fulfill the words
contained in the Prophet Malachy, because the Angel speaks in the very words
of Malachy.

Again, our Savior acknowledging that an Elias was to come before him, and
restore all things, adds, that he who was to come to restore all things, was
already come, and was the Baptist. He therefore must have restored all things,
or it must be confessed he did not execute his Office, or fulfill what was
written of him. Moreover, the Holy Ghost, by the Mouth of Zachary, speaks thus
concerning John, Luke i. 76.
And thou Child shall be called the Prophet of the Highest, for thou shall go
before the Lord to prepare his way, which is the very thing the Prophet Malachy
declares to be the Office of his Messenger. And whosoever shall consider what
in the Gospel is said of John the Baptist, and shall compare those things with
what the Prophet Malachy, and even the Scribes averred, that the Elias promised
should do, will easily perceive all that was said or Prophesied concerning
Elias, was so punctually fulfilled by the Baptist, as to cut off all further
expectation of the completion of this Prophecy by any personal Appearance of
Elias before our Savior's second Advent. For the Prophet says, Behold I will
send Elias, and the Gospel says, There was a Man sent from God whose Name was
John; and that this John was that Elias which was for to come. Vid. Pocock, p.
105.
The Prophet says of his Elias, That he was to come before the Great and
Terrible day of the Lord. And in the Gospel, John is said to come when the Day
of Wrath was coming, when the Axe was laid to the Root of the Trees, Matthew.
xxiv. 2.
and every Tree that brought not forth good Fruit was to be hewn down, and
cast into the Fire, when he was now appearing, Mat. xxiij. 38.
whose Fan was in his Hand to purge his Flour, and gather the Wheat into his
Barn, and to burn up the Chaff with unquenchable Fire. He came at the time,
when, says our Savior, Luke xix. 43.
their House was to be left unto them desolate; when the desolation of their
City, Luke xix. 43, 44.
Nation and Temple was irreversably at hand, -- when the Enemies of Jerusalem
were to cast a Trench about her, and lay her even with the Ground, and her
Children within her. Here it is said, That this Elijah should turn the Hearts
of the Fathers to the Children, etc. That he should Preach to Young and Old
Conversion and Repentance; and in the Gospel it is said of John, That he should
turn many of the Children of Israel to the Lord their God, that he should turn
the Hearts of the Fathers to their Children, and of the Disobedient to the
Wisdom of the Just, Luke iij. 3. Matthew. iij. 5, 6.
that he preached to all the Baptism of Repentance, and that with such success
and good effect, that Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the Regions round about
Jordan went out to him, and were Baptized of him, confessing their Sins; that
all the People, Luke vij. 29. Matthew. iij. 7. Luke iij. 13, 14.
and the Publicans justified God, being Baptized of John. So effectual was his
Ministry, that many of the Scribes and Pharisees came to his Baptism, and even
the Soldiers and the Publicans to be instructed by him. Vid. Dr. Pocock, p.
105.
He prevailed generally with the Jews to unite in one common Baptism, that of
Repentance, and whereas the Tradition of the Scribes taught, That Elias was to
Anoint the Messiah, and make him known to the People; John did Baptize him, and
declare unto the People that he was the Lamb of God, John i. 29. Matthew. iij. 16.
and at his Baptism by St. John he was anointed by the Holy Ghost.

What therefore better can agree, than the Prophecy in Malachy, and the matter
of Fact in the Gospel?

What can be further requisite to show that the Person who is characterized
thus by the Prophet, and who so punctually answered to that Character in the
Gospel, is one and the same Person, and that no other ought to be expected by
virtue of this Prophecy?

Now hence it follows, 1. Scribes and Doctors of the Jewish Church were all
mistaken in their Interpretation of this place of Malachy, That they and the
whole Jewish Church had entertained a false Tradition, in a matter of so great
Consequence as the Forerunner of their true Messiah, for they all had embraced
it as a Tradition, That Elias was to come in Person before the first Appearance
of the true Messiah; Trypho apud Justin. M. p. 268.
they all interpreted that place of Malachy to that effect, and thence
concluded, as they still obstinately do, (...), That because Elias is not yet
come in Person, their Messiah was not come. And yet this general Tradition of
the Jewish Church gives no Assurance of the Truth of this Assertion, or if it
does, it must be then confessed that their Messiah is not yet come. 2. Hence
also we may learn how vainly Men pretend to absolute Certainty on the account
of Oral Tradition; for that Tradition was received as much, as highly
reverenced, and regarded by the Scribes and Pharisees, as by the Romanists, I
hope will easily be granted, when we consider how zealous they were for the
Customs and Traditions of the Fathers: How they advanced the Tradition of the
Elders, even to the dissolution and making void the Law of God. And how
frequent are such Maxims as these among them, Vid. Leight. in Matthew. 15.2.
The Words of the Scribes are more worthy than the Words of the Law, and more
weighty than the Words of the Prophets. -- That the Words of the Elders are
more weighty than the Words of the Prophets. -- That they came from the Mouth
of Moses, as well as the written Law. -- That the written Law is narrow, but
the Traditional is longer than the Earth, and broader than the Sea.

And yet these Patrons of Tradition had not only generally received such
Traditions as made void the Law of God, but also such Traditions touching their
Messiah, his Forerunner, his temporal Kingdom, his glorious Reign on Earth,
etc. as gave Occasion to their Rejecting of him when he came: If then the
Jewish Church might pretend to oral Tradition as much as that of Rome, and yet
receive such Falsehoods as Tradition, which did evacuate the Law of God, and
cause them to reject their Savior, why may not they of Rome receive such
Falsehoods for Tradition as do evacuate the Law of Christ? If the People were
deceived and abused by following their Traditions, why may not others be
equally deceived in following the supposed Traditions of the Church of Rome?

3. Christian Church can be no certain Evidence in Matters of mere Speculation,
or of Interpretation of Scripture, that what they thus deliver is the Truth;
for they have generally taught from the third Century, That Enoch is to come in
the last days to resist Antichrist, and be slain by him, without the least
appearance of any Ground for this Tradition. And they have taught more
generally, even from the Second Century, That Elias the Tisbite is to come in
Person before our Savior's second Advent, and grounded this their Doctrine
upon the Words of Malachy and of St. Matthew, against the plain Assertion of
our Lord, and the most clear convincing Evidence that John the Baptist, and he
only, was that Elias, which, according to the Prophecy of Malachy was to come
as the Forerunner of our Savior. In a word, the Tradition of the Millennium,
of the Appearance of Enoch and Elias, seem to have had their Rise from the
Jewish Converts, zealous of the Tradition of their Fathers, and from them, not
from the Apostles, to have gained Reputation in the Christian Church. And the
Tradition of Prayers for the Dead seems to have had the same Original.

But now if a Tradition has been very ancient, Apostles, or to be worthy of
Acceptance upon rational Grounds, then it is sit to be embraced as such. For
Instance,

First, We have it from Tradition, That presently after the Apostles times all
Churches were governed by Bishops, presiding over Presbyters and Deacons, as
their lawful Governors; whence we infer we have just Reason to believe this
form of Government was Apostolical, since otherwise the Government left in all
Churches by the Apostles, must, in the immediate following Age, have been not
only changed, but corrupted every where. But that in the frame and Substance of
the established Government of the Church, a thing always in use and practice,
there should be so sudden a Change, so universal a Corruption, in so short a
time; and that all Christians, without the least Opposition that we read of, De
praescript. c. 28.
should conspire in this Corruption, is a thing morally impossible: For, as
Tertullian argues in like Case, Variasse debuerat Error doctrinae Ecclesiarum;
quod autem apud omnes unum est, non est erratum, sed traditum: What all
Christian Churches did so early agree in practicing Uniformly, came not by
Error, but Tradition.

Moreover it is clearly proved by the most learned Bishop of Chester, L. 2. c.
13 prima Assertio. p. 157, etc.
That the Writers of the Second Century distinctly mention the several Orders
of Bishops, and their inferior Presbyters in the same Church, and thereby give
us Reason to conclude that this Disparity was generally settled in that Age. Now
how improbable it is, that either such a Change, as must be here supposed, were
this an Innovation, should happen unadvisedly, or thorough Negligence, or that
the whole Church should have conspired so early to swerve from the established
Order, by placing Bishops above Presbyters without Complaint, or the Resistance
of any single Person that we hear of, will appear, if we consider,

1. The Subjects of this Constitution, viz. The Persons appointed by the
Apostles to govern and preside in every Church, they being constant Objects of
every Persons common Sense, seen in every Assembly, employed in every
ecclesiastical Affair, public and private, in which all Christians, Sick or
Well, Living or Dying, were concerned, we may reasonably conceive that which
some of the Apostles, to gain upon the Jews, did observe the Christian Feast of
Easter on the Fourteenth Day of the Moon, others might have mistaken this
compliance, as if the Apostles had judged that the fittest time for Christians
of succeeding Ages to observe it in, or that when they heard of an Elias to
come before the terrible Day of the Lord, or of the Reign of Christ on Earth a
Thousand Years, represented to St. John in a Vision; they might mistake the
genuine import of those Scriptures, and of others of like nature; but in a
matter of this kind, which was the daily object of the Senses of all
Christians, we cannot easily conceive how they could possibly mistake, and not
perceive that such a change was made, if really it was done.

2. We shall be more convinced that this was not performed by Conspiracy, or by
a joint consent of Christians to make so great an alteration in that form of
Government which the Apostles had established, if we consider,

1. The general agreement of all Churches in this matter, since not one single
Church or Corner of the world can be produced in which this Government did not
obtain. For how can we imagine that in a time when no General Council, could
meet to appoint it, and when there was no Christian Prince to set it forward on
a political Account, and when, by reason of the heat of Persecution, and the
distance of Christian Churches, there was so little commerce, and intercourse
between them, from the Churches of Armenia and Persia in the East, to those of
Spain in the West; from the African Churches in the South, to our British
Churches in the North, this constitution should have been universally received
and submitted to, if it had not been established by the Apostles, or the first
Founders of those Churches?

2. If we consider how much it did concern all Christians that such an
Innovation should not obtain among them, and tamely be submitted to. For all
the people were obliged to know the Governors to whom they were by Scripture
commanded to submit, and so they could not yield to this supposed Innovation
without the greatest danger to their Souls: The Presbyters, if they had by the
Apostles been advanced to the highest Power, would not so meekly have submitted
to an Authority usurped over them, but either out of a just Zeal for asserting
their Freedom, or out of Indignation at the insolence of the usurping Bishops,
or out of an unwillingness to submit and obey, which is natural to most Men,
they would have asserted their Equality.

3. This will be farther evident if we consider that even the persons thus
exalted could have then no motive or temptation to accept of this advancement;
for Men do not usually desire a change but upon prospect of some ease or
temporal Advantage, much less when they perceive the Change is only like to add
to their trouble, and increase their danger, now this was really the case of
the first Christian Bishops, they being still exposed to the sharpest fury of
their Persecutors, and commonly begun with first in any storm that was raised
against the Church; their Labors also were very great, for the care of the
Flock lay on them, and they were unwearied in the discharge of their Pastoral
Care; can we then reasonably think that they should be so fond of so much toil
and peril, as to violate the Institution of the Blessed Jesus or his Apostles
to obtain it.

Let any reasonable Person duly weigh these things, and ask his Conscience,
whether it can be really persuaded that such an early Innovation could
generally have prevailed in the Church of God.

Such also is the Evidence that we pretended to, Canon of Scripture, and that
those Books have not been so corrupted or depraved as not to be sufficient
Rules of Christian Faith or Manners: Concerning this matter let it be
considered,

First, That we have the true Canon of the Old Testament, and that the Books of
the Old Testament are not corrupted, we cannot know from the Infallibility of
the Jewish Church or her Traditions; for when she handed down these Scriptures
to the Christians, as the pure word of their inspired Prophets, she was not
Infallible, but actually had renounced her true Messiah, and judged him an
Impostor, and had embraced such false Traditions as did engage her so to do. So
that if, Chap. 14. p. 29.
according to the Author of Popery Misrepresented, As the Jews received the
Books of the Old Testament from the (Jewish) Church, (and the Christians also)
so also were they to receive from her the sense of them; the Jews, if not the
Christians also, were obliged to reject our Savior, as an Impostor, and one
who taught and acted contrary to their Law, and their Traditions.

Secondly, New Testament are not corrupted or forged, we cannot know from the
Infallibility of the Christian Church.

The Reason is because the Infallibility of the Church is so far from being a
proof of Scriptures incorruption, that no proof can be pretended for it but
uncorrupted places of Scripture. For if any man should attempt to prove the
Scriptures uncorrupted, because that Church says so, which is Infallible, I
would demand of him, seeing the Infallibility of the Church is not
self-evident, and seeing Infallibility is a Prerogative which no Man can
pretend to but from God's Assistance, and therefore no Man can be sure of that
Assistance but from God's free Promise, how shall I be assured of her
Infallibility? If he say from Scripture, promising it unto her, I would ask how
shall I be assured that the Scriptures are not corrupted in those places; and
if to this it be answered, From the Church's Infallibility, is it not evident
that he runs in a Circle, proving the Scripture's incorruption by the Church's
Infallibility, and the Church's Infallibility by the Scripture's incorruption.
Moreover, this is further evident from the Tradition, Practice, and
Acknowledgment of the whole Church of Christ, for to inform us in any
controverted Text, which is the Reading to be owned as true; her Doctors never
have sent us to Oral Tradition, or the infallible Assistance of the Church, but
always to the readings of former Ancient Authors, and to the Inspection of
ancient Manuscripts and Versions, and have declared what in it self is
manifest, and owned by all that ever treated on this Subject, That there is no
other way whereby we can attain to any knowledge or assurance in this matter.
Thus Sixtus Quintus in his Preface to his Bible, In hac Germani Textus
pervestigatione satis perspicue inter omnes constat nullum esse certius ac
firmius Argumentum quam Antiquorum probatorum codicum Latinorum fidem.
tells us, That in Pervestigation of the true and genuine Text, it was
perspicuous to all Men, that there was no Argument more firm and certain, than
the Faith of ancient Latin Books.

Let any Man peruse all Commentators, Ancient and Modern, of what Persuasion
soever, and he will be convinced of their unanimous concurrence in this
Assertion. Thus St. Austin tells us, That the Latins have need of Two other
Tongues, for obtaining the knowledge of the Divine Scriptures, viz. De Doctr.
Christ. l. 2. c. 11. de Civ. Dei, l. 15. c. 13.
the Hebrew and the Greek, Ut ad exemplaria praecedentia recurratur, si quam
dubitationem attulerit Latinorum Interpretum infinita varietas, That if any
doubt should arise from the great variety of Latin Versions, they might recurr
to the Greek or Hebrew Originals; That the Latin Versions of the Old Testament,
where it is necessary, Chap. 14, 15.
Graecorum Authoritate emendandi sunt, are to be corrected by the Authority of
the Greek. And that their Versions of the New Testament, where they vary,
Graecis cedere oportere non dubium est, must yield to the Greek Copies, is
without doubt. St. Jerome in his Epistle to Lucinius says, Ep. Tom. 1. f. 69. b.
That he had Translated most of the Old Testament according to the Hebrew, and
that he had Translated the New according to the Authority of the Greek: Ut enim
veterum librorum fides de Hebraeis voluminibus examinanda est, ita novorum
Graeci sermonis normam desiderat, For as the Truth of the Books of the Old
Testament is to be examined by the Hebrew, so is the Truth of the Books of the
New Testament, to be examined by the Rule of the Greek. In his Epistle to Sunia
and Fretela, he tells them, Tom. 3. f. 28. a.
That as in the New Testament, if at any time a Question arise among the
Latins, and there is a diversity among the Copies; recurrimus ad fontem Graeci
sermonis, we recurr to the Greek, the Original Language, in which the New
Testament was writ; so in the Old Testament, if there be a diversity between
the Greek and Latin Copies, ad Hebraicam recurrimus veritatem, Ep. Tom. 3. f.
10. b.
we recurr to the Hebrew Verity. In his Epistle to Damasus, he says, That he
had, at his command, Translated the Four Evangelists, codicum Graecorum
emendata collatione, mending the former Versions by the Collation of the Greek
Copies; it being the desire of Damasus, that, because the Latin Copies
differed, he would show, quae sunt illa quae cum Graeca consentiunt veritate,
which best agreed with the true Copies of the Greek; and indeed, says he, If
we must trust to the Latin Copies, let them, who think so, say to which, for
they are almost all different one from the other; surely the Scripture of the
New Testament, being writ in Greek, when that differs in the Latin Tongue, uno
de font quaerendum, we must have recourse to the Fountain. Now by the way,
they who speak so expressly of the Hebrew and the Greek Verity, by which the
truth of the Latin Copies is to be examined, show that the Decree of Trent,
that the vulgar Latin, Sess. 4.
pro Authentica haberetur, should in all Readings, Disputations, Preachings and
Expositions, be received as authentic; and that no Man should dare, under any
pretense to reject it, agrees with Antiquity after their usual manner, by way
of Opposition and flat Contradiction to it, though in this matter, I confess,
they are the more excusable; seeing, as Espenceus says, In 1 Timothy c. 3.
it rendered any of the Latins suspicious to know Greek, and it was almost
Heretical to know the Hebrew Tongue. And as Melchior Chanus does inform us, The
Schoolmen for Four hundred Years, Loc. Com. l. 2. c. 12. p. 108.
retained only the Latin Edition, quippe linguae Graecae and Hebraicae non.
habuerunt peritiam, because they had no skill in Greek or Hebrew.

Thirdly, New Testament have been handed down unto us uncorrupted in the
necessaries and substantials of Christian Faith and Manners, we conclude from
Reason grounded upon matter of Fact, delivered and testified by the Doctors of
the Universal Church, and we receive them as such from the rational Evidence
which Tradition affords in this Case. Whence we collect,

1. That the Apostles and Holy Spirit which did assist them in inditing of this
Canon for the Church's use, could not be wanting in causing them to be
transmitted to those Christians, for whose use they were indicted, because they
could not be wanting to pursue the end for which they were endited.

Besides that they were actually thus committed to them is the Tradition of the
whole Christian World, which owned and cited, read and received them for such
from the Apostles Days, as is apparent from the Epistles of Clement, Polycarp,
Ignatius and others, who were contemporary with the Apostles; and from the
works of Justin M. Irenaeus, and many others of the Second Century. They were
read also by the Jews as Trypho does confess, and by the very Heathens at the
invitation of the Christians: For our Doctrines and Writings, says Justin M.
Apol. 1. p. 52. Apol. 2. p. 7.
are such, (...), as all Men are permitted to read; and if you will vouchsafe
to look into them you may learn these things, for we do not only read them our
selves, Ibid. p. 82.
(...), but we bring them to you to peruse, knowing that they will be
acceptable to all that read them. Apol. c. 31.
We our selves do not suppress them, says Tertullian, and many Accidents do
put them into the Hands of Strangers. They were attested to by the Sufferings
of the Primitive Christians, who rather chose to suffer Death than to deliver
up these Books, which Sufferings they could have no Temptation to endure
besides their full Conviction, that they were, as they always styled them,
Passio S. Felicis saepius.
Deifici libri, Scripturae deificae, Books which instructed them to lead a
Divine Life, and which their Persecutors could have had no Temptation to
suppress and burn, had they not known them to have been the Records of the
Christian Faith, with which their Faith must live or perish. Moreover, they
contained things of the highest moment, and which it was their chiefest
interest to be well assured of, they being the sole Ground and matter of their
support under their sharpest Trials, and of their future Hopes; and therefore
Writings they were concerned to get, and hear, and read, and keep.

Add to this, that they very early were translated into other Languages, into
the Syriack by apostolical Men, says the Tradition of the Eastern Churches; by
Men of great Antiquity, who lived before the Canon was established, as is
apparent from their neglecting to translate the controverted Books of the New
Testament into the Latin and other Languages, Praeleg. in Bibl. polyglott. 13.
p. 91.
says Bishop Walton. From the Beginning, as we may rationally conjecture,
seeing the Church of Rome, and other Churches, which understood not Greek, were
founded in the Apostles Days, or quickly after; nor could it rationally be
supposed that they were without the Scriptures long: Especially if we consider,
That it was part of their Lord's day Exercise, says Justin Martyr, Apol. 2. p.
98.
to read the Writings of the Apostles: As for the Books themselves, we find
them mostly written to whole Churches, Nations, 1 Cor. i. 1. 2 Pet. i. 1.
or the whole World of Christians, To all that called upon the Name of our Lord
Jesus Christ in every place, who could not easily have received them, had the
Apostles, by whom they were at first converted, given no sufficient indication
of them. They were Books which could not have been spread abroad, as they were,
in the Apostles Names, whilst they were living, unless the Apostles had endited
them, nor be esteemed so presently the Charter of the Christian Faith, had they
been so forgetful as not to make them known to them, for whose Sakes they were
written. They were Books which pretended to a Commission from the Holy Jesus to
give Rules of Life and Doctrine to the Christian Churches, which none but the
Apostles and Evangelists could do, all others still pretending to deliver what
they received from them.

Lastly, They being written partly to confirm, and to ascertain to us the Story
of Christ's Birth, Life, Passion, Resurrection, and partly to engage us to
believe that Jesus was the Christ, partly to put an end to those Contentions,
and to rectify those Errors which had crept into the Church in the Apostles
Days, and which did need a speedly Reformation, partly to give Instructions for
the Bishops, Priests and Deacons, and Governors of the Church how to behave
themselves in their Offices, partly to justify themselves against false
Brethren and deceitful Workers, and to preserve their Proselytes from such as
did pervert the Faith, and partly to instruct them how to bear up in fiery
Trials, and to support their Souls under the Sufferings and Temptations to
which Christianity exposed them, and therefore on those Grounds which did
require their quick Dispatch upon that Errand, and to those Churches, for whose
use they did intend them, it is evident the Apostles must design that early
Notice should be given of them, and so commit them to their new born Proselytes
and Babes in Christ. Accordingly the Tradition of the Church assures us that
when the Apostles went to preach to the Gentiles they desired them to leave in
Writing the things which they had taught, Vid. c. 7.. 1, 2.
and that in compliance with their Desires they writ their Gospels; and having
preached the Gospel to them, Iren. l. 3. c. 3.
Postea vere per voluntatem dei in scripturis nobis tradiderunt fundamentum and
Columnam fidei futurum, They afterward, by the Will of God delivered to them
the Gospel they had Preached in Writing, to be the Pillar, and the Ground of
Faith hereafter. St. Peter speaks of all the Epistles of St. Paul, showing that
at least many of them were then written, Eusebius. Eccl. Hift. l. 3. c. 3.
and others of the Ancients, that they were all Fourteen, (...), noted by, and
manifest to all, though some doubted whether he were indeed the Author of one
of them.

2. Church, and was commended to them by the Apostles, as the Pillar and the
Ground of Faith, De Praescript. c. 36.
especially if we consider that the Autographa were still extant, says
Tertullian, some of those Persons were still living to whom they were directed,
and with whom they were entrusted, and all those Churches still continued
flourishing to whom they were sent, and to whom they were read in public, and
by whom in private.

3. Records being once so generally dispersed through places at so great a
distance, as they were in the Second Century, so universally acknowledged, and
consented to by Men of curious Parts, and different Persuasions, and repugnant
Judgments, and great Aversions from each other, preserved in their Originals to
succeeding Ages, multiplied into diverse Versions, copied out by Christians for
their private, and for public use, esteemed by them as digesta nostra, their
Digests, says Adv. Marc. l. 4. c. 3.
Tertullian, as Council. Carthag. apud Cypr. p. 232. Optatus, l. 1.
libri divini, Scripturae deificae, say the Martyrs, believed by all Christians
to be divine says Eusebius. H. Eccl. l 6. c. 25.3.25. Orig. contr. Cells. l. 3. p.
138.
Origin. And as the Records of their Hopes and Fears, and thereupon being so
carefully Eusebius. H. Eccl. l. 4 c. 26. Lib. 8 cap. 11, 13. Eusebius. l. 6. c. 19 p.
222. Justin. M. Ap. 2. p. 98.
sought after, so riveted in their Minds, for many say the Ancients had them
entirely in their Memory, they being so constantly rehearsed in their
Assemblies by Men whose work it was to Read and Preach, and to exhort to the
performance of those Duties they enjoined, being so frequent in their Writings,
so often cited in their Confessions, Comments, Apologies, and Epistles of the
Christian Worthies, Eusebius. l. 6. c. 19. p. 219.
as also in the Objection of those Adversaries, to whose view they still lay
open.

It must be certain that they were handed down to the succeeding Generations
pure and incorrupt.

Indeed these things render us more secure of the Scriptures, being preserved
entire, than any Man can be of the Statutes of the Land, or of any Histories or
Records whatsoever, because the Evidence of it depends upon more Persons, more
Holy, and so less subject to deceive; more concerned that they should not be
corrupted, than that no other Records should, and so we must renounce all
certainty of any Records, or grant the certainty that these are truly what they
do pretend. And,

4. This Corruption of the Word of God, Christians, but they who had embraced
the Faith, and used the same Copies of the Word of God in other places of the
Christian World, must have found out the Cheat; and therefore this corruption,
if at all effected, must be the work of the whole World of Christians: But can
it be supposed that the immediate succeeding Ages should universally conspire
to substitute their own Inventions for the Word of God, and yet continue
steadfast in, and suffer so much for that Faith which denounced the severest
Judgments against those which should do such things? Or that a World of Men
should with the hazard of their Lives and Fortunes avouch the Gospel, and at
the same time make an essential Change even in the Frame and Substance of its
Doctrine, whilst it yet daily sounded in their Ears, employed their Tongues,
and by so doing make it ineffectual both to themselves and their Posterity? Can
it be reasonably thought that they should venture upon that which were the
Gospel, true or false, must needs expose them to the greatest Evils whilst they
continued Abettors of it? Moreover, had such a thing been done, can we in
reason think that of those many Thousands, who in the Primitive Ages did
renounce the Gospel, that of those many wavering Spirits, those excommunicate
Members, especially those Heretics, who upon other motives did renounce the
greatest part of Scripture; can it, I say, be thought that none of those should
publish and disclose the Forgery, or answer the Alligations made from
Scripture, by saying, They were Citations of false and of corrupt Scriptures,
but that such apparent Forgeries should find a general Reception from all that
looked into their Truth, and be unquestionably received as genuine by Jew and
Gentile, Heretic and Orthodox, even in those times in which, and in those
places where they first appeared, and by those Persons who immediately before
received others as the true and genuine Copies of the Word of God.

Lastly, Providence of God, inducing us to judge that the Books thus delivered
to us by the Church as genuine, are truly so; for nothing seems more
inconsistent with divine Wisdom and Goodness, than to inspire his Servants to
write the Scripture as a Rule of Faith and Manners for all future Ages, and to
require the Belief of the Doctrines, the practice of the Rules of Life plainly
contained in it, and yet to suffer this divinely inspired Rule to be insensibly
corrupted in things necessary to Faith or Practice; who can imagine that God
who sent his Son out of his Bosom to declare this Doctrine, and his Apostles,
by the Assistance of the Holy Spirit to indite and preach it, and by so many
Miracles confirm it to the World; should suffer any wicked Persons to corrupt
and alter any of those terms on which the Happiness and Welfare of Mankind
depended.

This sure can be conceived Rational by none, but such as think it not absurd
to say, That God repented of his good Will and Kindness to Mankind, in the
vouchsafing of the Gospel to them.

That he so far maligned the good of future Generations, that he suffered
wicked Men to rob them of all the benefit intended to them by this Declaration
of his Will. For since those very Scriptures which have been received for the
Word of God, and used by the Church as such from the first Ages of it, pretend
to be the terms of our Salvation, Scriptures indicted by Men commissionated from
Christ, and such as did avouch themselves Apostles by the Will of God, and his
Command, for the delivery of the Faith of Gods Elect, and for the knowledge of
the Truth which is after Godliness, in hopes of Life eternal; they must be what
they do pretend to be, the Word of God, or Providence must have permitted such
a Forgery, as rendereth it impossible for us to perform our Duty, in order to
Salvation; for if the Scripture of the New Testament should be corrupted in any
essential requisite of Faith or Manners, it must cease to make us wise unto
Salvation, and so God must have lost the end which he intended in inditing of
it. Again, when we consider that in the Jewish Church the Scriptures were,
until the coming of Christ in very corrupt Times, and amongst very corrupt
Persons, preserved so entire, that Christ sends the Jews to them to learn
Religion, declares, that they have Moses and the Prophets; and both our Lord
and his Disciples confuted and instructed the Scribes, and Pharisees, and Jews
out of them, without the least intimation of any corruption that had happened
to them; we have still greater reason to judge the New Testament sincere, since
we cannot rationally suppose Providence less careful of the New Testament than
of the Old.

If against this Argument it be Objected, Ancients, and by Old Manuscripts,
that there was a difference betwixt their Copies of the Scripture, and those we
now use.

I answer, 1. That this is no certain Argument of any such difference, seeing
the Citation of the Ancients might differ thus by the failure of their Memory,
it being frequently their Custom to cite the Scriptures from their Memory
without inspection of the Book; moreover we find by Ocular Demonstration, that
these various Lectures make no considerable variation in matters of Faith or
Manners, or if one Text which asserts a substantial Doctrine be variously read,
so that the matter is thence dubious, there are others which assert it without
that Variety.

If then no Writing whilst the Apostles lived could pass for Apostolical, and
yet destroy or contradict the Faith they taught; -- if their immediate
Successors could not be ignorant of what the Apostles committed to them to be
read and taught, us the Records of their Faith and Doctrine; nor would they be
induced to deliver that for such which they believed not to be so, if neither
they could universally conspire to effect this thing; nor can it rationally be
thought that Providence would suffer them to do so: It Is morally impossible
these Writings should be forged or corrupted in matters of Concern or Moment.

If therefore Mr. M. will make good his Assertion, that they have the same
means to show that their Traditions are true, that is truly descended from the
Apostles; that we have to show the Copies of the Scripture which we use are not
corrupted in substantials; he must first own what we have proved of these
Copies to be true of his Traditions, viz. That they cannot be proved to be true
from the Infallibility of the Church, and that in any doubt concerning the
Truth of them, we must have recourse to the Original and Fountain of Tradition,
not to the Judgment of the present Age, as in the proof of the true Copies, all
Parties are agreed, that we must have recourse to Ancient Manuscripts, And to
the Fountains of the Greek and Hebrew.

Secondly, He must show what we have done touching the Scriptures concerning
his pretended Traditions, viz. That these Traditions were owned, cited, read
and received as Apostolical Traditions from the Apostles Days, that Jews and
Heathens were acquainted with them, that they were attested to by the
Sufferings of the Primitive Martyrs, that they were such as the Apostles
desired to leave in writing, and which they did so leave according to the Will
of God, and consequently were not oral Traditions, that they were universally
acknowledged, and consented to by Men of different persuasions, preserved in
their Originals to succeeding Ages, transcribed by Christians for their private
and their public use, esteemed by them as their Digests, and as deifying
Traditions, believed by all Christians to be divine, and as the Records of
their Hopes and Fears, that they were carefully sought after, and riveted in
their minds, and constantly rehearsed in their Assemblies, by Men whose work it
was to read, and preach them, and to exhort to the performance of those Duties
they enjoined; that they were frequent in the Writings, and often cited in the
Confessions and Apologies, the Comments, Homilies, Discourses and Epistles of
the Ancient Worthies, as also in the Objections of their Adversaries to whose
view they still lay open.

And lastly, he must prove they were Traditions which the good Providence of
God was as much concerned to keep entire and incorrupt, as to preserve those
Scriptures so, which by the Will of God were written, to be the Pillar and
Foundation of the Christian Faith; and when we see this task performed, we
shall be more inclined to admit of the pretended Traditions of the Church of
Rome, and to believe them as true and incorrupt as are the Copies of the Holy
Scripture.

But says Mr. M. Page 399.
When we believe that the Copies which we have now of these Books be not forged
nor corrupted Copies, but truly agree with the Originals given out by the
Apostles, we trust to the Tradition of all the after Churches that have been in
every Age from the Apostles to this very present Church; for it is as much in
the Power of the Church in any one of these Ages, to have thrust a false Copy
into their Hand instead of a true one, as to thrust a false Tradition into the
Mouth of every Catholic every where in place of a true one.

This Argument in the mouth of a Jew, First.
pleading for those Traditions which were rejected by our Lord and his
Apostles, runs to this effect:

It was as much in the power of the Jewish Church, to have thrust a false Copy
into the Hands of the Jews instead of a true one, as to thrust a false
Tradition into the Mouth of every Jew every where, instead of a true one; if
therefore their received Traditions actually were false, as your Christ and his
Apostles taught, you can have no assurance of the Copies, on which you depend
for proving your Jesus to be the true Messiah, are not false.

We say it is not in the power of any of the latter Ages, Secondly,
to corrupt the Originals without corrupting not only all the written
Manuscripts, but also all the Writings of that Christian Church in which those
Scriptures have been cited, and all the Commentaries on them, and all the
Translations of them into all Languages.

It Is therefore evidently false, That it is as much in the Power of the Church
in any one Age to have thrust a false Copy into the Hand of all Christians
instead of a true one, as to deceive them with a false Tradition instead of a
true one.

No Protestant ever asserted or imagined that the whole Church was either
willing or able, Thirdly,
in any point of Doctrine, to change at once, and in one Age, the true
Tradition for a false. No, they unanimously say, These Tares were sown by the
Enemy whilst Men slept, that they came in by degrees, and insensibly got Ground
by little and little; in one Age the Dispute was raised, the Opinion broached
by some Man of Vogue and Credit, in the next it passed for probable, in the
following Age for an Ecclesiastical Doctrine, and in the next advanced into an
Article of Faith. Thus for Example:

Images for the first Three Centuries were disregarded by all Christians, the
first thing they taught their Proselytes, was to contemn them.

In the Fourth and Fifth Centuries they crept into some few Churches by way of
Ornament, and symbolical Representation.

In the Sixth and Seventh Centuries they begun to be received for Instruction
and historical Commemoration.

In the Eighth Century in Italy and in the East, they advanced to the
Veneration of them, though this Novelty met with great opposition in the East
till the Tenth Century, and in the West till the Thirteenth Century.

Communion in one Kind came in among some Monks in the Eleventh Century by
reason of their negligence and rudeness, which made their Governors not trust
them with the Cup least they should spill it.

In the Twelfth Century it began to take place in minoribus Ecclesiis, in
lesser Churches.

The Approbation of Thomas Aquinas made it still more prevail in the Thirteenth
Century, and in the beginning of the Fifteenth Century it was established for a
Law.

FINIS.
A TREATISE OF TRADITIONS.

PART II.

Imprimatur

Liber cui Titulus [A Treatise of Traditions. Part II.]

July 12. 1688. Guil. Needham, RR. in Christo P. ac D.D. Wilhelmo Archiep.
Cant. a Sacr. Domest.

A TREATISE OF TRADITIONS.

PART II.

Showing the Novelty of the pretended Traditions of the Church of ROME; as
being, I. Not mentioned by the Ancients of their Discourses of Traditions
Apostolical, truly so called, or so esteemed by them. Nor, II. In their avowed
Rule, or Symbol of Faith. Nor, III. In the Instructions given to the Clergy,
concerning all those things they were to teach the People. Nor, IV. In the
Examination of a Bishop at his Ordination. Nor, V. In the Ancient Treatises
designed to instruct Christians in all the Articles of their Faith. VI. From
the Confessions of Romish Doctors.


WITH AN ANSWER to the Arguments of Mr. Mumford for Traditions.

And a Demonstration, That the Heathens made the same Plea from Tradition as
the Romanists do; and that the Answer of the Fathers to it does fully justify
the Protestants.

Jam primo quod in nos generali accusatione dirigitis divortium ab institutis
majorum, considerate etiam atque etiam ne vobiscum communicemus crimen istud;
ecce enim per omnia vitae ac disciplinae corruptam, immo deletam in vobis
antiquitatem recognosco -- Exclusa ubique antiquitas, in negotiis, in officiis,
totam auctoritatem majorum vestra auctoritas dejecti^. Tertullianus ad
Nationes, lib. 1. Cap. 10. LONDON, Printed by J. Leake, for Awnsham Churchill
at the Black Swan in Ave-Mary Lane, MDCLXXXIX.

THE PREFACE.
The Contents.
Showing, First, That the Lord's Day is mentioned in Scripture, as a known
Festival Day, a Day which bore Christ's Name, and on which Christians did
assemble for Religious Worship, 1. From those words, Rev. 1.10. I was in the
Spirit on the Lord's Day,. 1. 2. From 1 Cor. xvi. 2.. 2. 3. From Act. xx. 7..
3. 4. From the unanimous and uncontroulled Testimony of the Fathers from the
first and purest Ages of the Church,. 4. And showing, Secondly, That the
Apostles were commissionated from the Lord Christ, or were directed by his
Spirit to appoint this a day of public Worship in Honor of our Lord, and in
remembrance of his Resurrection,. 5. The Romanists can show no such Tradition
for any of the contested Doctrines,. 6. Mr. M's. Argument retorted against the
sufficiency of Tradition to establish this Doctrine, by showing that there is
no Tradition for abstaining wholly from servile Work upon that Day, but rather
the contrary,. 7. The not observing of this Day through ignorance of our
Obligation so to do, is not destructive of Salvation,. 8. The Command for
remembering the Seventh Day from the Creation to rest upon it from all manner of
Work, was Ceremonial and not Moral; this proved, 1st. From Reason,. 9. 2dly.
From the Words and Actions of our Savior,. 10. 3dly. From Gal. iv. 10, 11..
11. 4thly. From Col. ij. 14, 16, 17.. 12. 5thly. From the unanimous assertion
of the Fathers,. 13. Mr. M's. first Objection from God's Blessing and Hallowing
this Day Answered,. 14. His second Objection from those Words of Christ, If
thou will enter into Life, keep the Commandments, Answered,. 15. His third
Objection, That Saint Paul frequented Synagogues on the Sabbath Day, Answered,.
16. His fourth Objection, That in Christ Jesus nothing avails but keeping the
Commandments of God, Answered,. 17. His fifth Objection from the Words of
Christ, Pray that your flight be not on the Sabbath day, Answered,. 18.

IN this Discourse I have endeavored to show in what Sense we admit of
Tradition as a sufficient Evidence of the Truth of what we do believe, or
practice: And have demonstrated, That in those things which we receive upon her
Testimony the Romanists cannot pretend unto a like Tradition for any of their
Doctrines. Two things they farther do object against us as instances of things
necessary to be believed, which yet, say they, have no Foundation in the Holy
Scriptures, and therefore must be believed only on the account of Tradition, or
the Authority of the Church; viz.

First, The Observation of the Lord's Day, and the liberty we take in working
on the Sabbath, and not observing it as a day set apart unto the Service of the
Creator of the World.

Secondly, The Baptism of Infants, of which, what Mr. M. offers is sufficiently
considered in the following Treatise, and the practice has of late been fully
justified from Scripture and Tradition, jointly, by Three learned Treatises, to
which I shall referr the Reader. Mr. Walker's Modest Plea for Infants Baptism.
The Case of Infants Baptism. Dr. Still. Rational Account. Part. 1. cap. 4.
Touching the first particular, I shall Discourse at present in this Preface,
and show in opposition to Mr. Mumford, that we have sufficient Ground from
Scripture for observing the Lord's Day, and not observing of the Sabbath Day;
and that, as far as we depend upon Tradition in these Points, the Romanists can
show no like Tradition for their Tenets. To begin with the first of these
particulars; That the Lord's Day is by all Christians to be observed as a
Religious Festival, will be made good from these Considerations.

First, That it is mentioned in the Scripture as a known Festival Day, a Day
which bore Christ 's Name, a Day on which the Christians did assemble for the
performance of Sacred and Religious Worship.

Secondly, That it was perpetually and universally observed as such by the
Catholic Church including the times of the Apostles. And,

First, That it is mentioned in Scripture as a known Festival Day, a Day which
bore Christ's Name, a Day on which the Christians did assemble for the
performance of Religious Worship, will appear,

1st. From that Expression of St. John, Rev. i. 10.
I was in the Spirit on the Lord's Day: For explication of which words observe,
first, That the Name Lord in the New Testament does ordinarily signify the
Lord Christ; for God the Father having committed all Authority into his Hands,
he by so doing made him, as Saint Peter says, both Lord and Christ; Act. ij 36.
and therefore by this name he is distinguished from God the Father in these
words, 1 Cor. viij. 6.
There is one God the Father, of whom are all things, and one Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom are all things. And again, 1 Cor. xij. 5, 6.
There are differences of Administrations, but the same Lord, diversities of
Operations, but the same God: Wherefore by the Lord's Day here mentioned, we
cannot reasonably understand the Jewish Sabbath, that being not the Day of the
Lord Christ, or a Day instituted in Memorial of him, but a Day sanctified to
Jehovah, who is in the New Testament styled God the Father, or absolutely God;
and by that phrase distinguished from the Lord Christ. Moreover, the Sabbath is
in Scripture sometime said to be a Day Holy to the Lord; but it is never
styled, (...), the Lord's Day, either in Scripture, or in the Records of the
three first Centuries; and therefore we can have no reason to believe Saint
John intended the Jewish Sabbath by that Phrase.

2dly. Whereas Saint John, to denote the time when he received his Vision,
says, It was on the Lord's Day: It follows that this Day must be a Day well
known; otherwise he could not by this note sufficiently declare the Time when
he received his Vision: Since then the first Day of the Week, and that alone
was by the Christians of the first Ages styled the Lord's Day, and known to
them familiarly by that Name, it is rational to conclude, That the Apostle by
this Phrase did understand the first Day of the Week. For Confirmation of this
Argument, it is observable, that some Copies read that Passage of Saint Paul to
the Corinthians, (...), 1 Cor. xvi. 2.
On the first Day of the Week, being the Lord's Day, let every one lay by in
store. Ignatius, (...), Ep. ad Manes. Et ad Trallian.. 9.

(...). Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 23.

Eusebius. H. Eccl. l. 4. c. 26.


who lived Thirty Years in the Apostles Days, speaks thus, That Christians must
no longer Sabbatize, but keep the Lord's Day, in which our Life sprang up by
him. Dionysius Bishop of Corinth, who flourished in the second Century, writes
thus, This day being the Lord's Day, we keep it Holy. Melito Bishop of Sardis,
who flourished in the same Century, composed a Book, (...), of the Lord's Day,
and another of the Paschal Solemnity, clearly distinguishing the one from the
other. Justin M. Qu. and Resp. Qu. 115.
Irenaeus Bishop of Lions, in his Book of the Paschal Solemnity, declares, That
Christians did not on the Lord's Day, which was a Symbol of their Resurrection,
bend the Knee. Clemens of Alexandria calls the Eighth day, Contra Cells. l. 8.
p. 392. De Cor. Mil. c. 3. Cyp. Ep. 38. Ed. Ox. p. 75.
(...), the Lord's day. Origin among the Christian Festivals enumerates the
Lord's day, the Easter and the Pentecostal Festival. Tertullian says, Dominico
die jejunium nefas ducimus, vel de geniculis adorare, We judge it wickedness to
kneel on the Lord's day; and then he adds, That on the Easter and the
Penticostal Festival we enjoy the same freedom. And indeed the thing was so
notorious even to the Heathen World, that it was usual with them to put this
Question to the Martyrs, Dominicum servasti, Have thou observed the Lord's day?
To which their usual Answer was, Christianus sum, intermittere non possum, I am
a Christian and cannot cease to do it. And that, Dominicum agere, which is
sometimes the Phrase, imports, not to celebrate the Lord's Supper, but to
observe the Lord's day, is evident from Clemens of Alexandria, Strom. 7. p. 744.
who tells us, That the true Gnostick does, (...), make that day truly the
Lord's day, by casting away every evil thought, and celebrating the
Resurrection of Christ.

Now from these Passages it is clear, That the Easter Festival could not be
here intended by Saint John, that being never styled by the Ancients absolutely
the Lord's day, but always either, (...), or, (...), the Great Lord's day, or,
the Paschal Lord's day; and being constantly in those first Ages distinguished
from, and in their enumeration of their Festivals opposed to the Lord's day.
Moreover the Easter Feast seems not to have been so Ancient as the Apostles
Vision; for then it would have been observed uniformly as the Lord 's day was,
whereas the Eastern and the Western Churches differed much about it; and that
very difference demonstrates that the Lord 's day was the more ancient, because
the Question was, Whether the Eastern Festival should be kept on the Lord's day
only, or on the day of the Full-Moon, as by the Jews it was, on what day of the
Week soever that did happen.

And whereas Mr. M. asks, P. 207.
How prove you that it was not Christmas or Ascension day? I Answer, 1st. That
we have no Evidence from Antiquity, that either of these Festivals were then
observed, much less, that they were then known to the Christian World under
that Appellation. 2dly. The common Consent of all Interpreters, and the
perpetual Practice of the Church in all Ages from Saint John to Ignatius his
Scholar, and so downwards to this day, do give the name of the Lord's day to
Sunday, and to no other Festival of the Church, Weekly or Annual, sufficiently
instructs us what Saint John understood by the Lord's day.

3dly. Observe, That whatsoever in the Scripture has the Lord's Name and
Subscription on it, as the Lord's Temple, the Lord's Offerings, the Lord's
People, the Lord's Priests, was consecrated to the Service of Jehovah the Lord
of the Old Creation; wherefore the day which had so early the Name and
Superscription of the Lord Christ upon it must be supposed to be Holy to the
Lord of the New Creation, and consecrated to his Service: For as the Jewish
Sabbath being called the Lord 's Sabbath, or the Sabbath of Jehovah, was by
that Title known to be a day Sanctified to Jehovah, as Creator, so this day
being called the Lord 's day, is by this Note as certainly known to be a day
consecrated to the Service of the Lord Christ. And as the Lord 's Supper is
styled, (...), the Supper of the Lord; the Sacramental Table, 1 Cor. xi. 20. x.
21.
(...), the Table of the Lord; the Sacramental Wine, (...), the Cup of the
Lord, either because the Sacrament was instituted immediately by the Lord
Christ, to be observed to his Second Coming. Or, Secondly, Because it was
appointed for the remembrance of the Lord 's Death and Passion till that time,
even so, (...), the Lord's day, must be so called for one of these two Reasons,
or for both, viz. Because it was enjoined by Christ, or by Directions given to
his Apostles to command the Observation of it as a Day to be devoted to the
Service of our Lord Christ, or because it was by the Apostles so observed in
memory of our Lords Resurrection, and was from them received as a day to be
observed for all future Generations of the Church And that this day was
certainly observed by the Apostles, and by the Christians who lived in their
days, in Honor of our Lord, is evident from what has been already proved:
For if it were then known to Christians by the Name of the Lord's day, and if
so be the Lord's day, must import a day that is consecrated to the Service of
the Lord, it is clear, that they must then observe it as such, or act against
the knowledge of their Duty; if when Saint John received this Vision, it were
known to be a day devoted to the Service of the Lord Christ, it must be known
to be thus consecrated to his Service by some who had Authority sufficient so
to do; that is, at least by those Apostles and Rulers, to whom Christ had
committed the Guidance of his Church, and the determination of that outward
Worship he required from his Disciples: What they thus consecrated to his
Service, must be devoted either by virtue of their positive Institution, or by
their practice only; if by virtue of their Institution, then is it granted that
this day is of Divine and Apostolical Institution; if by their Practice only,
yet is it granted that this day was constantly observed by those Apostles who
were assisted in their Actions by the Holy Ghost; that 'twas by their Example
commended to the practice of all Christians; and therefore be alone can alter
this Apostolical Tradition, who better knows the mind of Christ, than they did,
and is more able to discern what Service is well pleasing to him than they were.

Secondly, This Practice will sufficiently appear from other Scriptures, which
either presuppose, or else directly show this was a day observed in the
Apostles time. Saint Paul in his Epistle to the Church of Corinth, writes
thus, Now concerning the Collection for the Saints, as I have ordained for the
Churches of Galatia, 1 Cor. xvi. 1, 2.
so do ye, (...), upon the first day of the week, let every man lay by him in
store as God has prospered him, that there be no gathering when I come. Where
observe,

First, That (...), does certainly signify the first day of the Week, the day
of our Lord's Resurrection from the dead; for the Four Evangelists do with one
Voice averr, That our Lord Jesus did arise, (...), the first day of the week:
Matthew. 28.1. Mark 16.2. Luke 24.1. John 20.1.
Nor can this reasonably be doubted by any who believe the Scriptures. Moreover
Saint Mark does clearly so interpret the Phrase; for the Sabbath being over,
says he, Mary Magdalene, and others, came, (...), early the first day of the
week, and found Christ risen; and v. 9. he adds, That Christ was risen early,
(...), that is, by the consent of all Interpreters, upon the first day of the
week. Saint Luke observes, Luke 23.56.
That they rested on the Sabbath day according to the Commandment, and then
adds, That they came unto the Sepulcher, (...), on the first day of the week.

Secondly, This may be Argued from the succeeding Practice of the Church,
which, in compliance with this Precept, still offered their Alms upon this Day;
for Justin M. (...). Apol. 2. p. 98, 99.
who flourished in the next Age to the Apostles, tells the Heathen Emperor in
his Apology, That 'twas the Custom of Christians to meet on the Lord's day to
Pray, to hear the Word, to receive the Sacrament; and then, says he, they who
are rich, and willing, give what they think fit; and what is thus collected, is
laid up in the hands of the President, who distributes it to Orphans, and
Widows, and other Christians, Locuples and dives es, and dominicum observare te
credis qui corbonam omnino non respicis? De opere and eleemos. p. 203.
as their Wants require. Saint Cyprian also taxes the Omission of this Duty on
the Lord's day as a Fault in Rich, and able Persons, saying, Thou art Wealthy
and Rich, and think thou that thou observest the Lord's day, who do not at
all respect the poor Man's Box?

Thirdly, All the Ancient Commentators on this Place, both Greek and Latin,
unanimously interpret this of the Lord 's day. Ambrose and Primasius among the
Latins; Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius and Theophylact among the Greeks.

Secondly, Observe, that no good Reason can be given why the Apostle should
limit the Collections of the Churches of Corinth, and Galatia, to the first day
of the week, but this; That this day was appointed for the Worship of our Lord,
and so more fit for the performance of those Duties which concerned his
distressed Members in those Times, for as the works of Charity and Mercy are
proper Duties of this day, so does this day contain a special motive in it to
enlarge their Charley, it being the day in which they were begotten to a lively
Hope, through the Resurrection of our Savior, and in which they constantly in
those times participated of his precious Body and Blood; and therefore having
then received spiritual Things so plentifully from Christ must be more ready to
impart of their temporals to his needy Servants.

Thirdly, Observe, that should the Text be rendered thus, Let every one lay up
against the first day of the week, there would be some good reason for that
Precept; provided that it were a day appointed for the Service of Christ, and
the Assemblies of all Christian People, for meeting thus together on that day,
they might then bring to the Assembly what they had treasured up against that
time, and then put it into the public Bank, as the Custom was in the first
Ages of the Church; and that they did so here at Corinth, seems highly probable
from the design of the Apostles Precept; for he exhorts them to have their
Charity ready, that there might be no need of a Collection when he came;
whereas, if they had kept their Charity in their own hands, and not put it into
the public Stock, there would still have been need of a Collection at his
coming. 2dly. The Apostle might command to lay it up against that day, to be
then offered to the Lord, because our Charity to his distressed Members is an
Odor of a sweet smelling Savor, Philip. 4.18. Act. 10.4.
a Sacrifice well-pleasing to God, a Duty fitly joined with our Prayers, that
so they may come up together as a memorial before God. Since therefore, whether
we translate the word's, upon the first day of the week, or against the first
day of the week, no reason does appear, why Saint Paul should pitch upon that
day, had it not been the day of their assembling together, the day on which
they met to serve the Lord Christ; we ought in reason to conclude it was so:
And if for the performance of this Work of Charity on the Lord's day, Saint
Paul thought fit to give his, (...), or special Order, can we suppose the day
it self should be observed without appointment of the said Apostle, or others
of like power with him, especially, if we consider that Clemens the
Contemporary of the Apostles, (...). Epist. ad. Cor.. 40.
does inform us, That our Lord commanded our Oblations and Liturgies should be
performed at times appointed, and not disorderly, but at those very times and
seasons which he had ordained; and thence concludes, That they who offer their
Oblations in those appointed Seasons, are blessed, and acceptable to God, and
that because they act agreeably to the Commandments of their Lord; for if
Christ himself gave Laws for the time when, and the persons by whom he would
have divine Offices performed, as Clemens here does plainly teach, there is
little doubt to be made but the Lord's day was his own Ordinance; and if, as he
there adds, These things were defined by his Sovereign Counsel, that all things
being done religiously according to his good Pleasure, might be acceptable in
his sight, it follows that this time could not Religiously have been set apart
for his Service, or have been acceptable to him, had it not been appointed by
the Counsel of his Will; so that, although this Text does not expressly command
that the first Day of the Week should be observed as the Christians weekly
Festival, yet if we join with it the uniform Practice of the Primitive Church
then, and ever since, they jointly prove that the first day of the Week was the
weekly Festival of Christians at that time, and strongly do imply, or suppose
that before this Apostolical Ordinance for these Collections on this Day, there
was another for the observation of the day it self; for how could it have
happened that all the Apostolical Churches throughout the World should from the
beginning have accorded to make this day a weekly Festival, unless they had
been directed thus to do by the Apostles themselves, by whom they were at first
converted to the Christian Faith, and with that Faith received this Institution?

3dly. We have another Scripture, Act. xx. 7. which fairly seems to conclude,
that the Apostles and the Christian Church did then observe this day, and meet
for the performance of Religious Worship on it; for there it is expressly said,
That upon the first day of the Week, when the Disciples came together to break
Bread, Paul preached unto them, Where Note,

1. That, (...), the first day of the week, was certainly the Lord's day, as
has already been made manifest.

2. Observe, That on this day the Disciples were not summoned extraordinarily
to come together, that Saint Paul did not, (...), call them together, as he did
the Assembly of the Elders of the Church, v. 17. but the Disciples were
themselves, (...), met in their Synaxis, or Assembly; the Text informs us, That
Saint Paul carried with them seven days, and in none of them have we any
mention of an Assembly to this purpose, but only on the first day of the week.

3. Observe, That they then met together to break Bread, which Phrase does
signify the sacred Action performed in celebration of the Holy Sacrament,
which 'twas the Custom of the Primitive Christians to receive in all their
Church- Assemblies on the Lord's day; 1 Cor. xi.
this the Apostle intimates when he complains of his Corinthians, That they
came together for the worse, because when they came together in the Church,
there were Divisions among them, so that they did not eat together of the Table
of the Lord. Now thus to come together in one place, says he, is not to eat
the Lord's Supper, i. e. it is not so to do it, as the sacred Action ought to
be performed; this therefore, when they came together in the Church they did,
and therefore what is coming together, v. 17. coming to the Church, v. 18.
coming to one place, v. 19. is coming together to eat, v. 33. Accordingly it
was the Custom of the Church from the Apostles times thus to communicate upon
the Lord's day. Pliny in his Epistle to the Emperor Trajan, Soliti sunt stato
die ante lucem convenire, etc. Ep. l. 10. Ep. 97.
tells him, That he found nothing to allege against the Christians, but their
Obstinacy in their Superstition, and that is was their Custom to meet together
on a set day before it was light, and to bind themselves by the Sacrament to do
no evil. Now this Epistle was writ only Six Years after the Death of the
Evangelist Saint John. And Justin M. who wrote but Fifty Years after his death,
(...). Apol. 2. p. 98, 99.
thus speaks, On Sunday all the Christians in the City or Country meet
together, because that is the day of our Lord's Resurrection, and then we have
read unto us the Writings of the Prophets and Apostles; this done, the
President makes an Oration to the Assembly, to exhort them to imitate and do
the things they heard; then we all join in Prayer, and after that we celebrate
the Sacrament, and they that are willing and able, give their Alms, etc.

Fourthly, This may be further proved from the Church's Testimony, and from the
plain Expressions of the Fathers, who flourished in the first and purest Ages
of the Church: For to this Effect;

Century the first, besides the words of Clemens Romanus, already mentioned,
the Apostle Barnabas says of the Apostles and Christians in the General,
(...), Sect. 15.
We keep the eighth day a Festival, in which our Jesus rose from the dead.

Century the Second, I have produced the plain Testimonies of Ignatius, Justin
M. Irenaeus, Dionysius of Corinth, Melito Sardensis.

Century the Third, I have produced already the Testimony of Clemens of
Alexandria, to which add that of Tertullian, who says in his Apology, Diem
folis laetitiae indulgemus, Cap. 16.
Sunday is the Festival of us Christians. And in his Book Ad Nationes, That
they did rejoice upon that day, Solemn Christianorum deum aestimant quod
innotuerit nos die solis, etc. Lib. 1. cap. 13.
and that this was a thing so well known to the Heathens, that hence they took
occasion to conjecture, That the Sun was the God of Christians; Neque enim
Resurrectio Domini semel in anno and non semper post septem dies celebratur. In
Esa. Hom. 6.

Hom. 7. in Exodus fol. 41.

Ep. 38. Ed. Ox. p. 75.


that of Origin, That the Resurection of our Lord is not celebrated annually
only, but every seventh day; which therefore, in opposition to the Jews, he
calls, Dominica nostra, The Christians Lord's day. And that of Cyprian, That
Aurelius, Dominico legit, reads on t^^ Lord's day.

Centuny the Fourth, Epiphanus informs us, (...). Expos. fid. cap. 22.
That the Holy Catholic Church keeps every Lord's day as a Festival. In a
word, no Church, no single Writer ever represented this as a new, or introduced
Practice, but do continually speak of it as the constant Practice of the
Christian Church. We never read that any of the converted Jews, though they
retained the Jewish Sabbath, ever disputed the Observation of the first day of
the week in honor of our Lord: And therefore, as the Reverend Bishop Bramhal
truly says, Page 918.
To question now whether there was a formal precept for that which all the
Christian World has obeyed ever since Christ's time, and shall obey until his
Second Coming, is a strange degree of Folly. And that this may be farther
evident, I add this second Proposition:

That the Apostles had Commission from the Lord Christ, Prop. 2.
or were directed by his Spirit to ordain and choose this day, to be employed in
the public Exercise of Christian piety, and in remembrance of the Resurrection
of our Lord. For,

First, Christ did Commission his Apostles to teach the Churches all his
Doctrine, and to deliver them all his Commands and Orders, which concerned
their Duty and his Service; for thus he delivers his Commission to them; All
Authority is committed to me in Heaven and Earth, Matthew. 28.18.
Go therefore, and disciple all Nations, teaching them to observe all that I
have commanded you: John 20.21.
He also says unto them, That as my Father sent me, so send I you; and surely
the Father sent him, who was Lord of the Sabbath, with full Commission to
change and alter it, and substitute another day in lieu thereof. Accordingly
the Apostles exercised this Power, they founded Churches, they delivered to
them the Doctrines and Commands of Christ, they settled Church Officers, Orders
and Discipline; and surely then they had Commission also to settle the time to
be appointed for the Service of their Lord and Master. When therefore they
began to practice the Observation of the first day of the Week, they only did
what their Commission from the Lord empowered them to do.

Secondly, That the Apostles were directed by the Holy Ghost to set apart this
day for Holy Worship, or to appoint Church- Meetings on this Day; and therefore
that this was done by a Divine Authority appears from this, That their
Determinations touching smaller Matters, and which were only ^porary, are by
themselves ascribed to the Holy Ghost; thus, when Saint Paul gives his advice,
in respect of the present necessity, touching a single Life, though he
confesses he had no express from Christ touching that matter, yet he ascribes
this Counsel to the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 7.40.
For I think, says he, I have the Spirit of Christ. Again, the same Apostle
speaking of the Directions which he gave concerning their Church- Meetings, and
their Behavior in them, says, 1 Cor. 14.37.
If any man think himself to be a Prophet, or Spiritual, let him acknowledge
that the things I write unto you are the Commandments of the Lord. The same
must therefore be much more acknowledged of things of so high a nature as that
is which they delivered to be observed by the Universal Church, they being
equally Appointed, and Authorized to instruct them in Discipline and in Matters
of Divine Worship, as in matters of Doctrine, and as well by Word as by
Epistle, and therefore as well in the Observation of the time appointed for the
Worship of their Lord, as in the due Regulation of it when they came together.
The same Saint Paul professes, 1 Cor. 11.23.
That he had received from the Lord what he delivered to the Church of Corinth,
touching the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper; and when he speaks of one
particular concerning which he had no precept from Christ, he says expressly,
This speak I, not the Lord; 1 Cor. 7.12.
if then the practice touching the Observation of the Lord's Day, had been of
the same nature, we may suppose the Apostles would not have failed to inform
the Christian Churches, That this was their own Constitution, not the Lord 's,
which since they did not, we may presume that they in this, as well as other
things, did only what they received from the Lord. And lastly the Apostle does
command the Christians to observe the Traditions which they had received, 2 Thessalonians. 2.15.
whether by Word, or by Epistle, and therefore must command them to observe
that day which by Tradition from the Apostles was certainly delivered to them.

But against these Arguments it is Objected, Scripture of many things ordained
by the Apostles, which are now laid aside, viz. The Kiss of Charity, the
Love-Feast, the Anointing with Oil, the abstaining from things strangled, and
from blood, and therefore cannot rationally conclude the Lord 's day ought to
be observed perpetually and unalterably, because it was ordained by those
Apostles who were assisted by the Holy Ghost.

To this I Answer, Apostolical Constitutions which concern the whole Church
must be esteemed invariable and perpetual, if they have these Conditions:

First, That they were made upon such Grounds and Reasons as equally concern
the whole Church of all Ages, and there has happened since no alteration of
Circumstances, which made it reasonable then to observe, what now we have no
Reason to perform: v. g. The Anointing of the Sick was a Ceremony annexed to
the extraordinary Gift of Healing, which ceasing, this Appendix of it ceased
with it, not by any repeal of the Church, but by expiration; as all the
Constitutions of Saint Paul, touching the use of Tongues, did with the failure
of that Gift. The Law which obliged the Gentile to abstain from things
Strangled, and Blood, was designed only to avoid offending the weak Jew; there
being therefore none such now, nor any hopes remaining of their Conversion by
this Abstinence, that Law must cease, not by a positive repeal, but by
cessation of the Cause, or Reason of it, according to those known Rules,
Sublata causa tollitur effectus, and ratio legis est lex, Take away the Cause,
and the Effect cease.

Secondly, When they are not about some lesser Ceremonies or Circumstances,
which in tract of time may become subject to abuse and hindrance, to a greater
good; and for that reason may be dispensed with, and abrogated by the Church,
by virtue of that general Rule of doing all things to Edification, but about
Matters of great Moment, such as concern the Service of our Great Master, and
the time to be set apart for the performance of it. For Instance, touching the
Kiss of Charity, all that Saint Paul or Peter have delivered concerning it is
this, That some times or other Christians should testify their mutual
affection to each other by a Kiss; and that this Kiss be not a wanton or
dissembling one, but an Holy one, or a true Kiss of Charity, and in this sense
it is still continued among Christians: Moreover it is of it self a thing
indifferent, and only good as it is an indication of true Charity, and therefore
is equivalently continued by all Acts of Christian Charity. The Love Feasts
were designed for the Refreshment of the Poor, by what the Rich brought to the
Holy Sacrament to be eaten by them at that Feast of Love; and since it after
happened through the looseness of Christians, that great Disorders were
committed in those Feasts, they being made occasions not of Divisions only, but
of Intemperance and Drunkenness, they were universally disused in the Fourth
Century, and converted into a more unexceptionable Charity to be distributed
among the Poor; according to that never failing Rule, That where the abuse is
greater than the use of a Ceremony, if the intended use may be obtained other
wife, Abusus tollit usum, the abuse makes it reasonable to cease the usage of
that Rite.

Thirdly, If they have been universally neceived through the whole Christian
World, from the Apostles times unto our days; not that the neglect of this
Observation, by any Church in any Age or Ages, could have rendered this
Ordinance invalid, or not obliging to Posterity, but because the continuance of
it from the time of its first Practice or Institution to this present moment,
is a just Presumption that all Christians have been always satisfied, and well
assured of their Obligation to comply with it, and that no Christians can have
any cause to vary from it. Now all these three particulars here meet: For, 1.
This Christian Festival has always been observed in all place^, and throughout
all Ages of the Church. 2. It was observed by all Christians for these very
Reasons, 1st. That as the Jews, by Observation of the Sabbath, professed to own
the Lord of the Creation for their God, and themselves to be his Servants; so
they by Observation of the Lord Christ might own him as their Lord and Master,
who was the Lord of the New Creation. 2dly. As they observed their Sabbath, in
Commemoration of the Blessings procured to them by the Creation, so the
Christians observed the day of our Lord's Resurrection, in thankful Remembrance
of the inestimable Blessings procured and consigned to them by it. Non
Dominicum diem timerent enim ne Christiani viderentur.
Now sure this solemn Act of owning Jesus for our Lord, on which account
Tertullian says, The Heathens feared to observe the Lord's Day, is a Duty of
the highest moment; and surely the Blessings partly purchased, partly confirmed
to us by our Lord's Resurrection, must as well deserve a day to be employed in
solemn and in grateful commemoration of them, as the Mercies which the Creation
did conferr upon Mankind; and so this Constitution must be concerning Matters
of great Moment. And, 3dly. These are never failing Reasons, and such as render
it as necessary now to observe this day, and will do so for ever; and no Man
ever can refuse the Observation of this day without being careless to own
Christ for his Lord, or to return Thanks for the Benefits of his Resurrection,
or without opposing, yea condemning the Wisdom of the Apostles, and the whole
Christian World to this very day.

Moreover, This Assertion is confirmed by the concurring suffrage of the
Ancient Fathers; for Justin M. Apol. 2. p. 99.
speaking of the Observation of this day, says, That our Lord arising from the
dead, (...), taught these things. (...). De laudibus Constant. p. 664.
Eusebius says, That Christ has prescribed to all the Inhabitants of the
World, by Sea and Land, that coming together into one place, they should
celebrate as a Festival the Lord's day. In time past, says Athanasius, (...).
De Sement. p. 1060.
the Sabbath was of great account, which Solemnity the Lord translated to the
Lord's day, nor do we set light by it without his Authority. In a word, So
Athanas. Sermon. de Resurrect. Tom. 2 p. 277. Ambros. Ep. 83.

Psalm. 118.24.


the Fathers generally apply that Passage of the Psalmist, This is the Day
which the Lord has made, let us be glad and rejoice in it, to the Lord's day,
as made or Instituted by the Lord, and Consecrated or Sanctified by his
Resurrection. Others of them say, That the Observation of the Lord's Day was an
Apostolical Tradition, and that they kept it as an Holy Day, Hesuch. in Levit.
c. 9. Leo. Ep. 11. Ed. Quesnel. p. 436.
Apostolorum sequentes traditionem, following the Tradition of the Apostles.
The Apostles, and Apostolical Men having decreed, Dominicum diem religiosa
solennitate habendum, That the Lord's day was Religiously to be celebrated.

And surely it is enough to satisfy all Conscientious Christians in the
Observation of this Day, that it was consecrated to the Service of our Lord,
either by Christ himself, or his Apostles, and as such has been celebrated
ever since by the perpetual practice of the whole Church Catholic, especially
if we consider what excellent Names these ancient Observers of it have ascribed
unto it, and what great Dignities they have put upon it, calling it the Queen
of Days, the Princess and the Principal of Days, a Royal Day, higher than the
highest, the first Fruits of the Days, whereas had they conceived it only an
humane Ordinance, it could not have deserved these Titles above other Days
ordained by the Church. In fine, how dangerous it is to say, That the public
Exercise of Christian Religion should depend upon so weak a Foundation as
humane Authority, which may alter its own Constitutions, and is subject to
manifold Errors, I leave to the prudent and judicious Reader to consider.

Let then the Romanists show three Texts of Scripture expounded constantly in
that sense by the whole Church, which confirms any of their Doctrines; let them
show us the Names of any of those Practices of theirs which we condemn, in
Scripture, and the Fathers of the first Centuries; let them give clear evidence
from their Writings, that such Practices were received in the Apostles days
throughout the Christian World, no Church, no Christian Writer ever excepting
against them, or mentioning them as newly introduced Customs; let them show us
plain Expressions from them declaring that they were instituted either by
Christ or his Apostles, and that they practiced them, Illorum sequentes
traditionem, in compliance with their Tradition, and then we shall no longer
question or condemn them.

Having thus Answered Mr. M 's. Argument against the sufficiency of the
Scripture from this Head, I retort it thus.

That is necessary to be done to Salvation, Page 204.
causes Damnation; but the observation of the Sunday (commanding the
abstaining from all servile Works) if neglected, or left undone, brings
Damnation; therefore to observe in this manner the Sunday, is a thing necessary
to Salvation; and yet this point is so far from being clearly put down in
Tradition, that standing merely to the sole judgment of it, we can clearly show
more Declarations for the lawfulness of working on the Sunday, than for the
unlawfulness thereof. The Canon of the Council of Laodicea only says, Can. 29.
That Christians shall rest on the Lord's Day, (...), if they can, well knowing
that it was not possible for many of them so to do, some of them being Servants
to Pagan Masters, some condemned to labor in the Mines, and toil in Galleys
when their Lords required them, and yet we find not in all Ecclesiastical
History those Christians ever then refused to labor upon this account; and
therefore Balsamon upon this Canon says, That, (...), they did not enjoin this
as a thing necessary; but added, If they could, let them do it; (...), for if
any one work on the Lord's day out of Poverty, or any other necessity, he will
not be condemned. And Zonaras on the same Canon adds, That the Civil Law
commands all without excuse to rest upon the Lord's day, (...), excepting
Husbandmen, (...), for it permits them to work on the Lord's day, provided that
they find no other day so fit for their work. That which he says touching the
Civil Law, Cod. Just. l. 2. Cod. de feriis.
is evident from that Law of Constantine where commanding all men to rest on
the Lord's day; he excepts Rural Labors, in which delay may be very
prejudicial to them; Enchirid Tit. 4.
which Law Hermenopulus gives us thus, (...), On the Lord's day and other
Festivals, let the Judges and others rest, excepting only Husbandmen; and none
of the Fathers of the Church living in those days, or in the following
Centuries reproved these Laws, or spoke any thing to signify that they
esteemed them Profane: Epitaph. Paulae ad Eustoch. f. 64.
On the contrary Saint Jerome tells us, That Paula, with all the Virgins and
Widows that lived at Bethlehem in a Cloister with her, repaired to the Church
on the Lord's Day, A^que inde pariter revertentes instabant operi distributo,
and returning thence, they all fell to their work, and made Clothes for
themselves, or others.

And lastly, Divine Institution, and, jure positivo, to be observed, yet am I
far from thinking that it is necessary to Salvation so to do, and much less to
abstain wholly from working that day, or that if any Church should rather think
it fit to keep another day in Honor of our Lord, or that if any Christians
should think, as some of the Ancient Fathers seem to have done, that under the
Gospel Dispensation there was no difference of days; but that the Christian
should observe every day as a Spiritual Sabbath, they should be damned, or even
Unchurched for that Opinion. And therefore this is like unto most other
Instances urged by Mr. M. impertinent, and such as reaches not unto the
Question, viz. Whether the Scripture be deficient in any thing that is necessary
to be believed, or practiced to Salvation.

To proceed to the Second Question touching our Freedom from any Obligation to
observe the Sabbath injoined in the Fourth Commandment: I say, that though
Tradition seems not sufficiently to do it, Scripture affords sufficient
Evidence, that the Observation of the Seventh day from the Creation was only a
ceremonial Precept, and therefore not obliging to the Christian; that is, the
Observation of the Seventh day from the Creation, as a day wholly to be set
apart for rest from bodily Labor, according to the Fourth Commandment, was not
enjoined by a Moral Law, or by a Law commanding what is naturally good
antecedently to the Command of the Lawgiver; or which can be resolved into any
Principle, or Dictates of the Law of Nature, imprinted in Men's Hearts at the
Creation, but that it was a Law which only did oblige the Jews and Jewish
Proselytes to rest from Labor on that day, laying no Obligation on the
Christian so to do. And,

First, That this Command to observe the Seventh day from the Creation could be
no Moral Precept, obliging all Mankind, is evident, 1. From the Reasons there
assigned of it; Because God having made the World in six days, rested the
seventh, and that therefore the Lord blessed the seventh day and hallowed it.
Now, evident it is, that no Man by the Light of Nature could discern that God
employed six days in the Creation of the World, or that he rested on the
seventh day only from his Labor; no humane Reason could, with any certainty
infer, That because he rested from his Labor on this day, we should rest also
on it; and so no Man, without a Revelation, could be acquainted with these
Grounds for Observation of this day. Moreover no Man by the Light of Nature
could know that Time ought rather to be computed by Weeks, or by the Number
Seven, than any other Number, and much less that one day in seven precisely,
rather than in ten, should be dedicated to God's Service; this being neither a
principle evident in it self, nor derivable from any thing that is so, and much
less that the last of seven days should be kept holy, rather than the first, or
any other of the seven, no day being more holy than another by inherent
Sanctity, but only by God's free and arbitrary injunction to apply it, or
consecrate it to Religious Uses. And sure God, notwithstanding the Creation of
the World in six days, had he so pleased, might have designed any of those days
for his Religious Worship. 4thly. Such Precepts as are purely Moral, and are
injunctions of things good antecedently to the command, can in no time or case
be violated or transgressed; whereas our Lord expressly has declared, That this
Law touching the Sabbath, in many cases, might be violated. And therefore
Chrysostom observes, That of those natural Laws, Thou shall not Kill, or commit
Adultery, etc. God gave no Reason, because the Light of Nature taught them; but
when it pleased him to prescribe the Observation of the Sabbath day according
to the Fourth Commandment, he adds these Reasons, (...). Stat. Orat. 12. Tom.
6. Ed. Savil. p. 542. (...). Theod. in Ez. 30.
because he rested on the seventh day from all his Work, and because thou wast
a Bondsman in the Land of Egypt, as knowing this Commandment was not
primogeneal, nor made known to us by the dictate of our Consciences, but was
temporary and particular, i. e. given only to the Jewish Nation, according to
those Words of Moses, I have given you the Sabbath, Exodus xvi. 19.

Secondly, This clearly does appear from that Defense our Savior made of his
Disciples, when they were censured by the Pharisees for violating the Sabbath
by plucking Ears of Corn, Matthew. xij.
and rubbing them; for our Lord justifies their Action, 1. by the Example of
David and his Men, verse. 3.
Who being hungry ate the show Bread, which by the Law of Moses was to be eaten
only by the Priest: Now in all Arguments, a pari, or taken from Example, the
Ground, or the Foundation of them must be this, In paribus par ratio, the
Reason is the same where the Case is so. And so in Arguments drawn from such
Actions, the Cases must be still alike in all considerable Circumstances, and
so it will be in the Example here produced, provided that the rest enjoined in
the Fourth Commandment be Ceremonial, for then the Case runs thus, I and my
Men, and David and his Men being both hungry, did that which was forbidden by a
Ceremonial Law of Moses; if therefore David and his Men were blameless, I and
my Disciples must be so: But if the Rest enjoined by the Fourth Commandment had
been Moral, it is evident the Cases could not be alike, since David and his Men
did only violate a Ceremonial Precept; but Christ's Disciples did transgress a
Moral Precept. So that we stand obliged to confess the Rest enjoined by the
Fourth Commandment was Ceremonial, or that our Savior 's Argument was
unconcluding and unsound, which it is Blasphemy to assert.

Again our Savior Argues, That his Disciples were not to be accused of doing
evil, Sabbath day, because God had declared he will have mercy, and not
Sacrifice; that is, he will have works of Mercy, which are Moral Duties, to be
preferred before Sacrifices, which are but Ceremonials, the feeding of the
hungry Body must therefore be compared to works of Mercy, the violating the
Rest prescribed by the Fourth Commandment is that which is compared to Offering
Sacrifice: Since then the Law concerning Sacrifices most certainly was
Ceremonial, the Law concerning the Sabbatick Rest must be so also.

Secondly, This may be fairly gathered from these Words of the Apostle Paul to
the Galatians, Gal. 4.10, 11.
You observe days, and months, and times, and years. I am afraid of you, least
I may have labored among you in vain. Whereobserve,

First, That the days, and months, the times and years here mentioned are only
Jewish days and times, as will appear first from the scope of the Apostles,
which is to show the Christian Gentiles were exempt from any Obligation to
observe the Law of Moses, for this being the chief design of that Epistle, the
days forbidden here must be the days and times commanded by the Law of Moses.
2dly. By Observation of those days and times, etc. they are here said to be
willing to return again to the service of weak and beggarly Elements. Now these
Elements to which they are said to have been in Bondage are the Mosaic
Ceremonies, v. 3, and 4. For we, says he, when we were Children were in
Bondage to the Elements of the World, but when the fullness of time was come,
God sent to redeem those that were under the Law, from any farther Bondage to
it.

Secondly, Observe, That the Months, Times and Years here mentioned, do
comprehend all other Jewish Festivals besides the Sabbath, for the Months
signify their New Noons; the Times, the set times of going up to Jerusalem;
the Years, their solemn Anniversary Feasts, which constantly returned at such a
time of Year, or after such a period of Years; and therefore the Days here
mentioned can only signify the Sabbath Days observed by the Jews, and so Saint
Jerome and Saint Chrysostom interpret the Place.

Thirdly, Observe, That the Jewish Sabbath, or the Day of Rest, appointed by
the Fourth Commandment, is certainly the seventh day from the Creation, as is
evident, 1. From the Reason there assigned, You shall keep the Sabbath, for in
six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, and rested the seventh day. 2. That
was the day which the Lord Blessed and Sanctified; if therefore that be
abrogated, and not to be observed by Christians, the day of Rest enjoined in
the Fourth Commandment must be abolished, which was the thing to be proved.

Thirdly, This will be still more evident from those words of the same Apostle
to the Colossians, affirming, 2 Coloss. xiv. 16, 17.
That Christ had blotted out the handwriting of Ordinances which was contrary
to us, and had taken it out of the way, nailing it to his Cross; and making
thence this Inference, Let no man therefore judge you in meat, or in drink, or
in respect of an holy day, or of the New Moons, or of the Sabbath days, which
are a shadow of things to come, but the body is of Christ. Where Note,

1st. That the handwriting of Ordinances respects Ceremonial Orders, for of
them only can it be truly said, That they were against us, and were contrary to
us, as being Yokes of Bondage, and Burdens grievous to be born; that they were
blotted out, and cancelled, and nailed to the Cross of Christ, and that they
were shadows of, or shadows in respect of things to come.

2dly. When it is said, Let no Man judge you in respect of these things, the
meaning clearly is, Let no Man censure or condemn the Christian for not
observing these New Moons, Feasts or Sabbaths. Hence then these Arguments
result.

First, No Man ought to condemn the Christian for not observing of the Jewish
Sabbath, because that Christ has blotted out the handwriting of ceremonial
Ordinances, which was against them; therefore the Jewish Sabbath was a
ceremonial Ordinance; therefore it is blotted out; therefore the Christian is
not obliged to observe it: That which is joined with Meats and Drinks, and with
New Moons, which are things confessedly Ceremonial, no difference at all being
observed by the Apostle, as to their being named hand-writings, things
cancelled, shadows, or the like, that must be ceremonial; that which is a
shadow of, or in respect of things to come, of which Christ by his Advent
exhibited the Body, that must be ceremonial, that must be cancelled, and
abolished by Christ; therefore the Jewish Sabbath must be abolished, as being
only ceremonial. The Answers which the Sabbatarians return to this last
Argument are these;

1st. That the Apostle means here by Sabbaths, not the weekly Sabbath of the
Jews; but the first, and last days of the great Jewish Feasts, which were by
them observed as Sabbaths, and are in Scripture sometimes styled by that Name.

1. The Apostle having said before, Let no Man condemn you, (...), for not
observing of the Jewish Festivals, or any part thereof, cannot be rationally
supposed in the word Sabbaths following, to forbid only the same thing.

2. In the New Testament the word Sabbath, or Sabbaths, is used above sixty
times, and in Fifty six of those places, it does unquestionably signify the
Jewish weekly Sabbath, and in the other places the whole week: since then the
Sabbath in the New Testament is never used for the first and last days of the
Jewish Feasts, but ordinarily is there used for their weekly Sabbath, we ought
in reason to conclude it here imports the same thing which it is used to
signify where it is mentioned in other places by the Holy Ghost, and not
conceive it here imports that which it is never used to signify in the New
Testament; that is, we ought to judge is signifies the seventh day Sabbath, and
not the solemn days of the great Jewish Feasts.

3. Wherever the word Sabbath in the Old Testament is mentioned in
conjunction with New Moons, or Jewish Feasts, it does import the seventh day
Sabbath distinctly and separately from all others, as will appear from the
perusal of all the places where these things are jointly mentioned, as, v. g. 2
Kings iv. 23. Esa. i. 13. Esa. lxvi. 23. Lament. ij. 6. Ezekiel. xlv. 17. Ezekiel.
xlvi. 1. Hos. ij. 11. Amos viij. 5. Being then here mentioned together with New
Moons and Jewish Feasts, it is reasonable to conceive it signifies the same
thing.

4. The Sabbath day in the Old Testament is often contradistinguished to all
other solemn Feasts, and more particularly to New Moons, and anniversary
Feasts; and therefore being here mentioned with them, we may presume it cannot
signify them, or any portion of them, but rather that it does import that
Jewish Sabbath, which in other places is put in opposition to them; as for
Example, 1 Chronicles. xxiij. 31. 2 Chronicles. ij. 4. xxxi. 3. Neh. x. 32, 33. And
lastly Moses, having reckoned up the solemn Feasts, Leviticus the 23: he adds
v. 37, 38. These are the Feasts of the Lord which you shall proclaim besides
the Sabbath of the Lord; seeing then the word Sabbath wherever it is used in
conjunction with New Moons or Feasts in the whole Book of God, does always
signify the Jewish weekly Sabbath we cannot doubt but in conjunction with
them, here it signifies the same; seeing the word is often put in opposition to
New Moons and solemn Feasts indefinitely taken, what reason have we to conceive
that in this place it should be taken for any part or portion of them.

Some Sabbatarians tell us, Sabbath here the Apostle understands not the
weekly, but the yearly Sabbaths, viz. the seven Years Sabbath, and the Sabbath
of the Year of Jubilee.

But the same Observations do confute this Gloss; for seeing the word Sabbath
in the whole New Testament does never signify the yearly Sabbath, but still
the seventh day Sabbath, or the whole week; since the word Sabbath, when it is
joined with New Moons and Feasts, as here it is, does always fignifie the
seventh day Sabbath, this Sabbatarian Gloss must be repugnant to that Sense in
which the word is used by the Holy Ghost, and therefore contrary to those Rules
by which we are obliged to expound the Scripture.

It Is Thirdly Answered, Apostle says not, as the words are rendered, Let no
Man judge you in respect of a Feast; but as they ought to be rendered, Let no
Man judge you, (...), in part of a Feast, New Moon, or Sabbath; whence they
conclude, that he intends not the whole Sabbath, but that part of it which
consisted in offering Sacrifices, and this he calls a shadow, or a handwriting
of Ordinances.

This Quarrel at the Translation of these Words is groundless; (...), does as
truly signify on the account, or on behalf or in respect, as it does signify
in part; as when the same Apostle says, 2 Cor. 3.10.
That which was made glorious, had no glory, (...), in this respect, by reason
of the Glory that excels. 2 Cor. 9.3.
And again, I have sent the Brethren, least our boasting of you should be in
vain, (...), on this behalf. 1 Pet. 4.16.
And when Saint Peter says, If any Man suffer as a Christian, let him not be
ashamed, but let him glorify God, (...) in this behalf. Moreover this
expression was in use among the Jews of that Age, as appears from that saying
of the Book of Maccabees, 2 Maccab. 15.18.
The care they took for their Wives and Children, etc. was, (...), in least
account with them, their principal fear being for the Holy Temple; whence it
appears, that our Translation of this Phrase is very suitable to the Language
of the Apostles, and of the Age in which they lived, and consequently to the
true meaning of these Words.

2dly. The Apostle here makes no distinction of parts of the Sabbath to be
retained, and other parts to be abolished; if therefore no Man should condemn
us, (...), for not observing part of a Sabbath, then no Man should condemn us
for not observing the Rest enjoined on that day, that being eminently part of
the Sabbath.

3dly. If, (...), the word, in part, can only be referred to the Sacrifices
offered on the Sabbath, then must it only relate to the Sacrifices of the New
Moons, and other Feasts, to which it more immediately is joined; whereas it is
acknowledged, not only that the Sacrifices offered then, but even the whole New
Moons and Feasts were part of that handwriting which was blotted out, and
shadows of things future, and Solemnities, for not observing any part of which
the Christian was not to be censured or condemned, and therefore this must be
affirmed also of the whole Sabbath Festival.

4thly. There is not one Example in the whole sacred writ, in which it can be
showed, that, (...), does signify the Sacrifices offered on the Sabbath day,
in distinction from the other Duties of the Day; whence evident it is, That
this Exposition of the words is groundless. Besides, had the Apostle intended
by these words only to signify, That no Man should condemn the Christians for
not offering Sacrifice on that day; what Reason could there be, why he should
not have plainly said so, rather than signify his mind in Terms so much
offensive to the Jews, as seeming to declare the Abrogation of their whole
Sabbath, and to misguide the Christian into such an apprehension? Surely, had
the Apostle embraced the Sabbatarian Doctrine, he would not have afforded so
great occasion to others to reject it. But against this Argument the
Sabbatarians thus Object;

That the Sabbath here mentioned is said to be a shadow of things future, but
the Seventh day Sabbath was a sign of a thing past, viz. of the Creation of the
World.

That the Sabbath was ( not as the Objection, without Ground,) a Feast
Instituted in Commemoration of the Creation of the World, proves not that it
was not a shadow also of things future; for the Passover was the memorial of
God's Mercy in passing over the Houses of Israel, when he smote the Egyptians;
the Feast of Tabernacles was a memorial that their Fathers dwelt in Tents and
Tabernacles; Pentecost was a memorial of the giving of the Law at Mount Sinai;
the Feast of unleavened Bread was celebrated in memory of their Passing out of
Egypt with their Dough unleavened, and of their deliverance from the
Afflictions they endured in Egypt; if therefore, notwithstanding the
Institution of these Feasts in memory of what was past, it is acknowledged by
all Christians, that they were shadows of good things to come, the Seventh day
Sabbath may be both.

And whereas it is by the Sabbatarians said, That the seventh day Sabbath seems
not to be a shadow of any Blessing which we at present do enjoy by Christ, it
may be Answered,

1. That this Expression of the Apostle does not necessarily import, that the
things mentioned here were shadows which related to things future, but only
that comparatively to those future things which were to be prescribed and
taught by Christ and his Religion, they were shadows.

2. This Objection seems to contradict the very Words of the Apostle, Apostolo
responde si potes, qui vacationem istius diei umbram futuri esse tes^^tur.
Contra Faustum l.
and therefore what Saint Austin said to Faustus is very proper here; Answer
thou the Apostle, if thou can, who witnesses, That resting on the Sabbath
day was a shadow of that which was to come. Even the Ancient Jews acknowledged,
That their Sabbath was a shadow of the Age of the Messiah; this being their
Assertion, That the Sabbath was given as a Type of the Holam Habba, or the Age
to come, by which they understand the Age of the Messiah; ( whence in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, the World to come does clearly signify the Gospel
Age,) and this they gathered from these Expressions of the Prophet Isaiah, Chapter
66.23.
which say, That it shall come to pass that from one New Moon, and from one
Sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to worship before the Lord; which, say
the Jews, is spoken of that Age to come, which shall be all Sabbath. In signo
data sunt Judaeorum populo, Iren. l. 4. c. 30. Ita Iren. l. 4. c. 30. Barnabas,
Ep.. 15. Orig. Hom. 23. in Numer. f. 136. August. l. 4. De Genesis ad lit. c. 11.
Clemens Alex. Strom. l. 4. p. 477. Orig. Hom. 23. in Number. f. 136. Machar. Hom.
35. Greg. Nyssen. Hom. 7. in Eccles. Tom. 1. p. 440. Cyril. Alex. in cap 6.
Amosi p. 315. Sabbata perseverantiam totius diei erga deum deservitionis
edocebant, Iren. lib. 4. cap. 30. Just. M. in Dial. cum Tryph. p. 229. c.
Tertull. advers. Jud. c. 4.
And all the Ancient Fathers do with one Voice declare, That the Jewish Sabbath
was Typical, and figured the Spiritual Rest which Righteous Persons should
enjoy by Christ, and their Spiritual Ceasing from the Works of Sin, and that we
always ought to be employed in God's Service.

Fourthly, The Fathers with one Voice Assert, That the Sabbath was ceremonial,
and that the Christians, or at least the Gentile Converts, were not obliged to
observe it. Justin M. Asserts, That after the Appearing of the Son of God we
have no need to observe the Sabbath. Lib. 4. c. 30.
Irenaeus, That it does not Justify, and that the Ancient Patriarchs pleased
God without the Observation of it. Adv. Jud. c. 4.
Tertullian, That the Observation of it was Temporary, and that it was blotted
out like as Circumcision, and other Rites of the Old Law. The Council of
Laodicea declares, That Christians ought not to Rest on the Sabbath, Can. 29.
but work on it, preferring before it the Lord's day. Epiphanius says, That
our Lord did his Miracles on the Sabbath, and commanded the Impotent Man to
take up his Bed on that day, to insinuate that the Sabbath was to be dissolved;
Haer. 30. Ebion.. 32. vid. Haer. 66. c. 82.
that hence the Apostles knew, (...), that the Sabbath was dissolved; that it
was dissolved by the Coming of Christ the Great Sabbath, who gives us Rest from
our Sins. Catech 4. p. 38.
Saint Cyril of Jerusalem tells his Catechist, That all Observation of Sabbaths
is to be rejected. It would be endless to recite all that the Fathers say upon
this Subject; but if we do consider how constantly the Fathers teach, That the
Patriarchs and pious Men, before the promulgation of the Law of Moses observed
not the Sabbath, how generally they teach that it was a shadow of good things
to come by Christ, and that our Savior both by his Miracles performed upon
that day, and by his Contests with the ^harisees, designed to insinuate the
dissolution of it, we can no longer doubt the Judgment of the Ancients in this
Matter.

To proceed then to Answer the Objections of the Sabbatarians.

First, Mr. M. Objects, God Blessed the Seventh day and Sanctified it, because
in that, and not in any other,. 9. p. 205.
he had rested from all his Work, Genesis 2. And then enquires, How comes this
Blessing given to no other day among the Seven, but given to the Seventh day,
only to be lost? who took away the Sanctification of it given by God himself,
and given for a Reason which is as obliging now, as ever?

To this I Answer, Bless and Sanctify the Seventh day does only signify to
set apart that day for his peculiar Worship, or as the Badge and Sign by which
the People, who owned Jehovah for their God, should be distinguished from all
other People, and by which He should also be disting uished from all other
Gods, by a Work peculiar to himself; for it being the Custom of all Nations and
of all Religions, to set apart some day or time as Sacred for the Worship of
their Gods, and in that time to Solemnize their Worship by the Commemoration,
or the imitation of some peculiar Actions for which they were Honored; God
would have this to be the Sign of His peenliar People, the Resting on the
Sabbath day, in Token that they owned him as the Creator of the World by
imitation of the Rest he took when he had made it: This God himself declares by
saying, Exodus 31.15, 16.
The Children of Israel shall keep the Sabbath to observe it through their
Generations for a perpetual Covenant. It is a sign betwixt me and the Children
of Israel for ever; for in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, and on the
seventh day he Rested; that is, Now that the Seed of Abraham are come to be my
People in Covenant, they shall keep the Seventh day as a Sign that they are
Consecrated to the Service of the Creator of the World, and that they own him
as their God. Ezekiel. 20.12.
Hence are these Sabbaths said to be given to be a sign betwixt God and them,
that they might know he was the Lord that sanctified them: and God commands
them to observe them, Exodus 31.13.
that they might know he was the Lord that sanctified them; that is, did
consecrate and separate them from all other Nations, to be his own peculiar
People. Hence also was it that till God had made of Abraham a great Nation,
till he had freed this Nation from that Bondage they were under to the
Egyptians, who would not let them rest from Work, and chosen them to be his
own peculiar People: He laid not this injunction on them, for even the very
Sabbath day before that mentioned by Moses to be observed by them as a day of
Rest, Exodus 16.1. Neh. 9.14.
they marched a wearisom Journey, and came at Night to the Wilderness of Sin;
and therefore Nehemiah says, That God made known to them his Holy Sabbath by
the hand of Moses his Servant; that is, then did he set a part that day to be a
day to be observed by them in Honor of him. Accordingly the Christian Fathers
generally teach, That none of the Patriarchs did keep the Sabbath, nor do we
find from Adam to Joseph the least mention of the Observation of it, though we
find frequent mention of all other Acts and Requisits of their Religious
Worship, of their Groves and Oratories, their Priests and Altars, their
Sacrifices and Oblations, Prayers, Vows, Thanksgivings, and, after Abraham, of
their Circumcision; the Book of Genesis is partly spent in giving an account of
the Travels of these Patriarchs from one place to another, and yet it adds
not one word of their resting any where, because it was the Sabbath day. Now
does it not seem strange that such a solemn Command should have been given to
Adam and all Mankind, as some conceive it was, and not the least Print or Token
of the Observation of it to be found for Two thousand Years?

And whereas some Object those Words of Moses, Exodus 16.23.
To morrow is the Rest of the Holy Sabbath to the Lord, and thence Collect,
that God had before Moses given a Command touching the Observation of that day;

It may be Answered, That the word is, is wanting in the Hebrew, and so the
Words may thus be rendered, This is that which the Lord has said, To morrow
shall be the Rest of the Holy Sabbath to the Lord; and so they will accord
exactly with those other Scriptures, which tell us, That the Sabbath was made
known to the Jews, not by Abraham or Joseph, but by the Hands of Moses; Ezekiel.
20.10, 12.
that God caused them to go forth out of the Land of Egypt, and (then) gave
them his Sabbaths to be a sign between him and them; whereas the Sign of the
Covenant between him and Abraham was only that of Circumcision. Now from all
these Considerations it seems evident that the import of those Words of Moses
in Genesis the Second, Wherefore the Lord blessed the seventh day, and hallowed
it, is only this, God made the World in Six days, and rested the Seventh, which
was the Reason that when he chose to himself a peculiar People, he made that
the day they were to set apart for his Service that so they might acknowledge
him, whom they served, to be the Creator of the World.

And Because on the same Day God overthrew Pharaoh and his Host in the Red Sea,
See Mr. Mede, Disc. 15. p. 56.
and by that Action completed his Deliverance of his People from Egyptian
Bondage, therefore he gives that as a farther Reason of the Observance of that
Day, Deuteronomy. 5.15.
saying, Remember that thou wast a Servant in the Land of Egypt, and that the
Lord thy God brought thee out thence with a mighty hand, and with a stretched
out arm, therefore the Lord thy God commanded thee to keep the Sabbath day.
Hence therefore,

1. We see sufficient cause why this Command should be inserted into the
Decalogue with as much Ceremony and Solemnity as the others were, although it
were not Moral, as to the Nature of it, it being so far Moral with respect unto
the end of its Observance, viz. The owning the Creator of Heaven and Earth, as
their peculiar God, in opposition to all Heathen Deities; that upon this
depended the performance of all the other Duties, which belong to the First
Table. For 'twas this Institution which continually brought this Fundamental
Article to their Remembrance, that the God they Worshipped was the Creator of
the World; they could not ask themselves why they thus rested, but this must
come into their Minds; this could not come into their Minds but they must be
inclined to despise all the old Heathen Deities, the Sun, Moon and Stars, and
the whole Earth, as being all the Creatures of their Great Jehovah: Wherefore
this Precept having such strict Affinity with the other Three, which were
unquestionably intended to remove the Kinds, the Objects, the Signs, and
Instruments of Idolatry, and keep them close to the sole Worship of the True
Jehovah, might very well find place among the Precepts of the Decalogue.

2. Hence also may we see sufficient Reason for the strict Charge God gave for
Observation of the Sabbath; for the severest Punishments which he inflicted on
the Violaters of it, and for the Promises he made of signal Blessings to the
Observers of it, viz. Because the Observation of this day tended so fully to
establish the great Foundation of the Law of Moses, That Jehovah the Creator of
the World was their God in Covenant; and because it was a most effectual Bar
against the Old Idolatry of the World, which chiefly did consist in Worshipping
the whole, or else some parts of Heaven and Earth, on which account we find God
often mentioning these things together, the keeping of the Sabbath, and the
fleeing from Idolatry, Levit. 19.3, 4.
as in these words, Ye shall keep my Sabbath, I am the Lord your God, turn you
not to Idols, nor make to your selves molten Gods, Levit. 26.1, 2.
I am the Lord your God. And in these following, You shall make no Idols, nor
graven Images, nor shall you set up an Image of Stone in the Land to bow down
unto it; for I am the Lord your God, ye shall keep my Sabbaths. Lastly, Because
the Violation of this Law was a virtual denial of the Creation of the World,
and consequently of that God who made it, and gave them this Temptation to
Worship the Heavenly Beings, that they were eternal. Accordingly we find the
Jews usually committing both these Sins at once, Idolatry, to wit, and
violation of the Sabbath, as in those Words, They polluted my Sabbaths, Ezekiel.
20.16.
for their Hearts went after their Idols; and in those of the Author of the
Book of Maccabees, Many of the Israelites consented to the Religion of
Antiochus, 1 Mac. 1.43.
and sacrified unto Idols, and profaned the Sabbath. Since then the
Observation of this Day was of so great moment for preservation of them from
that Idolatry to which they were so prone, and the neglect of it put them in so
great danger of returning to it. Surely we may discern sufficient Reason of the
Severities and Promises forenamed, and of the frequent Charges given for the
strict Observance of it.

3. Hence also may we see the plainest Reason for the non-Obligation of the
seventh day Sabbath now, Because that Reason of the Institution of it, which
concerned their Freedom from Egyptian Bondage, was peculiar to the Jews, and
therefore never could concern the Christian. The other Reason Assigned by God
that it might be a Sign between God and them, that they were his peculiar
People, and that he was the Lord that sanctified them, must also cease upon
their ceasing to be his peculiar People, and to have any more Relation to him
as their God in Covenant. Yea seeing God has now cast off that very People to
whom he gave the Sabbath for a Sign, and as Josephus truly says, (...), a Law
peculiar to that Nation, and that dispensation, it seems to be a kind of
Judaism, and as it were a virtual revolting to the Mosaic Dispensation to be
still, out of Conscience, Observers of the Rest which was peculiar to that Law
and Nation.

If it be here enquired, viz. Because God rested on that day, does not remain
and equally concern all Christians:

I Answer, No. For, 1. it seems a vulgar Error to conceive that God did chiefly
and primarily command the Jews to rest upon the Seventh day in imitation of his
Rest, there being nothing moral, or nothing in the Light of Nature which could
induce them to imitate him in this matter any more than in the Work of the Six
days preceding, in which God worked; which was so far from laying any
necessary Obligation on them to work upon those days, that God himself
established many other Festivals as a perpetual Ordinance, in which they were
obliged to cease from Labor on those Days on which he Worked. Wherefore the
great design of God, in requiring them to Rest upon that day, as he did, was
this, that by so doing they might acknowledge, as by a Sign and Pledge, That
they did Worship and own him as their God in Covenant, who was the sole Creator
of the World, according to these Words of God to Moses, Speak thou unto the
Children of Israel, saying, Ex. 31.13.14.
Verily my Sabbaths ye shall keep, for it is a sign betwixt me and you
throughout your Generations, that you may know that I am the Lord that does
sanctify you. You shall keep the Sabbath therefore, unto you. Wherefore the
Children of Israel shall keep the Sabbath to observe the Sabbath throughout
their Generations, for a perpetual Covenant. Now hence it follows, That God
neither did, nor could, agreeably to his Design, Command the Gentiles then, or
before, to observe the seventh day in imitation of his Resting; for then the
doing this by his own Nation could be no sign betwixt him and the Jews, that
they were his peculiar People, because it was, according to this Supposition,
the common duty of all other Nations. The Gentile Christians therefore never
were obliged to observe this rest by virtue of the fourth Commandment, and
being also not obliged to it by any Precept Evangelical, it cannot be in them
any act of Christian Obedience, but rather must be deemed the Fruit of Jewish
Superstition, so to do.

Secondly, I add that the injunction of this Rest upon a reason which remains,
and which does in the General concern all Christians, will not infer the
Obligation of the Christian to observe the Rest commanded for that Reason, it
being very common in the Law of Moses to require the Observation of Ceremonial
Precepts for Reasons which remain, and which do equally concern all Christians,
Lev. 19.10. verse. 30. verse. 37.
v. g. Thou shall not glean thy Vineyard, neither shall thou gather every Grape
of thy Vineyard, but thou shall leave them for the Poor. I am the Lord, thou
shall Reverence my Sanctuary, I am the Lord. You shall observe all my Statutes,
and all my Judgments, and do them, I am the Lord. Now God is still the Lord of
Christians, but hence it will not follow that they are obliged to observe these
Ceremonial Precepts, enjoined for Reasons still remaining, and equally
concerning Christians; it therefore cannot rationally be concluded, that
Christians are obliged to observe the Rest enjoined in the Fourth Commandment,
because it is commanded for a Reason that does still remain.

4. Hence we may easily discern the Reason why the Christians still observed
one day in Seven, and also why they chose to observe the first day of the Week,
and not the last. For when Christianity began, it had two sorts of Adversaries
to encounter, viz. The unbelieving Jews, and the Idolatrous Gentiles; and
therefore as a Testimony against the Heathens, who worshipped false Gods; that
is, the Gods who made not Heaven and Earth, they chose one day in seven to
signify they worshipped the true God, and the Creator of all things.

But then they chose the first of these seven days, to testify, against the
Jews, that they worshipped this God, not now as one in Covenant with the Jews,
or as their Redeemer out of Egypt, but as the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and through him our most loving Father, and to own themselves the Servants of
that God who on the morning of that day vanquished Satan the Spiritual Pharaoh,
and redeemed us from our Spiritual thraldom, by raising Jesus Christ our Lord
from the dead, begetting us instead of an Earthly Canaan, to an Inheritance
incorruptible in the Heavens; Dr. Spencer de Legibus Hebr. Mr. Mede Disc. 15.
this account of this change of the day I have borrowed from two very Learned
and Ingenious men, and for the further illustration and confirmation of it, lot
it be observed,

1. That the Jews never worshipped God, or put up their addresses to him under
the name of Father, as we Christians by our Lord are taught, and commanded to
do in these words, When you pray say, Our Father; this being as the Apostle
has observed, the peculiar privilege of Christians above the Jews, Romans 8.15.
that we have not received, as they, the spirit of bondage unto fear, but the
spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father. They were, it is confessed,
Children also, Gal. 4.1, 4.
but nothing differing from servants, as being Children in their Minority, and
so in bondage to the Rudiments of the world; whereas we having received,
through faith in Christ Jesus, the Adoption of Sons, God has sent forth the
Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, Abba Father. It is the saying of the
Jews, that a servant cannot say unto his Lord Abba; this being a word proper to
a Son, and only used by natural, or adopted Sons; we being therefore all the
Children of God, and his adopted Sons through faith in Christ Jesus, Joh. 1.12.
Gal. 3.26.
we have through him received this privilege to address our selves unto him by
the name of Abba, or our Father; and yet more certainly is it peculiar to the
Christian to own him as the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is his usual
name in the New Testament, and to address unto him in, and by that Name.

2ly. Observe that the Resurrection of our Lord Christ is generally ascribed in
the New Testament to God the Father; and when our Lord declares that he had
power to lay down his life, Joh. 10.18.
and take it up again, he adds immediately, This Commandment have I received of
my Father. Hence does the Holy Ghost assure us, that God the Father said unto
him, Thou art my Son, Act. 13.33.
this day have I begotten thee; for this as well as other reasons, that he had
raised him from the dead, and that He was declared to be the Son of God with
power, Romans 1.4.
by his raising him from the dead.

3ly. Observe that our Lord's Resurrection is represented as the Great
foundation of all the mercies derived to us from our Savior, as being that by
which they were completed, or confirmed to us. 1 Pet. 3 21.
Our Baptism does save us, says St. Peter, through the Refurrection of Christ
Jesus. Our freedom from condemnation is ascribed rather unto his Resurrection,
than his death; as in that question, Romans 8.34.
Who is he that condemns us? it is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen
again. Our Justification is ascribed to it: Romans 4.25.
For Christ was delivered for our offenses, and rose again for our
justification. From it derives our hope of Glory, 1 Pet. 1.3.
for we are begotten to a lively hope, through the Resurrection of our Lord
Jesus from the dead, of an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, reserved
in the Heavens for us. In a word, it is the foundation of our whole faith, 1
Cor. 15.14.
for if Christ be not risen, then our faith is vain.

Since then these blessings, so far exceeding those of the Creation, or of the
Jews deliverance from Egypt, were procured to us by the Resurrection of our
Lord, Ephesians. 1.19.
which was effected (...), by the operation of the strength of the power of God
the Father, since he became the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and through
him our Father, by raising him from the Dead, there seems great reason why this
day should be appointed as the day in which the Christian should acknowledge
himself a Worshipper of God his Father through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Moreover this day being peculiarly styled the Lord's Day, it is highly probable
it was observed by Christians primarily in honor of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
through him, to the Glory of God the Father, to whom our prayers, our praises,
and spiritual sacrifices are offered on that day through Christ.

And for Illustration of this matter let it be observed,

1. That the times of the Messiah were still represented by the Jews under the
Notion of Holam Habba, or the world to come; and the work of the Messiah as a
new Creation, or a Creation of new Heavens, and a new Earth. The Lord God shall
slay ye, and call his servants by another name: Isa. 65.15, 17. Isa. 66.22.
-- For behold I create new Heavens, and a new Earth, and the former shall not
be remembered, nor come into my mind. Accordingly, Heb. 2.5.
the Author to the Hebrews styles this new Dispensation (...), the world to
come; and they who then enjoyed the Gift of Miracles, or other extraordinary
operations are said to have tasted (...), the powers of the world to come. Heb.
6.5.
And the Renovation of Christians by this Dispensation, is represented as a new
Creation, wrought by Christ; Ephesians. 2.10.
for we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus to good words. He has
abolished the Law of Commandments, (...), Ver. 15.
that he might create those two, the Jew, and Gentile, into one new man in
himself; so that now if any man be in Christ Jesus, he is (...), a new
Creation, 2 Cor. 5.17.
old things are passed away, that all things might become new in him; for in
Christ Jesus nothing avails, (...), Gal. 6.15.
but this new Creation.

2ly. Observe that this new World, and new Creation, Hieron. and Theodoret in
Isa. 9.6. Eusebius. them. Evan. l. 7 p. 336
as it was made by Christ, so is it immediately subjected to him. He by the
Septuagint was styled (...), the Prince of Peace, the Father of the Age to
come; to him, and not unto the Angels, Heb. 2.5. Ver. 8, 9.
has God subjected this world to come. He has crowned him with Glory and
Honor, and set him over the works of his own hands, and has put all things in
subjection under his feet, Joh. 5.23. Phil. 2.10, 11.
declaring that he will have all men honor the Son, even as they honor the
Father; and determining that at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow, and
every tongue should confess that Jesus was the Lord, to the Glory of God the
Father. Moreover this power he received at the Resurrection, having then, Mat.
28.18.
as he says, all power both in Heaven and Earth committed to him; being then,
says the Apostle Peter, made both Lord and Christ, Act. 2.36.
and exalted to be a Prince and a Savior; whence he is said to be the first
born from the dead, Col. 1.10.
that he might be in all things (...), the preeminent.

3ly, Observe that Christians are represented in the New Testament as those who
do succeed the Jews in all their Covenant-Relations; Romans 11.19.
They being broken off from the true Olive, and we grafted in; and being
therefore a chosen Generation, a peculiar people, a Royal Priesthood, an Holy
Nation to show forth the virtues of him who called us from darkness to light, 1
Pet. 2 9.
and from the power of Satan unto God. This Covenant Relation they enjoy by
virtue of that Jesus who is the Mediator of a better Covenant; and who gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us, Tit. 2.14.
and purify us to himself a peculiar people. In fine, the virtues for which we
are to celebrate his Praises, are our Redemption by him from the wrath to come,
from the curse of the Law, from the power of Satan, from the dominion of sin,
our Adoption, our receiving of the spirit, by which we are enabled to cry Abba
Father, and as a consequent of that, our being heirs of Glory; and all these
mercies, as I have observed already, were confirmed by, and were completed to
us at his Resurrection.

If then in this Economy there be a new world, and a new Creation, a new Lord
to whom this world is subject, and who is to be honored and worshipped, as the
former was, though to the honor of the former; if there be a new Covenant
established in his blood, and by which he has purified to himself a peculiar
people; if to this Lord all power both in Heaven and Earth is given by the
Creator of the World, unto this very end that all men might thus honor him; if
this Lord has procured for us a Redemption from the power of Sin and Satan,
much more valuable than the Redemption of the Jewish Nation from Egyptian
thraldom; if by his Resurrection we are all begotten to the lively hope of a
much better Canaan; is there not cause sufficient for the Translation of the
Day appointed for the celebration of the mercies of the old Creation, and of
deliverance from the Jewish thraldom, and the agnizing of the Author of it as
the Lord that sanctified them, to a day appointed for Celebration of the new
Creation, and the deliverance accomplished by it, and the acknowledging the
Author of it as the Christians Lord? Is there not cause sufficient why
Christians should observe the day on which their Lord did triumph over their
spiritual Pharaoh, redeemed them from spiritual thraldom, begot them to a
lively hope of a Spiritual Canaan, and by the observation of it should profess
that they are Christians, and (...) that Jesus who is Lord of all things? Can
we refuse to give this honor to the Son, who is by God's appointment to be
honored as the Father, and whom we do thus worship to the Glory of God the
Father?

Mr. M. in behalf of the Sabbatarians Objects, 15. Obj. 2.. 9. p. 207, 208.
Mat. 19.17, 18. Mark 10.19. Luke 18.20.
That ou^ Lord said to one enquiring of him, What good thing shall I do to have
eternal life, if thou will enter into life keep the Commandments; and when he
still enquired of him which Commandments, did clearly explicate himself to mean
all the Commandments of the Decalogue given by Moses; whence he insers, That
the Author of our new Law with his own mouth required no less the keeping of
this Commandment of the Saturday Sabbath, as necessary for our entrance into
life everlasting, than the keeping any other Commandment.

Answ. 1. This Assertion is expressly false, and manifestly contradicts the
Text, for in none of these Evangelists does our Lord mention the Commandments
of the first Table, of which that of the Sabbath is one, but only does
enumerate those which belonged to the second.

2ly. His Inference is also-false, for Christ there speaks not of what was
necessary to Salvation to be observed by the Christian after his Resurrection,
but of what was necessary then to be observed by the Jew, speaking there to a
Jewish Governor, who was acquainted already with the Law of which he spoke,
and had observed it from his Youth.

Mr. M. Objects, That St. Paul preached every Saturday,. 16. Obj. 3. Act. 18. p
209.
for he disputed in the Synagogue every Sabbath.

Answ. 1. To this I answer first, That this Apostle has declared that the
seventh-day Sabbath was part of that handwriting of Ordinances which Christ
took away, and was a shadow of good things, exhibited by Christ, and so he
plainly did discharge the Christian from observation of the Rest required by
the fourth Commandment on the Sabbath- day.

2ly. That He, or any of his Brethren preached the Gospel in the Jewish
Synagogues upon that day, can be no evidence that they esteemed the Rest
required on that day obliging to the Christian, but only that they prudentially
complied with Jews and Proselytes in coming to their Assemblies on that day,
that so they might have more familiar access unto them, and better opportunity
to instruct them in the Christian faith; and therefore in pursuance of the same
good end, St. Paul, who was most free and vehement in declaring his and our
freedom from the legal Ceremonies, says, notwithstanding that to the Jew he
became as a Jew, 1 Cor. 9.20.
that he might gain the Jews; to them that were under the Law as under the Law,
that he might gain them that were under the Law; and therefore his example in
these cases will as much prove that we are to observe the Law of Moses, and the
Jewish Customs, as that we are obliged to keep the Jewish Sabbath.

Mr. M. farther adds,. 17. Obj. 4. p 210. 1 Cor. 7.19.
That St. Paul tells us that in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any
thing, nor Uncircumcision, but the keeping of the Commandments of God, of which
the Sanctification of the seventh day was one.

Answ. To which I answer that here he plainly begs the Question, which is only
this, Whether the Saturday under the Christian Economy, be still, by God's
Commandment, to be observed as a day of Rest; and contradicts the plainest
declaration of our Lord, and the whole Christian Church, that it was
Ceremonial, a shadow of things to come, a temporary precept, which laid no
obligation on the Christian.

Mr. M. closes with the common Sabbatarian Objection,. 18. Obj. 5. p. 211.
That Christ foretelling the destruction of Jerusalem, which was to happen
forty years after his Resurrection, when all the Ceremonial Laws belonging to
the Jews were abrogated, bids his Disciples pray their flight might not be in
the Winter, or on the Sabbath Day, Mat. 24.20.
that they might avoid the profanation of that day; whereas if that Commandment
had been Ceremonial, and then abrogated, they might have fled upon that day as
well as upon any other, and could not by so doing have profaned it.

Answ. 1. To this I Answer, first, That these words of Christ cannot be
rationally deemed to import that he advised them to pray their flight might not
be on the Sabbath, because he thought such flying then a sinful action, or a
profanation of that day, seeing he so expressly has declared the contrary, Mark
3.4.
saying, that it was lawful to save life upon the Sabbath Day, and that in all
such cases God would have mercy and not Sacrifice; Mat. 12.7.
that the Rest of that day might be violated to preserve the life of a Beast,
and much more to preserve the life of man; that the Sabbath was made for man,
and not man for the Sabbath, and therefore man might wave the Rest required on
that day when it was for his good to do so. Having then so often, and so expressly
taught his Disciples that it was lawful to fly for saving of their lives upon
that day, he could not use these words to intimate the contrary.

2ly. Though it were lawful, even when the Fourth Commandment was still in force,
to flee upon that day from danger, and travel upon case of urgent necessity;
yet many of the Jews thought otherwise, esteeming this an intolerable
profanation of the Sabbath, persecuting, and condemning our Lord for teaching
the contrary. If therefore his Disciples, or other Christians, should have been
compelled to flee upon that day they might have been molested, and persecuted
by their own Superstitious Nation, and so had cause to pray their flight might
not be on the Sabbath Day. And,

3ly. The believing Jews adhered stiffly to the observance of the Jewish Rites
( and consequently to the observance of the Rest commanded on the Jewish
Sabbath) till the destruction of Jerusalem, and thought themselves obliged so
to do, and therefore Christ might well advise them, knowing that they would
still retain these apprehensions, to pray their flight might not fall out upon
that day. And though it cannot be expected that we should know the Reasons of all
his actions, yet might he still permit the Christians to continue under this
apprehension of their obligation to observe the Law of Moses, that so the
unbelieving Jews might be the less offended at them, and so might be more ready
to embrace the Christian faith; and because he knew the time would shortly come
when the Temple should be destroyed, and they should thereby be convinced that
the Rites confined to that Temple were abolished.

OF TRADITION.
CHAP. VI.
That there is no Evidence of Traditions for the Doctrines of the Church of
Rome is proved; 1. Because there is no mention of them in the ancient Councils,
the Codex canonum Ecclesiae universalis, the Discourses of the Ancients Church
Government and Discipline, or in their Rituals,. 1. 2. Because we find no
mention of their Articles of Faith in the Creeds, Enchriidions, Compendiums of
Christian Doctrine, and Ecclesiastical Opinions, or in the catechistical
Discourses of the ancient Fathers,. 2. 3. Because the Fathers of the first Ages
were very careful and concerned to preserve the Traditions of the Apostles
truly so called, and so esteemed by them, and had occasion to mention them, by
reason of the pretenses of the Heretics of their Times to Tradition, and yet
they have not been concerned to preserve the pretended traditionary Doctrines
and Practices of the Church of Rome, 3.

HANING thus Stated the Question in these propositions, I come now to show,
that there is no Evidence of Tradition for any, much less for all those
Doctrines of the Church of Rome, which she has put into her Creed, and has
required all her Clorgy to believe and teach, as that true Catholic Faith
without which no Man can be saved.

For, First, the papal Jurisdiction over all Christians, the practice of
auricular Confession and Indulgences, of Prayer to Saints and Angels, of
Veneration of Images, of performing the public Services of Prayer, Singing,
Reading in a Tongue not understood by the People; I say, had they that evidence
of Apostolical Tradition for these things, it would be as notorious, that these
Doctrines were handed down by the Catholic Church throughout all Ages to this
present, as it is of other matters of continual practice, viz. The Lord's Day
Assemblies, the Ordination of Presbyters and Deacons by Bishops, the Government
of the Church by them, the Observation of the Easter Festival, Baptizing by
Trine Immersion, the mixture of Wine with Water in the Sacrament, etc. For all
these matters are therefore evident in the Tradition of the Church, because,
being continually practiced by her Members, they had continual occasion to
speak of them in their Discourses of Church Government, and Church Assemblies,
and of the Sacraments of the Church, and made numerous Constitutions about
them; they all appear in their most ancient Rituals, in the Accounts they give
us of their Assemblies, and of their practice when Assembled, and in their
ancient Councils, the Primitive Writers mention them upon all Occasions; they
draw Arguments and Conclusions from them, and show the Reasons why such
establishments were made by the Apostles. The like we see now practiced in the
Roman Church, touching the Novelties now mentioned; since they have obtained in
that Church, we find them got into their Rituals, and Books of S. Offices:
Their Councils do consult about them, make Canons and Decrees in favor of
them. Having then so frequent mention of these matters in the Councils,
Liturgies, the Canons and the Constitutions of the Western Church in these last
Ages, why is it we have nothing of them in the Canons or Constitutions
Apostolical, or in the Code of Canons of the universal Church, or of the Church
of Africa, where we have so frequent mention of all the other received
Practices and Customs of the Church, when Tertullian sets himself on purpose to
enumerate those things which had obtained in the Church, De Cor. c. 3.
Traditionis titulo, and consuetudinis patrocinio, under the specious Titles of
Custom and Tradition, why is it that he does not mention one of these Romish
Practices? De Sp. Sancto, c. 25, 27.
When St. Basil, if that be his Work which bears his Name, does professedly
discourse of the, (...), unwritten Customs which had obtained in the Church,
why is he wholly silent as to all these practices, if equally owned by the
Church as Apostolical? Surely these things give us just reason to suspect, that
they were not acquainted with them, and knew nothing of them.

Again, had they the Evidence of Tradition, Councils have been established, and
imposed upon us under an Anathema, were handed down unto them from our Lord's
Apostles; had the Apostles and their Successors still taught all Christians the
Doctrine of Concomitance, and the sufficiency of one Species to make an entire
Sacrament, and to conveigh the whole benefit of the Sacrament; Of the necessity
of the intention of the Priest to make a Sacrament; Of the number of the
Sacraments, that they are neither more nor less than Seven; Of Marriage, that
it is a Sacrament properly so called, and that by virtue of our Lord's
Institution; Of the Transubstantiation of the Bread and Wine into the Body and
Blood of Christ; Of the Oblation of a true propitiatory Sacrifice for the Dead
and Living in the Mass; Of a Purgatory, or place in which the Souls of Pious
Men do suffer Punishment, and from which, being afterward relieved by the
Prayers and good Works of the Faithful upon Earth, they go to Heaven before the
Day of Judgment: had they informed all Christians, That a Power of Indulgences
is left by Christ unto his Church; That Saints departed are to be Invoked, and
Images to be Venerated; That the Church of Rome is the Catholic Church, the
Mother and Mistress of all Churches; and, That the Pope is the Vicar of our
Lord Jesus upon Earth, and that without the Belief of this Faith Salvation
cannot be obtained, and consequently never was obtained by any Christian. I
say, had all these Articles descended to them from the Apostles through all
Ages of the Christian Church, they must be as notorious as any which have thus
descended, and which we can run up from Age to Age till we come to the
Apostles. For Instance, they must have been as obvious to be found in all the
Writings of the Fathers, as the Tradition of the Apostles Creed, the Canon of
the Scripture, the Writing of the Four Evangelists, etc. They also must have
been as diligently taught, as frequently inculcated as those things were, as
being no less necessary to Salvation, than any Doctrine contained in the
Scriptures, or in the Creed of the Apostles. We must have met with them in all
their Summaries of Christian Doctrine, of Ecclesiastical Doctrines, and their
Discourses writ on purpose to instruct others in the Articles of Christian
Faith, they would have been inserted into their Creeds, as other necessary
Articles were, taught their Catechumens, required of their Clergy at their
admission to Holy Orders, sent by their Patriarchs and Bishops in their
circular Letters, included in the Paschal Cycles, as were the Rule of Faith,
the Christian Symbol; and yet by diligent perusual of all these, we can find no
such matter in the Creeds, Enchiridions, Compendiums of Christian Doctrine, the
catechistical Discourses, the Treatises of Faith, and ecclesiastical Doctrines,
so frequent in the Writings of the five first Centuries; and therefore have
good reason to believe they were not then received or owned as Articles of
Christian Faith.

The Wisdom of the present Church of Rome yields a strong confirmation of this
Argument, for since their latter Councils have defined these Articles, we find
them Inserted into her Creed, and her Trent Catechism, contained in all the
Writings of her Doctors, touching the Articles of Christian Faith, and of
ecclesiastical Tradition, required to be believed, professed, and taught by all
her Clergy. What therefore shall we think of all the Fathers of the five first
Centuries, was it out of want of love to Souls, or care of their instruction,
in the necessary Articles of Christian Faith, that they were wholly silent in
these matters? Why then may we not fear that they neglected to hand down unto
Posterity other necessary Articles of Christian Faith? Or was it out of
ignorance that they were then necessary, how then came Romanists to know by
Tradition, that they are necessary now? Or, if they wanted neither knowledge to
discern all necessary Articles of Christian Faith, nor will, nor care to teach
all they conceived to be such, must it not follow, that those Articles which in
their numerous Discourses and Instructions on these Subjects, are not so much
as touched upon, were not then owned as necessary Articles of the Christian
Faith, and therefore ought not now to be imposed or received as such?

Add to this, Fathers of the first Ages were very careful, and concerned to
preserve the Traditions of the Apostles, truly so called, or so esteemed by
them, and to commit them unto writing to be the Testimonies of their Faith
against the importunity of Heretics, to whom it was peculiar, for the three
first Centurtes to refuse trial by the Scriptures only, and to pretend unto
some secret Traditions not contained in the Scriptures. For the Great Ignatius
going to his Martyrdom, confirmed the Churches he arrived at with his
Discourses, requesting them in the first place to avoid the Heresies which were
then springing up. He exhorted them also, Lib. 3. c. 35.
says Eusebius, (...), to stand firm to the Tradition of the Apostles, (...),
which, for the greater certainty, he, having testified concerning it, thought
necessary to leave in writing, and so endited his Epistles. Papias, Ibid c. 38.
often naming the Apostles, says the same. Eusebius, (...), puts down their
Traditions. And Polycarp, says Irenaeus, not only testified what was the truth
which he received from the Apostles, and by that testimony converted many of
the Heretics, but he also writ an Epistle to the Philippians, from which they,
who are willing and desirous of their own Salvation, may learn, (...), Lib. 3.
c. 3.
the Character of his Faith, and the Declaration of the Truth, so plain and
simple was the Faith of those first Ages, that the whole Faith and Truth of
Christ was thought to be contained there, where is not the least intimation of
one Article of the Romish Faith. The Faith received from the Apostles, says
Irenaeus, the Church, (...), keeps with the greatest care, and preaches, and
teaches, (...), Lib. 1. c. 23.
and by Tradition hands it down, as he himself there does, by giving us a
written Copy of all the Articles of Faith received by the universal Church from
the Apostles, beyond which the most learned Bishop taught nothing, as being not
above his Master; nor did the meanest Christian believe less, the Faith, and
Tradition of it being one and the same in all places. Now, not to insist upon
the inference which plainly follows hence, that none of the R. Articles could
be then esteemed Articles of Faith received from the Apostles Tradition, there
being nothing at all of them in the Epistles of Ignatius writ on purpose,
(...), for confirmation of the Christian Churches in the Tradition of the
Apostles, against the Heretics, or in that of Polycarp, though, (...), most
sufficient for declaration of the Truth; nor in Irenaeus, when purposely laying
down for confutation of the Heretics, (...), Lib. 1. c. 1. p. 42.
The Faith Preached by the Church, Cap. 2.
the exposition of the Truth, which the Church having received from the
Apostles, keeps, and of those things belonging, ad Fidem and Traditiones, Cap.
3.
to Faith and Traditions, in which the Christian Church unanimously does
consent, I say, not to insist at present on so plain an inference. Nothing can
be more natural than to collect, that had they known of any other Articles of
Faith, delivered to them from the Apostles only by word of Mouth, they would
have taken at least equal care for the propagation of them also to posterity.
Inasmuch therefore as the common Sense of Mankind agrees to this, That Records
are a more certain means of conveighing Truth to posterity, than Report, and
Men would be more apt to believe that the Apostles said what themselves wrote,
than that they said what they did not write, and what only comes down by
hearsay from them; surely the Fathers of the Church, had they known of these
Supernumerary Traditions of the Roman Church, in compliance with the Example
and Advice of St. Ignatius, would have committed them to writing, (...), for
the better security of them, and would have thought that very fit which he
declared to be, (...), very necessary, for conservation of Apostolical
Tradition. Surely they would have taken all the care imaginable, that these
unwritten Doctrines might not lose their credit by being long unwritten, for
they were not ignorant of that great truth of Origin, Dial. contra Marcion. p.
59.
(...), That which only is delivered by word of Mouth quickly vanishes, as
having no certainty. They therefore, had they known of such Traditions
necessary to be believed, would not have left it to an half witted Papias, to
run up and down to gather up these Hear-says from them who had conversed with
the Apostles, and to digest them in a Book of which they were so careless as to
preserve us nothing, but, Eusebius. H. Eccl. l. 3. c. 38.
(...), some idle Fables which he related, (...), as coming to him from
unwritten Tradition, and by which he deceived, (...), most of the Church
Guides; but would of purpose have written Books to secure the conveighance of
them to posterity, and to prevent the future Cheats, that such bold and half
witted Men might have put upon them, with false pretensions to Antiquity or to
Tradition. Even Eutropius, the Heathen, Dial. contra Marcion p. 59.
could argue against Marcion, That it was, (...), exceeding Foolish to conceive
those who were sent to preach the Gospel should do it, (...), without
committing what they Preached to writing; for it is probable, says he, that
they preached or declared this Salvation to them only who heard them, and had
no care the Knowledge of it should descend to Posterity; as had they only
preached, (...), without writing, they must have done. And may not we in like
manner argue against these latter Marcionites, That had the Fathers of the Age
following the Apostles observed and known, that some points of necessary Faith
had not been touched in any of their Writings, it is highly probable, that they
by handing of them down in writing, would have taken care the knowledge of them
should descend unto posterity, and would have formally, and with one voice
declared, that whereas the inspired Preachers, and Publishers of their Religion
had committed to Writing some Articles of the Christian Faith, but had not in
those writings expressed others which were of equal necessity to be believed;
it is therefore, to prevent all false pretenders to these Traditions
Apostolical, declared, defined, and made known to future Ages, that these, and
these alone are Doctrines of this kind, delivered orally by the Apostles to the
Church to be preserved and taught to future Generations. When even in the first
Ages of the Church they had to do with Heretics, who, when their Doctriens
were confuted out of Scripture, Cum enim ex Scripturia arguuntur in
accusationem convertuntur ipsarum Scripturarum, quasi non recte habeant, neque
sunt ex Authoritate, and quia vary sunt dictae, and quia non posset ex his
inveniri veritas ab his qui nesciunt traditionem. Iren. l. 3. c. 2.
as are the Doctrines of the Church of Rome, instead of answering the Arguments
produced by the Fathers of the Church from Scripture, accused the Scriptures of
Obscurity, and Insufficiency, saying, That they were spoken variously, or so as
to admit of diverse Senses, and that from them the Truth could not be known by
them who were ignorant of Tradition, non enim per literas traditam illam, sed
per vivam vocem, this Truth being delivered, not by writing but by word of
Mouth. When these Heretics pleaded for their Doctrines not found in Scripture,
Apostolos non omnia omnibus revelasse, Tertull. de praescript. c. 25.
quaedam enim palam and universis, quaedam secreto, and paucis demandasse, That
the Apostles revealed not all things to all Men, but some things they delivered
openly, and to all, some things secretly, and to few. Hieron. in Es. 19. fol.
40. b.
When they vaunted that they were, Filii sapientum qui ab initio Doctrinam
nobis Apostolicam tradiderunt, The Sons of the wise Men, who from the beginning
delivered to them the Doctrine of the Apostles, pretending to have received it
as it were by Tradition from the Apostles. Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 28.
When they had the boldness to affirm, (...), That all the Ancients, and even
the Apostles taught the same things which they did, and that what they
delivered was afterward corrupted by the Orthodox. I say, that in their
Discourses against these Heretics, they should not once endeavor to stop
their mouths by telling them what were indeed the Doctriens and Traditions
received from the Apostles, what were the things revealed to them by the
Apostles, but should still keep these necessary Traditions, which the Church of
Rome now teaches, as received from them, secret, not saying one word of them,
no not when they, in confutation of these pretenses of the Heretics, declare
what was the Rule of Faith, and the Tradition received from the Apostles, and
preserved by all the Apostolic Churches, is so incredible, as nothing can be
more, except this vain Imagination, That these very Fathers should concur with
these Heretics, as do some others in this Assertion, That saving Truth could
not be known from Scripture by them who were ignorant of Tradition, as being
not delivered down to Posterity by writing, but by word of Mouth, and yet at
the same time should say, Lib. 3. c. 1.
as Irenaeus does in his Discourse against them. That the Apostles first
Preached the Gospel, and after by the Will of God delivered it unto us in the
Scriptures, to be hereafter the Foundation and Pillar of our Faith. And as
Eusebius does, Lib. 5. c. 18.
That the pretenses of the Heretics unto Tradition might be probable, (...),
did not the Holy Scriptures contradict them. And as St. Jerome, That those
things which they feign to have received as Tradition, In Hagg. c. 1. fol. 102.
a.
absque authoritate, and testimoniis Scripturarum, percutit gladius Dei,
without the Authority, and Testimonies of the Scripture, the Sword of God does
smite; for what is this but to talk like us Northern Heretics, for to quarrel
with Men for appealing from Scriture, as obscure, and insufficient to decide
our Controversies without the Suffrage of Oral Tradition, to allege Scripture
as a sufficient evidence, that others vainly did pretend unto it, to reject
what others do pretend to have received from Tradition, because it wants the
Authority and Testimony of the Holy Scriptures, whatsoever it may pass for in
these ancient Fathers, is one of those very things for which we are proclaimed
Heretics.

In a word, That there should be unwritten Traditions necessary to be believed
unto Salvation, and neither the Creed of the Greek, nor of the Latin Church
make the least mention of any of them. That a Creed should be made perhaps at
Gentilly in the Seventh Century, and to obtain the better credit should be
called the Creed of Athanasius. That this Creed should inform us in the
beginning, That whosoever will be saved, before all things it is necessary that
he hold the Catholic Faith, threatening that he shall perish everlastingly who
does not keep this Faith entire, and whole; that therefore in the next words it
should say, and the Catholic Faith is this, and should conclude in these
Expressions, This is the Catholic Faith; and yet leave out almost as many
necessary Articles of Christian Faith, as it contained.

That the principal written Traditions which in comparison needed it not,
should be put together into a Creed, but that the unwritten ones, which needed
it very much, should be quite left out, and never thought of to that purpose,
till about Fifteeen hundred Years after; and that the Ancients, Tertullian, St.
Basil, Eusebius, and others, speaking expressly, and professedly of Traditions
not contained in Holy Scripture, should reckon up many unnecessary things, and
never mention in their Catalogues one of these necessary Traditions. That in
their Treatises of Christian Faith and Christian Doctrine, and of
Ecclesiastical Opinions, and their Instructions of the Catechized; the Fathers
should say nothing, the Persons who were to be instructed in all the Doctrines
of the Christian Faith, should hear nothing of all these Articles, and yet they
should be throughout all Ages of the Christian World so necessary that no
Salvation could be had without them; these, I confess, are truly R. Catholic,
that is, incredible Assertions; and if we must give credit to them, we must do
it upon Tertullian's Ground, Credo, quia est impossible.
Because it is impossible they should be true.

CHAP. VII.
The Novelty of the R. Doctrines farther proved, First, from the general
Tradition of the Church; that the Four Gospels and the Scriptures comprised all
that was necessary to be believed or done by Christians; this proved, 1. in
general,. 1. 2. From the particular account Tradition gives us of the Writings
of the Four Evangelists,. 2. Inference; this Tradition shows, That to preserve
a Doctrine safe to Posterity, 'twas not sufficient to receive it by Oral
Tradition, unless it were written,. 3. Secondly, This is proved from the
general Tradition of the whole Church of Christ; that the Apostles, or the
Nicene Symbol was a complete summary of all things necessary to be believed by
Christians,. 4. Where it is showed, that the Apostles delivered to their
Converts a System, or a form of Words, Ibid. That this form was delivered to
all Churches, and was for substance the same with that, which afterward was
styled the Apostles Creed,. 5. That Christians were received into the Church by
Baptism on the profession of this Faith,. 6. That it was taught as the entire
System of things necessary to be believed,. 7. That it was esteemed a Test of
Orthodoxy, by which they prescribed to Heretics,. 8. That this whole Summary
of Christian Faith was evidently contained in Scripture,. 9. And that
notwithstanding they unanimously styled it a Tradition,. 10.

MOreover, That the Articles of Faith owned by the Church of Rome, and imposed
upon all who hold Communion with her to be believed, and owned as such, under
the penalty of Anathema to him who does believe, or say the contrary, were not
received from Christ, or his Apostles either by unwritten Tradition, or by
traditional Interpretation of the Holy Scriptures, or any portion of them, to
that sense from whence it may be certainly concluded, that they were in the
Scriptures mentioned, or owned by the ancient Church as Articles of Christian
Faith, or as things necessary to be believed, or practiced by all Christians,
will be exceeding evident from these Considerations, v. g.

First, general Tradition of the Church of Christ, that all which the Apostles
preached, and taught their Converts by word of mouth, as either necessary to be
believed or practiced, they afterward, at their desire, committed unto
writing, and delivered to them in the Gospel, and the Holy Scriptures. This, in
the general, Postea per dei voluntatem in Scripturis nobis tradiderunt
fundamentum and columnam fidei nostrae futurum. Iren. lib. 3. cap. 1.
the Fathers do expressly say, declaring, That the Apostles first preached the
Gospel, and afterward, by the Will of God, delivered the same Gospel which
they preached to us in the Scripture, to be for future Ages the Pillar and the
Ground of Truth.

The Marcionites owned the Writings of St. Paul, (...). Dial. contra Marcion,
p. 59. (...). Ibid.
but rejected the Evangelists, St. Matthew and St. John. Against them therefore
Origin does in the person of Eutropius dispute after this manner, Did these
Apostles preach the Gospel with writing, or without writing what they preached?
Marc. Without writing. Eutrop. Is it probable they preached Salvation only to
them that heard them, and had no regard to them that were to come after, as
must be supposed if they writ not that Doctrine of Salvation which they
preached, for those things which are spoken, and not written, do presently
vanish?

St. Austin is express for the same Doctrine, for having told us, That our Lord
Jesus, according to the saying of St. John, Did many things which were not
written. He adds, Tr. 49. in Joh. Tom. 9. p. 355.
Electa sunt autem quae scriberentur ea quae saluti credentium sufficere
videbantur, That they chose out of them those things to be written which they
conceived sufficient for the Salvation of Believers. Quicquid enim ille de suis
factis and dictis nos legero voluit, hoc scribendum illis, tamquam suis
manibus, imperavit. De consensu Evangelist. lib. 1. cap. 35.
Again, He, says the same St. Austin, who sent the Prophets before his
descent, sent also the Apostles after his Ascension, of all whom he was the
Head, wherefore it must not be said that he writ nothing, seeing his Members
writ that which they knew by the Dictates of their Head, for whatsoever he
would have us read concerning what he did, or said, he commanded his Apostles,
as being his Amanuenses to write down. Now seeing all they were to teach was
only his Sayings and Commands, they who stood thus engaged to write all that he
would have us read of his Sayings, must write all that was needful to be known
in order to Men's Salvation; for all this, sure, the Savior of the World would
have us read; all this 'twas therefore necessary for them to write that we
might read.

Because that Heresies would afterward break in upon the Church, (...), etc.
Proem. in Matthew.
and the Manners of Christians would be corrupted, says Theophylact, it
pleased the Apostles to write the Gospels, that from thence being taught the
Truth, we might not be perverted by the Falsehood of Heresy, nor be corrupted
in our Manners. Now sure what is sufficient to preserve us from Heresy in
Doctrine, and from Corruption in Manners, must plainly and fully contain all
things necessary to be believed, that we may not be Heretics, and to be done,
that we may not be wicked.

To proceed to the particular accounts the Ancients give us of the inditing of
every Gospel in particular.

Eusebius informs us of St. Matthew, that the Tradition was, (...). Hist. Eccl.
l. 3. c. 24.
That he was necessitated to write; for having first preached to the Hebrews,
as he was about to go to others, commiting his Gospel to writing in his own
Language, he supplied by writing their want of his Presence from whom he went.
St. Chrysostom says, (...). In Matthew. Hom. 1. page 3.
They had it by Tradition, that the believing Jews desired St. Matthew to leave
those things in writing which he had delivered by word of mouth to them, and
that in compliance with this request he writ his Gospel in the Hebrew Tongue.
Sicut referunt Matthaeum conscribere Evangelium causa compulit talis, cum facta
fuisset in Pal. persecutio -- ut carentes forte doctoribus fidei, non carerent
doctrina, petierunt Matthaeum ut omnium verborum and operum Christi
conscriberet eis Historiam, ut ubicunque essent futuri totius secum haberent
sidei statum. Praefat.
The Author of the imperfect Comment on St. Matthew, who passes under the same
name, delivers the Tradition thus, That St. Matthew was compelled to write
his Gospel upon this account, That when a grievous Persecution arose in
Palaestin, so that they were in danger to be separated from each other; that
wanting Teachers, they might not want the Doctrine of Faith, they desired
Matthew to write for them the History of all the Words and Works of Christ,
that so, wherever they should be hereafter, they might have with them, totius
fidei statum, the whole form of Faith.

The Tradition concerning the Gospel of St. Mark runs thus, That when the
Hearers of St. (...). Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 15.
Peter, had been illuminated by his Doctrine. They were so affected with it, as
not to be contented with hearing of it all at once, or with the unwritten
Teaching, or oral Tradition of the heavenly Word; (...). Ibid.
but with all manner of Exhortations did entreat St. Mark, the Follower of St.
Peter, that he would leave them in writing a digest or memorial of the Doctrine
delivered to them by word of Mouth, and that they never ceased till they had
obtained their requests; and that thus they were the causes of writing the
Gospel of St. Mark,

This Eusebius relates from the Tradition of Clemens of Alexandria, and Papias,
Bishop of Hierapolis. The words of Clemens he gives thus, Clemens in the same
Book puts down the Tradition of the ancient Presbyters, touching the Order of
the Gospels, which is to this effect, -- Peter preaching the Word publicly at
Rome, and speaking the Gospel by the Spirit, (...). Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 14.
many that were present entreated Mark to write what he spoke, as being one who
had long followed him, and remembered the things spoken, and that thereupon Mark
having writ the Gospel, gave it to those who desired it. And of the same Mark,
Papias, says Euscbius, relates, That he took especial care to say nothing that
was false, and, (...), L. 3. c. 38.
to leave nothing out of his Gospel he had heard from Peter.

Moreover Eusebius farther informs us, from the same Authors, that St. Mark
going afterward to Alexandria, preached there, (...), Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 16.
the Gospel which he had written. And that the first Successors of the Apostles
leaving their Countries, did the work of Evangelists to them who had not as yet
heard of the Christian Faith, to whom they preached Christ, and delivered the
Writings of the Holy Evangelists, (...). l. 3. c. 37.
(...), laying this only in those places as the Foundation of the Faith, and so
going on to other Countries to convert them; and surely then the Successors of
the Apostles did not doubt, but that these Gospels did, with sufficient fullness
and perspicuity, contain the necessary Articles of Christian Faith.

Thirdly, Of St. Luke, the Follower of St. Paul, Lucas quod ab illo
praedicabatur Evangelium in libro condidit. l. 3. c. 1
Irenaeus informs us, That he writ in a Book that Gospel which was preached by
him, he adds, That St. Paul neglected not to teach the whole Counsel of God,
Cap. 14.
and that St. Luke neglected not to write what St. Paul had taught; and thence
inferrs against the Heretics, that they could not pretend to know what was not
taught by Paul, or was not written by St. Luke.

Fourthly, St. John, says the Tradition of the Ancients, was importuned by all
the Asiaticks, and by the Embassies of many others, to write his Gospel, and
his great care in Composing it, (...). Epiph. Haer. 51.. 6. Theoph. proem. in
Joh.
say they, was to speak of those necessary things which they had pretermitted
who writ before him; or of the Deity of Christ, which Ebion, Cerinthus, and
other Heretics denied, and the other Evangelists had not so fully spoken to.
The Martyrology of Timothy Bishop of Ephesus adds, That the other Evangelists
were brought to him, Apud Phot. Cod. 254. p. 1403.
containing, (...), The salutary Passion, the Miracles and Doctrines of our
Lord, and that he digested them in order, and added his own to them. Here then
from this Tradion it is plain and obvious to observe.

First, Christians, as a thing most certain, that to preserve a Doctrine safe
unto posterity, to keep it sure and certain, 'twas not sufficient for them to
hear it by the Ear, or to receive it by Tradition, though from the mouth of an
Apostle, but that 'twas requisite in order to that end, that what they heard
should be committed to writing, that so it might be both to them and others,
the Pillar and the Ground of Truth. Why else do they declare, that those things
which are only spoken, and not written, quickly vanish, and thence infer, That
if the Evangelists intended the Salvation of Posterity, they must have written
what they preached? Why do they say, it was necessary for the Apostles when
they were about to leave their Converts to commit what they taught in writing
to them? Why was it that they could not be contented, Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 2.
c. 15.
(...), with the unwritten teaching of the divine Doctrine, or in the Romish
phrase, with the infallible way of oral Tradition, but did, (...), desire with
all earnestness St. Mark to give them a Digest or Memorial in writing of that
Doctrine they had received by word of mouth? And why was Peter so delighted,
(...), with this desire of the Christians, which was a plain renouncing of oral
Tradition, and a preferring of the written word before it.

Secondly, Hence it is obvious to observe, That oral Tradition being thus
subject to failure and miscarriage, the Wisdom of our God and Savior thought
fit, that what was preached by the Apostles should be committed unto writing,
that it might be unto posterity the Pillar and the Ground of Truth. Hence, Lib.
3. c. 1.
says Irenaeus, they by the Will of God writ the Scriptures for this end. They
says St. Austin, writ what they knew by the dictates of their Head. He
commanded the Apostles to write, and what things should be written, were
chosen, doubtless, by the Holy Ghost, whose Penmen the Apostles were. Proem.
in Matthew.
(...), It was the pleasure of Christ, or his Apostles, says Theophylact, that
the Gospel should be writ, (...), that Christians being taught the Truth from
them, might neither be perverted by Heresies, or corrupted in manners.

Thirdly, Hence also it is evident, That the things chosen by our Lord and his
Apostles, and by the Holy Spirit to be written, were such as seemed to their
Wisdom sufficient for the Salvation of Believers, that they contained all which
our Lord would have us read concerning what he did, or said, all that truth
which was needful to preserve us from Heresy in Doctrine, or Corruption in
Manners, the whole state or system of the Christian Faith, which whosoever did
retain could not want Faith, even when he wanted Teachers, all that St. Peter
preached; the Foundations of Faith; the whole Council of God; the salutary
Doctrines of our Lord; all that was necessary to be known.

2. Church of Christ for many Centuries, that the Apostles Creed, as it was
first delivered, and as it was afterward explained by that of Nice, was a
complete and perfect Summary of all things simply necessary to be believed by
Christians.

That the Apostles and first Preachers of the Christian Faith, comprised the
Fundamentals of their Doctrine in some Creed, System, or form of words we learn
not only from the Tradition of the Church, but also from many passages of
Scripture, which mention, Luke i. 4. Heb. v. 12. Heb. vi. 1.
(...), the words of their Catechism; (...), the elementary Principles of the
Oracles of God; (...), the word of the beginning of Christ, or the Foundation
upon which Christians grew up unto perfection; Romans xij. 6.
(...), the Analogy of Faith, according to which all the Dispensers of the word
must frame their Doctrine; 1 Timothy iij. 15, 16. 2 Timothy i. 13.
(...), the mystery of Godliness to be preserved in, and by the Church, the
Pillar and the Ground of Truth, (...), a form of sound words which was
delivered to, and must be held by all Christians in Faith and Love; verse 14.
or a brief Summary of the things which were to be believed by all; (...), the
good depositum, or Summary of Christian Doctrine, committed to the trust of
others, or agreed on by the Apostles to be taught by all, 2 Timothy ij. 2.
and which also was by them to be committed to faithful Men, able to instruct
others in it: (...), Jud. iij. Philip. i. 27.
The Faith once, and at once, delivered to the Saints, which they must hold in
a good Conscience, and earnestly contend for.

2. Creed, System, or Summary of Faith, was by the Apostles delivered to all
Churches, and was for substance that which is now called the Apostles Creed, is
also evident from the Tradition of the Church of Christ. Irenaeus says, It is
the Faith which the Church received, Lib. 1. c. 2.
(...), from the Apostles and their Disciples. The true and life-giving Faith,
quam ab Apostolis Ecclesia percepit, and distribuit filiis suis, Lib. 3. c. 1.
Apol. c. 47.
which the Church received from the Apostles, and distributes to her Sons. It,
says Tertullian, is the Rule of Truth, quae venit a Christo transmissa per
comites ejus, which came from Christ, and was by his Companions handed down to
us. De praescrip. Cap. 9. Cap. 14. Cap. 21. Epist. ad Jov. Tom. p. 246, 247.
Page 501. Epist. 81.
The Institution of Christ, which all Nation ought to believe: Regula a Christo
instituta, The Rule prescribed by Christ; and which the Churches received from
the Apostles, the Apostles from Christ. This, says Athanasius, is, (...), the
Divine and Apostolical Faith, which was preached from the beginning. It is,
says Cyril of Jerusalem, the Tradition, (...), of the Holy and Apostolic
Faith. Is is, says Ambrose, the Symbol of the Faith of the Apostles, which
Symbol the Church of Rome keeps undefiled. Ruffinus in his Exposition of this
Symbol, says, Apud Hieron. Tom. 4. f. 46.
That their Ancestors left to them this Tradition, that the Apostles being to
depart one from the other, did first agree upon this as the Rule of what they
afterward should preach; and determined, hanc credentibus dandam esse regulam,
this should be given as a Rule to Believers, and as an Index of their Faith, by
which he should be known, qui Christum vere secundum Apostolicas regulas
praedicaret, who preached Christ truly according to the Rules of the Apostles.
It is, says Austin, De Temp. Sermon. 181. To. 10. p. 984.
certa Regula Fidei, the sure Rule of Faith, which the Apostles delivered. And
then he proceeds almost in the very words of Ruffinus, De Off. Eccles. l. 2. c.
22.
to declare, That this was the Tradition of the Ancients. Isidore Hispalensis
says, Tali ratione institutum majores nostri dixerunt, Our Ancestors have
said, that the Apostles Creed was instituted after this manner; and then he
goes on in the very words of Ruffinus to the end of that Chapter. De instit.
Cler. l. 1. c. 27. l. 2. c. 56.
Rabanus Maurus also has transcribed the same words, and in them brought down
the Tradition to the Ninth Century. And to return to the Age following
Ruffinus, Pope Leo tells us, Ep. 96.
This is the short and perfect Confession of the Symbol which is signed with
the twelve Sentences of the Apostles. Praefat. ad Expos. Symb. Apost. Apud
Ivon. decret. part. 1. c. 35, 36.
Venantius Fortunatus in the Sixth Century informs us, That this is the Symbol
which they among themselves wholesomely made by the assistance of the Holy
Spirit. It is, says venerable Bede, the Symbol of Faith delivered by the
Apostles.

3. It is also evident from Tradition, Christians were received into the Church
by Baptism on the profession of this Faith, or that this only was the Faith
which they required them to believe and to profess at Baptism. Justin Martyr
says only in the general, That as many as believed, Apol. 2. p. 93.
(...), that the things which were said, and taught by Christians were true,
were admitted by Baptism among the number of Christians. But Irenaeus, his
Cotemporary, L. 1. c. 1. p. 40.
gives us the Creed delivered by the Apostles, and says it was the undeclinable
Rule of Truth, (...), which the Christian received by Baptism, and the
preaching of that Truth by which, (...), the Church illuminates all that are
willing to come to the knowledge of the Truth. L. 7. c. 40, 41.
The Apostolical Constitutions tell the Priest what the Catechist, who is to be
Baptized, must renounce, (...), and the things which cencern his being Listed
among Christians. Now they are these, I rank my self among the Soldiers of
Christ, and I believe I am Baptized into the one unbegotten only true God, etc.
And after he has made profession of this Creed, he is to be Anointed, and
Baptized. Can. 46.
The Council of Laodicea says, That they who are to be Baptized must first,
(...), learn the Faith, and recite it to the Bishop, or his Presbyter. The
Seventy eighth Canon of the Sixth General Council says the same thing. Now
what it is to learn the Faith, we know from all the Fathers of those times, who
do with one consent inform us, that the Catechists were prepared for Baptism by
being taught the Creed, the Symbol, or the Rule of Faith, delivered and taught
by the Apostles, and afterward explained by that of Nice, or of
Constantinople, and that they were Baptized into the profession of this Creed.
Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 18.
Sozomen and Gelasius inform us that a plain Layman, and Confessor undertook
to confute a Philosopher in the Council of Nice. Gelas. Cyz. l. 2. c. 13.
And that he did this by repeating of his Creed, saying to the Philosopher,
There is one God, who having made all things, sustained them by his Word and
holy Spirit. This word, O Philosopher, we adore, knowing him to be the Son of
God, and believing that for our Redemption he was incarnate of a Virgin, and
was born, and was made Man, and that by his Death and Passion on the Cross, he
delivered us from eternal condemnation, and by his Resurrection he purchased
for us Life eternal, whom, being ascended into Heaven, we hope that he will
come again to be judge of all our Actions. And that the Philosopher answering,
(...). Syn. Constable. sub Menna Act 5. Bin. Tom. 4. P. 78, 82.
He believed this, the Confessor bid him then follow him to the Church to be
Baptized, at which, (...), the Nicene Synod rejoiced. From both which Instances
we learn, what was the Symbol into which Christians were Baptized, when that
Council met, and which they owned as sufficient for that end. Eusebius
Caesariensis speaks thus of his own Creed, approved by the Nicene Council, As
we have received from the Bishops that were before us, Socr. Hist. Eccl. l. 1.
c. 8. p 24.
(...), both when we were Catechized, and when we received Baptism; and as we
have learned from the Scriptures, and as we have both believed and taught when
we were made Priests and Bishops, so believing at present we declare this our
Faith unto you. The Council of Constantinpole confirms the Nicene Confession of
Faith, as, (...), Theodor. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 9.
being most ancient, and annexed to Baptism. Con. Constant. sub Menna Act. 5.
Bin. Tom. 4. p. 78, 87, 85. and 91, 96.
The Synod of Jerusalem says it was, (...), The Holy Symbol into which we were
Baptized and do Baptize. The Synod at Tire says the same thing. The Council of
Constantinople under Menna styles it, (...), The holy Symbol into which we were
all Baptized. Basilicus and Maurus in two several Edicts confirmed the same
Nicene Creed with these words, Evagr. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 4, 7.
(...), That it was the Creed into which they, and all the Believers before
them were Baptized. St. Jerome writing against the Luciferians, calls the
Apostles Creed the Faith of the Church, which Lucifer, se die Baptismatis
servanturum promiserat, had promised to keep at the day of his Baptism.
Theodoret says, Ep. 145. Tom. 3. p. 1023.
We require those who come every Year to Baptism, (...), to learn the Faith
expounded at Nice. Ep. 97. ad Mon. Palaest. c. 8. p. 637.
Pope Leo says of it, That it is the Confession, which pronouncing before many
Witnesses, Sacramentum Baptismi suscipimus, we receive the Sacrament of
Baptism, and that it was the Symbol, Ep. 24. ad Flav. c. 1. and 2.
quod per totum mundum omnium regenerandorum voce depromitur, which was
pronounced by all that were Baptized throughout the World. After this time we
find one of these two Symbols required to be rehearsed in the baptismal
Offices, either by those who came to be Baptized, or by their Sureties, Page 39.
as is evident from the Ordo Romanus, were it is required to be pronounced at
Baptism in Greek and Latin. De Eccles. Off. l. 2. c. 21, 22.
From the Treatise of Isidore Hispalensis, where it is called the Symbol, quod
competentes recipient, which they who were prepared for Baptism received and
learned. Lib. 1. c. 27.
From the Treatise of Rabanus Maurus of the Institution of the Clergy, which
says, That before the Catechumen was brought to Baptism, Apostolicae fidei ei
ostenditur Symbolum, the Apostles Symbol was showed to him, and he was asked
whether he believed it. From the Degrees of Ivo, which say, Part. 81. -- 90.
etc. 223.
That Baptizandis traditur salutare symbolum, the wholesome Symbol is delivered
to those that are to be Baptized. De consecr. Did. 4. c. 155, 156, 158, etc.
From the Canon Law compiled by Gratian, were we find many Canons to the same
effect. And lastly from the form of Baptism still retained in the Roman Church.

4. Creed used in the Church till the Nicene Council, and that of Nice, as the
true Explication of it, were by the whole Church of Christ, for many Centuries,
esteemed and embraced, and taught to others as the whole system of all things
necessary to be believed by Christians in order to Salvation, or as a perfect
Summary or Rule of the mere Articles of Christian Faith.

Irenaeus in the second Century, having cited the Creed of the whole Church,
which, with unanimous consent, she preached, taught and delivered, L. 1. c. 1.
p. 42.
as having but one Mouth, (...), the truth preached by the Church, and which
the Church dispersed through the World, Cap. 2.
Cap. 4.
received from the Apostles and their Disciples, the one and the same Faith
which the Church retained throughout the whole World. The Tradition of the
Apostles manifested in the whole World, Lib. 3. cap. 3. Ibid. p. 234.
and to be seen in every Church, (...), the one and only truth which she
received from the Apostles and delivered to others. I say, he speaking of this
Creed, this Faith, this (...), this preaching of the truth, declares, That he,
who, among the Governors of the Church, was the most able Speaker could say no
other things; (...). Lib. 1. cap. 2.
for none of them was above his Master, nor could he who was infirm in Speech,
lessen the Tradition, for the Faith being one and the same; neither did he who
was most able to speak of it exceed, nor he who spoke least of it diminish it.
And as a farther Witness of this matter, he brings in Polycarp attesting, Lib.
3. c. 3.
(...), That he received this truth from the Apostles, and this only.

Tertullian producing a like Creed of his times, De praescrip. Haer. cap. 37.
which he declares to be that Rule which the Church received from the Apostles,
De Resur. Car. cap. 18.
and the Apostles from Christ, the unum apud omnes edictum Dei, the one Edict
of God, which hangs up among all Christians; that is, says Rigaltius on the
place, The Symbol of the Christian Faith. De Virg. Veland. cap. 1.
I say, having produced this Creed, he styles it, Regulam fidei unam omnino,
solam immobilem, and irreformabilem, That Rule which is entirely one, and which
alone is unmovable, and not to be reformed; that is, which admits not,
novitatem correctionis, of any new Correction, as other things belonging to the
Church's Discipline might do. This Rule, says he, we, having once believed, De
praescrip. Haer. c. 8.
nihil desideramus ultra credere, hoc enim prius credimus, non esse quod ultra
credere debeamus, desire to believe nothing more, for this we first believe
that we ought to be believe nothing more; that knowing this, Cap. 14.
there is no need of seeking after other things, quia quod debeas nosti,
because, in it, we know all that we ought to know; the only Article to be
believed besides it being this, aliud non esse credendum, Cap. 9.
Cap. 14.
that nothing else is to be believed; this being regula fidei quae salvum
facit, the Rule of Faith which brings Salvation.

Origin in his Book of Principles lays down this Rule; Let the ecclesiastical
Preaching delivered by order of Succession from the Apostles, and to this
present time continuing in the Churches, Proem. in libr. (...),
be observed. Adding, That we ought to know this, that the Holy Apostles
preaching the Faith of Christ, did manifestly deliver even to those who were
most slow in Inquisition of divine Knowledge, quaecunque necessaria crediderunt
omnibus credentibus, all things which they believed necessary for all
Believers; and then he runs over the Articles of the Apostles Creed, as they
were then received in the Church of God, and says, These are the form of those
things, quae per praedicationem Apostolicam manifest traduntur, which are
manifestly delivered by the Preaching of the Apostles.

St. Cyril calls this Creed, Catech. 4. p. 24.
(...), The teaching of the Faith, and the instruction of the Catechist in the
Doctrines of the Church. Adding, That the Church had in few words comprised,
(...), Catech. 5. p. 44.
the whole Doctrine of Faith, and advising his Catechist, (...), to keep the
Faith alone, delivered to him by the Church. It is, says Hilary, Ad. Constable.
Aug. p. 342. 343.
the safest course to retain that first and only Evangelical Faith confessed in
Baptism, and to innovate nothing in it. And this he affirms in opposition to
the New Creeds so frequent in his Days. (...). Orat. 52. init. Ep. ad Epictet.
Tom. 1. p. 582. a. Epist. ad Afric. Episc. p. 932.
The Creed of Nice, says Nazianzen, is a short Boundary and Rule of Christian
Wisdom. It is, says Athanasius, sufficient for the destruction of all Impiety,
(...), and for the confirmation of the true Faith in Christ, for the
destruction of every wicked Heresy, (...), and for confirmation of the
ecclesiastical Doctrine. The Synod held at Sardis defined, That nothing farther
should be written of the Faith, but that all Men should rest contented with the
Faith confessed at Nice, Athanas. Ep. ad Antioch. p. 576.
(...), because it was in nothing defective; and because if any other Faith
should be composed, that might be looked upon, (...), as imperfect.

St. De tempore Sermon. 115, 119, 131,
Austin says, That the Catholic Faith is made known to the Faithful in the
Creed; that this Creed is, Comprehensio fidei nostrae atque perfectio, The
comprehension and perfection of our Faith; that it is, Plenitudo credentium,
totum continens compendio brevitatis, and confirmans onnes perfectione
credendi, The fullness of Believers, comprising the whole of their Faith in a
compendious brevity, Ep. 84. Tom. 3. p. 961.
and confirming all in perfect Faith. Theodoret writes to the Bishops of
Cilicia, that they would require their People tokeep the Nicene Faith entire
and undefiled, (...), as compendiously teaching the Evangelical and Apostolical
Doctrine. Damasus closes his Symbol, which for substance is the same with that
of Nice, Apud Hieron. Tom. 4. f. 44.
in these expressions, Haec creed, haec retine, believe and retain these
things. Subject thy Soul to this Faith, and thou shall obtain Life, and a
reward from Christ; which shows he thought this Faith sufficient for that end.
Ibid. f. 46.
Ruffinus informs us, that according to the request of Pope Laurence, he was to
compose something, de fide secundum Symboli traditionem, of the Faith delivered
in the Symbol: And of this he declares, That it was, norma praedicationis, the
Rule of the Apostles preaching, the Rule which they composed, credentibus
dandam, to be delivered to Believers, fidei suae indicium, the index of their
Faith. Petrus Chrysologus says, Sermon. 57, 58, 59, 60, 61.
That it is salutis symbolum, vitae symbolum, forma fidei, credulitatis norma,
fides quam credimus and docemus, the symbol of Life and Salvation, Ep. 27. ad
Pulcher. c. 4. p. 492.
the Rule of Faith, the Faith which we believe and teach. Pope Leo, That it is
a short, and perfecta confessio, and perfect Confession of the Catholic Faith.
The Great Council of Chalcedon says of the Faith of Nice, Act. 5. in fine.
That it suffices, (...), to the perfect knowledge and confirmation of Piety.
Theodor. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 15.
The Synod of Ariminum, That it was, (...), an exact Rule of Faith; that of
Sardis, That nothing was to be added to it, Apud Athanas. Ep. ad Antioch. P.
576. Id. de Synod. Arim. and Selsach. p. 876, 878.
(...), because nothing was wanting to it; that of Sirmium adds, That there was
no need of running to Synods; that of Nice, Having done all things for the
Catholic Church, a Synod to which (...), all Men assented, and all Men judged
it sufficient.

The Ordo Romanus, or old Roman Liturgy says, Apud Hittorp. p. 38, 39.
This is that Faith, qua credentes justificati sumus, by which believing we are
justified; salutaris sides, the saving Faith, which the Holy Spirit dictated to
the Masters of the Church. The sum of our Faith, which, as they had received,
so they delivered it unto them. Isidore Hispalensis says of the Apostles
Creed, De Eccl. Officiis. l. 2. c. 22.
That they appointed it to be given to Believers as a Rule, that it contained
few words, but in them were contained omnia Sacramenta, all the Articles of
Faith; that they who could not read the Scriptures, retaining in their Heart
these things, might have sufficient and saving knowledge, that it contains the
Confession of the Trinity and the Unity of the Church, Orig. l. 6. c 19.
and omne Christiani dogmatis Sacramentum, and the whole Christian Doctrine;
that this Symbol of Faith and the Lord's Prayer, Sentent. l. 1. c. 21.
parvulis Ecclesiae sufficit ad coelorum regna capessenda, sufficed to bring
the little ones of the Church to the Kingdom of Heaven. De Eccles. Off. l. 1.
c. 16.
And of the Nicene Creed he adds, That it speaks, de omni part fidei, of every
part of Faith.

Rabanus Maurus, in his Book of the Institution of the Clergy, Lib. 2. c. 56.
transcribes the forecited words of Isidore. Regino in the same Century says,
That all who come to Penance, De Eccl. Discipl. l. 1 c. 272.
or to receive the Sacrament, must be able to recite the Creed, and the Lord's
Prayer; for in the one is contained the Christian Faith, in the other we are
taught what we are to pray for; and that no Man in these matters must pretend
the slowness of his Understanding, or defect of Memory, for these things are so
short, as that the dullest Man may learn them, and yet they are, tam magna, ut
qui eorum scientiam pleniter capere potuer it sufficere ea sibi credatur in
salutem, so great that whosoever fully understands them will find them
sufficient for his Salvation.

Moreover, Ruffinus, Isidore, and Rabanus Maurus do inform us, that the
Apostles made this the sign by which he should be known who preached Christ
truly, secundum Apostolicas literas, according to the directions of the
Apostles, from those deceitful Workers who did not preach him, integris
traditionum lineis, according to the integrity of Tradition. Accordingly,

5. Observe, Fathers do constantly assert this Symbol to be a Test of
Orthodoxy, and that by which they did prescribe against all Heretics, proving
their Doctrines to be new, and such as ought to be rejected, as being not
contained in this Symbol, or this Rule of Faith. Irenaeus in his Book against
Heresies declares, Lib. 3. cap. 3.
that it is, sola vera and vivifica fides, the only true and life-giving Faith,
which the Church received from the Apostles, and distributes to her Children.
That even, without arguing, we might exactly discern the firmness of the Truth
preached by the Church, Lib. 1. c. 1.
and the falseness of the Heretical persuasions, there being nothing of them,
(...), Cap. 4.
in the institution of Faith delivered to the Church, and that, hanc tenentes
regulam, holding to this Rule, how many and various soever were their
Doctrines, Ibid. c. 19.
we might easily show their deviation from the truth. Cap. 3.
In his Third Book he confutes them from the same Topic, viz. this Tradition
of the Rule of Faith, visible in all Churches, and preserved in all the Bishops
of them succeeding the Apostles, declaring, That nihil tale docuerunt, neque
cognoverunt quale ab his deliratur, in their account of the Tradition received
from the Apostles, and the Faith preached to Men, they taught no such thing as
the deliriums of these Heretics. And he informs us, that Polycarp had
converted many of these Heretics to the Church, by declaring this was the only
Truth which he received from the Apostles: And in his Fourth Chapter, repeating
again this Creed, he says, It is that which even the Barbarians, who had not
the Scriptures, preserving in their Hearts, would stop their Ears against, and
sufficiently repel, ea quae ab Haereticis adinventa sunt, the Inventions of the
Heretics.

Tertullian also lays down this Creed as the Foundation of the Christian Faith,
and confutes all the Heretics, because their Doctrines were later than this
Creed, and were not contained in it. He begins his Discourse of Prescription
against the Heretics with this Foundation, Nobis nihil ex arbitrio nostro
inducere licet. cap. 6.
That Christians could induce no new thing, that they had the Apostles for the
Authors of their Doctrines, who themselves induced nothing of their own, sed
acceptam a Christo disciplinam fideliter nationibus adsignaverunt, but
faithfully delivered to the Nations the Doctrine they received from Christ.
Cap. 8.
And whereas the Heretics objected that Saying of our Lord, Seek and ye shall
find, and thence pretended that they, by seeking, had found their Doctrines in
the Scripture, though they pretended also to Tradition for them, and especially
for the interpretation of Scripture, as Irenaeus has informed us; Unum utique
and certum aliquid institutum esse a Christo quod credere omnino debeant
Nationes and idcirco quaerere ut possint cum invenerint credere. Cap. 9.
to this Tertullian answers, That true it was they were to search the
Scriptures for their Rule of Faith, and prove it thence, but then they also
were to believe, that when they had found that there, aliud non esse credendum
ideoque, nec requirendum, that nothing more was to be believed, and therefore
nothing more was to be inquired after, Cap. 8, 9.
besides those things which they believed were the matters of their Faith, and
that otherwise there would be no end of seeking, nec statio credendi, nor any
boundary of Faith; Let us seek therefore, says he, Cap. 12, 13.
idque duntaxat quod salva regula fidei potest in quaestionem devenire, but
that only which may be inquired after, so as that the Rule of Faith be safe.
Then he lays down the Creed as that Rule, and declares, Cap. 14.
That knowing this we need seek no more, because we know all that we need to
know. He adds, that the Apostles receiving a command to teach, and to baptize,
planted Churches in all Cities, whence other Churches, Semina Doctrinae
mutuatae sunt, Cap. 20.
borrowed the Seeds of their Doctrine, and that all these Churches were one,
first, and Apostolical, not by virtue of any Roman Unity, but by the Union of
Peace, and brotherly Affection; and, per ejusdem Sacramenti unam traditionem,
by showing the same Creed, which when they journeyed to any other Church, was,
Cap. 21.
Contesseratio Hospitalitatis, the League of Hospitality. And then he adds,
Hins igitur dirigimus praescriptionem, Hence therefore we direct our
prescription, i. e. From the very Faith and Symbol which the Apostles preaching
to the Churches delivered to them, in which Rule we find nothing of the New
Doctrines of the Heretics, and so are sure they belong not to the Faith, but
are to be rejected, ob diversitatem Sacramenti, Cap. 33.
as being different from our Creed.

And by these Examples we may learn by the way what Dionysius Bishop of Corinth
did, when, as Eusebius informs us, Hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 23.
He combating the Heresy of the Marcionites, (...), stuck to the Canon of
Truth; viz. that he confuted them, as does Irenaeus and Tertullian, by
appealing to the Apostles Symbol, or Rule of Faith left to the Churches.

Now here I appeal to any indifferent Reader, whether the Arguments of Irenaeus
and Tertullian against the Heretics of their Times be not to this effect. The
Tradition of the Faith is manifect to all the World, you may see, and hear it
in all Christian Churches where this Symbol is recited, in which, nihil tale
docuerunt, they taught nothing like to those New Heresies; they therefore are
to be rejected. And I desire any Man to tell me whether this Argument be not
stronger in the mouth of Protestants. The Apostles Symbol, the Rule of Faith
here mentioned by Irenaeus and Tertullian, contain nothing of the Romish
Articles, therefore they are to be rejected; whether this be not our way of
prescribing against the Church of Rome, that her Creed, as distinct from ours,
is new, not a tittle of it, not any thing like it was delivered in the Rule of
Faith, the Symbol, the Tradition of Christian Doctrine, taught, say these men,
by Christ, by his Apostles, received from the beginning by all Apostolical
Churches, and for Ten Centuries at least declared to have been the whole, and
perfect Rule of Christian Faith; and by our Catechism said to contain, All the
Articles of the Christian Faith.

6. Fathers do unanimously teach, That this whole Symbol, Summary, and Rule of
Faith was most apparently contained in Scripture, that it was gathered out of
Scripture, and when they taught it to their Catechists they proved every
Article of it from the holy Scriptures. Irenaeus says expressly, Lib. 3. c. 3.
That they who would might learn the Apostolical Tradition of the Church, ex
ipsa Scriptura, from the Scripture it self; the Doctrine which the Apostles
preached, being afterward delivered in the holy Scriptures, to be the Pillar
and the Ground of Faith. Apol. c. 47.
Tertullian says of it, That it is antiquitas praestructa divinae literaturae,
antiquity built upon the divine Scriptures. That as for this Rule of Faith, we
are to search the Scriptures for it, De praescript. c. 9. Cap. 15.
and seek until we find it there; That, quaerendum est donec inveneris and
credendum ubi inveneris, and that no man can speak of Matters of Faith, nisi ex
literis fidei, but from the Holy Scriptures. St. Cyril adds, that it is the
Faith, (...), confirmed by all the Scripture, and gathered out of them, and
that he would, Catech. 4. p. 44, 45. Page 30.
(...), from the Holy Scriptures give them the proof of every Article of it.
(...); For, says he, we must not deliver one tittle of the Mysteries of Faith,
without proof from the holy Scriptures; nor would I have you to believe me
barely saying these things, (...), if you receive not a demonstration of them
from the Holy Scriptures; (...), for the safety or security of our Faith is not
to be had, (...), but from the demonstrations of the holy Scriptures.
Athanasius says, It is a vain thing for men to run about, pretending to desire
Synods for the Faith; De Syn. Arim. and Seleuc. p. 873.
(...), for the holy Scripture is more sufficient than all Synods; but if they
must have Synods, that of Nice is sufficient, so that he who sincerely reads
their Writings, may by them learn, (...), that Religion toward Christ which is
declared in the holy Scriptures. And elsewhere he adds, That the Faith of Nice
was confessed, Ep. ad Epictet. p. 582.
(...), according to the holy Scriptures. Ruffinus confesses, That the
Articles of the Creed ought to be proved, Apud Hieron. To. 4. f. 48. b. Hom. 1.
de Symb.
evidentibus divinae Scripturae testimoniis, by evident Texts of Scripture.
Eucherius Lugdunensis says, That the Apostles Creed was gathered, ex diversis
voluminibus Scripturarum, out of diverse Volumes of the Scripture. Isidore
Hispalensis, De Eccl. Off. l. 2. c. 22. De instit. Cler. l. 2. c. 56.
and Rabanus Maurus, That the Apostles briefly did collect it from the holy
Scriptures: That they who could not read the Scriptures, retaining these things
in their Hearts, might have knowledge sufficient to Salvation. And,

Lastly, It is observable, Creed, and Rule of Faith was entirely contained in,
and gathered from the Scriptures, yet did they as unanimously concur to call
it a Tradition delivered viva voce, or by word of Mouth, and written not in
Paper, but on the Tables of the Christian's heart, because they generally
required all that were to be Baptized to commit it to their Memory. The
Barbarians, says Irenaeus, keeping diligently this Old Tradition, Lib. 3. cap.
4.
have this Doctrine written without Paper and Ink, by the Spirit in their
Hearts. This the Apostles preached, says Tertullian, De praescript. c. 21.
tam viva voce, quam per Epistolas postea, as well by oral Tradition, as
afterward by their Epistles. It is the Rule, says Cyril, Catech. 4 p 44.
which you must studiously keep, (...), not writing it in Paper, but keeping
the remembrance of it in your Heart, Symb apud Hieron. To 4. p 46 vide Crysol.
Sermon. 62.
and in your Meditation. Our Fathers left it by Tradition, says Ruffinus, that
these things were required to be written, not in Paper, sed in credentium
cordibus, but in the Hearts of Believers. It is the Symbol, says the Ordo
Romanus, which is not to be written in any matter subject to corruption, Orig.
l. 6. c. 19.
sed paginis vestri cordis, but in the pages of your Hearts; in tabulis cordis
carnalibus, in the fleshly Tables of the heart, says Isidore Hispalensis,
Rabanus Maurus, and innumerable others. Council. Brac. 2. can. 1.
Hence, as the Councils of Laodicea, Trullo, and of Braga have determined, it
was to be learnt by all that came to be Baptized, before the great Solemnity of
Easter; and they required a public Repetition of it by the People as often as
they received the Holy Sacrament: Council. Mo. gunt. c. 45. Catech 5. p. 45. 2 Thessalonians. ij. 14.
And lastly hence St. Cyril does press upon his Catechist, the keeping of it in
his Memory from that of the Apostle, (...), hold the Traditions which you have
been taught.

CHAP. VIII.
The Corollaries from these propositions touching the Creed are these, 1. That
these Symbols must contain all that the Apostles delivered as simply necessary
to be believed of all Christians, and all that the whole Catholic Church
judged needful to be held in point of Faith,. 1. 2ly. That these Creeds must be
a perfect digest of all things necessary to be believed now, and throughout all
succeeding Ages of the World,. 2. 3ly. That no Man who does heartily believe
these Creeds and the immediate Doctrines plainly contained in them, or
evidently deduced from them can deserve to be Anathematized, or to be excluded
from the Communion of Christians, for not believing any other simple Article of
Faith,. 3. 4ly. That all those Councils which have Anathematized their fellow
Christians for such Doctrines as are not in these Creeds, nor can be evidently
inferred from any thing contained in them have actually erred,. 4. 5ly. That
all the necessary Articles of Christian Faith are fully and perspicuously
contained in Scripture according to the Doctrine of the whole Church of
Christ,. 5. Mr. M. 's Objection from Tertullian answered and retorted, Ibid.
6ly. That the Faith of Protestants in all their necessary Articles is most
certain,. 6. 7ly. That in this Sense the Faith was handed down to us by
Tradition, viz. That this Creed which contains all the Essentials of it, has
been thus handed down by it, though by the same Tradition it was declared to be
also fully contained in the Scripture,. 7. 8ly. That the Romanists impose upon
us when they argue for Traditions neither contained in Scripture nor the Creed,
from the Sayings of Irenaeus and Tertullian, and other Fathers, which evidently
relate to the Tradition of the Creed,. 8. 9ly. That here is a full Answer to
the Catalogue of Fundamental Articles of Faith so often demanded,. 9. And to that
other Question, Where was your Religion before Luther?. 10. The Reason why we
still judge the Church of Rome a true Church,. 11.

NOW the Consequences which naturally result from this Tradition, are
sufficient to confirm the most important Arncles of the Faith of Protestants,
to clear up the most considerable Objections which are made against it, and to
confute, and wholly over throw the Doctrines of the Romish Church. For,

First, If, according to the Second Observation, Apostles delivered that which
we call the Apostles Creed, or something like it to all Churches, if all the
Christian Churches received such standing Rule of Faith from the Apostles and
their Successors; if, according to the Third Observation, all Christians were
received into the Church by Baptism, upon profession of this Faith, and were
admitted to the participation of the Eucharist upon the like profession; if,
according to the Fourth Observation, the Fathers of the Church have always
owned these Creeds as perfect digests of all the necessary Articles of
Christian Faith; if, according to the Fifth Observation, these Symbols were
always owned as a sufficient Test of Orthodoxy; and it was thought a clear and
a convincing proof, that the additional Doctrines of all kind of Heretics,
were on this sole account to be rejected, because they were not mentioned or
contained in this Creed. I say, if all these things are so, then it
demonstratively follows, both from the nature of the thing, and the Tradition
of the Church of all these Ages, that in these Symbols were contained all that
the Apostles delivered as simply necessary to be believed of all Christians,
and all that the whole Catholic Church judged needful to be held in point of
Faith. For is it reasonable to think that the Apostles, the Apostolic
Churches, or the four first General Councils were so forgetful as to omit any
fundamental point in that Creed, which they delivered to be believed by all
Christians as the Rule of Faith? What account can be given why any such summary
of Faith should be made at all by the Apostles, or their Successors, but for
this end, that in them all the necessary Articles of Christian Faith might be
comprised; if a Creed were suitably to this Tradition, delivered by the
Apostles to the Church, either we must think these Apostles unfaithful in their
Work, or the Creed an unfaithful account of their Doctrine; or that all which
they esteemed simply necessary to be believed is comprised in it; for to
imagine otherwise is in effect to say this is not the Apostles Creed, but a
part of it; but the Apostles, and the Church of the succeeding Ages giving it
that name, seem plainly to inform us that the sum, and substance of their
credenda was comprised in it. To deny this is in effect to say they dealt
deceitfully, and were a snare to Christians in composing of it; for to call it
a Creed, and to leave out of it that which was necessarily to be believed, what
had it been but to deceive the World, it being in effect to think that they had
given us a Symbol which was indeed no Symbol, as being no distinctive mark
betwixt the sound Believer and the Heretic, or one that errs in Fundamentals,
which yet the notion of the word Symbol does import, and which the Ancients
tell us this Apostolic Symbol was designed to be. In fine, it is to believe
that the Compilers of this Creed would put in some things unnecessary to be
believed in themselves, only as being circumstances of things necessary, as
that our Savior's Crucifixion happened under Pontius Pilate, his Resurrection
was on the Third Day, and yet would leave out some things which were simply to
be believed of all Christians. Moreover could the Apostles agree upon this as
the Rule of what they afterward should preach, and as a Rule to be given to
Believers, if it contained not the whole Council of God in things simply
necessary to be believed; if so, it follows, that either they observed not
their own Rule in Preaching of the Gospel, or if they did, they kept back from
the knowledge of the Faithful something necessary to be believed unto
Salvation. It is well known that in the Notion of the Fathers, a Rule imports
fullness and perfection, even such a fullness, say Varinus and St. Basil, as,
(...), Contr. Eunom. l. 1. p. 701.
by no means does admit of any Diminution or Addition; that it is, (...), a
boundary of what is right, wanting nothing. So Theodoret, Chrysostom,
Oecumenius, Theophylact. In Philip. iij. 16.
And could the Fathers then so constantly have styled any of these Creeds the
Rule of Faith, had they conceived them deficient in any necessary Points of
Christian Doctrine? Could they have styled either of them a perfect Confession,
comprizing the whole Doctrine of Faith, the whole of Christian Doctrine, the
comprehension and perfection of the Christian Faith, a comprisal of all the
Articles of Faith, a Symbol that speaks of every part of Faith, the Faith
sufficient for Salvation, the Life-giving, the saving Faith, the saving
Knowledge, the only Truth which they received from the Apostles, the only Rule
which admits of no Correction, no Addition, and no Diminution, the only Faith
delivered by the Church to be kept by her Children? Could they have told us,
that the most Learned could believe no more, and the meanest Christian did
believe no less; that they need know no more, that they desired to believe no
more, that they believed this first, that nothing more was to be believed, that
in it nothing was to be innovated? Could they have said expressly, that the
Apostles delivered in it whatsoever they thought necessary for all Believers,
and that they indicted it to be a mark by which he should be known, who preached
Christ truly according to the Rules of the Apostles; and by producing of which
it might be known, says Ruffinus, whether he were an Enemy or a Companion? And
lastly, could their Great and General Councils have defined so often, That it
should be lawful for no Man, (...), Council. Ephesians. Can. 7.
(...), to introduce, write, or compose another Faith besides that which was
defined by the Nicene Council. These are the words of the Third General
Council, where presided that Cyril of Alexandria, who, in his letter to John of
Antioch, says, We by no means permit the Faith defined, (...), or the Symbol
of Faith made by the Holy Fathers met at Nice, to be shaken by any; nor do we
suffer our selves or others to change one word, or transgress one Syllable of
what is there contained. This Epistle, says Mark Bishop of Ephesus, Apud
Council. Florent. Sess. 5.
was read, and approved by the Fourth General Council, which also decreed,
(...), That it should be lawful for no Man to add any thing to this Symbol, or
take any thing from it, or to change it at all, or transform it into another
Symbol. Theodoret. H. Eccl. l. 2. c. 18.
Athanasius speaking of the Synod of Ariminum, says, That the Orthodox and
true Servants of the Lord defined, that Men should be contented with that Faith
alone which was held at Nice, (...), and mind, and seek for nothing more, or
less, and that they deposed them who taught the contrary. And again, Ibid. Syn.
Constant. Sub Menna Act. 5. p. 87. apud Bin. T. 4.
That they should, (...), seek for nothing more than what was confessed by the
Fathers at Nice. In the Fifth General Synod, John, Patriarch of Constantinople
says, We have taken care, (...), that the foundation of Faith might remain
inviolate according to the Tradition of the Holy Fathers. And this
determination they declared was made,

1st. Apud Council. Flor. Sess. 5. Bin. Council. Tom. 8. p. 591. Ibid. Athan.
Epist. ad Afric. Episc. p. 932. Orat. de Div. Christi p. 165. Syn. Sard. apud
Athan. Ep. ad Afric. Episc. p. 941.
Because this venerable Symbol, says the General Council of Chalcedon, (...),
suffices to the perfect knowledge of the Truth; and as the Bishop of Ephesus
well notes upon that place, It is manifest, (...), nothing is wanting to what
is perfect; they also said, there was no need of adding any thing to it,
because it was sufficient, (...), for the Subversion of every wicked Heresy,
(...), to overthrow all the most ungodly Heresies, and that it was, (...), an
Inscription as upon a Pillar against all Heresies.

2dly. Because they would not alter the Tradition they had received from their
Forefathers. We, says Cyril in the General Council of Ephesus, have taken this
care that nothing should be added to, Apud Council. Flor Sess. 5. Bin. Ibid. p.
589.
or altered in the Nicene Symbol, as being mindful of him, that said, (...),
Remove not the ancient Bounds which thy Fathers have set.

3dly. Because they would not give occasion to any to suspect their Faith
imperfect, or that any Article of Faith was wanting in the Creeds already made.
Thus the Synod of Sardis decreed, (...), Apud Athan. Ep. ad Antioch. p. 576.
That nothing more should be written touching the Faith, but that all should
rest satisfied with the Faith confessed by the Nicene Fathers, (...), because
it was deficient in nothing; and, (...), least that of Nice should be esteemed
imperfect, and a pretense should be given to as many as will to write, and
define touching the Faith. Theodoret H. Eccl. l. 2. c. 15.
The Orthodox Fathers in the Council of Ariminum professed, That they were
Children of the Nicene Fathers, but if, say they, we should dare to take away
any thing from what they have written, (...), or add any thing to it, we should
be spurious Children, (...), as being Accusers of what they did, who delivered,
(...), an exact Rule of Faith. And again, they declare it, Ibid.
(...), a dangerous thing to add any thing, or take any thing from the Nicene
Creed, because if either of these things should be done, (...), the Enemies
would have liberty to do what they would. Page 951.
And Athanasius in his Epistle to John and Antiochus his Presbyters, commands
them, (...), to reject them who would say more or less than was contained in
that Creed. Apud Council. Flor. Sess 8. Bin. Ibid. p. 627.
And the Bishop of Ephesus well argues, That we can suffer nothing by keeping
to the same Faith which the divine Fathers confessed and believed, since none
but mad Men can accuse it of imperfection.

Secondly, Creed than the Apostles, and the Christians of the Four first
Centuries had? May the Churches of after-Ages make the narrow way to Life more
narrow than our Savior, his Apostles and the Fathers left it? When the whole
Church has so expressly taught that this Faith was sufficient for the perfect
knowledge of the Truth, that in it nothing was deficient, may others yet come
after them, and by adding as many more Articles, no way pretending to be
explications of the former Faith, remove the ancient Bounds which our Fathers
have set? Yea when the Apostles, (...), Act. xx. 27. (...), v. 20.
who profess that they revealed the whole Council of God unto the Churches, and
kept back nothing needful for Salvation, delivered this as the only Rule of
Faith, and their Successors handed it down unto posterity, as that to which
nothing was to be added, beyond which nothing was to be believed as an Article
of Faith, shall after Ages come, and add as many more Articles, as necessary to
be believed unto Salvation, as those which they delivered, and damn all those
who do refuse to own them as such? Moreover, what reason can any Man give why
any person should not be saved now by the same Faith which was sufficient for
Salvation in the days of the Apostles, and the first four Centuries? Are we
wiser than they? or are our Doctors more Learned, or more Faithful? Is there
another Covenant made with the Church since their Days? Are other terms of
Salvation since made? or is God less merciful to us than he was to them? Is not
the famous Rule of Lirinensis this, Quod ab omnibus, quod ubique, quod semper,
That which was always and every where believed of all, that is the Rule of
Faith? And must it not hence follow, that there can be no New Article, no
Declaration obliging us to believe any thing which was not always matter of the
Christian Faith?

If you would palliate the matter by this specious pretense, That though the
Church can make no Articles of Faith which never were revealed by the Apostles,
she may declare those that want sufficient Declaration; is it not Nonsense to
say, What always was believed wants sufficient Declaration? that is, it
wants what is necessary to render it an Article of Faith, or a thing fit to
be believed. Did the Apostles know that Article which you say wants sufficient
Declaration, to be a necessary Article of Faith, or no? Did the Compilers of
the Nicene or Constantinopolitan Creed? did all those Ages who asserted the
perfection of these Creeds, as to all matters of the Christian Faith know it,
or no? If not, then must they teach they knew not what, or their Successors,
without a new Revelation, could not know it: if they did know it, and declare
it, What farther Declaration could it need, unless the Church, after that
Declaration, lost a necessary Article of Faith delivered to her? If they knew
it, but did not declare it, they must be charged with concealing some necessary
part of the Gospel; or if it were unnecessary, why may not others still conceal
it, and not afflict and clog the Faith of Christians with unnecessary things?

If you say with the Latins in the Council of Florence, Apud Bin. Council. To.
8. p. 649.
that, (...), If all Men would acquiesce in the Faith defined, there would be
no need to be concerned for any other, besides that of Nice; but by reason of
Men's deviation from the Right Line, to bye, and crooked, false, and erroneous
ways, it is necessary, (...), to unfold and interpret better the same Faith,
and to make plain the way of Truth.

To this I reply, That here the Cause is given up to Protestants, for hence it
follows, that the Supremacy of the Pope, the Celibacy of Priests, the
Invocation of Saints, the Veneration of Images and Relics, the true and
proper Sacrifice of the Mass, the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, of
Concomitance, and Communion in one Kind, of Purgatory, Indulgences, Reading the
Service in a Tongue unknown, the Seven Sacraments, the Necessity of the Priests
Intention to the validity of a Sacrament, must be so far contained in the
Nicene Creed, as to be only Explications and Interpretations of the same
Articles of Faith; or it must be confessed that they are no necessary Articles
of Christian Faith, and since the Greeks did in that Council plead that nothing
was to be added by any after-Councils to the Nicene Faith, and the Latins in
effect did own, that nothing should be added to it, but only, (...), P. 644,
645.
another Exposition suitable to the Truth contained in it, which was not so
much an Addition, as, (...), an Explication of the same thing; they both
exclude the Addition of these Articles, unless that can be proved, which never
can be rationally attempted, That they are only Explications of the Nicene
Faith, as the Addition of Filioque to it was declared to be. And since we
Protestants do acquiesce in the Nicene Faith, it follows by the concession of
the Latins, that in respect to us, there was no need for after- Councils to be
concerned for any other Faith.

2dly. The Fathers who made, or who embraced this boundary of Christian Faith
expressly add, That there is no necessity of adding any thing unto it with
respect to Heretics, because it is sufficient of it self, for the aversion of
all Heresies. Thus in that great dispute which was between the A^ians and the
Orthodox, about adding something to the Nicene Faith, or making other Creeds
besides it, Epist. ad Epict. Tom. 1. p. 581, 582.
Athanasius gives his Judgment, That the vain talk of all the Heretics that
ever were, was baffled, and made to cease by the Faith confessed at Nice,
according to the Holy Scriptures, and that this Faith was sufficient, (...),
for the overthrow of all Impiety, and that no other Synod ought to be named in
the Catholic Church, but that, for the Confusion of them, it being, (...), the
mark of victory over all Heresy, and especially over that of Arius. And this
demonstratively follows from their constant Doctrine, that these Creeds fully
do contain all Doctrines of Faith necessary to be believed by all Christians,
for seeing Heresy must be an Error of Faith in matters necessary to be
believed, because it otherwise could be no damnable Error, there can be no
Heresy which is not a denial of something necessary to be believed, that
therefore which sufficiently instructs me in all things necessary to be
believed must also fortify me sufficiently against all Heresy.

3dly. This unfolding, making plain, better interpreting the Faith, being that
which only can be done by farther Declaration of the Sense of some Article of
Faith than formerly was made unto the Church, it is already baffled by the
Refutation of the former Plea; and it is plainly inconsistent with the
Pretenses of our new Patrons of Tradition, for either the Father taught the Son
this better Interpretation, and made plain this Sense of the Article, or he did
not, if he did, there was no need of doing this by any Council, if he did not,
then it is evident that the Son, if he believes this Sense, and this
Interpretation, believes somewhat which he received not by Tradition from his
Father, and so it must be certain that he may believe another sense of that
Article, than his Father taught, and so in any other Article, viz. another
sense of the Real Presence, of the Pope's Supremacy, etc.

Thirdly, no Man who does heartily believe these Creeds, and the immediate
Doctrines plainly contained in them, or evidently deduced from them, can
deserve to be anathematized, or be excluded from the Communion of Christians,
for not believing any other simple Article of Faith, for then he must deserve
to be excluded for a thing unnecessary to be believed by Christians. He may
indeed deserve to be excluded upon other Grounds from the external Communion of
the Church, as, v. gr. for irregularity of Life, or violating the Church's
Peace, but cannot justly be excluded for want of Christian Faith.

Fourthly, all those Councils which have anathematized their fellow Christians
for such Doctrines as are not in these Creeds, nor can be evidently inferred
from them, have been so far from being Infallible, that they have actually
erred. And all those Churches who have rejected others from Communion with them
upon the same account, have acted Schismatically, because they excluded others
from Communion without just Ground. It being therefore manifest that the Church
of Rome has added to the Nicene Creed these following Articles:

I. That the Pope of Rome is the Successor of St. Peter, and the Vicar of Jesus
Christ.

II. That the Roman is the Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church, the Mother
and Mistress of all Churches.

III. That to her therefore does belong to judge of the true Sense, and
Interpretation of Scripture, and that the Sense which she imposes on them is
to be received as true.

IV. That there be Seven Sacraments of the New Law instituted by Jesus Christ,
and which conferr Grace, viz. Baptism, Confirmation, the Eucharist, Penance,
Extreme Unction, Orders, Matrimony.

V. That in the Mass a true, proper, and propitiatory Sacrifice is offered for
the Living and the Dead.

VI. That in the holy Sacrament of the Eucharist there is made a Conversion of
the whole Substance of Bread into Christ's Body, and the whole Substance of
Wine into his Blood, and so the Body and the Blood of Christ is there
substantially present, together with his Soul and his Divinity.

VII. That under one Species only whole and entire Christ, and a true Sacrament
is taken.

VIII. That there is a Purgatory, and that the Souls detained there are helped
by the Prayers of the Faithful.

IX. That the Saints reigning with Christ are to be Prayed to, and their
Relics to be Venerated.

X. That the Images of Christ, the Blessed Virgin, and of other Saints are to
be Honored, and to have due Veneration given to them.

XI. That Christ left a Power of Indulgences to his Church, and that their use
is most wholesome to Christian People.

XII. That all the Rites used by the Roman Church in Administration of her
Sacraments are to be admitted.

And lastly, That this is the true Catholic Faith, without which no Man can be
saved. I say, It being manifest that the Church of Rome has added all these
Articles of Faith unto the Creeds forementioned, and by the Church declared to
be a perfect digest of the Articles of Christian Faith; it follows that they
must all be evidently proved to be contained in the Apostles, or the Nicene
Creed, or that the Church of Rome must be Schismatical, in excluding from her
Communion those who do not believe, or yield assent unto them.

And thus, I hope, I have sufficiently showed how this Tradition overthrows,
and fully does confute the New Doctrines of the Church of Rome. It now remains
to show how it confirms the Cause of Protestants, and clears up the Objections
which are made against it. Now;

First, Tradition, these Symbols, as they are a perfect Summary of Christian
Faith, so are they fully and perspicuously contained in Scripture; hence it
demonstratively follows, that according to the Doctrine and Tradition of the
whole Church of Christ, the sum of all the necessary Articles of Christian
Faith, must fully and perspicuously be contained in Holy Scripture, and may be
proved thence to the satisfaction of the meanest Catechist. And consequently,
the Holy Scripture was by them esteemed a full and perspicuous Rule of Faith,
according to our Sixth Note, in reference to all things necessary to be
believed, which is the Fundamental Article of Protestants.

But does not Tertullian speak in General, of never disputing with Heretics
out of Scriptures only, Q. of Quest. p. 258, 259.
because this Scripture combat avails for nothing but to the making either
ones Stomach, or ones Brains to turn, -- and conclude generally, We must not
therefore appeal to Scriptures, nor in our combat rely upon them, in which
either no Victory is to be obtained, or a very uncertain one.

Tertullian here proposes this Objection, the Heretics spoke of the
Scriptures, V. c. 7.. 8.
and persuaded their Doctrines from the Scriptures, and this he is so far from
reprehending, that he holds it a thing absolutely necessary to be done by all
who would discourse of divine Matters; It being impossible, says he, aliunde
de rebus fidei loqui, De praescript. cap. 15.
quam ex literis fidei, to speak of Matters of Faith, but from the Scriptures.
And therefore he not only owns that the Rule of Faith he pleaded for was first
delivered by word of Mouth, and after by the Writings of the Apostles; but also
to that Objection of the Heretics, Seek and ye shall find, Cap. 9.
he answers by granting, that the Scriptures are to be searched and sought
into, for finding out the Truth contained in the Rule of Faith, and that then
nothing more respecting Faith is needful to be sought, because they had found
what they sought for; then he proceeds to show, non admittendos eos ad ullam de
Scripturis disputationem, that the Heretics were not to be admitted to dispute
from Scriptures; and that, non sit cum illo disputandum, he was not to be
disputed with from Scripture, for these following Reasons.

1. Because, ista Haeresis non recipit quasdam Scripturas, those Heretics
received not some Scriptures, viz. Iren. l. 1. c. 26.
the Ebionites and Encratites rejected all St. Paul's Epistles, and embraced
only the Gospel of the Nazarens. L. 3. c. 11. p. 258, 259.
Cerinthus allowed only the Gospel of St. Mark. Valentinus only that of St.
John, Marcion only that of Luke, Ebion only that of Matthew.

2. Because, si quas recipit non recipit integras, those Scriptures which they
owned, they received not entire, but with additions and detractions, as their
cause required, cutting off from them what most clearly made against then
Heresies. Thus of the Marcionites, and the Lucianists, and the Valentinians;
Origin confesses, That they did (...), Contra Celsum l. 2. p. 77.
change and pervert the Gospel.

3. Because, if they admitted any Scriptures entire, yet they corrupted them,
per diversas expositiones, by adulterating the Sense of them, and miserably
distorting them, to the upholding of their idle Dreams; for, says Irenaeus,
they said their Doctrines were not perspicuously revealed in Scripture, (...),
L. 1. c. 1. p. 14.
but by our Lord were mystically couched in Parables, even so mystically, that,
as you may see from the first, to the Nineteenth Chapter of the First Book of
Irenaeus, it is enough to turn a Man's Stomach to read such Fooleries; as, v.
gr. They prove their thirty Aeones, because our Savior was Baptized when he
was Thirty Years Old, and from the Parable of the Laborers sent into the
Vineyard, some at the 1st, 3d, 6th, 9th, 11th. C. 1. p. 10.
hour of the Day, which numbers put together make up Thirty. Thus, says
Irenaeus, they endeavored to adapt some of our Lord's Parables, Page 32.
and some Prophetical Expressions to their Doctrines, that they might not seem
(...), without any Testimony from Scripture; but then, says he, they miserably
pervert the Order, and the Series of Holy Scripture, and deal with it as if one
should take the Image of a King excellently made in Jewels, and should deform
it into the Face of a Dog or a Woolf. They pretended also that some of their
Doctrines were received, (...), from unwritten Traditions; C. 1. p. 32.
and to prove them they produced a multitude, (...), of Apocryphal and
adulterated Scriptures which they had feigned, Lib. 1. c. 17.
pretending for their recourse unto Tradition this Accusation of the Holy
Scriptures, Lib. 3. c. 2.
That they were not right, nor of Authority sufficient, because they were
spoken variously, and that from them the Truth could not be found out by such
as were ignorant of Tradition, non enim per literas traditum illum, sed per
vivam vocem, it being not delivered in writing, but by Oral Tradition; that is,
they were plain Papists as to this pretense. Against such Men as these, says
Tertullian, the most skilful in the Scriptures will dispute in vain from
Scripture, cum nolunt agnoscere ea per quae revincuntur, his nituntur quae
falso composuerunt, and quae de ambiguitate coeperunt, since they will not own
that for Scripture by which they are refuted, they will insist upon their
Apocryphal Writings, and those things which they ambiguously have conceived.
Ergo non ad Scripturas provocandum est, and therefore we are not to provoke
them to dispute out of Scriptures, nor place our combat in those things in
which no victory is to be obtained, or a very uncertain one. Let now any
indifferent Reader judge whether Tertullian speaks in general against disputing
with Heretics out of Scripture, as Mr. M. here confidently says; and not only
of disputing against hanc Haeresin, that very Heresy which had these Arts to
delude what was brought against them from Scripture, and appealed from it, with
the Papists, to Oral Tradition.

And yet against these slippery Men, Irenaeus, and other of the Fathers first
argued from Scriptures, and cum ex Scripturis arguebantur, and when they had
baffled them there, and made them fly, as Romanists now do, unto Tradition,
they followed them at that Weapon; and by producing the Tradition of their
Creed and Rule of Faith, containing nothing of their New Doctrines, they
stopped their Mouths, giving them nevertheless to understand, Lib. 3. c. 1.
That the Rule of Faith was by the Will of God not only preached to, but
afterward delivered to them in the Scriptures, to be the Pillar and the Ground
of Truth, and that the Parables which they by their ridiculous Interpretations
adapted to their purposes, Lib. 2. c. 46.
were to be understood according to this Rule of Truth, and according to those
things which were perspicuously revealed in Scripture, and that then they would
not be Interpreted to a dangerous Sense. From which things thus explained we
learn,

1. That no Man can discourse of Matters of Faith but from the Scriptures.

2. That these Scriptures were written by the Will of God to be the Pillar and
the Ground of Truth to following Ages.

3. That if we do interpret the ambiguous Places of them by the plain, and with
Analogy to the Rule of Faith contained in the Creed, we cannot dangerously err.

Secondly, Protestant has for all his necessary Articles of Faith. He having
for his Creeds, which, says his Catechism, contain all the Articles of
Christian Faith, all the same Grounds of assurance which any Roman Catholic,
or any Christian can pretend to, viz. present acknowledged Profession, and
Tradition Oral of the present Church; and, 2ly. of all the Churches of the
Roman Communion, and of all other Christian Churches. 3ly. The Profession and
Oral Tradition of all Churches throught all Christian Ages, Times and Places,
and even of all the Apostles, who were, says this Tradition, the Authors
jointly of that Creed which bears their name. 4ly. The Writings of the Fathers
and of General Councils, who assure us that the Creeds they handed down unto
us, contained the Apostolical Faith, the one and same Truth, they had been
taught, the only, the entire, the perfect Faith of all Christians, to which
nothing was to be added, as well as nothing to be taken from it. Lastly, the
written word of God in which they say this whole Faith is expressly, and in
words contained, in which it may be found, and from which it may be proved to
the capacity of the meanest Catechist. Whereas nothing of this nature can be
showed in Confirmation of the Faith of Romanists.

Thirdly, Christianity was handed down the same for Substance and Essentials,
as it was from the beginning by Tradition, as the Ancients understood the word,
viz. by the continual practice of the Church delivering the Summary and Rule of
Faith, which she received from the Apostles to all her Members to be learnt by
heart, or to be written not in Ink, but in the fleshly Tables of their Hearts,
and then confirming all the Articles contained in it by the holy Scriptures,
See Chapter 7.. 7, 8, etc.
and sending her Members to it to learn the Truth of what the Church had taught
them. This is, says Irenaeus, the Tradition which we have received from the
Apostles, the Summary of Faith, the preaching of the Truth, the immovable Rule
of Truth, delivered to Christians at their Baptism, and by which the Church
enlightens all who come unto the Truth. And this, says he, the Apostles first
preached, and afterward delivered in the Holy Scriptures, and so they say all.

Fourthly, R. Doctors impose upon their Readers, when they urge the Sayings of
Irenaeus and Tertullian for the establishing of their Traditions, or the
asserting such Traditions as the Rule of Faith, which neither are contained in
Scripture, nor the Apostles Creed, when it is evident beyond exception that the
Tradition which they speak of is that of the Apostles Creed, and of the
necessary Articles of the Christian Faith contained in Scripture. Q. of
Questions p. 345.
Thus Mr. M. triumphs in those words of Irenaeus, What if the Apostles had not
left us the Scriptures, must we not have followed that Order of Tradition which
they delivered to those to whose charge they left the Churches to be Governed?
To this Order of Tradition many Barbarous Nations do assent, who have believed
in Christ without any Writings, keeping diligently the ancient Tradition, (not
Traditions, as Mr. M. deceitfully Translates.) Now let it be observed, That the
Tradition here mentioned is only, vetus Apostolorum Traditio, Lib. 3. c. 4.
the old Tradition of the Apostles, the belief of one God, maker of Heaven and
Earth, and so on to the end of the Apostles Creed; and this will be the
clearest Demonstration against the Roman Church imaginable, for if we must have
followed this Order of Tradition, had we been distitute of Scripture, we must
have absolutely rejected all the Articles of Romish Faith. Mr. M. Ibid.
That Irenaeus did believe that the Tradition left by the Apostles, was a
sufficient Ground of divine Faith, is true; L. 3. c. 3, 4.
but then it is as true that he believed that this Tradition was entirely
contained in the Rule of Faith he there lays down, that it was, (...), the
same, and only Truth, which was delivered by the Apostles; that it rendered
them who believed this only, Wise, and acceptable to God, and fully armed
against all Heresies. De praescrip. c. 28.
Tertullian does indeed put the Question, How is it likely that so many, and so
great Churches, should err in one Faith. Among many events there is not every
where one issue, Q. of Quest. p. 400.
The Errors of the Churches must needs have varied, but that which amongst
many, is found one, is not mistaken, but delivered. Audeat ergo aliquis dicere
eos errasse qui tradiderunt? De praescrip. c. 28, 29.
Dare then any one say they erred who delivered that one and the same thing?
But then this is so far from being plain Popery, as Mr. M. vainly boasts, that
it effectually, and at one blow, Ibid. De Virg. Veland. c. 1. De praescrip. c.
13.
destroys it; for having laid down his own Rule, immovable, and admitting no
Novelty, no Addition, and delivered this Rule in words at length, ut hinc quid
defendamus profiteamur, as a profession of that entire Faith he undertook to
defend against the Heretics, and beyond which nothing was needful to be known;
he proceeds to show that the Apostles in delivering this, as the entire Rule of
Faith, were not deficient in teaching any thing which was needful to be
believed. This he proves Chapter the Twenty-sixth, because Christ commanded
that what they heard in Secret they should publish in the Light, and on the
House top, and that they should not hide the Light under a Bushel, but set it
on a Candlestick, that it might shine to all in the House; these Precepts
either the Apostles understood not or neglected, if they did not fulfill them,
but hid some of the Light, that is, of the Word of God, and, Sacramenti
Christi, of the Doctrine of Christ. Whereas, says he, it was, incredibile vel
ignorasse Apostolos plenitudinem praedicationis, vel non omnem ordinem Regulae
nobis edidiffe, that eitheir the Apostles were ignorant of any thing they were
to preach, or that they did not perfectly reveal the Rule of Faith to all. He
also shows, That the Church did not alter what she had received from the
Apostles; because the Rule of Faith was one and the same in all Churches of
Christ, they being all one, Chap. 20.
ejusdem Sacramenti una traditione, by having the same Tradition of the same
Rule of Faith; and because they did, in eadem fide conspirare, agree in the
same Faith, this Rule, this Creed, mentioned Chapter the Thirteenth, must
therefore be according to Tertullian, the fullness of the Apostles preaching,
the entire Rule of Faith they preached to all; or else, according to him, the
Apostles must be ignorant or unfaithful, and his ensuing Argument, That all
succeeding Churches agreed in this Rule as in the Tessera Hospitalitatis, the
Signal of Friendship, Ibid.
that it was one and the same among them all, and that they who were not by
Original Apostolical Churches, were yet Apostolical, because they did conspire
with them that were so in the Belief of this Faith, is a farther demonstration,
that this Creed was the entire Faith delivered by the Apostles, and taught by
all Churches; since otherwise, Tertullian's Argument must be false; for he
expressly undertakes to prove that the Apostles delivered to the Churches the
entire Rule of Faith, and that the Churches did faithfully transmit to
posterity the whole Faith they received from them; and that because they all
transmitted the Apostles Creed, mentioned Chapter the Thirteenth, had not then
that contained the whole Christian Faith, owned then by all the Orthodox as
such, Tertullian had given up the Cause unto the Heretics; for they might have
replied upon him, as do the Romanists to us, that the Apostles delivered many
other Traditions, as necessary to be believed as those contained in the Creed;
and that these were the Doctrines which they owned, and Tertullian rejected.
Hence then our Demonstration from these words of Tertullian is invincible; All
Christians conspired in this, that this Rule of his contained the whole Faith
received from the Apostles, beyond which nothing was necessary to be believed;
whosoever could produce this Creed they received into Communion, pro
consanguinitate doctrinae, because agreeing with them in the Faith; and
whosoever pretended to any Articles of Faith, not mentioned in this Creed, they
confuted them, by saying, they had no such Article in the Creed, and therefore
the Apostles, Chap. 32, 33.
nihil tale docuerunt, taught no such thing, and rejected them, ob diversitatem
Sacramenti, as holding a Faith different from that of the Church. Now how is it
likely that so many, and so great Churches should err in one Faith? The Errors
of the Churches, had there been any, in delivering their entire Rule of Faith,
must needs have varied, but that which amongst them all was one and the same,
must be a sure Tradition; and then the Doctrines of the Roman Creed must be
rejected as not taught by the Apostles, and as different from the Churches
Faith. Mr. M. Ibid.
Lo here [plain Protestantism] in the highest point, proved and approved by all
Christians within Two hundred Years after Christ.

The same Doctrine is delivered Chapter the Nineteenth and the Twentieth, Page
429, 430.
on which Mr. M. insists, Sect. 20. Number. 4. for there he tells us, That our
Lord sent his Twelve Apostles, eandem doctrinam ejusdem fidei nationibus
promulgare, to preach the same Doctrine of Faith to the Nations, and so to
plant Churches in every City, from which other Churches received, traducem
fidei, and femina doctrinae, the Tradition of their Faith, and the Seeds of
Doctrine; and embracing of it, became all Apostolical, by receiving the same
Rule of Faith. Hence therefore, says he, we prescribe against the Heretics;
Hinc igitur dirigimus praescriptionem. Cap. 21.
for if our Lord sent his Apostles to preach, we must receive no other
Preachers of the Faith, than he appointed; now what they preached, ought not to
be otherwise proved, than by the same Churches which they planted, eis
praedicando, tam viva quod aiunt voce, quam per Epistolas postea, by preaching
to them by word of mouth, and afterward by their Epistles: And if so, it is
manifest, says he, that Doctrine is to be accounted true which conspires with
the Apostolical Churches, whence Faith had its Original, and that is to be
rejected which contradicts that Faith; it remains therefore, uti demonstremus
an haec nostra doctrina cujus Regulam supra edidimus de Apostolorum traditione
censeatur, and ex hoc ipso an caeterae de mendacio veniunt, that we demonstrate
whether our Doctrine, the Rule of which we have laid down, Chapter the
Thirteenth, derives from the Tradition of the Apostles, and consequently
whether all others be not false. He therefore does again declare, That the
Creed mentioned by him there, is the entire Rule of Faith, and that by which we
may discern who hold the Truth, and who teach Falsehood: And argues thus, All
the Apostolical Churches have delivered this Creed as that entire Doctrine
which they received from the Apostles, and all the Heretics say the contrary,
therefore their Doctrine must be rejected, and that of the Apostolic Churches
be received as the Truth. Mark here, Page 429.
to use the words of Mr. M. how the first ground on which we are to stand, as
upon a ground most advantageous for gaining the victory against Error, and
purchasing triumph to Truth, is the Tradition of this Creed of the Apostles, as
the entire Rule of Faith, for by that alone we assuredly know whether our
Doctrine, of which the Rule is given, Chapter the Thirteenth, came from
Apostolical Tradition, from this Rule of Faith delivered by the Apostles by
word of Mouth, and by their Writings, and then by Tradition delivered down by
successive practice of all Churches, to which Churches Tertullian here expressly
sends us, will be discovered that only Tradition of the Rule of Faith, in which
totum Christianae fidei Sacramentum, all the Mysteries of Christian Faith are
contained. And thus Tertullian goes on pressing his Adversary merely by the
Tradition of this Creed, as the entire Rule of Faith; and this way, and only
this way he prescribes, that we ought to show what Christ and his Apostles
taught.

Fifthly, What Catalogue have you of Fundamental Articles of Faith? For here is
a Catalogue of them recommended to the whole World of Christians by so great
Authority as may well be esteemed sufficient to satisfy the curiosity of this
inquiry; here being Symbols delivered as the entire Summary of Articles of
Christian Faith by the Consent of the Apostles, the four first General
Councils, received by all Orthodox Christians of all Places, and Ages as such,
for at least Six hundred Years; here is, as Irenaeus says, (...), as
Tertullian, Regula immobilis, and irreformabilis, as the Greeks in the Council
of Florence, (...), A Rule invariable, unmovable, unchangeable, not to be
shaken, or reformed; a Rule, which say the Fathers, Council. Hor. Apud Bin. Ses.
5. Tom. 8. p. 590.
admits of no diminution or addition, this being, (...), a secondary Foundation
of Faith after the Symbol; that it was not to be changed in the least, says
the Bishop of Ephesus. Whereas the Catalogue of Fundamentals in the Roman
Church is still variable and increasing, every new General Council having it in
their power by defining any new Thing disputed in the Schools, to advance it
into a New Article of Faith.

Sixthly, Where was your Church before Luther? by saying that our Church was in
all places of the World where these ancient Foundations were retained, and not
subverted by introducing Doctrines plainly opposite unto them, our Church
exactly is the same with that in Irenaeus and Tertullian's days, and could
undoubtedly have had with them free Communion by virtue of her Symbol, yea, if
that which always was professed to be the entire Summary of Faith be
sufficient, when owned, and Baptized into, to render us of the same Church with
them who so professed, they may here find our Church where they will scarce
find their own in all the Ages from the Apostles to the Tenth Century, in the
West, and till the Reformation in the East. For though our first Reformers in
the Church of England differed a little from the Greek and Eastern Churches in
some Rites and Practices, yet were we one in Faith; and so, as far as it is
needful for Sister Churches to be, of one Church. Council. Flor. apud Bin. To.
8. Sess. 5.
For they maintained stiffly in the Council of Florence that the Nicene or
Constantinopolitan Creed contained all the Articles of Christian Faith
necessary to be believed, or which were to be imposed on Christians, and that
it was lawful for no Man to add to, or take from it, or to propose another
Faith; Sess. 5. p. 586. Page 580.
that this was the Catholic Faith which ought to be, (...), one, and the same
among all Christians, that in this Symbol of Faith nothing was by the Fathers
permitted, nothing put defectively, nothing that wanted Correction or Addition.
Censura Orient. Eccles. Edit. per Stanisl. Socolovium. c. 1.

Atque hic quidem est ille verae and incorruptae fidei thesaurus, ab ipso
spiritu sancto, ne quid ex eo aut auferatur, aut aliquid alienum and
adulterinum illi addatur, sancte obsignatus; haec est illa divina, sanctissima,
perfecta ac universalis per orbem terrarum confusi populi Christiani tessera;
haec est illa communis confessio omnium sanctorum patrum; hic est certissimus
universae Christianae fidei limes, quem in utrisque manibus complectentes, quem
ubique magna liberate and alacritate confitentes velut quoddam coeleste,
integrum, and incorruptum, nullaque part contaminatum sanctorum, divino numine
afflatorum, hominum depositum ad extremum usque finem vitae nostrae
conservabimus. Censur. Orient. Eccl. Edit. per Stanislaum Socolovium. Cap. 1.
Apud Bin. Ibid. p. 580, 577.


In their Censure of the German Churches they set down the Constantinopolitan
Creed, as that Treasure of the true incorrupted Faith, sacredly sealed by the
Holy Ghost, that nothing should be taken from it, nothing alien or adulterine
added to it, as that Divine, most Holy, Perfect, and universal Tessera of the
Christian People diffused over all the World, the most common Confession of all
the Holy Fathers, the most certain boundary of the whole Christian Faith; and
they declare, That (...), this was the chief cause of the Schism betwixt them
and the Western Churches, that the Romans had added to the Nicene Creed; there
therefore was at that time no real difference betwixt them and us in the Symbol
of our Faith, and therefore nothing which could hinder our Affection to Her, or
Hers to us as a Sister Church, with which was maintained, and ought to be
maintained the Union of Peace and Charity, by reason of this universal Tessera
of Christian People, owned by both parties as the perfect Summary of their
Faith.

Lastly, Church of England acknowledge the Church of Rome still to continue a
true Church, and those in Communion with her, as true parts of the Catholic
Church visible, though far from being only so, because they are Baptized into
this Faith alone, and it is delivered to them even by the Church of Rome as the
whole Catholic Faith, the whole Faith necessary to Salvation. For through the
wonderful Providence of God it has so happened, Part. 1. c. 2. p. 13.
that the Trent Catechism has declared suitably to the Tradition of the
Ancients, that the Apostles made the Symbol, which now bears their Name, to be
a form of Christian Faith to those whom they should call, ad fidei unitatem, to
the Unity of Faith, and to be a mark of distinction betwixt false Brethren, and
those who, vere Christo militiae Sacramento se obligarent, truly did oblige
themselves to Christ by the Sacrament of their Warfare. And the Trent Council
in prejudice to all her following Decrees has also taught, That Symbolum
Apostolorum est principium illud in quo omnes qui fidem Christi profitentur
necessario convenient, ac Fundamentum Ecclesiae firmum ac unicum, Sess. 3. p. 7.
the Symbol of the Apostles is that Principle in which all who profess the
Faith do necessarily agree, and it is the firm and only Foundation of the
Church. And at their Baptism of Infants and Adult Persons, the Questions and
Answers run thus; Ritual. Romans de Bapt. parvul. p. 13. de Baptismo Adult. p. 28.
Pr. What ask thou of the Church of God? to which the Adult Person, or the
Godfather of the Infant replies, I desire Faith. Pr. What will Faith procure
for thee? Godf. Life eternal: And yet the Godfather of the Child, or the Elect
with the Adult Baptized, when they come to repeat this Faith, only recite the
Apostles Creed, and so they still retain the Ancient and Apostolic way of
admitting Members into the Church, as to matters of Faith required of them to
be believed.

CHAP. IX.
The Novelty of the Romish Doctrines proved farther, First, from the
Instructions given by the Church-Rulers to their Clergy, what they should teach
the People, in which they profess that they comprised the whole Faith and all
things necessary to be believed, taught and done, and yet make not the least
mention of the Romish Doctrines,. 1. Secondly, From the Examination of a Bishop
at his Ordination, who though he was not examined touching one of the Roman
Articles, yet was he upon his belief of other Articles approved as one fully
instructed in the Documents of Christian Faith,. 2. The full agreement of the
Eastern Churches with the West in this Matter,. 3. Thirdly, From the Ancient
way of confuting Heretics, by producing the Apostles and the Nicene Creed, and
declaring touching other Doctrines not contained in them, that they are of
Curiosity, not of Faith,. 4. Fourthly, From the ancient Treatises written on
purpose to instruct Christians in the Articles of Christian Faith, which
contain none of these New Articles,. 5.

A Farther Demonstration that the pretended Traditions of the Church of Rome
were not received anciently as Articles of Christian Faith, or as things
necessary to be believed or practiced by all Christians, may be taken from the
instructions given to the Clergy concerning what they were to teach the People
committed to their Charge. For amongst these things we find all the positive
Articles of the Faith of Protestants, the whole Symbol of the ancient Church,
our whole Duty toward God and to our Neighbor, all that we are to believe,
and pray, and hope for, but not one tittle of Romish Faith. In their
Instructions, quid sit a Presbyteris praedicandum, what the Priests are to
teach the People, The (a) L. 1. c. 82.
Capitular of Charles the Great, (b) De Discipl. Eccl. l 1. c. 102.
Regino, and (c) Decret. part 6. 155. -- 161.
Ivo tell us from the Councils of Rouen and Challon,

1. That they are to preach to all in General, That they believe in the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, one God Omnipotent who made all things; and that the
Deity, Essence and Majesty of the Three Persons, the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, is one.

2. That the Son of God was incarnate by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, for
the Salvation of Mankind; that he suffered, was buried, rose again the Third
Day, ascended into Heaven, and is to come in the end of the World to judge all
Men according to their Works; that the Wicked, with the Devil, shall be sent
into eternal Fire, and the Just, with Christ, shall possess everlasting Life.

3. That all Men shall rise again in their own Flesh.

4. He is to teach them for what Crimes Men shall be deputed with the Devil,
Gal. v. 19, 20, 21.
which the Apostle thus Enumerates; Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness,
Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions,
Heresies, Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings, and such like. They who
do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, and therefore let all
these things with all care be prohibited.

5. He is to teach of the Love of God, and our Neighbor, of Faith and Hope in
God, of Humility, Patience, Chastity, Kindness, Mercy, of Alms, Confession, and
Forgiving our Brethren from the Heart; for he that does these, and the like
things, shall inherit the Kingdom of God.

Moreover they tell us from the Councils of Gangra, Reims and Challon, that
every Priest must teach all his Parochians, Symbolum, and orationem Dominicam,
the Creed, and the Lord's Prayer, and cause them to repeat them when they come
to Confession at Lent, and not administer the Sacrament to them till they can
rehearse them, because none can be saved without the knowledge of them; in uno
enim sides and credulitas Christiana continetur; for in the one is contained
the Faith of Christians, Ivo Ibid. c. 158.
in the other is expressed what we are to ask of God; and these things are so
great, that he who can fully understand them, sufficere sibi credatur ad
salutem aeternam, understands what is believed sufficient to eternal Salvation.
And secondly, Because in the Lord's Prayer are comprised all things necessary
for humane Life; and in the Apostles Symbol, Cap. 159.
sides ex integro comprehenditur, the Catholic Faith is entirely contained,
and by learning it they would rightly learn, sidem Catholicam, the Catholic
Faith.

Hence then the Argument runs thus, If the Faith of Christians was equally
contained in many other Doctrines, why did not the Church equally require her
Clergy to teach them also to the People? Why do these Councils say, That her
Eaith, her Catholic Faith is entirely contained in this Creed of the Apostles,
and that the belief of these things is sufficient for the Salvation of him who
fully understands them? Sure there is some great Reason of that signal
difference betwixt the Church of those Ages, which say, the Apostles Creed
alone is that Faith without which, nemo salvus esse potest, no man can be
saved; and the present R. Church, which says of all her new Articles added to
the Creed, Haec est vera fides Catholica extra quam nemo salvus esse potest, Ab
illis quorum cura ad me in munere meo spectabit teneri, doceri, and praedicari
quantum in me erit curaturum. Bull. Pij 4 ti.
This is the true Catholic Faith, without which no Man can be saved, betwixt
that Church which only instructs her Priests to teach the Apostles Creed, and
that which makes all her Clergy swear to hold all the Articles contained in
the Creed of Pius the Fourth. And also to take care that they be held, taught,
and preached by all who do belong to their Care.

3dly, New Creed of Pius the Fourth, and added to the Nicene Creed, are ancient
Articles of Faith, will farther be made evident from the Examination which the
ancient Canons of the Church required of him who was to be ordained Bishop:
Can. 1. Council. Tom. 2. p. 1199.
For by the Canon of the Fourth Council of Carthage he was first to be
examined, si fidei documenta verbis simplicibus asserat, Whether in plain words
he asserted the Doctrines of Faith, that is, Whether he held the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost to be one God, and the whole Trinity to be Co-essential,
Consubstantial, Coeternal, and Co-omnipotent; whether he held that every
Person in the Trinity was perfect God; and that neither the Father, nor the
Holy Ghost, but the Son only was incarnate, as being, as to his Divinity the
Son of the Father, and as to his Humanity, the Son of an humane Mother, true
God of his Father, and true Man of his Mother, receiving true Flesh from his
Mother, and having an humane rational Soul, so that both Natures were in him;
that is, he was God and Man, one Person, one Son, one Christ, one Lord, Creator
of all things which are; and with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, the Author,
Lord, and Ruler of all Creatures; who suffered truly in the Flesh, died a true
bodily death, rose again with a true Resurrection of his Plesh, and a true
resuming of his Soul, in which he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.
It also is to be enquired of him, Whether he believes one and the same God to
be the Author of the Old and New Testament, that is, of the Law, Prophets and
Apostles, and that the Devil was not made wicked by Nature, but by his own
Will; whether he believes the Resurrection of that Flesh which dies, and not
another; whether he believes a future judgment, and, that every one shall
receive according to the things which they have done in the Flesh, Punishments
or Glory; whether he does not disapprove of Marriage, nor condemn Second
Marriages, nor condemn eating of Flesh; whether he Communicates with reconciled
Penitents, and believes that all Sins both Original and Actual, are remitted in
Baptism, and that no Man can be saved out of the Catholic Church. Cum in his
omnibus examinatus inventus fuer it plene instructus, When by Examination, he
is found fully instructed in all these things, let him be ordained Bishop, etc.
These were all the Doctrines of Faith required to be known, or held by the
Bishop in the 4th. Century. And this continued to be the Rule of his
Examination, and the whole Faith required to be professed by him at his
Ordination till the Thirteenth Century, as you may learn from the, Page 97, 98.
interrogatio de credulitate Episcopi, question touching the Faith of a Bishop
in the Ordo Romanus, which form of Examination they profess to have received
from the ancient Institution of the Holy Fathers, and especially from the
Council of Carthage. From the Council of Nantes, Can. 11. and from Regino in
the Ninth Century, De Disc. Eccl. lib. 1. cap. 443.
who transcribe this Canon of the Council of Carthage, as containing the form,
qualiter Episcopus ordinandus examinabitur, How a Bishop, that is to be
ordained, shall be examined. Decret. part. 5. c. 62 l. 1. c. 8. Did. 23. c. 2.
As also does Ivo in the Eleventh, Barchardus in the Twelfth, and Gratian in
the Thirteenth Century. These therefore from the Fourth to the Thirteenth
Century were reputed all the Articles of Christian Faith, in which it was
thought necessary that a Bishop should be instructed, and if he did assert
these things, he was thought fully instructed in the Documents of Christian
Faith.

And to show the Concord of the Eastern with the Western Churches in these
matters, Theodoret having given an account of Heretical Fables in Four Books,
he proceeds, Cap. 4. p. 262.
Book the Fifth, to Discourse, (...), of the Doctrines of the Church, and to
lay before us, (...), the Evangelical Doctrine, that by comparing it with that
of the Heretics, we may discern the difference betwixt Light and Darkness,
perfect Health, and mortal Sickness; and then he proceeds to give us all the
Doctrines contained in this Form of Examination, but not one of the Articles
which they of Rome have added to the Nicene Creed. In his First Chapter he
speaks of God the Father, the Creator of all things, and the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ. In the Second, Of his only begotten Son, co-essential and
coeternal with the Father. In the Third, Of the Holy Spirit, of the same
Nature and Substance with them both. In the Fourth, Of the Creation of all
things by the Father, with the Son, and Holy Ghost. In the Eighth, Of the Devil
asserting that he had not his wickedness from his Creator, but his own perverse
will. In the Eleventh, Of the Incarnation of our Lord, that he took flesh of
the Virgin Mary, had a reasonable Soul united to it, and so became God and Man
in one Person. That he took a true Body, chap. 12. A true Soul, chapter 13. A
perfect humane Nature, chapter 14. That he raised up the same Flesh in which he
suffered, chapter 15. That the same God was Author of the Old and New Testament,
chapter 17. That Baptism procures the Remission of all our old Sins, chapter 18. That
there would be a Resurrection of that very Body which was corrupted and
dissolved, chapter 19. And a future Judgment, where every one shall receive
according to what he has done in the Body, chapter 20. That this shall be at our
Lord's Second coming to judge the quick and the dead, chapter 22. That Matrimony
was to be allowed, chapter 25. yea Second Marriages, chapter 26. That the wounds
received after Baptism might be healed, chapter 28. That the Church forbids not the
use of Flesh, chapter 29. And here concluding his Discourse concerning
Ecclesiastical Doctrines, respecting Faith and Manners, he says, (...), These
are the Doctrines of the Holy Spirit which we must always follow, preserving
this Rule of them immovable. And that you may be sure that Scripture was the
Church's Rule, that taught her all these things, he does not only call these
Doctrines, (...), the Doctrines of the Gospel, and often say in his Discourse
upon them, (...), P. 249, 250, 259, 262, 275, 304.
These things we have been taught by the Holy Scriptures; the Holy Scripture
is, (...), the Teacher of these things; but concludes his Discourse of the
Doctrinals of the Church, thus, P. 304.
(...), These Doctrines the Church has received from divine Men, the Prophets,
and Apostles, and their Successors, these then were in his Age reputed all the
Doctrines of Christian Faith, and they were all conceived clearly to be
contained in, and proved from the Holy Scriptures; their Faith then did not
differ in one Article from that of Protestants, nor did they differ from them
in assigning Scripture as the Rule of Faith.

And 4ly. Fathers of the Church, who have employed their Time and Labor in
refuting Heretics. For they still lay down the Apostles, or the Nicene Creed,
as the Foundation of their Faith, and the entire belief of Christians; and
speak of other Doctrines as such in which they were at liberty to exercise
their parts and curiosity, but were by no means to obtrude them as Articles of
Christian Faith. Thus Irenaeus having given us the Faith which the Apostles
delivered to the Church, Lib. 1. cap. 4.
and which she did, through the whole World profess without Addition or
Diminution, he proceeds to show, That, (...), the Church retaining one and the
same Faith throughout the World, they exercised their knowledge about other
matters, to explain the dispensation of God toward Men, his long suffering
both toward Men, and fallen Angels, to enquire why one and the same God made
some things Temporal, others Eternal, some Heavenly, and some Earthly things?
why, being invisible, he appeared to the Prophets in diverse Shapes? why many
Covenants were made with Man, and what was the Character of every Covenant? why
God concluded all Men under Unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all? why
the Word of God was made Flesh, and suffered? why Christ came only in the last
times, and of the end of all things, and of things to come, (...), and to
explicate other things mentioned in the Scripture: But notwithstanding all
these Enquiries, the Churches Faith was still the same, as being comprised in
the forementioned Articles of the Apostles Creed. Tertullian having laid down
the same Rule in his Prescription against Heretics, Cap. 13, 14.
he reduces all enquiries beyond this Rule, libidini curiositatis, to the lust
of Curiosity, and says, That we may better be ignorant in other things, than
Curiously concerned to know them; whereas had there been as many more Articles
of Christian Faith delivered by the Apostles, and as necessary to be believed
by all Christians, as those which were contained in their Creed, and Rule of
Faith, what ignorance, or what unfaithfulness to Souls must they be guilty of
who mention none of all these necessaries, but virtually, and in effect exclude
them all from being so, by thus declaring that all beyond this Rule did only
serve to exercise our Wit, our Curiosity, our Knowledge concerning profound
Mysteries, which were no part of Faith, and of which, without detriment to the
Christian Faith, we might be ignorant.

Epiphanius having discoursed at large of all the Heresies of his time, he
closes his Discourse with an exposition of the Catholic Faith, in which he
speaks, Of one God over all,. 3. Of the Consubstantial Trinity, by which all
things were created,. 14. Of the Birth of Christ of the Virgin Mary, from whom
he received a true Body and true Flesh. Of his humane Soul, and of the imion of
both to his Divinity,. 15. Of his Sufferings on the Cross in his humane Nature;
of his descent into Hell; of his Resurrection; of his Ascension into Heaven,
whence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead,. 17. Of the Resurrection
of the same Body that died; of the future Recompense according to what we have
done in the Flesh; of the Damnation of the Wicked, and the future Happiness of
the Just,. 18. This, says he, is the Faith of the Church; (...),. 19. Vid.
etiam,, 25.
(...), these are the things which the one Catholic Church holds touching the
Faith,. 21. These things we have discoursed with as much brevity as we could,
of the Consubstantiality of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, of the incarnation
of Christ, and of his final coming, (...), and of the other Articles of Faith.
These therefore in his time comprised all the Articles of the Christian Faith,
the Doctrines of the Catholic Church, and therefore the New Roman Articles
could be no parts of Christian Faith, no Doctrines of the Church Catholic when
Epiphanius flourished in it. And upon account of this Symbol of Faith it is
that he calls the Church, and the way of Truth, (...), Haer. 59.. 12, 13.
The Kings Highway, and calls them the Servants of God, who do, (...), know
this firm Rule or Canon, and walk in this way of Truth.

5ly. Ancient Fathers, at the request or the desire of others, to be instructed
in the Articles of Christian Faith. Thus when the Emperor Jovianus desired to
learn of Athanasius, (...), the Faith of the Catholic Church, Athanasius tells
him expressly, To. 1. p. 245.
That it was that Faith which was, (...), confessed by the Nicene Fathers; and
that he might the better know it, he sets down their Creed at length, telling
him moreover, like a true Protestant, That the true and pious Faith in Christ
was manifest to all, Page 246.
(...), being known, and read from the Holy Scriptures.

When some Monks had desired St. Basil to send to them, De vera and pia fide p.
385. a.
(...), a written confessionof the holy Faith. In answer to this demand St.
Basil lays down this as his Foundation, That it is the property of a Faithful
Minister to preserve those things, Ibid. B.
(...), pure, sincere, and unadulterated, which are committed to him by his Good
Lord, to be distributed to his fellow Servants. I therefore, says he,
according to the Will of God, will lay before you those things, (...), which I
have learnt from the divinely inspired Scripture. This Fundamental position,
that it is the property of a Faithful Steward to deliver nothing to his fellow
Servants, as part of Holy Faith, but what he has learned from the Holy
Scripture, he confirms in these words; Ibid. C.D.
For if our Lord himself, in whom were hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and
Knowledge -- said thus, He (the Father) gave me a Commandment what I should say
and speak; and again, The things which I speak, as the Father has told me, so
I speak. And if the Holy Spirit spoke nothing of himself, but only spoke those
things which he had heard from him, how much more is it as well safe as pious
for us, (...), to do, and mind the same thing in the Name of the Lord Jesus.
Indeed, Ibid. E.
says he, when I conflict with Heretics, whose Footsteps I must follow, I am
compelled sometimes to use, (...), Expressions not found in Scripture, though
neither are they alien from the pious sense of Scripture, P. 386. a.
but now I have thought it most convenient to the common Scope of us, and you,
to fulfill your command in the simplicity of the sound Faith, (...), by saying
those things which I have been taught from the divinely inspired Scripture,
abstaining from those Names and Words, (...), which are not to be found
expressly in the Holy Scripture. For, says he, if the Lord be Faithful in all
his words, if all his Commandments are Faithful, and established for ever, and
done in Truth and Righteousness. Ibid. c.
(...), It is a manifest falling from the Faith, and a manifestation of Pride,
either to reject any thing that is written, or to superinduce any thing that is
not written, our Lord having said, My Sheep hear my Voice. -- And the Apostle
by an Example taken from Men, viz. That if it be but a Man's Testament, yet if
it be confirmed, no Man rejects, or adds any thing unto it, (...), Ibid. d.
most vehemently forbids that any thing should be added to, or taken from the
divinely inspired Scriptures. And therefore, though we have used other words in
our controversial Discourses against Heretics, (...), Ibid. e.
yet now, that a Confession of the sound Faith, and simple manifestation of it
lies before us, we will temper our style accordingly, (...), Page 387. c.
explaining it more simply and properly, and doing only that which may instruct
you, according to that saying of the Apostle, To give a reason of your Faith.
Now, Page 389. b. c.
says he, in doing this we neither have ability nor leisure to collect all
that is said in Scripture of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; but we hope,
says he, to satisfy your Consciences as to the manifestation of our knowledge
in the holy Scriptures, (...), and your full assurance of Faith, by those few
things we shall select out of the Holy Scriptures. And after this long
Protestant Preface comes a Creed owned by all Protestants in these words, P.
389. d. e.
We believe therefore, and confess one only true, and Good God, and Father
Almighty, of whom are all things, the God and Father of our Lord and God Jesus
Christ: And we believe one only begotten Son of God, our Lord and God Jesus
Christ, the only true (God,) by whom all things both visible and invisible were
made, and by whom all things consist, who in the beginning was with God, and
was God, and after was according to the Scriptures seen on Earth, and conversed
with Men, who being in the Form of God, coveted not to be (in the World) like
to God, but emptied himself, and taking upon him the Form of a Servant, by his
Nativity of a Virgin, and being found in fashion as a Man, he fulfilled all
things which were written of, and concerning him, according to the command of
the Father, being Obedient even to Death, the Death of the Cross, and being
raised again the Third Day from the Dead, according to the Scriptures, P. 390.
a.
he was seen by his holy Disciples, and the rest, as it is written; and he
ascended into the Heavens, and sits at the Right Hand of the Father, from
whence he comes at the end of the World to raise up all, and to give to every
one according to his Work, when the Righteous shall be taken up into Life
Eternal, and the Kingdom of Heaven, but the wicked shall be condemned to
everlasting Punishment, where their Worm dies not, and the Fire is not
quenched; and we believe one Holy Ghost and Comforter, by whom we are sealed
unto the Day of Redemption, the Spirit of Truth and of Adoption, in whom we cry
Abba Father, who distributeth and works in us the Gifts given of God to every
one to profit withal, as he wills, who teaches and brings to our Remembrance
all things which he has heard from the Son. The Good Spirit who Guides us into
all Truth, and confirms all Believers in true and exact Knowledge, in pious
Worship, and spiritual Adoration, and in the true Confession of God the Father,
his only Son our Lord and God, Jesus Christ, and of himself: (...), This we
think, this is, (...), the Rule of Holy Men. P. 392.
And I beseech you, laying aside all curious Questions, P. 391.
and indecent strifes about words, (...), to rest contented with the things
spoken by Holy Men, and by the Lord himself; and to withdraw your selves from
them that are alien from the Evangelical and Apostolical Faith, the Apostle
having said, That if an Angel from Heaven preach to you any other Doctrine,
besides that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed; and having
warned you to withdraw from every one who walks disorderly, and not according
to the Tradition which you have received from us. So that, according to St.
Basil, this Creed is the Tradition received from the Apostles, the Evangelical
and Apostolical Faith, the Rule of Faith, to which nothing is to be superadded,
besides which nothing to be preached as any portion of the Rule of Faith, and
this whole Faith expressly is contained in Scripture, and is delivered in the
words of Scripture.

Laurentius sends an Epistle to St. Austin to know of him, Quid sequendum
maxim, Enchir. c. 4.
quid propter diversas principaliter Haereses, sit fugiendum? What was chiefly
to be followed, and what, by reason of the diversity of Heresies, was
principally to be avoided, quod certum, propriumque fidei Catholicae
fundamentum, what was the sure, and proper Foundation of the Christian Faith?
In Answer to this Enquiry he receives a Treatise from St. Cap. 3.
Austin containing 122. Chapters, in which he undertakes to teach him, what he
was to believe, to love, and hope for, and in the general he tells him, Cap. 6.
that it is easy to instruct him in these three particulars, nam ecce tibi
Symbolum and dominica oration, in his duobus tria illa intuere, Cap. 7.
for behold the Symbol and the Lord's Prayer, in these two see these three
things, Faith believes, Hope and Charity prays; and then he goes on to a
particular Discourse on all these Heads, not speaking throughout all those
numerous Chapters of one Article of the Romish Faith, excepting only when
Chapter the 69. he speaks of Purgatory Fire, as of a doubtful and uncertain
thing; and Chapter 109. he utterly confounds it, by laying down for certain,
That during the time betwixt the Death of Christians and the last Resurrection
of their Bodies, their Souls are kept in hidden Receptacles, as they, by reason
of the Actions done in their Life time, became worthy of Rest or Misery.

One thing there is still more considerable, that when the Arian Heresy sprung
up, and even in the time, and at the Session of the Nicene Council, this was
still produced as the Faith of the Apostolic Church, the Rule of Faith, the
Faith which they had learned from the Scriptures and had received at Baptism,
and on account of which they challenged to be owned as Orthodox by all their
Christian Brethren. Alexander Bishop of Alexandria in his Epistle to his
Namesake of Constantinople recites his Creed with this Preface, Apud Theodor.
Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 3.
(...), so we believe, as it seemed good to the Apostolic Church, viz. We
believe in one only unbegotten Father, -- and in one Lord Jesus Christ his only
begotten Son. -- Besides this pious Faith of the Father, and the Son, We
confess, as the Holy Scriptures teach us, one Holy Ghost, the Sanctifier of
Holy Men under the Old Testament, and of the divine Teachers of the New, and
one only Catholic and Apostolic Church inexpugnable by the World, and
triumphing over all the wicked Insurrections of the Heterodox; after this we
confess the Resurrection of the Dead, of which our Lord Jesus Christ was the
first fruits, who indeed, and not in appearance only, took his Body from the
God-bearing Virgin, and who, in the end of the Ages, conversing among Men for
the abolishing of Sin, was Crucified, and dying -- rose again from the Dead,
ascended into the Heavens, and sits at the Right Hand of Majesty. These
things we teach and preach. (...), These are the Doctrines of the Church
received from the Apostles. Whereas, had the Apostles delivered any other
Doctrines of Faith, it is evident, these were but some of them, and therefore
that those others ought to have been mentioned by one who says these things on
purpose to declare his Orthodoxy, and satisfy all other Christians, that he
entirely embraced the true Christian Faith.

Gennadius has a Treatise in which he does designedly discourse of
Ecclesiastical Doctrines, omitting nothing, that I can remember, which then
obtained in the Latin Church, and yet in that whole Treatise he has not given
the least hint of one of the New Articles contained in the Creed of Pius the
Fourth; but, on the contrary, he in the General declares, That the Faith
received in Baptism is, Cap. 52.
fides Ecclesiae, the Church's Faith. And whereas in the Church of Rome
auricular and secret Confession is made necessary to the Receiving of the
Sacrament. He, Hortor prius publica poenitentia satisfacere, Cap. 53.
speaking not one word of that, does say expressly, If any Person, after
Baptism, has committed mortal Sins, I exhort him first to make satisfaction by
public Penance, and so being reconciled by the Judgment of the Priest to
Communicate; if he would not receive the Sacrament to his own Condemnation. And
whereas they now teach, That pious Souls go hence to Purgatory, Omnium
sanctorum animae cum Christo sunt, and exeuntes de corpore ad Christum vadunt,
c. 78.
to suffer for their Venial Sins, he positively declares, That since the
Ascension of our Lord into Heaven, the Souls of all Saints are with Christ, and
departing from the Body, go to Christ. Moreover he declares, That a Clerk is
not to be Ordained who has had Two Wives after Baptism, Cap. 72.
or who has had one who was a Concubine, and not a Matron, or who was married
to a Widow, to one Divorced, or a Whore, or who has Maimed himself, or
received Usury; but he says not one word of not receiving him to Ordination
who is not a Virgin, or does not promise to contain, or who is not Divorced
from his Matron. It Is therefore evident, that then none of these New Articles
had obtained in the Latin Church.

CHAP. X.
That Romanists have in the General confessed the Novelty of many of their
Doctrines,. 1. And in particular, 1st. Of the Integrity and sufficiency of Holy
Scripture, as to all necessary Articles of Christian Faith,. 2. 2dly. Of their
Canon of the Old Testament,. 3. As is proved from the Sixth to the Sixteenth
Century, Ibid. 3dly. Of the Right of Princes to call General Councils,. 4.
4thly. Of the Fallibility of Councils,. 5. Of Purgatory,. 6. Of Indulgences,.
7. Of the Veneration of Images,. 8. Of Invocation of Saints,. 9. Of Latin
Service,. 10. Of the Seven Sacraments in general,. 11. Of the Sacrament of
Confirmation,. 12. Of auricular Confession,. 13. Of Extreme Unction,. 14. Of
Marriage,. 15. Of Transubstantiation,. 16. Of Communion in one Kind,. 17. Of
the true propitiatory Sacrifice of the Mass,. 18. Of the Celibacy of Priests,.
19.

TO these clear Evidences of the Novelty of the pretended Apostolical
Traditions of the Church of Rome, I proceed now to add the plain, and the
ingenuous Confession of some of the most able and learned Members of that
Church, who either in the General have owned that many of these Traditions were
not Apostolical and Primitive, or handed down to them throughout all Ages of
the Church of Christ, or in particular confess that many of those Doctrines
which by that Church are now imposed as Articles of Christian Faith, either
began to be asserted, or imposed in after-Ages, or were disputed and
questioned, denied or condemned, or at the least not mentioned in some of the
preceding Ages of the Church. And,

First, Author of the Nouvelle Bibliotheque, or the New Library of the
Ecclesiastical Writers of the first three Centuries. For when he gives us the
Abridgment of the Doctrine of those Ages, he mentions not among them any, or
scarcely any of the present and contested Doctrines of the Church of Rome. (He
says indeed, Ils n' ont point doubt que l' Eucharistie ne fut le Corpse, and le
sang de J. C. They doubted not that the Eucharist was the Body and the Blood of
Christ, and they called it by that Name. But he durst not say as in his
Abridgment of the Doctrine of the Fourth Century, To. 2. p. 949, 950.
he does, Ils ont enseigne clairement que le pain and le vin de l'Eucharistie
etoient changez au Corpse, and au Sang de Jesus Christ; They clearly taught that
the Bread and Wine of the Eucharist were changed into the Body and Blood of
Jesus Christ, much less that they believed that this was such a change as did
annihilate the substance of the Bread and Wine.) He therefore in effect
confesses, that during these Three Ages he could find no Footsteps of the R.
Doctrines. The Author of the Book styled Onus Ecclesiae says, the Doctrines of
the Wicklevists were these,

1. That the Pope was not Superior to other Bishops.

2. That there was no Purgatory Fire.

3. That it was a vain thing to Pray for the Dead.

4. That auricular Confession was not necessary.

5. That the Communion was to be received in both Kinds.

And these, Quae plerique Scholastici secuti sunt, cap. 18.. 7.
says he, are Sophisms, which most of the Schoolmen delighting in logical
Tattle, and loving strange Opinions, followed. He further adds, that Huss and
Jerome of Prague held, That the universal Church consisted not in Rome, or in
the Pope, but in the body of the Elect, An haec, vel alia eorum dogmata fuerint
novae vanitatis vel Evangelicae Antiquitatis, nescio, Ibid.
and that Men might be saved who were not subject to the Church of Rome;
concluding thus, Whether these, or other of their Doctrines were new Vanities,
or of Evangelical Antiquity, Epist. l. 6. p. 245.
I know not. Erasmus in his Epistle to Martin Luther gives him to understand,
That there were in England Men of the greatest Note who esteemed very well of
his Writings, Ut quisque vir est optimus ita illius Scriptis minime offendi,
Ep. l. 12. p. 400.
and Men at Loven, who bore the same Affection to them. In his Epistle
Cardinali Moguntino, This, says he, I observe, that the better any Man is, the
less he is offended with Luther 's Writings. In his Letter to Cardinal
Campejus, he speaks thus, Videham ut quisque esset integerrimis moribus and
Evangelicae puritati proximus, ita minime infensum Luthero. Lib. 14. p. 446.
I heard excellent Men of approved Doctrine and Religion, rejoice that they met
with that Man's Books; and I saw, that as any man was more upright in his Life,
or nearer to Evangelical purity, he was the less offended with Luther. And in
the same Epistle he adds, Page 448.
that he conceived it not convenient presently to be incensed against a Man
with whose Writings so many excellent Governors, so many Learned and pious Men
were delighted. L. 15. p. 492.
In his Epistle to Godeschallus, he says, That he did not defend him even
then, cum non decessent maximi Theologi qui non vererentur affirmare nihil esse
in Luthero, quin per probatos Authors posset defendi, when the greatest
Divines were not afraid to affirm, that there was nothing in Luther which might
not be defended by approved Authors. And lastly he himself declares, Hausit
pleraque ex veteribus. Epist. l. 14. p. 447.
That Luther gathered most of his Tenets from the Ancients, and that had he
named the Ancients from whom he had them, he would have avoided much of that
envy which then lay upon him.

To proceed to the particular Controversies in the Order in which they are
mentioned in the Articles of Religion subscribed by our Clergy.

Holy Scripture, says our Sixth Article, contains all things necessary to
Salvation; so that whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby,
is not required of any Man that it should be believed as an Article of Faith,
or be thought requisite or necessary to Salvation. So that besides the same,
Art. 21.
the Church ought not to enforce any thing to be believed for necessity of
Salvation.

Agreeably to this Article the Bishop of Rhodes disputing with the Greeks in
the Council of Florence speaks thus in the behalf of the Western Bishops,
(...); Bin. Tom. 8. Council. Florent. Sess. 7. p. 609.

(...). Ibid.


I desire you Greeks to satisfy me in this Question, Does not the Gospel
perfectly contain the Doctrine of Christian Faith? Surely, says he, the
Reverence you bear to it will not permit you to affirm that the Faith is not
perfectly contained there. And that is true, and not denied by us, (...). Ibid.
which the Bishop of Ephesus said, That the Fathers had enclosed the Gospel and
the Holy Scripture, so that it should by no means be lawful to add to them. And
whereas the the Bishop of Ephesus had said, That the Evangelists did not forbid
that any thing should be added to what they had written, This, says he, with
his leave, cannot be said of Holy Scripture, for the Apostle Paul says, (...).
Gal. i. 9.
If any Man preach any thing besides what you have received, let him be
Anathema. And St. John in the end of his Revelations says, If any one add to
these things, God shall add to him the Plagues which are written in this Book.
(...). Ibid. Sess. 8. p. 630.
Nicenus also on the part of the Greeks says, We draw all divine Doctrines
from the Fountains of the Holy Scriptures, which are the principles and the
foundations of our Faith, to which nothing ever was, or ever shall be added by
us or any other Christian. (...). Council. Flor. Sess. 25. p. 783.
Time was, says the Archbishop of Nice in his Oration made at that time and
place, when the Church, the Spouse of God, was without spot or wrinkle, viz.
when we made more account of the simple and not curious Faith delivered as it
lay in the Gospel, and regarding that superfluous and talkative Divinity which
is the fruit of our own Reasonings, less than the Sacred Oracles, (...), we
attend only to what was written, delighting in the things spoken by the Holy
Spirit, and being compacted in one by them. So that it seems by these plain
words, that both the East and West were then of the same Judgment with the
Church of England in this Article.

It is declared, says John Gerson, by the Authority of Dionysius, Declaratur
ex Authoritate Dionysii dicentis nihil audendum dicere de divinis, nisi quae
nobis a Scriptura S. tradita sunt, quoniam Scriptura nobis tradita est tanquam
Regula sufficiens and infallibilis pro regimine totius Ecclesiastici corporis.
Lib. de Exam. Doctr. secunda part princip. consid. 1.
That we must not dare to say any thing of Divine Things, but that which is
delivered to us from the Holy Scriptures, of which the Reason is, That the
Scripture is delivered to us as a Rule sufficient, and infallible for the
Government of the whole Ecclesiastical Body, and Members of it to the End of
the World.

The Holy Scripture, says Gabriel Biel, is, according to B. Gregory, In Can.
Miss. Lect. 71. f. 200. Edit. 1510.
as the Mouth of God, quia per eam loquitur Deus omnia quae vult a nobis fieri,
because by it God speaks all things which he would have done by us.

Gregory the Great, says Molinaeus, asserts, Asserit Haereseos labe inquinatos
qui extra S. Scripturas aliquid docent aut proferunt, etc. Lib. de Council.
Trid.. 17.
That they are infected with the filth of Heresy who teach or produce any
thing beyond the Holy Scriptures; I mean in those things which appertain to the
Substance of Faith and Doctrine.

The Sorbon Doctor, who set forth the French Testament printed at Mons, A. D.
1672. informs us, Praeface 1, 2.
That St. Austin considered the Holy Scripture as the Treasure of Divinity, and
as the Source of all those Truths which a Man ought to know, for the
Edification of himself, or the Instruction of others. And speaking of the
mixture of profound places with those which are proportioned to the capacity of
the most simple, he says, That which ought to comfort us in this obscurity is,
that according to St. Augustine, the Holy Scripture proposes to us all that is
necessary for the conduct of our Life in a manner easy and intelligible, that
it explicates and clears up it self by speaking that clearly in some places
which it says obscurely in others.

The Guide of Controversies says, Guide. Disc. 2.. 40. n. 2.
That as for the sufficiency or the entireness of the Scriptures, for the
containing of all those Points of Faith which are simply necessary of all
Persons, to be believed for attaining Salvation, Catholics deny it not. And
for this he cites, among many other R. Doctors, this saying of Aquinas, In
doctrina Christi, 22. qu. 1. Art. 9.
and Apostolorum (he means Scripta) veritas fidei est sufficienter explicata,
In the (written) Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, the Truth of Faith is
sufficiently explained. In the same Article our Church having reckoned up the
Books of the Old Testament which she esteemed Canonical, Art. 6.
and which by both Churches are recieved as such, she adds the other Books, as
Hierom says, The Church does read for Example of Life, and Instruction of
Manners, but yet does not apply them to establish any Doctrine. Such are these
following.

The Third Book of Esdras. The Fourth Book of Esdras. The Book of Tobias. The
Book of Judith. The rest of the Book of Esther. The Book of Wisdom. Jesus the
Son of Syrach. Baruch the Prophet. The Song of the Three Children. The Story of
Susanna. Of Bell and the Dragon. The Prayer of Manasses. The First Book of
Maccabees. The Second Book of Maccabees.
Of all which (excepting only the Third and Fourth Books of Esdras, and the
Prayer of Manasses) the Council of Trent says, Whosoever shall not receive
them as Sacred and Canonical, Sess. 4.
let him be Anathema. And yet this Determination is so apparently repugnant to
the Doctrine of the Ancient Church, that Mr. Du Pin, a Doctor of the Faculty of
Divinity in Paris, and his Majesty's Professor Royal in Philosophy, has
entirely given up this Cause unto the Protestants. For,

1. Whereas it is confessed by all the Learned of both Churches, that we in
this distinction betwixt Books of the Old Testament Canonical and Apocryphal,
or not Canonical, exactly follow the Canon and the Judgment of the Jews, Tom.
1. dissert. praelim. p. 51.
from whom the Christians received the Books of the Old Testament. He also
says, The Christian Antiquity, for the Books of the Old Testament, has
followed the Canon of the Jews, that no others were cited in the New Testament,
but those which belonged to the Canon of the Jews. That the first Catalogues of
Canonical Books made by Ecclesiastical Authors, both Greek and Latin,
comprehend no others in the Canon. P. 612, 613.
In his Abridgment of the Doctrine of the Three first Centuries, he says
expressly, That the Christians of those times owned no other Canonical Books of
the Old Testament, but those which belonged to the Canon of the Hebrews; and
that they sometimes cited the Apocryphal Books, but never put them in the
number of Canonical Books.

And whereas Mr. M. and J. L. have had the confidence to say, Mr. M. p. 85, 86.
That after the Declarations of the Council of Carthage, Pope Innocent, and
Gelasius, etc. no one ever pertinaciously dissented from it, but such as
Protestants themselves do confess to be Heretics, J.L. c. xi. p. 23.
until the days of Luther. Or that no Catholic after the Church's Declaration
in the Year 419. ever doubted of them. Qui depuis les decisions des Conciles de
Carthage, and de Rome, and la Declaration d'Innocent I. n'ont compte, que vingt
deux, ou vingt quatre livres Canoniques de l'Ancien Testament. Tom. 1. Diss.
praelim. p. 60.
Mr. Du Pin having produced the express words of Gregory the Great, after that
time to the contrary, adds, in flat contradiction to them, these ensuing words;
We ought to make the same reflection on all the other Ecclesiastical Authors,
Greek and Latin, which we have produced, who, After the Decisions of the
Council of Carthage, and of Rome, and the Declaration of Innocent the First,
have counted only Two, or Four and twenty Books of the Old Testament; which
makes it evident that these Definitions were not yet followed by all Authors,
and by all Churches, till such time as this Matter was fully determined by the
definition of the Council of Trent.

And indeed, Mr. M. and J. L. confess, Vid c. 3.. 13. Lib. 1. de verbo Dei. c.
20. S. ad alterum.
That the Canon of Scripture was not defined till the Fifth Century: As
Bellarmine acknowledges, That Melito, Epiphanius, Hilarious, Hieronymus,
Ruffinus, in expounding the Canon of the Old Testament, followed the Hebrews,
not the Greeks: De locis Theol. l. 2. c. 11. Sect. Quid Ecclesi^sticum.
As Canus excuses Ruffinus for rejecting with us the Apocrypha, because he did
it, in eo tempore quo res nondum erat definita, when this thing was not
defined; on which account, says he, we also do excuse the rest; and so all
these men virtually confess, that there was no Tradition of the Church against
us during those Ages. So in the following Centuries, even till the time that
the Trent Council met, approved Authors do declare the Doctrine of the Church
to have been still according to the Doctrine of this Article, and contrary to
the Definition of the Trent Council. For,

In the Western Church Primasius a Bishop of the African Church, says, Cent.
6. In Apocalypse. cap. 4.
The Books of the Old Testament of Canonical Authority which we receive, N. B.
are Twenty-four, which St. John insinuated by the Twenty-four Wings.

Leontius Bizantinus having said, (...). De Sectis, Act. 2.
Let us reckon up the Books received by the Church, he adds, That the Books of
the Old Testament are Twenty-two, and concludes thus, These are the Books
Canonized in the Church, -- of which they that belong to the Old Testament are
all received by the Hebrews.

In the Ninth Century Nicephorus, Patriarch of Constantinople, Cent. 9.
undertakes to reckon up the divine Scriptures, which were received and
Canonized in the Church, and of these in the Old Testament he numbers only
Twenty-two as we do, Canon. Scrip. Chron. p. ult. Quibuscontradicitur and non
recipiuntur ab Ecclesia. Bibl. H. Eccl. and de vitis Pontif.
and among the Books contradicted, and not received in the Church, he puts the
Maccabees, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Esther, Judith, Susanna and Tobit.
Anastasius the Keeper of the Library of the Church of Rome, among the Books
which are contradicted, and not received by the Church, reckons the Maccabees,
Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Susanna, Judith and Tobit.

In the Twelfth Century Peter Mauricius, Cent. 12.
Abbot of Clugny in his Epistle against the Petrobusians tells them, they ought
of necessity to receive the whole Canon which is received by the Church; and
then having reckoned up the Canonical Books of the Old Testament as we do, he
adds, That after these Authentic Books of the Holy Scripture, Restant post hos
Authenti^os sex non reticendi libri sapientia, etc. Page 25. c. de Author. Vet.
Test.
there be Six not to be concealed, viz. the Books of Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus,
Tobit, Judith, and both the Books of Maccabees. Hugo de Sancto Victore says,
Sunt praeterea alii quidem libri, ut sapientia Solomonis, etc. Qui leguntur
quidem, sed non scribuntur in Canone de scripturis and scriptoribus Sacris Cap
6 Prolog in l. de Sacram c 7 And the division he says is made, Authoritate
universalis Eccl. Didasc. l. 4. c. 1.2.

Richardus de Sancto Victore excerpt. l. 2. c. 9.


That all the Books of the Old Testament are Twenty-two; and that there are
besides other Books, as the Wisdom of Solomon, the Book of Jesus the Son of
Syrach, Judith, Tobias and the Books of M^c^abees, sed non scribuntur in
Canone, but they are not written in the Canon; and this he very frequently
repeats. Richardus de Sancto Victore says in like manner, That the Books of
the Old Testament are Twenty-two, alii non habentur in Canone, others are not
put into the Canon, though they are read by us, as are the Writings of the
Fathers, and these Books are Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Tobit, Judith and the
Maccabees.

John Beleth having reckoned up the Books of the Old Testament, and told us
they were Twenty-two, he after says expressly, De div. Officiis c. 60, 62.
That Tobit, the Maccabees, Philo, and the Son of Syrach, were Apocrypha, and
that, hos quatuor quidem non recipit Ecclesia, the Church receives not these
four.

John of Salisbury in Answer to the Question put to him, Ep. 172. Edit. Paris.
1611. p. 279.
Quem credam numerum esse librorum V. and N. Testamenti? What he believed to be
the number of the Books of the Old and the New Testament? P. 281.
says, That following, Catholicae Ecclesiae Doctorem Hieronymum, St. Jerome as
the most approved Doctor of the Catholic Church in this matter, he undoubtedly
believed them to be Twenty-two. And then of the Books of Wisdom,
Ecclesiasticus, Judith, Tobias, and the Maccabees he says, Non reputantur in
Canone, They are not reckoned in the Canon; and having added to this account
the number of the Books of the New Testament, he concludes of them both thus,
Et hunc quidem numerum esse librorum qui in S. Scripturarum Canonem
admittuntur, celebris apud Ecclesiam, P. 282.
and indubitata traditio est, And that this is the number of the Books which
are admitted into the Canon of the Holy Scriptures, is what the celebrated and
undoubted Tradition of the Church declares.

The Ordinary Gloss received in this, Cent. 13. De libris Bibliae Canonicis and
non Canonicis.
and in the following Ages, with the general Approbation of the Schools, and
all the Doctors of the Western Church declares, 1. That the Canonical Books of
the Old Testament are only Twenty-two; and having reckoned them up in this
order, viz. Five Books of Moses, Eight of the Prophets, and Nine Hagiographa;
he adds, That quicquid extra hos est, ut dicit Hieronymus, inter Apocrypha est
ponendum, What Books soever there be, besides, relating to the Old Testament,
they ought, according to St. Jerome, to be put among the Apocrypha; particularly
before the Books of Tobit, Judith, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus and the Maccabees, he
says, Here begins a Book qui non est in Canone, or, qui non est de Canone,
Ibid.
which belongs not to the Canon. And again, Isti sunt libri qui non sunt in
Canone, These are the Books which are not in the Canon, and which the Church
admits as good and useful, but not as Canonical. He also gives his
Advertisement, Ibid.
That the Chapters added to Esther and to Daniel, are not in the Canon; so that
in all things he perfectly accords with the Church of England. 2. As for
those Books which are not Canonical he informs us, That Ecclesia eos legit and
permittit, the Church reads, and permits them to be read by the Faithful for
Devotion, and Information of Manners, but she does not think their Authority
sufficient to prove what is doubtful, or matter of dispute, or to confirm
Ecclesiastical Doctrines. And this, 3. because there is as much difference
betwixt Books Canonical and not Canonical, as betwixt what is certain and what
is dubious, betwixt Books written by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, and
Books indicted they knew not when or by whom. And, 4. He professes to have made
this distinction, and exact numeration of the Books which did, and which did
not belong unto the Canon, because there were many, who, because they did not
spend much time in studying the Scriptures, existimabant omnes libros qui in
Biblia continentur pari veneratione esse reverendos, thought (with the Trent
Council) all the Books contained in the Bible were to be received with a like
Veneration, not knowing how to distinguish betwixt Books Canonical and not
Canonical.

In the Fourteenth Century Brito a Friar Minorite put forth his Exposition of
the Prologues of St. Jerome upon the Bible, which were usually joined to the
Ordinary Gloss, and are still extant in the Works of Nicholas Lyra; and in his
Exposition of the Prologue upon Joshua, he informs us, That according to the
Hebrews, the Books of the Old Testament are divided into the Law, the Prophets,
and the Hagiographa; the Law containing Five Books, the Prophets Eight, and the
Hagiographa Nine; that the Books of Judith, the Maccabees, of Wisdom, and
Ecclesiasticus, the Third and Fourth of Esdras, and the Book of Tobit.
Apocryphi dicuntur, Quia vero de veritate istorum librorum non dubitatur, ab
Ecclesia recipiuntur.
are called Apoorvphal, because the Authors of them are not known, though they
are received of the Church, as not doubting the truth of them. In his
Exposition on the Prologue upon Kings, he tells us, That the Prologue of St.
Jerome was useful, ut sciamus librorum Canonis, and Apocryphorum distinctionem,
that we might (by it) know the distinction betwixt the Canonical and Apocryphal
Books, and that it defends the Holy Scripture against them who introduce the
Apocryphal Books for Hagiographa, or sacred Writings. And in his Exposition
upon his Prologue before Daniel, he says, Continet liber iste Apocrypham
partem, Historiam Susannae, Hymnum puerorum, and Belis Draconisque fabulas.
This Book contains something Apocryphal, viz. The History of Susanna, the
Song of the Three Children, and the Fables of Bell and the Dragon. Now this
being a work of so great Credit, as to be joined to the Gloss, and commonly
received, as Lyra says, must give us the prevailing Judgment of that Age.

Nicholas Lyra in his Preface upon Tobit says, That by the favor of God, he,
having writ, super libros S. Scripturae Canonicos, on the Canonical Books of
Scripture, from Genesis to the Revelations, intended by the same Grace of God,
super alios scribere qui non sunt Canonici, to write upon others which were not
Canonical, and which are only received in the Church for Instruction of
Manners, not being by her thought sufficient to confirm doubtful Matters. Now
these, says he, according to St. Jerome in his Prologue on the Kings, are
Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Judith, Tobias, and the Maccabees, Baruch, and the
Second of Esdras, as he says in his Prologues to those Books. In the beginning
of his Notes upon Esra he renews all this, saying, That he intended, though
Commenting upon the Historical Books of the Old Testament, to pass by the
History of Tobit, Judith, and the Maccabees, quia non sunt de Canone apud
Hebraeos nec apud Christianos, because they neither are esteemed Canonical by
Jews nor Christians; yea St. Jerome says in his Prologue, That inter Apocrypha
cantantur, the Church Chants them among the Apocrypha; I therefore, says he,
first intend to write on the whole Canonical Scripture, and then, super istos,
and alios qui communiter ponuntur in bibliis, quamvis non sint de Canone, upon
those, and other Books which are commonly put in our Bibles, though they belong
not to the Canon. Moreover the Third and Fourth of Esdras he passes over
without Notes for the same Reason. On the Thirteenth of Daniel he Notes thus,
The History of Susanna ought to be put, inter libros Bibliae non Canonicos,
among the Books of the Bible which are not Canonical; and in his Notes on the
Fourteenth Chapter he says of the History of Bell and the Dragon, ponitur
inter Scripturas non Canonicas, it is put among those Scriptures which are not
Canonical, after the History of Susanna. Now had not Lyra mentioned the
Judgment of the Church touching these Books, yet these Expressions in Comments
of so great Credit in the Church sufficiently show, that this was then a
Doctrine well received in the Church of Rome.

Antoninus Florentinus in his Historical Sums acknowledges only Twenty-two
Canonical Books of the Old Testament, Cent. 15. Sum. Hist. part. 1. Tit. 3. c.
4. etc. 6.. 12.
saying in General of Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Tobit, Judith and the Maccabees,
that Ecclesia recipit, the Church receives them as true and profitable, though
not as of force in matters of Faith, Unde forte habent Authoritatem talem
qualem habent dicta istorum doctorum approbata ab Ecclesia. Sum. Theol. part.
3. Tit. 18. c. 6.. 2.
and in particular of Ecclesiasticus, that it is, receptus ab Ecclesia ad
legendum, non tamen Authenticus est ad probandum ea quae veniunt in
contentionem fidei, received by the Church to be read, but is not Authentical
to prove things doubtful in the Faith.

Alphonsus Tostatus says of the Six debated Books, Praefat. in Matthew. qu. 2.
That they are not put into the Canon by the Church, nor does she regularly
command them to be read, or to be received, or judge them disobedient who do
not receive them. For, Ecclesia non est certa de Auctoribus eorum, the Church
is not certain of the Authors of them; yea she knows not, an spiritu sancto
inspirati, whether they were indicted by Men inspired of the Holy Spirit, and so
she obliges no Man, ad necessario credendum id quod ibi habetur, to yield
necessary assent to what they do contain. Enarrat. praefat. in l. paralip. q. 7.
And elsewhere, Though, says he, these Apocryphal Books be joined with others
of the Bible, and read in the Church, none of them is of such Authority, ut ex
eo Ecclesia arguat ad probandam aliquam veritatem, and quantum ad hoc non
recipit eos, that the Church proves any truth out of them, for as to that she
does not receive them.

Dionysius Carthusianus says, Praefat. in Genesis Art. 4.
The Books of the Old Testament are Twenty-two, as says St. Jerome in his
Prologue before the Kings, and having reckoned them up, Five Legal, Eight
Historical, Nine Hagiographa, he adds, Hos libros vocant Canonicos, alios vero
Apocryphos, These Books are called, (by Divines) Canonical, the rest Apocryphal.

In the Sixteenth Century Franciscus Ximenius reckons those Books of the Old
Testament which were extant only in Greek, Cent. 16.
as, Bibl. Complut. Praef. ad Lect.
Libri extra Canonem, quos Ecclesia potius ad aedificationem populi quam ad
auctoritatem Ecclesiasticorum dogmatum confirmandam recipit, Books out of the
Canon, which the Church receives rather for Edification of the People, than for
confirmation of Ecclesiastical Doctrines. Erasmus having numbered the Canonical
Books of the Old Testament as we do, In expos Symb. Apost. and Decal. Catech.
4. verse. finem. Ed. Antver. 1533.
concludes thus, Intra hunc numerum conclusit priscorum Authoritas Vet. Test.
volumina, The Authority of the Ancients comprised the Volumes of the Old
Testament, of whose Truth it was not lawful to doubt, within this number.
Johannes Ferus having told us that the Apocryphal Books were Nine, In exam.
Ordinand.
he adds, That, olim in Ecclesia Apocryphi public non recitabantur, nec
quisquam Authoritate eorum premebatur, anciently the Apocryphal Books were not
read publicly, nor was any Man pressed with their Authority.

Sebastian Munster in his Preface to the Old Testament, and in the Chapter of
the Canonical Books of the Old Testament numbers them exactly as we do, and
then he says, Intra hunc numerum concluserunt and Hebraei, and prisci
Christiani volumina veteris Testamenti, Both the Hebrews and the ancient
Christians comprised the Volumes of the Old Testament within this number; but
now the other (which he reckons as we do, excepting only the Song of the Three
Children) are received, in usum Ecclesiasticum, into the use of the Church.

Moreover, from the Ninth Century, in which the Ordinary Gloss upon the Bible
was begun by Strabus, to the Sixteenth, they did not only number the Canonical
and reject the Apocryphal Books, as we do, but they did it chiefly for the very
reason that is assigned in our Article, viz. among others the Authority of St.
Jerome, Card. Cajetan. Praefat. super Josuam ad Clem. 7.
declaring, That, Sancto Hieronymo universa Ecclesia Latina plurimum debet --
propter discretos ab eodem libros Canonicos a non Canonicis, The universal
Church is very much beholding to St. Jerome, not only because he noted what
Parts where added to the Books of the Old Testament, or were but doubtful
Appendixes, but also for separating the Canonical from the uncanonical Books.
That the Church received those Books which he received, and rejected those
which he rejected. That, Consonat Hieronymus cus maxima habetur fides in
Ecclesia -- is inquam Hieronymus in Prologo Galeato inter Canonicos libros V.
Testamenti hosce duntaxat enumerat. -- Firmiter tamen haerendum credo
sententiae Hieronymi Cujus Autoritas me movit, ne multo altius quam a suo
tempore de librorum horum ordine disputarem, cum and illis floruerit temporibus
quae doctis hominibus abundabant, and multa ex Gestis veterum Theologorum
legerit, quae nunc periere: peritissimus quoque suit and Graecae and Hebraicae
literaturae, and demum ejus testimonium ab Ecclesia pro sanctissimo habeatur.
Picus Mirand. de fide and ordinc. credendi, Theorem. 5.

Com. in libr. Hist. V. Test.

In primum cap. Matthew. ad v. 12.


Testimonium Hieronymi quoad hoc ut Sacrosanctum habetur in Ecclesia, as to
this Matter, the Church held his Testimony to be sacred; yea the whole Church
preferred it before any other account of this Matter, given by either Pope,
Council or Father. For, says Cajetan, as to this matter, ad limam Hieronymi
reducenda sunt verba tam Conciliorum, quam Doctorum, the words of Councils and
Doctors must be reduced to the Rule of St. Jerome. So that those Books which he
rejects, are not to be esteemed Canonical, as that word imports, Books
sufficient, ad firmandum ca quae sunt fidei, to confirm Articles of Faith, but
only as it signifies Books useful, and aedificationem Ecclesiae, for the
Edification of the Church; and with this distinction you may reconcile the
difference betwixt him and St. Austin, and betwixt the Councils of Carthage and
of Laodicea. Alphonsus Tostatus says, Magis credendum est Hieronymo quam
Augustino, maxim ubi agitur de veteri Testamento, St. Jerome is to be credited,
especially in things belonging to the Old Testament and Histories, before St.
Austin, for in this thing he exceeded all the Doctors of the Church.

The same Tostatus says, Ista distinctio facta est ab Ecclesia Universali quae
concorditer tenet istam distinctionem factam ab Hieronymo, nam ista tenebatur a
Judaeis fidelibus, and fult postea continuata in Ecclesia. Defens. Part. 2. c.
22.
That the Universal Church with one accord holds the distinction made by St.
Jerome, for that was held by the Faithful Jews before Christ's Advent, and was
afterward continued in the Church; and hence it came to pass that there was
never any Bible found in those times which had before it the Canon of Carthage,
the Catalogue of St. Austin, or the Epistle of Pope Innocent, or the Decree of
Pope Gelasius, whereas in all Manuscript and Printed Bibles the Prologue of St.
Jerome, styled Galeatus, was placed before them, by a common and universal
consent of the Latin Church, to be a sure Index and Discrimination of the
Apocryphal and Ecclesiastical Books from the Canonical. And this is the true
Reason why many of the forecited Authors speaking of the Apocryphal Books,
mention sometimes but Five or Six, viz. Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Judith, Tobit
and the Book of Maccabees, to wit, because St. Jerome in his Prologue upon the
Book of Kings mentions them only, though in his Preface to the Book of Jeremy
he rejects Baruch, and in his Preface upon Daniel he rejects the History of
Susanna, the Song of the Three Children, and the Fables of Bell and the Dragon;
and so do they who Comment on these Books, by his Example, and with respect
unto his Judgment. So that from what has been discoursed, it is exceeding
evident against the confident Assertions of Mr. M. and J. L. That after the
Fifth Century it was the General Opinion of the Church, till the Sixteenth
Century, that the Canonical Books were only Two, or Four and Twenty, and that
those Books we style Apocryphal, did not belong unto the Canon, and were not of
validity sufficient to confirm Articles of Christian Faith.

Concerning General Councils our Church asserts Two Things,

1. Art. 21.
That they may not be called together without the commandment and will of
Princes.

2. That they may err, and sometimes have erred, even in things pertaining
unto God; wherefore things ordained by them as necessary to Salvation, have
neither Strength, nor Authority, unless it may be declared that they be taken
out of Holy Scripture.

Now touching the first Proposition, That General Councils may not be called
together without the Commandment and Will of Princes, the Eastern Churches
concur in Judgment with us. Sguropylus in his History of the Council of
Florence says, That in their Synod held about the Union of the Eastern, and
the Western Churches they unanimously declared, (...), Sect. 2. c. 8.
That the Emperor, according to his ancient Custom and Prerogative, was to call
Ecumenical Synods, and no other was to do it. And again, The Emperor, says
he, Sect. 10. cap. 2. p 280.
and the Greeks contended, (...), that it was the Previlege of the Emperor to
call the Synod; and, upon that account his Name was placed first in it, as was
manifest from the Acts of the Councils.

The ablest Writers of the West say the same thing. Cardinal Cusanus declares,
We must say, touching a General Council, De Concord. Cath. l. 2. c. 2. f. 39.
That the Authority of it does not so depend on him that calls it, that if the
Pope do not call it, it should be no Council, quia tunc non fuissent omnia octa
universalia Concilia firma, quoniam per Imperatores congregabantur, for then
none of the Eight General Councils would be firm, they being all called by the
Emperors from whom the Bishop of Rome, as other Patriarchs, received by Letters
missive a public warning to come, or send unto the Councils. And again, From
what has been discoursed it appears, Lib. 3 c. 13.
Imperatores sanctos congregationes Synodales universalium Conciliorum totius
Ecclesiae semper fecisse, That the Emperors did always call General Councils.
This, says he, I have found to be true by perusing the Acts of all the General
Councils to the Eighth inclusively. And so I have read in the Gloss of
Anastasius, the Pope's Library Keeper, Quod universales Synodos de omni terra
Imperatores colligere soliti fuerunt, That the Emperors were wont to Assemble
General Councils. Dum lego veteres Historias, In reading of the ancient
Histories, I find not, says Aeneas Sylvius, that Popes alone did call
Councils, Lib. 1. de Council. Basil. p. 20. Lib. 3. Art. 1 q:
nor after in the time of Constantine, and other Emperors, quaesitus est
magnopere Romani assensus Papae, was the assent of the Pope of Rome much sought
after. Jacobatius informs us, That a principio facultas congregandi concilia
spectabat ad Imperatores, the power of gathering Councils belonged to the
Emperors from the beginning. Lib. 1. c. 2.. 2, 3, 4. Hist. Eccles. l. 5. in
Prooem.
Richerius in his History of General Councils is very frequent in his full
Assertions of this matter, proving this clearly from those words of Socrates,
(...) -- (...), Since that the Emperors became Christians the greatest Synods
were, and are held by their pleasure. But it is needless to insist longer on
this Head since Sancta Clara on this Article says, Page 294. Apol. 2. advers.
Ruff. f. 79. b. Where Erasinus says, Nota, Lector, olim Synodos Imperatorum
jussu congregari solitas.
These words seem to be confirmed by the Authority of St. Jerome who rejects a
Council, with this Question, Quis Imperator hanc Synodum jussit congregari?
What Emperor commanded the Assembling of that Synod? As if he held the command
of the Emperor to be necessary to that end; and sic observatum patet in omnibus
fere conciliis veteribus, and so it is evident it was observed almost in all the
ancient Councils.

As to the Second Part of this Article, General Councils may Err, and
sometimes have erred even in things pertaining to God; P. 295.
the same Author there tells us, That Communis est doctorum opinio Concilia,
etiam Generalia errare posse in rebus quae fidem, aut mores ad salutem non
necessarios, concernunt: It is the common Judgment of their Doctors, that even
general Councils may err in Matters of Faith, and Manners which are not
necessary to Salvation: And whereas our Church infers, that therefore things
ordained by them as necessary to Saelvation, have neither Strength nor
Authority, unless it may be declared, nisi ostendi possint, unless it can be
showed, that they be taken out of Holy Scripture. This Author says, these last
Words of the Article, Sententiam veterum, and omnium fere modernorum declarant,
declare that which was the Doctrine of the Ancients, and of almost all the
modern Doctors. That in the time of Ocham the Church was divided in this Point;
some holding, that a General Council, Haeretica potest labe aspergi, might be
guilty of Heresy, and much more of Error; some, That it could not thus be
guilty, and that the Doctrine of the Fallibility of General Councils was
afterward maintained by many eminent Doctors of the Church, De formali objecto
fidei, Tr. 5. c. 19, 20, 21.
is fully proved by Baronius against Turnbal; so that I shall reserve the
farther Prosecution of this Matter to its proper place, viz. The Discussion of
the Doctrine of the Infallibility of Councils.

Our Church in her Twenty second Article asserts, Romish Doctrine, concerning
Purgatory, Pardons, Worshipping, and Adoration, as well of Images as of
Relics, and also Invocation of Saints, is a fond thing vainly seigned, and
grounded upon no Warrant of Scripture, but rather repugnant to the Word of God:
And that these Doctrines were not derived to them from Apostolical Tradition,
their own Writers do ingeniously confess. For,

1. Concerning Purgatory, Alphonsus de Castro, declares, That in Veteribus de
Purgatorio fere nulla, De Haeres. l. 8. Tit. de Indulg.
potissimum apud Graecos Scriptores, mentio est: In the Ancients, and
especially the Greek Writers, there is scarce any mention of Purgatory; whence
it comes to pass, Contr. Luther. Artic. 18.
that to this very day it is not received in the Greek Church. Apud priscos,
amongst the Ancients, says our Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, It was not at all;
or very rarely mentioned; nor is it, to this Day, believed by the Greek Church.
Let him who pleases, read the Commentaries of the ancient Greeks, and he will
find, I suppose, that they speak not at all, or very rarely, of it: Sed neque
Latini simul omnes, sed sensim hujus rei veritatem conceperunt; Nor did the
Latins altogether, but leisurely perceive the Truth of this Matter: And then he
adds, Cum igitur purgatorium tam sero cognitum ac receptum universae. Ecclesiae
fuerit, quis jam de Indulgentiis mirari potest, quia in principio nascentis
Ecclesiae nullus fuerit earum usus? Since therefore Purgatory was so lately
known to, and received by the Universal Church, who can wonder, that in the
Primitive Church there was no use of Indulgences? In Cath. Romans pacif. apud
Forb. consid. Mod. p. 264.
Father Barns acknowledges that the Punishment of Purgatory is a thing, quae
nec ex Scripturis, nec Patribus, nec Conciliis deduci potest firmiter; which
can neither be firmly proved from Scripture, the Fathers, or Councils: And
that, Opposita sententia eis conformior videtur; the contrary Sentence seems
more agreeable to them. Wicelius says, Meth. Concord. Eccles. c. 8. Tit.
Funus, Ibid. p. 259, 260.
That though there should be some places of Purgation to receive naked Souls,
yet does it not become grave and wise Men, so certainly to define those things
which Scriptures have not expressed; nec Antiquorum traditio, nor the Tradition
of the Ancients has expounded. Erasmus says, Operum Tom. 1. p. 685. q.
There be many things, about which, not only, contentious, but even learned and
pious Men did doubt of old; as St. Austin, with others, doubted long about
Purgatory. That it was only a private Assertion, and not an Article of Faith,
generally received in the Twelfth Century, Chronic. l. 8. c. 26.
is evident from these Words of Otho Frisingensis, viz. That there is, apud
Inferos, in the infernal Regions, a Place of Purgatory, wherein such as are to
be saved, are either troubled only with Darkness, or decocted with the Fire of
Expiation, some affirm. Nor can I tell what to make of that saying of
Paschasius, if it does not show that he believes the contrary; for, says he,
our Lord says, he that eats my Flesh -- has eternal Life; ideo dicens
habet, quia mox anima carne soluta intrat in vitae promptuaria, De Corp. and
Sang. Domini, c. 19.
ubi Sanctorum Animae requiescunt, saying in the Present Tense, he has,
because the Soul being loosed from the Flesh, presently enters into those
Receptacles of Life, where the Spirits of Saints do rest.

Secondly, Pardons, or Indulgences, their Novel^y is still confessed more
freely. Inter omnes res de quibus in hoc opere disputamus, nulla est quam minus
aperte S. Literae prodiderunt, and de qua minus vetusti Scriptores dixerint;
neque tamen hac occasion contemnendae sunt quod earum usus in Ecclesia
videatur sero receptus, quoniam multa sunt posterioribus nota quae vetusti illi
Scriptores prorsus ignoraverunt, nam de transubstantiatione panis in Corpus
Christi rara est in Antiquis Scriptoribus mentio -- de Purgatorio fere nulla,
potissimum apud Graecos Scriptores; qua de causa usque in hodiernum Diem
purgatorium non est a Graecis creditum -- Quid ergo mirum si ad hunc modum
contigerit de indulgentiis, ut apud Priscos nulla sit de eis mentio, praecipue
quod tunc magis fervebat Christianorum charitas, ut parum esset opus
indulgentiis? -- quapropter non est mentio ulla indulgentiarum. De Haer. l. 8.
Tit. de Indulgentiis.

De invent rer. l. 8. c. 1. p. 325.

Part. 1. Sum. Tit. 10. c. 3.

In 4. Sentent. did. 20. q. 3. h.


Alphonsus Castro says, That among all the things, of which he disputed in his
Book against Heresies, there was nothing of which the Scripture spoke less
plainly, and de qua minus vetusti Scriptores dixerint, and of which the Ancient
Writers had said less. Many, says Polydore Virgil, from Roffensis, may,
perhaps, be moved not to trust to Indulgences, quod earum usus in Ecclesia
videatur recentior, and admodum sero apud Christianos repertus, because the use
of them in the Church seems new, and very lately received among Christians: To
whom I answer, -- That whilst there was no Regard to Purgatory, no Man looked
after Indulgences, which depend upon it: Coeperunt igitur Indulgentiae postquam
ad purgatorii cruciatus aliquandiu trepidatum est; Indulgences therefore began
after Men had for some time trembled at the Torments of Purgatory. Concerning
Indulgences, says Antoninus Florentinus, We have nothing expressly in the
Sacred Scripture, -- Nec etiam ex dictis antiquorum Doctorum, sed modernorum,
nor from the Sayings of the Ancient Doctors, but of the Modern (only.) Of
Indulgences, says Durand, few things can be said with any certainty, because
neither does the Scripture speak expressly of them. -- Sancti etiam Ambrosius,
Hilarious, Augustinus, Hieronymus minime loquuntur de Indulgentiis: And St.
Ambrose, Hilary, Austin and Jerome, do in no wise speak of them. Indeed I find
not any of these Authors who pretend to derive them higher than the Stations of
Gregory the Great, who lived in the Sixth Century.

Concerning the Worship or Veneration of Images, Fallibility of the Church of
Rome touching this Article.

First. That when the Second Nicene Council taught, That the Worship or
Veneration of Images was to be received as a Tradition of the Apostles, P. 4,
5, 6.
and the Primitive Church, this Assertion in the Eighth and the Ninth Centuries
was rejected as a plain Falsehood; and on the contrary it was declared, That
they who endeavored to introduce this practice, brought into the Church New
and unusual Customs, without, and against the Doctrine of the Holy Fathers, and
execrated by the Church of God, and condemned by the Tradition of their
Ancestors.

Secondly. P. 61.. 6.
That from the Eighth to the Fifteenth Century this Doctrine of the Veneration
and Worship of Images was rejected by very eminent Persons of the Western
Church.

Thirdly. That many learned Persons of the Church of Rome ingenuously have
confessed, P. 70.. 3.
either that in the Primitive Church they had no Images, and did not regard
them, or that they paid no Veneration to them, but rather disapproved, and
condemned it; Church Govern. part. 5.. 117.
to which I add these words of our late Oxford Writer, viz. Thus much is
granted, that Images, and so the Veneration, or Worship of them were very
seldom (if at all) used in the Christian Church for some of the first Centuries.

Concerning Invocation of departed Saints Altissiodorensis says, multi dicunt,
In Sum. part. 4. l. 3. tr. 7. c. de Orat. q. 7.

Ergo non vident quorum sunt orationes quas vident, ergo inutile est orare
ipsos -- Propter istas rations and consimiles dicunt multi, Opinio Commun is.
quod nec nos oramus sanctos nec ipsi orant pro nobis nisi improprie.
Altissiod. Sum. l. 3. Tract. 8. c. 5. qu. 6. and ult.

In Can. Miss. Lect. 30.

Vid. Bishop Usher 's Answer to the Jesuit, page 452.


many do say we pray not to them, but improperly, to wit, because, Oramus Deum
ut Sanctorum merita nos juvent, we pray to God that the Merits of the Saints
may help us; and in the Margent he says, that this was a common Opinion in his
time. And Gabriel Biel having propounded the Arguments against the Invocation
of them, adds, That by these and the like Reasons not only the Heretics of
old, but, nonnulli nostro tempore Christiani decipiuntur, some Christians of
our times are deceived. John Sharp informs us, That a quibusdam famosis
verisimiliter aestimatur quod istiusmodi orationes in Eoclesia Dei superfluunt,
it was thought by some eminent Men that such Prayers were superfluous in the
Church of God. Eckius says, Enchir. c. 15.
That if the Apostles and Evangelists had taught that the Saints should be
Worshipped, it would have been objected to them as arrogance, acsi ipsi post
mortem gloriam istam quaesivissent, as if they had sought for that Honor after
their Death. And Cardinal Perron ingenuously does confess, Replic. l. 5. c. 19.
That in the Writings of the Authors that approach nearest to the Age of the
Apostles, one shall find no Footsteps of the Custom of invoking Saints.

Moreover, It is a thing, says our Twenty-fourth Article, plainly repugnant to
the Word of God, and the Custom of the Primitive Church to have public Prayer
in the Church, or to minister the Sacraments in a Tongue not understood of the
People, and that this was the Custom of the Primitive Church, Treat. of Latin
Service, c. 1.. 2.
has in a late Treatise on this Subject been fully proved from the Confessions
of the Romanists. That they esteemed it necessary so to officiate is proved by
the Testimonies of the Western Church till the Thirteenth Century, Chap. 2.
Chap. 5.. 3.
and from the Romish Commentators on the Fourteenth Chapter to the Romans. To
all which add the Confession of Lindanus, Panopl. l. 4. c. 78.
That quae nunc passim cantantur non tam ad populi intelligentiam erudiendum,
quod priscos ubique spectasse, indubitatum; The things which are now every
where sung in the Roman Church, do not so much tend to instruct the People,
though without doubt that was the thing the Ancients every where respected.

The Church of England in her Twenty-fifth Article affirms,

1. There are two Sacraments ordained of Christ our Lord in the Gospel, that is
to say, Baptism and the Supper of the Lord.

2. Those five commonly called Sacraments, that is to say, Confirmation,
Penance, Orders, Matrimony, and Extreme Unction, are not to be counted for
Sacraments of the Gospel, -- nor have they the like nature of Sacraments with
Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, for that they have not any visible Sign or
Ceremony ordained of God.

Accordingly Johannes a Munster in Vortilage confesses, Et in margin haec
habet: Saeculum duodecimum duo tantum agnovit Sacramenta. Nobilis discurs.
prop. 3.
That Theophylact, Duo tantum agnovit Sacramenta, acknowledged only two
Sacraments. There is no Controversy, says Cassander, but that there are two
Sacraments in which principally consists our Salvation; whence it is, that
among the more ancient Writers the Sacraments properly so called are sometimes
reckoned two, sometimes three, when Confirmation by Chrism is added to Baptism;
and sometimes four, when the Body and Blood of Christ are reckoned as two
Sacraments; (in which Sense that from the Sixth to the Twelfth Century they
were reckoned only four, Pref. to the Treat. of Latin Serve.
has been fully proved elsewhere) of the other Sacraments we read not that the
Ancients comprehended them in any certain number, Consult. Cass. Art. 13. p.
106, 107.
nec temere quenquam reperias ante P. Lombardum qui certum aliquem and
definitum Sacramentorum numerum statuerunt, nor will you hardly find any one
before Peter Lombard who assigned any certain and determinate number of the
Sacraments. From this Confession of the Novelty of the number of the Seven
Sacraments in General, I pass on to the Confessions that have been made
concerning those five R. Sacraments in Particular, which our Article denies to
be Sacraments properly so called, or of Divine Institution. And,

First, As for Confirmation, Alexander of Hales, De hoc recitat Alexander part.
4. q. 24. M. 1. Et post eum Sanctus Thomas tres opiniones: una est quam tenet
Alexander, quod Sacramentum illud non est institutum neque a Christo neque ab
Apostolis -- Sed dicit quod Confirmatio instituta est ab Ecclesia in Concilio
Meldensi. Unde dicit Alexander sine praejudicio dicendum est, quod neque
Dominus hoc Sacramentum instituit neque dispensavit. -- Sed postquam Apostoli
defecerunt institutum fuit hoc Sacramentum Spiritus Sancti instinctu in
Concilio Meldens^, quantum ad formam verborum, and materiam elementarem, cui
etiam Spiritus Sanctus contulit virtutem sanctificandi. Biel in 4. Sent. q. un.
D. Alii quod in Aurelianensi Concilio, In 4. Sent. did. 7. Art. 1. Part. 3. q.
72. A. 1. ad primum.
Quod Dominus neque hoc Sacramentum instituit, neque dispensavit, That our Lord
neither instituted nor dispensed this Sacrament, nor was it instituted by his
Disciples; but as to the Form of Words, and the Matter of it, it was instituted
by the Council of Meaux. Soto informs us, That others attributed the
institution of it to the Council of Orleans. Thomas Aquinas says, That
touching this Sacrament there is a double Opinion, quidam enim dixerunt, for
some have said that this Sacrament was neither instituted by Christ, nor by his
Apostles, Sed postea processu temporis in quodam Concilio, but afterward, in
process of time, in some Council.

To proceed to Auricular Confession two things have been defined by the R.
Church concerning it.

1. That it is a Sacrament truly and properly so called, Council. Trid. Sess.
14. Can. 1.
and of our Savior's Institution.

2. Ibid. Can. 6, 7.
That this Confession by divine Right is necessary to Salvation, and that if
any one shall say that it is not by divine Right necessary for the Remission of
Sins in the Sacrament of Penance to confess all and singular mortal Sins,
though never so occult, which can by diligent Meditation be brought to our
Memory, with the Circumstances which change the Kinds of them, he is to be
Anathema.

In Opposition to the first Assertion Maldonate the Jesuit confesses, Maldon.
Sum. q. 18. Art. 4.
That sunt inter Catholicos qui putant nullum esse praeceptum divinum de
confessione, ut omnes Decretorum Doctores, and inter Scholasticos Scotus, there
are Catholics who think there is no Divine Precept for Confession, as all the
Canonists, and among the Schoolmen Scotus. In hac re and Haereticos and
nonnullos Catholicos errasse invenio. Tom. 3. Disp. 32.. 2.
Suarez declares, That in this matter he found that not only Heretics but some
Catholics had erred also, it being the Opinion of some Catholics, Hoc
Sacramentum non fuisse institutum neque a Christo neque ab Apostolis, sed in
Concilio Meldensi speciali spiritus Sancti instinctu, That this Sacrament was
neither instituted by Christ nor his Apostles, but in the Council of Meaux by
the special Instinct of the Holy Spirit.

Semeca, De poen. init. did. 5.
the Author of the Gloss, having mentioned the Opinion of them who said, That
Confession was instituted in the New Testament by St. James, says, Melius
dicitur eam institutam fuisse a quadam universalis Ecclesiae Traditione, It is
better said, that it was instituted by a certain Tradition of the universal
Church, than by the Authority of the New or Old Testament. Super lib. 5.
decret. de poenit. and remiss. c. 12. n. 18. Tom. 7. p. 228. Ed. Venet. 1617.
This, says Panormitan the Gloss holds, and consequently that the Greeks
offend not by not using this Confession, Confitentur enim soli Deo in secreto,
for they confess to God alone in secret, because such a Tradition came not to
them. And this Opinion pleases me, says he, very much, Quia non est aliqua
Autoritas aperta quae innuat Deum, seu Christum aperte instituisse confessionem
fiendam Sacerdoti, for there is no clear Authority which plainly shows, that
God or Christ instituted Confession to be made to a Priest. Lib. 3. de poenit.
cap. 1.
Bellarmine informs us, that about an Hundred Years before his time one Petrus
Oxomensis, Divinity Professor of the University of Salamanca, held, That
Confession was not of Divine Right, but grounded on some Statute of the
universal Church. Page 476.
Rhenanus on the Argument of Tertullian's Book of Penitence, says, That he
speaks of public Confession, Qua majores nostros apparet aliquamdiu usos
fuisse, priusquam ista secreta nasceretur qua hodie conscientiam nostram
Sacerdoti detegimus usque ad circumstantiarum omnium minutias, Which it is
evident our Ancestors used for some time before that secret Confession began,
in which we open our Conscience to a Priest, even to the discovery of the
smallest Circumstances: And having told us that there were among the Canonists,
qui institutam ab Ecclesia tradunt confessionem, who say that Confession was
instituted by the Church; P. 477.
and cited many Fathers, who taught with Chrysostom, Soli Deo confitendum esse,
That Confession was to be made to God alone; he adds, That for this Cause he
mentioned all those Testimonies, P. 478.
that none might admire, Tertullianum de clancularia ista admissorum confession
nihil locutum, quae quantum conjicimus, penitusid temporis ignorabatur, that
Tertullian spoke nothing of that secret Confession, which, as far as we can
gather, was wholly unknown at that time. Nor is it thus only with Tertullian;
They who lived, says he, many Ages after him, Admon. de quibusdam Eccl. dogm.
p. 685.
spoke mostly of public Penance, Nam express de privata qui loquuntur inter
veteres hand temere reperies, for you will scarcely find any among the
Ancients, who speaks expressly of the private Confession. Regaltius, in his
Preface on the same Book, says, Occultorum poenitentia, Quam postea Ecclesia
saluberiter instituit. Epitap. Fabiol. Ep. Tom. 1. f. 72.
sicut and castigatio Divinae Misericordiae reservata, the confession of secret
Sins, and the castigation of them, was then reserved to the Mercy of God.
Erasmus, in like manner, says, Apparet Hieronymi tempore nondum institutam
fuisse secretam admissorum confessionem, it is evident that in the time of St.
Jerome, the secret Confession of Sins was not yet instituted.

To proceed to the Second Head, touching the Necessity of this Confession,
Gratian discourses largely of it; and having produced the Opinions of many on
both sides, concludes thus, De poenit. and remiss. did. 1. cap. 89.
Cui^harum (sententiarum) adhaerendum sit Lectoris Judicio reservatur, utraque
enim fautores habet Sapientes and Religiosos, The Reader is left to his
Judgment to embrace which of these Opinions he pleases: For both of them are
favored by wise and religious Men. Lombard in the Discussion of this Question,
Lib. 4. Did. 17. p. 780.
does acknowledge, that in his time, quibusdam visum est sufficere si^^oli Deo
fiat confessio, it seemed to some sufficient, if the Confession were made to
God alone, without the sacerdotal Judgment, and Confession to the Church: Which
Testimonies gave Occasion to Thomas Aquinas to say, Magister, In 4. Sent. Did.
17.
and Gratianus hoc pro opinione ponunt, the Master of the Sentences, and
Gratian, speak of this as an Opinion; but after the Determination of the
Church, under Innocent the Third, it is to be reputed Heresy. St. Chrysostom
asserts, says Rhenanus, That Confession is to be made to God alone; docet idem
Ambrosius, and alii veteres, and that Ambrose and others of the Ancients, teach
the same. Antoninus Florentinus, being convinced by the clear Sayings of
Cassian, In Chron. p. 2. c. 2. Tit. 15.. 19.
the Scholar of St. Chrysostom to that effect, says, Tempore Johannis Cassiani
erat in opinione talis materia, viz. Si est necessaria confessio fienda
Sacerdoti, In the time of John Cassian, it was only matter of Opinion, whether
Confessions were to be made to a Priest or not.

Of the Sacrament of extreme Unction, informs us, That, In tertiam part. Th.
Tom. 4. disp. 39.. 2.
inter Catholicos nonnulli negarunt hoc Sacramentum a Christo institutum, some
Catholics denied that this Sacrament was instituted by Christ, viz. Hugo de
Sancto Victore, Lombard, Alexander Halensis, and Altissiodore: Whence, says
he, it plainly follows, that it is no true Sacrament. Mr. Du Pin speaking of
the Discipline of the first Three Centuries, Nouvel. Bibl. Tom. 1. p. 618.
says, That the Church in those times has not spoken at all of the Anointing
of the Sick, mentioned by St. James; peut etre parce qu' elle etoit assez rare
en ce temps, perhaps because it was very rare in those times.

Of Marriage, In 1 Cor. 7. v. 39.
Erasmus says, Haud scio an hoc Sacramentum septimum a Veteribus fuit
cognitum, I scarce know whether this Seventh Sacrament was known to the
Ancients, since Dionysius numbering them by Name, and explicating their
Effects, Rites, and Ceremonies, makes no mention of Matrimony. Secondly,
Whereas the Greeks and Latins have in so many Volumes treated of Matrimony,
nullus est locus unde liqueat illos Conjugium inter septem Sacramenta numerare,
there is no place whence it appears that they numbered Marriage among the Seven
Sacraments: And having added other Considerations from the Fathers, he
concludes thus; Verum cur haec recenseo, cum Durandus fateatur Matrimonium a
Recentioribus Theologis denique numerari coeptum inter ea quae proprie dicuntur
Ecclesiae Sacramenta; But why do I recount these things, since Durand
confesses that Matrimony began lately to be numbered, by the young Divines,
Consult. Art. 13. p. 108.
amongst the proper Sacraments of the Church. By the Confession of Cassander,
Peter Lombard denied, Gratiam in eo conferri, that Grace was conferred by it;
and Durandus did the same, whence he concludes, Non esse Sacramentum proprie
and stricte dictum, That it is no Sacrament properly, and strictly so called:
And he had good Reason to declare this of them both; for the Master of the
Sentences says, Lib. 4. did. 2. lit. A.
That of Sacraments some afford a Remedy against Sin, Et Gratiam adjutricem
conferunt, and afford assisting Grace, as Baptism; others, Remedium tantum
sunt, are only a Remedy, as Marriage; and others, Gratia and Virtute nos
fulciunt, do strengthen us with Grace and Virtue, as the Eucharist and Orders:
From which Division and exclusive Particle Durandus well concludes, That he is
one of them who exclude Matrimony from conferring Grace. Antoninus Florentinus
confesses, That the Canonists do say, and the Master of the Sentences seems to
say, Part. 3. Tit. 14.. 3.
That Matrimonium large dicitur Sacramentum, in quantum scilicet est Signum
Sacratissimae Rei, sed non confertur in eo Gratia, sicut in aliis, That
Matrimony is largely called a Sacrament, because it is a Sign of a most sacred
thing, but yet Grace is not conferred by it as in other Sacraments. Durandus
himself not only does declare expressly, That Matrimony neither conferrs Grace
on him that has it not, nor augments it in him that has Grace; but of the
Civilians in General he says, They held that Matrimony did not conferr Grace,
whence he concludes, That this Opinion is neither contrary to the Doctrine of
the Church in General, nor of the Roman Church in Particular. Whence he himself
concludes, That Matrimony is largely, In 4. Sent. did, 26.. ad Tertiam.
and not univocally styled a Sacrament. Aquinas upon the Sentences informs us,
that in his time, There was a threefold Opinion about this Matter, Quidam enim
dixerunt quod Matrimonium est nullo modo causa Gratiae, sed est tantum signum,
for some held that Matrimony was only a sign, but in no wise a cause of Grace;
but, says he, were this so, there would be no cause to number this among the
Sacraments of the New Law, others held that it conferred Grace to recede from
Evil, rendering the conjugal Act lawful, which, says he, is not enough; others,
that it conferrs assisting Grace, Et hoc probabilius est, and this, says he,
is most probable; whence evident it is, that this was then only a probable
Opinion. Bonaventure says, In 4. Sent. did. 26. qu. 2.
To this Objection some Answer, Quod illud Sacramentum nullam dat Gratiam, That
the Sacrament of Matrimony conferrs no Grace. The Gloss upon Gratian says,
Decretal. l. 5. Tit. 3. de Simon. c. 9.
It is no Sin to give or receive Money for Matrimony, seeing, though it be a
Sacrament, Per ipsum tamen Gratia non confertur, yet no Grace is conferred by
it: And again, In hoc Sacramento non confertur Gratia Spiritus Sancti sicut in
aliis, Decret. Cause. 32. qu. 2. c. ^onorantur.
In this Sacrament the Grace of the Holy Ghost is not conferred as it is in
others. And yet in opposition to all these Declarations the Trent Council has
defined, That if any one says that Matrimony is not truly and properly one of
the Seven Sacraments of the New Law, Sess. 24. de Sacr. Matrim. Can. 1.
instituted by Christ, -- Neque Gratiam confer, or that it does not conferr
Grace, he shall be Anathema.

In our Twenty eighth Article it is declared, Transubstantiation, or the change
of the Substance of Bread and Wine in the Supper of the Lord, cannot be proved
by Holy Writ; And that it cannot be proved from the perpetual Tradition of the
Church is plainly and frequently confessed by R. Doctors.

For when Paschase, and others, broached that Opinion That the Sacrament was
that very Body of Christ which was Born of the Virgin Mary. Ed. Colon. 1551. p.
195.
Bertram expressly teaches, That in saying this, Sanctorum Scripta patrum
contraire comprobantur, they are proved to contradict the Sayings of the Holy
Fathers. Durandus of Troarn says, Apud Larroq. Hist. of the Sacrament, p. 454.
Ed. Ang. De Euch. l 3. c. 23.. unum tamen.
That in the Ninth Century several opposed the Opinions of Paschase as
Novelties, which till then had not been heard of in the Church. Bellarmine also
confesses, That Scotus held that Transubstantiation was not an Article of
Faith before the Lateran Council, and they had reason so to say, since he
affirms, (1.) That the Church declared under Innocent the Third that this Sense
was, De veritate fidei, a Truth belonging to the Faith; In quart. Sent. distin.
xi. q. 3. lit. g. Colloq. Fontibell. p. 16.
and, (2.) That it was to be believed to be, De substantia fidei, and hoc post
istam declarationem solennem factam ab Ecclesia, of the Substance of the Faith,
after that solemn Declaration made by the Church. And Cardinal Perron
acknowledges, That the Opinion of Scotus was in this Sense true, That before
that Council Transubstantiation was not formally an Article of Faith, that is,
as to the formality of public Profession, and as to any prohibition rendering
him inexcusable who was ignorant of it. In 4. Sent. did. xi. q. 3. disp. 42..
1.
Yribarn says expressly, That in primitiva Ecclesia non erat de fide
substantiam panis in Corpus Christi converti, In the Primitive Church the
Conversion of the Substance of the Bread into the Body of Christ was no Article
of Faith. Alphonsus de Castro confesses, Adv. Haer. l. 8. tit. de indulg.
That of the Transubstantiation of the Bread into Christ's Body, Rara est in
Antiquis Scriptoribus mentio, the Ancients seldom do make mention. Modest.
disc. de Jes. Angl. p. 13. Annot. in 1 Cor. vij.
And our English Jesuits acknowledge, That the Fathers did not meddle with the
matter of Transubstantiation. Erasmus says, That in synaxi
Transubstantiationem sero definivit Ecclesia, it was late before the Church
defined Transubstantiation, and that for a long time it was sufficient to
believe that the true Body of Christ was present, whether under the consecrated
Bread or any way whatsoever. Bernard Gilpin in the Life of Bishop Tonstal
says, P. 40, 46. v. P. 33, 42, 48.
That he had often heard that Bishop say, that Innocent the Third did rashly in
making Transubstantiation an Article of Faith, when before it was free to think
so, or otherwise; yea that he knew not what he did when he made it an Article
of Faith. Holcot informs us, That paucis tamen persuasum est Corpus Christi
esse realiter in Sacramento Altaris sub speciebus panis and vini, Sent. l. 4.
qu. 3. lit. c.
Few Men were persuaded that the Body of Christ was really in the Sacrament of
the Altar under the Species of Bread and Wine; In 4. Sent. dist^ xi. q. 3. b.
and Scotus tells us, That to say that such things appertain unto the Faith, is
an occasion of turning all honest Men, and almost all that follow natural
Reason from the Faith, and of hindering their conversion to the Faith, and that
a profane Man, or one that follows natural Reason would think this Doctrine a
greater inconvenience, than all the Articles of the Incarnation; and, says he,
Mirum videtur quare in uno Articulo qui non est principalis Articulus fidei,
debeat talis intellectus asseri propter quem fides pateat contemptui omnium
sequentium rationem, it seems worthy of Admiration why such a Sense should be
asserted in one Article which is no principal Article of Faith, as renders the
Faith Contemptible to all who follow Reason.

Our Thirtieth Article affirms, the Cup of the Lord is not to be denied to the
Lay People, for both parts of the Lord's Sacrament, by Christ's Ordinance, and
Commandment, ought to be ministered to Christian Men alike; and that this was
the Doctrine of the whole Church of Christ to the Twelfth Century has been
demonstrated in a Treatise written upon that Subject: Cassander also clearly
testifies, That the Oriental Church does to this Day, and that the Roman Church
did for a Thousand Years, In Art. 22.
in the ordinary and solemn Administration of this Sacrament, give both Kinds
to all the Faithful, and that they were induced to do so, Instituto and exemplo
Christi, by the Example and Institution of our Lord; and that therefore it was
no rash thing, that all the best Catholics who were conversant in the reading
of the Divine and Ecclesiastical Writers, and were moved by the Reasons there
mentioned, were extremely desirous of the Cup, and did vehemently contend that
this salutary Sacrament of the Blood of Christ, Epist. 19.
together with the Sacrament of his Body, Juxta veterem, and multis saeculis
perpetuatam universalis Ecclesiae consuetudinem in usum reducatur, should be
reduced to use according to the ancient Custom of the universal Church
continued through many Ages. The same Cassander says, Antiquioribus saeculis
ad plenam, legitimam, and solennem Communionem, utriusque Sacramenti, Corporis
and Sanguinis Domini, participationem necessariam fuisse, That in former Ages
the participation of the Body and Blood of Christ, was necessary to a full,
lawful, and solemn Communion. John Barus declares, Cath. Romans Pacif. Sect. 7.
apud Forbes. Consid. Modest. p. 429.
That Communion in both Kinds, is, Scripturis, Patribus, and universalis
Ecclesiae consuetudini conformior, more conform to Scriptures, to the Fathers,
and to the Custom of the universal Church. And George Wicelius says, That the
Church of Rome did ill in intermitting the use of the Cup in public
Celebration of the Sacrament; adding, That Ejus rei cum nube quadam
certissimorum Testium septi sumus, In via Regia. Apud Forbes. Consid. Modest.
p. 427.
plerophoriam amplectimur omni secluso dubio, being compassed with a Cloud of
most certain Witnesses touching this matter, we have that full assurance of it
which excludes all doubt. And even Thomas Aquinas teaches, In Cap. 11. Ep. 1.
ad Cor. lect. 5. q.
That although whole Christ be under either Species, yet is he not in vain
tendered under both Species, Quia hic est vetus usus hujus Sacramenti, ut
seorsim exhibeatur fidelibus Corpus Christi in cibum and Sanguis in potum;
because this is the ancient use of this Sacrament, That the Body of Christ
should separately be given to the Faithful for meat, and the Blood for drink.

In our Thirty-first Article, the Sacrifices of Masses, in the which it was
commonly said, That the Priest did offer Christ for the Quick and the Dead, to
have Remission of Pain or Guilt, were blasphemous Fables, and dangerous
Deceits. Now of this Sacrifice the Trent Council teaches,

1. Corpus and Sanguinem suum sub Speciebus panis and vini Deo patri obtulit,
Sess. 22. cap. 1.
That Christ offered his Body and Blood, under the Species of Bread and Wine,
to God the Father.

2. That the same Christ, in this Divine Sacrifice, Idem ille Christus
incruente immolatur, qui in ara crucis semel seipsum cruente obtulit. c. 2. Una
enim eademque est hostia, idem nunc offertur Sacerdotum ministerio qui seipsum
tunc in carne obtulit. Ibid. Can. 1. Can. 3. P. 510.
is unbloodily offered, who bloodily once offered himself upon the Altar of the
Cross.

3. That therefore the Holy Synod teaches that this Sacrifice is truly
propitiatory, because one and the same Host is now offered by the Ministry of
the Priests, who then offered himself upon the Cross.

4. That therefore, if any Person says, That in the Mass there is not offered
to God, Verum and proprium Sacrificium, a true and proper Sacrifice; or that
the Sacrifice of the Mass is only a Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving; aut
nuda commemoratio Sacrificii in cruce peracti, or a naked commemoration of the
Sacrifice performed on the Cross, and not a propitiatory Sacrifice, let him be
accursed.

Now, as to the first of these Particulars, the Author of the History of the
Trent Council does inform us, That almost an equal Number of the Divines there,
denied that Christ, in the Institution of this Supper, offered himself; for if
so, the Oblation of the Cross, say they, would have been superfluous, because
Mankind would have been redeemed by that of the Supper, which went before: They
alleged also, That neither the Scripture, nor the Canon of the Mass, nor any
Council, ever said, that Christ offered himself in the Supper; saying, P. 536.
That it was not a time to ground ones self upon things uncertain, and upon New
Opinions, never heard nor thought of by Antiquity; and that when i^ was decreed
that Christ did offer himself, Twenty three Bishops did contradict it. He adds,
That the Bishop of Veglia said, P. 519.
That he that maintains a propitiatory Sacrifice in the Supper, must needs
confess, that by it we are redeemed, and not by his Death, which is contrary to
Scripture, and to Christian Doctrine: And, That the Bishop persuaded so many,
that it was almost the common Opinion not to make mention of the propitiatory
Sacrifice offered by Christ in the Supper. Now by the Confutation of this First
Proposition, the Second and the Third must be entirely confuted.

As for the Third and Fourth, the same Bishop teaches, Ibid.
that one propitiatory Sacrifice being offered, if it be sufficient to expiate,
no other is offered but only for Thanksgiving. And suitable to this Assertion
it is determined by Peter Lombard, in Answer to that Question, Si quod gerit
Sacerdos proprie dicatur Sacrificium vel immolatio, and si Christus quotidie
immoletur, Sent. l. 4. did. 12. lit. G.
vel semel tantum immolatus sit, Whether the Action of the Priest may properly
be called a Sacrifice, or whether Christ be offered daily, or was once only
offered: I say, in answer to this Question, it is determined by him, That what
is offered and consecrated by a Priest is called a Sacrifice and Oblation, Quia
memoria est, and representatio very Sacrificii, and Sanctae immolationis factae
in ara crucis, because it is the Memorial and Representation of the true
Sacrifice and Holy Immolation, which was made upon the Altar of the Cross: And
that Christ is daily offered in the Sacrament, Quia in Sacramento recordatio
fit illius quod semel factum est, because in the Sacrament is made a
Remembrance of that which was once done; and that what we do is, recordatio
Sacrificii, a Remembrance of that Sacrifice. Aquinas says, That the
Celebration of this Sacrament is styled an Offering of Christ, for Two Reasons;
First, Because, as Austin to Simplicius says, Images are wont to be called by
the Names of those Things of which they are Images; In Sum. part. 3. q. 83.
Art. 1.
Celebratio autem hujus Sacramenti imago quaedam est representativa passionis
Christi, quae est vera ejus immolatio, and the Celebration of this Sacrament is
an Image, representing the Passion of Christ, which is the true Oblation.
Secondly, As to the Effect of this Passion; to wit, because by this Passion we
are made Partakers of the Fruit of the Lord's Passion. In cap. 1. Es. P. 34.
Arias Montanus says, Non Sacrificium illud offerimus, sed illud ipsum Christi
representamus, We do not offer that same Sacrifice of Christ, but we represent
it. In Hebr. 10.
We must affirm, says Lyranus, That there is no Reiteration of the Sacrifice
of the Altar there, but a daily Commemoration of that one Sacrifice which was
offered on the Cross.

Our Thirty-second Article Asserts, it is lawful for Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons to marry at their own Discretion. Accordingly Vdalricus, Bishop of
Ausburg, the First of that Name, in his Epistle to Pope Nicholas the First,
tells him, That the First Council of Nice approved the Sentence of Paphnutius,
Apud Calixt. de conjug. Cleric. p. 445, 446.
discarding the Imposition of this Law upon the Clergy, and left this Matter,
Uniuscujusque voluntati, to every Man's Will; adding that the Law of Celebacy,
which Pope Nicholas then endeavored to impose upon the Clergy, was Communi
omnium sapientum judicio violentia, in the common Judgment of all Wise Men,
Did. 31.
a Violence. Gratian confesses that there was a time, Cum nondum erat
institutum, when it was not enjoined that Priests should contain: Yea, says
he, from the Authority of Pelagius the First, it is apparent that Priests,
Did. 28. c. 13.
Deacons and Subdeacons, Licite matrimonio uti possunt, may lawfully use
Matrimony: And to the Canons of the Councils of Neocaesarea and Ancyra, which
approved of their Marriage, he answers, First, That they were made, Cum nondum
erat introducta continentia Ministrorum Altaris, when the Continency of the
Ministers of the Altar was not yet introduced. Secondly, That they were made in
the East, and that, Orientalis Eccesia non suscepit votum Castitatis, the
Eastern Church received not the Vow of Chastity: Cap. 13.
and in his Fifty-eighth Distinction he expressly says, Sacerdotibus ante
prohibitionem ubique licita erant conjugia, That before the Prohibition it was
every where lawful for Priests to marry; and in the Oriental Church it is
lawful for them at present so to do; where the Gloss observes, That it is plain
that Gratian was of this Opinion, Aliquando in Latina Ecclesia Presbyteris
licuisse uti conjugio, That even in the Latin Church it was sometimes Lawful
for Priests to use Matrimony. Scotus confesses that it is very true, Sent. 4.
did. 37. qu. 1. Art. 1.
That Secundum consuetudinem primitivae Ecclesiae, according to the
Constitution of the primitive Church, it was lawful to use Matrimony contracted
before Orders. Cap. 4. De invent. rerum l. 5. c. 4. p. 344.
Clictovaeus in his Discourse of the Celebacy of Priests, and Polydore Virgil,
do with one Voice affirm, That Pope Syricius, who held that See A.D. 387. was
the first who imposed the Law of Celebacy on the Clergy. It remains, says
Cassander, That this Law should be relaxed to those who shall hereafter be
ordained; Et more veteris Ecclesiae, Consult. Art. 23. p. 199.
and huc usque Orientalium Ecclesiarum, And that after the Custom of the
Ancient Church, and of the Eastern Churches to this Day, Honest Husbands should
be admitted to the Ministry of the Church, and out of the Time of their
Ministry, should be allowed the use of their Wives, according to the Canon of
the Sixth General Synod. Wicelius in his Via Regia, Apud Calixt. de conjug.
cler. p. 457.
declares that the Marriage of Priests was unforbidden, In primitiva Christi
Ecclesia tam Orientis quam Occidentis, in the Primitive Church both of East and
West; and that it agrees not only with the Gospel, but also, cum Veterum
Synodorum Constitutionibus, cum exemplis Veteris Ecclesiae, with the
Constitutions of Ancient Synods, with the Examples of the Ancient Church; yea
even with the Examples of the Church of Rome, such as she was Five hundred
Years ago.

CHAP. XI.
Answer is given to the Arguments of Mr. M. for the Infallibility of Tradition,
as, v. g. 1. That the World had no other Rule for the first Two thousand
Years,. 1. Answered, 1st. by showing that this proves not the thing in
Question, which is not, Whether nothing can come down unto us by Tradition;
but, Whether in long tract of time, Men may not add to the Traditions which
truly they received, others which falsely they pretend to be such; and, Whether
pretenses to Tradition may not be justly scrupled, when ancient Records not
only do say nothing of, but plainly contradict them, Ibid. 2dly. That this
Argument contradicts the Tradition of the Jews, touching the Precepts of Noah
only imposed upon the World before, and of the Christians generally teaching
Men were then guided by the Law, not of Tradition, but of nature,. 2. The
Instances contained in this Argument considered,. 3. 3dly. It is proved that
both the Antediluvians and they who lived after the Flood were very prone to
Idolatry; and that God therefore would not trust them with any positive
Precepts, but such as were Recorded in a written Law,. 4. Mr. M 's. Second
Argument, That for above Two thousand Years more from Moses to Christ 's time
the Church was governed partly by Writing, and partly by Tradition. Answ. 1.
The contrary is proved both from the Scriptures of the Old and the New
Testament,. 5. 2. That the Traditions which obtained in the Jewish Church were
such as tended to the Evacuation of the Law of Moses the Introduction of vain
Worship, and the renouncing of the true Messiah,. 6. This is farther
demonstrated from the Scriptures of the New Testament and Josephus,. 7. Mr.
M's. Third Argument, That when the Scriptures were given to the Jewish Church,
all other Nations were guided only by Tradition, and yet had many true
Believers among them, as Job, etc. Answ. 1. That the Scripture manifestly
declares, that the Heathens generally were guilty of Idolatry, and that God had
given them a Law, not of Tradition, but of Nature,. 8.2. That Job and his
Friends believed in one God, not by Tradition, but the Light of Nature,
according to the Fathers,. 9.3. That when Christianity appeared, the great Plea
of the Heathens for it was Tradition which they pleaded after the manner of the
Romanists,. 10. The Answer of the Christians to this Plea is a full
Justification of the Protestants, and a demonstration that they were not Roman
Catholics in this Matter,. 11. For, 1st. They represent it as the greatest
folly to prefer Custom before Reason. 2ly. They add, That their Ancestors were
prone to receive Fables, and monstrous Opinions for Truths, which also
Romanists confess of the Writers of their Histories. 3dly, That this was the
Rise of all their Errors, that they followed their Fathers without consulting
Truth. 4thly. That they who pleaded Antiquity were themselves the greatest
Innovators. 5thly. That there was a time when the Heathen Religion was New,
Ibid. In defense of their own Proceedings they declare, 1st. That it is the
property of wise Men not to be enslaved to their former Opinions. 2dly. That
their Adversaries ought not to run them down with prescription or the belief of
their Ancestors, but fairly come to the Merits of the Cause,. 12. 3dly. That
they ought not to be run down with multitude, that being no mark of the true
Religion. 4thly. That they ought not to be called to yield a blind assent to
the dictates of other Men, without using their own Judgments. 5thly. That their
Separation from their Forefathers must be acknowledged Just and Righteous,
because they could show wherein they had erred. Lastly, That their Religion was
not New, but only it was lately that they knew it to be the true and old
Religion,. 13. Obj. 4. That before the New Testament was written and divulged
all Christians were governed by Tradition only,. 14. Answ. 1. That the Four
Gospels which were always judged sufficiently to contain the Christian
Doctrine, were writ soon after the Preaching of the Gospel. 2. That till then
the Apostles Preached only out of the Old Testament, and exhorted their Hearers
to attend to it as their Rule, Ibid. 3. That the Tradition of the Primitive
Church declared it necessary that Scriptures should be written to be to us a
Rule of Faith,. 15. Mr. M 's. Fourth Argument, that the Traditions of the
Church of Rome may be as fully proved, as it can be proved to one that never
saw London, that there is such a City, and that it is the Capital City of this
Kingdom, showed to be highly vain,. 16.

HAving thus showed the uncertainty of Tradition in many Cases, and proved that
the Doctrines of the Church of Rome have not descended by Tradition from the
Apostles, or the Primitive Church, I now proceed to Answer what Mr. M. does
offer to prove the certainty of Oral Tradition in the General, and of some
Romish Doctrines in Particular,

And, M. says, That all the Faith which true Believers had in those Two
thousand Years before the Scriptures of the Old Testament were written, Page
335.
had no other Ground than the Revelation of God, as proposed by the Tradition
of the Church present, to all Believers in every Age in which those Believers
lived. That the whole World was governed by Tradition only for the first Two
thousand Years. And he is so exact as to enumerate the very Tenets which they
held by Tradition, viz. The fall of Adam, and their Conception in Original Sin.
The means to be used to free themselves and their Children from it.

The immortality of the Soul, and that the Rewards and Punishments of the next
Life lasted for ever.

What Repentance they were to use.

That they were to stand fast to their Traditions, and account it a damnable
Sin to forsake them.

The Observation of the Sabbath, the Precept of not eating Blood obliging all
the World, the distinction betwixt clean and unclean Meats, and Beasts; the
Precept of Circumcision observed Four hundred Years by Abraham 's Posterity by
Tradition; the Covenant God made with Abraham, that he should be the Father of
many Nations, Disc. p. 91.
and that the Messiah should be born of his Seed.

R. H. informs us of other Positive Divine Laws; viz. Those of Sacrifice,
Firstlings, Holocausts, Peace Offerings, Birds in Sacrifice not divided,
mention of the Holy Times, Places, Persons, Prophets, of Tithes paid to the
Priest, Purifyings, Cleansings, changing their Garments, Vows, Prohibition of
Polygamy, contracting Marriages with Unbelievers, Excommunication. And these
Laws, says he, we may presume were received from an external infallible
Proponent, and were preserved by the Ecclesiastical Superiors, and Teachers of
these Laws in such a manner as those delivered since; and for the certainty of
their Religion there seems an Infallibility in these, as necessary, if not
more, for solving the great doubts arising therein before, as after the times
of a written Law.

Such Arguments as this, and those that follow, are not worthy of any
consideration by reason of their great impertinency, were it not upon this
account, that it is easy to evince they are so far from being Arguments; for,
that they are certain Demonstrations against the certainty, and the
Infallibility of the Traditions disputed betwixt us and the Church of Rome, and
plainly overthrow the Cause they were designed to maintain. To make this
evident, let it be noted,

First, That the Controversy betwixt us and the Church of Rome is not this,
Whether any thing may be derived down to Posterity by Tradition, for this we
have confessed in many Cases, and where Tradition from the beginning can
undoubtedly be had, we own it. But the Question is, Whether they who own, or
have Tradition for their Rule, may not add many things to that which truly was
received by Tradition pretending falsely that they also were derived by
Tradition to them: For if this may be so, the Church of Rome may also own at
present Tradition for her Rule, and yet with the like falsehood may pretend that
many Doctrines and Practices descended by a Primitive Tradition to her; and the
Traditions here enumerated may also truly bear that name, and yet the very same
persons may have handed down at the same time many other Practices and
Doctrines under the same pretense, which tended to corrupt the Faith and
Manners of those very Ages.

Secondly, The great Enquiry is, Whether in tract of time, viz. the space of
Sixteen hundred Years, such Doctrines, and practices may not be admitted and
owned as Primitive Traditions by a prevailing party of Gentiles, Jews or
Christians, which were nothing less than so. For if this has been actually so
before, and after the writing of the Law of Moses, and also since the
publication of the Gospel, then may the Doctrines and Practices of the Church
of Rome in so long tract of time, be thus admitted, and yet be nothing less
than Primitive Traditions.

And, Thirdly, Whether Pretenses to Tradition may not justly be suspected, when
ancient Records, which had equal reason to take notice of them, and could not
have condemned what the whole Church received as a Divine Verity, not only do
say nothing of, but plainly contradict them. Having premised these things, I
answer;

Fourthly, Tradition, in this Assertion contradict both the Tradition of the
Jews, and of the Ancient Fathers.

The Tradition of the Jews, Seldom. de jure Not. l. 1. c. 8. p. 102. etc. 10.
p. 116. ad p. 126.
who unanimously declare, That the Law given to the World after the Fall of
Adam, was only that of the Precepts of Noah against Idolatry. 2. Blasphemy. 3.
Murder. 4. Unlawful Copulation. 5. Theft. 6. The Law concerning Civil
Government; all which are Laws of Nature: And 7. The Law forbidding to eat
Blood.

The Fathers also generally assert, Vid. Seld. ib. l. 1. c. 8. p. 98, 99. Apol.
2. p. 83.
That before the written Law men lived according to the Law of Nature: So
Justin Martyr, That God admonished them, Per naturalia praecepta quae ab initio
infixa dedit hominibus -- and nihil plus ab iis exquisivit, by the natural
Precepts from the beginning implanted in their Hearts, and required nothing
more of them: So Irenaeus, That it was Reason, L. 4. c. 28.
or Philosophy, which before the coming of our Savior was necessary to make
them Righteous, and that it was their Schoolmaster to bring them to Christ:
Strom. 1. p 282.
So Clemens of Alexandria, That they were guided by the Law written, In
Naturalibus tabulis, De Cor. Milit. c. 6 Adv. Jud. c. 2.
in the Tables of their Heart, which was the common Law of the World; and that
it was this Law of Nature which, a Patribus custodiebatur, was observed by the
Fathers, and by which Noah, Abraham and Melchizedeck were Righteous: Praepar.
Evang. l. 7. c. 7.
So Tertullian, That before the written Law, (...), they were adorned with the
Virtue of Piety by right Reason, so Eusebius: That God led the Heathens to
Piety, (...), by the Law of Nature, Sermon. 1. Contr. Graec. ad Sylberg p. 20.
and of the Creation; so Theodoret. Particularly they inform us, That before
Moses the Patriarchs observed not the Sabbath; That without the Observation of
it, all the just Men forenamed, viz. Adam, Abel, Enoch, Lot, Noah and
Melchezedeck, Dial. cum Tryph. p. 236.245. L. 4. cap. 30. Adv. Jud. c. 2. 4.
Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 4. Praep. Evang. l. 7. c. 6. Demonstr. Ev. l. 1. c. 6.
pleased God; and after them Abraham and his Posterity till Moses; so Justin
Martyr. That Abraham was justified, Sine observatione Sabbathi, without the
Observation of the Sabbath; so Irenaeus. Non Sabbatizabant, The Patriarchs did
not keep the Sabbath, says Tertullian. They took no care of Circumcision or
(...), of the Observation of the Sabbaths, says Eusebius.

Secondly of Sacrifices, they affirm that Abel, Noah, Qu. and Resp. ad Orthod.
qu. 83. Constable. Apost. l 6. c 20 p. 284.
and others offered them not, (...), by Divine Command, but being moved to it
by the Light of Nature; by which, although they could not judge them necessary,
yet might they think them apt Testimonies of their Acknowledgment of God's
Goodness to them, and of their gratitude to him.

Now either in these Traditions the Fathers were mistaken, or they were not; if
in these things, delivered by them so unanimously, they were mistaken, this is
a farther Argument of the uncertainty of Tradition; if they were not mistaken,
then the Patriarchs before, and since the Flood, till Moses, in their Religious
Service, were not led by Tradition, much less by that alone; but rather guided
by the Light of Nature.

And to this, Holy Scripture seems plainly to accord, declaring, That the
Heathens had no positive Laws; that the, (...), Knowledge of God was so
revealed, Romans 1.19, 20.
by the Light of Nature, to them; That they became inexcusable, in that they
did not glorify him as God; That the Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men,
was so revealed by the Light of Nature to them, that they knew, that they, who
did the evil Actions mentioned in the First of Romans, were, by God's righteous
Judgment, worthy of Death; and that they were condemned in their own
Consciences when they committed Sin; V. 32.
and were obnoxious to Tribulation, Romans 2.15.
Wrath and Anguish from God's Justice, for so doing; though (...), their
Iniquity was by no positive Law forbidden. V. 9, 12. V. 15. Romans 12.17. Romans
2.10, 15.
That they had the Work of the Law written in their Hearts, directing them to
what was good; teaching them what was honest in the Sight of all Men,
testifying to them, that they did well in the Observance of those things; and
promising Glory, Honor, and Peace to them who did them. That albeit they were
Gentiles, V. 14.
(...), having no Law positive, or written, to direct them; yet were they, by
this Light of Nature, a Law unto themselves, and did, (...), keep the righteous
Precepts of the Law. Now is it likely, V. 26.
if God had given to the heathen World so many positive Laws, as are here
mentioned: And if they had been then so to be guided by Tradition, and bound
under the pain of Damnation to receive such Traditions, as the positive Laws of
God, and to conveigh them still as such to Posterity, they should be
represented still as without Law?

As for the Instances here mentioned, Traditions, as V. G. The Doctrine of
Original Sin imputed, and the Means to be delivered from it, The Eternity of
Rewards and Punishments, The Prohibition of Polygamy, Birds in Sacrifice not
divided, Cleansing and changing of their Garments; Some of them might be
learned by the Light of Nature, as far as it was needful they should know them;
as, What Repentance they were to use, viz. That which consisted in ceasing to
do Evil, That the Soul had a Subsistence when separated from the Body; That
they who would not submit to the Laws of their Society, should be excluded from
it, or not admitted to the Privileges of that Society, which is
Excommunication; That it was fit to have Times and Places set apart for God's
Worship, and to tender to him the First Fruits and Tithes of our Increase, to
make and pay our Vows to God, not to marry with Idolaters.

Some of them being Matters of continual Practice, might very easily be
preserved by Tradition to Posterity, as v. g. Circumcision, not eating of
Blood, Oblation of First Fruits, paying of Tithes, (though it is certain that
they had then no Law for Tithes, or offering of First Fruits) the Distinction
betwixt Clean and Unclean Meats and Beasts.

And lastly, most of those things which R. H. reckons up as positive Divine
Laws, are by the learned Dr. Spencer proved to be Customs received from the
Gentiles into the Family of Abraham, and taken up as things consonant to
Reason, though not commanded by it.

It is true also as R. H. observes, That Abraham obeyed the Voice of God, and
kept his Charge, his Commandments, or moral Precepts, Genesis 26.5.
his Statutes, touching the Service of the True God, the Circumcision of his
Family, and his Laws, or Judgments touching the doing Justice and Judgment; and
that he taught his Children so to do, according as God himself had foretold of
him, Genesis 18.19.
saying, I know Abraham, that he will command his Sons, and his House after
him, to keep the Way of Jehovah, to do Justice and Judgment: But then it is as
true, In locum.
that Chrysostom referrs this Praise of Abraham to his Obedience to God's
Voice, in leaving of his Fathers House, Custodia viae domini dictitur tempore
Abrahae id quod cuique ex officio praestandum erat. Seld. de jure Not. l. 1. c.
8. p. 100.
going he knew not whither, and sojourning in a strange Land, in offering his
Son Isaac, and in casting forth his Son Ismael; and not to his observance of
any positive and ceremonial Precepts delivered to him by Tradition. The things
which he conceives he was to teach his Children, excepting Circumcision, were
likewise not of this nature, but, (...), to do no Injury, to prefer nothing
before Justice, things taught them by the light of Nature.

Moreover it well deserves to be observed, Jews, knowing how little Tradition
was to be trusted, and how quickly the Progeny of Adam, and of Noah had
deviated from it in the highest Matters, he very exactly prescribes these
things in Writings still to be perused by, or read unto his People, that they
might learn to do the things he had commanded. The Apostolical Constitutions
teach, That when Men had corrupted, (...), Lib. 8. c. 12.
the Law of Nature, God gave the Jews the written Law. St. Chrysostom informs
us, That God gave not his Law in writing to Noah, Abraham and Job, but finding
their Minds pure, gave them, (...), the Grace of his Holy Spirit instead of
Books; but when the People of the Jews fell into the Gulf of Wickedness, (...),
In Matthew. p. 1.
then was it necessary for them to have the Tables, and the written Law to keep
them in remembrance of their Duty. Theophylact in like manner says, Proem. in
Matthew.
That when Men became unworthy to be taught, and guided by the Holy Spirit,
then God, the lover of Mankind, (...), gave them the Scriptures, that by them
they might be made mindful of his Will: Declaring that they knew nothing of the
derivation of God's positive Worship by Tradition only, but thought it
necessary that it should be made known unto them either by Writing, or the
immediate dictates of the Holy Spirit dwelling in their Hearts. They also add
that this written Law was given, (...), Constit. Apost. ibid. p. 349.
to supply the defects of the Law of ^^ature, by that God who would not suffer
them, (...), to be seduced; clearly insinuating, that Tradition, without this
written Law, was not sufficient to supply the defects of that of Nature, or to
preserve them from Error. As will be farther evident if we consider,

That both the Antediluvians, and they who lived after the Flood, and before
the Writing of the Law of Moses, had generally corrupted their ways, and
deviated from that Tradition which they undoubtedly received from Adam, and
from Noah, touching the Worship of the true and only God. For even whilst Adam
was alive, In Genesis 4.26.
and had not passed half his days, Men began, says the Chaldee Paraphrast, to
profane the Name of the Lord, Ainsw. in Genesis 4. v. 26.
by ceasing to pray to him. The Hebrew Doctors tell us, That in the Days of
Enosh, the Sons of Adam erred with great Error, and the Counsel of the Wise Men
of that Age became Brutish, and their Error was this, They said forasmuch as
God has Created these Stars and Spheres to govern the World, and set them on
high, and imparted honor to them, and they are Ministers that Minister before
him, it is meet that Men should Laud and Glorify, and give them Honor, for
this is the Will of God, that we magnify and honor whomsoever he magnifies
and honors. -- When this thing was come up into their Hearts, they began to
build Temples to Stars, and to offer Sacrifice to them, and to Laud and
Glorify them with Words, and to Worship before them, that they might in their
evil Opinion obtain favor of the Creator, and this was the Root of Idolatry.
Ibid.
And hence in the ancient Commentaries of the Hebrews the Age of Enosh is
represented as a wicked Age. In the time of Enoch, and before the death of
Adam, wickedness had mightily prevailed even among the Sons of God, or Members
of the Church; for Enoch is mentioned as the only Man who adhered perfectly to
God, and of him it is said, Wisd. 4.10. Verse. 11, 14.
That he lived among Sinners, and that God took him away from among the wicked,
least their evil Example should corrupt his Righteous Soul. After his
Assumption we find that Men had generally declined to iniquity, that all Flesh
had corrupted their Ways, Genesis 6.12.
excepting Noah and his Family, that they had forsaken God, and given up
themselves to Idolatry, saying to God, Job 22.17.
Depart from us, and what can the Almighty do for us?

About an Hundred Years after the Flood they set themselves with one Consent to
build the Tower of Babel in opposition to God, and in which, say the Hebrews,
Ainsw. ibid.
they designed an Idol Temple. Nahor and Tharah the Progenitors of Abraham were
Idolaters, Genesis 31.30, 53.
and after the Call of Abraham they continued so to be. In the Family of Isaac,
Esau and his Wives were a bitterness of Spirit to Isaac and Rebecca, because
they served God with strange Service, says the Jerusalem Tergum; that is, with
Idolatry. In the Family of Jacob, Genesis 31.22. Genesis 35.2.
Rebecca steals her Fathers Images: In his House were worshippers of strange
Gods and Retainers of Idols. When the Israelites lived in Egypt, they so
complied with their Rites, Praepar. Evang. l. 7. c. 28.
says Eusebius, (...), as to forget the Piety of their Forefathers. They
learned in Egypt, Sermon. 2. adv. Graec. p. 492.
says Theodoret, (...), to worship many Gods with them. They committed
Whoredom in Egypt, says Ezekiel, Ezekiel 23.2-19.
they multiplied the Whoredoms they had committed in the Land of Egypt. Whence
Joshua speaks thus unto them, Josh. 24.14.
Put away the Gods which your Fathers served in Mesopotamia, and in Egypt,
Here then is Evidence sufficient,

First, That the first Ages of the World were not abandoned only to the
uncertainty of Tradition, but were guided partly by the Light of Nature, and
partly by immediate Revelation; Tradition being by Divine Wisdom judged a more
imperfect Guide, than the dim Light of Nature.

Secondly, That when it pleased God to give his People Positive and ceremonial
Laws, he would by no means leave them to the uncertainty of Tradition, but
commanded that they should be written in a Book, for a Memorial to, and for a
Testimony against them, and should thence be read by, and to them, that they,
and the Generations to come might learn them. And,

Thirdly, That the Service of the one true God received by Tradition from Adam,
Enoch and others before the Flood, from Noah, Melchizedeck, Abraham, and the
Patriarchs after the Flood, was presently corrupted, and utterly defaced by
Idolatry, to let us see how insufficient mere Tradition is, since even in the
Days and Lives of them who lived so long, and who delivered this Fundamental
Article of Worshipping the one true God unto their Offspring, they saw them
running headlong to Idolatry, and adding many corrupt Inventions, and vain
Imaginations of their own unto that Worship they had received by Tradition from
them.

Secondly, M. adds, That for above Two thousand Years more, P. 415. P. 231.
from Moses until Christ's time, the Church was governed partly by Writing, and
partly by Tradition. For the Jews had at least two undeniable Traditions. For
they knew only by Tradition what remedy was to be used to free their Female
Children from Original Sin, as also to free their Male Children, in danger of
Death, before the Eighth Day. This Remedy they knew and observed, and were
bound to know and observe, and yet they infallibly knew it without having any
Scripture expressing to them the knowledge of this Remedy, or of their
Obligation to use it; or that it was so necessary for the Salvation of their
Children, whom they did believe to be in Original Sin, and by that debarred
from Salvation, unless some Remedy were applied. Some Remedy surely was as
necessary for the Female, as Circumcision for the Male. Show me this Remedy in
Scripture.

2. They truly believed some of those bloody Sacrifices to have been appointed
to them by God for the expiation of their Sins, but they could not believe
truly that these Sacrifices could expiate their Sins by their own Virtue; they
believing then that these Sacrifices had their expiative Virtue from the Merits
of Christ. Show me any Text in which this was then written.

1. Jewish Church until Christ's time was governed partly by Tradition, or that
Tradition was their partial Rule of Faith, in reference to any necessary
Doctrines or Rules of Manners, will appear a vain Imagination if we consider
that, in the Scriptures of the Old and the New Testament, they are still sent
unto the written Word to learn their Duty, but never to Tradition; the Prophets
do exhort them for their direction to repair to the Law, Esai. 8.20.34.16. Mal.
4.4.
and to the Testimonies, to the Book of the Lord. To remember the Law of Moses
which he commanded them in Horeb, for all Israel, with the Statutes and
Judgments, as their only certain Rule and Direction. Now that the ordinary
Succession of Prophets was to cease from the Days of Malachy to the Times of
Christ, whereas had Oral Tradition also been their Rule, the Prophets must have
had like reason to call upon them to remember that.

Moreover God only calls upon them by Moses, To do all the Words of this Law
which are written in this Book, and promises his Favor and Acceptance of them
upon that account, saying, If thou shall hearken to the voice of the Lord thy
God, Deuteronomy. 30.9, 10. Verse. 15.
to keep his Commandments and Statutes, which are written in this Book of the
Law, I will rejoice over thee for Good. See I have set before thee this day
life and good, and death and evil. And David speaks thus unto King Solomon, 1
Kings 2.3.
Keep the Charge of the Lord thy God to walk in his ways, to keep his Statutes,
and his Commandments, and his Judgments, and his Testimonies, as it is written
in the Law of Moses, that thou may prosper in all that thou do, and
whithersoever thou turnest thy self. If then the Observation of what was
written in the Law of Moses was sufficient to procure Life, Favor, Prosperity,
and Acceptance with God, surely this written Law must be a perfect Rule, and
must sufficiently contain all that was needful to be believed, or done unto
those ends. Hence is the King commanded to write him a Copy of this Law in a
Book, that he might learn to fear the Lord God, Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19.
and to keep all the words of this Law, and these Statutes to do them; and to
perform the words of the Covenant which are written in this Book, 2 Chronicles.
34.31.
is to keep God's Commandments, his Testimonies, and his Statutes with all the
Soul, and with all the Heart. Whereas had Oral Tradition been any part of their
Rule, they must have been obliged equally to observe what was delivered by it,
and all God's Statutes, and Commandments could not be written in this Book, as
it is so expressly and frequently declared that they were.

Our Savior in like manner bids them Search the Scriptures, Joh. 3.39.
because they thought in them they had eternal Life, in which apprehension, had
they been deceived, as they must have been provided that there was another Law
of Oral Tradition given to lead them unto Life eternal, our Savior doubtless
would have informed them of this dangerous Error, which yet he was so far from
doing, that when a Lawyer puts the Question to him, What shall I do that I may
inherit eternal Life? Luke 10.25, 26.
he Answers, What is written in the Law, how read thou? This do, and thou
shall live. Luke 16.29.
And sends the Jews to Moses and the Prophets, that by hearing them they might
avoid the coming to the Place of Torments; but neither he nor his Disciples do
ever send them to Tradition, or speak one word in approbation of it, which is
sufficient Evidence, that they knew nothing of this Rule of Mr. M.

2dly. Traditions concerning Doctrines generally believed, and Practices
needful to be performed among them, after the Law was written by Moses, and
after God had given them a Charge, upon the ceasing of the Succession of his
Prophets, to remember and stick close unto it, I say, the Traditions which
obtained in the Jewish Church, as far as we have any certain intimation of
them, were such as tended to the evacuating of the Law of Moses, to the
renouncing of the true Messiah, and to the introduction of vain Worship, and
superstitious Observances, whence it demonstratively appears that Oral
Tradition was not then a certain Rule, nor could the Jewish Nation be obliged
by divine Precept to receive it as such. To make this Evident; consider,

1. That our Savior often sends the Jews to Scripture, to Moses and the
Prophets, but never to Tradition.

2. That he still represents the great Asserters of Tradition in the Jewish
Nation, Matthew. 15.14.23.16, 17, 19. Mat. 15.10, 11.
to wit, their Elders, Scribes and Pharisees, as blind Guides, leading of the
Blind, as Fools and Blind; confuteth their Traditions, though generally
received, before all the People; Mark 7. Mat. 12.7. Matthew. 15.13.
justifies his Disciples in the neglect and violation of them; pronounces them
Plants which his Father had not planted, and therefore such as should be rooted
up.

3dly. He plainly tells them, That by these Traditions they did, (...),
transgress, make void, Mark. 7.10.
and null the Commandment of God. He shows this by plain Instances in their
evacuating the Fifth Commandment by their Traditions, in observing and
enjoining such Traditions touching the Observation of the Sabbatick Rest,
Matthew. 12.7. Matthew. 12.12. Luke 6.9. Mark 3.5. Luke 13.15. Matthew. 23.16 -- -23.
as contradicted that great Law of God, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice,
and made it unlawful to do good, and preserve Life upon that day, and which
sufficiently demonstrated, (...), the blindness of their Minds, and their
Hypocrisy, and in absolving them from their Oaths out of an ignorance so
Gross, as knew not they were virtually made to God. He also charges them that
by thus teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men, Matthew. 15.9.
they rendered God's Worship vain.

4thly. It is extremely evident that by virtue of some of these Traditions,
they rejected the true Messiah, and stood obliged by them so to do.

For, First, It is most certain that the Jews had a Tradition generally
received among them, That their Messiah should be a Temporal Prince; that at
his Coming he should restore the Kingdom to Israel; he should subdue the
Nations under them, and should erect a Temporal Dominion in the Jewish Nation
over all their Enemies. Trypho the Jew declares to Justin M. That, Dial. p. 249.
(...), the Scriptures do compel us to expect a great and glorious Messiah, who
shall receive, as the Son of Man, from the ancient of Days, an everlasting
Kingdom; In Celsum. l. 2. p. 78.
not such a mean despised one as was your Jesus. The Jews, says Origin, say,
That their Prophets represent their Messiah to be, (...), a great Person, and a
Potentate, and Lord of the whole Earth, and of all the Heathens, and their
Armies. De Bello Jud. l. 6. c. 31.
Josephus confesses there was an obscure Oracle found in their S. Books,
(...), That about that time one of Judea should govern the World. Suetonius and
Tacitus say, In Vespas. c 4. Hist l. 5.
That it was in the whole East, Vetus and constans opinio, ut eo tempore Judaea
profecti rerum potirentur, an old, and constant Opinion, that some out of
Judaea should obtain the Government of the World; and that this Prophecy was
contained, Antiquis Sacerdotum literis, in the ancient Writings of the Priests.
All the Disciples of our Lord did constantly expect this Temporal Kingdom, till
by the Holy Ghost's descent upon them, they were informed better, witness their
Contests, Matthew. 18.1.
Who should be the greatest in this Kingdom? and the desire of the Sons of
Zebedee, to sit one at his Right Hand, Matthew. 20.21.
and the other at his Left in it. And when they were assembled after his
Resurrection, Act. 1.6.
this was their Enquiry, Lord will thou now restore the Kingdom to Israel? It
is therefore certain that this was the Tradition of the whole Jewish Church
received from their Wise Men, and grounded on the Scriptures of the Prophets,
as they did interpret them.

Secondly, It was also a Tradition which generally obtained among the Jews,
That their Elias, who was called the Tisbite, was to appear in Person at the
Advent of the true Messiah, Justin M. Dial. p. 268.
and to anoint him to his Office. All we, says Trypho, expect that Christ
should be anointed by Elias who is for to come, (...), and because Elias is not
come, I think that our Messiah is not come. Thus was that place of Malachy
translated by the Seventy Interpreters long before our Savior's coming, Mal.
4.5.
behold I send unto you, (...), Elias the Tisbite, before the great and
glorious Day of the Lord come. Accordingly the Scribes, or the Expounders of
the Law, Mark 9.11.
did with one Voice declare, it was necessary that Elias should come first.

Thirdly, It was the general Tradition of the Jews, That the Law of Moses
should be perpetually obliging to them, and be observed even in the Days of the
Messiah. On this Presumption certainly it was, that Christ's Disciples, after
his Resurrection were strict Observers of the Law of Moses for a considerable
time, and so were also the Generality of the Jewish Converts. St. Peter was so
nice in Observation of it, as that till he was informed better by a Vision, he
thought such Meat was utterly unlawful as was forbidden by the Law, so that he
being in this Vision bid to slay and eat, cries out, as a Man tempted to an
unlawful Act, Acts 10.14.
Not so Lord, for I have never eaten any thing that is unclean. Whence Origin
well notes, L. 2. Contr. Cells. p. 56, 57.
That he, (...), for a long time kept the Jewish Customs, according to the Law
of Moses; and that, (...), living according to the Tradition of the Jews, he
contemned those who were not of the Jews, and even, when by this Vision he was
prevailed upon to go unto Cornelius, he begins his Speech to him thus, Acts
10.28.
You know that it is an unlawful thing, for a Man that is a Jew, to keep
Company, or come in to one of another Nation; Acts 11.2.
and when he had done it, his Brethren call him to an Account, and contend with
him for it. Acts 21.20.
St. James gives an Account to Paul of the great Zeal that all the Jewish
Converts had to the Law of Moses in these Words, Thou see Brother, how many
Thousand Jews there are which believe, and they are all zealous of the Law. He
farther tells him, how much they were offended with him, because they heard,
that he had taught, that they were not obliged to Obedience to the
Constitutions and Customs of the Jewish Law. And lastly, does exhort him to do
what might be proper to cause them to believe, That he also walked orderly, and
kept the Law. St. Jerome and Sulpitius inform us, Chron. Eusebius. l. 2. c. 45.
That Fifteen of the first Bishops of Jerusalem, with their Flocks, were all
Observers of the Law of Moses; and Origin, That, (...), Ibid. p. 56.
they of the Jews who believed in Jesus, left not their own Law. Moreover, by
the Unbelieving Jews, nothing was more abhorred than the Thoughts of changing
their Mosaic Customs: Their Accusation against Stephen was this, that he had
said, Acts 6.14.
That the Messiah should change the Customs which Moses had delivered to them;
and this was, in the Judgment of the High Priest, the Elders, and the Scribes,
sufficient to prove him guilty of that capital Offense of Blasphemy. On this
Account they bring St. Paul before the Judgment Seat of Gallio, because, say
they, he persuaded Men to Worship God, Acts 18.1^.
(...), against, or otherwise than was commanded by the Law of Moses. And when
he makes his Apology unto the Jews of Rome, for bearing of his Chain, he does
it in these Words, I have done nothing contrary to the Law, Acts 28.17.
or to the Customs of my Country. Deuteronomy. 29.29. Levit. 3.17. Exodus 12.17.
Now this Opinion they grounded chiefly upon those Places which seem to speak
of the Perpetuity of those Statutes, and say they shall be Ordinances to them
for ever; and consequently seem to infer a Declaration, from the Mouth of God,
that they should not be altered.

Lo here Three plain Traditions of the whole Jewish Church, Two of which
plainly tended to oblige them to renounce the true Messiah, and the Third to
blend Judaism with Christianity, and to refuse to preach the Gospel to the
Gentiles; here therefore is a Threefold Demonstration, not only of the
Uncertainty, but of the Falsehood of the Traditions, which obtained in the whole
Church of God.

For farther Demonstration of this Matter,

First, That the Traditions we have mentioned, were, (...), the Traditions of
the Elders, Mark 7.3. Acts 28.17. Gal. 1.14.
(...), the Customs and Traditions of their Fathers; they were the Traditions
of them who sat in the Chair of Moses, of the Interpreters of Scripture, the
Guides of the common People, they were the Traditions of those Men who
generally had obtained the Reputation of the greatest Knowledge and Exactness
in the Law, who did, (...), Joseph. de Bello Jud. l. 2. c. 12. Arch. l. 17. c.
3.
most exactly interpret the Laws, and declare the things belonging to them, and
who were by the Jews esteemed, (...), more Pious than the rest; so that if
these were Foolish and Blind Guides, they had no other to conduct them, except
those two pernicious Guides of Heretics, the Scripture, and the use of Reason.

Secondly, Observe that these Traditions were not taught only in our Savior's
Age, but long before, they being Customs and Traditions of their Forefathers.
The Asserters of them, says Josephus, Antiq. l. 18. c. 2.
were, (...), the most ancient of their Countrymen. Epiphanius informs us, That
they pretended to derive some of these, Malmon. port. Mosis, p. 36, 37, 38.
(...), or Traditions, down from Moses; and their own Writers do expressly
teach, That they were Traditions received from the Mouth of Moses. They
therefore must be taught whilst these Church Guides, and Rulers were
infallible, and the true Judges of Tradition, if ever they were so; and if the
Jewish Doctors might so generally mistake in Fathering these Traditions upon
Moses, why may not others do the like in Fathering theirs on the Apostles?

Thirdly, Observe that the Jewish Worship and Religion was then thought partly
to consist in them, and partly in the written Law; Gal. 1.14.
for St. Paul tells us, That he profited much, (...), in the Jews Religion,
being zealous for the Traditions received from his Forefathers. And besides his
being a strict observer of the Law, he adds in the same place, That he was,
(...), of that Sect of Pharisees, which joined Traditions to the Law of Moses,
Antiq. Judaic. l. 18. c. 2.
of whom Josephus says, That, (...), whatsoever was Divine, whether respecting
Prayers, or the performance of things Sacred, were done according to their
Expositions or Traditions. Moreover these Traditions were, says our Savior,
taught for Doctrines; they were, (...), belonging to their Laws, says
Josephus, the neglect of the Observance of them, was looked on as an high
Transgression, they being, say their own Records, equal to, if not more weighty
than the Law. The Jews were therefore in this Matter true Roman Catholics,
receiving these Traditions as part of their Rule of Faith, Pari pietatis
affectu, with like affection as the written Word.

And, Lastly, These Traditions were generally received by the Jewish Nation, no
Man gainsaying the Observance of them, but some few Sadduces, who in reality
were Heretics, and by the Jews reputed Schismatics. Cap. 7. v. 3. Antiq.
Judaic. l. 13 c. 18.
For the Pharisees and all the Jews held the Tradition of the Elders, says St.
Mark, Josephus informs us, That the Pharisees had, (...), the multitude on
their side, That they were, (...), the Persons which seemed to the People most
worthy of Credit, and the best Interpreters of their Laws. They were the Men,
says Christ, who sat in Moses's Chair; and their very Question, Mark 7.5.
Why walk not thy Disciples according to the Tradition of the Elders?
insinuates that it was a new, and a strange thing among them to find any one of
Reputation who transgressed their Traditions: Let then the Roman Doctors tell
us how vain, and false Traditions might thus generally obtain among the Jews,
and pretend to be derived from Moses, and even to be part of the Instructions
he received from God, when they were nothing less, and we will tell them how
the like Traditions might by them be received as Apostolical, or let them say
why we must be esteemed Heretics and Schismatics, for rejecting such
Traditions as our Dear Lord's Disciples, with his own approbation, did reject,
and which he taught even the Common People to contemn.

And now to Answer directly to his Instances, First, To that of Original Sin.
We call upon him to prove, 1. That they had any knowledge of the Imputation of
it; Dogm. Theol. Tom. 4. part. 2. l. 14. c. 2.
and well we may, when his own Petavius confesses, That the Greek Church has
spoke very rarely of it. Secondly, We desire him to prove, that Circumcision
was necessary for the Salvation of the Male, and his Justification from
Original Sin; this is another School Notion with which the ancient Church of
God was not acquainted, yea which they most expressly do gainsay, they having
solemnly declared that Abraham received it for a Sign, but (a) (...). Just. M.
Dial. cum Tryph. p. 241.
not for Justification, (b) Non in salutis praerogativam. Tert. adv. Judaeos c
2, 3.
not for Salvation, (c) Non quasi consummatricem justiciae. Iren. l. 4. c. 30.
not for the Consummation of Righteousness, (d) (...) Chrysostom. Hom. 39. in Genesis
p. 321, 322.
not for the Freedom of the Soul, for it avails nothing for the advantage of
the Soul; and that because it was administered to Children, who could receive no
Spiritual advantage, and no Justification by it, that it has (e) Pseud.
Ambros. in 4. ad Romans
nothing of Dignity in it, but is barely a Sign. And had it been prescribed, as
the Schoolmen dream, for a Remedy against Original Sin, what Remedy had they
for it before the Institution of the Ceremony of Circumcision? Were all their
Children damned in Egypt, or in the Wilderness, because they were not
Circumcised?

To his Second Instance of the Relation which their Sacrifices had to the
Expiation to be made by the Death of Christ, I Answer, 1st. That it appears not
that they had any knowledge of this Mystery; and 2dly. That if this was a
Tradition at any time made known to them, it is a demonstration, that Tradition
is no sure preserver of things most needful to be known; it being certain, that
before our Savior's time they had quite lost this Notion, for they believed
not that their Messiah, the Son of David, was to die, much less that he should
shed his Blood as a propitiatory Sacrifice for their Sins, they had learned out
of the Law interpreted by the Scribes, Joh. 12.34. Mark 9.32. Luke 9.45.18.34.
That Christ abided for ever, and therefore wondered to hear our Savior speak
of his being lifted up; and when his own Disciples heard him speak of his being
delivered up to Death, they understood not that Saying.

3. M. farther adds, That the Scriptures written by Moses were given only to
the Church of Israel, P. 337.
all other Nations, as they had then several true Believers among them, when
Abraham was separated from them, so there is not the least mention of their
Total decay of Belief after that separation. All they then still believed upon
Tradition, and so true Faith might be preserved among many who never heard of
Scripture till Christ's time. P. 338.
That Job and his Friends lived not among the Progeny of Abraham, and yet Job
was most eminent in Virtue, and true Faith, and his Friends believed in one
God, held the Resurrection of the Flesh, and that God should judge all Men
according to their Works, and diverse other Points, relying still only upon
Tradition.

Whereas Mr. M. declares: Repl. 1.
That there is not the least mention of the Total decay of the belief of other
Nations, when they were separated from Abraham; and when the Scriptures were
given by Moses to the Jews, it it already proved, that Abraham at his
Separation left his Kindred under Idolatry. And as for all the Nations round
about the Jews, and even under the whole Heavens; Moses informs us, Deuteronomy. 4.19.
Ps. 135.15. Ps. 96.5.
That they worshipped the Host of Heaven: The Psalmist, That their God's were
Silver and Gold, the works of Men's hands. That all the Gods of the Nations
were, (...), Demons, or wicked Spirits. In the New Testament we are taught,
That God suffered all Nations, in time past, Acts 14.16. 1 Cor. 1.21. Romans
1.21. Gal. 4.8.
to walk after their own ways; That they knew not God, nor did they glorify
him as God, That they became vain in their Imaginations, and their foolish
Hearts were darkened, That they served them who by nature were no Gods; yea
even in the time of Moses, the Gods of the People round about the Jews, whether
nigh unto them, Deuteronomy. 13.17.
or far from them, from the one end of the Earth unto the other end thereof,
were other Gods; and yet it is certain, That their Ancestors must have, some
time or other, received from their Forefathers the Worship of the true and only
God; which therefore is a Demonstration of the uncertainty of Doctrines
received only by Tradition, and that Men are exceeding apt to corrupt what they
do thus receive: Moreover the Scripture, in plain Opposition to Mr. M.
declares, That God made known his Godhead, and eternal Power, to the Heathens,
Romans 1.19, 20.
not by Tradition, but by the visible things of the Creation, that he left not
himself without a Witness; not by giving them Traditions, Acts 14.17.
but in affording to them fruitful Seasons; That they had a Law, not of
Traditions, written in their Memories, but of Nature, Romans 2.14, 15, 16.
written in their Hearts, by which they did pass Sentence of Approbation or
Condemnation of their Actions, and by which they were to be judged at the last
Day. That as for their Traditions, Coloss. 2.8.
they were vain Deceits, and the Traditions of Men, 1 Pet. 1.18.
Traditions received from their Fathers, which rendered their Conversation
vain; so far were these inspired Persons from believing that true Faith was
preserved among the Heathen by Tradition.

Secondly, That Job and his Friends believed in one God, etc. Tradition, but by
the Light of Nature, Chrysostom. Caten. in Job. p. 2.
the Fathers do inform us, saying that, (...), he by Nature did the things
required by the Law, using his untaught Knowledge. And that the Notions by
which he was directed were, Ibid. p. 391.
(...), congenial to his Nature, and such as God had planted in his Mind. And
whereas Mr. M. aslerts, That he believed the Resurrection of the Flesh, of
which he could not be informed by the Light of Nature: I answer, This cannot be
proved from those Words of Job, For I know that my Redeemer lives, Job 19.25,
26.
etc. seeing the Import of them may be only this; I know that my Redeemer, who
always lives, can hereafter deliver me out of this miserable Condition, and
though the Worms which have eaten my Skin, should proceed to consume my Flesh,
yet I feel my Soul inspired with a comfortable Belief, that before I die, I
shall see my self restored by the Mercy of God to an happy Estate; and in this
Uncertainty the Ancients leave this Passage, saying, That he may be conceived
here to assert that God, (...), Cat. p. 341.
will raise him out of the Earth by a Resurrection; or that delivering him from
his Disease, he will again renew his Skin corrupted with it, and that this,
(...), Deliverance from his Troubles, might be called a Resurrection.

Thirdly, Christianity was first preached to the Heathen World, and Christians
called upon the Heathens to turn from their dumb Idols to the living God, and
from their vain Customs received by Tradition from their Fathers, to the pure
and spiritual Worship of the Deity; the Heathens pleaded for their
Superstitions and Idolatries by the very same Arguments which Mr. M. and others
of his Party, use for the Defense of their own Superstitions, against the
Protestant Religion; saying, That it was the Religion delivered to them from
their Fathers, their Divines and Guides, on whose Discretion and Judgment it
became them to depend: That it became them to receive, as true, what was thus
handed down unto them from their Ancestors, and that Men ought not to be
permitted to examine it by their own private Reason, but to believe it upon so
long and General Tradition, though they saw no Reason for it: (...) p. 57.
Clemens Alexandrinus, tells us their Plea was this, (...), it is not
reasonable that we should change the Customs delivered to us from our Fathers.
Tertullian says, Apol. c. 6.
That this was their Apology for their Worship, That they did, Fidelissime
tueri a patribus traditum, most faithfully adhere to the Tradition of their
Fathers. Praepar. Evang. l. 1. c 10. p. 40.
Eusebius says, That the Heathen Worship still obtained, upon the Score of
keeping, (...), the Depositum committed to them, and handed down by their
Forefathers through many Ages, and that they looked upon it as Irreligious,
(...), L. 1. c. 2. p. 5.
to relinquish the Customs delivered to them from their Fathers, and to desert
those Gods which were received, (...), from the Beginning, both by the Greeks
and the Barbarians. This, says he, was with them a fixed Rule, (...) -- (...),
That every Man ought to worship according to the Custom of their Country, to
walk by, and follow the Piety of his Forefathers, and to adhere, (...), to the
Customs and Determinations which had obtained of old. Thus in Pseudo-Clemens,
Recogn. l. 5. c. 30.
they conclude it Impious to prevaricate in the Religion delivered to them from
their Ancestors, and not to worship those Gods, Quae nobis tradita sunt a
Majoribus nostris, which were delivered to us by the Tradition of our
Ancestors. If you ask them a Reason of their Persuasion, says Lactantius, they
can give you none, L. 5. c. 19. p. 517.
Sed ad Majorum judicium confugiunt, but they fly to the judgment of their
Ancestors, saying they were wise Men, they knew what was best. They persevere,
says he, pertinaciously to desend their Religions, as being, a Majoribus
traditae, delivered by their Ancestors, not considering the Quality of them,
Sed ex hoc probatas, and veras esse confidunt, quod eas Veteres tradiderunt,
tantaque est Authoritas vetustatis, ut in eam inquirere scoelus esse dicatur,
but being confident that they were true, and to be approved, because their
Ancestors delivered them; and so great with them, is the Authority of
Antiquity, that they esteem it a Wickedness to enquire into it; embracing that
as a known Truth, which they had thus received. We must believe, says Plato,
Apud Theodoret. Sermon. 1. p. 474. De Not. Deor. l. 3. ab initio p. 243.
those that were before us, and were, as they affirmed, the Progeny of the
Gods, though they give no necessary Demonstration of what they say; nor shall
any Man's Reason, be he never so learned, says Cicero, move me from that
Opinion of the Worship of the immortal Gods, Quam a Majoribus accepi, which I
received from my Ancestors. See here Popery, in the Foundation of it, borrowed
from Heathanism; see how exactly they comply in the same Plea.

Moreover the Answer which the Christians then returned unto this Plea of
Pagans from Tradition, Protestants against the same Pretenses in the Mouths of
Roman Catholics, and a full Evidence, that they were not Assertors of the
Roman Doctrine in this Matter. For,

First, They represent it as the great Folly of the Heathen World, that they
followed Custom against Reason, objecting it to their Reproach, that they did
what they saw done, not what their Reason told them should be done: That among
them, Arnob. l. 7. p. 236. L. 2. c. 6. p. 172.
Plus valet nullam habens consuetudo rationem, Custom without Reason prevailed
more, than the weight of Things examined by the Nature of Truth. What will you
do, says Lactantius to them, Majoresne potius quam Rationem sequaris? Would
you follow your Ancestors rather than Reason? esteeming this the greatest of
Absurdities. He farther adds, That they who were led, like Beasts, by others,
Et qui sine ullo judicio inventa Majorum probant, sapientiam sibi adimunt, and
who did without Judgment approve of the Inventions of their Ancestors; P. 173.
deprived themselves of Wisdom. Now if it be so great a Folly and Absurdity,
and such a brutish renouncing of all Wisdom, to comply with Custom against
Reason; and without exercising of our Judgments; must it not much more be so to
comply with it against Scripture, Reason, and the whole Stream of Primitive
Antiquity, as we must do, if we do yield a blind Submission to the Doctrines of
the Roman Church?

Secondly, They prove their Ancestors were not to be followed without the use
of Reason and Discretion, because they were so prone to receive Fables, and
even Monsters of Opinions: P. 21.
We are not to be drawn into Error by consenting to our Ancestors, says
Octavius, Majoribus enim nostris tam facilis in mendaciis fides fuerit, ut
temere crediderint etiam alia monstrosa mira miracula, for our Ancestors were
so easily imposed upon by Lies, that they believed rashly many other monstrous
Wonders. L. 1. p. 34.
You plead Antiquity, says Arnobius, as an Argument of Truth, Quasi vero
errorum Antiquitas plenissima Matter non fuerit, as if Antiquity were not the
pregnant Mother of Errors, and as if she had not brought forth all those
Things, which in their ignominious Fables impute such filthy Characters to
their Gods. De Civ. Dei l. 22. c. 6.
St. Austin also says, That, Antiquitas recepit fabulas fictas nonnunquam
incondite, Antiquity received Fables feigned, sometimes incongruously: And is
it not evident from the Confessions of the Romish Doctors, and Historians, that
in the dark and ignorant Ages of the Church from the Tenth to the Fifteenth
Century, their Church abounded with idle Monks who made it their whole Business
to fill Church History with lying Legends and Tales, as Foolish and Ridiculous
as those of Heathens. Locor. Theolog l 11. c. 6. p. 652.
For Melchior Canus does ingenuously confess, Res Gestas Sanctorum falsis and
commentitiis fabulis contaminari, That the Histories of the Saints were defiled
with false and counterfeit Fables. That most of their Writers have feigned so
many things, either in compliance with their Affections, or on set purpose;
That he was not only ashamed, P. 650.
but even weary of them, their whole Narration being invented either for gain,
or Error. Ibid. p. 658.
And speaking of their Golden Legend, he says, Praefat. ante Homil. de fest.
Sanctorum.
In illo miraculorum monstra saepius quam vera miracula legas. Royardus adds,
That such Writers weakened the truth it self, Insertis passim fabulis ac meris
nugamentis, by the Fables and mere Fooleries they frequently inserted.
Cornelius Agrippa says, De vanit. scient. cap. 97.
That lying piously they counterfeited Relics, framed Miracles, Confinguntque
vel plausibiles, vel terribiles Fabulas, and feigned plausible, or terrible
Tales. In lib. Confess. August.
Erasmus says, They studied to commend them whom they favored, Fabulis vanis;
and miraculis fictis, with vain Fables, and feigned Miracles. Cap. de
Reliquiis, l. 1. c. 11. p. 156. Lib. 5. p. 565.
The like complaints you may read in Cassander's Consultation, in Espencaeus's
Commentary upon Timothy, and in Lyranus on the Fourteenth Chapter of Daniel.
Aventinus informs us, That in the days of Hildebrand many false Prophets,
Fabulis, and Miraculis a veritate plebem Christi avertunt, did turn away the
People from the Truth by Fables and Miracles. Then, says he, arose false
Prophets, false Apostles, false Priests, P. 591.
Qui simulata Religione populum deceperunt, magna signa, and prodigia
ediderunt, who deceived the People with feigned Religion, and wrought great
Signs and Wonders. The Clergy of Liege add, That then were those Stories
feigned concerning Sylvester and Constantine no less ignorantly than impudently
and falsely, and many others, which, say they, Christian Modesty will not permit
us to tell, then crept in the traffic of Holy Things, Council. To. 2. Edit.
Colon. apud Quiritel. p. 809.
and the Holy Philosophy, by the subtle interpretation of Sycophants, began to
be corrupted, polluted, and violated with humane Inventions, and old Wives
Fables. John Gerson speaks thus, Enquire if there be not Apocryphal Scriptures,
De Defect. Viror. Eccles. Consid. 16. etc.
Hymns, and Prayers brought into the Church in process of time either of
purpose, or of ignorance, to the great hurt of the Christian Faith. He also
says, There is very much Superstition in the Worshipping of Saints,
innumerable Observations without all Ground or Reason, vain credulity in
believing things concerning the Saints reported in the uncertain Legends of
their Lives.

Thirdly, The Fathers tell them, That this was the rise of all their Errors,
Minuc. p. 26.
Quod inconsulte gestiant parentibus obedire, That they would without
consulting follow their Forefathers; Et fieri maluerunt alieni erroris
accessio quam sibi credere, and that they chose rather to follow the Errors of
other Men, than believe themselves. Clem. Alex. Adm. p. 57.
That they had never fallen into such impiety, (...), if being carried away
with Custom, they had not shut their Eyes against Reason. And it is also our
persuasion that this adhering to the Customs of the present R. Church, and to
the Customs which crept in, or advanced into Articles of her Faith, in the dark
Ages of the Western Church, gave the Rise to her Errors. We therefore do exhort
them in the Words of Justin Martyr, (...), Cohort. ad Graec. p. 15.
Not without trial to assent to the Errors of their Forefathers, nor presently
to think that true, which they mistaking, delivered to them for Tradition.

Fourthly, They retorted the Objection, saying, That if it were a Fault, Arnob.
p. 91.
A veteribus institutis in alias res novas migrare, to quit their ancient
Institutions for things new, it was as well their fault as ours. That whereas
they objected to the Christians, Divortium ab institutis majorum, Tert. ad
Nation. cap. 10.
their departure from the Institutions of their Ancestors, they communicated
with them in the same Crime. For, Exclusa a vobis Antiquitas, you, though you
plead Antiquity, against us, have your selves cast it off. Totam Authoritatem
majorum vestra Authoritas dejecit, Your own Authority has destroyed, or
overthrown the whole Authority of the Ancients; and we see (even whilst you
urge it against us) Per omnia corruptam, imo deletam in vobis Antiquitatem,
Antiquity wholly corrupted, and even extinguished amongst you, which is the
constant Plea of Protestants, that they desert the Roman Church only as far as
she has palpably deserted the pure and Ancient Church of Christ, they separate
from her only in those things in which she has most plainly separated from the
Faith, and Discipline of ancient Rome, and the whole Church of Christ; and this
has been so demonstratively proved in the Article of the true Canon of
Scripture by Bishop Cousins, of the Pope's Supremacy by Doctor Barrow, in the
Articles of Service in Latin, Veneration of Images, Communion in one Kind, the
Seven Sacraments, in Three late Treatises designed to prove the Fallibility of
Romish Councils by their actually false Decrees; that none of the Disputers of
the Church of Rome have dared yet to meddle with them, and thereby give us good
Assurance, who know they want not will to do it, that they cannot Answer them.
The like has excellently been performed in all the other controverted
Articles, if not to the Conviction, yet to the Silencing of our Adversaries.

Fifthly, They constantly tell the Heathens, That there was a time when their
Religion was New, and when their Gods began to be so; that this being so,
Arnob. l. 2. p. 92, 93.
Cum de novitate loquimini Religionum nostrarum, vestrae vobis in mentem non
veniunt, when they spoke of the Novelty of the Christian Faith, they forgot the
Novelty of their own Religion; our Religion, say you, P. 94.
was not Four hundred Years ago; and your Gods, say we, were not Two thousand
Years ago: Now is it not shameful and impudent in you, Quod agere te videas, in
eo alterum reprehendere, to reprehend another for what you do your selves, and
to object that as a Crime to others, which may be retorted on your selves?
Since then we as constantly affirm, and have as fully proved, That there was a
time when the Religion of the Church of Rome was new in the contested Articles;
That Christianity had gone through several Centuries before any of them were
received as Articles of Christian Faith; That many of them have been introduced
since the Ninth Century; may we not also add, that therefore Romanists forget
their own Religion, when they Charge ours with Novelty, and reprehend that in
us which they themselves are truly guilty of?

Sixthly, Theodo. Sermon. 1. contr. Graec p. 477.
(...), not to be enslaved to their former Opinions, nor to be bound to follow
the Customs of their Fathers, but to seek the Truth wheresoever they could find
it. That every Man ought, in those things especially which concern the manner
of his living, to trust to his own judgment, and rather to depend on his own
Senses in seeking out the truth, than, as if he himself were bereft of Reason,
Lact. l. 2. c. 7. P. 273.
Credentem alienis erroribus decipi, to be deceived by giving credit to the
Errors of others, God having given reason to him sufficient to find out the
Truth. Athan. contr. Gent. p. 32, 33.
And speaking of the way of Truth, they tell them, That (...), there needs
nonothing but our selves to come to an exact knowledge and comprehension of it.
If you ask them by what internal Principle we may arrive at this knowledge,
they Answer, (...), That it is every Man's Soul, and the faculty of Reason in
it. If you enquire by what external Directions this Mind must be assisted,
Ibid. p. 1.
they reply, They must, (...), find the Truth from the Divine Oracles, That,
(...), they are of themselves sufficient for the Declaration of the Truth, and
that even an Heathen Macarius might learn it there. Now this is plainly sending
us to our private Reason, and Apprehension of the Sense of Scriptures to find
out the Truth, and to assure us, That it is an act of Wisdom in us, not to be
enslaved to our former Opinions, nor bound up by the Customs of our
Forefathers, from searching after Truth wheresoever we can find it.

Seventhly, They add, That the Heathens ought not to prejudge and run them down
with this Prescription, or by objecting to them their revolt, A Religione
majorum, from the Religion of their Ancestors, but fairly ought to come unto
the merits of the Cause: Lib. 2. p. 90.
Causam convenit ut inspiciatis, non factum, nec quid reliquimus opponere, sed
secuti quid simus potissimum contueri, You are not, says Arnobius, to condemn
us for the Fact, without enquiring whether we had not a just Cause for doing
it, nor object to us what we have left, without considering what we have
embraced in lieu of it; for what hinders, why as others who invented Falsehoods
delivered them to Posterity; Sic nos qui verum invenimus posteris meliora
tradamus, so we who have found the Truth may deliver better things to
Posterity? Which Passages are a full Answer to all the French Rhetoric
touching the Prejugez legitimes comre les Calvinistes.

Eighthly, In particular against this manner of prejudging, Romanists; they say,

1st. That they ought not to be run down with multitude, that Religion could
not be proved true because it had many Followers, or false, because it had but
few Assertors; Arnob. l. 3. ab initio.
and that even the Christian Religion could neither be proved nor disproved
upon this account, and that this vain pretense of Heathens had already been
answered by the Christians, mill modis, a thousand ways, and refuted by most
cogent Reasons: And indeed among the Relics of Antiquity ascribed by some to
Athanasius, by others to Theodoret, to Maximus, to Etherius, we have one brief,
but full Discourse, (...), against them who judge of Truth only by multitude.
Athanas. Tom. 2. p. 293. (...) -- (...) -- (...) -- (...);
Where the Author first tells us, that he is to combat, (...), against a false
Assertion; that the Authors of it are Objects of Pity or Commiseration; that
they fled to this miserable Refuge only for want of Reason on their side, and
even confessed their being vanquished; that multitude was proper to fright a
Man, but by no means to persuade him; that in the concernments of this World we
do not much regard it; and much less should we be moved by it in heavenly
Matters, to recede from the Testimonies of the Scriptures, and the agreeing
Sentiments of the Ancients; that our Lord had told us, That many are called,
but few chosen; That straight was the Gate which leads unto Life, and few
there be that find it; And that every wise Man would rather be of the number of
those few, P. 291.
than of that number which goes in the broad way: For had any Man lived in the
days of Stephen, would he not rather have been of his side alone, than of the
side of the multitude which rose up against him. Had not Phineas boldly opposed
himself to the prevailing multitude, the Plague had not ceased, nor had the
rest been saved; Was it not better to fly with Noah to the Ark, than with the
multitude to perish in the deluge? to go alone with Lot from Sodom, than with
the multitude to perish there? We indeed venerate the multitude, but then it is
a multitude, (...), which flies not examination, but which affords
demonstration.

2dly. (...); Apud. Athanas. To. 2. p. 325.
They add, That they ought not to be called upon to yield a blind assent to the
Dictates of other Men, without using their own Judgments to consider and
enquire, What is possible, what is suitable, or unsuitable, what acceptable to
God, what is congruous to Nature, what consonant to Truth, what accords with
the Mystery, what is agreeable to piety. They have accordingly left us a
Discourse in opposition to those Men who required them, (...), simply to
believe their Dictates, without considering what was fit or unfit to be
embraced, informing us, That this was of many, (...). Page 326.
(...), horrible Doctrines, the worst, which Satan had invented to lead Men
into dangerous Deceits: That it was the Doctrine of Men who imperiously
commanded all Men to follow their Dictates, and, (...), to believe without
Reason, and called that Faith which was an assent without trial to things
unstable and undemonstrated; That it was, (...), the rise of Error, and of all
Evils, the Doctrine of all Heretics, who declined the Examination, that they
might avoid the consutation of their Doctrines; (...).
That according to it no Man could find the way of Truth, or avoid the
precipice of Error; That according to it we being asked to yield assent to the
unproved Doctrines of Heretics and Heathens; should consent to do so: P. 327.
Whereas if we examine what we are required to believe, we shall have full
assurance of the Faith, (...), neither believing without reason, nor speaking
without Faith.

Ninthly, They say that it must be acknowledged that they had rationally cast
off the Customs and Traditions of their Forefathers, because they could
discover wherein they had generally erred: Praepar. Evang. l. 4. c. 4.
For thus Eusebius speaks, If we can show that, (...), all the Heathens and
Barbarians which were before our Saviors time, did not know the true God, but
either worshipped those which were no Gods, or evil Spirits, it must be then
confessed that we acted, (...), by a true and righteous Judgment when we
became, (...), Revolters from the Superstition of our Forefathers; If
therefore we not only can, but actually have showed in the forementioned
particulars, that the Church of Rome has generally erred; then must it also be
acknowledged, that our Separation from her was the result of Truth and
Righteousness.

Tenthly, They lastly say, Arnob. l. 2. P. 95.
That their Religion must be Ancient because it consisted in the Worship of the
Supreme God, Quo non est antiquius quicquam, than whom nothing is more Ancient:
And in like manner we declare our positive Religion must be Ancient, because it
consists of the Articles delivered in the Scriptures of the New Testament, and
in the Symbol of the Apostles, and taught by the Four first Centuries; we
therefore in like manner do conclude with them, as to all the positive Articles
of our Religion, Non ergo quod sequimur novum est, sed nos sero addicimus
quidnam sequi oporteat, That what we follow is not New, though 'twas but lately
that we learned that it was that, and that alone we ought to follow.

Now by impartial consideration of these particulars, I leave any Man of Reason
to judge whose Religion is most suitable in the general Grounds of it, to the
Sentiments of Antiquity, whether we Protestants plead any thing against those
of Rome, which the ancient Christians did not also plead against the Heathens,
and whether the most plausible Objections of the Romanists against us be not
fully answered by what these Fathers say in the defense of common Christianity
against the Heretics and Heathens.

4thly. Mr. M. adds, all those who had been instructed by the Apostles before
Scripture was written, P. 322, 340.
converted and instructed Thousands who never had heard any Apostle preach, and
all these believed on the Authority of the then present Church: P. 415.
That from the preaching of Christ unto the finishing of the Canon, and the
divulging of the same in such Languages as all Nations understood, very many
Years passed, and all the true Believers in Christ's Church were governed by
Tradition only.

R. H. does also tell us, That God, besides, Guide of Controv. Disc. 2. chapter 5..
44.
and before the New Testament Scriptures, left these Doctrines sufficiently
revealed to the then appointed Ecclesiastical Guides, from whom both the
present People, and the future Successors of those Guides both were, and might
rationally know they were to learn them, and so, had there been no Scriptures,
might to this Day, by mere Tradition have learned them sufficiently for their
Salvation.

First, M. is much out when he talks of Seventy or Eighty Years before those
Scriptures were written, which were to be the future Rule of Christians; for
the Gospel of St. Matthew was writ, says the Tradition of the Fathers, Theoph.
proem. in Matthew. Athan. Synops. p. 155.
(...), Eight Years after our Lords Ascension. Mark writ his Gospel whilst St.
Peter lived, (...), Ten Years after our Lords Assumption, says Theophylact.
St. Luke writ, (...), Fifteen Years after our Lords Ascension, Proem. in Luc.
say Dorotheus and Theophylact. St. John, (...), Thirty two Years after our
Lords Ascension, says the same Theophylact. Chap. 7.. 2.
Now these Gospels, as I before have proved, were by the General Tradition of
the whole Church of Christ, esteemed sufficiently to contain that Christian
Doctrine which the Apostles taught, and purposely to have been written to
preserve it entire to Posterity.

Secondly, This Argument is wholly overthrown by this one Observation, That the
Apostles in their Preaching declare, that they spoke only what was written in
the Books of the Old Testament, or might be clearly gathered thence: When they
undertook to prove any Article of Christian Faith, they proved it from the
Scriptures of the Old Testament: When they reasoned with others, to bring them
to the Faith, they did it from the same Scriptures, Acts 26.22. 1 Cor. 15.2, 3,
4.
saying none other Things than those which the Prophets, and Moses did say
should come: When they would have their Proselytes confirmed in the Christian
Faith, 2 Pet. 1.19.
they send them to this more sure Word of Prophecy, encouraging them to take
heed to it, as to a Light that shines in a dark Place: And declaring that
those very Scriptures, which Timothy had known from a Child, 2 Timothy 3.15.
that is, before one Book of the New Testament was written, were able, through
Faith in Christ, or the Belief that Jesus is the Messiah promised in them, to
make him Wise unto Salvation: 16, 17.
That they were profitable for Doctrine and Instruction in Righteousness, for
Reproof, for Correction, that the Man of God may be perfect (both as to his own
Practice, Obadiah paraph. in locum.
and his teaching others) thoroughly furnished to every good Work.

If then, before the Scriptures of the New Testament were written, these
inspired Persons taught their Converts out of the Old Testament, and sent them
thither to learn the Truth of what they said; and bad them have Recourse unto
those Writings, as being able to make them Wise unto Salvation, and as being
more certain, and more to be heeded, than that Voice from Heaven, of which they
themselves testified: Doubtless, when they themselves, by the same Spirit, had
indicted the New Testament, they must be more concerned that they should be
guided by that written Word; then also it is evident, that they did not invite
Men to believe merely on the Authority, or Oral Tradition, of the then present
Church, nor practiced any thing whence it might be concluded, that after Ages,
by mere Tradition might be sufficiently instructed in the things which
concerned their eternal Welfare. Nay they sufficiently declared the contrary,
by choosing to adhere themselves, and call on others to adhere to what was
taught concerning the Messiah in the Old Testament, when Tradition was so
fresh, their Authority so fully was confirmed by Miracles, and they to whom
they spoke had the inspired Apostles in any matter of Dispute or Controversy to
repair unto.

Thirdly, St. Luke informs us, Tradition, Luke 1.2, 4.
and that he had committed it to Writing that his Theophilus might know, (...),
the Certainty of those Doctrines, in which he had been formerly instructed;
clearly insinuating, that he conceived the written Word a means of adding
certainty to what was only taught by Word of Mouth. Accordingly Eusebius
informs us, that he was necessitated to write his Gospel, that he might give
us, (...), Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 24.
a firm Account of those things which he had learned from his Conversation with
St. Paul, and with the rest of the Apostles. Church History says of St.
Matthew, Eusebius. ibid.
That he was constrained to write his Gospel, that by so doing he might supply,
(...), the want of his own Presence with them; and that when he was by
Persecution separated from them, Opus imperf. in Matthew. praefat.
his Converts might not want the Doctrine of Faith, but wheresoever they were,
might retain, Totius fidei statum, the entire form of Faith. The san. Tradition
does inform us, See Chap. 7.. 1, 2.
That the First Christian Converts, when they had heard the Apostles preach the
Christian Faith, would not be satisfied with receiving it, (...), by Oral
Teaching, but earnestly requested to have it left in Writing with them. That
the believing Jews, Petierunt Matthaeum ut omnium verborum and operum Christi
conscriberet eis historiam, To write the History of all Christ's Words and
Works, that they might have a complete System of their Faith. That the Romans
earnestly desired Mark, (...), to leave in Writing a Memorial of the Doctrine
delivered to them by word of Mouth, and never would desist till they had
obtained it; and that it was, (...), the light of Piety, which would not suffer
them to rest satisfied with the Oral Tradition of the Faith; that by the same
persuasion, Hieron. Prolog. in Matthew. Eusebius. H. Eccl. l. 3. c. 24.
(...), of his familiar Acquaintance, of all the Bishops of Asia, and the
Ambassies of many Churches. St. John, who before had spent all his time, (...),
in Oral Preaching, was at last moved to write his Gospel. The same Tradition
adds, That the Apostles having preached the Gospel, committed it to Writing to
be the Pillar and the Ground of Faith to future Ages, (...), the Anchors and
Foundations of our Faith, Athan. Synops. p. 61. Theophylact. proem. in Mat.
(...), That from these Scriptures being taught the truth, we might not be
drawn aside by the Falsehoods of Heresies. And lastly, That if they had not left
in Writing what they preached, Orig. Dial. contr. Marcion. p. 59.
they had preached Salvation, (...), only to them who heard them Preach, and
should have had no care of Posterity, because, (...), things only orally
delivered would quickly vanish, there being no demonstration of their Truth.
Which words, as they expressly do confute the certainty of Doctrines only
delivered to Posterity by word of Mouth; so the forementioned Traditions do
sufficiently inform us, what was the Judgment of the ancient Church in this
Affair, viz. That to ascertain those Christians who were taught the principles
of their Religion, it was necessary that should be written which they had been
taught; that they could not well otherwise supply their absence, or leave to
their Disciples an entire System of the Christian Faith, than by committing it
to Writing; that Piety should not permit even the Romans to rest satisfied
without such written Monuments of what they had been taught, or to conceive it
was sufficient that they had received it by Tradition, and that the Wisdom of
the Holy Ghost instructed the Apostles to commit to writing that which they had
Preached by Word of Mouth, that so it might become to future Ages the Pillar
and the Ground of Truth, and a sufficient Antidote against the Heresies which
afterward prevailed in the Church. Eusebius. H. Eccl. l. 3. c. 37.
And that the zeal of the first Successors of Christian Faith employed it self
as much in leaving to their Converts throughout all the World, (...), the
Writings of the Holy Gospels, as in preaching Christ unto them.

In Answer to Mr. M's. Fourth Reason for the Infallibility of Tradition, I
grant, P. 354.
That a Tradition made as credible to any Man, as it may be made credible to
one who never saw London, that there is such a City as London, and that it is
the head Town of England, will be a good and a sufficient Proof, that the
Traditions of the Church of Rome are true, and that upon such Evidence
afforded, it will be most unreasonable to question the Truth of them; but then
I think it is the vainest thing imaginable for any person to attempt to prove
them from a like Tradition.

For does Mr. M. know of any Man whoever doubted that there was such a City as
London, or that it was the head Town of England? Did he ever read or hear of
any large Discourses, any Testimonies brought from ancient Records, or
Traditions, from Divine Revelation, or from Reason, to prove there was or could
be no such Capital City in England? Can he produce as many Eye and Ear
Witnesses that the Traditions of the Church of Rome are truly Apostolical, as
may be easily produced for such a City? Let Mr. M. once prove that the
Traditions of the Romish Church were always generally received by all Mankind,
and that none ever had the Confidence to Question the Truth of any of them: Let
him prove them from Myriads of Eye Witnesses, who saw them writ by the
Apostles, or Primitive Professors of Christianity, as plainly as ever any Man
saw London; or as many Ear Witnesses hearing the Apostles preaching these
Traditions, as ever heard this Capital City mentioned by those who saw it: Let
him prove them by as many persons who writ to the Apostles concerning these
Traditions, as have writ to London, and by as many who resorted to the Apostles
to learn these Traditions, as have resorted to this City; by as many Books
describing these Traditions in the very Age in which they are supposed to have
been delivered, as there are Books which in this Age make mention of the City
of London, and by as many Canons of the Primitive Church relating to these
Traditions, as there are Statutes and Discourses relating to the City, Trade,
and Government of London. And I will then acknowledge, That it is impudent,
impious and blasphemous Impiety to doubt the Truth of these Traditions.

Mr. M. indeed supposes, That it is as evidently credible that God has
revealed such and such Verities, as it is credible by humane Tradition, that
there is such a City as London; but this he never undertakes to prove, as
knowing that it was an easier matter to suppose it: P. 355, 356.
And then he adds, That the very self same Tradition tells me that the same God
who revealed by his Apostles so many other Verities to his Church, did also
reveal by the same Apostles, to the same Church; that this Church was to be
heard as the Mistress of Truth, with whom he would ever be present, suggesting
to her all Truth, and never permitting the Gates of Hell to prevail against
her, that he placed her as a Pillar and Ground of Truth, giving her such
Pastors as should secure her Children from being tossed to and fro with every
Wind of Doctrine, and consequently this same Tradition tells me, God has
revealed this Verity of her being Infallible, in proposing any Point for Divine
Faith.

Now, First, Mr. M. is miserably out in this Discourse, for not one of these
Revelations here mentioned, whatsoever is the import of them, have descended to
us by Oral Tradition, but are all of them contained in Scripture as far as they
are truly cited.

Secondly, Whereas the Evidence that there is such a City as London, is so
great, that never any Body could deny, or question it; that the Church is
Infallible in propounding any Point of Faith, not clearly revealed in the Holy
Scripture, or that there are indeed any such Points of Faith, is at present,
and has been formerly denied by many Myriads of learned and pious Men, whose
worldly Interest it is, and was to believe that true which they deny to be so,
and whose rejoicement it would be to find it true, and that none of the places
here produced prove this Infallibility, or by the Primitive Professors of
Christianity were esteemed to prove it, they have unanimously held, and do at
present hold.

Thirdly, Ibid.
Whereas he says, He did see with his Eyes that she (viz. the Church of God)
did propose her Traditions for Verities received from God. Let it be noted,
That Mr. M. confounds the Church of Rome and the Church of God, excluding all
the Protestants, the Greek Church, and the Eastern Christians, not subject to
the Pope, from that Church, out of which there is no Salvation, (which, I hope,
is not so evident, as that there is such a City as London,) for it is not the
whole Church, but that of Rome, which claims this Infallibility, and on that
account proposes her Traditions for Verities received from God. Now then let
us return to our Capital City of London, and we shall find the whole Nation,
though of different Parties, Interests, and Judgments, agreeing that there is
in England such a Capital City as London, but yet we find half the whole
Christian World utterly denying many Traditions of the Church of Rome, to be
Verities received from God, and in particular that of the Pope's Supremacy,
without which the Church of Rome neither does nor can pretend to be the whole
Church Catholic. Now this denial of her pretended Traditions by so many
Churches, professing a like Veneration for those Traditions which are truly
Primitive, must prove as strongly, that the Traditions of the Church of Rome
are falsely so called, as her Assertion can be supposed to prove them Divine
Verities.

Again, whereas there are no universally received Records which give us the
least cause to doubt whether there be such a City as London, etc. the Records
of the Scriptures, Councils, and Fathers of the Church, cause many Myriads to
believe the Doctrines and Practices peculiar to the Roman Church, are so far
from being Apostolical Traditions, that they are plainly opposite to the
Doctrines, Practices, and Traditions formerly received, and approved in the
Church of Christ; and this they do believe so firmly, that they rather choose to
suffer loss of Life, and all the Comforts of it, than own these Doctrines of
the Church of Rome, as Apostolical Traditions.

Moreover, whereas it is no Man's Interest to make the World believe there was
such a City as London, if there was no such place in being, it is the Interest
of the whole Church of Rome to set up this pretense to Infallibility in the
General, that finding it disclaimed by other Churches, she with some Color may
pretend unto it; and it is the Interest of the Roman Clergy, as much to stickle
for the Truth of her pretended Traditions, as it was the Interest of Demetrius,
and his Fellow Artists, to avouch to the Ephesians, They might be truly Gods
which were made by Hands; and that the Image of Diana truly fell down from
Jupiter, since otherwise their Craft would be set at naught. And as it was the
Interest of the Master of the Pythonisse to be angry with St. Paul for casting
out the Evil Spirit from her, because thereby his Hopes of Gain was gone; For
if Men will not receive their Traditions as the Truths of God, they cannot Lord
it over their Consciences, nor drain their Purses, nor give Laws at pleasure to
the Christian World, but must be put to the hard task of proving what they
would have us take upon their Words.

And, Fourthly, Whereas he that doubts whether there be such a City as
London, may repair unto it to be convinced by ocular demonstration, whither
shall he repair who doubts of the Truth of the Traditions of the Church of
Rome for Satisfaction in that Matter? Will you send him to Scripture? You have
already told him he cannot know what is Scripture, what Copies, and what Texts
are uncorrupted, what Translation of it is Authentic, but by the Church; and
also, that when he knows all this, he cannot understand the meaning of the
Scriptures in places disputable, and variously sensed, as you know those are by
which you prove both the Churches Infallibility, and the Pretenses of the Roman
Church to be Infallible.

Will you send him with Mr. P. 360.
M. To the unanimous Consent and Tradition of our Church; that is, the Church
of Rome, what is this, but to bid him believe that Self-evident which he thinks
evidently false, to believe the Church of Rome to be Infallible in her
Traditions, and then he will not doubt of her Infallibility, or to turn Roman
Catholic, and then he will no longer be a Protestant? Will you add with him,
That what is proposed by the Tradition of such a Church is evidently credible,
Ibid.
and sufficient to beget an infallible assent? Is it not then matter of
Amazement, that so many Millions of Persons throughout the World endowed with
intellectuals as piercing, and accomplished with all Abilities which their
Adversaries can boast of, yea who many of them have strong temporal motives to
incline them to embrace the Romish Traditions, and all the miseries which Papal
Tyranny can inflict to awaken them into a serious consideration of all the
Evidence that can be offered for them, and who are Men seriously industrious to
attain Salvation, and Men who know they must perish everlastingly if they
resist the Truth clearly propounded to them: I say, is it not matter of
Amazement that so many persons, so qualified, should, from Generation to
Generation, so unanimously reject what is evidently credible, and able to beget
within them an infallible assent; yea, that they should dispute, and write many
Books against it, though they could never do so, but they must contradict what
is self-Evident? What is this, but in effect to say, All Protestants always
were, are, and must be, whilst they continue Protestants, resolved to be
damned, and as obstinate as the very Devil in doing what they know must tend to
their eternal Condemnation? Will you send him to the Universal Church; either
by it you mean only the R. Church, and her Adherents, or you do not; if you do,
you again send him to the Church of Rome; if you do not, you must renounce that
Article of Faith, which all your Clergy stand by Oath obliged to defend, viz.
the Roman Catholic Church, and with it your Pretenses to Infallibility on the
account of any of these Promises, which do confessedly belong only unto the
Universal Church of Christ.

CHAP. XII.
Mr. M 's. Fifth Assertion, That all Catholics ever held that for true which
was owned by the Universal Church of their times, and rejected the contrary as
an Error, answered by way of Concession,. 1. First, That this is absolutely
true in reference to Doctrines and Practices, truly necessary to the Being of a
Church. But, Secondly, That this is with Lirinensis to be restrained to the
Fundamentals of Faith, is proved, 1st. from Scripture, 2dly. from Reason,. 2.
Thirdly, From Instances; as, First, That of the Administration of the Sacrament
to Infants, which they generally practiced both in the Eastern and the Western
Churches,. 3. They declared this Practice to be necessary,. 4. That they speak
not this of such a participation of the Body and Blood of Christ, as may be had
in Baptism, but plainly of the Puriticipation of the Eucharist,. 5. Inferences
hence, 1. To prove the Definition of the Trent Council, touching this Matter
actually False. 2ly. That the Practice or Doctrine of the Church in any Age, is
no true Evidence of Tradition, or the right Interpretation of Holy Scripture.
3ly. That Mr. M 's. Argument, for Prayer for the Dead, from Tradition, is not
convincing,. 6. 2. From the Opinion of the Fathers, That it was not lawful for
a Christian to swear at all,. 7. 3ly. From their Opinion, That good Angels were
transported with the Love of Women, and got Giants of them,. 8. 4ly. From their
Opinion, That it was unlawful for any Clergyman to engage himself in Secular
Affairs,. 9. Or to go from one Church or Diocese to another,. 10. 3ly. When
whole Churches and Nations differ, and Heresies prevail, the Fathers say we
are, for finding out the Truth, to have Recourse only to Scripture, and to
primitive Tradition,. 11. A full Answer to Mr. M 's. Argument for Tradition,
from the Ancient Custom of praying for the Dead; showing on what Accounts the
Ancients did it, what Reason we have not to do it; That the Prayers for them,
used by the Church of Rome, are Novelties, and that those used by the Ancients,
were perfectly destructive of the Roman Purgatory,. 12.

MR. M. says, That whatsoever was held by the Universal Church, P. 367, 368.
was without farther Question held for true, and the contrary to it was ever
rejected as an Error. -- Neither will you ever find a Catholic who ever had
the Boldness to say that the Church of his Days did universally hold any thing
that was an Error; nor shall you ever read of any Catholic who refused to
conform himself to the Universal Belief and Practice which was current in the
whole Church of their times.

Now to this I answer, That the Universal Church may be considered Two ways. 1.
In a State of Unity within her self, so that her Members do universally agree
in the same Doctrine and Practice, few or none dissenting from the common
Doctrine of the Church; or in that State in which her Members are unhappily
divided, by reason of the different Sentiments of many great and famous
Churches, which yet exclude not either Party from being Members of the Church
Catholic, as she has always been since the great Rupture betwixt the East and
West; and as the West has often been divided, by reason of the great and
lasting Schisms which have happened betwixt contending Popes and Emperors, and
betwixt Popes and Councils, contending for Superiority.

2. I add, That this Agreement of the present Universal Church, may either be
in Doctrines and Practices necessary to the Being of a Church; or else in
Doctrines and Practices unnecessary, on which the Being or the Welfare of the
Church does not depend: Having premised these Distinctions, I answer;

First, That in Doctrines and Practices truly necessary to the Being of a
Church, the Agreement of the Universal Church is a sufficient Evidence that all
such Doctrines and Practices derived from the Apostles; because they were as
necessary to be held throughout all formen Ages, as in this. And therefore in
such Doctrines as were rejected by the Universal Church as Heresies, Austin
says truly, That it was sufficient Cause to reject them, because the Church
held the contrary; De Haer. c. 90.
they being such as did, Oppugnare Regulam veritatis, oppose her Rule of Faith,
or Symbol, universally received: And that it was sufficient to persuade any Man
he ought not, Aliquid horum in fidem recipere, to embrace any of the Doctrines
of Heretics as Articles of Faith; because the Church, who could not be
deficient in any point of necessary Faith, did not receive them. This way of
Arguing negatively, we therefore, with St. Austin, do allow, The Universal
Church knows no such Doctrine; ergo, it is no Article I am obliged to receive
as any part of Christian Faith. The Universal Church of Christ knows no such
Practice, therefore it is no Practice necessary to be done by Christians.

But, Secondly, In Reference to such Doctrines, or Practices, on which the
Being and the Welfare of the Church does not depend: I say, the Agreement of
the present Church can be no certain Argument, either of the Truth of the
Doctrine, or of the Derivation, either of the Doctrine or Practice, from
Apostolical Tradition. And this seems very suitable, even to the Rule of
Lirinensis, who having advised us to embrace that Sense of Scripture, and those
Tenets which were Ecclesiastical and universally received, he says, this is
especially to be observed, in iis, duntaxat, Common. c. 41.
quaestionibus quibus totius Catholici dogmatis fundamenta nituntur, In those
Questions only, on which depend the Foundations of the Catholic Faith. And
this is also evident from Scripture, Reason, and Tradition.

First, From Scripture, which plainly does inform us, that the Rulers of the
Jewish Church had taught for Doctrines the Commandments of Men, and such
Traditions as made void the Law of God, and by which they taught others to
transgress it, and by which they deserved the Title of blind Guides leading the
Blind: And these Traditions were received and observed by all the Jews, Mark
7.3. Gal. 1.14.
Traditions of the Elders, (...), Traditions received from their Fathers;
Customs which they who did not walk according to, were thought to teach
Apostasy from Moses. Now if the whole Jewish Church of that Age might thus
mistake in what she taught as Doctrines of the Scripture, or Practices, and
Doctines received from Moses by Tradition, why may not the Christian Church of
this present Age, or any other, be subject to the like Mistakes in Doctrine or
in Practice?

Again, That the Doctrines of the Millenium, of the Day of Judgment, being nigh
at hand; of the Reservation of good Souls in some place different from the
highest Heavens, were very prevalent in the first Ages of the Church, I have
already proved, Chap. 4.. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
though now they do as generally pass for Errors: And the like may be easily
proved of many Practices now wholly laid aside. Quod autem instituitur praeter
consuetudinem, ut quasi observatio Sacramenti sit, approbare non possum,
etiamsi multa hujusmodi, propter nonnullarum, vel sanctarum, vel turbulentarum
personarum scandala devitanda, liberius improbare non audeo, sed hoc nimis
doleo, quia tam multis praesumptionibus plena sunt omnia. Epist. ad Jan. 119.
cap. 19.
St. Austin in his Time complained, That all things or places were filled with
manifold Presumptions, and that these Corruptions had so generally obtained,
that albeit he thought they ought to be redressed, yet durst he not freely
disprove them; and if so many Superstitions were so publicly avowed and
practiced in his time, and urged upon others by the greatest part of the
Church; and if so many Doctrines prevailed in the greatest part of the Church
in former Ages, which now pass for Errors, why might they not generally do so?
What Reason can be given why the whole might not continue the true Church of
Christ, and hold these Doctrines, and espouse these Practices, as well as so
great Parts of the Church continue true Parts of the Church, and do so?

Thirdly, It is evident from Church History, that Doctrines and Practices have
generally obtained in some Ages of the Church, and passed for Apostolical
Traditions, which have in after Ages been discarded, as, v. g.

First, The Administration of the Eucharist to Infants, and the principle upon
which they did it, viz. That without Baptism and the Supper of the Lord, no Man
could have Life eternal. The Punick Christians, says St. Austin, call Baptism
Salvation, To. 7. li. de pecc. Merit. and Remiss. c. 24.
and the participation of Christ's body, Life. Whence is this, Nisi ex antiqua,
ut existimo, and Apostolica Traditione, qua Ecclesiae Christi insitum tenent,
but from an Ancient, and as I suppose, Apostolical Tradition, by which the
Churches of Christ have this deeply settled in them, That without Baptism, and
the Participation of the Lord's Supper, no Man can attain to the Kingdom of
God, or to Life Eternal: Whence he concludes, That it is in vain to promise the
Kingdom of God, or Life Eternal, to Children, without both these Sacraments;
and that with the plainest Evidence, provided that his Principle hold good. Now
of this Matter let it be considered:

That it was certainly the Practice of the whole Church of Christ for many
Ages, Greek Church and their Dependants from the continuance of this Practice
to this very Day, Notandum quod ex hoc quod dicitur hic, nisi manducaveritis,
etc. dicunt Graeci, quod hoc Sacramentum est tantae necessitatis quod pueris
debet dari, sicut baptismus, Nichol de Lyra in Joh. 6.
touching the Eastern Churches from their continuance of it by Tradition, even
since their Separation from other Churches in the Fifth and the Sixth
Centuries; for it is practiced still by the Cophti, or Egyptian Christians,
Brierw. p. 157. p. 165, 173. 178.
by the Habassines, by the Armenians, and by the Maronites, says Brierwood.

Moreover in the Third Century, De laps. p. 132.
Cyprian speaks of it as a Thing then in use, witness that Story he relates of
the Child, who, through the Wickedness of the Nurse, having tasted of the Idol
Sacrifice, when the Deacon came to give it the Cup, turned away its Face, and
shut its Mouth, and when the Deacon forced the Wine into its Mouth, presently
threw it out again; and Witness the Apology he thus makes for such Children, We
did not on our own Accord make have to the profane Contagions, Derelicto cibo,
and poculo domini, Ibid. p. 125.
leaving the Food, and the Cup of the Lord, 'twas the Perfidiousness of others
that destroyed us; and he seems to assert the Necessity of it from the Sixth of
John, Cap. 25, 26.
in the Third Book of Testimonies to Quirinus.

In the First Form of Liturgy we meet with in the Church of Christ, Constit.
Apost. l. 8. c. 13.
we find this Practice prescribed to be used in Christian Churches, Let the
Bishop communicate, and after him the Priests, the Deacons, Subdeacons, the
Readers, Singers, and Ascheticks, the Deaconesses, Virgins, Widows, (...), and
then Children. Hier. Eccles. c. 7. p. 360, 361.
Dionysius also says, That Children, in his time, were made Partakers of the
Holy Mysteries.

In the Sixth Age we find this was still the received Custom of the Western
Church from the Gregorian Office, which takes care that Baptized Infants, Ad
Sabb. Pasch. p. 73.
Non ablactarentur antequam communicent, should not suck before they had
communicated.

The Practice of the Western Parts in the Seventh Century is Evident from the
Council of Toledo which decrees, Council. Tom. 6. p. 552.
That they shall not be punished, Qui tempore Infantiae Eucharistiam receptam
rejiciunt, who in time of their Infancy vomit up the Eucharist. In the Eighth
Century we are informed by Charles the Great, Car. Mag. de Imag. l. 2. c. 27.
That this was then the General Custom of the Church of God. For against the
Doctrine of the Second Nicene Council, and of the Roman Church pronouncing
Anathema to those who did not Worship Images, he, and his Council of Three
hundred Bishops argue thus, That then, Infantes Baptismatis unda loti, and
Corporis Dominici edulio, and Sanguinis haustu satiati, pereunt, Infants who
have been Baptized, and have received the Sacrament of our Lords Body and
Blood, must perish. In the Ninth Century it was a known Constitution of the
Western Church, That the Priest should always have the Eucharist ready, that,
if any little Child be infirm, he might give him the Communion, and the Child
might not die without it; which Constitution is extant in the Capitular of
Charles the Great, L. 1. c. 161. Cap. 7. L. 1. c. 69.
in Walter Aurelianensis, in Regino de Ecclesiasticis disciplinis, in Ivo
Decret. part. 2. cap. 20. in Burchardus l. 5. c. 10. and so undoubtedly
obtained till the Twelfth Century. Not. in Reg. p. 551, 552. Not. ad librum
Sacrament p. 298.
In the Old Pontificials of the Eighth or Ninth Century, says Baluzius, there
is a Rubric requiring the Bishop or the Priest to give the Communion to the new
baptized Infant. And this continued, says Menardus, till the time of Paschal
the Second. And Hugo de Sancto Victore says, That if it can be done without
peril, De Ceremon. Eccl. l. 1. c. 20. Sive de Sacram. l. 1. c 20.
Juxta primam Ecclesiae institutionem, Sacramentum Eucharistiae in specie
Sanguinis tradendum est pueris, according to the Primitive Institution of the
Church, the Sacrament of the Eucharist must be delivered to Children in the
Species of Blood. Now by these Testimonies we learn how neatly the Trent
Council minceth this Matter, Sess. 21. c. 4.
when they say, That, Antiquitas eum morem in quibusdam locis, aliquando
servavit, Antiquity did in some Places, for some time, observe this Custom.
More ingenuous is Cardinal Bona, Rerum Litur. l. 2. c. 19. p. 877, 878, 879 --
882.
who confesses it was an ancient Custom, That, Quicunque Baptizabantur, sive
adulti, sive Infantes, sacra statim Communione reficerentur, whatsoever Infants
were Baptized they should presently be refreshed with the Holy Communion; and
proves this Custom from the Third to the Twelfth Century. And Baluzius admires,
Not. in Regin. p. 552.
That any one should say, Universalem Ecclesiam nunquam recepisse hunc morem
sine nota novitatis, that the universal Church never received this Custom
without a Note of the Novelty of it.

Secondly, They declared in the General from these Words, Basil says, Tom. 1.
p. 580. Tom. 2. p. 431.
That the Baptized Person ought to be nourished with the Food of eternal Life;
and that the Communication of the Body and the Blood of Christ is necessary to
eternal Life; and proves both these Assertions from this Passage of St. John.
Amphilochius in his Life, says, In vita Basil. c. 17. p. 221.
It is impossible that any Man should enter into the Kingdom of God, unless he
be regenerate by Baptism, (...), and partake of the Life-giving Mysteries of
the Body, and the Blood of Christ. St. Chrysostom declares, That none can enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven if he be not Baptized with Water and the Holy Ghost,
Hom. 3. de Sacerdotio Tom. 6. p. 16. l. 38. Tom. 2. p. 748.
(...), and if he do not eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood. And upon that
passage of St. John, Christ shows, says he, that this is, (...), Ep. l. 2. 2.
Ep. 52.
very necessary, and ought always to be done. These, says Isidore Pelusiota,
are the divine Mysteries, (...), without which none can obtain the heavenly
Rewards, as is apparent from the Divine Oracles, John iij. 3. vi. 53. In Cap. 6
Joh. l. 4. p. 361.
They are void of Life, says St. Cyril of Alexandria, who receive not the Son,
(...), by the participation of the Eucharist. Tom. 2. p. 92, 96.
Hincmarus Remensis says, These are the Sacraments of the Church, Sine quibus
ad vitam, quae vera vita est, non intratur, without which we cannot enter into
true Life. Albinus in his Book of Divine Offices, Cap. de celebr. Miss. p. 88.

Cap. 26. De instit. Cler. l. 1. c. 31.


and Amalarius in his Third Book of Ecclesiastical Offices, do in like manner
say, That sine his Sacramentis nemo intrat in vitam aeternam, without these
Sacraments none enter into Life eternal. Rabanus Maurus says, Men may have
temporal Life without this Food, and drink, Aeternam omnino non possunt,
eternal, Apud Baron. Tom. 10. p. 1007.
they can never have. Christ testified with an Oath, Says Humbert, That
without this refection that Life which is Christ cannot be had, saying, Verily
except you eat, etc. By which Testimonies we may see what Reason Austin had to
say this was a Doctrine deeply settled in the Churches of Christ, and thence to
infer, that Infants, ordinarily, could not have Life without participation of
the Eucharist, they speaking thus without exception of any Persons, or of any
case, but that of sudden Death, in which case also some of them allow that
Salvation may be had without actual Baptism.

3. They apply this general Doctrine to the Case of Infants, and say the
Sacrament of the Eucharist is to be received by them for Remission of Sins, or
that they may obtain Life, both which are necessary causes of the
Administration of it. In the Fourth Century Theodorus Antiochenus writ a Book
against some Heretics in the Western Church, Apud Phot. Cod. 177. p. 396.
who asserted, That Man does Sin by Nature, and not by Choice. And who, (...),
for Confirmation of their Opinion, urged, That Infants were baptized and
received, (...), the Communion of the immaculate Body for the Remission of
Sins. P. 400.
In Answer to these Men, says Photius, Theodorus broached a new, and strange
Opinion of Remission of Sins, perhaps not willingly, but that he might satisfy
their inquiry, (...); why do Infants partake of the immaculate Mysteries? Why
are they Baptized, if they sin not by Nature? (...), for these Sacraments are
given for Remission of Sins: Whence it appears, that the Custom of giving the
Eucharist to Infants was then generally practiced, and allowed of both in the
Western and the Eastern Churches: In the Western, because these Western
Heretics do from this approved Custom argue against the Doctrine of the
Church; in the East, because Theodorus of Antioch thought himself obliged to
own the Practice; nor is any question made, whether the thing ought to be done,
but it is plainly owned, that it was done, and that for the Remission of Sins,
and therefore for a necessary Reason.

Against the Pelagians, who denied that Infants were guilty of Original Sin,
and that they were obnoxious to Death eternal, the Fathers dispute from this
very Custom, and the Foundation of it, on the words of the Evangelist; saying,
That according to the Practice of the Church the Blood which was shed for the
Remission of Sins, was ministered to them, and therefore they had Sin to be
remitted; and that our Lord had said, Unless you eat the Flesh of the Son of
Man, and drink his Blood, you shall have no Life in you; and therefore Infants
wanted these things in order to their having Life, and were partakers of them
that they might obtain it. The places in St. Austin to this effect are
innumerable. For why, says he, Contr. Julian. Tom. 7. l. 2. c. 30.
is that Blood ministered to the Infant to drink, which was shed for the
Remission of Sins, that he may have Life, if by reason of no Original Sin, he
be obnoxious to Death? Christ, says he, is the Savior of Infants, Ibid. l. 1.
p. 949.
and unlevs they redeemed by him, they will utterly perish, seeing without his
Flesh and Blood they cannot have Life; this St. John thought and believed,
learned and taught. When Christ says, Unless you eat my Flesh and drink my
Blood, you have no Life in you; can I say the Child shall have Life, who ends
his Life without that Sacrament? Hypognost. c. 5. Tom. 7. p. 1405.
And again, He having said, Unless you eat, etc. and, He that eats my Flesh
and drinks my Blood has eternal Life; how is it that you (Pelagians) promise
the Kingdom of Heaven to Children not born of Water and the Spirit, not fed
with the Flesh of Christ, nor having drunk his Blood which was shed for the
Remission of their Sins? Behold, he that is not Baptized, and he that is
deprived of the Vital Cup and Bread, is divided from the Kingdom of Heaven. And
of what Sacrament he conceives our Savior to have spoken in these words, he
more expressly tells us, saying, Tom. 7. de peccat. merit. and remiss. l. 1. c.
19. p. 666.
Let us hear our Lord speaking not of the Sacrament of Baptism, N. B. but of
the Sacrament of his holy Table, to which none comes who is not rightly
Baptized. Except you eat and drink, etc. What do we farther seek for? dares any
body say this Sentence belongs not to Children? or that they can have life in
them without the participation of the Body and the Blood of Christ? But he that
says this, does not attend, That if that Sentence comprehends not all, so that
they cannot have Life without the Body, and the Blood of Christ, those of riper
Years are not obliged to regard it. From these, and many other Passages of a
like Nature, his Conclusion is this, Lib. 1. de peccat. merit. remiss. c. 24.
p. 670.

Nec pro eis fusus est sanguis, qui fusus esse in remissionem legitur
peccatorum. Apud Aug. Ep. 90. Apud August. Ep. 92.


If then so many Divine Testimonies accord in saying, That neither Salvation,
nor Life eternal is by any to be hoped for without Baptism, and the Body and
Blood of our Lord, they are in vain promised to Children without them. The
Council of Carthage, in their Epistle to Pope Innocent the First, complain that
the Pelagians durst assert, That little Children needed not Baptism, Propter
salutem, that they might have Life, and that the Blood shed for the Remission
of Sins was not shed for them. The Council of Mela, in their Letter to him,
complain that they asserted, Pueros quoque parvulos, si nullis innoventur
Christianae gratia Sacramentis, habituros vitam aeternam, That Infants might
have Life eternal, though they were not renewed by the Christian Sacraments.
Ibid. Ep. 93. p. 424.
To these complaints Pope Innocent returns this Answer, Whereas your
Brotherhoods assert that the Pelagians say that Infants may be saved without
Baptism, this is a very fond Opinion: Nisi enim manducaverint, for unless they
eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, they have no Life in
them; and they who would give them this, Sine regeneratione, without Baptismal
Regeneration, seem to void Baptism it self, by saying they have that which is
believed to be conferred upon them only by Baptism; where the Note in the
Margin is, Etiam R. Ecclesia credidit Eucharistiam parvulis necessariam, Even
the Roman Church believed that the Eucharist was necessary for little Children.
Behold, says Austin, Contr. duas Epist. Pelag. l. 2. c. 4. Lib. 1. Contr. Jul.
cap. 4. Ep. ad paulinum.
Pope Innocent says, that little ones cannot have Life without Baptism, and
the participation of the Body, and the Blood of Christ. And again, Pope
Innocent determined, that Infants could not have Life unless they did eat the
Flesh of the Son of Man. And a Third time, If the Pelagians will yield to the
Apostles See, or rather to their Lord and Master, saying, Except we eat his
Flesh, and drink his Blood, which the unhaptized Person cannot do, we shall not
have Life, they will at last confess that unbaptized Persons cannot have it.

In the Sixth Century, Hom. 7. B. P. Tom. 7. p. 279.
Caesarius Arelatensis urges this very Text of Scripture, Except you eat, etc.
as a most solid Testimony against the Blasphemies of Pelagius, That Baptism was
not to be administered to Children, Propter vitam, for the obtaining Life: For,
says he, these Words of our Savior, Non habebitis vitam in vobis, you shall
have no Life in you, do give us clearly to understand, that every Soul that is
void of Baptism wants both Life and Glory. Now, since that Passage of our Lord,
was never by the Ancients thought to have Relation to Baptism, but always to
the Eucharist, it is apparent that this Argument is of no Force at all, or that
it is the same with that which is so often urged by St. Austin, That none can
have Eternal Life who does not participate of Christ's Body and Blood; and none
can do that who is not baptized. Ep. Univers. Episc. per Nicaenum Council. To.
4. p. 1177, 1178.
Against the Pelagians, says Pope Gelasius, our Lord pronounces, That he who
eats not the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drinks his Blood, has no Life in
him: Where we see none exempt; nor dares any say, That an Infant can obtain
eternal Life without this Sacrament: Nevertheless, that the Providence of God
might cut off all the Wickedness of the Pelagians, it is not only said, Unless
a Man be born again of Water, etc. but also, Unless he eat, -- and drink, etc.
And that this is spoken of Eternal Life, none can doubt; because many who
receive not this Sacrament, have this present Life.

This Argument, you see, is generally urged by all that write against the
Pelagians; nor do we find that the Pelagians did in the least except against
the Practice, as either Novel, or not Catholic, but only did content
themselves to say, that Infants did receive these Sacraments, not to obtain
Life, but the Kingdom of Heaven.

And here it is to be admired, Austin, and these Fathers, spoke all this of
such a Participation of the Flesh and Blood of Christ, as is had in Baptism,
and not of the Participation of it by receiving of the Holy Eucharist: When,

First, The Proof they bring of the manducation, and drinking, required of
Children, that they may have Life, is from John vj. 53. which from St. Austin's
Days, to the Twelfth Century, has always been understood of the Eucharist, but
never of the Sacrament of Baptism. So generally the forecited Fathers.

Secondly, They bring distinct Proofs to evince that Infants are to participate
of both Sacraments; the Third of John to prove they ought to be baptized; the
Sixth of John to prove they ought to receive the Holy Eucharist^. So St.
Austin, so Isidore Pelusiota, so Pope Gelasius, in the Places cited.

Thirdly. They speak of the Mysteries in the Plural Number, as of things
necessary to be received for the Remission of their Sins, and the obtaining
Life Eternal: So Theodorus, Amphilochius, St. Chrysostom, Isidore Pelusiota,
St. Austin, Hincmarus Rhemensis, Photius, Albinus, Amalarius.

Fourthly, They speak first of the Sacrament of Baptism, and after of the
Supper of the Lord, declaring of them distributively, That Infants cannot have
Life, Sine Baptismo Christi, and sine participatione Corporis and Sanguinis
Christi, without Christ's Baptism, and the Participation of his Body and Blood:
So Pope Innocent. Sine Baptismo, and Corpore and Sanguine Christi, without
Baptism, and the Body and the Blood of Christ: So St. Austin.

Fifthly, They spoke of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper by way of
Distinction from that of Baptism, Non de Sacramento S. lavacri, sed de
Sacramento mensae suae. l. 1. de peccat. Merit. c. 19, 20. Ep. 107. p. 499.
Quod nisi Baptizati non utique possunt. Ep. 106. p. 487.
saying, Let us hear our Lord, not speaking of the Sacrament of Baptism, but of
the Sacrament of his Holy Table: So St. Austin.

Sixthly, They speak of that eating and drinking of this, Quod per corpus
geritur, which is done by the Body, Per ora, by the Mouths: So St. Austin.
Which Children have a right to, by being first Baptized; and of that Sacrament
of the Body and the Blood of Christ, Quo nemo nisi rite baptizatus, accedit, to
which none comes, who is not rightly baptized.

Lastly, Sometimes they speak of the Sacrament of the Lord's Table; of that
Sacrament emphatically, and of that Blood which the Child must drink. Now hence
it follows,

First, Trent Council has manifestly erred, when it declared of all the
Fathers in General, who held this Opinion, Sess. 21. c. 4.
Sine controversia oredendum est eos nulla salutis necessitate id fecisse, That
without Controversy we must believe, that they did not this from an Opinion of
the Necessity of it to Salvation; this being an Untruth so manifest, In. John 6.
that Maldonate, in direct Opposition to this Couneil, says, that St. Austin
and Pope Innocent were by this Passage of the Sixth of John induced to believe,
Infantes etiam baptizatos nisi Eucharistiam perciperent salvos esse non posse,
that even baptized Infants could not be saved, unless they received the
Eucharist; and that from that place they conceived the Eucharist was necessary
for Infants to Salvation, and that St. Austin mentioned this not as his private
Opinion, Sed ut fidei, and totius Ecclesiae dogma, but as a Doctrine of Faith
received by the whole Church; adding, Tom. 1. part. 4. p. 624.
as also Binius does, That this Doctrine flourished in the Church about Six
hundred Years.

Secondly, Hence it appears, that the same Council, by pronouncing an Anathema
against all who shall dare to say, Sess. 21. Can. 4.
That it is necessary for Children, before they come to Years of Discretion, to
receive the Sacrament, has virtually Anathematized St. Austin, Pope Innocent,
Pelagius, and the whole Church of Christ, for Six whole Centuries.

Thirdly, Hence it is evident that the Practice of the Church in any Century,
is no true Ground for the Interpretation of the Holy Scripture; seeing this
Practice of communicating Infants was built upon the Mistake of the Church of
the Ages mentioned touching the true Sense of those Words, Except you eat the
Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, you have no Life in you.

Fourthly, Hence it is evident, That if the present Church of any Age must be
the infallible Judge of what is Tradition; if what is generally received in any
Age must be derived from the Apostles, the Custom of giving the Sacrament to
Children for the Remission of Sins, and the obtaining Life, must be an
Apostolical Tradition, it being generally received for Six Centuries; and yet
if the Church of Rome, of the Three last Ages, was the Judge of what deserved
to be esteemed Tradition, the self same Doctrine being then generally rejected
by them, could be no Apostolical Tradition.

Fifthly, Hence Mr. M. may learn, that his Proof of Prayer for the Dead, and
Infants Baptism from Tradition, is not very weighty and convincing; or if it
be, the Custom of communicating Infants must be Tradition Apostolical. For
changing only the Subject, it will be easy to argue for it after the manner,
and in the Words of Mr. M. Let us take Two Traditions, P. 401.
the one confessed by you to be a true one, the other indeed condemned by you,
but asserted by me to be no less true than the former, because it is testified
by as good a Tradition as the former, and therefore either the former is not
proved sufficiently by this Testimony, or the latter is. The First Tradition,
for Example sake, is, That of Baptizing Infants: The Second, That of the
Communicating of Infants. Of these Two I discourse thus; Both these Points were
recommended by the Apostles to the Primitive Church, for divine Verities and
Practices; and so from hand to hand came most unquestionably delivered to the
Twelfth Century. Hence conformably to this Tradition, P. 402.
every where Christians baptized their little Children; every where they gave
them the Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist; but yet the communicating of them was
the more frequent Practice; because Children were baptized but once in their
Lives, but being once baptized, they frequently received the Holy Sacrament.
Well now, let us suppose, that both these Traditions be called in Question,
whether they be faithfully delivered as Sacraments to be received by Children;
or rather whether that of Communicating Infants were some humane Invention;
Soss. 21. Can. 4.
or as the Trent Council has determined, A thing unnecessary to be received by
Infants till they come to Years of Discretion: Let us see whether this
Tradition condemned by that Council with an Anathema, cannot defend it self
from Forgery as well as any Scripture questioned of being true Scripture. P.
403.
For Example, the Apocalypse, which was rejected by diverse Ancient Catholics,
whereas the Communion of Infants was never rejected by any Ancient Catholics
at all, nor by any of them said to be unnecessary. Amongst ancient Heretics,
the Pelagians, indeed, said, That it was not necessary to communicate them for
the Remission of Sins; but this is noted in them as a peculiar Heresy of their
own, by Pope Innocent, by Pelagius, by the Council of Carthage, and by St.
Austin, who pronounces against them, That Infants ought to be communicated for
the Remission of Sins: And the same St. Austin says, The Church does
necessarily do this by the Tradition, P. 404.
as he fupposeth, Apostolical, received from her Ancestors. He held therefore
such Communion of Infants, suitable to the Doctrine of the Church, and
Tradition. And this Tradition is that which I now stand upon, which indeed did
shine in the Practice of the Primitive Church. You shall scarcely find a
Liturgy or Service Book used in the ancient Church; which is not Witness of
this Tradition, though these Books were found in every Parish of Christendom,
in which Divine Service was almost daily said. P. 405.
St. Cyprian mentions it as the Practice of his Times: In both these Points it
is a strong Argument, and as strong for Communicating, as for Baptizing of
Infants; That no time can be named in which those Customs began. No man can be
thought of, who could by humane Means, and such Means as should not make a
mighty Noise amongst those great Reverencers of Tradition, draw all the World,
in so short a time after the Apostles, P. 406.
to follow Customs as Apostolical, which, in that Age, in which they were first
vented, were evidently, by every Man, not only known, but clearly seen to be
new hatched Novelties, and not Ancient and Apostolical Traditions. This Man,
who broached this false Doctrine, should have been put into the Catalogues of
Heretics by Epiphanius, and St. Austin; whereas they did not only, not put
down any such Heretics, but one of them puts down Pelagius for one, because he
taught the contrary. Now if you speak of this Custom going downward, until the
Age in which it began to be denied by Roman Catholics, the Custom of
Communicating Infants has come down with such a full Stream, that it drew all
Countries, in many Ages, with it; insomuch, that every where, but among a few
late born Romanists, the Pontificals, the Books of Sacraments, the Liturgies,
Eastern and Western, all the Ritualists, all the Books of Ecclesiastical
Discipline, P. 407.
and even the Canon Law bears witness of it. There was not a Country which
abounded not with such Monuments, and such Records; the very strongest Proofs
of assured Antiquity, and unquestionable Tradition.

Thus, I hope, I have made good that Tradition, shining in perpetual Practice
from St. Cyprian to Pope Paschal the Second, is a sure Relater of the Doctrine
and Practice of the Church, touching Communicating Infants; whence you may
clearly see, that the Trent Council has manifestly erred in this Matter, and
consequently was not Infallible; for if they could be actually false, in a
Point so universally current, they might bear Witness in many other Matters to
false Doctrine, and deny due Approbation to the true. P. 196. L. 1. contr.
Crescon. c. 33.


Sixthly, Hence we may learn how failly Mr. M. cites St. Austin, to prove,
That nothing for certain can be alleged out of Canonical Scriptures to prove
that Infants ought to be baptized; for is it possible, That he, who held it so
manifest from Scripture, that they ought to receive that Sacrament to which, De
peccat. Merit. l. 2. c. 27.
says he, no Man has right to come who is not first baptized, should think
there was no certain Proof from Scripture of their right to Baptism? Moreover,
how often does he prove their right to Baptism from that Passage of St. John,
Except he be born again of Water, De peccat. Merit. l 1. c. 30. L. 3. de
Origin. An. c. 11. Ep. 126. de Orig. An. l. 1. c. 9. 3. c. 13. Congerit
testimonia Scripturrrum l. 1. contr. Petit. c. 27.
and of the Spirit, no Man can enter into the Kingdom of God? How often does he
prove the Necessity of it from those Scriptures which conclude them guilty of
Original Sin? How often does he from Scripture pronounce them damned without
it? How often does he conclude it from the Annlogy it bears to Circumcision,
and bring, Congeriem Scripturarum, an Heap of Scriptures to confirm it? And
after all this can it be rationally thought, he should expressly teach, in
contradiction to his own constant Doctrine, That nothing could be certainly
alleged from Scripture to prove that Infants ought to be baptized? Nor is
there any thing more evident, than that Mr. M. C. 32, 33.
here wretchedly imposes on his Reader; for in the place cited by him in his
first Book against Cresconius, he speaks not of the Baptism of Infants, but of
Heretics, as will be evident to all that will inspect the place. In his Fourth
Book of Baptism against the Donatists, C. 24.
in the place cited, he speaks of this Point indeed; but so, as to assert, That
if any one, In hac re Authoritatem divinam quaerat, enquire after Divine
Authority in this matter, he may find what the Baptism of Infants will avail
them, De Genesis ad lit. l. 10. c. 23.
Ex circumcisione carnis, from the Circumcision used under the Old Law. In the
other Passage cited by Mr. M. he says, indeed, That the Custom of the Church
in baptizing Infants was not to be credited, Nisi Apostolica esset traditio, if
it were not an Apostolical Tradition; but does not in the least insinuate that
the Apostles left not this Tradition in their Writings.

Lastly, Hence it is evident that the Practice of the Church is no true Ground
for the Interpretation of the Holy Scripture, seeing this Practice was built
upon the Churches Interpretation of John vj. 53, 54, 56. in a Sense which that
Scripture does not bear.

Secondly, Savior's Words, I say unto you, Swear not at all, received in the
Second, Third, Fourth, and Fifth Centuries, it was absolutely unlawful for a
Christian to swear at all. To this Effect we have, in the Second Century the
express Testimony of Justin Martyr, Apol. 2. p. 36. D. Adv. Haer. l. 2. c. 56.
p. 216.
affirming, that Christ commanded Christians, (...), not to swear at all, but
always to speak the Truth, saying, Swear not all, etc. Of Irenaeus, who says,
our Lord has not only forbid us to swear falsely, Sed nec jurare praecepit, but
has commanded that we should not swear. Clemens of Alexandria, comparing the
Christian Laws with those of Plato, says, Strom. l. 5. p. 596.
that of Plato, (...), Avoid swearing in any thing, agrees (...), to our Lords
Prohibition of an Oath. And again; Avoid, says he, an Oath in Traffic,
Paedag. l. 3. c. 11. p. 255.
(...), and in other things; for the Lord will not hold him guiltless who takes
his Name in vain. And Basilides, Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 5.
who suffered under the Persecution of Severus, being urged by some of his
fellow Soldiers to swear, he confidently affirmed, (...), It was not lawful
for him to swear at all, for he was a Christian.

In the Third Century Origin observes, Tract. 25. in Matthew. F. 47. B.
that when our Lord speaks of Swearing, Matthew. xxiij. he speaks unto the Jews,
and that, Alioquin manifest superius vetuit omnino jurare, he had before
manifestly forbid to swear at all. And again; I think, that he who would live
according to the Gospel, ought not to adjure another; for that which our Lord
speaks in the Gospel, Hom. 35. in Matthew. F. 82. A.
Swear not at all; and this, Adjure not at all, is alike; Si enim jurare non
licet, quantum ad evangelicum Christi mandatum, verum est, quia nec adjurare
alterum licet, for if by Christ's Evangelical Precept, we must not swear at
all, it is as true, that it is not lawful to impose an Oath on others. De Idol.
c. 11.
I omit to speak of Perjury, says Tertullian, Quando ne jurare quidem liceat,
seeing it is not lawful to swear at all. Amongst the Heads belonging to the
Religious Discipline of Christians, which Cyprian collected for the Instruction
of Quirinus, the Twelfth is this, Non jurandum, That Christians must not swear;
which he proves from Matthew. v. 34. And to encourage Christians against Death,
he tells them, De Mortal. Ed, Ox. p. 157.
That it will be to them a Deliverance from many Evils they will be tempted to
in this Life; For, says he, Compeller is jurare, quod non licet, thou will be
compelled to swear, which is not a thing lawful to be done.

In the Fourth Century Lactantius teaches, Epit. cap. 6. p. 744.
That he who is of God, and a Follower of Truth, will never swear falsely, least
he seem to deride God, Sed ne jurabit quidem, nor will he swear at all.
Eusebius, Demonst. Evang. l. 1. c. 6. p. 23. Praep. Evang. l. 1. c 4. p. 12.
comparing the Laws of Moses with those of Christ, says, Moses commanded not
to swear falsely; Christ, (...), not to swear at all: And speaking of the
Advantages of Christianity, he reckons this as one, (...), That they had
learned from Christ not to swear at all. St. Basil, on that Passage of the
Psalmist; Who swears to his Neighbor, In Ps. 14. Tom. 1. p. 132, 133.
and deceives him not, observes that here Permission is given to a perfect Man
to swear, (...), but in the Gospel it is entirely forbid. Here it is said, He
that swears to his Neighbor, and deceives him not; there, I say unto you,
Swear not at all. In his Epistle to Amphilochius he declares, Can. 29.
That, (...), an Oath is wholly forbidden; Tom 2. p. 383.
and much more an Oath to do Evil. In his Asceticks he instructs us, (...), Not
to swear at all, Tom. 3. Ep. 63. p. 97.
nor to put his Money out to Usury. And speaking of Gregory Thaumaturgus; he
says, That he abstained from an Oath, contenting himself with Yea, and Nay,
(...), by reason of the Command of Christ. Epiphanius expressly says, Haer. 19.
Ossen.. 6. p. 44.
That our Lord commanded not to swear by God himself, (...), nor any other
Oath; it being of the Devil; or at the least an evil thing to swear; and that
Christianity requires us, Haer. 59. Cathar.. 7. p. 499. (...). p. 78.
(...), Not to swear, either in Falsehood, or in Truth, but only to say yea,
yea, and nay, nay. Gregory Nazianzen observes that an Oath is forbidden, (...),
only to us Christians.

In the Fifth Century St. Chrysostom is very copious on this Subject: In Matthew.
5.34.
For he informs us, that it was said to them of old, Thou shall not forswear
thy self, but speak the Truth when thou swearest; but Christ commanded not to
swear at all. 2. That to keep us farther from swearing by God, he says, Swear
not by Heaven, which is his Throne. 3. That Christ, by saying, What is more
than this comes of Evil, means (...), swearing, not forswearing; for it is a
thing confessed, and no Man needs to learn it, That false swearing is of Evil;
nor is it only more than yea and nay, but contrary to them. 4. That though
swearing was allowed by the Law, yet was it evil; because it was allowed only
by reason, (...), of the Weakness of them who received the Law, to keep them
from swearing by Idols: And, 5. That though then it were not evil, yet now is
it evil, and very evil, after so much Philosophy. 6. That we must not pretend
that we swear truly, Hom. 15. in Genesis p 96.
(...), for it is not lawful to swear true or false; let us therefore keep our
Mouths pure from Oaths. 7. That if we reverence nothing else, we should
reverence that Gospel we hold forth, when we bid Men swear; for opening it you
will find, Tom. 6. Statu. ar. Orat. 15. p. 565.
says he, Swear not at all; and do thou make that Law an Oath, which
forbids thee to swear? When therefore thou art about to adjure any one,
restrain thy self, P. 566.
and say to him who is about to swear; What shall I do! God has forbid me to
adjure, he now restrains me; and this will be sufficient for the Honor of the
Lawgiver, for thy Security, and to affright him who is about to Swear.

We find, says Theodoret, in the Laws of the Gospel, Qu. 37. in Geu. p. 31.
(...), the Swearer, though he swears true, to be of the Portion of the Devil.
He swears himself, That he would not the Death of a Sinner, Ep. 78. p. 949.
Tom. 4. Dial. 1. p. 23. Fab. Haer. l. 5. c. 16. Adv. Graecos Sermon. 9. p. 621.
(...), who forbids others to swear. And again; He that forbids others to
swear, interposeth an Oath. The Old Law, says the same Theodoret, forbids
Perjury, (...), but the New forbids an Oath. Our Lord, making Laws about Oaths,
(...), wholly forbids them.

If thou art a Christian, says Isidore Pelusiota, L. 1. Ep. 155.
and under the good Pastor, obey his Voice, (...), commanding thee not to swear
at all; and if we must not swear, neither must we exact an Oath. God, says St.
Jerome, permitted the Jews, as being Children, to swear, as he permitted them to
offer Sacrifice; not that they did well in it, In Matthew. 5.
but that it was better to swear by God than Idols, Evangelica autem veritas
non recipit juramentum, but the Evangelical Truth permits not an Oath. In Zach.
8. f. 115. b.
And again, Our Lord commands in the Gospel, Ut non juretis penitus, That you
swear not at all.

Jussit salvator noster ut Christiani homines non jurarent, De Gubern. dei l.
3. p. 88. Act. Council. Constable. Act. 1. Tom. 2. p. 129.
Our Lord, says Salvian, commanded that Christian Men should not swear. And
the Council of Constantinople, under the Patriarch Flavianus, adds, That,
(...), we are commanded by our Savior Christ not to swear.

Now here I ask, Whether all these plain Testimonies be sufficient to prove,
that it was once the Doctrine of this whole Church of Christ, That swearing was
wholly unlawful, and forbidden by those Words of Christ, on which they bottom
this Assertion? If this be granted; then, seeing it is evident that the present
Church holds, and by her Practice does approve the contrary Doctrine, it must
be granted that her present Belief, or Practice, can be no just Evidence, or
Proof of what was the Belief and Practice of all the former Ages. But if these
Testimonies give not sufficient Evidence, that this was then their Faith, and
the received Interpretation of the Text; then let the Romanists permit us to
deny their Doctrines and Traditions, till they have proved them to be
primitive, by more clear, numerous, and early Testimonies, and we ask no more:
For then they vainly must attempt to prove that any Text in Controversy betwixt
us and them, has, by Tradition, been interpreted against the Protestants; it
being certain, that no such Testimonies can be produced for that Sense of any
Scripture which we Protestants reject; and if the Fathers, after so many plain
and frequent Attestations, might practice and believe the contrary, to the
plain import of their Words in this particular, why not in other Matters also?
And to what purpose is it to confirm a Doctrine, or bottom an Assertion upon
Two or Three Citations from those Fathers who are not to be credited, it seems,
in what may be confirmed from Fifty of their plainest Testimonies, and by the
Suffrage of a General Council.

Thirdly, Apol. 1. p. 55. and p. 44.
It was the current Doctrine of the Fathers for Three whole Centuries, That the
good Angels were transported with the Love of Women, and begat Children of
them, which are those we now call Demons, or evil Spirits. These are the very
Words of Justin Martyr, who flourished in the Second Century. Adv. Haer. l. 4.
c. 70. p. 412. Paedag. l. 3. c. 2. Strom. l. 3. p. 450. l. 5. p. 550.
Irenaeus, who flourished in the same Century, says, That, Angeli
transgressores commixti fuerunt eis, the Angels which transgressed mixed with
them. And Clemens of Alexandria thrice informs us, that they fell from Heaven,
(...), through Incontinence and Love of Women.

In the Third Century Athenagoras informs us, Legate. pro. Christianis p. 27, 28.
That some of the Angels, (...), lusting after Virgins; and being overcome of
the Flesh, begat Giants of them; and that these Angels, and the Souls of these
Giants are the Demons which wander about the World. And in saying this, I
speak, (...), nothing, says he, without Testimony; but only expound, De Virg.
vel. c. 7. de cult. faem. l. 1. c. 2. de Idol. cap. 9.
(...), that which is mentioned by the Prophets. Tertullian says, That they
rushed down from Heaven, Ad Filias hominum, to the Daughters of Men; and thence
he calls them Desertors of God, and, Amatores Faeminarum, lovers of Women. St.
Cyprian twice informs us, De Idol. van. p. 13. de Habit. virg. p. 99. ed. Oxon.

P. 29.

Apud phot. cod. 234.


That they fell from their heavenly Vigor, Ad terrena contagia devoluti, being
debased to earthly Contagions. They fell, says Minutius, Terrenis
cupiditatibus degravati, being depressed by earthly Lust. Methodius, That they
conversed with the Daughters of Men, being taken with the Love of Flesh.

In the Fourth Century, Lactantius says, L. 2. c. 14. p. 216, 217.
That the Devil tempted them to Vice, Et Mulierum congressibus inquinavit, and
defiled them by Converse with Women; and so being excluded from Heaven they
became his Ministers, and they who were begotten by them became terrestrial
Demons. De praep. Evang. l 5. c. 4. de Noah and Arca, c. 4.
Hi sunt immundi Spiritus malorum quae geruntur Auctores, These, says he, are
the unclean Spirits, which are the Authors of all Evil. The same Assertions may
be found in Eusebius, in St. Ambrose, in Epiphanius, Number. 21. L. 4 c. 26. Hist.
l. 1. c. 3.
or some Author cited by him in his Sixty fourth Heresy; by Pseudo Clemens in
his Recognitions, and by Sulpitius Severus. Petavius, in his Notes upon
Epiphanius, says, Fuit haec vetustissimorum Patrum fere omnium Sententia
filios illos Dei qui Genesis 6. silias hominum adamasse dicuntur, Angelos fuisse,
This was the Opinion of almost all the most Ancient Fathers, That the Sons of
God, who are said in Genesis the Sixth, to have loved the Daughters of Men,
were Angels. Vetus fuit multorum and gravissimorum Authorum opinio, It was the
ancient Opinion of many and very grave Authors, says Fevardentius on the
forecited place of Irenaeus: And yet,

First, It deserves to be considered, De C.D. l. 15. cap. 23.
That they grounded this whole Fancy and Exposition, partly upon that spurious
Book of Enoch; which, says St. Austin, Continet istas gigantum fabulas,
contains those Fables of the Giants; and where, In Joh. To 8. Ed. Huet p. 132.
d.
says Origin, it is said, That Jared was begotten in the Days, (...), of the
Descent of the Sons of God upon the Daughters of Men; and partly upon the
concurring Tradition of the Jews, who had entertained the same Notion and
Exposition of the Place, as we may learn from their own Josephus and Philo,
Antiq. l 1. c. 4. p. 8. Philo de Gigant. p. 284, 285.
who from the said Traditions tell us, That, (...), many Angels of God,
conversing with Women, begot insolent Children, and Despisers of everything
that was good, as trusting to their own Strength.

Secondly, Consider that in the very next Century, this Fancy was run down, in
Terms very opprobrious, and much reflecting upon the Ignorance and Oscitancy of
the former Fathers: That which makes most Men thus Ignorant, says Theodoret,
Quaest. 47. in Genesis
on the place, is their careless reading of the Scriptures. And there he also
represents the Authors of the former Opinion, In locum.
as, (...), Men very stupid, and such as had a Knock in their Cradles.
Chrysostom adds, That they who affirm that these things were spoken, not of
Men, but Angels, were (...), speakers of Blasphemy; and then he proceeds, Edit.
Sichardi p. 52, 53.
(...), to overturn, or to confute the Fables of these Men. And in the very
next Century, Philastrius Brixiensis, put this very Doctrine into the Catalogue
of his Heresies, saying, Alia est Haeresis, quae de gigantibus adserit, quod
Angeli miscuerunt se cum faeminis ante diluvium, and inde esse natos gigantes,
There is another Heresy, which asserts, touching the Giants, That Angels,
before the Flood, conversed with Women, and that of them were these Giants
begotten. If then the Jewish Church received by Tradition, a Doctrine so
contrary to the very Nature of Angels, and consequently to Truth it self: If
the Fathers of the first four Centuries were so easily imposed upon by their
Traditions, and their spurious Books, as to embrace the same Opinion, not only
against Reason; but, as Theodoret, St. Chrysostom, and Austin have
demonstrated, against the Evidence of that very Text on which they grounded
their Opinion; which so expressly says, The Wickedness, not of the Angels, or
their Offspring, but, of Men was great, and that all Flesh had corrupted their
Ways; and that God therefore had determined to punish, not Demons, or the
Ghosts of Giants, but, the whole Earth, by bringing of a Flood upon them: If
they, I say, could read so carelessly this Chapter, as generally to interpret
one Verse of it in Opposition to the plain Import of the whole: If, Lastly, an
Exposition so long, and generally received, till the beginning of the Fifth
Century, could, in that very Century, by, by the greatest Fathers of the
Church, utterly rejected as Fabulous, Blasphemous, Heretical, (...), and guilty
of the utmost Folly, then must it be extremely evident,

1. That Tradition, in this matter, could be no certain Rule unto the Jewish
Church, and therefore could not be Infallible.

2. That the Fathers of the Christian Church have been imposed upon for some
whole Centuries, in this Affair, by spurious Authors, and by Jewish Fables; and
therefore they and the Fathers, of any other Age, must also be supposed subject
to the like Mistakes in other Matters of like Nature.

3. That they were prone, on these Accounts, to interpret Scriptures contrary
to the plain Import of them, and so cannot be owned as the Authentic
Interpreters of Holy Writ.

4. Hence also it is clear, that what has generally been received, without any
apparent Opposition in one Age, may, in the very next Age, be as generally
rejected with the greatest Scorn and Ignominy, and pass for Blasphemy and
Heresy.

Fourthly, Secular Affairs. For amongst the Sins which provoked God to Anger,
St. Cyprian reckons this, De lapsis p. 123.
Episcopos procuratores rerum secularium fieri, That Bishops became Proctors in
secular Affairs. The Sixth Canon of the Apostles decrees, That a Bishop,
Presbyter or Deacon shall be deposed, if he take upon him, (...), worldly
Cares. The General Council of Chalcedon, forbids all Bishops, Clerks, Can. 3.
or Monks, (...), to intermeddle with worldly Businesses. Can. 11.
The Second General Council of Constantinople having said, That the sacred
Canons deposed those Presbyters, or Deacons who took upon them secular
Governments, or Cares, ratifies the said Canons; declaring, That if any of them
did thus employ himself, (...), Council. Trull. Can. 1. (...). Conc. Nic. 2.
can. 1.
he should be expelled from the Clergy; for according to the most true Words of
our Savior, (...), No Man can serve Two Masters; and yet what Church at
present does observe these Canons, though they were all confirmed, and even
ascribed to the Holy Spirit, by the general Council held in Trullo, and by the
Second Nicene Council; or who now thinks himself obliged by that Text to do so?

Fifthly, Who knows not that anciently it was esteemed, Church a thing unlawful
for a Bishop, Presbyter, or any of the Clergy, to go from one Church or Diocese
to another? The first Nicene Council declares, That some, Can. 15.
who before their sitting had done this, did it, (...), against the Canon; and
decrees, That for the future, neither Bishop, Priest, or Deacon shall (...), go
from City to City. Can 21.
The Council of Antioch, approved by the whole Church, renews the same Decree.
The Council of Sardica represents the Attempt of such a Change as, Can. 1.
(...), a most pernicious Custom to be pulled up by the Roots; and as a
Wickedness which deserved, Translationes ab Ecclesia ad Majores apud Hilar.
Frag. p. 437. Can. 1. Apud Athanas. Apol. p. 744. Ep. 84. c. 4. (...).
Theodoret. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 11.
(...), to be severely punished; and therefore they declare, That they who made
such Changes should be excluded, even from Lay-Communion; and they object these
Translations to the Arians as their great Crime. The General Council of
Chalcedon confirms all the Canons made touching this Matter by these Councils.
Pope Julius, not only condemns this Transmigration, but says, That he who
practices it does, (...), despise the Station God has given him. Pope Leo
adds, That he who does so, shall not only be expelled from the Chair he had
invaded, Sed carebit and propria, but shall be deprived of his own. Pope
Damasus declares, That he will have no Communion with such Persons.

Moreover this Practice they condemn as Spiritual Adultery, declaring, That the
Church to which the Bishop, or the Priest is chosen, is his Wife; which
therefore he cannot dismiss, and take another, without Adultery. Thus the Synod
of Alexandria accuse Eusebius of Nicomedia for going from Berytus to that City,
as having forfeited his Bishopric, and committed Adultery against the Import
of that Precept, Apud Athanas. Apol. 2. p. 727.
Art thou bound to Wife, seek not to be loosed; which if it be said of a Woman,
(...); how much more of a Church, of the same Bishopric to which one being
tied ought not to seek another? (...), Apud Binium Tom. 4. p. 9 (...). p. 15.
That he may not be found also an Adulterer, according to the Holy Scriptures.
In the Synod under Mennas, it was also laid to the Charge of Anthimus, That,
having been Bishop of Trabisond, he did, (...), adulterously snatch that of
Constantinople against the Ecclesiastical Laws and Canons. Apud. Regin. de
Eccles. discipl. l. 1. c. 250.
Pope Calixtus from the same Scripture, determines, That if a Bishop, or Priest
leave his Church or Parish, which is his Wife bound to him whilst he lives, he
commits Spiritual Adultery.

And suitably to the Determinations of so many Councils, they who refused to be
thus promoted, were highly commended, as observing, (...), Eusebius. de vita
Constant. l. 3. c. 61.
the Commands of God, and the Canons of the Apostles, and the Church. Thus,
when upon the Deposition of Eustathius, Bishop of Antioch, they would have
preferred Eusebius, Bishop of Caesarea, to that See, he refused the Offer,
Sozom. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 19.
because, (...), the Law of the Church forbad it; and this Fact Constantine
commended, as acceptable to God: (...), Eusebius. ibid.
and agreeable to the Tradition of the Church.

But they who did transgress this Canon were removed from that See they were
translated to, though never so well deserving of the Church. Thus Gregory
Nazianzen, though removed from Sasima to Constantinople by the Emperor; though
he had labored so much in that Church to convert the Heathens he found there,
and hinder the Endeavors of the Heretics; yet the General Council of
Constantinople, observing, says Sozomen, (...), Hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 7.
the Laws of the Fathers, and the Ecclesiastical Order, took his Bishopric
from him, no ways regarding the great Merits of the Person. But who now, in the
Church of Christ, regards these Canons of so many General Councils, or looks
upon it as a Crime to admit of, or even sue for a Translation from a less
Bishopric to a greater?

It were easy to show the like Difference betwixt the Practice and Judgment of
the present Church, and that of former Ages, touching the corporal and
pecuniary Punishments of Men for difference in Religion, which they of former
Ages most plainly disapproved of, touching the Suffrage of the People being
requisite to the Election of their Bishop, which they expressly did assert,
disowning such pretended Bishops as wanted the Consent and Suffrage of the
People; to omit many other Instances which might be easily produced, to show
that Doctrines and Practices have passed for current, and even Apostolical, in
former Ages, which are now utterly rejected, and disapproved of in this present
Age.

But, Lastly, though when the whole Church is unanimous, as an Article of
Christian Faith, necessary to be owned by all Christians; the Plea from the
concurring Judgment of the Church is highly plausible, and never ought, without
the clearest Evidence of Reason, or of Scripture to be gainsaid, nor has the
Church of England ever disowned any such Doctrine; yet when whole Churches, or
Nations are divided in their Sentiments, concerning any Doctrine, and Number
may be pleaded by both Parties; then, say we with the Fathers, That we must
have Recourse unto the Scriptures. This is, at present, visibly the State, and
the Condition of the Church of Christ; she agrees now in nothing but the
Apostles, and the Nicene Creed; there is East against West, and West against
East; Protestant against Papist, and Papist against Protestant. Now, in this
case, the ancient Fathers of the Church declare it is our only safe and prudent
Course, to fly, as does the Church of England, to the Holy Scriptures, and to
primitive Antiquity; and say, That a Necessity is laid upon us so to do. Thus
Hippolytus, or whosoever is the Author of that Book which bears his Name,
having given an Account of the Prevalence which Antichrist shall have, clearly
insinuates, That the best Preservative against him is, P. 60.
Scripturas audire, to hear the Scriptures; and that Christ will pronounce them
Blessed who have done so: And that they who do not, Diligenter legere
Scriptures, P. 13.
diligently read the Scriptures, shall run up and down, saying, Where is
Christ? and shall not find him. The Author of the imperfect Work upon Matthew,
which passes under the Name of Chrysostom, speaking of the Times in which
Heresy prevails, Hom. 49. p 174.
says, Then let them who are in Judaea fly to the Mountains; that is, Qui sunt
Christiani conferant se ad Scripturas, Let them who are Christians have
Recourse to the Scriptures, to the Writings of the Apostles and Prophets. And
why, says he, does Christ at this time command, Omnes Christianos confer se
ad Scripturas, all Christians to fly to the Scriptures. Because, says he, in
this time, since Heresy has got the Churches, there can be no Proof of true
Christianity, Neque refugium potest esse Christianorum aliud volentium
cognoscere fldei veritatem, nisi scripturae divinae; the Christians, who are
desirous to know the true Faith, can have no other Refuge but the Holy
Scriptures. Before there were many Ways of showing which was the Church of
Christ; but now, if Men be willing to discern her, Nullo modo cognoscitur quae
sit vera Ecclesia Christi nisi tantummodo per Scripturas; the true Church of
Christ can by no other way be known, but only by the Scriptures; for now, all
those things, which are properly of Christ in truth, these Heresies have in
Schism; they, in like manner, have Churches, the Divine Scriptures, Bishops,
the other Orders of the Clergy, Baptism, the Eucharist; all other things, and
even Christ himself: Now in the Confusion of so great Similitude; he that is
willing to know which is the true Church of Christ, Unde cognoscat nisi
tantummodo per Scripturas? Whence can he know it but only by the Scriptures? P.
175.
Before it was known by Miracles who were true Christians, and who false; but
now, Signorum operatio omnino levata est, the working of Miracles is entirely
diminished; and the working of feigned Miracles, magis apud eos invenitur qui
falsi sunt Christiani, is chiefly found amongst those who are false Christians;
for the full Power of working Miracles is to be given to Antichrist. The Church
of Christ was formerly known by her Manners, the Conversation of all, or most
of her Members being Holy; but now Christians are like to, or even worse than
Heretics. He therefore who would know which is the true Church of Christ; Unde
cognoscat nisi tantummodo per Scripturas? Whence can he know her but only by
the Scriptures? Whence, our Lord, knowing that there would be such a confusion
of things in the last Days, commands, Ut Christiani qui sunt in Christianitate
volentes firmitatem accipere fidei verae, ad nullam rem fugiant nisi ad
Scripturas, That Christians, who are willing to remain firm in the true Faith,
should fly to nothing but the Scriptures.

The true Chrysostom gives exactly the same Advice in the like Case; for to
that Enquiry, What shall we say to the Greeks? Hom. 33. in Act. Tom. 4. p. 799.
There comes one of them, and says, I would be a Christian, (...), but I know
not to whom I should join myself, for there is much Contention, Controversy,
and Tumult among you Christians; What Opinion shall I choose? every one says,
Truth is on my Side; Whom shall I credit, who know nothing of the Scriptures,
and hear them all pretending to them? To this Inquiry Chrysostom answers, This
is much for us; for did we say you must believe our Discourses, thou had
reason to be troubled, (...); but since we say you must believe the Scriptures,
and they are plain, and true, it is easy for you to pass your Judgment; if any
Man consents with them, he is a Christian; if he contradicts them, he is far
from this Rule. Behold here the Heathen, sent by St. Chrysostom to pass
Judgment betwixt the Orthodox, and all sorts of Heretics, from Scripture
alone; and told, that it is easy for him so to do, because the Scriptures are a
plain Rule, whereby to judge in Matters of this Nature: But, says the Heathen,
one of you affirms, That the Scripture says thus; the other, That it speaks
otherwise; interpreting it to another Sense. But what of all this, says
Chrysostom, (...); for have thou not an Understanding, and a Judgment? Where
again the Heathen is supposed able, by his own Judgment, to discern who wrests,
who rightly does interpret Scripture. But how can I do this, says the Greek? I
know not how to judge of the Doctrines; I come to be a Learner, and you make me
a Teacher: If any one object thus, says Chrysostom, (...), we should ask him
whether this be not Dissimulation and Pretense; for if your Reason taught you
to condemn Heathenism, it may also teach you to judge betwixt us and Heretics;
do not therefore dissemble or make Pretenses, (...), for all things are easy.
Thou know what to do, and leave undone, do therefore what thou ought, and
with right Reason seek of God, and he will fully reveal this to thee, for he is
no respecter of Persons; it is not possible that he who hears without
Prejudice should not be persuaded, P. 800.
(...); for as if there were a Rule to which all things were to be adapted, it
would be easy to perceive who takes wrong Measures; so is it here: To this Rule
you see, viz. the Holy Scriptures, even the Heathen is sent, as to that which
is sufficient to direct him to Christian Truth, when there is, (...), much
Controversy, and Contention amongst Christians concerning it.

Lastly, Commonit. c. 6.
Vincentius Lirinensis lays down the same Rule; For if the Contagio^, says he,
though new, endeavor to infect the whole Church, as in the case of the Arians;
then, whosoever would discern the Catholic Faith from Heretical Pravity, must
be careful to adhere to Antiquity, C. 3, 4, 8, 25, 33, 39, 41.
viz. To that Sense of Scripture, which it is manifest our Ancestors held, and
must believe that without Doubtfulness, which all in like manner, with one
consent, held, writ, and taught, openly, frequently, and perseveringly, he
being only firm in Faith, who determines, Id solum sibi tenendum, credendumque,
quicquid universaliter antiquitus Ecclesiam Catholicam tenuisse cognoverit,
That alone is to be held, and believed by him, which he knows the Catholic
Church anciently held. But when Schisms and Heresies have grown ancient in the
Church, and the Poison of them has spread largely (which, say we, is the
present Case of the Church) then, says he, Nullo modo oportet nos, nisi aut
Sola, si opus est, Scripturarum Auctoritate, convincere, we ought only, if need
be, to convince them by the Authority of Scripture, or to shun them, as being
condemned, Cap. 41.
Jam antiquitus, by ancient general Councils of Catholic Priests; and when our
Adversaries assault us with either of these two Weapons, they will find us
ready, and able to defend our selves.

Mr. Mumford shows, that Prayer for the Dead, is at least, Tertullian; and that
from the Fourth Century, P. 401-406.
till the Reformation, it generally obtained in the Church; and is not this
enough to prove it an Apostolical Tradition, as St. Austin, and some others
represent it.

To this I have already returned one Answer, by showing, Communicating Infants
obtained in the same Century in which Tertullian lived; Vide supra. 6.
and that from the Fourth to the Twelfth Century, it was generally practiced,
and held necessary for the Salvation of the Infant; and yet the Trent Council
has declared, That it was neither necessary, nor Apostolical. And there is one
thing farther observable, to complete this Parallel, That Pseudo-Dionysius, in
that very place where he discourses of Prayers for the Dead, undertakes also to
account for that other Custom, Eccl. Hier. c. 7.. 3. quae est de precib. pro
mortuis. p. 417.
(...), of Administering, not only Baptism, but the most sacred Symbols of the
Divine Communion to Children, not capable of understanding Divine things. That
this was then done, he says expressly, not only here, P. 419.
but in these following Words, (...), The Priest also delivers to the Child the
Sacred Symbols, which his Paraphrast varies thus, (...), Pachymeres p. 436.
The Infant also partakes of the Mysteries. And these things, says he, our
Masters, (...), have brought down to us from an ancient Tradition; so that the
Practice, as it was as early, so was Tradition equally pretended for it.

Secondly, It has been lately showed by the Judicious (a) Answer to the Jes.
chapter 7.
Bishop Usher, the searned (b) De poenis and satisf. l. 5.
Dall. and by the Author of a late excellent Treatise of (c) Sect. 1.
Prayer for the Dead, and Purgatory; That the Ancients prayed for the Dead upon
these Five Accounts.

1. Dall. ibid. c. 7.
As believing the Doctrine of the Millenium, or the Saints Reign on Earth a
Thousand Years.

2. Dall. ib. Ush. p. 232, etc.
As supposing, that in the general Conflagration of the World, at the last Day,
all should pass through the Fire, and feel the Torment of it more or less.

3. Dall. ibid. c. 3, 4, 5, 6. Ush. ibid.
As thinking that the Souls of just Persons departed, were not to be admitted
into the highest Heavens, or the Fruition of Gods immediate Presence till the
Resurrection, but were till then reserved in Abraham's Bosom.

4. Dall. ibid. c. 9.
As thinking, That the Sentence was not instantly pronounced at the Day of
their Death, but was reserved to that of Judgment, when the Just should have a
public Absolution, and the full Crown of Righteousness awarded to them.

5. Dall. ib. c. 12.
As furmising, That even wicked Persons, by their Prayers, Alms, and Oblations,
might receive, Aut plenam Remissionem, aut tolerabiliorem damnationem, either a
full Remission, or a more tolerable Damnation. And indeed, I think it very
difficult to name one Ancient Author, by whom these Prayers are mentioned, who
held not one or more of these Opinions, which might give Rise unto this Custom;
that of the Millenium, and of the non-Admission of Souls into the highest
Heavens, being almost generally received in the Second Century, in which we
hear nothing of Prayers for the Dead.

Now all these Opinions are generally condemned, and discarded by the Church of
Rome, and if they may reject all the apparent Grounds, recorded in the Ancients
of this Practice, and censure the chief Reasons upon which they did it, why may
not the Tradition also be rejected, as being founded upon precarious Doctrines,
which they themselves deny to be Apostolical?

Thirdly, I answer, That if by praying for the Dead, Mr. M. only means, the
using of such Prayers as St. Paul made for Onesimus, viz. 2 Timothy 1.18.
That God would Grant him Mercy at that Day, viz. The Day of Judgment; or such
as our Church uses in her Liturgy, That God would deliver i^ in the Hour of
Death, and in the Day of Judgment; and that all they who are departed in the
true Faith of God's Holy Name, may, at the Day of Recompense, have their
perfect Consummation and Bliss, both in Body and Soul. I say, if he intends
this only, it is no more than we our selves do by our Practice and
Subscriptions own.

The Doctrine we deny, (...), defin. council. Florent apud Bin. Tom. 7. p. 851.
and p. 564.
is that which is contained in the definition of the Florentive Council, in
these Words; If those who have truly repented ^y in the Love of God, before
they have satisfied for their Sins of Commission and Omission, by worthy Fruits
of Penance, their Souls are purged after Death by purgatory Punishments; and
that they may be relieved from those Punishments, it is profitable for them to
have the Aid of the (...), viz. The Masses, Prayers, and Alms, and other Acts
of (...), performed by the Faithful; and that they being thus purged, (...)
presently after received into Heaven, and admitted to the immediate Vision of
God.

The Doctrine we deny, is that which in the Trent Council is delivered ^^^us:
The Catholic Church, instructed by the Holy Spirit, (...), S. Courgils, and in
this General Synod, taught from the Holy Scriptures, Purgatorium esse,
animasque ibi detentas fidelium suffragijs, potissimum vero Altaris acceptabili
Sacrificio, juvari, Sess. 25.
and the ancient Tradition (...) ^^ry, and that (...) by the (...) the
acceptable Sacrifice of the Altar; which Sacrifico, say they, (...) the
Tradition of the Apostles, (...) the Sins, Punishments, Sed and pro defunctis
in Christo nondum ad plenum purgatis, Sess. 22. cap. 2.
and Satisfactions of the Faithful living, but also for the Dead is Christ not
fully punged. And therefore she defines, That if any one say that, after
Justification, the Fault of the Penitent is so remitted, and the Guilt of
eternal Punishment so blotted out, Ut nullus remaneat reatus poenae temporalis
exolvendae vel in hoc saeculo vel in futuro in purgatorio, Sess 6. can. 30.
that there remains no Guilt of temporal Punishment to be suffered in this
World, or in the future, in Purgatory, before he can have admittance into the
Kingdom of Heaven, let him be Anathema. Now to prove this Doctrine from the
perpetual Tradition of the Church of Christ, Mr. M. must not only prove the
Antiquity of Prayer for the Dead, which no body denies; but,

1. Apud. Bin. Fom. 7. p. 838.
That some Souls^^dying in Christ, or departing hence in the Love of God, are
detrained in Purgatory; or, as the Florentine Council does exprels it, (...),
in a place of Torments.

2. That they are there detained to undergo some temporal Punishment for their
Sins, or to be fully purged from them after Death (...) purgatory Torments.

3. The^ by the Prayers, Alms, and Masses performed by the Living, they are
relieved from those Punishments, and are advanced from Purgatory to Heaven,
from Torment to the Vision of God before the Resurrection of the Body, and the
Day of Judgment: And when Mr. M. will undertake to prove these things, Ex
antiqua Patrum traditione, from the Tradition of the Fathers of the first Five
Centuries, or from the Tradition of the Apostles, he will justify the Decrees
of these Councils, and confute the Protestants. But this, if he be well
acquainted with the Writings and Customs of the Ancient Church, he must know to
be a vain Attempt; it being evident that they knew nothing of these Doctrines;
yea, that they often spoke things, as expressly contrary to every one of these
Particulars, as Light is opposita to Darkness: For,

4. Even from the Proyers (...) and from the Sentiments of those that (...)
most certain Demonstrations, (...) received in the Ancient Church of (...)

It is the Observation of St. (...) That even their Funeral Hymns taught them
to believe that the Feithful, immediately after Death were Happy, Hom. 14. in
1. ep. ad Tim. p. 309.
That they returned then unto their Rest, and were delivered from all their
Labors: We send out, says he, the Departed, (...), with Hymns; then is there
Joy and Gladness, every one praying thus to die, Hom. 14. in 1. Ep. ad Tim. p.
309.
(...), to cease from their Labors, and Conflicts, (...), to be delivered from
all dreadful things, (...), and to see Christ. Hom. 4. in Epist. ad Hebr. p.
453, 454.
And inveighing against the (...) Custom of Lamenting the Faithful at their
Death, he (...) do the burning Lamps import, is it not that (...) Champions?
What mean the Hymns, do we (...) and give Thanks, (...) (...) he has crowned
the Departed, that he (...) Labors; that freeing him from (...) Are not these
the Import of (...) are the Actions of Men rejoicing. (...) Return unto thy
Rest, O my Soul, for the (...) ously with thee: I will fear no Evil, for (...)
art my Refuge from the Trouble that compasse^ (...) what these Psalms import:
But thou wilst not do (...) with Grief: Do thou say, Return unto thy Rest, O
my Soul, and weepest? Are not these things seen, and Hypocrisy; for if thou
really believe what thou say, thou weepest superfluously; if thou do
not, Why do thou sing, why do thou suffer what is done, and do not drive
away the Singers? And again, Tom. 5. Hom. 61. p. 420, 421. (...). ibid.
Let the manner of his Interment shame thee: Psalms, and Thanksgivings, and the
Catalogue of his Progenitors, are things done, not that tho^ may weep, but
may give Thanks for them, (...), as being ^alled to greater Honor; and
consider to whom they (...) that place where is Peter and Paul, and the (...)
says he, if an Heathen (...) would not (...) (...) (...) Rest. And, lastly,
(...) who are gone before (...) Hymns, signifying our (...) Lamps and Incense
we attend th^^ (...) (...) (...) being delivered from this Life of Darkness,
they are the to the true Light. Tom. 6. Hom. 116. p. 944.


The Prayers used for the Dead in the Apostolical Constitutions, (...). l. 8.
c. 41. Wisd. 3.1.
i. e. the most ancient of that kind, which are extant, suppose the Souls, for
which they prayed, (...), resting in Christ, and in the Hands of God; so that
no Torment can touch them; and yet their Prayer for them is, That God would
forgive them all their voluntary, and involuntary Sins; That he would place
over them kind Angel^, which should conduct them into the Regions of (...)
Bosom of Abraham, Isaac, and (...) beginning, have pleased God, (...).
and (...) there is neither Sorrow, Grief, nor Sigh, but (...) the Region of
pious Souls free from (...).

Pseudo (...) Discourse touching those things which are performed about the
Dead, De Hier. Eccl. c. 7. p. 405, 406, 407. Pachym. p. 427.
declares, That the (...) to the Term of their Life, (...), (...) their sacred
Conflicts; and that being arrived (...) (...), they sleep in Joy, that being
come to the end, (...), of this present life, (...), they are filled with
divine Pleasure, as well knowing they for ever shall enjoy, (...), the good
things they possess. P. 407, 408. Pachymeres, p. 428.
That the Relations of the Faithful do pronounce him blessed, as being come
desirably, (...), to his triumphant End; that they bring him to the Priest,
(...), as to the conferring of his Crown, and therefore pour out Psalms of
thanksgiving to the Author of his Victory. That others, though unfit to be
partakers of the Holy Communion, are admitted to these Funeral Solemnities; P.
410.411.
that seeing him who died piously in the Liturgick Offices, (...), declared to
be one who indeed enjoys Communion with the Saints, who have been from the
beginning (...) the same End. P. 416. Pachym. p. 434.
That (...) the Combatant is (...) they bury his Body (...) Soul; Pachym. Ibid.
(...) (...) joys its good things, (...) bly deposited?

And then he tells us, That (...) the Priest made for him, P. 411.
was, That the Divine (...) would forgive him all his Sins committed through
humane infirmity, and would place him in Light, and in the Region of the
Living, in the Bosom of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, (...), in the Place from
which is banished all Grief, Sorrow and Sighing. For Explication of which
Prayer, He, and his Paraphrast there Note.

First, That these things, thus prayed for, are, Ibid.
(...), The plain and the most blessed Rewards of Holy Men.

Secondly, That (...), Ibid.
(...), (...) of Rest which receive Pious (...).

Thirdly, (...) for us by a Kingdom, (...) of Darkness, (...) Sighing,
signify, (...) (...) things ^y others to he suffered in the future Life, That
accordingly (...) Patriarchs, and all the Saints, are (...) and that the
Metaphor seems to be taken from (...) Bosoms of the Sea, to which those who
(...), that they may be at Rest; for as it is with them, so they who are in
this Life tossed with Tempests, Pachymeres p. 430.
(...), then rest in those Bosoms of the Patriarchs, as in an Haven.

Moreover, to this Question or Objection, Why should the Priest pray God to
pardon the Sins of the Dead, and to give him a portion in Light with Divine
Spirits, since every one receives from divine Justice, a retribution according
to what he has done in this present life; for the dead person having
completed all the Actions of his Life, P. 412.
what can the Prayer of the Priest do to procure him a place of Rest, (...),
besides that of which he was worthy and which was consonant to his Actions done
in this (...).

Now (...), P. 414, 415.
That the (...) (...), (...) from the Scriptures, (...) the Spots contracted
(...), He asks that those things (...) Retributions may be given to such as
(...) the Promises of God to be infallible; and (...) which is asked, (...),
according to the Holy Institution, shall entirely happen to those who are made
perfect, according to the divine Life; that he desires only the things which
are acceptable to God, Pachymeres. p. 434.
and, (...) will most certainly be given as being just and (...) by God.

Here then we see expressly that (...) the judgment of the Church, and those
renowned Fathers, who composed and used these Prayers,

1st. That they conceived that the (...), for whom they put them up, did (...)
^ease from their Labors and their (...) were delivered not only from (...)
fear of all things dread (...) where no Torm^^ (...) Sorrow, and Grief, (...)

2dly, (...) were with God, and (...) to greater (...) where blessed (...); to
the true Light; (...) stepped for Joy; were filled (...) of good Things; were
come to a (...); to the Bellowship of all Saints; to the Haven of Rest: And
that the purposes of their Prayers for them were to assure them, from the
Institution, and Promises of God of the Enjoyment of these things; whence it is
evident, that Ease and Freedom from all pain is not more opposite to intense
Torments (...) a place of Happiness, Rest, Joy and Pleasure, to that of the
extremest Misery, than were Prayers for the Dead unto the Romish Purgatory.
Now if such Prayers as these of the Ancient Church, excinsive of the Pains of
Purgatory, and made expressly for the exemption of all pious (...) from Grief
and Torment, and (...) Happiness after Death will (...) quickly put an end
(...) suppose the (...), and suffering (...) Guilt is pardo^^ (...) Church of
God was (...), so can we see no reason (...) most cogent Reason to the
contrary, (...)

Fifthly, Were pious Souls detamed in (...) a miserable State, and subject to
intense Torments, perhaps of many Years duration; and could the Prayers, the
Alms, the Masses of good (...) them ease under, or a more speedy, (...)
miserable plight, and their adva^^ (...) must be the most meritor^^^^ (...) to
be still praying, still mu^^ (...) for the deliverance of these (...) and
therefore doubtle (...) in the New (...) minutest (...) and ^ ^ and (...)
relieve them (...) f^^ctions of (...) Wi^^on (...) (...) most (...) rity to the
(...) the (...) Alms, much (...) off^r the (...) livery of them from that place
of forment; not giving the least hint of any benefit which would accrue to us,
or them, by doing so; nor one Example of any pious Person, who ever put up a
Prayer for them; nor any Intimation of then sad Estate, and how much it
deserv^^ our Pity and (...) (but leaving it to these poor (...) they had been
shrewdly (...) after-Ages back to (...) plight, and (...) to John Ger(...) See
Bish. Ush. of Purg. p. 174.
and ^ (...) the silly (...) ^^lumption, ^.

(...) of Charity, (...) our Lord in(...) with a chief (...) that he will say
unto us, Matthew. xxv. 35, 36.
Come ye bless^^, (...) and thirsty, and you gave me meat and drink; nak^^, and
you clothed me; sick, and you visited me; in prison, and you ministered to me.
Since then the Souls in Purgatory are all the living Members of Christ's Body;
seeing they there are in a State more worthy of our Pity, than the most sick,
afflicted, or needy of Christ's Members upon Earth; and 'twould be greater
Charity, if we were able, to relieve them then, than (...) any Miseries, they
here endure, how came (...) add, I was in the infernal (...) tormented with the
paint (...) Release? Hebr. xiij. 12.
Remember (...) bound with (...) the Body (...) this our (...) they endure
(...) to sympathize (...) Alms, and by (...) this affli(...) it is such as we
also (...) never call upon (...) are in Ron^ in Rurgatory, those (...) in a far
more afflicted State, as knowing, If he believed the Doctrine of Purgatory, it
would be so with us, Jam. v. 14, 15.
when separated from the Body? St. James exhorts the sick to send for the
Rulers of the Church; that they may pray over them; adding, for their
Encouragement to do so, That the Prayer of (...) shall save the sick; and that
if he has committed Sins, the^ shall be forgiven him; and that the effectual
fervent Prayer of (...) Righteous Man (...) but, if their Prayers would avail
also for the (...) of those Sins for which he was fry in (...) as careful to
(...) Why left he (...) to defire the like Prays (...) that place of Torment
(...) ragements (...) these good (...) not their Priests pray (...) tory? Do
they not represent this (...) stian Charity? Are they not still (...) it? What
therefore can we think of the (...) Can we imagine that Roman Catholics have
more ^^ction for distressed Souls than our Compassionate High Priest, and all
his Blessed Apostles? Or, rather must we not conceive this Silence of our Lord
and his Apostles, in that which fills up almost every part of R. Charity and
Devotion, a demonstration that Christ and his Apostles knew nothing of their
Doctrine, nor of the benefit of Prayers for Souls in Purgatory?

FINIS.

