Mr. VVHITES SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT On Monday, the 17th. of January. CONCERNING
THE TRIAL OF THE XII. BISHOPS, An. Dom. 1641.

AC: OX
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed for F. Coules and T. Bancks.

Mr. WHITE His Speech IN PARLIAMENT JANVAR. 17.
Master SPEAKER,
BY woeful experience we have been sensible of the great evils committed by
ill affected persons to the peace and security of the Kingdom, producing
thereby these dangerous and troublesome times; even such are the troubles that
this whole Nation and the other his Majesty's Kingdoms is fallen into, and
lies groaning under, that we have not felt the like in this Land never since
the civil divisions between the two Houses of York and Lancaster, or Barons
wars were on foot in the same; nay, let these troubles of our times be
compared with them, they are of far more dangerous consequence; there was in
those days only the sword to decide the controversies, no other place chosen
for that purpose but the field, in a warlike and courageous manner. In these
our divisions we have adversaries of no courage or magnanimity that rises
against us, only subtle and treacherous spirits lying in their Cabynets, and
keeping themselves close in their stately buildings, their devising on
divellish and hellish stratagems to be put secretly in execution for our
destruction; as powder-plots, fiering privately of Towns, nay, Cities, if
their endeavors might have success according to their desires, which strikes
us with amasement and continual fear of our safety in our own habitations
and places of livelihood; we cannot discern, so corrupt are the hearts of most
men, who scarce to converse, inhabit or eat withal, so malicious is Satan,
(working in his instruments) in whom he dwells, and over whom he altogether
reigns and rules, to bring to pass his own ends, that he works by no
ways, but by practicing of unheard or unconceived of plots amongst Christians,
as by Sorcery, Witchcraft, poisoning, and the like, these inventions can we
not be aware of: A man seeing his enemy, and knowing him to be so, may use
means either to resist or fly from him, thereby to save himself, but being
in place unsuspected to meet an enemy, pretending himself a friend, or at
least not knowing or conceiving him to be his enemy, how can he be secure, how
can he defend himself, or preserve himself from his malice or destruction?
These times are now filled with such malignant spirits devoted altogether to
the service of the Devil, laboring by all means to bring to confusion and
desolation all the opposers, or not complyants to their wicked designs.

Mrs. SPEAKER, having presented to your considerations the manifold dangers and
troubles we sustain by these practices of malignant persons, I presume humbly
to present to your view the Authors of the same, their practices to compass
their desires, and the means to avert and remedy the same, which I desire you
to consider of, and apply the same as to your judgments and wisdoms shall
seem requisite. The greatest and chiefest Authors of our miseries is the
Bishops and their adherents, favorers of the Romish and Arminian faction, that
have with a high hand and stretched out Arm in their several places of Power
and Jurisdiction, both spiritual and temporal exercised cruelty and tyranny
over the Children and Saints of God, binding the Consciences of free Subjects
only to their opinions and commands in the exercise of their Religion, with
extremity and greatest severitie, inflicting punishment upon those of tender
Consciences that shall refuse the same, enjoining all of the Clergy under
their authority, to teach only such things as may serve only to the defense
and maintetenance of their demised doctrines and tenants of their superiors,
preaching the same out of fear, not conscience; these corrupt Bishops Lords
over their brethren and fellow servants in the administration of the mysteries
of salvation, have been the prime Authors of all the troubles we are now
encumbered withal, I speak not, Master SPEAKER, altogether against their
persons, but even their offices and places of authority as now they are used,
contrary to the true iatent of the Apostles in the first admitting of the
ordination of Bishops, in these particulars, as I under favor conceave.

First their denomination and style, Lord Bishops, we find not any where
allowed, nay, not named in Scripture.

Secondly, they join not with their authority teaching and constant preaching
of the word of GOD warranted by the same, but separated contrary thereto.

Thirdly, joining with their Spiritual power, temporal Jurisdiction, usurping
to themselves, the only Office of the Magistrate.

Fourthly, procuring to themselves places of Judicature, chief Judges in great
Courts, as their High Commission, late Star Chamber, and the like, which are
all contrary to the rules and ordinances of Divine-writt. We cannot otherwise
conceive or expect, as long as their Offices thus corrupted remains without
limitation or correction, that ever there will be true Religion settled in this
Land, or any peace or unity of hearts and affections in this Kingdom, being
too apparent to all the world, that from age to age, since the Prelates have
had such power and command in the Common wealth, they have bin either the
roots and founders, or Actors and Competitors with others, of all the
divisions and dissentions that have ever been in this Kingdom, either
between the Prince and his people, or between the Prince and his Parliaments,
and still such persons of perverse Spirits, possess such Offices.

Secondly, I come to show you these their practices, how they have, and still
endeavor to bring to pass their wicked designs, they are known already I
verily believe, both to you and almost all men, that is, by Innova^ing
Religion, joining with the Church of Rome, approving as well of the Doctrine as
Ceremonies thereof, endeavoring to bring all others into the same opinion with
them, especially the Lords and Grandees of this Kingdom: to perfect this, they
raise divisions between the King and his Subjects, between King and
Parliament, between Lords and Commons, and between the Commons themselves; to
raise mutinies, Insurrections, Rebellions amongst his Majesty's good Subjects,
open Wars between his Majesty's Kingdoms one against another, and all under
pretense of the Religion, to defend the Office, power and Jurisdiction of
Bishops above all others, yea that their Spiritual power, is above the Kings
in Ecclesiastical causes, and the like, all which we have had woeful
experience of.

Thirdly, (and lastly) the means whereby we may remedy these evils is. First
to regulate and rectify their unlawful and usurped power and jurisdiction,
and settle such a form of government in Religion, as shall seem to the
wisdom of this House, to come nearest the word of God: And Secondly, with all
speed as we possibly can, upon Trial, bring to deserved punishment, these
Prelates and Bishops, that have been the only Authors of all our miseries.

FINIS.

