A DISCOURSE OF THE Love of God. SHOWING, That it is well consistent with some
Love or Desire of the Creature. And Answering All the Arguments of Mr. Norris
in his Sermon on Matthew. 22.37. And of the Letters Philosophical and Divine to
the Contrary. By DANIEL WHITBY, Chantor of the Church of Sarum.

I suppose that All which is intended by that Phrase, Thou shall Love the Lord
thy God with all thy Heart, etc. amounts to no more than ( 1st,) a sincere
Love, as it is opposed to that which is partial, and divided; and (2dly,) such a
degree of Loving as admits of nothing into Competition with him.

Mr. Norris's Treatise of Heroic Piety. p. 282. LONDON: Printed for Awnsham
and John Churchill, at the Black Swan in Paternoster Row. 1697.

TO THE READER.
I Think I have sufficiently considered all that is material both in the
Sermon, and in the Letters of Mr. N. and the Lady. In his Preface he endeavors
to vindicate his Exposition from Singularity, appealing, 1. to the Books that
are written after the Mystical and Spiritual way, Dr. Still. Fanat. of the Chapter
of Rome, p. 327.
i. e. those Phanatical Pretenders to extraordinary Visions and Illuminations,
to passive Unions, and Deiform Funds of the Soul, a State of Introversion, and
a Superessential Life, P. 259.
who talk of being baelosed in the Midhead of God, and in his Meekhead, and his
Benignity, and in his Buxomness. And sure it is not much for his Glory that
such Persons speak like him.

2. To some French Poets and Divines, which neither can we envy him.

But, 3. Whereas he calls in the Suffrage of the Reverend and Learned Bishop
Lake, a Man too Great to be overlooked; he is the very Person whose sense of
the words contested I have given, Chap. 3.. 1. and who in his Seventh Sermon is
most express against him in these words, On Matthew. 22.27.


But mistake me not, All other things besides God, are not excluded of our
Love. -- Wherefore, for the farther understanding of this Entireness of the
Love of God, we must not take other things opposite, but composite; we must
exclude nothing from our Love that does not enter into competition with God,
and oppose it self against the Love of God.

2 dly, If there be any thing that may be loved jointly with God, it must not
be taken as Coordinatum, but Subordinatum; it must not share equally with God,
but keep its distance, and receive our Love by a reflection from God.

3 dly, Upon this Inequality must our Love ground an unequal Estimate of
things, and we must love God above all Appretiative; we must account all, in
comparison of God, to be as Dung, to be very Loss.

4 thly, Finally, according to the Estimate, must the heat of our Affection be;
we must love God above all Intentive also; we must love other things as fit to
be used, not fit to be enjoyed, yea, we must use all the World as if we used it
not, but we must love God as him whom we would not only use, but enjoy also

Again, P. 335
There be many things and Persons which we are allowed to love, but we must
love them only until they come to the Comparison. If then the Question be,
Whether of the two we love more, to Whether of them we will stick in a case
where both cannot be held; or upon which of them we will fall foul, when it is
not possible for us to keep in with both, if then we can with Moses, esteem the
Reproach of Christ greater Riches than the Treasures of Egypt, we conform our
selves to Christ's first Rule.

Thus if we love God, P. 336.
we love him as we ought, that is, we love him above all things, and we love
him for himself; for that must needs follow when we love him for no other
thing, no not for our own sakes, but are willing to hazard all, even our selves
and all, for the love of him.

This, I hope, is sufficient to show that Excellent Prelate is an Adversary to
the Exposition of Mr. N. and an Abettor of the Vulgar Exposition.

He appeals, 4 thly, to St. Austin, in his Devotional Tracts. Now true it is,
that St. Austin has said many things which, to one unacquainted with his use
of Phrases, may mislead him into this Imagination, though, as he does explain
them, it is evident they are nothing to the purpose. V. G. He inveighs very
much contra cupiditatem mundi, but then he lets you know that we are then only
Guilty of it, Cupiditatem voco omnem motum ad fruendum se, and proximo, and
quolibet corpore non propter Deum. De Doctr. Christian. l. 3. c. 10.
when our Souls move toward themselves, their Neighbor, or any other thing
without respect to God.

For otherwise he informs us that the Fault we commit in the use of these
transitory things, Nam in omnibus hujusmodi rebus non ex earum rerum natura
quibus utimur, sed ex causa utcudi, and modo appetendi, vel probandum est, vel
improbandum, quod facimus, cap. 12.
is not in the nature of the things themselves, but from the cause of using,
and the manner or degree of desiring them.

Sometimes he will not allow us diligere terrena, but then it is because
dilection is a word that is used properly only for the love of better things.
Dilectionis enim nomen magis solet in melioribus r^busdici, in melioribus rebus
accipi. To. 9. Tr. 8. in Ep. Johan. p. 633.
Sometimes he will also tell us we must not amare, love Earthly things; but
then to love them is, Nihil aliud est amare, quam propte s^ipsum rem aliquam
appetere To. 4. 80 Qu. c. 35. p. 543.
in his Language, only to affect them for themselves; for otherwise, says he.
Non prohibet te Deus amare ista, sed non de^igere ad beatitudinem, God does not
absolutely forbid thee to love these things, but he forbids thee to love them
as thy Happiness.

He also often informs us that we must not enjoy, but only use these things, but
then he adds, That we enjoy that only which we love for it self, Decimus ea re
nos perfrui, quam diligimus propter s^ipsam, and ea r^ nobis fruen^um esse
tantum, quae efficimur beati, caeteris vero utendum. De Doctr Christian. l. 1.
c. 31

Quanquam and vicinissime dicitur frui, cum delectatione uti, cum enim adest
quod diligitur, etiam delectatione jecum, necesse est, gerat, p^r quam si
transieris, eamque ad illud ubi permanendum est, retuleris, uteris ea, and
abusive, non propr^e diceris frui, si vero inhaeseris, atque permanseris finem
in ea ponens laetitiae tuae, tunc vere, and frui dicendus es. Cap. 33.


and in which we place our Happiness, and make the end of our Joy; but if by
enjoying be only meant that using them with delight, and so as to pass from
them to that in which we ought to rest; this he allows of.

Take St Austin without his own Interpretation of the words Love, Dilection,
Concupiscence, Enjoyment, and he seems often to favor Mr. N.'s new Notion; but
if he be permitted to be his own Interpreter, he will be found to have said
nothing to his purpose, of which we cannot have a fuller Evidence than his own
Exposition on the words urged by Mr. N. for his own Opinion. For,

1. St. Austin in his First Book of Christian Doctrine, sets himself expressly
to the Consideration of the words of St. Matthew, Chap. 22.37. and in his
Discourse upon them expressly grants, That the love of our selves, and the love
of the Body, and of Provisions for it is included; Modus ergo diligendi prae
cipiendus est homini, id est quomodo se diligat, aut prosit sibi, quin autem se
diligat aut prosit sibi dubitare, dementis est; praecipiendum etiam quomodo
Corpus suum diligat, nam quod diligat corpus suum* idque salvum habere, atque
integrum velit, aeque manifestum est. -- Ergo praecepto non opus est ut se
quisque, and corpus suum diligat, quum id quod simus, and id quod infra nos
est, and ad nos tantum pertinet, inconcussa naturae lege diligimus. Cap. 25.
and for this, says he, we need no Precept, the Law of Nature teaching us, and
the Beasts thus to love.

And when he comes to give us the sum of what he had discoursed upon this
Subject, he begins it with this Advertisement, That there needs no Precept to
engage us to love our selves; and that we may know, and do this, the whole
temporal Dispensation of Providence, says he, Hoc ergo ut nosecremus, and
p^ssemus, facta est tota pro salute nostra per divinam providentiam dispensatio
temporalis, qua debemus uti, non quasi mansoria quadam dilectione, atque
delectatione, sed transitoria potius, tanquam via, tanquam vehiculorum, -- Ut
ea quibus ferimur, propter illud ad q^od ferimur, diligamus. Cap. 35.
was designed, which we are to use not with a permanent Love and Delight, but
only with a transitory, as being the way, the Vehecles, the Instruments, the
things by which we are carried up to him we love.

In his set Discourse upon those words of St John, Love not the World, neither
the things of the World, he expressly declares. That God does not absolutely
forbid us to love these things, but only not to love them as our Happiness; Non
te prohibet Deus amare ista, sed non diligere ad beatitudinem, sed ad hoc
probare, and laudare, ut ames creatorem -- Si autem amaveris haec, quamvis illa
Deus fecerit, and neglexeris creatorem -- Nonne tuus amor Adulterinus
deputabitur? -- Nunquid non est in his modus? Aut quando d^citur, Nolite ista
diligere, hoc dicitur? Ut non manducetis, aut non bibatis aut filios non
procreetis? Non hoc dicitur, sed sit modus propter creatorem, ut non vos
illigent istu dilectione, ne ad fruendam hoc ametis, quod ad utendum habere
debetis. Tr. 2. p. 592.
not so as to neglect our Creator; that he requires us to use a mean in our
Affection to them, and not to enjoy what we should only use, nor have our
Affections cleaving to them.

In his Meditations, which is one of his Devotional Tracts, he observes how the
World, Respice universum mundum and considera si in ^o aliquid sit quod tibi
non s^rviat omnis creatura ad hunc finem cursum suum dirigit ut obsequiis tuis
famuletur, and utilitati deserviat tuisque oblectamentis pariter and
necessitatbus secundum affluentiam and deficientiam occurrat. -- Si autem ista
Diligis ut subjecta dilige, ut arrum sponsi, ut munera amici, and beneficia
Domini; sic tamen ut memineris semper quod illi debeas, nec ista propter se sed
ista propter illum, nec ista cum illo sed ista propter illum and per ista illum
and super ista* illum diligas. Cap. 4.
and all things in it serve both our Necessity and Delight; but hence he will
allow us to love them only as things Subject to, and serving of us, as the
Gifts of God, remembering that we owe them to him, and must not love them for
themselves, but for him, not with him, but for him, and should love him by, and
above them. And this I think may be sufficient to acquaint us with the Opinion
of St. Austin in this Matter.

I am only farther to acquaint the Reader, that the Substance of many of these
Arguments was sent to Mr. N. long before his Letters appeared in Print, and
seeing he thought none of them worthy of the least notice, I humbly offer them
to the Reader, (especially to the Ingenuous Author of the late Discourse
concerning the Love of God, to whom I own my self obliged) and rest.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. The Question, Whether we are obliged to love God, so entirely, as
that we may love nothing else with a love of Desire,. 1. This Assertion is
showed to be contrary, 1st. To our Prayers for our daily Bread,. 2. 2dly, To
God's Promises of temporal good Things,. 3. And to his Threats of temporal
Evils,. 4. 3dly, To the Representation of them as God's Gifts and Blessings,
and our good Things,. 5. To God's Command to rejoice in them,. 6. To the
Industry required by God to procure these things, and his Blessing promised to
that Industry,. 7. Proofs from Reason, That God has not absolutely forbidden
the Desire of Pleasure, of Honor, or of temporal Enjoyments,. 8. Corollaries:
1. That this Doctrine is inconsistent with our Obligation to Pray, and with the
Prayers of our own, and of Ancient Liturgies. 2. With the Praises due to God
for temporal Blessings, and with the Thanksgivings for them used in our
Liturgy. 3. It tends to depreciate the Divine Gifts, to teach Men to slight
God's Promises, and contemn his Threats. 4. To destroy all Industry in our
Calling. 5. It lays the vilest Imputation upon the Dispensations of God's
Providence toward* us,. 9. Page 1 CHAP. II. To avoid the seeming Inconsistence
betwixt the Love of God only, and the Love of my Neighbor as my self, it is
said, That the Love of God with all our Heart enjoined in the First
Commandment, is the Love of Desire; the Love of my Neighbor required in the
Second, is only Love of Benevolence,. 1. To take off this Evasion it is proved,
First, That the Love of God required in the Injunction to love him with all our
Hearts, etc. cannot be discharged by a Love of Desire only, but requires also a
Love of Benevolence,. 2. Secondly, That though the Love of our Neighbor here
enjoined be not love of Desire of him as our Good, yet neither is it love of
Benevolence, or wishing well to him only, but to the due performance of it, a
desire of the Creature is necessary,. 3. Thirdly, That the Love of our selves,
our Relatives, our Neighbor, and our Friend (all which, says Mr. N. is love
of Benevolence only) is indeed that Love which chiefly opposes, and obstructs
our Love to God, and is the rise of our inordinate Affections to the World,. 4.
Fourthly, That though the Command to Love our Neighbor as our selves, does not
require us to Love our Neighbor as our Good, yet is not only lawful, but very
commendable so to do,. 5. This Doctrine, That the Love of God is entirely
exclusive of all Love to, and Desire of the Creature, destroys the Foundation
of these two great Virtues, Justice and Charity,. 6. It also casts a great
Contempt upon the Works both of Creation and of Providence,. 7. P. 27 CHAP.
III. The ordinary Exposition of these Words, Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy Heart, etc. laid down in the Words of Mr. N. and of the Scoolmen,
viz. That we are obliged by them to love God above all Things; 1.
Appretiatively; 2. Comparatively; 3. Intensively; and, 4. So as to love other
things only by way of Relation, and Subordination to God.. 1. That our Lord
Christ has approved of this Exposition is showed,. 2. The Censure which Mr. N.
gives of this Opinion, and the Abettors of it, reflects very unbecomingly upon
all the Prelates and Pastors of the Church of England, which are not of his
Mind, and lays unworthy Imputations on them,. 3. Some General Considerations
offered to engage him to abate somewhat of his Confidence, and his Censorious
Reflections for the future,. 4. Especially this, That they who adhere to the
common Exposition of these Words, differ no more from him, than he differs from
his former self, Sect. 5. The common Exposition further confirmed; First, From
this Consideration, That this Command was given to the Jewish Nation, whose
Promises were chiefly Temporal, and therefore could not be exclusive of the
desire of Temporal Blessings, Sect. 6. That therefore it ought to bear that
Sense, which is the certain Import of the like Phrases in all the Old
Testament, where they are only to be found, which Sense is plainly opposite to
that which Mr. N. contends for, Sect. 7. The true Sense of loving God with all
the Heart and Soul in the Old Testament, showed from that primary Relation, and
respect it has to their owning God to be the true God, in opposition to all
strange Gods,. 8. Secondly, From this Consideration, That this Love is required
as the Condition of Salvation,. 9. Thirdly, That to love God with all our Mind
cannot bear this Sense,. 10. The common Exposition serves all the Designs of
Religion in General, and of Christian Religion in Particular, as well as the
Exposition of Mr. N. and the Lady,. 11. P. 53 CHAP. IV. This Chapter contains
an Answer to Mr. N.'s Arguments from Scripture, for a Love of God exclusive of
all love of Desire of the Creature; as, V. G. 1st. From these Words, Thou shall
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, etc. Matthew. 22.37.. 1. 2dly. From
those Words of St. James, Ye Adulterers and Adulteresses, know ye not that the
Friendship of this World is Enmity to God, James 4.4. 2. 3dly, From these Words
of St. John, Love not the World, neither the things that are in the World, 1
John 2.15.. 3. And to his Arguments against the Relative Love of the Creature,
V. G. 1. That it is as much Idolatry, as the Relative Worship of the Creature.
This Answered, 1. ad hominem, by showing that it was formerly approved by Mr.
N. 2. By showing the Disparities betwixt the Relative Love of the Creature, and
the Relative Worship of Images,. 4. Object. 2. If Creatures be truly and
properly lovely, as being our true and proper Good, they are to be loved
absolutely and for themselves; if not, they are not to be loved at all.
Answered, By showing in what Sense they may be styled our true and proper Good,
and be loved for themselves, viz as that imports a love of them only for that
Goodness God has put into them; and how they may not be loved absolutely, and
for themselves, viz. as that excludes the Subordination of that Affection to
the Love of God,. 5. P. 91. CHAP. V. Mr. N. grants, That we may seek and use
sensible things for our Good, but, says he, we must not love them as our Good;
and that we may approach to them by a bodily Movement, but not with the
Movements of the Soul. This is Examined and Confuted,. 1. Argument 1. That God
is the sole Cause of our Love, and therefore has the sole Right to it.
Answered,. 2. Argument 2. The Motion of the Will is Good in General, i. e. to
all Good, and therefore to God only. Answered, 3. Argument 3. God is the end of
our Love, since he cannot act for a Creature, but only for himself; or move us
to a Creature, but only to himself. Answered,. 4. Argument 4. That God cannot
be loved too much, nor the World too little. Answered,. 5. Argument 5. That God
having called us thus to the Love of himself, cannot afterward send us to a
Creature,. 6. Argument 6. A Man cannot repent of placing his whole Affection
upon God, or have any thing to Answer for on that account. Answered,. 7.
Argument 7. God only is to be loved, because he only acts upon our Spirits,
produces our Pleasure, and he only does us Good. Answered,. 8. What the Lady
offers on this Subject briefly Considered, and Answered, 9. P. 114
ERRATA.
PAge 2. Line 7. in the Margin, (...). p. 3. l. 25. greater worth: p. 7. l. 5.
affect: p. 8. l. 20. our: p. 9. l. 2. fat: p. 16. l. 16. (...): p. 17. l. 3.
add our: p. 24. l. 27. add are: p. 35. l. 17. add desires: p. 44. l. 25. add
as: p. 45. l. 6. the: p. 46. l. 25. add all: p. 49. l. 15. (...): p. 51. l. 18.
add gives: p. 52. l. 6. add fatness: p. 58. l. 17. dependent: p. 66. l. 19.
dele him: p. 67. l. 5. entreat: p. 69. l. 25. accuse: p, 73. l. 25. add from:
p. 74. l. 15. add be: p. 75. l. 28. affect: p. 104. l. 11. them: p. 106. l. 14.
the: p. 111. l. 32. the: p. 121. l. 14. be: p. 139. l. 8. Justice: p. 143. l.
10. of: p. 153. l. 21. us.

A DISCOURSE OF THE Love of God.
CHAP. I.
The Contents.
The Question, Whether we are obliged to love God so entirely, as that we may
love nothing else with a love of desire, 1. This Assertion is showed to be
contrary, 1st, To our Prayers for our daily bread, 2. 2dly, To God's Promises
of temporal good Things, 3. And to his Threats of temporal Evils, 4. 3dly, To
the Representation of them as God's Gifts and Blessings, and our good Things,
5. To God's Command to rejoice in them,. 6. To the Industry required by God to
procure these things, and his Blessing promised to that Industry, 7. Proofs
from Reason, that God has not absolutely forbidden the Desire of Pleasure, of
Honor, or of temporal Enjoyments,. 8. Corollaries* 1. That this Doctrine is
inconsistent with our Obligation to Pray, and with the Prayers of our own, and
of Ancient Liturgies. 2. With the Praises due to God for temporal Blessings,
and with the Thanksgivings for them used in our Liturgy. 3. It tends to
depreciate the Divine Gifts, to teach Men to slight God's Promises, and contemn
his Threats. 4. To destroy all Industry in our Calling. 5. It lays the vilest
Imputation upon the Dispensations of God's Providence toward us,. 9.

THE love of a Being infinitely Excellent in himself, and infinitely Beneficial
to us, is so much our Duty and so much our Interest, it is such an excellent
preservative against the Charms of sinful Pleasures, and all the Lures of those
Temptations which tend to the destruction of our precious Souls; (...) Hier. in
Carm. Pyth. p. 3.
such a powerful incentive to that Obedience and Holiness, which will most
certainly conclude in everlasting Happiness; such a constraining motive to that
assimulation to God, which renders us partakers of the Divine Nature, and by
the Heathen Moralists is truly styled The Perfection of Man: It Is such a
Treasury of inward Satisfactions, and ravishing Delights; such a Feast of
Marrow and Fatness; such a sovereign Antidote against the Miseries and Evils of
this present Life; such a Spring of sweet Contentment under all Conditions, and
of entire resignation to the Will of our Beloved, that a good Man cannot,
without Reluctance of Mind, and secret Regret, seem to dislike any Opinions or
Hypotheses which are honestly designed to advance it to the highest pitch. And
did I not certainly believe, that the Measures of Divine Love I approve of, and
contend for, serve all those glorious Ends, and minister as properly and fully
to kindle and advance within us this divine Affection, as do those high and
impracticable Stretches to which my worthy Friend, and this Incomparable Lady,
with so great Beauty of Expressions, and with as hearty Zeal, have labored to
scrue it up; and that they do all this without those Inconveniences to which
their singular Hypothesis seems evidently exposed; and without those
Temptations it may minister to Men not well affected unto Piety, and without
those Misbodings it may create in those who are religiously inclined, I should
not have given my self the uneasy task of contradicting the Opinions of
Persons I so highly and so justly love and honor; or the Fatigue of canvasing
the ensuing Question so fully as these Papers do, I hope, without offense to
either of the Persons concerned; because with all the Deference I can show to
their great Endowments, and their great Works, The Question then is this,

Quest.. 1.
Whether the Scripture does require us to love God so entirely, as that we may
love nothing else with a love of desire, though it be only with Subordination
to him? So the philosophical and divine Letters dogmatically do assert;
declaring, Pref. P. 132.
That the love of God is exclusive of all other love; that it requires us in
Justice to withdraw every straggling desire from the Creature; and that it is
clear from the letter of the Commandment, P. 4.
that God is not only the Principal, but the sole Object of our Love. Whence it
must follow, that every degree of desire of any Creature is a sin, as being a
transgression of this Precept. 2 dly, Hence it must follow, that this sin is
plain Idolatry; for Idolatry consists in giving that Reverence and Affection to
the Creature, which is due only to the Creator. If therefore no degree of love,
or of desire, be due unto the Creature, but to the Creator only, by loving or
desiring the Creature in any degree whatsoever, we must give the affection to
the Creature which is only due to the Creator, and therefore must be guilty of
Idolatry. Hence sutably to their Opinion it is asserted, Sermon. p. 62.
That the Creatures are no more our Goods, than our Gods; and we may as well
worship them, as love them. And again, p. 77, 78. As to worship the Creature,
though but relatively, is to give that worship to the Creature which is proper
to God; so to love the Creature, though but relatively, is to give that love to
the Creature which is proper to God. I cannot see why one should not be
reckoned Idolatry, as well as the other. Now Idolatry in the New Testament is
frequently declared to be a damning sin, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Gal. 5.19. Ephesians. 5.5.
Col. 3.5.
which they that do shall not inherit the Kingdom of God: No Idolater having
any inheritance in the Kingdom of God, or of Christ, but in the lake of fire
and brimstone, which is the second death. So that, according to this new
Divinity, if I desire Fire as my good, when I am starved with cold, I shall be
cast into Hell fire: And if I love a Woman, and so desire her for a Wife, I
must be excluded from Heaven because I love, and I desire a Creature.

Moreover these Letters lay this down for certain, P. 203.
That he that desires any thing besides God, whatever he pretends, or however
he deceives himself, does not truly love God. And, that whenever the Soul moves
toward the Creature, it must necessarily forsake the Creator; and that it can
never truly turn to him without a dereliction of all besides him. Now, if it
cannot truly love him, it never can be loved by him, if it can never truly turn
to him, it can never be converted, and so it never can be saved; if it forsake
the Creator, by desiring, or moving toward any Creature, it must perish; for,
says the Prophet, all that forsake thee shall be ashamed, Isa. 1.28. Jer.
17.13.
and consumed. Now is it not strange Doctrine to affirm as certain, That we
cannot truly love God, if we desire our daily bread; that I forsake God, if I
move toward meat when I am hungry, or drink when I am thirsty? Such Doctrines
as these tend plainly to persuade Men, that God requires what they find
opposite to their very Constitution, and Being in this World, and so impossible
for them to perform and live; and this must render the highest act of our
Religion, the divine Love, ridiculous to some, and drive the weaker sort of
People into despair, by giving them occasion to think they do not love God
truly, or as they ought, because they, by experience, find they love a Dish of
good Meat, and a Cup of good Drink, and cannot but desire the one when they are
hungry, and the other when thirsty.

In opposition to this new Opinion, I shall endeavor to show, First, That it
is manifestly and expressly contrary to the plain Dictates of the Holy
Scripture, and the Experience and Reason of Mankind. Secondly, That it is
contrary to the Commandment which enjoins us to love our Neighbor as our
selves. Thirdly, That it virtually destroys the Foundation of those two great
moral Virtues, Justice and Charity. Fourthly, That it casts a vile contempt
upon the Works of God, to wit, his Works of Creation, and of Providence.
Fifthly, That it is attended with many other pernicious Consequences. Sixthly,
That it has been expressly and manifoldly contradicted, even by him who now so
hotly contends for it. Seventhly, And lastly, I shall endeavor to return a
plain and satisfactory Answer to all that is offered for this Doctrine, from
Scripture or Reason.


. 2.
First, It is manifestly and expressly contrary to the plain Dictates of the
Holy Scripture, and the Experience and Reason of Mankind. To make this evident,
I lay this down as the Foundation, That love of Concupiscence, and of Desire,
are the same; Desire being in English the same which (...) and Concupiscentia
are in Greek and Latin. Theory of Love, p, 12, 14.
Love is, says Mr. N. a motion of the Soul toward Good, and thus consid^red
it is what we call Concupiscence, or Desire. Now hence it necessarily follows,
that what I desire, I do also love; and that I may innocently love, what I may
lawfully desire to have, or to enjoy. Now God himself by diverse Methods has
instructed us, that we may lawfully desire the Creature He has himself obliged
us to desire, and therefore moderately to effect the World's good Things.

For, 1. He has made the desire of them the matter of our daily Prayer,
requiring us to address unto him daily for our daily Bread. Now under the name
of Bread it is agreed by all Interpreters that I have met with, that all things
needful to the sustaining and the comfort of this present Life are
comprehended; of which nature are Meat, Drink, and Clothing. For, Mat. 6.32
says our Savior, your heavenly Father knows that you have need of All
these things. Moreover, the Reason why we are to desire Bread being this,
because it is needful for the Support and Comfort of this present Life; it
follows that we have the same reason to desire of God what ever else is needful
to the Support and Comfort of this Life: And so to beg his Blessing not only on
our honest Labors, and endeavors to obtain and to preserve what is needful
for the Support and Comfort of our selves, and our dependants, but also on our
Flocks and Herds, and on all those Fruits of the Earth he has provided for the
use of Man. (...). Basil. To. 1. Orat. in Julitt. M. p. 318. (...). Gr. Nyssen.
Tr. 2. in Psalm. c. 3. To. 1. p. 295. Vid. Orig. in Matthew. To. 12. p. 271. D.
Chrysostom. in Psalm. 102. Olymp. in c. 5. Eccles. p. 634.
Prayer therefore being the desire of some good thing from God, two things are
evident, which destroy the Foundation of this Imagination; 1. That our Bread is
our Good. 2. That we may lawfully desire, and therefore love all that in this
Petition is comprehended under the name of daily Bread.

1 Timothy 4.3, 4, 5.
Again, St. Paul condemns those Heretics who taught Men to abstain from meats
which God has created to be received with thanksgiving of them who believe,
and know the truth; ( viz. that nothing is unclean of it self, Romans 14.14.) For
every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be received
with thanksgiving. For it is sanctified by the word, and prayer. By the Word,
giving us Authority to eat of every Herb, Genesis 9.3.
and every living Creature: And by Prayer, asking these good Creatures of him
who is the giver of every good Thing. Here then again we learn, First, That
every Creature of God is good; i. e. is good for Food to be received by us, and
therefore for our Food, and consequently for good; and why else is it to be
received with thanksgiving; for what we are obliged to thank him for is sure
his Blessing, and our good. Secondly, Hence we learn also, That every Creature
which is thus good for us, must be desired of God, it being Sanctified or
fitted for our use, (...), by Intercession to God for the Enjoyment of it.

. 3.
Secondly, God moves us to the performance of our Duty by the promise of these
temporal good Things, to walk in the ways of wisdom, Prove. 3.14, 15, 16. Psalm
112.2, 3.
because length of days are in her right hand, and in her left hand riches and
honor: To Uprightness of Life, because wealth and riches shall be in the house
of the upright: To Works of Charity, because the liberal soul shall be made
full, Pro. 11.25. 2 Cor. 9.6.
and he that waters shall be watered again, and he that sows plentifully
shall reap plentifully; Pro. 19.17.
and because He that has pity on the poor lends to the Lord, and that which
he gives will he pay him again: To Meekness, and Trust in God, Ps. 37.9.11.
because such shall inherit the earth, and shall delight themselves in the
abundance of peace: To seek first the kingdom of God, and the righteousness
thereof, Mat. 6.33. 1 Timothy 1.8.
that all these things may be added to us: To live piously, because Godliness
has the promise of this life, as well as that which is to come. Now, can any
rational Man deny, That what God promises as the Reward of our Obedience, is
our Good; or does he not allow, and even encourage us to affect and to desire
what he does promise! We therefore by these Promises are taught of God to love,
and to desire the good things of this present Life.

Moreover, Mark 10.29, 30.
our blessed Savior promises to them who forsake Houses and Lands and Life,
for his sake and the Gospel's, an hundred fold here, and afterward eternal
life. Now, if none of these things are fit to be the Objects of our Love, if
they be not desirable to us, why does Christ promise such an immense Reward to
those that do forsake, and quit them for his sake? Why does he promise, as an
Encouragement to do so, the Return of them an hundred fold; since what we are
not to affect, or to desire at all, of that we are not to affect or to desire
the Increase? Or why does Peter say to Christ, v. 28.
We have left all (these things) and followed thee, what shall we have? Does
not the Question plainly suppose, That leaving of these things was that for
which they might expect a Recompense? Which sure they could not do for leaving
only that which was not in it self desirable, which was not good, and so could
be no proper Object of their Love. Wherefore by these Expressions our Savior
plainly does instruct us that these are in some degree desirable, and proper
Objects of our Love. Again, when the Psalmist, to engage Men to keep God's
Commandments, says, More to be desired are they then gold, Ps. 19.10. Ps.
119.127.
yea, then much fine gold; and testifies of himself thus, I love thy
Commandments above Gold, yea, above fine Gold; do not these things suppose that
Gold in some degree might be desired, and loved? Ps. 63.3. Ps. 119.72.
When he says, Thy loving kindness is better then life it self: And again, The
Law of thy mouth is better unto me then thousands of gold and silver. When the
Wise Man commends Wisdom to us, by saying, Wisdom is better then Rubies, Pro.
8.11.
and all the things that may be desired are not to be compared to it. Does not
the Comparison show that these things in their kind are good? Does it not
suppose that there be many things that may be desired? In fine, when Christ
declares, Mat. 10.37.
That he who loves Father or Mother, Wife or Children, or even his own Life,
more then him, is not worthy of him; does not he tacitly suppose that it is as
natural to love, and to desire the Continuance of Life, as to love Father and
Mother; and that this Love is only Vicious when it exceeds or rivals that
Affection which we owe to him?

. 4.
3. God threatens, to deter Men from their Sins, That he would, as a token of
his Indignation, deprive them of these temporal Good things, That they should
then be cursed in their basket. Deuteronomy. 28.17.18. v. 48. v. 63.
and store, in the fruit of their body, of their land, of their kine and Sheep:
That they should serve their Enemies in hunger, and in thirst, and in
nakedness, and in want of all things; and that the Lord would rejoice over them
to destroy them, and to bring them to naught. That he would inflict upon them
his sore judgments, the sword, Ezekiel. 14.21.
the pestilence, the noisome beast, and the famine. Now, if Life, Plenty, and
the Fruits of the Earth, their Kine, and Sheep, were not good and desirable
things, wherein consists the Curse, and the sore Judgment in being thus
deprived of them? Or why does Solomon so earnestly desire, 2 King. 8.36, 37,
etc.
That God, upon their Prayer, and their Repentance, would grant Deliverance
from the forementioned Evils?

Again, this is one of God's Motives to engage his People to depart from evil,
That their iniquities witheld good things from them, Jer. 5.25. Jer 3.3.
That therefore were the showers witheld, and the latter rain failed; Hag. 1.10.
That therefore the Heaven over them was staid from dew, and the earth was
staid from her fruit. Now, if these temporal Enjoyments were not indeed good
things, why is the witholding of them styled the witholding of good things from
them? If they were not fit Objects of Desire, where is the punishment in the
withdrawing them? or where is the motive to depart from evil, that they might
prevent these things?

4. God has sufficiently informed us, 5.
That these things are truly good for, and fit to be desired by us, by
declaring, That they are his Blessings, 1 Chronicles. 29.12. Hos. 8.2. Pro. 10.22.
Deuteronomy. 8.18. Eccl. 3.13.
his peculiar Gifts: That riches and honor come of him, That he gives corn,
and wine, and oil, and that his blessing makes rich, and that he gives power
to get wealth; That the enjoying of the Good of all our Labor is the Gift of
God; That God Gives to Man, not only riches and wealth, chapter 5.19.
but also power to eat thereof, to take his portion, and to rejoice in the
fruits of his labor, and that this is the Gift of God; and that it is from the
Hand of God that we enjoy the Good of all our Labor: But if none of the fruits
of our Labor be our Good, how can we enjoy the Good of all our Labor, or why
should we rejoice in them? Can we more effectually depreciate his Gifts, or
undervalue his Blessings, than by saying that there is nothing in them which
deserves to be esteemed our Good, or ought to be desired of those that love him.

Moreover, how positive soever these Metaphysical Men are, that these are not
our Goods, the holy Scripture is as positive to the contrary; For in the Story
of Lot, we have twice mention of his Goods; Genesis 14 12, 16. Genesis 31.18. Luke
6.30.
in the History of Jacob, that he carried away all his Goods. St. Luke says,
Of him that takes away thy goods ask them not again. He introduces the Rich
man, saying, there will I bestow all my fruits and my Goods. Luke 12.18. Luke
16.25.
He introduces Abraham saying to Dives, Son, remember that thou in thy life
time receivedst thy good things: Luke 19.8.
And Zacheus, saying, Half of my goods I give unto the poor. Though I give all
my goods to relieve the poor, and have not Charity, I am nothing, 1 Cor. 13.3.
says St. Paul: And he commends the believing Jews, Heb. 10.34.
for taking joyfully the spoiling of their goods. All which things plainly show
that in the Language of the holy Ghost, whatever Metaphysics may say to the
contrary, these outward Blessings were their Goods. Moreover, the wise Man
frequently informs us, That it is the Good of man to eat and drink, Eccl. 2.24,
3.12, 13.22. chapter 5.18, 19. chapter 8.15.
and make his soul enjoy the good of all his labor.

That this is his Portion. To receive them, is to receive good at the hand of
God, Job 2.10. to be silled with them, is to be filled with goodness, Psalm.
107.9. Jer. 31.14. to use them freely, is to fill our soul with good, Eccl.
6.3. to promise these things, is to promise good to them, Deuteronomy. 30 9. Jer.
32.42. to give them, is to do them good, Jer. 33.9. to deny them to our selves,
is to bereave our souls of good, Eccl. 4.8. and to withold them from the Poor,
is to withold good from him to whom it is due, Pro. 3.27. All which Expressions
are a perfect Demonstration, That these temporal Enjoyments are, in the
Language of the Scripure, our Good things, and therefore may be loved and
desired as our Goods. Moreover, the Apostle makes the giving of these temporal
Blessings to the Heathen World the Testimony of God's Goodness to them; He has
not, says he, left himself without a Witness (...), doing them good, Act.
14.17.
in giving them rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling their hearts
with food and gladness. This also by our Savior is represented as a
Demonstration of God's Love to all, That he makes his Sun to rise on the evil
and the good, Mat. 5.45.
and sends rain on the just, and on the unjust. By this he shows himself
kind to the unthankful, Luke 6.35.
and to the evil. They therefore who do absolutely deny that these are our good
things, i. e. things which do good to us, they leave God without a Witness of
his Goodness to the Heathen World, and weaken the Engagement laid upon us, from
this Example of our God, to love our Enemies, and to do good to them. And,

6.
Fifthly, As a just Consequence of this, God has enjoined us to rejoice in
them, and so to return the Tribute of our Praises and Thanksgivings to the
Author of them. For thou, says God, Deuteronomy. 26.11.
shall rejoice in every good thing which the Lord thy God has given to thee,
and thine house. The Jews were commanded to rejoice in all their Feasts, but in
this of the First Fruits particularly, for all the good Things that Year
afforded. The wise Man, after all that he had said touching the Vanity of the
Creature, concludes, There is nothing better for a man, than that he should
eat, and drink, and make his Soul enjoy good, or delight himself in the fruits
of his labor, Eccles. 2.24. and rejoice in his own works, chapter 3.13, 22. And
for neglect of serving God with cheerfulness and gladness of heart in the
abundance of all things, i. e. says the Targum of Jonathan, Deuteronomy. 28.47, 48.
(...) of all good things, God threatens to the Jews, That they should serve
their enemies in hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedness, and in want of all
(good) things. These things, says the Apostle, God has created to be received
with thanksgiving; and God expects we should continually bless him for them,
saying to his own people, when thou have eaten, and art full, Deuteronomy. 8.10.
then thou shall bless the Lord thy God for the good land which he has given
thee. Bless the Lord, O my soul, Psalm. 103.1, 2, 5.
says David, and all that is within me bless his holy name. Bless the Lord, O
my soul, and forget not all his benefits who satisfies thy mouth with good
things. Psalm. 104.1, 14, 15.
And again, Bless the Lord, O my soul, for he causes the grass to grow for the
cattle, and herb for the service of men, and wine, that makes glad the heart
of man, and oil to make his face shine, and bread, which strengthens man's
heart. Now, if Love, Praise and Service, be due unto God for these things,
surely they must be good things to us, as they are represented here; if he is
to be blessed for them, they must be desirable Blessings; if we are to rejoice
in them, if the abundance of them should create in us Cheerfulness and Gladness
of Heart, they must be a fit ground of Joy and Gladness, and so must be our
Goods, since no man can rejoice in that Enjoyment which yields no good to him;
if from them we may make our Souls enjoy good and delight, and there is no
better Employment we can put them to, than to enjoy them cheerfully our selves,
and to make others cheerful by the Participation of them, must they not be our
Good, and proper Objects of our Delight and Joy, much more of our Desire?

Sixthly,. 7.
The Industry which God requires from us, that we may enjoy these temporal good
things; the Appetites he has implanted in us toward them, which cannot be
satisfied without Industry; the Faculties he has given us to fit us for it;
the Callings he has placed us in, and in which we can never thrive without it;
and the temporal Blessings he has promised as the Reward of our Industry; are
all sufficient to convince us, That these temporal Enjoyments are good, and
desirable things to us. Even in Paradise God found Employment for our Industry,
Genesis 2.19.
requiring the Man that he had put into it to dress it, and to keep it, and so
by Industry to sustain his Life; and to secure his Pleasure, when he was turned
out thence, God laid the Burden upon him and his Posterity, Genesis 3.17.
That in the sweat of their faces they should eat their bread, till they
returned unto the ground. Under the Evangelical Dispensation, every Christian
is to have his Calling, 1 Cor. 7. 2 These. 3.12. 1 These. 4.11. Ephesians. 4.28.
in which he must abide; he is exhorted with quietness to work, and eat his own
bread; and to do his own business, working with his hands, or working (...),
that which is good, with his hands; and if he will not labor, when he can, 2
These. 3.10.
the Apostles Canon says he must not eat when he would. Moreover, though we
bring nothing into the World, yet we bring Appetites, which have no other use
but to desire these Temporals, and Constitutions which cannot at all subsist,
or not conveniently, without them; which therefore were undoubtedly designed to
prompt us to that Industry by which alone we can obtain them. We have hands
also suited for Work, and Strength enabling us to labor, and Reason to contrive
how to employ that Labor in procuring the things we want. All which things
show, even without a Revelation, That Divine Wisdom did intend that we should
live in the Exercise of Industry to procure these things, and not well without
it; having so many Desires to be appeased, so many Wants to be supplied, so
many Troubles to be removed, so many Appetites and Senses to be gratified by
our Care and Industry, in the pursuit of these things. But now imagine these
temporal Enjoyments not to our good, not proper Objects of our Desire, not
worthy of the name of temporal Blessings, you cut off all Motives to this
Industry; for where there is no proper Fruits of Industry, nothing which is
Operae pretium, worth the labor, there can be no cause of Labor: Now where
there is nothing good for me, nothing desirable, no Blessing to be obtained by
Labor, it is certain that there is no ground or motive unto Labor. And
therefore, to excite us to this Industry, God has engaged to give to the
diligent pursuit of these things, 1 Prosperous Success, Prove. 13.4.
declaring, That the soul of the diligent shall be made fat, whilst the
sluggard desires, and has nothing: 2 Plentiful Accommodations for our
Sustenance; Prove. 21.5.
for as The thoughts of the diligent tend only to plenteousness, so has God
assured him of Satisfaction from it; for he that tilleth his Land shall be
satisfied with bread. 3. Increase of Wealth and Riches; for though the blessing
of the Lord makes rich, Prove. 10.4.
yet he conveighs that Blessing to us by the hand of Diligence, for it is the
hand of the diligent that makes rich; Prove. 13.11.
and he that gathers by labor, who, says the wise Man, shall increase. Now
surely that which God does promise to us as a Blessing, and Reward for a just
motive to our Industry, must be something desirable to us, and good for us, and
so our good.

But had we no such evidence of these things from Scripture,. 8.
even Reason and Experience would powerfully convince us.

First, That God has not forbidden the Desire, or denied us the Enjoyment of
any worldly Pleasure, which is truly (...), a Pleasure that does call for no
Repentance, because his all wise Providence has made such liberal Provisions
for them. For wherefore has he given to us Organs capable of great and
exquisite Delight in all our Senses? Wherefore has he caused the fruitful
Earth to furnish us with things so grateful to the Palate, so fragrant to the
Smell, so pleasant to the Eye? Did he not give us the free use of these
Enjoyments, provided that we take this freedom with Moderation and Discretion,
use it with Thankfulness, and with Submission, and Subordination to the Glory
of the Donor? Therein consisting our iniquity, not that we do at all love
Pleasures, but that we love them more than God. 2 Timothy 3.4.
This is apparent to a demonstration, from the very definition of Pleasure
contained in these Letters; viz. That Pleasure is the Gratification of natural
Appetites, Let. 7. p. 150.
according to, and not exceeding the intention of Nature. For this definition
takes it for granted, That the God of Nature intended the Gratification of our
natural Appetites, that is, our Pleasure. Moreover what are these natural
Appetites, but natural Desires? What is it that gratifies them but the
Enjoyment of the thing desired? I must have therefore implanted in me by the
God of Nature, as many natural Desires of the Creature, as I have natural
Appetites, which may and only can be gratified by the Enjoyment of the Creature.

What therefore does the good Lady mean when she affirms so positively, Let.
9. p. 179.
That if he desire the Creature as the true cause of our Pleasure, it is so far
from being our good, that it certainly becomes our evil. Does she mean that I
sin if I desire drink, as the true cause of the pleasure that I find in
quenching my Thirst; or Wine, as the true cause of making glad my Heart? This
she can only mean upon the account of that new Invention of Mr. Mal Branch's,
That God is the immediate and efficient Cause of all our pleasing Sensations:
Now that being but an invention of yesterday, spick and span new Philosophy,
not discovered till this last Age, all precedent Ages, according to this
Doctrine, lay under a necessity of sinning. And so must all at present, whose
heads are not cast in Metaphysical Moulds, they being thought incapable of this
fine Speculation, and therefore forced still to believe the Scripture, Genesis
18.5. Judge. 19.5.
when it says, that Wine makes glad the heart of man, and that bread comforts
his heart. And when it speaks of pleasant Bread, Dan. 10.3. Cant. 4.13.16.
Prove. 24.4.
and pleasant Fruits, and of Chambers filled with all precious and pleasant
Riches, and of the sweetness of the Honey and the Honeycomb.

Secondly, He cannot absolutely have forbidden the desire of Honor; for if so,
why has he planted in us such a natural thirst after it? Why does he promise
it so often as the reward of Wisdom? Prove. 22.1.
Why has he told us, A good name is rather to be chosen than great riches;
that it is better than the precious Ointment? Eccles. 7.1.
Why has he made it our Duty to pursue whatever is praiseworthy, Philip. 4.8.
honorable, and of good report? Why has he made it a commendation of Faith,
Hebr. 11.2.
that by it the Elders obtained a good report? Why has he ordered matters so,
as to render a good Reputation, and an honorable Esteem so highly instrumental
to promote his Glory, and so beneficial to our selves and others, that great
and good things can scarce successfully be done without it? And,

Thirdly, As for temporal good Things; he by making such rich Provisions of
them for the Sustenance of our lives, and by framing our Bodies so as not only
to relish and delight in them, but also to be nourished and sustained by them,
has sufficiently intimated that it is his pleasure that we should in
reasonable measure desire and enjoy them, otherwise his care would have been
vain, and his works useless; yea, he might seem to have laid an ill design to
tempt and ensnare us, and draw us off from himself by them. In fine, when we
come into the World in the want of all things, with Appetites which have no
other use but to desire them, and cannot but be pleased with them; when we have
Natures that cannot long, or conveniently subsist without them; when the Organs
of our Senses are so framed, as naturally to be delighted with them; when the
wise Providence of God has framed the whole Earth for satisfaction of those
Appetites; when by the Order of Providence from the Creation, all Men do pursue
them, and even good Men pray unto God, and do praise him for them, can it be
needful to spend more words in confutation of a Paradox, which all Men do
renounce in Speculation or in Practice; or to evince that God has not entirely
forbid all love, and all desire of the World's good Things. Now hence it
follows;

First,. 9.
That this Doctrine is inconsistent with our Obligation to pray for any
temporal Blessings which we want either for our selves, or others. 1 Kings 8.
Whosoever looks into the Prayer of Dedication, made by Solomon, will find it
is employed in begging temporal Mercies for the Jews in answer to their Prayer,
viz. in asking deliverance from that Pestilence which destroyed their Lives;
that Famine, Mildew, Blasting, Locust which consumed their Fruit, that Drought
which consumed their Drink, and that Exile which deprived them of that good
Land which flowed with Milk and Honey. The Ancient Liturgies prayed always
thus, See Dr. Comber, comp. part 2. p. 178.
Let us beseech the Lord to give us a temperate Air, gentle Showers, refreshing
Dews, and plenty of all Fruits; so that the year may afford us store of all
good things, and abundance of all Provisions. In our Liturgy we pray that God
would give and preserve to us the kindly Fruits of the Earth, so as in due time
we may enjoy them: That the King may study to preserve his People in Wealth,
Peace and Godliness: That we may receive the Fruits of the Earth to our
comfort: That God would increase the Fruits of the Earth by his heavenly
Benediction, and turn our great Scarcity and Dearth into Plenty and Cheapness.
Now, seeing Prayer is a desire of some good thing from God, if these Enjoyments
be not our good things, if we may not desire or affect them, we cannot thus
address unto God for them.

Secondly, This Doctrine is inconsistent with that Praise, and that
Thanksgiving which we owe to God for all the Mercies we enjoy. How often does
the Psalmist call upon us to praise the Lord for his goodness in these things;
Psalm. 108.8.
for feeding the Hungry, relieving the Fatherless and Widow; Psalm. 81.16. Ps.
147.14. Ps. 103.5. Ps. 104.28. Ps. 145.16.
for feeding us with the flower of wheat; for filling our mouth with good
things; for opening his hand, and filling all things living with plenteousness?
How punctual is our Liturgy, in giving thanks for our Creation, Preservation,
and all the Blessings of this Life; for sending Rain upon the Earth, that it
may bring forth fruit for the use of man to our great comfort; for the relief
and comfort we receive from any seasonable and blessed Change of Weather; for
Plenty owned as an act of God's especial Bounty, and his loving Kindness to us!
But how can we esteem these things the Blessings of this Life, acts of God's
special Bounty, and testimonies of his loving Kindness to us, if, by conferring
them, God affords us nothing we can or need to desire, or ought to be affected
with? Ought we not highly to value, to have a due esteem, and a due sense of
divine Goodness, in affording us those mercies which thus engage our Souls to
bless him, and all that is within us to praise his holy Name? And can any thing
tend more to lessen this value and esteem for them, or to impair the sense of
Divine Goodness in affording them, then thus to represent them as things which
good Men do not need, cannot desire, and ought not to affect.

Thirdly, This Doctrine tends to depreciate the divine Gifts, to undervalue all
God's temporal Blessings, to cause Men to despise and slight his temporal
Promises, and to contemn his threats of the same kind, and render both unable
to obtain the ends his Wisdom has designed in making them; for what greater
contempt can we cast upon the divine Gifts? how can we more effectually vilify
the divine Blessings, or slight these Promises, than by thus solemnly declaring
they contain nothing in them which a good Man can desire or affect? What motive
can such Promises afford us, Deuteronomy. 28.47, 48.
to serve the Lord with cheerfulness and gladness of heart i^ the abundance of
all things? And if the temporal Evils which God threatens, are not to be
valued, if they cannot deprive us of any thing which is our good, or which a
pious Soul can either desire or need; why should we be afraid of them? Or what
effect can they have on us to deter us from the evil of our ways? To engage us
to love God only, the incomparable Lady desires us to consider, Let. 9. p.
181, 182.
That this is the best way to secure to us that which we are so fond of, even
the Enjoyment of the Creature; and that to fix our love warmly and entirely, N.
B. on God, is to be sure of possessing all that is good in other things. Now,
does she not by these words confess there is some good in other things, and
consequently something desirable? Why therefore does she say, Ibid. p. 179.
That in all reason Creatures ought not to be thought desirable? Has she not
told us, P. 201.
That the desire of God, and the desire of the Creature in their own natures,
are incompatible? Why therefore does she move us by this consideration, to
secure to our selves what we may not desire? P. 202, 203.
Does she not add, That he that desires any thing besides God, what ever he
pretends, or however he deceive himself, does not truly love God. And that the
Soul that moves toward the Creature, must necessarily forsake the Creator? Why
then did she her self propose this Argument to move us to the Enjoyment, and
consequently to the desire of the Creature? She did it doubtless because she
found this was God's motive to seek first the Kingdom of God the Righteousness
thereof, that then all things else shall be added to us; that this was his
encouragement to Godliness, that it had the promise of this life. But this
affords a demonstration of her mistake in all that I have quoted from her, for
may we not desire what God does promise? If then he promises these Creatures
as the reward of Godliness, and seeking first his Kingdom, can the desire of
what he thus has promised be incompatible with the desire of God? Can we
forsake the Creator, by moving toward what he thus excites us to? Can we cease
truly to love God, by desiring that which he does promise?

Fourthly, This Doctrine tends to destroy all Industry in our Calling, and all
pursuit of temporal Enjoyments by our honest Labor: Let. 7. p. 132.
For let me totally withdraw every straggling desire from the Creature, and
surely I shall be so kind to my self as to withdraw my labor from it. Let.. 9.
p. 179.
If in all ^eason Creatures not to be thought desirable, 'tmust be unreasonable
to toil and labor for them, and to eat them in the sweat of our brows: If none
of these Enjoyments be worth my labor, surely I have no ground to labor for
them; now where there is nothing good to me, nothing desirable to be obtained
by Labor, there can be nothing worth my labor.

Fifthly, This Doctrine lays the vilest imputations upon the dispensations of
God's Providence toward us. For it makes God encourage us to the performance
of our Duty, by promising, Let. 9. p. 203.
that we cannot move toward without forsaking him, nor desire without doing
that which is inconsistent with true love to God. P. 201.
It lays this Imputation on the Just and Holy God, P. 208.
that he has made that our Sin which is natural and ncessary, as sure it is to
desire Food when we are hungry: It makes him to have planted in us natural
Appetites, or desires which he intended we should gratify, and yet has not
permitted us to desire that which alone can gratify them. That he has filled
the Earth with his Blessings, Ps. 115.16.
and given it to the Children of Man to no end; that he has caused the Herb to
grow for the service of Man, Ps. 104.14, 15.
Wine to make glad, and Bread to strengthen Man's heart, and yet will not
permit us to desire that Bread which gives us strength, or love, i. e. be
pleased with that Wine which makes our hearts glad.

Why therefore does the good Lady enquire, When shall we be so just to God, P.
132.
and so kind to our selves, as totally to withdraw every straggling desire from
the Creature! Is it justice to God to say, that he requires us to Pray, and
Praise him, for what he requires us totally to withdraw our desires from? Has
God required as an act of Justice that we should not desire what he, by
promising as the rewa^d of our Obedience, does even count us to desire; and by
those Appetites he has implanted in us, does even force us to d^si^e? (...) it
kindness to our selves to hate our ow^ ^^esh, Ephesians. 5.29.
as the Apostle intimates he does, who takes not care to to nourish it? Is it
kindness to our selves not to desire for our selves that which is needful for
the Body? How then can it be Charity to give that to others, which out of
kindness we desire not to our own selves?

Again, why does she add, That if we did consult either our Honor or Interest,
P. 147, 148, 149.
we should abandon all other desires; it being as unjust, so unsafe to give
desire the least tendency toward any Object but him who is the only proper and
adequate one.

Is it our interest not to desire Food convenient for us, or is it for our
Honor to think the Blessings God has promised not worth a wish? Can it be
unjust to gratify my natural Appetites, P. 149, 150.
according to the intention of the God of Nature? Can the regular application
of the Faculty of desire to such Objects as are agreeable to our Nature, be
either unjust or unsafe? Why then does she here give us this as the Definition
of that Pleasure which she declares to be the grand motive to Action? P. 259.


CHAP. II.
The Contents.
To avoid the seeming Inconsistence betwixt the Love of God only, and the love
of my Neighbor as my self, it is said, That the Love of God with all our Heart
enjoined in the First Commandment, is the love of Desire; the love of my
Neighbor required in the Second, is only Love of Benevolence,. 1. To take off
this Evasion it is proved, First, That the Love of God required in the
Injunction to love him with all our hearts, etc. cannot be discharged by a love
of Desire only, but requires also a love of Benevolence,. 2. Secondly, That
though the love of our Neighbor here enjoined be not love of Desire of him as
our good, yet neither is it love of Benevolence, or wishing well to him only,
but to the due performance of it, a desire of the Creature is necessary,. 3.
Thirdly, That the love of our selves, our Relatives, our Neighbor, and our
Friend (all which, says Mr. N. is love of Benevolence only) is indeed that
love which chiefly opposes, and obstructs our love to God, and is the rise of
our inordinate Affections to the World,. 4. Fourthly, That though the Command
to l^ve our Neighbor as our selves, does not requir^ us to love our Neighbor
as our good, yet (...) only lawful, but very commendable so to do, (...) This
Doctrine, That the love of God is (...) exclusive of all Love to, and desire of
the C^^ature, destroys the Foundation of these two (...) Virtues, Justice and
Charity,. 6. It also casts a great Contempt upon the Works both of Creation and
of Providence,. 7.

Argument 2.. 1.
I Proceed now to my Second Head, viz. to show, that this Exposition of the
Precept, to love God with all our hearts, renders it contrary to the following
Command, enjoining us to love our Neighbor as our selves. That this is a just
Prejudice, if true, against this new Invention the Admirable Lady confesses,
and confirms in these words; Let. 7. P. 135, 136.
It were, I confess, a strong prejudice against their way of stating the Love
of God, if it were in any measure injurious to the right Understanding and due
performance of the love we owe to our Neighbor. For since the Precepts of the
Gospel are an exact and beautiful System of Wisdom and Perfection; every one of
whose Parts are so duly proportioned to the other, that the result of all is
perfect Harmony and Order. I must needs conclude, that when such a sense is put
upon one Precept as causes it to clash and interfere with another, it cannot be
the genuine meaning of it; and if I cannot make over the whole of my desire to
God, without defaulking from that portion of love he has assigned my Neighbor,
I must of necessity set the signification of that Precept to a lower pitch, and
find out some other Medium to interpret the first and great Commandment. But
then they think to salve the matter with the distinction of love, into love of
desire, and love of Benevolence; declaring that the former is due to God alone,
and is the thing required in the Commandment, to love God with all our hearts;
the second only belongs to our Neighbor, and is the thing enjoined in the
Command, to love our Neighbor as our selves. Thus Mr. N. Let. 8. P. 154, 155,
156. See P. 71, 72.
It Is most certain, that the most entire love of God, enjoined in the first
Commandment, does by no means exclude the love of our Neighbor* enjoined in
the second, in case these two loves be of two different kinds; the former
suppose love of Desire, and the latter love of Benevolence, there being no
manner of Repugnancy between the desiring none but God, and the wishing well to
Men. Thus, says he, is it in this case; for the word Love, when applied to God
in the First Commandment, signifies desiring him as a good; and when applied to
Men, in the Second, (it) signifies not desiring them as a good, but desiring
good to them: And cannot I thus love God only, and my Neighbor too, and so
fulfill both Commands? Cannot I desire but one thing only in the World, and yet
at the same time wish well to every thing else? It Is plain that I may, and that
the entireness of my love to God, does no way prejudice my love to my
Neighbor; supposing the latter love to be of a different kind from the former.
Now in Answer to these Suggestions I shall endeavor to show.

1 st, That the Love of God required in the Command to love him with all our
hearts, is not only a love of desire, but of Benevolence also.

2 dly, That though the love of our Neighbor here enjoined be not love of
desire of him as our good; yet neither is it love of Benevolence only, but that
to the due performance of it a desire of the Creature is requisite, which is
sufficient to consute the Hypothesis, That the love of God required in the
command, To love God with all our hearts, is exclusive of the love of the
Creature.

3 dly, That the love of Benevolence allowed by Mr. N. and his good Lady, is
indeed that love which chiefly opposes and obstructeth our true love to God,
and is the rise of our inordinate Affections to the World.

4 thly, That though this Precept, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self,
cannot be well supposed to command us to desire our Neighbor as our good, yet
is it not only lawful, but very commendable so to do.

. 2. Prop. 1.
First, Then I say, That the Love of God required in the Injunction to love him
with all our Hearts, cannot be discharged by a love of Desire only, but
requires also a love of Benevolence. For is the desire of Enjoying him all that
he desires from us, to testify and express our love to him? Does he not
require upon this account that we should be zealous in the promotion of his
Honor? That we should rejoice in every thing by which his Holy Name is
Glorified? That we should promote, as much as in us lies, the advancement of
Piety, and Holiness, and Righteousness, because these things are acceptable and
well pleasing to him? That we should endeavor the Repentance of the Sinner,
Luke 15.7.
because this creates joy in Heaven, and God is highly pleased with it? Are we
not therefore to be filled with the Fruits of Righteousness, Phil. 1.11.
because they tend to the Praise and Glory of God? Mat. 5.16.
Must not not our Works shine before Men, that we may glorify our heavenly
Father? 1 Cor. 10.31.
Yea, whether we eat or drink, or whatever we do, must we not do all to the
Glory of God? Should we not be grieved at, and industrious to prevent whatever
tends to the Dishonor of his Holy Name? Does he not enjoin us to do good to
others for his sake? to love his House, his Ministers, his Servants, because
they are related to him? and require Servants to obey their Masters, Ephesians. 6.7.
(...), with good well-doing service to the Lord; and do we not by all these
things testify our good will to God. When the Excellent Lady says of the
Divine Lover, That wherever his Beloved is interested, Let. 11. p. 266.
his Soul is all on Fire; he does not pursue his Service with a languid and
frozen application, but with the Diligence and Zeal of Love; He will not see
his Beloved affronted, his Law contemned, and his Designs opposed, and tamely
stand by and hold his peace, nor does he regard what himself may suffer, but
only what service he may reasonably hope to do, and never is chary of those
things we usually call our own, whether Fortune, or Fame, or Life it self, but
only deliberates how he may reserve them for the most opportune season of
spending them freely in his Beloved's Service? Does she not in all this speak
of the Love of Benevolence? Are not all these Acts of Benevolent affection to
God? When we are thus zealously concerned for the Honor of our Neighbor, when
we desire he may be pleased and gratified, and rejoice when he is so; and are
grieved when any thing is done to his Dishonor, or by which he is much
displeased; when we love any thing related to him, and treat it respectfully
for his sake; do we not by these things show our love of Benevolence to our
Neighbor? Why therefore may we not be said to testify and express our good
will to God, by doing the like things toward him.

The Excellent Dr. Barrow not only makes it one Property of true Love to God,
Sermon. 23. of the Love of God, Vol. 3. p. 316.
to bear the greatest good will toward him, but also says, There wants not
sufficient matter of exercising good will, both in Affection and Action toward
God; (for) we are capable both of wishing, and in a manner, as he will
interpret it, and accept it, of doing good* to him by our concurrence with him
in promoting those things which he approves and delights in, and in removing
the contrary. Moreover when Christ says, He that loves Father and Mother,
Mat. 10.37.
Wife or Children, or his own Life more more than me, is not worthy of me: Does
not the comparison require, that the Love mentioned should relate to the same
kind of love? If then the love of Father and and Mother be only that of
Benevolence, and the love of God and Christ be that of Desire only, let Mr. N.
tell us why they may not both be very well consistent, as well as the love of
God, and of our Neighbor are upon that account believed to be so, if the love
of both be that of desire, it follows, in opposition to his Grand Tenet, that
Creatures may be loved with love of Desire; but if the love here mentioned be
that of Benevolence, then is it certain that love of Benevolence is not only
due to God, but also that it is due to him in an higher measure than to any
Creature. And indeed this Matter needs to be explained a little, and then it
will scarce need a further Confirmation

First, Then we may consider God in his Divine Essence, as an All-sufficient
God, infinitely happy in himself, and incapable of any accession either to his
Being, or internal Happiness; and in this sense to wish well to him, or to
desire to him Good, is vain and impracticable; and therefore considered thus,
he is incapable of Love of Benevolence.

But then we may consider him as the great Governor of the World, giving Laws,
which he would have us to observe, and by Obedience to which he is glorified by
Men, and is well pleased when they do cheerfully and readily comply with them,
and is dishonored and displeased when they affront him by their Disobedience.

We also may consider him according to his immitable Perfections, and his
communicable Attributes, viz. his Holiness and Righteousness, his Truth and
Faithfulness, his Goodness and Mercy. Now these being the Excellencies and
Perfections of his own Nature, which he cannot choose but love and delight in,
he is pleased to express himself as one who very much desires that all his
Subjects should be like him in them, and to delight in all that are so, and who
endeavors to make others so; he being glorified by them who promote these
Excellencies in themselves, and others, and as one who is highly offended,
displeased, and even grieved when Men neglect these things, and act in
opposition to his great Design of promoting these Perfections in Mankind; and
thus he is very capable of our Love of Benevolence: For whenever we do him
service out of good will, and pure desire to please him; when we aspire to
greater measures of Holiness, and Righteousness, and are Fruitful in good
Works, because these things are acceptable to God, and tend to the promotion of
his Glory; when we endeavor that all with whom we do converse may advance in
them from the same Principle; in all these cases we express our good will to
him. When we are zealous for his Honor, rejoice to see it promoted, are
grieved at any thing which does dishonor and displease him, and are
industrious to prevent it; in this we we show a Zeal for God, and a displeasure
against these things, arising from a love to him. And when we love his Servants
for his sake, and our Neighbor, because made after the Image of God; this is
in Scripture represented not only as an Indication, but an Expression of our
love to him; Hebr. 6.10.
For God is not unrighteous, says the Apostle, to forget your labor of love,
which you have showed to his name, in that you ministered to the Saints. Mat.
25.40.
And forasmuch as you did it to one of these, says Christ, you did it unto me.
And therefore Crellius and Carrellaeus do well inform us, That the love of God
is strictly and most properly taken for that affection by which we desire that
those things which are grateful to God may be done by us and others:
Strictissime, and maxim proprie sumitur pro affectu eo quo desideramus ut ea
tum a nobis, tum ab aliis fiant quae deo sunt Gratissima; quemadmodum enim amor
erga alium in universum consideratus, est affectus ejusmodi quo ea cupimus quae
alteri sunt bona, unde ^it etiam ut, si amor iste sit intensus, and fervens,
pro viribus id ipsum conemur efficere, atque id unice agamus, ut is quem
diligimus rebus sibi gratis, and utilibus potiatur. Ita etiam Charitas, seu
amor erga Deum ea unice desiderat quae Deo, ut ita dicamus, sunt bona, hoc est
grata, atque jucunda, qualia sunt omnia ista quae honorem illi afferunt* aut
alias voluntati ipsius sunt consentanea. Crell. etc. Christian. lib. 3. cap. 4.
Curcell. Instit. lib. 7. cap. 22. sect. 3.
For as love to others in the General is that affection by which we desire
those things to another which are good; and if that love be fervent, endeavor,
as we are able, to effect it, and chiefly are concerned that he whom we love
may enjoy what is grateful and profitable to him. So Charity, or Love to God,
only, N* B. those things which, as we may say, are good, that is grateful and
delightful to God, as are all those things which conduce to his Honor, or are
otherwise according to his Will. And indeed the desire of enjoying God as the
chiefest good, is so natural, so deeply rooted in self-Love, that it bears an
affinity to that general desire of Happiness, which Philosophers will not allow
to be Virtuous, or Praiseworthy, because it is not free, but natural; but this
Love of Benevolence to him is a more pure Fla^^ a more noble and disinterested
Affection; the desire that he may be Glorified by others, and that he may not
be Dishonored by them, is the desire of that on which our Happiness does not
depend, and so it is a love which Centers upon God alone without respect unto
our selves; it also shows a stronger compliance of our Will with the Will of
God, a greater Sympathy of Affections, a stronger Complacency in Goodness, an
higher Resemblance of Divine Perfections, than our desire of the chief Good
imports, and so it renders us more partakers of the Divine Nature, and so more
acceptable and lovely in the sight of God. Love of Benevolence is therefore due
to God, as well as to my my Neighbor, and so the love of God and of Neighbor
is not on that account of different kinds. And if it cannot be denied that this
is true and genuine love of God, it cannot be denied that this love also is
required in the Command, To love the Lord with all our Heart, and all our Soul;
and then it is demonstratively evident, that Phrase cannot exclude the love of
any Creature, because it is confessed, that with this love of Benevolence we
are to love our Neighbor as our selves.

. 3. Prop. 2.
Secondly, I add, That the Duty of Love I owe to my Neighbor cannot be
discharged by a love of Benevolence, or by wishing well to him only, but that
it imports also a love of Beneficence, or a sincere endeavor of doing all the
good I can to him. This is self-evident, and confessed by Mr. N. when he says,
It makes us ready not only to wish them, P. 162, 163.
but to do them all the good we can; to wish and to do well to them, to desire
good to them all, and to do them good as far as we have Opportunity. And of
this St. James sufficiently informs us, when he says, Jam. 2.15, 16.
That to wish well to our Brother, to wish he may be warm and clothed, without
affording him, (...), the things which are profitable to the Body, is an
unprofitable piece of Charity. And yet how is it possible we should be able, or
even desirous to afford him what is necessary for the Body, if we our selves
may not desire the things that are so? Let us reflect upon those acts of
Charity to our Neighbor, for which our Lord has promised to us the Kingdom,
and we shall easily discern we cannot do them, without desire of the Creature
as their Good. For can we feed the Hungry, or give drink to the Thirsty,
without desiring to have Food and Drink to give them? Can we take the Stranger
in, without desiring an House in which we may receive him? Or Cloth the Naked,
without desiring to have wherewith to Cloth him? It Is therefore certain, that
we cannot discharge this Christian Duty to our Neighbor, without a desire of,
and an endeavor also to enjoy the Creature, and then it must be also certain,
that the Love of God is not exclusive of all love, and all desire of the
Creature.

Besides, we by this Precept are obliged to love our Brother as our selves; now
are we barely to wish well to our selves, and not desire Life, Health, Sleep,
Ease, Comfort, and all the Necessaries of this present Life? If then we are to
love our Neighbor as our selves, that love must certainly engage us to desire
for our Brother the continuance of Life, Health, Ease and Comfort, and all the
Necessaries of this present Life; and also that we may have what will enable us
to minister to him in these things.

Object. Let. 8 p. 165.
But, says Mr. N. Our love of our selves is not love of Desire, but
Benevolence; for whosoever reflects upon the love of himself, will presently
perceive that it is not a desire of himself as his Good, but a desire of some
Good to himself, as appears from the Vulgar Expression, Charity begins at Home;
and from the Vice of Self-love, by which we mean a Craving, N. B. and seeking
after more than comes to a Man's share, without having any regard to the
Community, or a greedy pursuit of our Private Interest, in opposition to that
of the Public.

Answ.
I Answer, Let this be granted, has he not in these words said enough to
destroy his own Hypothesis, That the Creature must not be desired as our Good?
For if Self-love be a desire of something good to my self, if I may Crave and
Seek after as much as comes to my Share; If I may pursue my private Interest as
far as I can do it, without Opposition to the Public; then it will follow,
that if any Creature can be good for me, if any portion of them may fall to my
share, if it may be for my Interest to pursue any of them, I may so far Desire
and Crave them, and then my Love of God cannot exclude my Love or my Desire of
them.

2 dly, Though Mr. N. says, It Is most undoubtedly so, that my Love of my self
is not Love of Desire: Both Scripture and Reason most undoubtedly declare the
contrary; for Self-Preservation, and the continuance of Life, are the natural
Desires of all Men: Now these are truly a Desire of our selves, that is of
something of our selves which we have not already, Psalm 23.15, 14.
and yet this desire of Life, and love of many Days, being only the desire of
what God does promise as the Reward of our Obedience; it is unquestionably the
Desire of something Good for us, and so of something which Self-love does
prompt us to desire. When Christ requires us to love him more than Life it
self, and God enjoins his People to obey his Precepts, Deuteronomy. 6.14. chapter 30.15.
that they may live, do not all these things teach us, That the continuance of
Life is a thing desirable, and that we may love many days? Now this only
Happiness to be the desire of some Good to us, because the desire of our
selves, i. e. of the continuance of our Being is the desire of some Good to us,
and is at once the desire of our selves, and the continuance of Good; that is,
of Being to our selves. And this we learn from Mr. N. himself in these very
Letters, whereof he says, Let. 6. p. 121.
That since our Being is in it self a Good, and the Foundation of all the Good
that we do, or shall ever enjoy, it can be no sooner received that it brings an
Obligation of loving our Creator: For if our Being is in it self a Good, must
it not be our Good? Must not the continuance of it be the continuance of our
Good? Does it not therefore lay an Obligation on us to love our Creator,
because we by receiving it have received Good from him? And if our Being is the
Being of our selves, must not the love of it be the love of our selves? and the
desire of the continuance of it, be the desire of the continuance of our selves.

. 4. Prop. 3.
Thirdly, That the love of Benevolence is indeed that love which chiefly
opposes and obstructeth our true love to God, and is the rise of our
inordinate Affections to the World, is also very evident. For,

Sermon. of Self-love, p 309, 310.
1. That the love of our selves is love of Benevolence, he and this Lady have
informed us.

Now This, says the Excellent Dr. Barrow, is the Root from which all other
Vices do grow, and without which hardly any Sin could subsist; the chief Vices
especially have an obvious and evident dependence upon it.

All Impiety does involve a loving our selves in undue manner and measure, so
that we set our selves in our Esteem and Affection before God; we prefer our
own Conceits to his Judgment and Advice; we raise our Pleasure above his Will
and Authority.

From hence particularly, by a manifest Extraction, are derived those chief and
common Vices, Pride, Ambition, Envy, Avarice, Intemperance, Injustice,
Uncharitableness, Peevishness, Stubbornness, Discontent, and Impatience. For,

We overvalue our selves, our Qualities and Endowments, our Powers and
Abilities, our Fortunes and external Advantages; hence we are so Proud, that
is, so Lofty in our Conceits, and Fastuous in our Demeanors.

We would be the only Men, or most considerable in the World; hence are we
Ambitious; hence continually, with unsatiable greediness, we do affect and
strive to procure increase of Reputation, of Power, of Dignity.

We would engross to our selves all sorts of good Things in the highest degree;
hence enviously we become jealous of the Works and Virtue we grudge, and repine
at the Prosperity of others, as if they defalked somewhat from our Excellency,
or did Eclipse the brightness of our Fortune.

We desire to be not only full in our Enjoyment, but free and absolute in our
Dominion of Things, not only secure from needing the Succor of other Men, but
independent in regard to God's Providence: Hence are we so covetous of Wealth;
hence we so eagerly scrape it, and so carefully hoard it up.

We can refuse our dear selves no satisfaction, although unreasonable and
hurtful, therefore we so greedily gratify sensual Appetites in unlawful, or
excessive Enjoyments of Pleasure.

Being blinded or transported with fond Dotage on our selves, we cannot
discern, or will not regard what is due to others: Hence are we apt, upon
occasion, to do them wrong.

Love to our selves does in such manner suck in, and swallow up our Spirits;
does so pinch in, and contract our Hearts; does, according to its Computation,
so confine and abridge our Interests, that we cannot in our Affection, or in
real expression of Kindness tend outward, that we can afford little good Will,
or impart little Good to others.

Deeming our selves extremely Wise, and worthy of Regard; we cannot endure to
be contradicted in our Opinion, or crossed in our Honor: Hence, upon any such
Occasion, our Choler rises, and easily we break forth into violent Heats of
Passion.

From the like Causes it is that we cannot willingly stoop to due Obeisance of
our Superiors, in Reverence to their Persons, and Observance of their Laws,
that we cannot contentedly acquiesce in the Station or Portion assigned us by
Providence, that we cannot patiently support our Condition, or accept the
Events befalling us.

In fine, if surveying all the several kinds of naughty Dispositions in our
Souls, and of Miscarriages in our Lives, we do scan their particular Nature,
and search into their Original Causes, we shall find inordinate Self-love to be
a main Ingredient, and a common Source of them all.

In particular, the love of Life, which is by them esteemed Love of
Benevolence, to what base Fears, and sordid Actions does it not expose us? How
many myriads have lost their Reputation, Honesty, their Conscience, and their
own Souls to save it? This therefore is that piece of Self-denial so often
inculcated, so vehemently pressed in Scripture, that we may continue Christ's
Disciples, and may be Faithful to him to the Death. The immoderate love of it
being that which is especially pronounced inconsistent with the love of God,
and with Fidelity to Christ. Hence he so often says, Mat. 10.39. chapter 16.25.
He that finds his own Life shall lose it; and he that loses his life for my
sake shall find it. Luke 13.26.
And if any Man come to me, and hates not his own Life, he cannot be my
Disciple. Can therefore any Person doubt whether this self-love, this love of
Life, be not as much forbid by the Command of loving God with all our Hearts;
as the desire of Houses, Lands, or any temporal Possessions, or think it less
obstructive of, or inconsistent with it, because it is love of Benevolence? But
will Mr. N. or his Good Lady, by reason of the mischievous Effects of this
Self-love, this love of Life, persuade the World that no Man ought to love
himself at all, or desire at all the Preservation of his Life? And yet would
they be pleased to revise their Arguments, and those especially which are taken
from the Consideration of the Danger of the Love of the Creature, they would
soon perceive they were of equal Force against all love of our selves, and of
our lives.

Again, the love of Parents, Children, Husbands, Wives, Relations, Friends, is
love of Benevolence; and yet it is the Root of many and great Vices, it is that
which renders it exceeding difficult to obey the Laws of Christ, when they once
come in Competition with these Beloved's of our Souls; for where there is by
Nature the closest Union, and the most intimate Affection, it must be very
difficult to burst these Bonds asunder, and disingage our Hearts from them.
Hence that great Duty of Self-denial is still expressed by loving God more than
these; (...). Mat. 10.37.
for, He, says Christ, that loves Father and Mother, Son or Daughter more
than me, is not worthy of me. And by a comparative hatred of them, for, He,
Luke 14.26.
says Christ, that hates not Father and Mother, Wife and Children, Brothers
and Sisters -- cannot be my Disciple.

Moreover, does not Experience convince us, that from the excessive love we
bear to our Relations, beloved Sects and Parties, mostly proceeds that Strife,
Debate and Variance, those Quarrels and Contentions, that Wrath, Hatred, Envy,
Bitterness of Spirit; those Schisms, Factions and Seditions; those Animosities
and Heart-burnings; those Calumnies, Detractions, rash Censures, which are in
the World?

Is not this one great Root of that Avarice, that scraping for the World, that
hoarding of it up, that want of Charity we complain of that Men are very
desirous to advance their Families, and leave them in great Plenty and Splendour
in the World?

Can it be therefore doubted, Whether this love of Benevolence be one great
thing forbidden in this Injunction, To love the Lord with all our Heart, etc.
or whether it be not inconsistent with it as that love of the Creature, of
Houses, Lands, joined with it in the Text; which Men do often part with to
preserve the Life of these Beloveds? But will Good Mr. N. or the Lady, hence
conclude, That the Love of God with all our Hearts, is entirely exclusive of
all Love of Benevolence to Father or Mother, Wife or Children?

. 5.
Fourthly, That though this Precept thou shall Prop. 4.
love thy Neighbor as thy self cannot be reasonably supposed to command us to
desire our Neighbor as our Good; yet is it not only lawful, but very
commendable so to do. I say, the Command to love our Neighbor cannot be a
Command to desire him as our Good, because the love of my Neighbor is this
love of another as such, the wishing well, and doing good to another, without a
formal respect to my self; whereas loving another as a Good to me, is properly
Self-love. The true reason then why I cannot love my Neighbor in the Sense
here required, with love of desire as a Good to me, is not because he is a
Creature, for I my self am a Creature, and yet may love my self, as I have
proved, with a love of Desire; and I may love and desire those temporal good
Things God has promised, though they be only Creatures; but because whatsoever
I thus love, must be affected, and desired from Self-love, and not from love
unto another.

Nevertheless, it is very evident that I may, and sometimes ought to desire my
Neighbor as a Good to me. For, is there not such a thing as a good Friend, a
good Companion, a good Neighbor, a good Counselor; and may not I want, and so
have reason to desire this Friend, Companion, Neighbor, Counselor, as a Good
to me? Are not such Persons very needful and beneficial to us in this Life? And
will not Self-love teach us to desire what is so needful and so beneficial to
us? May not the Parish of B. desire that Mr. N. may continue their Minister, as
being a Good to them? When Great and Good Men are in danger to be taken from us
by Sickness, or the Casualties of War, how heartily do we pray for the
continuance and preservation of their Lives? And do we not desire this as a
public Good? And when we grieve for them as dead, and gone into a State of
Happiness, can we do this out of Benevolence to them? Or, do we not so from the
Sense of our own Loss of one so good, and so desirable to us? 2 Kings 13.14.
Did not Ioash weep over Elisha, because he was the Chariot of Israel, and the
Horsemen thereof? 2 Chronicles. 35.24.
Did not all Judah and Jerusalem mourn for Josiah, because they said, Under his
shadow we shall live among the Heathens? Lam. 4.20.
Are not Good and Righteous Men the greatest Blessings to a Nation, and may we
not then desire the continuance and increase of them as our Good? Does not the
Psalmist speak of God's Saints and Servants, Psalm. 16.3.
as the Excellent in whom was, (...), all his desire? Contempl. and Love, p.
307.
Does not Mr. N. say, There are some things which I love with great Passion,
such as are Conversation with select Friends? Is not Vir desiderii, Dan. 9.23.
the Scripture Expression, for a Person highly beloved? And may not Madam B.
and Madam I. be to the Lady, Mulier desiderii? What, Let. 7. p. 133.
though they cannot supply our Wants, yet if they can supply any of them, our
want of good Company, Instruction, Learning, Knowledge, Health, may they not be
desired on that account? What though they must seek their Felicity abroad, P.
134.
and cannot be their own chief Good, can this authorize us wholly to withdraw
our Hearts from our Neighbor, or from a faithful Friend, who is better to us
than a Brother, Prove. 18.24.
and never to desire any Conversation with him for our Good? It Is therefore
evident from those Considerations, That we may not only desire Good to our
Neighbor, but that we may also desire him as a Good to us.

Thirdly,. 6.
I add, that this Opinion, That the Love of God is absolutely exclusive of all
love to, and all desire of the Creature, destroys the whole Foundation of these
two great Virtues, Justice and Charity: For,

1. This is the natural Foundation of all Justice, Thou shall do to others, as
thou would be dealt with. If then the love of God obliges me to have no
love, and no desire of the Creature, it must oblige me to have no desire to
preserve my own Life, my Health, my Goods, my Wife, my Servant, or any other
Creature that is mine; and then no Obligation can be laid upon me from this
Rule of Christ, To desire to preserve the Life, Health, Goods, Relations of my
Neighbor, or any other thing that is his. Nor if I suffer them to be impaired,
can I have any inward Sense, that I do that to others which I would not have
done unto my own self.

2. All Charity, or Love unto my Brother, depends upon this Precept, Thou shall
love thy Brother as thy self. Now if this love to my self does naturally
produce within me a desire of all things that will do me good, i. e. a desire
of the continuance of my Being, and so of all things necessary to my Being; a
desire of Ease, when I lie under Pain; of Supplies, when under Want; of
Comfort, when I am in Trouble; of Pleasure, when I may innocently enjoy it: In
a word, a desire of every thing by which I may receive Advantage, Comfort,
Honor and Delight, then must my Obligation to love my Neighbor as my self
engage me to desire all those Creature Comforts by which I am enabled to do him
Good. But if, as these Philosophers inform us, Let. 6. p. 126.
The Love of God is exclusive of all love of, and consequently all desire of,
the Creature. If he that loves God as he ought, as he cannot, so he need not
love; and therefore not desire any thing else. If he be obliged in Justice to
God, Let. 7. p. 132.
and in kindness to himself to withdraw every straggling desire from the
Creature; if Creatures ought not to be thought desirable; Let. 9. p. 179. P.
201.
if the desire of God, and of the Creature, are in their own Natures
incompatible, then can no true lover of God desire any of those Creatures
whereby he may be able to do good unto his Brother; and so he never can be able
to perform those acts of Charity and Beneficence this love unto his Neighbor
does require, though he has no Temptations to these Sins which, Let. 7. p. 139.
otherwise, obstruct his Benevolence to him.

. 7.
Fourthly, By stretching this Commandment to an exclusion of all desire of, or
affection to, the Creature, a great Contempt is cast upon the works, both of
the Creation and of Providence. For,

1. As to the Works of the Creation, they are generally and truly said to be a
Declaration, not only of the Power and Wisdom, but of the Goodness of God; but
if there be not one of all his Works which is good to us, and so our good, not
one of them we should desire or love; that is, be pleased with, what Indication
can they afford of Divine Goodness to us? Genesis 1.4.
Moses informs us, That God saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was
very Good. The Hebrew word, says Mr. Ainsworth, is extended to that which is
is goodly, fair, sweet, pleasing, profitable, commodious, and causing Joy. The
word (...), Good. Not only Metaphysically, as Mr. N. imagines, Sermon. p. 62. but
as being what God designed them, profitable and delightful to Man.
says Schindler, Non tam bonum esse substantialiter, quam amabile, volupe,
jucundum, utile, and gratum, esse significat. Accordingly it, by the
Septuagint, is rendered, (...) and (...). And wherein does the Goodness of these
things consist, but in their fitness to serve the ends for which these
Creatures were created? Now is it the Herb only, which was created for the
Service of Man; Genesis 1.14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
was not the Host of Heaven made to give him Light, and Heat, and benign
Influences, and for Signs, and for Seasons, and for Days, and for Years? Was
not the Earth made to be inhabited by him? Was it not given to the Children of
Men for their use? Was not the Air made for him to breath in, the Fire to warm
him, the Water to afford him drink? Genesis 9.2, 3.
Were not the living Creatures given him for Food, as the Herb? The Ox, the
Ass, the Horse for Travel and for Tillage of the Earth; the Flocks and Herds,
to feed and clothe him? The Fruits of the Earth to sustain him? The Corn, Wine
and Oil to comfort and make glad the Heart of Man? Are not all these things
made in such an Order and Dependence by Divine Wisdom, as that the Influence of
the Heavens should render the Earth fruitful; and that the fruitful Earth
should yield her Corn, and Wine, and Oil, and these should minister to the
Support and Comfort of Man's Life? Is not this the true import of that Promise,
The Heavens shall hear the Earth, Hos. 2.21, 22.
and the Earth shall hear the Corn, and Wine, and Oil, and they shall hear
Iesrael? When the Psalmist calls upon the Sun, and Moon, the Heavens, and the
Waters that are above the Heavens, the deeps, and the Whales swimming in them;
the Mountains and Hills, fruitful Trees and Cedars, the Beasts and Cattle,
creeping things and flying Fowl to Praise God; does he not in effect invite and
stir up Man to praise God for the Benefit he has received from these things,
and for the kindness God designed to him by them? Now if there be nothing in
the whole System of the Creation which is our Good, which we may love, i. e. be
pleased with and desire, how came these Creatures to be styled very Good; and
that in reference to one great end of their Creation, the Service of Man?
Wherein consists the kindness of God designed in Creation of them? And whence
arises the Obligation to such Praises and Thanksgivings for them?

Moreover the same Moses informs us, That God created the Woman to be an help
meet for the Man, Genesis 2.18. chapter 1.28.
because it was not good for Man to be alone; and that he Blessed them both,
and said, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the Earth. Now is there
comfort in the Society of a Bosom Friend, nothing desirable in a help meet for
the Necessities and Uses of this present Life; or may I not desire what is so
comfortable, 1 Cor. 7.9.
and so helpful? If it be better to marry than to burn, must it must not be
good to desire a Wife, that I may not burn? If it be a Blessing to be Fruitful,
and an Infelicity and Judgment to be Barren, may I not, when I have a Wife,
desire Children by her, because they are Creatures?

The Providence of God respects his Preservation, and his Government of all
things, and with relation to both these we have have just cause to say, Psalm.
33.5.
The Earth is full of the goodness of the Lord. For he preserves Man and
Beast; and this he does by giving and continuing to them Life and Breath, and
all things. Hence, to the memory of God's great Goodness, the Psalmist has
declared, Psalm. 145.9, 15, 16.
That the eyes of all things wait upon him, and he giving them their meat in
due season. He opens his hand, and fills all things living with
plenteousness. On this account he is by the Apostle said, Acts 14.17.
Not to have left himself without a witness of his Philanthropy, (...), by
doing good to all in giving them fruitful Seasons, and filling their hearts
with Food and Gladness. Now if the giving Life, and all things needful to
sustain it; if the filling all things living with plenteousness, and our Hearts
with Food and Gladness, be not giving us any thing that is our good, any thing
we may love, or be pleased with, any thing we should desire, or move toward,
wherein consists the great goodness of all these Acts of Preservation?

As for the other Act of Providence, God's Government of Mankind, who knows not
that the great Objection made against it both by Jew and Heathen was this, That
it so often happened to the Wicked to abound in temporal good Things, and to the
Good to be afflicted with great Misery and Want; That such was the Prosperity
of the wicked, Psalm. 73.7, 12.
that their eyes stood out with fullness, and they had more than heart could
wish; that they prospered in the world, and increased in Riches; Jer. 12.1.
That the way of the wicked prospered, and they were happy who dealt very
treacherously: Job 21.7, 13.
That they continued to old age, mighty in power, safe from fear, free from the
rod of God, spending their days in mirth and wealth. Psalm. 73.14.
Whereas many were the afflictions of the Righteous, they being plagued all the
day long, and chastned every morning. That there is a just man who perishes in
his righteousness, and there is a wicked man that prolongeth his life in his
wickedness. That there be just men to whom it happens according to the work
of the wicked. Eccles. 7.15. chapter 8.14.
Again, there be wicked men to whom it happens according to the work of the
righteous. Now had it not been generally received as a certain truth, that
these external things were our Good, that they were proper Objects of our
Desire and Affection, and that the want of them was the want of what was good
and fit to be desired, there could have been no foundation for this Objection
against Providence. Whence it is evident, that the Opinion which represents the
Creature as no fit Object of our Desire and Affection, and and denies them to
be our Good, does contradict the general Judgment of Mankind.

CHAP. III.
The Contents.
The ordinary Exposition of these Words, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with
all thy heart, etc. laid down in the Words of Mr. N. and of the Schoolmen, viz,
That we are obliged by them to love God above all Things; 1. Appretiatively. 2.
Comparatively. 3. Intensively. And, 4. So as to love other things only by way
of Relation, and Subordination to God,. 1. That our Lord Christ has approved
of this Exposition is showed,. 2. The Censure which Mr. N. gives of this
Opinion, and the Abettors of it, reflects very unbecomingly upon all the
Prelates and Pastors of the Church of England, which are not of his Mind, and
lays unworthy Imputations on them,. 3. Some General Considerations offered to
engage him to abate somewhat of his Confidence, and his Censorious Reflections
for the future,. 4. Especially this, that they who adhere to the common
Exposition of these words, differ no more from him, than he differs from his
former self,. 5. The common Exposition further confirmed; First, From this
Consideration, That this Command was given to the Jewish Nation, whose Promises
were chiefly Temporal, and therefore could not be exclusive of the desire of
Temporal Blessings,. 6. That therefore it ought to bear that Sense, which is
the certain Import of the like Phrases in all the Old Testament, where they are
only to be found, which Sense is plainly opposite to that which Mr. N. contends
for,. 7. The true Sense of loving God with all the Heart and Soul in the Old
Testament, showed from that primary Relation, and respect it has to their
owning God to be the true God, in opposition to all strange God's,. 8.
Secondly, From this Consideration, that this love is required as the Condition
of Salvation,. 9. Thirdly, That to love God with all our Mind cannot bear this
Sense,. 10. The common Exposition serves all the designs of Religion in
General, and of Christian Religion in Particular, as well as the Exposition of
Mr. N. and the Lady,. 11.

HAving thus established, and confirmed this Proposition, That it is lawful to
have some love for, and some desire of the Creature, and showed that the love
of God cannot be entirely exclusive of all love, or all desire of the Creature
as our Good, I now proceed to answer what is offered to the contrary from
Scripture, and from Reason. And,

. 1.
First, The great Objection insisted on from Scripture arises from the words
of Christ, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, Mat. 22.37.
and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. Now to fix the true sense of
these words I shall 1 st, Lay down the ordinary Exposition of them, and offer
some Arguments to confirm it. 2 dly, I shall consider and confute the Novel
Exposition of Mr. N. and answer what he offers against the commonly received
Interpretation.


Now the ordinary Exposition of these words, says Mr. N. is by the generality
of Divines expressed thus, Vol. 3. p. 5.
(1 st,) That we are to love God with a superlative Affection, so as to be
ready always to prefer his Favor before all other things; to choose to obey
him, rather than man; to please him, rather than to gratify our selves; to
enjoy him, rather than any carnal Interest whatsoever; and so as to be ready,
rather to lose any temporal good, or suffer any temporal Evil, than commit the
least Sin against him. (2 dly,) That we are to love other things only in a way
of Relation and Subordination to God; Ibid. p. 75.
for seeing God requires us to love him with all our hearts, our love to other
things must be derived from, and dependant on our love to God, and we must only
love them for his sake, as they relate unto him, or as they enable us to serve
him, or as they are instrumental to the Enjoyment of him. This by the
Schoolmen, and Systematical Divines, is thus expressed.

First, That we are to love God above all things Appretiative, i. e. so as to
prize him in our Judgments above all things; to esteem him more valuable in
himself, more beneficial to us than all things else we can enjoy, according to
that saying of the Psalmist, Psalm. 63.3.
Thy loving kindness is much better than is Life it self; to esteem him as the
only Felicity of our Immortal Souls; their chief and most desirable Good, the
only Being in whom is perfect Rest, entire Complacency, and full Satisfaction
to be found, and consequently to look on all things else as Loss and Dung
compared to him. And whilst we retain this value for him, we can never prize or
be concerned for any thing so much as for his Favor, nor refuse to part with
any thing which tends to deprive us of it, we can never value any other thing
so much as to permit it to rival him who is exceedingly more precious in our
Eyes, and more desirable to our Souls, and so we cannot overvalue any worldly
thing. This therefore may be truly styled the loving him with all our Mind.

Secondly, That we are to love God above all things Comparative, i. e. with a
superlative Affection, so as to be ready always to prefer his Favor before all
other things. And this Affection, this cleaving of our hearts unto him, must
follow from the forementioned Estimation of him: For if we fully are convinced
that there is infinitely more Excellency in God, more Happiness to be expected
from him, than all the Honors, Pleasures, Profits, Interests, Relations, and
Satisfactions of the World can tender, and so the highest reason that he should
always be prefered before them; and that we should still cleave unto him, in
opposition to any other thing: It Is certain he can have no rival in our hearts,
nothing that stands in competition for our love, nothing we do not truly hate,
and despise comparatively to his Favor; nothing that can tempt us to depart
from from him, or to do the thing which will hazard his Favor, or provoke his
Displeasure; and may we not then be faid to love him with an entire and
undivided heart?

Thirdly, That we are to love God above all things Intensive, that is, our
desires must be more ardently inclined toward his Favor, and the Enjoyment of
him; we must long, thirst, and pant more after him, rejoice more in his Favor
than in any other thing, be more concerned to retain it than to secure any
worldly Blessing, and be more satisfied in it than in Marrow and Fatness; and
what more can the love of God with all our Souls import? For seeing such a
prevalence of our Desires toward him, and Delight in him, will not permit us
to desire any thing in opposition to him, or against his Will and Pleasure; but
will constrain us to quit all other Interests, that we may happily retain our
Interest in him, we thus desire and delight in above all other things: It
follows, that by thus loving God with all our Souls, our love unto, or our
desire of the Creature, can never be inordinate or irregular, and so can never
be offensive to God, and then it cannot be forbidden by the Command, To love
the Lord our God with all our Souls?

In these things seems to be implied, or from them certainly will follow that
endeavor above all things to please him; that industrious care to serve and to
obey him; that vigorous Employment of all our other Faculculties in his
Service, which will demonstrate, that we comparatively do not labor for the
Meat that perishes, do not permit our Secular Employments, or our pursuit of
any temporal Enjoyments to impair our diligence in the securing our eternal
Interests; and therefore that in the true import of the Phrase, we love God
with all our might, all other Senses of it being inconsistent with that
Diligence in our Callings, and that Industry in our Civil Affairs which God
himself requires from us. And,

Fourthly, Hence it follows, that we are to love all other things only in way
of Relation and Subordination to God; for if we do co-ordinately love any other
thing, Cum autem ait toto cord, tota anima, tota mente nullam vitae nostrae
partem Reliquit quae vacare debeat, and quasi locum dare ut alia revelit frui,
sed quicquid aliud diligendum venerit in animum illuc rapiatur quo totius
dilectionis impetus currit. Aug. de Doctr. Christian. l. 1. cap. 22.
we love it equally with God. And certainly if God requires us to love him with
all our Hearts, and all our Souls, our love to other things must virtually be
comprised in our love to God, or be independent on it, or subservient to it, or
else we must deprive him of some portion of the Heart he wholly calls for.
Moreover God being our ultimate and chiefest Good, all other things can only be
Good, as they conduce to the Enjoyment or Service of him, and so are to be
loved by him; that is, we must love them as they relate to him, as they enable
us to serve him, as they are, or may be Instrumental to his Glory, or to our
Enjoyment of him. When therefore we desire the Creature only for God's sake,
viz. that we may have Food and Raiment to sustain that Life we have devoted to
his Service. Increase of temporal Enjoyments, that we may be more able to feed
Christ's hungry, and clothe his naked Members, or more engaged to serve him
with Joy and Gladness of Heart for the abundance of all things, when we desire
Marriage, or a Wife, that we may not burn; and Children, that, as Plato says,
we may breed them up in the Fear and Nurture of the Lord, (...). De Leg. l. 6.
p. 869. F.
and leave behind us a Race of pious Persons, who may do him service, when we
are dead and gone; and Honor, that we may be more instrumental to promote his
Glory, and to do Good to others; and lastly, the Knowledge of the Creature,
that we may learn to Glorify the Creator, by viewing the Power, Wisdom, and
Goodness he has discovered in the Creation of them; who sees not that this
love of the Creature centers in the love of God, and tends expressly to his
Glory, and therefore cannot be forbidden by this Command to love the Lord with
all our Hearts, and all our Souls?

And of this Exposition of these Words we cannot reasonably doubt,. 2.
if we consider that our Lord himself does plainly seem to favor and approve
of it, making that Service, and so that Love which he requires from us, to
consist in that prevalence of Affection which enables us, in any competition
betwixt the love of the World, and the love of Him, to cleave to God, and
despise the World. This evidently is the import of these words, Mark 6.24.
No Man can serve two Masters (when their Services and Commands do interfere)
for he will either hate the one, and love the other, he will cleave to the one,
and despise the other; ye cannot (therefore) serve God and Mammon. Mr. N.
indeed says, Sermon. p. 64, 65.
Here we are plainly told we cannot divide between God and the Creature,
because we cannot love either of them but upon such a Principle as must utterly
exclude the love of the other. But, 1 st. the word Mammon does not signify the
Creature in general, but Riches and Money in particular: Now will it follow,
that because I must not love Money, that I may not love my Victuals, or that
because I may not desire Riches, which Agur prayed against, I may not desire
Food convenient for me, which he prayed for? 2 dly, When our Lord says, Matthew.
6.24.
No Man can serve two Masters, can this be so interpreted, as to infer we
cannot serve our Master Christ, and be Servants to our Masters according to the
Flesh in all things not forbidden by him? Must I needs hate my Master, if I
love my Savior; or despise him, if I cleave to my Lord Christ? Must not then
the words be necessarily Interpreted of Masters Coordinate, or Masters whose
Commands and Services do interfere? 3 dly, What is the Business of a Servant,
is it not to obey the Pleasure of his Lord, and yield himself up entirely in
Subjection to his Commands? What therefore must it be here to serve God, but to
give up our selves entirely to his Service, and the Obedience of his Will? What
to serve Mammon, but to give up our selves to the pursuit of Riches, and to
obey the Desires and Cravings of our covetous and worldly Appetites? Thus it is
certain, that we cannot divide betwixt God and the Creature, or love the one
but from a Principle which excludes the love of the other; but a Subordinate
Affection to the Creature is no more exclusive of our love to God, then is the
Service of an Earthly Master exclusive of the Service which we owe to Christ
our Master.

Again, Christ places the due love of himself in the prevalence of our
Affections to him above other things, Mat. 10.37.
saying, He that loves Father and Mother, Son or Daughter, (...), above me, is
not worthy of me; whence it must follow by the Rule of contraries, that he who
loves Christ more than Father and Mother, Son or Daughter, or any worldly
Interest whatever, must be worthy of him. From these two places it is therefore
evident, that to love God so as to despise and to forsake all other things, to
cleave unto him; to love God superlatively, so as to have our Affections more
powerfully carried out after him, than any other thing that is most dear unto
us, is, in the Scripture Sense, to love God with a whole and an entire Heart.
And surely, if I love God, so as to love nothing which is contrary to him, or
which he forbids me to love, I can do nothing contrary to the love I owe
unto him. If I love him, so as to prize neither Friendship, Relations, Fame,
Honor, Pleasures, Riches, Life, or any temporal Concernments, so as to offend
him by preserving them, I do not inordinately love them; for Obedience being
the true test of Love; where there is no neglect of Obeeience, there can be no
want of love. Moreover, if I prize nothing in comparison with God in my mind,
if I cleave to nothing in competition with him in my will, if I desire nothing
in comparison with him in my Affections, if I pursue nothing but with relation
to his Glory, and in Subordination to his Sacred Will, how can I be wanting in
my Duty to him? And if I be not wanting in my Duty to him, how can I sin
against him?

. 3.
That by this Exposition this precept is extended beyond the real import of it,
even beyond what any Person, in this State of Imperfection, does, or can do, is
very plausibly asserted by all the Romish Commentators I have read, and by the
most judicious of the Reformed, who affirm, it only does require sincere
Obedience, and to aim at, and endeavor to advance to that Intension and
Superlative Affection which we cannot expect completely to attain to in this
Life.

But that any Person should not be satisfied with all this, but still be
stretching of this Duty to a higher pitch, charging the Authors of this
Exposition with Insincerity, and love unto their Lusts, and the Exposition it
self with the most odious Consequences, this is just matter of our Admiration.
And yet this is so plainly, and so confidently done by Mr. N. that in defense
of their own Reputations, and of the Reputation of their traduced Brethren, all
the whole Body of the Clergy, who differ from him in these Sentiments, stand
bound to vindicate themselves from those vile Imputations which he casts upon
them. For,

First, As to the first Part of the common Exposition, (...) 3. p. 7.
That God must be loved with a Superlative Affection, he Affirms that, Sure the
Authors of it could not but be sensible that herein they did not rise up to the
Letter of the Text, which manifestly requires a more elevated Sense; P. 12.
namely that our whole Affections be placed upon God, and that we love him so
entirely, as to love none but him. That we ought to love God, not only with the
best and most, but with the whole of our Affection; P. 11.
that we love him entirely, not only with Integrity of Parts, but with
Integrity of Degrees; that we love him, not only with every Capacity, Passion
and Faculty, with the Understanding suppose, Will and Affections, but in every
degree of every Power, with all the latitude of our Will, and with the whole
possibility of our Souls; that we bestow on him not only the highest degree of
it, but every degree of it, the whole. In one word, that God be not only the
Principal, but the Only Object of our Love. No less can he be supposed to
require from us by Virtue of this Great Law, when he bids us to love him with
all our Heart, with all our Soul, and with all our Mind.

Secondly, As to the second Branch of the ordinary Exposition, That we are to
love other things beside God, only in a way of relation, and "subordination to
God; He is pleased to speak somewhat contemptibly of the Authors of it, as if
he pitied their Ignorance. His words are these. P. 75.
So it is said by some who think they strain the love of God to a very high
pitch, when they tell us we must love nothing but God, or in order and relation
to God. So then, according to these Men, we are allowed to love Creatures,
provided it be in a Relation and Subordination to God, who, upon this
Principle, is not to be the only, but only the final and ultimate Object of our
Love. But methinks these Men's relative Love is very much like the relative
Worship of the Papists, they make God the only ultimate Object of Divine
Worship, and so do these Men make him the only last Object of divine Love, but
yet they allow of giving divine Worship to a Creature, provided it be in a
transitive and relative way. And so these Men allow of bestowing our love upon
a Creature, provided it be for God's sake, or in relation to God, provided it
do not stop at the Creature, but run on till at last it fix upon God as its
final Object.

P. 217.
In his Tenth Letter he speaks thus; The Truth and Reasonableness of this
Notion, ( viz. That God only is to be the Object of our Love,) seems to me so
very evident, that as I cannot withold my assent from it my self, so, were it
not a matter of Practice wherein our Passions and Interests are concerned, as
well as Theory that imploys our Understandings, I should strangely wonder at
all Rational and considerate Persons that can. But this, in great measure,
silences my admiration: For this is the great disadvantage that all Truths of a
moral Nature lie under, in comparison of those that are Physical or
Mathematical, that though the former be in themselves no less certain than the
latter, P. 218.
and demonstrated with equal evidence, yet they will not equally convince, nor
find a parallel reception in the minds of Men, because they meet with their
Passions and Lusts, and have often the Will and Affections to contend with,
even after they have gained upon their Understandings. -- Were I to deal only
with the Rational Part of Man, I should think the half of what has been said
enough to convince that; but considering the nature of the Truth I advance, and
what a strong Interest is made against it in the Affectionate Part of Human
Nature, I cannot expect to find the General^ty of Men over forward to receive
it. -- The other Precepts of Morality cross only some particular Interests of
Man, P. 221.
and fight only against some of his stragglings Passion; but this engages the
whole Body of Concupiscence, and at once encounters the whole Interest of
Prejudice, all the Force that is or can be raised in Humane Nature; which when
I consider I cannot hope by the clearest and strongest Reasoning to reconcile
the Generality of the World to a Notion so opposite to the Passions, Customs,
and Prejudices of it; only there may be here and there some liberal and
ingenious Spirits, P. 221.2 d.
who have in great measure purged themselves from the Prejudices of Sense,
disingaged their Hearts from the love of sensible Objects, and so far entered
into the methods of true Mortification, as to be capable of Conviction, and of
having their minds wrought upon by the light and force of Reason. And lastly he
adds, P. 242, 243.
That Men are backward not only to pay that entire Love which they owe to God,
but even to acknowledge the Debt, and are not only loath to obey the Command,
but even to understand it, will use a thousand Arts and Devices to shift off
and evade the genuine force of it;. 6.
and, rather than fail, will say, That though God in the most plain and express
terms calls for whole Love, yet he means but a part of it. Strange and amazing
Partiality and Presumption! But of this general Backwardness to receive the
Sense of this plain Command (as plain as, Thou shall have no other Gods but
me.) I have already hinted an account in the former part of this Letter. I
shall not return that Answer to these reflecting Words which they deserve, but
shall content my self, First, To offer to Mr. N. some General Considerations
which may be proper to move him, upon second thoughts, to abate him somewhat of
his Confidence, and be more moderate in his Censures of his Fathers and
Brethren, if not out of respect to them, yet out of regard to his own dear
Self, who in his other Writings has plainly and expressly taught that very
Doctrine, and Exposition which he now Condemns. Secondly, I shall further
establish the common Exposition, and confirm it by the clearest Evidence of
Scripture and of Reason. And, Thirdly, Shall endeavor to return an Answer to
his pretended Demonstrations, for his new elevated Sense of this Command. And,


First,. 4.
Whereas he says, The common Interpreters sure could not but be sensible that
herein they did not rise up to the Letter of the Text, which manifestly
requires a more elevated Sense. Let me instruct him to consider whether
Christian Charity will permit him thus peremptorily to pronounce that before
him; and Mr. Malbranch, and all Commentators gave such a Sense of this great
Commandment, of which they could not but be sensible that it fell short of all
Men's Duty, or of what God required them to do, that they might live; and that
they thus deviated from the Sense which the Text manifestly required; that is,
that the Interpretation they delivered, as the true import of the Text, was
contrary to the manifest Sense of it, and to the inward Sentiments of their own
Consciences.

Secondly, P. 7.
Whereas he adds, That they could not advance higher without building in the
Air, and were therefore forced to cramp the Sense of this great Commandment,
and to put such a Construction upon it not as the express words of it require,
but as their Hypothesis would bear. And that only he and Mr. Malbranch, P. 22.
have thought otherwise, or any further. Let me entreat him to consider whether
it be reasonable to conceive that God left all Men ignorant of the true Grounds
of this Command, till he and Mr. M. appeared to instruct the World in the true
meaning of it; that though all Men were obliged by the light of Nature, all
Jews and Christians by the light of Scripture, to love God with all their
Hearts and Souls, yet they had no just Ground or Reason so to do, till he and
Mr. M. blessed the World with this new Invention, that our Lord has given us
another reason of this Precept is evident from these words, Deuteronomy. 6.4.
Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God is one God, Mark 12.29, 30.
(...), therefore thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, etc. And
I hope he will not dare to say that he built Castles in the Air, for want of
his Philosophy, or gave us only such a reason as forced us to cramp the Sense
of this Commandment.

Thirdly, Let me entreat him to consider the plain Consequences of this his
singular Opinion and Interpretation of these words, viz. That all Interpreters
before him have taught all Men to love God less than he required of them by
virtue of this great Law, P. 11, 15.
to do God great Injury and Injustice, to defraud the Creator of what was due
to him, to cross the Order of Nature, and resist the Will of its Great Author;
to be Idolaters, P. 37.
i. e. to worship the Sun, and to give every Creature a share in our Religious
Acknowledgments; to commit Spiritual Fornication and Adultery; to Deifie and
Idolize the Creature; to do what is as much Idolatry, as is that Relati^e
Worship which the Papists do ascribe to Images. Now can he indeed believe all
Christians and Jews of former Ages were, and that all at present, besides Mr.
Malbranch, and those few who embrace his Sentiments, are Guilty of these horrid
Crimes? If not, he must be so Uncharitable, as to think they do not act
according to their Principles, or must confess that these things do not follow
from them.

Fourthly, When he says his Exposition is so very evident, Let. 10. p. 217.
that it is matter of just Admiration, that any Rational and Considerate Person
can withold his assent from it; and that the reason why we do not see, or
seeing will not own it, P. 221.
is because it thwarts our Passions, Interests and Lusts, Customs and
Prejudices: Because we have not purged our selves from the Prejudices of Sense,
P. 222.
disingaged our Hearts from the love of sensible Objects, nor entered so far
into the Methods of true Mortification, as to be capable of Conviction: That
they who allow not of it, P. 243.
are Guilty of strange and amazing Partiality and Presumption, unwilling not
only to obey the Command, but to understand it, and rather willing to show a
thousand Arts and Devices ^o shift off, and evade the genuine force of it. I
say, when he uses such Expressions, let me entreat him to consider whether it
does become him thus to bespatter all his Adversaries, and tell them to their
faces, if they will not yield assent to his odd Notion, they must have Lusts
and Passions, which obstruct the Evidence of Truth; to cause all his Fathers
and Brethren who comply not* with his Sentiments, which scarce any of them do,
as Guilty of strange and amazing Partiality, as Men not purged from the
Prejudices of Sense, not disingaged from the love of sensible Objects, not
entered so far into the Methods of true Mortification, as to be capable of
Conviction.

Fifthly,. 5.
Because it may be some Inducement to him, to show more moderation in his
Censures of those that differ from him in this Matter, to consider that the
Great Mr. Norris was formerly of the same Opinion with them, and that they
differ no more from him, than he now differs from his former self, I shall
proceed to show that in his former Treatises he has conspired with us in this
matter. For,

1 st. In his Idea of Happiness, discoursing of the Degrees of the love of God,
he says, The Computation of Bellarmine is accurate enough, P. 426.
who reckons Four. The first, is to love God proportionably to his loveliness,
i. e. with an infinite Love, and this Degree is peculiar to God himself; The
second, is to love him not proportionably to his Loveliness, but to the utmost
Capacity of a Creature, and this Degree is peculiar to Saints and Angels in
Heaven. The third, is to love him not to the outmost Capacity of a Creature
absolutely considered, but to the outmost Capacity of a mortal Creature in this
Life; and this, he says, is proper to the Religious. The fourth, is to love him
not proportionably to the outmost Capacity of a Creature, but only so as to
love nothing equally with, or above him, that is not to do any thing contrary
to the Divine Love; and this, says Mr. N. is an absolute indispensable Duty,
less than which will not qualify us for the Enjoyment of God hereafter.

P. 83, 84.
In his Treatise of the Theory and Regulation of Love, he says, That as we are
obliged to love God, so ought we to love him beyond all other things
whatsoever. -- We may, and must Prefer him in our Love, Thou shall love the
Lord thy God with all thy Heart, with all thy Soul, with all thy Mind, and with
all thy Strength. So runs the Commandment, and very just we should; for if,
even in particular Goods, Order requires that the most lovely should be loved
most: N. B. much more ought we to love him who is the very Essence of Good,
Good it self, beyond all Derivative and secondary Good.

In his Treatise of Heroic Piety, he has these words; P. 282.
I know it is usually Objected, That what is supposed to be thus Heroickly
performed, is inclusively enjoined by virtue of those comprehensive Words, Thou
shall love the Lord with all thy Heart. To which Objection he Answers thus: I
conceive that All which is intended by that Phrase amounts to no more than,
(1st.) a sincere love of God, as it is opposed to that which is partial and
divided; and, (2dly,) such a degree of loving as admits of nothing in
competition with him: And thus far reaches the bounds of indispensable Duty, it
being impossible that he who does not love God in this Sense and Degree, should
keep his Commandments.

Now here I would crave leave to ask him whether, when he wrote these things,
He could not but be sensible that he did not rise up to the Letter of the Text,
and that it manifestly required a more elevat^d Sense; though, to preserve his
Heroic Piety, he pretended to conceive, it amounted to no more than loving God
sincerely in opposition to a par^ial ^^d divided love, and so as to admit of
nothing into competition with him? Whether by these Savings he taught Men to
love God less th^n ^e r^^^ired, to defraud him of his due, to r^sist his W^ll?
etc. Whether he only said these things, as b^ing then under the Power of his
Passions, Lusts, Interests, Customs and Prejudices, and not being in due
measure purged from the Prejudices of Sense, not disingaged from the love of
sensible Objects, not so far entered into the methods of true Mortification, as
to be capable of Conviction; and of having his mind wrought upon by the light
and force of Reason? If not, let him learn hereafter, from his own Sense and
Experience, not to pass such severe and undue Censures on his Brethren. Having
premised these things, I proceed,

2 dly, To establish and confirm the common Exposition from the Evidence of
Scripture, and of Reason. Let it be then observed,

First, That this Command was given to the Jewish Nation,. 6.
and is only cited by our Lord, or by the Lawyer, from Deuteronomy. 6.5. where the
words runs thus, Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God is one Lord, and thou shall
love the Lord thy God with all thy mind, and with all thy soul, and with all
thy might. Now hence arises a demonstration, that this Text cannot be
expounded so as to exclude all love, or all desire of the Creature. For the
Land they lived in was the Land of Promise, styled by God himself, (...), The
pleasant Land, or, The Land of Desire, Psalm. 106.24. Dan. 8.9. (...), The Land
of Glory, or the Glorious Land, Ezekiel. 20.6. Dan. 11.16
as being the Glory, the most pleasant, and desirable of all Lands; to
encourage them to go in and possess it, it is represented to them as an
exceeding good Land, a Land which flows with Milk and Honey; Number. 8.7, 8.
a good Land, Deuteronomy. 8.7, 8, 9.
a Land of Wheat, and Barley, and Vines, and Figtrees, and Pomegranates; a Land
of Oil-Olive and Honey; a Land wherein they should eat Bread without
scarceness, and in which they should not lack any thing; Deuteronomy. 11.12.
a Land which the Lord thy God cares for; the eyes of the Lord thy God are
upon it, from the beginning of the year, even to the end of the year. And might
they not desire what was the very promise made to the Seed of Abraham? Might
they not love, or be pleased with a Land so glorious, so pleasant, and
desirable? Doubtless they would have marched but heavily through the Barren and
Desolate Wilderness, had Moses by this Precept forbid them to desire, or be
pleased with this Land flowing with Milk and Honey. Moreover, the Blessings of
this Life were the chief things which God did promise to these Jews, as the
Reward of their Affection and Obedience to him; Deuteronomy. 8.18.
whence he is said to give them Wealth, that he might stablish his Covenant
with them, to make them plenteous in the Works of their hands for Good: And the
taking away of those outward Blessings was the chief thing threatened in the Law
of Moses, to deter them their Disobedience; For, says God, Deuteronomy. 11.13, 14, 15.
if you will hearken diligently to my Commandments, to love the Lord your God,
and to serve him with all your heart, and with all your soul, then will I give
you the Rain of thy Land in due season, that thou may gather thy Corn, and
thy Wine, and thy Oil: And I will send Grass in thy Field for thy Cattle, that
thou may eat and be full. Exodus 23.25, 26.
Ye shall serve the Lord thy God, and he shall bless thy Bread, and thy Water;
and I will take Sickness from thee, and fulfill the number of thy days. Levit.
15.18, 19.
Ye shall do my Statutes, and shall keep my Judgments; and ye shall dwell in
the Land in safety, and the Land shall yield her Fruit, and ye shall eat your
fill. If ye walk in my Statutes, Levit. 26.3, 4, 5, 6.
and keep my Commandments to do them, then will I give you Rain in due season,
and the Land shall yield her increase, and the Trees of the Field shall yield
their Fruit, and you shall eat your Bread to the full, and dwell in your Land
safely. And I will give you peace in the Land, and you shall lie down, and none
shall make you afraid; and I will have respect unto you, and make you fruitful,
and multiply you. Deuteronomy. 28.1 -- 13.
If thou observe to do all the Commands which I command thee this day, blessed
shall thou in the City, blessed in the Field, blessed in the Fruit of thy Body,
of thy Ground, of thy Cattle, in the increase of thy Kins, and the Flocks of
thy Sheep, in thy Basket, and thy Store: The Lord shall command the Blessing
upon thee in thy Storehouses, and all that thou set thy hand unto: The
Lord shall make thee plenteous in Goods, in the Fruit of thy Body, of thy
Cattle, and thy Ground: The Lord shall open to thee his good Treasure, the
Heaven to give thee Rain unto thy Land in its season, and to bless all the work
of thine hand. Deuteronomy. 30.9.
If thou obey the voice of the Lord, he will make thee plenteous in every work
of thine Hand, in the Fruit of thy Body, of thy Cattle, and of thy Land for
Good; for the Lord will again rejoice over thee for Good, as he rejoiced over
thy Fathers. These temporal good things he declares to be his Gifts; Deuteronomy.
6.10, 11. chapter 26.11.
for these he requires them to bless the Donor, saying, When thou have eaten,
and art full, then shall thou bless the Lord thy God, for the good Land he has
given thee; commanding them to rejoice in every good thing he has given them.
Moreover, upon their Disobedience, he threatens the removal of all these
Blessings, and to strip them of all these good things; that he would shut up
the Heavens, Deuteronomy. 11.16, 17.
that there be no Rain, that the Land yield not her Fruit, and that they should
perish quickly from the good Land that God had given them; that they should be
cursed in their Basket and Store, in the Fruit of their Body, of their Land, of
their Kine, and Sheep; that he would send upon them Cursing, Vexation, Deuteronomy.
28.17, 18, 20, 48.
and Rebuke in all they put their hand unto; and that they should serve their
Enemies in Hunger, and in Thirst, and in Nakedness, and in want of all things.
Now if God, by requiring them to love the Lord with all their Hearts and Souls,
had enjoined them not to desire, or affect any of these outward things, to what
purpose does he promise what he forbids them to desire? Or what Encouragement
can such Promises afford them thus to love him? If these things were in no
sense their good, why are they styled God's Blessings and his Gifts? And why
are they commanded to rejoice in them, and so bless him for them? Yea, why are
they said to be blessed in them? But if they were their good things, why might
they not desire or effect them proportionably to the Goodness that was in them?
Yea lastly, if they were not good and desirable things, wherein consists the
hurt and Curse in being stripped and deprived of them? It Is therefore manifest
that this Interpretation, as it casts a slur and a reproach on all God's
temporal Blessings, as having in them nothing good, nothing fit to be desired,
or worthy to be loved, and therefore tends to rob him of the Praises due unto
him for them, so does it also impair the force of all the Promises by which God
did endeavor to engage his People thus to love him, and of those threats by
which he did deter them from their Disobedience; this therefore cannot be the
genuine import of these words.

Argum. 2.. 7.
Again, from this Consideration, That this Command was given to the Jewish
Nation, it follows that it ought to bear the Sense which is the certain import
of it in all those other places of the Old Testament where it only does occur,
it being only found in the New Testament as a Citation thence. It Is therefore
certain, that it does not require us to love God in perfection of degrees, or
in the elevated Sense contended for, but only to love him with a sincere and a
prevailing love. For,

First, God's Servants entered into a Covenant to serve the Lord after this
manner. Thus Asa gathered all Benjamin and Judah, 2 Chronicles. 15.12.
and they entered into Covenant to seek the Lord God with all their Heart, and
with all their Soul. And good Josiah, 2 Kings 23.3.
with all his People, made a Covenant before the Lord to walk after the Lord,
and to keep his Commandments with all their Heart, and with all their Soul: Now
if, in this Covenant, they promised to love God with every degree of every
Power, with the whole possibility of the Soul; to bestow on him not only the
highest Degree of it, but every Degree of it, the whole; and to make him not
only the Principal, but the only Object of their love, they promised what they
knew they never could, what to be sure they never did perform. And why then is
it said, That the People stood to the Covenant, and that God wus found of them.
But if they only promised love of Sincerity, and love to God above all other
things, and that they would adhere to him and his Service, then may this Phrase
Import no more.

Secondly, This God required them to do, to render them the Objects of his
Grace and Favor, promising to have Mercy on them in their Captivity on this
Condition. Deuteronomy. 4.29.
If from thence, says Moses, thou shall seek the Lord thy God, thou shall find
him; if thou seek him with all thy Heart, and all thy Soul. And again, if thou
shall return to the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, Deuteronomy. 3.2, 3.
and with all thy Soul, then the Lord thy God will turn thy Captivity, and have
Compassion on thee, and will bring thee into the Land which thy Fathers
possessed; and thou shall possess it, and he will do thee Good. And upon this
Condition only does Solomon desire this Mercy, saying, 1 Kings 8.48.
If they turn to thee with all their Heart and all their Soul in the Land of
their Enemies, then hear thou their Prayer and their Supplication. Now is it
reasonable to conceive that God required such an absolute Perfection of Degrees
in their Affection and Obedience, to qualify them for his Favor under their
Captivity? If so, they must for ever have continued Captives. Would he promise
to restore them to their good Land, and to do them Good upon a Condition that
would not permit them either to desire that pleasant Land, or any other
Temporal Enjoyment as their Good? Sure the Suspension of his Favor upon this
Condition, is a clear Evidence, that this Phrase bears a milder Sense.

Thirdly, God does acknowledge that some of them did actually love him thus,
That King David had kept his Commandments, 1 Kings 14.8.
and followed him with all his heart, saving in the matter of Uriah; and yet we
find him Guilty of Mistrust of God's own Promise, by saying, I shall one day
perish by the hand of Saul; 1 Samuel 27.1. chapter 21.2. chapter 25.22.
of Lying to Abimelech, of a rash Oath, in Swearing to cut off the House of
Nabal; of Injustice, in giving a deceitful Ziba half the Goods of Mephibosheth;
2 Samuel 19.29. chapter 24.1. 2 Kings 23.24, 25.
and of Pride, in numbering the People. God also testifies of good Josiah, That
he turned to the Lord with all his Soul, and all his Heart, and all his Might,
since therefore God himself declares of Men thus subject to Imperfection that
they did thus love him, that love cannot require a Perfection of Degrees, but
only a sincere and prevalent Affection to him.

. 8.
In a word, in the Language of the Old Testament, to serve God with the whole
heart and Soul; to walk before him with a perfect heart, and with Integrity of
heart, has an essential respect to the owning him alone to be the true God, in
opposition to all strange Gods, and the continuing steadfast in his Service, in
opposition to the Service of the Heathen Idols, or the Calves of Dan and
Bethel; Thus when God permitted a False Prophet to arise among them, and to
show a Sign, or do a Wonder to tempt them to desert him, and go after other
Gods, he declares he did this for trial, Deuteronomy. 13.3.
Whether they loved the Lord their God with all their Hearts, and all their
Souls, and therefore it must be sufficient to show they did so, that they were
not prevailed upon by that false Prophet to decline from following after God,
but still cleaved steadfastly to him. Hence of those Kings who, with the true
God, served Idols, or served him in an undue manner; it is said, they did not
serve God with all their hearts. 2 Kings 10.31.
V. G. Iehu took no heed to walk in the Law of the Lord his God with all his
heart, for he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam. And of Solomon it is
said, 1 Kings 11.4.
That his Wives turned away his heart after other Gods, and his heart was not
perfect with the Lord his God. chapter 15.3.
Of Abijam, That his heart was not perfect with the Lord as the heart of David
his Father, 2 Chronicles. 12.1.
for he walked in all the sins of his Father Rehoboam, who forsook the Law of
the Lord. And of Amaziah, chapter 25.2.
That he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, but not with a
perfect heart; because coming from the Slaughter of the Edomites, ver. 14.
he brought the gods of the Children of Seir, and set them up to be his gods;
and bowed down himself before them, and burnt incense to them. Whereas the
contrary is said of all those Kings who put away all Idolatry, and served him
according to the Law of Moses, viz. of Hezekiah, 2 Kings 18.24
who removed the high Places, and brake the Images, and cut down the Groves,
chapter 20.3.
it is said, That he walked before the Lord in truth, and with a perfect heart.
Of Asa, 1 Kings 15.12, 14.
who removed all the Idols which his Father had made; That his heart was
perfect with the Lord all his days. And of Josiah, who put away all the Images,
and the Idols, and the Abominations which were in the land of Judah, and in
Jerusalem; 2 Kings 23.24, 25.
That he turned to the Lord with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with
all his might, acccording to all the law of Moses. Thus of Judah revolting from
the Lord, after the Punishment of Israel for her Idolatry, it is said, Jer.
3.10.
she turned not unto the Lord, (...), from her whole heart, but feignedly. And
the advice of Samuel to Israel runs thus, 1 Samuel 20.20, 21.
Serve the Lord with all your heart, and turn you not aside after vain things.
From which Observation we may reasonably Collect, that when we love God, so as
not to make an Idol of any thing by loving it in opposition to his will, or
equally with God, or so as that it Rivals not him, nor draws our Hearts from
that Obedience we owe to him; then do we in the prime import of this Phrase,
love God with all our Souls and Hearts; and hence we learn how apposite the
reason here assigned is, for loving God with all our Hearts and Souls, viz.
That the Lord is one God, or that he only is the Lord, and therefore to him
alone belongs the superlative Affection of the Soul and Heart, which is due
from all Creatures to their God.

Argument 3.. 9.
Thirdly, The love required by this Text, our Lord requires as the Condition of
Salvation; for the Question of the Scribe was this, By doing what shall I
inherit Life Eternal? Luke 10.25. verse 28.
the Answer of our Lord is this, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, etc. this do, and thou shall live, i. e. eternally. What therefore he
requires in this Text he plainly does require as the Condition of Salvation.
Now that cannot be love of God with that Perfection of degrees which excludes
all Imperfection, and so all Sin, for were that made the necessary Condition of
Salvation, no Person could be saved, the best of Men being Imperfect, and
subject to sin in this Life. Moreover this new Exposition destroys the Covenant
of Grace, for that requires only sincere Obedience as the Condition of
Salvation, and introduces again the Covenant of Works, i. e. a Covenant
requiring perfect Obedience in order unto Life.

Fourthly, Argument 4.. 10.
If to love God with all the heart, import the loving him with all our love, so
as to have no other Object of our love, or on which we may in any measure set
out heart, then to love God, (...), and (...), with all our Mind, Mark 12.32.
and all our Understanding, must import that we must have no other object of
our Mind, no Knowledge, no Understanding of any thing else, nothing but God on
which we may employ our rational Faculties, the reason being perfectly the same
in both cases, because the Command is so, but this is manifestly absurd, as
being not only contrary to the Practice of all Mankind, but destructive of all
Sciences, all Arts and Trades, unless they are best learnt, and acquired by
thinking upon God alone.

Moreover this Exposition, as it gives the truest import of these words, so
has it also this to recommend it, that it serves all the designs of Religion
in the General, and of Christian Religion in Particular, as much as does the
Exposition of these words for which good Mr. N. and the Lady do so much
contend. For,

Let. 5. p. 94.10. p. 238.
First, Do Mr. N. and the Lady recommend unto us their Sense of this command as
an effectual preservative against Sin? Sure this is done as fully by that love
which does engage us to be always ready to lose any temporal Good, or suffer
any temporal Evil, rather than commit the least Sin against God. Moreover can
his Understanding be prevailed upon to prize any thing, or be concerned for any
thing so much as to endeavor to obtain, or to preserve it by displeasing God,
who values the favor of God infinitely above all other things, and counts them
loss and dung compared to him! Can his Will be diverted from God by any
temporal Concerns, or any Charms of a Temptation, who loves him so as still to
cleave unto him, in opposition to all other things, and to admit of nothing
which stands in competition with him for his love; yea, who has nothing he does
not truly hate and despise, comparatively to his Favor; nothing that can tempt
him to depart from him, or do the thing that will provoke his Displeasure? can
he offend in his Affections to, or his desire of any worldly Good, whose love
to God, and his desire to enjoy him, will not permit him to desire any thing in
opposition to him, or against his Will and Pleasure? If then the Love we plead
for will not permit the Lover to offend in Mind, in Will, Affection, or Desire,
how can it suffer him to offend in Action? Let. 10. p. 238.
How pure and chaste then must his Soul be, that is so thoroughly purged of all
created Loves, and in whom the love of God reigns so absolute, and unrivaled,
as it does in such a Lover's Breast, who never suffers any thing to stand in
Competition with his Love and Duty to his God? But when it once begins to do
so, hates and rejects it with the utmost detestation. P. 239.
How secure must he needs be from Sin, when he has not that in him which may
betray him to it. He has but one Love at all predominant in his heart, and that
is for God, none but what is entirely subject to, and governed by it; and how
can he that thus loves nothing but God, be tempted to Transgress against him.

Secondly, Do they represent the Sense which they impose upon this Precept as
that which elevates the amorous Soul to the most noble Heights of Piety, as an
effectual means to secure Obedience, and a strong Impellent to Good? Will not
that Love which will not suffer me to Sin against God preserve me holy, pure,
and harmless before him in love? Will not that Affection do the same which
obliges me, (1.) to prize him above all things, to esteem him infinitely more
valuable in himself, and infinitely more beneficial to me than all things else
I can enjoy; to look upon him as my chief Good, the only Felicity of my
Immortal Soul, the only Being in whom its Everlasting Happiness, and its true
Satisfaction does consist. P. 100.
Oh! What can be too difficult to do, to acquire a more perfect Enjoyment of
what we thus love and prize? What can be too hard to suffer for the sake of the
chief Object which has thus won our heart? (2.) Will not that Affection which
so powerfully does convince me, That there is infinitely more Excellency in
God, more Happiness to be expected from him, than all the Honors, Pleasures,
Profits, Interests, Relations, and Satisfactions of the World can tender,
engage me always to prefer his Service before these base and trivial Interests?
And (3.) will not that Love which carries my Heart more ardently, my Desires
more fervently after God than any other thing, make me long, breath, pant,
thirst more after him, rejoice more in his Favor, and be more satisfied with
it than in Marrow and Fatness; make me diligent and vigorous, always abounding
in the work of the Lord. P. 192.
Whilst this Devout Lover thus Contemplates the Divine Perfections, whilst he
looks on God as his exceeding great Reward, and desires him accordingly, is not
his Obedience prompt, and ready? Does not his mind move with alacrity, and
unwearied vigor? And are not all its Motions regular and pleasing? Must not he
who so zealously desires, and so impatiently thirsts after God, be very well
disposed, and above all things industrious to unite himself unto God, P. 185.
must not he who thus prizes him for his incomparable Excellencies, think it
his Happiness and Perfection, and therefore make it above all things his
endeavor to be like him? Must not that secure our Obedience to him, which
constrains us always to prefer our Interest in his Perfections, and in the
Blessings he has promised to the Obedient, before all other things: To obey
him, rather than Man; to please him, rather than to gratify our selves; to
enjoy him, rather than any worldly or carnal Interest whatever: And forces us
to say with the Psalmist, Whom have I in Heaven like thee, or what is there on
Earth I can desire in comparison of thee? What incentive can he want to engage
him to walk before God unto all well-pleasing, P. 240.
and to perfect Holiness in the fear of God, and what a wonderful Progress must
he needs make in it? Whether will not this superlative Love of God carry him;
and to what degrees of Perfection will he not aspire, under the Conduct of so
Divine, so Omnipotent a Principle? If Obedience be the Fruit of Love, then what
an entire Obedience may we expect from so entire a Love as can admit of nothing
into competition with it, nothing which is not wholly subject to, and governed
by it? And so can have no Suckers to draw off the Nourishment from it, no other
Love to check and hinder its Growth; what is there that can hinder him who has
so emptied his heart of the Creatures, P. 241.
and devoted it so entirely to God, that his desire of all other things is
always comparatively none, and, when they hinder his desire of him, are
absolutely none, P. 188, 189.
from reaching the highest pitch of assumable Goodness? Since therefore
wherever Obedience is found, it is a certain Criterion of Love; and to derive
universal Obedience from the Love of God, or to argue from that Obedience to
the entire, N. B. Love of God, is as sound a way of Argumentation, as to prove
any other Effect by its Cause, or Cause by its Effect. Hence from the universal
Obedience which this Love must produce, I argue demonstratively, That it is
that entire Love of God which is required by the Command, To love God with all
our hearts. Seeing there is no better Diagnostick to discover our Love, P. 189,
190.
then by observing what is the most frequent Subject of our Thoughts; and
wherever the weight of our Desire rests, the stream of our Thoughts will
follow; it being certain, that what I prize above all things, and above all
things desire, must be still uppermost in my Thoughts, and be the very thing on
which the weight of my desire rests: What better Diagnostick can I have to
prove my Genuine Affection to that God I do so infinitely prize, so fervently
desire, and in Affection do prefer before all other Objects? If therefore we
would come up to our Holy Religion, P. 194.
if we would be those Wise and Excellent Creatures that God designs we should,
let us above all things fix our love upon its proper Object, put it into a
regular Motion, and then do but allow it scope, and faithfully pursue its
Tendencies, and we need not be afraid of doing amiss; we should run the Race
that is set before us with Cheerfulness and Vigor, in a direct Line, and with
unwearied Constancy. P. 295.
For what wise Man would think much to relinquish a lesser, for a greater Good?
Or show any Inclination for lower Delights, when courted to the Enjoyment of
the Highest?

P. 96.
Thirdly, Do they say the Love of God they plead for makes the best provision
for our Pleasure? Is not this as true of the measures of Divine Love assigned
by us? For have not we who Contemplate and Prize him as our Chiefest Good, and
our exceeding great Reward, compared to whom nothing is lovely or desirable,
the same Object still present with us? And the same reason to fix the Eyes of
our Understanding on, P. 97.
and direct the Motions of our Will toward him? May we not always Contemplate
and Enjoy his Beauty, assuage our Thirst at this Fountain, and feast our hungry
Souls upon his never-failing Charms? And must not the Assurance of our Interest
in so great a Good, our Enjoyment of a Reward so Excellent, our sight of such a
Perfect and a Charming Beauty, the Satisfaction which all our Appetites may
find in sweet Communion with, and in Enjoyment of him who is so able to
replenish all our Faculties, and gratify all our Desires, even Ravish our
Hearts, and fill our Souls with unspeakable Delight? Must not these Sentiments
be highly Ravishing and Entertaining, P. 256, 257.
must they not fill every Faculty with a full Tide of Joy? Must they not be
Sweets that know no Bitter, Ioys without Allay, Pleasures that have no Sting?

Fourthly, P. 101.
Do they add that by this Love we are secured from Disappointment, Iealousies,
and all that long train of Pain and Grief which attends Desire when it moves
toward the Creature. While others are tormented with Fears and Cares, P. 236,
237.
unsatisfied Desires, and unprosperous Attempts, etc. Are they not as entirely
secured from any thing of this nature who love nothing, and desire nothing but
in relation to God, i. e. as it enables us to serve him, is instrumental to his
Glory, or to our Enjoyment of him, or to perform the Duty we owe to others for
his sake? And, 2 dly, in Subordination to God, so as that our Love to, or our
desire of them, is wholly subject to, and governed by our Affection to him.
And, 3 dly, with entire Resignation to his all-Wise Providence, and full
Submission to his Will; so that we desire nothing but conditionally, if Divine
Wisdom see it good for us, we ask nothing but with this Restriction, if it be
thy pleasure; and are still ready to par^t with it, when he who gave it is
pleased to recall it, and to say when he has done so, The Lord gave, and the
Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord. For what more naturally
tends to produce in us that (...), that Quietness, that Smoothness, and
Tranquillity of Spirit in all Conditions and Events, in which Philosophers have
placed the Happiness of Man? Is it not evident that he whose Will is thus
resigned to the Will of God, cannot be crossed in his Desires? and so he never
can admit of a Disturbance, or a Disappointment, or be in Pain, or an excess of
Grief, but whatsoever does befall him, can possess his Soul in Patience; he
fears not any thing which may betide him, because he knows it must befall him
by the Direction of that Providence which he is willing should dispose of all
his Interests and Concerns, nor is he troubled with distracting Cares for any
thing he wants, because he is contented to want what Providence sees fitting to
deny him.

P. 233.
How happy therefore is the Man who can thus Order and Regulate the Master and
leading Passion of his Nature. That can thus love the Lord his God with all his
Heart, Soul and Mind; how to be envied is that Man who can thus disingage his
Affections from the Creature, and settle his whole Love upon God? [That he
loves nothing else but for his sake, nothing but as it is instrumental to his
Glory, nothing but with entire submission to his all-wise Pleasure.] That can
force the Creatures to withdraw, command their absence, and wholly empty his
heart of their love. [Yea can hate and despise them whenever they prove
Temptations to, or Hindrances of his Love to, or his Enjoyment of God.] How
ravishing and lasting are his Delights? How solid and profound is his Peace?
How full and overflowing are his Joys? How bright and lucid are the Regions of
his Soul? How entire and undisturbed are his Enjoyments? What a settled Calm
possesses his Breast? What a firm stable Rest does his Soul find when she thus
reposes her full weight upon God? How loose and disentangled is he from the
World; and how unconcerned does he pass along through the various Scenes and
Revolutions of it; how unmoved and unaltered in all the several Changes and
Chances of this present Life?

Why therefore does Mr. N. tell us, That the Man that harbors Creatures in his
Bosom, Let. 10. p. 240, 241.
and divides his Heart betwixt God and them, will be always in great danger of
being betrayed by them; and though he should with great Care, and habitual
Watchfulness preserve for God a greater share in his Affections (which is the
most such a one can pretend to) yet he will have such a weight constantly
hanging upon his Soul, that he will be never able to sore very high, or arrive
at any Excellency in Religion? Can our Love of what God promises; our Esteem
for his Blessings; our Desire of what he commands us to pray for that we may,
and to give thanks for when we have received, be obstructive to our advancement
in Religion? Can that Heart be said to be divided betwixt God and the
Creatures, which never suffers the Creature to come in competition with him,
never loves it in opposition to him? Can that Soul have any weight upon it
obstructing its ascent to God, which always infinitely prefers him in her
Affections before all other things; and is still ready to quit them for his
sake?

In fine, it may deserve to be considered, that we cannot safely argue that a
thing is, may, or should be so, because it would be an advantage to Religion
were it so: For what an advantage would it be to Truth, to have a living
Infallible Judge of it; or that every Parson of a Parish, or every Private
Person were Infallible? But must we therefore grant to the Papist such a living
Judge, or to the Quaker such an Infallible Spirit? What fine Harangues might
Mr. N. and the Good Lady make of the Advantages to Religion, which might arise
from living without sleep, or weariness, or without the Body which presses
down the Soul, and yet all their fine Rhetoric would be lost, because this
suits not with that Nature God has given us; if then he has given us a Nature
subject to the same Necessities of other things, as well as Sleep and
Faculties, which cannot but desire them; so that we may expect as well to live
without the Body, as without them: They must also spend their Rhetoric in
vain, when they endeavor to persuade us to banish all desire of the Creature
from us.

CHAP. IV.
The Contents.
This Chapter contains an Answer to Mr. N.'s Arguments from Scripture, for a
love of God exclusive of all love of Desire of the Creature; as, V. G. 1st.
From these Words, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, etc.
Matthew. 22.37.. 1. 2dly. From those Words of St. James, Ye Adulterers and
Adulteresses, know ye not that the Friendship of this World is enmity to God,
James 4.4.. 2. 3dly. From these Words of St. John, Love not the World, neither
the things that are in the World, 1 John 2.15.. 3. And to his Arguments against
the relative Love of the Creature, V. G. 1. That it is as much Idolatry as the
relative Worship of the Creature. This Answered, 1. ad hominem, by showing that
it was formerly approved by Mr. N. 2. By showing the Disparities betwixt the
relative Love of the Creature, and the relative Worship of Images,. 4. Object.
2. If Creatures be truly and properly lovely, as being our true and proper
Good, they are to be loved absolutely and for themselves; if not, they are not
to be loved at all. Answered, by showing in what Sense they may be styled our
true and proper Good, and be loved for themselves, viz. as that imports a love
of them only for that Goodness God has put into them; and how they may not be
loved absolutely, and for themselves, viz. as that excludes the Subordination
of that Affection to the Love of God,. 5.

. 1.
AGainst this sense of the Words I plead for, Mr. N. has but one Objection from
the words themselves, and it runs thus, The Text says, Sermon. p. 10.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy Soul,
and with all thy Mind, but does he love God at this Rate, who loves him only
principally, and more than any thing else? Does this exhaust the Sense of this
great Commandment? Can he be said, with any tolerable Sense, to love God with
all his Heart and Soul, that only loves him above other things, at the same
time allowing other things a share in his love? Can he be said to love God with
all his Love, N. B. who loves him only with a part? What though that part be
the larger part, it is but a part still, and is a part of the whole? What
Logic, or what Grammar will endure this? To this I answer,

Answ. 1.
First, That he assumes what never will be granted by Divines, viz. That
Scripture Phrases must be Interpreted not according to the Analogy of Faith,
and the import of the same words elsewhere occurring in the Holy Scripture, but
according to the Rules of Logic and of Grammar, which supposition would render
the Interpretation of Scripture very absurd in many places. For instance, 1.
The Apostle says, Phil. 2.21.
All Men seek their own, and not the things of Jesus Christ; that is, say
Interpreters, many, or most Men, do so. The Gospel was Preached to all the
World, Col. 1.6, 23.
to every Creature under Heaven, says the same Apostle; and the Faith of the
Romans was spoken of in all the World; Romans 1.8.
when as then many Parts even of the Roman Empire had heard nothing of it. Here
therefore all Interpreters allow a Synecdoche totius pro part, i. e. the whole
is put for the most celebrated Parts of the World; and will he here ask, Can
that be said to be Preached to all, and spoken of in all the World, which is
only Preached and spoken of in a part of it? Is a part the whole? 2. Again,
Children obey your Parents in all things; Servants obey your Masters according
to the Flesh in all things, Col. 3.20, 22.
says the Text. This Generality, say Interpreters, is to be restrained to all
things honest, to all things belonging to their Right as Parents, or Masters to
command; and will he here cry out, What Logic, or what Grammar will endure
this? 3. In Precepts absolutely negative, Negatio non est absoluta sed per
comparationem.
and even exclusive, that which in Words is absolutely denied, must be
interpreted so as only to import, that it is denied not absolutely, but
comparatively, not as to the whole, Hos. 6.6.
but as to the degree; as, V. G. God says, Mat. 9.13.
I required Mercy, and not Sacrifice; Mat. 10.20.
when as yet the greatest part of Leviticus is employed in giving Laws
concerning Sacrifices. Christ says, Fear not them which can kill the Body; 1 Samuel 12.24. and Prove. 24.21.
Samuel, Only fear the Lord, and serve him; and yet says the Scripture, Fear
the Lord, and the King, and Render to all their dues, Romans 13.7.
fear to whom fear; so that the import of these Words must be this, Fear not
the one so much as the other; fear not Man or Idols so as to incur the
displeasure of God. Labor not for the Meat that perishes, says the
Scripture, Joh. 6.27.
(...), Work not for it; and yet says the same Scripture, Ephesians. 4.28.
Let him that stole, steal no more, 1 These. 4.11.
but rather let him labor, working with his hands the thing that is good, for
he that will not labor shall not eat; 2 These. 3.12.
so that the import of that Phrase is only this, Do not chiefly, and primarily,
labor for the Meat that perishes; and will he here again cry out, What
Logic, or what Grammar will endure this?


Answ. 2.
Secondly, I ask what Grammar will not endure it? I have already showed, the
Hebrew and the Greek of the Septuagint do use the Phrase in this Sense; as for
the Latins nothing is more common with them than to express an ardent Love, by
saying, In amore est totus, unice amat, toto pectore diligit, omni studio
aliquem amplectitur: In French it is as common to say, Ie vous aim de tout mon
coeur: We teach our very Children to say, I love my Dad, I love my Mam with my
whole Heart; nothing therefore being more ordinary in every Language than to
use this Expression, when we do not in the least intend to signify the Person
we thus love, is loved exclusively of all others, but only that he is very much
beloved by us: Why may not the Scripture say this of that God we are obliged to
love above all things, and before all things, and so as to love other things
only in Subordination and Relation to him; loving none other with that Love
which is due and proper to him? For as we are commanded to serve him only, and
yet may serve our King, our Master, and our Friend; to fear him only, and yet
may fear our Parents, our Superiors and Masters, because we do not serve them
with that Religious Worship, nor fear them with that Reverence which is due to
God alone: So may we love the Creature with a love of Desire, and our Neighbor
with a love of Benevolence, and yet love God only with that Desire and
Benevolence which is due to him alone. When Mr. N. proposes this Objection
against his own Opinion, That if the Love of God required our whole Affection,
we could not love our Neighbor as our selves, he is forced to Answer thus,
that If the Love of God, Sermon. p. 71.
and of our Neighbor were of the same Kind, that entire Love of the former
would indeed exclude the latter; but this is not the Case, we are not here
supposed to love God in the same Sense, or with the same sort of love wherewith
we love our Neighbor. So, say I, is it in our case, we do not love the
Creature with the same sort of Love, or in the same Sense in which we love God,
i. e. not with a Religious Affection, but with a Natural only; not as our
Spiritual, but as our Temporal Good; not as the Good of our Immortal Souls, but
our Frail Bodies; not as our End, our Rest, or our chief Good, not for its own,
but for God's sake; whereas we love God with a religious Affection, as the
Spiritual and Eternal Good of our Immortal Souls, as our End, Rest, and our
chief Good, and even for himself: Duct. Dub. l. 4. chapter 2. R. 2. n. 9, 10, 11.
p. 524, 525.
For this he does, says the Excellent Bishop Tailor, who loves God above every
thing else, for all that supereminent Love by which* God is more loved than all
the World, all that Love is pure, and for himself: For the Philosophers were
wont to say, A Man loved Virtue for Virtues sake, if he loved it when it was
discountenanced, when it thwarted his temporal Ends and Prosperities; and what
they call loving Virtue for Virtu^s sake, the Christian calls loving God for
God's sake. And had Mr. N. when he said, Let. 8. p. 158.
There are but two sorts of Love, that of Desire, and Benevolence, considered
that this love of Desire may be branched into religious and natural Desires,
desire of things Spiritual and Temporal, of things good for the Body and for
the Soul, of things to be used here, and to be enjoyed here and hereafter, of
things as necessary for our being and our well-being, of things to be desired
for their own and for God's sake; He would have discerned as great a difference
betwixt one Love of Desire and another, as betwixt Love of Desire and of
Benevolence; or at the least would not have thought that he who desired the
Creature in a sense thus limited, desired him in the same sense, or with the
same sort of Desire with which his Love and his Desire is carried out toward
his Great Creator. So that I need not now to advertise him, that he should not
insist so much on the English Particle with, since the Original Greek from
whence these words are cited, ran thus, Thou shall love the Lord, (...), from
the whole Heart; now sure we may love one thing ex animo, from the whole Heart,
and desire it entirely, and yet may also sometime employ our desires upon other
things?

The Second Objection from Scripture is taken from the words of the Apostles
James and John;. 2. Object. 2.
the words of the Apostle James are these, James 4.4.
Ye Adulterers and Adulteresses, know ye not that the Friendship of this World
is enmity to God? Whosoever therefore will be a Friend of the World, is an
Enemy to God. Whence he infers, P. 66.
that in St. James's account our Heart is so much God's Propriety and peculiar,
and ought so entirely to be devoted to him, that it is a kind of Spiritual
Adultery to admit any Creature into Partnership with him in our Love.

I Answer, Answ.
That as a Woman becomes not an Adulteress by any Affection to, or Friendship
with another Man, for she ought to love her Friend, and Neighbor, and
Relations, and to show Friendship to them, but only by loving Friend or
Neighbor with the love proper to her Husband, with that love which comes in
competition with, Si autem amaveris h^c quamvis Deus fecerit and neglexeris
creatorem, and amaveris mundum nonne tuus Amor Adulterinus deputabitur. August.
in Ep. Joh. To. 9. Tr. 2. p. 592.
and invades that conjugal Affection which belongs to him alone. So neither
does all love of the Creature make us guilty of Spiritual Adultery, but only
that love of the Creature which is proper to God, and stands in competition
with him, and makes us Idolize the Creature, by giving it that share in our
Affections which is due to God alone, as is evident from the very words, Ye
Adulterers and Adulteresses; for that (...). Theodo. in Ezekiel. 23.20. Hence are
the Idolatrous Jews styled the Seed of the Adulterer and the Whore, Isa. 57.3.
And said to commit Adultery with Stones and Stocks, Jer. 3.9. With their Idols,
Ezekiel. 23.37. And to go a Whoring after other Gods, Judge. 2.17. Ps. 73.27. Ps.
106.39.
Phrase, as often as it Metaphorically occurs in the Old Testament, imports the
declining of the Jews to Idolatry, and the giving that Worship and Service to
Idols and false Gods, which belongs only to the true; and consequently that
Friendship of the World which rendered the Persons here represented, Guilty of
Spiritual Adultery, must be that inordinate Affection to the World which made
it Rival God, and Rob him of the Service and Obedience due to him; and this the
Context clearly shows, for the Friendship of the World there reprehended was
such as proceeded from the Lusts which were in their Members, and caused them
to desire the World's Good, not to supply their wants, but to consume them on
their Lusts, and such a love of the World as produced Wars, Fightings, and even
Murder, that they might obtain the Worlds good things, ver. 1, 2, 3, 4.

Sermon. p. 67.
But, says Mr. N. Every lover of the Creature is in proportion an Idolater upon
our former Principle; for by loving Creatures we suppose them our Goods, that
they are able to act upon our Souls, and affect them with pleasing Sensations,
that they perfect our Being, and are the causes of our Happiness, which is to
suppose them to be so many Gods; so that there can be no such thing as loving
the World with moderation, since we ought not to love it at all, for we Deifie
the Object of our Love; and to affect the Creature in any degree, is so far to
Idolize it. To this I Answer,

First, Answ. 1.
If there can be no such thing as loving, i. e. desiring the Creature with
moderation, Nunquid non est in his modus? S. August.
why does the Scripture prescribe this Moderation as to the things of this
World, by saying, Let your moderation, as to these things, Phil. 4.4.
be known unto all, the Lord is at hand. Be careful for nothing, but in every
thing by Prayer and Supplication with Thanksgiving, let your requests be made
known unto God. Are not our Petitions of these things from God our desires of
them? Is not our dependence on that Providence for them, which will give good
Things to them that ask them, the Remedy here prescribed against our anxious
Cares for these things? And must not then the Moderation here required Respect
the same things? 1 Cor. 7.29, 30.
Again, Brethren, says the Apostle, the time is short, it remains that both
they that have Wives, be as if they had none; and they that weep, as though
they wept not; and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and they
that buy, as though they possessed not; and they that use this world, as not
abusing it: For the Fashion of this world passes away. Here do not all the
Ancient Commentators agree that the Apostle prescribes mediocrity as to these
transitory Things we can enjoy but for a short time? And that by commanding us
to have and use them as if we did it not, (...). Theoph. vide Theodoret and
Oecum in locum.
he only does enjoin us not to have our hearts affixed, and our chief care
employed about them; and that to abuse the world is thus to use it to the
Satisfaction of our Lusts, or so as to employ all our Studies and Affections on
it; does not the Apostle himself thus explain our weeping for our lost Friends,
viz. 1 These. 4.13.
That we should not do it immoderately; and is not that sufficient warrant, so
to interpret the other Particulars? And since these words respect the
Moderation of our Joy and Grief, and we do joy and grieve according as we do
affect the Objects of those Passions; why should they not be also deemed to
respect the Moderation of our Affection to, or our desires of this World?

Secondly, If we Deifie the Object that we love, we Deifie every Woman that we
love in order to Matrimony; every Child and Relation we desire to preserve,
that so we may enjoy the Benefit and Comfort of their Presence; we Deifie our
selves when, according to the Psalmist, we desire life and love many days; yea,
we Deifie all the Meat and Drink we love, and therefore do desire to eat and
drink of; and if I love and desire a Cup of good Wine, because it makes glad
the Heart of Man, I am, ipso facto, an Idolater.

Thirdly, I deny that it is necessary that he who loves, i. e. desires any
Creature (suppose Meat when he is hungry, or Drink when thirsty) must suppose
that Creature perfects his Being, and is the cause of his Happiness; or that it
is able to act upon his Soul, and affect it with pleasing Sensations: It Is only
necessary that he should suppose those pleasing Sensations will follow upon the
Enjoyment of those Creatures, and are not to be had without them; for put case
a Sensual voluptuous Man were of your Opinion, would he ever the less pursure
the delights of the Flesh, and of the sensual Appetites? Is it not the Pleasure
annexed to the Enjoyment of these things which all the World pursue? And must
they not then have the same reason to desire and pursue them, while the same
Pleasures are annexed to the Enjoyment of them, whoever be the efficient cause
of that Pleasure, or whatever it be that acts upon the Soul, and affects it
with these pleasing Sensations?

Fourthly, It cannot be Idolatry to suppose God acts upon my Soul by the virtue
he has put into a Creature, rather than immediately by himself; for then all
the World must have been Idolaters before Mr. M. and Mr. N. made known this new
Opinion to the World; Sermon. P. 22.
for he confesses that among the whole Tribe of Philosophers that went before
them none of them thought any otherwise, or any farther, but universally held,
that Bodies had a power of producing such Sensations: It Is also evident that
Children for a long time taste the Pleasures of the Creatures before they can
be able to discern that God immediately produces these pleasing Sensations in
them; and that the Generality of the World are still incapable of knowing that
he does so. Now is not this to vilify the Providence and Wisdom of God, and to
reproach his Goodness to say, That he has laid the World under a sad necessity
of defrauding God of his Worship, and committing that Sin of Idolatry, which he
that does, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.
says the Apostle, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Moreover all Idolatry
implies an act of Religious Worship, Gal. 5.20, 21.
though misplaced; now do we by desiring Meat when we are hungry, Ephesians. 5.5.
or Drink when thirsty, Apoc. 22.15.
or by thus loving Meat and Drink as things which may gratify our hungry or
our thirsty Appetites, by the virtue God himself has implanted in them,
worship Bread and Drink? All religious Worship proceeds from a direct immediate
Intention, either to give Honor to that which we conceive to be God, or else
ascribes to the Object worshipped some of the Divine Attributes, or Essential
Perfections; but do we conceive Bread and Drink to be God, by asking them of
God, that is, desiring them, or by rejoicing in them as his Blessing, i. e.
being pleased, or affected with them as such, or by conceiving he has put any
virtue into them to do us Good? Do we ascribe unto the Creature any of the
Divine Attributes or Perfections, or say in effect they are Omnipotent, by
thinking God may enable them to raise pleasing Sensations in us; or to work
upon our Animal Spirits, and by them upon our Souls? Surely could there be any
semblance of Idolatry in this case, it must wholly lie not in conceiving that
Creatures can move our Animal Spirits, which is all we say or think they do,
but in conceiving that these Animals Spirits can act upon the Soul, and that
these Motions of them can be grateful, or ungrateful to it?

The words of the Apostle John run thus,. 3.
Love not the World, Object.
neither the things that are in the World; 1 John 2.15, 16, 17.
if any Man love the World, the love of the Father is not in him: For all that
is in the World, the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of
Life is not of the Father, but is of the World. And the World passes away, and
the Lusts thereof, but he that does the will of God abides for ever. Sermon. p.
65, 66.

Non hoc dicitur sed sit modus propter Creatorem. August. in locum.


Here you have again all Love of the World expressly forbidden, as altogether
inconsistent with the Love of God; not the immoderate Love of the World only:
For, it is plain that the words import a great deal more, namely, That we are
not to love the World at all; that all Love of it is immoderate.

To this the Reverend Dr. Barrow Answers, Answ.
that The Apostle explains himself, Sermon. Vol. 1. p. 318.
that by the World he means those things which are most generally embraced and
practiced in it; the Lust, or the desire of the Flesh, that is Sensuality and
Intemperance; the Lust of the Eyes; that is Envy, Covetousness, vain Curiosity,
and the like; the Ostentation or Boasting of Life, that is Pride, Ambition,
vain Glory, Arrogance, Qualities as irreconcilably opposite to the Holy Nature
and Will of God, so altogether inconsistent with the Love of him, begetting in
us an Aversation and Antipathy toward him, rendering his Holiness distasteful
to our Affections, his Justice dreadful to our Consciences, and Himself
consequently, his Will, his Law, his Presence hateful to us. And that this is
the true import of the words, is highly probable; 1. Because these things,
says the Apostle, are not of the Father: Whereas the moderate Desire of, and
Affection to the World's Good things, is of that God who has implanted in us
natural Affections and Propensions to them, made them the Objects of our
Desires and our Industry, encouraged us to affect them by making the matter of
his Promises, and has allowed us to rejoice in them. 2. Because he says, He
that loves the World, the love of the Father is not in him, which cannot
possibly be true of that Relative and Subordinate Love unto it, which he has
made Provisions for.

Again, if we understand by these things, the desire of those things which
gratify our Appetites with Pleasure, V. G. by the Lusts of the Flesh, the
desire of Meat, Drink, and voluptuous Enjoyments, as they do gratify the
Flesh; by the Lust of the Eye, the desire of Gold, Silver, large Possessions,
noble Houses, rich Furniture, fair Gardens, as they do gratify the Eye. By the
Pride of Life, the desire of Places of Dignity, Noble Titles, all the Honor
and Glory of the World, as they gratify our Thirst of Honor. Has he not told
us, That the pleasing Sensations which produce these desires in us are not of
the World, i. e. the things contained in it, but of the Father; that they are
the natural, Let. 2. p. 17, 18.
genuine, and direct Effects of God; that it is of the proper Nature of God to
produce them; that he wills them for themselves, and naturally delights in
them, and therefore sure would have us to will and delight in them, and
consequently to desire them. What then remains but that we should understand by
the love and desire of these things, that immoderate love and desire which
tends to captivate our Affections to them; and to prevail upon us to transgress
the Will of God, that we may enjoy or preserve them, that is, the immoderate
love and desire of these things.

I proceed now to consider what Mr. N. objects from reason against our Relative
Affection to the Creature,. 4.
i. e. our love of it in Relation to God.

Now as, says he, to worship the Creature, Minus te amat Domine qui tecum
aliquid amat quod proper te non amat. Aug. Solil. c. 19.
though but Relatively, is to give that Worship to the Creature which is proper
to to God, so to love the Creature though but relatively, is in like manner to
give that love to the Creature which is proper to God; Non ista propter se sed
is^a propter illum diligas. Med. c. 4.
and if this be thought a sufficient reason to disallow of a Relative Worship,
I cannot see why we should not, for the same reason, give Sentence against this
Relative Love; or why one should not be reckoned Idolatry as well as the other.

To this I Answer, Answ.
(1.) That Mr. N. was formerly of another mind; for in his Discourse of
Platonic Love he speaks thus, P. 443.
Because God is of too sublime and refined Excellency to be fastened on
immediately by our Love, Plato recommends to us (...), a method of Ascent,
which is from loving the Beauty which we see in Bodies, to pass on to the love
of that Beauty which we see in the Soul; from the Beauty of the Soul, to the
Beauty of Virtue; and lastly, from the Beauty of Virtue, to the immense Ocean
of Beauty; and these, says he, are the Steps of the Sanctuary. Now do we not
find here all that Mr. N. condemns in our Relative Love? viz. the love of the
Creatures by way of Relation to God, not as the only, but the final and
ultimate Object of our Love; a love of that Creature for God's sake, or in
Relation to God, Sermon. Vol. 3. p. 75.
provided that it do not stop and fix at the Creature, but run on till at last
it fix upon God as its final Object.

Reas. and Rel. p. 244.
Again, We ought, says he, to make God the direct and primary Object of our
Love, and to love nothing for it self, but only in and for God. In his
Aspiration he speaks thus, P. 246.
My God, I will love thee as thou teach me; the first and direct Motion of
my Love shall be toward thee; and whatever I love besides thee, I will only
love in and for thee. And does he not here say, that he is taught of God to
love other things besides God for his sake?

In his Essay upon Contemplation and Love, he says, Sect. 2, 3.
God ought to be the ultimate end of all our Actions; and we ought not in any
of our Actions (and therefore not in our Love) to stop short of this Center,
but in all our Actions to make a farther Reference either actual or habitual.
And again, Sect. 5.
An end may become evil by being rested in, when it is not the last, without
any farther respect or reference. So that it is the want of this respect and
reference, which renders the love of the Creature evil.

And now to show what little cause he had to parallel this Relative Love of the
Creature, with the Relative Worship we condemn in the Church of Rome, and so
unhappily to pronounce all Christians Guilty of Idolatry, who love any thing
besides God for his sake, I need only to remind him of a few things which, had
they been considered, would have put him out of love with this Comparison, viz.

First, That the distinction of Relative Worship is proper to the Worship of
Images, which can deserve no Worship for themselves, but as they represent some
Object which deserves Worship: Now to say thus of all inferior good things,
that they can deserve no Love, or cannot be desirable for any real Goodness God
has put into them, is to beg the Question.

Secondly, Motus qui est in Imaginem quantum est Imago, est unus and idem cum
illo qui est in Rem; and sic sequitur quod eadem reverentia exhibeatur Imagini
Christi and ipsi Christo: Cum ergo Christus adoratur adoratione latriae*
consequens est, quod ejus Imago sit adoratione latriae adoranda. Aquin. Sum.
Part. 3. Q. 25. Art. 3.

Sententia D. Thomae quatenus docet eodem actu adorationis coli Imaginem, and
exemplar per illam representatum est verissima piissima, and fidei decretis
admodum consona. Petr. de Cabrera in 3. Part. Th. Q. 25. Art. 3. Disp. 3. N. 56.

Dicendum ergo primo est fieri recte posse ut Prototypon in Imagine and Imago
cum Prototypo uno actu adoretur, atque hoc modo posse Imagin^m Christi ad^rari
Latria. Suarez in 3. Part. Th. To. 1. Disp. 54. Sect. 4.


That we only charge them with Idolatry in Worshipping the Cross, and the
Images of God, and Christ with Latria, i. e for giving the same Worship which
they give to God and Christ, to the Cross, and to the Image, which is a
Creature of their own making. Now can Mr. N. charge us with giving the same
love to the Creature which we give to the Creator? Moreover, we charge them
with Idolatry, for doing this with the same Individual inward and outward Act;
now can Mr. N. charge us with loving the Creature by the same Individual desire
with which we love God.

Thirdly, The Relative Worship which they do give to Images is plainly forbid
in the Second Commandment, but as this cannot be said of this Relative Love
without begging the Question; so I have sufficiently proved already, that it is
highly approved in the Holy Scriptures, That God has made Provisions for it,
accepts of it, and does encourage us to perform it, as will be still more
evident by an Instance proper to this Subject, viz.

Mr. N. does, and must allow a Relative Love of Benevolence to the Creatures,
Christ having so expressly said for the Encouragement of our Charity to his
Servants; Mat. 25.40.
For as much as you did it to one of these little ones, my Brethren, you did it
unto me. Mark 9.41.
And again, Whosoever shall give you a Cup of cold Water in my Name, because
you belong to Christ, shall not lose his reward. And the Apostle, Hebr. 6.10.
that God is not unrighteous to forget your labor of love that you have showed
to his name, in that you have ministered to the Saints, and do minister. And
Solomon, Pro. 19.17.
that He that has pity on the poor, lends to the Lord. In all which cases
there is a love of the Creature for God's sake, or in Relation to God; a love
of the Creature in a Relative, transitive way; a love of them terminating upon
God and Christ, and yet a Love highly acceptable to God, and such as he has
promised richly to reward; but then it is not love of the same kind with that
Affection which I owe to God, as being not an Elicite, or an immediate Act of
Religion, as is the love of God, but only an Imperate Act of it, as the Schools
speak; it proceeds not from the same act which carries me directly to God, the
love of God being the Cause, that of Man the Effect; it is not done by any act
of my mind joining God and the Creature together, as one integral Object, but
it is love to the Creature for that Relation which it has and bears to God and
Christ, and therefore it is not a forbidden, but a very acceptable kind of Love,
though it be plainly Relative.

And so it is also in our Love of Desire to the Creature; for I love them for
God and for Christ's sake, when I desire them that I may have wherewith to feed
Christ's hungry, and clothe his naked Members, and in all the other Instances
forementioned. It Is therefore evident, that this Relative Love, and the
Papists Relative Worship of Images, are so far from being exactly Parallel, as
Mr. N. asserts, that they have nothing common to each other but this, that both
are styled Relative, which also happens in that love of Benevolence for God's
sake, he allows of.

But says Mr. N. Either Creatures are truly and really lovely,. 5. Object.
as being our true and proper Good, or they are not; if they are, then a
Relative Love is too little; we ought to love them with more than a Relative
Love; we ought to love them absolutely and for themselves; but if they are not,
then even a Relative Love is too much; for what is not truly lovely, is always
loved too much, if it be loved at all: So that either way there is no pretense
for admitting this last Expedient of our Concupiscence, the Relative Love of
the Creature.

Answ.
To this I Answer, That when he says, The Creature is not our true and proper
Goods, this may be taken in the most elevated Sense, in which God only is our
true and proper Good, and then his Argument runs thus. Either Creatures are to
be loved as our God, or else they are not to be loved at all; and this
Consequence I hope is not as clear as the day; or it may be taken in a large
sense for that which is the Good of the whole Man, Soul and Body, and then also
I deny that what is not thus lovely, is not to be loved at all; for I may love,
because I may desire my daily Bread, though it be not the proper Good of my
Soul, but of my Body only. Or lastly, our true and proper Good may signify
that only which is some way conducing to our Good, to the Advantage and Comfort
of this present Life, as being instrumental to the Sustentation, and the
Contentment, and Pleasure of this Life, or to our Preservation from those
afflictive Evils which are incident to us in this Life; and all that in this
lower sense is lovely, may be loved, and yet not loved Non te prohibet Deuteronomy
amare ista, sed non diligere ad beatudinem, sed ad hoc probare and laudare ut
ames creatorem. August. in Ep. Joh. To. 9. Tr. 2. P. 592.
absolutely, and for it self, as that excludes the Subordination of that
Affection to the love of God, since thus we are not to desire Life it self, but
as this Life conduces to God's Glory, which is the sovereign end of all our
Actions.

Secondly, Answ. 2.
Therefore I add, That Creatures may be said to be loved absolutely, and for
themselves, either as that imports only for the Goodness God has put into
them, the Good they do, the Pleasure they afford to our natural Appetites; and
in this sense I have proved they may be loved absolutely, and for themselves,
and this I also learn from these words of Mr. N. Contempl. and Love, p. 299.
The Great Author of Nature has made Provisions for the Entertainment of our
natural Faculties, and particular Appetites; all our Senses, Seeing, Hearing,
Tasting, Smelling, and Touching have their proper Objects and Opportunities of
Pleasure respectively; and the Enjoyment and Indulgence of any of those
Appetites is then only, N. B. and in such Circumstances restrained, when the
greater Interests of Happiness are thereby crossed and defeated.

Now sure I may desire that Pleasure of Appetites which God has made provision
for, and consequently may desire those particular Objects which afford that
Pleasure, since otherwise that Provision God has made for the Entertainment of
our Animal Falculties must be made in vain. Again, if the Enjoyment of, and the
Indulgence of these Appetites is only then restrained, when the great Interests
of Happiness are thereby crossed and defeated; then the Enjoyment of, and the
Indulgence to them is not wholly restrained, and then the desire of that
Enjoyment and Indulgence to them is not entirely restained, and therefore in
some measure, and in some Circumstances is allowed. Ibid. p. 308, 309.
He also owns, that Some repast may be found in the Creature, and that it is
Good to be chosen, though not to be rested in; and may I not then desire that
Repast? May I not love what is Good to be chosen with a love of Concupiscence?

But, 2 dly, to love Creatures absolutely, and for themselves, may signify to
love them exclusively of a Relation to, and the Subordination of that love to
God; and in this sense they are not to be loved absolutely, and for themselves.

1 st. Not exclusively of a Relation of them, and our affection to them to
God's Glory, seeing whether we eat, 1 Cor. 10.31.
or drink, or whatever we do, we are to do it all to the Glory of God.

2 dly, Not exclusively of the Subordination of the love of them to the love of
God, because we must still love them with that Moderation and Indifferency,
which will not permit our Affection to them to hazard or obstruct our pursuit
of the Supreme Good. For, Ibid. p. 326.
says Mr. N. Whenever we turn the edge of our Desire to Created Good, it is
Prudence, as well as Religion, to use Caution and Moderation, and gage the
Point of our Affection, least it run too far. Where again he plainly allows of
some affection to, and some desire of Created Good, and if Prudence and
Religion require Caution and Moderation in the use of those Affections and
Desires, they, by so doing, do approve them in some measure, for there can be
no Caution or Moderation of our Affections and Desires to that which must not
be at all affected or desired.

CHAP. V.
The Contents.
Mr. N. grants, That we may seek, and use sensible things for our Good, but,
says he, we must not love them as our Good; and that we may approach to them
by a bodily Movement, but not with the Movements of the Soul. This is Examined,
and Confuted,. 1. Argument 1. That God is the sole Cause of our Love, and
therefore has the sole Right to it. Answered,. 2. Argument 2. The Motion of
the Will is to Good in General, i. e. to all Good, and therefore to God only.
Answered,. 3. Argument 3. God is the end of our Love, since he cannot act for a
Creature, but only for himself, or move us to a Creature, but only to himself.
Answered,. 4. Argument 4. That God cannot be loved too much, nor the World too
little. Answered,. 5. Argument 5. That God having called us thus to the Love of
himself, cannot afterward send us to a Creature,. 6. Argument 6. A Man cannot
repent of placing his whole Affection upon God, or have any thing to Answer for
on that account. Answered,. 7. Argument 7. God only is to be loved, because he
only acts upon our Spirits, produces our Pleasure, and he only does us Good.
Answered,. 8. What the Lady offers on this Subject briefly Considered, and
Answered,. 9.

HAving thus considered the Arguments produced from Scripture against the
common Interpretation of this Great Commandment, Him only shall thou desire.
and for a love of God wholly exclusive of all love to, Sermon. p. 12.
and desire of the Creature, even so far, and so unhappily exclusive of it,
that we are told, That he that desires any thing besides God, Let. 9. p. 202,
203.
whatever he pretend, or however he deceive himself, does not truly love God;
P. 201.
That the desire of God, and desire of the Creature are in their own Nature
incompatible, even so incompatible, that whenever the Soul moves toward the
Creature, P. 203.
it must necessarily forsake the Creator. I now proceed to the Examination of
those Arguments from Reason, by which Good Mr. Norris and the Lady endeavor to
establish this Opinion, only premising for the better stating of the Question,

What he, and the Good Lady grant to us. And,

First,. 1.
They own, That we may seek and use those sensible things to which, Sermon. Vol.
3. p. 73, 74.
by the Order of Nature, Pleasure is annexed; That they may be innocently
sought for and used, Let. 4. p. 75*
though they must not be loved; That we may seek and use sensible things for
our Good, but we must not love them as our Good. Which in plain terms is
affirming and denying the same thing, as is demonstrable from Mr. N.'s
definition of the love of Concupiscence, for Pleasure, says he, is Good, even
our Good, seeking Pleasure must suppose a desire of it; and that desire is
Love, or the effect of Love; for it supposes a motion of the Soul toward it,
Theory and Reg. of Love, P. 10.
and Love, says he, is only a Motion of the Soul toward Good.

Again, seek and use sensible things for our Good we cannot, whilst we suppose
they are not Good for us, i. e. that they will do us no Good, if then we may
seek, and use sensible things for our Pleasure, and our Good, they must do us
Good, and so be our Good: For That, Sermon. p. 9.
says he, is our Good, which does us Good.

Moreover it may be enquired why he is so indulgent to our seeking of these
things, who will not permit us to love them in the least measure, P. 72.
and who contends for an utter annihilation of all desire of the Creature; does
not our Savior say as expressly, Luke 12.29.
Seek not what you shall eat, or what you shall drink; as St. John does, love
not the World? Does not his Apostle say as expressly, 1 Cor. 10.24.
(...), Let no Man seek his own things? And can he tell us any reason why of
two things equally prohibited, we may be allowed the one, and not the other, or
why the Prohibition of loving or desiring the Creature should be entirely
exclusive of all love and all desire of the Creature, and yet the prohibition
of seeking and minding the Creature should not be as exclusive of all seeking
and all minding of it? Col. 3.1, 2.
But to proceed:

This, Let. 4. p. 75, 76.
says he in his Letter, I farther illustrate thus, you are to distinguish
betwixt the Movements of the Soul and those of the Body; the Movements of the
Soul ought not to tend but toward him who only is above her, and only able to
act in her, but the Movements of the Body may be determined by those Objects
which environ it; and so by those Movements we may unite our selves to those
things which are the Natural or Occasional Causes of our Pleasure, thus because
we find Pleasure from Fire, N. B. this is warrant enough to approach it by a
Bodily Movement, but we must not therefore love it; for Love is a Movement of
the Soul: And that we are to reserve for him who is the true cause of that
Pleasure which we resent by occasion of the Fire; who, as I have proved, is no
other than God, by which you may plainly perceive what it is I mean, by saying,
that Creatures may be sought for our good, but not loved as our Good. But this,
says he, is more intelligible than practicable. But,

1. Is this Philosophy suitable to the Language of the Holy Ghost; does he
speak as if we sought and approached the Creature only by a Bodily Movement,
and not with any Movements of the Soul. Deuteronomy. 12.15.
Does not he say, Notwithstanding thou may kill and eat flesh in all thy
Gates, whatsoever thy Soul lusts after, according to the Blessing of the Lord
thy God which he has given thee. Ver. 20.
When the Lord thy God shall enlarge thy Borders, and thou shall say, I will
eat flesh because thy Soul longs to eat Flesh, thou may eat Flesh
whatsoever thy Soul lusts after. Ver. 21.
Thou shall kill of thy Herd, and of thy Flock which the Lord has given thee,
and thou shall eat in thy Gates whatsoever thy Soul lusts after, (...), with
all the desire of thy Soul, thou may eat, says the Hebrew thrice; Thou must
do it only by the Movements of the Body, Deuteronomy. 14.26.
says Mr. N. Again, Thou shall bestow thy Money for whatsoever thy Soul
lusts after, for Oxen, or for Sheep, or for Wine, or for strong Drink, or for
whatsoever thy Soul desires. Where again we find, (...), the desire of the
Soul, (...), the Concupiscence of the Soul allowed to go forth toward Oxen,
and Sheep, and Wine, and strong Drink. Ita ut nulla re careat quam animo suo
possit expetere. Eccles. 6.2.
The Preacher also laments the Folly of the Man who having Riches, Wealth and
Honor in such abundance, that he wants nothing which his Soul can desire,
and yet he has not an heart to enjoy them freely, and delight himself in the
Good of them. See Isa. 58.11, 12. Rev. 18.14. So plainly does the Holy Ghost
contradict this New Philosophy.

2 dly, Is it suitable to the Sentiments of Mr. N. when he says, Contempl. and
Love, p. 307.
There are some things in the World which I love, N. B. with great passion,
such as are Conversation with select Friends, or Men of Harmonical and Tuneable
Dispositions, Reading close and fine-wrought Discourses, solitary Walks and
Gardens, the Beauty of the Spring, and above all, Majestic and well composed
Music; these I delight in with something-like satisfaction and acquiescence,
and the last, could I enjoy it in its highest Perfection, would, I am apt to
fancy, terminate my Desires, and make me Happy. Now could he do all this
without any Movement of his Soul toward them? Are none of these things truly
and really lovely, because they are Creatures? Or must he love them too much,
Sermon. p. 78.
if he love them at all?

3 dly, He is here speaking of seeking the Creatures for our good: Now has the
Body any apprehensions of what is for our good? Can it desire, or seek any
thing under that Notion? Has it any apprehension of the Objects that make
Impressions on it as the natural or occasional Causes of our Pleasure? Does
that find Pleasure from the Fire, or remember that it did so? Is it not
evidently the Soul that apprehends, remembers, seeks, desires, and does all
these things? How unintelligible therefore is it to talk of all these things
only as Movements of the Body, and and not as Movements of the Soul? To take
his own Instance, Do we approach to the Fire by a Bodily movement without
desiring the Fire, and expecting Pleasure from it? And is not this desire and
expectation a movement of the Soul? Is it not the Soul which moves those animal
Spirits into those Parts and Muscles by which we are enabled to approach the
Fire by a bodily movement: So that, as far as I am able to perceive, here is
nothing true, nothing satisfactory, I had almost said nothing intelligible in
this pretended Illustration.

Moreover, when He, and the Lady, allow us to move toward these things, only as
the Occasions, not as the Causes of our Good, I ask, Is not the continuance of
my Life and Being good? And is Food only the occasion, is it not the means by
God appointed for the continuance of Life? Is Physic only the occasion, is it
not the means of my Health? Is sleep only the occasion, is it not the means of
my Refreshment? And so of the Pleasure that we find in the Recovery of our
Health, and the Refreshments of our wearied Spirits?

And lastly, were it true that God is the immediate cause of all the Pleasure
that we find in the Creature, was any Body acquainted with this Notion till
these latter days? Does one in Ten thousand now believe it? Are the generality
of Men capable of Understanding it? And must not then all who in former Ages
did not, and who at present cannot understand, or believe it, lie under a
necessity of desiring the Creature, as the true cause of their Pleasure, and so
have a movement of the Soul toward it as such? So that this matter is both
impracticable and unintelligible.

The Notion also seems as useless, as it is unintelligible; for am I not as much
obliged to God for the Benefit and Pleasure I receive from any of his
Creatures, whether he do immediately produce that Pleasure in me by occasion of
them, or does produce in me those Faculties by which I am enabled to perceive
the Pleasure they afford? Is not the Pleasure which reflects from them as
occasions, or as natural Causes of it, still the same? And is not the Giver of
these Faculties and Creatures the sole Author of it? Is not causa causae, causa
causati? Must not he who is the efficient cause of all those Faculties by which
I perceive Pleasure from the Creatures his Providence affords me, be the true
efficient cause of all my Pleasure? Is it not the same Kindness to give me
Money to build me an House, and to pay my Debts my self, as to build an House
or pay my Debts for me, since either way my Debts are equally paid, and my
House built, and the Benefit is the same.

In fine, Does this Notion tend at all to abate or lessen our desires of the
Creature? Not at all. For be it supposed, that they are only occasions of our
Pleasure, yet are they granted to such occasions as are always attended with
this Pleasure, and without which it would not be produced in us by God. If then
the Object be as pleasing as it would be, provided God had lodged a power in it
to excite this Pleasure in me, and given me Faculties to perceive it without
his immediate Operation, as certainly it is, then is it also equally desirable;
it being the Pleasure it self, not the efficient of it, that I do desire.

Mr. N. says, We must not desire them as our Good, because they do us no Good;
they afford us no Pleasure, but God does upon occasion of them. A very
Metaphysical Consideration, which scarce any one regards in the pursuit of his
Pleasure, and which will abate no Man's desire of it, for the Gratification of
the Appetite, the Enjoyment of the Delight, and the pleasing Sentiment is that
thing desired and pursued. Sermon. p. 73.
Now the Creatures being allowed to be the positive Conditions upon which God
by his immutable Law and Order stands obliged to give these Gratifications and
Delights, and without which he will not produce in us one of these pleasing
Sentiments, must not my pursuit of Pleasure, and desire of it, oblige me to
desire and pursue that without which I know I cannot have it, and with which I
am sure I cannot want it? they being the positive Conditions determining the
Operation of God, to produce this Pleasure in me, i. e. to give me that which
only I desire and pursue, and for which only I desire the Creature. However it
is granted,

First, That we may seek and use sensible things for our Good; and hence it is
inferred, that we may desire and be pleased with, that is, may love them as our
Good; because it is the apprehension of them as Good to us, or as things which
may do us Good, which moves us to use and seek them for our Good.

Secondly, It Is also granted, That we may unite our selves, and approach to
them by the Movements of the Body, which Movements of the Body being not
Mechanical Motions, but caused by some Movements of the Soul toward them;
hence, I conclude, we may approach or unite our selves to them also by some
Movements of the Soul; which is the thing denied by Mr. N.

And having premised this, I proceed directly to return an Answer to the
Arguments by which Mr. N. endeavors to establish his Opinion, That the Love of
God is exclusive of all Love of the Creature, and does require us in Justice to
withdraw every straggling Desire from it.

I confess, the Incomparable Lady has let fall some words, which seem to lay
an Imputation of the worst of Follies upon this attempt. Her words are these,
Let. 11. p. 260.
I will not search for Arguments to enforce this Love, after those incomparable
ones you have so well inculcated, which are indeed unanswerable; And not to be
opposed by any thing, but that which is as unconquerable, as it is
unaccountable, wilful Folly. But though these be indeed hard Strokes, I Am sure
they come from a very soft and tender hand, and from as sweet a tempered Soul
as lives in Flesh. They therefore must be taken by the right handle, and must
be thought to be intended as an high Compliment to Mr. N. not as an imputation
of Folly to all that should oppose his incomparable Inforcements of his Tenet.
Passing them therefore over with this gentle touch, I pass on to a
Consideration of the Arguments of Mr. N. contained in his Sermon, and in his
Letters.

Then he argues thus, Argument 1.
God is the only Cause of our Love,. 2.
that is, of that Bent or Endeavor whereby the Soul of Man stands inclined to
Good in General; Sermon. p. 13, 14, 15.
this Notion of our Souls being a necessary Adherent to our Beings, such as we
never were without, and such as we never can put off. Now if God be the only
Author and Cause of our Love, has He not then the Sole Right and Title to it?
If He does as much Produce my Love, as He does my Being, why has He not as
much Right to my Love, as to any part of my Nature?

Answ.
This Argument proves nothing to the purpose, by his own Confession; for it only
proves that God is the Cause of all that Love which is a necessary Adherent to
our Beings, Sermon. P. 13 14.
such as is all over invincible and irresistible; of that motion of Love in
which we are purely passive, over which we have no more Command, than over the
motion of our Heart and Pulse; which we can never control; can never be
without; never can put off; Sermon. Vol. 3. P. 213.
which the Devils and Damned Spirits, says he, have, as well as Glorified
Saints. Now is this the Love God calls for in this Text? Is it a purely passive
Love which it is not in the Power of Devils to withhold, and in which the
greatest Saints cannot excel them? Is God concerned that we should not want
that which is a necessary Adherent of our Beings? That which we never can put
off, never can be with without? Does he require that only which no Man can
defraud him of? Mr. N. is sensible that the Text is not at all concerned in
this Love, confessing that our Free Love is the only Love that falls under
Command, Let. 10. p. 231.
and the only one that is in our Power. And why then does he argue from such a
Love, to that Free, Active Love, which too many are without, and too many do
put off; or from that Love which cannot be, to that Love which is commanded.
Moreover

Answ. 2.
This Argument plainly destroys the thing it was designed to establish: For he
lays down his Thesis thus, Sermon. p. 12.
That our whole Affections are to be placed on God, and that we are to love him
so entirely, as to love none but him. This, says he, I shall endeavor to
establish upon this double Basis, (1.) That God is the only Author, or Cause of
our Love. And will it not hence follow, that he is the only Author and Cause of
our Natural Love, Bent, and Inclination to every thing besides himself? And can
he be the only Author and Cause of our Love to all other things, and yet forbid
that very love which he alone produces in us? God, says Mr. N. is the Author
of all my Love, he has produced it all, it is therefore highly just and
reasonable he should have it all. God, say I then, is the Author of all the
Love of my self, and of my Preservation, my love of Food, Drink, Cloths, of
Honor, Riches, Pleasure, Life, my love of Women, and of Sensual Delights, and
of the Gratification of all my Natural Appetites according to, Let. 7. p. 150.
and not exceeding the Intention of (the God of) Nature, which is acknowledged
to be Pleasure. Let. 10. p. 221.
And the natural tendency we have to them being from the Author of Nature must
needs be right, it being impossible (says Mr. N.) that God should put a Biass
upon the Soul. P. 222.
If therefore it is the Perfection and Duty of every Rational Creature to
conform those Determinations of his Will that are free, to that which is
natural, or to take care that the Love of his Nature, and the Love of his
Choice conspire in one, that they both agree in the same Motion, and concenter
in the same Object, as he says it is, then it is the Duty and Perfection of our
Nature to choose to Love, or freely to affect the Preservation of our Life and
Being, our Food, Drink, Cloths, Honor, Riches, Pleasure, and the Gratification
of all our Natural Appetites according to, and not exceeding the Intention of
the God of Nature. Again, God is the Cause and Author of all my Love of my
self, of my desire of Self-Preservation, and of all that I judge needful for,
and pleasant to me. He is the Author of all that natural (...) we bear to our
Relations, and also of that love we owe unto our Neighbor, as having made him
in all considerable Respects the same with us, or equal to us, and therefore
equally deserving our Affection, and having founded it on this clear Principle
of Nature, That we should deal with others as we would be dealt with. Will
therefore Mr. N. say, That because God is the Author of all this Love of
Benevolence, it is just and reasonable he should have it all? No sure; the
utmost that he can reasonably hence conclude is this, that it is just and
reasonable we should only love our selves, our Relatives and Neighbou^s in
relation to God, or in Subordination to him. And this is likewise all he can
rationally conclude from God's being the Author of our Love of desire, viz.
That we should desire nothing, but with Relation to, or in Subordination, and
Submission to him.

In a word, as God is the sole efficient Cause of my Intellectual Love in the
true Philosophical Sense, by giving me the Faculties, and the Liberty by which
I choose Intellectual Good; so also on the same is he the cause of all my
sensual Love, i. e. of my Love of the Body, of all the Conveniences and
innocent Delights of it, as also the sensual Love of Beasts. And must he
therefore be the Proper and Immediate, yea, the Sole Object of this Love? Let.
of Love and Music, p. 446.
Do you not call that a sensual Desire, whose Object is a sensual Good? And is
God such a one? A Man says Mr. N. is in Love, that is, he has a sensual
Desire toward a sensual Good. Ibid. p. 447.
And this, says he, cannot be evil; for then 'twould be a sin to be in Love,
and consequently there would be a necessity of sinning, in order to Marriage,
because no Man (not therefore Mr. N.) is supposed to Marry but whom he thus
loves; and so Mr. N. being Married, had once a sensual Desire of a sensual Good
without Sin; and therefore was not obliged by this Commandment to make God the
only Object of his Love of Desire. And indeed it is palpably absurd to say, I do
God Injury or Injustice in loving or desiring those Sermon. p. 15.
things which he has given me Faculties on purpose to love and desire, which
have no other use but to desire, which cannot be satisfied without the
Enjoyment of what we desire; which if he did not intend we should Gratify, he
gave them only as Snares and Torments to us. God's Right therefore in this Case
can be only this, that I never love any sensual Good against him, or to the
Dishonor of him, but rather that I love it only in Relation, or in
Subordination, and Submission to him, not that I love it not at all.

I lay down this an evident and undeniable Proposition, Argument 2.. 3.
that the natural Motion of the Will is to Good in General. Let. 10. p. 224.
But now how can the Will be moved toward Good in General, but by being moved
toward All Good; for to be moved toward Good as Good, is to be moved toward
All Good. And how can the Will be moved toward All Good, but by being moved
toward an Universal Being who in himself is, and contains All Good?

Answ.
This is a piece of Sophistry, and a mere Fallacy; for when we say the Will is
moved to Good in General, the meaning of those words is only this, That nothing
but what is Good in reality or appearance can move the Will, or that it is
always moved by some or other of those things which are contained within the
Compass or the Sphere of Good; not that in all its Motions or Elections it
desires all that can be called Good. V. G. I desire to eat when I am hungry, to
drink when I am thirsty, to take my rest when I am sleepy, not that I think All
that is Good is contained in my Food, Drink or Sleep.

Moreover, to be moved toward Good as Good, is not to be moved toward All
Good, but to be moved toward any particular Object, sub ratione boni, under
this Prospect that it is, some way or other, Good for me to enjoy that Object;
even as to be moved toward Evil as Evil, i. e. sub ratione mali is not to be
moved to all that is evil, but to be moved to evil, under the Apprehension or
Conviction that it is evil, Let. 10. p. 228.
or pernicious to me. And this we cannot do; not because we have no motion from
God toward it, but to the contrary; which Mr. N. phancies to be the only
reason why we cannot possibly Will, or Love evil, as evil. For that would prove
as much that we cannot love Evil at all, under the false appearance of Good;
for sure we have no motion to it from God under that false appearance, but to
the contrary: Sure the desiring of Evil can in no sense be the natural and
proper effect of that great Impression whereby God moves us continually toward
himself. But the plain reason of it is, because to Will Evil, as Evil, is to
desire it because it is not desirable; which is, to move toward it without a
motive. And, 2 dly, because it is to desire what is pernicious to me, because it
is so; which is contrary to the first Principle of self-Preservation God has
planted in us. And hence arises also a demonstration, that the Will is not
always moved to Good in General, or toward all Good, because it is so often
and so powerfully moved to Good apparent only, which being in it self Evil, and
only in appearance Good, we can have no motion to it from that God whom, says
he, we move to by moving toward Good in General, nor can it be the effect of
that General impression by which God moves us continually to himself.

Mr. N. farther argues thus, Argument 3.. 4.
That as God is the Author of this motion, so is he the end of it too, Sermon. p.
17.
and he moves us to good no otherwise than by moving us toward himself. For
can God move us toward the Creature? Can he move us from himself? Can he act
for a Creature? Can he make a Creature his end? Does not God make all things
for himself? Is he not always his own end? Has not this the evidence of a
first Principle, that God acts only for himself? In his Tenth Letter this is
offered anew in a great Crowd of Pompous and Obscure Expressions. P. 225, 226.
V. Gr. God cannot act but by his Will, that is most certain, ( i. e. not by his
Power, not by his Knowledge, not by his Wisdom, but only by his Will, wonderful
confidence.) But now the Will of God is not, as in us, an Expression that he
receives from without himself, (i. e. I suppose the Word expression may be the
Printers, not the Authors fault;) and which accordingly carries him out from
himself, but an inward self-centring Principle, that both derives from, and
terminates in himself, (as V. G. his Will to create the World, and all things
in it, his Will to Redeem Mankind, his Will to Judge the World.) For as God is
to himself his own Good, his own Center, and beautiful Object, so the Love of
God can be no other than the Love of himself: Whence it will follow, that as
God must therefore be his own End, and what ever he Wills, or Acts, he must
Will and Act for himself; so that the Love that is in us (to Cherries) must be
the effect of that very Love which God has for himself; there being no other
Principle in the Nature of God (no Wisdom, Power, Knowledge, etc.) by which he
is supposed to Act. Now, not to insist on many other Mistakes contained in this
Argument, and briefly hinted in the Parenthesis, I answer.

First, Answ. 1.
That whether God can act only for himself, or for a Creature, may easily be
determined from these excellent Words of Mr. N. in his Treatise concerning
Perseverance in Holiness; viz. When God persuades Men to be Holy, P. 262.
he persuades every man to that which is best for him, I say best for him; for
God being already possessed of all possible Perfection, Deus se vult diligi non
ut sibi aliquid, sed ut eis qui diligun^ aeternum praemium conferatur; hoc est
ipse quem diligunt. August. de Doct. Christ. l. 1. c. 29.

Ille igitur usus qui dicitur Dei, quo nobis utitur, non ad ejus sed ad nostram
utilitatem ref^rtur; ad ejus autem tantummodo bonitatem. c. 32.


cannot act any thing for any ^elf-advantage; and therefore whatsoever he does
is for the Good of his Creatures. And does not he act for a Creature, who does
all he does for the Good of his Creatures? And therefore, says he, as God did
not at first speak this World into Being, to raise himself a monument of Power,
and Divine Architecture; so neither does he govern the rational part of it by
the Precepts of Religion out of any self-design: (Now where he has no
self-design, he can have no self end:) For can a man be profitable to God, P.
263.
as he that is wise may be profitable to himself? Is it any pleasure to the
Almighty that thou art righteous, or is it gain to him that thou make thy way
perfect? No certainly. And therefore, when he chalked the ways of
Righteousness, and Holiness for men to walk in, it could not be for any self
end, but purely for the Good of Man. Now I am apt to think that he who acts not
for any self end, acts not always for himself; that he who acts purely for the
Good of Man, acts for a Creature, because he acts for the Good of a Creature,
and so he acts not only for himself. Her. Piety, p. 285.
Moreover, he says, God has declared that he is only so far pleased with our
Services to him, as they are beneficial to our selves. Whence it is easy to
conclude, this is the only end of that Command to serve him; for had God any
other end, he would be pleased with the obtainment of it. Furthermore, I ask
what does he mean, when he says, The Love of God can be no other than the Love
of himself? Let. 8. p. 158,
He has confidently told us, There are but these two sorts of Love, love of
desire, and love of Benevolence; and has delivered it for certain, Theory and
Reg. of Love, p. 76.
That as Indigence in the Lover is the ground of his loving with the Love of
Concupiscence; so Indigence in the Person loved, is the Ground of loving him
with the Love of Benevolence. And thence he has concluded, that God cannot be
loved by us with a Love of Benevolence; P. 77.
because there is nothing we can wish to God which he has not already. And is
not this as much a demonstration, that God cannot love himself with a Love of
Benevolence? For what can he wish to himself that he has not already? Nor can
God love himself with a Love of Desire: For what Indigence in him can be the
Ground of this Love of Concupiscence? What can an infinitely perfect and
necessary Being farther desire to himself? How can either of these kinds of
self-love derive from him, in whom can be no Indigence; or terminate in him,
who is capable of no addition to his infinite and necessary Perfection, and as
incapable of any diminution from them? Again, when he says, God Wills and Acts
for himself, what does he mean? Is it, that he Wills, and Acts for that which
he has already, and cannot choose but have, or for what he has not? If the
latter, the Question returns, What, can he, who is infinitely and necessarily
happy, Will or Act for that he has not already? If the first, why should he
Will or Act for what he has already, and cannot choose but have? Can he have it
the more for doing so? So unintelligible is this inward self-centring Principle
of Mr. N.

Does not the Scripture say, Object.
God has made all things for himself? Prove. 16.4.

I answer, Answ.
It does so, according to our Translation: but in the Hebrew the word is (...)
from (...); and so the words may be thus rendered, the Lord has made all things
to answer to themselves, (...), aptly to refer one to another; even the wicked
for the day of Wrath, according to that descant of the Learned Grotius, Singula
Deus ordinat ad id quod singulis convenit; ordinat impium ad diem calamitosum.
The Targum and the Syriac render the words thus, The Lord does all things for
them that obey, and reserveth the wicked for the evil day. The Bishop of Ely
renders them thus, The Lord disposes all things, Lammaanthu, according to his
Will, even the Wicked for the day of wrath, i. e. to be then the Executioners
of it. In a word, had the Hebrew word been (...), it might have been well
rendered for himself; but being (...), it seems not to admit of that
Translation. Nevertheless, would he be content with the old Divinity, That God
loves Himself with a Love of Complacency; and that God does all things for his
Glory; and that in this Sense all things are of him, and to him, Romans 11.36. 1
Cor. 8.6. Col. 1.16. he would have no Adversary. Only they would be ready to
inform him, That as it seemed to many of the Ancient Fathers and Philosophers;
(...), etc. Clem. Alexandr. Strom. 5. p. 585. B. Eadem verba laudat Theodoretus
adv. Graecos, Sermon. 4. p. 535.
so does it seem to them a vain Imagination to conceive the great design of any
of God's glorious Works, and admirable Dispensations should be only this, to be
admired and applauded by us worthless Creatures; that he may gain Esteem, or a
good Word from such vile Creatures as we are. We take too much upon us, if we
imagine that the Allwise God can be concerned whether such blind Creatures as
we are, approve or disapprove of his Proceedings; or that he really can suffer
any diminution of his Glory by our dislike, or is advanced in honor by our
approbation of his Dispensations. We think too meanly of, and we detract from
his Great Majesty, if we conceive that he is tickled with Applause, and chiefly
aims at Reputation from us in all his glorious Designs, this being such a
weakness in our Fellow Creature, as is styled Ambition, and loving of the
Praise of Men, a Crime which he will punish in them; and so it cannot be the
great Design of all the Dispensations of his Providence. That therefore, such
as we should think well of him can be no farther his concern, than as it serves
the nobler Ends of his great Goodness; viz. that these Conceptions may engage
us to that Affection to, that Imitation of him, and that Obedience to him,
which tends to the promotion of our Happiness.

God therefore acts for his Glory when he discovers to the World those
Excellencies and Perfections of his Nature, which are just motives to the
performance of that Duty which we owe unto him; or when he does display before
us those imitable. Perfections in which it is our Glory to be like him. But
then, it farther is to be observed, that God, in the discovery of these Divine
Perfections to the World, designs as well the Benefit and Happiness of Man, as
the advancement of his Honor. For when he does discover all those Attributes
which represent him Good and Merciful, kind and obliging to the Sons of Men, he
does it with design, and in a manner very proper to lay the highest Obligations
on us to Returns of Love and Gratitude, and to engage us to that Imitation of
his Goodness and Mercy to our fellow Creatures, which renders us partakers of
the Divine Nature, and helpful to others in all their Exigencies and
Distresses. When he gives signal Demonstrations of his Almighty Power, and of
his great Wisdom, he designs by this to teach us, that he is able to foresee,
and to divert those Evils which may at any time befall us; to rescue us from all
our Miseries, and to confer the greatest Blessings on his Servants; that so he
may encourage us to place our Trust in him at all times, to repair by humble
Suppli^ations to the Throne of Grace for suitable help in time of need, and to
serve him faithfully in expectation of his Favor and Protection. When he
manifests himself to be a God of Truth, and Faithfulness, one who will
punctually perform his promises to, and execute his Threats upon us, he does
this chiefly to affright us from those Sins which make it necessary for his
Justice to be severe upon us, and to provoke us to the performance of those
Duties to which he has annexed the greatest Blessings. When he informs us,
that his Holiness and Justice cannot permit the Wicked to escape his Vengeance,
or any upright Soul to want the tokens of his Love, or the reward of his
sincere Obedience; his great design in all this is, that Sin, which is the rise
of all our Miseries, may be avoided, and Holiness, which is the true
advancement, and the best accomplishment of Humane Nature, may be more
earnestly pursued by us. So that God's acting for his Glory, is also acting for
the Good of his most noble Creatures; it is only recommending himself to their
good Liking and Affection, that so he may the more effectually promote their
Happiness. Nor is his Will that we should act for his Glory any self-centring
Principle, terminating in himself; but it is a Principle of great Good Will and
kindness to Mankind, and terminating in his Happiness: Whereas Mr. N.'s account
of God's Love, his Will and Actings, does render him the most selfish Being
that we can imagine; one who can love nothing but himself, will and do nothing
but purely for himself. Our Charity must be such as seeks not our own things;
1 Cor. 13.5.
it must engage us not to seek our own, chapter 10.23.
but every Man another Good, Phil. 2.4.
and to please him for his Good: Romans 15.2.
Our Friendship purely must respect the Welfare of our Friend, and when we
exercise our Charity, or pretend Friendship purely from prospect of our own
Advantage, our Friendship becomes Mercenary, and our Charity degenerates into
Self-love, And to this Charity and Friendship we are incited chiefly by the
Example of our God, and yet it seems his Love terminates only in himself, and
can be no other than the love of himself; and how then can it oblige me to the
forementioned Charity and Friendship to my Neighbor for his sake.

To this Question therefore, Can God move us toward a Creature? Can he move us
from himself? I Answer, Yes he does move us toward the Creatures by all those
Appetites, Affections and Desires he has implanted in our Natures to them, by
all the Commands he has laid upon us to pray for our daily Bread, to be
industrious to procure them, and to bless him for them. Does he not move the
hungry Appetite to desire Meat, the thirsty Drink, the naked to desire Cloths,
the Poor supply of his Wants, etc. And does he not in all these Cases move us
toward the Creature? Has not God made these things the matter of his
Promises, and his Encouragements to Duty? entailing upon Godliness the Promises
of this Life? and engaging to them who seek first the Kingdom of God, that all
other things shall be added to them? We therefore are by him moved toward the
Creature, as a motive to the Enjoyment of himself. And sure thus moving us to
the Creature is not to move us from himself, but to himself by means very
proper to excite us to love, obey, and cleave unto him who does thus load us
with his Blessings, and pours his Benefits upon us; as the whole Book of
Psalms, and the whole Law of Moses testifies.

Argument 4.. 5. Preface to the Letters.
The Love here discoursed of and recommended, is the Love of a God, that is, of
all that is Good, of all that is Perfect, of all that is Lovely, of all that is
Desirable, in short, of all that truly is; and can any Love be too great or too
high for such an Object? Or, rather does he not deserve infinitely more than
we, or any of his Creatures can bestow upon him? What, can infinite Good be
loved too much? Or is any degree of Love too high for him who is infinitely
lovely, and who infinitely loves himself! -- And why then should it be thought
such a stretch of the Love of God, to make it entire and exclusive of all other
Loves? Can we love God too much, or Creatures too little?

To this I Answer, First, That what I have discoursed is sufficient to evince
that this is such a stretch of the Love of God, as renders it inconsistent with
our Duty, and Obligation to pray for any temporal Blessings which we want. That
it tends to depreciate the Gifts of God, and to impair the sense of Divine
Goodness in them; to destroy all our Industry in our Callings, and all pursuit
of Temporal Enjoyments by our honest Labors: That it removes the natural
Foundation of all Injustice, and cramps all charitable Beneficence: That it
casts a vile Contempt upon the Works both of Creation and of Providence: And
lastly, that it casts this imputation upon the Just and Holy God, that he has
made that our Sin, which is Natural and Necessary: As sure it is, to desire
Food when we are hungry; that he will not allow us to desire what he knows we
have need of. It makes him to have planted in us natural Appetites and Desires
which he intended we should gratify, and yet has not permitted us to desire
that which alone can gratify them. And sure, if this Hypothesis do all, or any
of these things, it by so doing must stretch this Duty of the Love of God
beyond the bounds prescribed to it by our God, and Savior.

Secondly, If God be all that truly is, all that is not God, truly is not; and
what is not, can have no Love to God, or any other thing. So that this stretch
of Metaphysics destroys that Love he recommends. Moreover, to say that God is
all that is Good, is to contradict God himself, who said of all the Creatures
that he made, that they were very Good: To say that he is all that is lovely,
all that is desirable, is to beg the Question. Again, that God deserves
infinitely more than we can bestow upon him, that an infinite Good* cannot be
loved too much, i. e. more than he deserves, is very true, but not pertinent;
for we can be no more obliged to love God, than we are to serve him as he
deserves; which we can never do: For he deserves to be served answerably to the
Reward that he has promised; but can we perform such Service? He deserves
Perfect and Angelical Obedience; but are we therefore, in this State of
Imperfection, obliged to it? The Question is not, What is too much for him, if
we could perform it, but, What he has made our Duty, and therefore does expect
we should perform. Now has he made it our Duty so to love him, as not to love
our selves; not to love Health and Pleasure, not to desire Food and Raiment, or
any other Blessing he has promised as the Reward of our Obedience? If not,
it is evident that Duty of Affection which we owe unto him cannot be exclusive
of all love of the Creature.

But, Thirdly, the Absurdity of this way of Arguing will best appear by the
propounding of some Parallel Instances, as (...). The Messalians, or Euchitae
stretching those words of Christ, Luke 18.1.
which command us to pray always, and not to faint; and those of the Apostle,
pray without ceasing, 1 These. 5.17.
as Mr. N. does the Command, to Love God with all our Heart, etc. declared,
That they who would be saved, must be continually employed in Prayer, so as to
do nothing else, (...), etc. Damascenus de Haeres. apud Cotel. de Monum. Eccl.
Graec. To. 1. p. 304: Nam qu^m Dominus dixerit, oportet semper Orane, and non
deficere, and Apostolus, sine intermissione orate (quod sanissime sic accipitur
ut nullo die intermittantur certa tempora orandi;) isti ita nimis hoc faciunt,
ut hinc judicentur inter Haereticos numer^ndi. August. de Haeres. c. 57.
till they had found their Sins sensibly expelled by them, and going out from
them as an Evil Spirit, and the Holy Ghost as sensibly entering into, and
dwelling in their Souls: And this, said they, was the true Communion of
Christians one with another.

Hence they declared themselves to be the Men who had wholly renounced the
World, (...) -- (...). Epiph. Haer. 80.. 3. p. 1069. (...). Ibid.. 4. (...).
Theodoret. Haer. Fab. lib. 4. cap. 11. Dicuntur Euchitae opinari Monachis non
licere, sustenandae vitae suae cuusa aliquid operari, atque ita seipsos
Monachos profiteri ut omnino operibus vacent. August. de Haer. c. 57.
left all things, and had no Possessions upon Earth, as Epiphanius says of
them: And misunderstanding those Words of Christ, Labor not for the meat that
perishes, they held it unlawful to work for the sustaining of this present
Life. And therefore they styled themselves Spiritual Men, or the Poor in
Spirit, and spent that time in Idleness, and Sleep, which was not spent in
Prayer. They also neglected both the Hearing and Reading the Word of God, and
contemned the use of the Sacraments, as thinking, (...). Damascen. ibid. p.
302. (...). Theodoret. Ibid.
That the Soul could not be purged by them; but only by the Prayer they
magnified so much.

Now, as the Scriptures, on which they grounded these Practices, in their
Grammatical Import, are as full for Praying always without ceasing, and against
Laboring for the Meat that Perishes, as is the Text under contest for loving
God exclusively of any Love of the Creature; so is it easy to Harangue in
Favor of these Heretics after the manner of Mr. N. viz. The Duty which we
recommend is the desire of Happiness and Salvation, that is, of all that is
truly lovely and desirable, of the truest Riches, the Divinest Honors, the
most Ravishing Delights, of the Vision of God in Glory, the Enjoyment of him,
the being made like him, and seeing him as he is: And can any desire be too
Great, or too High for such an Object, or rather does it not deserve infinitely
more than we are able to bestow upon it? What, can an Endless Happiness, and
Immense Glory be desired too much? Why then should it be thought such a stretch
of the Desire of Happiness, to make it Entire and Exclusive of all Labor for
the World? Can we love Happiness too much, or the World too little? I appeal to
the Judicious Reader whether the Argument of the Massalian Heretic be not as
like to that of Mr. N. as one Egg is to another; and whether it be not of equal
strength with that which he has here produced.

What he has more to say upon this Subject, is directly levelled against those
Persons, if there be any such in the World, who conceive the Love required in
the Command, to love our Neighbor as our selves is a love, or desire our
Neighbor as our Good, which I have showed to be a Contradiction in adjecto;
the desire of our Neighbor as our Good being not properly love of our
Neighbor, but our selves; and therefore though some Divines do, and reasonably
may, say that Mr. N.'s Exposition of the First Command renders it inconsistent
with the Second, which requires me to love my Neighbor as my self, because it
excludes me from the desire of those Creatures by which I may do good to him,
and give him the things needful for the Body, as I do to my self; yet I desire
one Instance of one of those many who ever said that the Love of our Neighbor
in this Precept, Let. 8. p. 159.
signifies the desiring him as a Good; P. 157.
or of those Objectors who are pleased to presume this, that so he may in some
measure account for his Imagination, P. 172.
that the World runs so generally upon this Notion. But though neither I, nor I
believe any Body else is concerned in any thing he said, as it relates to that
Particular; yet because he so discourses on that Subject as seems to render it
as absurd to Love, or desire any other Creature as our Good, I will single out,
and accommodate those Passages to this matter, and then return an answer to
them.

Argument 5.. 6. Let. 8. p. 160, 161.
He therefore enquires thus, Is it once to be thought that God who is Infinitely
Good, Infinitely desirable, Infinitely deserving of our highest Affections, nay
of our whole Love, and withal Infinitely able to satisfy and reward it, should
command us to love and desire a Creature as vain and infirm, and as much a
shadow as our selves? Is it to be thought that he should first call us to
himself, and then, as if he alone were not able to suffice for us, and to
satisfy the enlarged Appetites which he had given us, should call in the
Creatures to part of the Expense, and send us from himself to them? Are these
thoughts worthy of God?

Answ.
What means he by these Questions? Does he not know that the same Jesus who
said, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, Soul and Mind,
commanded us to say unto him, Give us day by day our daily Bread? And has he
not then commanded us to desire, and so to love what he commands us daily to
ask of him, whom we thus love with all our Hearts? Was it not usual with him,
when he had fed his Hearers with the Bread of Life, the Food that abides to
Eternal Life, to feed their Bodies also with his Creatures, and so to send them
from the one Food to the other; as knowing well the Bread of Life was never
designed to suffice for the Body, or to satisfy those Bodily Appetites which
he had given them? Again, does he not know, that God commanded his own People
to love, Deuteronomy. 11.13, 14, 15.
and serve him with all their Hearts and Souls; encouraging them to do so by
this Promise, that then he would give them Corn, and Wine, and Oil, and they
should eat and be full? That the Blessed Jesus exhorts us to seek first the
Kingdom of God, Matthew. 6.32, 33.
and the Righteousness thereof, and then all these things (Meat, Drink and
Clothing) should be added to us by our Heavenly Father, who knows we have
need of them? Does not St. Paul excite us to live Godly, because Godliness is
profitable to all things, 1 Timothy 4.8.
having the promise of this Life? Does not the Psalmist say, O fear the Lord
all ye his Saints; Psalm. 34.9, 10.
for there is no want to them that fear him. The Young Lions do lack, and
suffer hunger; but they that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing? And
again, The Lord will give Grace, Psalm. 84.1^.
and Glory, and no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly?
And has not God by these Expressions first called us to himself, and then sent
us to his Creatures, as his Blessings on our Obedience? Do not those Promises
suppose in us a Love of, and a desire to enjoy the Blessings promised? And then
does he not send us to these Creatures for satisfaction of those Appeties he
has implanted in us toward them? As knowing Spiritual Nature was never
designed to satisfy the Body, and that these Creatures were by his Wisdom and
Goodness purposely provided to satisfy our bodily Appetites; so that this
pompous Rhetoric serves only to Arraign the Providence of God, in making us
with Appetites which not be satisfied without the Creature, and his Wisdom in
drawing us to Love and serve him by the promise of these outward Blessings?

Argument 6.. 7. Let. 8. p. 162, 163, 164.
Our Conscience does often upbraid to us the Love of the Creatures, but never,
that I know of, does it reproach us for our indifferency toward them, or
prompt us to repent of it. And indeed it would be a strange kind of Repentance,
for a Man to fall upon his knees, and confess to God as a Sin, that he had
withdrawn all his Desires from his Creatures, and fixed them upon Him. I will
suppose a Man to place his whole Affection upon God, and so to love him with
all his Heart, Soul, Mind, and Strength, as to withdraw his Love from all the
Creatures, and not in the least to desire any of them as his Goods. -- I
farther suppose him to persevere in this disposition of Mind to the very last:
And then ask, whether you can think such a Person has any thing to Answer at
the Bar of God's Justice (upon this account) or whether you think God will
Damn, or eternally Separate such a one from his Presence, as defective in his
(Duty) merely for not making the Creature his Good, and the Object of his
desire.

Answ.
This Rhetorical Harangue is indeed somewhat affecting; but has nothing of
Argument in it. For when he says Conscience does never reproach us for our
indifferency to the Creature, what thinks he of the Prodigal who is so
indifferent toward it, as that he cares not though he spend that in Gaming, or
squander it away in Prodigality, which had he been more concerned to keep it,
might have preserved himself and his Family from Want and Misery? What thinks
he of the Tradesman, who is so indifferent toward the Creature, that he will
not give himself the trouble to consider whether he thrives or decays in his
Trade or Calling, till at last he breaks, and robs many, who had Dealings with
him, of their Right? How easy is it to put twenty Cases of like nature; in
some of which an indiscreet Piety and Love to a Party, joined with this
indifference, has contributed not a little to their Want and Beggary.

And since he will be putting Cases, why stopped he here where he did? I will
suppose, says he, a Man to place his whole Affection upon God, so as to
withdraw his Love from all the Creatures; and I suppose him to persevere in
this disposition to the last. And there he stops. I go on therefore to suppose
this Man to want Health, Sleep, Clothes, and all things needful to the Body,
and to the Preservation of his Wife and Children; and yet so employed in Love
to God, that he desires not Rest, Health, nor any thing else needful either for
his Body or his Family; and that he perseveres in thus withdrawing his Love
from the Creatures to the last; and then ask whether he may not have something
to answer for at the Bar of God's Justice upon that account? I suppose this Man
to be one of the Alambrados or a Quietist; so intent upon his Mental Prayer,
Divine Contemplation, and Union with God, as that he has withdrawn his Desires
wholly from the Concerns of his Estate, his Family, or his own Body. I suppose
lastly that this Man withdraws himself thus from the Desire of the Creature,
out of a Principle of Religion, either that of the Euchitae, that we are not*
to labor for the Meat that perishes, or that of Mr. N. that the Love of God
is exclusive of all Love and Desire of the Creature; and that he cannot Love
the Creature too little. And then I ask again, Whether this Man may not be
defective in his Duty, for not making the Creature the Object of his desire?
Whether he may not fall down upon his Knees and say, Lord, I have been so
indifferent toward those Creatures which are thy signal Blessings, and thy
gracious Gifts, to which all Mankind owe the Preservation of their Souls in
Life; that I have not thought them worthy of the least desire, or been
concerned to pray to thee for my daily Bread. I have thought it my Duty to love
thee so entirely, as to withdraw my Love from my Wife, Children, Relations,
Friends and Neighbors, by withdrawing it from those Creatures which could
alone enable me to afford them what was needful for the Body; 1 Timothy 5.8. Ephesians.
4.28.
and by so doing I have neglected to provide for those of my own House; and to
work with my hands that which is Good, that I might have to give to others, as
thou have commanded me. I have so loved thee with all my Soul, as not to suffer
it to desire the Food which was necessary to sustain my Life: Ephesians. 5.29.
And so have hated that Flesh and Body, I stood bound to nourish and to
cherish, and so as to neglect my natural Rest and Health, and thereby to
contribute to the destruction of that Life which thou have given me. I have
done all this from such a Principle of Religion as tends to depreciate thy
great Goodness in affording them, to vilify thy Blessings, and to make Men
slight thy Promises, as unworthy of the desire of the Man that truly loves
thee; and to lay this vile Imputation upon thy All-wise Providence, that it
has planted in us natural Appetites and Desires, which it would not have us
gratify.

2 dly. Answ. 2.
To return Question for Question; When did Conscience upbraid him for praying
for his daily Bread, or asking with Agar, food convenient for him, or for
desiring to procure it by honest Industry? I suppose a Man to love the temporal
Blessings God has promised, and so to make his desire of enjoying them one
motive to obey and serve him; to desire Life, Psalm. 34.12.14.
to love many days, that he may see Good, and therefore to depart from evil,
and do good; to desire all things needful for the Body which he is to nourish,
and for that Family he stands bound to provide for. Yea, when God has given
him Riches and Wealth, to desire to eat thereof, Eccles. 2*24. chapter 5.19.
to rejoice in it, and to take his portion of it, and to make his Soul enjoy
Good in his Labor; I suppose also that he perseveres in this disposition of
mind to the end, and then ask, Whether you can think such a Person has any
thing to Answer for at the Bar of God's Justice upon that account? Or whether
you think God will Damn, or eternally Separate such a one from his Presence as
defective in his Love to him, merely for making the Creatures his Good, and the
Object of his desire?

Object.. 8.
His last and, in his own Opinion, his strongest Argument for this entire and
exclusive Love of God runs thus; Sermon. p. 57, 58, 59.
If God be the only true Cause that Acts upon our Spirits, and produces our
Pleasure, then he only does us Good; he only perfects our Being, and makes us
happy: And if he only does us Good, then he only is our Good, then he only is
lovely, then it is plain that we ought to love none but him, and him entirely.
Or, to Argue backwards, we are to love nothing but what is lovely, nothing is
lovely but what is our Good; nothing is our Good, but what does us Good;
nothing does us Good, but what causes Pleasure in us; nothing causes Pleasure
in us but God, therefore we are to love nothing but God.

Answ.
In Answering this Objection I shall first show that it is not agreeable to the
Sentiments of Holy Scripture. And,

1. Is this Doctrine consistent with all those Exhortations the Scripture every
where affords us, Act. 9.36. 2 Cor. 9.8. Luke 6.35. Gal. 6.10.
to do Good to our needy Brother, and charitably to contribute to the Relief of
his Wants, for by abounding in these Alms we are said to abound in Good Works;
to Work that which is Good. By doing these, we are said (...), 1 Timothy 6.18.
to do Good; (...), to work Good to them; and by withholding them to withhold
Good from him to whom it is due. But since we hereby only minister to them of
those Creatures which, Prove. 3.27.
says Mr. N. are in no sense their Good, Sermon. p. 59.
nor able to do do them any, nor can communicate any Good to them. How can we
thus do good to them only by communicating that which cannot do them any Good?
Were indeed that of the Apostle true of these things, that they are good and
profitable to Men, we, by this contribution, Tit. 3.8.
might be well said to do them Good; but if, for want of Principles, and
Thoughts sufficiently Reformed from the Vulgar Philosophy, he styled that Good
and profitable to Men, which is in no sense their Good, and is unable to do
them any Good; then St. Paul taught Men to commit Sacrilege and Idolatry in
affording them some portion of our Love of desire; for, says he, if the
Creatures be in any sense our Good, Ibid
then some portion of our Love is due to them.

2 dly, Is it not the Recommendation of Wisdom that she is to be preferred
before all things desirable, Prove. 8.21.
that she fills our Houses, (...), with things desirable, Ecclus. 1.17.
that there is, (...), a desirable treasure in the House of the Righteous?
Prove. 21.20
Is not fine Bread in Scripture called Bread of desire; the pleasant Land of
Canaan, a Land of Desire; Dan. 10.3. Ps. 105.24. Isa. 32.12. Ezekiel. 26.12. Amos
5.14. Nah. 2.9. Lam. 1.8, 11, 12.
fruitful Fields, Fields of Desire; pleasant Houses, Houses of Desire; pleasant
Vineyards, Vineyards of Desire; and pleasant Furniture, Vessels of Desire? Does
not the Prophet Jeremy lament the Loss Jerusalem had sustained of all her
pleasant things, that the Adversary had spread out his hand upon all her
pleasant things, and that she was forced to give her pleasant things for meat
to relieve her Soul? And are not these pleasant things in the Hebrew her
desirable things, and in the Greek (...)? Now is not Wisdom thus recommended to
us, that we may be induced to court her for these desirable things! These
concupiscible Treasures with which she fills the Wise Man's House? And must
they not then be lovely, and proper Objects of desire? Do we reap no pleasure
from these pleasant Lands, Fields, Vineyards, Houses, Furniture, or this
pleasant Bread? Are they not all declared by the Wisdom of God to be desirable?
And can that be desirable which is in no sense our Good, nor can communicate
any Good to us? If so, why may not the Creatures be desirable, though they do
us no Good?

Psalm. 19.1.
3 dly, Does not the Psalmist say, The Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the
Firmament shows his handy work? And the Apostle, That the invisible things,
Romans 1.19, 20.
viz. the Godhead and Eternity of him that made them, were seen by the things
that were made; that God had by them clearly made known, (...), that which was
known of God: Does not the Author of the Book Wisdom truly say, Wisd. 13.1.
That vain were they that could not out of the Good things that were seen, know
Him; that is, neither by considering the works acknowledge the work Master;
since by the Beauty and the Greatness of the Creatures proportionably their
Maker is seen? Now can it be said of those Creatures which declare to us the
Glory of God, and show us by the Beauty that is in them, the Beauty of their
Maker, in whom that which is known of God is manifest, being seen in his Works?
Can that which thus affords us the knowledge of that God whom to know is life
eternal, be in no sense our Good, wholly unable to do us any Good? Can they in
no measure be the Causes of the Happiness of those Heathens to whom they gave
the Knowledge of the Nature of God, and a Testimony of his Goodness to them?
Can they not give us so much as one grateful Sensation, one little contemptible
Pleasure resulting from this Knowledge of God? If, as Solomon says, Eccles.
11.3.
Light is sweet, and it is a pleasant thing to behold the Sun, is it no
pleasure thus to view, in his Creatures, the Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of
God, and the Beauty, Order, the Benefit which redounds to us from his Creatures.

I Answer by way of Concession, Answ. 2.
That God produces all our Pleasure, and that he only does us Good; chapter 1.8.
for so the Apostle James assures by saying he is the Giver of every good and
perfect Gift, Acts 17.25. Romans 11.36.
he gives to us Life and Breath, and all things, all things are of him, and
from him, says St. Paul. 1 Chronicles. 29.14.
For all things come of thee, says David, and of thine own have we given thee.
Yet if he does us any Good by his Creatures, by the Ministry of Angels pitching
their Tents about us, may we not love those Angels that thus minister to us?
May we not desire of God that he would give them charge concerning us? If he
does us any Good by the Conversation, Examples, Writings of Good Men, may we
not desire them, and their Writings as our Good; i. e. to improve our Knowledge
and our Piety? And why th^n may we not desire any other of God's good
Creatures, why not fruitful Seasons, why not Food? If, as St. Paul affirms, God
does (...), Acts 14.17.
do us Good by giving us fruitful Seasons, and by filling our hearts with food
and gladness, and does enable us to do Good to others by them.

Again, Is not God equally the cause of all our pleasing Sensations in us,
whether we believe that God himself is the immediate Author of them, or that he
has given us those Faculties which are capable of perceiving a grateful Relish
and Sensation in their regular Application to such Objects as are agreeable to
their Nature, and Divine Bounty has administered? For instance, let it be
indeed the Sun that shines upon us, and that warms us by that Faculty of
enlightening and producing heat that God has given it, seeing it does this
purely by the virtue the Divine Power and Wisdom has imparted to it, without
any Knowledge or Intention of doing us any Good; what portion of our Love can
it deserve upon that account, any more than by being the occasion only, or
positive condition determining God to produce in us that sweetness which the
Wiseman says their is in Light, and that pleasure we find in beholding the
Sun, or being heated by his Rays?

Answ. 3.
3 dly, This seems to me to prove as effectually that we ought to hate nothing
but God. For, If God be the only true Cause that acts upon our Spirits, and
produces all our pain (which Mr. N. does equally contend for) then he only
does us hurt, then he only is our hurt, he only impairs the Perfection of our
Being, and makes us miserable; and if he only does us hurt, then he only is our
hurt, and then he only is hateful, and the proper Object of our hatred; then
it is plain we ought to hate none but him, and him entirely: Or, to Argue
backward, we ought to hate nothing but what is hateful, nothing is hateful but
what is our hurt, nothing is our hurt but what does us hurt, nothing does us
hurt but what causes pain in us, nothing causes pain in us, says Mr. N. but
God, therefore we are to hate nothing but God. The Good Lady had urged
something of this nature, though not with that strength that I have given to
the Argument; let us see now what he Answers to it.

When you speak, Repl. 1. Let. p. 29.
says he, of God's being the cause of pain, either you mean as to this Life,
or as to the next; if as to the next, that has nothing to do with the Duty
which we owe him here; if as to this present Life, the pain that God inflicts
upon us here is only Medicinal, and in order to our greater Good, and
consequently from a principle of kindness.

I grant the Pains of the next World have nothing to do with the Duty we owe to
God, Answ.
any otherwise than as they are incentives to it, that we may avoid them; but
yet they have something to do with his Argument; for are not the Pains and
Griefs of the Damned a modification of the Soul, are not all modifications of
the Soul immediately caused by God, and by him only? And must not then the
Pains and Miseries of the Damned be, according to this Philosophy, immediately
caused by God, and by him only? And if these Pains and Miseries be the hurt and
evil which the Damned suffer, is not that God who does immediately cause them,
the immediate Author of their hurt and evil? And if he only does them hurt, he
only by your Argument, is their hurt, and then he only is hateful, and the
proper Object of their hatred; then it is plain they ought to hate none but him,
and him entirely, and then their hatred of him cannot be their Sin. If then it
be an absurdity to say the Damned ought to hate God entirely, and him only, his
Argument and Hypothesis from which that absurdity so naturally flows, must be
absurd. Whereas we who conceive that Men's Damnation is of themselves, that they
are their own Tormentors by their reflection on their own Actions, that they
have excluded themselves from the Beatifick Vision which would have made them
happy, by making themselves incapable of enjoying a God of infinite Purity,
that they have rendered themselves unworthy to be snatched out of the Flames of
the Earth, 2 Pet. 3.7.
when all the things that are in it shall be burned up, and so shall suffer in
that Fire which is kept for the Day of Judgment, 1 These. 4.17.
and of perdition of ungodly Men, whilst the Just shall then be caught up into
the Air, and be for ever with the Lord. We, I say, are not at all concerned in
this Objection, though Mr. N. imagines that it lies equally against us. Let.
2. p. 27, 28.


Moreover, is it true that all the Pains which God inflicts upon the Wicked in
this Life are Medicinal, and in order to their greater Good? What thinks he of
the Despair, Horror, the Agonies both of Soul and Body some desperately wicked
Persons lie under at the hour of death? Of the Pains the bloody Hector suffers
in a Duel by a mortal Wound? Of the wicked Soldier mortally wounded in the
Field? The horrid Criminal presently put upon the Rack and there exspiring? The
Atheist or Debauched Person taken away by a sudden stroke or by a violent
Death? Do they suffer these Pains in order to a greater Good?

Though I acknowledge Pain, Repl. 2. Let. 2. p. 17, 18, 19.
says he, to be as truly the effect of God as Pleasure, yet it is not after
the same manner the effect of God, as Pleasure is: Pleasure is the natural,
genuine and direct effect of God, but Pain comes from him only indirectly and
by accident; for first, it is of the proper Nature of God to produce Pleasure,
as consisting of such essential Excellencies and Perfections as will
necessarily beautify and and make happy those who are, by being in their true
rational Order, duly disposed for the Enjoyment of him, but if this same
excellent Nature occasion pain to other Spirits, this is only indirectly and by
accident, by reason of their moral indisposition for so sovereign a Good. Answ.


Again, when God causes Pleasure, it is because he wills it for it self, and
naturally delights in it, as comporting with his primary design which is the
Happiness of his Creatures, but when he causes Pain, it is not that he wills it
from within, or for it self, but only from without, and for the sake of
something else, as it is necessary to the Order of his Justice; for had there
been no Sin, there never would have been such a thing as Pain, which is a plain
Argument that God wills our Pleasure as we are Creatures, and our Pain only as
we are Sinners; but now in measuring our Devoirs to God, we are not to consider
how he stands affected to us as Sinners, but how he stands affected to us as
Creatures.

Answ.
Here it is plain the Good Man shifts the Scene, deserts his Subject and his
Argument at once, that he may seem to avoid the Consequence which follows from
it; for evident it is, that in his Sermon he was discoursing of those Pleasures
and Pains only which by the impressions the Creatures made upon us were by God
produced in us, the Pleasures of the Senses, the Eye, the Palate, the Smell,
Taste and Touch, and the Pains incident to them; and from these only is it that
he makes his Inference, That Creatures are not to be loved or desired at all,
as being not the Causes, but the Occasions of these Pleasures, and that God
only is to be loved, because he only causes them. Now is this true of these
sensual Pleasures of the Palate, and the Throat, and the Belly, of the carnal
Pleasures of the Men of the World, of the Pleasures of Envy, and the Pleasures
wicked Men take not only in doing evil themselves, ^
but in seeing others do it; of the Pleasure they take in Rioting in the day
time, that it is of the proper Nature of God, as consisting of such essential
Excellencies and Perfections to produce them, rather than to produce in us that
Godly sorrow which works Repentance unto Life, 2 Cor. 7.10.
the pangs of the New Birth, or those afflicting Pains he lays upon his
Children for their profit, Heb. 12.10. Ver. 6.
to make them partakers of his Holiness, and which are the Fruits of that Love
which is the chief of his Perfections? When God causes Pleasure, says he, he
does it because he wills it for it self, and naturally delights in it as
comporting with his primary design, which is the Happiness of his Creatures;
does he mean the pleasure of tickling, or of scraching when I have the Itch, or
the sensual Pleasures which the Drunkard finds in swallowing down his Liquor,
or the Glutton in his delicious Fair, or the Lustful Person in his Unchaste
Embraces? No, says he, the Pleasures that beautify and make us happy in the
Enjoyment of God. But what is this to that purpose of his Sermon, or his
Argument which only concerns the Pleasures which we find upon occasion of the
Creatures making impressions on our Senses? Again, Pain and Pleasure are both
truly the effect of God, but not after the same manner, viz. I approach to the
fire and it warms me, God is the natural, genuine and direct Cause of this
Pleasure: I approach nearer to it, and it burns me, God is the cause of this
Pain of burning only indirectly, and by accident, the fire is only the occasion
of both; God immediately does both, his Operation is equally determined to do
both by the same occasion; Who then is able to see any reason why he should be
thought the natural, genuine and direct Cause of the first, and only indirectly
and by accident the Cause of the latter?

Again, God, says he, wills our Pleasures as we are Creatures, and our Pain
only as we are Sinners. He would do well to reconcile this with the Sentiments
of Mr. Malbranch, That we being Sinners, Entr. 3. p. 91.
and by consequence unworthy to be recompensed by agreeable Sentiments, oblige
God, in consequence of his immutable Will to make us feel Pleasure in the time
that we offend him: What also does he think of the Pains of Bruit Beasts, which
by his Argument must be produced by God only; Does God produce in them pain
only as they are Sinners? What of the pains of the Holy Martyrs flagrant in
Flames of Love to God, are they inflicted on them only as they are Sinners? Is
it not for the Trial of their Faith, Patience, Love and Obedience, 1 Pet. 1.7.
that the Trial of their Faith might be found to their Praise, Honor and Glory
at the Revelation of the Lord Jesus? What thinks he of the direful Agonies and
Sufferings of the Blessed Jesus, was he also a Sinner? Did he not for the Joy
that was set before him endure the Cross? Hebr. 12.2.


In fine, it is certain that the Wicked find the same sentiments of Delight and
sensual Pleasures in their sinful, as do the Righteous in their lawful Actions;
viz. the lustful Person in his unchaste Embraces, as the Good Man in the
Marriage Bed. It Is certain also that these sensual Delights and Pleasures are
very obstructive unto Piety, and great Incentives unto Vice: What hinders the
good Seed from bringing Fruit unto perfection? Luke 8.14.
(...), the Pleasures of Life, says Christ. Whence comes wars and fightings
among us? James 4.1.
(...), from your Pleasures, says St. James. Why do you covet, Ver. 3.
and so zealously affect the World's good things? that you may, says he, spend
them, (...), in your Pleasures. What gave rise to the Corruptions of the
Heathen World? even this, that they did, (...), Tit. 3.3.
serve diverse Lusts and Pleasures. Is it not the pleasure we expect from the
Enjoyment of the Creature, that gives the Rise to all that love and that desire
of the Creature which you so tragically inveigh against? And after all this,
will you not only determine God's Operation to the production of the pleasure
of all our sinful Actions, and oblige him by an immutable Law to reward our
Transgressions with Pleasure and Delight, and immediately and solely to produce
that in us which is so obstructive to Piety, so powerful an incentive to that
Sin he infinitely hates, and is the rise of all that Mischief which flows from
the Love and Desire of the Creature; but also tells us, That God naturally
delights in them, and wills them for themselves, that they are natural,
genuine, and direct Effects of God, and that it is of the proper Nature of God,
as consisting of such essential Excellencies and Perfections to produce them?
Credat Iudaeus Apella.

And having thus impartially considered all that Mr. N. has offered on this
Subject,. 9.
I proceed next to the Discourses of the Good Lady on the same Subject; whose
Rhetoric is very Charming, and her devout Affections highly commendable, but
her Arguments seldom reach the point; and when they do, their strength is not
equal to the Beauty of the Style.

P. 144, 210.
I grant unto her, that we are not to rest in the Creature as our end: For what
we are to love only in due relation to our end, we cannot rest in as our end;
That we are not to desire them as our Happiness, P. 179, 180, 181.
or to look upon them as the completion of our Bliss; because we are to prize
God only as the Object of our Bliss and Happiness: That we are not to lay the
weight of our Souls upon them, or place our Felicity in them: P. 143.
That we must not cleave to any Creature, or fix our Hearts upon it; for that
is contrary to that superlative Affection to God, which requires us to part
with all things, to cleave close unto him. That we must not suffer the Creature
to usurp our hearts, Ibid.
or to sit uppermost in our minds; for then we cannot love God above all
things. Let her go on with her chaste Rhetoric and Holy Flames, to beat down
this inordinate Affection to the Creature; and we will equally admire, and
approve her sayings. We accord with her, That the very best of Creatures are
not able to satisfy the Longings, P. 132.
and fill the Capacities of our mind. Whence it will follow, that we must not
place our Satisfaction, or the Contentment of our mind in any Creature; which
notwithstanding, if the Creature can supply our Wants, and be ordained by the
Providence of God to do so, we think it is the proper Object of our desire to
have that want supplied. Let. 9. p. 185.
We ought not to love the World, says she, because of the danger of being
conformed to it; for nothing is so excellent at imitation as Love, nothing does
so easily assimilate.

Now does she here mean the corrupt manners of the World? Her Proposition is
invincible; but reaches not the point. If she means the good Things of the
World, Food, Drink, Clothes, Houses, Lands, Orchards, Gold or Silver, I hope
the danger of assimilation is not here very great. It Is granted, That the whole
compass of desire must not be carried out after the Creature; Ibid. p. 195.
for then I could not desire God above all, and before all things. So that my
desire of Temporals when lawful, should be comparatively none; and when they
hinder my desire of him, should be absolutely none. P. 132.
It Is therefore true, That the boundlesness of desire is a plain Indication,
that it was never made for the Creature Only. But will it follow hence, that
the Creature was not made for the Satisfaction of our natural Desires, or that
our natural Appetites should not move to desire the Enjoyment of them? We
grant, P. 208.209.
That God (virtually) comprehends all possible Good, i. e. that he has Virtue
sufficient to produce it, and that he is the very Fountain and sole Author of
it. But will the Love of God assuage her Hunger, quench her Thirst, or cloth
her Nakedness? Or is he any other way the satisfier of our Desires of these
things, than by affording us those Creatures he made on purpose for those ends?
And must not then the hungry Appetite desire these Creatures for its Food, the
thirsty for its Drink, etc. But, says the Good Lady,

Object.
If we allow the Creature to be in any degree our Good, Let. 5. p. 95.
it is hard to keep our selves from desiring it; and if we permit desire, we can
never be secure from irregular Love; it being easier not to desire at all, then
to desire with moderation.

Answ.
It is not only hard, but it is sinful to keep our selves from desiring the
Creature; it being to keep our selves from desiring what God has promised, and
made the matter of our daily Prayer, and to rob our selves of all the Pleasure
which arises from the Gratification of our natural Appetites or Desires
according to, Let. 7. p. 150.
and not exceeding the Intention of Nature, Ibid. p. 149.
and of all that grateful Relish or Sensation which every Faculty enjoys in the
regular Application of it self to [i. e. in the desire of] such Octjects as are
agreeable to its Nature; that is, of all the innocent Pleasures of our Lives.

2. Nor is it true, That it is easier not to desire at all, than to desire with
moderation. For doubtless, this Excellent Lady desires rest and sleep when she
does want them, Food when she is hungry, and Drink when she is thirsty, and
Health when she is sick, and desires all these things with moderation; but can
she with more ease abstain from desiring them at all?

3. Though we permit desire; yet if we do not permit it to exceed the real
Necessities of Nature, and the bounds which Scripture has set to it, and
having Food and Raiment are therewith content: If we pursue the Comforts of
this present Life, or the Gratifications of our natural Appetites according to,
and so as not to exceed the Intention of Nature; if we pursue them in relation
to, and in due Submission to the Will of God; and only by those means, and in
those measures he allows of, as Reason and Scripture do require, we cannot be
immoderate, and therefore not irregular in the desire of them.

4. Our Hopes, our Fears, our Grief, Delight are subject to the like
Irregularities; but must we therefore never permit these Passions to move
toward their proper Objects? In fine, love of Benevolence toward our selves,
our Friends, Relations, and our Life are too often excessive, and are indeed the
Root of that immoderate desire we have for the Creature; and yet they are
commanded. It will not therefore follow, That we may not desire temporal good
things at all, because these desires are subject to Irregularity.

If we once permit our Desires to stray after the Creature, Object. 2. P. 138.
we open a Bank to all that Mischief, Malice, and Uncharitableness that is in
the World.

That is, Answ.
if I pray; that is, desire of God my daily Bread; if I say to him with Agar,
Feed me with Food convenient for one; if I ask of my Heavenly Father what he
knows I have need of; if I desire to have what he has promised, I open a
Bank to all that Mischief, Malice and Uncharitableness that is in the World.
This is strange Doctrine; yet the Good Lady thus attempts to prove it.

For the Creature being finite and empty too, Ibid.
how is it possible, but that a multitude of Lovers who all desire the same
thing, -- should cross each other in these desires and pursuits, and
consequently destroy that Peace and mutual Benevolence which ought to be
cherished among rational Beings, and to which the Precepts of the Gospel so
strictly engage us.

Answ.
I have already granted that these Creatures are not desired to satisfy the
Soul, but to supply the Wants of the Body. Now is there any necessity in that
fullness which the Earth affords for all, that I should desire what another
has; or that my desire of Meat, Drink and Clothing, which is all that Nature
craves, and with which Christianity requires me to be content, should move me
to cross the natural desires of others to have Meat, Drink and Clothes, when
Providence has made a plentiful provision of these things for us all? A desire
thus limited to contentment with Food and Raiment, lays a sure Fund for
Charity to others, by disposing us to part with what is not thus necessary for
our selves, to supply our Brother's Wants; which is all that Charity requires.

Object. 3.
It is very unreasonable to love the Creature, because it can never answer the
end of Love. We desire only in order to Happiness; nothing being desirable any
farther, than as it promotes that end: But the Love of the Creature is more apt
to hinder, than advance our Happiness; and therefore in all Reason, Creatures
are not to be thought desirable.

Answ.
I Answer, That we desire not only in order to our final Happiness, but also in
order to the Gratification and Satisfaction of our Bodily Wants. For what we so
far need, as that we are not able to live without it, we must desire, as much
as we desire to subsist; though the desire of Life it self should be in order to
God's Glory, and the Welfare of our Souls: And therefore in that sense even the
desire of that Food by which we do sustain that Life, is a desire of it in
order to our Happiness.

2. To say this Generally, and without all Restriction, that the Love, that is,
as she her self Interprets it, the desire of the Creature is more apt to hinder
than advance our Happiness, is in effect to say that God himself does move us
to love and to obey him by the promise of things more apt to hinder than
advance our Happiness; and that he has Implanted in us natural Desires of such
things; and that our Lord commands us daily to desire and pray for what rather
tends to hinder than advance our Happiness.

In fine, When the Lady says, This is most certain, P. 189.
that what we love will be uppermost in our minds; I desire her to consider,
that it is a contradiction to say, That what I love only in relation, and in
Subordination to another, whom I do value above all things, should be uppermost
in my Mind; that is, preferred in my Mind before that very Being my Mind does
value much above it.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for A. and J. Churchill.
PRince Arthur. An Heroic Poem. In 10 Books. Fol. King Arthur. An Heroic
Poem. In 12 Books Fol. Both by Sir Rich. Blackmore, Knight. Physician to His
Majesty. Tractatus de Visitatione Iufirmorum, Seu de eis Parochorum Officiis.
Quae Infirmos, and Moribundos recipient. In Gratiam Iuniorum, and in
Visitandis Infirmis minu. Exercitatorum Editus. Authore Johanne Stern, S. T.
D. and Vicario de Trimm, in Dioecesi Midensi. A Commonplace Book to the Holy
Bible: Or, the Scriptures Sufficiency Practically Demonstrated. Wherein
whatsoever is contained in Scripture, respecting Doctrine, Worship, or Manners,
is reduced to its Proper Head: Weighty Cases Resolved, Truths Confirmed,
difficult Texts Illustrated, and Explained by others more plain. 4o Mr. Locke's
Letter to the Bishop of Worcester. 8o Mr. Kettlewell's Office for Prisoners for
Crimes, and for Prisoners for Debts. 12o A Second Vindication of the
Reasonableness of Christianity. By the Author of the Reasonableness of
Christianity. Mr. Robert Peirce's Bath Memoirs: Or, Observations in Three and
Forty Years Practice at the Bath, etc. 8o Mr. Bold's Discourse of the Knowledge
of Christ Jesus. To which are added some Passages in the Reasonableness of
Christianity, etc. With some Animadversions on Mr. Edward's Reflections on the
same. 8o Mr. Bold's Reply to Mr. Edward's Reflection on the same. 8o
There is now Printing a New Edition of the large Cambridge Concordance, in
Folio, with great Improvements; To which Edition is added, The Concordance to
the Apocrypha, never before Published. To be sold by A. and I. Churchill.


