A DISCOURSE, Confirming the TRUTH and CERTAINTY OF THE Christian Faith From
the Extraordinary GIFTS and OPERATIONS OF THE Holy Ghost, Vouchsafed to the
APOSTLES and PRIMITIVE PROFESSORS of that FAITH.

By Daniel Whitby, D. D. and Chantor of the Church of Sarum.

LONDON, Printed for A. Churchill, at the Black Swan in Paternoster Row,
MDCXCI.

Imprimatur.

Geo. Royse. R. Rmo. in Christo Patri at Dom. Dom. Johanni Archiep. Cantuar. a
Sacris.

June the 30th. 1691.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THAT this Discourse may not seem to take that for granted which cannot be
proved, and that some Notions in it, seemingly new, may give the Reader no
Offense. I crave leave to premise:

First, That the Holy Ghost was certainly designed for a Witness to the Truth
of our Lord's Resurrection, and Exaltation to the Right Hand of Majesty, and
given to confirm the Christian Faith. For,

First, Our Savior does assure his Disciples, that this his Advocate should at
his coming convince the World of Sin, viz. of the great Sin of Infidelity,
because they believed not in him; 16. Jo. 9, 10.
and of Righteousness, or that He, though condemned by the Sanhedrim as a False
Prophet, and a Deceiver of the People, was a just and righteous Person, one
highly favored by the God of Heaven, because the sending of the Holy Spirit
was a full Evidence that he was Gone to the Father, that he was exalted to the
Right Hand of God, and had received from the Father the Promise of the Holy
Ghost.

Secondly, St. John, the beloved Disciple, does inform us that the Spirit was
the great Witness that Jesus was the Son of God, Joh. 5.6, 8.
and that of the three Witnesses on Earth to this great Truth, the Holy Spirit
was the first.

Thirdly, St. Paul does frequently declare, that by the (...), i. e. the Gifts,
(...), 1 Cor. 16. (...), 2 Cor. 1.21, 22.
and Distributions of the Holy Ghost, the Testimony of Christ was confirmed to
all Christians, and that God by giving this Holy Spirit to them, did confirm
them in Christ.

And upon this, as well as other Accounts; he seems to be called (...). the
Advocate of Christ, because he was to undertake the Defense of the Ministry,
and the Prophetic Office of our Lord against the Presidents of the Sinagogue,
and the great Sanhedrim of the Jews, who had condemned him, and procured his
Death as a False Prophet.

Secondly, I premise that the Sin against the Holy Ghost seems best explained
by that Notion of the Holy Ghost, which I have here espoused, to make this as
clear as I am able; let it be noted,

First, That there is a manifest Distinction in the New Testament betwixt the
Power of working Signs and Miracles, and the Gifts and Distributions of the
Holy Ghost. As when St. Paul speaks of things wrought by him to make the
Gentiles obedient in Word and Deed, by mighty Signs, and Miracles, (...), 15.
Romans 19.
and Powers of the Holy Ghost, when he speaks of the Gospel preached by him in
demonstration of the Spirit, (...), 1 Cor 2.4.1.
and in Power, and of the Duty of the Clergy to commend themselves to others by
the Holy Ghost, (...) 2 Cor. 6.6, 7.
and by the Power of God; When he speaks to his Galathians, of him that
ministers the Spirit, (...), 3 Gal. 5.
and works Miracles among them, And to his Thessalonians, of the Gospel
coming to them in Power, (...) 1 These. 1.5.
and in the Holy Ghost. And lastly, to the Jewish Converts, that God bore
witness to the Word of his Grace, by Signs and Wonders, and diverse Miracles,
(...), 2 Heb 4.
and Distributions of the Holy Ghost. And that being baptized, (...), 6 Heb. 4,
5.
they were made Partakers of the Holy Ghost, and had tasted the Powers of the
World to come.

Secondly, That the Holy Ghost was sent, after our Savior's Resurrection, to
bear witness both to the Truth of his Resurrection, and of the Doctrine which
he taught, He giving in his Testimony with the Apostles, of these things. For
when the Advocate comes, 15 Joh. 16, 17.
which I, says Christ, will send you from the Father, he shall testify of me,
and you also shall bear Witness of me, for you have been with me from the
beginning. Accordingly we, says St. Peter, are his Witnesses of these things,
5 Act 32
and so is the Holy Ghost which he has given to those that obey him.

Thirdly, That our Lord Jesus, and his Apostles seem plainly to assert the Holy
Spirit was to give in his Testimony, after his Resurrection and Ascension to
the Father: This is so evident from the forecited Places, and from that
Expression of St. John, 7 Joh. 39.
the Holy Ghost was not yet, because that Jesus was not yet glorified; that it
seems needless to add any thing in farther Confirmation of it.

Now hence it follows, that the Holy Ghost was to be a succeeding Testimony to
that of the Miracles wrought by our Savior upon Earth, and consequently that
the Sin against the Holy Ghost, was a Sin chiefly, and completely to be
committed afterward; which also seems probable even from the Tenor of o^r
Saviors Words. 12 Luke 10. 12 Matt. 24. 3 Mark 29.
Whosoever shall speak a word against the Son of Man (as you now do, who say,
He has a Devil, and casts out Devils by Beelzebub) it shall be forgiven him,
(...), but whosever (hereafter) shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost, it
shall not be forgiven him.

Fourthly, Observe that this was the last Testimony God would exhibit to the
Jews, to evidence to them that Jesus was indeed the true Messiah, and that on
their Rejection of it depended their being given up to judicial Blindness, and
to utter Desolation, and Excision from being any more hi^ Church, and his
peculiar People. Accordingly, after this Blasphemy against our Lord, both He,
and his Disciples, s^ill call them to that Faith and Repentance which would
assuredly procure their Pardon; but then He warns them of the Greatness of
their Sin, as being next to that which was unpardonable, informing them, that
as they had blasphemed the Miracles wrought by he Finger of God, or by the
Power of the Spirit before their Eyes, so if they should add to this, the
Contempt of those internal Gifts and Operations of the Holy Ghost, which were
to be vouchsafed after his Resurrection, for farther Confirmation that he was
the Son of God, their Sin should then become unpardonable. And the Author to
the Hebrews, declares it a thing impossible to renew them to Repentance, 6 Heb.
5, 6.
who being made Partakers of the Holy Ghost, and having tasted the Powers of
the World to come, did notwithstanding wilfully apostatize from the Profession
of the Christian Faith; for that by the word (...), in that Expression, we are
to understand miraculous Powers may be concluded, not only from the like Use of
the Word in this Epistle, (...) 2 Hebr. 4. (...). 2 Act. 22. (...).4 Act. 33.
(...) 8 Act. 13.(...) 19 Act. 10. See 15. Romans 19. 1 Cor. 2.4 2 Cor. 6.7. 3
Gal. 5. 1 These. 1.5.
but also in many other Places of the New Testament. 2. That (...) the World to
come, denotes the Times of the Messiah, cannot be reasonably doubted by him,
who well considers, that Christ himself, according to the Translation, 9 Esa. 6.
or Exposition of the Septuagint, is styled (...), the Father of the future
Age, and that the Apostle writes to the Jews, in whose Account there were two
Ages, the one before, the other after the coming of our Savior, which they
constantly styled Holam Habba, the future Age, or the World to come, 2 Heb. 5.
as the Apostle intimates in that Expression, For unto Angels has he not put
into Subjection the World to come; that is, whereas the World before Christ was
chiefly governed by Angels, the Almighty having divided the Nations, 32 Deuteronomy. 8.
(...), according to the Number of the Angels which were to preside over them,
17 Eccl. 17.
says the Septuagint, and Set, of them, a Ruler over every People, says the
Son of Syrach, according to the constant Doctrine of the Jews, embraced also
generally by the (...). Just. M. Apol. P. 44. vid. Athenag. ^g. pro Christian.
P. 27. c. Clem. Recogn. l. 4. c. 4.2. Eusebius. Demonst. Evang. l. 4.
Ancient Fathers, the World to come, or Christian State, is not thus put in
Subjection to them, but to one far exceeding the Angels, even the only begotten
Son of God.

A Discourse, tending to evince the Truth of Christian Faith; from the
extraordinary Gifts and Operations of the Holy Ghost, by which it was at first
confirmed.
WHosoever well considers the admirable Perfection of the Christian Faith, how
far the Doctrines and Precepts of it do excel all other Doctrines and
Precepts, which either in pretense, or truly have been revealed to the World,
will find sufficient Reason to believe that such an excellent Dispensation took
it is rise from the most excellent of Beings. For it is,

1. A Revelation which represents God to us such in all Respects, as Men of
Wisdom and Discretion would desire to be their Governor, viz. a God of infinite
Power to protect, of infinite Wisdom to direct us, and of the greatest
Goodness, Love and Compassion to design, and to promote our Happiness and
Welfare.

2. It prescribes such Laws as every wise Man would choose to live by, they
being Holy, Just and Good, 7 Romans 12. 12. Romans 1.
and Obedience they require, being our reasonable Service, that is, such
Service as our own Reason cannot but approve of as fit and proper to be done.

3. It is a Dispensation which propounds such Arguments to persuade us to yield
Obedience to these: Laws, as no Man, who regards his own Interest, and truly
loves himself, can resist, they being the most admirable Blessings promised to
the Obedient, and the most direful and lasting Evils threatened to the
Disobedient.

4. It is a Revelation which affords us good Assurance of the most powerful
Assistance to perform this Duty, even the Aids of Divine Grace.

Now that such a Revelation has in it the true Characters of a Divine
Religion, that it contains a Doctrine worthy of God, and therefore worthy of
all Acceptance, and cannot reasonably be thought a politic Contrivance of the
Wit of Man, much less the Product of wicked and deluding Spirits will appear
evident to any who has Ability, and Opportunity to compare it with all
pretended Doctrines and Religions, which either the Wit of Man, or Craft of
Satan, had before brought into the World.

Let any Person, who thinks otherwise, produce any Religion which does so
naturally tend to render Men truly devout and pious toward God, Chaste and
Temperate, Patient and Contented under all Conditions, more Just and Honest,
Kind and Peaceable, and Fruitful in good Offices toward all Men, and which
affords more solid Comforts and Supports under the Miseries of human Life; let
him produce one Book, besides the Holy Scriptures, composed before they were
written, which gives us such a clear, and true Idea of the Attributes and Works
of God, prescribes a more rational Service of him, has Rules of Life more
equal in themselves, more beneficial to Mankind, which does more fully tend to
make Men better in all Respects, Relations and Conditions; and which does offer
more powerful Enducements to persuade them to be so, and then he may have
reason to prefer what he has thus produced before the Pandects of the
Christian Faith; but if no other Book can vie with the New Testament, no other
Religion can compare with that which is contained in it; then must we either
say with Epicurus, that God is not concerned to be obeyed and worshipby the
Sons of Men; or, with the Infidel, discard all Revelations of his Will as
false; or grant that this, above all others, deserves to be embraced as the
must true and perfect Revelation of the Will of God.

But this Argument has by much better Pens been handled, and improved into so
clear a Demonstration of the Truth of Christian Faith, that nothing but the
disagreeing Lives of Christians, which generally fall so exceeding short of
what this perfect Rule prescribes, or run so counter to it, could make Men to
suspect the shining Evidence of it.

I therefore have chosen to insist upon another Argument, arising from the
Extraordinary Gifts and Distributions of the Holy Ghost, by which this Doctrine
was at first confirmed, in which I hope to make some small addition to the
Performances of others, and which I shall endeavor to confirm, by proving the
ensuing Propositions.

I. That the Gifts and powerful Operations of the Holy Ghost were most
assuredly vouchsafed to propagate and confirm the Christian Faith.

II. That the Assistance of the Holy Ghost vouchsafed to our Lords Apostles,
and to the Primitive Professors of the Christian Faith, are a most full and
ample Confirmation of it, and a convincing Evidence that it is derived from the
God of Truth.

Now that the Gifts and powerful Operations of the Holy Ghost were thus engaged
to confirm and propagate the Christian Faith, will be apparent,

1. From the Assurance which the Baptist gave, 44 Isa. 3. 36 Ez. 27. 2 Joel 28.
both to the Jews in general, and to the Pharisees and Sadducees in particular,
that the Messiah would suddenly baptize those who believed in him with the Holy
Ghost [3 Mat. 7.11.]

2. From a like Promise which our Savior made to his Disciples, that he would
send his Holy Spirit down upon them, and would baptize them with the Holy
Ghost, 16 John 13.
and Fire [15 John 26.5 Act. 5.] or with the Holy Ghost appearing in a fiery
Shape, and by that Spirit would show them things to come; and from his Promise
made not to them only, but to Believers in general, that they should receive
the Holy Ghost, Note that at the Feast of Tabernacles, they were accustomed to
compass the Altar with Branches in their Hands, crying out Hosanna, but on the
last Day of the Feast, they were enjoined to compass it thus seven times;
saying some Prayers, in which they often repeated these Words, Hosanna and
Hatzlicha, save now and prosper us, and, as they add, by the Institution of
their Prophets, they then fetched Water from the Fountain of Siloah, and
brought in into the Temple to their Priests, who poured it out upon the Altar
with the Wine of the Sacrifice, singing these Words of the Prophet Isaiah, With
joy shall ye draw Water out of the Wells of Salvation, 12 Isa. 3. and whilst
they were thus singing, th y expected the Holy Spirit should fall upon them,
Talmud. tract. de festo Tabernac. cap. c^a^l. And hence we learn why this Day
was called the great Day of the Feast, and why our Lord spoke then to them of
the Holy Ghost, under the Metaphor of Water.
[7 John 38, 39.] and lastly, from the Promise made by St. Peter to all Jews
and Gentiles then present at Jerusalem, and being Witnesses of the miraculous
Gifts of this good Spirit, conferred on the Apostles in these Emphatical
Expressions [2 Acts 38, 39] Repent and be baptized every one of you in the Name
of Jesus Christ, for the Remission of sins, and ye shall receive the Gift of
the Holy Ghost, for the Promise is to you, and to your Children, and to all
that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. These things
being so plainly foretold and certified, and made the matter of a Promise, we
have good reason to conclude that they were true, for had no signal Evidence
been given of the Completion of all the Promises now mentioned upon the
Primitive Professors of the Christian Faith, the Expectation of the Christians
must have been entirely frustrated, and the whole Story of the Evangelist St.
John, and of the Acts of the Apostles, must have been convinced of Falsehood,
especially when they so roundly do pronounce of Christ's Disciples, they were
all filled with the Holy Ghost, and that great Grace was upon them all, 4 Acts
31, 33.

2. Moreover, that this was the usual Effect of Baptism, especially where 'twas
attended with the Imposition of the Apostles Hand; that some of those
miraculous Gifts were for a time confor'd on all at Baptism, seems highly
probable from the Baptists Words, who, when Jerusalem, and all Judaea, and all
the Region about Jordan had been baptized of him, speaks thus to them [ Mat.
3.11.] I indeed baptize you with Water to Repentance, but he that comes after
me, shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and Fire; from the Tenor of the
Promise, 2 Joel 28. It shall come to pass in the last days, I will pour out of
my Spirit upon all Flesh: From St. Peter's Engagement, (...), to every baptized
Person, that he should receive the Holy Ghost; and that because the Promise did
relate to all the Jews, (...), and all the called Gentiles; from St. Paul's
Question to the Disciples of St. John (19 Acts 3, 5, 6.) What Baptism have ye
received, who confess, that with it ye received not the Holy Ghost; and his
baptizing them in the Name of the Lord Jesus, that so the Holy Ghost might fall
upon them. From his express Words to the Church of Corinth, even where he is
discoursing of these extraordinary Gifts (1 Cor. 12, 13.) That by one Spirit
they were all baptized into one Body; and from his Declaration to the whole
Church of Ephesus, 1. Ephesians. 13.
that after they believed (and were baptized) they were all sealed with the
Spirit of Promise; and from the close Connection of the (...), Just. M. Dial. 2.
p. 94. D.
(...); or baptized Persons, with the tasting of the Spiritual Gift, and being
made Partakers of the Holy Ghost, and of the Powers of the World to come, 6
Heb. 4, 5. Here then we find a Promise of the Holy Ghost without restrictions,
and a Completion of it answerable to the largeness of the Terms in which it was
comprised, and consequently Matter of Fact avouched in Confirmation of the
Apostles Testimony, of which, no Person that was baptized could be ignorant,
and of the Falsehood of which Testimony, no Christian could be Witness from his
own Experience, without a Demonstration of the Falsehood of the Assertors of
that Faith.

3. Their Writings give us great Assurance of the Completion of this Promise to
Believers, the History of the Acts of the Apostles begins with the Descent of
the Holy Ghost on the Disciples at the Day of Pentecost, Acts 2.
and the Experiment they gave of his miraculous Assistance to Men of every
Nation under Heaven; it proceeds to tell us, how he fell on the Samaritan
Converts at the Imposition of the Hands of John and Peter; Acts 8, 17.
how at the Preaching of the same Apostle, he fell upon the Family, Acts 10, 44.
the Friends and Kindred of Cornelius, and upon twelve Disciples of the
Baptist, upon the Imposition of the Hands of the Apostle Paul. (...). Romans 1.11.
The same Apostle begins his Epistle to the Romans thus, I long to see you,
that I may impart unto you some spiritual Gift, that you may be established.
And he concludes it thus, I know that when I come to see you, I shall come in
the Fullness of the Blessing of the Gospel of Christ. Romans 15.29.
In his Twelfth Chapter, Romans 12, 6.
he declares that he had (...) diverse Gifts, according to the Grace given to
them; particularly, that of Prophecy. In his Fifteenth Chapter, he declares he
was the Minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, Romans 15, 16.
ministering the Gospel of God to them, that the Oblation of the Gentiles to God
might be acceptable, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost; adding, Romans v. 81.
that Christ had efficaciously wrought with him to make the Gentiles obedient
in Word and Deed, by mighty Signs and Wonders, and by the Power of the Spirit
of God. In his First Epistle to the Church of Corinth, he abounds in such
Expressions, as manifestly do respect these Gifts not only exercised by him,
but received by them. I thank my God, (...). 11 5, 6, 7.
says he, for the Grace given you in Jesus Christ, that in every thing you are
enriched in him in all Utterance (or Tongues) and all Knowledge, even as the
Testimony of Christ was confirmed in you, so that you are deficient in no Gift.
He spends his whole Twelfth Chapter in the Enumeration of those Gifts, by which
the Manifestation of the Spirit was confirmed among them, viz. the Gifts of
Wisdom, 1 Cor. 12 8, 9, 10, 29, 30.
Knowledge, Prophecy, and the discerning of the Mind of God, the Gift of
Miracles, of Faith, of Healing, of diverse kinds of Tongues, and the
Interpretation of them; concluding with these Questions, Are all Apostles? Are
all Prophets? Are all Teachers? Are all Workers of Miracles? Have all the Gifts
of Healing? Do all speak with Tongues? Do all interpret? but covet earnestly
the best Gifts. 2 Cor. 8 7.
In his Second Epistle, he declares that they abounded in Faith, in Utterance
and Knowledge. He chides them for abusing these extraordinary Gifts, by making
them Occasions of their Boasting in that mistaken Place, 1 Cor. 4.7.
What have thou (of these Gifts) which thou have not received? and if thou have
received them, wherefore do thou boast, as if thou had not received them?
and for their using them, so as to breed Confusion in the Church, 1 Cor. 14 26.
saying, How is it Brethren, that when ye come together, every one of you has
a Psalm, has a Doctrine, has a Tongue, has a Revelation, has an
Interpretation? Let all things be done to edifying. His Apostleship being
despised, or questioned by some, or being judged inferior to that of others, he
confirms and justifies it by declaring, That his Preaching was not in the
enticeing Words of Man's Wisdom, 1 Cor. 2.4.
but in Demonstration of the Spirit, and in Power, that they themselves were
manifestly declared to be the Epistle of Christ, ministered by him, written not
with Ink; 2 Cor. 3.1, 3.
but with the Spirit of the living God; and that he therefore needed no other
Letters of Commendation to them; that he was not a whit behind the very chief
of the Apostles, 2 Cor. 11.4, 5.
and that they had received no other Spirit than what they had received from
him, that in nothing was he behind the very chief of the Apostles, the Signs of
an Apostle being wrought among them by him in all Patience, in Signs and
Wonders, 2. Cor. 12.12, 13.
and mighty Deeds; and that in nothing were they inferior to any other
Churches. In his Epistle to the Galatians, he compares, himself with the chief
of the Apostles, and the Pillars of the Church, 2. Call. 7.8, 9.
declaring, that he who wrought effectually in Peter to the Apostleship of the
Circumcision, was as efficacious in him toward the Gentiles, that these
Pillars saw, and perceived by the Grace given to him, that the Gospel of
Uncircumcision was committed to him, as the Gospel of the Circumcision was to
Peter, and therefore gave unto them the Right Hand of Fellowship, that he with
Barnabas, 3. Gal. 13, 14. 1. Ephesians. 3.15. Romans 29. 6. Heb. 4.
should go unto the Gentiles, and they unto the Circumcision: Adding for
Consolation to the Gentiles, that Christ had redeemed them from the Curse of
the Law, that the Blessing of Abraham might come upon the Gentiles, that they
might receive the Promise of the Spirit through Faith. He magnifies the God of
Heaven, for blessing his Ephesians with all Spiritual Blessings in heavenly
things Note that (...) may be so rendered in this Place, is probable.

1. From the Phrase (...), for the Gifts of the Holy Ghost are styled (15. Romans
29. (...), the Blessing of the Gospel, and the Promise of the Spirit (...) the
Blessing of Abraham. 3. Gal. 14.

2. Because these Gifts are styled (...), thus when our Savior had (3. John.
12.) discoursed of the Spirit received in Baptism, he says he had told them
(...), and they who were Partakers of these Gifts, are said to have tasted
(...). vis of the heavenly Gift. 7. Heb. 4.


or Gifts) in Christ Jesus: he prays that God would farther give unto them the
Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, for the Acknowledgment of Christ; and he
exhorts them to be filled with the Spirit, speaking one to another in Psalms
and Hymns, and spiritual Songs: The same Exhortation he repeats to his
Colossians: And a like Prayer he makes for them, that they may be filled with
the Knowledge of his Will in all Wisdom, and spiritual Understanding. Two of
his Admonitions to the Thessalonians are conceived in these Words, quench not
the Spirit, despise not Prophesies. 5 Ephesians. 16.17.
3 Col. 16. 1 Col. 9.
1 These. 5.19, 20.
The Author to the Hebrews pronounces it a dreadful thing to fall from the
Profession of the Christian Faith, 6 Hebr. 4, 5.
because upon their first embracing of it, they had tasted of the heavenly
Gift, and of the powers of the World to come, and were made partakers of the
Holy Ghost; and therefore by revolting, after they had thus received the
Knowledge of the Truth, chap. 10. verse. 29.
they did despite to the Spirit of Grace. St. Peter advertiseth the same
converted Jews that the Gospel was preached to them by the Assistance of the
Holy Ghost, sent down from Heaven: 1 Pet. 1.12.
And he gives these instructions to them, for the Use of their extraordinary
Gifts, ch 4. 10, 11.
As every Man has received (...) the Gift, so let them minister the same one
to another, as good Stewards of the manifold Grace of God; if any Man s^eak,
let him speak as the Oracles of God; if any Man minister, let him do it as of
the Ability which God gives, that God in all things may be glorified through
Jesus Christ. St. John informs the Christians, 1 John 2.20, 27.
that they had an Unction from the Holy one, and they knew all things
necessary, and that the Unction they had received, abiding in them, they had no
need that any Man should teach them, but as the same Anointing taught them all
things. Moreover, says he, c. 3.24.
hereby do we know that we abide in Christ by the Spirit which he has given
us; and that this was their Preservative against the many Antichrists that were
in the World.

4. That these extraordinary Operations of the Holy Ghost were thus vouchsafed
to confirm the Christian Faith, is farther evident from the Consideration, that
the Apostles do, with the greatest Confidence, produce this Testimony of the
Holy Ghost, as a convincing Demonstration of the Resurrection of our Lord, and
of the Truth of what they had delivered in his Name; and as a full
justification both of their Office, and their Actions: The God of our Fathers,
5. Acts, 30, 31, 32.
says St. Peter, has raised Jesus to be a Prince, and a Savior, to give
Repentance unto Israel; and we are his Witnesses of these things, and so is
also the Holy Ghost, which he has given to those that obey him. When Peter was
accused for transgressing the Jewish Rites, by conversing with Cornelius, and
others uncircumcised Persons, he apologizes for himself, by saying, The Holy
Ghost fell upon them, 11 Acts, 15.
as upon us at the beginning; and by that fact, convinced the Zealots of the
Circumcision, when the believing Pharisees contended that it was needful to
Circumcise the Gentiles, and to command them to keep the Law of Moses, St.
Peter by this Argument confutes them, That God who knows the hearts of Men,
bare witness, that though uncircumcised, they were accepted with him, 15. Acts,
8.
by giving them the Holy Ghost even as he did to us. St. Paul speaks thus to
the Church of Corinth, My preaching was in demonstration of the Spirit, 1 Cor.
2 4.
and in power, that they had received the Confirmation of the Faith bv the
Arrabo, the Pledge, 2 Cor. 5.5.
or earnest of the Spirit, by whose Testimony they were abundantly confirmed in
the Truth of what they did believe, and in the Certainty of what they did
expect. These Gifts are represented by him, as a convincing Motive to the
Prophet, or spiritual Person, to acknowledge, that what he wrote was the
Commandment of God: 1 Cor. 14.3
That the Gospel which he preached was the undoubted Truth, and that which was
to be retained in opposition to the Law, he proves to the Galatians, because
the ministration of the Spirit, and the Power of working Miracles was the
result not of the Law, but of the Gospel Dispensation: For thus he puts the
Question to them: 3 Gal. 1. 3 Gal. 2, 3 Gal. 3, 3 Gal. 5.
O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you, that you should not obey the
Truth? this only would I learn of you* Received you the Spirit by the Works of
the Law, or by the hearing of Faith? Are you so foolish, having begun in the
Spirit, are you made perfect in the Flesh? He therefore that ministers the
Spirit, and works Miracles among you, does be it by the Works of the Law, or
by the Hearing of Faith? In his Epistle to the Thessalonians, he argues their
Election by God because his Gospel came not to them in Word only, 1 These. 1. v.
5, 6.
but in Power and in the Holy Ghost, and much assurance, and they received the
Word in much affliction, and with joy in the Holy Ghost. In his Epistle to the
Hebrews he shows the dreadful Issue of the Contemners of the Gospel upon this
account, that God bare witness to it by Signs, 2 (...) 4.
and Wonders, and diverse Miracles, and Distributions of the Holy Ghost,
according to his will. Now Arguments of this nature neither could be urged by,
nor being offered, could prevail upon, wise and considering Men, had not the
Matter of Fact, on which they did entirely depend, been uncontestible.

5. This argument receives yet farther strength from this consideration, that
those Gifts, and powerful Operations of the Holy Spirit were either such of
which even Infidels might, from the Nature of them, be convinced, or such as
from some outward, or sensible Appearance, or by their inward Operations and
Effects, made themselves known to them who had received them; for instance, the
working of Miracles, as the making the Lame to walk, the Deaf to hear, the
Blind to see, the Dead to live, which were all Miracles of Mercy, or the
inflicting Blindness upon Elymas, or Death on Ananias and Saphira, 13 Acts. 11.
5 Acts 5, 10.
the delivering Men up to Satan, the Rod which the Apostle threatens to the
Disobedient in the Church of Corinth, which were all Miracles of Judgment, the
casting out Devils by the Name of Jesus, the healing the Sick by Imposition of
Hands, the Gifts of Prophecy, and discerning of Spirits, the Gifts of Tongues,
and the Interpretation of them, if truly done, were things self-evident, and
could not well be exercised without a sensible Demonstration to all that saw,
perceived, heard, or felt them, that they were performed: And therefore, by
enabling his Servants to perform them, God gave full testimony to the Word of
his Grace. Some of these Gifts, 1 Cor. 14.22, 23.
says the Apostle, were signs not to them that believe, but to them that
believed not, and by the Exercise of them he will be convinced, and the Secrets
of his Heart will be made manifest, and he will be induced to consess that God
is in you of a Truth; and therefore these are fitly styled (...) the
Manifestation of the Spirit. 1 Cor. 12.7.
The Baptism of the Spirit was at the first attended with a lambent Fire, so he
fell on the Apostles in the shape of fiery Tongues, 3 Mat. 16.
when our Lord Jesus was baptized, the Holy Ghost descended on him in the Shape
of a Dove, say the Evangelists, Epiph. Haer. 30. N. 13. 8 Romans 23. 2 Cor. 1.22.
4 Ephesians. 30. Chapter 1. 13 8 Romans 15, 16. 4 Gal. 6, 7. 1 John 5, 10. 1 John 4.13.
(...) a Fire was kindled in Jordan, says Justin Martyr (Dialcu. Tryp. p.
315.) (...) a great Light shone upon the Place says the Gospel of the
Nazarens, which the Syrian Churches also acknowledge in their Liturgy. The
Spirit then given to believers is styled the first Fruits which raised an
expectation in them of the Redemption of their Bodies, (...), 1 Cor. 1, 6.
(...), 2 Cor. 1.21, 22. vid. 2 Cor. 5.1-5 5 Gal. 5. 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. 2 Timothy 1.14.
the Earnest of the Spirit in their Hearts, the Spirit by which they were
sealed up to the Day of Redemption, the Earnest of their Inheritance for the
buying out of the purchased Possession, the Spirit by which they were enabled
to cry Abba Father, who testified to their Spirits that they were the Sons of
God, and should be heirs of Glory, and the VVitness of God within them. Which
expressions plainly intimate, that they who had this Spirit could certainly
know he dwelt in them, and could be thence assured of their Relation to God,
and of the Happiness which he had promised to them, according to the saying of
St. John, hereby we know that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has
given us of his Spirit. Moreover.

6. The Primitive Professors of the Christian Faith afford us a full Testimony
of the Continuance of those Gifts and Operations of the Holy Ghost in after
Ages. St. Clemens, the Companion, and Fellow Laborer with St. Paul, in his
Epistle to the (...). S S. 2.
Church of Corinth says, that they were filled with an insatiable desire of
doing good, and that there was a full Effusion of the Holy Ghost upon them all.
Eusebius adds, that the first Order of the Succession of the Apostles and the
Evangelists, which preached the Gospel after them, (...), Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c.
37.
did many and strange Wonders by the Holy Ghost. Ignatius the Martyr says of
the (...), Proem.
Church of Smyrna, that she was favored with all Gifts, and was deficient in
no Gift. Justin Martyr, in his Dialogue with Trypho, declares expressly of those
who were converted to the Novi nonnullos indies Christi Disciplinam
suscipientes, (...), Dial. cum Tryph. P 258. A (...), P. 308. B. (...), P. 315.
D.
Christian Faith, that they every one received the Gifts, as they were worthy,
when they were Baptized, some the Spirit of Knowledge, some of Council, some of
Fortitude, some of Healing, some of Foreknowledge, some of Doctrine. And
again, amongst us, says he, even to this present Time, the Gifts of Prophecy
are preserved, whence you Jews ought to understand, that what of old was proper
to the Jewish Church, is now translated to us; and a third time, Our Men and
Women have the Gifts of the Holy Ghost. Irenaeus, speaking of the wonderful
Operations of our Lord, says thus, (...), L. 2. c. 57.
They who are truly his Disciples, receiving Grace from him, do the like Works
in his Name, as every one has received the Gift from him; some ejecting Devils
so efficaciously, that they who were delivered from them, espoused the
Christian Faith, and constantly persevered in it; others had the Knowledge of
things future, Divine Visions, and prophetical Predictions were vouchsafed to
them; others by Imposition of Hands, cured the Diseased, and others raised the
Dead. It Is needless, says he, to insist upon Particulars, for the miraculous
Gifts which the Church, throughout the World, enjoys, and the beneficial
Miracles she works for the good of Heathens, are innumerable. And treating of
these Words of the Apostles, We speak Wisdom among those that are perfect, he
says, that (...), L. 5. cap. 6.
the Apostle, by the perfect, Understands those who have received the Spirit
of God, and by that Spirit speak all Languages, as we our selves have heard
from many Brethren of the Church, having prophetic Gifts, and by the Spirit
speaking all Languages, discovering the hidden things of Men, and manifesting
the Mysteries of God.

Here then we find by all these early Testimonies of Martyrs, for the Christian
Faith, that in the first and second Centuries, innumerable Gifts were still
continued, not only to some Churches, but to all Churches, every where, that
every one at their Baptism received some or other of these Gifts; and that
there was a full Effusion of the Holy Ghost upon them all; that these are
Relations, not of things past and gone, or only performed in a Corner, but of
things performed every day in the Face of the public Assembly, and so
confirmed by the joint Testimony of all Christian Churches, that they were
Miracles which their own Eyes had seen, Tongues, and Prophetic Gifts, which
their own Ears had heard, Gifts which they urged against the unbelieving Jew
for his Conviction, and beneficial Miracles so truly wrought upon the Heathen,
that they were efficacious to engage them to espouse, and persevere unto the
end in the Profession of the Christian Faith. And therefore this may well
deserve to be esteemed, Adv. Cols. l. 1. ^. p. 5.
as Origin well styles it, (...), the proper Demonstration of our Jesus, the
Archetype or essential Word; no other Doctrine, no other Pretender to the
Power of doing Signs or Wonders, having ever derived the Power from himself, on
others, entayl'd it on them by Promise, or engaged that all Believers should
receive it; no Heathen Apollonius, no Roman Jugler ever pretending to enable
their Followers to speak with Tongues, to interpret the Language of another, to
discern the Secrets of Men's Thoughts, to confer all, or any of these Gifts by
Imposition of Hands. And Secondly, (...), the most Divine Convincing
Demonstration of the Truth, and the celestial Original of that Faith which gave
the full Effusion of these Gifts to the Professors of it.

I have hitherto discoursed, as if the Gifts of Healing, Diseases, casting out
Devils, and working other powerful Miracles, were to be reckoned among the
Gifts of the Holy Ghost, and I indeed believe that all these are (...), the
Operations of the Spirit; but then I humbly conceive, that this Phrase, (...),
the Gifts of the Holy Ghost, does in the Scripture bear another Sense, and does
dictinctly This is the constant Notion of the Holy Ghost among the Ancient
Jews: See Maimon More Neb^thim, Pa t 2. c. 45. Gradus Secundus, Mr. Smiths
Select Disc. Tract of Prophecy, Chapter of the Holy Ghost.
signify the inward Gifts, by which the Understanding is enlightened, and is
enabled to perform things, which by Nature it could not do without immediate
Workings of the Holy Ghost. When therefore we read in Scripture of (...), I
grant we generally are to understand miraculous Operations performed upon
others, as the Healing of the Sick, making the Lame to walk, the Deaf to hear,
the Blind to see, the Dead to live, the casting out, and silencing of Devils,
and their Oracles; but when we find in Scripture mention of the Holy Ghost, and
of the Gifts of the Holy Ghost, or Spirit, I humbly conceive, we rather are to
understand the Gifts of Wisdom, Knowledge, Faith, Prophecy, discerning of
Spirits, the Gifts of Tongues, and the Interpretation of them. My Reasons for
this Notion, which I submit to better Judgments, are these following.

1. Because our Savior, whilst he was upon Earth, 10 Mat. 8. 10 Luc. 9.17.19.
7 Joh. 39. 16 J h. 7. 2 A ^s 33.
gave to his Apostles, and to the Seventy Disciples, Power to heal the Sick; to
cleanse the Lepers, raise the Dead, and cast out Devils; and yet the Evangelist
St. John, informs us, that the Holy Ghost was not yet, because that Jesus was
not yet glorified. Our Savior tells his own Disciples, that the Paraclyte
would not come till he departed; And St. Peter, That our Lord being exalted to
the Right Hand of God, received the Promise of the Holy Ghost; the Holy Ghost
therefore must signify some thing distinguished from the Power of working
Miracles.

2. It is almost impossible to conceive that the Disciples of the Baptist
(mentioned Acts 19.) had never heard of the other Miracles wrought by Christ,
and his Apostles, and yet they do expressly say, we have not heard whether there
be an Holy Ghost, this Phrase must therefore, in their apprehension, signify
somewhat distinct from what we properly do call the Power of working Miracles.

3. The Prophecy of Joel, which by St. Peter is mentioned as the Promise on
which the giving of the Holy Ghost was founded, is only a Promise of Visions,
Dreams and Prophecy, but not of Miracles, and the Gifts of the Spirit mentioned
by the Prophet Isaiah are only those of Wisdom, Chap. 11 2, 3.
Knowledge, Understanding, Council, Courage, Piety, and the Fear of God; no
mention being made of signs and wonders.

4. Because throughout the History of the Acts of the Apostles, where St. Luke
has occasion to mention the Miracles which the Apostles and Primitive
Professors did, he always uses the Words (...), Wonders, Signs, Powers, but
where he speaks of Persons prophesying or speaking with Tongues the wondrous
Things of God, he does as constantly ascribe this to the Holy Ghost descending
on them: Instances of the first kind you will find, 2 Acts 22, 43. 4.16, 22,
30, 33. 5.12. 6, 8. 8.6, 13.14 3. 15.12. 19.11.

Instances of the second kind occur, 1 Acts 16. 2.4, 11. 7.51. 8.17. 10.44, 45.
19.2, 6. 20.23, 28. 21.11. 28.25.

5. Because where the Scripture mentions these things together, it puts a
manifest Distinction between Signs, and Wonders, and Gifts, Vid. Supr. prefat.
and Operations, and distributions of the Holy Ghost, as v. 9.15. Romans 19.3.
Gal. 5.2. Heb. 4.21. And therefore having spoken of these things hitherto in
general, and without distinction, for farther demonstration of this Matter I
proceed to speak more particularly of some of those (...) or Gifts which in the
stricter Acceptance of the Word, do bear that Name.

1. And first, the Gift of Prophecy affords a signal Demonstration of the
Assistance of the Holy Ghost vouchsafed to the Abettors of the Christian Faith.

I have already showed that this Gift was exercised at Rome, at Thessalonica,
it is represented by St. Paul as a thing common and luxuriant in the Church of
Corinth, who declares, 1 Cor. 14.26, 31. v. 1.
that each Man had his Revelation, and that all might prophecy, and that they
should desire spiritual Gifts, but above others Prophecy. Moreover, he
instructs them how, and when to use, and when to limit and restrain this Gift,
and chides them for abusing the plentiful Effusion of it, to the Confusion of
the Church, the Disturbance of the Peace, and the Hindrance of her Edification.

Now the Word Prophecy, imports sometimes only the Interpretation of the
Scriptures, or Will of God to the Edification, Exhortation, or Comfort of the
Hearer; sometimes the composing of spiritual Hymns, of Praises and
Thanksgivings by the immediate Assistance of the Holy Spirit, in both which
Senses, it is used by St. Paul, when mentioned among the (...), vouchsafed to
the Church of Corinth, but then it was so used, or with such Evidences of
Divine Assistance, as to convince, not only the Unlearned, but Unbelievers,
that God was in them of a truth. 1 Cor. 14.23, 24.
Sometimes it signifies the Prediction of future and contingent things, as when
the Author of the Revelations says, that the Testimony of Jesus was the Spirit
of Prophecy; 10 Rev. 19. 11 Acts 27, 28. 13 Act. 1.21 Act. 9, 10.
and in this Import of the Word, we have mention in the Acts of the Apostles,
of the Prophet Agabus, who foretold the Dearth which was to happen in the Reign
of Claudius Caesar, and of other Prophets coming from Jerusalem to Antioch, of
Prophets and Teachers at Antioch, of four Daughters of St. Philip; which did
prophecy. And among the Gifts dispensed by our Savior, when he ascended up on
high, are reckoned Prohets and Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers. Thus Justin
Martyr tells the Jew, that the Gift of Prophecy, Dial cum^ Tryph. p. 308.
which among them had long since ceased, was conferred upon the Christians,
(...), for we have to this very time the Gift of Prophecy. Lenaeus says, L.
2. c. 57.
That Prophecy and Visions, Predictions of things future, and Revelation of
things secret, were frequent in his days. And in Eusebius, there is mention of
an The Prophets of Montanus says he prophesied ( Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 5. c.
17.) (...). Eusebius also adds, that some thought M^ntan^^, A^cibiades and
Theodotus might Prophecy, because there were (...) Many strange Effects of
this Divine Gift still remaining in diverse Churches, Hist. Eccles. l. 5 c. 3.
Ancient Writer, who, to consute the Montanist, all whose pretended Prophets
were Extatick, brings in a Catalogue of the renowned Prophets of the Christian
Church, who never suffered the like Phrensies, and after calls for a Succession
of these Prophets, as a thing necessary in the Christian Church, which, had the
Gift then ceased, could not have been required from its Adversaries without the
greatest Prejudice to the Church of Christ. Now this was even by the Heathens,
admitted as a certain Rule, Si divinatio ergo Deus, and it is as certain, that
if God vouchsafed the Gift of Prophecy, to Christians, in Confirmation of that
Faith, that Christianity is derived from God. Add to this,

2dly, That they who were then called to Sacred Functions were either chosen to
them immediately by the Holy Ghost, or, with their ordination, they received
some measure of these extraordinary Gifts, this indeed we might reasonably
expect, who know the Manifestation of the Spirit was given (...) for the
benefit of others, 1 Cor. 12 7.
that they should be more eminently vouchsafed to those Men who we
particularly designed for the perfecting of the Saints, 4 Ephesians. 12.
for the Work of the Ministry, for the edifying the Body of Christ. We find
that Christ himself was consecrated to his Prophetic Office by the descent of
the Holy Ghost on him at Baptism, and when he ordained his Apostles, he says
unto them, as my Father sent me, 24 L^ke 4.
so send I you, receive the Holy Ghost, and would not suffer them to begin
their testimony concerning him till they should be endued with Power from
above, or with the Holy Spirit. 12 Acts 2.
The Holy Ghost said, separate me Barnabas and Saul for the Work whereunto I
have called them. St. Paul speaks thus unto the Elders of Asia, 20 Acts 28. 1 Timothy 4, 14. 2 Timothy 1.6. Ephesians. ad Cor. ss.
take heed to your selves, and to the flock over which the Holy Ghost has made
you Overseers: And he advises Timothy not to neglect the Gift which was given
him by Prophecy, and the Imposition of the Hands of the Presbytery, to stir up
the Gift received by imposition of hands. Clemens Romanus says, that the
Apostles out of their Converts, chose Bishops and Deacons (...). Clemens of
Alexandria adds, that John coming from Asia ordained such to be of the Clergy
who were (...), Eusebius. H^^. E^cl. l. 3. c. 23.
as I may render it, presented to him by the Holy Ghost. Ignatius says of the
Bishops placed every where, that (...) (...)

(...) (...) (...) Ep^^ Ep^^ ^^.1. (...).

(...), etc. Ep. ad Philadelph. S. S. 1.


they were appointed by the Council of Christ Jesus, of the Bishops, Presbyters
and Deacons, that they were assigned by the Sentence of Christ Jesus; that they
were sent by the Father of the Family, of Onesimus Bishop of Ephesus, that he
was given them by God, of Polycarp Bishop of Smyrna, that he was made Bishop by
God the Father, and Christ Jesus, and of the Bishop of Philadelpha, that he
received the Office not by himself, nor by Man, St. Cyprian says of the
Bishops and Priests in general, that they were constituted such, not only by
the Suffrage of the People, and the Consent of their Fellow bishops, Copr. Ep.
55. Edw. Ox. Ap. 69. p.
but also judicio Divino, that he did make them Priests and Bishops, that they
had Dei testimonium, and that it was a great Absurdity to think that Bishops
were not constituted in the Church by God, which, if true, is certainly a
Demonstration not only of the ^postolical, but the Divine Original of
Episcopacy. But,

3dly, Of those Gifts which show the Power of the Holy Ghost engaged to promote
the Christian Faith, that of Tongues is most illustrious, for the Spirit which
fell upon the Christian Converts, opened their silent Mouths, and made them
speak the proper Dialect of every Nation under Heaven. 2 Acts 5
No sooner did an Apostle lay his hands on an illiterate Person, but he spoke
with Tongues, this was a thing exceeding requisite to the speedy Propagations
of the Gospel, which in the space of Forty Years was to disperse it self
throughout the World according to our Lord's Prediction, it therefore was a
thing public, 24 Mat. 14.
and notorious to all the World, it was daily exercised among the Heathens by
others to convert them, and by themselves when they embraced the Christian
Faith, as we are frequently informed by the History of the Acts of the
Apostles, and the Epistle to the Church of Corinth, among whose Gifts are
reckoned diverse kinds of Tongues, 1 Cor. 12.10.
and the Interpretation o^ them, to whom St. Paul even objecteth this amongst
their Crimes, that when they came together, every one had his Tongue, Chap.
14.26.
and that if they proceeded thus to speak with Tongues, they would be the
Authors of Confusion, and cause the Heathens, who came to their Assemblies, to
say, that they were mad, there be some Interpreter, concluding, that, order
being thus observed, no Man should forbid to speak with Tongues; Church in
which the Apostle found so great Divisions, Errors and Miscarriages, and of
which the Apostle says only, 2 Cor. 8.7.
that they came behind the other Churches in no Gifts, we may then reasonably
suppose others, and better Churches, had at least an equal share in this
miraculous Endowment. This is that signal Demonstration of the Spirit which
becomes more convincing from the exceeding firvolousness of those exceptions
which are made against it by Men who want no subtility, or wisdom to suggest
Evasions, where they may be found. For,

1. To assert that at the laying on of the Apostles Hands, the Preaching of a
Sermon, the rushing of a mighty VVind, so strange a Fit of Melancholy, such
unaccountable Diseases should seize upon so many thousand Christians, and
should direct each Motion of their Tongues, to think that this effect should be
so proper and peculiar to the Christian Temper, as that no other Persons should
pretend unto it, that it should naturally cease, when once the Christian Faith
had spread it self throughout all Nations, and never give the World one fresh
experience of its efficacy, that we know of, after the second Century, is sure
a Symptom of a distempered Fancy, and the deepest Melancholy.

2dly, Others who ascribe the Gift of Tongues to the Assistance of the Evil
one, seem yet more palpably absurd; seeing the Doctrine which was promoted by
this Gift is pure and peaceable, and highly instrumental to advance God's
Glory, and to direct Mankind to the Enjoyment both of present and eternal
Happiness, and therefore cannot reasonably be supposed to derive from that
impure, mischievous Spirit, who labors after nothing more than the Dishonor
of the God of Heaven, and the Destruction of Mankind. This Doctrine was
designed to overturn the Devil's Kingdom, 26. Acts 18.
to turn Men from the Power of Satan unto God, and to deliver the deluded World
from that Idolatry, those barbarous and inhuman Rites, and those ridiculous and
filthy Ceremonies which he had taught the World to practice, and espouse as
part of that devotion which was due to what they called God. Moreover, this
Doctrine silenced all the Devil's Oracles, it forced his Legions to quit those
seats they had so long and quietly enjoyed before our Savior's coming, and to
Nesi se Da monas confessi fucrint, Christiano mentiri non audentes, ibidem
illius Christiani pr^^acissmi sanguinem fundite, Tertul. Apol. c. 23.

Haee omnia sciunt plerique pars vestrum, ipsos Daem^nas de semetipsis
confiteri, quoties a nobis tormentis verborum, and crationis incendi^ de
corporilus exiguntur, -- ipsis testibus esse eos Daemon^s de se ver^m
confi^entibus credit, Minut. p. 31. Cyptian Ep. ad Demetr. Lactan. l. 2. c.
15. l. 4. c. 27.

(...). Porphyrius apud Eusebius. praepar. Evang. l. 5. c. 1.


confess they were but Devils, and could do nothing when the Name of Christ was
mentioned. Now sure it is irrational to think Satan should thus contend with
Satan, that he should destroy the very Kingdom he himself erected, or that he
should concern himself to propagate, and to confirm that Faith which bears the
greatest Opposition both to his Nature, and Designs.

Obj. I know not any thing which can with any color of pretense be offered to
invalidate the Strength of this plain demonstration of the Truth of Christian
Faith, but this surmise, that these things are recorded only by the Apostles,
and Evangelists, and Primitive Professors of that Faith, and so the Truth of
what they say only depends upon their testimony delivered in their own cause;
now this exception will be fully obviated by these Two Considerations.

Ans. 1. That these Writings must be sent unto the Churches to which they were
directed, these Histories of the Acts of the Apostles composed in those very
Ages when Christianity by the Apostles was propagated through the World, and
therefore whilst all Persons concerned in the things delivered by them, might
be certain of the Truth, or Falsehood of what they did affirm touching these
Gifts, and Operations of the Holy Ghost vouchsafed to them, or exercised among
them.

2. That we have many strong and convincing Reasons to believe that these
Apostles, and sacred Writers spoke forth the words of truth and soberness in
that which they delivered in these Writings touching these Gifts and Operations
of the Holy Spirit, and did not in these Epistles, and Discourses boast of that
which they had not performed, or which those Churches, to which these Writings
were directed, had not experienced.

And first, That these Writings were composed, and sent unto these Churches in
that very Age in which the Apostles lived, and propagated the Christian Faith
throughout the World, may be concluded. (1.) Because they bear the Names of the
Apostles, and Evangelists, for no Man could pretend they were so, had they not
really been such, but they must put a Cheat upon the World, and substitute
their own inventions, for the Word of God. Moreover they have been handed down
for such by a more general Tradition, and of a firmer Credit than any of the
Books of Cicero, or Virgil, which we indisputably own as theirs, for it was a
Tradition of the whole Christian World, which owned, cited, read, and received
them as such from the Apostles days, as is apparent from the Epistle of St.
Clement, Barnabas, Ignatius, and Polycarp, whilst others which pretended to the
same Original, were universally rejected by them. Besides they did attest them
so to be by many sufferings which they had no temptation to endure besides the
Truth of their assertion: 'twas a Tradition which concerned things of the
highest moment, and which it was their greatest interest to be well assured of,
they being the sole Ground of their support at present under the sharpest
Trials, and of their future hopes; and therefore Writings which they were
concerned to get, hear, read and keep, they were Books, written to whole
Churches and Nations, yea the whole World of Christians, who could not have
receiv^d them easily, had the Apostles, by whom they were converted, given no
intimations of them. Books of the greatest Opposition to the Superstitions both
of Jews and Heathen, and which denounced upon them the greatest Plagues and
Judgments, such as obliged them to search, as much as possible, into the Truth
of what they said, and yet these Books were by them not denied to be the Works
of those Apostles and Evangelists whose names they bare, they were Books which
could not be spread abroad in the Apostles days, and in their names, unless the
Apostles had indicted them, nor be esteemed as the great Characters of the
Christian Faith, if the Apostles were so forgetful of them, as not to let those
Persons, for whose sake they were written, know it, they were Books which
pretended to a Commission from the Holy Jesus to leave a Rule of Life and
Doctrine to Mankind, which was entrusted only in the Hands of the Apostles, all
others still pretending to deliver only what they received from them, they were
indicted partly to confirm the Christian Faith, and to engage Men to believe it,
partly to put an end to the Contentions, and rectify the Errors which had crept
into the Church in the Apostles days, and needed speedy reformation, partly to
justisy themselves against false Brethren, and to assert the Truth of their
Apostleship, and partly to preserve their Proselytes from such as did pervert
the Faith, and partly to instruct them how to bear up in fiery trials, and to
support the Souls of Christians under the Miseries they suffered from a
persecuting World, and therefore they were written on such Grounds as did
require a quick dispatch upon these errands to the Churches for which they were
intended, and so the Apostles must be supposed to give early notice of them,
and to divulge them to the Christian World whilst they, to whom they were
committed, were able to disprove them, if they had been false.

In a Word, The Epistle to the Romans must be false, or else it must be sent by
the Apostle before he had seen Rome, 1. Romans 11, 15, 28.
for it contains an intimation, that he had not seen them, a desire to see
them, and a Promise to come to them. The first Epistle to the Corinthians must
be indicted whilst the Contentions and Disorders, touching the Exercise of their
spiritual Gifts, continued, because it was designed to correct them, and whilst
St. Paul was in a Capacity to be in Person with them, because he says, 1 Co^
11 34. Chapter 8, 9.
the rest will I set in order when I come, The second Epistle must be written
when the great Famine happened in Judaea, of which Agabus foretold, because two
Chapters of it are spent in exhortation to a liberal Contribution to it, 2 Cor
8.4.11. Acts 30.
and St. Paul was himself the Messenger by whom that Charity was sent. The
Epistle to the Galatians must be indicted whilst the Controversy touching
Justification by the Law, or by the hearing of Faith was hot amongst them,
whilst their dissatisfactions touching the Apostleship of St. Paul continued,
and whilst he lived, for I Paul, says he, 5. Gal. 2. 1 Gal. 2^. Chapter 6.17.
testify to yo^ thus and thus, the Truth of what I write, I confirm to you by
the Oath of God, and he concludes his Epistle thus, henceforth let no Man
trouble me, for I bear in my Body the Mark of the Lord Jesus. In his Epistle to
the Ephesians, he strengthens his exhortation with the Consideration of his
Bonds, 3. Ephesians. 1.4.1. 1 Phil. 13, 19, 23, 25, 27. 2.12, 24. 1 Col. 24, 29
2.1.4.18.9.10. 1 These. 2.17. 3.10.5.6. 2 These. 3 2.17. 13. Heb. 18, 19, 23.
saying, I Paul the Prisoner of the Lord beseech you. In that to the
Philippians, he mentions his Bonds, his expectation of deliverance from them by
their Prayers, his desire to dye, his assurance he should live to serve the
Church, his absence from them and confidence that he should come to them. In
that to the Colossians, he speaks of his present joy, his sufferings, his
labors for the Church, his solicitude for them, and those of Laodicea, his
salutation with his own hand, his sending Tychicus and Onesimus to give them an
account of his Affairs. In his Epistles to the Thessalonians, he speaks of his
absence from them, of his great desire to see them, his solicitude for their
stedfastness under the Sufferings they endured for the Faith, his comfort when
he heard that they stood firm, he desires their Prayers, that he may be
delivered from evil Men, and concludes with the Salutation of his own hand. In
the Epistle to the Hebrews he begs their Prayers, that he may be the sooner
with them, and promises to come with Timothy: as for those writ to Timothy,
Titus and Philemon, I hope it is needless to prove that they were written whilst
they lived, and were not sent unto them in another World. In a Word, all or
most of these Epistles carry his Name before them, his Mark or Token in the
Close, they mention the Brethren then living, and speak of Salutation from, or
to them, in them he is still praying for them, or begging the Assistance of
their Prayers, to omit many other things which are most certain Indications of
the Time when they were written.

2dly, That the Apostles in these Writings, speak the Words of Truth and
Soberness in that which they delivered, touching these Gifts and Operations of
the Holy Ghost, and did not boast of that which they had not performed in those
Churches, or of that of which those Churches had no experience, will be evident
from these Considerations.

1. That they suffered loss of Goods, Life, Credit, and of all that could be
counted dear unto them, to confirm the Truth of what they taught, and they
persuaded Myriads in all those places to which these Writings were directed by
them to follow the Example of their Sufferings, propounding to them only the
first Fruits, the Earnest, the Comfort of the Holy Spirit here, the Joys of
Heaven hereafter, as the true Motive, and Engagement to endure all these
dreadful things. Now, if Persons void of Subtilty, and human Artifices, as the
Apostles were, deliver to the World a Doctrine, which is according to
Godliness, and worthy of the God of Heaven, as is the Christian Faith, if they
declare they had Commission from Heaven to divulge that Doctrine, and that they
expected at present no advantage by it, but only the most dreadful Sufferings,
this being what their Master had foretold, and that to which they were
appointed, 16. Joh. 2, 33. 1 These. 3.3, 4.
as we read in their Epistles, if accordingly they did suffer all, that Wit and
Malice could inflict upon them, and sealed their Doctrine with their Blood, I
say when all these Circumstances concur, what reason can we have to dispute
their testimony, or think they could be acted by any Motive in the Publication
of the Christian Faith, but the Conviction of the Truth of what they published.
Again, since Men who are convinced of a future Happiness, are naturally so
unwilling to quit the Pleasures and the Enjoyments of the World in Prosecution
of that Happiness, can it be thought that many Myriads, who could have no
conviction of it, if these things were false, should, with the greatest Joy and
Freedom, part with Life, and all the sweet Enjoyments of it, to promote a known
Delusion, and in defense of those Epistles, which made a frequent mention of
Gifts and Miracles imparted to them, when they had no experience of them,
especially, if thirdly, we consider, that the Assistance and Comforts of the
Holy Ghost were promised to all Christian sufferers, and they were told, that
as their troubles did abound, 2 Cor 15. 1. Pet. 4, 14.
their comforts should abound much more, that when they were reproached, and
exercised with fiery Trials, they were happy People, because the Spirit of
Glory, and of God would rest upon them, this the Apostles taught them to
expect, and this, say the Apostles, ye have found, for ye became Followers of
the Lord, and of us, 1 These. 1^.6.
having received the Word with much affliction, and joy of the Holy Ghost. Now
if this promise was sensibly made good unto them, they received the Earnest of
the Truth of Christian Faith, and an assurance of God's concernment to
encourage and reward the faithful Christian; but if they found no sensible
experience of this Pledge, and Earnest of these Consolations, what reason had
they to expect the Blessings of another World, or to continue to take joyfully
the spoiling of their Goods, the Loss of Credit, Life, and all their worldly
Comforts, in propagation of that Faith which had so palpably deceived them, and
to establish the Belief of those Epistles which contained these apparent
Falsehoods?

Secondly, If Men in their Epistles to their Proselytes, speak largely of the
Gifts which they have exercised; and of the mighty Works they have performed
among them, and also of the Power conferred upon those very Proselytes, to
exercise those Gifts, and do those Wondrous Works; if in those very Writings
they appeal to the Senses, and the Consciences of those to whom they write, and
boldly tell them, that their Eyes have seen, and their own Consciences bear
Witness to the Truth of what they say; and if those very Writings, which
contain these bold Appeals, are by those very Men, to whom they do appeal,
received, and embraced as Divine Epistles, there can remain, when all these
Circumstances do concur, no place for doubting of the Truth of this Appeal. Now
that this was most certainly the Case of our Apostles, cannot be reasonably
denied, if you admit that they then writ, when what they said might easily have
been confuted, if it had been false; for they, with the greatest Confidence,
assert, That God confirmed the Word of his Grace by doing Signs and Wonders by
their Hands; that he bare witness to it by mighty Signs and Wonders, 2 Heb 4.
and Distributions of the Holy Ghost; as has been proved already.

Thirdly, You have heard them also frequently asserting, and testifying, that
the like Gifts and Operations were vouchsafed to those Churches, to which these
Letters were directed, and that they were all Partakers of this Grace.

Fourthly, For Confirmation of these Sayings, they appeal unto the Searcher of
all Hearts, and to the Consciences of those to whom these Writings were
directed, even you your selves, say they, 1 These. 2.10, 11.
are Witnsses, and God also, how holily, justly, and ur^^l^mably we behaved our
selves among you, for neither at any time used we flattering Words, as you
know, nor a Cloak of Covetousnes, God is witness, Verse. 3, 4.
our Exhortation was not of Deceit or Guile, we have not followed curini^^gly
devised Fibles; we have not walked in Craftinefs. nor hundled the word of God
deceitfully, 2 Cor. 4.2.
but do by manifestation of the Truth commend our selves to every Man's
Conscience in the sight of God.

Now these Considerations do mightily confirm the truth of what they have
delivered in these Books; for can it rationally be be conceived; that Men of
such Abilities to write the deepest Mysteries, and the exactest Precepts of
Morality, should be so strangely foolish, as to confirm them chiefly by an
Appeal to the Senses and Experiences of those Men, who, as themselves were well
assured, had never seen, or done, or found the least Experience of any of those
things they mentioned; but if we could suppose, that the Apostles had been so
strangely inconsiderate, can we believe those Writings which contained an
Appeal of so great Falsehood and Hypocrisy, and only were confirmed by Perjury,
and impudent Appeals unto the Conscience of those Men, who never found those
Comforts of the Holy Ghost, who never had these Gifts of Tongues,
Interpretation, Healing, Prophecy, etc. which these Epistles tell us were
their daily Exercise. I say, can we believe that such Epistles should obtain to
be embraced by those Churches, to which they were indicted, and by all other
Christians, as the Word of God? May we not with like Reason think a Mountebank,
who should in Commendation of his Balsoms, pretend that he had wrought great
Cures by them, upon many Persons present, and before their Eyes, when both his
Conscience, and their Mouths were able to attest, that they received not the
least Benefit from any of his Balsoms, should by this impudene Untruth, engage
those very Persons, he so shamefully belied to assert the Sovereign Virtue of
them, in contradiction to their own Experience.

Lastly, if they who enter these Appeals, and by them do endeavor to confirm
their Proselytes in the Profession of the Faith they teach, have many subtle
and industrious Adversaries, Men zealous to oppose that Faith, and defirous to
find Occasions of Advantages over them, and apt, for want of such Occasions, to
accuse them falsely, and charged by the Apostles with false Accusation; and yet
these very Persons, when these very Arguments, and Demonstrations of the spirit
are urged in Confirmation of that Faith which these deceitful Workers did
gainsay, could find no Ground of Cavil against these things, or could prevail
upon no Persons to believe, that they had reason to accuse them of Falsehood or
Deceit in these Particulars; we cannot reasonably suspect they used any Fraud
or Falsehood in their Words or Writings; but this is certainly the Case of these
Apostles, and more especially of Blessed Paul, 1 Cor. 16.9. 1 These. 2.14. 1
Tit. 10.2 Tim. 3.2. 3. Ep. of Joh. v. 10. 1 Phil. 25, 16. 2 Gal. 4.
for their Epistles do inform us, that they had many Adversaries, that they
were in continual Perils from the Jews, were often encountered by the
Philosophers, and the Disputers of the World; that even among themselves were
many vain, unruly Talkers and Deceivers, which gainsaid their Doctrine; many
proud Boasters, and Corrupters of the Truth, which did endeavor to empair
their Credit in the Church, and who did prate against them with malicious
words; that there were some, who preached Christ only out of a Principle of
Strife and Envy, that they might add Affliction to their Bonds; and some false
Brethren, who came in privily to spy out their Liberty: Nor have we reason to
suspect, that all, or any of these Adversaries, negelected any Pains or
Diligence, which ought in reason to be used, to search into the Certainty of
what they offered for Confirmation of this Faith, and for Vindication of their
Apostleship, from these Aspersions which these false Apostles laid upon them.
Since then we never find the Truth of these Relations questioned by any of
their numerous and potent Adversaries, the false Apostle, or false Brother, the
inqusitive and learned Precisian, or the malicious Jew, and since we are
assured by the Event, that if Attempts of such a Nature have been made, they
all proved ineffectual, and insufficient to lessen or take a way the Credit of
these Writings in the Christian World. I say, seeing these things are so, it
may be certainly concluded that these Writings were not, and could not be
convinced of Falsehood, but contained Matter of unquestionable Truth. Now hence
it clearly follows, that this Assistance of the Holy Ghost, was a most full and
ample Confirmation of the Christian Faith, and a sufficient Evidence that it
derived from the God of Truth, for this they constantly declared, 1 Cor. 3.9. 1
Romans 4
that they were Apostles sent from God, Co-workers with God, and faithful
Stewards of his Mysteries; that they were Servants, and Apostles of that Jesus,
who was declared to be the Son of God with power, and that they preached the
Gospel by Virtue of the Holy Ghost, sent down from Heaven. This then must be a
certain Truth, or else their Story must be false. Moreover, from what has been
discoursed, I conclude, that the Power, by which these holy Men were acted,
could not derive from Satan, it therefore must derive from God, whence it will
follow, that what it was designed to confirm, must be certain Truth, or God
must be supposed to employ his Power to confirm a Lie, and stablish an
Imposture in the World, by the Assistance of his Holy Spirit, which is a great
Absurdity, and very much repugnant to to his Truth and Justice. And if these
things convince us of the Truth of Christian Faith.

Hence have we reason to infer, That it is very worthy of our Labor, and much
concerns us to be well acquainted with this Faith. God is not busied about
Trifles, when he is pleased by extraordinary Methods, and Transports of Nature
to show the Glory of his Power, we may be sure the Doctrine he thus confirms,
is worthy of all Acceptance; of this Salvation, says St. Peter, the Prophets
have enquired, and searched diligently, 1 Pet. 1.11, 12.
because it was that glorious Work of Mercy, and of Wisdom, to which the Holy
Spirit in them gave his Testimony, and when we preached the same Gospel by the
Assistance of the Holy Ghost, sent down from Heaven, (...)
the Angels presently desired to look into it; if then these Sacred Prophets
thought it worthy of their Diligence, instantly to search till they had found
the Time appointed for this Revelation of the Will of Heaven, it must be worthy
of our Care, to search those Scriptures which contain it. If blessed Angels,
who continually behold the Face of God in Glory, and who are less concerned in
these glad Tidings, than we are, thus earnestly desire to view the Mystery,
which contain it. If blessed Angels, who continually behold the Face of God in
Glory, and who are less concerned in these glad Tidings, than we are thus
earnestly desire to view the Mystery, which the Apostles had discovered by the
assistance of the Holy Ghost, it must be both our Duty, and our Wisdom to be
industrious to know it, the Speculations of Philosophy may be neglected, as
being (...) says Socrates; but Ethics well deserve our Study, as being
purposely designed for the Improvement of our Souls. Wherefore, this Wisdom,
this Demonstration of the Spirit, which wholely aims at the eternal Happiness
of Man, and is designed to make him wise unto Salvation, and even advanced to
Divine Perfections, deserves as much to be preferred before all other Wisdom, as
the Concernments of our Souls deserve to be preferred before the Interests of
our frail Bodies, or our eternal Interests, to be regarded more than temporal.

Inf;. II. If this Demonstration of the Holy Spirit does so abundantly confirm
the Truth of Christian Faith, it must exceedingly concern us in Point of
Interest and Wisdom, to yield Obedience to all the Precepts of that Faith. The
Gentiles had the Law of Nature written in their Hearts, their Conscience
bearing them witness, 2 Romans 14, 15. (...) 1 Rom 24, 26.
and their inward Reasonings, sometimes accusing, and sometimes excusing them,
and the Result of their Trasgressions against this dim and imperfect Law of
Nature, was, that God gave them up to vile Affections, and to a reprobate Mind;
the Law was given to the Jews by Ministration of holy Angels, and therefore
every Transgression of it received a just Reward of Recompense. 2 Heb. 3, 4.
How then, says the Apostle, shall we escape, if we neglect so great
Salvation? which at the first, was spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed by his
Apostles, God hearing witness to it by diverse Distributions of the Holy Ghost.
Especially, if we consider, First, That by Disobedience to the Christian
Precepts, we contradict the great Design of all those Demonstrations of the
Holy Spirit, which were vouchsafed to confirm it, the Wonders wrought by the
Power of the Spirit being intended, 15 Romans 18.
faith St. Paul. to make the Gentiles obedient in Word and Deed. Secondly, That
this great Confirmtion of the Christian Faith, does highly aggravate the Gunt
of our Transgressions of the Christian Precepts, for the stronger is the Motive
to believe, the greater is the Guilt of Disobedience, because such Motives may
be easily discerned, and so our Ignorance of them must be less excusable, and
we cannot resist their Evidence, but we must offer violence to the Convictions
of our Consciences: were Christian Faith confirmed only be probable Inducements
to believe it, our Disobedience to its Precepts would be most irrational, they
being in themselves most excellent, and such as our own Reason must approve as
beneficial to our selves, and others, the Motives which engage to the
Performance of them, are infinitely to be preferred besore, whatever stands in
competition with them; the Evils which they, threaten to the disobedient, more
terrible and lasting than any we can suffer by being steadfast in this Faith;
and surely then, whoever owns the Certainty of Christian Faith, and lives in
Contradiction to it, or by his Practice, gives the Lie to his Profession, can
have no Shadow of Excuse, or Hopes or Mercy at the great Day of his Account. In
a word, seeing this Demonstration of the Holy Spirit does convince us of the
Truth of Christian Faith, it must add Strength to all the Motives, Engagements
and Encouragements to lead a Virtuous, and holy Life, which this Religion,
above all others, does afford. For ifall that is delivered in these VVriting,
and Epistles, indicted by the Apostles and Evangelists; be the Revealed Will of
Heaven, then all the Promises and comfortable Passages recorded in them, will
be assuredly made good to all true Christians, and the Assurance of these
inestimable Blessings must lay upon us strong Engagements to be steadfast,
immovable, always abounding in the Work of the Lord, as knowing that our
Labor shall not be in vain in the Lord.

FINIS.

