THE FALLIBILITY OF THE Roman Church, Demonstrated from the manifest Error OF
THE 2d NICENE and TRENT Councils, Which Assert, That the Veneration and
Honorary Worship of Images, is a Tradition Primitive and Apostolical.

IMPRIMATUR.

Maii 28. 1687.

Guil. Needham.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Randal Tailor near Stationers Hall, M.DC.LXXXVII.

The Preface to the Reader.
TO that which I have said in the close of this Discourse, touching the
Infallibility of the second Nicene Council, and her Authority in proposing
Articles of Faith, interpreting of Holy Scripture, and in declaring what was
the Tradition of the Church of Christ; I think fit here, by way of Preface, to
add these things.

1. That if she has a just and an assured Title to these Privileges, then must
she be infallible in the interpretation of these following Scriptures.

(...). 2. Nic. Conc. Can. 15.
Let not a Clergyman, from the time present, be placed in two Churches, this
being an Argument of filthy Lucre, and alien from the Ecclesiastical Custom;
For we have heard from our Lord's Mouth, That no Man can serve two Masters, for
he will either hate the one, and love the other; or he will cleave to the one,
and despise the other. Let therefore every one, according to the Apostles
Injunction, remain in that Calling wherein he was called, and place himself in
one Church only; for those things which are done in Ecclesiastical Affairs for
filthy Lucre, are alien from God. Now either those words of St. Paul do really
command all Clergymen to abide in that Church in which at first they were
placed; and those words of Christ do, in their true and proper sense, forbid
them to have two Benefices with Cure, or two Churches under their care, or they
do not so: If they do, then do the Doctors of the Church of Rome continually
practice what is forbid by Christ, and as continually neglect what is commanded
by St. Paul; we also have, according to the determination of this Council, a
full conviction that they are generally addicted to filthy Lucre, and are,
above all other Clergy, transgressors of Ecclesiastical Custom. If these Texts
do not bear the sense here put upon them, then has this Council erred in their
interpretation of these Scriptures; and if they have so evidently erred in
those Interpretations of the Scripture which concern the Manners and Duty of
the Christian Clergy, why may they not err also in those things which concern
their Faith? Moreover, it being evident and confessed, that the Command to tell
the Church, especially concerns Offenses against good Manners; and that our
Lord's Promise is to be with these Guides, teaching Men to observe those things
he has commanded; surely it must be evident, that these Texts are
impertinently alleged for the infallibility of General Councils, in their
interpretations of the Holy Scripture, if they do not prove the infallibility
of this General Council in their interpretation of these Scriptures.

2ly, This Council in her second Canon, speaks thus; (...). 2. Nic. Council.
Can. 2.
Since when we sing, we promise to meditate in the Judgments of the Lord, and
not forget his words Psalm. 119.16.
; it is most wholesome that all Christians should observe this, but especially
the Hierarchy: And therefore we command, that all who are promoted to a
Bishopric, should altogether know the Psalter. Now I desire to know of the
Romish Doctors, how they will reconcile the sense here given of the Psalmist 's
words, with their public singing in an unknown Tongue? For if it be wholesome,
that all Christians should observe this, and it be certain that they cannot do
it, unless they do entirely know the Psalter: it is also certain, that when the
Psalter is only sung in Latin, all Christians cannot meditate in these
Judgments of the Lord, how wholesome soever it may be to them so to do. Again, if
the forementioned Privileges did certainly belong unto this Council, then must
she also be infallible in these following Decisions, viz.

1. In that of Canon the 3d, which runs thus; (...). Ibid. Can. 3.
All Elections made by Princes of Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, shall be
void, according to that Rule, which says, If any Bishop, by using the secular
Powers, obtain a Bishopric, let him be deposed; and they who do communicate
with him, let them be excommunicated. According to which Canon, all the
Elections of French and English Bishops must be void, and all Christian Princes
must be deprived of their just Prerogative in this Affair.

2ly, In their first Canon they confirm all the (...), etc.
Canons of the Apostles, and of the six Holy and Ecumenical Synods, and also
of the Topical Councils assembled to make such Determinations; and of the Holy
Fathers, because all these being enlightened by one and the same Spirit, decreed
things expedient, whom therefore they anathematized, deposed, or separated from
Communion, we also do anathematize, depose, and separate from Communion. And in
particular, they frequently Anathematize and condemn among the List of
Heretics Viz. Act. 7. p. 556, 588. vid. Act. 3. p. 165, 181. Act. 6. p. 421,
424.
Pope Honorius. Now if all these Canons be not to be received, either as to
Matters of Faith, or Manners; then has this Synod dangerously erred in
determining, that they were all to be received, as being made by Men,
enlightened by the Holy Ghost in their decisions. If they be to be thus
esteemed, to omit at present almost infinite Advantages, which this Concession
gives to our Cause, then was the sixth Council in Trullo assisted by the Holy
Ghost to determine thus;

1. (...). Syn. Trull. Can. 13.
Because we know that in the Roman Church they have made a Canon, that they who
are to be ordained Priests, or Deacons, shall promise no more to accompany with
their Wives: We, following the old Canon of Apostolical appointment, will have
the conjugal society of Holy Men, according to the Laws still firm and valid,
by no means dissolving their conjugal Society with their Wives, nor defrauding
them of the enjoyment of each other at times convenient. If therefore any
Person be found worthy to be ordained Subdeacon, Deacon, or Priest, let him by
no means be hindered from receiving these Orders, because he lives with his
lawful Wife; nor shall any Man require him to promise, that after his
Ordination he will abstain from conjugal Duties, lest by so doing we become
injurious to that Marriage which God ordained, and our Lord blessed with his
Presence. The Voice of the Gospel crying out, What God has joined, let no Man
put asunder; and the Apostle teaching, That Marriage is honorable, and the Bed
undefiled; and saying, Art thou bound to a Wife, seek not to loosed.

2. When they determine thus; (...). Ibid. Can. 36.
Renewing the Canon made by the General Councils of Constantinople and
Chalcedon, We decree, That the Chair of Constantinople shall enjoy equal
privileges with that of Rome, and be magnified in Ecclesiastical Matters as
that is.

3. When they decree thus; (...), etc. Can. 55.
Since we have understood that in the City of Rome they fast on Saturdays in
Lent, against the Tradition of the Church, it seemed good to the Holy Synod,
that the Canon which says, If any Clergyman be found fasting on the Lord's
Day, or any Saturday, except one only, let him be deposed; if any Layman, let
him be excommunicated, shall be inviolably observed in the Church of Rome also.
And,

4. When in their first Canon they Anathematize Pope Honorius; that is, they by
God's Spirit were assisted in the first Decree, to condemn the Practice and
Constitutions of the Church of Rome of that Age; and much more the practice of
the present Church of Rome, as contrary to the Voice of Christ and his
Apostles; In the Second, to decree against the Pope's Supremacy; In the Third,
to charge the Church of Rome with walking contrary to the Tradition of the
whole Church besides, and give Laws to rectify that Abuse; In the Fourth, to
declare, not only that a General Council may be infallible without the
Confirmation, or even Concurrence of the Pope, but also may infallibly condemn
him for an Heretic.

Moreover, in this Nicene Council, this pleasant Story is twice related, viz.
That a certain Monk being haunted with the Spirit of Fornication, (a Spirit too
familiar with such Professors of Continency) who vehemently urged him to
uncleanness. The old Man miserably cried out, How long will it be e're thou let
me alone, thou have been with me even to old Age? Then the Devil visibly
appearing, said, Swear to me thou will tell no Body what I shall now say to
thee, and I will tempt thee no more. Then the Monk swore, by the High God, that
he would tell no Man what the Devil should say. Whereupon Satan spoke thus to
him; Worship thou no more the Image of the Blessed Virgin with her Son in her
Arms, and I will no more molest thee. The Monk hearing this, notwithstanding
his Oath, goes the next day to Abbot Theodore, and tells him all that the Devil
said. And the Abbot commending him for it, farther told him, That it was better
for him to frequent all the Stews in the City, than to deny to worship, by that
Image, the Lord and his Holy Mother. And when the Devil comes again, and taxes
the Monk with Perjury, he tells the Devil, that he knew it very well, but rests
satisfied in this, That it was only Perjury against his God and Maker. Where
note,

1. That this ridiculous Tale is so acceptable to that Good Synod, that they
command it to be read, Act the 4th; P. 252. p. 381.
and Act the 5th they make a repetition of it.

2ly, That they condemn the Monk 's Oath, as being (...), Ibid. p. 253.
a wicked Oath; and, (...), a false Oath, and so not binding; and say, That it
was better to forswear himself, than to keep an Oath for the destruction of
Images; and seem all to be pleased with the decision of Abbot Theodore. Now if
this be good Divinity, then is it better to be perjured, and take the Sacred
Name of God in vain, than not to worship Images; yea, it is better to commit
Fornication, and make the Members of Christ the Members of an Harlot, than not
to adore the Works of Men's hands.

Nom every Body knows, that Perjury and Fornication are Sins against the Law of
Nature; and that no Law of Nature does command the Veneration of the Images of
Christ, or of his Blessed Mother, that Christ and his Apostles said expressly,
Thou shall not forswear thy self; thou shall not commit Adultery; but never
said, Thou shall worship Images: Who then can want discretion sufficient to
discern, that this Determination made in the Synod, without exception of one
Person, must be false?

It would be endless to reckon all the idle Dreams, and foolish Stories,
produced by this Synod, in favor of their Images. But it is also needless,
seeing the Illi cum errore suo Scripturas Divinas cohaerere minime posse
senserunt, ad Apocryphas quasdam, and risu dignas naenias pedem verterunt.
Libr. Carol. l. 3. c. 30.
Council of Frankford has well observed, That when these Fathers perceived
that their Doctrine by no means would accord with Scripture, they turned
themselves to Apocryphal and Ridiculous Tales.

And Graeci, qui Imagines defendebant, Daemonum spectris and muliebribus
somniis parum verecunde abusi sunt, ut in Nicaena Synodo videre licet. Comment.
in 2. ad Tim. p. 155.
Espencaeus does ingenuonsly confess, That the Greeks defended Images with the
Apparitions of Devils, and the Dreams of Women, as is to be seen in the Nicene
Council.

3ly, Observe, That from the Epistle of Germanus Bishop of Constantinople,
cited with approbation by this Nicene Synod, we learn not only, That the People
then received the Sacrament in both kinds, but also that they received both
(...). Apud Conc. Nic. 2. Act. 4. p. 314.
according to Christ's own Tradition, for the commemoration of his Death, and
of his Resurrection; and that they were divinely moved with an insatiable
desire of partaking of his Holy Body and Blood; which shows that then they held
our Lord's Tradition, and the Memorial of his Death obliged the common People
to receive both Kinds; and that their desire of both, was a desire inspired by
God: And then, what Inspiration must that be which moved the Councils of
Constance, Basil, and Trent, to hinder them of the enjoyment of the Cup, and
even to forbid them to desire it, it is not difficult to determine?

4ly, Observe, That one Reason which the Fathers of this Council give for the
Worship of the Image of Christ, is this, because (...). Anastas. apud Syn. Nic.
2. Act. 4. p. 249.
he himself was not sensibly present with us, but only present as to his
Divinity; and that he was not to remain with us, (...). Epist. Germani Episcopi
Constantinop. apud Syn. Nic. 2. Act. 4. p. 305.
(...), corporeally.

They therefore could not believe Transubstantiation, or his Corporeal Presence
in the Sacrament, for having that still kept upon the Altar, or in the Pyxis or
Ciborium, had they believed Christ was corporeally present in it, they must
have also thought that he remained still corporeally present with his
Disciples, and his Church on Earth, and not denied such a presence with them as
they plainly do; and must have owned some other presence of our Savior with
us, than that of his Deity, which yet apparently they do not. Moreover, they
pronounce (...). Council. Nic. 2. Act. 7. p. 578.
Anathema against all Persons who do not profess that our Lord was
circumscribed as to his Humanity; and therefore they pronounced this Anathema
on all who held, That his Humanity was present in the Sacrament, by way of
Transubstantiation, since it is agreed on all hands, that his Body is not there
circumscribed, or present, after the manner of a Body.

And so much for the Observations which concern the things delivered in the
second Nicene Council. What follows from the Doctrine here established, against
the Tenets of the Romish Church, and the Assertions of the Guide of
Controversies, is as follows.

1. Hence it is evident, That in Judges subordinate dissenting, R. H. Disc. 2.
c. 3.. 23. p. 100.
there is no Universal Practice obliging us to adhere to the Superior, or in
those of the same order and dignity to the Major part. For neither could
Christians be obliged to adhere to this false decision of the Pope, and second
Nicene Council; nor did the Councils of Frankford, Paris, or the German,
French, or British Churches, think themselves obliged so to do.

2. Here also it is evident, in the judgment of these Councils and Churches, R.
H. Disc. 1. c. 3.
That the subordinate Clergy may be a Guide to Christians, when opposing the
Superior; for so these Councils and Churches thought themselves, when they
opposed the Pope of Rome, and the Decrees of the second Nicene Council; and so
undoubtedly they were provided the Decisions of that Council, approved by the
the Pope, be false.

3. Here also is demonstrated the fullness of that Assertion of R. H. That
Christians ought to submit to the Decisions of such Church Guides, declaring
the Sense of the Fathers; Disc. 2. c. 2.. 19.
the sense which was imposed on them by the Nicene Synod, being notoriously
false, and by the forementioned Councils, and Churches, declared so to be.

4. R. H. Disc. 3. c. 2.. 13.
Hence it follows, That if acceptance of a considerable part of
Church-Governors absent from any Council, is that, and only that which renders
it equivalent to a General Council, The second Nicene Council, for 500 Years
after their sitting, could not be General, seeing the greatest part of the
Western Church-Governors were absent from it, and for 500 Years did not accept
of its Decrees, but reject, condemn, and abhor them; and how it should become,
after so long a Period, what for so many Years it was not, I am yet to learn.

5. Disc. 3. c. 3.. 16.
Hence it must follow, That if according to R. H. all Persons dissenting from,
and opposing a known definition of the Church in Matters of-Faith, be
Heretics: Then must that of the second Nicene Council be no Definition of the
Church in Matters of Faith; or all the forementioned Councils, and Churches,
that so long dissented from, and opposed it, must have been Heretics during
that whole time; and consequently the Pope himself, and all that Communicated
with them, for five Centuries, must be unchurched also.

6. Hence we Demonstratively learn, That Councils by the Church of Rome reputed
general, may confidently pronounce Anathema's, put their Decrees into their
Creeds, and call Men Heretics who disown them, as did the second Nicene
Council; when yet it is extremely evident, that their Decrees are false, their
Anathema's wicked and unjust; and they whom they style Heretics, may be Good
and Orthodox professors of Christianity.

7. Disc. 3. c. 10. p. 314.
Hence it appears how absurdly R. H. and other Romanists, assert, That none can
be sufficient Judges of the Misarguings of Councils, unless it be some
following Councils of the same Authority; and that private Men can by no better
way learn what is Tradition, but from the Church speaking by her Councils; and
that Apostolical Tradition cannot be known but by the Judgment of the present
Church: for sure our Reason was given us for little purpose, if it cannot serve
us to discover, that this Nicene Council has argued amiss, and delivered that
as Apostolical Tradition, which was far from being truly such.

8. Hence also we may learn the vanity of the Objections framed against the use
of Reason, in judging of the Truth or Falsehood of Things defined by such
Councils, viz. That it is great pride for private Persons to oppose their
Judgments to the Definition of a General Council; to think they can see
clearly, what so many Persons could not see: With many other things of a like
Nature, urged with much Rhetoric, but with more weakness, by the Roman
Catholics; for in such Cases as these are, the private Person does not rely
upon his private Judgment, but on his Judgment concurring with the Judgment of
all Learned Protestants in this and former Ages, and of the whole Church of
Christ for Six Centuries; and with the major part of the Western Church for so
many more; and with the Confessions of many learned Persons of the Church of
Rome: And what absurdity it is to prefer the Judgment of so many, joined with
the clearest evidence of Scripture; what pride to follow the Evidence produced
here, let any reasonable Person judge.

Lastly, Because some Persons take the liberty to say, The Church of Rome, and
her Councils, do not require Men to venerate, to worship, or bow down to
Images; let them know, that their Trent Council has decreed, Sess. 5.
eis debitum honorem and venerationem impartiendam esse, that due honor and
veneration is to be imparted to them, according to the Definition of the second
Nicene Council.

And that the Fathers of that Council generally say, (...), Act. 2. p. 130,
132, 133, 135. Act. 3. p. 183, 189, 192.
I worship and adore the Sacred Images, and anathematize those who do not so
confess or practice.

In the 7th Session they declare, We should P. 555.
(...), salute and give them honorary Worship. In the same Session they
declare, That it is without doubt acceptable, and well-pleasing to God, (...),
to worship and salute the Images of Christ, the Blessed Virgin; of Angels, and
all Saints. Adding, That if any one doubt, or be wavering, touching the Worship
of Holy Images, Act. 7. P. 584. vid. Act. 4. p. 248.
(...), our Holy Synod, assisted by the Holy Ghost, does Anathematize him.

The Part. 3. Chapter 2.. 24.
Roman Catechism enjoins the Parish Priest to declare, That Images of Saints
are placed in the Church, ut colantur, that they may be worshipped; and they
have forced those who held the contrary, to renounce it as Heresy. When
therefore any English or French Papists tell us, That they do not venerate, or
bow down to Images; or that the Church of Rome does not enjoin them so to do,
they either know not what their Church does teach, or wilfully prevaricate; all
Roman Catholics being obliged by these Councils, and taught by this Catechism,
to pay this Veneration and Worship to them.

Mendae sic emendandae.
In Pref. p. v. l. 16. Marg. for (...) r. (...).

In the Body of the Book, p. 2. l. 12. Marg. for (...) r. (...).

A DEMONSTRATION, That the Church of ROME, and her Councils, have actually
Erred, etc.
CHAP. I.
The Fathers of the Nicene and Trent Councils, teach, That Image Worship is a
Tradition of the Apostles, received by all Christians from the beginning.. 1.
The Councils of Constantinople and Frankford, in the same Age, say, It was the
Tradition of the Apostles, and the Fathers, that Images were not to be
worshipped.. 2. This last Assertion is proved; 1. From express Testimonies of
the Fathers, saying, They had no such Custom or Tradition; That Christ and his
Doctrine taught them to reject and abandon Images; and, That they taught all
their Converts to contemn them.. 3. 2ly, That Image Worship was by them
represented as an Heathenish Custom, It being, say they, proper to the Heathens
to make and worship them, and proper to Christians to renounce the Worship of
them.. 4. 3ly, When Heathens objected this to Christians, That they had no
Images or Statues, yea, that they laughed at those who had them; they own and
justify the thing.. 5. 4ly, They commend the Policy of the Jews for having
none, and the Wisdom of those Gentiles who had none; and held it a mark of
their own Excellency that they had them not; and that they shut their Eyes when
they worshipped, that they might not see any sensible Object.. 6. 5ly, They
answer and reject those very Pleas when used by Heathens, which afterward were
used by the Nicene Council, and the Romish Church, in the behalf of
Image Worship.. 7. 6ly, These Fathers represent the having Images of Christ,
and of his Saints, for Worship, as a thing proper to the vilest Heretics.. 8.

AMongst the many Evidences that might be easily produced to show, that the
pretended General Councils of the Church of Rome, have, with great vanity, and
most apparent falsehood, defined, That they received the Doctrines, which they
endeavored to impose upon the Christian World, from Primitive and Apostolical
Tradition; one is, The Veneration, or honorary Worship of the Images of Christ,
his Virgin Mother, the Martyrs, and the Saints departed: For the second Nicene
Council, and the chief Bishops mentioned, or residing in it, do very
frequently, but also very falsely say, That the Doctrine and Practice there
declared, and required, touching the Adoration of S. Images, is Apostolical
from the beginning, and that which has been always practiced by the Church of
Christ.

. 1. Pope Gregory the Second, having, like a true infallible Interpreter of
Scripture, told us, That in that Expression of our Lord's, (...). Council. Nic.
2. Con. To. 7. p. 12.
Where the Carcass is, there will the Eagles be gathered together: by the
Carcass was to be understood Christ, and by the Eagles, Religious Men, and
Lovers of him. He adds, That (...). p. 13.
these Religious Men flew like Eagles to Jerusalem; and having seen our Lord,
and James his Brother, and Stephen the first Martyr, they painted them as they
had seen them: And that Men no sooner beheld them, but leaving the Worship of
the Devil, they fell immediately to worship these Images; not indeed with
Latria, but with Relative Worship.

Pope Hadrian says, That Sicut a primordio traditionem a sanctis Patribus
susceperunt. Act. 2. p. 103. Hoc enim traditum est a sanctis Apostolis. p. 110.
and p. 99. In universo mundo ubi Christianitas est, ipsae S. Imagines ab
omnibus fidelibus honorantur. p. 106.
all Orthodox, and Christian Emperors, all Priests, and religious Servants of
God, and the whole company of Christians, observed the veneration of Images and
Pictures, for memory of pious compunction, and even till then worshipped them,
as they received a Tradition from the beginning from the Holy Fathers to do.
That the special Honor, Adoration, and Veneration of them, was delivered by
the Holy Apostles. And that throughout the whole World, wherever
Christianity was planted, these venerable Images were honored by all the
Faithful.

Tharasius, Patriarch of Constantinople, declares, That this of the Venerable
Images, was (...). Act. 5. p. 348, and 388.
the Tradition of the whole Catholic Church of God from the beginning.

Gregory Bishop of Possene, cites for it a Synod of the Aposties met at (...).
Act. 1. p. 64.
Antioch, commanding Christians no longer to err about Idols, but instead of
them, to paint the Image of Christ, God and Man.

And Leo Bishop of Rhodes, adds, That the Holy and Venerable Images were to be
in the Church, (...). Ibid.
according to the Custom delivered of old Times from the Apostles.

And at the conclusion of many of their Actions, the Fathers Act. 2. p. 132,
133, 136, 152, 153. 3. p. 188. Act. 4. p. 328. 5. 389. 7. 576.
generally affirm, That they embraced and practiced the worship of Images,
(...), according to the Tradition of the Holy Apostles; and (...), Act. 2. p.
145.
as they delivered to them, who from the beginning were eyewitnesses of the
Word.

Yea, the whole Synod does frequently assert, they were taught thus to judge of
the (...). Act. 4. p. 321.
Adoration of Images by the Holy Fathers, and by their Doctrine delivered by
God. That their Tradition concerning it, was Act. 7. p. 553. (...).
(...), the Divine Tradition of the Catholic Church. And that in defining and
asserting it, (...). p. 556.
they followed the Doctrine of the Holy Fathers taught them by God, and the
Tradition of the Catholic Church, and knew this was the Doctrine of that Holy
Spirit which dwelt in her. That they (...). ibid. item p. 588.
followed in observing this Tradition, St. Paul and the whole Apostolical
College; and that thus the Doctrine of the Holy Fathers was confirmed, thus the
Tradition of the Catholic Church, (...), from one end of the Christian World
to the other, held and practiced. That this was (...). p. 581.
the Doctrine received from the first Founders of the Christian Faith, and
their Divine Successors. And lastly, they do often with full Voice (...). Act.
7. p. 576. Act. 8. p. 592.
cry out, (...), this is the Faith of the Apostles, this is the Faith of the
Fathers, this is the Faith of the Orthodox, this is that Faith which
establishes the World.

And suitable to this is the Language of the Trent Council, which commands all
Bishops, and others, whose Office it is, to instruct the People, to teach them
diligently, That the Images of Christ, the Mother of God, and other Saints, are
especially to be had and retained in Temples; and that due Honor and
Veneration is to be given to them, because the Honor tendered to them, is
referred to the Prototype; so that by the Images which they kiss, before which
they uncover their Heads, and prostrate themselves, they worship Christ, and
venerate the Saints, whose Similitudes they are: And this, say they, is done
J^xta Catholicae and Apostolicae Ecclesiae usum, a primaevis Christianae
Religionis temporibus receptum Sanctorumque Patrum consensionem. Sess. 25.
according to the custom of the Catholic and Apostolic Church, received from
the first Age of the Christian Faith, and the consent of the Holy Fathers.

. 2. On the other hand, the Council of Constantinople, consisting of 338
Bishops, assembled in the Year 754, declares, That (...). Council. Nic. 2. p.
452. (...). p. 508.
this evil invention of Images, neither has its being from the Tradition of
Christ, or his Apostles, nor of the Holy Fathers. And having forbidden all
Christians to worship any, or to place an Image in the Church, or in their
private Houses, they conclude unanimously thus, Ibid. p. 532.
(...), this is the Faith of the Apostles, this is the Faith of the Fathers,
this is the Faith of the Orthodox.

The Council of Frankford, consisting of 300 Bishops, assembled by Charles the
Great, out of Italy, Germany, and France, A. D. 794. declares, That the Quia ut
hoc facerent, ab Apostolis sibi traditum mentiebantur. Lib. Carol. l. 2. c. 25,
27.
second Nicene Council had offended in two things; (1.) in decreeing that
Images should be worshipped: And, (2.) in saying falsely, that this was
delivered to them from the Apostles. They add, That Relictis priscorum patrum
traditionibus, qui imagines non colere sanxerunt, novas conari and insolitas
Ecclesiae consuetudines infer. Praesat. in lib. 1.
leaving the Traditions of the Ancient Fathers, who decreed, That Images should
not be worshipped, they endeavored to bring into the Church new and unusual
Customs. That they endeavored to bring into Christian Religion the new
Adoration of Images, Absque Sanctorum Patrum doctrina and consacerdotum per
diversas mundi parts consensu. L. 4. c. 21.
without the Doctrine of the Holy Fathers, and the consent of their fellow
Priests throughout the World. That this of Image Worship, was, Praefat. p. 10.
impudentissima traditio, a most impudent Tradition. And that this pretended
Tradition was Neque in Evangeliorum tonitruis, neque in Apostolorum dogmatibus,
vel quorumlibet Orthodoxorum Patrum doctrinis uspiam reperimus insertam. L. 4.
c. 13.
neither to be found in the Oracles of the Prophets, nor in the Writings of the
Gospels, nor in the Doctrines of the Apostles, nor in the Relations of the
former Holy Synods, nor in the Doctrines of the Orthodox Fathers. That it was
instituted by them, nullo Antiquitatis documento, vel exemplo, without all
Instruction, or Example from Antiquity.

A Synod held at Paris, under Ludovicus Pius, and Lotharius, Anno Dom. 824,
says, That the Contra Authoritatem divinam and sanctorum Patrum dicta. P. 23.
second Nicene Council declared for Image Worship against the Divine Authority,
and the Sayings of the Holy Fathers. And that Ed. Pith. p. 25, 26.
they determined against the Worship of them according to Divine Authority,
and, juxta sententias sanctorum Patrum, according to the Judgments of the Holy
Fathers.

Agobardus, Bishop of Lions, having declared against all Image Worship, says,
L. de Imag.. 30. p. 263.
This is sincere Religion, is Mos Catholicus, haec Antiqua Patrum Traditio,
this is the Catholic Custom, this is the Ancient Tradition of the Fathers, as
is easily proved even out of the Book of Sacraments which the Roman Church
uses. And again, Nullus Antiquorum Catholicorum unquam eas colendas, vel
adorandas fore existimavit. P. 265.
None of the Ancient Catholics did ever think that Images were to be
worshipped or adored.

Hincmarus, Arch bishop of Rhemes, informs us, That Secundum Scripturarum
tramitem, traditionemque Majorum. Opusc. 55. cap. 20.
this Nicene Synod was condemned and evacuated by a General Synod called by the
Emperor Charles the Great, according to the way of the Scripture, and the
Tradition of the Ancients. De Gestis Franc. Lib. 5. cap. 28.
Aimoinus also complains of them, That they had decreed touching the Adoration
of Images, aliter quam Orthodoxi Patres antea definierunt, otherwise than the
Orthodox Fathers had before defined.

In that Synod, says, In ea Synodo confirmatum st Imagines adorari debere,
quod omnino Ecclesia Dei execratur. Annal. Part. 1. ad An. 791.
Roger Hoveden, it was confirmed, that Images should be adored; which the
Church of God does wholly execrate.

Now in this Matter let the Truth lie where you please, it is sure no little
Prejudice against receiving any thing as a Tradition, upon the evidence of a
few single Fathers, in Matters of mere Speculation, as some Traditionary
Doctrines of the Church of Rome most surely are; that in a thing of this
Nature, which must be either daily practiced, or omitted by the Church, whole
Councils, of 300 Bishops at the least, in the same Age, maintain such
contradictory Assertions; one saying, frequently and expressly, That this was
the Doctrine of the Apostles, and all the Ancient Fathers; the others as
expressly, That it never was the Doctrine of either of them. One, That this was
the practice of all faithful Christians; the other, That they never found it
practiced by any of the Orthodox Professors. But though such contradictory
Assertions in another Case, might cause a wary Person to suspend his assent to
either of them, yet I am confident, that whosoever is unprejudiced, must in
this case give in his Verdict against the Doctrine and Assertions of the Trent
and of the second Nicene Council.

. 3. For notwithstanding all the confident Assertions of these Councils, the
Testimonies of the Ancient Fathers are so full and clear against that Honor
and Veneration of Images, which by these Councils is imposed upon all
Christians, with an Anathema to them who do assert, or even think the contrary,
that he who does impartially read them, and does not conclude that the whole
Church of Christ did, for 500 Years and more, condemn this practice; and in
plain terms, or by just consequence assert, they had no such Tradition, cannot
sustain much loss, if he quite want the use of Reason.

For, (1.) the Fathers do expressly say, The Church of Christ has no such
Custom, or Tradition. (...). Apud 2 Nic. Council. Act. 6. p. 492.
We Christians, says Theodotus, have no Tradition to form the Images of Saints
in material Colors. (...). Protrept. p. 34. (...).
An Image, says Clemens of Alexandria, is indeed dead Matter, formed by the
hand of the Artificer; but we (Christians) have no sensible Image of sensible
Matter. St. Ambrose says, That Quae Ecclesia inanes ideas and vanas nescit
simulacrorum figuras. De fuga saec. c. 5. p. 246.
Rachel who hid the Images, is, or signifies, the Church. Which Church knows no
empty Idea's, or vain Figures of Images, but knows the true Substance of the
Trinity. Nos autem unam veneramur imaginem, etc. in Ezech. c. 16. p. 189. F.
We, says St. Jerome, have but one Husband, and worship but one Image, to wit,
the Image of the Invisible and Omnipotent God. (...). Apud Council. Nic. 2. Act.
6. p.
We, says St. Chrysostom, do by their Writings enjoy the presence of the
Saints, having the Images, not of their Bodies, but of their Souls. (...).
Ibid. p. 484.
We have no care, says Amphilochius, to figure by Colors, the bodily Visages
of the Saints in Tables. So certain is it that they had no such Custom in the
five first Centuries, That,

2. They plainly tell us, that the first thing they taught their Converts, was
the contempt of Images. (...). In Celsum, l. 3. p. 120.
We plainly show forth the gravity, or decorum, of our Principles, and do not
hide them, as Celsus does imagine, seeing even to those who are first entered
among us, we teach the contempt of Idols, and of all Images, says Origin.
(...). L. 8. p. 412. (...), etc. l. 2. p. 91.
God, says he, cannot wholly overlook the Christians, because they are the Men
who despise Images of humane Art, and endeavor to ascend by Reason unto God
himself; they transcended not only Images, but the whole frame of Creatures to
ascend to the God of all the World.

3. They add, that they were taught thus to abandon, and forsake all Images and
Statues by the Religion they embraced, and by the Doctrine of the Holy Jesus.

(...). L. 5. p. 255.
The Christian Doctrine, says Origin, does not permit them to be sollicitous
about Images and Statues, or about the Works of God, but to transcend them, and
to lift up the Soul to the Creator. (...). L. 7. p. 359.
They, by the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, says he, are moved to relinquish all
Images and Statues, and to look up, by the Word, unto the Father. Again, (...).
L. 7. p. 362.
The Christian, says He, does not look upon Images, for he is taught by Christ
to seek nothing which is little or sensible, but only those things which art
Great, and truly Divine. He adds, That (...).
the Prophets had foretold of the coming of Christ to cause them to desist from
the worship of Idols, and of Images, and of Demons. (...), etc. L. 7. p. 375.
Other Nations, as the Scythians, Africans, etc. abstain from Images, says he;
but they do it not upon the same account upon which we Jews and Christians are
averse from it, for we abstain by reason of the Commandment, which says, Thou
shall not make to thy self an Idol, nor the similitude of any thing in Heaven
or Earth; which things do not only cause us to reject Images, but make us ready
to die, rather than we will defile our conception of God with any such Impiety.

Arnobius says, That Qui ab signis inertibus atque ex vilissimo formatis luto
ad Sydera sublevavit and Coelum. Adv. Gent. L. 1. p. 22.
Christ had elevated the Christian from fruitless signs made of vile Earth, to
the Stars, and Heaven, and made us to present our Prayers and Supplications to
the God of all things.

. 4. 4. They say, that it was proper to the Heathens to make and worship
Images; and it is frequent among the Fathers, to call them Worshippers of
Images, instead of Heathens, and to describe the Christian as one who has left
off, and has renounced that practice. (...). Admon. p. 39. A.
Clemens Alexandrinus speaks to the Heathens thus; Art has deceived you with
its Delusions, leading you to honor Images and Pictures. (...). L. 3. p. 131.
We are not like the Getae, and Cilicians, and other Nations, to which we are
compared by Celsus. For they provide Images for their Gods; but we, says
Origin, remove from God all Honor by such things, as judging them more fit for
Devils. And again, he represents them as Men, (...). L. 4. p. 177.
who having fallen from the true knowledge of God, under a vain Imagination of
Piety, worship Images: And he represents the Christians, as those who by the
Conduct of the Word, or Reason, ascended from Wood and Stone, Silver and Gold,
and all that was precious in the World, to the Creator of all things. Quid enim
insigne preferimus nisi primam sapientiam qua frivola humanae manus opera non
adoramus: qui vult intelligere qui sunt Christiani istis indiciis utatur
necesse est. Ad Not. l. 1. c. 5.
What Ensign do we bear before us, says Tertullian, but that first Wisdom,
which instructs us not to worship the frivolous Works of Men's Hands, that
Abstinence whereby we do refrain from the Goods of others, etc. He that will
understand who are Christians, must know them by these Marks and Tokens. Vos
simula ra effingitis ex auro, l. 2. p. 98. Quae quidem nos cessamus facere, l.
6. p. 189.
You are the Men who make Images of Gold, says Arnobius, which we Christians
cease to do. Isti qui fragilia colunt. L. 7. c. 26.
This is the Doctrine of the Holy Prophets which we Christians follow; this is
our Wisdom, which they who either worship Images, or defend vain Philosophy,
deride. Eorum qui simulacra venerabantur. (...). L. 4. c. 1.
Innumerable of all Nations, says Origin, are turned to the Christian Faith,
not without the great hatred of those who worshipped Images; whereas they who
have left all Images and Statues, is his description of the Christians.

Accordingly we find the Fathers still representing this as an Heathenish
Custom. Ad Autolyc. l. 1. p. 76.
If you speak of the Greeks, and other Heathens, says Theophilus, they are the
Men who worship (...), the Images of dead Men. Hic enim Gentilis est error.
Orat. de obit. Theod. p. 61.
Helen, when she had found the Cross, did worship Christ, but not the Wood,
because that, says St. Ambrose, was the Error of the Heathens. (...). Hist.
Eccles. l. 7. c. 18.
It is no marvel, says Eusebius, that those of the Heathens, who of old were
cured by our Savior, should do such things, ( i.e. erect his Image, as did the
Woman cured of her bloody Issue) since we have seen the Images of the Apostles,
Paul and Peter, yea, and of Christ himself, kept painted with Colors on
Tables, for that of old they were wont imprudently, by an Heathenish Custom,
thus to honor them whom they counted their Saviors, or Benefactors. This
therefore was an Heathenish, and not a Christian Custom: For had Christians
customarily had such Statues, and Pictures, why does Eusebius make this a Badg
of Heathenism? Why does he say, It was no marvel that Heathens should do thus?
If the Images of Christ, and his Apostles, had been then common in all
Christian Oratories, why is it mentioned as so rare a thing that he had seen
them? Why, lastly, does he say that this was done (...), that is, according to
Valesius, imprudently, and inconsiderately? Adamantius the Manichaean cites
those words of the second Commandment, Effigies and Imagines. Contra Adam. cap.
13.
See that you make no Effigies, or Images, for I am a jealous God, to reprehend
the Zeal of the God of the Old Testament; to which St. Austin answers, That
Vult ergo videri favere se simulacris, quod propterea faciunt ut miserrim and
vesanae suae sectae etiam paganorum concilient benevolentiam. Ibid.
he only quarrels with God's Zeal, because it forbad Images, and so would seem
to favor Images, which, says he, these Men do to conciliate the favor of the
Heathens to their mad and miserable Sect, where we learn, not only that
Simulacra and Imagines, are with St. Austin the same thing, but also that it
was only Heathens who then favored Images, and those who had a kindness for
them. Agobardus in the 9th Century, says, That Ob religionis honorem aut
aliquam venerationem more Gentilium. De Imag. p. 248.
to use the Images of the Apostles, or our Lord himself, for the Honor of
Religion, or any Veneration, is to use them after the manner of the Heathens,
and that if Constantine did adore the Images of St. Peter and Paul, Ex
consuetudine Idololatriae pestifera. p. 252.
he did it from the pestiferous Custom of Idolatry. So generally and so lately
was this esteemed an Heathenish and Idolatrous Custom by the Fathers of the
Church.

. 5. 5. This thing was so notorious to the Heathens, that they object it to the
Christians as their Crime, that they had no Images, that they would not make,
would not endure, much less venerate them, and that they laughed at those who
did. Celsus objects, says Origin, That (...). L. 8. p. 389, 404.
we avoid the making of Images. And again, (...). L. 7. p. 373.
In this, that they will not endure Images, they are like unto the Scythians,
etc. and other irreligious and lawless Nations, who dedicate no Image to their
Gods, and count them Fools that do so. And a third time; thou laugh'st at our
Images. Quod non deorum alicujus simulacrum constituamus aut formam. L. 6. p.
189.
For this cause you lay great Impiety to our charge, says Arnobius, because we
make no Images, or shape of any of the Gods. In a word, When Adrian the Emperor
had commanded that Christo Templum facere voluit [Severus] quod and Adrianus
cogitasse fertur, qui Templa in omnibus civitatibus sine simulacris jusserat
fieri. Hist. August. c. 43. Qui consulentes sacra, repererunt omnes Christianos
fieri, si id optato evenisset. ibid.
Temples should be made in all Cities without Images, it was by them
conjectured that he made them for Christ, says Lampridius; who adds, That he
was forbidden to proceed in this Enterprise, by those who, consulting the
Oracles, found that all Men would turn Christians, if this, according to their
wishes, should fall out. Whence evident it is that it was not the use of
Christians then to have Images in Churches, but that the contrary was according
to their wishes.

6ly, If we consider what the Fathers answered to this Accusation of the
Heathens, we shall more fully be convinced, that they did not venerate, but did
entirely reject the use of Images, as vain, ridiculous, and inconsistent with
the Christian Faith, and the true worship of a Deity. For,

Whereas the Heathens complained that Christians laughed at their Images. That
Origin replies, (...). L. 8. p. 404.
that they did not laugh at the insensate Statues, but at those who worshipped
them. And he justifies this practice of the Christians, by saying, That (...),
etc. l. 7. p. 362.
any Man of sound Reason could not but laugh at them who looked upon Images,
and by the contemplation of them, thought to ascend from what was seen, and was
a Symbol, to what was understood.

2ly, They answer, by distinguishing betwixt such Images as were the work of an
Artificer, saying, That these they did reject; and such as were spiritual,
consisting in the resemblance of the Virtues and Persections of their Lord, and
these they owned, as acceptable to God, and such as they regarded. (...), etc.
L. 8. p. 389.
The Images which are agreeable to God, says Origin, are not such as are
framed by servile Artists, but those Virtues which are formed in us by the Word
of God, and are the Imitations of the First Born of the Creation, in whom are
the Examples of Justice, Temperance, Fortitude, Prudence, and Godliness, and
all other Virtues. (...). Ibid.
In all therefore who are furnished with these Virtues, are the Images with
which we think it meet to honor the Prototype of all Images, the Image of the
Invisible God, his only Son; and (...). Ibid.
they who put off the old Man, with his Works, and put on the New, which is
renewed in Knowledge according to the Image of him that created him, by
receiving this Image of their Creator, make such Images in themselves as God
regards, insinuating, that God liked no other. (...).
In sum, says he, all Christians do attempt to make such Images, as we have
now related, not such as have no Life or Sense, nor such in which wicked
Demons may reside; that is neither such Images as were in use amongst the
Heathens, nor such as are now used by the Church of Rome, for theirs, I
suppose, have neither Life nor Sense: (...). Ibid. p. 390, 391.
Let therefore any Man that will, says he, compare the Images I have now
mentioned, framed in the Souls of pious Persons, with the Images of Phidias,
and Polycletus, and the like, and he will manifestly discern that the latter
are void of Life, and corrupted by Time: and therefore he concludes, That there
is no compare betwixt the Images of Christians, and of Heathens. So that the
Images which are obnoxious to the Injuries of Time, and which are void of Life
and Sense, were then accounted Heathen Images, the Images of Christians were
then only those which are framed in the immortal Souls of Men. According to
that of Theodotus Ancyranus, (...). Apud Conc. Nic. 2. Conc. To. 7. p. 492.
We have no Tradition to form the Images of Saints in material Colors, but we
are taught to express their Virtues, recorded in the Writings concerning them,
as their living Images. And that of Amphilochius, (...). Ibid. p. 484.
We are not concerned to frame the fleshly Persons of the Saints by Colors
upon Tables, but to imitate the Virtues of their Conversations.

3. To the Comparison made by Celsus betwixt them and the Scythians, Moors, and
Persians in this Matter, Origin replies, (...). L. 4. p. 374.
That it is true, both they and Christians were averse from Images, but then
the Christians rejected them on better Grounds than Heathens did, viz. because
they would not violate the Commandment forbidding the use of them, and because
they dreaded to debase the Divine Worship, by bringing it down to Matter shaped
in such a Manner and Figure. And (...). L. 8. p. 391.
because finding by the Doctrine of Christ the way of Piety toward God, they
avoided those things which by appearance of Piety made Men wicked. Which
passages assure us, not only that the Christians of those Times abstained from
all religious use of Images, but also that they did it in obedience to the
Doctrine of Christ, and the Commandment forbidding it, i.e. upon the very
Motives which move us to do so.

4ly, Arnobius in answer to the same Objection of the Heathens, That Christians
did contemn the Deities, because they had no Images of any of them, nor did
they worship their Effigies; whereas Sequitur ut de simulacris dicamus qua
multa art componitis and religiosa observatione curatis. L. 6. p. 194.
the Heathens made, and with religious Observation did regard them; gives this
reason why the Christians had them not, viz. Honorum hac genera aut risui
habere si rideant, aut indigne perpeti. P. 189.
Because, (says he) we do conceive, that if they certainly be Gods whom we
worship, and have that eminence which by that name is signified, they will
deride, or be offended with such kind of Honor. 2ly, He tells them, that he is
not able to determine, Utrumne istud serio and cum proposito faciatis gravi, an
ridendo res ipsas. Ibid. p. 194.
whether they themselves do this seriously, or with intention to deride what
they pretend to worship: For Si enim certum est apud vos Deos esse quos
veneremini, atque in summis coeli regionibus degere, quae ratio est, ut
simulacra ista fingantur a vobis? p. 195.
if it be certain, says he, they are Gods whom you worship, and that they have
their Habitation in the highest Heavens, what reason can induce you to frame
these Images of them? Which Reason does as much concern the Roman Images, for
they are Images of Christ, the Virgin Mother, and of those Saints and Martyrs
whom they suppose to live in Heaven. 3ly, He calls upon the Heathens to clear
up their Understandings, and consider, That Simulacra ista, quae templis in
omnibus prostrati, and humiles adoratis, ossa, lapides, era sunt, etc. p 200.
those Images before which they lie prostrate, and which they humbly adore, are
Wood, Stones, Brass, Silver, or Gold; and such are also all the Images of Roman
Catholics. And having urged these, and many other Arguments, he concludes,
Satis demonstratum est quam inaniter fiant simulacra, p. 210.
He had sufficiently demonstrated how vainly Images were made. Whence evident
it is, that Christians then esteemed it a vain ridiculous thing, and a
dishonor to that Jesus whom they owned as God, to worship him by Images, and
that they had no Image of any thing in Heaven. And indeed, the very silence of
the Christians, as to the Matter of Images, when they professedly reply to this
Impeachment of the Heathens, is a sufficient Argument that they allowed no use
of Images in their Religious Worship, and that they paid no Veneration to them:
For should any Heathen now object against the Church of Rome, That they had no
Images, would they not answer, They had the Images of Christ, his Virgin
Mother, and of his Blessed Saints and Martyrs? This therefore should in honesty
and reason have been the Answer of the Ancient Christians to the like Objection
of the Heathens made against them, had it been suitable to the received
Principles and Practice of their Times.

Moreover the Heathens, as Lactantius informs us, thought an Image so very
requisite to the performance of Religious Worship, That Nec ullam Religionem
putant, ubicunque illa non fulserint. L. 2. c. 6. p. 169. Ed. Leyd.
they imagined there could be no Religion where there was no Image. And this
induced them to conceive, that albeit they knew not of any Images the
Christians used, yet had they some concealed amongst them. And hence Caecilius
asks the Christians, Cur occultare quidquid illud colunt magnopere nituntur?
cur nullas aras habent, templa nulla, nulla nota simulacra? P. 10.
Why is it that you hide and conceal the Thing you worship, be it what it will?
Why have you no Altars, no Temples, no known Images? not doubting but they had
some Images concealed. To this Imagination of the Heathens, Origin thus
replies, L. 3. p. 120.
We openly declare the venerable Principles of our Religion, and do not hide
them as Celsus does imagine, for we teach our Converts the contempt of Idols,
and of all Images. Octavius also takes notice of it in these words; Putatis nos
occultare quod colimus si delubra and aras non habemus, -- quod enim simulacrum
Deo fingam cum si recte existimes sit Dei homo simulacrum? p. 36.
You think we hide what we worship; if we have not Temples with Images and
Altars. And then he answers in behalf of Christians, with a free inunuation
that they had no such things, and gives these Reasons why they had them not;
What Image shall I make of God, since if you rightly do esteem it, Man is the
Image of his Maker? What Temple shall I build, when the whole World cannot
contain him? What Sacrifices should I offer, since a good Soul and pure Mind is
the Offering that he will accept? Haec nostra sacrificia, haec Dei Sacra sunt.
Ibid.
these (and not Temples, Images, or Victims) are the holy Services which we
present unto our God. Whence it is evident that Images were not admitted then
amongst the Sacra of the Christians; and that they held it not convenient to
make an Image of that Jesus whom they asserted to be God.

Now briefly to reflect upon these things; Can it be reasonably imagined, that
they who so expressly tell us, They had no Tradition to make the Images of
Saints, no sensible Image, no Images of their Bodies; and that they knew no
vain Figures of Images; that they who declare that they themselves despised,
and taught their Converts the contempt of Images; that their Religion, and
their Savior, taught them not to be sollicitous about them, but to relinquish,
abstain from, and to abandon them; that they who teach that it was proper to
the Heathens to honor Images and Pictures; that the Custom was Heathenish and
Idolatrous, and only fit for Demons; and that Christians were to be known by
this, that they would not adore the Works of Men's Hands; that they had left all
Images and Statues, and that this was their wisdom; that they to whom it was
continually objected by the Heathens, that they neither had, nor would endure
Images; that they avoided the making Statues, and laughed at them who did it:
And who in answer to these things, not only do confess the thing, but also
justify and glory in it, telling their Adversaries, That Images were vainly
made by him, who was the Image of his Maker, and should make no other Images;
that they deservedly laughed at them; and that the Heavenly Powers themselves,
if they were subject to that Passion, would laugh at such Votaries; I say, Can
it be reasonably conceived, That they who say such things, should make it
matter of their Faith, that Images were to be worshipped, and in their constant
practice should adore the Images of Christ, and of his Saints?

6. Nor do the Fathers only declare, in their Apologies and Conflicts with the
Heathens, they had no Images; but they commend themselves, and others, upon
that account, and say, it was a thing to be commended, both in them and others.
And,

On this account they mightily commend the Jewish Polity, because it taught
them, not only to transcend all Images, but all created Beings, and to ascend
to the Creator of the World, saying, That (...). Orig. adv. Celsum l. 2. p. 91.
(...). L. 4. p. 181.
he that does inspect their Laws and Constitutions, will find, that they were
Men who had a shadow of the Heavenly Life on Earth, because they had no
Image-makers in their Commonwealth.

As for themselves, they declared, That they on this account (...). L. 4. p.
177.
were Men, or something more excellent than Men, because they did not venerate,
but did transcend all Images, and go immediately to God. And Nonne laudem magis
quam poenam merebatur repudium agniti Erroris. Apol. cap. 12.
if we do not worship Statues, and cold Images, like to those dead Men which
they represent, do we not deserve praise rather than punishment, says
Tertullian, for the refusal of this ancient Error? Yea, they declare their
humble confidence, That (...). L. 8. p. 412. (...). Ibid.
God would not overlook them, but vouchsafe them some manifestation of his
Goodness, and give them some Fruit of his Providence, amongst other Reasons for
the very Cause, because they, despising Images of Humane Art, endeavored
directly by Reason to ascend to God.

And lastly, As for those Heathens, who for some time worshipped the Deity
without Images, they say, They served God Dicit Antiquos Romanos plusquam annos
150, Deos sine simulacro coluisse, quod si adhuc remansisset castius Dii
observarentur. Aug. de C. D. l. 4. c. 13. Agob. de Imag.. 24.
more purely when they had no Images; and that their Religion would have been
better had they done so still. But as for those who retained them, and looked
upon them when they worshipped, or did esteem them Sacred, they d^clared, they
could not but look upon them Orig. l. 7. p. 362, 367.
as Men of a lame and infirm Mind, they could not but laugh at their folly. And
they do frequently apply that passage of the Psalmist to them, August. and
Theodoret. in Psalm. 113.
They that make them, are like unto them; as judging it the extremity of Error
in them who had the use of Reason, to worship Stocks and Stones. Now sure we
cannot reasonably think these Fathers practiced themselves what they thus
laughed at, and condemned in others: That they admired the Jewish Polity,
because it did permit no Images in their Sacred Worship, and yet conceived
these things not only well consistent with, but even an advantage to the
Christian Polity; or that, at the same time, they could conceive themselves
praiseworthy for rejecting, and even despising Images of humane Art; and yet
not only have them, but think them worthy of their Veneration, and by them
should ascend unto that Jesus whom they owned as their God: We therefore may be
well assured from these Sayings, that the Christians of those times did not
look upon Images when they performed their Worship to God the Father, or his
Son Christ Jesus. And to assure us yet farther that they did not do it, they
inform us, that when they paid their Worship to the due Object of it, they did
shut their Eyes, and thought it was their Duty so to do; and that this practice
did enable them the better to lift up their Minds to God.

Origin, in allusion to those words of Christ; I am come into the World, that
they who see not, may see; and they who see, may be made blind, says, That
(...). l. 7. p. 358.
the Word makes the Eyes of the Soul to see, but blinds those of the Senses,
that the Soul may without distraction behold what it ought: if therefore any
Man act after the manner of Christians, the Eye of his Soul is opened, but that
of his Sense is shut; and by how much more he opens his better Eye, and shuts
the Eyes of his Senses, by so much more he sees, and contemplates better God,
and his Son, who is the Word and Wisdom. And again, (...). p. 362.
Even the meanest Christian shutting the Eyes of his sense, and opening those
of his Soul, transcends all the whole World, and shames the wise Men of the
World, who, (...), looking upon Images, by contemplation of them, do endeavor
to erect their Minds to God. St. Basil says thus, (...). In Psalm. 37. To. 1.
p. 208.
I do not confess with my Lips, that I may appear to many so to do, but,
shutting my Eyes, inwardly in my Heart, I show my inward groanings to him that
sees in secret: They therefore doubtless thought not Images then needful to
excite Devotion, or to move compunction in them, though by the Act. 2. p. 103.
Second Nicene Council they were afterward declared useful to these Ends.

. 7. And therefore whereas Heathens had many of the same pretenses for having,
and for using Images in their solemn Worship, which that Nicene Council, and
the Church of Rome have since took up, the Sayings of the Fathers equally
confute them both. For,

1. Whereas the Trent Catechism says, That the having Images in Churches, and
the giving Worship and Respect unto them, tends, maximo Fidelium bono, Part. 3.
cap. 2. Sect. 24.
to the great benefit of the Faithful. And the Second Nicene Council does
frequently in effect declare the same. Theodotus smartly puts this Question to
those who used them in his Time; (...). Conc. Nic. p. 492.
Let them say, who do erect such Forms, What profit can redound unto them by so
doing? or to what spiritual Contemplation are they led by that remembrance?
Strom. 7. p. 714.
Clemens of Alexandria expressly says, That they are, (...), vain, and
Profane. L. 2.. 5. p. 161.
Lactantius, that they are, insensibilia and vana, vain and insensate things.
Origin and St. Austin, That they were dangerous and hurtful to the Christians,
and for that cause avoided by them.

2. Whereas the Heathens said, That they used their Images (...). porphyr. apud
Eusebius. praepar. Evang. l. 3. c. 7.
only to represent things invisible, by what was visible; and to teach them, as
it were, to read the Things concerning the Gods out of these Image-Books; that
these Things were as Letters which did instruct them in the Knowledge of God,
and by inspection of which they attained unto it: That the Divinity was to be
propounded to the Mind, and these Things only to be used, (...), Max. Tyr.
dissert. 38. p. 370, 377.
to bring God to their remembrance, (...), and, as it were, a Manuduction, or
way to bring him to their Minds. That they were but Plutarch. de Iside and
Osir. p. 382.
as Glasses whereby to represent God to them; and that they ought to be
approved, (...), who do not worship them, but by them the Godhead. The Fathers
having mentioned these Notions of the Heathen Wisdom, say, That nothing can be
more ridiculous, and greater matter of their shame; and that they are more like
to (...). Athanas. contr. Gent. p. 21, 23. Eusebius. praepar. Evang. l. 3. c. 13.
l. 5. c. 14.
writers of Fables, than Divines; that God was not honored by such Symbols;
that they who know the Truth, ought not to think to honor the Divine Virtues
by Images made of insensate Matter, but they should openly teach all, not to
admire things obvious to Sense, but only the invisible Maker of them, and
worship his invisible and incorporeal Virtues, not thinking to honor the
Divinity with insensate Statues, which can have nothing wellpleasing to God,
nor be the Images of Divine Powers, but with sound Doctrine, and a pure Mind.
By all which Sayings, they equally condemn the Symbolical Images of the S.
Trinity and God the Father, tacitly allowed by the Doceatur populus non
propterea divinitatem figurari, quasi corporeis oculis conspici, aut coloribus
vel figuris exprimi possit. Ses. 25. Jam enim receptae sunt fere ubique.
Trent Council in these words, (When it is expedient for the unlearned, in
Figures, to express the Histories and Narratives of Holy Scripture, they must
be taught, That the Divinity is not therefore pictured, as if it could be seen
by a corporeal Eye, or expressed by Colors, or by Figures) and Bell. de Rel.
Sanct. l. 2. c. 8.
received generally in all Roman Churches.

And, 2ly, whereas the (...). Act. 1. p. 60.
Nicene Council, and the Roman Church have introduced Images of Christ, the
Blessed Virgin, and the Saints, under the same pretense; as tending, 1. to
Instruction, viz. The Images of Christ being framed, say they, that his
Incarnation may be made known to all; and the Images of the Apostles, Prophets,
Martyrs, to be a short VVriting, and Excitation, and teaching of the People,
especially the most simple. And, 2ly, for the remembrance of the Prototypes. I
say, whereas these are the Romish and the Nicene Pleas, the Fathers do expressly
say, (...). Amphil. apud 2. Nic. Council. Act. 6. p. 484.
They cared not to make any such Images of Saints, because they had no need of
them; (...). Theodot. ibid. p. 482.
they knew not to what spiritual contemplation they could be erected by such
remembrance of them; they had the Writings of the Saints, which were their
living Images, and with them were content. St. Austin, speaking of some who
said, That our Lord Christ had written Books of Magic, and committed them to
St. Peter and Paul; he conjectures, that they therefore made mention Credo quod
pluribus locis simul cum illo pictos viderunt.
of these two Apostles, because they had in many places, particularly at Rome,
seen those two pictured with him. And then he adds, Sic omnino errare meruerunt
qui Christum and Apostolos ejus non in Sanctis codicibus, sed in pictis
parietibus quaesierint. De Cons. Evang. L. 1. c. 10.
So verily deserve they to err, who sought Christ and his Apostles, not in the
Holy Bibles, but on painted VValls; an Expression which deserves to be
considered by them, who have taken from them those Books in which St. Austin
judged it fit to seek Christ and his Apostles, and substituted in their room
these Wall Lecturers, which it is evident he approved not of. And much less
the Council of Frankford, witness these words; Quae vesania est dicere per
imaginem ad memoriam veniemus de ejus in terra praesentia. Lib. Carol. l. 4. c.
2.
What madness is it to say, That by a painted Image we may come to the memory
of Christ's Presence on Earth. Oh unhappy Memory! which, that it may remember
Christ, who never should recede out of the mind of a good Man, needs the
beholding of an Image.

3. The Heathens say, That by beholding of their Images and Statues they
ascended to the Prototype; and that their Images were invented for this End,
confessing, That if any one was able straight to erect his Soul to Heaven, and
go directly to God, Max. Tyr. dissert. 38. p 369.
(...), such, in likelihood, could need no Images. The Second (...). Act. 4. p.
320. (...). Act. 7. p. 556.
Nicene Council in like manner says, That they worship the Images of Christ,
his Blessed Mother, and the Saints, That by their Pictures they may be able to
ascend, by Memory, unto the Prototype. And because the more they view their
Images, the better are they excited to the remembrance and desire of the
Prototype, and to give honorary Worship to the Images. Now this, as you have
heard, the Fathers have declared to be the very thing for which they laughed at
the Philosophers, that by looking upon Images and Symbols, they thought to
ascend to what was understood and represented by them, declaring, That
Christianity taught them to overlook these things, and to ascend immediately to
God, and to his Son; and that the rudest Christian did so, by shutting of his
bodily Eyes, and not by looking upon what was sensible. Accordingly the Non
corporeus nobis visus, sed Spiritualis est necessarius. Lib. Carol. l. 2. c. 21.
Council of Frankford teaches, That to contemplate Christ, who is the Virtue
and Wisdom of God; or to behold the Virtues, which by God were derived upon his
Saints, they needed not that corporeal sight which was common to them with
unreasonable Creatures, but the Spiritual only.

4ly, The Fathers of the Second Nicene Council, do not only style these Images
Sacred and Holy, but declare, They salute them in hope of being made partakers
of Sanctification by them; asserting, That by paying honorary Worship to them,
they expect, Act. 4. p. 265, 321, 453, 492.
(...), to be made partakers of some Holiness; and that they really do, (...),
derive some Holiness from the Action. And doubtless the Heathens had the same
conceit, as is evident from the frequent Assertions of the Fathers against
them, and consequently against the Second Nicene Council, That there could be
nothing Sacred, nothing Holy in an Image, or in any thing made by an Artificer.
Accordingly the Nec Sanctae dici debent. L. 3. c. 2.
Council of Frankford says, They ought not to be called Holy: And the Synod
held at Qui -- Sanctus nuncupari sanxerunt, and sanctimoniam ab eis se adipisci
posse professi sunt. p. 20.
Paris, says, The Second Nicene Council erred not a little, not only in
saying, That Images were to be adored, but also in calling them Holy; and
saying, That Holiness might be had by them.

Now can it rationally be supposed, that they who thus declared, That Images
were needless; that they knew no advantage could be received by them; that all
Men were to be taught not to admire them; that they deserved to err who sought
Instruction from them; that as for Christians, even the rudest of them rather
chose to shut their Eyes, when they performed their Devotion, than to employ
them about sensible Objects, with many other things of a like nature: Can it, I
say, be well imagined, that these very Men should judge these very Images fit to
instruct, to sanctify, to work compunction in them, yea, to be Objects worthy
of their Veneration?

. 8. Once more the Fathers represent this as a practice proper to the vilest
Heretics: For of the Carpocratian and Gnostick Heretics, it is related by
Imagines quasdam depictas, quasdam de reliqua materia fabricatas habent,
dicentes, formam Christi factam a Pilato, and has coronant, and reliquam
observationem circa eas similiter ut Gentes faciunt. Epiph. Haer. 7. p. 108.
Iren. l. 1. c. 24.
Epiphanius, That they had many Images, some painted, others framed in Gold and
Silver, and other Matter, which they said, were the Representations of Christ
made under Pontius Pilate. Carpocratians, says Imagines quasdam depictas,
quasdam de reliqua materia fabricatas habent, dicentes, formam Christi factam a
Pilato, and has coronant, and reliquam observationem circa eas similiter ut
Gentes faciunt. Epiph. Haer. 7. p. 108. Iren. l. 1. c. 24.
Irenaeus, have some painted Images, some also made of other Matter; saying,
That their Images of Christ were made by Pilate; and these they crown and place
with the Images of Plato, Aristotle, and Pythagoras, and perform other Rites
unto them as the Gentiles do; that is, they censed and worshipped them, say
(...). Anaceph. p. 140.
Epiphanius, and Colebat Imagines adorando incensumque ponendo. August. Haer. 7.
St. Austin. Thus of Marcellina, a Carpocratian Heretic, it is related by
Epiphanius and St. Austin, That she made the Image of Christ, and Paul, and
Homer, and Pythagoras, and did cense, worship, or bow down to them. Besides,
St. Austin does affirm of Carpocrates, That he Hic Iesum hominem tantummodo
putasse prohibetur. Ibid.
was reputed to have held, That Christ was only Man, and so could not intend to
give him the Worship due to God. And Bellarmine himself confesses, That Isti
cum Christum colerent proculdubio imaginem ejus propter ipsum colebant. De
Imagine Sanctorum, c. 24.. sexta Ratio.
without doubt, they, of whom Irenaeus speaks, did worship the Image for the
Relation which it bore to Christ. And thus the Doctors of the Church of Rome
allow it worthy of Worship, and so must be condemned by Irenaeus as much as are
the Carpocratians. Here then is undeniable conviction that what the Second
Nicene Council have decreed to be the Worship due unto the Images of Christ,
and all the blessed Spirits; and what the Church of Rome does daily practice,
was deemed, in the purer Ages of the Church, a practice proper to the vilest
Heretics. They have these Images, say the Fathers; They offer Incense, and bow
down to them; and in this they do like Heathens, and therefore not like
Christians: Therefore the Christians of those Ages did not so; for what is more
absurd, than to reprove these Heretics for doing that which the best of
Christians daily practiced?

CHAP. II.
The Arguments of the Fathers against the Worship of Heathen Images, conclude
equally against those now used by Christians as, v. g. 1. That it was
incongruous to worship or bow down to them, because they were made of Earth,
insensate Earth, the same with that of which Vessels were made for common uses,
and they were sensual Objects, and therefore were not to be adored, but trod
upon, contemned, and cast away.. 1. 2ly, Because they were worse than Beasts,
imperfect Insects, and dead Things, which yet it would be a vile and unbecoming
thing for Men to bow down to.. 2. 3ly, Because the Artificer who made them was
better, whom yet 'twas shameful to adore, that being the Works of Men's Hands,
they could not be holy, valuable, acceptable to God, and so not fit to be
adored; that the Works of God were not to be adored in honor of him, much less
the Works of Men's hands in honor of the Saints.. 3. 4ly, That Man, who was the
Image of God, and was made upright, was not to adore the Images of Men, or
venerate earthly Things.. 4. 5ly, Because if what they worshipped were Heavenly
Powers, they would laugh at, or be angry with such Worshippers if they were in
Heaven; it were better neglecting Images to look up thither; that if Images
were made for the commemortion of the Dead, or of the Absent, they were not to
be worshipped.. 5. 6ly, Because Images were dangerous, as tending to debase the
Soul, and render the Divine Majesty contemptible.. 6. 7ly, Because they were
the Invention of the Devil.. 7. That the Fathers could not have spoken these
things, which equally conclude against all Image Worship, if they themselves
had worshipped Images.. 8. That had this been their practice, the Heathens must
have then retorted these things, as afterward they did.. 9. That many of these
Sayings of the Fathers are expressly condemned in the Second Nicene Council..
10. That the Church of Rome has persecuted many for saying the same things,
and forced them to renounce them as great Heresies.. 11.

THis will be farther evident, if we consider the Objections which the Holy
Fathers make against that worship of Images which had obtained in the Heathen
World. For they produce such Arguments against it, as equally destroy all
Image Worship, whatsoever be the Object represented by the Image; and do as
fully prove it is unlawful to worship Images of Christ, and of departed Saints,
as to adore the Images of Heathen Deities: so that it must be granted, that
either in their days Christians did neither bow to, nor prostrate themselves
before the Images of Christ, the Blessed Virgin, or the Saints departed; or
that they practiced that which they themselves most vehemently reproved in the
Heathens. Now these Arguments of the Fathers are taken; (1.) From the
consideration of Images themselves: And here they argue,

. 1. 1. From the Matter of them, thus, That (...). Clem. Alex. protrept. p. 38.
De simulacris ipsis nihil aliud deprehendo quam materias sorores esse
vasculorum instrumentorumque communium. Tertul. Apol. c. 12. (...). Athanas.
contr. Gentes, p. 15. Quis autem non intelligat nefas esse rectum animal
curvari ut adoret terram quae idcirco pedibus nostris subjecta est, ut calcanda
nobis non adoranda sit, Lact. l. 2. c. 17. p. 228. Non est dubium quin Religio
nulla sit ubicunque simulacrum est -- Quia nihil potest esse coeleste in ea re
quae fit ex terra, Ibid. c. 18. p. 229. Deum cujus seeds illa est, quem oculis
non possumus animo contemplemur, quod profecto non facit qui aes, aut lapidem,
quae sunt terrena, veneratur, Ibid. cap. 1. p. 140. Stultissimi sunt qui non
intelligunt esse mortiferum, relicto Deo vivo, prosternere se, atque adorare
terrena, qui nesciunt, and illos aeternam poenam manner qui figmenta
insensibilia fuerint venerati, Epit. cap. 1. p. 736. Cum vos terrae submittitis
humilioresque facitis, ipsi vos ultro ad Inferos mergitis ad mortemque
damnatis. Lact. l. 2. c. 2. p. 148.
the Materials of carved Images were only polished Earth, which Christians were
taught to tread upon, and to contemn, and therefore could not, without
wickedness, adore, what they did trample under feet; and that to humble
themselves to what was as to Matter Earth, was to humble themselves to Hell,
and to condemn themselves to death. That they who adore them, consider not that
they daily burn, and tread upon the like Matter; that they are made of the same
Matter with our Common, and perhaps impurer Vessels. That there can be no
Religion where there is an Image, because Religion consists in things Divine
and Heavenly, whereas there can be nothing Heavenly which consists of Earth.
That certainly he does not in his Mind contemplate God, who gives Veneration
to an Image.

That Tu ergo adoras insensilem, cum unusquisque habens sensum, nec ea quidem
credat adoranda quae a deo facta sunt, and habent sensum. Clemens Recogn. l.
5.. 16.
this Matter is insensate, and that it is a certain Maxim among Christians,
(...), that they are not to worship that which has no sense. That it is great
folly to adore what is void of sense, when every one that has sense, knows
those things are not to be worshipped which are made by God, and have sense.
That they are Fools, and blind, who know not that they shall everlastingly
perish, who worship Figments void of sense.

Nec ponderare secum unamquamque rem potest vulgus indoctum, ut intelligat
nihil colendum esse quod oculis mortalibus cernitur, Lact. l. 2. c. 3. p. 149.
Origin. l. 7. p. 362. supra August. contra Acad. l. 1. c. 1.
That nothing is to be worshipped, but wholly to be cast away, which is the
Object of our Senses, and is seen with mortal Eyes; and that our Savior came
to free God's Worship from these sensual Objects.

. 2. 2ly, Comparing these insensate Images with other things, to wit, with
Beasts, and with dead Things, they discourse thus;

That (...). Clem. Alexandr. protrept. p. 33, 34. (...). Athanas. contr. Gent.
p. 15. Melior est etiam bestia, ut si pudeat adorare bestiam quam fecit Deus
videntem, audientem, etc. viderent quam pudendum esset adorare malum and carens
vita sensuque simulacrum, August. in Ps. 113. vide Tertul. Apol. l. 12.
Minucium p. 26. Arnob. l. 6. p. 202. Theodoret. in Ps. 113. Clem. Romans recog.
l. 5.. 16. Chrysostom. in Es. Hom. 2. p. 1037.
if it be a most vile and unbecoming thing for Men to worship and bow down to
Beasts, it is more shameful for them to worship and bow down to Images, they
being more dishonorable than any living Creature; A Mouse, a Worm, a Mole, a
Serpent being much better than an Image, because they have sense, which Images
have not; The Birds of the Air being more honorable, because they have life
and motion, which Images have not; they can frame Voices with their Throats,
which Images cannot; they judge Images to be things void of Sense, and therefore
nest, and make their Habitations in them, and even mute upon them. That they
are worse than any dead thing, for that once lived, whereas Images never did
enjoy one moment of Life.

. 3. 3ly, From the consideration of the Artificer, or the efficient Cause of
Images, they argue thus;

That the Melior est qui fecit quam illa quae facta sunt, and tamen factorem
ipsum nemo suscipit aut veretur. Lact. l. 2. c. 2. p. 146. (...). Athanas.
contr. Gent. p. 15. item p. 11, and 23. August. in Ps. 113. Artifex melior est
eis, quia ea potuit membrorum motu atque officio fabricare, quem tamen
Artificem te utique puder ct adorare. p. 1305.
Artificer who made these Images, must be esteemed better than his own
handiwork, because he gave unto it that perfection it enjoys; and it is
impossible there should be more perfection in the Work, than in the Artificer;
that therefore it is much more shameful to adore the Image which he makes, than
to adore the Man himself.

That (...). Clem. Alex. Strom. 7. p. 714, 715. (...). Orig. contr. Celsum p.
6, 7.
nothing can be Sacred which is the Work of Men's hands. That the Works of
servile Artists, and Stone-cutters, cannot be Sacred. That it is a thing
written by God in the Hearts of Men, that nothing is to be esteemed Sacred, or
Holy, or of much value, which is the Work of the Mechanic, or Artificer; That
Images made by servile Men, of earthly Matter, must be vain, earthly, and
profane.

That the (...). Orig. in Celsum p. 367.
Heathens had no just reason to quarrel with the Christians, for saying, They
were Men of a lame and infirm Mind, who repaired to that which falsely was
esteemed Saered, as if it truly were so; and who did not see that nothing could
be sacred which was the Work of servile Artists.

That (...). Orig. ibid. Ti (...). Eusebius. praepar. Ev. l. 5. c. 14.
the curiosity of making Statues, has in it nothing acceptable to God. And
that the Heathens ought not to forbid Christians to assert, That they are blind
who think that Piety does appertain to Images, or Statues, made out of Matter
by the Art of Man. No, 'twas reserved to a General Council of Christian Bishops
to forbid this, and to style those Images which were the Work of the Artificer,
(...), the Holy, Sacred, Venerable, Adorable Images, a thousand times.

That (...) Justin. M. Dial. 2. p. 66. Vos impii lapides and signa and opera
manuum hominum adoratis. Tharacus apud Baron. A. D. 290.. 5. (...). Clem. Alex.
protrep. p. 29. Non sit nobis Religio humanorum operum cultus. August. de vera
Relig. c. 55. vid. Agob. p. 257.
it was an impious and foolish custom to adore the works of Men's hands; and
that such worship of humane Works, should be no part of the Religion of a
Christian.

That it was Summopere pensandum esse, quia si opera manuum Dei non sunt
adoranda and colenda, nec in honorem Dei, quanto magis opera manuum hominum non
sunt adoranda and colenda, nec in honorem eorum, quorum similitudines esse
dicuntur? Agob.. 28. p. 261. Vid. Clem. R. Recogn. l. 5.. 16. Claud. Taurin.
Bibl. Patr. To. 4. p. 147.
seriously to be thought upon, That if the Works of God's Hands were not to be
adored and worshipped, no not in honor of that God who made them, much less
were the Works of Men's hands to be adored in honor of them whose Similitudes
they are said to be.

. 4. 4ly, From the Dignity, the Quality, ^^e Posture of the Persons
worshipping, they plead thus, viz.

That Est autem perversum and incongruens ut simulacrum hominis a simulacro Dei
colatur, colit enim quod est deterius and imbeciliius. Lact. l. 2. c. 17.
Man is the Image of God, whereas the Images of Heathen Deities and Saints are
but the Images of Men. Now nothing can be more perverse, or more incongruous,
than that the Image of a Man should be adored by him who is the Image of his
Maker, because he by so doing worships what is worse and weaker than himself.
That if any Image was to be adored or worshipped, it should be Si ulla Imago
esset adoranda vel colenda, Creatoris potius esset quam Creaturae; nempe
hominem fecit Deus ad Imaginem and similitudinem Dei-Certe si adorandi fuissent
homines, vivi magis quam picti; id est, ubi similitudinem habent Dei, non ubi
pecorum; vel, quod verius est, lapidum, five lignorum, vita, sensu, ratione
carentium. Agob. de Imag.. 28. p. 262.
that of the Creator, rather than the Creature, viz. Man whom God made
according to his Image and Similitude. That if Men were to be adored, it should
be rather living Men, than painted; that is, when they have the Similitude of
God, rather than that of Stones and Wood, void of Life, Sense, and Reason.

That (...). Clem. Alex. Strom. 7. p. 715.
if Holiness is to be ascribed not to God only, but to that which is framed in
honor of him, it may fitly be applied to the Church, which to the Honor of
God is made holy by the acknowledgment of him; or to him whom God does prize
and honor, in whom he dwells, in whose just Soul we may perceive the Divine
Character, and Sacred Image, and who is an Image dedicated to the Honor of
God; but the word Sacred is not to be applied to that which is made by servile
Arts, or is adorned by the hand of a Jugler.

That Melior and tu, quamvis ea non feceris, quoniam quae illa non possent,
facis. August. in Ps. 113. p. 1305. Nec intelligunt homines ineptissimi, quod
si sentire simulacra and moveri possent ultro adoratura homines fuissent a
quibus sunt expolita. Lact. l. 2. c. 2. p. 146. Velim autem dicerent mihi hi
qui idola colunt, si optant similes fieri his quos colunt: vultne aliquis
vestrum sic videre quomodo illi vident, etc. quales ergo dii habendi sunt isti
quorum similitudinem habere contumelia est? Clem. R. Recogn. l. 5.. 15.
Man himself is far more excellent, because he does what Images cannot; and he
has Sense, and Life, and Reason which they want; and that if Images could
move, they would rather adore Men that made them. That Men would think it a
reproach and injury to be compared to them, or to be like them in their want of
Life, and Sense, and Motion; and that therefore they should blush to worship
that which they would not be like, or compared to: and they who made and
worshipped them, were, as the Psalmist says, like unto them, destitute of
Manhood, and fallen into such absurdity, that it was just with God to deprive
them of sense.

That Quid ante inepta simulacra and figmenta terrena captivum corpus incurvas?
-- ad coelum atque ad Deum sursum vultus erectus est, illuc intuere, illuc
oculos erige, in supernis Deum quaere, ut carere inferis possis. Cypr. Ep. ad
Demetr. Ed. Ox. p. 191, 192. Cum nobis sublimis vultus ab Artifice Deo datus
sit, apparet istas Religiones Deorum non esse rationis humanae, qui (quae)
curvant coeleste animal ad veneranda terrena. Lact. l. 2. c. 1. p. 139. Ipsi
ergo sibi renunciant, seque hominum nomine abdicant, qui non sursum aspiciunt
sed deorsum. p. 140.
God had made Man upright, with a face looking up to Heaven, and so would have
us to look up to Heaven in the Acts of our Religion; that hence it appeared,
that those Religions could not be suitable to humane Reason, which caused this
Celestial Being to bow down and venerate earthly things; and that he renounced
the Being, and the very Name of Man, who did not look upward, but downward in
his Religious Service of God.

That the Heathens served God more purely when they had no Image, August. de C.
D. l. 4. ubi supra.
and that their Religion would have been better if they had so continued.

. 5. 5ly, From the consideration of the Object worshipped by these Images, and
in honor of whom by the Heathens they were said to be made, or really were
made, they frame these Arguments against the Adoration of them, viz.

That whatsoever deserves to be called a God, Arnob. l. 6. p. 189.
or placed among the Heavenly Powers, if it be capable of laughter, will deride
this kind of Honor; or if prone to anger, will be provoked to Indignation by
it.

That if the Gods be in Heaven, Ibid. p. 195. supra.
it is a folly to direct our Eyes to Stones, and Wood, and Walls, when we
address our selves to them; and that we rather ought to direct our Eyes to
Heaven where we believe they are. Quanto igitur rectius est, omissis
insensibilibus and vanis, oculos eo tendere ubi seeds, ubi habitatio est Dei
very? Lact. l. 2. c. 5. p. 161. vid. p. 148.
That it were better, wholly omitting these vain and insensate things, to
direct our Eyes thither, where is the Seat and Habitation of the God of Heaven;
and that God must be sought in the Heavens, that we may be freed from Hell.

That Docui Religiones Deorum triplici ratione vanas esse: una, quod simulacra
ipsa quae coluntur, effigies sunt hominum mortuorum. Lact. l. 2. c. 17. p. 227.
Quid sibi volunt ipsa simulacra quae aut mortuorum aut absentium monimenta
sunt? nam omnino fingendarum similitudinum ratio iccirco ab hominibus inventa
est, ut posset eorum memoria retineri qui vel morte subtracti, vel absentia
fuerant separati: Deos igitur in quorum numero reponemus! si in mortuorum, quis
tam stultus ut colat? si in absentium, colendi ergo non sunt, si nec vident
quae facimus, nec audiunt quae precamur. Lact. l. 2. c. 2.
the Religion of the Heathens is vain, because the Images they worship are the
Effigies of dead Men. That Images are either for the commemoration of the Dead,
or of the Absent; it being therefore folly to adore either the Dead or Absent,
it must be much more folly to adore their Images.

. 6. 6ly, From the Form of Images they also gather many Reasons to condemn
them; saying,

That Opinio and men's imperitorum artis concinitate decipitur. Minuc. p. 25.
(...). etc. Clem. Alex. protrept. p. 39. (...). Strom. 5. p. 559. Species
membrorum parit in unoquoque sordidissimum erroris affectum, ut quoniam in illo
figmento non invenit vitalem motum, credat numen occultum, effigiem tamen
viventi corpori similem; seductus forma, and commotus authoritate quasi
sapientum institorum obsequentiumque turbarum, sine vivo aliquo habitatore esse
non putat. August. in Psalm. 113. p. 1306. Orig. adv. Celsum l. 8. p. 391.
the shape of a carved or painted Image, through the gayness of the Art, tends
to debase the Soul, and to expose it to erroneous Opinions of the Deity, to
render vile and contemptible the Divine Majesty, and by a show of Piety to make
Men wicked; and that therefore they refused to make or use them, and were by
Moses forbidden so to do.

That Quis autem adorat vel orat intuens simulacrum, qui non sic afficitur, ut
ab eo se exaudiri puter? -- Hoc enim facit, and quodammodo extorquet illa
figura membrorum, ut animus vivens in sensibus corporis magis arbitretur
sentire corpus, quod suo corpori simillimum videt. Illa causa est maxima
impietatis insanae, quod plus valet in affectibus miserorum similis viventi
forma, quae sibi efficit supplicari, quam quod eam manifestum est non esse
viventem, ut debeat a vivente contemni. Plus enim valent simulacra ad curvandam
infelicem animam quod os habent, oculos, aures, manus, pedes habent, quam ad
corrigendum quod non loquentur, etc. August. in Psalm. 113. p. 1307.
Images were rejected by them, because they could not without danger use them;
For who, say they, adores or prays, looking upon an Image, who is not so
affected as to think to be heard by it; for the Figure of the Members almost
extorts this; and this is the greatest cause of this mad Impiety that the form
like unto one living, whose likeness makes it to be supplicated to, does more
prevail in the affections of miserable Men, than the evidence that it does not
live at all, does that it ought to be contemned by him who indeed is living.
For Images prevail more to bow down the unhappy Soul, in that they have a
Mouth, Eyes, Ears, Nostrils, Hands and Feet, than these Considerations can
prevail to correct the Error of it, that they will not speak, see, smell, or
walk.

. 7. 7ly, As to the extrinsecal impulsive Cause, or first Inventor of Images,
and Image Worship, they declare expressly, That Artifices Statuarum, and
Imaginum, and omnis generis simulacrorum diabolus saeculo intulit. Tertul. de
Idol. c. 2. (...). Theodotus Ancyr. apud 2. Nic. Conc. Art. 6. p. 492.

(...). Epiph. Haer. 79. interpret Agobardo. Agit hoc nimirum versutus, and
callidus humani generis inimicus, ut sub praetextu honoris sanctorum rursus
Idola introducat, rursus per diversas effigies adoretur. De Imag.. 31.

(...). Eusebius. praepar. Evang. l. 4. c. 16. p. 161.


the Devil and his Angels were the Inventors and Introducers, both of the
Images, and Image Worship of Heathen Gods, and of the Saints. That the Devil
brought into the World the Artificers of Images, and Statues: That they were
evil Angels who taught Men to make them. That they had clearly proved that the
first invention of Images, and Statues, was from the Devil. That it was
manifest, that this vain counsel of painting the Visages of the Saints, was one
of the Methods of Satan, an Invention of Men acted by the Devil. For which
assertions they are frequently Anathematised, and condemned to Hell by the
Second Nicene Council.

In a word, Lactantius not only laughs at them who kiss, and worship, and bow
down to these Frustra igitur homines auro, ebore, gemmis deos excolunt and
exornant. Ergo his Iudicris, and ornatis, and grandibus pupis, and unguenta,
and thura, and odores inferunt, his peplos and indumenta pretiosa. L. 2. c. 4.
p. 154, 157.
great Puppits, as he thinks fit to call them, but also at the vanity of such
as adorn them with Gold, or Jewels, that cover them with Vails, or precious
Garments; that offer Incense, or sweet Odours, or consecrate Gold or Silver to
them; and who they are who do these things at present, we are not to learn.

. 8. And now let any Man of Reason judge, whether all these Considerations do
not as much concern the Images of Saints, and even of our Blessed Lord, as they
concerned the Images of Heathen Deities? whether their Images, as well as those
of Heathens, be not made of Wood like to that we burn; or of polished Earth
like to that we tread upon, and trample under feet, and of which Vessels are
often made for viler uses? whether they be not sensual Objects, things void of
sense, and without Life, Motion, or ability to speak? whether they be not made
by the Artificer, are not the work of servile Artists, Stone-cutters,
Mechanics? whether they be not the Works of Men's hands? whether they be not in
the Roman Church adored, and reverenced by Men made upright after God's Image,
and dedicated to his Honor, and who have what Images have not, and do what
Images cannot do? whether any who adore them, desire to be like unto them?
whether the Images which Papists reverence, be not the Images of Heavenly
Powers, of Beings now in Heaven, the Images of dead or absent Persons, or made
for the Commemoration of such Persons? And being so, Whether these Sayings of
the Fathers do not equally concern them both? Or, whether they do not equally
condemn the Worship of the Images of Saints, and Heathen Deities? If then these
very Fathers had themselves made and worshipped Images subject to all, or any
of these Characters, and had received a Tradition from Christ and his Apostles
so to do themselves, and teach all Christians so to do, who can imagine that
they would have spoken such plain and frequent Contradictions, both to their
Practice and their Doctrine, and talked as if they equally intended to condemn,
and even ridicule the Christian and the Heathen way of Worship?

. 9. Again, suppose the Fathers could have been thus destitute of common sense,
and void of foresight, Would not the Heathens have taken this advantage to
retort upon them all that they argued against their Image Worship; and tell
them, That which they condemned in them, was only what themselves did daily
practice, and taught all Christians to observe? Could Celsus, Porphyry,
Hierocles, Eunapius, Julian, and all the other Heathen Wits, have wholly waved
and neglected such a plain Advantage? Put case they heard these Fathers daily
telling them, that 'twas a wickedness to adore that which was made of Earth;
that it was impious and foolish to adore the Works of Men's hands, or what was
void of sense; that they renounced the Name or being of a Man, who bowed down
to venerate earthly things; that they could not but judge them impotent and
blind, who called such things Sacred, or deemed it piety to adore them; and
that they could not choose but laugh at and upbraid their Folly. Should all the
Pagans know, that what they thus objected against their Image Worship, was of
equal force against that which themselves did daily practice; that there were
Images in every Christian Church, made by Men's hands of Earth, as void of sense
as any they adored; and that the Christians did esteem, and call them Sacred,
adore, bow down to, venerate them; could they abstain from saying, in the words
of the Apostle, Thou art inexcusable, O Christian, whoever thou art, that
judge us for doing these things; for wherein thou judge another, thou
condemnest thy self, for thou that judge do the same things?

When this Corruption began to spread it self through the Eastern Churches, and
to be countenanced at Rome; and many had submitted to these superstitious
Practices, the Heathens presently began thus smartly to reply upon those
Christians who condemned their Image Worship. (...); 2 Nic. Conc. Act. 5. p.
353.
What, have you not also in your Churches Images of Saints; and do not you pay
worship to them? What is the practice of you Christians; (...). Ibid.
do not you represent in Images that which you call a God, viz. your Savior?
(...); Act. 5. p. 373.
Why to refore do you complain of us, who are your selves more superstitiously
addicted to the like practices? The Heathens, says Tarasius, Patriarch of C.
P. and the great Champion of Image Worship, defended their Idols by
condemnation of the Martyrs, saying, (...). Ibid. p. 376.
Why strive you with us, and refuse our Images, when you have Images of your
own? Why is it then, that the more Ancient Pagans, Hierocles, and Lucian,
Porphyry and Celsus, Caecilian and Symmacus, Julian, Eunapius, and others,
object such things against the Worship of the Christians, as were most
evidently false, viz. the Worship of the Sun, an Asses Head, of the Clouds, and
the Priests Genitals; or most apparently impertinent, as the Worship of a
crucified Malefactor, b^t never mention this; which if the practice of the
Christians had given them occasion so to do, had been so proper, and so
obvious, that the most rude and unskilful Adversary could scarce neglect to
mention, or avoid taking notice of? These Persons, surely, neither wanted skill
nor Wisdom to know what made for their Ad^antage, and what was proper to retort
upon their Adversaries. They had no kindness for the Christians, which might
induce them to wave this obvious Reply to these Accusations of the Christians
brought against them; nor could they possibly be ignorant of what the
Christians practiced in this kind, they being some of them Apostates from the
Christian Faith, and admitted to their public Worship. It Is therefore certain,
that the Practice and Doctrine of those purer Ages, gave them no occasion to
retort these things.

. 10. 3ly, Let us reflect a little upon the Language and Deportment of those
who have professedly admitted of the Veneration of the Images of Christ and of
his Saints, and see if we find any thing resembling these Sayings of the
Fathers in their Words or Actions. Since that this Image Worship has obtained
amongst the Latins, who ever heard such Language from them?

What Romanist will say, The Christian Doctrine did not permit them to be
sollicitous about Images and Statues, but to relinquish them, to reject them;
that Christ came to cause them to desist from the worship of them, and to
elevate them from earthly Images to Heaven? Who of them will declare, That all
the Images of Christ, and of the Blessed Virgin, which they solemnly adore at
Rome, were falsely called Images; that they were worse than Mice, and Worms, and
Moles? Who of them will pronounce it an insignificant and needless, a
ridiculous, shameful, foolish, incongruous, perverse, impious, irreligious,
heretical, heathenish, and devilish practice, to adore an Image or a Statue?
Where shall we find amongst them these general Axioms, That Christians must not
worship that which is a Creature, that which has no sense; that it is impious
and foolish to adore the Work of Men's hands; that this should be no part of the
Religion of a Christian; that it is folly to adore the Dead, or Absent, and
much more folly to adore their Images; that the Devil brought into the World
the Artificers of Images and Statues? Since then the Fathers, without
distinction, or exception, do frequently assert these things, and many more of
a like nature, it is evident they did not worship or bow down to Images, as do
the Members of the Church of Rome: For if no Man would thus speak, who means
as the Papists do, surely these Fathers were far enough from their Opinions. Is
any Man so void of understanding, that being only to declare that Earthly
Princes are not to be obeyed and reverenced as Gods, he should continually
teach, without all limitation and distinction, That Earthly Princes are not to
be obeyed or reverenced? since then the Fathers generally say, That Images are
not to be admitted or reverenced by any Christians; and that they ought not to
bow down to them, and do not limit these Expressions, it is exceeding clear
that they intended not only to declare they were not to be worshipped with
Latria, but also that no outward and inferior Worship should be given to them.

After the introduction of Image Worship into the Eastern and some Western
Churches, we find their Language and their Practice as opposite to these
Discourses of the Fathers, as is Light to Darkness. For then we never hear,
That whatsoever is the Work of an Artificer, is vain, earthy, and profane;
that nothing of this Nature can be sacred, valuable, pious; but always speaking
of their Images, as in the Second Niceno Council, under the Titles of Sacred,
Holy, Venerable, adorable Images. Then they professedly deny, condemn,
endeavor to confute the Axioms so frequent in these Holy Fathers. For instance;

1. Nothing is to be worshipped, say the Fathers, which is made with Hands; it
is impious and foolish to adore, (...), things made with Hands. This
Proposition those good Fathers will by no means admit of, without their
Restrictions; Scripsisti non esse manufacta veneranda. 2 Nic. Conc. p. 10.
Thou have written, says P. Hadrian, to the Emperor Leo Isaurus, That things
made with hands are not to be venerated. And having called him Indoctus,
Crassus, arrogans, superbus, Ibid. Manufacta diaboli noxia and execranda
dicebat, qua sunt manufacta ad ministerium and gloriam Dei.
proud, arrogant Dunce, he very learnedly informs him, That this was only true
of the Manufacta Diaboli noxia and execranda, hurtful, and execrable manufacta
of the Devil, not of things made with Hands for the Ministry and Glory of God.
In his Epistle to the Emperors, Constantinus and Irene, approved by the whole
Council, he objects thus; Sed dices, quia ipse Deus interdixit adorare
manufacta. Act. 2. p. 114.
You will say, That God himself forbids us to adore things made with hands; and
answers thus, That Quid est supra terram quod non sit manufactum, cum a Deo sit
factum. Ibid.
every thing upon Earth is made with hands, it being made by God; and then
flies to his old distinction, betwixt the Images of Demons and of Saints.
Theodorus, Patriarch of Jerusalem, says, That (...). Act. 3. p. 185.
some contentious Persons urge, That the Images of Saints ought not to be
worshipped, as being made with hands. But let them know, says he, that the
Cherubim, the Ark, the Propitiatory, the Table, were by God's Precept made with
hands, and were worshipped; and then he rests in the distinction of Pope
Hadrian. Leontius triumphs over this Objection, thus; (...). Act. 4. p. 237.
Tell me, thou, who think nothing that is made with hands, and nothing
created is to be adored; shall thou kiss thy wicked Wife, and may not I kiss
the Image of the Blessed Virgin?

These Fathers, many of them clearly say, That Images were the Invention of the
Devil: And in that (...). Act. 1. p. 57.
Council is pronounced an express Anathema upon all that say so; and as I shall
hereafter show, they have either expressly, or in effect, denounced their
Anathema's against all these Fathers, and almost all that they have said.

. 11. Moreover, in the late Persecutions, in the days of Henry the 7th, the
Papists forced Christians to renounce those very things as Heresies, which are
so fully and expressly here asserted by the Fathers. For instance;

1. The Renunciations of some of them run thus; Thomas Tailor, Jan. 22. 1490.
I have kept, and held, by the space of two Years, one suspect Book of
Commandments, written in the same, That no Man should worship any thing graven,
or made with Man's hands; whereby, after that Doctrine I have believed, that no
Man ought to worship Images.

2. I have misbelieved, and to diverse manifestly showed, Augustine Stere, Jan.
28. 1490.
That Images of Saints are not to be worshipped, after the Doctrine of a Book
of Commandments, which I have had in my keeping, wherein is written, That no
Man shall worship any thing made or graven with Man's hands; attending the
words of the same literally, and not inclining to the sense of the same.

3. I have holden and believed, that the Images of the Crucifix, Thom.
Boughton, May 28. 1499.
of our Blessed Lady, and of other Holy Saints, should not be worshipped; for
nothing wrought, or graven with Men's hands, ought to be honored or lowted to,
as I have read diverse times in an English Book that we call the Commandment
Book.

4. I have believed, and diverse times showed, William Priour, Jan. 28. 1490.
that Images of Saints be not to be worshipped, saying, and holding, That no
such thing is to be worshipped, that is graven and made with Man's hands.

5. I have spoken against worshipping of Images, John Tanner, Jul. 15. 1491.
that we shall worship no Stocks, ne Stones, ne nothing made or graven with
Man's hand; no likeness of things in Heaven, in Earth.

6. I have affirmed, Simon Waiver.
That Images made of Stocks and Stones are not to be worshipped, or should not
be worshipped, nor nothing made with Man's hands.

Some of them renounce and confess after this manner; Thomas Tailor, Ibid.
I have said them Foolis which goes to St. James in pilgrimage; adding, that
St. James had no foot to come against them, no hand to welcome them, neither
tongue to speak to them; so reproving the worship of Images.

I have openly said, Alize Higuel, Feb. 5. 1490.
That Images of Saints be not to be worshipped; that when devout Christian
People of their Devotion, be wont to offer their Candles burning to the Image
of St. Leonard, I have for their devotion called them Fools: furthermore
showing in this wise, when St. Leonard woll ete a Candle, and blow out an oder,
then I will offer him a Candle, else woll not: Also, when I have seen Cobwebs
hanging before the Face of the Image of our Lady, I have said, and reputed them
Fools that offers to that Image; but if she would blow away the same Cobwebs
from her Face --

I have affirmed, Robert Makam, June 17. 1506.
and said, That the Crucifix, and other Images in the Church, made of Stocks
and Stones, are but Idols, and ought not to be worshipped; adding, and saying,
that Ball the Carpenter, or Pyke the Mason, could make as good as the Crucifix,
for it is but a crooked Stick.

I have said, John Bennet, Feb. 7. 1507.
That no manner of Image ought to be worshipped, for that they can neither
smell, speak, nor hear.

Sometimes their Confessions, and Abjurations, run after this manner, viz.

I have said, Isabel Dort, July 19. 1491.
That it were better to give a poor, blind, or lame Man a Penny, than to bestow
their Money in Pilgrimages, and worshipping the Images of Saints; for Man is the
very Image of God, which ought all only to be worshipped, and no Stocks, ne
Stones.

I used to say, Thomas Stochin, March 22. 1498.
We should rather worship the Image that God has made, that is to say, the
poor Man, than the Image that Man has made, and painted, the which stands in
the Church.

All these things they renounce, as contrary to the common Doctrine and
Determination of the Universal Church of Christ, and as false Doctrines,
contrary to the Christian Faith, as great Heresies, and false Opinions,
reproved, and damned by all Holy Church; and against the Doctrine of Christ and
his Apostles. And yet these Sayings thus condemned by the Second Nicene
Council, and thus renounced as great Heresies, in all parts where the Power of
the Church of Rome prevailed in these latter Ages, are either the express
Sayings and Doctrines of the Ancient Fathers, or little different from them in
sense; whence any Man may easily discern how great an opposition there must be
betwixt the Doctrine of the Ancient, and of the present Church of Rome; the
true Catholic Church of Christ in the Primitive Ages, and that which now
usurps the name of Catholic.

CHAP. III.
That the Ancients did not bow down to, or venerate Images, is farther proved;
1. Because they never were concerned, as are the Romanists, to Answer the
seeming repugnancy of this practice to the Second Commandment, or to use any of
the Distinctions so frequent in the second Nicene Council to that effect.. 1.
2ly, Because they answer all the Objections urged by the Nicene Council,
against the Protestant sense of this Precept, viz. the instance of the
Cherubims, and of the Brazen Serpent, etc.. 2. 3ly, Because many of them
declare, that this Precept rendered the very Art of making Images unlawful to
the Christians.. 3. 4ly, Because they generally declare, that by this Precept
the Christian is forbid to give any outward Worship to Images, or to bow down
to them.. 4. 5ly, Because they reject and confute all the Distinctions used by
the second Nicene Council, and by the Romanists, to reconcile this Precept to
their Practice, asserting; 1. That this Command is moral and perpetual, and
obligatory to all Christians. 2. That this Precept does not only forbid the
Worship of Images with Latria, but all outward Adoration of them. 3. That this
is the Second Commandment, and not a part of the first only. 4. That not only
Idols, but Images, are by this Precept forbid to be adored.. 5.

. 1. THat the Ancients knew nothing of this pretended Tradition, will be still
more evident from their Discourses touching that Commandment, which so expressly
says, Thou shall not make unto thy self an Idol, nor the similitude of any
thing in Heaven or Earth. For had they generally practiced, had they received a
Tradition touching the Veneration of the Images of Christ, his Blessed Mother,
and the Saints and Martyrs, is it not wonderful that none of all the Fathers
ever did that which all Christians, who entertained the Worship of them ever
did, viz. That they should never offer any Answer to the obvious Objection from
this Commandment against it, or in the least attempt to reconcile this Precept
with their Practice; or to propose any of those Distinctions, Limitations, or
Excuses, which are so frequent in the Writings of the Romish Doctors, and which
they judge so necessary to prevent Idolatry, and to inform aright the Minds of
them who venerate their Images, and to satisfy the importunity of those who
scruple at it, and do suspect it is a breach of this Commandment? The Matter of
this Image Worship looks so ill, it seems so manifestly repugnant to the
Command, forbidding us to worship any similitude of any thing in Heaven or
Earth; it is at least in appearance so like to that very practice which they
derided in the Heathens, that it was highly reasonable, if this had been the
Doctrine and Practice of their Times, that these Primitive Fathers should at
least have considered, and stated the Question, How far, and in what sense it
was lawful; and with what Intention, and in what Degree, and with what Cautions
and Distinctions this might lawfully be done. The present Doctors of the Church
of Rome, are not so careless now adays, as were the Fathers in this Matter.
When they write Catechisms for the Instruction of the People, sometimes they
Vid. Dall. de Imag. p. 77.
wholly leave out this Commandment; sometimes they do abbreviate it, and make
it only say, Thou shall not worship Idols: Or if they be so daring as to
present the whole Commandment to the view of Roman Catholics, they carefully
expound, and clog it with many Limitations and Distinctions, that their
Proselytes may not be tempted to think the words do mean what in their plain
and obvious sense they do import.

Thus was it also with the Bishops of the Second Nicene Council, who introduced
this Image Worship into the Eastern Church. Constantinus, Bishop of Constantia
in Cyprus, seems to insinuate, That the Reason which moved God to make this
Injunction, was not the Evil of Image Worship, but the propenseness of the Jews
unto Idolatry; For, says he, (...). Act. 4. p. 200. vid. Act. 6. p. 468.
when the People were moved to commit Idolatry, then God spoke thus to Moses,
Thou shall make no similitude to serve them. In other places they affirm, That
God does only here forbid (...). Act. 7. p. 556, 584.
the worship of them with Latria; the worshipping of Images (...). Act. 5. p.
355, 376, 412.
as Gods, but not the worship of them with Doulia; and often do observe, that
(...), or (...). Act. 7. p. 584. Act. 4. p. 248.
outward Worship, by saluting, or bowing of the Body, is not appropriated to
God, but is an Honor often given to the Creatures, and therefore is such Worship
as may be given to S. Images. And sure it may be charitably presumed, that the
Fathers of the Primitive Church were as heartily concerned for the Instruction
of their Flocks, and were as able to perceive as Roman Catholics, that seeming
opposition which the Veneration of Images bears to this Commandment; and yet we
do not find in all their Writings, for five hundred Years, one Caution to
inform the People, that this Law concerned not that Image Worship they are
supposed to have practiced, and derived down unto Posterity.

Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, Tertullian, and other Writers of the Ancient
Church, make frequent mention of this Precept, especially when they discourse
against that Image Worship which the Heathens practiced; but they afford not
one Iota to distinguish that Worship they condemned in the Heathens, from that
which they are said to have then given to the Images of Christ, and of his
Saints; or to except them from the Censure they so generally pass upon all
Image Worship; or to inform us, that the worship of such Images is well
consistent with the Second Commandment.

. 2. To make this Argument yet more convincing, let it be considered, That
these very Fathers thought themselves concerned to answer those Objections
which Papists now, and other worshippers of Images before them, made against
that sense of the Commandment which Protestants embrace; viz. That God by it
forbids all outward Worship, or Veneration, to be paid to Images.

For whereas they object the (...). Theodorus Patr. Hieros. 2. Council. Nicen.
Act. 3. p. 185. vid. Act. 4. p. 197, 236. Act. 6. p. 468. Act. 2. p. 107, 115-
Cherubims placed in the Jewish Temple; Tertullian answers, That when God
forbad the making the likeness of any thing in Heaven or Earth; in the next
words, Thou shall not worship them, he showed the Cause of that Prohibition,
was the removal of Idolatry; and therefore, says he, the Sic Cherubim and
Seraphim-certe simplex, Ornamentum, long diversas habendo causas ab
Idololatriae condition, ob quam similitudo prohibetur. contr. Marc. l. 2. c.
22.
Cherubims seem not here forbidden, because they were not made for Worship, but
for Ornament.

Clemens of Alexandria, to the same Instance answers, That (...). Strom. l. 5.
c. 564.
the Cherubims were the Symbols of Angels glorified, not the Images of Saints;
for he who had advised them to make no graven Idol, would not himself have made
the Image of Saints, or Holy Things.

2ly, The framing of the Brazen Serpent by Moses, is also pleaded in favor of
Image Worship in the Second (...). Act. 5. p. 356, 357. Act. 2. p. 108, 109.
Nicene Council. Now to this Tertullian answers, That this was done by Non in
Idololatriae titulum, sed in figuram Remedii. Contr. Marc. l. 2. c. 22. Non ad
derogatioe^ Legis, sed ad exemplarium causae suae. L. de Idol. c. 5.
Moses, not as an Image of Idolatry, but as a Figure of their Remedy; that it
was done, not in derogation to the Law, but as a Figure of the Cross.

Just. M. Dial. cum Tryph. p. 321, 322.
Justin Martyr in like manner says, That it was a Figure of the blessed Jesus,
who was to save us from the bitings of the old Serpent; for otherwise, says
he, How can we reconcile it with the Command of the same God, to make no kind
of Image?

Tertullian speaks thus to the Christian, Ne facias adversus legem simulacrum
aliquod, niti and tibi Deus jusserit. De Idol. cap. 5.
If thou observest the same God, thou have his Law, make no Smilitude; if thou
respectest the Precept of the Similitude that afterward was made, imitate thou
Moses; make no Image against the Law, unless God also do command thee.

3ly, To the Objection made by De fide Orth. cap. 93.
Damascen, and before him by Celsus, That God made Man after his own Image,
Origin replies, That (...). L. 7. p. 376. (...). Ibid. vid. l. 8. p. 389.
it is one thing to be an Image of God, another thing to be made after his
Image. And that this Image of God is preserved in the Rational Soul, made like
in Virtue to to him, not in the Lineaments of the Body.

These are the Exceptions made against this Law, which the Ancient Fathers
diligently take notice of, and show not to be Breaches of, or Contradictions to
this Precept. Whereas, had then the Christians been accustomed to worship or
bow down before the Images of Christ, and of the Blessed Virgin, and the Saints
departed, this Practice would have ministered more weighty Scruples to employ
their Pens: And therefore we have reason to conclude, their practice gave them
no occasion to answer those Objections which Romanists are so industrious to
solve, and they, who were concerned about lesser Matters, never mention.

. 3. But then if we consider, That these Fathers who are so profoundly silent
in the Particulars now mentioned, so unconcerned to show, that any Veneration
of any Images whatsoever, was any ways consistent with this Precept, are very
loud, and frequent in declaring, as many of them do, That this Commandment
rendered the very Art of making Images unlawful to the Christian, that with one
Voice they say, That it forbad all outward Veneration, and bowing down to any
Images whatsoever; and that they do as fully contradict, and overthrow all the
Distinctions, Shifts, and Excuses of the Romanists, whereby they do endeavor
to avoid the Condemnation of this Law: I say, when we consider this, we cannot
have the least suspicion left, that they should practice in their Actions, or
in Mind approve, what they in words so fully have condemned. And,

1. We find that many of them have declared expressly, That God by this
Commandment forbad the very making of an Image, and rendered the very Art of
Painting, and engraving Images, unlawful to the Christian.

Clemens of Alexandria styles it, (...). p. 30. (...). p. 41
(...), an evil Art: and adds, That we Christians plainly are forbidden to
exercise this deceitful Art, the Prophet having said, Thou shall not make the
similitude of any thing in Heaven or in Earth.

Origin declares, That (...), l. 4. p. 181. (...), l. 6. p. 321.
the Jewish Polity admitted of no Painter or Statuary, the Law ejecting all
such out of it. And all these Arts of graving and of painting Images, he also
styles Arts of Wickedness. And again, (...), etc. l. 6. p. 321.
As for Painters, Carvers, Image-makers, we think that they who do respect
their Evil Arts, not taking off their Minds from all things visible, and
sensible, to fix them upon him who is Light, are yet in Darkness.

Tertullian says, Jam vero ipsum opus personarum quaero, an Deo placeat qui
omnem similitudinem vetat fieri? De Spect. cap. 23. Et conjungens, neque
similitudinem, etc. toto mundo ejusmodi artibus interdixit servis Dei. De Idol.
c. 4.
Even of the Work of such Persons, I enquire, Whether it can please that God
who forbad any likeness to be made, how much more of his Image? The Author of
Truth loves not what is false; whatsoever is feigned, is Adultery with him. The
Divine Law proclaims, Thou shall make no Idol; and adding, neither the likeness
of any thing in Heaven or Earth; has, through the World, forbidden the
Servants of God to exercise such Arts. And to this Objection of the
Image-maker, I have no other Trade to live upon: He answers, What have thou to
do with God, if thou wilst live by thy own Laws? Patet Exclesia omnibus, si
nulla exceptio est artium, quas Dei disciplina non recipit, c. 5.
The Church permits all Men to labor, but not to labor in those Arts which
the Discipline of God receives not.

Chrysostom says, I (...); in Matt. Hom. 49. p. 316, 317.
condemn the Arts of making Pictures as no Arts, for they only tend to
superfluous Expense; whereas the Name of Arts is only to be given to those
Trades which appertain to things necessary, and belonging to the Life of Man.
For God for this cause gave us Wisdom, that we might find out Methods by which
we might advantage our Life. But tell me, Where is the profit of making little
Images, or Animals on Walls or Garments?

And lastly, The Apud Council. Nic. 2. Act. 6. p. 425. (...). Ibid. p. 505.
Council of Constantinople, consisting of 338 Bishops, calls this, (...), the
unlawful Art of making Pictures. Judge therefore whether the Christians of
those five first Centuries, could have any custom received from Tradition, to
adore what they declared unlawful for any Christian Man to make, though he did
not adore it, Whether they held it necessary that Images should be worshipped,
who held it both superfluous and wicked outward Veneration to any Image
whatsoever.

Origin, in that very Homily upon Exodus, which Romanists do cite in favor of
their Exposition of the word Idol, to signify a thing that has no real Being
in the World, is very clear in this Particular, declaring, Quae nunc fermo Dei
universa complectens simul abjurat, and abjicit, and non solum Idolum fieri
vetat, sed and similitudinem omnium in terra, etc. Hom. 8. in Exodus
That the Command forbids not only to make an Idol, but also the similitude
of all things; so that if any Man, in any Metal of Gold, Silver, Wood, or
Stone, makes the resemblance of any four-footed Beast, Serpent, or Bird, and
sets it up to be adored, he makes not an Idol, but a Similitude; or if he make
a Picture to that end, he does the same: And, that the Word of God
comprehending all these things together, casts away, and abjures them; and does
not only forbid an Idol to be made, but also the similitude of all things which
are on the Earth, in the Waters, and the Heaven; adding, and saying, Thou shall
not adore nor worship them. Aliud est colere, aliud adorare; potest quis and
invitus adorare -- colere vero est toto his affectu and studio mancipari,
utrumque ergo resecat sermo divinus ut neque affectu colas, neque specie
adores. Ibid.
Now, it is one thing to adore, another thing to worship; for a Man may
unwillingly adore, as they who flatter Kings, who are addicted to such things,
may seem to adore Idols, when in their Hearts they know an Idol is nothing in
the World; but to worship, is to be devoted to them with our whole Affection,
and Study; both which the Divine Word cuts off, providing, That thou should
neither worship them with thy Affection, nor adore them in appearance, or
external show.

The other Author whom they cite to countenance their Exposition of the Word
Idol, is Theodoret; who there declares indeed, That Idols signify things which
have no Existence: but then he adds, That Similitudes here signify the Images
of things subsistent, as of the Sun, Moon, Stars, and Men; which things, says
he, (...), in Exodus q. 38.
the Commandment enjoins us neither to worship outwardly, nor with Latria, or
with the Worship of the Soul, teaching both these kinds of Worship to be wicked.

Clemens of Alexandria writing against the Antitactes, who rejected the God of
the Old Testament, and acted in opposition to his Commands, tells them, that if
they would act suitably to their Principles, (...). Strom. l. 3. p. 441.
Seeing God, by Moses, had forbidden to make any graven or molten Images, they
should adore them; plainly insinuating, that this Adoration was forbidden by
this Precept. I have already showed, that L. 7. p. 375.
Origin declares, That Christians abstained from the worship of all Images, by
virtue of this Command; and that which says, Thou shall worship the Lord thy
God, and him only shall thou serve: And Tertullian, That the Cherubims seem
therefore not to be forbidden here, because they were not made for Worship, but
for Ornament. Epiphanius says, That (...); Haer. 69. p. 759.
if the Son of God had been a Creature, God would not have propounded him to be
worshipped, he himself having said, Thou shall not make to thy self any
Similitude, and thou shall not worship it. God, says Fulgentius, Omni
creaturae adoratio and servitus vehementissime prohibetur. -- Prorsus
interdixit, ne quis auderet creaturam adorare creaturaeque servire. Ad Donat.
p. 592, 593.
in the first Precept of the Decalogue, most vehemently forbad all the Faithful
to give Adoration or Service to any Creature: and commanding himself to be
adored, he wholly forbad that any one should dare to adore or serve a Creature.
And therefore in the end of that first Commandment he speaks thus of all
things he created, Thou shall not worship them, nor serve them.

In the sixth and seventh Centuries, when the Historical use of Images began to
find admittance in the Church, and Christians were permitted to adorn the Walls
and Windows of the Church with them; or to engrave and paint them, the better
to express or represent the History of Parables recorded in Scripture, they do
excuse themselves from being thereby guilty of the breach of this Commandment,
or any other of like nature, by this distinction, That they had Pictures only
for Remembrance, not for Religious Veneration.

Thus when Serenus, Bishop of Marseilles, finding his People prone to worship
Images, did, after the Example of good Hezekiah, break and remove them from the
Church, though Gregory the Great approves not of his breaking of them, yet he
commends his Et quidem zelum vos ne quid manufactum adorari possit habuisse,
laudamus, sed frangere easdem imagines non debuisse judicamus. Tua Fraternitas
ab earum adoratu populum prohibere debuit, l. 7. Ep. 110. Convocandi sunt,
eisque sacrae scripturae est testimoniis ostendendum, quod omne manufactum
adorare non licet, quoniam scriptum est, Dominum tuum adorabis; si quis
imagines facere voluerit, minime prohibe adorare, vero omnibus modis veta. Al.
de vita Ep. l. 9. c. 9.
Zeal against the adoration of what was made with Hands; declaring it the
peoples Sin, which was to be forbidden by all means; and bids him, calling them
together, show, from the Testimonies of the Scripture, that it is not lawful to
adore any thing that was made with hands, because it is written, Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. He adds, That he was
moved with an inconsiderate Zeal in breaking of them, to prevent their being
worshipped, because they were set up in Churches, not to be adored, but only to
instruct the Minds of the Simple, and especially the Pagans, which abounded in
his Diocese; and that it was one thing to adore a Picture, another, by the
History of a Picture, to learn what was to be adored. Where this great Pope,
without distinction or limitation, condemns all adoration of an Image,
declaring, in opposition to the Fathers of the Act. 4. p. 248. 7. 584.
second Nicene Council, That nothing was to be adored which was made with
hands: And proving this from that very Testimony of Scripture, which in that
Council is twice said to make nothing against the Adoration of them, because
the word only is not joined to Adoration, but to the Service of Latria. He also
does command Serenus to forbid the adoration of them, omnibus modis, by all
manner of ways opposing to this forbidden Adoration, the having of them Frangi
non debuit, quod non ad adorandum in Ecclesiis, sed ad instruendas solummodo
mentes nescientium collocatum. Ibid.
only for Instruction; which manifestly proves, that the Adoration rejected and
condemned by him, as contrary to the Holy Scriptures, was all kind of
Adoration, all that is more than using of them for Instruction only.

To weaken this plain Testimony of so great a Pope, they have since put words
into an Epistle writ by him to Secundinus the Monk, in which he is made to
speak according to the late Distinctions of the Schools; and to admonish that
Monk not to worship the Image of our Savior, viour, Imaginem salvartoris
nostri non ideo petis, ut quasi Deum colas. Nos quidam non, quasi ante
Divinitatem, ante illum prosternimur. Epist. l. 7. Ep. 54.
as a God; and to inform him, That Christians do not prostrate themselves
before it, as before the Divinity; concluding hence, that he elsewhere
condemned only the worshipping of Images as Gods: But the gross Forgery is
happily detected by the industry of Corruption of the true Fathers, p. 75, 76.
Dr. James, who collated this Epistle with seven good Manuscripts; in all which
no such words were to be found.

Apud Gerson. Comp. Theol. Expl. 1. praecept. To. 2. F. 25.
No Word of God forbids that Images be made, says Bid; but it by all means
does forbid that they be made unto this end, viz. that they be worshipped and
adored.

This Command, says Agobardus, Non de solis similitudinibus alienorum Deorum,
sed and de coelestibus creaturis. Lib. de Imag. p. 221.
must not be only understood of the Similitude of false Gods, but also of the
Heavenly Creatures, or of those things which humane Fancy has invented for the
Honor of God. And from them, and the 4th of Deuteronomy, he says, Quanto
magis opera manuum hominum non sunt adoranda and colenda, nec in honor eorum
quorum similitudines esse dicuntur? p. 222.
this chiefly ought to be observed, That if the Workmanship of God's Hand is
not to be adored, no not in Honor of that God who made it; much less may we
adore the Workmanship of Man in honor of those Persons whose Images they are
said to be. And hence, as you have seen already, the Councils of Frankford, and
Paris, and the Western Clergy, condemned the Decree of the second Nicene
Council, as being, contra Authoritatem Divinam, and Scripturarum tramitem,
against Divine Authority, and the course of Scriptures.

. 5. Moreover, these Fathers clearly and abundantly confute all the
Distinctions used by the Romanists, and by the Second Nicene Council, to
reconcile their Practice with this Precept, and all the specious Pleas they
have invented for that end; as v. g.

1. Do they, with Mr. Thorudyke, say, that this Commandment is not Number Deus
primum per naturalia praecepta, quae ab initio infixa dedit hominibus, admonens
eos, id est, per Decalogum, quae si quis non fecerit non habeat salutem, and
nihil plus ab eis exquisivit. Iren. l. 4. c. 28. etc. 31. Decalogi quidem verba
ipse per semetipsum omnibus similiter Dominus locutus est, and ideo similiter
permanent apud nos, extensionem and augmentum, sed non dissolutionem
accipientia per carnalem ejus adventum.
perpetual, and moral, and so not obligatory to the Christian?

The Fathers generally assert against them, That all the Precepts of the
Decalogue, excepting only the carnal Observation of the Sabbath, oblige all
Christians; that the words of the Decalogue Christ spoke alike to all, and
therefore they remain alike with us, receiving their Augmentation and
Extension, but not their Dissolution from our Savior's Advent, they being
natural and common to all. That they were not only spoken to the Israelites
going out of Egypt, Origin Hom. 8. in Exodus
sed multo magis ad te, much more to the Christian. Numquid propterea dicturi
sumus, non ad nos pertinere quod scriptum est, maximeque ipsum Decalogum, qui
duabus illis lapideis tabulis continetur, excepta Sabbati observatione carnali,
quae spiritualem sanctificationem quietemque significat? quis enim dicat non
debere observare Christianos, 1. ut uni Deo Religionis obsequio serviant, 2. ut
Idolum non colatur, 3. ut nomen domini non accipiatur in vanum, 5. ut Parents
honorentur, ne 6. Homicidia, 7. Adulteria, 8. Furta, 9. falsa Testimonia
perpetrentur, ne 10. Uxor, ne omnino res ulla concupiscatur aliena? Quis est
tam impius, ut dicat ideo se ista legis non custodire praecepta, quia est ipse
Christianus, nec sub lege, sed sub gratia constitutus? Contra duas Epist.
Pelag. l. 3. c. 4. p. 899.
What shall we say that the Decalogue, excepting the carnal observation of the
Sabbath, does not belong to us? Who is so wicked, says St. Austin, as to say,
That therefore he observes not those Precepts, because he is a Christian?

Clemens of Alexandria, Tertullian, Origin, St. Cyprian, Epiphanius, Vide. 4.
Austin, Fulgentius, do urge this Precept upon Christians; and some of them
expressly say, That it concerns not only Jews, but Christians also. And even the
Trent Catechism teaches, That all the Precepts of the Decalogue, except the
fourth, are natural and perpetual, and cannot be changed; so that Ut quamvis
lex Moysis abrogata sit, omnia tamen praecepta quae duobus tabulis continentur,
populus Christianus servet. Part. 3. cap. 4. Sect. 4.
although the Law of Moses be abrogated, yet Christian People are to observe
all the Commands of the two Tables; not because Moses did command them, but
because they are agreeable to Nature, and that constrains them so to do.

2. Do they say, with the second Act. 4. p. 248. Act. 5. p. 356, 376. Act. 7.
p. 556, 584.
Nicene Council, That this Precept only forbids the worshipping of Images as
Gods, or giving of Latria to them, but not the paying of external honorary
Worship, or outward adoration to them? Note the propriety of the words, says
In Dan. 3.
Jerome, neither Worship of the Gods, nor Adoration of the Image, is agreeable
to the Servants of God. The Command forbids both inward Worship, and external
Adoration, say Origin and Theodoret. Thou shall not worship them with the
Veneration of thy Body, nor the Affection of thy Mind, says Gerson. Exhort ad
Mart. p. 167.
Origin declares, That they who abjured Christianism in times of Persecution,
made the same excuse as does the second Nicene Council in this Matter, viz.
That (...), they gave not Latria, but only outward Worship or Veneration to the
Idols. But to this Romish shift he thus replies, viz. That this excuse would
also free the Jews from the like Guilt in worshipping the Gods of Moab, and the
golden Calf; for he observes, that the Scripture says, Not of them who went a
whoring after the Gods of Moab, Number. 25.2, 3.
(...), they gave Latria to their Idols; for it could not be, says he, after
so many Signs and Wonders, which their Eyes had seen, that they should
presently be brought, (...), to think the Idols, with which they fornicated,
were indeed Gods. Thus also, says he, very likely did the Jews, (...),
outwardly adore the Calf, (...), not giving Divine Worship to that which they
had seen then made. And indeed, evident it is, that the similitude of any thing
is not the thing it self; and therefore the command forbidding us to worship
the Similitude of any thing in Heaven, or Earth, cannot be reasonably supposed
only to forbid us to worship a Similitude of God, as God.

3ly, Do they, to give some color to this subterfuge, assert, That what we
call the Second Commandment, is indeed part of the First? The Jews, and
Christian Fathers, excepting only St. Austin, and Fulgentius, do, with one
Voice, declare the contrary. (...). Orig. l. 3. c. 4.
The first Commandment, says Josephus, teaches, That God is One, and that he
only should be worshipped; the second commands us, not to make the Image of any
living thing to worship it. (...). Libr. de Decal. p. 590.
The first, says Philo, is about Monarchy; the second about things made with
hands, not suffering us to prepare Images, or Statues, as those hurtful Arts of
Painting and Engraving do. Ad Autolyc. l. 3. p. 23.
Theophilus reckons these (...), or Ten Commandments, thus; 1. Thou shall have
no other Gods but me. 2. Thou shall not make to thy self an Idol, or the
similitude of any thing, 10. Thou shall his Wife, etc.
etc. not covet the House of thy Neighbor, nor desire Clemens of Alexandria
declares, That (...). Strom. l. 6. p. 682.
the first Command shows, That there is one only God Omnipotent, and forbids
Idolatry; the second, is against giving of his Name to vain things, which
Artificers have made. Si ita putetur non complebitur december numerus mandatorum,
and ubi jam erit Decalogi veritas? Hom. 8. in Exodus
Should these two be numbered as one, says Origin, the number of Ten
Commandments would not be complete; but if you reckon them as we do, the Truth
of the Decalogue will remain; wherefore the first Commandment is this, Thou
shall have no other Gods but me; the second, thou shall not make to thy self an
Idol, or any Similitude, etc. Of the Ten Commandments, the (...), etc. Synops.
p. 64.
first, says Athanasius, is this, I am the Lord thy God; the second, Thou
shall not make unto thy self an Idol, or the similitude of any thing. Et in
secundo praecepto repromissionem esse sociatam. Ephesians. 6. F. 104.
St. Jerome reckons four Commandments of the first Table, and says, a Promise
was added to the second of them. To all these may be add L. 2. c. 17.
Tertullian against Marcion, and against the Cap. 2.
Jews. The L. 2.36. l. 7.3.
Constitutions under the name of Clement. L. 1. p. 93.
Sulpitius Severus, in his Sacred History. P. 554.
Pseud-Ambrosius on the 6th Chapter to the Ephesians. The imperfect Work upon
Hom. 49. p. 175.
St. Matthew passing under the Name of Chrysostom. P. 273.
Procopius Gazaeus, upon Exodus. To. 1. p. 24.
Zonarus in his Annals; with diverse others. And if that which we style the
second Commandment, be only a part and explication of that Precept, Thou shall
have no other Gods but me, it only can forbid what is forbidden in that
Precept, viz. the giving of that Worship which is due to God, to any Image;
whence it will follow, That to bow down, to kiss, offer Incense to the Images
of Heathen Deities, or of the very Devil, is not a thing forbidden by this
Precept, since by such Actions, say the second Nicene Council, and the Roman
Doctors, We do not worship Images as Gods: And if the paying this inferior
Worship to the Images of Heathen Deities, be not forbidden in the words of this
Commandment, I conceive it cannot be reasonably thought to be forbidden in any
other Precept, there being only this which speaks of Image Worship; and if it
were forbidden in no Precept of the Moral Law, it necessarily will follow, that
it was lawfully performed by the Heathens.

4ly, Do they pretend that Idols only are forbidden to be adored in this
Precept, but not Images; this indeed is the conceit of Romish Doctors, and of
the second Nicene Council; but this also is plainly opposite unto the general
Tradition of all the Fathers of the Church, who constantly observe, what is as
evident in the Commandment as words can be, viz. That it forbids not only Idols
to be worshipped, but also the similitude of any thing whatsoever; As besides
the express Testimonies of Clemens of Alexandria, Theophilus, Tertullian,
Origin, Athanasius, Epiphanius, St. Austin, and Fulgentius, produced already,
is farther evident from the express Assertions of P. 321, 322.
Justin Martyr, in his Dialogue with Trypho: Of C. 59.
Cyprian, in his third Book to Quirinus: Of P. 39.
Julius Firmicus, in his Treatise of Profane Religion: Of Carm. p. 99.
Nazianzen, in his Verses: Of the P. 554.
Pseud-Ambrosius, upon the 6th Chapter to the Ephesians: Of Qu. 38.
Theodoret, in his Questions upon Exodus; and of innumerable other Authors.

To all which add that of Tertullian, That Omnis forma, vel formula Idolum. De
Idol. c. 3.
every Form, or little Representation, is an Idol; and all Service performed
about it, is Idolatry. That of the Council of Frankford, Sed ne Idola
nuncupentur, adorare eas and colere Recusamus. Lib. Car. l. 4. c. 18.
We do not call the Images placed in Churches, Idols; but we refuse to worship
and adore them, lest they should be called Idols. That of Agobardus, That Puto
quod videretur eis non tam Idola reliquisse quam simulacra mutasse. De Imag. p.
248.
if they who have left the Worship of Demons, should be commanded to venerate
the Images of Saints, I think they would seem to others, not so much to have
left Idols, as to have changed their Resemblances. Add lastly, the Complaint of
all the Fathers against the Arians, That by introducing the Adoration of a
Creature, they brought in (...), an Idol-making Heresy; under the pretext of
Christianity, they secretly introduced the Worship of Idols, and transgressed
that Precept which forbad the Adoration of an Idol, or of any Similitude,
clearly insinuating, That by worshipping any Creature, it was made an Idol.

Since then the Fathers of the second Nicene Council, and the Romish Doctors,
do with such diligence and industry inculcate these Distinctions and
Limitations of this Precept, seeing they were so much concerned to blanch, and
color over the seeming opposition of their practice to it: And since the
Fathers must have had the like Occasions, Reasons, and inducements so to do; if
they had practiced the same custom, of making and adoring the Images of Christ,
and of his Saints, and yet they never in the least concern themselves about
this Matter, never use any of these Limitations or Distinctions, nor any other
of like Nature in their own defense, but do as manifestly reject, condemn, and
overthrow them all, as any Protestant could do.

Since, 2ly, they thought themselves obliged to show, that which comparatively
concerned them little, viz. That the making of the Cherubims, and of the Brazen
Serpent by Moses, and the making Man after his Image by God himself, did no way
thwart this Precept, but yet were wholly unconcerned, to add, That the making,
and adoring of the Images of Christ, and of his Saints, was also well
consistent with it, since they do often say, That, notwithstanding this
Command, it might be lawful for the Jew to make an Image, where there was no
peril of worshipping, or bowing down to it; and it was also lawful for the
Christians to have August. in Psalm 113.
their Cups, and Dishes, for the Sacramental Bread and Wine, and other
Vtensils; and that such things were not condemned by this Commandment, or to be
ranked with what was here forbidden; but yet they never go about to prove, That
it was lawful, notwithstanding this Command, to have, or worship Images of
Christ, or any of his Saints, since even in the following Ages, when Images
began to be received into Churches, they still declare they did not violate
this Precept, because they had them not for Adoration, but only for
commemoration; and that this Precept forbad them not to make, though it by all
means forbad them to adore an Image.

3ly, Since many of them have declared expressly, That God by this Command
forbad the very making of an Image, and rendered the very Art of Painting and
Ingraving, unlawful to the Christian; and they more generally do assert, That
He by it, forbad even all outward adoration of them, and consequently expressly
must declare themselves transgressors of it, and practicers of wicked Worship,
if they both made and gave external Adoration to the Images of Saints.

And, 4ly, since they plainly argue against all honorary Worship of them, thus,
That if the Workmanship of God's Hands is not to be adored, no not in honor of
that God that made it; much less may we adore the Workmanship of Man, in honor
of those Persons whose Images they are said to be. Declaring, This, should it
be done by Christians, would rather look like changing, than leaving of their
Idols.

And, lastly, since they solemnly profess, That by Reason of this Precept, they
had rather die than worship any graven Image, with many other-like Expressions;
it is, upon all these accounts, extremely evident, that then they had no Images
of Saints, erected or painted in the House of God; and that when they were once
admitted, they neither paid to them any outward Worship, nor did they think it
lawful so to do.

CHAP. IV.
The Fathers forbid Christians to make or worship Images and Pictures.. 1. 2ly,
Some of them represent it as a vain thing to desire them.. 2. 3ly, When they
saw them in Churches, they tore and pulled them down, as being contrary to
Scripture and Religion.. 3. 4ly, When it was objected to them by the Donatists,
That some of them placed Images on the Altar; they reject the Calumny with
great abhorrence.. 4. 5ly, When the worship of Images was objected to them by
the Manichaeans, they say, This was done only by some rude People by the Church
condemned.. 5. From the 8th to the 15th Century, the veneration of Images was
rejected by the most eminent Persons of the Western Church.. 6.

. 1. AND suitably to these Declarations, we find the Fathers, as occasion
served, either forbidding of the People to make, or at the least to worship
Images, and showing of their Zeal against them, that did so both in Word and
Action.

Epiphanius speaks thus to the Christians of his Time; (...). 2. Nic. Conc.
Act. 6. p. 473.
Attend to your selves, and remember that you bring not Images into the Church,
or into the Dormitories of the Saints, nor yet into your common Houses, for it
is not lawful for a Christian to wander after them with his Eyes. (...). Hom.
de Div. and Laz. p. 565.
Picture not Christ, says Asterius, Bishop of Amasa, but bearing him in thy
Soul, carry the incorporeal Word in thy Mind. The Council of Eliberis decrees,
Placuit in Ecclesiis picturas esse non debere, ne quod colitur and adoratur in
parietibus depingatur. Can. 36.
That Pictures should not be in the Church; not because in times of Persecution
they may be abused by Heathens, as Baronius; nor because they happily may be
defaced by the moisture of the Walls, as others descant on that Canon; but,
least that which is worshipped and adored (by Christians) should be painted
upon Walls. This Canon was made by the Orthodox Fathers, says Ob hujusmodi
evacuandam superstitionem. De Imag. p. 266.
Agobardus, to evacuate the Superstition of Image-worshippers. And whatsoever
is the import of it, it manifestly does forbid the introduction of any Image
into the Church to be adored; for saying, That it is our Pleasure, or our
Judgment, that Images ought not to be in Churches, it must by consequence
forbid the giving any adoration to them, since what we must not have, we cannot
worship; and what we are forbid to have, to that we are forbid to exercise
those Actions which presuppose the having of it. It also does apparently forbid
the introducing the Image of our Blessed Lord and Savior, and painting that on
the Church Walls, for he was surely adored and worshipped by Christians; and
that this is indeed the meaning of the Canon, will be very probable, if we
consider, that about that time some superstitious People, in imitation of the
Heathens, who were accustomed to paint within their Bochart de l' Orig. des
Images, des Saints. p. 598, 599.
Temples, the Images of those Gods they worshipped, began to paint upon the
Walls of Churches, the Eusebius. de Vit. Constable. l. 3. c. 48.
Gospel Parables, viz. our Lord (...). Conc. Nic. 2. p. 121. Council. Trull.
Can. 82.
carrying a Sheep upon his Shoulder, to represent the Parable of the Lost
Sheep; the Gospel Histories, as our Lord in the form of a Lamb, with the
Forerunner pointing to him. Which Picture was afterward approved of by the
sixth Synod, though the Council of Eliberis, thought it not fit thus to paint
what was by Christians worshipped.

. 2. And suitable to these Declarations of their Judgment, and these
Exhortations, has been the practice of the most Learned Fathers of the Church.
Even to the days of Jerome, says Usque ad atatem Hieronymi erant probatae
Religionis viri, qui in templis nullam ferebant Imaginem, ne Christi quidem.
Vol. 5. Symbol. Catech. p. 989.
Erasmus, Men of approved Religion, would not suffer any painted, carved,
graven Image, no not of Christ himself. And therefore when Constantia, the
Sister of the Emperor Constantine, being in Palestine, desired Eusebius to send
her the Picture of our Savior Christ. To this Request (...), etc. Apud 2. Nic.
Conc. Act. 6. p. 494, 496.
Eusebius returns this Answer; What Image is it you would have? That of his
Divinity. This I suppose you did not ask for, since no Man knows the Father but
the Son, and no Man knows the Son but the Father; or is it the Image of his
Humane Nature, that servile Form, which, for our sakes, he took upon him? This
certainly is that whose Image you desire; but we have learned, this is now
tempered with the Glory of the Godhead; and that this mortal is swallowed up of
Life. And if his Disciples in the Mount were not sufficient to endure the
luster of it, when transfigured, who shall be able to express the splendour of
his Glorious Body in dead and senseless Colors and Adumbrations? now that
putting off Corruption and Mortality, the similitude of the Form of a Servant,
is changed into the Glory of the Lord. Whence it is evident, he judged Christ's
Humane Nature was not then to be painted, or represented to the Eye, and
therefore knew of no such custom then approved by the Church. For had such
Images then been common in all Churches, and all private Oratories; had they
then been received by all Christians, from one end of the World to the other,
as the second Nicene Council says, Why did Constantia send as far as Palestine
for what was every where to be had? Or, why should Eusebius refuse to satisfy
her in a Request so reasonable? Why does he put her off with an Excuse, which
was as opposite to the Opinion of the Church of Christ confirmed, says that
Council, by their daily practice, as it was opposite to her Request?

Olympiodorus being to build a Church in honor of Christ and of the Martyrs,
writes to Nilus, a celebrated Monk, and a Disciple of St. Chrysostom, to know
whether he should set up any Images of them in the Choire, or Sanctuary; or any
other Images in the House of God, for the gratification of the Eyes of the
Beholders. To this Request (...). Conc. Nic. 2. Act. 4. p. 228. (...). Ibid.
Nilus returns this Answer, That it was a very childish Business, to cause the
Eyes of the Faithful to wander after the aforesaid Things; and that it was the
Indication of a strong and manly apprehension, to have in the Sanctuary only
one Cross framed, that the Church might be filled indeed with Histories of the
Old and New Testament, done by the Hand of an excellent Painter, that they who
could not read the Scriptures, might by the sight of these Pictures, have the
memory of the courageous Actions of the Servants of God, and might be provoked
to an emulation of their glorious Actions. So that he clearly shows, that then
no Pictures were allowed in Churches but for Historical uses; that no Images of
Christ, or of the Martyrs, were thought fit to be placed in the Choire; that
the use of them, to gratify the Eyes, was childish, and not suitable to Men of
strong and Manlike Understandings.

. 3. Thus Matters stood in the middle of the 5th Century, but in the 4th it was
thought opposite to Scripture and Religion to admit Images into the Christian
Churches: Witness the Epistle of Quando venissem ad Ecclesiam, quae dicitur
Anablatha, inveni ibi velum pendens in foribus Ecclesiae tinctum, atque
depictum, and habens Imaginem, quasi Christi, vel Sancti cujusdam; non enim
satis memini cujus Imago fuerit: cum ergo hoc vidissem in Ecclesia Christi
contra autoritatem Scripturarum hominis pendere Imaginem, scidi illud, and
magis dedi consilium custodibus ejus loci, ut pauperem mortuum eo obvolverent,
and efferrent; illique contra murmurantes, dixerunt, si scindere voluerat,
justum erat ut aliud daret velum, atque mutaret; quod cum audiissem, me daturum
esse pollicitus sum, and illico esse missurum. -- Nunc autem misi quod potui
reperire, and precor ut jubeas Presbyteros ejusdem loci suscipere velum a
latore, -- and deinceps praecipere in Ecclesia Christi istiusmodi vela, quae
contra Religionem nostram veniunt, non appendi. Decet enim honestatem tuam hanc
magis habere sollicitudinem ut scrupulositatem tollat, quae indigna est
Ecclesia Christi, and populis qui tibi crediti sunt. Apud Hierom. Epist. To. 2.
F. 58.
Epiphanius to John Bishop of Jerusalem, where he says; When I was come into
the Village called Anablatha, and entering into the Church to pray, found there
a Veil, dyed and painted, and having the Image, as it were, of Christ, or of
some Saint, for I do not well remember whose Image it was. But seeing this,
that contrary to the Authority of Scriptures, the Image of a Man was hanged up
in the Church of Christ, I rent it, and gave counsel to the keepers of the
Place, that they should rather wrap up and bury some dead Body in it. They
murmuring, said, That having rent this, he should send them another: Which,
says he, I promised, and have now sent; and I desire you to bid the Presbyters
of the Place receive it of the Bearer; and henceforth to command them, That
such Veils as these, which are repugnant to our Religion, should not be hung up
in the Church of Christ; for it becomes you to be the more careful, for the
taking away that Scrupulosity which is unworthy of the Church of Christ, and of
the People committed to your charge. This Epistle is extant in the Works of Ep.
To. p. 58.
Jerome, both Manuscript and printed: It is owned as genuine by In Council.
Narbon. p. 616.
Sirmondus and Petavius: It was long since cited against Image Worship by the
Councils of Lib. Car. l. 4. c. 25.
Frankford and Synod. Paris. c. 6.
Paris; and so the Truth of it cannot be reasonably disputed. This being thus
premised, I observe;

1. That he declares it contrary to the Authority of Scripture, to hang up in
the Church of Christ the Image of a Man: He does not say the Image of a wicked
Man, but simply, and without all distinction, Imaginem Hominis, the Image of a
Man.

2. He clearly does insinuate, That, for any thing he knew to the contrary, the
Image which he rent was the Image of Christ, or of some Saint; for whether it
was so or no, says he, I do not well remember: Whence evident it is, that had
it been the Image of Christ, or any of his Saints, he would have rent it. He
therefore did not think, that to destroy those Images which were erected for
his Worship, was to offer a most vile Affront unto his Savior, as afterward
the second Nicene Council did, and now the Papists do conceive.

3. He positively declares, That all such Veils so hung up in the Church, were
contrary to the Religion of the Christians.

4. He desires the Bishop of Jerusalem to charge his Presbyters, that they
should suffer no such thing hereafter to be done; i. e. no painted Images to be
hung up in the Church of Christ, and that because it was unworthy of the Church
of Christ, the People committed to his charge, to be scrupulous or concerned
about such Trifles.

5. Observe; That when he rent this Veil, and counseled the Men of Anablatha,
to wrap and bury some poor Body in it; they did not say, for ought appears; and
he did not regard it if they said so, that this was to profane the Sacred
Image, or that he offered an Affront to Christ, or to his Saints, by rending of
it; but they say only this, That having rent that, he should provide another:
Whence it is evident, that they had then no Custom or Doctrine of the Church,
which could maintain the hanging up, or could condemn the rending of this Veil.

. 4. The Aversation which all good Christians had to Images, was so well known
to the Enemies of the Church, that they made their advantage of it, to withdraw
her Subjects from Communion with her. For the Donatists well knowing how
detestable a thing it was unto the Christians of that Time, to see an Image set
up in the Church, and more especially upon the Altar, they framed this Calumny,
the more effectually to draw them off from her Communion, Dicebatur illo
tempore venturum esse Paulum and Macarium, qui interessent Sacrificio, ut cum
Altaria solent niter aptarentur, proferren illi Imaginem quam primo in Altari
ponerent. Sic Sacrificium offerretur, hoc cum acciperent aures and animi
perculsi sunt, ut omnis qui haec audierat diceret, qui inde gustat de Sacro
gustat. Optat. l. 3. p. 75.
That the Catholics, Paulus and Macarius, would bring an Image, and place it
on the Altar whilst the Sacrifice was offered. This Rumor startled the
Faithful; for when the fame of it was spread abroad, the Ears and Minds of all
Men, says Optatus, were much troubled at it; and all that heard it, began thus
to speak, Whosoever tastes of any thing from thence, does taste of a forbidden
thing.

Whence we with Masius in Josh. Cap. 8. v. 31.
Masius, a Learned Romanist, observe, how much the Ancient Christians did
detest the sight of any Image on the Altar; that is, how much they did detest
the present practice of the whole Church of Rome.

2ly, Observe the Answer of the Christians of those Times unto this Calumny.
They do not say, true it is, we do set Pictures upon our Altars, and that not
only for Ornament and Memory, but for Veneration also: And we do well to do so,
and suitably to the Tradition of the Church of Christ, so that you ought not to
be troubled at it, or frighted from our Communion by it; which is the only
Answer the Church of Rome can make to this Objection, and which the Fathers
ofthat they should be made?

. 4. But, 2ly, these Fathers do with one Voice declare, That by this Precept
the Christian is forbidden to worship, to bow down, or to give that Age would
have made, had they then practiced as the Church of Rome does now; but they do
utterly deny the Thing, rejecting it with detestation and abhorrence. Optatus
does confess, That Et recte dictum erat, si talem famam similis veritas
sequeretur; at ubi ventum est a supradictis nihil tale visum est, nihil
viderunt oculi Christiani quod horrerent -- visa est puritas, and ritu solito
solennis consuetudo perspecta est, cum viderent divinis Sacrificiis nec mutatum
quicquam nec additum. Ibid.
had the Thing been true, the Separation of the Donatists would have been just;
that this use of Images would have been a pollution of Divine Service, and a
thing alien from the Custom of the Church, and which the Eyes of Christians
could not have beheld without horror. Clearly condemning, by this Answer, the
practice of the Church of Rome, and justifying the separation of Protestants
from her Communion, had it been only made on this account.

You have already seen, from the Testimony of Nilus, That in the East they
admitted nothing in the Sanctuary but the Cross, and in particular, no Image.
In the West likewise, the placing of an Image on the Altar was forbidden, in
the 9th, 10th, and 11th Centuries.

Regino cites a Constitution of a Council held at Rhemes, in which it is
commanded, Nihilque super eo ponatur, nisi capsae cum Sanctorum Reliquiis, and
quatuor Evangelia. De disc. Eccles. l. 1. cap. 60.
That nothing shall be placed upon the Altar, but a Chest, containing the
Relics of the Saints, and the four Evangelists. And this Constitution seems
to forbid the placing Images upon the Altar, says Baluzius upon that Canon;
And this, says he, seems also to have been the Sentence of the French Council
held at Tours, A. D. 567. And therefore in the old form of Synodal Admonitions,
which was read in Churches by the Deacon after the Gospel, one Admonition is
this, Nihil ponatur, nisi capsae and reliquiae aut forte 4 Evangelia, aut pyxis
cum corpore Domini. Adm. Antiq. apud Baluz. ib. p. 603.
That nothing shall be placed on the Altar, but the Chests and Relics, or
perhaps the four Gospels, or the Pyx, with the Body of the Lord for the
viaticum of the Sick. But in the two new Forms of Admonition published by
Baluzius, the last of which is used at present in the Romish Church, the
Admonition runs in these words, Et desuper nihil ponatur nisi reliquiae, ac res
Sacrae, and pro Sacrificio opportunae. Adm. Nov. p. 607, 611.
Let nothing be placed upon the Altar, but Relics, and things Sacred and fit
for the Sacrifice. The Introduction of Images upon the Altar, making it
necessary to make this Alteration in their Admonition. Even in like manner as
the defalcation of the Cup in the 14th and 15th Centuries, made it necessary to
change the old form of Admonition, in which they warned all the Faithful Omnes
fideles ad Communionem Corporis and Sanguinis Domini accedere admonete. Adm.
Antiq. p. 605.
to come to the Communion of the Body and the Blood of Christ, on Christmas,
Easter, and Whit-sunday, into that now extant in the New, and only inviting
them Omnes fideles ad communionem Corporis Domini Nostri invitate. Admon. Nov.
p. 609. Admonete. p. 613.
to come to the Communion of the Body of Christ. By which, and by an hundred
Instances of a like Nature, we may learn how impossible it is for them, who
have made that the present practice of their Church, which was forbidden by,
and was detestable to their Forefathers to innovate in any Matter, or alter
the received Customs of the Church; and what a goodly Argument is brought from
the present Customs, Traditions, Doctrines of the People of that Church, to
provethey always held the same Doctrines, and practiced the same Religious
Rites.

. 5. Moreover, when Images began to be admitted into Churches, and by some
Superstitious People to be adored, the Fathers of the Church, both by their
Words and Actions, showed their dislike and their abhorrence of it. It was the
custom of some Christians, to pay some outward civil Worship unto the Images of
their Christian Emperors, till they themselves forbad it: This Jerome taking
notice of, does plainly, in his Comment on the Prophet Daniel condemn and
reprehend, saying, Cultores Dei eam adorare non debent; ergo Judices and
Principes seculi qui Imperatorum Statuas adorant and Imagines, hoc se facere
intelligunt, quod tres pueri facere nolentes placuerunt Deo: Et notanda
proprietas, Deos coli, Imaginem adorari dicunt; quod utrumque servis Dei non
convenit. In Dan. 3. p. 256.
Whether we call it a Statue, or a Golden Image, the Worshippers of God ought
not to adore it; let the Judges and Princes of the Age, who adore the Statues
and Images of the Emperors, understand, that they do that which the three
Children refusing to do, pleased God. And here the propriety of the Words is to
be noted; they say, That Gods are to be worshipped, the Image to be adored;
neither of which is to be done by any Servant of God.

When the Manichees, upon occasion, ministered by some rude and superstitious
People, had charged some Christian Churches with Image Worship St. Austin
writing of the Manners of the Catholic Church against them, directly severs
the Case of those rude Persons, from the approved practice of the Catholics.
Nolite mihi colligere professores nominis Christiani, nec professio^is suae vim
aut scientes, aut exhibentes, nolite consectari turbas Imperitorum, qui vel in
ipsa vera Religione superstitiosi sunt. De Morib. Eccl. Cath. c. 34.
Do not, says he, mention to me such Professors of the Name of Christ, as
either know not, or keep not the Force of their Profession; nor the companies
of rude Men, which either in the true Religion it self are superstitious, or so
given to their Lusts, as that they have forgotten what they promised to God.
Then as an instance of those superstitious Persons, he adds, That Novi multos
esse Sepulchrorum and Picturarum adoratores. Ibid.

Nunc vos illud admoneo, ut aliquando Ecclesiae Catholicae maledicere
desinatis, vituperando mores hominum, quos and ipsa condemnat, and quos
quotidie tanquam mafilios corrigere studet. Ibid.


he himself did know many who were worshippers of Tombs and Pictures; but how
vain, how hurtful, how sacrilegious these Men are, I have purposed to show in
another Treatise. Now this do I admonish you (Manichaeans), that you cease to
speak evil of the Catholic Church, by upbraiding it with the Manners of those
Men whom she her self condemns, and seeks every day to correct as naughty
Children. These things St. Austin speaks of those who were Professors of the
Name of Christ, and Children of the Church; they therefore cannot be supposed
worshippers of Heathen Idols such heathenish Persons being never owned as
Christians by the Church of Christ, but still rejected as her Enemies, and
publicly condemned by many of her Canons and Decrees. Nor does St. Austin say,
these Persons worshipped Pictures with Divine Worship, or that they esteem them
as Gods: Had he conceived this to have been their Crime, he would not have
said, That in the True Religion they were superstitious, but rather that they
were mere heathenish Idolaters; the (...). Act. 6. p. ^17.
second Nicene Council having told us, That never any Christian Man did give
Latria to an Image. Nor can it reasonably be conceived, that many who professed
the Name of Christ should be such Sots, as to believe an Image, made by their
own hands, could be the Great Creator of the World, the Maker of the very Man
that made it, and of that very Metal which composed it.

Moreover, St. Austin here requires the Manichees, Not to upbraid the Church of
Christ with the practice of these naughty Children, whom he calls worshippers
of Pictures, they being only a rude multitude of superstitious People; of such
as either did not know, or did not answer their Profession; such as the Church
condemned, and still endeavored to correct. Had then St. Austin, and all good
Christians of his Age, been themselves worshippers of Pictures; had he believed
that the Doctrine and Tradition of the Church of Christ, required all good
Christians to give them honorary Worship; would he so generally, without
distinction or exception, have condemned all Worshippers of Pictures as
superstitious, rude, and ignorant of what Christianity required? Would he so
fully have declared, That the Church of Christ condemned, and did endeavor to
correct them for it? Would he have charged the Manichees with great injustice,
for imputing Picture-worship to the Church of Christ, and not have given some
of those Limitations and Distinctions with which the second Nicene Council, and
the Romish Doctors do so much abound, to put a difference betwixt the avowed
and constant practice of the Church, and what both he and she condemned in
these Worshippers of Pictures? St. Austin therefore must be a very dolt, or
else must here demonstrate the Church of Christ did, in his Time, conceive all
Picture-worship to be superstitious, and opposite to the Profession of
Christianity; and that which she condemned, and did endeavor to correct in
those that practiced it.

. 6. And as those Fathers so expressly declared against the Doctrine of the
second Nicene Council, before they had decreed it; so afterward, from the 8th
to the 15th Century, it was expressly contradicted and rejected by the most
Eminent Persons of the Western Church.

In the same Century it was condemned by the Council of Frankford, consisting
of three hundred Bishops, A. D. 794.
as has been showed already.

It was condemned in the same Century, not only by Albinus, or Alcuinus, Tutor
to Charles the Great, and Scholar of Venerable Bede who wrote a Book against
the second Nicene Council, and that Assertion of it, Contra quod scripsit
Albinus Epistolam, ex Authoritate Divinarum Scripturarum mirabiliter dictatam,
ilamque -- in persona Episcoporum and Principum nostrorum, Regi Francorum
attulit. Hoved. Ann. part. 1. F. 232. B.
That Images ought to be adored, confuting it from Holy Scripture; but also by
the Princes and Bishops of the Church of England, in whose Name that Book was
sent to Charles the Great.

It was condemned in the 9th Century, by the Council held at Paris, A. D. 824.
It was in the same Century declared to be Pseudo-Synodus. l. contr. Hincmar.
Laudan. c. 20. Chron. ad A. 792. ad An. 794.
falsely called a Synod, because it decreed for Image Worship, by Hincmarus
Rhemensis, by Ado Viennensis, and by Regino Abbas Prumiensis.

It was condemned also by Agobardus, Bishop of Lions, who was made Bishop by
the consent of the whole Clergy of that Nation; for in his Book yet extant
against this Image Worship, he declares, amongst many other things already
cited from him, thus; Nemo se fallar, -- quicunque aliquam Picturam, vel
fusilem, five ductilem adorat Statuam, non exhibet cultum Deo, non honorat
Angelos, vel Homines Sanctos, sed simulacra veneratur. Sect. 31.
Let no Man deceive, let no Man seduce, or circumvent himself: Whosoever adores
any Picture, any molten or graven Statue, he does not worship God, or honor
Angels or Holy Men, but he venerates Idols. And yet Ego crediderim Agobardum
scripsisse, quod omnes tum in Gallia, ut etiam a Sirmundo observatum est,
sentiehant. Bal. Not. in Agob. p. 88.
Baluzius and Sirmond^s, do ingenuously confess, that Agobardus has writ only
that which the whole Church of France did then acknowledge. Papirius Massonus,
who abridged him, says, Graecorum Errores de Imaginibus and Picturis
manifestissime detegens, negat eas adorari, quam sententiam omnes Catholici
probamus, etc. Praefat.
That he did manifestly detect the Errors of the Greeks, ( i.e. the Nicene
Co^ncil) concerning Images and Pictures, denying that they were to be adored;
which Doctrine all we Catholics approve, and follow the Testimony of Gregory
the Great corcerning them; which as you have seen was this, That Images were
neither to be broken, nor yet adored

Ecclesiae Gallicanae and Germanicae in hac sententia, constantissime aliquot
seculis perdurarunt. Cap. de Imag. p. 173.
The German and French Churches, says Cassander, after the Council held at
Frankford, most constantly continued for some Ages, in that Sentence which they
first received from the Church of Rome, viz. That Images were neither to be
broken, nor yet to be worshipped. If for some Ages they must assuredly continue
in it till the 11th Century; and that they did so, is evident from the
Chronicle of Hermannus Contractus, who styles the second Nicene Council a false
Synod, on the forementioned account. Chron. ad A. D. 794.

That the Germans continued of the same mind in the 12th Century, is evident
from the plain words of Quippe apud Alemannos and Armenios S. Imaginum adoratio
aeque interdicta est. L. 2. de Imp. Aug. Angel. p. 199. In qua Synodo de
Imaginibus adorandis, aliter quam Orthodoxi Patres antea diffinierant,
statuerunt.
Nicetas Coniates, who says, That then among the Almains and Armenians, the
worship of Holy Images was equally forbid.

That the French Church was still of the same mind, is evident from the
Continuator of De Gestis Francorum, l. 5. c. 28.
Aimoinus, who plainly says, That the Fathers of the Nicene Synod otherwise
decreed concerning Image Worship, than the Orthodox Doctors had before defined.
And from the Collection of Decrees made by Ivo, Bishop of Chartres, who
declares the Judgment of the Council of Eliberis to be this, That Picturas in
Ecclesia non esse adorandas. Decret. Part. 3. c. 40, 41.
Pictures ought not to be worshipped, but that they only ought to be Memorials
of what is worshipped; and cites the Passage of Pope Gregory to that effect.

In the same Century, Simon Dunelmensis, an Oxonian Doctor, and Roger Hoveden
their Professor, both assert, That in the second In quo, proh dolor! multa
inconvenientia and verae Fidei co^traria reperiebantur, maxim quod pene omnium
Orientalium Doctorum unanimi assertione confirmatum fuerit; Imagines adorari
debere, quod omnino Ecclesia Dei execratur. Hoved. Ibid. Dunelm. ad A. 792.
Nicene Synod were many things contained which were inconvenient, and contrary
to the true Faith: and that in the said Council was established a Decree, That
Images should be worshipped; which thing the Church of God wholly abhors. And
here let it be noted, that in these Writers we find not the least hint of a
Distinction between due and undue worship of an Holy Image; or betwixt Worship
which the Church of Christ allows, and which the Church abhors; but Imagines
adorari debere, that Images should be worshipped, is declared to be the
Doctrine which God's Church abhorred.

In the 14th Century, Robert Holcot, Professor in Oxford, most plainly asserts,
That Ideo aliter potest dict, quod nulla adoratio debetur Imagini, nec licet
aliquam imaginem adorare. -- Quia autem propter Imaginem Christi excitamur ad
adorandum Christum, and coram Imagine adorationem nostram facimus Christo; ergo
dicitur large loquendo, N. B. quod Imaginem adoramus. In Ecclus. Lect. 158. c.
13. Vide Reliqua.
no Adoration is to be given to any Image; nor is it lawful for any Man to
worship Images. And Matthew of Westminster, condemning the Decree of the second
Nicene Council, as Hoveden had done before him, Ad A. D. 793.

In the 15th Century, Omnino prohibentur fieri ad hunc, viz. finem, ut
adorentur and colantur; unde sequitur neque adores, neque colas ea; ad
adorandum igitur and colendum prohibentur Imagines fieri. Sequitur non adorabis
neque coals; inter quae sic distingue, non adorabis, sc. veneratione Corporis,
ut inclinando eis vel genu-flectendo; neque coals, sc. affectione mentis. Comp.
Theol. in Explic. 1. praecepti. Tom. 2. p. 25.
Gerson, Chancellor of Paris, says, We do not worship Images, and that they
are forbidden to be worshipped; that the second Command forbids us to bow the
Body, or the Knee to them, or to worship them with the Affection of the Mind.

And Quod vero Christiana Religio Imagines sustinet in Ecclesia, and Oratoriis,
non permittit eo fine, ut adorentur ipsae sed ut fidelium mentes per earum
inspectiones excitentur ad reverentiam and honorem exhibendum his quorum sunt
Imagines, in quorum cognitionem recordativam ducunt. Et hic modus dicendi
videtur esse Rob. Holcot, super illud sapientiae infelices sunt -- mihi videtur
dicendum, quod neque adoro Imaginem Christi quia lignum, nec quia Imago; sed
adoro Christum coram Imagine Christi, quia scilicet Imago Christi excitat me ad
amandum Christum: hic modus loquendi originem videtur trahere ex dicto quodam
B. Gregorii Sereno Episcopo, etc. Et quidem, quia eos adorare vetuisses omnino
laudamus, fregisse vero reprehendimus, etc. In Can. Miss. Lect. 49. F. 127.
Gabriel Biel, an Oxonian Doctor, teaches, That then some of their Doctors
held, that any Image is not to be worshipped, either for it self, as it is
Wood, or Stone, nor yet considered as a Sign or Image. And that the Christian
Faith permits them to be reserved in the Church, not that they may be
worshipped, but that the Minds of Men may be excited to give reverence to them
whose Images they are; and that this they said according to P. Gregory.

In the 16th Century, Imagines in Ecclesia ideo tolerantur ut admoneant, non ut
colantur, alioquin omnino excusari possunt minime. In Act. Apost. cap. 7. p. 94.
Ferus, a Learned Preacher at Mentz, says, That Images are tolerated in the
Church, that they may admonish, not that they may be worshipped, for otherwise
they can admit of no excuse.

Yea, a Council held at Can. 14.
Mentz, A. D. 1549, during the Session of the Trent Council, speaks thus, Let
our Pastors accurately teach the People, that Images are not propounded to be
worshipped or adored, but that by them we may be brought to the remembrance of
those things which we ought profitably to call to mind.

CHAP. V.
Against this pretended Tradition of the second Nicene Council, it is farther
argued, 1. Because the Jews, though zealous for the observance of the Law of
Moses, and generally believing that it forbad the having, and much more the
bowing to an Image, did never, for the five first Centuries condemn the
Christians for this practice, as afterward when Images began to be received
into Churches, and adored, they always did.. 1. 2ly, Because the Apostles, and
succeeding Fathers, who answer all the other Scruples of the Jews against the
Christian Faith, speak not one word in Answer to this great Objection, that it
allowed of Image Worship in opposition to the second Commandment.. 2. 3ly,
Because the Evidence of Truth has forced many Learned Writers of the Romish
Church to confess, That the Primitive Church had no Images, or did not adore
them.. 3. From this Discourse, these four things are inferred; 1. That the
Councils received by the Church of Rome as general, are not infallible
Interpreters of Scripture, or infallible Guides in Matters of Faith.. 4. 2ly,
That the second Nicene Coucil has imposed that on Christians as a Tradition of
the Church of Christ, which was not so; and therefore was deceived, and did
deceive in Matter of Tradition.. 5. 3ly, That Roman Catholics do vainly boast
of the Consent of Fathers on their side.. 6. 4ly, That the Doctrine of the
Church of England is much safer in this particular than that of Rome.. 7.

MOreover, that Image Worship was no Doctrine delivered to the Church of
Christ, either by Writing or Tradition from the Apostles, that it was not
practiced in the first Ages of the Church, will be apparent from the deportment
of the Jews toward the Christians, and the consideration of what they thought
of the erection of an Image in the place of Worship, and of the adoration of
them.

. 1. And, Act. 21.20.
we know that even the believing Jews were zealous for the strict observance of
the Law of Moses, and were much offended at St. Paul, because they apprehended
he had taught the Jews to forsake the Law of Moses, and not to circumcise their
Children, or walk after the Customs of their Fathers.

We also are informed by Tum poene omnes Christum Deum sub Legis observatione
credebant. Sulp. l. 2. c. 45. Eusebius. Chron.
Eusebius and Sulpitius, that this Zeal continued among the Jewish Christians
for a considerable time after the death of the Apostles, viz. till the
destruction of the City by Hadrian. For till that time the Bishops of Jerusalem
were of the Circumcision; and almost all who believed in Christ, did yet
observe the Law.

The Sect of the Ep. ad August. and August. contr. Faust. l. 19. c. 18. Orig.
contr. Cells. l. 2. p. 56. l. 5. p. 272.
Ebionites and Nazarens, continued till the days of Jerome, they were dispersed
throughout the Churches of the East, and were stiff Assertors of the Obligation
of the Law of Moses; and held, Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 3. c. 27.
That Men were to be saved by the observation of it.

2. We know, that in the Judgment of the Jews, who lived about our Savior's
Time, and after, nothing was more detestable, nothing was more repugnant to the
Law of Moses, than the admitting of an Image in the place of Worship, much more
the bowing down to it.

They constantly declared to Pilate, upon occasion of the Roman Eagles, That
(...). Joseph. Halos. l. 2. c. 14.
they could not permit any Image to be placed in their City. And that (...). L.
2. c. 8. l. 18. c. 4. l. 2. c. 17.
their Law was violated by the little Images of Caesar annexed to the Roman
Standards; and that they would rather die than endure them there. They tell
Petronius, That it could not be permitted to have the Image, either of God or
Man, in their most sacred Temple, or elsewhere. They persuade Vitellius not to
come thither with them, because it was not suitable to the Laws of their
Country to see an Image brought into it.

And they declared to Herod, Son of Antipater, That (...). Archeol. l. 18. c.
7. l. 15. c. 11.
whatsoever they endured, they would not suffer the Images of Men within their
City.

3. Certain it is, that for a long time no Samaritan, or Jew, ever objected to
the Christians their violation of the Second Commandment; or at the least,
pretended to be scandalized at their defection from this Law of God. No single
instance of this Nature can be produced from all Antiquity, till after the
fifth Century, when Images began to be admitted into Churches, provided that
they were not worshipped. Then was it that the Jews began to call the Christian
Churches, upon that account, Batte Aboda Zara, the Houses of Idolatry. And from
that time they have not ceased to object to them the violation of this Law, and
to profess that they were scandalized at it.

In the second Nicene Council, Germanus, Patriarch of Constantinople,
confesses, That (...). Act. 4. p. 300. and p. 240.
upon this account the Jews did often cast reproach upon them; and that the
Saracens did the same.

Gregrory, in his Epistle to him, adds, That (...). p. 288.
if any one do accuse this Image Worship of Idolatry, he is one who calumniates
after the manner of the Jews.

In the fifth Action, a Jew is introduced speaking thus; (...). p. 356, 357,
384, 348.
I believe in a crucified Jesus, who is the Son of God; but I am scandalized at
you Christians, because you worship Images, whereas the Scriptures every where
command us not to make any graven Image or Similitude.

The Christians are to be reckoned Idolaters, says Dr. Pocock, Not. Miscell.
p. 322.
R. Kimchi, because they bow down and adore the Image of Jesus of Nazareth.

Catechism. c. 33. p. 68. B.
Fabianus Fiogus, a Jewish Convert, informs us, That the Jews dispute after
this manner; God in the Decalogue, writ with his own Finger, has command that
no kind of Image or Similitude, should be made, etc. but Christians make and
worship Images, they therefore violate this Precept; this, says he, is an
undoubted thing among them, and therefore they call the Christians Worshippers
of Idols.

Joseph King of Cosri, is said to prefer the Jews before the Christians, Buxt.
Praesat. ad Cosri.
because the latter bow themselves to the Works of their own hands.

Had therefore the first Christians received a Tradition from the Apostles to
adore Images, and had all Christians practiced suitably to this supposed
Tradition, both the Believing and the Unbelieving Jews, being such Zealots for
the observance of the Law of Moses, and professed Enemies of Images, and of the
adoration of them, must have been scandalized at it. We see that they were very
much incensed against St. Paul, for teaching, Act. 21.20.
That the Gentiles were not obliged to observe their Law; that they would not
endure him, unless he also would walk orderly, and keep the Law. If then St.
Paul, and Peter, as Apud 2. Nic. Conc. p. 101.
P. Hadrian averrs; if the rest of the Apostles, as the second Nicene Council
says, had taught and practiced this Image Worship, so flatly opposite to their
Law, and therefore execrable to them, this must have stirred up their
indignation against St. Paul and Peter much more than their asserting, That the
Ceremonial Law did not oblige the Gentiles could have done.

It Is surely difficult to conceive, that they who thought their Law so highly
violated, by framing the Picture of a Man, or of an Eagle, and would rather die
than admit of them, because they held they were forbidden by their Law, should
either, being Christians, continue zealous to assert the Obligation of that
Law, and yet admit the Doctrine which did enjoin them both to frame and worship
Images; or should, continuing unbelieving Jews, never accuse the Christians of
a Crime so execrable in their sight, nor dissuade any Christian from complying
with this great violation of their Law?

. 2. Yea farther, had this Practice, or Tradition, obtained in the days of the
Apostles, or the five following Ages, the Apostles, and Primitive Fathers,
would likely have endeavored to remove this Scandal from the Jews, and to
return some Answer to an Objection so very obvious, for their prejudice against
Image Worship being greater than against any other thing, they had the greatest
reason, upon the supposition of such a practice of the Christians, to labor to
remove it. And yet we find not that St. Paul in his Epistles writ partly to
satisfy the Jews, that Circumcision was not to be imposed upon the Gentiles;
and partly, to warn the Gentiles not to bear the Yoke of Jewish Festivals and
Ceremonies; or in that purposely designed to teach the Jews, that the
Priesthood being changed, the Ceremonial Law must also change together with it;
or that St. Peter, or St. James, in their Epistles to the dispersed Jews, take
the least notice of so great a Prejudice, or spend one word to reconcile the
Jew to this supposed Image Worship.

Justin Martyr, Origin, Tertullian, St. Cyprian, G. Nyssen, Epiphanius, St.
Chrysostom, St. Austin, with many others, have writ on purpose to take off the
Objections of the Jews against Christianity; and in these Writings they have
been very diligent in taking off the Scandal of the Cross, and proving, That
the Jewish Festivals, and Sabbaths, were abolished; and that their Laws
concerning Circumcision and Sacrifices were abrogated; but they spend not one
word to show that Christians were exempted from that Precept, which forbad the
bowing down to any Image, or Similitude; or to excuse that Worship of them they
are supposed to have practiced, or to declare, as does the second Nicene
Council, that this Commandment only forbad the worshipping of Idols, or of
Images as Gods, or to give any other satisfaction to the Jews in this
particular.

The Apostles, and the Fathers, do jointly labor to remove the Scandal of the
Cross, and to convince the Jew, that it was reasonable to worship him who was
crucified upon it; but they say nothing to remove that which was a greater
Scandal to them, as the confession of the Jew now mentioned does assure us,
viz. the worship of the Cross, and of an Image, which was the Work of their own
Hands. They tell the Gentiles, That no Man had reason to condemn them for not
observing the New Moons, and Jewish Sabbaths, but give them not one Item that
they had no reason to condemn them for making and adoring Images.

The whole New Testament, which takes especial notice, Romans 2.22.
that the Jews abhorred Idols, gives not the least distinction betwixt an
Image, and an Idol, nor the least hint of any of those Evasions and
Limitations, by which the Church of Rome now finds it necessary to reconcile
her Practice to the second Commandment; nor of those Expositions or Retortions
used in the second Nicene Council, to refute the Clamours of the Jews. Which is
a full conviction, that the Ancient Church had no such Doctrine or Practice,
which could make it necessary for them to fly unto these Romish Shifts and
Subtilties.

. 3. To conclude; The Suffrage of Antiquity is so very clear, the Testimonies
of it are so numerous, and so convincing, that they have forced many Learned
Persons of the Church of Rome, ingenuously to confess, either that in the
Primitive Church they had no Images, did not regard them; or that they paid no
veneration to them, but rather disapproved and condemned it.

The Universal Church, says Statuit olim Universa Ecclesia, ut nullae in
Templis Imagines ponerentur. Lib. de Nov. Celebrit. p. 151.
Nicholaus de Clemangis, being moved by a lawful Cause, viz. on the account of
them who were converted from Heathenism to the Christian Faith, commanded, That
no Images should be placed in Churches.

Quem, non modo nostrae Religionis expertes, sed test Hieron. omnes ferme
veteres sancti Patres damnabant, ob metum Idololatriae. De Invent. Rerum, L. 6.
c. 13.
The Worship of Images, not only they who were not of our Religion; but, as St.
Jerome testisieth, almost all the Ancient Holy Fathers condemned for fear of
Idolatry, says Polydore Virgil, where the opposition of these Holy Fathers to
others not of our Religion; and the mention of Pope Gregory among them, shows
the vanity of what the Apud White, p. 249.
Jesuit Fisher says, That Polydore speaks this of the Fathers of the Old
Testament, not of the New.

Nos dico Christianos, ut aliquando Romanos fuisse sine Imaginibus in
primitiva, quae vocatur Ecclesia. Syntagm. L. 1. p. 14.
This surely I cannot omit, says Giraldus, that as the Ancient Romans so we
Christians were without Images in that Church which is called Primitive.

Saevissimis his temporibus de Sanctorum imaginibus ne cogitarint Episcopi --
abstinebant ad tempus. De Council. Eliber. l. 3. c. 5.
The Bishops in these times of Persecution, says Mendoza, little thought of
Images of Saints; they abstained from them for a while, least the Heathens
should deride them, and should conceive that Christians worshipped them as
Gods. All these are Witnesses against the second Nicene Council, that the
Practice was not Apostolical, Universal, and Primitive.

What Opinion the Fathers had of this Practice, these following Persons will
inform you.

Petrus Crinitus says, That De Hon. Discipline. l. 9. c. 9.
Lactantius, Tertullian, and very many others, with too much boldness, did
affirm, That it belonged not to Religion to worship any Image.

Erasm. vol. 5. Symbol. Catech. p. 989.
Even to the days of Jerome, who died in the fifth Century, Men of approved
Religion, says Erasmus, would not suffer any painted, or graven, or woven
Image, no not of Christ himself.

Certum est, initio praedicati Evangelii, aliquanto tempore inter Christianos,
praesertim in Ecclesiis, Imaginum usum non fuisse. Consult. cap. de Imag. p.
163.
It is certain, says Cassander, that when the Gospel was first preached, there
was no use of Images for sometime, among the Christians, as is evident from
Clemens of Alexandria, (who flourished at the close of the second) and from
Arnobius, (who flourished at the beginning of the fourth Century.)

And again; Quantum veteres initio Ecclesiae ab omni veneratione Imaginum
abhorruerunt, unus Origenes declarat, p. 168.
How much the Ancients, in the beginning of the Church, abhorred all veneration
of Images, Origin alone, in his Book against Celsus, shows.

And a third time; Sane ex Augustino constat, ejus aetate simulacrorum usum in
Ecclesiis non fuisse. p. 165.
Truly it is manifest, from the Discourse of St. Austin, on the 113th Psalm,
that in his Age, the use of carved Images or Statues, was not come into the
Church.

Lastly, he adds, That in the Days of Gregory the Great, (that is, in the sixth
Century) Quae fuerit men's, and sententia R. Ecclesiae adhuc aetate Gregorii,
satis ex ejus Scriptis manifestum est, viz. ideo haberi Picturas non quidem ut
colantur and adorentur, etc. p. 170.

Consuetudo R. Ecclesiae pariter consractionem and adoratiouem improbat, p. 17^.


this was the Mind and Doctrine of the Romish Church, That Images should be
retained, not to be adored or worshipped; but that the Ignorant should by them
be admonished of what was done, and be provoked to piety. That the Roman Church
did equally condemn the adoration and the breaking of Images.

That the second Nicene Council, Graeca illa Synodus qua Part Imagine^s
adorandas censebat damnata fuit, ut quae -- consuetudini R. Ecclesiae
adversaretur, p. 172.
as far as it determined for the Adoration of Images, was, by the general
consent of the Fathers of the Council of Frankford, condemned, and rejected, as
being a Determination which was repugnant, not only to the Holy Scriptures, and
the Ancient Tradition of the Fathers, but also to the Custom of the Roman
Church. And in a word, Fortasse optandum esset, ut Majores nostri huc usque in
prisca illa Majorum suorum sententia integre perstitissent. p. 175, 179, 180.
That it were to be wished, perhaps, that our Predecessors (viz.) those of the
Church of Rome) had continued in that old Doctrine of their Ancestors; to wit,
that Images neither should be broken nor adored.

De Van. Scient. cap. de Imag.
The corrupt Custom, and false Religion of the Heathens, says Cornelius
Agrippa, has infected our Religion, and has introduced into our Church Images
and Idols, and many barren pompous Ceremonies, none of which was found or
practiced among the Primitive Professors of Christianity.

And now, from what has been discoursed in these Chapters, I infer,

. Inference 1.
4. 1. That the Councils received by the Church of Rome, as the infallible
Proposers of their Faith, namely, the second Nicene Council, and that of Trent,
have erred, and have imposed a false Interpretation of that Precept which does
command us not to bow down to the similitude of any Thing in Heaven or Earth,
and therefore they are falsely said to be infallible in Matters of Faith, or
true Interpreters of Holy Scripture.

And indeed, whosoever seriously will consider of those Scriptures which are
produced, either by this whole Council, or by Pope Hadrian; with approbation of
this Council, or offerr'd by some Members present, or contained in some of the
Citations produced by them for the having Images in Christian Churches, or for
the giving Adoration to them, will find them so apparently perverted, and
horribly impertinent, as that he will be forced to question, not only the
Infallibility, but even the common Wisdom or Discretion of those Men who had
the confidence to use them to these purposes. For,

1. John, the pretended Vicar of the three Oriental Patriarchs, says, That
Act. 4. p. 200.
Jacob wrestling with him, saw God Face to Face; which yet can do no Service to
the Maker, or Worshipper of Images, but by supposing, with the old Heretics,
called Anthropomorphites, that God has Face or Features like a Man.

Leontius, Bishop of Neapolis, says, Act. 4. p. 239, 240.
If thou accusest me for worshipping the Wood of the Cross, thou must accuse
Jacob for blessing wicked and idolatrous Pharaoh; which instance will be only
pertinent, when it is proved that Pharaoh was an Image, and that Blessing is an
Act of Adoration.

Pope Gregory the Second, says, That Cum figuram vellet, aut simulacrum
videre, ne force erraret, orabat Deum dicens, Ostende mihi teipsum manifessto,
ut te videam. p. 11.
when Moses desired to behold an Image, or Similitude, lest he should be
mistaken in the Visien, he said to God, Show me thy self manifestly, that I may
see thee; but does not prove that Moses desired to see an Image, or material
Likeness of God, or that God showed him any such Similitude.

Germanus, Bishops of Constantinople, argues for Images after this manner; Act.
4. p. 304.
In the Book of Numbers, the Lord speaks to Moses, saying, Speak unto the
Children of Israel, and bid them make themselves Fringes in the borders of
their Garments, and put upon the Fringe of the Border a Ribband of Blue; and it
shall be unto you for a Fringe, that you may look upon it, and remember all the
Commandments of the Lord, and do them. Now if, says he, the Israelites were
bid to look upon these Fringes, and remember his Commandments; much more ought
we, by the inspection of the Images of Holy Men, to view the end of their
Conversation. And yet there seems to be some little difference betwixt a Fringe
and a graven Image, betwixt remembering God's Commandments to do them, and to
break them.

Pope Hadrian finds in Isaiah, a Prophecy concerning Gospel-Images, as clear as
the Nose upon your Face; for, Ecce signum; Quemadmodum Esaias propheta
vaticinatus est. Act. 2. p. 110.
In that Day there shall be an Altar to the Lord in the midst of the Land of
Egypt; and a Pillar at the Border thereof to the Lord, and it shall be for a
Sign.

He also finds the sweet Singer of Israel harping often upon the same String, and
prophesying of Images to be adored in the Gospel Times; saying, Magnopere
vultum ejus secundum humanitatis ipsius dispensationem adorari praemonuit,
inquiens, etc. Psalm. 4.6.
The Light of thy Countenance, signatum est super nos, is signed upon us.

And again; Psalm. 25.8.
Lord, I have loved the Beauty of thy House, and the place of the Tabernacle of
thy Glory.

And a third time; Psalm. 27.8. Psalm. 44.12.
Thy Face, Lord, will I seek.

And a fourth; Even the Rich among the People shall entreat thy Face.

And, Psalm. 96.6.
lastly, in those words, Honor and Majesty are before him; Strength and Beauty
are in his Sanctuary.

And what can be more evident for Image Worship than these Texts, which do so
plainly mention the Face and Countenance of God.

Theodosius proves, That we Christians must have Holy and Venerable Images;
because it is said, Act. 4. p. 213.
Whatsoever things were written, (...), aforetime, were written for our
Learning; wherefore the venerable Images being written upon Wood, and Stone,
Romans 15.4.
and Metal, must be for our Instruction.

Away with those ignorant Fellows, who can derive the Pictures of Christ and
his Apostles, no higher than St. Luke and Nicodemus; this Theodosius finds them
among the Writings of the Prophets, as clear as the Noon Day; see, (...), they
were engraven afore-time, even before Christ's Humane Nature, or his Apostles,
had a being; and had it not been thus, we Christians had been void of Hope, for
these things were written, that we through comfort, (...), of these Pictures,
might have hope.

They have all found it in the Book of Canticles, or something which makes for
it; for there it is most appositely said, Act. 6. p. 408. Cant. 2.14. Psalm.
48.8.
Show me thy Face, and let me hear thy Voice, for thy Voice is sweet, and thy
Countenance is comely. And in that of the Psalmist, As we have heard, so have
we seen.

Act. 4.197.
Ezekie 's Temple was made, say they, with Cherubims, and Palm Trees; so that a
Palm Tree was between a Cherub, and a Cherub; and every Cherub had two Faces,
so that the Face of a Man was toward a Palm Tree on the one side, and the Face
of a young Lion toward the Palm Tree on the other side; and thus it was
throughout the House round about. So that it seems to them to have been an
(...), or an House of Imagery; and yet should you ask them where this Temple
was built, or what Existence had these Cherubims, but in the Vision of the
Prophet, it will puzzle their Infallibilities to answer you.

Lastly; They argue from the Author to the Ibid.
Hebrews, thus; Verily, the first Covenant had also Ordinances, and a worldly
Sanctuary, there was a Tabernacle made, in which was first the Candlestick, and
the Table, and the Shewbread, which is called Holy; and after the second Veil,
the Tabernacle, which is called the Holiest of all, which had the Golden
Censer, and the Ark of the Covenant, overlaid round about with Gold, wherein
was the Golden Pot that had Manna, and Aaron 's Rod that budded, and the Tables
of the Covenant, and over it the Cherubims of Glory shadowing the Mercy-Seat.
If then, say they, (...). p. 200.
The Old Testament had Cherubims shadowing the Mercy Seat; let us have Images
of Christ, and of his Holy Mother, shadowing the Altar; for because the Old
Testament had such Things, the New received them. This, say the (...). Ibid.
Synod, is the truth; This, say the Princes, is the Command of God. But why did
they not conclude also for another Ark and Mercy-Seat, another Tabernacle, a
Golden Censer, and a Pot of Manna, seeing it was but saying, as in the case of
Images they do, because the Old Testament had these things, let us Christians
have them too, and it infallibly must be so? And tell me now, Can any one who
reads these powerful Demonstrations from, and excellent Expositions of the Holy
Scripture, doubt of the Truth of that which is so often asserted by this Synod,
That Act. 3. p. 157. Act. 7. p. 580, 581, 585.
they were certainly assisted by the Holy Ghost?

But to be serious; If all, or any of these places, have any strength to prove
that Images should be set up in Churches, or adored by Christians, why do not
any of their Writers use them to that end? if they do not, Why may not they be
taxed with weakness, who use such Proofs as none but the most undiscerning
Persons could produce, and which their best Friends are ashamed of?

. Inference 2.
5. 2. Hence it is evident, that the second Nicene Council grossly was mistaken
in that Determination and Assertion, so frequently repeated in that Council,
That Image Worship had been delivered to them by the continual Suffrage and
Approbation of the whole Church of Christ; and was the Tradition of the whole
Church Catholic, even from the Times of the Apostles.

And consequently, that this Council has been actually deceived in Matter of
Tradition, as well as in her Interpretations of the Holy Scripture: For whereas
it is frequently there said, That this was the constant Doctrine and Tradition
of the Holy Fathers of the Catholic Church; the opposition is not greater
betwixt Light and Darkness, than betwixt the Assertions of the Fathers, and the
Determinations of the Council. For,

1. The Fathers of that Council do pronounce Anathema (...). Act. 1. p. 57.4.
p. 317.5. p. 389.7. p. 576.8. p. 592.
against all Persons who take such places of the Holy Scripture which are
spoken against Idols, as spoken against Holy Images; i.e. who say the second
Commandment forbids the Worship, not of Idols only, but of Holy Images. And so
they do pronounce Anathema against Justin Martyr, St. Clemens of Alexandria,
Origin, Tertullian, St. Cyprian, St. Austin, Theodoret, Fulgentius, Agobardus,
the Councils of Constantinople, Frankford, and Paris.

2ly, The Fathers of the same Council pronounce Anathema (...). Act. 1. p. 57.
against all Persons who say, That the erection of Images is the Invention of
the Devil, and not the Tradition of the Catholic Church; and so they do
pronounce Anathema against Clemens of Alexandria, St. Ambrose, Theodotus,
Amphilochius, St. Jerome, and St. Chrysostom, Agobardus, Hincmarus, and the
three forementioned Councils, who all declare, That this was no Tradition of
the Catholic Church. And against Clemens of Alexandria, Tertullian,
Lactantius, Eusebius, Theodotus, Anoyranus, and the whole Council of
Constantinople, who say expressly, That Image-making, or Image Worship, was the
Invention of the Devil.

3ly, These Fathers do pronounce Anathema (...). Act. 4. p. 317.5. 389.7. p.
576.
to all who violate, break, or dishonor S. Images; which Epiphanius, Serenus,
and all the Fathers of Constantinople did; and upon all that knowingly
communicate with them, who contumeliously speak of them, or dishonor them.

Now seeing all the Christians of the 4th Century did certainly communicate
with Epiphanius; of the 6th Century with Serenus; since all the Fathers
mentioned in my second Chapter, do in their sense dishonor Images, they in
effect pronounce Anathema against them all.

4ly, They pronounce Anathema (...). Act. 4. p. 317.5. p. 389.
against all Persons who detract from, or who speak evil of their S. Images.

Now since the Fathers have declared concerning Images in general, That they
are worse than Mice and Worms; that they are the Invention of the Devil; with
many other things of a like nature, mentioned Chapter the second; they must be
all obnoxious to this Anathema.

5ly, They pronounce Anathema (...). Act. 4. p. 212.
against all who do not call them Holy and Sacred Images; that is, against St.
Clemens of Alexandria Origin, Lactantius, Eusebius, and others, who have
declared, That they cannot be Sacred; and that they are Men of impotent
Spirits, and lame Minds, who so esteem them.

6ly, They denounce Anathema (...). Act. 1. p. 61.7. p. 584.
against all those who do not worship Images; or who doubt of, or who are
disaffected to the worship of them. Now this Anathema, if what is here produced
cannot be refuted, must certainly be pronounced against the Blessed Apostles,
and all the Christians of the five first Centuries.

Lastly; Whereas Origin declares, That the first thing which Christians taught
their Converts, was, the contempt of all Images; the Fathers of this Synod
pronounce Anathema (...). Act. 1. p. 61.
to all who do not diligently teach all Christian People to adore the Images of
all Good Men from the beginning of the World.

. 6. 3ly, Hence also may be seen how vainly and unjustly Roman Catholics do
boast of the consent of Fathers on their side, and say, That they expound the
Scriptures according to that Sense which they received from the Ancients; it
being evident, from what has been discoursed, that in their Exposition of
these words, [ Thou shall not make to thy self the Similitude of any Thing in
Heaven or Earth, etc. Thou shall not bow down to them] they do embrace a Sense
which no Father, for the first six Centuries did ever put upon them; and do
reject that Sense they generally did impose upon these words.

. 7. 4ly, Hence I infer, That the Religion of the Church of England is, in this
particular, much safer than is that of Rome. For if Image Worship be not forbid
in this Commandment; nevertheless we only do neglect that practice which their
best Writers deem Illud ante constituendum Imagines, ex carum per se genere
esse quae (...) nominantur, hoc est quae ad salutem omnino necessaria non sunt,
nec ad substantiam ipsam religionis attinent, sed in potestate sunt Ecclesiae
ut ea vel adhibeat, vel ableget, pro eo atque satius esse decreverit. Petav.
Theol. dogm. To. 5. l. 15. cap. 13.. 1.

Ea est hujusce miserrimae dissensionis materia, sine qua, sicut multis
videtur, salva per fidem, spem, and charitatem incunctanter, and in hoc seculo,
and in futuro salvari potest Ecclesia, quorum sensus, and sententia talis est,
quid fidei, spei, and charitati obesse potuisset, si Imago nulla toto orb
terrarum picta, vel ficta fuisset. Epist. Eugenii P. 2 Act. Synod. Paris. P.
130, 134.


indifferent; which no Jew ever did perform to any Patriach or Prophet, nor any
Christian for 600 Years to any Apostle, Saint, or Martyr, and which no
Scripture has commanded; and so we only do neglect to do that which neither
Example of the Ancients, nor any Precept does commend to our practice. Whereas
if Image Worship should be here forbid to us Christians, which, to speak
modestly, seems highly probable, the Church of Rome must practice and enjoin,
that Worship which provokes God to jealousy, exhort and force her Members to
perform that Worship from which God does exhort them to abstain, least they
corrupt themselves; She must enjoin that Action upon pain of her Displeasure,
and of the Wrath of God, which he commands us to avoid, because he is a jealous
God; she must imprison, and cut off by Excommunication, and by the Sword,
Christ's Servants, because they will not, by doing that which God so
frequently, and so directly has forbid, incur the hazard of his Wrath, who
says; Deuteronomy. 4.25, 26.
If ye corrupt your selves, and make a graven Image of the likeness of any
thing, I call Heaven and Earth to Witness this day, that you shall soon utterly
perish: And it is easy to determine which we ought most to fear, the Wrath of
God or Man.

FINIS.

