A Manual OF DIVINE CONSIDERATIONS, Delivered and concluded by the Reverend
THOMAS WHITE.

Deuteronomy. 32. 29. O that men would be wise! that they would understand! that they
would consider the last things!

Hierem. 12. 11. All the earth is become desolate with desolation, because
there is not a man that considers.

Translated out of the Original Latin Copy.

Printed in the year, MDCLV.

To his honored Cousin, JOHN COTES of Woodcote, Esquire.
SIR,
THose endearing expressions, which I, beyond my merit or expectation, received
heretofore from my worthy friend, your indulgent Father; and those other due
respects which I owe unto that Name and Family whereof I am a branch, engage me
to prefixe your Name in the Frontispiece of this little work. I dare
confidently put the same into your hands as a solid piece, and deserving your
regard. And albeit I am neither ambitious of honor, nor fearful of censure,
yet I desire you to give it protection; who notwithstanding you have a
different sense from me in points of Religion; yet I hope you are not so
estranged, but that you dare accept a book, presented by a kinsman, who is
moreover, dear Sir,

Your most affectionate Servant, W. C.
From my chamber this day of the memorial of our Lords Passion, 1655.
To the Reader.
ALthough this co^pendious Treatise will not admit a large Preface, yet I shall
venture to give in few words a civil account, which I hope will not much wrong
your patience.

In the first place, I must remove all honor from my self, it being due unto
him, who composed the considerations set down in this little Manual, assuring
you, he is one, who for his general and rational knowledge is the wonder of
this age; yet I shall be silent in his commendations, lest some should think I
say too much, and others I am sure will esteem all that I can say too little:
It is enough to tell you they are Mr. White's.

They were dictated by him to diverse Gentlemen then under his charge, and the
objects of his care, as fast as his pious soul conceived them, which breaking
forth expressed it self in an active and burning charity. Behold therefore deep
sallies proceeding from a zealous heart. They are not a miscellany of fragments
stolen out of other men's works; but a sinewy discourse, issuing from a profound
judgment, compacted together, and tied up with such a strength of reason, so
close, and pressing the motives so home, that Vice has nothing to color her
deformity, which he has not unmasked; nor have the Virtues any luster to set
forth their inviting beauties, which are not likewise by him discovered.

Finally, that man who is but meanly considerative, must be mainly defective in
his capacity, if he does not easily of himself fall upon firm resolutions to
perform the duties correspondent to a good Christian. And if yet either a
dullness of nature, or a quickness of unmortified affections, make the soul cold
and dry in the consideration of spiritual objects; the Author comes in again
at every turn, and assists with conclusions, suggested, and substantially
raised upon the firm Basis of his wel-grounded motives.

As for the persons to whom he delivered them, they were Gentlemen of good
condition, well qualified, and Catholics; who yet (by an unhappy mistake of
some seduced Zelots) were therefore disesteemed and cast off, as being scarcely
either good Christians, or loyal Subjects. An error nourished by some of our
greatest (whose honor and name I spare) and so far drove on by design, under
pretense of securing the State, their temporal Interest, and the
new-established Gospel; that now at length they have lost and undone
themselves, their best Subjects and Friends, and the Formalities (though that
be least to be lamented) of their supposed Church, and all that flourish of
Religion whereunto they pretended; the storm rising (according to Gods
judgments) in another quarter, where some of them did least fear it. But in
the mean time, while they ruffled it in their glory, many honest Catholic
Christians lost both life and fortunes. Nor had these distressed Gentlemen any
other comfort, but their prayers, joined with the practice of virtues, and a
good conscience, for which they suffered.

To the almighty, whose loins are girded with power, they offered up their
daily supplications, beseeching him to regard and pity his holy Spouse, the
Church; to cast an eye of mercy upon his servants misery; to look graciously
upon their religion and innocence; to grant them patience, obedience, and
humility; to mollify the obdurate hearts of their adversaries; and in the
bowels of his eternal charity, for his son Christ Jesus sake, to recall, and
receive into the bosom of his Church, their seduced, yet still their
dearly-beloved Countrymen. Such were their weapons to advance Religion, such
was their armor to defend themselves, and such use they made of the
considerations and conclusions to be seen in this ensuing Treatise.

Wherein, toward the latter end, you shall find some Meditations composed
properly for those, who after a long time spent in prayer and study, having
mortified their own wills, were called by God and their superiors to assist
their Country in an active life, and to undertake the sublime function of
Priesthood. And albeit those considerations of single life, and some other
points more immediately conducing to that particular state, are not so
generally concerning all men; yet I would not defraud thee of whatsoever was in
the original Copy.

I was willing therefore to dress those Meditatio^s also in our English habit,
since the least spiritual profit of the Reader is infinitely more worth then
all my labors; and I verily believe there be many who will read them, and make
good use of them, learning daily more and more to esteem and increase that
talent which God has given them, for the benefit of their own souls, and the
salvation of others, and to watch and guard their steps warily, when they see
to what a high pitch of perfection they are obliged by virtue of their
profession, how perrillous and pernicious every the least slip may prove to
themselves, and how scandalous to others, being to act upon a slippery stage,
before the eyes of many curious observers. God forbid that they should cause
his Name to be blasphemed, his holy Spouse to be despised, or his sacred
Priesthood to be vilified among the nations which do not know him; when as
their Saintlike virtues, as well as their sublime vocation, ought to make them
a spectacle of reverence to Angels and men. Nor will those discourses be only
profitable to such as are, or should be in a state of perfection; but they also
who humbly creep along, and lead a secular life; may among other good lessons,
learn to obey and honor that celestial state, whereof he ought to acknowledge
himself much unworthy, whoever best deserves it.

Lastly, I assure you that although I extremely liked the Latin piece, and
loved the Author for it; yet being contented with the Original, I was not
ambitious to translate it, by reason of difficulties, and those more then many
will imagine, until I was solicited and engaged, and had the help of a
powerful friend. And then also, at first, I intended it only for the private
use of my Family, neither did I therefore dress it up so accurately, as
otherwise I would have done; albeit to my utmost capacity I delivered the
sense of the Original, and followed it closely, it being that which I
principally aimed at. But now since I publish it, and invite all, especially
the honorable Society of those, who were once my fellow Collegiats, to peruse
it in our mother tongue; I could wish I had made it more polished, and
pleasing. However (such as the Translation is) I am confident it is worth your
reading, and will with Gods grace make you happy, if seriously put in
practice; without which, a hasty running over it will only prove a fruitless
curiosity, and not able to attain or reach that end, for which it was either
composed or translated. For certainly, when the day of judgment shall come,
says Thomas a Kempis, it will not be examined what we have read, but what we
have done; nor how well we have spoken, but how religiously we have lived.

Of the Beginning, and End of Man.
1. Meditation. Of the creation of the World.
1 COnsider how God, whereas he was of himself essentially Being, and ever most
blessed, the Quintessence ofall good being reconcentred into his indivisible
Essence, by the necessity of the first and highest contradiction, pressed with
an intimate weight and act of his bounty, flowed forth, and in a manner
squeezed himself into whatsoever is besides.

2. Consider, how admirably and fully he powered forth and ordained the nature
of the Universe, without any matter to be presupposed, and without any help of
additionall assistance: how conveniently he tied together all its parts,
according to his eternal wisdom, and so fitly accommodated them, that
nothing did superabound, nor was there any thing that could be desired, wanting.

3. Add to these, the immensity of the Creature, set in array almost with an
infinite extension beyond the reach of all humane understanding, which yet in
all its hugeness falls away, and sinks into the abyss as it were of nothing, in
comparison of its Creator; who if it had been conformable to his free purpose,
and the most absolute counsels of his wisdom, could in the very twinkling of
an eye, have as infinitely exceeded this his mighty work, as that does surpass
and exceed an invisible atome, which by a perpetual division is even ready to
pass into nothing.

Conclude then, what kind of disposition and affection thy soul ought to bear
toward God: whether thou comparest the excellent infinity of his nature to thy
self, but a contemptible part of his meanest work; or that thou do
contemplate the force and height of his wisdom, piercing and passing through
what is deepest in creatures; or that thou labourest to weigh, and adore, the
most perfect and holy ways of his bounty: lest thou be included in the
damnation of that blindness of men, who knowing God, do notgive unto him
honor and glory.

2. Meditation. Of the Fall of the Angels.
1. COnsider how, when God had placed innumerable armies of celestial Spirits
in the highest part of his admirable Fabric, of which every one, even to the
very last, in natural excellency, and fullness of Being, exceeded the whole
material Sphere of Creatures; and that besides all this, they were elevated by
supernatural gifts to a conversation and acquaintance with God himself:
nevertheless, whereas a main multitude of them, proud of that beauty which was
given them, forgot their Creator, and took final content in themselves; he in
the twinkling of an eye plucked them down, all fettered in the cables of hell,
and for ever shut them up in the lowest and basest dungeons of corporeal
putrefaction, and by an irrevocable sentence, deputed them to intolerable and
eternal punishments, without any the least hope of pardon, and this for one
only sin, committed in a moment. So that those princes and powers of the
Heavens, and commanders of the Universe, through obstinacy of sinning, became
haunters of darkness, and ugly creatures, more weak and unworthy then the most
contemptible man alive.

Conclude; if God would not spare so excellent a nature, and the very prime
grace of his world, and work, but in a most severe and eternal judgment,
changed it into so deformed a vileness, for having committed but one sin; what
hope is there left for thee, a contemptible slave of flesh and blood, if for
the love of dung and mud thou shall despise thy Creator, and cleave to sin?
Whilst it is permitted, whilst thou have time, shake off thy drowsinesse, and
fear, and pacify that Lord, who is jealous of his honor.

3. Meditation. Of the Creation of Man.
1. COnsider, how that God, when he had built up the admirably cunning
Architecture of the corporeal World, at length formed thy Parents, and in them
thy self, as a final end of so fair a work. The body he fitted out of the
common Elements with a more then usual comeliness: deprived indeed of such
natural fences and assistance, wherewith other creatures are born; but of so
great use and service, that it might well stir up the envy of the rest of the
creatures, every one in their own kind, whether we respect its beauty,
commodity, or pleasure.

2. Consider besides, how profusely he bestowed all those things which are
round about us upon man; how the East unto the West, the South unto the North,
as if they were Villages depending upon a great City, do expose one to the
other their native commodities in a full market. The vast depths of the Sea
unknown to man, cannot secure the Fishes; no more then the huge spaces of the
sp eading unequal can protect the flying Foul: the strange profundity of earth
and waters, heaped upon them, preserves not those Gems and Metals which are hid
within their bowels. Look about thee, and see how the whole world, as great as
it is, does serve thee by proportionate particles of it self.

3 Add now unto these, the glorious day, and the beautiful night, the
interchangeable course and season of the year, and times, which are chained
together for thy use, with a more strict and severe bondage, then if they
advanced, or made their stops only at thy beck and commanding pleasure.

4 But above all things, ponder well the commanding soul, in whose eye the
rest, though so great, are but base and trivial, how with a never-resting
motion it tends, and grasps at the Crown and Fountain of all things, and
leaving whatsoever is besides at such a despicable distance as cannot be
imagined, reposeth in him alone, who is to this our Universe, an unfathomable
and incomprehensible Universe.

Conclude; if what thou art, thou have received; what ever thou art, must be
returned back to him again. If thou have received the service of all things
about thee, through all, and in all, his will alone is to be observed. If those
things whereof thou can not reach the knowledge, by his command do attend
upon thee; whatsoever is under the power of thy understanding, let it serve
him. And lastly, if thou art created less then he alone, do not through a
degenerate baseness, suffer any creature to have dominion over any of thy
affections.

4. Meditation. Of original Justice.
1. COnsider; whereas the way by nature appointed to commence to Beatitude was
obscure, hard and encumbered, both by reason of the senses giddiness, wandering
rather any way, then keeping to the right; as also, through the weakness of
the understanding running astray into errors, labyrinths, and mazes without
end; as likewise, through the yoking of the will with flesh and blood, and
plunging in the same; and that few, or none at all, did seem able to force a
way through; lastly, the commensuration of our perfect good, compared to the
poverty of our meannesse, was such, that even in possession it might be
neglected by a perverse and illtainted affection: Goodness it self was not
satisfied, until he cast into the new-created soul seeds of his very self in
the native vastness, and made it fruitful with the Divinity it self, that it
might germinate and spring forth into the proper and natural possession of it
self, which should captivate and swell up all the capacity of affection with an
overflowing fullness, accomplish an immediate access for us unto him, by an
uninterrupted adhesion of Faith, Hope, and Charity, and procure a joyful and
pleasant way to Bliss, both by intellectual, and temporal successefulnesse.

2. Add, the brooks of grace, which were derived upon the servile powers of
the soul; the discourse guarded, that it might not any ways fail; the motions
of the unruly and floating sensuality made gentle, and pacified; the ruins of
the decaying body prevented; and the journey of both portions made smooth to
pass unto Eternity.

3. What need is there to mention the blessed aspect of the rest of the world,
the tractable condition of beasts, and the bounty and pronenesse of the earth
to be manured, inviting man to command its obedience?

4. Wonder at the ministeries of celestial Spirits, and those Princes of
concealed glory being sent to take the charge of thee, who are not only thy
companions, but in a manner servants for thy profit.

Conclude, that how much thou art less then all the mercies of God, pouring
himself out beyond that which thy nature demands, beyond his own Ordinance
and appointment; so much, if thou will be grateful, thou ought to erect thy
self above thy self, and what thou art able: and chiefly remember, that
whatsoever true goodness is in thee, it is all above thee. Be wary, lest
forgetful, thou arrogatest any thing to thy self, or esteem thy self any
thing, or judge any man, or undertake to do any thing of thy self, being
mindful of thy own poverty, and the divine greatness.

5. Meditation. Of the Fall of Man.
1. COnsider, how our want of Spirit did cast us forth with confusion, out of
that eminent height of Glory wherein God had placed us. He gave unto Adam a
helper, in whom he should have loved Gods and his own similitude; but he,
through a foolish concupiscence, and sensual, became a deserter of the divine
commandment, and betrayed himself to banishment, and perpetual miseries, with
so many, and such infinite ages of his posterity.

2. Consider, how death is born with us; and that the forerunners of it are in
a manner worse then death it self, diseases, griefs, and afflictions daily
pressing themselves upon us; wrapped up in ignorance, as in the clouts of our
Infancy, in the very noonday of our actions we grope and are amazed, we are
hurried into precipices of all kinds, with an unbridled and stormy affection,
being neither able to obtain, nor so much as acknowledge truth and felicity,
which lies enticing us even at our very feet, until the short day of this
mortal light being suddenly finished, we are cast forth in a full flood into
an eternal night of unspeakable mischief.

3. Where are now the heads of those Monarchs and Emperors, who made the world
to tremble? Where are those martial armies of mighty Conquerours? Where are
the cunning and crafty fetches of State Politicians? Where are those soaring
wits of Philosophers, which comprehended the secrets of Heaven and Earth? Where
are those admirable works of Artificers, that have proved nothing impossible
for industry to perform? Where is the vigorous persuasion of Orators, or the
alluring sweetness of Poets? Through the morsel of one apple, for the
pleasure of a moment, being entangled in the boggs of Hell, they live, and are
lusty only to torment themselves.

Conclude, in how great humility and care we must live, in the expectation of
so strict an account of Justice, and so many dangers, in which whole ages of
people have been shipwracked, and cast headlong into the bottomless depth of
eternal perdition.

6. Meditation. Of Sin.
1. COnsider, that a sin is committed as often as the soul is drawn away by an
affection of any thing from the desire of that which is its true good, unto
which it is essentially and naturally inclined.

2. Sin therefore, as much as it has from sinfulness, is contrary to Nature;
as heat is an enemy to water: it is a disease of the soul, and weakens it in
the operations which are connaturall unto it; it is a blemish, deforming her
beauty.

3. Again, sithence reason was given to us as a Governesse, and aims at
nothing else then what is absolutely best to be done, all things being
considered; it is necessary that he who runs astray from it by sin, does by so
doing fall into mischiefs; and by how much thesin is more grievous, by so much
are the mischiefs more grievous into which he falls.

4. Now because the desire of that which is according to reason is
fundamental, and in a manner established in the soul, and therefore cannot be
extinguished; it is necessary, that the soul of a sinner remain divided against
it self, always wavering and inconstant.

5. Moreover, whereas this desire is in that part of the soul which knows it
self, and follows her own motions; it is necessary that the life of a sinner be
subject to continual pains, griefs and miseries, because that something
always happens contrary to the mind and appetite.

6. Lastly, since whatsoever thing besides does therefore breed torment,
because it produces an ill affection, that is, grief; but sin is intrinsecally
the worst of affections; it is therefore necessary, that among all mischiefs
sin is the most singular and chief.

Conclude, how horrible and grievous the mischief is, in which thou and the
world art drowned through Adams sin. Arise therefore up with thy whole
strength, and free thy self with the utmost endeavors of thy soul.

7. Meditation. The effects of Sin.
1. COnsider, how many and how gt mischiefs sin has brought upon mankind, in
all parts both of the body and soul: what a gross darkness it has brought
upon the understanding: so that in natural things, what the world is, and the
celestial globes, what the constitution of the earth is, upon which we tread,
very few know any thing that is worth the knowledge. But concerning God and the
Intelligences, which have no bodies, besides those things which are taught us
by faith, we believe mere dreams.

2. What should I speak, how wholly ignorant we are of humane actions, and what
belongs to our very selves? What is past, we hear not; that which is to come,
we are by no means able to comprehend; those very things which are present,
which we our selves touch, and which in some fashion compel us not to be
ignorant of them, we notwithstanding penetrate them not. No man can tell what
he knows, nor whereof he is ignorant, how able, or how weak: what will not an
undertaker promise, being in very deed of himself able to bring nothing to
perfection?

3. Now if we but look upon the miseries of the body; From whence arise so many
strifes and contentions, and such losses of the goods of Fortune, but sometimes
through negligence, and at other times through rashness or overmuch
covetousness? From whence are so many wars and slaughters, and the threads of
so many men's lives cut asunder in one day? From whence are so many become
maimed, and creeples, ^ffected by mutual wounds? From whence are the swarms of
so many of the rest of diseases; whereof some are common and natural? This man
gets a Fever by his intemperancy, another a Pleurisy by his immoderate
labor: besides particular torments of the intralls appropriate to particular
vices; the Dropsy or the Gout through too much drinking; the venereall
Infection, or the running of the reins, which pursue impure lusts. How great a
part of Mankind are entangled in these calamities? and their contagion spares
not even such as are most innocent.

Conclude with an acknowledgement of, what a strange monster it is that
encompasseth thee: cry out, and roar at the sight of it, and with the whole
extent of thy power labor to shake off all encumbrances, and free thy self,
and thine.

8. Meditation. Of Death.
1. COnsider, how the last end of the foresaid effects of sin is death, which
in one moment, in the very twinkling of an eye, ravisheth away all that which
in the whole course of thy life was most amiable, and with which thou were most
acquainted; as the food and delights of thy taste, the vanities of thy
garments, the curiosities of thy eyes and ears, the pleasing inticements of
smell and touch, thy Palaces, Farms, Honors, Dignities, Power, Friends, Wife,
Children, the body it self, and all the bodies interior affections: so that
there remains to thy self thy soul alone, and that all naked, which before thou
did hardly take notice of by some obscure reflection.

2. Which soul moreover is wearied with the weight of terrene affections, and
chained with corporeal phantasmes, trembling with the ignorance of it self,
and of such things as are presently to come upon it, astonished with the
unknown account of life, torn away by violence from the embracement of the
body, ignorant of all things, and fearing the worst.

3. To all this is joined the extreme torment of that sad hour: for if the
loss of our liberty or substance, if the departure for a few days from the
place of our friends or their company, if the extension or cramp of the
sinews, if the dissolution of any sensitive particle causes such intolerable
griefs, that the greatness of the sense of it does sometimes take away sense
it self: of what a strange nature will that hour be, when bitter death at once
shall divide us from all these, without any the least hope of returning.

4. Add, what will make that hour more grievous, the love of that which we
must loose, the despair of recovery, the foul conscience of the sins we have
committed, and the horror of future punishments.

5. But that which is of exceeding terror, is, that no hour or moment of our
life is free from death: in the morning who can promise to himself to see the
evening, or at the evening who can promise himself the next morning? A cup of
water, a morsel of meat, the biting of some beast, an intemperate exercise,
and some things by the only fight of them do break asunder the brittle thread
of our life. We are the scorn of all chances; the slip of a foot, the error of
a hand, a stone falling down, and infinite other accidents do force us from our
lives.

Conclude, that sin is abolished by a just fear of death, acknowledge it to be
the cause of all thy miseries, and that the only remedy is to abstain from it,
and continually to kill it in thy body.

9. Meditation. Of a damned Soul.
1. COnsider, a Soul oppressed with terrene and corporeal affections when it
is separated from the body, with what horrible pains and miseries it is
entangled and afflicted.

First of all, because it is in no manner able to obtain those things which it
pursues with her chief affection; honors, for example, pleasures and the like,
the time for the enjoying whereof is now past.

2. Besides, she is tormented with her desires, which are contrary, and
fighting among themselves, when as one of the contraries which she coveteth
cannot be had, nor consist with the other.

3. Besides, that all these desires combat, and mortally disagree with that
inbred appetite of good according to reason, which she carries with her in her
very substance, the most vehement above all her desires, and never possibly to
be rooted out.

4. Furthermore, that it cannot possibly but see the greatness of that which
is true beatitude, both according to her nature, and grace likewise; which are
all lost, and to be despaired of: nor yet can it despise it when it is seen.

5. Add to these, that infinite fuel of envy and impatience, to see the
glory of them who waged the same war with them in this life, with like, or
perchance worse conditions, yet now enjoy eternal felicity.

6. On the contrary side, she cannot be ignorant of the vanity of those
vilegoods, which the soul has preferred before bliss; which being most base,
flying away for all eternity, and irrecoverable, forsake her still most eagerly
gaping after them; yet she, transported toward them with the whole activity
and violence of a free soul, with a greater force then what is heavy descends,
then fire burns, or the Sun runs the ring of his circumference, is without
restraint perpetually pined and maugred.

7. And which is the grievousest thing of all, the fleeting passage of time
being over once, and ever, with an unchangeable and unvaried activity, roaring
it cries out, and ever shall cry; nor shall be able to fail or die, being
insufferable, and execrable to her self, to heaven, to Saints, to the damned
also, and all creatures besides; being become an eternal monument of the
Divine anger, and of a creatures baseness.

10. Meditation. The torments of a damned Body.
1. COnsider, that since all grief and malady of the Body, proceeds out of the
strength and activity of the Soul, it is necessarily consequent, that the very
sufferings of the body shall be infinitely more vehement after its
resurrection, when as the soul being free from the necessity of a body, does
act her operations by her full self; and the body being altogether subject to
the same soul, without any mixture of contrary, or repugnance, without measure
does receive the impressions of the soul, by the whole capacity of the subject,
how great soever it be.

2. Again, the fantasy will then be infinitely more powerful to create
strange and most fearful images, which will fill and overwhelm the man with an
instant terror, and anguish most presentiall, and round besieging, not
concerning some one object only, but together about all those objects which
with abomination it detesteth. The appetite also, like to a kind of infinite
Ocean, will overflow with a deluge of unbridled motions, beyond all imagination.

3. Ponder now seriously in thy soul the miserable pains of the Gout, Colic,
Stone, and all other diseases, the distension and convulsion of the nerves and
sinews, and whatsoever torments the mischievous cunning of cruel tyranny has
found out: and suppose them all to be applied to thy whole body, and to every
particle of the same, chiefly to those wherein thou have been ungrateful to
God, and heaped up the treasure of Gods wrath; and yet be certain, in all thy
deepest Meditations, thou art far short of the truth of things, nor can once
imagine what horrible torments shall thoroughly pierce, and settle in a damned
body.

4. Contemplate further the vexing power of the eternal fire, and above other
miseries, the horrid presence and behavior of the most hideous ministers of
the divine punishment.

Conclude, whether the experiment of such an eternity can please thee: remember
in what continual danger of the same thou do live; thy own actions, and very
light occasions are driving thee on, and drawing thee into it, unless thou
beware.

11. Meditation. The condition of Adams Posterity after his Fall.
1. COnsider, how notwithstanding that most heavy punishment, whereby all
mankind was banished out of the delights of Paradise, and the unhappy memory
which Adam and Eve did inculcate continually to their children, both of the
happiness which they had lost, and what they did in the present suffer; the
first parents of mankind were scarce dead, when as all their posterity, without
order and shame, rebelled against God, and Nature, so much, that of infinite
thousands of them, whereunto they were increased, there was scarce one just man
found, upon whom the mercy of God might extend it self, without an injury
committed against his Justice: for the Senses infected with original
corruption, and thereby taken up with exterior Objects, did not permit the
soul to return to internal things, and the consideration of her self; and the
forcible necessities of hunger, thirst, cold, and such like accidents, known by
experience, by use, and continual custom, did sooner ensnare the soul with
pernicious affections, then they could by ripeness of years, and reason, take a
just care of themselves.

2. Presently, the example of the Parents leading to worldly appetites,
appeared unto the children a sufficient guide and authority. Thus a forerunning
deluge of iniquity, ushered in those waters, that overwhelmed the whole world;
a dreadful monument of the misery of sin.

3. And yet notwithstanding all this, men were not herewith admonished,
although the witnesses of so grievous a punishment remained still a live, but
were deservedly dispersed for their pride; and a part, through a total
forgetfulness of the natural light of reason, deserved to be exterminated with
fire and brimstone, not one native inhabitant of a great Region, being found
worthy of mercy.

Conclude, what grace and favor has been shown to thee by God, who of his only
bounty has drawn thee forth out of so universal and contagious a mischief,
and the causes of so great a misery.

12. Meditation. Of Gods Mercy to the Jews.
1. COnsider, how that God, when he had declared by experience, that malice was
so deeply rooted in man, that it was in vain to seek to keep him within bounds
with examples of severity, and that the knowledge of God did degenerate into
gross superstitions, and that by this means the seeds of virtue did quickly
degenerate into horrid barbarism; he resolved to discover in the second place,
if knowledge were not wanting, whether the appetite would rest quietly under
the conduct of reason, and thereupon made choice of one man, and constantly
instructed him with benefits, for three generations, establishing them in his
love, and surcharging them with promises; and when this seemed to be done
abundantly, he sent his heirs into Egypt, where they suddenly increased into a
vast Nation.

2. And now they were no less then six hundred thousand fighting men, when he
sent to them a Lawgiver with prodigies and wonders, such as no memory of man
did ever see the like: and further, himself pronounced a Law with his own
mouth, before the whole people, in terror and exceeding majesty, and did
labor to imprint it in their hearts and memories, both with benefits and
threats, with punishment of the Egyptians, and those Nations which he
overthrew, and utterly rooted out in their sight; as also with their own
sufferings, whom, in forty years, their children being placed in their
steads, he changed, that there might not remain among them such as should
remember the Egyptian impurities; by giving them miraculously their meat and
drink, their garments, and their victories, a moderate temperature being given
night and day, by a cloud and fire, exceeding promises of his protection being
likewise assured to them for the future, if they would but observe his Law.

1. Conclude, in admiring the all-bounty of God, and his care in cultivating
mankind, how he does as it were labor about it.

2. Again, conclude, how great the misery of our kind is, how deeply rooted,
that it is not sufficient to be learned, nor to know the Law of God; but the
greatest labor is to manage the appetite. What pains must thou take, that by
continual Meditation thou may renew the memory with the thoughts of our
Christian Profession, and deeply imprint it, urging the affection to remain!
For what chanced to all these people, if thou do but mark it, thou shall also
observe the same to be in effect acted in thy self.

13. Meditation. Of Gods continued mercy, and Man's misery.
1. COnsider, how God brought the Nation of the Jews, a Law being given unto
them, into a Country which flowed with milk and honey. How he established
their political government with his own hand, in which every one should eat of
his own Vine, and rest under his own Fig Tree; where there should be no
exactour, no molester among them. He instituted also so many Festival days,
years, and times, and such ceremonies, that by reason of them it might seem
impossible to have fallen from the fear of the Divinity.

2. All which notwithstanding, they fell away, and revolted from God, and were
according to the quality and degree of their offense, chastised by those
Nations which bordered upon them: and when they returned to God, Commanders
were given them to wage their wars, and minister justice, which were neither
perpetual, nor very eminent: but when their revolts, and fallings from God
became more frequent, and that their scourges were thereupon more grievous,
which they would not acknowledge to be due unto their crimes, but attributed
them to the order of their Commonwealth, which had yet been instituted by the
Divinity it self; Kings were granted, both David most valiant in war, and
Solomon most wise in peace; under whom as they lived in greater glory, so also
in greater misery, being famous in war, but miserable; being glorious in
peace, but slavish; reaping out of their own devises, vain ostentations in lieu
of the real blessings of peace, abundance, and justice.

3. Presently, by reason of their state and condition, ten Tribes fell to
idolatry, and the other two followed after, infected with their contagion:
neither did the Prophets sent by God, with God his own eloquence and wonders,
profit any thing; but necessary it was they should be cast forth to the
Assyrians and Babylon.

4. Not withstanding, God brought them back again repentant, in a small number,
and as it were for the last remedy subjected them to the temporal rule of
Priests and Scribes, expecting in a manner, that themselves would have been
kept in their duties by the bait of temporal honor, and that at least for the
worlds sake, they should have retained the common people in the true service of
God. And when they also looked only upon temporal things, he raised up the
Pharisees, and other Regulars, with the show of abstinence from worldly
commodities, whom yet ambition and avarice did quickly blind and overthrow.

Conclude, that there was nothing more behoving, or that God in a manner could
have done to his Vineyard. See what a care is necessarily to be had to thy
soul, and how nothing is sufficient without the special assistance of God
within thee. Remember that humility and earnest prayer unto God, with
watchfulness, and continual care, and labor, is to be joined together; and
that it is never fit for thee to think thou have done enough, or that thou art
secure, whether thou art sollicitous for thy self alone, or that the charge of
others be committed to thee.

14. Meditation. Of Gods merciful Redemption.
1. COnsider, how God, when other remedies did fail, was forced to the
extremity of all bounty; so that he communicated the bounty of his very self,
really and identificatively uniting the selfsame in one Person with the humane
nature: for neither had the all-goodnesse satisfied it self, if it had been
never so freely bestowed by participation, when as it might be done
essentially, and entitatively; nor when it saw humane nature by its misery
thrown down into such a state, as it seemed therefore to deserve so great a
commiseration and pity, because no other remedy could be sufficient, could
very goodness contain it self, but that it must spring forth, where there was
a possibility to be good.

2. Add moreover, that the order of the rest of the works of the Divine
wisdom did require, that among the second causes, there should be some firm
principle of those qualities, which it caused perpetually and constantly to
abide in humane nature: but of Grace, and like supernatural gifts, seeing they
are participations of the Divine Essence according to its properties, there was
found no root, or steadfast foundation out of the Divine Essence to perpetuate
those; therefore in humane nature by a connaturall root, it was necessary that
God should become Man.

3. But otherwise also, when as the order of Grace was in such manner to exceed
inferior substances, as to equal them amongst themselves, and sometimes to
exalt the lower above the higher; there was no principal cause, nor
sufficiently authorizing so great an innovation, besides God himself the
Creator of all things.

4. And moreover, to receive an alien nature to his own, without a confusion of
those natures, was the only work of existency subsisting, and by consequence
not of a received or restrained being.

5. What should we say moreover, but that the master and teacher of the secrets
of the divine knowledge and wisdom, could not be, but he that did comprehend
them, and to exact of a reasonable creature, accustomed to the evidence of
axioms, and demonstrations, a belief unmovable, must be of such an one, whose
authority should be more unchangeable, then nature it self, and both the one
and the other proper to God alone?

6. Besides, this Economy of the world, was to be governed and perfected by
the ministeries of Angels, both of good, and bad, and an innovation of the
order of the Universe to be added where it was needful; and therefore without
doubt the work proper to the Commander of this great Universe, and the absolute
Lord both of corporeal and intellectual substances.

7. Lastly, the load of sin by a mixture of supernaturalls, with the weight of
the Deity added unto it, was increased so immensely, that virtue, had it not
been ennobled by the Person of God added to it, would not have been able to
overmatch it.

15. Meditation. How God became Man.
1. COnsider, how God vouchsafed to become Man, not declining his weakness and
infirmity; how he underwent hunger and thirst, and the like maladies of nature,
not refusing pains and griefs inflicted from without, not calumnles nor
reproaches, not contempt nor infamy, neither last of all the inbred war of
the sensitive appetite against reason, being in an agony through trembling and
fear, through sadness and weariness.

2. Chiefly, because indeed all these things are not evils, nor disagreeing to
the Divine nature, since they are the works of his hands, and he cannot hate
any thing which he has made: again, because they could not reach to the Deity,
although they pressed upon God in his humanity. But as the Sun in the
dunghill, and God, who is in hell by his essence, is neither defiled, nor
ofless account, by reason of the filthiness and horror of the place: So in
like manner does the Godhead neither suffer pains nor contempt, through the
miseries of the humanity, although in a more sublime manner united to it.

3. Add to these, that all things which happened unto Christ were in very deed
main good things, and most of all to be desired: For as to a Musician, to sing,
and to a Mathematician, to learn or teach; so is it also exceeding good, and
delightful for a virtuous man to exercise himself in the substance of virtue.
Now God by election and virtue, put himself upon all actions and passions.

4. Besides that, he descended to present himself a Master most perfect, and
therefore to give real examples of that whereunto his words did invite; and to
leave for us the way of true vertuetrod forth by his own footsteps.

Conclude, in like manner, to esteem none of those things, which reason and
order persuade to be done, to be too low, or un worthy of thy person,
especially if thou art in office, and perceivest some that are under thee slow
in performing their duties: be mindful that it is thy part, with a helpful
hand, by thy own example, to pluck the scruples of vain Opinions out of the
paths of them that are less wise.

16. Meditation. Of the Preparation for the coming of our Savior.
1. COnsider, that God to be Man is a work of so great excellency, that
whatsoever is in the world besides is not undeservedly directed to this end.
For this was created the Heaven, and Earth, and Seas, the Sun and Stars, the
myriads of Angels, and the infinity of Men, eternized by mortality never
failing to be repaired, and whatsoever is contained in these, or belongs unto
them.

2. For this end was permitted the rupture of the Celestial Hierarchies, by
the rebellion of no mean part of them, and that all ourstock was to be damned
in one lump.

3. For this the whole Earth, by the degrees of the fore-running Monarchies,
was collected to advance the Roman greatness, that the Trumpet of the Gospel
might reach through all the world, and rouse them up, as it were with one
sounding, when it should rore out from the tops of the Roman hills. For
although the Romans gained but a small part of the world with their Armies, yet
they had made a passage into all the rest of the Nations of the Earth, where
they had no command, by their covetousness and luxury.

4. For whenas the Grecian wits were made to serve the Roman power, a crafty
and outrageous lewdness left nothing unattempted, which might corrupt the
manners of men. Then were the wicked superstitions of the whole world gathered
together, and practiced; whole ages spent in the prodigal effusion of civil,
and ackinded blood; a Traytorous apprehension of Innocents; a violent robbing
of guests and friends; prodigious lusts; new kinds of cruelty; and whatsoever
was most wicked, the same was most in honor and price.

5. The Family of Abraham, Gods wisdom being in a manner consumed, with
providing of so many sorts of remedies, and his bounty in suffering their sins,
was in such a state, that a very few, but those the most chosen seeds of
Virtue, remained, which were to be dispersed into the rest of the world, and
there taking root and fructifying, were to leave that unhappy people abandoned,
and given up as desperate unto the power of darkness.

6. Moreover, the fame of the coming of the Messiah had already, both by
ancient and new Oracles, stirred up the expectation of the whole world. The
land of Jury, not only by the mouths of so many Prophets, by the Law and
Ceremonies; but also by the Acts of the Patriarchs, and by the turns of their
own Commonwealth, did prophecy it. The Sibylls, and the Druides, and the
answers forced from the Devils, promised the same grace; and the whole
compass of the world became such in Civil Orders, understanding, and
government, as might compel, in a fashion, the divine bounty to this sublime
work.

Conclude, how true a saying it is, that all is for the elect, and works for
their good: God has so ordained it, and it is thy fault if it be not so for
thee. Adore God made man, praise the wisdom of the Creator, acknowledge what
he has conferred by so great a bounty unto our stock, in Christ, and to us, if
we be his followers.

The end of the Meditations, of the Beginning and End of Man.
Of Christian Virtues.
1. Meditation. Of Faith.
COnsider, thatwhereas God is Truth it self, by his very own Essence, and not
by any other thing, it is more impossible for him to be deceived, then for fire
to be cold; and to deceive, then for fire to cool: whatsoever therefore is said
by him, the same is more certain, and necessarily true, then that which is seen
by sense, or demonstrated by the understanding.

Conclude, when it is manifest that any thing is said by God, that it is
foolish to doubt of it, or to suppose any reasons, though they seem never so
evident, can have any truth in them, or to think them to be any other then
deceitful.

2. Meditation. Of the Church.
1. COnsider, how absurd a thing it is for God to give a Law, or a Doctrine,
and not to leave a means how those whom he would have to know and observe it,
should come to it; but more especially whereas Christ our Lord taught i^ with
so much labor and grief.

2. Again consider, that the testimony of the Catholic Church is more then
humane: For that so many Congregations of men, divided by such distance of
places, and long succession of times, among so many changes of State, even to
this day, should agree that these very Articles were delivered unto them by
Christ and his Apostles, could not be brought to pass by any humane force.

3. In like manner, whereas in the same Church there was, and ever shall be,
men flourishing in all Sciences and Arts; that this Doctrine notwithstanding,
was never found contrary to any humane Science, Art, or either profit or
pleasure, it could not proceed from the wit or invention of man.

4. That the same Doctrine, when as it contains so many Tenets, and they
opposite to those disordinate affections by which men are enslaved, and of
which a reason can no ways be given out of their proper principles, and yet
grew up in no age by arms, or by force, and subdued men both wise and
voluptuous; and that for so many ages it has possessed so large a kingdom,
exceeds the industry and force of man.

5. Lastly, that in all Ages there should be continual miracles, (if there be
any belief to be given to humane History) and that these should be in this
Church, and in her alone; it could only be the work of God.

Conclude, when thou understandest that the Catholic Church does testify,
that she received some Article from God by a succession of Doctors, to behave
thy self in the same manner, as if thou did hear the same from God thy self,
and that thou can not doubt, or admit any disputes concerning the same
Article, without prejudice of the Divine Truth.

3. Meditation. Of the Supremacy of the Sea of Rome.
1. COnsider that, as in the natural body of any living creature, it is
necessary one part should be constituted from whence life should be derived
into the rest, and which being corrupted, the rest also presently do fail: So
also we commonly see it practiced in the moral body. And this is the King in
his Kingdom, the Senate in an Aristocracy, and the General in an Army. The
very same has Christ our Lord done in the Church, having set the Roman among
the Churches, and the Successor of Saint Peter among the Pastors; whom he
confirmed with his own Prayer, and promise, that the rest might be strengthened
by him.

Conclude, that thou art not to expect that the whole Church should testify to
thee that it has received such a Truth from God, which thing is either
impossible, or very hard; but if the Seat of Peter teaches that it has
received any thing of Christ, delivered to her by his hands, do thou captive
thy understanding, and doubt not at all, but that Jesus Christ spoke it:
dispute nothing, nor doubt any thing; although thy fortunes, although thy body,
and thy life were to be delivered up for it.

4. Meditation. Of Gods goodness.
1. COnsider, that God is goodness it self, that is to say, a collection of all
Goods which can be desired, or wherein we can possibly delight. For certain it
is, that whatsoever is good cannot be estranged from goodness: as also, nothing
that is not good can possibly be found in goodness it self.

2. That he is an infinite one, since nothing that is not good can be in it, by
which it might receive a bound or limitation. A greater good therefore, then
which can be either loved, or desired by us as it deserves to be: And that the
possession, and fruition of this God, is promised to us by himself; and unless
we fail our selves, shall be perfected by him.

Conclude therefore, with what vehemence of affection, what love, what fervor,
we ought to be transported toward him. How we ought to esteem nothing, in
comparison of him. How we ought to think of nothing else, endeavor nothing
else, but that we may arrive at this good: to pursue that with all our soul,
with all our strength: and when we shall thoroughly perceive our own weakness,
and that we desire it nothing in such manner as is fit, how ought we to
languish, and to pine away in the pursuit of it?

5. Meditation. Of Hope.
1. COnsider, that since it is the part of goodness to make good, as it is of
heat to warm, and that God is very goodness it self; it can in no wise fall
out, but that he, wheresoever, and whenever any good can be done, should will
it, with a kind of necessity of his goodness; and by how much the greater the
good is which is to be performed, with so much the greater inclination, and
fervor, be carried unto it, and that by so much the more it should suffice to
obtain it, only not to resist it. Wherefore so that thou covetest the chief
good; do but desire it ardently, and make thy self capable of it by not
interposing the obstacle of sin, and certainly thou shall obtain what thou
wishest for.

Conclude, that thou will extend thy self with thy whole soul, as to a thing
certain, and not to be doubted of; for a heart that fluctuates and wavers
toward its good, is displeasing to God. Do not be terrified with any
difficulty whatsoever, being certain, by how much greater the difficulty is, by
so much the more shall thou find God ready to assist thee, against whom nothing
can resist: only love, and be confident; the rest remit unto him, who is as it
were compelled with as great an inclination to do thee good, as he himself is
his own goodness.

6. Meditation. Of Charity.
1. COnsider, that we love them by compulsion of Nature, in whom we perceive
those virtues, which either our selves have, or which we do wish we had; and
the greater those virtues are which reside in those whom we love, and by how
much they are more ingrafted in them, so much also is the love greater, and
stronger which is procreated in us.

2. See therefore how that whatsoever thou can desire, the same is to be
found in God, in all its kind more noble then in any creature. Do thou desi e
knowledge? he is all wisdom. Fortitude? he is all power. Nobility? he is the
Fountain and Origin of all being. Pleasure? he is his own; that is to say, the
living and perfect fruition of all good. If you desire to know how all these
are in him, they are all his very substance, and his substance is his very
being, or to be: and as being it self cannot but be; so impossible is it, that
God should be destitute of any one of these perfections.

Conclude, with what hearty affection God is to be beloved, and blush at thy
self, to see, how him whom once thou did view behaving himself in a gallant
manner; yea, one whom thou did never see, but only heardest him praised, by
one to whom thou gave credit, or of whom thou have read in History after his
death; nay, and I may add also, even such a man whom thou certainly know
never to have been at all, nor to have done any of those things which thou
admirest, some fabulous person, which thou read of in books, or beholdest
only acted upon a Theater; and yet thou so love him, as to afford him high
affection, praising his deeds, fearing his dangers, rejoicing in his
prosperity, and weeping at his misery. But that God, whom thou know to be
such by reason, and a sure Faith, thou should love so seldom, so coldly,
with so great difficulty, and yet notwithstanding, applaud thy self as if thou
had done well.

7. Meditation. Of Gods Love to Man.
1. COnsider, that nothing is more natural, more reasonable, more due, then
that he who loves, should be beloved again: but to Gods love, whether in
affection or effect, that is to say, in the communication of himself, or his
goods, there is not any thing comparable.

2. For his affections, they are as great as himself, since whatsoever he
applies himself to love, he embraces it with all himself, and with all the
whole necessity of his Essence. His love is also most free in the beginning of
his affection, seeing we as then were nothing, nor could it any ways be
thought wherein we could be profitable to him. And in fine, that very love in
him, was the vigor, the operation, and the communication of those goods which
we possess.

3. Again, it was he who bestowed upon us all good, not one excepted. First of
all, he made us his image and likeness: that as he is the very Fountain and
universal state of all Being; so we by our understanding, should be a kind of
Storehouse, and Compendium of all Being too. As he, by his will and good
pleasure, absolutely governs all things; so we also should use all external
things for our own profit, the most holy Virgin his Mother not excepted; that
the Elements, and their Inhabitants, the Heavens, and the holy Spirits that
govern them, should serve us, and that nothing should hurt our souls, in which
part we are amiable, but our selves; and our selves ought not, although the
whole world, and whatsoever is in it should fall away to nothing.

4. Last of all, he was in no wise sparing of himself; but as the Church sings
with Saint Thomas, In birth, he made himself our dear.
Eating, he gave himself for cheer.
In death, himself our Ransom is:
And reigning he himself's our bliss.


5. Add moreover, that he did not bestow all these things in common, being
careless of thee, but he designed them for thee in person, pointing out thee by
name. Thee he did know, better then thou do thy self? Thee he loved; to thee
he communicated the riches of his goodness; to thee he made himself servant.

Conclude, that thy spirit ought to fall into an ecstasy as thou considerest
these things, and that the marrow of thy soul, and thy very life should breath
it self forth into flames, and violent throbs of love toward him that loves
thee so much.

8. Meditation. Of Love to our Neighbors.
1. COnsider, thy neighbor to be of the same nature as thy self, bearing
equally the image of God, alike capable of beatitude, and of all other goods,
and of God equally beloved; who, howsoever good, or great, the things be which
he possesses, thou art nothing the poorer, but rather the richer, if he use
them well; who in all likelihood the less of good he has, will be so much the
more hurtful to thee; who was also bestowed upon thee, that thou might do
him good, and in him worship, and love God, and seeing thou can not be
profitable to him in himself, thou might in some manner as it were
recompense his love, and bounty in a member of his; and by how much the more
thou shall be careful to profit him, by so much without all doubt thou shall
profit thy self.

1. Conclude, how many, and how great the obligations are, which thou have for
to love thy neighbor; that thou do boast in vain of love, if thou do not
love thy neighbor; how absurd a thing it is, to wish a mischief to him whom
thou can not hurt; and how far more absurd it is, to neglect and abuse the
occasion of salvation, and good which is granted to thee; but extremely most
absurd it is to hurt thy self, that thou may prejudice another.

2. Desire therefore, that thy neighbor may have all that is good, and more
heartily, the greater. If he uses some things amiss, yet do not envy him, but
wish him more, that by accession of good, he may be thereby taught to use the
other better. Above all things strive to render some of Gods benefits to him,
and by so doing, draw from him greater benefits toward thy self.

9. Meditation. Of our duty toward our Parents.
1. COnsider, that thy Parents were given unto thee, that by their means thou
should in the first place have all goods of nature, then the gifts of
discipline, aster this government, when thou were now able to dispose of thy
self, and last of all the goods of Fortune. Since therefore from them it is
that thou have all things that are good, see what thou can repay them that be
considerable.

2. Weigh moreover how that thou art a certain particle of them, cut off
naturally from them, and that thy obligation toward them is not grounded in
the abstracted consideration of reason, neither can any wise perish, as having
its foundation rooted in thy very substance. Thou art flesh of their flesh, and
bone of their bones.

3. Lastly, ponder how deservedly God promises long life to such as honor
their parents, because they that are ungrateful to those of whom they have
received life, do not deserve it: and that Christ our Lord did cast up, and
deliver the whole account of his life to be, that he might perform the will of
his Father.

Conclude, when as thou art not able to render what is due, thou remainest
always obliged to endeavor what thou art able. That neither any injury, nor
ill will of thy Parents ought at any time to provoke thee either to negligence,
or revenge. But if they are troublesome unto thee, endure it with patience, and
thou shall have a great reward: hold thy selfever ready to execute all good
offices toward them.

10. Meditation. The duties which we owe unto our Country.
1. COnsider, that the thing which is called thy Country, is a collection of
men, which beginning in thy self, by Parents, kindred, and alliance, is derived
unto familiars, friends, neighbors, fellow-citizens, and to all such as are
contained under the same political government. So that the good or bad of
them, does breed to thee, or thine, either thy profit or disprofit. See
therefore, that what benefit soever thou have received from thy Parents, those
same, and more, thy country has bestowed upon thee; and whatsoever obligation
thou have to thy parents, thy country makes a greater claim to it. Thou art a
part, thy country the whole. Thou art a subject, thy country superior.

2. Add moreover that what proportion there is between an infinite and a
finite, the same consideration is to be made of a thing in common, in relation
to the particular. Therefore the good of the community is esteemed as a divine
good, because it is accounted unlimited, both in time and number: but the
consideration of thy country unto thee, is as much as of all mankind, since it
is but by chance that thou have communication with any others beside.

3. Gather from hence, the piety, obedience, and reverence which it behooves
thee to bear toward thy country: if it be unjust toward thee, endure it; if
it persevereth, forget it, and study nevertheless to render all good for evil:
never seek revenge, but if it acts wickedly, remember it does not belong to
thee to punish it: be not brought about under any pretense to endeavor any
thing against it, but endure all with patience, knowing certainly, if it be ill
with that, it cannot be well wit^ thee: but chiefly confess thy utmo^^ care
that thou may be profitabl^ unto it, remembering that Christ ou^ Lord,
although he came for the salvation of all mankind, yet he scarce ever passed
the bounds of his own country, that is to say, the Nation of the Jews.

11. Meditation. Of Obedience.
1. COnsider, that whereas there is no other difference of a Law and the
command of a Superior, then that the Law proceeds without passion, and upon
serious advisement, but the superior with a more present efficacy, and less to
be contemned; who ever is subject to them, and neglects either the one or
other, he is guilty of the breach of the common welfare, for which purpose they
were ordained; he contradicts himself, since for the most part, the power is
approved by them that are to be ruled by it; he violates his own promise, in
that he promised to observe them, when he became one subject to them he
offers violence to the justice of his Superior, for if the Superior has
the right of commanding, he is manifestly unjust who does not obey him; and a
greater injustice it is, then that whereby the right of a private man is
infringed. He is obnoxious to Gods judgments, because he has not done as he
commanded, by reason he has contemned his vicegerent, because by an usurped
privilege, wherewith he has exempted himself de facto from man, he has
reserved and made himself obnoxious to Gods immediate judgment.

2. Lastly, he ought to give an account for every mischief arising out of his
Act, whether it be by a relaxation of government, or by scandal given to
others, or by offending Superiors, or by those punishments, which of
themselves, or by accident, are derived upon him. Nor doubt, but on the
contrary side, as great as these miseries are, so great, nay, far greater are
those goods which are reserved for those, that do observe the Laws and
prescripts of their Superiors.

Conclude, to esteem no law, nor command of thy Superior, as of light moment;
but with thy whole heart, with a ready and cheerful will, embrace and observe
even what shall seem hardest to thee.

12. Meditation. Of Obedience to Superiors.
1. Consider, how it is from thy Governors, and Superiors, that thou do
possess thy own in peace, justice, and commodity proportionable to thy state;
that thou can provide, and be helpful to thy self, and (if such be thy
condition) that being nothing solicitous of food, raiment, or other
necessaries, thou attendest only to what shall be for thy souls and bodies
increase and delight.

2. Consider moreover, that thy Governors are already perfect, no: having any
need of thee, who also if they would live, and attend only to themselves,
others would provide for them. That they be such, to whom thou can bring no
great good, nor profit, nor do any great mischief. In the mean time, they
omitting the care of their own, are solicitous for thee; for thee they labor,
it is thee that they esteem as one of their children, nor have any thing more
in their intention, then to make thee better then themselves.

3. Again, consider that they are wise men, of greater age, skill, and
experience, and know more what belongs unto their change then thou do: and
have many helps to find that out, which thou want. That the rewards of their
labors which they expect in this world, are late, and light, nor comparable to
their labors; and if they were great, since they proceed not from thee, they
do no ways diminish thy debt. That the account which they are to give unto
God, is heavy, since they must not only answer for themselves, but for thee
also, and thy actions. That the punishments are severe which are threatened
against those that do ill; and that in this life also, there is not a more
perilous action, then the government of men.

Conclude, to have a reverend and grateful mind always toward them, not to
judge of their actions rashly, but to embrace, or at least patiently endure
them, as proceeding for the most part out of their love toward thee. Lastly,
to endeavor thy self, that thou may be such, that they shall have no cause
to deal with thee, and govern thee oath wise then with love, and good will. If
any thing that is sharp, or not so virtuous as should be, proceeds from them,
to remember, that to suffer some discommodities, among many profits, is not
considerable; That if they do otherwise then well, we must pardon them as men,
but we must be indebted to them for whatsoever is well done, as to friends.

13. Meditation. Of Liberality and Gratitude.
1. COnsider, that it is a greater happiness (as our Lord himself witnesses)
to give, then to receive: therefore it is the part of a noble mind, if it be
compelled through the necessity of humane condition to receive any thing of
another, to be careful to restore it perfectly back again; but if he cannot,
yet to acknowledge it ingenuously, and to publish it abroad.

2. Gratitude also for a benefit received, does entice and draw forth a second,
if the benefactour bears a noble heart; but with him that is base, it
satisfies, and stifles clamorous complaints.

3. Again, there is not a reproach more odious, then that of a benefit received
with ingratitude; from whence it proceeds, that according to the imperial
constitution, a courtesy done might be revoked, if ingratitude were proved.

4. Moreover, God among other causes by which goods are to be acquired, has
placed the prayers of the poor, that, as it were out of the nature of the
thing, he would bless those, for whose prosperity the poor make supplication
to him. Therefore he that receives a benefit with obligation, or hopes of
prayers to be offered for the benefactour, is absolutely bound to pray for him;
and if he does it not, the mischiefs which shall happen to the benefactour will
be imputed to him.

Conclude, gifts are prudently to be asked, and accepted, to wit, when
necessity compels thee; when they are received, they are to be acknowledged
and commended; and if there be any thing wherein thou can profit thy
benefactour, it is to be done with diligence. This is the condition of
benefits, that if thou have done any, thou should esteem them as little: but
if thou have received them, esteem them as great. Last of all, when you can
return nothing else, endeavor in your prayers to God to obtain all good for
those that have conferred any benefit upon you, do it fervently, and earnestly;
and in the first place take care thy prayers may be such, as shall be to God
acceptable.

14. Meditation. Of Rash Judgment.
1. COnsider, how a judgment is called rash, when without sufficient ground
thou condemnest another of a crime: which to do, first of all is unjust, as
well because thou do occasion a prejudicial conceit, and hurtest the fame of
thy neighbor in thy self; as also, that by reason of such judgment, thou art
ready to treat him as a guilty person, if occasion offered it self.

2. It is also an act of imprudence, because it determines of a thing that is
hid, without any sufficient argument; and a token of a corrupt affection
concerning the same crime: for men who are innocent, esteem others as harmless
also; but those that are guilty, think all men like themselves.

3. It is also more often false, then true; for it is a thing manifest, that
the seeds of virtue are so fixed in man's nature, that for the most part they
cannot be rooted forth. Whence it was that when as Elaas thought himself alone,
there were seven thousand besides. So in Ninive also, there were 100000. of
innocent persons. Nay, for the most part all men, in a cause that imports not
their own interests, do embrace virtue.

4. Lastly, whosoever it is that sins, he is the bondsman of God, and it belongs
not to us to judge of him, but unto God; and therefore when as we judge another
man's slave, we make our selves obnoxicus to Gods judgments.

Conclude, to suspend thy judgment in a matter that is uncertain, and to i^
c^^e to think the best of every one. For every one is presumed to be good,
until the contrary be manifest: although because thou know not whether he
be good or bad, to expose thy self that he may do thee a mischief, be no part
of wisdom; but for every thing else to be ready to do good, to hear, and to
speak well of him.

15. Meditation. Of Detraction.
1. COnsider, that the Fame of Man, among all the goods of Fortune, if it be
not better then the good of Fortune, is a thing most precious, and highly to be
esteemed: And therefore that the injury of him who takes it away, is more
grievous then that of him who shall take away money.

2. Besides the damage is in a manner irreparable, as well, because it is hard
to a man for to contradict himself; as also, because the speech is scattered
among those whom thou know not, can not bring together again, nor will
believe thee although thou catest thy own saying.

3. Moreover, that whether thou speak without any intention of hurting, it is a
manifestation of a corrupt and wicked soul, to be delighted in the
commemoration of another sin; or that thou think the fame of thy neighbor
to be any obstacle to thee, it is the part of a base and narrow mind, to desire
to grow up more by another man's fault, then by thy own virtues.

4. Add to these, how many persons thou drawest along with thee, to be
companions in the mischief: because men for the most part do willingly
discourse of other men's faults, and scatter them abroad among themselves.

5. Nor think thy self excusable, if thou detract from any without any passion,
or sign of passion, but as it were out of commiseration; for the malice is so
much the more grievous, and it behoved thee to have taken so much the more
heed, in as much as thou were less subject to passion.

Conclude, to keep a door of circumstance before thy lips, and to speak nothing
of another without mature deliberation; since that every word draws afte it a
long train of sins. Hate therefore all detraction, and be not delighted with
the commiseration of detractours, which is to no avail.

16. Meditation. Of Slanderers.
1 COnsider, peace, and friendship to be certain public goods, because the
nature of them is to extend not to one alone, but to many. Add, that there is
no fruit more pleasant in man's life, then that of friendship, and that without
peace, man injoves nothing of his own in quiet, nor does any thing of that
which he possesses yield him profit.

2. Again, consider, that discord arising out of light beginnings, increases
without measure: for when as once an ill impression is made upon one or both
parties, all the others actions, though done with a good intention, are taken
in the worse part, and are themselves corrupted. To this may be added, that he
who sows discord creates mischief for himself, and his friends, who had a
good opinion of him; for had they not been his friends they would not have
afforded any credit to him concerning that other who should have been a friend.

Conclude, how deservedly a detracting whisperer, and his charming noise is
detestable to God and man, being an enemy of the divine Grace, and Nature it
self. Stop thy ears to those who speak ill of any one, but chiefly of thy
friends. Specially if thou have any thing against thy friend, carefully seek
the means, that without offense thou may reveal it to him; and thereby know
what he is able to say in defense of himself: and if thou find any calumny
imposed upon him, ever afterward beware of him, who wittingly and willingly
created it. Shun both him and his discourses, give no ear unto him, because
thou may be certain most heinous mischiefs by his means do hang over thee.

Of Virtues in relation to ones self.
17. Meditation. Of good Works.
1. COnsider, as it is the nature of heat to warm, so is it or good to do good;
wherefore by how much the more any one partakes of it, so much the more
ardently is it necessary he should be moved to act accordingly.

2. Again, consider, that profit is not to be looked after in doing good: for
if a brute beast perfects his actions agreeable to his nature, and that the
soul it self does perform the delightful operations of the senses, without any
further end; how unworthy a thing is it, that the same should not have a will
to follow those operations which are proper to her self, without regard of
profit?

3. Add, that by how much a reasonable soul is more noble then that of beasts,
by how much more efficacious, by how much more universal; by so much her
appetite and delight ought to be more vehement in goods that are connaturall to
her self, then in those that appertain to sense.

4. Besides, the life of him is most sweet, and exceeding pleasant: not alone
for the goodness it self of virtue; but also in that it makes the praises, and
congratulations of those that receive the benefit to be perpetual, that their
aspects and countenances are sweet, and cheerful, their vows, of happiness;
the encountering of men is on every side gracious; no sadness, nor repentance
for any thing committed: besides other infinite pleasures.

5. At last, it is the most ready way to honor, power, and wealth: because all
desire he should be exalted, from whom they expect both justice, and goodness;
every man willingly treats and deals with him; every man embraces him heartily
and freely, as faithful in all occasions; every man in his affairs puts
confidence in him.

Conclude, that thy perpetual study ought to be to do good to thy neighbor,
especially to such as are in necessity: and blush to think how a Prince
believed he had lost that day, wherein he had not bestowed some Act of Grace;
whereas thou art still seeking out of thy bounty some advance of profit for thy
self, neither art moved with the example of God himself.

18. Meditation. Of Government.
1. COnsider, how Offices were ordained by the institution both of God and Man
for the common good, and therefore a greater Charity is required of those that
are to be advanced to Offices, then of other private men; Christ our Lord
signifying this, when he said to Peter, Do thou love me more then these?

2. Again, consider, it is a work more then humane to govern men; whereupon
Princes are instiled with the Title of Gods. Moreover, since it is the
property of wisdom to dispose in order, to arrange and keep in order wise
men, is an affair of the highest, and mastering wisdom, and a work
approaching to God. And therefore ample honors and rewards in the sight of God
and men, are due, and to be given unto those that are placed in government, to
every one in his order.

3. Again, they are obliged, who are set in Office, to give an account for all
that evil, which through their negligence, shall chance to those who are under
their government and charge, their labors are to be more heavy, and more
continual, then other men's whatsoever. So that when there is any need, they
ought with their examples to tread out the path, where in their subjects should
follow, in whatsoever laborious, or contemptible exercise. Their faults also in
themselves are more grievous, and more exposed to view, nor can they by any
mean sly hid.

4. Besides these, the fault which in them appears but as light, draws after it
a chain of many and mighty mischiefs. And lastly, the punishment, and dishonor
of those, who carry themselves negligently, are intolerable, and of all most
horrible.

Conclude, that an Office is a thing worthy, and to be wished for, but not to
be demanded; since thou know not how thou shall manage thy self in it. Nor
yet is it to be refused, when God, according to the judgment of those whom it
concerns, shall impose it upon thee; because it is a great good; nor may
thou doubt of Gods assistance, nor refuse it without sin, when he shall be
pleased to call thee up to it. If thou art set in Office, tremble to think with
what love and care thou must labor for thy self, and others, and what miseries
pursue sloth. Stir thy self therefore up, and go on, and never rest secure.

19. Meditation. Of Scandal.
1. COnsider, that it is necessary for them who profess a special charge and
love of souls, not only to abstain from those things which are evil, but from
those also which carry any show of it; for he that does any such thing, with
desire of a temporal commodity, induces his neighbor who is not sufficiently
able to judge, to imitate what is bad, or blasph me his good.

2. In the first place therefore, he wounds his soul, diminishes Gods
honor, diverts men from his service, defiles his own reputation, and that of
others, who are of like profession, he hinders the profit that should proceed
from their Ministry; and all these are cast behind, for the pursuance of some
base gain, or despicable pleasure.

3. Add, that the thing which he does, for the most part is not without sin:
for whereas humane actions ought to be estimated not according to the
principles of Metaphysics* but by the moral judgment of a prudent man; not
every thing which to a subtle discourse, but which is congruous to humane
conversation, is approved just and right.

4. Besides the damage for the most part of our neighbor, and a disturbance of
the Commonweal, which happen out of the bordering vice, do also ordinarily
proceed from such like actions. Wherefore the end for which sin is prohibited
is found in them, and therefore it is hard to find how they should be
innocent, and free from all vice.

Conclude, that thou must live plainly and uprightly, and that thou will avoid
not only such things as of themselves are naught, but also those which carry a
face of badness; and that thou will no less beware of those things which are
generally esteemed wicked, then of those which are truly so indeed.

20. Meditation. Of Rashness.
1. COnsider him who desires any thing, how he is troubled, and in affliction,
until he injoyeth what he desires: besides, he is disquieted, full of cares,
and burden some to himself, and others, whiles he is finding out the means how
to compass what his unbridled concupiscence proposes unto him; and for the
most part to be ignorant, and to overvalue the thing that he desires; and
when he has it, to esteem it nothing, as taught by experience, that there was
nothing to be desired in it: but in the interim he is tormented with a large
measure of solicitude, labor and pain. But the greatest folly is, that
heplaceth his affection in that, which rests in the power of another man,
unto which either he can by no means come, or otherwise it must be obtained
with loss and painful displeasures.

2. Lastly, when as the peace of man's life consists in the enjoyment of all
that which he desires, but this can only chance two manner of ways; either
by being secure to obtain whatsoever thou desire, or by desiring nothing, nor
other way then is in thy power to obtain; since the first way is impossible,
and the other track is in thy own power, it is manifest, the total felicity of
humane life is constituted in a moderate appetite.

Conclude, to watch carefully over thy soul by inclining thy affections to the
best, and withdrawing them from opinionative impressions and motions, knowing
that good and evil is placed in thy self, and whether thou shall live a happy
or a miserable life.

21. Meditation. Of Martyrdom.
1. COnsider, how that among all things that are terrible, the most terrible
thing is Death, and unto which the other miseries of our life are only steps.
What great fortitude therefore is it, to make a change of life which is most
pleasant, into death to be suffered by torments? and this not in the fury of
war, nor the transporting ardor of a passion, nor through inevitable necessity;
but with a quie: mind, with a constant deliberation, life being offered, all
those that are nearest persuading to the preservation of it, when it would be
an honor, and profitable to retain it, and that it would be thought wisely
done.

2. How great a gain is that act of Faith, whenas all thy senses denounce
infallibly, that they, and all those things which they delight in, are come now
to their period; that Country, Parents, Friends, Honors, Pleasures, Wealth,
Power, and whatsoever else, to which thou have been accustomed, shall from
henceforth be-sted thee nothing; and again, of what is to come they cannot
speak, or promise any thing: yet relying upon the promise of such things as
appear not at all, to be nothing afraid to forsake, and cut off those things
where with thou art acquainted, together all, in one moment?

3. What great charity is it, in the twinkling of an eye, to cast away all
these dear and cordial delights, whereof thou art or could be possessed,
and all thy hopes of the same, and thy self especially, for whom all the rest
of those amiable things are ordained, and from whence they do assume the reason
of being amiable, for the love of him whom thou have never seen, nor heard of
by any, that could say they saw him?

4. Lastly, how high an act, and of how great Religion is it, to offer up thy
self, and all that is thine in one holocaust to God, for a testimony to Kings,
that he is God, whose commandments are to be observed, the commands of men
being contemned when ever they are contrary to them? What a heap also of high
honor is yielded up unto God, and what kind of conceit will Nations frame of
him, when they shall perceive his servants to hasten to all the greatest
miseries in the world, rather then transgress the least of his Commandments?

Conclude, with what honor they are to be reverenced, with what admiration
they are to be worshipped, that do these things: and with what fervor thou art
to labor that thou may be found worthy of so great an honor.

22. Meditation. Of Perseverance.
1. COnsider, that the misery which perseverance endures cannot be grievous,
for what is grievous is short: how shameful is it therefore, and reproachful,
to be overcome only as it were by continuance of time, and importunity of
matters of little moment?

2. Besides that, the inconstant man condemns himself, either for that he
inconsiderately did begin, or that he now without just cause does leave off:
both of them the part of an unwise man, and who is not master of his own
actions. More over, he is scorned by all men, nor has any one any good esteem
of the event of what he undertaketh.

3. Add to these, that for the most part he loses the reward of the labors
which he has past, which were greater then th^se to come, because the greatest
difficulty is in the beginning; as also great hopes, and near at hand, for
light ensuing difficulties.

4. Again consider, that nature her self, and whatsoever does well, acts
better by perseverance then force; and that those things more thoroughly
penetrate the soul, or any other external matter, which are imprinted sweetly,
and by custom, then those that are applied by a sudden change: for that
always which is violent is corruptive, and contrary to nature.

5. Lastly, weigh, how that all and every opposition against which perseverance
resists, are but light, nor can come upon thee but one at one time; from
whence it proceeds, that unless thy mind be troublesome in the thoughts, and
remembrance, in the things themselves there is nothing that deserves either
flight or fear.

Conclude, not to change that good which thou have timely undertaken; for not
the beginnings, but the end of the Action is crowned. Not to fear difficulties,
before they set upon thee, and thou shall find them much lighter: for they
terrify more in the amusement of our fancies, then when they are present. Cast
thy thought upon our Lord, and fearing nothing, proceed with constancy and
alacrity. Go on, and do something daily, and take care only for that which
this day is to be done, and taken care for.

23. Meditation. Of the Observation of Order and Discipline.
1. COnsider, that those things which are constituted of number, whatsoever it
be, and whether it be found to proceed from God, or men, the form and essence
of them all is order. From whence it comes to pass, that he that touches but
one link of order, shakes the whole chain of the body. Now the order of a
Community is the observance of the Rules and Ordinances.

2. Again, other goods, as those of Virtue, Science, and the rest, are in
themselves but particular goods, and of their own nature to be effected in
singular persons, and but by accident in more; only Order of it self is the
good of the whole Community. Besides, whatsoever is in the Community, it,
either altogether, or as far at least as it is common, proceeds from order,
or by means of that it is perfected.

3. Add to these, how a little error increases in any good by reason of the
Community. Do thou lose one quarter of an hour? in a Community it is so many
hours, as there are four Persons numbered in it. Do thou take away one dish
of a halfpeny? it increases suddenly unto pounds. What should I but add, how
a Community is for the most part neither of a certain number, nor a limited
time? Into what an infinite mischief therefore does a little, and an error in
the beginning as it were contemptible, spring forth on a sudden, if the least
liberty or oppression be brought in?

4. Then weigh, if any one either by example, or other occasion does hurt to a
Community, of how great a discommodity is he bound to the restitution, when as
out of justice, the superior is obliged to command order to be kept, and the
inferior is bound to observe it: for Order of it self is the proper object of
public justice, and who concurreth to the fact, is obliged to the whole damage.

Conclude, if thou art a superior, to take care that Order be observed with
all rigor; and if thou art inferior, to be watchful, as far as it lies upon
thy part, that discipline be not neglected: if a mitigation be at any time to
be made, to use it so, that it pass not either for an example, or scandal to
discipline, and but rarely to think the same necessary, and to admit it with
great wariness, and to put more confidence in the judgment of thy superior,
then in thy own, and at all times to fear thy own inconstancy.

24. Meditation. Of Courage and Constancy.
1. COnsider, that the rewards of the life to come are such, that they cannot
be compared either with the joys or miseries of this life; for they do exceed,
as an infinite exceeds a finite, as intellectual things do sensual, as
spiritual do corporeal, and as eternal are preferred before momentary. Add
moreover, that the present labors are seasoned with many comforts, with the
peace and joy of a good conscience, with the success it self, with the glory of
a great fortitude, with comforts sent down from God, with the favor of men,
and their ready assistance, and the confusion of our adversaries.

2. Again, if thou reflect thy eyes upon the life of the rest of men, how much
more intolerable labors shall you see undertaken for lighter rewards? Look but
upon Soldiers, Saylors, such as labor in the Mines, or the life of Slaves,
how it is passed over without ease, or comfort of body, or of soul, or the hope
of vainglory, or a little coin.

3. Yea also, contemplate those miseries which are to be endured, if thou
seek to avoid the labors of Virtue: What passions, brawls, envy, ill will,
detractions, dangers: so that thou shall be troublesome, and burdensome to thy
self. But what follows the period of this short life, who is able to express?

Conclude, to harden thy face to the undertaking of labors, seeing how foolish
a thing it is for the fear of a little pains, or present difficulty, to ingulf
thy self into these unspeakable and intolerable miseries. Know that labor is
natural, and will be made delightful by custom. Shake off therefore thy
drowsiness, and remember thy self to be a man, a comparer of what is past with
what is to come; neither doubt of the victory, if you dare but undertake the
battle.

25. Meditation. Of Passionate Desires.
1. COnsider, that it is settled in us by nature, to will and desire to do all
things according to reason; so that not the least child can endure it to be
said that he acts in passion; but by how much a man is more pressed with
passion, by so much the less will he suffer himself to be persuaded that he is
so. But when we perceive another man doing any thing in passion, we slight him,
and laugh him to scorn.

2. Moreover, passions do drive us contrary ways, and lead us along in an
uncertain, and giddy course of life, and precipitate us headlong into vast
mischiefs, through inconsideration of circumstances, and the effects which it
brings along with it. Of it self it is painful, in effects it is worse.
Passion discovered makes its master obnoxious and easy to be played upon by
the man that is wise, who having searched out his humors by the proposition of
those objects which in passion he coveteth, or hates, drives him along, how,
and which way he pleases. Lastly, Passion is no other thing then a portion of
folly.

3. Add the mischiefs of the sin into which it drives us, the loss of
spiritual goods, and the falling into the punishments which are known by
revelation.

Conclude, with all thy strength, and thy whole endeavor, to watch, that thou
may understand unto what passions and desires thou art subject; that thou
may reprove and repress at the first their force and motions; that
incessantly thou may fear, and search all thy works with Lanthorns, before
thou do them, and whiles thou art doing them: being sure, that so far as
thou shall profit in this exercise, so far thou may be secure of thy
actions, and of a life without blame.

26. Meditation. Of humble submission to the Divine Providence.
1. COnsider, that whereas God is good, and constituted the Universe of good
things, it is consequent that all things good are knit together, and do
mutually usher in one the other, and have their causes certain, and rightly
ordered. But evils do fall in, as it were by accident, without any determinate
causes, and without order. Therefore is it necessary, that to whatsoever good,
although temporal, as honors, power, riches, pleasure, the passage must be
more efficacious, and secure by Virtue, then by Vices; but unto evil, the
tract is full of thorns, and there is no constant method: neither to temporal
goods, can any highway be made by doing ill.

2. Add, whereas those things are only properly our deeds, which one designs
to do by knowledge, foresight, and resolution; and that the meanest action of a
man cannot be totally ordered by him, because no man has any perfect knowledge
in every circumstance concurring to the action, as it is manifest to him that
considers it: we must therefore depend upon God in all, and every act, and
circumstance. And therefore how foolish is it to think to govern kingdoms, and
to bring unto perfection great affairs, without the Patronage of God, or
contrary to his pleasure?

Conclude, not to be confident of any action, before thou do see it finished,
and brought to perfection; because there are many things in it whereof thou
never did it consider: nor yet to glory in it when it is done; for all that
which is thy share in it had never brought it to perfection. Neither must thou
presume of any virtue whatsoever, or grow insolent over others, because those
are not sufficient to do the work which are the end of them: from whence it
comes to pass, that we perceive the actions of the weakest counsel reach
oftentimes, and attain the conclusion, when those, that are most cunningly
proposed, do fail of the purpose. Nor must we run astray, to obtain any effect
by sin; nor believe that any mischief can be achieved by force of wit. Neither
must thou be exceedingly solicitous of such things as are far off, nor hinder
another man's good, although a far off thou conceivest he may be prejudicial
unto thee.

27. Meditation. Of Prayer.
1. COnsider, that whereas the soul has two movers, the sense and the
understanding; whereof the sense is ever open, and moved by her objects, and by
frequent strokes draws the understanding to he opinions, and the will to her
affections: it is clear, that except the understanding draws away her self by
Meditation to the contrary verities, and the will by prayer to pious and right
affections, from sensitive impressions; it cannot be avoided, but that becoming
carnal, and worldly, we should be quite estranged from the true goods of the
soul.

2. Again, seeing God, through the necessity of his goodness, affects nothing
more then to communicate his gifts, and we are not otherwise capable of them,
but by our understanding, and will, rightly disposed; which is done by
Meditation and Prayer; and that by them we are capable of all good whatsoever:
know certainly that there is nothing in Gods Treasure, which by force of Prayer
may not be drawn forth and applied to thee.

3. Lastly, since Meditation and Prayer is nothing else but an illumination of
the understanding concerning the most eminent and clear verities and most of
all necessary; and a fitting of the will to the greatest goods, most of all to
be desired, and exceeding natural; it follows, that nothing can be found
more sweet, nothing more delightful, nor any thing to which thou may more
con andy adhere then to these two.

Conclude, the exercise of Prayer ought to be daily, most diligent, most
necessary; to be esteemed, and practiced as a thing more excellent then any
other business. But that thou ought to esteem for Prayer, all that which
has the fruit of Prayer, to wit, the ascertaining of the understanding, and
the preparation of the will in things concerning thy salvation.

28. Meditation. Of Humility, and Reverence to God.
1. COnsider, how thy soul by the benefit of Sciences, gathers into her self
the wholestock of being, by infinite chains of an infinite number of
consequences: and how those things which are contrary in themselves, are not
only in the soul together, but also agreeing, so that one thing cannot be
separated from another.

2. Weigh therefore, if that there should meet together in a center, into one
entity, not by collection of parts, but simplicity of substance, all that, not
only of this Universe, whereof so little is comprehended by us, but whatsoever
possibility, and fruitfulness of being is poured forth, through spaces not to
be imagined by us, of Eternity, Immensity, and sublimity, by an indissoluble
verity of essences, so that also every one should remain singular, and
indivisible notwithstanding, in the simplicity of the highest formality; weigh,
I say if thou can, of what sort, hownoble, and high, that being should be,
how by an original necessity of being, it is the principle and fountain of
all, how it is a superabundant stock of fullness of good, and for the enjoying
whereof all things subsist. And when thou can ascend no further, call him God.

3. Add, that he is the All of all things, that thou and thine proceed from
him, are sustained by him, and preserved from falling into nothing.

Conclude, with what amazement, with what terror thou ought to be taken and
stricken with the view of his greatness, and the lightning of his glory: with
what profound humility, abjection, and plunging of thy self into the abyss of
thy own nothing, it behooves thee to present thy self before his divine eyes:
thou, an invisible Atome drept from his works, who themselves, as great as they
are, seem infinitely less then nothing, being compared to their Creator.

2. How much is it fit thou should not endure that any thing should be
compared with him, or be vouchsased any honor at all when he is mentioned? And
with what immense gratitude art thou bound to restore, and offer up thy self,
and thine, which were originally his, and belonging to his service more justly,
then any slave to his lord, or he that has received a benefit, to his benefact
our? And value in the first place, that he vouchsafes to receive thy self of
thy self.

29. Meditation. Of heedfull Attention to Gods Inspirations.
1. COnsider, that whereas God acts all things which he does by his
knowledge, and his will; and that every thing, with all its parts and powers,
was made by him: it is consequent, that he knows them all, and perfectly
comprehends the effects of them in themselves.

2. Lastly, whatsoever is done through the whole Universe, he has, as it were,
the History of it written in the Tables of his own Eternity, that not the least
dust can be divided, not one sand grow together, not a drop of water, not a
leaf of a tree can fall without his will and knowledge: whatsoever he wills
is most efficaciously performed, and wheresoever he ^^^lleth, there most
infallibly it fails.

1. Conclude, not to be scandalized, or sad, for whatsoever shall come to pass,
besides thy own sins; being certain, that since it proceeds according to the
counsel of him that is all wisdom, tempered with perfect goodness, it
cannot, all things considered, but be best of all, that it should so come to
pass.

2. Again, never go about a long time before to consult and be solicitous
concerning thy future life and actions: since every plot of thine is uncertain,
and doubtful, whether it will be for good or bad, since thou do not
thoroughly foresee even what is before thy eyes.

3. Attend to God alone, that thou may do thy duty in whatsoever he commands
or counsels thee: but think that he commands that, which now not to be done is
wicked; and to counsel that, which according to thy present knowledge, and
power, seems to thee fit to be done, without any passion, or corrupt affection.
Neither be thou afterward solicitous, whether it succeeds or not, being
secure, that wisely, according to thy Conscience, thou did undertake it, and
as it was sitting for thee: but always stand vigilant, and full of regard in
the sight of him that does see thee, and thine; whether outwardly by any
opportunity, or inwardly by any inspiration he offer thee any thing, that thou
may not omit it; and more especially, that thou may not attempt that
thing which might displease him.

30. Meditation. Of the Reverence due to Saints.
1. COnsider, that those blessed Spirits which in joy God, are the friends of
God, seeing his face, and talking with him, as one friend is wont to discourse
with another, knowing all the reasons of his Providence, partakers of all the
secrets of the wisdom of God, as to whom he has revealed all that he has
heard from his Father.

2. Again, consider that they are the most perfect and noble among creatures;
the treasures of wisdom and science; having the fullness of Sanctity, and
Goodness naturally, in a manner, rooted within them; elevated above their
nature, and the excellency of any possible creature; they are deiformd, full of
God himself, and unchangeable by an unspeakable participation of his Eternity.

3. Moreover, they are established in grace, and as it were in like power, by
God: for as he would communicate to us the goods and benefits of Nature by
natural causes, for the manifestation of his bounty; so he made choice of
these, to communicate and bestow moral goods at their intercession. So much
more mighty then upon the earth, by how much more they do superabound in
Charity.

4. Consider them lastly to be such, as have endured a hard combat before they
attained Glory: those that have remained in temptations with Christ, for whom
the vast compass of the World was made, and ages have run their race.

Conclude, they are to be honored according to the state of their eminency,
and dignity: that they are to be reverenced, and prayed unto, according to the
power and grace which they have with God: that they are to be imitated in their
virtue, and abiding of battles, for which they were given to be examples to
thee. If thou inquirest how much; more then wise men, more then those that are
powerful, or princes, more then thou can do, or invent; because their
dignity is more then that thou can sufficiently admire.

31. Meditation. Of Devotion to our B. Lady.
1. COnsider, that the blessed Virgin was so far a cause, that God should be
Man, as our Mothers are that we should be living, and mortal: And that Jesus
did owe unto his Mother, as he was Man, as much in proportion for that benefit,
as we do to ours, in that we have a being from them. O wonderful and
inexplicable greatness!

2. Again, it was granted to her by God, that out of her purest blood, she
should give matter, and nourishment unto Christ; that she should take care of
him in his infancy. Nay, moreover, she received power over him, as well for
correction, as direction: for this is a mothers power, and she was truly a
mother.

3. Add that, although a mother after her son is come to the age of freedom,
and emancipation, cease to be greater then her son by right, and in princes
is absolutely subject: notwithstanding, the authority, and reverence, and
power, which she has by grace, and good will, in a good child remains nothing
less then it was formerly, as long as she behaves her self wisely.

4. Out of which Considerations behold, as fervently as thou can, the
unspeakable dignity, and power of the mother of God. And add, whereas God
distributeth his gifts according to the quality of those that receive them, and
that the quality of his mother was without comparison, or measure; he must have
powered upon her the fullness of dignity, power, grace, and eminency, not in a
higher degree of the same nature, but in a manner more noble, and large, by the
whole kind and nature of it.

Conclude, that thy reverence and devotion, though it ought to be in a more
high degree unto the rest of the Saints, then toward any other creatures in
what power soever they are seated; yet must it be notwithstanding particular:
whenas to the most blessed Virgin, there is due a devotion perpetual,
universal, continual, in such manner inferior to the worship of God, as that
it must not yet be separated, but as it were concomitant, or accompanying it,
and in a sort less in the essence alone, in the circumstances almost equal,
as due to her, who by grace and favor reigns with him.

32. Meditation. Of the daily Sacrifice of the Catholic Church.
1. COnsider, that whereas a sacrifice is the consumption of some creature,
without our own profit, for a testimony that we acknowledge God to be the
fountain of all being, and from whom are both our selves, and all that is ours;
that he is the end, for whom all things are, and to whom we direct our selves,
and what is ours; that he is Lord of life, and death, of bodies, and of souls,
and according to whose will, all things are, or are not: it therefore ought
only to be offered unto God, and by consequence is the principal act of
religion and sanctity, which we can possibly set forth.

2. Add moreover, that it is a gift, by the oblation whereof our prayers are
rendered more acceptable unto God, and more efficacious; whether it be, that our
soul is more lifted up when we bestow any thing, or that it requires a
proportion of humane prayer.

3. But the Christian sacrifice is the most noble, the life of the man God
being the offering, in comparison of which, the whole world is nothing, full of
infinite mysteries, and beyond understanding: as that the host sacrificed
should not remain dead; that a quantitative body, whole, with its figure,
should exsist in every particle of an alien quantity; that a substance should
be presented under other likenesses, and that they should subsist in it after a
manner impossible to be uttered.

4. To conclude, this sacrifice is not of the Priests alone, but of every one
in the Catholic Church, who, except they be careless, may offer it up by the
hands of the Priest, for themselves and theirs, as much as he himself can do
it, yea, although he should be unwilling to it.

Conclude, what a rashness, negligence, slothfulness, nay, and infidelity it
is, to be present at an act the only most religious, and most holy, the most
mysterious, and the greatest of all others, lastly, wherein in a manner the
whole substance of advantage in a Christian life does consist, without
attention, or affection; either for custom, or by command; and in the mean
time to have the mind absent, and wandering in other thoughts.

33. Meditation. The frailty of the Body.
1. COnsider thy body, how it consists of an element which is heavy,
burdensome, and unprofitable, depressing thy soul, and hindering thy actions,
abounding with numberless excrements, which are not only troublesome, but also
filthy, and to be cast out of sight.

2. As many members as thou have, so many are the seats of several diseases,
occasions of thy sufferings, and springs of thy griefs. Read but the books of
Physicians, and it will prove a miracle in a manner, that in so great a
multitude, and such an easy access of sufferings, any one should be possibly
free. Moreover, how great is the grief and torment of them, how tedious are
they to thy self, and to such as live with thee, we can hardly attain to speak
it, no nor to think it.

3. Again consider, what a needy creature thou art: look upon thy garments, how
many trades have there been employed in making them up? from how many
creatures, herbs, elements, and countries have they been fetched? are those any
thing fewer that are gathered together for thy food? Then for medicines? as
also for the building, and furniture of thy house? If any part of the world
were wanting, thou would be destitute of some of these: so that the whole
world is necessary, and conspires together for the relief of thy person.

4. Moreover, the virtues of the body, how little praise deserve they? Beauty
serves but for other men's eyes, thou receivest no fruit thereof. Besides, of
what great frailty is it? obnoxious to age, diseases, casualties; nothing more
of substance, then a shadow, or a dyed light, that in what it resides it would
be a labor to find out.

5. The strength of a beast, unto thee, whose honor it is with wit to subdue
the strongest things, will turn neither to virtue nor to profit, since thou
must give place to the vigorous force of a little engine or vise, to an horse,
ox, or the like creature. As for nimblenesse, it is but a toy, and a
commendation of vagabonds, who expose their bodies to sale for other men's
pleasure: and for what else serves it for the most part, more then to make thy
self servile, and a game for others to look upon, being compared to a Monkey,
or some little bird?

Conclude, it is unworthy a man to glory in the body, or esteem it of any value.

34. Meditation. Of the miseries of the Soul.
1. COnsider, how thy soul may be rather said to be admitted to the sight, then
the participation of what is good unto her: how miserable and unhappy is she
how subject to all the maladyes of the body? If the body grieves, if it
rejoices, if it be hot, or cold, if it suffers any the least discommodity; the
soul does not only suffer with it, but is also tedious to her self, and
strugleth along, being entangled, and unprofitable in the performance of her
own actions.

2. Moreover, with how many passions is she vexed, and in a manner rent into
pieces, when as the itching desire of pleasure allures one way, the swelling
ambition of honor inticeth the contrary, the hope of gaining wealth persuades
another, envy a fourth? Thus passion oppresses her, when through rashness she
thinks not of it, and afflicts her also, when she does think of it, and
hurries her away from the very thought. Hence it is that she feigneth matters
most easy, to be impossible, and things impossible, to be most easy, and
carries and scatters miserable man among precipices, and rocky passages.

3. But that which is the accomplishment of misery is this, that the whole
universe of creatures suffices not to exalt her to the beatitude she is born
to: and when as all other things enjoy for the most part their end, and not any
considerable part are deprived of it; the greatest part of man alone is
entangled and wrapped up in miserable punishments, and torments, which cannot
be comprehended by thought, and a few of the remainders only are saved: whereas
notwithstanding, beyond the contributed service of all the bulk of corporeal
creatures, and the Celestial Hierarchy; God employed himself for almost four
and thirty years together, and by a death most cruel, by Sacraments of a
stupendous efficacy, and in the chief place, by an eternal presence of
himself in the chief of them, made himself the minister and instrument to help
and bring him to salvation.

4. Now as for the excellencies of the soul, what are they? For science, thou
have none; or so little, that by how much the more thou know, so much the
more is thy grief, by knowing better the multitude of those things whereof thou
art ignorant, which are infinite in respect of those whereunto thy knowledge is
arrived; nor is there any one work of God, no not the least dusty atome,
whereof thou can attain to a perfect knowledge.

5. As for thy virtue, thou can never be secure; in every moment thou art
ready to be proud of it, and loose it: and for the snares of the Devil, they
are infinite, and past finding out by means of which they would snatch it from
thee every moment, but only that God restrains him beyond thy strength.

Conclude therefore, not to wax insolent, but to bewail thy misery; since it is
truly such, as thou can never acknowledge, or bewail it sufficiently enough.

35. Meditation. Of the knowledge of ones self.
1. COnsider, how unworthy a thing it is, when of thy self thou art worth
nothing, therefore to value thy self because thou think another has less.
And then, wherein is it that thou excellest another? In beauty? Thou can not
enjoy that which thou can not behold. In strength or nimblenesse? It is the
commendation of beasts. And how frail also are these things, which chance, or
a disease will take from thee? neither can thou be sure of it to morrow:
which being also another gift, is not to be attributed to thy praise, but to
his that bestowed it.

2. But they are the dowries of the mind wherein thou art excellent: thou art a
Philosopher, a Divine, thou teach great matters. I pray God thou do, and
not cracking things uncertain for certain, being deceived thy self, deceivest
thy Scholars, acting the part of a blind guide to such as are blind already.

3. Art thou skillful in affairs of Commonweals? It Is a business very
dangerous, changeable every hour, never constant, and whereof there can be no
certainty. Lastly, art thou profitable to many, being excellent in any art?
Weigh, how the name of profit is a name of servitude throughout all things, and
therefore art thou less then those to whom thou art profitable.

4. Observe therefore, that naturally thou do estimate all things that are
thine at too high a value, and do depresse what belongs unto others too low,
and that others proceed in the contrary; and thy worth is to be apprised, by
how much others value thee.

5. Add, that there can be no utility without use; and how many, and how
necessary are those things for thee, which do not depend upon thee, that thy
utility may be useful.

6. Again, whatsoever thou considerest not, it is not thy self, but God, and
nature which work and effect it by thy means. See then, that thou can not
consider the least part, and in a manner nothing of the things that are to be
done. The most part thou do by habit, that is, naturally; in what thing
therefore is it that thou preferrest thy self before others?

Conclude, to value thy self as thou art of thy self, and not to mingle thy
self with the condition and judgment of others.

36. Meditation. Of Covetousness.
1. COnsider, that abundance of the goods of fortune is sought for to supply
the needinesse of nature; but it happens contrarily, that he that has more, is
more needy: for the poor man seeks only to beg a penny, the rich man looks
after a pound, a Prince after millions. Wherefore there is nothing that
satisfies the appetite, except a man sets a measure to himself, which in the
beginning he may excellently do. In the mean time man runs on his course, and
loses this present life in affliction, and labor, that after some years he
may live happily; which years he knows not whether he shall live to see them:
and if they do come, yet are they shorter then those that are passed, and in
which he cannot enjoy himself, and he has lost more by his folly.

2. And after riches are obtained, a greater care is necessary for the
conservation of them: for thou have more servants, for whose actions thou art a
surety before God, and men. In the mean time they with their whole endeavors
study to spend wastfully thy goods, as much as lies in their reach, or as much
as thou do not carefully keep from them: so that the care of keeping them is
greater then the labor to attain them. And after this, where is the fruit,
when as thou have nothing but thy food, and raiment, others eat up the rest,
thy eyes looking on, and seeing how they devour thy wealth, who will be most
ungrateful toward thee?

3. But let it be granted, they are good upon whom thou bestowest thy goods;
yet they cannot be chosen without care, nor without care can thy goods be
dispersed among them: and it is impossible but thou should take many that
are not such, and of those others thou can be in no wise certain.

4. Besides, by how much thy wealth is more eminent, thy state is so much more
hard, and dangerous: they move the greedy appetite of more, and more mighty
ones, and provoke them to lay more treacherous snares against thee, and are
defended with more labor and care.

5. Lastly, with how much study and care they are obtained, and kept, with so
much grief and pain they are lost, and so much also is life more miserable
without them, and death also when they are to be forsaken.

Conclude, to set a bound to the desire of wealth, that thou may wish for no
more but what may be conveniently obtained, and kept with such labor, and care
for change, that life may not be grievous to thee; for the rest to make use of
life, and enjoy it, that this day thou may serve God, being nothing
solicitous for food or raiment.

37. Meditation. Of Carnality.
1. COnsider, that whereas carnal copulation is an action which by its nature
belongs unto the whole substance of man, and is making of a man, seeing it is a
decision of a certain the most pure, and elaborate substance, extracted out of
all the parts of a living creature by a secret force in nature, there cannot be
any deordination in it, but it must be a most grievous sin.

2. Add, that when as the injury which is done by the fornicatour to his own,
and the body of his confederate, is contrary to an inclination of nature
inbred, and not subject to him that has it; and again, in that it is committed
not against any one part in special, but against the whole person; the offense
hereby becomes more heinous, then if it were against justice, or then if it
were the cutting away of some member of the body.

3. Add also, that the action is excessive momentary; as if one should gurry
down large quantities of drink at one swallow: that it is most undecent; so
that there is no man so filthy, that can endure to commit it in presence of
another; nay, there are some beasts that will not suffer themselves to be seen:
that it is not of any value or honor, but a thing appertaining to brute
beasts, capable of no praise; nay, originally to insensible plants. And lastly,
if Boethius may have credit, it is a pleasure not to be discerned; whenas those
wretches who commit the crime, know not in what part they feel it, nor of what
kind it is; insomuch, that it is not comparable to one smack of the taste, and
is more discerned by the itching then the act: and yet notwithstanding this
very thing is the origin of in numerable mischiefs, and an insnaring labyrinth
beyond expression; for this time, which is so precious, is lost among
jealousies and griefs, the soul pines away with bitterness, same and honor is
neglected, friends are lost, fortunes dissipated, the body weakened, and cast
into most horrible diseases, and torments, the conscience is vexed, God is
rejected with hatred, and the whole man consumes away, soul, body, and
substance, becoming vile, and contemptible to his very self.

Conclude, to observe watchfully, to esteem nothing as of light moment, that
leads unto this misery, nor willingly to enter, by manner of sport, into
dalliance of this so great a mischief, by means whereof man is easily debased,
and in a sporting folly is utterly undone, in the sight of God, himself, and
the world: abhor the very appearance, and suspect the remotest allurements of
the flesh, assuring thy self thou can only get the conquest by flying.

38. Meditation. Of the State of Wedlock.
1. COnsider, that whereas the love of man to his wife is the most strong, and
constant, among all animal affections; it is necessary, the inconveniences
arising from thence, should also be most grievous. If thy wife be a fool, if a
scold, if proud, or infamous, or sluggish, thou have made thy self a slave to a
most cruel prison: and how small a number are free from such like vices? or
how can thou be sufficiently cautious, not to light upon some one that is
such?

2. But let it be granted, that she is the best that may be; yet art thou no
longer at liberty to choose thy friends, and familiar companions: thou art tied
and must perforce endure those who are of your mutual alliance, of what
condition soever. If thou love thy wife, all thy miseries are doubled,
because thou do license fortune to sway over thee in two bodies; nay, every
misery invades thee with advantage, because thy own sufferings grieve thee for
her sake.

3. Add, with what affection, and how perpetually must thou serve her: thou
must sit at home, pleasures must be set aside, duties omitted, and those sweet
societies are to be broken off to which thou were accustomed. Then if thou have
no children, thy house is solitary, thy bed unfruitful, thy thoughts full of
tedious emulation, and thy endeavors seem unprofitable. But if thou have
children, thou must dread their infancy, have a watchful care over their
vouth, and provide for every age. By a communication of affections, thou art so
many times miserable, as thou numbrest so dear pledges. And who can promise
thee they shall be good? if they are unfortunate, if wicked, if ungrateful, if
foolish, if deformed, they must not be cast away: before thine eyes thou must
perpetually bear the burden of thine own folly.

4. All these, if thou die before them, thou forsakest them being needy, and
orphans. If they pass out of the world before thee, thou have obtained a
mournful old age. Whichsoever happens, with what a torment of thy bowels art
thou divided, and as it were torn away from so dear pledges? What should I
speak of the attentive care of thy substance, whereby to nourish and enrich
them? It is necessary, that the soul which descended from heaven, should be
enslaved to dirt and to beasts, and that precious leisure which was due to the
consideration of heaven, must be employed upon dung.

5. But perchance these miseries may not fall upon thee. See if ninety of a
hundred are not drowned in these difficulties; and it is by grace from above,
and not the force of thine own wisdom, if thou avoidest them. But thou through
courage of thy mind, can pass through all, and never burn in the midst of
the surnace. A likely matter, since thou could not warrant thy self being
free, but voluntarily did run into the danger.

Conclude, if thou art free out of necessity, to bless God, and live
contented; if it be by choice of free will, to pray unto God to preserve it;
being mindful, how it is folly to accuse fortune, if being fairly admonished,
thou perishest through thy own willfulness.

39. Meditation. Of Gluttony.
1. COnsider, how short the delight of meat and drink is, how it passes in the
twinkling of an eye, how slight it is, that except a man uses attention, he
cannot observe it, and whenever he has attentively tasted a thing, he can
rarely judge of it, except he have experience; how vile and infamous it is,
that man for the most part will blush to acknowledge that he is led by it, and
those kind of people are most contemptible, whom we term Parasites or
Smelfeasts.

2. In the mean, how dishonorable is it, rising from the table to turn himself
presently to sleep, or to discharge his belly over a close stool, and to be
impotent in duties belonging to his calling, and wearisome to himself? How
uncomely is it to express any affection to good cheer? What shall I say of the
crudities, and nauseating of the stomach after a feast, and of the diet also to
be observed for several days, if no disease ensue?

3. Now he that has got a custom of it, what is he good for? he casts away
his honor, forsakes his friends, is made a scorn to his enemies, a dishonor
to his parents, subject to idleness and sloth, and prone to all kind of
wickedness.

Conclude, to use such a mean of meat and drink, as may serve for health and
action: if thou exceedest the usual measure, let it be done to that purpose,
that thy spirits may become more lively, and not be oppressed, and made
sluggish: bridle thy mouth with reason, that by observation thou may know
what does good, how much does hurt, how much overloads: and thus with giving of
thanks accept what God shall provide for thee.

40. Meditation. Of Drunkenness.
1. COnsider, that the peculiar deformity of drunkenness consists, in that
the reason weakened with too much drink is compelled to serve the domineering
appetite, so that a drunkard is truly a beast, nay, so much worse, as it is a
thing more deformed, for to make reason a slave, then that it should be
altogether wanting.

2. Weigh considerately the comportment of a drunkard, in his words, in his
eyes, in his motion, in his face; how confounded and different is he from
himself, and even ridiculous to children?

3. The life moreover of a drunkard is a shop of brawls and slaughters; he
never passes out of his house that he is not always subject either to do some
mischief, or suffer it, for what he acted when he was in drink, remains to be
satisfied for when he is sober.

4. Add, that he is much weakened in the operations of his understanding, he
betraies secrets, he tattles out his appetites, and discovers his designs, and
actions, he is tracked out by all men, he is discerned, he is scorned; he is
also unfit for the duties of a common life: how many mischiefs through
drunkenness do fall upon a soldier, a mariner, or whosoever it is that has
any business of weight or moment committed to his charge? In truth who is
there that will commit any slight matter to the care of a drunkard, since it is
certain, that he will in his drink either betray the business, or spoil it by
being circumvented?

5. Lastly, the life of a drunkard is base and odious, ungrateful to ones
familiars, dishonorable to parents, infamous to all, and by custom usually
arrives to that height of turpitude, that neither reason, nor body, can execute
the ordinary functions of humane life.

Conclude, to abominate so filthy a kind of vice, and abhor the company of
drunkards as of so many beasts: when any occasion of drinking offers it self,
if thou can not avoid it, be thou the last, and trembling avoid every stroke:
know assuredly, that there is poison contained in every cup that is drunk with
excess; shun therefore what thou art able every glass that is coming toward
thee, until there creeps in some occasion whereby thou can privily slip from
the rest who are disturbed with drink. Thou can not persuade a beast to drink
more then is necessary; esteem therefore him unworthy of thy company, nor to be
accounted a friend or kinsman, who induces thee to the like.

41. Meditation. Of Anger.
1. COnsider, that anger is a desire of revenge; revenge, a part of justice, to
wit, that he may suffer evil, who has done evil, which is an act of reason;
anger is therefore so much the more deformed, when it strayeth from reason, by
how much it is natural for it to be joined with it.

2. Again, anger is joined with grief: he therefore brings grief upon himself,
who cherishes his anger. See now, how senseless it is, whenas another has
done thee an injury, that thou should therefore frame and create a new
scourge for thy self. He therefore who is angry rejoices his enemy, and
completes his desire, which was, that he should bring u pon himself misery and
grief: but he who ispatient, in that very thing is a conqueror, since he
hinders that his enemy cannot heap a mischief and sorrow upon him; for other
miseries are therefore miseries, in that they sad the soul.

3. Farther, a man that is angry is an impediment also to himself: for whiles
he betrayeth the mind that he has to do a mischief, he both makes his enemy
wary to prevent it, and that he also, disturbed with his own passion, sees not
what is needful to be done to effect his purpose.

4. But for a wise man, with whom should he be angry? for he that commits the
mischief does it either justly, and then it is an unjust thing to be angry for
it; or through ignorance, and then it is unbeseeming a wise man, for to wish
any hurt to another, for any thing which was done by chance, or through
ignorance: or lastly, out of passion, or through an evil affection; whom it is
fit we should pity, for if it had been well with him, he had never done the
injury; but being in a passion for the time, he was a beast: and as you are not
angry with a dog, or a bear, so neither is it a thing becoming to be angry with
such a man. But he that has contracted an irrational affection is so much
worse then a beast, by how much he is more perseverantly and more deeply the
same, that a passionate man is for a short space.

5. Add to these, the turpitude of an angry man in his countenance, in the
headlong rashness of his motions and gestures, not seeing what is fit to be
done, speaking things unworthy himself, vexing himself, and hindering that very
revenge which he most of all desires. Lastly, anger is also hurtful and
causes diseases in the body.

Conclude, to embrace meekness, and not to give the reins of reason to so
unbridled, and inconsiderate an affection: when thou see one angry, view, and
consider in him, how in thy anger thou art wont to behave thy self, and learn
to be virtuous by the consideration of the foulness of another man's vice.

42. Meditation. Of Learning.
1. COnsider, how that among those actions which are not virtues, and yet may
be virtuously used, some of them do perfect other things, and some of them, man
himself: and of those, some cultivate the body, and others the soul of man, in
that wherein the soul is lord, and excellent above other things: and these
necessarily excel all others, as much as the soul excels the matters of the
others.

2. Add, that whenas man is man, by reason of his soul, those among men ought
to be most eminent, who take the care of instructing the soul: whence it is,
that naturally men do out of their hearts admire, and honor cordially such as
are learned, and scorn the foolish that are rich; nay, they do moreover
willingly believe, and submit themselves to the learned, as greater then
themselves: from whence the Governors of Common wealths are addicted to
learning, and are accounted to know more then other men: neither can wealth,
nor abundance be wanting to those that excel in power, except they despise
them.

3. But the whole life of such as practice arts, and sciences, how much does it
excel others? their pleasures, purged from lees, are purely tasted; whenas
corporal delights, disturbed with a tumult of passions, and sensible
alteration, make that themselves cannot be known. They are constant and
persevering; but the corporal passes presently into lothsomnesse, and
disdain. They are more easily obtained, because they stand in need of fewer
instruments, and those more ready at hand This life brings neither diseases to
the body, nor detriment to fame, nor to our friends any defect of duty: nay
rather it exhorts, and furnishes us where with to avoid all these
inconveniences.

4. Lastly, it is quiet, and free from infinite troubles, because it does not
mingle it self with such things, for the obtaining whereof strifes, and cares
do besiege the life of man, with so much importunity, and by labors chained
together draw it along in misery. But if we will cast our eyes upon such
businesses, she plays the great mistress, and by superior discourses of a
higher strain, does rule and order them,

Conclude, to give thanks unto God, that he has placed thee in such a rank of
men. Resolve to use thy utmost endeavor in that Vocation, and to be fixed in
that (...) whereon thou are pitched; to (...) those who are hardened with such
blindness, that they can neither acknowledge thy happiness nor their own
vileness, and think themselves wise, whiles they attempt to seduce others, and
bring them to their condition.

43. Meditation. Of the study of Theology.
1. COnsider, that the perfection of a humane soul consists either in this,
that it self is made a partaker of those considerations which are of the
highest rank and order, or that it extends its own to such things as are
inferior to its self; of the which, the first comes by contemplation, the
other by action: and for both these ends sacred Theology does most eminently
instruct it.

2. For it reaches to the highest contemplation of God, and those spiritual
substances which are next unto him; it treats also of the beginnings, the
end, substance, order, and constitution of all things; it considers the
operation, providence, and command as well of God, as of spiritual substances,
and of all kind of action which is proper unto man, and from whom neither the
meanest of things can ly hid, nor the greatest escape his capacity: it is
Theology that frames, and regulateth the principles, and the Architectonick
Idea.

3. Moreover, the profit of it is such, that it confirms our faith, governs
our manners, and exempts a man from the servitude of pinning himself upon
another judgment, concerning those things which become and are proper to man
as man. But its eminency is such, that the Divine is always to be called to
counsel to advise what is to be done, and to give his approbation in all other
Arts and Sciences whatsoever, especially such as are the most excellent among
others.

4. It teaches such as sit at the helm to govern kingdoms, and states, what
is lawful, what is honest, and what is necessary to be done. It instructs
the Lawyer how his own principles are to be understood, and how far they are to
be extended. To the Masters of families, to Citizens, to Merchants, in one
word, to all men when they are in deepest consultation concerning themselves,
and their affairs, it is necessary, and the Princess of action; it is
honorable before all men, it is admirable, and to be esteemed with reverence.

Conclude, in no wife to show thy self unthankful to the divine mercy, who
has vouchsafed thee so great a benefit: but when thou have considered to what
a dignity he has lifted thee up, contend in humility, and the returning of a
grateful soul, that he may not repent him of so great a benefit, but that he
would bestow upon thee that favor with perseverance to gather the desired
fruit.

44. Meditation. The excellency of the State of Priesthood.
1. COnsider, that a Priest is placed in the midst, between God, and his
people, to carry and offer up the oblations of the people unto God, and bring
down those graces which God shall please to bestow upon his people. And out of
the former consideration he has assigned unto him two offices: for he is as a
Master to instruct, and direct the people in those things wherein they are to
behave themselves in their duty toward God; by which dignity and title, he
excels all the professors of other sciences and arts, and is seated upon
the top of all honor whatsoever, which may be had from humane science or
virtue, and consequently is to be preferred before any private person, in all
kind of eminency; with whatsoever science or virtue he shall be adorned, by
reason of his dignity.

2. Besides, he is set to be an Overseer of the solemn devotions of the people:
and therefore seeing the obligation of the people toward God, is greater then
any other obligation toward themselves, their country, or their parents; it is
clear, no other office in the Commonweal, whether it be of Judges, Commanders,
or Kings is, or can be comparable to the office of Priesthood.

3. Moreover the business which Priests do deal in, since it is of the soul,
and an eternity of salvation, or misery, which are infinitely higher and of
more concernment then those goods which are administered, and taken care of by
others; it is therefore to be esteemed a great perverseness to account the
Priesthood any other then the supreme dignity.

4. Now on the other part, concerning the Priests communicating of the mercies
of God to man, it is a certain dignity which cannot be expressed, and not
otherwise to be compared to other men, then as the Sea to rivolets, or the Sun,
or the whole element of fire to one of our little fires; because those
supernatuall gifts of God are to be received unitedly in him, which are
particularly to be divided among the people, according to the diversity of
measure whereof every one is capable; and this is not in such things as
accompany our nature, but in the divine nature, by an effusion of the fullness
of its very essence and perfection, overflowing the world, by virtue of the
holy Ghost, through, and after Christ's passion.

Conclude, to what great and high an excellency thou art called: do not be
sluggish, but cheerfully follow God who calls thee, and he will make thee able
for thy vocation: cast thy self upon him, but let it be thy whole self, with
all the latitude of thy heart, because so great an honor requires more then
all: follow him confidently, yet not trusting in thy self, but in him; for
gifts of such a nature are not of mortal birth, or of humane condition, but
spring from God.

45. Meditation. Of the Mission of the English Seminaries.
1. COnsider, what obligation thou undergoest for the undertaking of that work
which is destined for thee. First of all, thou have bound thy self with an
oath, which is a greater obligation then if thou were only tied by a vow, for a
promise is strengthened by an oath, as it is manifest in the very promises of
God: for in a vow thy faith and truth is obliged unto God, which is to be kept
for the reverence thou owe unto him; but in an oath the very truth of God is
engaged, to be observed with the same reverence.

2. Thou do moreover incur the obligation of justice, receiving thy
sustenance upon this condition and contract, that thou will assist with thy
labors and endeavors thy Country in extreme want of men that are fit (which
is to say, of such who are esteemed so, by them to whose care the nation it
self is committed) to help her in spiritualls, that is to say, in the chiefest
and extremest necessity; which obligation does necessarily prevent, and make
void every vow of a thing that is not compatible with it.

3. Thou art also bound by office; which bond is far more noble then any
private obligation of ones self, for it proceeds forth of an intention of a
common good, which is more eminent then any private profit, and it implies the
authority of a superior, for what is done by office is done by command. Since
therefore public authority excells by far, private power, it is a sin more
grievous to act contrary to a precept, then contrary to a private promise.

4. Add, that it is the command of such a superior which thou have not chosen
to thy self, nor has the people by any natural power granted them by God
among the gifts of nature imposed it upon thee; but whom God, and Christ our
Lord by a special decree of his wisdom has ordained, and commended to be
obeyed.

5. Moreover, which way the obligation of charity does bind other men, it ties
thee first, and strongest, since the aforesaid obligations do not dissolve it,
but increase it, and strain it closer. If therefore it be lawful for Monks for
charity sake to leave their Cloisters, and deserts, how much more art thou
bound not to forsake thy station, and prefer private profits, or ease, before
the Church of God?

Conclude to go on with what thou have undertaken, neither to be called aside
with vain fancies, and aliene hopes, from the office which is imposed upon
thee, nor to harbor any tentation of this kind.

46. Meditation. The Charge of a Seminary Priest.
1. COnsider, how that God ordained the life of man in such a manner, that the
perfection of charity may be had in any state; yet notwithstanding he appointed
one to be more fit then another, for the obtainment, and exercise thereof; whom
therefore we call more perfect, because charity is the form of perfection. See
now in what degree your state is placed; and if so be that you look upon the
employment whereunto you are called, the highest speculative action is to
Evangelise, that is, to be the Master of such as contemplate: the practical,
is to govern souls: both of them the chief works of charity, to teach the
ignorant, and correct sinners. But to administer the Sacraments is an office
altogether divine, not to be placed among humane actions.

2. If you look upon the condition of your life, it is to be among dangers,
where you always ought to be prepared to lay down your soul for your friend;
amids poverty, and necessity, that temporal gains may be always accounted as
dung, if you will rightly execute your Commission and Charge.

3. If you look upon your State, yours is such, which out of a perfect
contemplation, and possession of charity, extends it self to the care of your
neighbors, the action it self now not hinderng, but increasing charity.

4. If you look into the obligation wherewith you are bound, there cannot be a
greater thought of among men. To God you are tied with an oath, as great a
bond, as conscience has any; to your neighbor, in piety; to your Country in
the knot of humane necessity, in comparison of which the rest are to be
despised.

5. In the consideration of your Office, you have the common good for your end,
the highest, and most efficacious motive of a free action.

6. You are lastly bound with the necessity of a precept, seeing you set forth
to execute the work in obedience to the Pastor of the Universal Church, then
which there is none to be found in the whole earth more honorable, or of more
obligation, whilst you do persevere in the obedience of your Pastor, whose
very authority is derived from God by special ordination. Since therefore the
order of charity is to be greater, in those things unto which there is greater
obligation, it is not to be doubted but that your labors are bedewed with the
prime myrrh of charity.

Conclude, that whatsoever are the greatest goods among men, are bestowed by
God upon you: that it is not to be neglected, but that you must labor with an
earnest care, that you may show your self a worthy Minister.

47. Meditation. Of the dignity of a Priest.
1. COnsider, of how much dignity it is, and honor, to have received the
administering of God himself, although it be only for honor sake, to bear him
in your hands, to have him in your power, to give him to whom you will, and to
deny him to whom you list. See, how the Priest has received that which is not
granted to the Angels, nor was ever lawful for any but only to his blessed
mother. See, how not only men, and Monarchs, but the Angels also fall prone
before the knees of a Priest; not only to adore God in his hands, but also to
reverence such power granted unto men. For without doubt it is a certain degree
above their dignity, and senting of the infinity of the Divinity.

2. Add moreover, of what great power it is to sit a judge of men, not as
concerning strifes and injuries, but as of their very persons; what they have
done unbeseeming God, and themselves: judging it not by proofs, and
allegations, but by the simple truth, and a view of the very spirit of the man
himself. Of how much sovereignty is it, that the counselors of Kings, and
those that deal in mysteries of State are obliged to speak nakedly, and
clearly, before them, and to conceal nothing; to accuse themselves, and to
undergo as well the orders, as the punishments which the Pr^^st will impose
upon them. And how great dignity is it that God does not open, if the Priest
does shut, or loose, if there be any thing that he does bind; that he has put
the kingdom of heaven in a manner into his hands, that he may bestow it upon
such as he judges worthy, and keep him away whom he believes unworthy.

3. These are things that are wonderful, and of a fearful altitude, and
admiration, which we may yet in no wise doubt of, except we dare to reprove
Christ of falsehood, and infidelity. And is there yet any one so foolish, that
can think any thing besides this to be sublime, any thing else to be
honorable, or to be esteemed in humane dignities?

Conclude for to strive with all your strength to obtain befitting virtues, as
knowledge, prudence, and the love of God, and your neighbor: and knowing what
is committed to your charge, contemn all things, besides what may conduce, or
hinder you from the better performing of it. Be all wholly relishing of God, nor
defile your self with secular affairs, which, since they are by so much
inferior, are very unbeseeming you and your calling.

48. Meditation. The difficulties of the Seminary Priest in executing his
charge.
1. COnsider, specially, the charge that lies upon you: for it is commanded
that you both make them good that are sinful, and keep them so when you have
made them. Of which the first requires that you remove the heart and mind of
another, from those goods whereof he has a strong conceit, to new ones; a
business that is the hardest of hard things. And I add, from goods of such a
nature, that we see them with our eyes, and our senses; to such as are
invisible, of which we can neither bring experience, nor perceive any sensible
argument, or footstep, and they most opposite, and dissonant to those whereof
we have the present possession.

2. Neither are you to deal by illustrious miracles in an apostolical manner,
which of their own force are able to move and shake a man's heart; but by
reasons scarcely intelligible, and authorities to which they give no credit.

3. Nor are you to convince a nation which is yet rude, and unfashioned, and
thereupon amuzed with a new splendour of reason shining upon them, or the
curious strangeness of such things as are denounced unto them; but rather,
with men that are hardened, who have formerly fallen from the true faith, who
have a brawny heart to repulse your arguments, and who by perpetual custom,
are bred up, to believe that you are not to be believed, and how the things
whereto you persuade them, are but mere impostures.

4. But now, when they are brought to goodness, neither can you nurse them up,
and keep them in with civil laws, nor with ecclesiastical discipline, nor
with any outward splendor, or profit, as it were with milk, until they should
grow more ripe: but you have all the weight of humane diligence, and power,
pressing backwards, and leading contrary ways. And you are to work by means
that are purely spiritual, and not intelligible: which very thing, of what
labor and difficulty it is, he does not understand, who has not had
experience.

5. Add to these, the incommodities of your person, your dangers, I say, and
persecutions continual, and when it shall please God, either a prison, or
death. Oftentimes you shall have no certain home to put your head in, nor
scarce a friend to whom you will not be accounted troublesome, if you make your
access to his house. Your poverty is to be endured, and dissembled; and when
there is wanting for your self, you must yet be giving something to others.
Your adversaries are both abroad, and at home: and if you have gained any
thing, there will be those who will lay perpetual snares for you, and backbite
you. Others who are no ways better then you, will carry themselves insolently,
and have many to help them: they will domineer and abound, who yet profess the
contrary, when you are in want, who justly might enjoy those things, and do
suffer in very deed what others do avoid by professing to suffer them.

Conclude, if you favor any thing of matters which are celestial, to march on
with courage in the path of life, and to strive to enter by the narrow gate. Do
not through pusillammity or feebleness of courage, or any other fault of
yours, commit any thing that may make God esteem you unworthy of your calling;
bearing well in your mind, that the rewards are great, both of comfort in this
life, and of beatitude in the next, which wait for you.

49. Meditation. Of receiving the Blessed Encharist.
1. COnsider, thou art to receive into thy heart and body thy God, and that he
comes unto thee as great, and as glorious as he is accustomed to be seen by the
heavenly inhabitants, the conduit, and fountain of being, essence, and of all
goodness. How high is he? how glorious? how holy? how good? how abundant? and
how strong? how almighty? and how wise? how rich? how pious? how merciful? how
every way to be honored, and wholly desirable? such, and so great, does the
Son of God come to thee, and in the Son the Father, and in both the holy Ghost,
one, and true God, alone immortal, alone working wonders, alone good; the same
thy creator, who has bestowed upon thee the least of things, as well as the
greatest; whatsoever thou have, or art; whatever thou have had, or have been;
or shall have, or shall be. He is thy preserver, from whom as a beam, or ray
from the Sun, thou perpetually do spring, and flow, who to repair the ruins
of thy nature, falling away into a nothing, enriched thee with heaven, and
earth, and all those things that are n them. For thy benefit it rains, and is
fair; for thee has he prepared the Summer, and Winter, Spring, and Autumn.
Look round about, what thou do eat, with what thou art clothed, what those
things are that defend thee from the distemper of the air, and protect thee
from the violence of enemies; what thou do spend for the solace of thy
senses, or do take as medicines for thy health: thou shall see the East, and
West, the South, and the North, the surface of the earth, and the very bowels
thereof, the waters, and the air, moreover the ages that are present, and to
come, by Gods command (who comes to harbor himself with thee) have conspired
together for thy aid, and service.

2. Add moreover the ministering spirits for the salvation of the Elect, and
the watchful eye of God moving all things, not sparing himself in Christ, in
this banquet.

Conclude, with a trembling, and horror of thy entire soul, and body; with the
whole fullness, and submission of all thy affections; with the most inward, and
most secret searching, and cleansing of thy conscience; with a most enflamed,
and efficacious love, to receive, embrace, bind fast, and keep so much of
goodness, so much of grace, and felicity, streamed down by our Lord into thy
bosom; and convert thy self toward, and into it, with all thy whole strength
and endeavor.

50. Meditation. Of the most Blessed Sacrament.
1. COnsider, that Jesus Christ comes unto thee, to be personally received in
this Sacrament, in whom the fullness of the divinity does corporally dwell, to
whom the holy Ghost is given without measure, who is the head, and fountain,
and the worthy fullness of grace, science, and of all gifts and virtues.

2. He it is, that is the General, sent by God into this world perfectly to
bring it into subjection under God. He is the executor of the divine
providence, to perfect all his Counsel. He is the full, and universal
dispenser of his virtues, and graces. He is the Prince of men, and angels, and
the supreme head. He is at the last day to be the Judge, both of the living,
and the dead, and who is to dispose of rewards, and punishments, according to
the rate of their merits.

3. Again, it is he, who when he was God most blessed, took upon him the form
of a slave, and wailing sent forth his first voice: for thee he did partake of
the miseries of flesh, and blood, voluntarily suffering hunger, thirst, cold,
heat, anguish, grief, fear also, and anger, sadness, confusions, emulations,
envy, treacheries, dangers, infamy, reproaches, threats, and death it self, for
thy sake.

4. He, who for thy love, powered forth the overflowing assaults of nature by a
deadly sweat of blood upon the earth, so preciously watered. He, who was
contented for thee to be apprehended, after the manner of malefactors, to be
drawn along, accused by false witnesses, to be unjustly judged, to appear
before judges of all sorts, and to be made a scorn unto soldiers, servants,
and contemptible slaves. He, who being innocent, blushed not to be whipped, to
be crowned with thorns, to be covered with a robe of derision, to bear a reed
in his hand with which he should be beaten, and to be offered up a scorn to the
ungrateful people, though all in vain, to appease their causeless envy. He,
who was willing to carry a cross upon his shoulders, to be nailed unto it, to
be deputed among the wicked, to drink vinegar, and gall; and the discipline of
thy peace being finished, to undergo the divorcement of soul, body, and the
last drop of his blood, that thou might be spared.

Conclude, what a banquet, what a charger of dainties, what an one, and how
rich a potion of all health, has God mingled for thee with his own hand? O
unworthy man, if thou make thy access with a lukewarm, or negligent
affection! and how much more, if thou neglectest to come at all?

FINIS.
AN INDEX of the MEDITATIONS delivered in this Manual.
Of the Beginning and End of Man. fol.
1. Meditation. Of the Creation of the World. 1 2. Med. Of the Fall of the
Angels. 3 3. Med. Of the Creation of Man. 5 4. Med. Of Original Justice. 8 5.
Med. Of the Fall of Man. 12 6. Med. Of Sin. 15 7. Med. The Effects of Sin. 17
8. Med. Of Death. 20 9. Med. Of a Damned Soul. 23 10. Med. The Torments of a
Damned body. 26 11. Med. The Condition of Adams posterity after his fall. 28
12. Med. Of Gods Mercy to the Jews. 31 13 Med. Of Gods continued mercy and man's
misery. 34 14 Med. Of Man's Redemption. 38 15. Med. How God became Man. 41 16.
Med. Of the Preparation for the Coming of our Savior. 44
Of Christian Virtues. fol.
1. Med. Of Faith. 49 2. Med. Of the Church. 50 3. Med. Of the Supremacy of the Sea of Rome. 52 4. Med. Of Gods goodness. 54 5. Med. Of Hope. 55 6. Med. Of
Charity. 57 7. Med. Of Gods love to man. 60 8. Med. Of love to our Neighbors.
63 9. Med. Of Duty to our Parents. 65 10. Med. The Duties which we owe unto our
Country. 67 11. Med. Of Obedience. 69 12. Med. Of obedience to Supcriours. 71
13. Med. Of Liberality and Gratitude. 74 14. Med. Of Rash Judgment. 77 15.
Med. Of Detraction. 79 16. Med. Of Slanderers. 81 17. Med. Of good works. 84
18. Med. Of Government, 87 19. Med. Of Scandal. 90 20. Med. Of Rashness. 92
21. Med. Of Martyrdom. 94 22. Med. Of Perseverance. 97 23. Med. Of observation
of order and discipline. 100 24. Med. Of Courage and Constancy. 103 25. Med. Of
Passionate Desires. 105 26. Med. Of humble submission to the Divine Providence.
107 27. Med. Of Prayer. 110 28. Med. Of humility and reverence toward God. 112
29. Med. Of heedfull attention to Gods Inspirations. 115 30. Med. Of Reverence
due to Saints. 118 31. Med. Of Devotion to our B. Lady. 120 32. Med. Of the
daily sacrifice of the Catholic Church. 123 33. Med. The Frailty of the Body.
126 34. Med. Of the miseries of the Soul. 129 35. Med. Of the knowledge of our
selves. 132 36. Med. Of Covetousness. 135 37. Med. Of Carnality. 138 38. Med.
Of the State of Wedlock. 141 39. Med. Of Gluttony. 145 40. Med. Of
Drunkenness. 147 41. Med. Of Anger. 150 42. Med. Of Learning. 153 43. Med. Of
Theology. 156 44. Med. The excellency of the State of Priesthood. 159 45. Med.
Of the Mission of the English Seminaries. 162 46. Med. The charge of a Seminary
Priest. 165 47. Med. Of the Dignity of a Priest. 168 48. Med. The difficulties
of the Seminary Priest executing his charge. 171 49. Med. Of receiving the B.
Eucharist. 175 50. Med. Of the most B. Sacrament. 178
These titles although not in the original, are yet prefixed to the
Meditations, and this precedent table adjoined for the benefit of the Reader.
if there be any mistake pray pardon it; and correct the errors in the print
thus.

Fol. 69. lin. 2. for confess read confer. f. 80. l. 13. for faul r. fault.
f. 88. l. 10. for there r. their. f. 95. l. 23. for these r. those. f. 115. l.
ult. for wills r. nilleth. f. 118. l. 22. for deiformd r. deiform. f. 126. l.
14. dele thy.

Omnia mea facta, dicta, sed and cogitata (si quae been) cum a Deo solo sint,
ad Dei solius gloriam diriguntor.

Quae vero male, cum illa proprie mea sint, Jesu redemptoris mei misericordiae,
and Sanctissimae Ecclesiae summique Pastoris ejus Censuris humillime
submittuntor.

W. C.


