THE Day DAWNED BOTH TO JEWS AND GENTILES, And Clear Discoveries of LIGHT AND
Righteousness; The Bright and Morning STAR Appearing.

Jacob wrestled with the Angel until the breaks of the day, and would not let
him go until he blessed him. Printed in the Year. 1684.

The Day dawned both to Jews and Gentiles, and clear discoveries of Light and
Righteousness.
IN the Beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God, and the same was with him in the Beginning; by it was all things made that
was made, and without it was nothing made that was made: so without him their
is nothing can be made: as he said without me ye can do nothing, so then it is
by Grace in Jesus Christ that Salvation comes; for by Grace are ye saved, as
he says unto Paul, My Grace is sufficient for thee; so Grace and Truth came by
Jesus Christ the Lord of Glory, in whom all Glory ends, unto whom all Glory
is returned and ascribed, unto him who si^teth upon the Throne, who lives for
ever, before whom the four and twenty Elders and Beast fell down and Worshipped
God, saying, Worthy, worthy is the Lord God and the Lamb, and to receive all
Power, Honor, Glory, Might, Majesty, and Dominion be given unto him that
lives for ever and for ever more: not unto us beause we can do nothing, but
all honor unto him because he can do all things, who created all things by the
Word of his Power, which word breathed into Man the breath of Life, in the
beginning, and the word is Life, and in it is the Light of Men, and the Light
is perfect, and comes from above from the Father of Lights, and as the Father
has Life in himself, so he has given the Son to have life in himself; and
whosoever believe in the Son, has Eternal Life in him, and he that has not
the Son has not Life, but I am come that ye may have Life, and that ye may
have it more abundantly, that your joy may be full, that ye may know Life and
Immortality brought to light. By him that is true, is the perfection of Beauty,
who is the Glory of all Nations, unto him shall the gathering of all Nations
be, that they may see him in his shinings, of whom the Prophets have foretold,
and behold, it is now come to pass, his coming was prophesied of, that he
should come in, and with his thousands and ten thousands, with his innumerably
companies and Troops and Armies of Saints and Angels, and the Armies that are
in Heaven follow him, who rides on his White Horse, whose face is as
lightning, and his Raiment as white as Snow, who has a Rainbow about his Head,
and now he is come to Reign, and to sit on the Throne; he that was dead is now
alive, he lives for evermore; he that says, Behold, I come quickly, and I will
not tarry; and for the cry of the Poor, and the sighing of the needy, I will
arise, says the Lord of Hosts, I have heard, I have heard the cries of my
Afflicted, I have heard, I have heard the groaning of the oppressed, and I am
coming down to deliver, because the cries of Sion as unto me the cries of the
traveling ones, whose pains shall hasten, deliver; and because this is her
cry, How long Lord holy and true art thou, arise and avenge our cause on them
that dwell on the Earth, also this was the cry of the slain that lay under the
Altar, that was slain, and filled all the day long, these had the Testimony of
Jesus, these were beheaded for it, these had no other head but Christ, these
were hidden in him, and he was head over them, and all that did Reign as head
over them were taken away; So Christ in them was the Supreme Authority, he
Reigned King in his Kingdom, where the Kingdoms of the World are become the
Kingdom of God; and his Christ, and he is become all and all in them: These are
the true Spouse that is coming up out of the Wilderness, leaning upon the
breast of her beloved, and indeed there is no other to be leaned upon besides
him, upon whom help is laid, he has laid help on him that is mighty, and
whither shall we go but unto him, Thou have the word of Eternal life, the word
of life and peace, that satisfies the disquieted Soul, for it is he that
dissolves the doubts by the sweet incomes of his love, and sweet distilling
Showers from above, by his former and latter Rain, and blessed are all they
that feel and enjoy it, yea, most of all happy and crowned for ever shall they
be that dwell in his love. O what shall I say, there is not greater love, more
enduring love, more constraining love, confirming love, it confirms and
establishes that heart that feels it; they can say, O God my heart is fixed in
thee and upon thee not in the form but in the power of God; such are fixed
Stars, fixed in the Firmament of God's power, shining Stars, some greater and
some lesser, every one in its Degree and Order, the wise Creator has fixed
them in the Firmament of his glorious power, such come to shine above the Word,
above the dark forms of the World, in the Firmament of the Heavens in Paradise.
Again, where God has Planted them, as in that day wherein the Morning Stars
did sing together, and the Sons of God shouted for joy, there was a mutual
harmony, an Angelical harmony, an innocent harmony, all must be brought unto
this into Innocence, into Joy and Humility; as the Angels in Heaven, so God
will make up his Church of such Jewels, as he will complete and bind them up in
the bond of Peace and covenant of Love, out of all strife, he will redeem them,
and from amongst men. And the numberless number which John saw on Mount Sion of
all Nations, Kindreds, Tongues, and People which were to be brought there,
which God is bringing to pass in this our day; yea, of all Nations, and of all
sorts, of People the Lord is now gathering, as a Shepherd gathers his Sheep
together and brings them to their Fold; so is Christ the true Shepherd,
bringing all the true Jews to the Heavenly Jerusalem from above, not only into
one form, but into the heavenly power, and heavenly life of Jesus where they
shall sing Hallelujah with the Lord God, and the Lamb, who has redeemed them,
and such as are redeemed by his power, and washed by the word of Regeneration,
who are made white in the Blood of the Lamb, who are come to the Blood of
Sprinkling, and to know their Conscience washed from dead works, these come
again to serve the living God, and worship him in the beauty of holiness in the
light of Righteousness; into it must the Nations be gathered, the Nations of
them that are saved, must walk in the light of the Lord, and of the Lamb in the
Light of the Holy City, in the Light of the New Jerusalem, and the Lord is
gathering all Nations inone place of Worship, into his own Spirit, the Spirit
of Truth as he says, such Worshippers is my Father, seeking to worship him;
and in the beginning of the first creation, he said, Let the Waters be gathered
into one place; so the people are the Waters which are to be gathered into one
place of Worship. And John saw the numberly number that stood upon Mount Sion
of all Nations, and he says, I heard the sound of many Waters, as of a great
people with Harps, harping with their harps, and they sung a new song which
none could learn, but they that followed he Lamb; these were the redeemed of
God which were brought home, these sung before his Throne, who lived for, ever,
who had their Names written in Heaven, these Reigned with the Lamb over the
Beast, and over his power, these were sealed with the Seal of God in their
foreheads, and in their right hand they stood upon the Sea of Glass mingled
with fire; and John said, I hear as it were the sound of a Trumpet, it talking
with me; so all the redeemed comes to hear as well as John the sound of the
Trumpet, it of God sounding from heaven in them; that Trumpet sounded clearer
and clearer, which is the way of the Bridegroom talking with them who are his
true Spouse, as a man talks with his friend: So they come to the Ministration
of the Spirit, unto the ministration of Angels; he says, Come let us reason
together, and Abraham reasoned with the Lord, and convened with the Lord, unto
whose house the Angels came; and the Lord says, shall I do any thing and hide
it from my servant Abraham: so all that truly serve the Lord and fear the Lord,
they are of the faithful Generation of Abraham, and shall be accounted to the
Lord for a Generation; yea, his Seed shall serve him, the chosen Seed unto whom
the promise is so, they shall be a numberless number that shall come from the
four Winds of the Earth, and hasten to the Holy City, whose Gates are not shop
by day nor by night, but yet the unclean cannot enter therein, none but the
redeemed, the washed and purified by the Spirit of Judgment, and burning them
that do pass through the Rivers of Judgment, that do pass through Jordan, such
enter the good Land, and know Judgment brought forth into Victory, so the Lamb
and the Lion comes to lie down together, and the little child shall lead them;
so they come to be lead by Christ their leader, they are little children in
Christ, he that would be greatest amongst his Disciples, must become as this
little child, as Christ himself says, so they must be led by him as those
little children that cannot go of themselves, nor are not able to do any thing
without him, as he says unto Peter, Once thou girdest thy self, and wentest
whither thou would, but another shall gird thee, and thou shall be led
whither thou would not, so he leads his into a daily cross and self-denial;
Christ says, if any man will follow after me, and be my Disciple, he must
first deny himself, and take up his daily cross, and follow me; a cross to the
carnal mind, which stands in death and enmity to the pure appearance of the
Lord Jesus Christ. So to be carnally minded is death, but to be Spiritually
minded is life and peac; Sow to the Spirit that you may reap life; for if ye
sow to the flesh you will reap the wages of sin and death; but all that come to
the gift of God, which is Life and Truth, and receive it in the love of it,
they come to be set free by it, and if the Truth set you free, then are you
free indeed, no more children of the Bondwoman, but of the Freewoman, which
brings forth the Heir of life, the Son of Righteousness, which she comes to be
clothed with, and to have the Moon under her Feet, she is clothed with his
Righteousness, with the Righteousness of Faith, which speaks on this wise,
Justification by Jesus Christ, Abraham by Faith was justified, and his Faith
was imputed to him for Righteousness: so every one that is a child of Faith,
they are of Abraham's seed, according to promise, they feel their Faith
speaking to them better things than the blood of Abel, so they grow up in
Faith, and from Faith to Faith, and from strength to strength, and so at last
they meet with the Lord in Sion, where they behold the King in his beauty; and
these come to say, How beautiful are thy Tents O Israel, how excellent are the
dwellings of Jacobs O Israel? who is like to thee a People saved of the Lord;
and this shall be the Song that shall be heard in the Land of Judea; we have a
strong City for which God has appointed salvation for Walls and for Bulworks,
a City that has foundations whose Builder and Maker is God.

The God of Abraham and of Israel,
Has caused us in pleasant Tents to dwell.
Abraham was perfect, he was in his Tent
when the Angel to him God then had sent.
Jacob a plain man dwelt in Tents,
Therefore O Israel hasten in within thy Tent,
And stand within thy Tent door that the Angels
of God thou may see come in unto thee,
When they do glad tidings brings
That thou may Hallelujah sing, for evermore.
For such redemption is drawing nigh,
That the redeemed shall sing on high;
Yea their peace shall so increase,
They shall make sweet melody.
So turn into your strong hold ye Prisoners of hope, hold fast your Hope,
Faith, and Confidence, which Anchors go in him that is the Rock, which the
Storms never did nor never can, nor never shall more, that it may be known you
are the man's building, that the Rain nor Storms could not beat down, because it
was grounded upon the Rock; then you will come to say, and experience, that
Greater is he that is in you, than he that is without you, or he that is in the
World; so the Prince of this World comes to try and to sift your Building, but
all that are anchored in the Rock in Christ Jesus, who did conquer and
overcome, and was made perfect through suffering so all that are in him, shall
be made more than Conquerours, through his love; this is their victory, even
their Faith, by which they overcome the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; so by
Faith Noah entered into the Ark, which by Faith he had built: so all ye that
have built this day, the Ark of God's. Covenant by Faith, and are entered into
it, will have a safe hiding place within the rock, an hiding place, which is
sure for ever; and all who are without this, who are not so surely builded, the
Floods is coming that will wash them away, and quite beat down their building,
such will be seen to be the foolish builders, whose house is upon the sands,
where no foundation can be laid, and blessed is that man whose God is the Lord
this day that comes to experience, and to say, O the height and the depth, the
length and the breadth of the love of God which we have in Christ Jesus, that
unseparable love, that superabounding love, that far exceeds the love of Women,
of which I am persuaded, neither Principalities nor Powers, things past, things
present, nor that which is to come, will be able to separate those from this
love of God, which they have in Christ Jesus, who are firmly fixed therein, as
the Sun in the firmament, by a perpetual decree, so do the fixed Stars stand
upheld by the Lords right hand, these are the true Spouse, that leans on her
beloveds breast; he does her Aid and Assist, he nourished her in the
Wilderness, for in times, time, and half a time, until the Flood and Storm is
over and the Man-child, the Whale is cast up unto God, and into his Throne, so
he that overcomes will I give to sit in my Throne, as I overcome and sit in my
Fathers Throne, so he that overcomes has right to eat of the Tree of Life; he
that does the commandment of Jesus, he overcomes he enters into the Gates of
the holy City, whose Gates are filled with praises and everlasting Hallelujahs,
which all the Redeemed shall sing for ever, who does know the overcoming in
them. Come up thou North wind and blow, and thou East wind and blow, and South
and West wind and blow upon the Garden, and kindle the Spices thereof, that the
frequent smell of the sweet Spices may go forth, that when the beloved comes to
walk there in his Garden, he may take delight in the sweet favor thereof, that
it may be as the savor of Jacob, as of the field which the Lord has blessed,
the sweet breath of Jacob, and breathing forth of life: my beloved is become as
a Fountain of Gardens, and sweet distilling showers, always distilling and
dropping the sweet heavenly showers, my beloved is become as a bed of sweet
Spices, and as the dew of Hermon distilling and running down as the sweet
Odours and precious Ointment, he is altogether lovely, he is the chief of ten
thousand, his doctrine drops as the dew, and as the sweet showers in the Summer
spring, which causes the Lilies to grow; and the Turtle does sing in the sweet
valleys where the Rivers of God's pleasure does flow.

The Wilderness shall become as a pleasant Spring,
The Desert forth her pleasant fruits shall bring.
And the faithful shall both rejoice and sing.
And now my beloved friends, I shall show you a more excellent way, a way which
the Lord has cast up, a high and a glorious way, a way for the ransomed and
the redeemed to walk in, a way that the wayfaring man, though a fool, shall not
err therein, the way which is Christ, the new and living way, and the good old
way so as many as has received Christ, so let them walk in him, and he is the
way that is new cast up, for the Gentiles to walk in, the way, the truth, and
the life, and no man comes to the Father but by me, says Christ, and no man
comes to me but he whom the Father draws, so all must come to the feeling of
the drawings of the Father in them, who draws them to the Son, that they may
know the Son lifted up in them, who will then draw all men after him, so as the
outward Sun draws up by the heat and virtue thereof, and by its shining, all
the Trees and Fruits of the Earth, so the inward Sun, the Sun of Righteousness,
it draws up all the Trees of Righteousness after him: Ye are the Trees of
Righteousness, the planting of the Lord, and he shall grow up as a young Plant,
and as a Tree by the Rivers of Water, whose leaf shall never fail, but always
shall prosper, they shall be as green Olive-branches round about his table. And
Joseph was as a fruitful bow growing by a Well side, whose branches did spread
over the wall, over the wall of Separation, his sheaf came to overtop all the
other; though the Archers shot at him,

Yet Joseph's Bow abode in strength,
And he got the victory at length;
And how the famine got into their land,
They were not aware, neither did they understand.
But at last when they came to see.
Then to Joseph submit must they.
And now Oh my beloved friends, you that have the living taste and sweet savor
of life, eat and drink abundantly, for the more you taste, the more you will
desire, it is desirable meat it is meat indeed, as Christ says, My flesh is
meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed, and except ye eat my flesh and drink
my blood you have no life in you. These were hard sayings to be understood,
about which their minds fell a reasoning: Can this man give us his flesh to
eat, reasoning like Nicodemus, who came to Jesus by night, reasoning with flesh
and blood, which stands in the darkness; but flesh and blood never revealed
these things, but he that is born of the Spirit comes to see these things
revealed by the Spirit of Christ the Lord; and as the Wind blows where it
lists, so the Spirit descends from heaven like a Dove; and behold, says
the true Spouse, My beloved has Doves eyes, so they that were waiting at
Jerusalem for the promise of his coming the second time, he came and appeared
in the midst of them, as he faith I will be in the mid^t of them, he ascended
upon them, when the doors were shut, as a mighty rushing Wind so fell the Holy
upon them, which sat upon each man like a Dove, they then came to speak which
new tongues the wonderful things of God which they had seen, and these things
are now seen by his descending again from Heaven as lightning, and as die
lightning comes cut of the east, and shines into the west, so shall the
coming of the Son of Man the second time without sin to salvation, and we have
seen his coming and the enlightening Angels of his presence is coming to
enlighten the whole earth, according to his ancient promise, it is now coming
to pass, the glory and knowledge of the Lord shall fill and cover the earth, as
the waters fill and cover the sea, so it is the spiritual bread and spiritual
wine that the outward flesh and blood signifies; the inward and spiritual
Grace, the inward spiritual bread, which ail his Disciples did, and do seed on,
as they said evermore, Give us this bread; and, I am the bread of life, said
Christ, and whosoever eats thereof, they shall never hunger again, and
whosoever shall drink of the waters that I shall give, they shall never hunger
again, and but it shall be in them a well of waters springing up unto
everlasting life; these are the pleasant waters, the waters of Shiloh, which
runn softly, sweetly, and pleasantly, as the honey out of the rock, so is the
springing in of the word of life more sweeter than the honey and the
honeycomb, this is the new Wine of the Kingdom, the fruits of the heavenly
wine which the saithfull drink of every day, new in the Fathers kingdom, and
this is the cup of Blessing, this is the spiritual Bread and Wine, this is the
spiritual Supper of the Lord Jesus Christ, and this all are to eat of, until
the Lord come in them.

The outward Supper was but a Figure and a Sign of the inward and Spiritual
Grace, so the inward Spiritual Grace and Heavenly Bread, is that which the
outward figured out, so great is the Mystery of Godliness; Christ manifests
in mortal flesh, and these things has the Lord in his wisdom hid from the
wise, and the prudent of this world; and he has revealed them unto Babes and
sucklings, even to new born Babes, that are new born. Again, they that desire
the sincere milk of the Word that they may grow thereby, but many prophets and
wise men desired to see these things, but they did not see them therefore, the
world by its wisdom never came to know God, but he that will be truly wise in
the things that are of God, must first become a fool as to tthe Worlds wisdom,
and come to a Child-like state; My little Children, says the faithful and
true, for whom I again travel in birth until Christ be formed in you.

The figleav'd garment though sewed with a seam,
It shall not serve to cover the unclean,
But their nakedness this day will be seen;
The people walk in clouds and forms,
They do not seee clear light,
But the day draws near, he will appear,
And he will shine most bright.
The Lord of Hosts is coming into the Vineyard this day, and to look over it,
and to look for the fruits thereof, and behold, says the Lord of Hosts, I
planted my Vineyard upon a very fruitful Mountain, I dug a well therein,
and made a a Wine Press therein, I also made a Tower therein, all this have I
done; what more could the Lord of Hosts have done that he has not done for his
Vineyard: but he comes to look for fruit there, but behold wild Grapes, Grapes
some of Sodom and Egypt; therefore thus s^i^h the Lord of Hosts, Repent and
return, and work your first works, else, Behold I come quickly and lay the
Vineyard desolate, and take away the Hedge that was about it, and let in the
Beasts of prey upon it; I will also forbid the clouds that they shall not tain
upon it. And this is the Lamentation mentation that may be taken up over a
great part of the house of Israel, who does bound in their pride as well as
other iniquities, by which the truth of God comes greatly to suffer by their
unrighteous walking, who profess the Light and walk in darkness; which causes
the people to say, All are alike, but we say, No, the workers of Iniquity must
bear their burden, but the children of the Light, and of the day of God, they
will be clear of the works of Iniquity, and of the workers thereof: The day of
separation is coming, although the Seed of Israel was in number as the sand on
the Seashore, yet but a remnant of them shall be saved: and let not any think
the worse of the precious truth, because of the ill carriages of some, and the
debauchery of some because of the breaking out of the^r corruption, who never
were well wounded, nor never came to the sound healing, but tins was the
complaint of the daughter of Sion, her wounds were slightly healed, therefore
all come to the search, how have thou been wounded; have the Dragon had such a
wound in his head that he can never be healed more: he that will wound the
Dragon is come and slay Ahab: yea, the Angels hand is laying hold of the
Dragon, the old Serpent called the Devil, and all his pride and iniquities
shall be slain with him, the Lord will search the camp, and all shall see what
hinders them, what Golden wedge is hidden in it, and every one must cast lots,
and choose to himself: Is it, I; Is it, I; What sleeper is there for which cause
the waves thus beat? read within what is hidden within the Vessel, is there not
a sleeper, if there be, arise and awake, it is high time, the God of Heaven is
coming to make known who are his own, and what is his own, and what is not he
will cast out: the Kingdom of God is like a net, that brought up the Fish both
good and bad; but in the day when he gathers them into Vessels, he shall cast
the bad into the Sea again; every particular will then be concerned: Is it, I;
Is it, I; am I a wise Virgin, have I oil in my lamp, and is my lamp made ready,
and is it burning, for the midnight cry is gone forth, behold the Bridegroom
comes, every one is concerned for himself; seeing my oil will not serve
another, nor another for me, what does the witness of God say, every one must
feel this, the Spirit of Jesus to justify him, and this is the peace that none
can give nor take away, so every one must be reconciled unto God through Jesus
Christ the reconciler, who came to reconcile the World unto himself, so all
must follow him that reconciler that reconciles, the Lamb of God that takes
away the sins of the World, he makes perfect as pertaining to the conscience,
this is the perfect law of God, the covenant which is sure; so there is
perfection in the light of the Lord God and of the Lamb, and he perfect ail
that are sanctified, and all the works of God are perfect, and there are all
complete in him, so all must follow the Lord and his leadings, and direct
guidings,, who goes safely on as the measure of grace, as he has received and
believed in, so they will come to walk by faith which they have in them selves,
this is the word of says which was once delivered unto the Saints, which word
we also preach to the world, and to this word the Apostle recommends every one
unto the word of his grace, which is able to save them, lead them, guide them,
and direct them, and build them up in the most holy faith, and I can say no
other thing hut direct all unto the word of faith, unto the faithful witness in
their own conscience, and there to look and wait for the appearance and coming
more and more of the Lord Jesus Christ, therefore hasten Lord Jesus and come
quickly.

And blessed is he, who is found this day having on his Wedding Garment; for
when the King came and beheld his guests, when they were come into the Bride
Chamber, he looked over them; he there (...) on who had not on his Wedding
Garment, he said friend, How came thou hither, having not on the Wedding
Garment? How many this day are got under the profession pretended Friend, as he
says? How came thou hither? Have thou put off the Old Man with his deeds,
and put on the New Man which is Christ, as he says? Put on the Lord Jesus and
be clothed with him. But how is the Wedding Garment put on? Art thou clothed
with the Day Stars of God, with the everlasting Righteousness with the
Righteousness of Saints? put on changing of Raiment the pure and white linen,
the Garment that is washed of the Lamb; which must be without Spot, or Stain, or
Blemish, or any such thing. So must be every member that belong to the glorious
Body of Christ, for as he is so are his members all complete in him, this is
the spouse the Lambs wife, the Bride that has made her self ready washed and
made white in his Blood: shining in his glory and in the beauty of Holiness
without Spot, or Stain, or wrinckle, or any such thing; these are as sheep come
up from the washing made pure and white in the blood of the Lamb, these have
passed through Death, and such he will crown with life and dominion over Death
and Hell. They shall reign and know the thousand years Sabbath, the Sabbath of
rest; as it is said they shall reign with him a thousand years and for ever and
ever lasting; so blessed is he and they that has a part in the first
Resurrection, on whom the second Death shall have no power, and I am the
Resurrection and the life said Christ, and he that believes in me, said
Christ, shall never die nor see Death. And I will raise him in the last day, he
must be raised in the day in the Light of the Lord which is day, Christ is the
light, they must arise in him; I in them, and thet in me, and he that is in
Christ is a new Ceature. All old things are passed away and all things become
new; and he that has Christ has crucified the flesh with the lust and
affections thereof; so they come to be crucified to the World, and the World to
them: so they come to leave their grave clothing behind fallen Adams
transgression, the sinful lust of die flesh, and pride of the world, and pomps
and vanities thereof, that which people have been long a talking of; but
leaving those things undone which they should have done: but the Lord is coming
to face die Nations whose face is in his hand, and to make known the sayer from
the doer, but it is he that does his will shall be justified in that day,
wherein he will make up his Jewels and him will he spare as a man spares his
only Son that serves him, he that does my commandments he is my Disciple, ye
are my Disciples if ye do all whatsoever I command you.

The harlot like the ture Spouse does her self adress,
She stands up perfection, she does profess,
But God is come and coming, her to discover
She shall be seen before the day is over.
Although she sits and rules much like a Queen,
The day is coming, wherein she shall be seen;
And all flesh has sinned and come short of the glory of God,
And all flesh had corruped the way before the Lord:
And alt has been Children of wrath, and we as well as others
Ye all has been born blind from the Mother Eve.
Until the Lord Jesus Christ Anointed the Eyes of the Blind, with the ointment
of his own making, or eye Salve: by which he has done the cure as he did to
the Blind Man, who was born blind; and when he was asked how he came to see,
his answer was this one thing. I know whereas I was once blind, I now see,
although the mighty and the learned could not believe, saying, How could this
Man do these Works he being a Sinner? thus they condemn the Just one; and it is
said, he could work no Maircles in his own Country for their unbelief sake; so
they that do believe can now say with the Blind Man, whereas I was once blind I
now see, and this I know is the Maircles he is now a working and a doing, that
the Nations may see and be saved. And every eye shall see him, and the powers
of Heaven shall move, then shall they see his coming in the Clouds of Heaven
with power and with great Glory; and we have more than a cloud of Witnesses who
have seen his coming in them: so these are clouds who have the Rain in them,
and the wells who have water in them, so many as have reserved the spirit of
Christ are the clouds in which Christ raineth, not the outward clouds seeing he
faith we have more then a cloud of witnesses, but in men he is coming to reign
yea in thousands and ten thousands, these are the Armies which are in Heaven
that follow the Lamb, these are the numberless number which no man could
number, and John inquired of the Angel what are these, and he said, these are
them that have passed through great tribulation, whose garments are made white
in the blood of the Lamb and they follow the Lamb which way ever he goes;
therefore they were clothed in white for they were worthy, these Sung a new
Song that none could learn, nor none never can learn but the followers.

Of the Lamb it is a new Song indeed,
That none can sing but the holy Seed
That through death comes to be freed.
And have they not all heard, ye verily his sound is gone forth into all Lands,
and his words to the end of the Earth; so they heave all hard but they have not
all obeyed. If ye here and obey then it shall go well with ^ou, its the willing
and obedient that shall eat the good of the Land, but the disobedient mail
dwell in a dry Land they shall be like the heath in the desert that shall not
know when good comes, therefore obedience is better then sacrifice, and to
hearken is better then the fat of Ramms. Therefore hear that your souls may
live, hear what the Spirit and the Bride says, come up hither, come up to the
mountain of the God of Jacob, and he will teach you of his ways, and ye shall
walk in his paths in the path of peace; in which all the ransomed of the Lord
walk and all the redeemed who inhabit the holy mountain of his holiness, where
no destroyer can never come, therefore blessed are the undefiled in the way who
walk in the way of holiness, in the path of peace: which leads them to that
eternal Joy where all the saints in light have their true rest, and where they
come to profess that year that passes all understanding, whether has ear
heard, whether have it entered into the heart of Man, neither can it be
conceived by any, the riches of the love of God, the treasures of life, the
fullness of joy, and unspeakable glory that is laid up for all the faithful ones
who came to inhabit this holy mountain wherein is the feast of Tabernacles, or
feast of fat things, the wine well refined from the lees. So they that dwell in
thy house they always will praise thee, they that inhabit thy holy Mountain,
they shall always sing Hallelujah with him that inhabits Eternity and dwells
in the light, he also dwells with the Children of men, unto that man will I
look said the Lord who is of a broken heart; and a contrite Spirit: and
trembles at my word. So the eye of the Lord runs to and fro in the Earth, but
his eye is upon the faithful that they may dwell with him, so he says, I will
walk in them and dwell in them, and they shall be my people and the Tabernacle
of God is with men, and he will place his name in the midst of them; the name
of the great Jehovah in which is everlasting strength, and now the Angel is
flying forth, saying, now is Salvation come, the ^ingdom of our God and the
power of his Christ and blessed are they who witness this saying, the Kingdom
of God. Come, in them and the day of his power come, in them which is Christ
the power of God, these know the reign of Christ and the second coming of
Christ in the flesh, so every Spirit that confesieth that Jesus Christ is come
in the flesh, is of God; and they that deny his coming in the flesh, are of
Antichrist, but many will confess that Jesus Christ once came in the flesh, but
they must come to know the second coming of Christin their flesh, so than they
come to a right knowledge of Christ in them the hope of their glory, and such
will come to say, although, I have known Jesus Christ after the flesh, I shall
henceforth know him So no more but after the spirit, a quicknig Spirit, the
Lord from Heaven; who is come to quicken and make alive them that were dead in
sins and trespasses: so these come to know the work that Christ came to do in
them, and and to make them alive unto God, so ye that were once dead in your
sins and trespasses, he has made alive; and these are faithful witnesses of
his coming and resurrection: who have seen his comingin them? yea Christ is
their Wisdom, their Sanctification, and Redemption; and they can say the day of
the redeemed is come wherein they come up as sheep from the washing, and
through the washing of Regeneration. These comes to be washed from all Spots
and Stains, and to ware there washed Garments without spot or stain, these were
the number that John saw they were not defiled with Women, but they were
Virgins that follow the Lamb so was the State of the Church of Christ
signified, and foreshone by the Angel unto the faithful: and he says, I send
mine Angels to testify the things to the Churches, he that walked in the midst
of the golden Candlestick, he that is in the midst of the Holy City; the
streets whereof is paved with pure gold, and he says, I will make die Soul of
man more precious than the golden wedg^ of Ophir so he is purifying and
refining as a refiner of Silver, and a purifier of gold as seven times in the
fire, that his workman-ship may shine forth in the Nations. And Christ says, I
come to kindle a fire in the Earth, and what if it be already kindled, but do
thou feel a spark of this holy fire, that Christ is kindling of it in thee of
his fire of Love, do thou feel the smoking flax begin to smoke in thy heart?
And do thou feel the bruised Reed? Do thou feel thy heart begin to be made
tender, and a desire begin to arise to know the Lord? Then surely the Lord will
not quench this smoking flax, tho it be but a Spark, it shall become a flame:
and he will not break the brased reed, but he will bring it forth to victory.
So though the grace be little in appearance it is strong enough, it is
sufficient to save all that trust in it, it is saving grace, so though the
faith be little as a grain of Mustardseed; it is able to remove the Mountains,
and to raire the hills far away, it is like the little leeven that the Woman
hid in the three measures of Meal, until the whole lump was levened; so grace
is the leeven which as it works in thee, it will work such a change and beget
such a pure mind, such a Spiritual, a Christ like mind, so thou will become
like minded and changed into his divine Nature, a natural branch ingrafted into
the vine and taken of the wild Olive, and ingrafted into the new stock, so the
root will be new and the fruit will be new also; so thou will come to know the
root and offspring of David, thou will spring and grow up in him who is the
righteous branch of David, who shall spring forth as die Cedar of Lebanon, and
grow as a tree by the Rivers of water, whose leaf shall never fade this tree,
shall grow again in Paradise; and shall bring forth twelve manner of fruits,
and shall yield its fruit every month, and bring it forth in due season; so the
people of the Lord are taught of the Lord, and in righteousness they come to be
established, and great shall be their peace and their peace shall flow as the
River; they shall be as a well watered Garden, who feel the heavenly, bedewing
and showers, the former and the latter Rain, the showers of his mercy which are
renewed morning by morning, so they will come to learn the parable if the
fig tree, when she began to put forth her tender bud, as in the the time of
spring, then behold Summer draws neigh, does this fig tree begin to cast
forth her buds in the do, thou feel the time of come in thee, is there a
spring of life springing up in the? than sinners draws neigh wherein the
turtles voice will be heard, and the singing of Birds will be known, and such
will come to sing the Winter is past, the rain is over and gone.

The Turtles voice is heard now at last,
The sing of Burds is came
The Lord is come and secret he does reveal
They can not hinder him by all there wit and still;
But his Enemies all he will out run,
He will conquer them, he will them over come:
The voice of the Bridegroom is heard this day,
The voice of trumphet and of Victory,

21 5th Month, 1684.
Written for the Author, Dorothy Wight
Victory they shall all know that follow the Lord fully.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 22. for Deliver read Deliverance. l. 26. for filled r. killed. p.
3. l. 20. for word r. world. p. 4. l 21. for numberly r. numberless. l. 36. for
way r. voice. p. 5. l. 14. for shop r. shut. p. 9. l. 6. for go r. you. l. 7.
for more r. move. l. 8. you are the Wise man's building. l. 33. for whale is
cast r. while cast. l. 40. r. fragrant Garden. p. 12 l. 51. for said r. saw. p.
13. l. 5. for Stars r. Star. l. 6. for changing r. change. l. 29. for face r.
fan twice in the line. l. 41. for the r. its. p. 14. l. 4. for reserved r.
received. l. 30. for profess r. possess. ibid. for year r. peace. l. 31. for
whether r. neither, twice in the line. p. 15. l. 50. r. but do thou feel the
time of Spring come in thee. l. 51. r. is there a Spring of Life springing up
in the Summer. p. 16. l. 5. for secret r. secrets. l. 6. for still. r. skill.

THE END.

