A Way to the Tree of (...)

Discovered in Sundry DIRECTIONS for the Profitable Reading OF THE SCRIPTVRES:
Wherein is described occasionally The nature of a Spiritual Man: And, in a
Digression, The Morality and Perpetuity of the Fourth Commandment in every
circumstance thereof, is discovered and cleared,

BY JOHN WHITE Master of Arts and Preacher of Gods Word in Dorchester in the
County of Dorset.

Search the Scriptures, for in them you think you have Eternal life. John
5.39. LONDON, Printed by M. F. for R. Royston, at the sign of the Angel in
Ivy-lane, 1647.

TO The right Worshipful the Mayor, Recorder, Bailives, Burgesses, and the
rest of the Inhabitants in the Borough of Dorchester, in the County of Dorset;
Grace be unto you and peace from God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.
NO man (I conceive) will wonder (Right Worshipful and Dearly Beloved in the
Lord) that I present you with this small Treatise: being an account of some of
my labors which I have taken amongst you. I know not of whom they are likely
to find (nor desire they may have) better acceptance then of those, of whose
love manifested unto me in so many honors and favors, by which you have so
many ways engaged me now near these two and forty years, (wherein I have
continued amongst you) I have had so abundant and full experience.

Besides, in presenting you with this poor Treatise, I give you of your own
(as I may truly say with the Prophet David, 1 Chronicles. 29.14. although not
altogether in his sense.) For am not I yours? as S. Paul tells the Corinthians,
that himself, and Apollo, and Cephas, were theirs: 1 Cor. 3.22. And by
consequent the issues of all my weak abilities, you may as justly challenge to
be your own as the Master might claim the issues of the bondslaves borne in
his house, to be his: and as in true estimation it is such, so I desire you to
accept it, as an acknowledgement (although in no proportion a satisfaction) of
that great Debt which I owe unto you.

And, to speak truth, it will be of special use to you, to account this
labor of mine, such as it is, as your own, that you may so entertain and
embrace it, so use, husband, and employ it to your best advantage, as we use to
do those things that are our own. For the chief reason wherefore the manifold
helps, which God is pleased to afford us by the labors of other men, usually
profit us so little, is, because men look not on them as matters, wherein
themselves have a peculiar interest, and so neglect them, as we too usually do
those things which are of common and general concernement.

As for the matter handled in this short Treatise, I desire you to take notice,
that of all the Truths that I have delivered unto you, in so large a time of my
Ministry, continued amongst you, I have chosen this, above all other subjects,
to recommend unto you in a more especial manner, and to leave with you as a
memorial of my tender affection toward you, for these two weighty reasons.
First, because this duty of studying the Scriptures (whereunto this Treatise is
intended as an help) is of all others of most general concernement, and of
most necessary and common use. Secondly, because it has pleased the Lord to
cast us into dangerous times, wherein some men endeavor, what they can, to
bring the Scriptures into contempt, crying down that sacred book, as
containing nothing else but a dead letter, and being a beggarly element, fit
for none but the lowest form of Christians. Others, that are unstable and
unlearned, (as the Apostle terms them, 2 Pet. 3.16.) wrest them at their
pleasure, to their own destruction, and the endangering of their brethrens
souls.

Let me, therefore, in the bowels of Christ, beseech you (Brethren) as you ever
hope to get any power of grace into your hearts, to have your spiritual life
quickened, your comforts assured, and your ways directed, to take heed to this
Sure and Infallible word of Truth, as to a Light shining in a dark place, (as
the Apostle speaks, 2 Pet. 1.19.) as containing in it your Food, your Physic,
your Evidences, your Comforts, your Arms, both for offense, and defense; and
in a word, which is the very life of your Souls, the Light of your
Understanding, the Director of your Wills, and the Moderator of your Affections.

Study this Word, which our Savior terms Searching of the Scriptures, John
5.39. which is done not by Reading them over cursorily, but by examining them
diligently; comparing Scripture with Scripture, that we may know the full mind
of God revealed therein, who many times lays not down the whole truth together
in one place, but leaves us to take in some other clauses, out of other places,
to make up the full of that truth which he would reveal unto us. For want of
this care of laying Scripture to Scripture, many taking up the truth of God by
parts, ground thereupon dangerous errors, wronging God in making him to speak
what he never meant, and overthrowing their own Faith, to the hazard of their
own Souls.

Of one thing we must be very careful, that we bring with us our minds free,
and not prepossest with any Opinion, which we have either framed in our own
phantasy, or received from others: A mind forestalled by an erroneous conceit,
is no fit Judge of any Truth, or of any Testimony concerning Truth; but as
colored glass transmits the light, and represents it to the eye infected with
the same color with which it self is dyed: Or as the taste, distempered by
some ill humor, relisheth all things which it receives according to that
humor with which it self is infected: so happens it with a mind prepossest
with any fantasy, it apprehends and judges of all things according to that
opinion which it self has entertained.

Lastly, the Scriptures being in themselves exceeding broad (to use the
Psalmists expression, Psalm. 119.96.) that is, of large comprehension, and
withal very mysterious, containing in them wonders, (as they are termed, ver.
18.) there needs, together with our reading, much Meditation upon what we have
read, (as the same Prophet tells us, that he did meditate upon Gods Law all the
day, Psalm. 119.97.) much conference, especially with Ministers, and other
experienced Christians, much use of learned men's writings, which give great
light to the understanding of dark places in Scripture, which we shall often
meet withal: But above all, fervent and continual Prayers, wherein
acknowledging our own blindness, and inability, of our selves, to search into
the deep Mysteries revealed in the Word, (with Agur, Prove. 30.2, 3.) we beg
earnestly the assistance of Gods Spirit, to open our eyes, Psalm. 119.18. to
make us to understand the way of his precepts, ver. 27. to give us
understanding that we may know his testimonies, ver. 125. being assured, that
as there is no other means to reveal unto us the mind of God, but his Spirit,
1 Cor. 2.11. so God will not deny that help to those that ask it, James 1.5. as
his children find by their own experience, 1 Ioh. 2.27.

The publishing of this Treatise is, by the Providence of God, cast into the
last of my days, perhaps, that you might lay nearer to your hearts, and more
heedfully remember the last words and counsels of your dying Pastor, as usually
the last directions and advise of dying Parents, or other near friends, make a
strong impression upon the hearts of those to whom they are given: Withal
seeing, being shortly to be taken from you, I shall be able to do you no more
service, in mine own person, I desire to leave this monument behind me, that
when I shall be seen no more, being dead I may yet speak unto you, as Abel is
said to do, Heb. 11.4.

And now (Brethren) I know you cannot but be very sensible of that sad
condition, into which you were lately reduced, when not only you suffered the
spoiling of your goods, but your very lives did hang in doubt before you, and
you feared day and night, having no assurance of your lives, as the Lord
threatens it should happen to his people, Deuteronomy. 28.66. And I desire, that the
memory of those sad times may be still fresh in your minds, that your flesh may
still tremble for the fear of God, and you may be afraid of his Judgments (to
use the Psalmists phrase, Psalm. 119.120.) that observing for what evils the
wrath of God was then kindled against you, you may the more carefully watch
over your ways, for time to come, that you provoke not the Lord hereafter to
power out his indignation in some more fearful judgment, whose hand you have
found so heavy upon you in what you have felt already.

Notwithstanding, I beseech you withal, take notice of a mixture of many
mercies, even with that heavy Judgment. As, first, that God gave you yet your
lives for a prey, which is all the favor that he promised Baruch, Ier. 45.5.
and that not only by preserving you from the enemies sword, but besides by
withdrawing his own hand when the last year he called to contend by the
Pestilence, which brake in upon you several times and by several ways, and
yet gleaned only a few amongst you, here and there, at that time, when some
other Towns were almost laid wast by the same stroke of Gods hand, but the
Lord still repented him for this, and said, it shall not be, Amos 7.3, 6.

Again, though your estates were wasted, yet your dwellings were preserved,
that you might not be as Sodom, or like unto Gomorrah, as some other places
are: as it was often threatened, and as often really intended by your enemies,
and had questionles been accordingly executed, had not the Lord by his Power
and Providence almost miraculously prevented it, saying unto them as he does
unto the sea, Job 38.11. Hitherto shall thou come, and no farther, and here
shall thy proud waves be stayed: as if God had reasoned with himself as he
does concerning his own people, Hos. 11.8, 9. How shall I give thee up
Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah? how
shall I set thee as Zeboim? mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are
kindled together, I will not execute the fierceness of mine Anger, I will not
return to destroy Ephraim, for I am God and not man, etc.

Above all the rest of Gods favors, mixed with those judgments which you lately
felt; esteem not this as the least, that although your Teachers have been
driven into corners, yet they have been by Gods goodness preserved for your
farther service, and are now restored to you in safety, that your eyes behold
them, and your ears hear their voice, showing you the way that you should
walk in, when you turn aside to the right or left hand; a mercy which God
accounts sufficient to sweeten even the bread of adversity and the water of
affliction, Isay 30.20. And even that want of them for a while, may be of
special use to you, to warn you to set an higher price on Gods Ordinances
hereafter, and to answer them with proportionable fruits, lest God bring upon
you that heavy judgment, threatened against his own people, the utter taking
away of his Kingdom from them, to bestow it on a people, that might yield him
a better account thereof, Mat. 21.43.

As for the losses which you have sustained in your outward Estates (which
considering how long you were in the enemies hand, were less then most other
Towns have felt) if you suffer any hurt thereby, you have none to blame but
your selves. If God by your own experience show you the vanity of these
outward things, which we cannot hold when we have them, that avail not in the
day of wrath, Prove. 11.4. that comfort us least when we need it most, that too
often prove snares unto us, while we enjoy them, and leave us nothing but
sorrows when we lose them, and thereby take off your hearts from loving and
depending on them, that ye may take care to lay up your Treasures in Heaven
(as our Savior advises, Mat. 6.20.) out of the reach of thieves and
plunderers, (which we may truly conceive to be the end that God aimed at in
delivering you into the hands of spoylers and robbers) you may become great
gainers by all your losses.

I know what carnal reason will suggest, that it stands you upon to be now
more earnest in laboring with all diligence to repair your losses; and it
grieves my heart to see, that this counsel prevails so much with many, that
should by this time have learned Christ better. Give me leave to lay before you
a praecedent of your own. About 34. years since, the Lord sent upon this
town a fearful fire, which consumed the best part of it, the loss at an
under value amounting to more then forty thousand pounds. What fell out
thereupon? There met together about seven or eight well-affected persons, and
agreed to contribute in money, and annuities, out of their Lands, the sum of
eight hundred pounds for the erecting of an Hospital, for the setting of poor
children on work: The whole town consented to double their weekly rates for
relief of the poor, enlarged their Churches, and reduced the town into order
by good government: What gained they by all this? within the compass of six
or seven years, God so poured out his blessings upon the place, that it was
in that short space in better condition then it had been before that calamity
fell upon them. Can you have a better argument then that, which is taken from
experience among your selves? Or is there to be found a surer or more
comfortable way of making up your losses, then that which you found so
successful then? Follow their steps, honor God with the first of your
substance, which he has left you, relieve his poor servants, set effectually
upon the reducing of the town to order by Government, God is still the same
God, and will not fail to supply you with such estates as will be best and
meetest for you.

I assure my self you want neither will, nor resolution to set forward the
works, wherein Gods honor and the welfare of this place are so much
concerned: Only I desire you to embrace the first opportunities, which the
Lord shall put into your hand, to bring your purposes to effect. Say not with
the people, Hag. 1.2. The time is not come, that the Lords house should be
built: Things of public concernment ought to be our first and chiefest care,
which when we labor to set forwards with all our power, we engage the Lord
himself, to take care of, and prosper our private affairs.

Now the Lord stir up the spirits of you all as he did the spirits of
Zerubbabel, and Ioshuah, Zech. 1.14. to take his work in hand with speed and
courage, and be assured of the same success that these holy men found; and
besides honor to your selves, and comfort in your own hearts at present, the
entering into the Joy of your Lord hereafter, Mat. 25.21, 23. Which that you
may do, and find, is, and shall be the prayer of

Your Humble Servant JOHN WHITE.

To the Author.
Sir,
NOtwithstanding yours, or the Printers haste and importunity, I must not let
these Treatises of so much worth go out of my hands without that due testimony
which my heart gives of them. As the compilement of them is close, and pithy;
so, the materials full of spiritual vigor, accompanied with a strength both of
Harmonious, and also Argumentative Reason. The subjects themselves all
seasonable, when enjoyments of God through Scripture Revelation, without us,
and by Faith, and spiritual experience withinus, is esteemed but a living upon
the letter, and a way beneath for infant Christians to walk with God in. And
both these you have here with much evidence vindicated and cleared. As likewise
the Morality of the fourth Commandment (the conscientious observation of which
has (through the blessing of God following his own institutions) both elevated
and preserved at its height, the practical part of the power of godliness in
this Kingdom,) which is laid aside by many true professors of piety, as a part
of the Jewish paedagogie.

For the particulars themselves, your Description of a spiritual man; is
deeply fetched from that which constitutes him such, and does genuinely
distinguish him from all other, by that which is most proper to his
constitution, and peculiar to his Faith, namely, The Demonstration of the
Spirit. And as the subject is spiritual, such are your characters given, and
your way of reading it; exceeding spiritual: even according to the Apostles
own direction: comparing (or suiting) spiritual things with spiritual; and
accordingly is also full of that demonstration of the spirit, which you therein
make essential and constitutive of his faith. I see how ever we may differ in
Ecclesiastics, and matters of outward order a little; yet in spiritualls, or
what is more conjunct to the inward and spiritual man, we agree. All our lives
meet not in that part of the circumference, yet in this center we unite and
embrace; and herein I do rejoice, and will rejoice for ever.

In your first and main part, concerning the Scriptures, your discourse bears
a comely suitableness to the nature and scope of that subject also. For as the
Historical belief of their authority, end, and use, is the foundation of all:
so your demonstrations thereof are formed out of, and framed into a congeniall
Harmony and consonancy to right Reason, and contain a natural Genealogy and
story of divine Truth about them, whereof one is the offspring of the other:
which way of setting forth divine Truths, as it carries with it the greatest
conviction, and (as your self (in that forementioned Treatise) express it)
begets Faith Historical, which has for its ground a rationality, and
consonancy to reason; so it is made use of by the holy Ghost, as a blessed
subservient to that which you make the immediate proper cause of saving Faith,
The Demonstration of the Spirit.

For your last piece, The more general notion of such an indefinite sense of
the Fourth Commandment, I remember you and I long since mutually pleased our
selves to have singly and apart agreed in. But this your so exact particular
explication and demonstration of this intent of God therein, exceedes what I
either did then, or have since imagined, could have with that rationality,
perspicuity, even to more then a probability, been made forth of the words
thereof. I do herein exceedingly admire the wisdom of God in penning and
ordering the words of that Fourth Commandment in such a posture (whereof you
have made observation) as that command might become a genuine and natural
root, (more natural then Abraham is to Jew and Gentiles successively;) First,
to bear that last seventh day, that old Sabbath the Omega of the week, and
when that should be lopt off, then to give as fresh sap to the first seventh
day, the Alpha of the week, the Lords day Sabbath. It makes me say of the
Commandment, with an inversion, what the Apostle says upon the like reason,
of that of Love, It was an old Commandment, and yet is still a new one.

Sir, as the honor you have done me to commit these Treatises to the Test of
my weak judgment ere you transmitted them to the press, has clean taken
off that little of jealousy of any strangeness by reason of these unhappy
differences in comparison of former intimacy: so the quickening materials hereof
have fully revived in my heart that intensenesse of Christian and Brotherly
love toward you, with this just cause of addition and increase: That after
your having sacrificed your spirits and strength in the most public way of
service to God and his Church, with more then ordinary activity and
selfe-denyall: you still retain such a spiritual vigor both of Grace and
judgment, (as this issue shows) in these years of old age and infirmities.
Thus much (if any stamp of mine might arise to any such a value) for a private
encouragement at least be pleased to accept as it is given with all
faithfulness, from

Your ancient and still true and faithful Friend, and unworthy Brother, Tho:
Goodwin.

A Table of the title of the several Chapters and Sections contained in the
Treatise following.
Cap. 1. OF the necessity of preparation to Reading. Page 1 Cap. 2. Sect. 1. Of
the Author of the holy Scriptures. Page 7 Sect. 2. That the holy Scriptures
appear evidently to be the word of God. Page 18 The first Mark, by which it
is evident that they are so: The Style and Phrase of them. Page 19 The second
Mark; The Subject or Matter handled in them. Page 25 The third Mark; The
powerful effect of the Scriptures on men's hearts. Page 33

Cap. 3. The Scriptures having God for their Author must needs be of Divine
authority. Page 45 Cap. 4. That the penmen of holy Scriptures were holy men
guided in that work wholly by Gods Spirit. Page 57 Cap. 5. That the Scriptures
contain all things necessary to salvation. Page 63 Cap. 6. Of the scope of the
Scriptures, which is Gods Glory and man's Salvation. Page 70 Cap. 7. That they
which read the Scriptures must be men of spiritual minds. Page 76 Sect. 1.
The description of a spiritual man Page 78 Sect. 2. Of the spiritual man's
operations. Page 86 Sect. 3. Of Faith, and the two sorts of Faith, Historical
and Justifying. Page 90 Sect. 4. Of Spiritual experience, other means of
comprehending things spiritual. Page 115
Cap. 8 Of the choice of fit times for reading the Scriptures. Page 125 Cap. 9.
Of particular preparation before reading Page 133 Cap. 10. Of reverend
attention and heedfull observation in reading the Scriptures. Page 141 Cap. 11.
Of duties after reading the Scriptures, especially Meditation and Prayer. Page
149 Cap. 12. Directions for the right interpretation of the Scriptures. Page
160 Cap. 13. Directions for raising observations out of the Scriptures, for our
own instruction and edification. Page 169 Sect. 1. Of the Subject matters
handled in the Scripture, and first of works. Page 172 Sect. 2. Of the Laws
given by God to his Church, and recorded in Scripture. Page 197
Concerning the Morality of the fourth Commandment. Sect. I. That the Law of
the Sabbath in the fourth Commandment, is Moral, and therefore perpetual.
Page 213 Sect. II. Answer to the Arguments against the institution of the
Sabbath in Paradise. Page 133 Sect. III. The morality and perpetuity of the
Sabbath proved out of the fourth Commandment. Page 253 Sect. IV A continuation
of the consideration of the rest of the Laws recorded in the Scripture, with
such instructions as may be drawn from them. Page 300

DIRECTIONS FOR THE PROFITABLE Reading of the Scriptures.
CAP. I. Of the necessity of preparation thereunto.
THat the reading of the Scriptures is nothing else but a kind of holy
conference with God, Preparation in the reading of the Scriptures,
wherein we enquire after, and he reveals unto us himself, and his will; we
shall manifest more fully hereafter, when we shall show that these holy
writings are the Word of God himself, who speaks unto us in and by them. 1.
Enforced 1t From the presence of God with whom we confer in reading.
Wherefore when we take in hand the Book of the Scriptures, we cannot otherwise
conceive of our selves, then as standing in Gods presence, to hear what he will
say unto us. So much the Prophet seems to imply, Psalm. 73.17. when he
expresses his consulting with Gods Word, by that phrase of going into the
Sanctuary of God, (for there indeed was Gods Word kept) that is, going in unto
God, as going into the Sanctuary is termed, 2 Samuel 7.18. these kinds of
expression seem to imply, that when we betake our selves to the reading of the
Scriptures, we come in unto God, or stand in his presence, to enquire at his
mouth.

Now with what reverence it becomes us to stand in Gods presence, Requiring
therefore of us due reverence in performing that duty. 1. From the Majesty of
God.
appears not only by Jacobs fear after he knew God was in the place where he
lay, Genesis 28.16, 17. but farther, by the caveat given by Solomon, to take heed
to our feet, when we enter into Gods house, Eccles. 5.1. and that upon a double
ground; partly, because God is in heaven, ver. 2. that is, high, and full of
Majesty, and consequently to be attended with reverence, 2. From the sense of
our defilements and inabilities.
and fear; and partly, because we have shoes on our feet, which God warns
Moses to put off, Exodus 3.5. when he stood in his presence; that is, (to speak
in S. James his phrase) we have filthiness, and superfluity of naughtiness in
our hearts, which must be laid aside, that when we come unto God to be taught
by him, we may receive his word with meekness, James 1.21. So that both the
Majesty and Holiness of God, whose eyes are purer then to behold evil, Hab.
1.13. and the corruptions and defilements of our own hearts necessarily require
an heedfull, 2ly From the inconveniences that follow neglect of such
preparation.
and careful preparation of our selves, before we enter into Gods presence, to
enquire at his mouth, and look into his word.

The necessity of this preparation, when we read the Scriptures, will be yet
more evident, if we observe the ill consequents which follow the neglect of
this duty, in such persons as either wholly, or too often omit it; who boldly
entering into Gods presence, 1 Unfruitfulnesse in our selves.
and handling the holy things of God with unwashen hands, that is, reading his
word with unsanctified and unprepared hearts; as they come unto the work
without due reverence, so they return for the most part without fruit, 2
Discredit of the word it self.
and by that means bring up an ill report upon the sacred ordinance of God, as
if it were a dead letter without any quickening power at all, unsavory food
without nourishment, unfruitful seed that yields no increase. Secondly, 3
Discouragement to others.
by the same means they weaken the hearts of such as might be encouraged to
undertake this holy exercise, from the use whereof they are much deterred, when
they observe some of those that are frequent in the practice of this duty,
remain still ignorant, unfruitful, dead-hearted, and disconsolate. And lastly,
4 Discomfort to our selves.
they occasion discomfort to themselves, when, notwithstanding the use of this
means, they find themselves ever learning, and never come to the knowledge of
the truth, remaining still either in ignorance, or in disobedience of heart, at
least in much deadness of spirit, without zeal, life, or activity in holy
duties.

Thus we cannot but observe with grief of heart, an exercise in it self every
way useful, fruitful, and comfortable, if it be duly and conscionably
performed; by the neglect of careful preparation become not only unfruitful,
and unprofitable, but besides by necessary consequent, unpleasant,
distastefull, and burdensome to those that use it. To manifest the necessity
of due preparation in reading the Scriptures, much more might be spoken, and
many more ill consequents might be observed, that are occasioned by the neglect
thereof: But the considerations already mentioned, are sufficient to evince the
usefulness and necessity of such a preparation. Taking that therefore for
granted, that this duty of preparation, when we undertake the reading of holy
Scriptures, must be performed, our next work must be to give directions for the
manner, and order how the Readers heart must be fitted to the performance of
this task, which cannot well be done without taking knowledge of the nature of
that word which is to be read, and of the end and scope at which it aims.

That the observation of the nature of Gods word which we read, 2 Directed by
considering, 1. the nature of the Scriptures.
may much farther us in this duty of preparation to the reading, and study of
the Scriptures, is evident by our use and custom in ordinary things of this
life. We choose and husband our grounds according to the nature of the seed
wherewith we intend to sow it; and according to the nature and condition of
that matter wherewith we fill our Vessels, we make choice of them, appointing
some for dry things, and others for moist, and fit them diversely for foul or
clean. In like manner must we consider the nature of the Word, if we mean to
order our hearts aright, which are the grounds that must receive this holy
seed, the Vessels that must contain this precious balm. We must therefore
consider that the word is a pure word, Psalm 119.140. that we may cleanse and
purify our hearts for the receiving of it. We must know that the Law is
spiritual, Romans 7.14. and heavenly, James 3.17. that we may labor for
spiritual and heavenly minds to entertain it; we must apprehend it as a word
of power and authority, the voice of God, that mighty Creator of Heaven and
Earth, before our hearts can be subdued to receive and entertain it with that
meeknes, Jam. 1.21. and trembling of heart, Isa. 66.2. which is required. We
must be persuaded that it is a sure word, 2 Pet. 1.19. a faithful word, Tit.
1.9. a vision that will not lie, Heb. 2.3. as proceeding out of the mouth of
him that cannot lie, Tit. 1.2. or else we shall never be prepared to embrace it
with faithful and believing hearts, without which the word cannot profit us at
all, Heb. 4.2.

In the next place, 2 By observing the end whereat the Scriptures aim.
we must take knowledge of the end wherefore the word was given, if we mean to
use and apply it as we ought: seeing we know one cannot use an instrument
aright, unless he know for what use it was made. Now the principal ends for
which the Scriptures were given, were; First, the manifesting of God unto us,
1. Making God known to us. 2. Directing our ways.
that we may honor him as God. Secondly, the directing of us in the course of
our conversation, not only by informing our judgments, but by obliging our
consciences, to guide our selves by the rules proposed therein, in the course
of our practice. Wherefore the Prophet David used Gods Law as a lanthorn to his
feet, Psalm. 119.105. thinking on his ways, that he might turn his feet to Gods
testimonies, v. 59. remembering that the things which are revealed, 3. Yea
converting the soul.
belong to us to do them, Deuteronomy. 29.29. So that as the power of the Scriptures
is to purify the soul, 1 Pet. 1.22. and convert it, Ps. 19.7. so the use of it
besides is, to make the man of God perfect unto every good work, 2 Timothy 3.17.
that so it may prove the power of God every way, both to sanctification and
salvation, as the Apostle affirms it to be, Ro^. 1.16. Without the knowledge of
this principal scope whereat the word aims, it will be impossible either to
observe what we ought in reading the Scriptures, or to apply them aright.

That we may therefore give fit directions for the profitable reading of the
Scriptures, it manifestly appears to be necessary to enquire, first, both into
their nature, and scope: And as for their nature, it cannot well be opened,
unless we consider the Author by whom the Scriptures were given, (from whom
withal flows their authority) the instruments by which they were conveyed to
the Church, and the matter or subject which they handle: wherewith if we take
in the scope at which they aim, their necessary use unto us, their power to
command us, and ability to work effectually in us; and lastly, their infallible
and undoubted truth and righteousness will evidently appear. So that we shall
have just occasion to handle in order these four points:

1. The Author from whom arises the authority of the Scriptures.

2. The Penmen by whom they were written.

3. The matter or subject which they handle.

4. The scope or end at which they aim.

CAP. II. Of the Author of the holy Scriptures.
SECT. I. That they neither could, nor were fit to be given by any other then
by God himself.
IT must be considered that at present, we have nothing to do with Atheists,
Pagans, Jews, or Turks, that deny the Scriptures, either wholly, or in part, so
far are they from acknowledging them to be Gods word; but only with such
persons, as admitting and allowing them to be the word of God, do yet want
some clearer light, and fuller evidence, to work into their hearts a more
certain persuasion, and more feeling impression of that truth whereof they are
convinced, that all that is within them, even their whole heart, may not only
bow and stoop, but be wholly thrown down, and laid flat on the earth before
this mighty scepter of the kingdom of Christ. Wherefore, we shall not need to
bring in all the arguments that are used and taken up by others, to prove the
Scriptures to be Gods word, but passing by amongst them such as are more
obscure and farther deduced, shall content our selves with such plain evidences
of this truth, as may be best understood of the simple, and appear at the first
view, as being lively characters imprinted on the face and body of this sacred
Book, by that divine Spirit that composed it.

Before we lay open these evidences it will be needful to demonstrate, that it
is neither possible, nor fit, that these Scriptures should flow from any other
fountain, then the most sacred breast of that holy Lord, who is the only
fountain of all wisdom and truth, and the God of all sovereignty and power. A
truth which will be easily acknowledged, if in the first place we take notice,
that it is generally confessed that the Scriptures are, or at least contain
that Law which is left unto the Church of God, for the right ordering thereof
in all things, which also is evident to all that read them; And yet that this
truth may be more fully cleared, it will not be amiss to establish these two
Positions.

First, That the Church of God must have a Law.

Secondly, That this Law can be found in no other books but the Scriptures.

That Gods Church must have a Law, That Gods Church must have a Law; proved, 1t
By the light of Nature, directing all societies to govern by Laws.
and that as it is a Church, I conceive no sober man will deny, if it were not
proved, being so clearly manifested by the constant practice of all Nations and
societies of men from the beginning of the world, as having found the
establishing of laws the only means of preserving themselves from ruin. The
truth is, there was never found any Nation so barbarous, that was not governed
by some kind of Law or other. If then the light of Nature directed all men
generally to the use of laws, as the main band of humane society, and the best
remedy against confusion, and ruin that necessarily attends upon it; shall we
think that the God of nature, the fountain of all wisdom, the first, and best
former of societies would leave the body of a society composed by himself, as
it were the work of his own hand, in more hazard then men do the states which
they settle and stablish by their counsel?

Again, 2ly Because the Church, of all societies, most needs a law, as being, 1
Both the largest and most dispersed of all societies.
we know that the larger the body of a State is, and the more dispersed, the
more need it has to be firmly knit together by those strong bands of society:
Now we see the smallest societies that are amongst men, and the most nearly
compacted together, the inhabitants of one small City, the fellows of one
College, governed by laws and orders: whereas the Church is the largest of all
societies in the world in extent, and most dispersed, as being possible to be
scattered over the whole face of the earth, and consequently above all other
states on earth needs to be established by the best laws, as being hardest to
be governed, and most subject to disorder and confusion without them.

In the next place, we see the laws of men reach no farther then the ordering
of men's outward conversation, 2 To be ordered in the very motions of the heart;
and meddle not with the inward thoughts and motions of the mind. But in the
government of the Church, the chiefest work must be the ruling of the heart and
conscience, as the Apostle tells us, that Gods word and laws reach to the
imaginations of the heart, and bring under the very thoughts to the obedience
of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5. and enter into the very dividing of the soul and
spirit, and to the discerning of the thoughts of the heart, Which are, 1 More
various then outward actions. 2 More speedily moved and hardly governed.
Heb. 4.12. Now how much greater variety and diversity there is in men's
thoughts, then in their actions, how much more easily and speedily they are
moved, and consequently with how much greater difficulty they are governed and
kept in order, is evident to all men. Consequently we must conceive, that the
just, wise, and provident God that directed all men to give laws to order men's
actions, would himself much more give laws for the ordering and well governing
of the thoughts and conscience.

Lastly, 3ly And the Church being Gods more special care, as being, 1 His own
inheritance.
if God in the course of his Providence have taken order, that other states, to
which he has only a general relation, as Lord of all the earth, should be
governed and ordered by fit laws for the preservation of society and peace: we
cannot deny, but his care must be much greater for the governing and well
ordering of his own people, in whom he delights, his chosen generation, his
peculiar inheritance, which he has set apart to bring forth fruits to himself,
Deuteronomy. 32.9. Romans 7.4. in whose good or ill carriage (seeing his Name is called
upon them) his honor is more interessed, 2 In which his own honor is most
interessed.
then any parents can be in the behavior of his own children. And consequently
we must conclude, that if all the States in the world were left without
government, yet God would give laws, nay, the most exact and perfect laws, for
the well ordering of his own Church, seeing it redounds so much to his own
honor, as Moses tells us, Deuteronomy. 4.7, 8.

Thus then the first Position proposed is evident enough, This law can be found
no where but in the Scriptures.
that the Church of God must have a law. The next is more clear then it, that
this law can be found in no other books then the Scriptures. And, to prove it,
we need no more but to put men to produce us any other volume besides this
sacred book, wherein that law is written, let them name us to whose custody it
was committed, and where it may be found. There is no reason the law given to
the Church should be committed to any other then the Churches keeping; 1
Because the Church, the keeper of its own records acknowledges no other. 2
Other bastardwritings compared with it appear to be counterfeit.
now the Church acknowledges no other Book for the word or law of God, but
this alone; neither did ever any dare to pretend that any other book besides
this, was Gods word or law; if any should, the very comparing of such
bastard-writings, with the true word, would easily discover them to be no
better then counterfeit.

But to clear this point more fully, we shall desire to manifest this one truth
more, which any sober minded man will easily assent unto, namely, that it is
neither possible, nor in any sort convenient, that the law for the governing of
the Church should be given by any other then by God himself. Besides, 1t It was
not possible that any other then God himself should give this law. 1 Because
it rules the spirit of man, to which no creature can give a law: As being
unable to take account of the breach thereof. 2 Because Gods will must be the
Churches law,
First then, it is not possible, and that upon a double ground. The first is,
that God being a Spirit, and therefore to be worshipped and served in spirit
and truth, John 4.24. the laws that prescribe the duties of that worship and
service, must of necessity reach to the spirit and inward man. Now the giving
of such laws is beyond man's power, and therefore no lawgiver, from the
beginning of the world, ever took upon him that task. And indeed, it were
absurd for a man to give such laws, of the observation or breach whereof he
could take no account: now we know, seeing no man can know the thoughts of
another man's heart, it is impossible for him to judge whether they be
answerable or contrary to the law, by which they were appointed to be ordered.

The second reason, why it is impossible for any other then God himself, to
give a law unto the Church is, because it is agreeable to all rules of equity,
that Gods own will should be the law and rule to all creatures, seeing they are
all the work of his hand, much more to the Church, which besides her Creation,
Being his own both by Creation and Redemption.
he has purchased to himself by the blood of his Son, Act. 20.28. And
consequently being his own, by the strongest title, must be disposed according
to his will, even by our Saviors rule, which allows one to do with his own
what he will, Mat. 20.15. If then Gods will must be the creatures law, who can
give it but himself? for who has known the mind of the Lord, Romans 11.34?
Surely, if none known the things of man, but the spirit which is in man, Now
none can know Gods mind but himself.
the mind of God can much less be known by any but his own Spirit, 1 Cor.
2.11. It is true concerning a man's mind, seeing it is moved according to
reason, in order to the end which he proposes to himself, therefore one that
knows another man's end, may with some probability guess at his thoughts, and
purposes tending to that end, which Solomon implies in affirming, that though
counsel be hidden deep in the heart of man, yet a man of understanding may
draw it out, Prove. 20.5. And so a man knowing that Gods main end, in all his
ways, is his own honor, may conclude that Gods law must be such as may direct
men in those ways, in which they may most glorify God. But what those
particular directions must be, it is impossible for men to guess, till God
himself reveal them.

It is true, that the very light of nature, which God has planted in every
man, will discover unto him some of the chief heads of the duties, that he
requires of him, as to love the Lord with all our hearts, and to fear, and
serve him, Deuteronomy. 10.12. And to serve one another through love, Gal. 5.13. But
in what particular services we are to express our piety to God, or love to
men, what man can prescribe or imagine? For that the ways by which both these
main duties may be performed, are various and diverse, it is evident, now to
which of these different ways God would direct one, it was impossible to
guess, till God himself had made it manifest in his own word.

To give instance of this truth in some particulars; Especially laws positive
must needs be given by God alone
it was impossible for any man to conceive what ceremonies or outward acts God
would accept and be best pleased withal in the duties of his worship. No man
could divine that the tree of life should be a Sacrament to Adam in Paradise:
or Circumcision to the Jews, or Baptism and the Lords Supper to Christians.
For ought any man could conceive to the contrary, the Priesthood might have
been settled upon the Tribe of Simeon, as well as Levi. The rest of the Sabbath
might have been fixed on the second or sixth day, as well as on the seventh,
and on the first, if God had so appointed it. And for the duties of the second
Table, it was not of absolute necessity that God should establish such a kind
of subordination and subjection of one man to another, as he has done, or give
every man a propriety in his goods, to possess them as several to himself, or
limit one man to one wife, and ordain marriage for the only way of propagation
of mankind: seeing that, although all these are fit and convenient, yet God
(if he had pleased) might have given other rules for the governing and
establishing peace amongst men, and it was as lawful for him to give the
creatures what laws he pleased, as to give them what natures he pleased. So
that seeing the law for the right ordering of the creatures depends merely upon
Gods will, which cannot be known, unless himself reveal it, it must needs be
granted, which was first proposed, that none could give the law to Gods Church
but God himself.

Next, if it had been possible, 2ly Nor is it convenient that any other then
God should give this law. 1 For preserving Gods authority.
it was no way fit, either for the advancing of Gods honor, or for the
furthering of man's good, that any other should give that law then God himself.
Not fit for Gods honor in two respects; First, Gods authority could be no way
so well preserved, as by giving his own law to his people; seeing all men
acknowledge that giving of laws is an honor annexed to the highest power,
although the execution of them be committed to Magistrates of a lower degree.
It may be probably guessed, that even heathen Lawgivers, by pretending, either
consulting with their gods in giving their laws, or allowance of them by them,
acknowledged law-making to be a divine prerogative; which yet is more fully
manifested by this, that we acknowledge no law to be just that is not either
founded on, or consonant to Gods law, either written in man's heart, or
delivered in his word. So that it was fit that God should give the law to his
own people, to preserve his own authority amongst them.

Again, it is requisite for Gods honor in another respect, 2 And that we might
have a perfect mirror of him. Which none could give but himself.
that none but God himself should give his own law to his people, because none
is able to give so perfect a mirror of God, as himself. As for men, we know
none of them has seen God at any time, John 1.17. and it is so little a
portion that they know of him, Job 26.14. that it is impossible they should set
him out as he deserves. Now it is for Gods honor that he should be expressed
as fully as may be, which neither is, nor can be performed so exactly by any
man, as it may be by his law, which represents unto us the image of his mind,
and will, and gives us a more distinct knowledge of him then his works can do.
Nay, his word serves as a Commentary to his works, as laying before us the
rule, according to which God orders all his ways: so that by the help thereof,
we understand the righteousness and holiness of all his acts, as David did,
Psa. 73.17. which he could not find out before. It is true indeed, that the
very works themselves praise God, and show him in his tender mercies, Psalm.
145.5.8. in his mighty power, Job 36.22. and 37.23. and Godhead, Ro^. 1.20. yea
commonly in his righteousness, in rewarding, and punishing, Psa. 58.11. But
they neither express him so distinctly, nor consequently affect the heart so
deeply, as they do when they are illustrated by the word, as Job confesses,
chap. 42.6. that he never saw God so clearly, nor abhorred himself so much, as
when God described unto him his works, in that conference, Job 38. etc.
Wherefore seeing the image of God is most exactly expressed unto us in the
word, it is most fit that the word, that represents him to us, should be given
by God himself, who knowing himself best, can give us the most perfect draught
of his own face. Besides these respects unto Gods honor, in regard of man's
good, it was not convenient that the Scriptures which contain Gods law to his
Church, should be given by any other then God himself. For first, 3ly For ma^s
good. 1. To subdue his heart to obedience.
man's heart would hardly be brought to stoop to any power but Gods alone, whose
voice only prevails upon the conscience, and subdues the very thoughts and
imaginations of the spirit, which the voice of no man can do. Besides, 2. To
make his services accepted.
nothing can make our services, performed to God, or man, to be duties of
obedience, but the undertaking of them upon Gods command, which we do, when we
know the precept that prescribes them to be the voice and word of himself.
Lastly, 3. To assure his reward.
nothing but Gods word could assure us of the rewards of our obedience, to make
us always abundant in the work of the Lord, knowing that our labor is not in
vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58. nor make a man tremble at the curses threatened
against the disobedient.

Wherefore, seeing the Church of God must have a law, by which it must be
governed, unless we conceive God to be more regardlesse of his own people,
then he is of the rest of the world. And next, seeing it was impossible that
any should give this law, but God himself, because none but himself could know
his own mind. And thirdly, seeing if it had been possible, yet it was no way
convenient, either in respect of Gods honor, that God should commit the
authority of making laws to any creature, or suffer his own image, which is
represented in his law, to be drawn out by man, who knows him but imperfectly,
or in respect of man, who should have been left uncertain, both of the
acceptance of his services, and of the assurance of his rewards, if the law,
that requires the one, and promises the other, were not given by God himself,
the position which we undertook to prove, must needs remain firm and
infallible, that none could or was fit to be the Author of the Scriptures,
wherein the law of God is contained, but only God himself.

SECT. II. That the holy Scriptures appear evidently to be the Word of God.
THe marks, or notes, by which the holy Scriptures are evidently discovered to
be Gods word, are diverse, of which we shall for the present content our selves
with three only, and those which are most easy to be discerned. The first is,
the style and phrase of speech, wherein the Scriptures apparently differ from
all other writings, composed by men. The second is, the subject or matters
which the Scriptures handle, which are many times beyond the compass of man's
reason to find out, and therefore must be revealed by God himself. The third
evidence, is taken from the wonderful effectual power, which the Scriptures
appear to have upon the hearts of men, in terrifying, comforting, subduing, and
renewing them; of which in their several order.

MARK I. Of the style and phrase of the Scripture.
SAint Paul, 1 Cor. 2.4. proves unto the Corinthians, that his Ministry was of
God, because it carried with it great power and authority, in simplicity and
plainness of speech. Majesty, is for the most part a character of power and
authority, and that so lively, that it is not easily counterfeited. Outward
ornaments grace it nor much, The Majesty of the Scriptures manifests them to be
Gods Word. 1. In the composure, void of art yet full of power.
neither does the want of them much obscure it. And it is therein like unto
light, simple indeed, but yet so beautiful and glorious in it self, that the
addition of any color, rather blemisheth then adorneth it; such is the Majesty
of the Scriptures style, nothing is more plain, as being for the most part void
of the ornaments of art, and eloquence, and yet appears so full of Majesty, to
such as well observe it, that it moves awe and reverence in the heart. It is
true, that this Majesty is not so easily discovered in every phrase, and clause
of a sentence, but is most clearly manifested in the whole frame and composure
of those holy writings. As the Majesty of a man's countenance is not so fully
discovered in any one part of the face, as in the whole visage taken jointly
together.

Of this Majesty whereof we now speak, it will be more easy to give an instance
then a proof, seeing it can be no otherwise discovered then light is, by the
very view of it self: Any man, that advisedly reads the Scriptures, may easily
observe such weight in the words and phrases of speech, and shall meet with
such high and unusual, and yet plain and significant expressions, in diverse
passages of that book, that he shall be enforced to acknowledge, that which the
Pharisees servants sent to apprehend our Savior reported of him, that never
man spoke like that man, John 7.46. And yet withal, this seems to be some
probable argument of such a Majesty in the style of the Scriptures, that it so
strangely suits with those high mysteries which are handled in that book, that
it cannot well be fitted to any other subject. So that if those divine truths
be expressed in any other then a Scripture phrase, they seem to lose much of
their luster and beauty; and if that phrase be applied to any other subject,
then those holy mysteries, it seems like Saul's armor on a childs back, or a
parable in a fools mouth, as Solomon speaks, Prove. 26.7.

Now then as a man's countenance discovers in some measure, the spirit that is
within him, (as a Prince, and some base abject having a diverse aspect, a
different comportment, another kind of style or phrase of speech, are judged
to have a different spirit within, from which those outward effects proceed,
the one base and abject, the other heroical and generous) so the Majesty of
that high and lofty style, wherein the Scriptures are written, discovers a
divine spirit full of Majesty and power, which stamps that character upon them.
But this Majesty with which the Scripture speaks, besides the bare phrase and
style, will be yet farther manifested, by that strange and unusual manner of
commanding, with great Authority and power, which we find frequent in that
book, far different from the commands of men, as will appear easily in these
ensuing circumstances.

He that reads a law, which neither entreats, 2. In the commands.
nor persuades, but prescribes and commands, conceives presently that he hears
the voice of Authority: But when he observes, that the command is not to all
alike, but is delivered with relations and respects to men, according to their
several states and degrees, and that it extends not to all men in general,
but only to the inhabitants of such a Country, or members of such a Society,
he must needs withal discern it to be the voice, not of a supreme,
transcendent, and absolute, but only of some limited and bounded power,
extending neither to all, nor to those which are subject to it, indifferently
and equally. But when in Gods book he reads a law delivered in another form,
proposed to the whole world, 1. Given to the whole world, and without respect
of persons.
without any limitation of Country, Nation, or State, how can he conceive
otherwise, but that he hears the voice of a transcendent power, that extends it
self over all the world? And when he finds Kings and Beggars spoken of, and
to, in the same phrase of speech, without respect or reservation of honor, or
distinction of degrees, how can he choose but fix his thoughts on that infinite
Majesty, before which rich and poor, Prince and Subject, are all alike, because
they are all the work of his hands, as Elihu speaks, Job 34.19.

Secondly, 2. Reaching to the very thoughts.
we see that the commands of the greatest earthly Potentates, reach no farther
then the ordering of men's outward conversation, but extend not to the ordering
of the motions or thoughts of the heart, whence it is that we usually say (and
justly may in respect of humane laws) that thoughts are free. So then, when we
see that men dare not take upon them the regulating of men's thoughts, by any
law, we must needs suppose that they acknowledge, that their power reaches
not to the mind and spirit, unto which they can give no laws, because they
cannot know when they are broken or obeyed. But God in his word gives laws to
the conscience, and commands the thoughts, and inward motions of the mind,
requiring to love God with all the heart, Mat. 22.37. and ones neighbor as our
self, ver. 39. and forbidding lust, anger, malice, etc. and other inordinate
motions of the mind, Mat. 5.28. Lev. 19.17. Which necessarily implies, that he
that gives such laws is the God of the spirits of all flesh, Numb. 27.16. the
searcher of the hearts, Ier. 17.10. able therefore to know, and judge the
obedience, or rebellion of the very thoughts of the soul and spirit.

In the third place, 3. Extended to creatures out of man's power and command.
we must needs grant, that though no creature be exempted from man's service,
yet there are many of them that are not under his command, as being without his
reach, or too great to be mastered by his power; such are the heavens, with all
their hosts, the earth, the seas; the winds, etc. which the Lord himself seems
to have reserved to his own jurisdiction. Hence it was, that those that thought
our Savior to be but a mere man, wondered to hear him rebuke the winds, Mat.
8.26, 27. a thing that no mere man, well advised, ever did. As for Joshua's
words to the Sun and Moon, Josh. 10.12. they have indeed the form of a command,
but had only the virtue of a prayer, so that the Lord, and not the Sun heard
Joshua, ver. 13. Seeing therefore men forbear to command the heavens, earth,
seas, winds, etc. and in Scriptures we find commands and bounds given to the
seas, Job 38.11. Ps. 104.79. the earth fixed to a place, by Gods decree, Ps.
119.90. his word settled in heaven, Ps. 119.89. the winds, fire, hail, snow,
etc. fulfilling his word, Psalm. 148.8. we must needs acknowledge, that the
voice that commands all these, is the word of that powerful Lord; who having
made all these things, has right and power to command and give laws unto them
according to his pleasure.

Lastly, no man well advised, 4. Fortified with sanctions of promises and
threats beyond man's power.
ever took upon him to threaten those things that were beyond man's power to
effect, and therefore seeing that reaches only to men's outward estate and no
farther, and that too limited to the bounds of this present life, we never
find men's sanctions, given in their laws, extended beyond the promises or
threats of present, or outward good: or evil: as for instance, either to give
or take away men's liberty, their wealth, or estates, or life at the most. But
Gods word threatens plagues upon on the soul, hardness of heart, a reprobate
sense, a trembling spirit, a spirit of madness, and giddiness: and promises
light of knowledge, power of faith, increase of grace, etc. nay, reaches
beyond this life, to eternity, threatening the wicked with the worm that dies
not, Isa. 66.24. everlasting fire, Mat. 25.41. everlasting chains, Jude 6. and
promising an inheritance immortal, 1 Pet. 1.4. a Kingdom that fades not,
Rivers of pleasures in Gods presence for evermore, Psalm. 16.11. Such promises
and such threatenings which exceed the limits of any mortal power to bestow or
inflict, must needs be acknowledged to proceed from the God of spirits and
eternity.

Lay all these particulars together, and thus we may frame the argument, drawn
from the commands which we find in Scripture, to prove it to be the word of
God. That voice which commands and gives laws to the whole world, and that
without respect of persons, that prescribes and gives rules to the thoughts of
the heart, that promises and threatens rewards and punishments to the soul,
and that eternally, that gives laws to those creatures, over which no man had,
or ever challenged any power, the heavens, earth, seas, winds, etc. that must
needs be the voice and word of God; But such is the voice that speaks in the
Scriptures, therefore the Scriptures must needs be acknowledged to be the voice
and word of God. Thus the Majesty of the Scriptures manifested in their lofty
plain style, and in their transcendent commands, and sanctions, discover these
sacred volumes, to be the word of him to whom alone belongs Majesty, Authority,
and Power.

MARK II. Of the subject or matter handled in the Scriptures.
THe second argument, The subjects handled in Scripture show them to be Gods
word.
by which the Scriptures may be proved to be Gods word, is drawn from the
consideration of the subject, or matters which are handled in them, and they
are either principles of faith, or rules of practice: Now before we speak of
them particularly, thus much must needs be acknowledged in general, as an
undoubted truth. Impossible to be discovered by light of Nature. 1t. The
Principles of Faith.
Whatsoever was impossible to be known by any creature, or to be found out by
discourse of natural reason, that must of necessity be discovered and made
known by God himself. But it will appear, as evidently as the very light, that
most of the grounds of faith, which the Scripture proposes unto us, are such
as neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor ever entered into man's heart, 1
Cor. 2.9. and therefore could never be either revealed or discovered by man.
Wherefore, seeing we find them discovered in the Scriptures, we can do no
less then acknowledge them to be the word of God. Of these two Propositions
only the Minor is questionable, which will be sufficiently cleared by the
ensuing instances.

To begin with the most eminent object of faith, 1. God himself.
God himself. No man has seen him at any time, John 1.18. neither consequently
knows him as he ought, as our Savior testifies, John 17.25. much less can
manifest him unto others. Indeed, that God is, yea his Godhead and power are
understood by the works of Creation, Romans 1.20. But how little true knowledge
of God is discovered to natural men by that way of groping, as the Apostle
terms it, Acts 17.27. appears by the writings of the most learned amongst the
Heathen (to omit the fantasies of the rest) who speak so little, and so
uncertainly concerning God, that they seem like the blind man, whose eyes were
not yet fully cleared by our Savior, Mark 8.24. who saw men walking like
trees. Neither indeed are their writings, compared with the Scriptures,
revealing the glory of God in the face of Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. so much as the
light of a candle to the Sun shining at noon day. As for the mystery of the
Trinity, it is generally acknowledged to be a secret, unsearchable by natural
reason, or discoverable any way but by the revelation of the Word and Spirit.

Next unto God, 2. The Creation of the world, with the manner and order of it.
may follow the Creation of the world, which we likewise believe by faith, Heb.
1.3. which although the Heathen, upon the consideration of the creatures, by
the light of natural reason, were forced to acknowledge, and consequently that
it must be the work of a God: yet that the creatures were made by Gods mere
word, finished in six days, and created in such order as we find mentioned,
Genesis 1. no Heathen man ever took upon him to relate: neither (seeing man was
made the last of all creatures) was it possible for him to divine, what was
done before he had any being; wherefore the Scriptures, so exactly describing
the time, means, and order of the Creation, must needs be the Word of the
Wisdom of the Father, who was brought forth ere the mountains were settled,
Prove. 8.25. present when he prepared the heavens, ver. 27. by his Father when
he appointed the foundations of the earth, ver. 29, 30.

Thirdly, the state of man before his fall, 3. The history of man's fall and the
consequents of it.
the whole history, means, and manner of his fall, with all the circumstances
thereof, especially the corruption that it brought upon the whole nature of
man, which we term Original sin, together with the subjection of all men to
the curse and wrath of God thereby, and the manner how it is propagated, both
in the stain, and guilt of it to posterity, as they are things unsearchable by
natural reason: so the memory of them being once lost, together with the
antiquities of the first times of the world; or at least imperfectly and
uncertainly delivered and related to posterity, through so many hands, as it
must needs pass, before the time of Moses, it was impossible but the full and
certain knowledge of them, must be hidden from such as had no better light then
that of nature, to search them out; wherefore we find that they are wholly
passed over in all writings of Heathen men, but in the Scriptures are clearly
opened, as far as they are necessary to be known, which shows them to be the
Word of God, seeing they reveal these things that cannot be taught by humane
reason.

Fourthly, 4. Man's Redemption by Christ.
that wonderful mystery of man's Redemption by Jesus Christ, being a secret
that never entered into man's heart, 1 Cor. 2.19. was never so much as dreamed of
by any natural man, neither do we find the least syllable of it in any
Heathen man's books. The truth is, it seems so incredible a thing to flesh and
blood, that the Prophet, not without cause, when he begins to speak of this
wonder, asks, who has believed his report? Esa. 53.1. and the Apostle tells us,
that when it was preached, the learned Grecians accounted it foolishness, 1
Cor. 1.27. or a mere fantasy. Now that which seems incredible to reason,
when it is known, was very unlikely to be found out by reason at the first,
before it was known. If there were no more but this, that this wonderful work
proceeded merely from the free motion of Gods will, without any other cause
moving thereinto, then his own love and compassion, as Christ himself affirms,
John 36.16. And the Apostle, 1 John 4.10. how could any man divine, what God
purposed in his own heart before he had wrought it, unless himself had
revealed it? So that it must needs be granted, that this word which sets out
unto us the mystery of our Redemption by Christ, must be the Word of God
himself.

Lastly, 5. The benefits thereof.
the condition into which man is redeemed by Christ, is another mystery, hidden
from the eyes of all that see by no clearer light, then that which natural
reason yields them. It was utterly impossible for any man, Unio^ with Christ.
Adoption. Justification. Renovation.
by the light of nature, to have discovered our mystical union into one body
with Christ, by the Spirit; our adoption by grace to be the sons of God; our
Justification by faith, through the imputation of Christ's righteousness; our
Renovation or new birth, wherein our hearts are changed by the effectual
working of the spirit; Resurrection of our bodies to glory.
the restitution of our bodies to life again, with a change from the state of
corruption to incorruption, of natural, and earthly bodies, to spiritual, and
heavenly, and our glorious, and ever blessed condition to be enjoyed hereafter,
in the immediate, and everlasting fruition of God in the highest heavens.
Wherefore, we find not so much as any mention of these things among any of the
Heathen, unless perhaps they stumble upon the immortality of the soul, which
yet they rather dream of, then understand distinctly. Wherefore the Scriptures
revealing unto us so clearly all these things which natural reason could
neither teach nor comprehend, must needs be acknowledged to be the Word of God.

It appears then hitherto, 2ly Many rules of life. 1. The inward disposition of
the heart toward God in fear, love, and faith.
that the principles of faith, laid down in the Scriptures, must needs be
acknowledged to be revealed by God, and not by man. The same truth will be
evidently manifested, in the rules of practice, if they be duly weighed. To
begin with the duties to be performed unto God, and first with the affections
and right disposition of the heart. The Apostle tells us, we cannot believe on
him of whom we have not heard, Romans 10.14. and the Psalmist affirms, that
they only trust in him, that know his name, Psalm. 9.10. and we know that it
was the lively representation of God unto him, that struck that deep impression
of fear into Jobs heart, and made him vile in his own eyes, To be wrought in
us only by the full discovery of God unto us.
Job 40.4. and 42.5, 6. The truth is, those holy affections of love, fear, and
affiance in God, cannot be grounded on any other, then a true, and distinct
knowledge of him, which, as we have seen already, the light of natural reason
could never discover: so that none can prescribe unto us the right disposing of
the heart toward God, in those holy affections of love, fear, and faith in
him, but the same that can reveal unto us the right knowledge of himself.

As for the outward duties of worship, 2. And outward duties of worship.
that they cannot be devised by men, but must be appointed by God himself, the
very light of nature taught Heathen men themselves. Wherefore we find that
those forms of worship which they observed, the wisest amongst them either took
from the Sibylls books, or from some other directions pretended to be given by
the Gods themselves. Neither can we possibly be assured that such rites, as we
worship God withal, In the observation of the Sabbath, use of the Sacraments,
etc.
are accepted, unless God himself prescribe them, as we see he did the whole
form of ceremonial worship in the Leviticall law, and the Sabbath, and
Sacraments, both in Paradise, and under the Gospel by our Savior Christ.

And for the services which are to be performed to men, first, we find little
in the Precepts of such as are mere Moralists, concerning that fountain of
those duties, whence they ought to flow, which is love, without which none of
them is accepted, 1 Cor. 13.3. Neither do we find that measure of love
required by them, which our Savior commands, to love our neighbor as our
self, Mat. 5.44. wherein he affirms we go beyond natural men, and consequently
implies that we do more then natural reason teaches, whence it will follow,
that the law which requires that duty, was not given by man, and therefore must
needs be acknowledged to be the Precept and Word of God, and not of man.

Nay, beyond all this, 3. Most of all self-denial, which nature never taught.
we find that Gods Word requires of us the denial of our selves, and that
every way, both of our own vvisdome to prescribe, (as the Lord requires his
people to do not what is right in their own eyes, Deuteronomy. 12.8. but what is
right in the eyes of the Lord their God, Deuteronomy. 13.18.) and of our own ability
to undertake and perform, (as our Savior requires us to bring forth fruit in
him, without whom we can do nothing, John 15.5.) and of our own ends, (as
the Apostle tells us, that we must bring forth fruit unto God, Romans 7.4. that
he may be glorified, Mat. 5.16. and therefore the Prophet calls Israel an empty
Vine, because he brought forth fruit to himself, Hos. 10.1.) whence it is, that
our Savior makes this self-denial, the first step to Religion, Mat. 16.24. A
duty that humane reason is so far from prescribing, that it cannot so much as
allow and submit unto it when it is prescribed, and that because it cannot
find out man's emptiness and weakness, the ground on which self-denial is
founded, or at least sensibly acknowledged. Wherefore the Scriptures, which
require that duty, which is so contrary to the principles of nature, must needs
be the Word of God.

Thus we see, that the subject which the Scriptures handle, is above the pitch
of humane wisdom, whether we look to the grounds of faith, or rules of
practice, which are laid down therein. The true knowledge of God whom the
world has not known: the great and glorious works of the worlds Creation,
with the time, manner, and order thereof: And of man's Redemption after his
fall, and corruption thereby; together with the state into which he is
redeemed, to be mystically united to Christ, by the Spirit, which gives him
interest in his merits and righteousness, makes him Gods child by adoption,
and an heir of glory. The duties of fear, love, and affiance in God, all
grounded on the true knowledge of him; And lastly, the service of love to man,
binding him to love his neighbor as himself, yea, his very enemies, and above
all things to deny himself. So that the Scripture discovering those things,
which natural reason could never find out, must needs be acknowledged to be
delivered by God himself, and to be his Word.

MARK III. Of the powerful effects of the Scriptures upon men's hearts, which
discover them to be the Word of God.
THe two former Marks of the Scriptures, which manifest them to be the Word of
God, appear as it were in the face, and body of that sacred volume; this third
Mark is taken from the wonderful, and supernatural effects, that they work
upon the heart and conscience, which are such as cannot possibly be performed
by any other then a divine Power. These effects may be reduced unto three
heads. First, Secondly, Thirdly,

To begin with the first; The first Effect of the Word, the pricking of the
heart. Differing from natural terrors,
the terrors and prickings of heart, which are caused in men by Gods Word; It
cannot be denied, but there may be, and are sometimes wrought in men's hearts
some natural terrors, which may cause in them much unquietness, but between
such natural passions, and these spiritual agonies, which are wrought by the
word, there will appear a wide difference, if they be well examined, and that
more ways then one, 1. In the grounds upon which they be raised.

2. In the effects produced by them. The grounds of natural terrors.

1. A natural sense of sin.

2. A natural acknowledgment of Gods Justice, Holiness, and Power.


which may be easily made manifest, by observing, first, the grounds whence
either of them do arise; And secondly, the effects which the one and the other
produce, in those on whose hearts they make impression, with the different
consequents that follow thereupon.

Concerning the grounds, upon which terrors are raised in man's heart, the
causes of such as are natural, appear to be evidently different from those
which raise spiritual passions. For we cannot be ignorant, that every man by
nature, having imprinted in his heart some rude notions, at the least both of
good and evil; and withal some acknowledgement of Gods Justice, Holiness,
and Power, and having besides a conscience within his own breast, sitting as
Judge, to pass censure upon his own ways and actions, before which his
thoughts accuse or excuse one another, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 2.15. must
needs have usually some sense of every known sin, either more or less. Whence
it follows, that the more the conscience is illightned, and by that means
awakened, to look back upon a man's own sin, and the wrath of God lying upon him
for sin, and his powerful revenging hand pursuing him, the more he must of
necessity be distracted in his thoughts, with fearful terrors, which may
cause his life to hang before him, All working in the heart fears of punishment.
Deuteronomy. 28.65. and to be bitter unto him, and yet these terrors, as arising
from natural principles, are merely natural, being caused by a natural sense
of sin, and acknowledgment of Gods wrath, and fear of his own danger thereby,
which any man may have by nature.

From this apprehension of the guilt of sin, The grounds of spiritual terrors.
and fear of the punishment that follows it, the causes that affect a godly
man's heart, differ in two respects: First, Secondly, they are affected by them
on different considerations of Gods revenging hand: For the former, a natural
man is usually sensible only of sins against the law of Nature, 1. Discovery
of the sins of infidelity, pride, etc.
and especially sins against the second Table. But the Word of God represents
unto a man chiefly, more secret and inward evils, infidelity, pride, self-love,
sensual affections, hypocrisy, hardness of heart, and the like, and causes
them to appear unto him the foulest, and most abominable of all kinds of sin,
that can be committed.

In the second place, Cain complains, Genesis 4.14. or the sin, as it is a
trespass against man, and a wrong done to him, which affects him more then the
sense of any dishonor done to God, as Judas was sensible of nothing, but
betraying innocent blood, Mat. 27.4. But when Gods Word smites the heart, it
represents to the guilty person, his trespass against God, his Majesty, 2. And
those as trespasses against God.
and Holiness, which affected David, Psalm. 51.4. His unkind and causlesse
trespassing against the God that made, sustaineth, and carries him upon Eagles
wings, Deuteronomy. 32.10, 11.15. His frowardness, in trespassing out of
perverseness of spirit, against often warnings, and against the secret checks
of his own conscience. His folly, that thus perverts righteousness to no
profit, Job 33.27. forsaking the fountain of living waters, to hew broken
cisterns that hold no water, Jer. 2.13. whereby he has abased God in his
heart, Deuteronomy. 32.15. and set him at a lower rate then the transitory things of
this life, yea, then his own bare lusts. By all which he has defiled his own
soul, is become like the beasts that perish, Psalm. 49.20. nay, worse then they,
Isa. 1.3. so that he loathes, and is ashamed of himself, Job 42.6. Ier. 31.19.

Now as the considerations in sin, 3. And fear of Judgment certain,
intolerable, eternal.
that affect men naturally, and spiritually, are diverse, so are the
apprehensions of the danger, that comes by sin; A natural man's fears are like
that of Belshazar, Dan. 5.6. something he trembled at, but what it was he
understood not, or like those terrors threatened, Deu. 28.65, 66. wherein they
shall fear day and night, they know not why. But the Word of God shows one the
cause of his fear, representing the purity of those eyes of jealousy, which he
has provoked, makes it evident that God will by no means pardon the guilty,
Exodus 34.7. that he cannot be beguiled, will not be entreated, is impossible to
be escaped, and yet cannot be endured, as smiting with the arm of God, and not
of man: whose breath, as a river of brimstone, kindles that pile of fire and
much wood, which God prepares for sinners, Isa. 30.33. whose worm dies not,
neither does their fire go out, Isa. 66.24. So that by the Word the sinner
sees the rod, and who has appointed it, Micah 6.9. and feels it in his
apprehension certain, present, intolerable, and eternal: which compasses him
so with terrors, that he knows not what to do, unless he can make his peace
with God, and procure his pardon.

Hence it follows, The consequents of these severasl kinds of passions. In
natural men astonishment, fretting, hatred of God. In spiritual me^ shame,
grief for offending God, fear of loss of his favor. lastly, deliberation what
to do.
that as natural and spiritual terrors are raised upon different grounds: so
the effects and consequents of them must needs be diverse, which was proposed to
be handled in the next place. For natural terrors produce nothing but
astonishment and amazedness, so that such men lie down in their confusion,
fretting with indignation, and murmuring in their hearts, at their condition,
with Cain, Genesis 4.13. and both fearing God, and hating him. On the other side,
the terrors raised by Gods Word, in the heart, produce withal a loathing of
ones self, as a filthy creature, shame of ones own vileness, grief as much
for his unkindnesse toward God, as for his misery by sin; fear of the loss of
Gods favor, as much as of his revenging hand, indignation at ones own folly,
and wickedness, still acknowledging the Justice and Righteousness of God,
which produces at last deliberation what to do, with the Prodigal son, Luke
15.17, 18.

So then, natural terrors break, these melt the heart: natural terrors are
mixed with pride, these produce abasement of the spirit: Natural terrors
cause repining at God, these indignation at a man's self: Natural terrors
drive one, from; these, unto God, to sue for peace, the former force him into
the mouth of hell: these cast him into the bosom of Christ, with uncertain
hopes at first, and with a trembling heart, as the Lepers adventured on the
Syrians camp, 2 Kings 7.4. yet with hope of some possibility to find favor,
and with a resolution to cast himself upon God, come what will; Such kind of
heart-breakings which are wrought by the Word, being impossible to be wrought
by any natural means, argue that word that causes them to be of God, who
works according to his own pleasure, in all things, what he will.

Thus the first work of the Scripture, The second supernatural effect of the
Word, conversio^. 1t The means whereof are manifested only in the Word; showing,
in pricking and wounding the heart, manifestly discovers it to be the Word of
God, as working beyond the power of nature: But the conversion of the soul, by
the same Word, will make it yet more evident. Now it appears, first, by the
means of his conversion, and secondly, by the nature and kind of the work it
self. The means by which the Word draws on the heart toward this work of
conversion, are by proposing unto one cast down, by the sight of sin, and sense
of Gods wrath, two grounds, without which that work of conversion cannot be
brought to effect. 1. The inability of all creatures to work our peace.
First, the unprofitablenesse, and inability of all creatures to help, in that
dangerous condition, in which he finds himself. Secondly, the way of
reconciliation and peace, tendered by God himself, to repentant sinners, by the
mediation of Jesus Christ his own Son.

The inability of the creatures to do us good in this case, is only
manifested by Gods Word, 1. Of our selves to satisfy for sins passed.
which makes it evident, that we cannot help our selves neither by flight from
Gods presence, which fills all places, Ps. 139.7. nor by resisting his power,
which would be like the encounter of the thorns with the sire, Isa. 27.4. nor
by entreating and making peace with him, who will by no means clear the guilty,
Exodus 34.7. without satisfaction, which we cannot make in our own persons,
neither by our wealth, which is no ransom for souls, Psalm. 49.7, Either by
ourwealth, of by our righteousness. 2. Or by any other creature.
8. nor by our righteousness, seeing if we could fulfill the whole law, it is
but duty, Luke 17.10. and therefore can make no satisfaction for sins past. All
other creatures we find in the same condition with our selves, debtors to God
for all that they have or can do, and therefore unable to satisfy for us, and
as unable to defend us from Gods power, 2ly Pointing out the only way of
making our peace Christ Jesus. 1. Holy in himself. 2. Accepted of his Father.
3. Satisfying his Justice to the full.
as they are to work our reconciliation: So that our salvation by any creature
appears to be utterly impossible.

The heart of a sinner, being by this means brought to despair of help unto
salvation by any creature, the Word points out unto him that fountain which God
has opened for sin and for uncleanness, Christ Jesus himself, the only Son of
his Father, the holy one, in whose mouth no guile was found, Isa. 53.9. In whom
God is well pleased, who was bruised for our iniquities, so far that God did
see the travel of his soul, and was satisfied, Isa. 53.12. and who in our
flesh fulfilled all righteousness, and that for us. This means of
reconciliation, 4. Tendered to us by God himself.
the Scripture tells us God offers to all that will embrace it, and that upon
his faithful Word, which is truth it self, Psa. 119.142.151. Yea, makes it
manifest that this mercy is of inestimable value, and beyond belief, yet that
it becomes God to do things incredible, to cause his mercies to exceed, not
only the mercies of men, but even man's apprehension, as the love of Christ
passes knowledge, Ephesians. 3.19. that all men may be astonished at the
consideration of his mercies, as well as of his judgments, and generally of all
his ways, Romans 11.33.

Thus Gods Word shows, A means, 1. Suiting with Gods Justice. 2. Magnifying his
Mercy. 3. Discovering his Wisdom.
that this way of saving sinners, suits well with Gods justice, because he
pardons not without sufficient satisfaction: with his mercy, because it sets
out the plentifulnesse of his compassion: Psalm. 86.15. and 103.11. with his
wisdom, because this is a way past finding out, as all his judgments are a
great deep, Psalm. 36.6. and consequently makes a sinner confident, that a way
of peace, proposed by God himself, ratified by his faithful promise, and of
such advantage to further his own glory every way, 4. And consequently
advancing his glory.
is really intended, upon which the distressed soul is encouraged to follow
that only way, by which he sees hope of escaping the vengeance to come, which
he could never have known, unless God had revealed it in the Scriptures, Romans
16.25, 26. which must therefore be acknowledged to be the Word of God. 2ly The
nature of co^version, consisting,


Now if the grounds of man's conversion, could be found no where but in the Word
of God, much less could the act it self of conversion, be wrought by any other
instrument, then the same Word. For whereas conversion is the turning away of
the heart from all creatures, himself and all unto God, which consists in two
main acts, self-denial, and total subjection to God, it is evident that
neither of these two can be wrought any other way, then by the power of the
Spirit, working by the Word. To begin with self-denial, 1. In selfdenial
impossible to nature.
consisting in the abandoning of ones own wisdom, righteousness, ability to
do any good, desires and endeavors after his own ends, in credit, profit,
pleasure, or any other way: what wise man among the Heathen, guided by the
light of nature, ever taught it, much more practiced it? Or how is it possible
that corrupt nature should conquer it self? Indeed, it is true that natural
wisdom has prevailed upon men, to change them from a vicious disposition, to
moral honesty, perhaps somewhat out of conscience, or more out of
self-respect, to grace themselves by the honor of a virtuous disposition, but
to deny ones self, one cannot be possibly persuaded, but by something that is
not himself.

Again, 2. In a total subjection to Gods will.
it is impossible that the whole spirit of man, with all the thoughts thereof,
should be brought under to a free and cheerful submission to Gods will,
unless the very temper and frame of it be altered. For that Gods desires
should be our desires, his will our will, his delights our delights (our
wisdom in this state of corruption being enmity against him, Romans 8.7.) can
be wrought by no other way, Which nature opposes. And therefore must be new
framed after Gods image, to bring it to this subjection.
but by making our nature answerable to Gods Nature, which necessarily requires
the destroying of the corruption thereof, and the creating of it after God, in
wisdom, and holiness, Ephesians. 4.24. Col. 3.10. Now the changing, and new creating
of the heart is beyond man's power, effected only by him that made it at the
first; wherefore, even in respect of our new birth we are said to be his
workmanship, Ephesians. 2.10. receiving this spiritual, as well as our natural life
from him, to whom it properly belongs to quicken the dead, Romans 4.17. to raise
up whom he will, John 5.21. as having life in himself: v. 26. wherefore the
renewing of the heart, being a work above nature, and properly the effect of a
divine power; it necessarily follows, that the Scriptures, which are found by
experience to be the instruments of that high and supernatural work, must have
a divine original, and consequently be the Word of God.

The last of the divine and supernatural effects, The third supernatural
effect of the Word, reviving wounded spirits. To be effected only by Gods Word
that wounded them.
wrought by the word, is the sustaining and reviving of distressed and wounded
spirits. Now that this can be effected by no other means then the Word, is
manifest not only by experience, which makes it evident that humane wisdom or
eloquence can do nothing to purpose this way: but besides, by the
consideration of the cause whence the affliction of the spirit arises. For
seeing it is the apprehension of Gods wrath, provoked by sin, that breaks the
heart, it must needs be granted that it cannot be healed, but upon a persuasion
that God is pacified, as we see in that wounded spirit, Job 33.25. and in
David, 2 Samuel 12.13. which must be wrought by a message coming from God
himself, as it is God that must cause David to hear the voice of joy and
gladness, ere the bones that he had broken could rejoice, Ps. 51.8. It must
therefore be the same hand that has smitten, that must heal, Hos. 6.1.
wherefore seeing it is only Gods Word that wounds the soul, as has been
showed; the Word that restores and heals it, must needs be granted to be the
same Word of God.

That no other means, but the voice and Word of God, accompanied with his
Spirit, can perform these great works of melting, converting, and comforting
the soul, we have showed already. Now it may be doubted, whether those effects,
as they are beyond the power of nature, be not also beyond the power of the
Word it self. Seeing many hear and read that Word, But many use the Word in
whom it works no such effect.
but they remain still senseless, careless, rebellious, and carnal, lovers of
themselves, and high minded, etc. and others walking in darkness without
light, Isa. 50.10. finding no peace nor comfort in the Word it self, as if
there were no balm in Gilead, nor no Physician there, Jer. 8.22. Now if the
power of working these effects be in the word, how comes it to pass that they
appear not in the greatest part of those that hear, and read it?

To this We answer, it sufficiently proves that it has this power. 1t If it
work it in some, it proves it has that power. 2ly Where it has not this
effect, 1. Either the heart is not rightly disposed,
Meat has power to nourish, and medicines to cure, yet all are not cured by
medicines, nor nourished by meat. To the producing of an effect, besides the
power of the cause, is required a right disposition of the subject. The
highway, the stony, and thorny ground, we know brought no fruit to perfection,
which our Savior tells us, was not by any defect in the Word, but by the ill
disposition of the heart, Mat, 13.19.20. etc. And the Apostle tells us, that
those that had not faith to mix with the Word, profited not by it at all, Heb.
4.2. Again, a cause powerful enough in it self, may want effect, where it is
not rightly applied; there are that hear the Word and understand it not, Mat.
13.19. Some that understand, and believe it not, 2. Or the Word not rightly
applied.
John 12.47. Some that believe it, and remember it not, Iam. 1.23. And lastly,
some that after all this apply it not at all, or at least not as they ought,
taking hold of judgment, when they need the promises of mercy, or laying hold
of mercy, when judgment is their portion, 3ly The Word works not necessarily,
but voluntarily.
Deuteronomy. 29.19. Lastly, we must remember, that the Word works not necessarily, as
fire heats, but voluntarily, being only mighty through God, 2 Cor. 10.4.
working by the Spirit, which like the wind blows where it lusts, John
3.8. Thus Lydiaes heart was opened by God, when others were shut, Acts 16.14.
And many scoffed at Saint Peter's Sermons, which notwithstanding converted three
thousands, Acts 2.41.

We have then sufficiently manifested the Scriptures to be Gods Word: First,
Secondly, thirdly, lastly,

CAP. III. The Scriptures which have God for their Author, must needs be of
divine Authority.
The former Position being once granted, that the Scriptures are Gods Word, no
man can question their Authority, whether that be of him or no. So that this
evident truth, needing no power at all, our labor must be only to show, what
we mean by that divine Authority, which we challenge unto the Scriptures; for
the opening whereof, we must first, consider in general, what this name
Authority imports. In Scripture, as well as in other Authors, the names of
Authority and Power are used indifferently, Authority is not Power in genetall,
as if they were one and the same thing, although in strictness of
signification, we may find a real difference between them. For this term
Power, implies that strength by which any thing not only subsists, but withal
bears out it self against whatsoever opposes it, and besides is enabled to
work any notable effect; but this signification as making little to our
purpose, we shall omit for the present.

More pertinently to the matter in hand, But right to rule and govern.
this name of Power is taken for that dominion and right of ruling, and
governing, which one has over another, to dispose and order that which is
governed. In this sense Power seems to be a more general name then Authority,
as is evident by the correlative terms opposed thereunto. For subjection
(which imports any kind of subordination of one under another) seems most firly
to answer to Power, as the Psalmist matcheth man's dominion over the works of
Gods hands, with subjection or putting all things under his feet, Psalm. 8.6.
And obedience, which is a voluntarily yielding or submitting ones self to
another will, may be conceived to be more properly correspondent to
Authority, as the Centurion expresses the subjection of his servants and
soldiers, by their readiness to do his will, Luke 7.8. At least howsoever the
names be sometimes used indifferently, there is manifest difference between
prescribing to a reasonable creature, and between the disposing of that which
is without reason.

Authority therefore, And that most properly reasonable creatures.
being most properly restrained to the government of reasonable creatures, is
that power by which a superior has right to prescribe unto such as are under
him. By right, in this description, we exclude tyranny, which is the usurping
of authority, without or against right. Secondly, As being only capable of
prescription.
we imply that it properly extends only to such as are capable of
prescription, which are reasonable creatures. Lastly, we extend it to all kind
of prescribing, both to the understanding, what to assent unto and believe, and
to the will, what to follow and embrace. All which particulars, if we lay
together, we shall find that Authority originally is founded in God alone, and
that men have no title unto it, but by deputation from him, as the Apostle
expressly restifieth, Romans 13.1. Which reaches, 1. To the understanding, what
to believe. Which only belongs unto God to prescribe. 1. Seeing he only knows
things by vision. 2. Only has light in himself.


To begin with that branch of Authority that prescribes unto the understanding,
what to assent unto as truth, we know that this is a Power that no man may
justly challenge, seeing a rule must be certain; now man's understanding we know
is capable of error, Romans 3.4. and that for two reasons. First, man's knowledge
is not by vision, or looking through the nature of things themselves, but by
information from sense, which represents only the outward appearance, 1 Samuel
16.7. and leaves reason to guess at the inward nature of things, wherein there
cannot but be much uncertainty. Secondly, seeing it is light which makes all
things manifest, Ephesians. 5.13. which none has originally in himself but God
alone, who dwells in the light, 1 Timothy 6.16. nay, is light it self, 1 John
5.5. and therefore men can have no light but by communication from God, who
illightens every one that comes into the world, John 1.9. it must needs follow,
that man can have no infallibility of judgment, because he judges by that
light which is not in his own power, but is supplied or withheld according to
the will of God, who disposes it, at his pleasure.

Now then, men having no infallibility of judgment in themselves, must
necessarily rest upon something without themselves for a certain rule of truth,
First, because only God both is light in himself, as we have showed, and
withal is in and through all things, Ephesians. 4.6. which are therefore said to
be naked in his sight, Heb. 4.13. as will be farther showed hereafter.
secondly, because he is a God that cannot lie, 3. And cannot lie.
Tit. 1.2. being a God of truth, Deuteronomy. 32.2. nay, truth it self, John 14.6. and
consequently may be rested on, as an infallible oracle of truth, an honor
peculiar to God, and incommunicable to any creature. So that the first branch
of Authority, which is the power and right of giving rules of truth, belongs to
God alone, and cannot be challenged by any creature.

The next branch of Authority, 2 To the will. Which belongs likewise to God
only.
is the right of prescribing to the will, which must also be appropriated unto
God only, and that on three grounds. First, because it can be no otherwise,
for seeing both man and all creatures have their being, not only originally
from God, 1. Because it moves In and By him, and therefore must have the rule
of moving From him.
but besides in him by continual support, Act. 17.28. it must follow, that
they can move no otherwise, nor no longer then his power assists them, no more
then the staff can do without the force of the hand that uses it: which also
is true of all other creatures, that they are turned about by his counsel to
do what he wills, Job 37.12. Psalm 148.8. So that, as all other creatures, so
man amongst the rest must of necessity have the rule of his motions from Gods
will.

Secondly, it is not more necessary then equal, 2. He only has power to do
with his own what he will.
that it should be so, because of the total and absolute dependence that man
has upon God every way, for it is just that one may do with his own what he
will, Matthew. 20.15. which also the very principles of nature teach all men, as
appears by subjecting children to the will of their parents, on whom
notwithstanding they depend neither totally, nor principally. Nay this equity
is much greater in man, then in any other creature, because the acknowledgement
of Gods will in all things to be most just, Psalm. 119.128. by submitting and
subscribing thereunto, and thereby to himself to be a God without iniquity,
Deuteronomy. 32.4. is the main end for which man was created, and endowed with
understanding, and with a will to be directed by it, and there is great reason
the workman should use his tool to that end for which he made it.

Lastly, it is every way convenient that God should prescribe to men's will, 3.
It is best that Gods will should be our rule. 1t For men in particular; seeing
his will is only infallibly, 1. Good. 2. And certain. 3. And assures good
success by his assistance. 2ly And in general. 1. When men are best united and
preserved by following one rule. 2. And God is most honored when all submit to
his will.
both in respect of themselves in particular, and in respect of the
administration of the world in general. For men in particular it is better,
because Gods will first is absolutely good, Psalm. 143.10. whereas men's are
evil. Secondly, is constant and unchangeable, Ps. 33.11. whereas men's are
variable every moment. And thirdly, the following of Gods direction in our ways
assures us, both of success in our endeavors, Josh. 1.8. and acceptance of
our service, when we know we do nothing but what God himself commands. And as
for the general administration of the world, it must needs be every way most
convenient, that God prescribe unto all men, that when all are guided by one
rule, order and unity might be preserved. Lastly, how Gods honor is furthered,
when his laws pass for rules of practice, without contradiction, and by men's
submission thereunto are acknowledged to be holy and just, has been partly
intimated before.

Hitherto then it appears, that divine Authority reaches to the prescribing,
and giving rules to the two most eminent faculties in man, the Understanding,
and Will, what to believe, embrace, and prosecute. A power which he has right
unto by the absolute sovereignty which he has overall things, by the
infallibility of his truth; and lastly, by the unchangeable righteousness and
goodness of his will. All which laid together, must necessarily infer, that
absolute Authority is founded originally in God, and in him alone. It has
pleased him notwithstanding to impart this power of his to men, This Authority
God having absolutely in himself imparts to men.
whom he has made his substitutes on earth, but within certain bounds and
limits, this limited Authority committed by God to men, is for distinction sake
called humane authority, as that absolute Authority from which it is derived,
is called divine. What either of these are, and by what limits they are
severed, will best appear by laying their differences one against another.

The first difference between divine and humane Authority, is in the fountain,
whence they spring; Distinguished from his absolute power 1. In the fountain,
Gods is originally in himself; Man's derived from him.
Gods Authority is founded in himself, man's in God. Therefore Gods affirmation
or command must be received without contradiction, though we understand neither
reason why, nor end whereto, so that to silence our very thoughts, it is enough
to say, The Lord has spoken it: but when men affirm or command, we cry, To the
law and to the testimony, Isa. 8.20. wherewith if their commands or assertions
agree not, there is no light in them, so that we may warrantably except, with
the Apostles, Whether it be meet to obey God or men judge ye, Act. 4.19. So
then, the first difference is this, that Authority that prescribes by the
absolute power of the commander is divine, that which prescribes by virtue of
another under whom it commands, is humane. 2. In the subject matters
prescribed. 1. Principles of faith.


The second difference between the Authority of God and man, is in respect of
the subjects, or matters prescribed, which are either principles of says, or
rules of life; for the former, because God is true and every man a liar, Ro^.
3.4. therefore in grounds of faith, Which only God can deliver. 1. Because many
of them are unsearchable by man.
we admit no testimony but Gods alone, for two reasons: First, the imperfection
of our knowledge, arising partly by the nature of the things to be believed,
whereof many are unsearchable by man's wisdom, and therefore must be revealed
by the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.11, 12. and partly from the weakness of the means of
our knowledge, which is the information by sense that looks only on the
outward appearance, 1 Sa^. 16.9. so that it is impossible that man should know
any thing in matters of faith, but by revelation from God, which also he
apprehends weakly and imperfectly. So that in matters of faith there is no
infallibility in man's knowledge, and that which is, depends upon the credit not
of the man, but of the Spirit which reveals it. Another reason why man's
testimony is no sufficient ground of faith, 2. Because men may lie.
is because men may deceive as well as be deceived, wherefore though they often
speak truth, we are not sure that they do so always, because it is not
contrary to their nature to lie, Whereas Gods knowledge is infallible. 1.
Because he has light in himself. 2. And knows by vision, not by discourse.
as it is unto Gods, Tit. 1.2.

Neither of these imperfections are found in God, whose knowledge must needs be
every way perfect, because he sees by his own, not by a borrowed light, which
must therefore be without any mixture of darkness, 1 John 1.5. And, because
the means of Gods knowledge is by vision, not by discourse, yea, by such a
sight as pierces through the very nature of all things, seeing God himself is
in and through all, Ephesians. 4.6. Besides, the most of the things which we
believe, 3. And must needs understa^d what he freely gives.
are things freely given us of God, 1 Cor. 2.12. which therefore he must needs
understand fully, seeing the spirit in man understands the things of a man,
although no man else know them, 1 Cor. 2.11. Now in the next place, there can
be no more question of Gods fidelity in revealing, then there is of his
infallibility in understanding all things, seeing truth is Gods nature, And can
no more deceive then be deceived.
which therefore he can no more swerve from, then from himself. So seeing we
find Gods testimony every way infallible, and man's uncertain, it must needs be
granted that it is peculiar to God alone to establish grounds of faith.

Again, for the regulating of man's practice, 2. And rules of life only to be
prescribed by God. 1. Whose will is infallibly good. 2. And the duties
prescribed are his services.
there is a wide difference between Gods and man's Authority; for if we respect
the substance of duty, that can be prescribed by none but God alone, both
because only his will is infallibly good, Psalm. 143.10.119.39. and therefore
only fit to be the rule of righteousness; and besides, because the duties
commanded, being all of them immediately, or mediately services unto God, it
was most fit that God alone should appoint the duties of his own service. The
truth is, in matters of practice, man's authority has to do only in two
things: First, in applying the rules of moral duties to particulars, for the
preservation of order, and peace thereby. Secondly, in compelling men to
obedience, in such duties as are prescribed. In brief then, divine Authority
establishes principles of faith, and prescribes the substance of moral duty;
humane authority, meddles not in laying down any grounds of faith at all, and
in moral duties prescribes, not the substance, but only the order and manner
of outward performance of that which divine authority has commanded.

The third difference between divine and humane Authority, 3. In the extent of
this authority which binds the conscience, belonging only to God.
is in the extent of them both. Humane authority (being ordained for
preservation of order, and by it of peace, in civil society, for the
furtherance and supporting of godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2.2.) reaches no
farther then to bind men to conform to order in the course of their practice;
but divine Authority having an higher scope, even the renewing of the heart, and
bringing under the thoughts thereof to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5.
binds the conscience, that is, both the judgment of man, to allow that which
is commanded, as holy and just, with the Apostle, Romans 7.12. and the will to
choose it as good, and the affections to embrace it Romans 7.22. accordingly:
yea, the whole man to follow it, with the strength of constant endeavors,
after the Prophet David's example, Psalm. 119.106.112.

Hence it follows, that in obeying men's commandments, he that does what
Authority requires (so he perform it in a willing submission thereunto, in
obedience to God, which the Apostle calls obeying for conscience sake, Romans
13.5.) has performed his duty, neither has cause to judge himself a
transgressour, though he approve not the law it self as good and holy, nay,
though upon good ground he think the contrary to that which is commanded, more
fit and convenient, so he think not so out of any self-conceipt, rash
judgment, or distaste of the Authority that commands. But in obeying Gods
Commandments it is far otherwise. For though a man fulfill the law in the
outward act, yet if he allow it not as holy and just, if his endeavor be not
to conform his will to Gods will therein, if he rejoice not in performing it as
a good man does, Prove. 21.15. his own conscience ought to condemn him as a
transgressour, and sinner against God, at least in some degree. So then divine
Authority binds the conscience by a double band, both of the power that
commands, and of the justice of the commandment; but humane Authority binds
only by virtue of the power that commands, not by the equity of the
commandment, further then it agrees with Gods law, or conduces to order and
peace, for which Authority was established.

The last difference between divine and humane Authority, 4. In the sanctions
annexed to the precepts.
is in respect of the sanctions annexed to their laws, which are proportioned
to the nature and quality of the obedience required, and to the power of him
that requires it. For Gods commands in his laws are specially inward holiness,
righteousness, love, etc. and that under the penalty of the curse, and wrath
of God, 1. Reaching to the soul. 2. And reaching to eternity.
to be poured out on the soul, as well as on the body, both in this life, and
in the everlasting flames of hell fire, if men sin against the law, and under
promise of eternal life if they fulfill it. Whereas men, that require an
orderly conversation outwardly, threaten and promise only some outward and
temporary good or evil.

These differences between divine and humane Authority, laid together, may help
us to a description of them severally, The description of divine Authority,
by which their natures are best distinguished. Divine Authority is that power
of God, founded upon the total dependence of all creatures upon him, and upon
his infallible wisdom, truth and goodness, by which he has right to
prescribe and manifest all grounds of truth to be believed, and assented unto
upon his own testimony, without contradiction, and to give rules of practice,
to be embraced with all the heart, as perfectly holy, just and good, because he
commands them, under the rewards and penalties of everlasting life, and eternal
damnation.

Humane Authority, And humane.
is a limited power, derived from God to man, by which he is warranted,
according to Gods will, for the furthering of public good, to prescribe unto
such as are put under his power, rules of order in their conversation, for
preserving peace in a way of godliness and honesty, binding those whom they
command in all things, not contrary to Gods law, to conform their practice and
actions thereunto, for the Authority which commands them in Gods name, under
the rewards and penalties of some outward good or evil.

By this which has been delivered, concerning the grounds and extent of that
divine Authority, which we challenge and claim to be due to the Scriptures, we
may observe what power this sacred Word ought to have over men's hearts, and
consequently in what manner it ought to be heard, read, and received.
Whatsoever it proposes, the heart must assent unto and believe, without
contradiction or debate, how probable or improbable soever it appear to carnal
reason. And whatsoever is commanded therein, the whole heart and every thought
of it must stoop unto, and embrace, as holy and good, howsoever it please or
displease the natural man, and that merely for the Authority of him that
commands it.

CAP. IV. Of the Penmen of the Scriptures, that they were holy men, inspired
and guided in that work infallibly and wholly, by the Spirit of God.
BOth the clauses of this Proposition Saint Peter knits up together in one
testimony, affirming that no prophecy of Scripture is of private
interpretation, nor that those prophesies came in old time, by the will of man,
but that holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost, 2 Pet.
1.21. Who the most of these holy men were, it is well known to the Church, the
titles of their Books bearing their names: The Scriptures delivered, 1t By holy
men, as was most fit.
And that they were holy men, the histories of their lives remaining still upon
record, and their honorable memory in the Church to this day, sufficiently
declare, such as were Moses, David, Solomon, the Prophets and Apostles. And
that the rest, whose names are either concealed, or doubtful, were such
likewise, will be evident to any indifferent person that shall consider two
things.

First, 1. They must be such that had so near communion with God.
we know that God will be sanctified in all that come near him, Lev. 10.3. as
it is meet he should, seeing his eyes are purer then to behold evil, Heb.
1.13. one that is glorious in holiness, Exodus 15.11. and whose house holiness
becomes for ever, Psalm. 93.5. Now then, for Gods honor, it was fit that none
should be employed in this work of publishing Gods will and law to his people,
which so nearly concerned his own and his Churches service, and wherein they
were to be admitted into so near a degree of familiarity with him, as to be
made acquainted with his chiefest secrets, but only such persons as were
approved for holiness.

Secondly, 2. And by this means some respect is won to their writings.
the corrupt nature of men is such, as we know that the least occasion would be
sufficient to breed distaste of that, which nature in it self is so averse
from, (as the dressing, vessel, or sometimes servitor, that presents the sick
man the meat which his stomach loathes, moves him to abhor it) and consequently,
if there were just exception against the persons that bring it, the message it
self would quickly be distasted, as the Lords offerings were for Elies wicked
sons, 1 Samuel 2.17. So that it concerned the Lord, both for his own honor, and
his Churches good, to deliver his Word by the hands of holy men.

It adds something to the estimation of the Scriptures, that they were written
by such holy men, as we have formerly mentioned, but this at the uttermost
adds unto them only an humane respect, 2. Directed by the Spirit of God.
but that which procures unto them divine reverence, which ought to make all
hearts stoop unto them, is that they were written by the direction of the holy
Spirit, the Spirit of truth, especially if we thoroughly consider what manner of
direction it was which was given unto these holy Penmen of these sacred
Oracles, in the composing thereof. The Apostle, 2 Pet. 1.20, 21. describes that
kind of assistance of the holy Ghost, in the delivery of the Scriptures, two
ways. First, Secondly, he describes the same assistance affirmatively,
testifying that they spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost.

In the former of these, Not by the abilities of nature.
wherein he expresses this manner of delivering the Scriptures by way of
negation, the Apostle excludes the working of the natural faculties of man's
mind altogether: First, the understanding, So that not only the matter or
substance of the truths revealed, Both in the matter and expressions.
but the very forms of expression were not of man's devising, as they are in
Preaching, where the matter which men preach is not, or ought not to be the
Ministers own that preaches, but is the Word of truth, 2 Timothy 2.15. but the
terms, phrases, and expressions are his own. Secondly, he says, that it came
not by the will of man, who neither made his own choice of the matters to be
handled, Neither of them suggested by man's understanding, nor directed by his
will; farther then to understa^d and approve what the Spirit suggested. But the
Penmen were carried by the holy Ghost.
nor of the forms and manner of delivery: So that both the understanding, and
will of man, as far as they were merely natural, had nothing to do in this
holy work, save only to understand, and approve that which was dictated by God
himself, unto those that wrote it from his mouth, or the suggesting of his
Spirit.

Again, the work of the holy Ghost in the delivery of the Scriptures is set
down affirmatively, when the Penmen of those sacred writings are described, to
speak as they were moved or carried by the holy Ghost, a phrase which must be
warily understood. For we may not conceive that they were moved in writing
these Scriptures, as the pen is moved by the hand that guides it, without
understanding what they did: For they not only understood, but willingly
consented to what they wrote, and were not like those that pronounced the
Devils Oracles, rapt and carried out of themselves by a kind of ecstasy,
wherein the Devil made use of their tongues and mouths, to pronounce that
which themselves understood not. But the Apostles meaning is, that the Spirit
of God moved them in this work of writing the Scriptures, not according to
nature, Yet understandingly and willingly.
but above nature, shining into their understandings clearly, and fully, by an
heavenly and supernatural light, and carrying and moving their wills thereby
with a delight, and holy embracing of that truth revealed, and with a like
desire to publish and make known the secrets and counsels of God, revealed unto
them, unto his Church.

Yea, beyond all this, the holy Ghost not only suggested unto them the
substance of that doctrine which they were to deliver and leave upon record
unto the Church, (for so far he usually assists faithful Ministers, in
dispensing of the Word, in the course of their Ministry) but besides he
supplied unto them the very phrases, method, The holy Ghost made choice both of
the expressions and methods.
and whole order of those things that are written in the Scriptures, whereas he
leaves Ministers in preaching the Word, to the choice of their own phrases and
expressions, wherein, as also in some particulars which they deliver, they may
be mistaken, although in the main fundamentals which they lay before their
hearers, and in the general course of the work of their Ministry, they do not
grossly err. Thus then the holy Ghost, not only assisted holy men in penning
the Scriptures, but in a sort took the work out of their hand, making use of
nothing in the men, but of their understandings to receive and comprehend,
their wills to consent unto, and their hands to write down that which they
delivered.

When we say, that the holy Ghost framed the very phrase and style wherein the
Scriptures were written, we mean not, that he altered the phrase and manner of
speaking, wherewith custom and education had acquainted those that wrote the
Scriptures, Yet uttering his own expressions as it were in the sound of their
voice
but rather speaks his own words, as it were in the sound of their voice, or
chooses out of their words and phrases such as were fit for his own purpose.
Thus upon instruments men play what lesson they please, but the instrument
renders the sound of it more harsh or pleasant, according to the nature of it
self. Thus amongst the Penmen of Scriptures, we find that some write in a
rude and more impolished style, as Amos; some in a more elegant phrase, as
Isay. Some discover art and learning in their writings, as S. Paul; others
write in a more vulgar way, as S. James. And yet withal the Spirit of God drew
their natural style to an higher pirch, in divine expressions, fitted to the
subject in hand.

How needful it was, that the Spirit of God should solely manage and
accomplish this work of penning the Scriptures, has been showed already in the
former point, wherein we proved that the Scriptures must necessarily be the
Word of God, seeing faith can stay it self on no other foundation, then a
divine testimony, and our services cannot be accounted a duty of obedience,
unless it be done in obedience to Gods will, which can be made known no other
way then by his own Word. Now the inferences hold strongly thus, The Scriptures
are Gods own Word, therefore they must be delivered by his own Spirit, seeing
none else could know Gods mind, as none knows the mind of man but the spirit
which is in man, 1 Cor. 2.11.

CAP. V. Of the Subject or Matters handled in the Scriptures, that the
Scriptures contain all things necessary to salvation.
IT much concerns such as address themselves to the reading of the Scriptures,
The subject matters revealed in Scriptures are,
to know what subject they handle, of what nature it is, whom, and what it
concerns, as being an effectual means to awaken the heart, and quicken the
affections of men unto that holy exercise. For all experience makes it evident,
that men usually attend carefully to such things as most nearly concern
themselves, 1. Such as concern men. 2. And in the highest degree.
and are not much moved usually with things, in which they have no special
interest. And are serious in matters of importance, on which their own safety,
or their estate depend, but slight things that are of small worth, and of no
great moment to their gain or loss. Wherefore to move men to be serious in
reading the Word, it is needful to make it evident that the subject thereof is
high and heavenly, exceeding man's wisdom, and therefore worthy to be
thoroughly searched into: And besides, of such importance to us, that upon it
depends our everlasting happiness, the way whereunto, and means whereof, are
set down therein.

Seeing therefore it appears, that the Position proposed, and the consideration
thereof are so pertinent to our present purpose, and therefore fit to be
handled in this place, it will be needful to open it more fully, and to that
purpose to express,

First,

Secondly,

Concerning the former of these two, Necessary imports not, 1. A natural
necessity. 2. Nor meritorious.
by necessary we understand not a natural necessity, by which the being of
one thing depends upon another, as the effect does upon the cause, no nor a
meritorious necessity, by which salvation might be earned as one earns his
wages by his labor, in either of which senses it is impossible that any thing
should be necessary to salvation, which can have no cause in nature, nor be
earned by desert, seeing it is a free gift, But a necessity imposed by the
will, of God.
Romans 6.23. Ephesians. 2.8. But by necessary, we mean a necessity imposed by the will
of God, who bestowing eternal life freely, had power to bestow it on what
conditions he pleased, and has promised it only under the Covenant of faith
and obedience, the rules whereof being contained only in the Scriptures, and
therein fully, they are for that cause said to contain all things necessary to
salvation.

When we say, it is only the will of God, that makes faith and obedience
necessary to salvation, we deny not but this will of his has in this, as in
all things else, respect to his own glory, For the advancing of his own glory.
1. Our faith bearing witness to his Al-sufficiency, and Truth. 2. Our
obedience to his Authority, and Righteousness. Yet are not all things in
Scripture alike necessary.
which is testified at least by our faith and obedience. For our relying on him
by faith bears witness to his sufficiency, faithfulness, and truth, as our
obedience in submitting cheerfully to his will, in all that he commands,
acknowledges his Authority, Wisdom, and Holiness; So then this will of God,
in requiring of us these conditions, is every way just as well as free. Now
when we say, the grounds and rules of faith and obedience, contained in
Scripture, are necessary to salvation, we mean not that all are of like
necessity. Ignorance, or unbeleef in God, or Christ, excludes absolutely from
salvation, John 3.18. so does not ignorance, or unbeleef in some temporal
promise, although it cannot be excused from sin. In brief then, when we say
all things necessary to salvation are contained in Scripture, we mean both that
the things written therein are necessary to that end, although not alike
necessary, and that there is nothing necessary to that end, that is not to be
found there.

We are next to show what we understand by this term containing. Scriptures
contain things, 1. In express terms. 2. By necessary consequence
Now things may be contained in Scripture, either expressly, and in plain
terms, or by consequence drawn from some grounds that are delivered in
Scripture, and one of these two ways all grounds of faith, or rules of
practice, are to be found in these holy writings. It is no where affirmed in
Scripture in express terms, that the holy Ghost is God, but we read, 1 John
5.7. that the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost are one, and from thence
infer by necessary consequence, that the holy Ghost is God, because he is one
with the Father, who is God. We are no where in precise words commanded to
baptize infants, but from the precept given to the Fathers to circumcise them,
we take our selves to be warranted to baptize them, because Baptism and
Circumcision are in substance one Sacrament. We are no where expressly
commanded to discover the fault of what we sell, or to give a just value for
that which we buy. But we have general rules commanding us to speak the truth
from the heart, Ps. 15.2. To do as we desire to be done unto, Mat. 7.12. and
forbidden to defraud our brother in any matter, or go beyond him in
bargaining, which imports as much. Thus, where all things needful to be
believed, or done, are not clearly expressed in Scripture, yet they are implied
and drawn out from thence by necessary consequence.

This truth, that the Scriptures contain whatsoever is necessary to salvation,
is sufficiently ratified, by evident testimony of the Word it self, which sends
us to the Law, and to the Testimony, Isa. 8.20. tells us, that in them we have
eternal life, John 5.39. that they alone are able to make the man of God
perfect to every good work, 2 Timothy 2.17. and wise to salvation, ver. 15. that
the Law of God is perfect, Psalm. 19.7. and though there be an end of all other
perfections, yet the commandment is exceeding broad, Psalm. 119.96. that is,
comprehends all needful things, so that nothing is wanting in it. Whence
proceeds that curse upon every one that adds, as well as upon them that take
away from that Book, Rev. 22.18. Yea besides, this truth is consonant to all
grounds of reason, whatsoever our adversaries allege to the contrary.

For first, we have reason to presume, It was fit that God should deliver his
will in writing. 1. As the most easy way to make it public.
that God would take the easiest way for the instruction of his Church; now it
is evident, that it is more easy to leave things upon record in writing, then
to charge them upon men's memories, especially when they are many, and
consequently must burden the memory; whereas lying before men's eyes, in
writing, they may easily be overlooked at all times, without trouble. If it be
replied that traditions are few, and may therefore be easily remembered: We
answer first; they may be infinite, for ought we know, seeing no man ever took
upon him to tell us how many they are. And secondly, be they more or fewer, yet
they are more easily preserved by writing, then by tradition, as all men know.

Again, it was fit that in teaching his Church, 2. As the safest way to prevent
corruption
God should take the safest way, and freest from error, as well for his own
honor, as for his peoples good, both which must needs be extremely hazarded
and hindered by corrupting the truth with errors, which lead men into
perdition, and can hardly be prevented by delivering the word by tradition,
partly, because many men's memories are weak, and a great part are negligent,
especially in things of this nature; and lastly, because many are maliciously
bent against the law, which the wisdom of the flesh cannot admit, Romans 8.7.
whereas the word written, being an unerring record, easily helps the weak, and
convinces the refractary, by setting the undoubted truth before men's eyes.

Farther, 3. As the best way to win credit to his Word.
seeing the word is the ground of faith, it is fit that it should be so
delivered as might win most credit and estimation amongst men. Now we know that
written records are most authentical, and of most account with men, and
therefore are fittest to work men to assent unto the truth of God. It is true I
grant, that men's faith depends neither upon wirting nor tradition, but upon the
testimony of the Spirit that dwells within the godlies hearts, manifesting that
the truth proposed is the word of God. Notwithstanding the outward credit which
the Scriptures carry amongst men, by which such as are won afterward to
believe, begin at first to think reverently of them; and others that believed
not, are restrained from scorning or opposing them, seems to be much furthered
by the Authority that the writing brings unto those records, which are received
and submitted unto by the Church, and commanded and countenanced by the
testimony thereof.

Lastly, 4. And as most honorable.
whereas there is so much honor done to all humane laws, by which States are
governed, that they are composed into one body, and preserved in books written
or printed for that purpose, it seems absurd that God should deliver his law
thus by patches, part by writing, and part by tradition, resembling the feet of
Nebuchadnezzars image, Dan. 2.33. part of iron, and part of clay, and unworthy
both of the Majesty of him that gives the law, and of the law it self that is
given. And if we may take precedent from former times, we may say with our
Savior, from the beginning it was not so. For when God left the law to be
delivered by tradition, he delivered it wholly, that way; when he caused it to
be written, he caused it to be written wholly, not only the Moral, but the
Judicial and Ceremonial too, containing many observances of small value,
termed beggarly rudiments, Gal. 4.9. So that he left not out the least
circumstance of any legal rites to be supplied by tradition. Is now Christ
less faithful in Gods house, then Moses was? Or how is it that in this clear
light of the Gospel, we should be left more uncertain, then the Jews were under
the law? and that in matters of greatest importance, Purgatory, the Popes
Supremacy, Invocation of Saints, etc.

The truth is, when men put no stint to their traditions, nor give us any
account of the number of them, they give cause of suspicion, that they have
purposely left open this back door, to conveigh into the Church those humane
inventions of theirs, under the cloak of the Traditions of the Church, which
otherwise the express letter of the written word had excluded. But we resolve
to forbear controversies: Only, to quicken men to a more heedfull attention to
the Scriptures, it was needful to show, not only that the most weighty things,
that concern us far more nearly then our Lands and Revenues, then our liberty
or lives, even our evidences for, and directions to everlasting blessedness,
are to be found in the Scriptures, but more then that, to make it appear that
they are to be found in no other books or writings. Whence it must needs
follow, that without this word having neither firm ground to stay our faith on,
nor any certain rule to guide our practice by, we are in this left without
light, without comfort for the present, and without hope or expectation for
time to come.

CAP. VI. Of the scope and end of the Scriptures, which is, Gods glory and man's
salvation.
THat the honor of God, which is the principal end of all his works, The
first end of the Scriptures is Gods honor.
Prove. 16.4. should likewise be the main scope of his word, is agreeable to all
reason: and that it is so, the Scriptures themselves witness. They testify of
Christ, John 5.39. that God was in him reconciling the world to himself, 2 Cor.
5.19. and thereby magnifying the riches of his grace in his kindness toward
us through Christ, Ephesians. 2.7. and that to the praise of his glorious grace,
Ephesians. 1.6. They witness the Creation of the world, by the word of his power,
and the administration of it in righteousness, even to this day, so that
whatsoever Gods works witness of him, his Majesty, Greatness, Goodness,
Compassion, etc. Psalm. 145.5, 6, 7, 8. that his word sets out more fully and
clearly, and by the same means furthers our salvation, by setting out the
power, holiness, goodness, and justice of God, moving us to fear and trust in
him, Psalm. 78.6, 7. that he may bring upon us all the good that he has spoken,
Genesis 18.19.

How the glory of God is manifested, and consequently advanced, by, and in the
Scriptures, will best appear by particular instances. Manifested in the
Scriptures, 1t By describing his Nature.
The first evidences for God therein, are the direct testimonies which are
given of him, describing the excellency of his nature, Exodus 34.6, 7. or
ascribing to him some of his glorious Attributes, as Isa. 6.3. or admiring his
wonderful works, as his servants do, Psalm. 104.1. that he is righteous and
holy in them all, Psalm. 145.17. as all the world acknowledges, Psalm. 64.9.
yea, wicked men themselves, Judges 1.7. nay, the very Devils, Mark 1.24. whose
testimonies, being, as they are, Gods professed enemies, when they are for him,
must needs much advance his honor: see Deuteronomy. 32.31.

The next of the most pregnant testimonies for God, whereby his honor is
advanced, which we find in Scriptures, are his Laws, 2ly Delivering his Laws.
with the sanctions annexed thereunto, wherein God is pleased to reveal his
mind fully unto us, and to give us as it were a perfect mirror of the
thoughts of his heart, for whosoever, in reading these Laws, finds them very
pure, Psalm. 119.140. righteous and very faithful, ver. 138. all of them right
concerning all things, ver. 128. perfect every way, Psalm. 19.7. must of
necessity conclude, that seeing all the streams that flow so immediately from
God, savor of so much purity and perfection, the fountain whence they flow,
which is himself, must needs be more pure, so that he must be a God of truth,
without iniquity, just and right, Deuteronomy. 32.4.

The third cloud of witnesses, 3ly By recording his Works, 1. Of Creation. 2.
Of Providence. 1. In Preserving.
by which Gods honor is advanced in the Scriptures, are his works, both of
Creation and of Providence. Creation, for the Heavens declare the glory of God,
Psalm. 19.1. the invisible things of him being seen from the Creation, Romans
1.20. His power and wisdom, in framing and supporting, his faithfulness and
mercy, in preserving and providing for all that his hand has made, see, Psalm.
33.3, 4, 5, 6. and 145.15, 2. Governing, wherein are discovered, 1. His Truth.
2. His Justice and Holiness.
16. Nay, in that part of his Providence, which concerns the government of all
his works, more especially his truth, in performing all his promises, justice
and holiness in rewarding every man according to his works, Job 34.11. (so
that it shall be well with the righteous, Psalm. 58.11. and ill with the wicked,
Isa. 3.10, 11. though brutish men understand it not, Psalm. 92.6. as the prudent
do, Hos. 14.9.) are so clearly set out in the Scriptures, (as David found,
Psalm. 73.17.) that he which beholds his ways and works in them, must confess
that they all praise him, Psalm. 145.10.

It is true, that these works and ways of God, These works of God are not
clearly discovered but by the light of the Word.
without the light of the word, do set forth the glory of him that made them,
as a curious piece of work shows the skill of him that formed it. But to a
blind man, who has no eyes, and to him, who having eyes wants light to
discover the form of it, neither the exactness of the work it self, nor the
skill of him that made it appear. Whereas therefore men in themselves, are as
it were in the twilight, when they bring their natural reason to judge of Gods
ways and works; the word of God sets them out in a clearer light, by
discovering unto men, not only the works themselves, but withal the rules
according to which they are wrought, and end at which they aim, as that the
wicked are raised up aloft, that they may be cast down into destruction, Psalm
73.18. and flourish, that they may be destroyed for ever, Psalm. 52.7. a
consideration that clears Gods justice in this particular, and thereby much
advances his honor.

To advance the honor of God yet farther, 4ly Discovering the weakness of the
creature.
the Scriptures discover unto us the weakness and insufficiency of the
creatures, that the all sufficiency of God may be more admired, as Isa. 51.12,
13. and Psalm 146.3, 4, 6. manifesting that they were nothing at the first,
have nothing now, but what is borrowed from God, and that too in a very scant
proportion. So that if we enquire where wisdom, power, sufficiency and
perfection are to be found, the depth says, it is not in me, the sea answers,
it is not in me, all creatures they have heard the fame thereof, Job 28.22. but
only the mighty Creator of heaven and earth, has possessed all these things,
in the beginning of his ways. Thus the Word sets out riches, men's strong City,
Prove. 18.11. to be nothing, Prove. 23.5. strong walls, no better then ripe figs
that fall into the eaters mouth, Nah. 3.12. horses and chariots, a broken reed,
Psalm. 20.8. unable to save a man, Psa. 33.17. honor an empty breath, gracing
no man without wisdom, Psalm. 49.20. men lighter then vanity, Ps. 62.9. Princes
but a puff, Psalm. 146.4. nay, whole Nations but as the dust of the balance,
Isa. 40.15. nothing, nay less then nothing, ver. 17.

Thus the Scriptures, setting God and the creatures one against another, like a
foil under a diamond, God in his absolute and transcendent perfections, the
creatures, though excellent by the beauty that God has given them, yet empty,
weak, and contemptible, compared with God, do advance his glory beyond
comparison. So that as the height of heaven is seen by this, that when we have
climed the top of some high mountain, which, when we stood in the low valley,
seemed to touch the sky, we find our selves to be as far from heaven, as we
were before: So when we have beheld the greatest excellencies of the most
admired creatures, it is no more in comparison of Gods perfections, then if we
had seen the basest worm. By these diverse ways do the Scriptures advance Gods
honor, and throw down all creatures at his foot.

The next scope of the Scriptures, The second scope of the Scriptures, our
salvation furthered. 1. Proposing the means thereof.
is the furthering of man's salvation, which they effect two ways: First, by
proposing the means of salvation: and secondly, by winning our hearts to
entertain them. First then, they present unto us God himself, offering life and
salvation in Christ, that believing in him we might have eternal life, John
3.16. Next, the Scriptures propose the rules of an holy life, being the way
that leads to salvation, and so serve for a guide to direct us, Psalm 119.105.
A Counselor to advise us, ver. 24. shining out unto us as a light in a dark
place, 2 Pet. 1.19. discovering unto us the way, and the crooked paths on
either side of it, leading to death and destruction.

The next means by which the Scriptures further our salvation, 2. Winning our
hearts to embrace it by the Spirit accompanying it.
is by winning our hearts to embrace and seek it, which it performs by the
Spirit that accompanies it, for that only quickens the soul, John 6.63. by
giving us a taste of the heavenly gift, and enabling us to comprehend with all
Saints, the breadth, length, depth, and height thereof, Ephesians. 3.18. whereupon
we desire, and seek it with all our souls. Withal, it causes us to relish
Gods Gommandements, which we find sweeter then honey to our mouths, Ps.
119.103. or at least provokes us to a longing desire after them; as David
opened his mouth and panted, longing for them, Ps. 119.131. wishing that his
ways were directed to keep Gods statutes, Psalm. 119.5. craving Gods help to
assist us therein, to order our steps in his word, Ps. 119.133. promising to
run the way of Gods Commandments, when he shall enlarge our hearts, Ps.
119.32. afflicting our selves for our wanderings from them, and praying to be
brought back into a right way, Ps. 119.176. Thus Gods word stirs up the desires
of the soul after God and Christ, and thereby moves us to take hold of eternal
life. An effect of which none miss, but such as reject and put it off from
themselves, with those Acts 13.46.

CAP. VII. Who they are that profit by reading the holy Scriptures; that they
must be men of spiritual minds.
IT is an evident and known truth, They must have spiritual minds that
understand the Scriptures; Because the Scriptures themselves are spiritual.
that to the apprehending of any thing, there must be a correspondence in
nature, between the faculty, and the object that it apprehends, as between
light and the eye, between meat and the taste. Seeing therefore (as we have
made it evident already) the most part of the matters handled in Scripture are
spiritual, it is impossible that they should be comprehended by any other then
by a spiritual mind, 1 Cor. 2.15. A natural man being as incapable of the
right understanding of spiritual things, as a beast is of rational discourse.
That is, both incapable to comprehend them in their own nature, and much more
to approve them, seeing he esteems them foolishness, 2 Cor. 2.14.

It is true, Yet it is all men's duty to read and study them.
that the study of the Scriptures is every man's duty, according to that
general exhortation, John 5.39. seeing they were intended by God unto the
whole Church, whose revealed will is, that all men should be saved, and come to
the knowledge of the truth, 1 Timothy 2.4. And if all men are bound to do the
things revealed, Deuteronomy. 29.29. it must needs be granted, that they are bound to
know them. Wherefore it must necessarily follow, that none can be excluded from
the reading of the Scriptures, in which those duties are prescribed. All that
we affirm is this, But only spiritual men profit by them as they ought
that of those that do, and ought to read them, none can profit by them as
they ought, unless they be men of spiritual minds, without which they can
neither understand nor believe them; and such as mix not the word with faith
profit not by it at all, Heb. 4.2.

Notwithstanding, Notwithstanding those that come not prepared with a good
heart, 1. May receive it while they are reading.
the endeavors of those that have not yet gotten such spiritual minds, are
not altogether vain, if there be in them any true desire to get the knowledge of
those heavenly mysteries revealed therein. For though they come not prepared
with such an heart as is required, when they take the work in hand, yet God may
give it them while they are about the duty, as he opened Lydiaes heart, while
she was hearing S. Paul's Sermon, Acts 16.24. and converted three thousand in
hearing of Saint Peter's Sermon, Act. 2.41. Or the Spirit may afterward bring
those things to remembrance, 2. Or the Spirit may bring them after to
remembrace. 3. Or at least they may by reading be restrained, if not converted.
which they seemed to slight at the first reading, and may then work
effectually by them, as he dealt with his own Apostles, John 12.16. Or lastly,
though there follow no effectual work of grace, yet there may ensue, by the
knowledge of the ways of godliness, some restraint from evil, and the
practice of some good duties, as Herod did many things upon John Baptists
preaching, Mark 6.20. though he were far from effectual reformation.

SECT. I. The description of a spiritual man.
A Spiritual man is a member of Christ, A spiritual man is, 1. A member of
Christ.
endowed by his Spirit, with an habitual power to comprehend and embrace all
things spiritually. We call him a member of Christ, because he becomes such an
one in the very instant of his regeneration, being united to him by the Spirit
of sanctification. For seeing there is no fountain of life but God alone, nor
any means of conveighing it to us, but only by Christ, especially the life of
grace, John 5.26. who therefore calls himself the life, John 14.6. and with whom
our life is hid in God, Col. 3.3. we cannot receive this spiritual life any
way, but by our union with him. Wherefore every regenerate person is said to
abide in Christ, John 15.4. to live in him, Gal. 2.20. to dwell in him, Ephesians.
3.17. to be a member of his body, 1 Cor. 12.27. to be quickened in him, Ephesians.
2.5. to be created in him, Ephesians. 2.10. to be nourished and increase in him,
Col. 2.19. So evident a truth it is, that every regenerate person is made a
member of that body, whereof Christ is the head.

This person thus made a member of Christ, 2. By his Spirit abiding in him.
has the same spirit, by which he is united unto Christ, continually flowing
unto him, from him who is the head and fountain of life, and quickening him with
that habitual power, which enableth him to do all things spiritually. A power
it must be, to distinguish it from those acts of illumination wrought sometimes
in unregenerate men, as in Balaam, Number. 23.5. and 24.15, 16. and Saul, 1 Samuel
10.10. whereby they have some light at present, and remain afterward in
darkness, (like the Air illightened by the Sun, which retains that light no
longer then the Sun shines into it, because it has no fountain of light in it
self) whereas a regenerate man has an anointing abiding in him, 1 John 2.27. a
mind to know God, 1 John 5.21.

We call this power habitual, 3. And planting in him a spiritual ability,
(wanting a fitter name to express it) because it abides constantly in him
that receives it, as habits do in those that have them, from which
notwithstanding it differs, because habits are partly, and sometimes wholly,
acquired by use, and often practice, whereas this is not gotten, but infused.
And besides, this cannot be lost as natural habits may, but abides for ever,
John 14.16. as flowing to him that enjoys it, from the never-failing springs of
Gods all sufficiency, and immutability, and conveyed unto him, and continued
by the infallible means of his inseparable union with Christ, by the eternal
Spirit.

We term it for distinctions sake a power or ability (though in proper speech
names of natural things cannot in all things express or fit those which are
spiritual.) Called a seed.
The Scriptures term it a seed, 1 John 3.9. as being indeed the beginning of
spiritual renovation, from which it grows and increases to farther
perfection: sometimes they term it a spring or fountain, A spring or fountain.
as John 4.14. yielding a lasting supply of grace, as a fountain does of water:
sometimes from the Author from whom it is derived, The life of Christ.
Aspirituall principle,
the life of Christ, 2 Cor. 4.10, 11. There are that call it a spiritual
principle, and that is the name that we shall most frequently use in the
ensuing discourse.

What name soever we give it, we may not conceive it to be a new faculty, added
unto those which are in men by nature. A man when he is regenerate, has no
more faculties in his soul, then he had before he was regenerate. Which is no
faculty added to those which are natural. But a natural faculty altered,
Only in the work of regeneration, those abilities which the man had before are
improved, and receive a farther strength to comprehend, and work spiritually,
as they did naturally before regeneration. Thus our bodies in the resurrection
from the dead, shall have no more, nor other parts then they have at present,
only those which are now natural, shall then be made by the power of God
spiritual, 1 Cor. 15.44.

But a more lively resemblance of this change in the faculties of the soul, And
brought under the government of the Spirit;
in this work of regeneration, we may discern in those natural and sensitive
faculties, which we have common with beasts; For they having no higher
principle then sense, use them sensually, but a man, enjoying the same
faculties, under the command of a reasonable soul, uses them rationally. So
happens it in a regenerate man, his understanding, will, and affections, which
when they had no other command but reason, had no more but rational
operations, now being under the guiding of the Spirit of Christ, ruling in him,
work spiritually. Hence it is, that a regenerate man every where in Scripture
is said to walk after the Spirit, Romans 8.1. to be led by the Spirit, Gal. 5.18.
to walk in the Spirit, ver. 25.

This principle of spiritual life, Which is the root of spiritual habits
improperly so called.
planted in a regenerate person, by his union with Christ, is the fountain or
root of all those habits of spiritual grace, which are severally distinguished
by the names of faith, hope, love, fear, etc. although to speak properly,
Properly only diversifications of the actings of that spiritual principle.
they are but the diversifications of the actings of that spiritual principle
within us, distinguished by these names, which withal, after the manner of
natural habits, are much increased, and strengthened by the use and much
exercise of them, and are as much weakened by disuse and neglect of exercise.
Out of that which hitherto has been spoken, we may see, that a regenerate man
has in him these three things: First, a principle of spiritual life.
Secondly, spiritual habits of faith, hope, love, fear, etc. which flow or
spring from that principle. Lastly, spiritual motions and operations according
to those habits.

The manner of giving or planting this spiritual principle in a regenerate
man, 4. Given by way of infusing or shedding.
we express by the term of endowing; now that wholly excludes all working or
endeavors of men in gaining it, as indeed it must be acknowledged to be Gods
gift, John 3.10. In a more strict signification it is called infusing, or
pouring in, or out, as that phrase is applied, Joel 2.28. and Acts 2.35. to
express the large and plentiful bestowing of the gift of tongues, as it is in
other places to signify the like manner of giving other spiritual graces,
which the Apostle affirms God shed on us abundantly through Christ, Tit. 3.5, 6.

This phrase of infusing or shedding (as has already been intimated) implies
men to be merely passive, Manifesting man to be merely passive in receiving
it.
in receiving this spiritual life, yet not altogether as vessels are in
receiving that which is poured into them. To make this more evident, the holy
Ghost sets out that state, in which grace finds us, being yet unregenerate, by
the name of death, Ephesians. 2.1.5. as it does our regeneration by the name of
quickening, Ephesians. 2.5. begetting again, 1 Pet. 1.3. and 1 John 5.18. new birth,
John 3.3.5. and 1 Pet. 1.23. creating, Ephesians. 2.10. whence regenerate men are
termed new creatures, Gal. 6.15. All phrases which imply us to be as merely
passive in the act of our renovation, as we were in our first creation or
generation.

Indeed if your New birth, were no more, but the improving of something which
we had in us before, or the strengthening only of that which was weak in us, it
is true that man himself might cooperate with the Spirit of Christ in this
work. But seeing it appears to be the bestowing of that which was not at all;
what is there, in the man to be regenerate, that can cooperate with the Spirit,
in his Regeneration? Nature can do nothing, unless it be to hinder and oppose
the work. For we know that is enmity against God, Romans 8.7. and cannot receive
the things of God: 1 Cor. 2.14. At the best we know nature is but the matter
which is renewed, or new formed; and matter, as we all know, can have no
operation at all. As for grace or spiritual life, we know we had none at all,
till it was infused, and that which is not at all, cannot possibly have any
operation. So that it must needs be granted that there is nothing in a man to
be regenerate, that can work any thing at all in the act of his regeneration.

It being granted then that a man is merely passive in the work of his
regeneration, And therefore not to be discerned by us how it is wrought. Though
we may discern 1 the preparations thereunto:
it must needs be impossible for him to discover how it is wrought, as
impossible as it is for one to know how he receives his own life. It is true
that he may discern the preparations to the work, such as are those terrors
and agonies which oftentimes are before the work of regeneration, and are
raised in a man's heart, by the discovery of his own miserable condition, in
which he stands, and of the unability of all the creatures in the world to
bring him any help, seconded with some serious deliberations what to do, and
ending in some desires and purposes to make use of some means for the escaping
of Gods wrath, if it may be. Such motions as these are, by which the heart is
many times prepared for the work of regeneration (which may be resembled to
the heating of metalls before they melt, and are cast into the molde to be
fashioned) because in them the spirit of a man is wrought upon in a natural
way, and by the help of natural reason one may discern, as any creature that
makes use of sense and motion, cannot choose but discern and know what it
self does.

Much more may a person regenerate, 2. and first operations thereof.
discern and understand the motions and operations, that are performed by him,
after he is regenerate, seeing it is evident that in them his spirit works
together with the Spirit of Christ. Only the first act of infusing and
receiving grace, being wrought in us, and not by us, yea and that in an
instant, and not by degrees, is impossible to be discerned, how it is wrought,
either by nature, which understands not spiritual things, or by spiritual
sense, which (as we have seen already) flows from that spiritual life newly
received, and therefore cannot discern what was done before it had any being
at all.

Notwithstanding, it is not impossible for a regenerate man to feel the very
first illapse of the Spirit into the soul, for it may bring that sense with it
self, although it does not always so, Yet it may bring the sense of it self
even in the instant of receiving it, but not usually.
nor perhaps usually; for though when a blind man receives sight, he must
needs know that he sees, as soon as he sees, yet in receiving this spiritual
life it is not so. The giving of spiritual life, and the giving of the sense
of it, be two distinct acts of the Spirit, which may, but do not always, go
together. Howsoever even in such persons as in the instant of regeneration
feel themselves regenerate, though they know what is wrought in them, yet how
it is wrought they cannot understand.

The author of this work of regeneration is Christ by the Spirit. Unto this,
By the Spirit of Christ.
the fashioning and quickening of all things that are created, and continually
renewed, is ascribed, as in the first Creation, Genesis 2.2. the Spirit is said to
move upon the waters, that is, to fashion and form that rude mass out of which
all things were made, that Spirit garnished the Heavens, Job 26.13. And the
renovation of all things by continual propagation is ascribed to the same
Spirit. Psalm. 104.30. and more especially the infusing of the soul: Genesis 2.7.
Job 33.4. So that the abilities thereof are most significantly termed The
Spirit of understanding, Job 32.8. of strength and courage, Judge. 14.6. of
counsel and government, Numb. 11.25. and 1 Samuel 10.9, 10. But above all, the
Supernatural abilities of Grace and Sanctification, are ascribed to the same
Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.8.9. called for that cause The Spirit of Sanctification: 2
These. 2.13. and 1 Pet. 1.2. in so much that all graces of regeneration are
termed the fruits of the Spirit. Gal. 5.22. This Spirit resting on Christ. Isa.
61.1. (who is for that cause said to be anointed with the oil of gladness
above his fellows, Psalm. 45.7.) and to be full of grace, John 1.14. as having
the Spirit given him not by measure, John 3.34. flows from him to all his
members (as the head sends out influence of life to all the body) so that of
his fullness they all receive, grace for grace, John 1.16. that is, graces
answerable to his graces:

SECT. II. Of the spiritual man's operations.
THe operations of a spiritual man we have, in the former description,
expressed by the terms and phrase of Comprehending, and Embracing, All things
Spiritually. Where, under the terms of Comprehending and Embracing, we
understand all the several kinds of the operations of a spiritual man, and by
All things, we note the subjects of those operations, and by the last term
Spiritually we signify the manner of those several workings or motions.

Comprehending, 1. Comprehending implying all the acts of the understanding.
is properly that act of the understanding, by which we conceive such things as
are represented us, which is the ground of our judging of them afterward, but
in this place we understand by it, both the apprehension of such as are
represented and the judging of them, after they are apprehended, by way either
of approbation or disallowing; both these acts of the understanding the Apostle
mentions, Phil. 1.9. Again, although embracing seem first to import election
of the will, 2. Embracing, including the motions of the will and affections.
yet here we include under it the prosecution of things chosen, with the
affections of desires, hopes, cares, joys, etc. Together with the opposite
motions, of rejecting, hating, fearing, shunning etc. of such things as the
understanding in judgment disallowes.

By All things we understand things of all kinds, 3. All things.
whether natural, or spiritual, or mixed. 1. Natural.
Now Natural things are all sorts of creatures, with their several qualities,
adjuncts and operations, which though they are themselves natural, yet their
first cause, their dependences, ends, relations, and whole order of
administration, are of spiritual consideration, which therefore a mere
natural man can neither thoroughly comprehend, nor at all judge of aright, as
the Psalmist witnesses, Psalm. 92.6. as a spiritual man (which the Scripture
calls a wise man) can do, Hos. 14.9. neither consequently can he make that
right and holy use of them, which a spiritual man may do, and does usually,
Psalm. 64.10.

Spiritual things, 2. Spiritual.
are God himself in the first place, whom the world has not known, John
17.25. as spiritual men do, 1 John 2.13. and next, the things freely given us
of God, as the Apostle terms them, 1 Cor. 2.12. especially Christ, with all
his treasures, which the Apostle affirms none but a spiritual person can
comprehend 1 Cor. 2.14. as being hid from all ages and generations, and
manifested only to the Saints, Col. 1.26, 27. and that by God himself, Mat.
11.25.

Those things which are of a mixed nature, 3. Mixed.
are spiritual things, expressed and represented by such as are natural, as
are the Word and Sacraments. For in the word, the phrases and forms of speech
are according to nature, and of use amongst natural men, but the things meant
and expressed by them are spiritual. And in the Sacraments, the elements and
the Sacramental actions, by which they are used and applied, we know are
natural, but those things that are represented by them, are wholly Mystical
and Spiritual: in both, the natural man understands the phrases, expressions,
and rational discourse in the Word, and in the Sacraments, not only the
visible Elements and actions, but their signification also; but the things
signified in both, seeing they are such as eye has not seen, and that cannot
be comprehended by any Natural means, they cannot be understood by any
natural man.

All the difficulty in unfolding this truth lies in interpreting this term
Spiritually, 4. Spiritually.
a word that may be taken in a double sense, as is also the word Spirit whence
it is derived. For a spirit in strict signification, is that which is
absolutely and merely so, and in that sense the name is appropriated to God
alone, John 4.24. According to this sense, Spiritual is that, which is of or
belonging to God, or heavenly and spiritual. Comparatively a Spirit signifies
that which is less gross, or material, to which is opposed gross, carnal
and sensual: both senses may be included under this term, in this place.

Again to comprehend spiritually may be referred: First, to the object
comprehended, Which referred to the object imports 1. to comprehend that in
things which is spiritual. Or by a Spiritual Light to comprehend all things.
and so it signifies to comprehend that which is spiritual in that object:
Secondly, it may be referred to the means, and it signifies to comprehend
things by a spiritual light or judgment. Lastly, referred to the manner, it
implies to comprehend in a Supernatural way, which we specially intend in this
place, though withal we include both the former senses.

What it is to comprehend, or understand things spiritually is hard to
express, as it is hard to describe, what it is to see or hear, which are well
known to such as see, or hear, but is impossible to be described so
distinctly by discourse. Resembled by sight, to which faith answers;
The Scripture sets it out by resemblance of outward senses, as Heb. 5.14. and
amongst the senses sets out the two ways of discovering things spiritually,
faith by sight, and experience by taste. So Abraham believing Christ by faith,
is said to see his day, John 8.56. And taste, which shadows out spiritual
experience.
Moses to see him that is invisible, Heb. 11.27. And again, we are said to
taste, that is, prove by experience that the Lord is good, 1 Pet. 2.3. both are
joined together Ps. 34.8. The two several ways of comprehending things
spiritually, Faith and Experience, we are now to enquire into, describing them
as plainly as the nature of them will give leave.

SECT. III. Of Faith, and the two sorts of faith, Historical, and Justifying.
FAith or believing is in common use of speech taken for inclining strongly in
opinion unto that of which we have no infallible assurance, Faith not taken
here as opposed to certain knowledge:
and in that sense it is opposed to knowledge, which signifies assurance of
some thing upon certainty, Butimporting certain knowledge upon Divine testimony.
and that most commonly by some sense or other. But amongst Divines, Faith is
commonly taken for a full persuasion of any truth upon Divine Testimony. This
Faith is usually distinguished into Historical, Temporary, and Justifying
Faith, (as for that which they term the faith of Miracles, it concerns not
the subject that we have in hand.) But because Temporary faith, will hereafter
appear to differ not in nature, but only in some degree from Historical
faith, we shall need only to entreat of that and Justifying faith, at present.

The nature of true faith, and the difference between that, and the other,
which we call Historical, will be most easily and clearly discovered, by
setting down a brief description thereof, True or justifying Faith described.
and by explaining the several parts of it afterward. We therefore define
faith, to be a spiritual habit, by which a Regenerate man having in himself,
upon a Divine testimony, an evidence of the truth, and goodness of the
Promise, and Covenant of eternal Salvation through Jesus Christ, relies on him
only for everlasting life, and blessedness.

We call Faith an habit, Which is, 1. An Habit, yet unlike it. 1. Seeing it is
infused, not gotten by use. 2. And cannot, as habits may, be wholly lost.
because it much resembles those habits which are properly so called,
especially in this, that it is hardly, or (according to truth) never to be
removed or wholly lost: Although otherwise it differ from them in this, that
those natural habits are acquired by use, whereas faith is infused by the
Spirit of grace, if we respect the first planting of it in the heart:
Notwithstanding, it cannot be denied, that when it is once rooted in the heart,
it may be and is further strengthened, and perfected by continual use and
exercise as our natural habits are.

The cause of faith is (as has been already intimated) the Spirit of Grace
flowing unto a regenerate man from Christ his head, 2. Infused by the spirit
abiding in us,
and in respect of that cause as well as of the nature of it, we term it a
spiritual habit, and so we find it reckoned amongst the fruits or effects of
the Spirit. Gal. 5.22. And here we meet with the first difference between
Historical, and Justifying Faith, that they proceed from different causes, the
one being infused by the spirit of Christ, dwelling in us, the other the effect
only of natural reason, further enlightened (at the most) by the assistance of
that Spirit, as shall be farther proved hereafter.

The subject of justifying Faith, 3. Into a regenerate person.
is only a regenerate person. For, whosoever believes has eternal life, John
5.24. into which there can be no entrance without regeneration, John. 3.5. but
in more express terms, 1 John 5.1. the Apostle affirms, that whosoever
believes that Jesus is the Christ, is borne of God. Now historical faith we
know may be found in the Devils themselves, James 2.19. And temporary faith,
(which as we have intimated already, is of the same nature) may be in such as
have no root, Luke 8.13. that is, as the Apostle expresses it in another
phrase, 1 John 3.9. No seed of God abiding in him, nor is borne of God, which
is all one. And from hence arises the second difference between historical,
and justifying Faith, that they are found in diverse subjects, the first even in
the wicked, the latter only in the godly.

The kind of assurance which true faith is built upon, 4. Which gives him an
evidence
we call an evidence, as the Apostle also terms it, Heb. 11.1. Who also in
the same place expresses the object of that faith, by two different names
given it, in diverse respects, Things hoped for, and Things not seen: as also
he expresses the assurance of them, by two other names, Substance, and
Evidence. Now it is true that by those different names, the same things are
meant, for the most part, although it be true, that some of those things which
we believe, although they be invisible, have notwithstanding a being in
present, and therefore cannot properly be said to be expressed by hope, so that
the things hoped for, are but some of those things which we believe.

These objects, Of things invisible,
Things invisible, and Things hoped for, (and consequently yet to come) Faith
so apprehends, as having withal a kind of subsistence and visibility,
although in diverse respects. For looking at things which it believes, it
apprehends them, as already having a being in the will and purpose of God, and
this it does without error, as God without error calls the things which are
not, as if they were, Romans 4.17. seeing they have a being in him, although
they have no subsistence as yet in themselves. These and other objects which
are not seen, Faith makes evident, that is, beholds them by a spiritual sense
though they be hidden from the bodily eye, as Abraham in this manner is said to
behold Christ's day, John 8.56. which was not in being till many hundred years
after, and Moses is said to see him that is invisible. Heb. 11.27. And thus is
faith, the substance of things hoped for, and evidence of things that are not
seen.

When we say that by faith we have a spiritual evidence, And therefore makes
no use of sense, or reason.
and manifestation of things that are invisible to the outward sense, we
necessarily imply that this Faith makes not use in this apprehension of any
natural help, either of Sense or Reason. Not of Sense, for things invisible
cannot be the object of sense. Nor of Reason, which can help in this case
little more then Sense; seeing it receives information by Sense, from whence it
gathers things by way of discourse, which indeed may convince a man that things
are, but can give him no evidence, or Demonstration of the things themselves.

Hence it is, that when a man comprehends things by Reason, he may be able by
discourse of Reason to inform another man of that which he knows, and by that
means cause him to understand it as well as himself; but in those things
which are apprehended by Sense, But apprehends the things themselves by
spiritual sense:
he cannot do so. He can relate to another man what he sees, or hears, or
tastes, but can neither make him see, nor hear, nor taste, that which
himself does, nor (if he be one that never had use of those senses) make him
by any discourse understand, either what the object is that he apprehends, And
therefore cannot by discourse make another understand what he feels.
or how his sense is affected by it, or (if he have the use of the same senses)
make him able by his discourse, to apprehend the thing it self, which he
discernes in its proper species, though he may breed in him some conceit of it
by an imagination of some other thing of the same kind, which that person
himself has apprehended by the same sense before. So is it in matters of
faith, he that believes cannot many times give a reason why he believes, nor at
any time represent unto another that which is manifested unto him, nor show him
what satisfying delight, and sweetness he finds in those things which he
believes: he can only in general manifest unto him that he finds the tender
mercies of God exceeding great, Psalm. 119.156. his thoughts toward us
precious, Psalm. 139.17. his Testimonies wonderful, Psalm. 119.129. and
exceeding sweet, ver. 103. but cannot describe that excellency, or sweetness,
which himself finds. Yet seeing those things that are believed, are also
agreeable to right reason, the reasonablenes of them the believer may manifest
to another, but the evidence of them he cannot show. This evidence by
demonstation, historical faith wants:


How justifying faith has an evidence of the things which it apprehends, we
have seen: Historical wants this evidence, as we shall see anon, as having no
further assurance of what it believes, then that which Reason suggests, which
may rather be termed a conviction that such things must be, then an evidence
what they be. And therefore differs, from justifying faith, not only in
degrees but in nature: For justifiing faith, is built upon a divine Testimony.
Whence it is evident, that those two kinds of faith are of different natures,
not only of diverse degrees, because the grounds of assurance on which they are
built, are as far different, as Reason, and Sense.

To clear this truth fully, we must consider the different testimonies, upon
which justifying and historical faith are built. For we shall find that true
faith is built upon a Divine, the other upon an Humane testimony, which our
Savior calls the Revelation of flesh and blood, Mat. 16.17. as the Apostle
does the other, The Demonstration of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.4. and a little
after, The Revelation of things by the Spirit, which are understood only of
spiritual men: ver. 10.14, 15.

We call that a Divine testimony which is given by the Spirit of God to that
spirit which is within a regenerate person. For unto any testimony two things
are required. First, the manifesting, and presenting that which is to be
credited, or believed: Secondly, an ability in him to whom it is witnessed to
understand it; otherwise the proposing any thing by discourse to a beast that
wants reason to understand speech, or the relating of any thing to a man that
has reason, in the Greek tongue, who understands no language but English, is
no testimony, no more then it is to a deaf man that cannot hear. Wherefore to
make a divine testimony, there must be both a divine testimony unto a man, and
withal a mind in him able to understand that revelation.

First therefore, the Spirit of God must reveal and manifest unto a man that
truth that is to be believed, as the light discovers any visible object. Next
there must be in that man a light planted in his heart (which the Apostle, 1
John 5.20. terms An understanding to know him that is true) as the light or
visuall faculty is planted in the eye, or else he cannot comprehend that light
that shines unto him. For want of this inward light it was, that the Israelites
who had seen with their bodily eyes all Gods wonders, and by reason were
forced to acknowledge that they were wrought by the finger of God, yet are
truly charged by Moses, not to have an heart to perceive, nor eyes to see, nor
ears to hear unto that day, Deuteronomy. 29.4.

The evidence then which a true believer has of any truth of God, By way of
Demonstration, far different from conviction by reason.
which he embraces, is the manifesting of that truth unto the spirit, not
only by a form of words to the natural understanding, but beyond that by a
kind of Demonstration unto the spiritual mind, as the evidence of any object
to the eye is by the shining of the light upon it, which makes it appear to be
such as it is. This kind of testifying, or evidencing things in a spiritual
way the Apostle calls, Romans 8.16. As representing the things themselves in
their proper species.
the witnessing of Gods Spirit with our spirit, mentioning expressly two
spirits, whereof if either be wanting there can be no divine Testimony.

The beholding of Divine truths with a such spiritual eye, represented by way
of Demonstration, is so necessary, that without it men could not be witnesses,
Without which believers could not be Gods witnesses.
or at least sufficient witnesses to Gods truth. For he that will testify any
thing upon credit, must see it with his own eye, or discern it by some other
sense of his own. Otherwise he that testifies a truth upon another man's
relation, bears witness rather to the relator, then to the truth related. So
that to make men witnesses to Gods truth, they must not only have it related
unto them, but besides further manifested by way of Demonstration and
spiritual evidence, that they may say with the Apostle, 1 Ioh. 1.3. That we
have seen with our eyes, and looked upon, declare we unto you. Which not only
winnes much credit with others, but mightily affects the person himself, as it
did Job, when he thus saw God, Job 42.5. and Abraham when he saw Christ's day:
John 8.56.

It is evident then that true Faith is grounded upon a Divine testimony.
Whereas Historical faith rests on an humane Testimony.
In the next place we must make it appear, that Historical faith relies only
upon an humane testimony. Now it cannot be denied that the truths of Divine
mysteries though they cannot be found out by man's reason (as the Apostle tells
us they never entered into man's heart, 1 Cor. 2.9.) yet are they all consonant
to right reason: and it is as evident that the testimony of reason, Embracing
divine truths,
is an humane testimony. I say then, that historical faith rests not upon the
evidence or demonstration, but upon the reasonableness of divine truths, 1.
For the reasonableness of them rather then upon Gods testimony of them.
which therefore man's reason cannot but assent unto. For example: the Creation
of the World, Resurrection of the body, Incarnation of Christ: and may be
acknowledged by reason to be possible upon the supposition of Gods
Almightinesse, yea, and fit to be done by him, whose scope is to make known
his Power, Psalm. 106.8. and to magnify his Word (that is, 2. Or if on the
testimony of the Scripture, yet upon an humane testimony. Because he believes
the Scriptures themselves, 1. Either upon the Churches testimony of them. 2.
Upon the reasonableness of truths delivered therein.
his mercy promised in his Word) above all his works: Psalm. 138.2. to set out
in ages to come the riches of his grace, Ephesians. 2.7. So that howsoever these are
Mysteries of faith, yet seeing Reason (which is an Humane testimony) may
approve them, it is evident, that an Historical faith believing these things
for the Reasonableness of them, is but merely upon an Humane Testimony.

Nay, if he should go a step further and believe any thing that is written
in the Scriptures, for the Testimony of the Scriptures, yet still he believes
upon an Humane testimony, because he believes the Scriptures themselves upon
Humane testimony, as upon the general consent for the Church which receives
the Scriptures, as the Word of God; or upon the probability and reasonablenes;
or of the things therein delivered, lastly, upon the observation of the Truth
of those holy writings in most things, which makes them believed to be true in
all. For the Assent unto one thing for another is built upon that, to which we
first give our Assent. As a stone in a wall, though it lies immediately upon
that stone that is next under it; yet is indeed supported by the foundation
which bears up all the building.

We see then a wide Difference between Justifying, and Historical faith, in
the cause, subject and ground of Assurance; we shall find no less in the
Object. Now the general Object of Faith, we know, is Gods Word and Promise,
which only is a sure ground to build Faith upon, as being the Word of the God
of truth, Deuteronomy. 32.4. A fourth difference between justifying and Historical
faith in the Object of both.
who cannot lie, Tit. 1.2. or deny himself, 2 Timothy 2.23. or change his mind,
Number. 23.19. So that his Word must needs be Everlasting, Ps. 119.144. founded
for ever, v. 132. upon two unfailing foundations, his Everlasting Truth, and
unresistible Power.

But the particular Object of justifying Faith is Gods Promise of
Reconciliation, and Salvation by Christ, in whom only we are Justified, Romans
Historical faith assents to the truth of Gods promises:
3.24. In these Promises, both general, and particular, an Historical faith
may believe both the truth, and the goodness of them: But the goodness of
them to himself in particular he believes not, which a justifying Faith
assents unto, and embraces, Justifying faith, embraces the goodness of them
to himself in particular.
That it is good to draw near unto God: Psalm. 73.28. that his Law is good,
Romans 7.16. his Judgments good, Psalm 119.39. yea his very chastisements, Psalm
119.71. all working together to good, Romans 8.28. Not only because God who is
good, does good, Ps. 119.68. but besides, because all is sanctified and made
good in Christ; for whom one finds it good to account all things loss, not
only his own righteousness, Phil. 3.9. but his own will and desires, which
he casts aside, desiring to be guided by his Spirit, which is good, Psalm.
143.10. seeking Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption in
Christ, 1 Cor. 1.30.

It is indeed impossible for any man to rely wholly on Christ, Without which
one can never be brought to affect Christ with all his heart,
unless his will be brought to choose, and desire him for that excellency of
goodness, which is to be found in him, seeing God has planted in all
Creatures (man especially) as strong desire of, or propension to their own
chiefest good, which cannot be destroyed without the destruction of Nature it
self. So that a man will never be brought to deny all things for Christ;
unless he be well assured that he shall find in Christ that sufficiency that
makes him more happy then all things can do besides.

Now it may be easily Demonstrated, that Historical faith, though it may
assent unto the truth, yet cannot embrace the goodness of the Covenant, made
by God with man in Christ. For how can he who never yet learned to deny
himself (which no natural man can do) think it good to abhor his own
righteousness, or be pleased to have no ability in himself to any good, no
wisdom of his own, no will of his own, but to fetch all his Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption from Christ? to take only the
Will of Christ for his Rule? To refer the glory of his best works unto God
alone, and to his honor, as our Savior requires, Mat. 5.16. and the Apostle,
1 Cor. 10.31.

So then howsoever Historical, and Justifying faith, seem to embrace the same
object, namely the promise of Salvation by Christ; yet to speak properly, it
is the same only Materially, but not Formally; because though they embrace the
same promise, yet they embrace not the same thing in that promise: Historical
faith acknowledges it to be true, but only Justifying faith believes it to be
good, at the least to be good in particular, to himself that believes.

From this different apprehension of the object of Faith, arises another
difference between these two kinds of Faith, in the Mind of him that believes.
As a true Believer does.
For a true Believer having in himself by the Spirit a clear Evidence, not
only of the truth; but besides, of the goodness of the Promise which he
believes, and that to himself in particular, is strongly carried after it with
all the desires, and affections of his Soul, closing not only with the
Promise, but with Christ himself, tendered unto him therein. For in all Regular
Motions of the Spirit of man (such as were Adams in his innocence, and such as
are those that are in the regenerate, as far as they are regenerate,) the
Will is so guided by the Understanding, that when that judges any thing to be
the chiefest good, the other cannot choose but embrace it. So that a man
clearly apprehending, and judging that there is no true happiness to be found
but in Christ, the whole heart necessarily relieth upon him, and closes fully
with him, denying himself wholly, both in opinion and judgment, and in
purpose and choice.

Thus far a true Believer goes in embracing Christ. But a temporary Believer
cannot.
How near one that has no more but Historical faith, may come unto him, we
are now to enquire. The coming on of such a person toward Christ, our Savior
himself describes unto us in that parable of the Sower, Mat. 13.20, 21, 22.
but more clearly the Apostle, Heb. 6.4, 5. who sets out before us the distinct
steps, and degrees by which one may advance forwards toward the entertaining
of the Promises of Salvation, and Life, and yet fall short at the last.

To begin therefore with the Apostles expressions in that place, he tells us
that one which may afterward fall away (and therefore was never truly one of
Christ's, 1 John 2.19.) may notwithstanding be enlightened, Although he may
may taste of the Heavenly gift, may be Partaker of the Holy Ghost, may taste
of the good Word of God, and Powers of the World to come. These particulars it
will be needful to examine severally in their order. That a natural man may
be the gift of Illumination, Be enlightened,
understand more of the Mysteries of Godliness, then his natural reason could
teach him, no man can deny; and we have already showed that this may be done
without any change of the heart, only by the Improvement of Natural Reason,
by the light of the Spirit.

Now when a man is thus enlightened, and convinced by reason of the truth of
those divine Mysteries, 2. And may have some Taste of the Heavenly Gift.
he may very well have some pleasing taste of that Heavenly gift mentioned in
the next place, not only the gift of tongues, and Prophesying, called the gift
of the Holy Ghost, Act. 2.38. whereof the Apostle acknowledges that men out of
the state of Grace may be partakers, 1 Cor. 13.2. But besides of Christ
himself, and the favors and free mercies of God bestowed in him, called the
gift of God, John 4.10. and things freely given us of God, 1 Cor. 2.12. which
the temporary believer, apprehending, and observing, that they promise much
good unto man, may easily be delighted withal.

But this delight which such a man has in these heavenly gifts, can be but a
taste, as the Apostle calls it, such as one has of things that he never takes
down, nor much less digests to receive any true strength thereby in the Inward
man. Which comes far short. of that full content which true Believers find in
Christ,
Such a taste the Hearer had, resembled by the stony ground, Mat. 13.21.
affecting him with a present Joy, and Delight, as those things do that have a
pleasant taste: such the Jews found in John Baptists Doctrine, wherein they
rejoiced for a season, John 5.35. But this taste comes far short of that
satisfying content, which Godly men find in God, Psalm. 116.7. and in his Word,
Psalm. 119.103. which moves them to love them above all things, ver. 127. and to
cleave to them for ever, verse 111.112.

For if it be well considered, As being grounded on a mistake,
a temporary Believers taste of heavenly things, we shall find to arise out of
a double mistake. First, of the Nature of the Benefits offered to us in Christ,
1. Of the nature of the benefits offered
as Holiness, Peace, Joy, and which he conceives to be outward holiness,
moral honesty, carnal content, sensual joy, like that of the fool, Luke
12.19. Now this conceit of some carnal, and temporal good, which is to be
found in Christ, may work in a man some desire after him, and delight in the
Word, in which he is published, and proposed: such a conceit, that Christ
should be a temporal Prince, wrought upon the Jews, and won them to
entertain our Savior for a time, but when they saw, that his Kingdom was not
of this World, as himself speaks, John 18.36. they soon forsook him, so Ioh
6.15.24.66.

This first Mistake is seconded by another, 2. Of the conditions under which
they are tendered:
no less them the former, wherein they misunderstand both the conditions under
which Christ is offered, and the services which he requires. For a Carnal man
hearing of the large offers of Salvation and Peace, so freely tendered, desires
them and hopes to gain them at an easy rate. But upon farther enquiry
finding, that neither Christ nor any of his benefits are to be had without
renouncing the World, nay, denying himself, Mat. 16.24. he is offended, Mat.
13.21. and turns away with a sad heart, Whereupon he may be moved to do, or
fuffer some thing for Christ;
and discontented like the young man, Mat. 9.21.22.

Such a man it may be at his first entertaining the Word, while his affections
are warm and fresh, for Christ's sake may sustain some reproach, and make some
small losses, and sacrifice some of his weaker lusts at Gods command, hoping to
satisfy him thereby: as Saul attempted to do, by destroying the rascal
multitude, and carrion cattle of the Amalekites, 1 Samuel 15.9.13. So dealt Herod
with John Baptist, Mark 6.20. when he saw that nothing would satisfy him
unless he would part with his Darling Herodias, he forsook him and became his
utter enemy, ver. 17.

And no marvel if only a taste of Spiritual things, But can never be brought
to deny the World, much less himself.
which a man neither thoroughly understands, nor if he did would much desire, as
being altogether unsuitable to his carnal disposition, be insufficient to take
off his heart from the love of these outward, and Carnal things, which are
every way so agreeable, and pleasing to his carnal disposition, much more to
move him to abhor him self with that holy man, Job 42.6. to account himself
a fool, a beast, with David, Psalm. 73.22. to condemn all his righteousness,
Esa. 64.6. Phil. 3.7.9. to renounce all ability to do any good, 2. Cor. 3.5. to
abandon his own lusts, 1 Pet. 4.2. and his own ends, that he may live wholly
to the will of him that died for him, and rose again, 2 Cor. 5.15. fetching
all from Christ, 1 Cor. 1.30. and referring all to him: 1 Cor. 10.31. Which a
true Believer yields unto. 1. As thoroughly understanding the emptiness of the
Creature.
For till corrupt nature be changed, it can neither deny it self, nor be
wholly subject to Gods Law, Romans 8.7.

These considerations which a temporary believer cannot brook, a true Believer
easily submits unto. As well upon a full discovery of the vanity, and
emptiness of all things save Christ: Phil. 3.7, 8. 2. And finding them
unsuitable to his renewed Nature.
as also upon the clear manifestation of the infinite value of Christ, and all
the Heavenly Treasures, which are laid up in him; which moved Moses to make
more account of him with reproach, then of the treasures of Egypt, Heb. 11.26.
And besides, his nature now being altered, all those things that were
agreeable, 3. And lastly, finding that what he abandons for Christ he gains in
him. 3. Of the Duties required of him.
and suitable unto him before, he finds now unsuitable, and unserviceable. And
lastly, for self-denial, which nature can never digest, one who is now by
faith become a member of Christ, finds that whatsoever one loses for him, he
receives again in him with infinite advantage, Mar. 10.29, 30.

Again, a temporary believer mistakes the duties required of a Christian, as
much as he does the conditions. For conceiving them to consist in outward
performances, with the Pharisees, Mat. 5.21.27. he thinks them an easy task
with the young man, Mat. 19.20. But finding upon better enquiry, that in
hearing the heart must tremble, Isa. 66.2. in prayer the Soul must be powered
out, Isa. 26.16. that outward performances are nothing, unless the thoughts be
brought under to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5. and the flesh with the
lusts crucified, Gal. 5.24. finding these things impossible to flesh and blood,
he cries out with the Capernaites, An hard saying, John 6.60. Whereas a true
Belecver sticks neither at the condiditions nor the Duties.
and renounceth his service, ver. 66.

But a true Believer as he sticks at no condition, so he sticks at no service
which Christ requires. He finds a heart melting at Gods word, 2 King. 22.19. A
Spirit helping his weakness in Prayer, Romans 8.26. enabling him to power out
his complaint, Psalm. 102. in the title: He not only esteems Gods
Commandments equal, Psalm. 119.128. and good, ver. 39. but himself able to
run the way of them when God enlarges his heart, verse 32. able to do any
thing through him that strengthens him, Phil. 4.13. in despite of his
corruptions that hinder him, Romans 7.23. Desiring that his whole heart may be
inclined to Gods Testimonies, Psalm. 119.36. sound in his Statutes, verse 80.
and his steps ordered in Gods ways, ver. 133. Considering his ways for that
purpose, ver. 59. and making the Word a light unto his steps, ver. 105. All
this he does with much cheerfulness, knowing that he serves for his own
good, Deuteronomy. 6.24. having his fruit in Holiness, and the end everlasting life,
Romans 6.22. Thus he delights in Gods Law, Psalm. 119.11. Romans 7.23. and abhors
his own corruptions, ver. 24.

Thus then a temporary believer, Wherefore Temporary Believers must needs fall
off at last: but a true Believer stands fast to the end.
grounding his resolution to embrace Christ, and his Law, upon such gross
errors, must needs waver and fall off when he finds his mistake: Whereas a
true belever, understanding truly what Christ is whom he chooses, and what are
his Laws and conditions, and finding by experience his bargain no worse then
he conceived it, stands still to his first choice, and as Boaz liking the
woman, as well as her inheritance, willingly took them both, Ruth 4.9, 10.
which his Kinsman refused, because he could not have the land alone, being all
that he sought after: So the Godly, liking Christ, and his Laws, as well as the
benefits that he brings with him, take them both: Whereas cranall men lose all
the benefits that Christ brings with him, because they refuse Christ and his
yoke, which they cannot brook by any means. The second difference between a
true and temporary Believers taste. The first relisheth Christ him self;


A Second Difference between a True and Temporary believers taste, is in the
Proper object of them both. For that which a true believer finds sweet unto
him, is Christ himself, and the heavenly and spiritual Treasures that he
brings with him: In which a temporary believer finds no relish at all, but
that which affects him, is some supposed carnal commodity or Temporal good,
which he hopes to gain by Christ: Like one who taking Pills wrapped in Sugar,
tastes only the Sugar, but not the Pill it self, The other some outward good
which he hopes to gain by him.
the bitterness whereof, which he can by no means brook, is such, that if he
tasted it, it would cause him to spit it out again.

Thus far we have described the Temporary Believers taste of the heavenly
gift: the like relish unto this he has of the good Word of God; The difference
of true and temporary Believers taste in the Word of God.
Now that may arise, either from the Novelty of the knowledge revealed therein,
(which affected the Jews in John Baptists Ministry, as our Savior tells
them, John 5.35. As it did likewise the Athenians in S. Paul's, Acts 17.20, 21.)
or at the most from the large promises expressed therein, which also (as has
been intimated) he understands carnally, and hoping to gain to himself an
interest in them, upon that false supposisition he is transported with a
carnal joy, and delight, Mat 13.20. which is soon altered into a discontented
humor, when he finds himself mistaken in his hopes.

The next thing that affects a temporary Believer is the powers of the world to
come; Their different taste of the powers of the world to come.
So he calls that future, heavenly, blessed condition of the Saints, called the
power of an endless life, Heb. 7.16. not like this present estate, weak and
infirm, but full of power and glory, called therefore a glorious inheritance,
1 Ephesians. 18. and Glory which shall be revealed in us, Romans 8.18. a Kingdom that
cannot be shaken, Heb. 12.28. whereunto our bodies laid down in Weakness,
shall be raised up in Power, 1 Cor. 15.43. Now a temporary believer, mistaking
and apprehending this estate to be some outward happiness, and hoping to have
some title to such a Glorious Condition, may please himself with that
fantasy for a season, and so may seem to find some sweetness in the powers
of the World to come, which if he understand aright, he would find no delight
in, as being unsuitable to his disposition.

The Last clause, How a temporary Believer may be partaker of the Holy Ghost.
that they are partakers of the Holy Ghost, may be probably meant of the gift
of Tongues, and Prophesying, which they that have are said to receive the Holy
Ghost, Acts 8.17. and 11.1. because even these common graces are reckoned
amongst the gifts of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.10, 11. which he bestows sometimes
even on unregenerate persons, as appears, Mat. 7.22. and 1 Cor. 13.12. the
Apostle supposes one may have all these gifts, without true love, that is,
without true Sanctification. So that in all these Clauses, there is nothing
affirmed of a temporary believer, but that which may be without true
Sanctifying Grace, for ought appears to be contrary.

These temporary believers our Savior, Mat. 13.20, 21. A Temporary Belcever
like Stony ground,
and Mark 4.16, 17, 18. resembles to the Stony, and Thorny ground, neither of
which brings any fruit to perfection, and yet the latter goes farther, in
entertaining and cherishing the seed of the Word, then the former. The stony
ground which is soft above, and hard underneath, represents unto us an heart
moved with fodaine affection, Having his affections somewhat moved, but the
depth of his soul, his Understanding and Will, hardened still.
by the hearing of the Word, Mat. 13.20. whereupon without any settled
judgment, or well grounded resolution, or any great examination of the way
that he chooses, he entertaines the Word, and seems to embrace the rules that
it prescribes: So that it falls out that the principal parts, or depth of the
soul, the Understanding and the Will, are not wrought upon to any purpose in
this seeming change, but remain hard and untractable, as they were before.

Hence it comes to pass, Whence it is that he shows himself suddenly, and at
first cheerfully in profession;
that, as corn, which is covered with a shallow earth, shootes up and shows
it self quickly above ground, Mat. 13.5.20. whereas that which has depth of
earth, spreading the roots downwards, is longer ere it appear, and show it
self above the earth: So he that entertaines the Word only with a slight and
ungrounded affection, suddenly appears and shows himself in outward
profession, falling on to the practice of holy duties, before his heart be
settled in the love of the truth: as it fell out in Herod, Mark 6.20. This
notwithstanding he seems to set upon with much cheerfulness, and present
delight, either for the novelty of the way, or for the advantage which he hopes
to gain thereby: such a person Simon Magus is described to be, Acts. 8.13.19.

The third resemblance between this ground, and the Temporary Believer is, that
as in the stony ground wanting depth of earth, the seed can take no strong
root in it, to yield sufficient nourishment, that it may hold out when the
heat comes: So the Word which enters not into the depth, But having not
sentertained the Word with a well settled judgment and resolved will,
or midst of the Heart, as it ought to do, Prove. 4.21. that is, which wants
firm settling in the judgment, which must approve it upon good knowledge, as
David does, Psalm. 119.97.128. and in the well settled resolutions of the will,
upon that approbation, ver. 106.111. (reckoning beforehand what it will cost,
according to our. Saviors counsel, Luke 14.28. whereof S. Must needs fall off
in time of Trial.
Paul warnes the Disciples, Acts 14.22. showing himself a precedent thereof
unto them, Acts 20.23, 24. upon which firm resolution must be settled) must
needs wants means to hold a man fast to it in time of trial.

This is the Nature and fault of the Stony ground, but that which is Thorny, A
Temporary Believer resembled to Thorny ground.
and the Temporary believer resembled thereby, goes a step further; for the
Seed that lights upon it, meeting with a deeper earth, neither shoots up nor
vanishes so suddenly as the former, and yet, though it wither not, Which bath
more depth of earth, more setlednesse in judgment and resolution. But for the
want of cleansing the heart of worldly cares, and preasures, fails in the end.
Wanting a clear light to discover fully the excellency of Christ, and the
vanity of the Creature.
but hold the Root and Greenness still, it brings no fruit at all to
perfection, Luke 8.14. Such an one was Demas, 2 Timothy 4.10. This Believer is
neither so heady nor sudden in his affection, or profession, as is the former:
And yet although he knows more of God and Christ, and embraces the Profession
of Godliness with more advised deliberation and resolution then the former
does, for all that, for want of cleansing his heart of his inbred corruptions,
whereof earthly mindedness is the chief, he comes to naught at last.

The fault of this Believer is, that though his judgment be convinced of the
excellency of God linesse, notwithstanding he wants that clear Spiritual
Evidence of it, which only is able to win the whole heart to embrace it, and
to abandon all things for it, with S. Paul, Phil. 3.8. And withal, he never
yet had a like full discovery of the vanity, and emptiness of those earthly
things, that bewitch his heart, which causes him to retain the love of them
still. Thus he joins the love of Christ, So that he embraces Christ with the
world, which the incompatible.
and of the world together, which being incompatible, and impossible to subsist
together, Mat. 6.24. James 4.4. 1 John 2.15. it must necessarily follow, that
seeing earthly affections had the first possession of this man's heart, and
being confirmed by long use and custom, getting a stronger Root then God lines
can have, they will hardly give place, as our Savior tells us, Mat. 19.23. and
being the more prevalent of the two, draw the greatest strength of the heart
and of the desires after them, so that Godliness, wanting strength of
affection to keep life in it, must needs grow weak and heartlesse.

This then being the nature of Historical faith; under which, that which is
Temporary is comprehended, the difference between that and true Justifying
faith, appears in these six things. First, in the cause, Six differences
between a True and Temporary Believer.
the one proceeds from Natural Reason, the other from the Spirit of
Sanctification. Secondly, in the subject, the one may be in an unsanctified
person, the other is only in a man regenerate. Thirdly, in the kinds of
assurance, which is, that the one is only a Conviction, in the other there is
an Evidence. Fourthly, in the grounds of their assurance, the one is a divine,
the other an humane Testimony. Fifthly, in the object, the one acknowledges the
truth of that which it apprehends, the other withal finds and tastes the
goodness of it. Lastly, in adherence; the one embraces Christ by mistake, the
other upon sound knowledge: the one affects some imaginary good in Christ, the
other Christ himself, with all his Heavenly treasures: The one takes in the
love of Christ, to the love of the world, the other casts out all to make room
for Christ. Yet a true Believer may fail in his practice: But holds his
Resolution still,


It is true that this true Believer, though he adheres firmly to Christ in his
resolution; yet he follows him not so fully sometimes, in the course of his
practice, as S. Paul complains of himself, Romans 7.15.19.23. and David, Psalm.
119.176. which happens not only by the lusting of the flesh against the
spirit, Gal. 5.17. but withal by the neernesse of the flesh to sensible
objects, by which the lusts thereof suddenly take fire, and inflame the heart
with inordinate motions, ere the Spiritual part can make head against them.
Yet such a person holds his resolution still in general, to walk with God,
from whom he departs not wickedly, Psalm. 18.21. But still loves his Law, Psalm.
119.97. Delights in it, ver. 47. Romans 7.23. Swears to keep it, Psalm. 119.106.
and that to the end, ver. 111. and strives to make it good in his practice,
ver. 59, 60. Casting himself upon God for his assistance thereunto, ver. 133.

This man may be likened to a Country newly Conquered, And may be resembled to
a Country conquered, but not full quieted.
but not quieted, wherein after the enemies Armies are broken, and his strong
holds taken in, yet some lurking Rebels suddenly break out, and make head
again, and rob, and spoil, but shall never be able to win the country out
of the Conquerors hand, or beat him out of the field. For in a person
Regenerate, though the strong holds, and imaginations of his heart be taken
down, and brought under the Obedience of Christ: 2 Cor. 10.5. yet the lusts
which are rather Crucified then fully killed, make head oftentimes against the
spirit, Gal. 5.17. but shall never be able to alter this man's judgment, nor
the full resolution of his will, to cleave unto Christ, but he shall still
conclude it is good for him to draw near to God, Psalm. 73.28.

SECT. IIII. Of Spiritual Experience, the other means of comprehending things
spiritually.
EXperience, in general, Experience in general described is,
may be described to be the Discovery by Sense, and Knowledge thereby, of
something not evident in it self, but manifested by some Event or Effect. This
general Description of Experience, may easily be applied, both unto that which
is Natural, and to that which is Spiritual. The later of these two being not
easily understood in it self, (unless it be of those that find it in
themselves) and therefore hard to be expressed, may not unfitly be shadowed by
the former, which is well understood of all. 1. Knowledge acquired by Sense.


Experience we affirm to be a Knowledge, not infused, but acquired, out of the
Observation of the Events or Effects by Sense, Whereby Reason guesseth at some
inward thing that appears not.
whereby Reason being informed, guesseth at some inward, and secret cause,
whence they proceed. Wherefore brute beasts, because they want Reason, cannot
properly be said to have Experience, though they must be acknowledged to have
something answerable thereunto, as being, by the help of Sense, 2. Of things
not Evident in themselves but manifested by Events, or Effects.
moved to take or leave things which they find agreeable or hurtful to
themselves. This kind of knowledge being grounded on sense, is usually most
certain, and generally most affects.

This Experience must be of such things as are not manifest in themselves, but
are only discovered by the Effect, as that Honey is sweet, and Wormwood bitter,
because the taste by often taking them proves them to be so, though neither of
them can be outwardly discerned. But we are not so properly said to know Snow
to be white by experience, because it appears so to the eye, or to know a Man
by experience, when we behold one whom we never saw before: But when by his
Actions, Words, and Conversation, we discover the inward disposition of his
mind, which appears not outwardly, we are properly said to know him by
experience.

That inward thing, Which may be either a quality, or the very thing it self,
if it be of a Spiritual Nature.
which Experience thus discovers, is oftentimes a quality in some subject or
other, as that Fire is hot, and Snow cold. Sometimes the very subject it self,
if it be a thing invisible, is likewise discovered by Experience. As by
Experience I know that there be Winds, though I never saw them, because I have
heard the sound, and felt the violence of them, as our Savior speaks, John
3.8. So the Experience of Gods Works, manifests that there is a God, Ps.
58.11. though no man has seen him at any time, John 1.18.

That there is such a kind of Natural Experience as we have spoken of, That
there is Natural Experience, all acknowledge.
all men will readily acknowledge, because all men find it in themselves;
whether there be any Spiritual Experience, it is no marvel though many men
doubt, because there be so few that have it. For if few men had the sense of
sight, and all the rest of the world were blind, the generality of men, that
never had the benefit of seeing, might perhaps doubt whether there were any
such thing as light, or colors, or sight, or no. Now that there must be
Spiritual Experience, if there be Spiritual Sense, no man can deny: And that
there is such Spiritual Sense, is evident by the Apostles Testimonies,
expressly naming Senses by which men discern betwixt good and evil: Heb. 5.14.
And when Moses acknowledges that the Israelites had seen Gods wonders, And
there is Spiritual Experience is proved.
and yet denies that they had eyes to see, Deuteronomy. 29.4. he evidently implies
that there is a double Sense, one outward and Natural, and another inward and
Spiritual.

To make this truth, that there is such a Spiritull Sense, yet more manifest,
If there be Spiritual Sense, there must needs be Spiritual Experience. There
is such a Spiritual Sense;
let us but consider Godly men's Affections, and whence, and how they are
raised. For that affections are most commonly, and always most effectually
moved by fense, it is evident: wherefore if there be Spiritual Affections, it
must needs be granted that there be Spiritual Senses that move them. Now that
David's longing after God, Psalm. 42.1.21. Panting after his Word, Psalm. 119.140.
Delight in the sweetness of it, ver. 103. 1. Because there are Spiritual
Affections
Trembling at his presence, ver. 120. Grief for breach of his Laws, ver. 136.
Zeal for it, ver. 139. and for his house, Psalm. 69.9. are Spiritual
affections, is apparent, seeing they were raised by Spiritual objects, and
consequently the Sense, that apprehending them begat these Affections, must be
Spiritual. 2. Because there is an ability to discern and distinguish both
Natural Affections from Spiritual,


A farther argument, that these Senses are Spiritual, is this, that by them
men are able to discover not only Spiritual things from Carnal, but
Spiritual things themselves one from another, comparing Spiritual things with
Spiritual things, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 2.13. And that not only in
their general natures, (for so far the understanding may judge of them) but
the very particular subsistence of the things themselves. And Spiritual things
one from another.
Thus a Godly man that has the motions of carnal joys, fears, sorrows etc.
when he feels the like affections in Spiritual things, is able to say of
both, this fear, joy, or grief, is Spiritual, and that is carnal. And when
he has felt Spiritual Agonies and heart-breakings, is able to say when they
come again, these are the very same that afflicted my soul heretofore: as a
woman, that has felt the Throws of Childbirth, can say when she feels them
again, these are the pains of travel.

Again, 3 Because men find inward comfort, and ease by Spiritual objects.
But none in outward and carnal things.
when Godly men finding themselves afflicted in spirit, find by their own
experience, that carnal comforts releeve and ease them, no more then Jacobs
Children and Wives did him, Genesis 37.35. or then Jobs friends helped him in his
distress, whom he calls Miserable comforters, Job 16.2. But for all that
carnal reason can say unto them, they remain still in darkness without
light, as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 50.10. till God make them hear the voice
of Joy, and Gladness, Psalm. 51.8. till a Messenger in his Name assure them
that there is a ransom accepted for them, Job 33.24. I say, when carnal
comforts work nothing on them, but only Spiritual comforts ease their
hearts, as Gods word quickened David, Psalm. 119.50.92. it manifestly discovers a
Spiritual sense within, which is affected with nothing but that which is
Spiritual.

Of this Spiritual Sense, 4. Because the same spiritual objects that affect
the godly at some times, at other times affect them not.
this is a farther Evidence, that the same things proposed to the same, or
diverse men, though all godly, affect them not alike at all times, sometimes
moving the heart in a strong manner, whereas at another time they have little
or no operation at all. That message, that God had accepted a Ransom, had a
great effect upon that distressed Man, Job 33.24. in reviving his spirit: the
same message by the mouth of Nathan, 2 Samuel 12.13. wrought nothing for the
present upon David's heart, which remained broken still, Psalm. 51.8. And
generally all godly men find by their own experience, that those
instructions, reproves, and consolations which at some times awaken, wound,
and revive their spirits, at another, move them no more either way then a
charm does a deaf Adder, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 58.4. Which must
needs happen, because Spiritual Sense is at sometimes bepummed, and awakened
at other times.
Now they being still men of spiritual minds, and at all times understanding
alike those things that are proposed, no reason can be given, why they are so
ineffectuall at one time, and powerful at another, but this, that at some
times, Spiritual Sense being benumbed, they then hear only by the hearing of
the ear, as Job speaks, Job 42.5. but at other times when those senses be
awakened, they taste, and see, and feel the same, and consequently are
affected as Job was in that place, and Jacob when he saw the Chariots sent to
bring him into Egypt, Genesis 45.27.

No man knows that he lives but by sense, 5. Because we know that we have in
us Spiritual Life, which cannot be felt but by Spiritual Sense.
Naturally, by Natural sense, and Spiritually, by Spiritual Sense, (for the
Natural man understands not the things of the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.14.) Now
godly men know that they live by Faith in the Son of God, Gal. 2.10. and
feel in themselves the operations, and motions of the Spiritual life, both in
seeking after those things that cherish it, as Gods Law, and Word; Psalm.
119.130, 131. Good company, ver. 63. and 101. especially Gods Spirit, Psalm.
51.12. as also by shunning whatsoever might impair it, as evil practices,
Psalm. 119.101. wicked company, ver. 115. and by their delight in things
agreeable to them, Gods Love, Psalm. 116.7, Holy duties wherein they please him,
But some feel no such Spiritual life in themselves
1 Chronicles. 29.9. and grief at sinful courses, Psalm. 119.136.

What shall we think then, of the condition of those that feel no Spiritual
life at all in themselves, but are always complaining that they are senseless
and dead?

I Answer; 1. Their complaints argue that they have it. For dead men as they
feel not, so they complain not.
that a wicked man may judge himself to be without Spiritual life, by the
very judgment of Natural Reason, or being convinced by the Word, but such a
man feels not his deadness, nor is grieved at it, though he may be affected
with the consequents of it sometimes, nor labors to get life: but he that
grieves, and is continually unquiet in such a seeming dead condition, and
labors all he may to get out of it, manifestly discovers to others, though
himself discern it not, that there is yet life remaining in him ^ For he that
is once dead complains nor grieves no more.

Yea, the same persons, 2. Their striving to move and go on even in their
greatest weakness.
farther discover some degree of Spiritual life remaining in them, not only
by their striving to walk in God's ways, when they find no ability to do it
with the Apostle, Romans 7.19. and though they cannot run the ways of Gods
Commandments, with that largeness of heart they desire, Psalm. 119.32. yet
they move forwards according to their ability; 3. Their grief at Gods
dishonor by themselves and others.
and, in the midst of their senslesnesse, can be grieved, both at foul
dishonours done to God, and at the miseries of his people; As some persons,
being so weakened by sickness, that they know not either what they do, or what
is done unto them, nor have any sense of their own life, yet are offended at
the flashing of a candle in their eyes, or a pinch, or other violence done unto
their bodies.

Wherefore we must needs grant a Spiritual Sense, exercised in discerning
good and evil, Heb. By this Experience we discern 1. Good. 1. God himself
exceeding good.
5.14. and by that a Spiritual Experience of both. Of Good: the Author,
whereof is God, whom we taste to be Good, 1 Pet. 2.3. Psalm. 33.8. by the
experiments of his mercies in general, Psalm. 145.9, 10. and to our selves in
particular, as David found in his own case, Psalm. 116.5, 7. and righteous, as
he proves and shows himself experimentally by his works, Psalm. 58.11.
especially faithful to his servants. By the same experience we find the
things given us of God to be good, his Spirit, 2. His cou^sells and graces.
Psalm. 143.10. his Counsels good, and that such bring great peace, Psalm.
119.165. the work of Sanctification in us exceeding good, in mortifying our
corruptions, in quickening to holiness, yea all the fruits of the Spirit, love,
joy, peace, etc. Gal. 5.22.

Besides, 3. The effects of his ordinances. Prayer.
by this Experience we find the good effects of Gods ordinances. Prayer
powerful with God, Psalm. 18.6. as appears, if not by a direct answer by
message, as Dan. 9.13. Act. 10.4. or voice from Heaven, as John 12.48. yet by
real effects, Psalm. 116.2, 3. and evidence to our own spirits, Psalm. 66.19,
20. which much eases the heart, The Word
1 Samuel 1.18. The Word searching the thoughts, 1 Cor. 14.25. Heb. 4.12.
Pricking the heart, Act. 2.37. and subduing it to the obedience of Christ, Act.
2.37, 41. Converting the soul, Psalm. 19.7. yea, making wife to salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. wiser then all the World, Psalm. 119.98, 99, 100. Comforting the
spirit, ver. 50.

By the same Experience we discern evil. 2ly. By the same Experience, we
discern evil.
The vanity of all the creatures, riches, and honor, which make one no better
then a dog that dies in a ditch, Ps. 49.20. and leave him a fool at last,
Ier. 17.11. Wisdom, and whatsoever is admired amongst men, Vanity, Eccles.
2.15. so that by experience one finds an end of all perfection, Psalm. 119.96.
the pleasures of sin, leaving a man in all evil, Prove. 5.14. without fruit,
Romans 6.21. sin it self out of measure sinful, as the Apostle expresses it,
Romans 7.13. making a man a very beast, Psalm. 73.22. Withal it makes one find
the corruption of his whole nature: Psalm. 51.5. Abomination of his
righteousness, Isa. 64.6. Inability to any good, Romans 7.18. even so much as to
think any good thing. 2. Cor. 3.5.

This Experience wonderfully strengthens Faith, This Spiritual Experience much
1. Strengthens faith.
when by the events we find all things to be as we believed; as the Israelites
believed God, when they saw the Egyptians drowned, Exodus 14.31. and David knew
that God favored him by his deliverance, Psalm. 41, 11. and his confidence,
that God would deliver him, was because God had delivered him, 1 Samuel 17.37.
see 2 Timothy 2.17, 18. Secondly, 2. Quickens Affection.
Experience wonderfully quickens affections, by those sensible Objects which it
discovers, as the sight of Joseph's chariots wonderfully revived Jacobs heart,
Genesis 45.27. and Gods deliverances of David wonderfully increased his love,
Psalm. 18.1. and 116.1. It is true indeed that Faith works more steadfastness,
and firmness of adherence, Marks of Spiritual Affections 1. When they are
kindled by Spiritual objects.
but Experience usually breeds the greater strength of affections.

These Affections we may know to be Spiritual, if, First, they be kindled by
Spiritual objects, such as are the Sense of Gods Love, manifested unto us in
the experiments thereof, in pardoning our sins, Psalm. 103.3. Luke 7.47. in
guiding us by his Counsel, Psalm. 73.24. mastering our corruptions, preventing
our errors, 1 Samuel 25.32. grief, and fear, for his displeasure, Psalm. 77.7,
8. occasioned by our sins, Ezra 9.15. yea for his dishonor by other men's
sins, Psalm. 119.136.139. Secondly, 2. When they are seasonable.
when they are answerable to Gods dealing with us, rejoicing, and mourning
seasonably; when God calls us to either, Eccl. 7.14. not preposterously, 3.
When they keep the heart humble and tractable.
as Isa. 22.12. Thirdly, when they keep us within our bounds, humble and
tractable, like the Psalmist, Psa. 131.2. in a reverend fear of Gods Majesty.
Lastly, when they provoke and quicken us to holy duties, not only of Prayer,
or thankesgiving, but generally of all service and obedience, as they do the
holy Prophet, Psalm. 116.16, 17.

It is true that, Yet it is only the Spirit of God which must testify to our
spirits that they are such.
when all is done, none can assure us that our affections, and motions, are
Spiritual, but the same Spirit which works them in us, which as it testifies
with our Spirit that we are Gods children, Romans 8.16. so does it assure us that
we are moved by his Spirit. It cannot be prevented but that many men will
deceive themselves, mistaking carnal motions for Spiritual, as Iehu did, 2
King. 10.16. But although some men think they are in the right way, when they
are wide of it: yet that lets not another man, who is in the right way, to know
and be assured that he is in it.

This large Description of the nature of a Spiritual man, The use of this
description of a spiritual man.
is of singular use, both for the encouragement of those that find themselves,
in some good measure, answerable to this pattern, that is here set before
them, to go on with cheerfulness in the study of the Scriptures and in all
other holy duties required of them: As also for the awakening of others, who,
when upon examination they find themselves out of this blessed condition may
labor with earnest desires and fervent prayers to beg that Spirit at Gods
hands, that may make them such, as finding themselves, while they remain
otherwise, in a dangerous condition, in which neither Gods word, nor any of the
rest of his ordinances, can profit them as they ought.

CAP. VIII. Of the choice of fit Times and Seasons for Reading the Scriptures.
THere is a season to every purpose under the Sun (says the wise man, Eccl.
3.) the observation whereof, not only adds grace unto every good action, but
many times facilitates the work it self, which we have in hand, and makes it
more easy to be compassed. The consideration whereof ought to move us, in such
a weighty work as is the study of the Scriptures, to enquire what times and
seasons may be most conveniently chosen out, and set apart, for the exercising
of our selves in this so holy a duty. No time limited by God for the study of
the Scriptures but the Sabbath.


It is true that, besides the Sabbath day, God has limited to men no certain
time for the duties of Prayer and study of the Scriptures, only we have
general commands to be frequent and continual in Prayer, Ephesians. 6.18. 1 Thessalonians.
5.17. and diligent in meditation of the Word, Josh. 1.8. of both which we have
examples in the practice of holy men, Only in general the often exercising of
our selves therein is required.
Psalm 58.17. Dan. 6.10. Psalm. 119.97. But the particular times for either
duty, which are impossible to be directed by any general rule, are left to be
determined by Christian wisdom.

Now times, either for Prayer, or Reading, may be either constant and set,
Times for studying the Scriptures are, 1. Occasional.
or uncertain and occasional. For there are times wherein God calls us
extraordinarily to Prayer, Isa. 22.12. either in afflictions felt, James 5.13.
or feared, Psalm 116.3.4. and 50.15. or for mercies expected, Dan. 9.2, 3. or
already received, Psalm. 18.1. and 116.12, 13. The like occasions we may meet
withal for searching the Scriptures, to resolve us in doubts, Psalm 73.17. To
comfort us in afflictions, Psalm 119.50. To direct us in matters of advice,
Psalm 119.24. To guide us in our way, verse 105. To assist us in temptations,
Ephesians. 6.17. Such or the like occasions, may cause us to have recourse to the
word extraordinarily, besides the ordinary studies of it, to make us wise unto
salvation and furnish us to every good work, 2 Timothy 3.15.17.

For the constant and daily study of the Scriptures is required, 2. Set and
constant. And that for All men,
not only of the Ministers of the word, Tim. 4.15, 17. and Magistrates, Deuteronomy.
17.19. (although indeed it concerns them above others) but besides of all:
John 5.33. and that by a kind of necessity, considering men's ignorance in
matters appertaining to godliness, Psalm. 73.22. Prove. 30.21. the difficulty of
understanding things that never entered into man's heart, 1 Cor. 2.9. and the
great necessity of attaining the knowledge of those things, which are the
grounds of Faith, the Rules of practice, and the power of God to salvation,
Romans 1.16.

Nay, Even such as have attained some good measure of knowledge.
if we had attained to some good measure of the knowledge of the Mysteries of
godliness, by the Word, yet how we should be ready in the use thereof, either
for directing our own ways, Psalm. 119.50.105. for admonishing others, Col.
3.16. for defense in time of temptation; with our Savior, Mat. 4.4.7.10. for
comforting our Brethren, 1 Thessalonians. 4.18. for examining our teachers doctrine,
with the Bereans, Acts 17.11. unless besides the knowledge of the Scriptures,
we keep them fresh in memory by continual meditation and often perusing of
that volume, which being so large as it is, must of necessity take up some
reasonable portion of time daily for this exercise.

In limiting this time for Reading the Scriptures, respect must be had, both to
Order, In choosing times for reading Scriptures we must respect
and Proportion. For the former, godly men have accustomed to begin the day
with religious exercises, as with Prayer, Psalm. 5.3. and 88.13. and Psalm.
55.17. 1. The Order. 1. The morning is a sit time, for Prayer and Reading.
the Morning was one of the three times wherein David presented his prayers
unto God. Now although Prayer and Reading of the Word be two distinct
exercises, yet that they mutually help one another, is most manifest, and
consequently are fit to be joined together. For the Word ministers matter of
Prayer, and is the ground of our Petitions, who have no promise to be heard,
unless we ask according to Gods will, 1 Io. 5.14. which is no where revealed but
in the word, which therefore strengthens our faith in Prayer. Again Prayer must
needs awe us with the reverence of Gods Majesty, and consequently prepare our
hearts to tremble at Gods word in reading it, which God is well pleased
withal, Isaiah 96.2.

The fitness of the Morning for these exercises is evident: 1. As it is fit to
honor God with the first of our time.
not only because the first of our time, as of all things else, belongs unto
God, whose service ought to be our special and chiefest care: but besides, 2.
The heart in the morning is freest from worldly thoughts.
because the heart, being then most free from worldly thoughts, is fittest for
holy meditations. And withal when in the beginning of the day the heart of a
man is seasoned with holiness, and with the fear of God, he finds himself
the better fitted, to walk humbly with him all the day after.

It is very fit to close up the day with these duties wherewith we began it. 2.
It is good to close up the day with these, holy exercises.
The Evening was one of David's times for Prayer, Psalm 55.17. and 141.2. and
Isaaks, as it seems, Genesis 24.63. Then indeed it is fit to pass our accounts
with God, concerning our carriage the day before, that having made all our
reckonings even with him, we may with assurance lay down our selves to rest in
peace. Now, we have already intimated, how fit it is to join Prayer and
Reading together, so that if the Evening be a fit time for Prayer, it must be
acknowledged to be fit for Reading also.

The Mornings then and Evenings, 2. The proportion of time to be allowed for
holy duties: wherein we must respect, 1. The Duty; and therein, 1. What must be
done. We must study the whole Scripture.
are our fittest times for Prayer. As for the proportion of time to be allotted
for this exercise, it must indifferently respect both the Duty, and the person
that undertakes it. In the exercise it must be considered both, what must be
done, and in what manner. For the former, seeing all Scriptures were written
for our Instruction, 1 Cor. 10.11. not only the Laws, and Commandments which
we are to do and obey, Deuteronomy. 29.29. but Examples too, not only the New
Testament, but the Old also: it must needs be our duty to know, and
consequently to study them all: wherefore we must so proportion our time for
this exercise, that we may often go over, by reading, the whole body of the
Scriptures.

The manner of Reading the Scriptures, 2. In what manner, With great
deliberation as holding out, 1. Things weighty,
must be with great deliberation, and that not only because the matter
contained in them is weighty, and of a mysterious nature, the Phrases
significant, the expressions brief, and sometimes by the propriety of the
language wherein they were written unusual, and therefore not easy to be
understood of the vulgar; 2. And nearly concerning our selves.
but also because that which we read so nearly concerning us, and must be
carefully laid up in our hearts, and written there, Pro. 2.5. and 7.1. and be
hidden in them, Ps. 119.11. that it may be our continual meditation, ver. 97.
and dwelling in us, Col. 3.16. may not only furnish us for every good work, 2 Timothy 3.17. but also enable us to instruct our friends and neighbors, talking
unto them, upon all fit occasions of wisdom and judgment, Psalm. 37.30, 31.
and at home our families, as we sit in the house, and walk by the way, Deuteronomy.
6.7.

This time allotted for the reading of the Scriptures must not only be
proportioned to the work, And allot time accordingly:
but to the persons too that study them, and that with due respect had, Having
respect 1. To men's abilities;
both to their abilities, and employments. The weakness of men's abilities,
whether of natural understanding and memory, or of knowledge gotten by
learning, which must needs be weak, in young beginners especially, imposes on
them necessarily the more labor and pains in study, and consequently requires
more expense of time in reading. If the Iron be blunt, and one whet not the
edge, he must put to the more strength, says Solomon, Eccl. 10.10.

As for men's callings, 2. And emploiments. 1. Requiring more study by
Ministers, Magistrates, Husbands, Parents.
and employments, Ministers who need to be furnished with all knowledge, are
required to give themselves wholly to this study, 1 Timothy 4.13.15. Magistrates
to have the book with them, to read in it all the days of their life, Deuteronomy.
17.19. Josh. 1.8. Husbands, who must teach their wives at home, 1 Cor. 14.35.
Parents, who must bring up their children in the nurture and admonition of the
Lord, Ephesians. 6.4. and talk of the Law in their family, Deuteronomy. 6.7. As they need a
greater measure of knowledge, 2. More time to be allotted where men's callings
are easy.
for the necessary discharge of their duties, so must they allow the more time
that they both attain it, and have it ready for daily use.

Again, seeing all men's Employments are not alike, but some are more toilesome,
and others being more easy, afford more leisure for the attending of those
holy duties, it must be considered how much may be conveniently spared, from
such necessary businesses, as their callings cast upon them, seeing God
requires Mercy, and not Sacrifice, Mat. 9.13. Howsoever, Yet all must set a
part some time for this duty;
even those who are most straightned by the business of their employments,
must notwithstanding so order their affairs, that they spare some fit portion
of time for these duties of Gods service: who can easily recompense it unto
them by prospering their labors, and assures us that he will be no man's debtor
for the least service done for him, Mal. 1.10.

Of two things men are to be admonished. First, Three caveats, to avoid, 1.
Negligence. 2. Incombrance with too much business.
that they bring not themselves into straights of time, either by negligence in
their callings, which often puts them to labor at unseasonable times, or by
loading themselves unnecessarily with multiplicity of business, and worldly
employments, which when they have undertaken, being not able to dispatch in
convenient times, they take liberty to make use of those times for worldly
affairs that are fit to be set apart for holy duties. By either of these
ways, men being drawn to omit these duties at the first, at last by disuse of
practice lose withal the very desire and resolution to perform them. These
must know that God, in matters of his service, dispenses with inevitable, but
not with voluntary necessities. He will indeed have Mercy, and not Sacrifice,
but neither negligence, nor covetousness, rather then Sacrifice.

Secondly, 3. Not to mistake suspension for a discharge from the duty.
men must take heed that they mistake not a dispensation for suspending these
duties, for a full discharge from them. Employments in secular affairs are not
better then holy duties, neither is the service of men, better then the service
of God. Consequently the one ought not to be left for the other: Only, whereas
our affairs are so limited to their season, that they must sometimes be done
at present, or not at all, whereas holy duties suspended for a time, may be
performed afterward, God is pleased that his Services shall give precedence to
our urgent necessities, not that they shall be excluded by them. Wherefore he
that by inevitable necessity is enforced to omit Prayer or Reading in the time
appointed, must redeem the first opportunity for the performance of them, as
soon as he may afterward.

This holy exercise of Reading the Scriptures daily being every way so
necessary, so comfortable, so profitable, let all that desire to grow in
knowledge, Faith, and Obedience, that expect Gods blessing upon their souls,
and labors, attend daily at the gates of Wisdom, Pro. 8.34. encouraged by
that gracious promise, We shall know the Lord if we follow on to know him, Hos.
6.3. Especially in these times under the Gospel, wherein it is promised that
all the earth shall be filled with knowledge as the waters cover the Sea: Hab.
2.14.

CAP. IX. Of the Manner of Preparation before the Reading of the Scriptures.
OF what necessity careful Preparation is to the Reading of the Scriptures,
has been sufficiently manifested in the first Chapter, wherein we showed that
the Truths revealed in Scripture, are in themselves deep and great Mysteries,
that our understanding is shallow, and full of darkness, and thereby unable
to comprehend them. Lastly, that our rebellious carnal dispositions are, with
great difficulty, brought to submit fully to Gods will revealed, much more to
delight in it as we ought. We are now to show what this Preparation is, and
wherein it specially consists.

There needs indeed unto this work a double Preparation, Adouble Preparation
needful. 1. To the undertaking and resolving upon the duty: 1. For the
sluggishnes of our nature.
First, to the undertaking. Secondly, to the performance of this duty. For the
undertaking of the work it self, we need to be prepared with a firm and
constant resolution, before we go about it. Partly, because of the
sluggishnesse of our carnal natures to holy duties, and our inconstancy and
unstedfastnesse in persisting and going thorough with them to the end: (which
moved holy David to strengthen himself thereunto with a solemn oath, Psalm.
119.106.) and partly because we know how dangerous it is to put ones hand to
the Plough and look back again, 2. For the danger of breaking of the work
begun. To this resolution we must be strengthened, 1. By the sense of our
ignorance and perverseness.
Luke 9.62. which moved the same Prophet to resolve and promise to perform Gods
Statutes always even to the end, Ps. 119.112.

Now the grounds, upon which our hearts must be settled in the firmness of such
resolutions, must be drawn: First, from the sense of our own blindness and
ignorance, who of our selves have not the knowledge nor understanding of a man,
as Agur acknowledges, Prove. 30.3. as indeed every man is brutish by his own
knowledge, Ier. 51.17. and withal by that ignorance of ours being alienated
from the life of God, and past feeling, without special grace preventing, are
given over to all lasciviousness, as the Apostle sets out such a condition,
Ephesians. 4.17, 18. made to be ensnared and taken for a prey, Isa. 42.22. Nay,
besides that we are men of untractable spirits, naturally averse from, and
opposite to, all Gods Counsels, Romans 8.7. and bent in our own resolutions to
do what is good in our own eyes, though we say not so much in express
terms, with the Jews, Ier. 44.16. All which considerations laid together,
are great motives to awaken our hearts, to apply our selves to the study of the
Scriptures, 2. By assurance that this is the only means ordaned by God to
help both.
as the only means to inlighten our eyes, Psalm. 19.7.8. and to subdue the
thoughts of the heart to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5.

Secondly, we must be well assured, that there is no other means ordained by
God, but the Word alone to help us out of this dangerous condition. That is the
light that shines unto us out of a dark place, to which we must take heed, 2
Pet. 1.19. the only light to our steps, Psalm. 119.105. Without which whosoever
speaks, there is no light in him, Isa. 20.8. now as there is no other means
of true knowledge but the Word, so we must understand that this is so full of
heavenly Wisdom, that it is able to make one wise to Salvation, 1 Timothy 3.15.
Wiser then our teachers then our enemies, then the ancient, Psalm. 119.98, 99,
100. And that it is not more full of wisdom then of power, quick and
powerful, Heb. 4.12. the Power of God to Salvation, Romans 1.16. able to cleanse
the ways even of young men, Ps. 119.9. in a word, sufficient to convert the
soul, Psalm 19.7.

The heart of man being thus once sensible of the miserable, and dangerous
bondage, into which it is brought by ignorance, and perverseness, and being
with all assured, that the Word is both a lamp, and light, Prove. 6.23. and
besides that, as a fire and hammer, as it is resembled, Ier. 23.29. able by the
power of God, to master and bring under those rebellious thoughts of the
spirit, which no earthly power can subdue: cannot but be effectually moved to a
resolution, and earnest desire to make use of it for the freeing himself, in
that dangerous condition in which he stands at present, by his blindness, and
perverseness of spirit. As it fared with Jacob, who seeing nothing before his
eyes, but famine, and death, when he had once been informed that there was
corn in Egypt, resolved to have it whatsoever it cost, yea though he were to
hazard his beloved Benjamin in the voyage, Genesis 41.1. and 43.24. As likewise,
upon the same consideration, the lepers adventured their lives in the Assyrians
camp, 2 King. 7.4, 5. And indeed a desire kindled in the heart of a man, upon
such effectual motives, will neither suffer him to be idle, like the slothful
man who had rather starve then labor, Prove. 21.25, 26. nor yet wavering and
unconstant, because he will still find in himself the same powerful motives
urging him forward to go on in this work, which drew him unto the undertaking
of it at the beginning.

But the most prevalent means, 3. By the delight which we may find in the use
of it.
to keep a man on constant in the use of this holy Ordinance, especially with
desire and cheerfulness, is not so much the great necessity that drives him to
it, as the delight that he finds in the Word, for the wonderful wisdom
revealed therein, Psalm 119.129. the Purity of it, ver. 140. together with the
absolute perfection of it every way, which drew holy David to the continual
Meditation of it, ver. 96, 97. yea for the sweetness of it, ver. 103. arising
out of the sutablenesse of it to his sanctified Nature, but most of all for the
great profit that it brings sundry ways, Preparation. 2. To the practice of
the duty when we go about it.
expressed Psalm. 19.7, 8, 11. and 119.9.11, 50, 98, 138. Prove. 2.11, 12. and
3.18, 23, 24. and in sundry other places.

A man's heart, being thus confirmed with a full purpose, and settled resolution,
to undertake, and continue constantly in the study of the holy Scriptures, must
be more particularly prepared to the work it self when one goes about it. In
the first place one must be careful to free himself from all encumbrances that
pester the heart. Secondly, he must awe his heart with a holy reverence both of
the Word it self, and of him that speaks in and by it. Thirdly, the soul
must be quickened with a spiritual appetite and desire after it. Fourthly,
Faith must be stirred up and strengthened ot believe it. Fifthly, the heart must
be made soft and tender to admit and entertain it. Lastly, all must be closed
up with an effectual prayer, for the Spirits assistance, to give life and
power to the Word, to work upon the heart and conscience effectually.

The first work, 1. By cleansing the heart.
when we come to read the Scriptures, is to cleanse the heart, as men do the
ground where they cast in their seed, that we sow not among thorns, Ier. 4.3.
Unless vessels be emptied, whatsoever we power into them runs over. 1. Of
all naughtiness.
Now the heart must be cleared in general of all superfluity and naughtines,
James 1.21, and particularly of worldly cares which choke the word, Mat. 13.22.
2. Of all worldly thoughts.
and of all manner of distracting thoughts, of what nature soever, which must
needs hinder attention while we are about this serious work. And lastly, of all
unquiet passions of anger, fear, joy, sorrow, etc. 3. And of all distempering
passions.
which unsettle the heart, pervert the judgment, and bring perverseness into the
will, and so hinder and distract all the faculties of the soul, that it cannot
receive, discern and embrace the word as it ought.

Next, 2. By awing the heart with due reverence of God before whom we stand,
and has power to command us.
to possess the heart with Reverence we must advisedly consider with what, and
whom we have to do, while we are reading the Scriptures. That the God before
whose presence we stand, first is our God, by Creation, Psalm 100.2, 3. and
Redemption, Isa. 43.1. and Covenant, Deuteronomy. 26.17. and therefore has right to
command us what he pleases, according to our Saviors intimation, Mat. 20.15.
to whose will and word we have already vowed obedience, which we must the more
carefully perform, because he can find us out in all our failings, as knowing
our very thoughts afar off, Psalm 139.2. much more having all our ways before
him, Psalm 119.168. and being one who will not forgive our wilful
transgressions, John 24.19, 20. such considerations cause us to receive the
Word with that trembling of heart which God so much respects, Isa. 66.2.
withal we must know that the Word is a Law, that must sway our hearts, being
so righteous and holy in all things, Psalm 119.128. that we cannot but approve
it. Nay, so good, verse 39. that we cannot but submit to it with all
cheerfulness, as being ordained to us for our good, Deuteronomy. 6.25. who submitting
thereunto, and walking according to it, have our fruit in holiness, and the end
everlasting life. 3. By stirring up in our selves a spiritual Appetite to the
word.
Romans 6.22.

Thirdly, we must labor to quicken, and work into our hearts a Spiritual
appetite after the Word, such as Job found in himself, Job 23.12. and holy
David, Psalm. 119.131. which arises both from the sense of our emptiness (for
the full soul loatheth the honey and the honey comb, Prove. 27.7.) and withal,
of the fitness of the Word, to supply unto us whatsoever we want and hunger
after, as being the food of our souls, 1 Pet 2.2. the word of eternal life,
John 6.68. which quickens us, Psalm 119.50. and is besides sweet and pleasant
above measure, verse 103. In a word, all those Motives, which we prescribed
before, to be used to stir up our selves to undertake this holy exercise,
must be again called to mind when we set about it.

Fourthly, 4. By awaking our faith. 1. By remembering that it is the word of the
God of truth.
That we may awaken and strengthenen our faith to entertain and believe the
Word, we must consider that it is the word of him that speaks righteousness,
Isa. 45.19. whose faithfulness is to all generations, Psalm 119.90. and who
has founded his testimonies forever, verse 152. So that we have great reason
to build firmly upon every tittle and syllable which we find in this Word,
without doubt or question. 2. That he has made it his power to salvation.
Besides that, we must remember that God has made this word his power to
salvation, Romans 1.16. mighty through him to cast down strong holds, 2 Cor.
10.5. and has promised that it shall not return empty, but shall surely
execute that for which it was sent, Isa. 55.10, 11. Indeed it wondrously
furthers the operation of the Word in our hearts, when we set these promises
before our eyes, and urge God with them, and challenge the making of them good
unto our souls. God indeed much delights to be pressed with his word, and to
be called upon, as Elisha did when he stood by the waters of Jordan, and smote
them with Elijahs Mantle, crying out, Where is the God of Elijah? 2 Kings 2.14.

In the fifth place the heart must be made pliable and soft, 5. By softening
the heart and making it pliable.
like that good ground, Luke 8.15. for soft things we know easily take
impression of any form that is imprinted on them, as the Apostle calls the
Doctrine delivered to the Romans Romans 6.17. It was the tenderness of Iosiahs
heart, mentioned, 2 Chronicles. 34.27. which caused that deep impression in his
spirit by the reading of the Law, verse 19.21. This pliablenesse of heart we
are brought unto, by casting aside of our own wills and wisdom, which stiffen
our hearts against Gods counsels, as appears by those rebellious Jews, Ier.
44.16. Indeed a very fool is more tractable then one that is wise in his own
eyes, Prove. 26.12. This tenderness is called opening of the heart, Acts 16.14.
which is the work of the Spirit, much furthered, by awing our hearts with a
reverend fear of his Majesty before whom we stand. Which being to be wrought
by God only, it is needful when we begin the work to lift up the heart unto
God in prayer.
Their presence before God, made Cornelius and his company so apt and ready to
hear S. Peter's Sermon, Acts 10.33.

Now seeing it is the work of God only, to frame us to such a disposition of
heart, who only can take away the stony heart out of our bowels, and can in
stead of it give us a heart of flesh, Ezekiel. 36.26. we must in the last place,
before we enter upon this work, lift up our hearts to him in prayer, to open
our eyes, Psalm 119.18. enlarge our hearts, verse 32. incline them to his
testimonies, verse 36. and that to keep them to the end, verse 112. Ordering
our steps in them, verse 133. and acquainting us with the will of God, by his
Spirit, to teach us to do them, Psalm 143.10. according to his promise to
send his Spirit to lead us into all truth, John 14.16.30. Some short effectual
prayer to this purpose, to close up our meditations in this preparation of ours
to the reading of the Word, representing unto God our dependence on him alone,
which is a means to make us humble and thankful.
for his assistance to prosper us in the use of his own ordinance, seldom
returns without a gracious answer, and is of great use unto us, both to keep
down the swelling of our hearts, if we find that this work prospers in our
hand, 2. And to make us good bushands of the grace which we receive.
as manifestly discovering that the grace we receive comes from God, unto whom
we have addressed our selves by prayer; (which takes away all glorying in our
selves, 1 Cor. 4.7.) and withal it makes us careful to be good husbands of
that which we have received from Gods hands, as well knowing, that seeing we
have no more then he is pleased to bestow upon us, it is not in our power to
command it when we will.

CAP. X. Of reverend Attention and heedfull Observation in reading the
Scriptures.
First, such Preparation to the reading of the Scriptures, as we have before
prescribed, cannot but dispose the heart to heedfull attention, consisting in
the uniting of the thoughts together, Attention consists in the uniting and
fixing the thoughts upon what we read,
and bending and fixing them upon that which is read. To this attention men are
often stirred up, when they are to hear God speak unto them, as Psalm 49.1.
Thus the people of Israel, when they were to receive the Law in mount Sinai,
were first prepared unto attention by the sound of a Trumpet. This attention we
may be moved unto, by considering the person that speaks, and the nature of
that which is spoken.

The authority and wisdom of him that speaks requires great attention of him
that reads or hears Gods Word. Required 1. From the authority and wisdom of
him that speaks.
A child must hear his Father, Prove. 4.1. A subject must attend reverently to
the words of a Ruler, Job 29.21. Yet none of them is our potter as God is, Isa.
63.4. or made us as he did, Ps. 100.3. nor consequently can challenge such
respect from us as he may. Gods people must hear because it is God that
speaks, Exodus 20.1. Psalm 50.7. and 81.7. Besides, the wisdom of God
requires our diligent attention, as it is required upon that ground, Psalm
49.2, 3. now it is Christ that speaks in his Word, who is the wisdom of his
Father, 1 Cor. 1.24. in whom are hidden the treasures of wisdom, Col. 2.3.

Again, 2. From the Subject which the Scriptures handle.
the Matter or Subject which is handled in the Scriptures requires of us great
attention, not only for the weight and importance of those high mysteries,
which are therein revealed; But besides that for the great interest which we
our selves have in those things which we find in that sacred volume, as being
directed unto us, 1. Weighty and mysterious.
2. Nearly concerning us.
and written for our instruction, Romans 154. containing our evidences and the
title that we have to eternal life, John 5.39. the laws and directions which
we and our children must observe, that we may do them, Deuteronomy. 29.29. especially
seeing all those things concern us in the highest degree, yea, much more nearly
then our estates, liberty, peace, nay, then our lives themselves. So that we
have great reason to attend diligently to every tittle written in this book,
much more heedfully then Benhadads Messengers did to the words of Ahab. 1 Kings
20.33.

Besides, In attention mark both the matters and expressions;
our heedfull attention to the Matter or Substance of that which we read in the
Scriptures, we must take special notice of the phrase, wherein it is
expressed. Partly, because many of the phrases used in that book are not vulgar
or of ordinary use, Some of them unusual.
and therefore not so easily understood, unless they be carefully observed.
Thus S. Peter tells us of many things in S. Paul's Epistles hard to be
understood, 2 Pet. 3.16. Partly, because the Scriptures themselves being as
they are very copious and full of matter (as David tells us the Law is exceeding
broad, Psalm 119.96.) are oftentimes brief and short in the Phrases and
expressions, whence it must needs follow, Most of them brief and of large
signification.
that the words must needs be of large signification, so that, if they be not
well observed, much of the matter contained in them may easily be lost.

Unto this Attention must be joined judicious Observation, Unto attention add
observation of special passages,
which is nothing else but the fixing and staying of the mind upon some
special passage where we find things represented unto us either more weighty
in themselves, or else more proper to our selves, for our particular use and
occasions. It is true, that all Gods Testimonies are wonderful in themselves,
Weighty in themselves or more proper to us.
Psalm 119.129. all of them pure, verse 140. righteous concerning all things,
verse 128. yea all of them are profitable to give understanding, Psalm. 119.130.
to cleanse ones ways, verse 9. to convert the soul, Psalm 19.7. to make the
man of God perfect to every good work, 2 Timothy 3.16. yet there are some things
in Scripture more important then others; and some more useful then others for
some persons, times, and occasions.

Together with Attention and Observation, A third duty, Approbation and affent
to what we read.
there must necessarily be joined Approbation of every truth revealed in the
Scriptures, such as we: find in holy David, Psalm 119.128. not only because
Gods Law is the truth, verse 142. and therefore must be approved by us, 1.
Because it is the truth of God. 2. Because till our judgment approve it we
canuot believe it.
that came therefore into the world, that we might bear witness to the truth,
as our Savior speaks of himself, John 18.37. without which God has no honor
by us at all, seeing it is the receiving of his testimony by us, by which we
seal to his truth, Ioh. 3.33. But besides, because we can neither believe that
which we approve not in our judgment, nor possibly bring our hearts to yield
unto it true and sincere obedience.

This assent which we give unto Gods Word, This assent is not forced, only
voluntary, but necessary.
in approving whatsoever it presents unto us, is neither forced nor only
voluntary, but rather necessary, as is the judgment of sense. For when the eye
judges of colors, or the taste of meats, it is not in the power of either of
these senses to judge otherwise of them, then they appear to the sense that
apprehends them. This approbation of those several truths which are contained
therein, is an acknowledgment that they are not only righteous and true, Psalm.
119.137, 138. with the Psalmist, but withal with the Apostle, that they are
good, Romans 7.16. as also the Prophet acknowledges, Psalm. 139.19. which is the
only means to bring our hearts to love, and delight in them, which indeed is
the fullest testimony that we can give to the perfection, purity, and
excellency of them every way, Psalm. 119.96.140.

It is true that every godly man, at all times, gives his assent to every truth
of God revealed unto him, but the help of that Anointing which abides in him,
and teaches him all things, Neither is alike firm at all times because the
evidence by which it is discovered is not alike clear at all times.
1 John 2.27. Notwithstanding that assent is not alike firm at all times,
because the evidence, by which he acknowledges it, is not alike clear at all
times, but is sometimes obscure like the twilight, at other times full and
perspicuous, as the sun is shining in his strength. Such a full closing of
our hearts, with every particular truth which we meet with in reading Gods
Word, we are to labor for, and to pray for: and indeed when men clearly
discern the glory, But when it shines to us clearly transports the heart with
spiritual raptures. Which sometimes fall on us in reading and necessarily
cause some pause in the work in hand. 1. Because the mind wholly taken up
therewith cannot at present attend other things. 2. Because such affections
being kindled in a sluggish heart need to be fomented lest they goeout like
fire in green wood.
and beauty, of those heavenly Mysteries, and taste the goodness of them, they
cannot but ravish readers with admiration, as Psalm. 119.29. bring the heart to
value them at an inestimable rate, ver. 72.127. transport them with strong, and
heavenly affections toward them, of love, ver. 97. desire, ver. 131. and joy,
ver. 111.162.

It happens sometimes, that such Spiritual Raptures seize on a man, even while
he is reading the Scriptures, (as the Disciples hearts burned within them,
whilst our Savior talked with them, going to Emaus, Luke 24.32.) whereupon
the heart opens it self, to close with, and draw in that ravishing Object, as
it is probable David's did, Psalm. 119.131. which will necessarily enforce him to
make some pause in the work which he has in hand, for a little while; which
must need happen, partly because the mind while it is wholly taken up with
that truth which it embraces, cannot easily attend any thing else, at that
present, as it falls out, that when a man's eyes are dazzled with beholding the
Sun, they can for the present see nothing else perfectly: And partly, because
such new begotten affections, seeing they are kindled in an heart too sluggish
of it self, need to be cherished and kept alive, lest they languish and grow
cold again, as fire if it be kindled in green wood, goes quickly out if it
be not quickened a while by blowing.

Such short pauses, upon such occasions, if they happen to us in reading the
Scriptures, rather further; then hinder us in our work, For a godly spirit
quickened by such sweet refreshings, receives increase of alacrity, and is
thereby strengthened to go on, with much greater life, to the end of this holy
exercise, which by such an help is, if not more speedily, yet doubtless more
effectually, and to better purpose performed. The truth is, such a pause need
not detain us long, but the affections being refreshed by some short
meditation on that which moves them, a man may set on to the work again, and
after that is fully ended, he may resume again into his thoughts, and satisfy
himself with the fuller contemplation of that object, that so much affected
him.

CAP. XI. Of duties after Reading the Scriptures, especially Meditation and
Prayer.
TOo many Readers of Gods Word, The error of such as content themselves with
bare reading, without meditation afterward
are like unto the person described, James 1.24. who beholding his face in a
glass, goes his way and forgets of what shape he was. Or like Ezekiels
hearers, who as soon as they had pleased their ears with his Sermons, laid
aside the thoughts of what they had heard out of their hearts, and still went
on in their old ways of covetous practice, Ezekiel. 33.31, 32. In like manner
fares it with these men, when the Chapter is read, the work is ended in their
opinion, the Bible is laid aside, and together with it, all thoughts of all
that they have read, as if there were no farther use to be made of that holy
exercise.

It may be probably conceived, And the cause of it.
that these men are drawn to this duty, rather out of conviction of
conscience, that such a duty ought to be performed, or by love of the credit,
either of knowledge, or of the form of godliness, rather then by any true
desire, either of a comfortable communion with God, in the holy use of his
ordinances, or of the excellent fruits of this holy exercise, the increase of
knowledge of God, and Christ, which the Word brings, John 15.39. with like
increase of every other grace, the converting of the Soul, Ps. 19.7. cleansing
of ones ways, Psalm. 119.9. subduing the thoughts to the obedience of Christ, 2
Cor. 10.5. and making the man of God perfect to every good work, 2 Timothy 3.17.
so that it is no marvel if God in Justice deny these men those fruits of
Grace, The end of studying the Scriptures is not only knowledge but practice.
and Sanctification which they never desired.

Wherefore, seeing practice and not bare knowledge is; or should be, the end
and fruit of the study of the Scriptures, as Moses expressly tells us, Deuteronomy.
29.29. we must conceive, that after we have read them, the greatest and hardest
part of the task is still behind. 1. We must therefore Meditate upon what we
have read.
Wherefore, after we have read any part of Scripture, our special care must
be, when we have done, to recount and revolve in our minds those things that
we have read, and to meditate on them seriously. Herein our first labor must
be to find out the true sense and meaning of the words, 2. Searching out the
true Sense and scope of the word which we have read. 3. Singling out and
applying what is of more special use to our selves. 4. Working those things
upon our hearts till they warm our affections. 5. Advising how we may bring
them into practice.
together with the scope unto which they are directed. Secondly, having
discreetly chosen out such things as we judge to be of greatest use to our
selves, for the building of our faith, or directing our practice, we must
carefully apply them to our selves, our conditions, and occasions. Thirdly,
after that is done, we must whet them upon our hearts, till they warm, and
quicken our affections. Lastly, we must advise about, and resolve upon, the
means to bring all into practice.

Such places of Scripture, as either express unto us Mysteries hard to be
understood, or set them out in dark and unusual Phrases of speech, (of which
sort S. Peter tells there be many in Paul's Epistles: 2 Pet. 3.16.) need to be
the more diligently scanned, and if our own understanding be too weak to search
into the meaning of them, we may do well to make use of other men's writings,
or conference. But for finding out of the scope of any place of Scripture,
there needs a wise Judgment, directed by the due consideration of the
precedents and consequents, Though all Scriptures be useful every way, yet
some may concern us more particularly.
compared with the substance of the matter handled, in that place which we have
in hand.

In the Second place, though all Scripture be profitable for doctrine,
reproof, etc. 2 Timothy 3.17. and so no part of it must be slightly passed over,
yet seeing some things therein delivered, may more nearely concern us in
respect of our dispositions, condition of life, and accidental occurrents, our
care must be, in reading, to single out such things as we find fittest for our
selves, Which we must so apply as if we were named therein.
and to apply and take them home unto our selves in such sort, as if we were
specially named in any Precept, Reproof, Promise, Commination, Consolation, or
the like, which is the most effectual means to awaken, and stir up
affections, and to set on our endeavors, as manifestly appears in good Josiah
his example, 2 Chronicles. 34.20, 21.

For such particular applying of things to our selves, Examples hereof we have
in Scripture.
we have frequent precedents in Scripture. For there we find the promises
made, in such a time, and to such persons, applied both unto other times, and
persons. As that promise made to the children of Israel, Isa. 49.8. is applied
to us under the Gospel, 2 Cor. 6.2. and a little after, ver. 16.18. is applied
to us likewise the promise made to them, Levit. 26.11, 12. Ier. 31.1. The
promise made to Joshua, cap. 1.5. and that upon which David buildes, Psalm.
118.6. are both applied in like manner, Heb. 13.5, 6. So likewise the Prophet
Isaiah his exhortation to the people of his time, is pressed upon us
Christians, Ephesians. 5.18. and in like manner David's caveat, Psalm. We must look
upon the Law as a rule to guide us, and a judge to try our actions by.
95.7, 8. is urged upon us, Heb. 3.7, 8. and the judgments threatened, or
executed on those under the Law, the Apostle tells us, happened to them for
ensamples to us, that we might beware of the like sins, 1 Cor. 10.6, 11.

In applying the Law with the Sanctions thereof (seeing it serves not only for
Direction, to show us what we ought to do, but for judgment, to teach us what
to think of what we have done) we may easily mistake if we be not wise, and
therefore in judging of our selves and our works by the Law, Whether our
conformity to the law be spiritual, as the law is spiritual.
we need some caveats to keep us from error in our judgment.

First, seeing the Law is spiritual, and therefore requires the conformity of
the spirit, as well as the outward man, to Gods will, as appears by our
Saviors interpretation of it, Mat. 5.22, 28. a man must not only bring his
works, but his thoughts to be tried by the Law, Whether our obedience be out of
a sincere heart, and a fruit of faith, and love, etc. Which will make us abhor
even our righteousness. In judging our selves, by the Law, observe, 1. Whether
we sin presumptuously, or out of infirmity.
so that if one have done a work answerable to the Law, if it be not done in
uprightness of heart with a cheerful spirit, which God requires, Deuteronomy. 28.47.
if it be not a fruit of our faith, and love to God, it is abominable, 1 Cor.
13.3. A consideration that must make all our righteousness, in his eyes like
filthy rags, Isa. 64.6. and move him to cry out, Enter not into judgment with
thy servant, Psalm. 143.2.

Secondly, we must consider, that the Law is not so much broken by slips and
infirmities (for in the midst of them one may, and a Godly man always does,
justify the Law, Romans 7.16, 22.) as by sins of presumption, such as are
mentioned, Deuteronomy. 29.19. and Ier. 44.16. when a man sins wilfully, and
prepares not himself to do according to Gods will, Luke 12.47, 48. wherefore
a man has no reason to apply to himself the curses of the Law, for such slips
of infirmity which are threatened only against such as are wicked
transgressors, Psalm. 59.5.

Thirdly, 2. Whether our obedience be sincere though it be not perfect.
though it be true, that the Law requires perfect obedience, pronouncing a
curse upon all that confirm not the words of the Law, to do them, Deuteronomy.
27.26. yet being now delivered in the hand of a Mediator, that condition is so
far moderated, that sincerity of obedience is accepted in stead of
perfection, according to that of the Apostle's, that where there is a willing
mind, one is accepted according to what he has, not according to what he has
not, 2 Cor. 8.12. In the former of these David stands upright with God, Psalm.
18.20, 21. and offers himself to trial, Psalm. 139.23. In the latter he dares
not lift up his face, Psalm. 130.3.

Lastly, 3. Whether we conform to the law in the maine course of our way
though we swarve in our steps.
we must consider, that although the Law censure every action, or thought of
the heart, and approves or condemns every one of them, as far as it is
agreeable, or contrary thereunto, yet the person is censured rather according
to his way, then according to his steps, that is, according to the maine course
or scope of his life, then according to his particular acts. Thus a man may
judge himself, to be an observer or keeper of the Law, though he fail in many
actions; (as David is approved, as one that did that which was right in the
eyes of the Lord, notwithstanding the matter of Vriah, because the maine course
of his life was holy, 1 Kings 15.5.) and on the other side, one is condemned as
a transgressor of the Law, if the course of his life be wicked, though he do
many things according to the Law, as Iehu is, 2 King. 10.30, 31. The want of
the due observation of those rules, causes many a hypocrite to promise
himself Peace, and many a Godly man to afflict his spirit, without sufficient
cause.

Our third labor, after we have read the Scriptures, must be to work into our
hearts, by meditation, those things which we find most profitable for our own
use, so long till our affections begin to kindle, and our hearts to wax warm
(as Elisha stretched himself often upon the Shunamites child, till he first
waxed warm, and then neesed, and opened his eyes, 2 King 4.34.35.) So that our
delight in those divine and heavenly truths, and desire after them, discover
themselves as they do in holy David, Psalm. 119.5.20, 40, 97, 103, 111, and
131, etc. This is best done by appropriating them unto our selves, for that
which affects us, is that which most nearly concerns us; without this means
of quickening our hearts, they remain dead and senseless, and the Word becomes
utterly unprofitable.

Again, because we are little affected with those things which we believe not
(as Jacob was with his sons words, till he saw the Chariots, which assured him
of the truth of what they affirmed, Genesis 45.26, 27.) our chiefest care must be,
to bring our hearts to believe what we read, as undoubtedly true, as David
believes Gods Law to be faithful, Psalm. 119.138. True from the beginning, ver.
160. truth it self, ver. 151. as being the word of that God that cannot lie,
Tit. 1.2. nor change his mind, Numb. 23.19. nor be hindered in whatsoever he
purposes to do, Dan. 4.35. but he does whatsoever he will, Psalm. 135.6.

Withal, Our next care must be to work our hearts to a love of the law, and
delight in it.
we must labor earnestly, to work our hearts to the love of those Counsels of
God, which we embrace by faith for their Righteousness, Psalm. 119.128. Purity,
ver. 140. Perfection, ver. 96, 97. and especially for the usefulness and
wonderful benefit of them to our selves, that we may desire them with all our
souls, Psalm. 119.131. and delight and rejoice in them, ver. 162.174. To this
purpose, it will be needful to set before us the wonderful efficacy of the
Word, which not only counsels, Psalm. 119.24. and directs us in our ways, v.
105. but helps us farther in clensing them, ver. 9. in quickening the spirit,
ver. 93. giving wisdom, v. 98, 99, 100. converting the soul, Ps. 19.7.
bringing great reward, that we obtained by observing them, ver. 11. and great
peace which they have that love them, Psalm. 119.165. These eminent excellencies
of the Word, set before us in such particulars, cannot choose but make these
heavenly counsels precious in our eyes, as they are to holy David, Psalm.
119.72.127.162. and bring the soul to delight in them exceedingly.

Such fervent affections, This will make us serious in devising how we may put
the counsels of God in practice.
if they once quicken a man's spirit, cannot choose but move him to advise
seriously with himself, how he may bring both his heart and practice, to
conform to those holy counsels and directions, which he finds laid before him
in Gods Word, whereupon he must necessarily fall to the considering of his
disposition, condition, employments, and occasions, and to the devising of a
way, how to frame, out of the Word, rules to himself, for the ordering of them
aright, according to the mind and will of God, with the Prophet David, Psalm.
119.59. bethinking himself what means he may make use of to that purpose,
taking the Word with him as a light in his hand, to guide his steps, Psalm.
119.105. joining to the company of godly persons, v. 63. chasing away the
wicked that might withdraw him, verse. 115. and this he does with all speed,
verse. 60. with a resolution to hold on in this holy course to the end, verse.
112. unto which he binds himself by a solemn vow and covenant, v. 106.

A man having thus resolved upon the practice of such duties, as the Word
prescribes, For which end we are to take hold of the first Opportunities
offered.
must embrace the first opportunity offered unto him, to put his resolution in
execution. Partly, because Opportunities are not always presented; and
besides, because the time of this life, which is allotted for the practice of
the duties required, is short, and the duties themselves are many, wherein the
more we abound the more we increase our reward, and further our account at the
last day, 2 Cor. 9.6. And lastly, because the enlargement of the heart is
requisite to the running of the way of Gods Commandments, Psalm 119.32. which
therefore it will be needful for us to make use of, when it comes upon us,
knowing that we cannot command it when we will.

Now in setting to the Practice of such duties, as the Word prescribes,
although we must have respect to all Gods Commandments, after David's example,
Psalm 119.6. for that is our Righteousness, Especially for those duties which
are laid before us in Reading the Word.
Deuteronomy 6.25. yet seeing all duties cannot be performed at once, we must
take more special care for the present, not only of those things which our
employments in our particular callings, or incident occasions press upon us,
but of those also which the Word which we have read or heard directs unto,
conceiving that God thereby more especially commends them unto us for that
present.

We know, that we are not only to do what God has commanded, In all our
Practice we must observe not only what is commanded, but withal as it is
commanded.
but besides to do it as he has commanded, Deuteronomy. 5.25. without turning aside
to the right or left hand, verse 32. that is, to perform the duties which God
prescribes, in such Manner, Form, and Order, as he requires them to be done.
Wherefore, he that desires to be accepted in his Obedience, ought to set the
Word of God before him, as David does his judgments, Psalm 18.22. as a man
does the copy by which he writes. This is done by keeping the rules, given us
in the Word, fresh in our memories, reviving them by often meditation. This use
David made of the Word which he carried always with him as a Lantern, to
direct him in every step, Psalm 119.105. having it ever with him, verse 98.
and having respect to his statutes continually, verse 117.

Thus it behooves us to make use of the Word after we have read it. Examining
our ways how near they come up to the rule, or come short of it.
But withal, because we know the rules thereof are not only given for
direction, but besides for examination of our ways, it will be good for us, to
call our selves daily to account, how our practice answers the rules, that are
from time to time set before us in reading or hearing the Word. Both that on
the one side, we may be encouraged in conforming our practice to the Law, and
rejoice in the grace of God working in us, with thankfulness; That we may be
either thankful, or humbled.
and on the other side, when we find that we have swarved from the duty
required, and the rule set before us, we may be humbled and grieved for our
failings, and driven to seek unto Christ, to make up our peace, and may pray
more earnestly for Gods assistance, to look better to our ways for time to
come, as David does, Psalm. 119.131, 132, 133, 176.

I make no question, but that the consideration of these directions, given for
the profitable reading of Scriptures, will work diversely upon diverse persons.
1. Obj. Such a strict rule will discourage some, 1. As conceiving it impossible
to be followed. 2. Or requiring more time then can be spared. 2. Object. And
others to mourn when they come short of what is prescribed. To the first, 1.
The difficulty arises from their unwilling minds. 2. As much time may be
spared from their vanities. To the second, 1. We deal with a gracious Father,
who accepts a willing mind. 2. Only we must endeavor to come as near to the
rule as we may.
Some conceiving the rules impossible to be observed, in that exact manner as
is prescribed, or at least, that such a strict observation of them, will cause
greater expense of time and labor then they are willing to spare, are deterred
from the performance of the duty, as the Jews were from following our Savior
upon the hearing of his Sermon, Joh. 6.60, 61. Some others, men of tender
hearts, may, pondering all these duties in their thoughts, be driven to mourn
in secret, when they find their own performances so unanswerable to the rules
formerly delivered, and may doubt whether they are accepted or no.

To the former, I answer, that the same exception lies against all Gods
commandments, and the supposed impossibility arises especially from the
unwillingness of their own minds: and lastly, the expense of time or labor is
not so much as may well be spared from their vanities; or if an hour or more
in a day be spared from labors, God can recompense it by his blessing, without
which early rising, and hard laboring, are to little purpose, Psalm. 127.2. To
the later sort I say, that we come far short of our duty in all our services,
that we deal with a gracious Father, who accepts us according to that we have
if there be a willing mind, 2 Cor. 8.12. as requiring mercy rather then
sacrifice, Mat. 9.13. Only our endeavor must be, to do all things as perfectly
as we can, and for that purpose the rule must be set down in the exactest
manner, which also serves best both to direct us, and to quicken our endeavors,
and besides to stir us to thankfulness, for Gods gracious acceptance of our
imperfect services, and pardon of our failings.

CAP. XII. Directions for the right interpretation of the Scriptures.
NOt only the matters and subject which the Scriptures handle, being high and
mysterious in their nature, (which the Psalmist calls Wonders, Psalm. 119.18.)
but besides that, the phrase and manner of expression, which is in many clauses
far from vulgar or common use, make many things in Scripture hard to be
understood, as the Apostle acknowledges, 2 Pet. 3.16. wherefore, there is
required much wisdom and diligence in searching after the true sense of Gods
word, without which we cannot but err dangerously in the grounds of our faith,
and in the rules of practice. It will be therefore needful to set before us
such rules, as may help to direct us in finding out the true sense of the
Scriptures.

But before we come to lay down these rules, we must necessarily agree upon
two conclusions. The first is acknowledged by all men without contradiction,
which is, That there can be no infallible interpreter of the Scriptures but God
himself. The second, though it be somewhat more questioned then the former,
yet is as true as it in all points, namely, That every Godly man has within
him a spiritual light, by which he is directed in the understanding of Gods
mind revealed in his word in all things needful to salvation.

Concerning the former of these two conclusions, we must necessarily
acknowledge, that seeing no man knows Gods mind but himself, as the Apostle
affirms, Romans 11.34. 1 Cor. 2.16. therefore none can interpret his word, in
places doubtful, None can interpret Scriptures but God himself.
but himself. For, seeing Gods mind cannot be otherwise known to us, then by
the words wherein it is expressed, and when the words are such as may import
diverse senses, who can tell in which of those senses God used them, and would
have them taken by us, but himself that uttered them, unless some other person
were privy to his thoughts?

As for the second conclusion, Every godly man has a light in himself to show
him the mind of God in his word.
that godly men have a light within their own breasts, by which they are able
to understand Gods meaning in his word, in things necessary to salvation, we
know that God has promised by his Prophet, that no man shall need to teach his
neighbor, because every man shall know him from the greatest to the least,
Jer. 31.34. And the Apostle, that the anointing that they have abiding in them
shall teach them all things, 1 John 2.27. the Anointing there mentioned is that
spirit which is given us of God, by which we know the things that are freely
given us of God, 1 Cor. 2.12. by which every man understands spiritual things,
as every man sees and discovers natural things with his own eyes.

That every man should have within himself such a light or spiritual
understanding, Which conduces 1. To Gods honor.
as we have mentioned before, by which he may discover, and know the mind of
God revealed in his word, conduces much to Gods honor two ways. 1. As having
as many witnesses as believers.
For first, God has by this means as many witnesses of his truth, as there are
true believers, of whom every one knows what he speaks, Ioh. 3.11. by his own
understanding, and becomes thereby a more authentical witness unto others, of
that which he believes, upon a more certain ground, then if he had seen it with
his own eyes.

Secondly, 2. And those more fully discovering his truth and more affected with
it.
every godly man having this inward light, by which he discovers the mind of
God speaking in his word, knows his truth more fully and clearly, then he could
possibly do by the helps of any other man's light, and finds his heart thereby
more affected with those glorious and holy truths which the Word reveals,
understanding the righteousness and purity of that Word, as David did, Psalm.
119.138.140. which indeed is the only true means of admiring and honoring God
for that holy word, in which are discovered such glorious excellencies, that
our very souls are ravished with it, as David's was, Psalm. 119.97. upon the
discovery of the sweetness thereof, verse. 103.

Besides, 2. To our comfort when we see with our own eyes.
it is a singular comfort to every godly soul, to see with his own eyes. It Is
true, that it is a great comfort to a blind man, to meet with a faithful
guide, whom he may trust to lead him on in his way: but it comes nothing near
the content, which a man that has eyes takes when with them he sees the way in
which he walks. This discovery of the truth of God revealed in his word, is the
only means of grounding our faith, preserving us established in the truth
against errors, and apostasy, and of filling our souls both with present
comforts, and future hopes. This inward light may much be cleared and enlarged
by 1. The Ministry of the word. 2. Conferences.


It is true that this inward light, or anointing (as Saint John calls it) may
be much cleared and enlarged by such helps as God is pleased to afford us, by
the ministry of his word, by private conferences, and reading of godly men's
writings, which are therefore to be made use of diligently and constantly; and
therefore they are justly to be suspected, who rejecting them, brag of I know
not what inward light which they have received, 3. And reading of godlymens
books, which too many neglecting endanger themselves.
which too often, by the event at least, is discovered to be a seducing spirit
of error, leading them from one fantasy to an other, to the endangering of
their own souls, and such as cleave unto them. These helps therefore, which we
have mentioned, are not to be despised, nor yet any farther to be depended on,
then as spectacles, serving to make things clearer unto the light which we have
within us, which discovered them not so fully before.

To go on then, Rules for the finding out of the true sense of Scripture.
to the finding out, and laying down of those rules, which must be followed for
the finding out of the true sense of the Scriptures, we must lay down, first,
the foundation: That God intending in them, to reveal unto man his mind, must
of necessity, if he would be understood, speak unto them, after the manner of
men, and therefore make use of such words and phrases, as men use to make their
minds known by one to another. So that the first thing which we must look unto,
in seeking out what God means to acquaint us with in his word, is to consider
what the expressions, which we meet withal, signify in common use of speech
amongst men. This we call the Gra^maticall sense which they hold forth in their
native and proper signification, and besides that which they signify in common
use of speech, figuratively; as the woman's seed, Genesis 3.15. is her posterity,
and the serpents head, is the serpents power. For seeing words signify by
institution, they must be taken to signify according to men's intention, in
common use of speech, whether properly or figuratively.

This Grammatical sense may be found out by the Scriptures themselves, four
ways. First, 1. To find out the Grammatical sense, 1. By comparing
Translations with the originals.
by comparing the Translations with the originals; as where we read, Genesis 3.15.
He shall break, there are that read it corruptly, She shall break. Here the
original soon determines the controversy, wherein the pronoune Hu, can
signify nothing but He, or It, both which are all one in effect in this place.

The second means of finding the sense of Scripture by Scripture, 2. By
examining the circumstances of the Text:
is the examining of the circumstances of the text, and scope of the place,
wherewith if any word, taken in the usual sense, agree not, we must seek out
another sense, though less usual, in which it may agree. As 1 Timothy 4.1.
Christ is the Savior of all men; the word Savior, must be interpreted in a
general sense, for a preserver or deliverer from evil or danger indefinitely,
not a Savior from everlasting death and damnation, as after it signifies
because of the clause which follows, especially of those that believe, which
implies that he is so a Savior of those which believe; namely, from
everlasting death and hell as he is not of all other men; seeing that in respect
of everlasting salvation, Christ properly is not the Savior of any other, but
only of his own body the Church, whereof he is the head, 3. By comparing one
Scripture with another.
Ephesians. 5.23.

The third means to find out the true sense of words in Scripture is the
comparing of one Scripture with another: For truths must agree. Wherefore if
the words, being taken in one sense, agree not with themselves, and other
Scriptures, we must find out another sense, in which they may agree, Genesis 1.27.
God in the Creation of man, is said to make them Male and Female, which,
according to ordinary construction, we might conceive to be done at one time,
but the larger narration of the Woman's creation, Genesis 2.11. shows us, that the
creating them Male and Female, must be referred to diverse times, and actions:
as likewise, because the Woman was made of the Man's Rib, we know that when,
Genesis 2.7. Man is said to be made of the dust of the earth, by man must be
understood the Sex, not the kind, that is, only the Man, not both Man and
Woman, as Genesis 1.27.

The last means, 4. By examining the sense given by the Analogy of Faith.
is the examining of any sense given, by the Analogy of faith, that is, by
evident grounds of faith, gathered out of Scripture, with which if any sense,
given of any place of Scripture, agree not, we must have recourse to some other
interpretation. When it is said, Joh. 15.2. Every branch in me that bears not
fruit, we must not interpret the branches that bear not fruit, and are
therefore taken away at last, to be really in Christ, as parts of his mystical
body, because we know, that no branch which is truly ingraffed into Christ can
ever be taken away, so that we must understand that phrase of such as are in
Christ visibly, as members, not of his true body, but only of his visible
Church. The Inchanters Rods, related to be turned into Serpents, Exodus 7.12.
must be interpreted to seem so, rather then to be so, because the changing of
the nature of creatures, is beyond the Devils reach, seeing it is peculiar to
God as well as Creation.

As the words and phrases of Scripture must be understood literally, 2. To take
all Historical relations in the order in which they are related,
so in the histories and relations of things done, they must be conceived to be
acted in that order in which they are related, unless for avoiding some
manifest contradiction, in the circumstances of the narration, Unless
circumstances of the Text enforce us to allow an Anticipation.
we be forced to allow an anticipation, or inverting of that order, as we have
sometimes cause to do: The Holy Ghost either for the perspicuity of the
history, or some like occasion, relating things together, which were done a
great distance of time asunder, or those things asunder which were done
together.

There are that make many senses of Scripture, but upon no sufficient ground,
There is but one sense of any place of Scripture.
whereas it is apparent, there can be but one true and right sense. Yet we
grant that some places may have a proper sense, or a mystical or allegorical,
as it is called, Gal. 4.24. No not in Allegories.
But if we weigh it well, there is but one sense of the words, which is proper,
the other is the sense of the Type expressed by those words, which represents
unto us some mystical thing. Or if we will needs distinguish them, the one is
the first sense, the other is the full sense.

Such Allegorical senses of Scripture, Which we must not easily admit, unless
Scripture warrant them;
we must not easily admit, unless the Scripture it self warrant them. At least
when some things which we read in Scripture, may be aptly applied to represent
other things Allegorically, we have no warrant to obtrude our Allegories upon
others, Nor obtrude our interpretation of them upon others; nor build
principles of faith or rules of life upon them.
as the sense of the Holy Ghost, much less to build upon them any ground of
faith, or rule of life. Only it may not be unlawful, to show the
unanswerablenesse of some outward things in the Old Testament, to spiritual
things manifested in the New for illustration, where we find apt resemblances
between them, so it be done with sobriety.

It happens sometimes, When two different constructions may be made of the same
words,
that two different constructions may be made of the same place of Scripture,
importing both of them a sense Orthodox, and indifferently agreeing with the
circumstances, precedents, and consequents of the Text. We may take which we
please, or both if need be.
In such a case, a man is at liberty to embrace which he thinks best, so he
condemn not the other, or to make use of them both for instruction and
meditation, as conceiving that the Holy Ghost (who could in those, as well as
in other places, have spoken more distinctly) has left those places of
doubtful construction, to supply us with more variety of matter, for our use
and edification.

We meet sometimes with Parables and similitudes, Similitudes must be extended
no farther then the Holy Ghost intends them. Nor any principles of truth built
upon them.
which we must be careful to extend no farther then the Holy Ghost intends
them; and that may be easily discerned, by the occasion, and by the scope of
the Text. Now these similitudes, being used for illustration, by the holy
Spirit, we may easily make use of them so far; but it is not so safe to build
any principle of truth upon them, which is not confirmed by other clear places
of Scripture.

Where we find heavenly things expressed by earthly, as when God is said to
come down, Resemblances of spiritual things by earthly must be understood
spiritually.
to depart, to sit, to stand, to have parts of an humane body, when the state
of glory is called a kingdom, wherein men are said to have houses, thrones,
etc. we must understand the resemblances spiritually, not according to the
nature of those things by which they are resembled. So Gods hand, notes his
power; his eye, his providence, etc. which also we must not proportion
according to the scantness of a man, but extend according to the infiniteness
of a God.

CAP. XIII. Directions for raising observations out of the Scriptures for our
own instruction and edification.
ALl wise men in their writings, First, propose unto themselves a scope or end
at which they aim especially. Secondly, in relation thereunto they make choice
of matters and subjects fit for that end which they propose unto themselves.
Thirdly, those matters which they intend to handle they digest and dispose in
such a method; and Lastly, they express and set them out in such phrases and
forms of speech, as may best fit the matter which they have in hand. Seeing
therefore God in these holy writings (which we call the Scriptures) speaks to
men after the manner of men (as he must do, For raising observations out of
Scripture,

1. Search after the scope.

2. Take notice of the matter.

3. Observe the order.

4. The phrases or expressions.


if he will be understood by them) we must necessarily in the First place
search after the end and scope at which he aims principally in these books.
Secondly, we must take notice of the matters or subjects which he handles
therein. Thirdly, we must carefully observe the order and method; and Lastly,
the words and phrases of speech, which the Lord makes choice of in expressing
and setting down those things which he delivers in this sacred Volume.

Now the general scope which God aims at in these holy writings (which we call
his word) is that which he also proposes unto himself in all his works; The
general scope of Scripture is to make God known.
namely, to make himself known unto men, that they may honor him as God,
advancing him alone in their hearts, and believing in and serving him alone,
may by that means further their own salvation. That this is the end of the
Scriptures, is clearly testified by our Savior himself, Joh. 5.39. who upon
this ground exhorts us to search the Scriptures, because in them (says he) ye
think (that is, you make account) you have eternal life, and they are they
which testify of me. And that which is spoken of the history of Christ, Joh.
20.31. that it was written that we might believe him to be the Son of God, and
believing on him might have eternal life, may be truly verified of God
himself, and of the scope of his word in general.

For these purposes, For which end Gods spirit handles subjects fit for it.
Recording his works,
and for the furthering of these ends, God makes choice of, and handles in the
Scriptures such subjects as may make him best known unto us. Such as are all
his wares and works as well of Creation as of Providence in the administration,
supporting, and disposing all that he has made, Especially in the government
of his Church.

1. His laws.

2. The application of them by the Prophets.


especially in the government of his Church. Secondly, his Laws and Precepts,
which he has given to his people for the right ordering of their ways.
Thirdly, we have in the Prophesies the Application of these Laws and of the
Sanctions annexed thereunto, unto the manners and conditions of the people to
whom they are delivered, together with the histories both of the godly
prospering in the ways of Gods service, and of the wicked perishing in their
rebellions, Psalm. 92.15. Hos. 14.9. 1 Cor. 10.6. All discovering his glorious
attributes,
In all which the Lord has wonderfully discovered unto us his power, goodness,
wisdom, faithfulness, justice and mercy. The consideration whereof must
needs, or ought at least to work our hearts to a firm adherence to him, To win
us to adhere to him in faith, love and fear.
in faith, love, and fear, and quicken us to all duties of obedience, in which
he requires to be served, unto which we are wonderfully encouraged by such
examples as are laid down before us in the Word, which manifest the
righteousness and holiness of God, rewarding every man according to his deeds,
so that all the ways of the Lord are right, and the just shall walk in them;
but the transgressors shall fall therein, Hos. 14.9.

SECT. I. Of the subject matters handled in the Scripture, and first of Gods
works.
THe Scriptures in recording and setting out before us the history of Gods
works, In the work of creation is manifested Gods
begin first with the creation of the world, with all things therein by his
mighty word: wherein is discovered unto us, Eternity,
first, Gods eternity, who was before all things, Psalm. 90.2. yea before time
it self, in which they were created, and therefore must needs be from
everlasting. Secondly, Self-being,
we may take notice of his self being, who being before all things, and giving
being to all things, must necessarily be of himself, and could not otherwise
have imparted that being to the Creatures, which he had not in and of himself.
Thirdly, we discover his free and overflowing bounty, Bounty,
whom nothing could possibly move to create the world, but his own goodness:
and who in creating it has furnished and stored it with such infinite variety
of all things, all of them excellent and perfect in their kind, so that the
heavens and earth are full of his riches, Psalm. 104.24, 25. Fourthly, Power,
we cannot but acknowledge his infinite power, who by his word alone created
the vast bodies of the heavens, and the earth, and the host of them by the
breath of his mouth, Psalm. 33.6.9. Fifthly, Majesty,
we cannot but admire his incomprehensible majesty manifested in that
magnificent palace of Heaven, which he has prepared and furnished for
himself, whence he sends forth that glorious creature the light, and makes it
his covering, as he does the clouds his chariots, Ps. 104.2, 3. Perfection,
In the sixth place his infinite perfection is manifested in imparting to the
creature all those several perfections that we find in them, which must
needs therefore be in a far more eminent degree, in him that gave them. Lastly,
Wisdom.
his unconceiveable wisdom is fully evidenced, in the infinite variety,
wonderful order, mutual correspondence, and useful serviceableness of all
those creatures that he has made one to another, Psalm. 104.24.

Next to the Work of Creation are Gods acts of Government and Administration of
all that he has made, All which appear likewise in his works of
administration or providence.
wherein we may again take notice of all those glorious Attributes that we have
formerly mentioned, especially of his wonderful power and faithfulness, in
supporting by his own hand, all that he created by his Word: So that they
continue to this day according to his Ordinance, Psalm. 119.90, 91. propagated
in their kinds (which we must esteem no other then a continued Creation, Psalm.
104.30.) provided for by his care, Psalm. 145.15, 16. and Psalm. 147.8, 9.
directed by his wisdom and power to do whatsoever he commands. Job 37.12.
Psalm. 148.8. So that the creatures several motions and operations, even of
those which are carried according to the course of nature, are to be looked
upon as so many acts of God, in and by them, in whom they move and have their
being, Acts 17.28. ordered by him according to his Will, and that even the
smallest amongst them, and in their most inconsiderable motions, even to the
Sparrowes lighting to the ground, Mat. 10.29.

These Acts of Gods Providence are most clearly and especially manifested in
ordering and disposing of the affairs, Especially in ordering the affairs of
men:
and ways of the sons of Men, whose courses of life and works, if we compare
with Gods dispensations toward them, we shall easily be able to discover his
perfect Justice, Discovering his Justice and Holiness in rewarding men
according to their deeds.
and Holiness, in rewarding every man according to his deeds; his mercy and
faithfulness toward his servants, notwithstanding their manifold failings,
which either God graciously passes by, Ps. 130.10, 11. or corrects only in
mercy, His faithfulness and mercy toward his own.
as Psalm. 89.32, 22. and faithfulness, Psalm. 119.75. turning even their
chastisements and afflictions to their good: Psalm. 119.771. His exact Justice
upon the wicked, whom he puts away like dross, Psalm. 119, 119. His Patience
toward the wicked.
His incredible patience and long suffering, even toward the vessels of wrath
fitted to destruction, Romans 9.22. continuing unto them the common blessings of
this life, Mat. 5.45. although fatting them thereby to the day of slaughter,
that when they have filled up the measure of their iniquities, the wrath of God
may come upon them to the uttermost, 1 These. 2.16. His faithfulness and truth,
in fulfilling his word not only in his promises of mercy to his own servants,
as it is testified, His Faithfulness and Truth in fulfilling his Word.
Josh 21.45. but withal in executing his judgments threatened, 2 Kings 9.36. of
which there fails not one word, as that wicked King testifies, 2 Kings 10.10.
His Power in raising and casting down whom he will.
His power in raising up, and pulling down, at his pleasure, Psalm. 113.7. Luke
1.52. His wisdom in preventing and overthrowing the devices of the crafty, Job
5.12, 13. His Wisdom in preventing wicked men's policies taken in their own
snares.
causing their own tongues to fall upon themselves, Ps. 64.8. and bringing
about all their counsels to concur to the execution of his will, even in those
ways and by those means, by which they labor most to oppose it, as it
evidently appeared in the cursed practices of the Jews and Pilate against our
Savior Christ, Act. 4.27, 28.

For the discovering and observing of those glorious Attributes of God, and
distinctly, All which that we may discover, we must search into his works
particularly:
(as indeed the works of God are sought out of all that have pleasure therein,
Psalm. 111.2.) as well that we may yield unto God his due honor, as that we may
from the consideration of those works, gather grounds of comfort and
instruction to our selves; Above all the rest into that glorious work of our
Redemption.
But above all the rest of these great works which God has wrought, we must be
most careful in searching thoroughly into that glorious, and never sufficiently
admired mystery of man's Redemption by Jesus Christ, which the very Angels
themselves desire to search into, 1 Pet. 1.12. In whose coming into the world,
by the will and appointment of his Father, and taking unto himself the nature
of Man, his abasement in that Nature, not only to the form of a servant, but
besides to the very death of the Cross, his Triumphing therein over Satan,
death, and hell, manifested to the world by his glorious Resurrection from the
dead: Wherein his unsearchable wisdom, unconceiveable love, exact justice,
almighty power and faithfulness, are more clearly discovered then in all the
rest.
The unsearchable wisdom, unspeakeable, yea, unconceiveable love and mercy,
exact Justice, Almighty Power, and steadfast Faithfulness, and Truth of the
holy Lord, are more clearly discovered unto us, then they are in all the rest
of the works, which he has wrought. And for that cause the History wherein
these things are recorded, is above all others most fully and exactly penned,
and the truth thereof most faithfully attested by four several witnesses, and
those without all exception, and consequently it is to be most carefully
studied and thoroughly searched into by us.

What the maine scope of the Evangelists is in penning that History of the
Birth, Life, The maine scope aimed at, in the penning that history is, that we
might believe that Jesus is the Son of God.
Death, and Resurrection of our Blessed Savior, has been intimated already,
namely to work our hearts to believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God,
that believing we might have eternal life, John 20.32. And to this purpose
they in the first place begin with the description of our Saviors person,
and therein they set out unto us his two distinct Natures, both his Deity, and
his Humanity, (although united into one person,) and by full and clear
evidences they prove both the one and the other.

That Jesus Christ was truly God, the Son, Which is proved by Testimonies of
God from heaven, of angels, of men, even enemies, nay, of devils themselves.
the Everlasting and only begotten Son of the Father, the Evangelists prove by
Testimonies of all sorts: First, of God himself proclaiming it from heaven,
with his own voice, Mat. 3.17. and 17 chap. 5. Of the Angel, Luke 1.32, 35. and
not only of his own Disciples, Mat. 16.16. John 6.69. but besides by the
acknowledgement of those that crucified him, Mat. 27.54. nay, But especially by
his own works wrought by a divine Power.
of the very devils themselves, Mark. 1.24. But above all the rest his
manifold and wonderful Works, which he wrought publicly in the view of the
world, which were acknowledged to be done by a divine Power, as the commanding
of the winds and seas, healing of all diseases by his word, casting out Devils,
giving sight to those which were borne blind, John 9.32, 33. restoring the dead
to life, Luke 7.14, 15. John. 11, 43. And beyond all these the raising of his
own Body, Especially the raising of his own body out of the grave.
by his own Power, out of the grave, (which declared him mightily to be the Son
of God, Romans 1.4.) are produced as a cloud of witnesses for the manifesting of
the deity of our Savior Christ, recorded by holy men, who were eye and
ear-witnesses of all that they relate unto us, 1 John 1.1.

In the next place the Evangelists prove our Savior to be truly man diverse
ways, Withal Christ is proved to be truly man by his conception and birth,
growth, actions and passions after the manner of men.
by his Conception, and Birth, by his growth, both in the stature of his body,
and in the abilities of his mind, Luke 2.52. By his actions of eating,
drinking, sleeping, etc. By his passions of grief, Luke 19.41. joy, Luke
10.21. anger, Mark 3.5. fear, Mark 14.33. Heb. 5.7. By his infirmities of
hunger, Mat. 4.2. thirst, John 19.28. and weariness, John 4.6. All of them
showing not only the truth of his humane nature, but besides his abasement to
the taking up of the very infirmities thereof.

The Evangelists having showed him to be truly Man, 2 Yea to be the man
promised, by fulfilling all the Prophecies in him.
in the next place show him to be the same man, the same Christ that was
promised to the Fathers, and foretold of by the Prophets, by making it appear
how all the Prophecies were fulfilled in him: That concerning his Stock, Borne
of the stock of David;
and Parentage, he was of the house and family of David, Mat. 1. Luke 3. which
was further manifested by his parents coming to Bethlehem the City of David to
be taxed, because he was of the Lineage of David, In Bethlehem;
Augustus the Emperor having appointed every man to be taxed in his own City,
Luke 2.3, 4. Secondly, that he was born in Bethlehem, the place where Christ
was to be borne, as the Priests and Scribes testify to Herod, and prove it out
of Mic. 5.2. Thirdly, Of a Virgin.
that he was conceived and borne of a Virgin, Mat. 1.22, 23. Fourthly, that in
the accidents that befell him in this life and death, he was every way
answerable to the Prophecies, Called out of Egypt,
that he was called out of Egypt, Mat. 2.13, 15. Rode into Jerusalem upon an
Ass, Mat. 21.4, 5. Riding on an Affe, Crucified between two thieves, etc.
Was crucified between two thieves, Mark 15.27. received venegar to drink,
John 19.28, 29. had lots cast upon his garments by the soldiers, Mat. 27.35.
had his side, hands, and feet pierced, John 19.36, 37. and the like: in all
which circumstances, seeing our Savior so fully answered all that had been
foretold of him by the Prophets, it is evidently and fully proved that he was
the same Messiah that was promised and spoken of by the Prophets.

Having thus demonstrated by unquestionable testimonies, 3. Performing the
office of a Mediator,
that Christ the Messiah promised was truly God and Man, the Evangelists in the
next place make it evident by particular instances, that in the days of his
flesh he performed all that belonged to the Office of a Mediator. As first, 1.
As a Prophet.
that he performed the Office of a Prophet, as was promised, Deuteronomy. 18.18. who
should teach his people all things, John 4.25. and to this end they gave unto
us a brief sum of diverse of his Sermons, in which he dispenses the truth
of God faithfully, and gives the true and full interpretation of the Law,
clearing it from the corrupt glosses of the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat.
5.21.27, 33, 38. whose hypocrisy and pride he lays open before the people,
and sharply reproves upon all occasions, warning men to take heed of them as
dangerous seducers especially, Mat. 23.

Above all the rest the greatest care of the Evangelists, 2. As a Priest
offering up himself a Sacrifice for sin;
is to set out and describe unto us the office of our Saviors Priesthood,
which they do at full, as being of greatest importance to us for the
establishing of our faith, in the assurance of our Redemption. In setting forth
of Christ's execution of the office of his Priesthood, and therein of the
offering up of himself a sacrifice for the sins of men, they especially
labor to manifest three things. First, And a sacrifice, 1. Holy without
blemish.
that this Sacrifice of his was without blemish, holy and pure, without which
it could not have been acceptable to God, that they sufficiently evidence by
the Innocence of his Person, manifested by the holiness of his Life, and
Conversation. 2. Voluntary.
Secondly, they make it appear that this Sacrifice was every way free and
voluntary, which also himself professes, John 15.18. 3. Real and sufficient.
Thirdly, by diverse circumstances they make it evident, that his suffierings
were both real, and not fained, or only in show, and in all respects
sufficient for the satisfying of Gods Justice to the full, and consequently for
the pacifying of his wrath, and for the purchasing of our Peace, and
Reconciliation. All which we must firmly believe if we mean wholly to rely
upon that Sacrifice, the means of establishing a full and perfect Peace
between God and man.

To begin with the first, of these, First, That Christ was holy, manifested 1.
By his holy life.
the History set him out to be a careful observer, not only of the whole
moral Law, but even of all the Legal ceremonies, even to the fulfilling of
all Righteousness, as himself speaks, Mat. 3.15. Secondly, it describes him
to be one that stood fast against all Satan's temptations, which he resisted and
overcame, that he kept an holy Communion with God, not only in his forty days
fast, before he entered upon the execution of his Office in the Ministry
publicly, but continually upon all occasions in frequent and fervent prayers,
wherein sometimes he spent whole nights, Luke 6.12. Thirdly, the histories
instance particularly in his dutiful respect and subjection to his parents,
Luke 2.51. and to all Authority, Mat. 17.27. In his lowliness and meekness,
Mat. 11.29. Merciful and kind disposition to all men, amongst whom he went
about doing good, Acts 10.38. and diverse the like.

Besides, Justified against his adversaries, unjust and false cavils against
him,
our Saviors holy Life is justified and sufficiently cleared even by his
professed adversaries, who although they slandered and traduced him continually
to the people, observed and watched him narrowly in all his ways, Luke 6.7.
and chap. 14.1. and chap. 20.20. laid snares for him to entrap him in his
words, Mat. 22.15. notwithstanding could fasten nothing blameworthy justly
upon him. Neither for any breach of the Sabbath, wherein he justifies against
all cavillers, his actions of mercy and necessity, Mat. 12.10. and Luke 6.3.
Nor in keeping company with sinners, which he makes good, Mat. 9.12, 13. Nor in
sleighting of the Law, which he professes he came not to destroy, but to
fulfill, Mat. 5.17. Nor in advancing himself against authority, in which point
his own Acts sufficiently clear him, who denied to be a Judge, Luke 12.14.
much more to be a King, John 6.15. and pays his tribute quietly unto Caesar,
Mat. 17.27. (though his adversaries charged him with the contrary, Luke 23.2.)
and at the last submitted himself to the sentence of death pronounced against
him by Pilate, from which he had power enough in his hand to have freed
himself, if he had pleased to make use of it to that end, as himself tells
Peter, Mat. 26.53.

Beyond all this the testimonies of his Father from heaven, By the Testimonies,
1. Of God from heaven;
stiling him his welbeloved Son in whom he is well pleased, Mat. 3.17. and
chap. 17.5. Yea of the Devil himself from hell, who entitles him, The holy one
of God, Mark. 1.24. Of Judas who betrayed him, 2. Judas who betrayed him;
and witnessed openly to the chief Priests and Elders, that he had sinned in
betraying the innocent blood, and being smitten in conscience with the horror
of so execrable a fact, departed and hanged himself. 3. Of the Judge that
condemned him
Of the Judge that condemned him, who even then when he gave sentence of death
upon him, yet gave him this testimony, that he was a just person, and washed
his hands from his innocent blood, Mat. 27.24. Yea of the very high Priests
themselves, who searching out matter of accusation against him, and finding
none, at last were fain to condemn him upon the disagreeing testimony of two
false witnesses, Mat. 26.60. Mark. 4. By the disagreeing testimony of the
Witnesses produced against him.
14.59. and that too for that which in truth contained (though it had been
true) nothing worthy of blame. All these testimonies laid together are more
then sufficient evidences to clear his holiness and innocence to the whole
world.

Thus the Evangelists having cleared the first point, That his Sacrifice was
voluntary, is evidenced,
that Christ was an innocent and holy person, and therefore fit to be offered
up as a pure and acceptable sacrifice unto God his Father; In the second place
they make it as evident, that this sacrifice was every way free and voluntary.
Now this appears, not only by our Saviors own profession, that he did lay down
his life for his sheep, that none did take it from him, but he laid it down
himself, and that he had power to lay it down, and take it again, John 10.18.
that he was straightned, and pained till his Baptism (he means his sufferings)
was ended, an expression which manifests in him a restless desire (as he
speaks in express terms, Luke 22.15.) to accomplish that work of our
Redemption, by offering up himself upon the Cross for the sins of his
people. 1. By his actions before his sufferings.
But besides is farther manifested more fully by his actions before his
sufferings, and by his behavior in them.

Before his sufferings, His often predictions of the time, place, and kind of
death which he was to suffer.
take notice how often he speaks of his Passion, and foretells and gives
warning of it to his Disciples; and that not only in general terms, as Mat.
16.21. but distinctly and particularly lays down before them the time, place,
and kind of death that he was to suffer, and by what means, and by whose hand.
Pointing out the Traitor before the Treason plotted.
Yea, when he comes up to Jerusalem, before the Treason was plotted, he both
knows and points out the Traitor, Mat. And discovering those that were to
apprehend him, before they were in view.
26.21, 25. And at the very instant when the officers came to apprehend him,
before ever they came within view, he gave notice of their approach to his
Disciples: So that it cannot be questioned (which also S. John witnesses) that
he knew before hand all that should come upon him, Notwithstanding, he goes up
to Jerusalem,
John 8.4. Notwithstanding all this he goes up voluntarily from Galilee to
Jerusalem, at that very feast when he knew the time of his suffering was come;
when he comes thither, he hides not his head, but enters into and teaches
openly in the Temple, Luke Teaches openly in the Temple.
21.37. And although he withdrew himself out of the City, Luke 21.37. Retires
to the place, which the Traitor knew;
yet he never so much as changes his accustomed place whither he was wonted to
retire, although it was well known to Judas, John 18.2. nay beyond all this,
when the Officers that came to apprehend him knew him not, (no not so much as
Judas himself, who was with them, And discovers himself to such as
apprehended him, and puts himself into their hands.
for their guide) he discovers himself unto them once and again; and though
at his presence the Officers went backwards, and fell to the ground astonished,
yet he puts himself into their hands, John 18.4, 5, 7, 8. All these things are
full and manifest evidences, that howsoever he prayed earnestly for the passing
away of that Cup from him, yet he freely and willingly submitted to the good
pleasure of his Father (as himself speaks, Mat. 26.42.) to make his Soul an
offering for the sins of his people, and thereby to finish the work of our
Redemption.

Much more evidently did this readiness of our Savior, to lay down his life
for his people, Much more is Christ's Sacrifice manifested to be voluntary by
his actions in his sufferings.
appear afterward when he came to his sufferings, when he not only refused to
ask help of his Father, or to make use of his own Power (by which he might as
easily have destroyed those that came to apprehend him, as he drove them
backwards and felled them to the ground, John 18.6.) to rid himself out of the
hands of his enemies, as he might have done, Mat. 26.53. But besides, when he
came to his answer, he does not so much as plead for himself, When he does not
so much as plead for himself;
either before the high Priest, Mat. 26.63. or afterward before Pilate, Mat.
27, 12, 14. but (as it was foretold of him by the Prophet, Isaiah 53.7.) stood
as a sheep before the shearer, dumb, and opened not his mouth. And lastly,
when he was nailed to the Cross, And breathes out his Soul into his Fathers
bosom, while his life was yet whole in him.
he voluntatarily breathed out his Soul into the bosom of his Father, as it
is evident both in that he was dead a good space before the two thieves that
were crucified with him, whereas by reason of the strength of the natural
constitution of his body, he might have subsisted under those torments longer
the^ they. And besides, by yielding up his life, when it was yet whole in him:
as it evidently appeared by that loud cry which he uttered at the very instant
of his death, as is testified, Mark 15.37, 39. Luke 23.46. All which are
undeniable evidences of our Saviors voluntary resigning up, and laying down
his life by the will of his Father for his peoples sins.

The third and last circumstance in our Saviors Passion which the Evangelists
lay down before us, That Christ's Sufferings were real, is cleared
that they were real, and not feigned, appears evidently by the whole
narration of our Saviors buffeting, scourging, and crucifying at last, and by
his death which followed thereupon. By the soldiers who found him dead, and
therefore forbear to break his legs;

By the wound which they gave him in his side;

By the Centurions Certificate to Pilate of his death; By his burial.


The truth whereof is sufficiently testified sundry ways. First, the Soldiers
forbear to break our Saviors legs, because they saw apparently that he was
already dead, John 19.30.33. Secondly, it appears by the wound which the
Soldiers gave him in his side, which pierced his very heart, as appeared by
the water which issued out of the wound. Thirdly, by the Certificate which was
given in to Pilate by the Centurion, that he had bin a good while dead, Mark
15.44, 45. Fourthly, by the burial of his body by Joseph of Arimathea, Mat.
27.60. together with the preparations which the women made to embalme it, Luke
23.56. And Lastly, by the watch which the chief Priests and Pharisees set
about his grave to prevent the stealing away of his body by his Disciples, Mat.
27.66.

It is true, That they were sufficient,
that those diverse torments and death at last, yea, the most cruel, painful
and accursed of all deaths, the death of the Cross, which our blessed Savior
endured in his body, were but a part of that debt, Appears not only by his
death, part of the punishment of sin,
which we ought unto God for sin, and which as our surety he took upon him
to satisfy for us. For the death and outward pains of the body, were
neitheral, nor the greatest part of that curse which was brought upon man by
sin. The heaviest weight of the wrath of God lay upon his soul; So that it
was needful, But besides, by his suffering in Soul.
that the Soul of Christ also should bear the wrath of God, and be made an
offering for our sin, as was foretold, Isa. 53.10. The Evangelists therefore
are very careful to set before us the pangs and anguish of our Saviors Soul,
So great, that himself professes his Soul was heavy to the death; That it
caused him to sweat great drops of blood;
the agonies whereof were such that himself professed that his Soul was heavy
to the death, Mat. 26.38. and the violence thereof so great, that he did sweat
great drops of blood, which fell from him to the ground, Luke 22.44. So that we
cannot conceive that a person of so incomparable fortitude as our Savior was,
could have so deep an impression made upon his Soul, by any other thing, then
by the sense of his Fathers wrath, wherewith he wrestled in that conflict, God
withholding from him at that time, And to cry out upon the Cross, My God, my
God, etc.
the comfort of his favor, as himself implies, when he cries out in the
anguish of his Spirit upon the Cross, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? Mat. 27.46. That such speeches, and such effects, could proceed from no
other cause then the sense of his Fathers wrath, So that he might truly say,
that work of our Redemption was finished, and the debt fully paid.
cannot be denied. In what manner, or measure he felt it, is too much vanity
and curiosity to enquire. It is enough unto us that it was so much as God
accepted in full satisfaction for our debt, which also our Savior himself
seems to imply in the words uttered immediately before his death, It is
finished, John 19.30. This work of man's Redemption discovers 1. Gods
unconceiveable love to man.


This great and glorious work of God in Redeeming, and Reconciling himself to
the world, by the blood of his only begotten Son Jesus Christ, discovers unto
us in the first place, such a measure of Gods unspeakable and unconceivable
love to man, as passes all knowledge, to use the Apostles phrase, Ephesians. 3.19.
Secondly, 2. His wonderful Wisdom.
it gives an evidence of his wonderful and infinite wisdom, in devising and
finding out a means, by which that holy God, who will by no means pardon the
guilty, Exodus 34.7. might yet without any empeachment unto his Justice at all,
pardon sins, yea, more then that, might admit men into an holy Communion and
fellowship with himself, being before enemies, and by sin wholly separated
from him, by joining God and man together in the person of his Son, who
assuming unto himself our nature, 3. His mighty Power.
thereby came Emanuel, God with us, Mat. 1.23. Thirdly, herein God manifests
his wonderful power, not only in spoiling Principalities and Powers, and
triumphing over them, Col. 2.15. but besides in conquering death by dying, and
leading captivity captive, by becoming a Captive unto those whom he subdued
wholly and triumphed over in his Cross. Fourthly, 4. His infinite Justice.
God made known his Justice, and Holiness, in the hatred of sin, when he
spared not his own Son, when he became our surety, and took our sins upon
him, but would bruise him and put him to grief, when he made his Soul an
offering for sin, though himself had done no violence, neither was any
deceit found in his mouth, Isa. 53.9, 10. Lastly, 5. His faithfulness and
Truth.
Gods faithfulness and truth evidently appeared in fulfilling and making good
his gracious Promises, in the fullness of time, whereby he had engaged himself
both to our first Parents in Paradise, and to the Patriarchs, and Prophets in
succeeding ages, so that nothing has failed of all that he had promised.

The serious consideration of these particulars laid all together, The serious
consideration of these particulars ought to fill our hearts,
and by heedfull meditation laid home to our hearts, cannot but furnish us with
variety of most useful and profitable instructions, which ought to raise up
our hearts to an astonishing admiration of those glorious Attributes, 1. With
admiration.
and excellencies shining out so clearly unto us in this wonderful work. 2.
With Gods love.
Next, it cannot but fill them with the love of him, who so far abounded in
his love to us, that he gave his own Son to be a propitiation for our sins, 3.
With a faithful dependence on him.
1 John 4.9, 10. Thirdly, it is an effectual means to establish our hearts in
a firm dependence upon that God, who having freely given us his Son, cannot
but together with him give us all things, Romans 8.32. Fourthly, 4. With his
fear.
it must needs possess our hearts with an awful and reverend fear of that
justice of that righteous and holy God, who makes it so evidently appear that
he will by no means clear the guilty, Exodus 34.7. seeing he spared not his
own Son, though innocent in himself, yet when he took only our sins upon
him, and became a surety for us, he punished sin in him to the utmost. This
consideration should be a more effectual means, to move us to pass the time
of our dwelling here in fear, hating the very garments spotted with the flesh,
Iud. 23. then the casting off of the Jews, sometimes Gods ancient and only
people, the casting of the Apostate Angels into hell, the drowning of the whole
world by the Flood, and consuming of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes: see 2 Pet.
2.4, 5, 6. 5. And teach us to deny our selves.
Lastly, there cannot be a more effectual means to move us to deny our selves
for him, and for the service of his Church, then such a pattern laid before us
in the example of our blessed Savior, which himself urges to that purpose,
Mark 20.44, 45. and the Apostle most effectually, Phil. 2, 5, 6, 7.

Hitherto we have considered the maine scope at which the Scriptures aim,
Besides the general work of Creation, and Redemption,
in recording Gods works unto us; namely, the setting out and advancing the
glory of him that wrought them, that by bringing our hearts to a reverend fear
of that glorious and dreadful Name, The Lord our God, as he is styled, Deuteronomy.
28.58. filling them with an holy rejoicing in him, and establishing them in a
firm dependence on him, we might further our own salvation. For which purpose
we have laid before us only those general works of Creation and Providence,
We are to consider diverse particular acts of Providence.
especially in the Redemption of the world by Jesus Christ. It will not be an
unprofitable work, in the next place to take a surview of some particular acts
of Providence, wherein we shall easily discover those glorious Eminencies of
God, in some Examples one of them, in some more, whereof we shall give a few
instances, which will show us the way how to make the like observation in the
rest.

That history of saving Noah and his family in the Arc, Noah's preservation in
the deluge, Lots deliverance in Sodom, Manifest Gods faithfulness and mercy to
his servants.
when the rest of the world were overwhelmed and swept away in the general
deluge, and the delivering of Lot, and his family, out of the burning of Sodom,
and Gomorrah, are strong evidences of Gods faithfulness, and mercy to his own
servants, as both Moses, Genesis 19.29. and the Apostle, 2 Pet. 2.5.7, 9. make use
of them to that purpose. In delivering of the Children of Israel, His wonders
in bringing his people out of Egypt,
out of that heavy bondage, under which they had been long held by the
Egyptians by such strange wonders, with a strong hand, an outstretched arm as
David calls it, Psalm. 136.12. slaying great and mighty Kings, Psalm. 136.18. and
giving his people possession of their lands, and in the land of Canaan,
Planting them in Canaan;
possessed by Giants (to whom the children of Israel being compared, seemed but
as grasshoppers, Number. 13.33.) Notwithstanding their Cities walked up to heaven,
Deuteronomy. 1.28. And generally the plucking down of the mighty from their seats,
Luke 1.52. and raising up of the poor out of the dust, to set them with
Princes, Discover his Power, and Sovereignty.
Ps. 113.7, 8. discovers his infinite Power, and absolute Sovereignty by which
is both enabled, and has right to do whatsoever he pleases, in heaven and
earth, Psalm. 135.6. and none can stay his hand, or challenge him for what he
does, Dan. 4.35. His preserving and advancing Abraham, and his posterity,
The blessings of God upon Abraham and his posterity whom he so mightily
increased in a strange Country, in riches, in honors, that he was esteemed as
a mighty Prince, by those amongst whom he dwelt, Genesis 23.6. preserved among
strangers, shadowing them under his own wings, rebuking even Kings (as Pharaoh,
Genesis 12.17. and Abimelech, Genesis 20.3. for their sakes, Psalm. 105.14.) Are
evidences of his truth and Al-sufficiency. His taking the wise in their
craftiness. And turning the counsels of men to serve his own ends,
evidently declare both Gods All Sufficiency and faithfulness, in making good
his Word, Genesis 12.2, 3. His taking of wise men in their craftiness, Job. 5.13.
causing their own tongues to fall upon them, Psalm. 64.8. (as he did Hamans,
Hest. 6.9, 10. and chap. 9, 10.) argue his Power, Wisdom, and Justice. The
making use of the malice of Joseph's brethren to bring him into Egypt, both for
his own advancement, Argue his wisdom, and goodness.
and for the preservation of Jacobs family, Genesis 45.5. Psalm. 105.17. set out
both his Wisdom, and Goodness, as Joseph observes, Genesis 30.20. and generally
the histories of the particular acts of divine Providence are but instances of
the wonderful effects of those glorious Excellencies in God, whereof one or
more of them are minifested unto us thereby.

Now that we may the better discover that God is righteous in all his ways,
David testifies, Psalm. 145.17. seeing that all righteousness consists in the
just proportioning of all dispensations to the ways, and works of men,
whether they be good or evil, we must carefully compare the ways in which men
walk, with the ways in which God walks toward them, whereby we shall easily
and plainly discover the justice of God as well in rewarding the righteous, In
comparing the ways of men with Gods dispensations toward them,
as in taking vengeance on the wicked. Withal we must take notice that God
has an especial aim to make it appear to the world, that all his mercies
which he bestows upon men are every way free, Appears his free mercy even to
his dear servants,
and that he is no debtor to the best and most holy among the sons of men. For
which cause he has left upon record the failings of such men as are most
renouned and honored in the Church: Manifest by the failings of the best
amongst men.
As the grosser slips of Noah into drunkenness, Genesis 9.21. of Lot into
drunkenness and incest, Genesis 19.33, 35. David into adultery and murder, 2 Samuel
11.4.15. Yea the smaller errors of others, though in sins not so scandalous,
as Abraham's twice failing in his faith, manifested in concealing, through fear,
that Sarah was his wife, Genesis 12.12. and chap. 20.2, 11. and Moses his speaking
unadvisedly with his lips in his passion, Numb. 20.10. Psalm. 106.32. though
Abraham's faith was the grace for which he was most renowned, who is therefore
styled, Faithful Abraham, Gal. 3.9. and the father of the faithful, and one
strong in faith, Romans 4.16, 20. And Moses most eminent grace was meekness, for
which he is preferred above all others, Numb. 12.3. Examples which may indeed
both support the hearts of such as find themselves subject to those
infirmities, from which the best are not free, and move all men to walk in fear
and trembling, seeing they that stand may so easily fall, and may besides
easily clear this truth that in the sight of God no man living can be
justified, Psalm. 143.2. much less can challenge any thing at Gods hand, but
must acknowledge, that if they be not condemned, much more if they be rewarded,
it is out of free mercy and grace.

Again, whereas God seems, as it were, To understand the justice of Gods
administration in
to suspend sometimes the execution of his justice against wicked men, at least
for a while, notwithstanding their desperate and rebellious courses by which
they provoke the eyes of his glory, for the manifesting of his patience, The
prosperity of the wicked,
even toward the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction, as the Apostle tells
us, Romans 9.22. and the affliction of the godly,
And on the other side seems to set his face against his own children,
exercising them under his rods, and withholding from them the comfort of his
favor, as in bitterness of spirit they complain, Psalm. 77.7, 8. That in these
cases we may understand and judge aright of Gods ways, and give him the honor
of his justice and faithfulness, we must take with us these two directions.
First, look not on the beginning, 1. Look not on the beginning, but on the end
of Gods work.
but on the end and issue of all Gods dispensations, both toward the godly and
the wicked: thus are we advised, Psalm. 37.37, 38. Mark the perfect man, for his
end is peace, but the end of the wicked shall be cut off. This indeed was the
means by which the Prophet David supported his heart, when he was full of
fretting and envy at wicked men's prosperity, and as much discouraged at his own
chastisements, which lighted upon him every morning, Psalm. 73.3, 14, 17. when
by searching the Scriptures, he found that how fair and glorious soever the
present state of wicked men appeared to the outward view, yet the end of them
was sudden and horrible destruction, and his own end, besides all the comfort
of Gods counsel at present, was advancement to glory, Psalm. 73.19, 24.

The Second thing to be taken notice of in Gods patience, 2. Observe the cause
whence' both arise. The wickeds prosperity proceeds from wrath; the Godlies
afflictions from his love.
in bearing with wicked men for a time, and in chastening his own children, is
the fountain whence these dispensations both toward the one, and the other
proceed; the forbearance of wicked men comes from his wrath, and the chastising
of his own from his love and faithfulness, Psalm. 119.75. And this evidently
appears by the contrary effects wrought upon them both. For wicked men's hearts
by Gods patience toward them are the more hardened in sin, Eccl. 11.8.
thereby treasuring unto themselves wrath against the day of wrath, Romans 2.5.
Increase in pride, opening their mouths in blasphemy against Heaven, Psalm.
73.8, 9. and fill up their iniquity to the uttermost. So that the Lord, even
then when be seems to spare them outwardly, notwithstanding executes his
judgments upon them inwardly, in a more secret, but yet in a more fearful
way. On the other side the Godly profit by their afflictions, grow more
humbleminded, tenderhearted, and more tractable to the will of God, Psalm.
119.67, 71. Ier. 31.18, so that Gods patience toward wicked men, as it
proceeds from wrath, so by the just judgment God of it increases their
condemnation by hardening their hearts: as on the other side afflictions of the
godly, proceeding from his faithfulness and mercy, work together to their
good, Romans 8.28.

SECT. II. Of the Laws given by God to his Church, and Recorded in Scripture.
HItherto we have considered part of the subject matter which the Scriptures
handle, namely, the Works and Acts of God, How Gods honor is manifested in his
Law recorded in Scripture.
which are therein recorded; and have observed that the maine end which the
Holy Ghost aims at in registring them is, to set out the glory of God
manifested in them, the wisdom, power, holiness, goodness, justice, and
faithfulness of him, that wrought them, which easily appear in those works if
we search into them, that those glorious Excellencies being made known to men,
they might honor him as God, and cleaving unto him, and serving him in holy
fear might further their own salvation. We are in the next place to set
before us the Laws, that the Lord has given unto his Church, which being every
way Perfect, Psalm. 19.7. Right concerning all things, Psalm. 119.128, very Pure,
ver. 140. Wonderful, ver. 129. Holy and good, Romans 7.12. Psalm. 119.39.
manifest the perfection, righteousness, purity, and goodness of that God that
gave them, as the Psalmist concludes God to be righteousness, because all his
judgments, (in which he includes his Laws) are upright, Psalm. 119.137.
Especially seeing these Laws are given to men as rules of their practice,
according to which if they walk they please God, 1 These. 4.1. and are accepted
of him, which is a further argument that the Lord himself is Righteous and
Holy, who is pleased with nothing but righteousness, and holiness, and
requires nothing else of those that serve him.

Under this name of the Law of God the Scriptures oftentimes comprehend not
only the Commandments which are the Rules of our life and practice, By which
we mean not the whole Word of God as it is sometimes taken;
but besides the Principles and grounds of faith, and generally the whole Word
of God, as Psalm. 19.7. when it is said that the Law of God converts the soul,
which is the most proper effect of the Gospel, it is evident that in that
place under the name of the Law the Psalmist must understand the Gospel too.
As likewise when he tells us that his delight is in the Law of God, which
sustained his spirit, that he perished not in his afflictions, Psalm. 119.92. he
must of necessity understand Gods promises as well as the precepts of the Law,
seeing they be the promises, rather then the precepts, that support the soul
in times of trial, when we know whom we believe, who is both able and willing,
and ready to make good what he has promised, as his children find by
experience that there failed not ought of any good which the Lord had spoken
unto the house of Israel, but all came to pass, Josh. 21.45.

But as for the Promises (especially those that concern the Kingdom of
Christ, But only the Commandments,
For the present we have now in hand only that which is properely, and most
commonly understood by the name of the Law, which contain those commandments
and rules of practice which God has given to his Church for her direction, and
left upon record in the Scriptures. Now these we know are distinguished by the
names of Laws moral, Judicial. Ceremonial. Moral.
ceremonial, and judicial, which by Moses in sundry places are promiscuously
called Laws, Statutes, Judgments, and Ordinances. Of these several sorts of
Laws, that which we call Moral comes to be handled in the first place. Of
these this which is called the moral Law (because it was given by God for
regulating of men's manners and conversation) is of all the rest of the Laws
most ancient, Which is the most ancient of all Laws,
most general, and most perpetual. First, most ancient, Psalm. 119.160. as
being given to our first Parents in Paradise, As given to Adam in Paradise,
that is, to man as soon as he had any being. I grant indeed that we have no
record of any other Laws given to Adam, but those which we find mentioned, Genesis
2. which are only some branches of the Second Commandment in the tree of life,
of the Fourth in the Institution of the Sabbath, of the Seventh in the Law of
Marriage, and of the Eight in appointing them to keep Paradise, which are all
of them positive Laws, and therefore need to be expressly set down, or else they
could not have been known, whereas the rest of the Laws, being all Laws of
nature, and therefore discernible by natural right reason (for which cause
they are said to be written in man's heart) might be known although they were
not recorded, and therefore are omitted by Moses in that brief history. But
that the rest of the moral Precepts were given unto Adam, although perhaps not
by word of mouth, Either by word or written in his heart;
but written in his heart at the same time, must needs be granted, unless we
conceive that God made Adam more imperfect then any other of his creatures; for
that he gave all the rest of the creatures rules of their motions and
operations either imprinted in their natures if they want sense, or by the
direction of sense in those that have it, is as clear as the light. Now that
God should either give no law, or (which is almost one) an imperfect law to
man, who most needed, was most capable and best able to make use of a law, must
needs much disparage either his kindness to mankind, or his wisdom in
rendering the most eminent and serviceable of all the creatures upon earth,
unusefull and unprofitable at the least for most part if he had no perfect law
to guide him.

It must therefore be necessarily granted that the whole moral Law was given
to Adam (that is, to mankind) in Paradise, And consequently most universal, as
given to the whole nature of man in him.
and by necessary consequent must be acknowledged to be of all laws the most
ancient, and upon the same ground must necessarily be general, or universal;
seeing it was given in our first parents to the whole nature of man, which when
that law was given was wholly in them. It is true, that the change of man's
condition by Adams fall has seemed to cause some small alteration in the law,
as it is not a duty that now binds us to labor in Paradise, or to abstain from
the one, or to eat of the other of the trees that stood in the midst of it.
Notwithstanding even by that law all men in general are bound to labor in
such employments as God calls them unto, and to abstain from all things that God
forbids, and to make use of all such ordinances as the Lord appoints for the
confirmation and strengthening of their faith. So that those laws given to Adam
bind all men still, in the grounds and scope of them, although they oblige not
his posterity in those things, which had relation to that state wherein he then
stood, and from which afterward he so suddenly fell.

And upon the same ground, Upon the same ground those moral laws must needs
be perpetual,
that those laws which were given to Adam, are perpetual, to continue as long
as men have a being on earth. For seeing they were given to him as the root of
mankind, they necessarily bind his posterity, in succeeding generations, to the
end of the world. We never find any new law given to the Church in any age. It
is true, that the law given to Adam has been since renewed; perhaps to Noah,
after the flood, Which have been renewed,
(as may be probably guessed by that which we read concerning murder, Genesis
9.6.) And it may be to Abraham, after God called him out from Vr of the
Chaldeans, seeing we find him commended for keeping Gods commandments, his
statutes, and his laws, Genesis 26.5. But most fully and clearly, it was renewed
and restored by Moses, upon mount Sinai. But not altered;
And that the law then published, for the substance of it, was no new law,
appears by comparing the law given to Adam, which is in effect the same with
the second, fourth, seventh and eighth commandments of the decalogue, with
which in a general consideration, they are all one, if they be compared
together.

That this which we call the Moral law, Psalm. 119.152.) and was to remain, and
to be observed as a rule of life unto Gods Church, our Savior himself
witnesses in express words, Mat. 5.18. where he professes that until heaven
and earth pass (that is, till the worlds end) one jot, or one tittle shall not
pass from the law. Wherefore whatsoever was praescribed in that law, we may
observe and guide our selves by it, to direct our practice, and tender it unto
God, as a duty required and commanded in his own law. For which end both our
Savior Christ himself and the Apostles also after him (even then when both the
Judicial and Ceremonial laws were abolished) yet upon all occasions press
the observation of the Moral Law, And is therefore urged in the very letter of
it by the Apostles.
and that too in all the duties thereof, and that by virtue and from the letter
of the commandment it self, Romans 13.8, 9. Ephesians. 6.2. James 2.10, 11.

As for those, Romans 6.14.) We are not under the Law, but under Grace.
plead, that we are therefore now no more under the command and rule of the
law; they mistaking the end and scope at which the Apostle aims, put a sense
upon his words, It is only an encouragement to mortify our lusts which the Law
forbade, but brought us no power to subdue as Grace does.
which he never intended. For he makes use of this Position, in that place,
only as a strong motive to encourage us to resist sin, and not to suffer it to
reign in our mortal bodies to obey it in the lusts thereof, Romans 6.12.
because we have now, under the Gospel, power to master and means to obtain
victory over it, which we may be assured of upon this ground, that we are not
under the Law (which indeed forbids sin, but in the mean time, furnishing us
with no power to resist it, by the corrupt inclination of our rebellious
spirits rather awakens and quickens our corrupt lusts, by restraining them,
then subdues them) but under Grace, and consequently under the government of
the Spirit which supplies us with ability to resist sinful motions, and to
conform to the law, that our thoughts may be brought under the obedience of
Christ which the law of it self could not give us. So that by that Spirit we
have the fear of God planted in our hearts, that we shall not depart from him,
Jer. 32.40.

Yea, We are no longer under a Schoolmaster.
Gal. 3.14, 15. that the law was our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, but
after faith is come we are no longer under a schoolmaster. To which we answer,
that the Apostle intending in that place to prove against those who pressed the
observation of the law to establish their own righteousness, for the obtaining
of eternal life, Romans 10.3. and laying before himself this scope, to make it
evident that there can be no justification by the works of the law, but only by
the righteousness of faith, (because for want of ability to fulfill the law
perfectly in every point (which is impossible to us through the weakness of
the flesh, Romans by it that it leaves us under a curse) he takes in hand and
has just occasion to make it appear that one special use of the law is to
drive us unto Christ, The moral law drives to Christ for justistification.
in which respect he is said to be the end of the law to those that believe,
Romans 10.3. Which is true indeed even of the Moral Law: especially if we take
in with it the promises and threats annexed thereunto, whereof, neither the
one can be obtained, nor the other escaped, but by Christ alone. But the
Apostle speaks there of the ceremonial law especially.
But in this place the Apostle especially points at the ceremonial law,
which under types and shadows represented Christ unto that Church of the
Jews, which now by the coming of the body of whom they were shadows are
wholy taken away.

Now whereas the same Apostle tells us, Tim. 1.9. The law is not made for a
righteous man.
he means not that the Law was not made for such a man for his direction, to
be the rule of his life, but seeing a just man voluntarily submits to the Law,
and both desires and endavours to walk according to it, True, as a b^idle,
because he has a stronger means to hold him in, a sanctified spirit within him.
to hold him in by way of restraint, because he is kept within his bounds by
his own spirit, which inclines in it self unto Gods Testimonies, Psalm.
119.112. chooses the way of his Truth, v. 99. vows to keep Gods judgments,
ver. 106. makes them his desight, ver. 143. and finds delight in them, ver.
103. and therefore having within himself a principle that enforces more
strongly to the duties of obedience, then the terrors of any law can do, the
law in that respect is not given to a righteous man who is a law unto himself,
(and yet so that he guides himself by the rule of that Law alone, Psalm.
119.24, 105.) But, as he adds in the words that follow, it is made for the
lawless, and disobedient, and the like, who need this Law, both as a bridle to
keep them within their bounds, by the terrors thereof, and besides as a Judge
to condemn them for their disobedience, when they become transgressors and
walk contrary thereunto.

It is true indeed, Christ indeed freed us from the ceremonial Law,
that from the Ceremonial law, we are wholly freed by the coming of Christ
into the world, who is the body of those shadows; and it is as true that the
Judicial law is likewise made void to us, And Judicial;
as being given to the Jews, as such a State, not as a Church, and therefore
cannot be continued, not only because the State of the Jews, to which it was
given is, and was, shortly after Christ's Ascension dissolved, but besides
because the Church, being spread over so many different Nations, and States, it
was impossible for them all to be grounded by the same rules of civil Policy.
Not from the Moral.
But for the Moral Law, seeing it sets down rules of governing a man, as a
man, it is communicable to all men of what Nation soever, and is therefore
universally and perpetually to be observed. Notwithstanding even concerning
that Law we gain ease and relief by Christ, three ways, by which that yoke,
(if we think fit so to term it) is made easy unto us, although to speak
truly the Commandments in themselves are not grievous, as the Apostle
testifies, 1 John 5.2.

First, therefore, Christ also has freed us from the curse of that Law.
which required of us full and exact obedience thereunto in all things, and
that under the penalty of an everlasting curse, to rest for ever upon our
bodies and souls, if we failed in the least duty required therein, as it is
denounced, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Now Christ being made a curse for us has taken off
from us, and redeemed us from this curse of the Law, Gal. 3.13. and seeing this
exact obedience which the strictness of the Law required, is now made
impossible unto us by reason of the weakness of our nature, corrupted by Adams
fall; God through Christ has been pleased to moderate unto us the rigor of
the Law, in respect of the obedience required therein, and is pleased to accept
our sincere, constant, and faithful endeavors to perform to the uttermost of
our power what we are able to do, although we come short of what the Law
requires, and are accepted where there is a willing mind according to that
which we have, and not according to that which we have not, 2 Cor. 8.12.

The Second benefit which we have by Christ in relation to the Law, 2. And from
exacting our obedience to Justification.
is, that whereas the Law requires of us perfect obedience to every
commandment thereof to be performed by us in our own persons, for the
attaining of eternal life, as our Savior implies in his answer to the young
man, Mat. 19.19. Now Christ having in his own Person perfectly fulfilled the
whole Law, Mat. 3.15. his Righteousness apprehended by Faith is imputed to us,
and accounted ours, as if we our selves had performed it, and is accepted by
God for the justifying of us before him, Phil. 3.9. Romans 5.18, 19. so that we
have thereby a just title to eternal life, which otherwise we could have laid
no claim unto by any righteousness of our own, which is so far from
justifying of us before God, that the best of it before him is no better then
filthy rags, Jsa. 64.6. rendering us abominable in his eyes, which are purer
then to behold evil: So that in his sight no man living in himself can be
justified, Psalm. 143.2.

Lastly, 3. And from that ill effect of the Law to quicken our lusts.
by Christ we are freed from an ill effect, which the Law wrought in us, yet
only occasionally, not properly by it self, (for the Commandment is holy,
just, and good, Romans 7.12.) But sin taking occasion by the Commandment slew
us, so that the Commandment which was ordained to life, we find unto us to be
unto death, Romans 7.10, 11. because the Law laying a restraint upon our corrupt
lusts, but bringing with it no power of the Spirit, to enable us to subdue and
conquer them by making a bar against them, caused them to swell the higher
and to rage the more violently, (as waters do when they are penned by a damme
that is made against them) which the Apostle calls the reviving of sin, when
the Commandment came, Romans 7.9. But Christ bringing with him the Spirit of
grace and Sanctification, by which those corrupt lusts are in some measure
mortified, and subdued, the Spirit of Christ taking away that enmity and
contrariety of the flesh against the Law, and working our hearts to a
complyanie therewith, By giving his Spirit to work us to a compliance with Law.
causes it to work in us a quite contrary effect to that which it has in
natural men, an exceeding love unto Gods Testimonies, Psalm. 119.167. an holy
delight in them, ver. 77. Romans 7.22. for the sweetness which we find in them,
Psalm. 119.103. so that our hearts incline to perform them always even to the
end, v. 112. This gracious effect of the Spirit working with the Law in the
hearts of the godly, is part of that new Covenant, which God promises to make
with his people, unlike the Covenant which he made with their fathers, which
they brake, to write his Law in their inward parts, Ier. 31.32, 33. and 32, 40.

A DIGRESSION CONCERNING THE MORALITY OF THE Fourth Commandment.

BY John White Master of Arts and Preacher of Gods word in Dorchester in the
County of Dorset.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Royston.

A Digression concerning the Morality of the Fourth Commandment.
SECT. I. That the Law of the Sabbath in the fourth Commandment, is Moral,
and therefore perpetual.
FOr the evidencing of this truth, The first Argument, it was given to the
whole nature of man in Adam.
our first Argument shall be drawn from the Institution of this day of holy
Rest, immediately upon man's creation, recorded Genesis 2.3. which upon the
examining thereof, will appear so strong and clear in it self, that it might
be sufficient to convince any man, that is not forestalled beforehand by too
much prejudice. And it may be thus framed. What Law soever was given to our
first Parents in the beginning without relation to their present state binds
all mankind to the worlds end. But such was this Law of the Sabbath.

It is true that there happened upon the fall of our first Parents, a change in
the Law, Two changes of the Law given to Adam, occasioned by his fall.
which was given them by God in the beginning. The First change happened to the
whole Law, in respect of the conditions, and in part of the use of it. For
whereas of man in the state of innocence and perfection, full and perfect
obedience to the whole Law was required, 1. In respect of the whole Law,
perfect obedience thereunto being then possible,
to be performed by him in his own Person, whereunto he was sufficiently
enabled by the perfection of his nature, in which he was created, but by the
fall of Adam that ability was so far weakened, that such obedience was made
impossible to him, or any of his posterity after him: But by his fall made now
impossible, the righteousness of Christ is accepted for us.
now in stead of our personal obedience, the Righteousness of Christ, who in
our nature fulfilled the whole Law, is imputed to us for our justification, and
our obedience is required, only as a fruit of that faith, by which we are
justified. This makes so great a change in the Covenants made between God and
man, before, and since the Fall, that they are usually esteemed to be two
diverse Covenants, the former before the Fall we call the Covenant of works,
and this latter, since the Fall, we term the Covenant of Grace.

The Second change which happened in the Law, 2. In respect of some Laws given
Adam in respect of his condition rather then of his nature.
by occasion of Adams fall, was in respect of some duties commanded in the Law,
the Sacramental tree of life, and the whole use thereof, were of necessity
taken away, because the promise whereof that tree was the Seal was void, by
Adams breach of the Covenant, to which it was annexed. And the charge of
keeping, and dressing Paradise, was by like necessity utterly void, when man
for his rebellion was cast out of that Garden. Other commandments, as those
concerning man's labor, and women's subjection to their husbands, were made
straighter then they were before, but the substance of these Laws remained
still. And these changes happened only in such particulars, as respected rather
the state of man's innocence in which he then stood, then the nature of man in
general; and are therefore excepted in the Major proposition, wherein is
asserted no more but that these laws are perpetual, which were given to Adam
as a man, not as to perfect man.

This proposition thus understood is founded upon this ground of truth, God
made his Covenant with Adam in respect to his nature, not to his person.
that God established his Covenant with Adam principally in respect of his
nature, and not so much in respect of his person; so that by consequent it must
follow, that all who are partakers of that nature are bound by that Covenant.
Of this faith we have an evident demonstration, in the punishment which light
upon the whole nature of man for Adams transgression, which of necessity
supposes the sin of man's whole nature, in Adams person, in whom it was then
included: seeing otherwise we know the son shall not bear the iniquity of
the father, Ezekiel. 18.20. So that the argument holds strongly and convincingly
in this manner. As appears because the nature of man becomes guilty of the
breach of that Covenant.
If Adams breach of Covenant made between God and him, brought guilt upon all
his posterity, that is, upon the whole nature of man, then it must needs follow
that the Covenant obliged the whole nature of man, it is utterly impossible
that one should become a guilty person by breach of a Covenant to which he was
never bound. But the punishment inflicted upon the whole nature of man, makes
it evident that the whole nature of man was made guilty by Adams transgression;
wherefore the whole nature of man was bound in the Covenant which God made with
Adam, and consequently is obliged by the Law which was given in that Covenant.

Unto this argument, Secondly, Christ urges the Law of marriage given in
Paradise as then in force:
may be added another proof taken from our Savior Christ's reasoning with the
Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 19.48. about their question concerning divorce,
which they pretended to be permitted by Moses his Law, Deuteronomy. 24.1, 2. For in
disputing with them our Savior grounds his argument against the divorce
pretended to be permitted by the Law of Moses, because it crossed that Law
given unto Adam. So that all the strength of our Saviors argument against
their divorce must rest upon this Maxim. Implying that the Law given in the
beginning is unalterable.
That which the Law given to Adam in the beginning did not allow, that ought
not to be allowed: which is all one as if he had said, that the Law given to
Adam from the beginning is unalterable, and therefore remains still in full
force, so that all men to the worlds end are bound to yield obedience thereunto.

Some perhaps may object, farther, and therefore determines no more but that
the law of marriage, which was given to Adam in the beginning, stands still in
force, but resolves nothing concerning the Obligation of the rest of the Laws
which were given to Adam at the same time, whether they be of force still or
no. First, we say that seeing our Savior resolves that the divorce supposed to
be permitted by the law of Moses is therefore not to be allowed, because it was
contrary to the law of marriage given by God to Adam in the beginning, then by
all the rules of Logic and reason, it must necessarily follow, that whatsoever
is contrary to any Law established in the beginning must needs be unlawful,
because the reason of disallowing that kind of divorce, is not drawn from any
thing that is peculiar to the Law of marriage, but from that which is common to
all the rest of the Laws which were given at the same time, as well as to that
particular, namely, that the Law given by God from the beginning did not permit
it.

Secondly, if our Saviors answer to the Pharisees, wherein he condemns the
divorce pretended to be permitted by the law of Moses, then the rest of the
Laws given at the same time to our first Parents: now it is absurd to imagine
that our Savior who knew their cavilling humors by experience, would leave
them that starting hole. Wherefore when he condemns the divorce pretended to
be permitted by Moses, for that only reason because it was contrary to the Law
given to Adam in the beginning, he must necessarily infer that the Laws which
were then given are still in force, both unto us, and unto the end of the world.

The major proposition of that syllogism that concludes the morality and
perpetuity of the Sabbath (namely, Adam, which had respect to his nature, and
not to his present condition, are moral and perpetual) being thus fully
cleared and confirmed, there remains only the minor or second proposition to be
made good, which consists of two branches: Now the law of the Sabbath was given
from the beginning.
The first that this law of the Sabbath was given to Adam in Paradise. The
second that it was given to him in respect of his nature, and not of his
person; that is, to him as a man, not as an innocent or perfect man. Of these
two branches, the opposers of the morality of the Sabbath, meddle not with the
latter, but oppose only the former: affirming that the institution of the
Sabbath by God was not from the beginning. The reasons of which opposition we
shall examine after we have given our reasons for the proving of the contrary;
namely, that the Sabbath was instituted by God from the beginning.

The dispute concerning the day in which Adam fell, whether it was on the sixth
day on which he was created or on the next day; (which seems more probable if
all things be duly weighed) as also of the time when the Sabbath day was first
instituted, whether it was before Adams fall, while he was yet in Paradise; or
after his fall, when he was driven out of Paradise; is not of any great moment
to the point which we have in hand; (although seeing in the series of the
history written by Moses, we find the giving of this, and diverse other laws,
recorded before Adams fall, we have reason to think all things to have been
done in the same order in which they are related; unless we had better
arguments then mere surmises to induce us to judge otherwise) it is enough to
our present purpose to have that acknowledged, which no man denies, that the
law was given, while the whole nature of mankind was in our first Parents, upon
that ground therefore supposed and granted by all, we thus argue.

That which Moses relates God to have done, Proved by the series of the
history, Genesis 2.
that he did in the manner and order that he relates: but Moses relates that
God instituted the Sabbath from the beginning, as well as marriage, and some
other Laws: therefore it was so and then done. The words of Moses his relation
of the Institution of that day of rest, Genesis 2.3. are these. And God blessed
the seventh day and sanctified it. Now that these words Blessed, and
Sanctified, in the most proper and ordinary construction signify instituted
and annexed a blessing to the observation of it, I conceive no man will deny.
Wherefore seeing this is the most usual and proper signification of these
words, and seeing no incongruity with other clauses and expressions in the
letter of that text, no contradiction to any other place of Scripture, nor
repugnancy to any principle of faith, enforce us to seek out any other more
unusual signification of them, we have sufficient warrant to construe, and
interpret them according to their usual, literal, and proper sense in this
place.

Now that Blessing and Sanctifying the Sabbath was from the beginning (besides
the series of the history, And by the terms blessed and sanctified,
which is a stronger and more convincing argument to prove that it was so, then
any that is, or can be alleged, to prove the contrary) may be evineed and
farther made good by these reasons. First, we find the Lord himself in the
fourth Commandment affirming that he had blessed and sanctified the Sabbath day
(for so all the Interpreters render these words according to the most proper
signification of them in the original tongue) as remembering and referring unto
an act done before the giving of the Law. Repeated in the fourth Commandment,
and pointing at an act past.
Now we find in no place of Scripture, any mention of the Lords blessing, and
sanctifying the Sabbath day, before the publishing of the Decalogue upon Mount
Sinai, but in this only, Genesis 2.3. Neither do those that deny the Morality of
the Sabbath, mention or suppose any time, precedent to the delivery of the Law
by Moses, wherein God blessed and sanctified the Sabbath day, neither if any
such thing had been done by God, would the Scripture have omitted the recording
of it, being a matter of so great importance; neither lastly, 3. Neither was
any time so fit for giving this Law of the Sabbath as in the beginning:
was there any time so fit for the giving of this Law, as when the ground of
the Institution of this holy Rest, which was Gods manifesting of the perfecting
of the worlds creation by his resting on that day, was new and fresh in memory.

This reason taken from the fitness of the time for the enacting and
publishing of this Law, carries with it the greater weight, Eccl. 3.11. and
consequently, we have no reason to imagine, that God would omit the fittest
time for the giving of this Law, and defer it to a time less seasonable: As
appears in instituting other Feasts.
especially seeing we see that in the Institution of the Feasts of less
imporportance, as Easter, and Pentecost, of less frequent observation, and to
last but for a time, he took care to ordain them, when the mercies were yet
fresh and new, for the preserving of the memory whereof they were appointed.
The same course the Church took afterward, in the ordaining of the Feast of
Purim, wherein both the occasion and Institution of the Feast went both
together. Nay even the Heathen themselves by the very light of nature were
directed to follow the same rule, as all men know.

But the strongest and clearest argument to prove the Institution of the
Sabbath by God from the beginning, The Apostle affirms it, Heb. 4.3, 4.
Heb. 4.3.4. in these words. Although the works were finished from the
foundation of the world, for he spoke in a certain place (namely, Genesis 2.2.)
of the seventh day on this wise. And God rested the seventh day from all his
works. To show the force of the argument, which is to be drawn out of this
place, we must in this whole disputation of the Apostle's, begun chap. 3.12.
and ending, chap. 4.11. consider what he chiefly aims at, and intends to
prove, which is to dissuade men from unbeleefe; to which purpose he sets before
them the dangerous consequents thereof, namely, that it excludes men out of
heaven. To prove this he alleges the testimony of the Prophet David, Psalm.
95.11. who threatens the people of his time to be shut out of Gods rest, as
their Fathers by hardening their hearts through unbeleefe were shut out of
Canaan, (a Type of heaven) if they proved unbeleevers, and hardened their
hearts thereby, as their fathers had done. If it should be replied unto the
Apostle, that David in that place alleged out of the Psalm. meant not heaven
by the rest which he there mentions, the Apostle demonstrates plainly that
David in these words, which he relates, could not possibly by the name of Rest,
mean any thing else but the rest of heaven.

The Apostle's argument by which he demonstratively proves, David mentions in
that place, must needs be such a rest, as the men to whom he speaks had not
entered into; (for then it had been a vain thing, to threaten to shut them out
of that, which they had already in possession) but had a possibility to enter
in it (or else it were a like folly to threaten that as a judgment upon them,
to deprive them of that, which they should never have any possibility to
obtain.) But (says the Apostle) there was no such rest to be entered into by
them in David's time, but only the rest of heaven, therefore David in that
place, cited by the Apostle, could mean no other rest, but the rest of heaven.
To make good this argument he gives a sufficient enumeration of all the kinds
of rests, which were possible to be meant by David, in the place alleged,
(which must all of them have this condition, that they might be entered into by
men) which were three, the rest of the Sabbath, the rest of Canaan, and the
rest of heaven: into all which men had a possibility to enter. Now the rest out
of which they are threatened to be excluded, must be a rest which they had not
already entered into; But (says our Apostle) into two of these Rests men had
entered before David's time, into the rest of the Sabbath, from the foundation of
the world, in which God rested, after he had perfected his works, and into the
rest of Canaan, in the days of Joshua; therefore David could not threaten them
to be excluded out of either of those rests; there could therefore be no other
but the rest of heaven, out of which they might be excluded, because there was
no other, but the rest of heaven, to be entered into in David's time, from which
yet they might, and were in danger to be shut out by unbeleefe.

That the Rest of the Sabbath was entered into from the foundation of the world,
the Apostle expressly affirms in these words, And God rested the seventh day
from all his works. But (say our opposits) the Apostle here affirms no more,
but that God entered into that Rest of the seventh, or Sabbath day, but he
speaks not one word of man's entering into rest on that day. Nowun to this we
answer, that these particulars which follow cannot be denied. First, that the
conclusion, which the Apostle intends to prove, is, that unbeleefe, shuts a man
out of heaven. Secondly, it is as manifest, that to prove this he produces the
Prophet David's testimony, threatening men to be shut out of Gods Rest, if they
hardened their hearts by unbeleefe, as their Fathers had done. Thirdly, it is
evident that the Apostle assumes, that David by this rest could mean nothing
else but heaven. Fourthly, it is as clear, that he proves that the Psalmist by
the Rest which he mentions in that place, could mean no other Rest but heaven,
because there was no other rest left, out of which men might be excluded, but
heaven, in David's days. In the Fifth place, to make that good the Apostle
proceeds by way of enumeration or induction, and reckons up three several
sorts of Rests, which might be called Gods Rests, namely, the Rest of the
Sabbath, the rest of Canaan, and the Rest of heaven. Sixthly, the Apostle
farther assumes, that the rest which David mentions, could not be the rest of
the Sabbath, nor the rest of Canaan. Seventhly, it cannot be denied, but that
he affirms that the people had many years, ages before David's time, entered
into Canaan, under the conduct of Joshua. Every one of these particulars is so
clear in it self, that no man with any color of reason can deny any of them.
The question is only, by what argument the Apostle proves, that by the Rest
mentioned by David, he could not mean the rest of the Sabbath, for that only
branch was left to be made good, to make up the full demonstration of the
conclusion, that the Apostle took on him to prove, that by that rest, out of
which David threatens them to be excluded by unbeleefe, the Psalmist could not
mean Canaan, all men will acknowledge that the Apostle reasons thus. The
Prophet David could not threaten them to be shut out by unbeleefe, from that
rest which they had in their own possession: but of the rest of Canaan they had
been possessed long before even from the days of Joshua. Now it remaining upon
the Apostle's hand to prove, that David by Gods rest could not mean the
Sabbath, he must of necessity take up the same argument, by which he had before
proved, that he could not mean Canaan by Gods rest, that is, because they had
entered into that rest many years before. In like manner, if he will make good
his argument, he must prove that David could not mean the rest of the Sabbath,
because they had entered into that rest long before. The opposites tell us, that
the Apostles words can import no more, but that God entered into the rest of the
Sabbath, from the foundation of the world, but there is no mention made of man's
entering into that rest at that time. But how vain this exception is, we are now
to show.

If we understand these words Heb. David meant, because he speaks of a rest yet
to come: But the rest of the Sabbath was entered into long before David's time,
even by God himself, from the foundation of the world; Therefore the rest of
the Sabbath could not be the rest that David meant in that place. I grant
indeed that the conclusion necessarily follows out of these premises. But I
affirm withal, that the major proposition is utterly false, and no way futes
with the scope of the Apostle in this disputation. For it is true, that
notwithstanding Gods entering into the rest of the Sabbath, David could not mean
that rest in this place, because it is possible, that men might not enter into
that rest, although God did, and it is only men's entering into that rest, that
makes it impossible to be meant by David here, who speaks of excluding men from
entering into that rest which he there means, from which they could not be shut
out, if they had entered already, and therefore, if they had entered into the
rest of the Sabbath before, David could not mean that rest in that place. So
then the opposition lies not between men's excluding, and Gods entering, both
which might perhaps stand together; but between man's excluding and man's
entering, upon which the whole weight of the disputation lies, and that so
evidently that it may be justly wondered, that any man that desires to submit to
the truth, should not acknowledge it. If therefore we frame the major
proposition so, that it may suit with the Apostles scope, which best interprets
the meaning, it must be composed in this form, or at least to this purpose.
That rest into which the Jews had entered already, could not be the rest out of
which David threatens that they should be excluded by unbelief. Whereunto if
we add this minor, or second proposition; But into the rest of the Sabbath God
had entered from the foundation of the world; there could follow no conclusion
at all. But if we add our minor proposition, and so form our syllogism thus:
That rest, into which the Jews had entered from the beginning, cannot be the
rest, out of which those that harden their hearts by unbelief, are threatened
to be excluded: But into the rest of the Sabbath men had entered from the
beginning: Therefore, the rest of the Sabbath could not be that rest out of
which they are threatened to be excluded, that harden their hearts through
unbelief: This conclusion naturally and necessarily follows out of the
premises, and fully suits with the whole course of the Apostles disputation,
and with the scope at which he aims.

If there were no other Argument, aims in this disputation, so it will not be
amiss to consider the grounds, which the Apostle lays, for the raising of his
argument: To prove then, that David threatens unbelievers to be shut out of
heaven, which he here calls by the name of Gods rest, he lays this for his
ground, that this name of Gods rest can be applied only to three things, the
Sabbath, Canaan, and Heaven. Now these three being all members under one
general head, and distinguished one from another, must needs have something
common to them all, and something proper and peculiar, wherein they differ.
That which is common to them all, is first, that they are Gods rests, that is,
rests which God ordains for, and bestows upon men. Secondly, that they are
therefore rests into which men may enter. The difference between these rests
is, that two of them were possessed by men already, and one of them was yet to
come. Now the Prophet David's words expressly mention a rest to come, and to
conceive and affirm, that the Apostle building his argument upon this
distinction, as it plainly appears he does, should impertinently intend to
bring in Gods resting in his own person, is to confound this distinction of
rests, which the Apostle lays for the ground of his Argument, and by
consequence his whole disputation that is built thereupon.

To conclude, Heb. 4. but farther in applying it to his purpose insists most
strongly upon the opposition between the words in Genesis 2. and the words of
David, Psalm. 45. by which he makes it manifest, that David could not mean that
rest of the Sabbath, that Moses speaks of, Genesis 2. For Heb. 4.3. thus he
reasons: David speaks of a rest to come, but Moses speaks of a rest past,
therefore David cannot mean the rest of the Sabbath of which Moses speaks,
which was entered into so long before. And again, v. 5. he takes up the same
opposition, in these words. And in this place (of David) again, If they shall
enter: both in the 3. and 5. verse. the Apostle insists upon David's expressions
[If they shall enter] which he shows cannot refer to the rest of the Sabbath
which was entered into (as Moses relates) long before. Now wherein stands this
opposition between the relation of Moses that [God rested] the seventh day, and
David's intermination [they shall not enter?] there is no opposition between
these two expressions, God has entered, and, They shall not enter, but between
these two, They have entered, and, They shall not enter, there is a manifest
opposition; whereas therefore the Apostle presses strongly this opposition,
ver. 3. and ver. 5. it must be granted, that though he expresses only Gods
resting on the seventh day, yet he specially intends man's resting, which was
grounded thereupon.

Some amongst the opposites grant that the Apostle may in the 3. and 4. verses
of Heb. 4. though he mention Gods resting too, as being instituted and grounded
upon Gods resting upon the same day. But this (they say) was intended only
indirectly and by consequence. Neither (say they) does the Apostle limit Gods
resting, and man's resting unto the same time, but mentions only Gods rest,
which was indeed from the foundation of the world, but not man's rest, which
began only from the delivering of the Law by Moses. To this we answer, that it
must needs be that man's resting is principally and directly intended in that
place by the Apostle, although it be not expressly mentioned, and that Gods
resting is only named as the ground of the institution of man's rest: so that
when he affirms that God rested from the foundation of the world, he implies,
that man rested with him at the same time; seeing (as we have showed) the whole
weight of his Argument lies upon man's, and not upon Gods resting. And when he
affirms that man had already entered into that rest, it was fit for him to
assign the time when he entered into that rest, as he does afterward set down
the time when he entered into the rest of Canaan: because the expressing of the
time of entering into that rest, is that which gives most strength to his
Argument. Besides, if man's resting upon the giving of the Law by Moses, were
meant by the Apostle, it was easy for the Apostle to have named that time, as
it was to name the other.

But what may be the reason (may some say) why the Apostle in this place,
principally intending and meaning man's resting on the Sabbath, mentions
notwithstanding only Gods resting on the Sabbath day, but speaks not a word of
man's resting on that day; and proves that out of Genesis 2.2. when he might as
easily have proved the other out of the verse following? To this we answer,
that the whole course of the Apostles dispute, shows evidently what he means.
Secondly, we say that Gods rest sufficiently implies man's resting at the same
time, as being the very ground and foundation upon which the rest of man on the
Sabbath day was grounded. Thirdly, why the Holy Ghost was pleased rather to
imply man's resting on the Sabbath day, under the phrase of Gods resting, then
to express in plainer terms, we can no more give a reason, then we can tell
why the same spirit of God sets down diverse disputations in such broken
expressions, that need the supply of many clauses to make up the sense clear
and full, or why in other places of Scripture he shadows out many things, under
obscure phrases, which might as easily have been expressed in clearer and
plainer forms.

SECT. II. Answer to the Arguments against the Institution of the Sabbath in
Paradise.
TO avoid the Institution of the Sabbath, Genesis 2.3. Exceptions against this
argument from Genesis 2.
in express and plain terms, (and so distinctly related in that place, that
any man may justly wonder, that any one endewed with reason should oppose so
clear an evidence) the opposites have invented strange interpretations of these
words [Blessed and sanctified] which carry the Institution. 1. There is related
only, what God did, not what he ordained.
Some interpret them as relating an act of God, what he did, not as his command
what he appointed men to do, as if the words signified no more but this, That
God honored and advanced the day by his resting thereon. This absurd
interpretation the very letter of the text sufficiently and plainly confutes,
which relates Gods resting, and his sanctifying that rest, Gods resting and
sanctifying are related as two distinct acts.
the one grounded on the other, verse. 3. That he sanctified the day, because he
had rested therein. Besides, men, because they are most employed in secular
affairs, are said to sanctify a day by leaving of their labors in secular
things that they may spend their time in holy duties. And how can God sanctify
a day by his act of resting?
But how God can be said to sanctify one time above another; seeing he is holy
in all his works, ( Ps. 145.17.) who can imagine?

Others interpret the words, Blessed, 2. Sanctified means that he decreed to do
it only, as Jer. 1.5.
to express, not what God did at present, but what he decreed then to act and
do afterward, viz. when he gave his Law to his people by the hand of Moses,
upon mount Sinai. And to give the better countenance to this interpretation
they parallel it with another place, Jer. 1.5. where God tells Jeremiah, that he
sanctified him before he came out of the womb. In which place, Sanctified, can
signify no more, Jeremiah; Where does Blessed, signify Decreed to bless?
admit the word Sanctify, signify decree to sanctify, where does the word
Blessed signify decree to bless? But admit such an instance might be found
for that also: Again it is taken so in one, proves not that it must be so in
this.
This were a mad form of reasoning. The words, Sanctified and Blessed, in one
place signify, Decreed to sanctify and bless, where the circumstances of the
Text admit other interpretations: therefore the same words, where they may have
a better construction, according to their usual and proper signification, must
be interpreted in a sense less proper and usual, though no necessity urge us
thereunto. If such a liberty as this were admitted, we should never be able to
draw any certain conclusion out of any place of Scripture whatsoever.

A third sort there are, 3. It is related in Genesis by anticipation.
Genesis 2.3. import an institution, but that is (say they) related in that place
by way of anticipation, referring and pointing out unto us, a time when this
was done more then 2400 years after, when the Law was given by Moses upon mount
Sinai. Now this interpretation must suppose the whole third Verse, Genesis 2. to
be inserted there by a Parenthesis, and then some clause must be added by way
of supply, to make up some such sense as this: But what enforces to admit an
anticipation?
This resting of God upon the seventh day, was the reason and ground of Gods
sanctifying and blessing the seventh day, in the Law which God gave unto his
people, by the hand of Moses upon mount Sinai. But first what incongruity with
the scope of this place, or with any circumstances of the Text, in which this
is related; or with any other place of Scripture, or with any principle of
faith, enforces us to allow such an anticipation in this place, as we are
forced to admit in some other places; because we cannot otherwise find how they
may agree, either the words with themselves, or with some other place of
Scripture, without which necessity to admit anticipations were to confound all
order of Scripture.

For the countenancing of this anticipation, Moses ( Genesis 2.) having mentioned
Gods rest ( verse. 2.) upon the seventh day, had thereupon a fit occasion to
point at the Law, which being given afterward, It cannot be proved that the
Law was given before Genesis was written.
was grounded upon that rest of God, which is here related. To which we answer;
First, this conceit supposes, that which no man in the world shall be ever
able to prove, that the book of Genesis was written by Moses after the giving
of the Law (otherwise how could Moses in this place give a reason of that Law
which was not then in being?) but it seems more probable (if conjectures may
have any place in reasoning) that the book of Genesis, as it is placed first in
order, The contrary seems more probable.
so was first written. For it is manifest by Saint Stephens words, Act. 7.25.
that God had revealed himself to Moses before he went out of the land of Egypt
into Midian, and had designed him to be the deliverer of his people. Again,
that Moses, during his abode in Midian, had leisure enough to pen that history,
it is evident in it self. Lastly, that the penning and reading of that history
might be of singular use to stir up the children of Israel to go up out of
Egypt to take possession of the land of Canaan in which their Fathers had been
so long a time sojourners, and so blessed and advanced by God, that they were
esteemed as Princes amongst those with whom they lived, especially God having
so freely and fully given that land to them and their posterity, is so evident
that no man can with any color deny it. So that it must needs follow that in
settling their anticipation upon such a supposition they build at the best upon
a very uncertain ground.

Besides, 2. The pointing at the Law in Genesis had been superfluous.
it had been merely superfluous to have pointed at the ground of instituting
the Sabbath in this place in Genesis, seeing it is clearly expressed in the
body of the Law given by Moses. Now whosoever considers, what brevity Moses
uses in penning the history of the world, allowing but 6 Chapters to the
setting out of an history of 1650 years, must needs judge it to be very
improbable that he would lengthen it with needless and useless repetitions.
Lastly, all that can be inferred on it, the fairest that are produced to
countenance this fained anticipation, proves no more but this, (if all were
granted that they allege) that there may be an anticipation; but how will they
prove that it must be? and that is it which it concerns them to make good,
especially seeing there are so many strong, if not convincing arguments which
prove the contrary, as we have showed already.

Hitherto there appears (for ought that we see) no great occasion, Arguments
against the giving of the Law of the Sabbath to Adam.
or use at all of this pretended anticipation, Genesis 2.3. which notwithstanding
we must be enforced to acknowledge, if it can be proved, that the Sabbath was
not Instituted before the giving of the Law by Moses upon mount Sinai, or till
the first intermission of the raining of Manna, which was not long before it.
Wherefore they endeavor to prove that the Law neither was, nor could possibly
be given to Adam in Paradise: This maintainers of that opinion labor to make
good by three Arguments. First, 1. It was impossible for Adam to observe the
Sabbath.
that it were absurd to conceive that God would give Adam a law, which was
impossible for him to observe. Secondly, that he should give him a law, 2. It
was needless.
which to him in the state of innocence, 3. The Patriarchs till Moses his time
never kept the Sabbath.
was altogether needless and superfluous. Thirdly, they insist strongly upon
this, that if God had given Adam such a law at that time, then had the
Patriarchs been bound to the observation of that law. Now (say they) if the
Patriarchs had been bound to the observation of that law, they had certainly
kept it: but that neither all or any of them observed any such, is manifest by
the history of their lives written by Moses, wherein there is no mention of any
such thing.

For the first of these three arguments, Adam in Paradise to keep a Sabbath,
they reason thus: The Sabbath (say they) was appointed for the public worship
of God, 1. That supposes public worship to be the whole duty of the Sabbath.
as all men must needs acknowledge: But Adam and his wife could not make a
public assembly, nor consequently worship God publicly, nor by the same
observe a Sabbath according to the Law. To this we answer in the First place,
Though public worship be the principal, yet it is not the sole duty of the
Sabbath. Honoring God, forbearing to do ones own ways, or to find his own
pleasure, or to speak ones own words are duties of such an holy day of Rest,
as God delights in, Isa. 58.13. as well as public worship. And the Fourth
Commandment, which sets apart an whole day unto the Lord entirely, and
commands therein a total cessation from all our employments in our ordinary
calling, makes it evident. The sequestring of our selves from our ordinary
secular affairs for religious duties is the full scope of that fourth
Commandment, which if a single person shut out by sickness, or any other
casual accident from public Assemblies perform, he keeps an acceptable
Sabbath unto God, though he cannot join with the Congregation in the duties of
public worship.

Again, 2. Two, where no more are, may be esteemed a public assembly.
be esteemed to be a public Assembly? It is clear that our Savior esteems
the meeting of two or three for prayer a gathering together, Mat. 18.20. And
then it is plain that Adam and Eve, meeting together in Paradise, and employing
the whole day in prayer and other holy, and religious exercises, may in a true
and proper sense be said to worship publicly: so that in this argument brought
against possibility of keeping a Sabbath by Adam and Eve in Paradise, 3. It is
no good argument, Adam could not then keep the Sabbath, therefore he had no Law
for it.
the propositions are both faulty. Besides, this is no good argument, Adam and
Eve could not at that present keep a Sabbath, therefore they had no Law given
them by God to command it. The fifth Commandment prescribing the duties of
Parents to their Children, is questionless a Law of nature, shall we say that
this Law was not at the least written in Adams heart from the beginning,
because he had then no child? We think it wisdom to make laws for wars in
time of Peace, although there can be no execution of them for the present.

The Next Argument against the Institution of the Sabbath in Paradise, Adam
needed no Sabbath, neither for his body, nor for his mind. For his body (they
say) he needed no Sabbath, because that he being exercised in no painful or
toylsome labor, but exercised only in such work as might be accounted rather a
recreation then a labor, needed no rest at all or refreshing of his body
thereby. 1. Ease by rest, though it be a consequent, is not the scope of the
Sabbath.
To this we answer, that the ease of man, and beast from labor, although it be
a consequent of the rest of the Sabbath, yet was it never the scope of it,
seeing the moderation of labor belongs properly to the same commandment,
which enjoynes labor, that is, unto the Eight, as the Apostle also interprets
it, Ephesians. 4.28. The Fourth Commandment forbids labor indeed, but not so much
for mercy, as for Piety, nor so much for easing of the toil of the body, as
for the preventing of the distraction of the mind by labor, seeing we know the
body cannot labor, but the mind must needs be more or less employed withal,
which therefore at that time cannot so freely be wholly exercised in Spiritual
duties, as it ought. So that Adam might have use of a Sabbath in Paradise, 2.
Adam might make use of the Sabbath in respect of his mind.


Yea, but (say they) Adam much less needed a Sabbath in respect of his mind,
then he did in respect of his body, because his mind in that state of
Innocence being continually filled with heavenly thoughts, he could not choose
but keep a perpetual Sabbath. To this Objection we have answered in part
already, that the Sabbath requires of us not only the filling of the mind with
heavenly Meditations, but besides a total sequestration of the whole man to
the exercise of all holy duties; forbidding us to find our own pleasure, or
our own ways, Isa. 58.13. that is, take up any employment either of body, or
mind, about any of those affairs which may properly becalled our own, such as
are all our secular affairs. Now although Adam in Paradise had not in that
ease and pleasure of his in keeping the Garden, his mind so wholly taken up
with that business, as ours are now in our more toylsome works; yet it must
needs be and was his duty too to attend, and to have his mind exercised in the
thoughts of those things that he took in hand, which on the Sabbath ought to
be wholly laid aside. In one word, Adam was and ought on other days to be
wholly heavenly minded in the use of earthly things, but on the Sabbath day, he
was to be wholly heavenly minded in the use of heavenly things.

All then that can be made good in this parcular is only this, Adam in some
respects less needed a Sabbath then we do, whence cannot possibly be inferred
that he therefore needed none at all; nay, upon the same ground it will follow,
that because he being riper in knowledge, stronger in faith, and more quickened
and fervent in affection, less needed the Sacraments, or other like helps as
we do, it was not fit for him to have any Sacrament at all. As well as of the
Sacraments, etc.
Rather we may conclude, that because Adam infinitely excelled us in all these
abilities, therefore, though he less needed, yet he was more fit to keep a
Sabbath then we are, having more leisure, and being more heavenly minded then
we are. All this while we speak of the Sabbath as if it were given to man only
for his own good, whereas the principal scope of it is the honoring of God,
which was Adam duty as well as ours: So that in respect of the principal end
of the Sabbath Adam needed that Law for the observation thereof, as well as we.

In the last place it is urged that if the Sabbath had been instituted in
Paradise, Exodus 16. immediately before the giving of the Law. We answer, that
if they can make it appear that none of the Patriarchs did observe the
Sabbath, we will be willing to grant them that they had no Law that bound them
to any such observation: But it will be a very hard matter to make that appear
by any convincing argument. Yes, (say they) if they had observed it there would
have been left some record of it by Moses, who wrote their lives; as (say they)
he has left us instances of their observing of the other Nine Commandments,
but for their observation of the Sabbath day he makes not so much as the least
mention at all. To this we answer diverse things. First, 1. It follows not; we
have no recording of the Patriarchs observing the Sabbath, therefore they
observed it not.
we except against this form of arguing from Negative authority, which
according to the sentence of Logicians proves nothing at all; and hereof,
though we might give other instances, we will content our selves with one only
concerning the point which we have in hand. In all the Books of Joshua, Judges,
Ruth, For 550 years after Moses we have no record of keeping the Sabbath.
the two books of Samuel, and the first book of Kings, (containing the history
of the Church, for 550. years, and written much more largely then the books of
Genesis, and the beginning of Exodus) we find not upon record so much as the
very name of the Sabbath; shall we therefore conclude from thence that the holy
men of those times, especially Joshua, Samuel, and David, kept not the Sabbath,
when we know they had a Law that bound them thereunto? and yet we have
instances enough out of the same books of their keeping of the other nine
Commandments. It will not be sufficient to except against the instance
produced by us, that we know these holy men kept the Sabbath, though there be
no record of their keeping of it, because we are sure that they had a Law, that
bound them to keep it, but the Patriarchs had no such law; this I say is no
just exception against our instance, for it is to beg the point in question.
All that they can gain by this Allegation is, that it is not so certain that
the Patriarchs kept the Sabbath, because it is not so certain that they had a
Law that bound them to observe it. Now this is a wild form of arguing. It is
not certain, (though we prove it is) or at least not so certain that the
Patriarchs had a Law that bound them to keep the Sabbath, therefore it is
certain that they kept it not. As for that color that they make use of for
the strengthening of their exception against our instance, that Moses records
the Patriarchs keeping of the other nine Commandments: It were enough that we
have said already, that we have the like evidences in the books of Joshua, of
those holy men's keeping of the other nine Commandments. We have records of the
Patriarchs keeping the other nine Commandments.
But to give a fuller answer, I conceive they will not say, that in the book of
Genesis, there be instances of the Patriarchs observing of every duty required
and prescribed in those Nine Commandments, Not of all the duties of all those
nine. 4. And we have records of the Patriarchs public worship.
And we say that we find instances of the Patriarchs observing of the Fourth
Commandment, for we read that they worshipped God publicly, Genesis 4.26. chap.
12.8. (which that phrase of calling upon the name of the Lord implies, as I
conceive they themselves will not deny.) And I am sure they acknowledge that
public worship is a duty of the Sabbath. But hereunto they will reply, that
the performing of this public worship proves not the observation of the
Sabbath, or seventh day for that worship. To which we answer: that using of
public worship necessarily supposes a time, a fit time, and a time of Rest
for that worship, for so much themselves acknowledge to be of the Law of Nature,
And it is probable on the seventh day.
Add hereunto what is recorded of the sending out of Noah's dove just at the
distance of seven days, Genesis 8.10, 12. Surely this could not be done casually
that they should accidentally light just upon the distance of seven days, so
many times together: If then it were done purposely, why was that number chosen
above all others? was there any mysterious holiness in that number? If
conjectures might take place, we might with great probability conceive that
Noah and his children had upon those days dedicated to his worship been suing
for peace, and sent out to see whether there might be any tidings of a
comfortable answer to their prayers. These I confess are no
infallibly-concluding arguments to prove the Patriarchs observation of the
Sabbath, or seventh day, but seeing it is possible, nay more, very probable,
that Moses in this relation points at some such thing, it is enough to
overthrow the opposites conclusion which must be this; That it is certain that
Moses makes no mention of the Patriarchs observation of the seventh or Sabbath
day.

Secondly, Exodus 16.23. 2. It appears Exodus 16.23. that the Sabbath was known
before the Law was given.
proves evidently that the observation of the Sabbath was a thing sufficiently
known to the children of Israel before the Law was delivered unto them upon
Mount Sinai. For when the Elders of Jsrael wondering that the people had
gathered twice so much Manna on the sixth day, as they had done each of the
five days going before, come to Moses to enquire of him what the reason of
that strange event might be, ver. 22. he answers them presently, To morrow is
the holy Sabbath of the Lord, etc. which is all one as if he had said (as he
does afterward in express terms, ver. 29.) that the Lord gave them on the
sixth day a sufficient portion of bread for two days, that no man might break
the rest of the Sabbath, by going out to gather food upon that day. In that
place you see Moses speaks of the Sabbath as of a thing which the children of
Israel well knew beforehand, (or else he had spoken Parables to them in naming
a day, and referring the into an Ordinance of which they had never heard
before) yea neither the Elders nor any of the people so much as enquire of
Moses, what he meant by that name of a Sabbath, as they would have done, if the
name had been new unto them, but depart satisfied with Moses his answer,
without any farther scruple or enquiry. Besides, the Lord by Moses rebuking
those that contrary to Gods Commandment went out to seek food on the Sabbath
day, expresses himself to them in this manner: How long will ye refuse to
keep my Commandments, and my Laws? implying that this was a continued breach
of the Sabbath, as well as of other Laws of God. By all those circumstances
laid together, and duly weighed, it will appear that the observation of the
Rest of the Sabbath, was well known to the Church of God, by a long continued
Law, delivered from hand to hand to posterity, although in process of time,
much disused and neglected by men in the course of their practice, especially
in the Egyptian bondage.

To elude the force of this Argument, The Sabbath was not instituted till Exodus
16. And upon occasion of a double miracle. 1. The giving of a double portion of
Manna on the sixth day. 2. And preserving it uncorrupted till the next day.
there are that affirm that Moses, Exodus 16. mentions not the Sabbath as a
thing formerly known, but delivers it at that time as a new Ordinance from God
himself, instituted by him by occasion of giving them a double portion of
Manna upon the sixth day, and consequently, being a Commandment then first
given, it was impossible to be known before. Thus they make this declaration of
Moses, Exodus 16.23. to be the first institution of the Sabbath, whereunto (they
say) God prepares the people by a double miracle. The First, the giving a
double portion of Manna on the sixth day: The Second, the preserving of that
Manna, which was left on the sixth day, uncorrupted, that it might serve them
for food on the seventh day, whereas upon other days that which was reserved
and kept till the next morning stanck, and was full of worms, Exodus 16.20. And
besides the words [To morrow shall be the Sabbath] carry the form of an
institution.
And that it may carry the full form of an Institution, they render that
clause, ver. 23. not as we do, To morrow is the Sabbath of the Lord, but as it
best suites with their own purpose, To morrow shall be the Sabbath of the
Lord, that the whole sentence joined together in this form, [This is that which
the Lord has said, to morrow shall be the Rest of the holy Sabbath unto the
Lord] may carry with it the complete form of an Institution.

To begin, first, with the double miracle; the former of them which was the
giving of a double portion of Manna on the sixth day, 1. The first miracle 1.
Perhaps was none at all.
may be questioned, whether it were a miracle or no, it is out of question that
the stinting of the gathering of Manna upon the other days, was by the melting
of it through the heat of the Sun, ver. 21. Now if it were longer before the
heat of the Sun did break out upon the sixth day, and by that means they
had more time for the gathering of their Manna upon that day then they had upon
other days, what miracle was that, that the same persons in a longer time
gathered twice so much, as they had done in a shorter time before? 2. If it
were, it honored the sixth day, not the seventh.
Besides, if it should be esteemed a miracle, it honored the sixth day on
which it happened, and not the seventh day which succeeded it. 2. The second
was certainly no miracle at all.
The second pretended miracle was questionless none at all. For Manna being so
pure a food might easily without a miracle be kept uncorrupted a day and an
half, as our ordinary provisions are preserved much longer without any
corruption at all. Nay rather the corrupting of that food so suddenly-upon
other days, that being sweet at night it should not only stinck, but be full
of worms too by the next morning, seems, if any thing to be miraculous.

As for the formality of the words of this pretended institution, First, the
Original no more favors their interpretation then ours; 3. The words in the
Original are only [to morrow the Sabbath] without [is, or, shall be.]
the words translated exactly are these; To morrow the Sabbath of the Lord,
without is, or shall be. Secondly, the context, if it be well examined, seems
rather to favor our, then their interpretation: neither can it be proved, that
there lies any command at all in that clause, which they take for the
institution, And are a reason, not acommand.
which seems more probably to be a reason of the command it self. It is true,
the clause prefixed, gives notice of a command to follow, but of what
Commandment? Not of any command expressed in the clause immediately following,
but of that which comes after: Bake that which ye will bake, etc. Which is
indeed an express command, and seems to be the only direction given by Moses
from God to the Elders, the former words expressing only the reason of that
which they enquired after, why God had given them a double portion of Manna on
the sixth day. Namely, because he would not have the Rest of the holy Sabbath,
violated by gathering of Manna upon the seventh day.

To examine things somewhat more distinctly. First, we have instructions given
by God unto Moses, and appointed to be delivered by him unto the people,
containing a promise of giving them Quails and Manna, and of Manna a double
portion on the sixth day, Reasons why those words. Exodus 16.23. can be no
institution of the Sabbath.
that they might not be put to the labor of gathering any upon the seventh
day, and withal a direction to prepare that overplus which they should gather,
that it might serve for provision for the day following; but in these
instructions which God gives to Moses, there is not a word of the Sabbath, 1.
God mentions not the Sabbath in his directions to Moses.
but only upon the by. Again, in Moses his directions which he gives unto the
people from God, all that he commands them is concerning Manna, the Sabbath is
mentioned only occasionally. If God had minded to give this charge to Moses to
deliver this Law for the observation thereof to his people, he would not have
given him such exact rules concerning the use of Manna, and passed over the
Sabbath almost in silence. But it appears plainly that only the direction of
God concerning Manna, and the use thereof, was that new Commandment which he
was to deliver to the people, and therefore is fully and clearly expressed,
whereas the Sabbath as being mentioned by him occasionally is passed over in
few words.

Again, Exodus 16. there is any institution of the Sabbath at all. For, first,
2. There happened at that time no memorable event to ground an institution.
here is no ground of instituting a festival day, seeing that must needs be
some memorable event which dignifies that day, that is to be consecrated above
other days, which is a rule which God and the Church, and even heathen men by
the light of nature guided themselves by. Secondly, here is no convocation of
the people, 3. The people are not convened as they ought to have been to
receive this law.
who ought to have been assembled to hear that law that they must all obey, as
they were not only Exodus 20. when God himself delivered them the moral law
upon mount Sinai, but also when Moses his servant delivers unto them from God
the Ceremonial and Judicial Laws, Exodus 34.32. and 35.1. whereas here we find
only a meeting of the Elders, But only the Elders, and that occasionally only.
and that too occasionally, not by the call of Moses, but their voluntary
recourse to him, to enquire the reason why the people had gathered a double
portion of Manna on the sixth day, and what should be done with it. Thirdly, 4.
Here is no direction for the observation of this new feast.
here is no direction for the observation of this new feast, and without it the
law is not only imperfect, but in effect no law at all: Whereas there is a full
direction for the use of their double portion of Manna, which makes it evident
that the ordering of their Manna must needs be the only charge which the Lord
sent by Moses to the people.

Others therefore there are who go not so far as to plead for the institution
of the Sabbath in this Exodus 16. Though the words amounted to an institution,
yet they are a preparation to a following institution.
but will have these words of Moses to be only in the nature of a preparation
to an institution which was to follow. To this also we answer; First, that this
opinion is pressed with the same difficulties that the former is, if things be
duly weighed. 1. The same reasons are against that too.

2. There is no like instance in giving any other law.

3. What needs it?

4. Why is this ground omitted in the fourth Commandment?


Secondly, let them but give us one instance of any such kind of preparation
used before the giving of any other law. Thirdly, let them show us what need
there is of any such preparation at all, when the people were almost
immediately after to be prepared in so solemn a manner for the receiving of
that and the rest of the laws. Lastly, if the giving of a double portion of
Manna on the sixth day, or the ceasing of Manna on the seventh, were such great
means to win credit to this new Sabbath, how is it that neither the one nor
other is so much as once mentioned in that whole fourth Commandment wherein
notwithstanding, is so fully and largely laid down the ground of the
institution of that law, especially, this mercy being so new and fresh in
memory, whereas God in the fourth Commandment goes back to the beginning of
the world to seek out another and firmer foundation of instituting the Sabbath,
without mentioning of this at all. Thus when all circumstances are duly
weighed, it will easily appear to any not forestalled by prejudice, that in
this Exodus 16. Moses speaks of the Sabbath to the Elders of Israel, Whence it
appears that Moses mentions the Sabbath to the Elders, Exodus 16.23. as a thing
known.
as of a thing well known unto them beforehand, and by consequent which the
Jews were wel-acquainted with before the Law was given to Moses on mount
Sinai, whereupon it must needs follow, that they received it from the
Patriarchs, delivered from hand to hand as other truths and laws of God were,
and consequently by that the Patriarchs in their generations observed the
Sabbath, although their observation thereof be not left upon record by Moses,
whose task was not to write a diary of the Fathers lives, but to leave to
posterity the remembrance of the most memorable examples both of their actions,
and of the events that befell them, both for Gods honor and our instruction.

SECT. III. The morality and perpetuity of the Sabbath proved out of the fourth
Commandment.
IF this principle (which will at last appear to be an undoubted truth) were
generally received and acknowledged, that the whole Decalogue is moral, and
consequently immutable; this question concerning the morality of the Sabbath
were at an end. Now the general opinion wherewith most men are possessed (but
without any firm ground, either out of reason, or Scripture) that it must needs
be granted, that there is something ceremonial in the fourth Commandment,
either the set day, or the strict rest of the Sabbath, or both, has been a
great occasion of begetting and cherishing this error, that there is something
mutable in the Decalogue, and consequently that it is neither moral nor
perpetual. If therefore upon a due and thorough examination of all the
several clauses and expressions which we meet with in the fourth Commandment,
we can make it appear that there is nothing in that fourth Commandment that is
any way ceremonial, and therefore mutable; we shall remove a great scruple
which has long troubled the minds of many men, diverse of them much esteemed
both for their learning and piety.

Before we begin to take this task in hand, The words of of the fourth
Commandment in a fair construction enjoin nothing ceremonial neither in the
day nor rest:
can have no other sense then that in which we take them. It will be sufficient
for us to make it appear that according to the usual course of grammatical
construction, and without any incoherence or incongruity with other parts of
the law, they may be taken in such a sense as we give them. For if we can but
make this appear, that our construction of the words is as fair and proper as
any other that is given by others, the consequent of establishing the
immutability of the Decalogue is of that weight, that I conceive any man of two
probable interpretations will be willing to embrace that which most makes for
the establishing of the moral law. Which is as much as needs to be proved.
It must therefore be our care to make it appear that the sense, which we give
of the words of this law, may stand according to a fair and usual manner of
grammatical construction, and those that will oppose us, must prove on the
other side that it cannot stand.

That we may proceed methodically in the interpretation of the Commandment,
first, enquire what the scope is at which it aims. The appointing of a day of
rest cannot be the scope of the fourth Commandment.
For all Laws being rules directed to some end proposed, cannot so well be
interpreted any way, as by the end unto which they are directed. Now the
appointing of a day of rest, cannot possibly be the last scope of this
Commandment, seeing we know rest from labor is enjoined to give us freedom
for holy duties, and the exercising of our selves therein, But of rest for holy
duties,
which consequently must be the principal thing intended in the fourth
Commandment. But then it will be questioned, to what kind of holy duties this
day is consecrated. For there are many that imagine that God has set it apart
only for duties of public worship. Public and private.
But this opinion seems not to agree with the letter of the Law, which in
express terms gives the whole day unto the Lord, for his own immediate
service in religious worship. Now we know public worship takes not up the
whole day. It must needs be granted therefore, the Lord appointed that day of
holy rest for the performance of something more unto God then public worship,
and so much is expressly affirmed, Isa. 58.13. where we are forbidden to find
our own pleasure, or speak our own words upon that day, which, as all men must
acknowledge, must needs extend to the ordering of our carriage in private, as
well as in public, so that the setting apart of a whole day of rest unto God,
for his public, and private worship, seems to be the full scope of this
fourth Commandment.

Next to the scope of this Law, 3 Parts of the fourth Commandment, the 1.
Sum. 2. Explication. 3. Reason.
we are to consider advisedly the frame and composure of it, and therein we are
first to take notice of the principal parts of the Law, which we shall find to
be three. First, we have laid down unto us the sum of the Law, Exodus 20.8:
Secondly, we have the explication of that sum, ver. 9. Thirdly, we have the
reason of all, v. 11. Each of these two first parts contain three heads of
duties pointed out in the sum, and opened and unfolded in the explication,
and confirmed in the reason of the Law. The first duty is Preparation,
intimated in the word Remember: The second, the Sequestration from ordinary
employments, implied in the word Sabbath. The third is, Sanctification of that
rest, expressed in the phrase, to keep it holy. All these are explained in
their order. Our Preparation must be by the dispatch of all our Secular
affairs in six days: Our rest must be a cessation by all persons from our
usual labors and employments in secular affairs. The Sanctification of our
rest, must be by employing our selves in holy duties. The confirmation of all
follows in the reason of the Law; of Preparation and rest from Gods own Act of
Creating the world in six days, and ceasing from his work on the seventh, and
the Sanctifying of that rest from Gods Commandment, and ordaining the seventh
day to be a day of rest unto us for ever. Now wherein the strength of that
Confirmation lies, will be the maine point in question, of which hereafter.

To come now to the Explication of the words and phrases in this Commandment.
Deuteronomy. 9.7. Others there are that think it points at the Antiquity of that Law,
given many ages before, and therefore to be called afresh to mind, as the
Psalmist says, he will remember the works of the Lord, his wonders of old,
Psalm. 177.11. and 143.5. and withal some conceive that he taxes the peoples
forgetfulness of that Law, and neglect of the observation of it in the time of
their bondage in Egypt. Some or all of these senses may be implied in this
word Remember, but beyond all these we may probably conceive that it may
import. Remember implies [Think upon, and by dispatching of thy business,
provide for the Sabbath]
Think upon, and accordingly beforehand provide for the observation of this
holy rest by dispatching of all the works of thy calling, that nothing may be
undone, which providence and diligence might prevent, that might hinder thy
rest on the seventh day. As for those which conceive that in this Law labor
upon the six days is commanded, as well as rest upon the seventh, they are
much mistaken. The precept for labor is delivered in the eight Commandment,
as the Apostle interprets that Law, Ephesians. 4.28. In this place is commanded the
dispatch of our secular affairs before the Sabbath, whether it be done in six
days or fewer it is not material, as to this Law.

The next term to be explained, Sabbath is a day of rest, which only, and not
seventh, is expressed in sum and conclusion of the Commandment.
is the name of the Sabbath or day of rest, and easing from labor, (as that
word properly signifies) which is repeated again in the conclusion of the
Commandment. And it is not to be passed by without observation, that whereas
the old Sabbath from the beginning till Christ came was the seventh day, or
last of the week, and both in the explanation, and reason of the Commandment
is appointed to be one of the seven, yet God mentions not the name of seven
either in the Sum or in the Conclusion of the Commandment. We have therefore
reason to conceive that seeing God in this Law was to prescribe something of
the Law of Nature, The day of rest being of the law of nature, and the set day
of positive institution.
which is the appointing of a day of holy Rest to be consecrated unto God for
his worship, which the very light of nature teaches, and in the explanation
and reason of the Law, to add something which is of positive Institution,
namely, the proportion of the time, and the set day wherein this rest was to be
observed, he first settles that which is of the Law of nature, and afterward
establishes that which is Positive. God purposely makes choice of such fit
expressions (especially in his Law, in which he is most exact) as may best
acquaint us with his mind. Wherefore seeing this is a fit Method to be
observed by him, and seeing the composure of this Law agrees with it, we have
reason to conclude that the Lord himself intended it in this place.

The last phrase in the sum of this Commandment remains, which is, To keep it
holy. To keep holy, is to employ the day in holy duties of Gods immediate
worship.
Now to keep a day holy, is to employ it in holy actions, directed to the
immediate service and worship of God in the use of such ordinances as he has
left unto his Church, and to pass our time therein in holy speeches and
meditations. Actions may be holy, either in the manner of doing them, as when
we perform duties either to God or men in obedience to Gods will, in a
reverend and holy fear of his name, in thankfulness for mercies received, and
for the advancement of his glory, which ought to be our maine scope in all
things, 1 Cor. 10.31. And so we are redeemed out of the hands of our enemies,
that we might serve him in holiness all the days of our lives: as Zachary
tells us, Luke 1.75. which reaches to all our ways and actions. Or else actions
are holy besides in the matter or subject of them, In meditations, conferences,
prayer, hearing, reading, etc.
as divine meditations, conferences, prayers, reading, or hearing Gods word
etc. These duties or the most part of them must have a place in our daily
employments, but must be so our whole work upon the Sabbath day, as the works
of our ordinary callings ought to be on the other six days.

This then is the brief sum of the law: In the explication is assigned the
proportion of time for this rest, a day of seven.
namely, that it must be one day in seven, or one day in every week. And in
the limiting and assigning of that proportion of time, that he may show unto us
at once, not only the meaning, but also the equity of this Law, he makes a
distribution of the week into seven parts, whereof he allows unto us six for
our ordinary labors and employments in our several callings, and contents
himself with the seventh day only, which he appoints to be a day of holy rest
for his own immediate worship, which is notwithstanding not a day lost unto
us, but indeed a day of blessings, a day of thriving in grace, and a day of
enjoying an holy Communion with our God, and rejoicing in him; a day of
enjoying heaven upon earth, if it be observed as it ought to be.

To take up the words themselves in order as they lie before us, Six days
allowed for labor, whether the six first, or last, is not expressed.
it follows [sixe days shall thou labor,] which six days those days of
labor shall be he expresses not, whether the six first, or the six last,
but speaking indefinitely he leaves the words to be understood indefinitely:
Questionless the maine thing that he prescribes in this explication is the
proportion of time to be set apart for this holy rest, the order to be observed
therein he sets down afterward, in the reason of the Commandment, wherein he
leaves a rule to direct us which of the seven days we are to set apart for
this holy rest: But in this explication the chiefest thing that God sets before
us is the equity of reserving this proportion of time, that is, In this
proportion of time the equity of the Law appears.
one day of seven, for his own worship, which will be sufficient for that use,
and yet lea ves sufficient time for the dispatch of our own affairs. Day here
is a natural day, such as the other six are.
By a Day he means a natural day consisting of four and twenty hours, which
is the seventh part of the week. Shall, is as much as May, a word rather of
permission then command; God in this place having no purpose to order any thing
concerning our secular affairs farther, then they have relation to his own
worships and to the making way for the better observation of this holy day of
rest.

It follows, Do all thy work, is, dispatch thy work that thou may be free to
keep the Sabbath.
lies the force of a command, but that command is not so much to require us to
labor, as by labor to dispatch all the business of our secular employments,
leaving no needful thing undone, that by care and diligence might have been
finished in the six days precedent, the neglect whereof might be an occasion
of violating the rest of the Sabbath. Our works are the works of our secular
callings, excluding businesses which our callings lay not upon us.
By all our work he means all the work that our particular callings lay upon
us, in which God has placed us, and which alone are properly called our own
works. So that by this clause he excludes all business that cannot properly be
called our own, as not imposed on us by God in the callings assigned us by him,
and by consequent prohibits intermedling with unnecessary business, Three
things laid before us in this explication.

1 A command to dispatch our works.

2 A promise implied that we shall be able to do it.

3. The manifestation of the equity of this Law.


and overlading our selves with many employments which may be more then six
days labor can dispatch. So that in this clause we have three things laid
before us. First, a direction or command expressed to dispatch our works in
six days: Secondly, we have a promise implied, that by Gods prospering hand
assisting us we shall be able to compass our works; for he says we shall do,
etc. a word that includes a promise, as well as it expresses a command.
Thirdly, we have Gods equity in the command, who requires no more time of us,
then we may spare without prejudice,

God then having allowed us a sufficient proportion of time for our own
employments, Seventh is an ordinate number signitying one of seven.
Now the word Seventh being indeed an ordinate number, may either signify one
in seven. and so note out only the proportion of time which God reserves to
himself, (as the tenth part of an Ephah, Exodus 16.16. and the third part of an
Hin, Numb. 15.6, 7. signify no more but such a proportion of either measure.)
Or it may note the seventh in order, (as when David is named the seventh Son of
Jesse, 1 Chro. 2.15. we are to understand the last and youngest of seven) and
in this sense our opposites generally take it in this place; but in whether of
the senses it must be taken here, we are now to examine, the determination of
this point being of great importance to guide us aright in the interpretation
of this Commandment.

Those who take Seventh in this place, Ha prefixed before Seventh notes a
particular day.
for the seventh in order, or the last of seven, strengthen their opinion with
a double reason. First, (say they) here is Ha Notificative, prefixed before
Shebigni, Ha does not always notify. 2. Where it does, it points out things
by their eminency as well as by their particularity.
of purpose to point out a particular day, as that particule usual restraines
an indefinite signification to a particular. To this we answer. First, though
this particle ha do often notify or put an Emphasis to the word to which it
is prefixed, yet very often it has no notification nor Emphasis at all.
Secondly, when it does notify it notes out things by their eminency as well as
by their particularity: as if we should translate it in English, That seventh
day; why may it not signify that eminent Seventh day, Ha added to a Numerall
notes always a particular.
Yea, (they reply) but Ha added to a Numerall notes always a particular of
that number. We answer, diverse instances may be given to the contrary where ha
prefixed to a Numerall notes nothing at all. Not always* Instances to the
contrary.
The four branches of the River of Paradise, are reckoned up by the names of,
first, second, third, and fourth, Genesis 2.11.13, 14. where ha is prefixed to
them all, yet signifies indefinitely without Emphasis, or respect to order. The
Pillars in the Temple, Jachim, and Boaz, are numbered the first, and second, 1
King 7.16. and have ha prefixed, yet signify no more but one, and the other,
without reference to order. Joseph's brethren answer him concerning themselves
and their brethren, One is not; the particle ba, which is prefixed notes not
which of their brethren, whether eldest, or second, or sixth, or eleventh it
was that was not. But suppose ha, Seventh in the reason of the Commandment
implies seventh in order, therefore it is so to be understood here.


The Second reason, which they bring to prove that Seventh in this place, must
necessarily signify seventh in order, or the last of seven, is this. The same
seventh day, (say they) must be meant in this place in the explication of the
Commandment, which is meant afterward in the confirmation of it. But in that
confirmation the seventh day mentioned is the last of seven, therefore it must
be so taken here. It will appear when we come to the reason that it is not so
taken there.
that admitting that the term seventh is so taken in the next verse, that
proves not that it is so to be taken here, unless it be manifest withal that
the force of the reason of the Commandment lies in the taking of the term
Seventh in that sense; which will appear to be otherwise, for we shall show
that the strength of the confirmation of the argument lies in the term
Seventh taken indefinitely, not taken particularly, that is, for seventh in
proportion, not for seventh in order.

All words and phrases used in Arguments are not argumentative, All terms in
an argument, are not ^rgumenttaive.
some of them serve only to fill up the sense, but prove nothing at all. As for
example, Moses, Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16. to dissuade the people from making any
resemblance of God, reasons in this manner. Some are added to fill up the sense
only, and have no force of reason in them.
You saw no manner of similitude when the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb, out of
the midst of the fire, take heed therefore lest you corrupt your selves. In
this argument the naming of the place where, and the fire in which God appeared
to his people, only fill up the narration, the whole force of the argument lies
in this, that because they saw no similitude, therefore they should make none:
So it is in Gods mentioning his Rest on the seventh day.
In this Commandment which we have before us, Gods manifesting of the
perfecting of the worlds Creation by his resting on the seventh day, could not
be clearly expressed without mentioning the day in which he rested, which was
indeed the seventh day from the Creation, but the Lord proves nothing from the
order but from the proportion of the time wherein he rested. In arguing, the
terms of the proporsion to be proved, must (where there is any Ambiguity)
interpret the terms of the argument, because the argument is brought for the
proporsition to be proved, not the proposition for the argument. The
proposition to be proved then being that one day in seven must be consecrated
unto God, and the arguments brought to prove it, being taken from Gods resting
one day in seven: although that happened to be the last of the seven days, yet
the proportion of the time of rest, being the only thing intended to be proved,
is the only thing to be respected both in the argument, and in the terms
wherein it is expressed. So then hitherto we see no reason why the term
Seventh in the explication of the Commandment may not be taken indefinitely
for one in seven, as well as particularly and strictly for the last in seven.

Yea, that the very clause precedent to these words directs us to take the
term Seventh in this place indefinitely, The allowing of six days for
labor indefinitely directs to take the seventh indefinitely.
as pointing only at the proportion, and not all at the order of the time,
wherein we are to rest. First, this is evident and unquestionable, that God
dividing the whole week into seven parts, allows unto us six days for the
dispatch of our business in our secular affairs, and reserves the seventh for
himself for his own worship. In the next place it is as clear, that as the
six days allowed for labor are to be taken, so we must take the seventh
which is set apart for this holy Rest. Now that these six days allowed unto
us for our labor are to be taken indefinitely, and to be respected only
according to the proportion of the time, I conceive no man with any color of
reason can deny, seeing the maine thing that God insists on, and labors to
clear unto us, is, that six days are sufficient for the dispatch of our
secular affairs. Now if the proportion of time be all that God respects in the
six days of labor, then the proportion of time must needs be all that God
can intend in the seventh day, which he sets apart for a day of rest.

The next clause in the Law follows, Sabbath of the Lord thy God; that is,
consecrated, and dedicated to him.
a day of holy rest consecrated to the Lord thy God. Now things are said to be
Gods for the peculiar interest that he has in them, whether by Creation, as
Psalm. 100.3. He made us, and therefore we are his people; By redemption or
purchase, so the children of Israel God challenges to be his own, because he
had bought them, Isa. 43.1. By deputation or designation, as Christ is called
Gods king, Psalm. 2.6. and David a Type of Christ, Psalm. 89.19, 20. Or by
advancing or honoring, so a day may be called Gods, because he has advanced
or honored it above other days, Psalm. 118.24. Or lastly, by consecration and
dedication to God; so the Priests are the Lords, Levit. 20.26. the tithes,
vessels, etc. the Lords, for his service. Now in both these latter respects,
the day of holy rest is the Lords day, as he calls it, his Sabbath, Exodus
31.13. Both because his works have advanced that above any other day; and
besides, because upon that ground it is consecrated to him and set apart for
his service. To restrain men from violating of the holy rest of the Sabbath, it
is sufficient that it is the Lords, but to make a deeper impression of it upon
men's hearts, he thought fit to add, The Lord thy God, a dreadful name to his
people, Deuteronomy. 28.58.

This foundation being laid, No manner of works, that is, of thy calling, not
excluding,
he has a sufficient ground to take upon him to dispose of it, and therefore
in the next ensuing clause, strictly enjoins, In it thou shall do no manner of
work, he means none of the works mentioned before, properly called our own
works, 1. Works about Gods service.
or works of our particular callings. As for works about Gods service, such as
were those about the service of the Tabernacle, justified by our Savior, Mat.
12.5. Works of necessity for the creatures preservation, which also Christ
allows, Mat. 12.11. 2. Works of necessity.
(from which also God himself cease not, Joh. 5.17.) Works of mercy, 3. Works
of mercy.
though not of absolute necessity, such as was the restoring of the man's
withered hand, Matthew. 12.12, 13. yea though it be to our selves, verse. 7. they
are not to be accounted among the works forbidden upon this day. If there were
any stricter rest then this enjoined the Jews, (which perhaps will not so
easily be proved) it is not required by any restraint in this Commandment, and
therefore not exacted upon us Christians. As for the forbidding of the kindling
of a fire, and dressing of meat, Exodus 16.5.13. and 35.3. they were inhibitions
which determined (as it is most probable) with the Israelites peregrination in
the wilderness, and laid upon them by other laws; so that hitherto we meet
with nothing ceremonial in this fourth law.

The last main branch of this law is the reason or confirmation of it. No
reason annexed to any law but only to this fourth Commandment.
But before we undertake the opening of the phrases and terms in which it is
penned, we cannot but take notice of one thing by the way, that we find no
reason annexed to any other Commandment of the Decalogue but to this alone. We
find indeed some Sanctions annexed to the second, third, and fifth
Commandments, but none save this fourth is confirmed by a reason. The cause
hereof can be no other but this, because whereas the duties commanded in other
laws are either laws of nature, or at least approvable by natural reason as
soon as they are delivered, Because the grounds of other laws are evident in
themselves, but the ground of this law could not be known unless it had been
revealed.
because the grounds upon which those laws are founded, are evident in
themselves; the grounds of this fourth Commandment could not have been known,
unless they had been revealed by God himself. Indeed that God must be
publicly worshipped, That a set time must be appointed, and that it must be a
time of rest from private employments, are dictates of natural reason. But why
we must observe a weekly Sabbath and not a monthly, and why the seventh or
first day of the week rather then the third or fourth, no man could have found
out the reason unless God had revealed unto us the Creation of the world in
six days and his resting upon the seventh, by the consideration whereof the
equity of this law clearly and manifestly appears, and upon the manifestation
thereof is as easily approved and assented unto even by the light of natural
reason.

So then the reason alleged in this Commandment shows us not why God ordained
a Sabbath, is, how the equity of these two particulars is discovered therein,
that we may acknowledge this Commandment also to be just and good, as S. Paul
speaks of all the rest. Romans 7.12. yea equal and right concerning all things,
as the Prophet David speaks, Psalm. 119.128. and thereupon submit unto it, not
by constraint, but by a willing mind, 1 Pet. 5.2. Now concerning the former of
those two particulars, why God allots out such a proportion of time, as one day
weekly for his Sabbath, we have already in a great part discovered the equity
thereof in the explication of this law, wherein it appears that so much time
may be spared, without prejudice to our particular callings, which if it should
be denied, God makes farther manifest by this reason annexed, which we have
before us.

To make it appear that six days in the week are sufficient for the dispatch
of our secular affairs, one ground must be supposed, Why we may spare one day
of seven for this holy rest.
which is unquestionable, that men's labors about the things of this world, are
only for the conservation of the creatures, and fitting of them for man's use.
That ground being laid, this reason for the strengthening of our faith lays
before us the example of God himself, who created the world and all things
therein in six days: from whence we may strongly reason, that he that without
the help of man's labor, created the world in six days, can easily by man's
labor of six days support and conserve the world. If it be questioned whether
he will do it; reason will easily conclude, that the same goodness that moved
God to give a being to things that were not, will much more move him to
conserve and provide for the things that are, being all the work of his own
hand, seeing we know him to be a faithful Creator, as the Apostle calls him, 1
Pet. 4.19. Wherefore we find that the godly for the strengthening of their
faith, and dependence on God upon any incident occasion, usually have recourse
to the creation of the world, as the means to assure themselves of his
protection, or supply in any thing that they need, as Psalm. 119.73. Jer. 14.22.
unto which God himself directs us, Isa. 45.11, 12. Our help stands in the name
of the Lord which has made heaven and earth, Psalm. 121.2.

The Lord having made it appear that the consecrating of a day weekly unto God
for his worship, Why we must observe such a particular day.
gives us next a reason, why he makes choice of the seventh day rather then any
other to be this day of holy rest, even because himself rested from all his
works of creation upon that day. Now that this rest of God is the ground of
appointing this to be the day of rest, all men acknowledge, but how the reason
must be drawn out from this ground, and wherein the force of it consists, is
all the question: For whereas in Gods rest there is a double consideration, the
one of the act it self simply, the very resting of God from his work, the
second of the consequent of it, If we draw the reason from Gods act of resting,
it must be the seventh day.

If from the honoring of that day thereby, it enforces the observation of the
first day as well as of the seventh.


the advancing and honoring of that day above other days thereby: If we draw
the reason of the instituting of this day from Gods simple act, it necessarily
inforceth the observation of that very seventh day from the creation after Gods
example: But if we draw it from the consequent of his rest, the advancing and
honoring of that day thereby, it binds us as well to the observation of the
first day of the week now, as it did the Jews to the observation of the seventh
day heretofore.

Those that oppose the morality of the Sabbath, We cannot make Gods act of
resting the ground of instituting the Sabbath.
from Gods bare act of resting himself upon that day: which if they do, they
must form their argument in this manner, That day in which God himself rested
from his works, he appointed to be a day of men's resting from their works: but
that was the seventh or last day of the week: therefore God ordained that to be
the day on which men should rest from their works. Now against the argument
framed in this manner there lie two main exceptions; 1. Gods example is not the
ground of any Commandment.
the first of them is, the example of God neither is, nor can be any warrant to
us to do the like, neither do we ever find it proposed unto us as a rule which
we must follow. This is true, that Gods or Christ's examples are are set before
us sometimes as incitements to stir us up to the performance of such duties as
are required of us by the law, as Luke 6.36. Be merciful as your heavenly
father is merciful, and Phil. 2.5. Let this mind be in you which was also in
Christ: but we never find any act of Gods or of Christ's proposed unto us as a
rule to teach us what we should do. Gods actions declare that it is his will,
that it should be done, but when he directs us what he will have us to do, he
sends us unto the law and to the testimony, Isa. 8.20. Neither do we ever find
that the mere act of God was ever the ground of any law. Although as in this
particular case, (and in the institution of some other feasts) some consequent,
or something that accompanies that act, may be an occasion of an institution.

Perhaps to this some may reply, first, a law given in these words, We have the
precept first, and then Gods example to encourage us to observe it.
[The seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God] and then we have Gods
example to stir us up to the practice of that duty required in that law. To
this we answer, that we have a law indeed that commands the observation of an
holy day of rest unto God, We have no precept for the particular day of rest
before the reason.
and a second branch of that law, which appoints the proportion of the time of
that rest, that it shall be one day in the week, but concerning the third
branch, (without which the law it self is not perfect) that is, which day of the
week shall be the day of that rest is not expressed (as we have partly already
showed in opening the explication of this Commandment) but only in the reason
annexed unto this law.

Unless therefore it can be proved, As has been showed already that [seventh]
in the explication of the Commandment notes not the particular day.
Now the weakness of the reasons alleged, to prove that this term [seventh]
used in the explication of this law, signifies the last day of the week, we
have showed already. And by one reason have made it more then probable, that
this term [seventh] in that place signifies only indefinitely one of seven,
and not particularly such a certain day of the seven. The second reason which
farther manifests that truth, and makes it evident, And is further proved,
because God mentions it not at all in the conclusion of the Commandment.
we have deferred until now, and it is this; If God had intended to command
that the last day of the week should be observed for the Sabbath, he must and
would have mentioned it in the conclusion of that reason by which he shows us
the equity of the observation of that day rather then any other. Now he is so
far from doing that, that he forbears the mentioning of that name of [seventh]
in the conclusion at all.

That this which we allege may have the greater sway with us, the conclusion
of this Commandment has the very same words which we find in the first giving
of this law, Genesis 2.3. whether the words themselves were taken out of that
history I will not peremptorily define, though it seems most probable. Whereas
he precisely names it in the Law given to Adam, Genesis 2.
This is clear, the words in both places are the same in every title else, save
only that in stead of the term [seventh] in Genesis, God uses the name
[Sabbath] in this Law. This questionless he does not without reason (for God
neither forgets, nor mistakes, nor speaks unadvisedly, as men do too often:)
now what may be the reason why God makes choice of this word [Sabbath] in the
conclusion of this Commandment? This is evident that by changing the word
Seventh into Sabbath, which is of larger signification, the day of rest is not
so precisely tied to the last day of the week in this fourth Commandment, as
it is in the Law given to Adam, Genesis 2. why then should we not think that God
intended in this law given by Moses, to leave the set day of this holy rest
more at large, then he had done in the Commandment given to Adam?

Why God might think it fit to do so, And might do, because till Christ came
the Creation of the world was Gods greatest work, and fittest to ground the law
of the Sabbath upon.
we see manifest reason; for until the fall of man, there could be no day
fitter for the observation of an holy rest unto God then the last day of the
week, in which by the rest of God from creating the creation of the world was
declared to be fully perfected, which was the greatest work then done, or to be
done, if man had not fallen. But now when man was fallen, But man's redemption
by Christ being a greater work, required the altering of the Sabbath to the
First day of the week.
and therefore to be redeemed and created anew, which was a greater work then
his creation at the first, so that a greater work and mercy of God to men was
to be remembered, there was in a sort a necessity of changing the day of rest
from the last to the first day of the week, on which man's redemption was to be
perfected. And consequently it was fit that the law given to man fallen, and to
be redeemed, should be so penned in general terms, that when this glorious
work of man's redemption should be perfected, there might be a change of the day
of rest without any change of the law.

A second exception that we take against the drawing of the reason of this
fourth Commandment, 1. To urge the keeping of the Sabbath from the act of
resting, shows not the equity of the law.
from the example of God resting on the Sabbath day, to bind us thereupon to
the observation of the same day, for the day of our rest, is this; A law we
know is a rule of equity, and to give a reason of a law is to make it appear to
be so. God then in giving this for a reason of this Commandment, could have no
other aim before him, but by this reason to show the equity of this law, both
in appointing the proportion of time for an holy rest, and in limiting it to
such a particular day. Now to draw the reason of our resting from Gods resting,
Because Gods condition and ours is not alike.
shows no equity in the law at all. We cannot make good this position, It is
equal and just that we should rest because God rested. There is infinite odds
between Gods condition and ours. God might rest as long and as often as he
pleased, seeing he has al-sufficienty in himself, and is not supported by
labor, as men and their estates are, who if they should cease from their
labors too long or too often, must necessarily perish. So that by reasoning in
this manner, that we must rest because God rested too, cannot make the equity
of this law appear at all.

Seeing therefore the equity of the law cannot be evidenced by reasoning from
Gods mere act of resting upon that day; But drawing the reason from Gods
honoring of that day by his rest, the equity of the law is evident.
If we draw the reason of the law from the honoring of the seventh day, by
Gods resting upon that from all his works, we may conceive that he argues in
this or that manner. That day which is honored by God above other days, by
his most eminent works of mercy to mankind, shall be the day of holy rest, to
be consecrated to him for his worship; but the day in which God ended and
perfected the creation of the world, is the day honored and advanced above all
other days by that wonderful work, therefore that shall be the day of your
holy rest. In this syllogism the minor or second proposition only is expressed
in the words of the law, and that too only in part, for there is no more said,
but that God rested that day, not that he honored that day by his rest, which
notwithstanding is necessarily implied; for he that says that Christ rose the
first day of the week, must mean as much as if he had said, Christ made the
first day of the week honorable and memorable by his resurrection on that day.
As for the major or first proposition in this syllogism, it is a principle
acknowledged by all men by the light of nature.

It is evident that days and times in themselves are all equal, Laying down a
ground upon whcih God instituted other feasts. And the Church.
and advanced above other days, ought to be observed above other days, is as
clear and evident. Wherefore we see that God himself has taken that for his
ground of justifying the feasts of Passover and Pentecost, and in imitation of
him the Jews upon the same ground took upon them the observation of the feast
of Purim, Hest. 9.21, Yea the very heathens led thereto by the light of nature.
23. Yea the very heathen themselves, as all histories testify, have always
made the days of their birth, of founding their Cities, of obtaining memorable
victories, and the like to be days of annual observance in joy and feasting.
So that to consider the day of Gods rest, as a day advanced above other days,
and thereupon to ordain that to be a day of holy rejoicing in God in
remembrance of his great and glorious works, is to show an equity acknowledged
by light of nature in the institution of the Sabbath.

Now whereas God both in all his ways, God therefore purposing to show the
equity of this law, could not but set down the reason so as that might best
appear:
but more especially in his laws, takes special care to make it appear unto
men that they are all equal and just in all things, (as the Prophet David
acknowledges, Psalm. 119.128. both for his own honor, and withal to draw us
the more cheerfully to obey and serve him) we cannot imagine that he being to
give a reason of this law, and having so fair a ground, by which he might
manifest the equity thereof even to natural reason it self, should conceal
that, and propose another reason in which the equity of the law could not be
manifested at all. Nay farther, whereas God insists so much upon that ground,
especially in the institution of the Passover, Especially seeing he does it in
ordaining other feasts of less importance.
Exodus 12.42. it seems very strange that he should against his custom neglect
or pass by that ground upon which he instituted other feasts, in the
institution of the greatest of all feasts that ever was ordained in the Church.
It seems therefore more then probable, that this reason drawn from Gods resting
upon the seventh day, must be deduced, not from Gods act in resting on that
day, but from the consequent of that rest, the honoring of that day by his
resting therein.

Some man perhaps may reply, of the day wherein he rested be made the ground of
appointing that the day of our rest, Which way soever we draw the reason, it
still enforces the observation of the seventh day.
it is all one, because either way it binds us still to the observation of the
same seventh day. We answer, that although to the Jews it was all one, which
way soever the reason was deduced, yet it makes a wide difference in the
Commandment, to ordain the day to be observed, because God rested upon that
day, or to command it to be observed, because God honored that day by his
resting therein: Not so, for the act of Gods resting is appliable only to that
day: But the honoring of the day thereby is appliable to other days.
cannot be communicated to any other then that very day wherein he rested: but
the honoring of that day being of a special nature, may be communicated to
any other day that shall be honored in like manner. So that if the reason be
drawn from Gods act of resting upon that day, if we change the day we alter the
law, but if we draw the reason from Gods advancing of the day by his resting
therein above other days, we alter not the law when we observe another day
upon the same ground.

It may be objected yet farther, The rule thus laid down is, 1. Uncertain. 2.
Obscure.
be our rule for the observing or altering the day of holy rest, it may fall
out that diverse days being made remarkable by such events, it will be hard to
judge which of them is most eminent, and consequently pointed out unto us by
God to be observed. 1. Not uncertain,
as being perpetually, univerfally and more frequently to be observed then any
other festival day. Because it is grounded upon the honoring of the day by the
greatest, most universal and perpetual mercy bestowed on the Church.
Whence it must needs follow that the work of mercy, upon the memory whereof
that day is founded, must be such, as not only brings an universal and
perpetual benefit, but besides, the greatest of all benefits unto the Church.
Now that the works of creating the world by Gods word in the beginning, and
since of the redemption of it by Jesus Christ, are the most eminent of all the
mercies bestowed by God upon man; and indeed the fountain and foundation of all
the rest, the benefits whereof remain to the worlds end, is more evident then
the light. And of these two the later being in all respects the far greater
mercy, and therefore deservedly carrying the observation of this holy day in
remembrance thereof, yet has the wisdom of God so ordered it, that in the
consecrating this day of rest, both should be remembered; the creation in the
proportion of the time by setting apart one day of seven, and the redemption by
changing the Sabbath from the last day of seven to the first, in which our
Savior by his resurrection from the dead perfected that glorious work. So then
the rule for the observation of the day of this holy rest, is not uncertain, as
is pretended.

Neither is this rule so obscurely laid down unto us, 2. Nor obscure, because
the light of natural reason may discover it.
but that it may be understood of as many as desire seriously to search into
it. For whereas the light of nature acknowledges and teaches (as we have
showed already) this principle, that the observation of festival days, is
most fitly grounded upon the remembrance of some memorable event or other,
which has happened upon those days which are to be observed, when we read in
this Commandment, that God appoints his Sabbath to be kept upon the day on
which he finished the Creation of the World, even natural reason will suggest,
that in this institution God observes the rule of nature in ordering that for
the day of this solemn Feast, on which the greatest general benefit which
(till the Redemption of the world by Jesus Christ) had been wrought for mankind
from the beginning, was accomplished. Now that rule which the very light of
nature approves being observed by God, in appointing the day for this holy
rest, natural reason will lead us on to conclude, that when a more eminent
work then the Creation of the World is performed, it must carry the observation
of the Sabbath unto that day on which it was accomplished, upon the same
ground, and by the same rule, by which it was first ordained to be observed
upon another day. Reason easily draws particular directions out of general
rules, when it finds the grounds of that rule appliable to more then that
particular. For instance, the command for Circumcising Infants, because they
were within the Covenant, quickly taught the Church of God the Baptizing of
Infants upon the same ground, because they are within the same Covenant.

It may be farther objected, 3. The rule had been plainer if God had said, you
shall keep theseventh day in memory of the Creation, till I perform the greater
work of your Redemption,
if God had laid it down in express terms, as thus, You shall keep the
Sabbath upon that day which you shall find most honored above other days by
my most eminent Work, which I shall accomplish upon that day, or yet more
clearly, till the coming of Christ, you shall observe the last day of the week
for your Sabbath, in remembrance of the Creation of the world, and after
Christ's resurrection you shall celebrate the first day of the week in memory of
the redemption of mankind, 1. So might the second Commandment have been
plainer.
we grant that the rule had been plainer, if it had been so expressed. And
questionless the second Commandment had been plainer, if it had been
expressed in some such manner as this, Thou shall not worship me with any
worship of thine own devising, but in such manner, and in the use of such
ordinances, as I shall prescribe. 2. And the Commandment for baptizing of
Infants.
And it had been plainer, if our Savior in giving commission to his Apostles
to baptize, had exprefly named the Infants of believing Parents, as he did in
commanding them to be Circumcised. Many passages in Scripture might have been
expressed in plainer terms then those in which they are delivered. It is
enough to satisfy any sober mind, that God who was at liberty to express
himself as he pleased, thought it fit to speak to us in this manner.

We may add farther, if we observe it well, The discovery of such changes to
follow, had brought the services into contempt.
and fourth Commandments in this obscure manner, for if God had in the second
Commandment expressed himself at full, that the Jews should for the present
worship him according to the ordinances which Moses gave them, but after the
coming of the Messiah they should in stead of them use such Rites as he should
ordain. And if in the fourth Commandment he had thus expressed himself; Your
Sabbath for the present shall be the last day of the week, but after the
Resurrection of Christ you shall change it to the first day of the week, the
discovery of the changes to come in the Rites and form of Gods worship, had in
all probability bred in Gods people, a contempt of those duties which they were
to perform, at present, as being temporary and imperfect, and such as were to
give place to better ordinances, that were to succeed them, which they could
not endure to hear of, Acts. 6.14. It pleased God therefore to pen the Law in
such a form, that his people might understand out of it, as much as concerned
them to practice at present, and yet we Christians might find in it farther
directions when there should be occasion to make use of them. Gods wisdom in
concealing these changes illustrated by the policy of Princes.
Thus Princes sometimes, to keep their Counsels secret, send out their
commands with sufficient instructions what to do at present, and with farther
Commissions sealed up, and not to be opened till they come to the place where
those farther directions, which are contained therein, are to be put in
execution.

Having now examined the reason of this Commandment, [For] in the Law shows
the equity of the proportioning of the time set a part for this rest.
and showed how it must be deduced and applied, let us next consider the words
wherein it is expressed. This particle [For] referres both to our labor of
six days, and rest upon the seventh, and manifests the equity of the Law, in
requiring such a rest of us, as if we deal providently in managing our
affairs, needs not to hinder them, seeing God allows as much time to us for
the dispatch of our business, as he took up in the Creation of the world,
requiring no more of us but the setting apart one day in seven to be kept holy
in remembrance of the Creation of the world, and that too for our own comfort
and improvement in grace, and for the farther quickening and strengthening of
our souls, In six days God made all things, and therefore by six days
labor, can, and will assist thee to dispatch all thy work.
as well as for his own honor and glory.

In six days God made heaven, earth, etc. and therefore both is able, and as
a faithful Creator, will be ready to assist and prosper thee so in all thy
labors, that all thy business shall be dispatched in six days, namely,
whatsoever thy calling and needful occasions shall require to be done, as God
in six days created whatsoever was needful, as is implied in these words;
All that in them is. It has been before observed, that Gods creation of the
world is often mentioned, as a means to move men to depend upon him; and it
may be probably conceived, is remembered here to stay our murmuring at the
sparing of one day weekly from our implomyments.

And rested the Seventh day: And rested, etc. And 1. thereby established his
work. 1. And rejoiced in it.
but is mentioned here only as one of seven, not as the last of seven. This was
not a total cessation (whereof God being a continual Act is incapable) but
only a resting from works of Creation, and implies two acts of God. The first,
the establishing and settling all his works to continue in himself according to
his own Ordinances, Psalm. 119.89, 90, 91. The other, his rejoicing and
delighting himself in the work of his hands. This Rest of God was not as ours
for a day only, for he never wrought in the work of Creation any more, and may
perhaps point at our eternal Rest, wherein we shall cease from all our labors
for ever.

Therefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day, Therefore the Lord blessed, etc.
as declaring by his rest that the Creation was perfected.
and sanctified it: because he had by his resting on that day, manifested the
perfecting of the Creating of the world, all things being made that were
needful, so that there was no cause to go on with that work of Creation any
longer; wherefore in memory of this great work of the Creation of the world,
God sanctified this day, as being dignified above other days, by perfecting of
so glorious a work. Gods blessing of the day is the ordaining of it to be a day
of blessing, a day of thriving in Grace, and abounding in spiritual comforts,
a day of rejoicing in God, and his goodness, and encouraging our selves by the
remembrance thereof to serve the Lord with cheerfulness and gladness of
heart. Sanctifying is a setting apart of the day unto God to be employed in
holy exercises, as preaching, hearing, reading, praying, etc.

Thus far then we find in examining the phrases, The rest of the Sabbath was
a type of Christ's rest in the grave, and therefore abolished.


It is objected that the Rest commanded in the fourth Commandment, was a
figure of Christ's rest in the grave, and therefore is now banished with the
rest of those shadows. We answer: this typical relation to Christ, That was
accidental to the Sabbath, it was a Sabbath before it was a Type.
for it was a Sabbath before Christ was looked upon as a sacrifice for sin,
that is, before man had fallen, and consequently before there was any need of
our Saviors resting in the grave. Seeing therefore it was a Sabbath before it
was a type, it may remain a Sabbath though the type be taken away.

They will, it may be, The strictness of the rest enjoined the Jews is taken
away.
is ceremonious and abolished. The rest (say they) to be observed of us
Christians, is only for public worship, and no longer, so that the remainder
of the day after public duties are ended is free, and then men are at liberty
to make use of the time remaining for recreations, or for any secular affairs
as occasion shall required.

In answer hereunto we have showed already, Esaias 58.13. reaches to our private
carriage also. And the Law calls the whole day the Sabbath, or rest of the
Lord, that is, both commanded by him, and consecrated to him. For the whole
week being distributed into seven parts, six are allowed for labor, and the
seventh is consecrated unto God, which therefore must be a natural day, as the
other six are. To reply, that we are not bound by that Law, is to beg the
question.

But why should not Christians be bound to rest the whole day as well as the
Jews? The Jews not bound to rest but for holy duties.
Surely if the Sabbath were a type of Christ's rest in the grave, yet there
could be no type in a whole day, as there was in Jonas his three days: So the
rest of the whole day having no type in it, is not abolished for that cause.
What then? was it a part of the burden of those ceremonious observances from
which Christ has freed us? To give the fuller answer hereunto, let us examine
what rest was enjoined the Jews, that we may discover wherein the
burthensomenesse of that rest consisted.

First, Exodus 10.23. as if men after the public exercise were to sit still and
to do nothing. Was it then a ceasing from labors to follow sports, that the
Sabbath might be like the feast of the Calfe? Exodus 32.6. or was it rest from
worldly labors, to fit men and give them the more leisure to attend holy
duties? Such a rest indeed the Law requires, For which we have as much need of
rest as they.
and the Sabbath to be kept holy. Now if this were all that God required of the
Jews to rest, that they might be exercised in hearing, reading, praying, etc.
Is this the liberty Christ has purchased unto us, that we may be less godly
then they? less frequent in prayer and other holy duties then they? For if we
are bound at least to equal, if not to go beyond them in our exercise in those
holy duties, we have as much need of rest from ordinary employments as they had.

This will be made more evident unto us if we lay before us these five
particulars. First, 1. As having a more weighty ground for observing this holy
rest.
our ground of consecrating the Sabbath is as great and weighty, and more clear
and evident to us then it was to the Jews, seeing Gods mercies toward man, are
more clearly represented us in man's redemption, then they could be to them in
the worlds creation and conservation. Secondly, 2. And are as much bound to
advance Gods majesty as they. 3. And more helps then they. 4. And as much need
to prevent distractions as they. 5. And our duties are as many or more then
theirs.
the majesty and greatness of God to whom we consecrate this day, is as fully
manifested to us as to them. Thirdly, our helps and means for the raising up of
our spirits to an holy rejoicing in God, are greater and more effectual then
they were unto them. Fourthly, we need as much as they, all helps to prevent
the distraction of our minds, and to the quickening of our spirits. Lastly, our
exercise in spiritual and holy duties, is in all respects as much or more then
theirs. So that if all be laid together, the observing of a whole day of rest
for our exercise in holy duties, is as useful and as needful to us Christians
as it was heretofore to the Jews.

To clear this point yet more fully, 1 Private prayer and reading.
let us lay before us the right manner and order of performing the duties in
which the Sabbath day is to be sanctified. First, therefore all men must needs
grant that the private exercises of prayer, reading Gods word, and meditation,
which are constantly to be used on other days, are not to be neglected, but
ought rather to be enlarged on the Sabbath day. 2. Recordation of Gods mercies,
general and, Particular.
Again, as the Sabbath ought to be a day of gladness and rejoicing in God,
Psalm 118.24. for all his mercies to man in general, so it is a time of
recounting his extraordinary favors to our own souls in particular, which will
be of special use to quicken and fill our hearts with the love of God by
tasting the sweetness of his goodness, and to carry us on with more
cheerfulness and life of spirit in the performance of all the duties of that
day, both private and public.

Thirdly, 3. Preparation to public duties.
for the public duties themselves, they can never be rightly performed without
precedent preparation: David will wash his hands in innocence, and so compass
Gods Altar, Psalm. 26.6. and Solomon tells us we must take heed to our feet when
we enter into Gods house, Eccles. 5.1. and bethink our selves of the majesty
and greatness of that God before whom we present our selves, and of our own
vileness, that are but dust and ashes, Genesis 18.27. nay, which is worse,
unclean and filthy persons, Isa. 64.6. unworthy to stand before a God that has
pure eyes: and the Apostle tells us of superfluity of naughtiness that must be
laid aside, when we come to hear, that we may receive the word with meekness,
Jam. 1.21. into an honest and good heart, Luke 8.15. Meditations by which we
must prepare our hearts in our private exercises of reading Gods word and
prayer, much more in these which are more solemn and public. Again, 4.
Recordation and application afterward.
hearing of the word without recordation, meditation, and particular
application after we have heard, profits not much more then our meats do
without digestion. Add unto all these, 5. Instructions to the family. 6. Works
of mercy.
instructions to the family: Works of mercy in visiting of the sick, comforting
the afflicted, relieving the poor, etc. and we shall find little spare-time
left on the Lords day, for other then religious and holy employments.

As for the objection that the Jews are precisely restrained from going out of
their places to gather Manna on the Sabbath day, Exodus 35.3. For the restraint
from going out to gather Manna, we know that must needs be taken away when
Manna ceased, and bound the Jews no longer, who had liberty otherwise not only
to go out of their places, but to go small journies on the Sabbath days, as
appears, Acts 1.12. As for the inhibition to kindle a fire on the Sabbath day,
some conceive it respected only the building of the Tabernacle, which work
though God would have hastened, yet he would not have the rest of the Sabbath
violated for the furthering thereof, nor so much as a fire kindled in any of
their tents about that work, to which they allege, that charge of building the
Tabernacle, and of forbidding work on the Sabbath day, go both together, both
Gods direction to Moses, Exodus 13.11, 13. and in the delivery thereof to the
people, Exodus 35.2, 3, 4. Howsoever that inhibition of kindling fire was but
temporary during the Israelites peregrination in the wilderness.

The reasons by which it appears that this restraint of kindling a fire on the
Sabbath day was only temporary, Restraint from kindling a fire on the Sabbath
was but temporary. 1. It has not the form of a continuing ordinance. 2. It
crosses our Saviors rule, The Sabbath was made for man. 3. The loosing of a
beast on the Sabbath, allowed. 4. Christ was at a great feast on the Sabbath,
which could not be without a fire.
are these. First, we find not the usual clause which is added in most
ordinances, which were to continue, added in this restraint, that it should be
observed throughout their generations. Secondly, this seems to cross our
Saviors general rule, Mark. 2.27. That the Sabbath was made for man, and not
man for the Sabbath; he means for man's comfort and refreshing, for which
kindling of fire and dressing of meat may be, and are in a sort necessary.
Thirdly, our Savior allows the loosing of a beast from the stall, and leading
of him to the water on the Sabbath day: now we know, the beast might be
provided for by setting water in the stall overnight, which would refresh it
sufficiently, and better then meat dressed overnight could comfort many men.
Fourthly, we find our Savior present at a great feast, Luke 14.1. where many,
and it seems persons of quality, verse. 7.12. were bidden: now it is very
unlikely that the provisions for that feast were dressed over night; and if it
were dressed on that day, neither would the Pharisee have permitted, nor our
Savior have countenanced the dinner with his presence, if dressing of meat,
kindling of fires on the Sabbath day, had been forbidden by the law, Now why
the dressing of Manna, while the Israelites were in their peregrination in the
wilderness was forbidden, though the dressing of other meats might be allowed
afterward, there may be some reason given. For Manna it may be might be as
good and comfortable eaten cold as hot, and the preparing overnight, might be
no inconvenience at all; howsoever it is out of question that in that unsettled
condition of the Israelites wandering in the wilderness, when they were
enforced to pick up fuel, where they could get it, baking and boiling must
needs be more troublesome and laborious then it was afterward in Canaan, where
being settled in their dwellings, they had all things whereof they were to make
use for such works provided and ready at hand.

But to conclude, Howsoever such strictness of rest was not required of them
by the fourth Commandment.
to have been as great as they imagine, it must needs be granted that there is
no clause in the fourth Commandment that enjoins it, which requires no more
then a rest from our ordinary secular employments, that we may be at leisure to
attend wholly upon the duties of religious worship, that we consecrate the
whole day unto God, as the words of that law do clearly express it. So the
rest of the laws that enjoin such strictness of rest being taken away, the
fourth Commandment may remain fully in force in every clause of it. And (as it
has been already intimated) it concerns us to take special notice of Gods
expression, [Six days shall thou labor and do all thy work] by which he can
mean nothing else but the works of our particular callings, which only may be
properly called our works: for there be general works which be proper to all
callings, and subordinate thereunto, as to eat and drink, and to cloth our
selves, and to make use of the rest of the comforts of this life, by which we
are strengthened and enabled to labor in our particular callings. These cannot
properly be called our works, and are as well to be done on the Sabbath as on
other days, with this difference only, that whereas they are done on other days
to enable us to labor, they are to be done on the Sabbath to strengthen us to
holy duties.

These reasons which we have laid down before, so blessed, that they shall be
sufficient for the dispatch of our needful employments, is evident by the
reason which is annexed to that Commandment, which proves it by the creation
of the world by God in six days, a ground of faith which concerns us as well as
the Jews. Wherefore seeing we have as great reason, as great helps, and as
great encouragements by the assurance of Gods blessing upon our six days
labor, to sanctify an entire day of holy rest unto God, as the Jews had; And
seeing the express words of the law appoint the whole day to be consecrated
unto God, why should not we take our selves to be as strongly bound as the Jews
were to the keeping of the holy rest of this whole day, which we call the
Sabbath, seeing there appears no sufficient reason why we should judge any jot
or title of this law to be taken away? For as for those allegations, that the
rest of the Sabbath was a type of Christ's rest in the grave, and a part of the
Jewish bondage, how little force they have, we have showed before.

Now then if it evidently appear to all that will consider things with any
indifferency, which now by Christ's resurrection is altered from the last to the
first day of the week, is there commanded, otherwise then in a general rule
equally communicable both to the Jewish and Christian Sabbath, there appears no
necessity of granting any thing to be mutable in this fourth Commandment more
then in any of the laws of the Decalogue.

It has been intimated before, Adam in the beginning, and renewed afterward
by Moses upon mount Sinai, is an everlasting rule left by God unto his Church
for the right ordering and guiding them in all their ways.

The premises then being duly weighed and laid together, All the laws written
in the Decalogue are moral and immutable in all things.

But the fourth Commandment concerning the observation of the Sabbath day, is
one of the laws of the Decalogue.

Therefore this law of the Sabbath is perpetual and unchangeable in all things
which are concerned therein.



And so much concerning the morality and perpetuity of the fourth Commandment
in the Decalogue by way of digression.

SECT. IV. A continuation of the consideration of the rest of the Laws recorded
in the Scripture, with such instructions as may be drawn from them.
HAving now established the perpetuity of that Law which we call Moral, Adam,
the root of mankind, and that not so much to his person, as to the nature of
man, which was wholly in him, when he received this Law from God; and
consequently binding all those who are partakers of that nature, it must needs
be acknowledged that whatsoever commands we find therein, we must guide our
selves by, as the rule of our practice. Which that we may the better do, it
will be needful to lay before us some rules, All duties to God, and man are
commanded in the Moral Law.
that may direct us in the right interpretation of these Commandments.

Before we give these rules it will be necessary to lay before us this evident
ground of truth, that these ten words, (as they are called) comprise all the
heads of duties to be performed both to God, and man. This is clearly
manifested by our Saviors answer to the Lawyer that tempted him, Luke 10.26.
enquiring what he might do to inherit eternal life, to whom Christ replies,
that whatsoever duty was needful to the attaining thereof, was to be found in
the commandments, where he wills him to seek it. Now these precepts being
delivered in such brief expressions, as they are, it must needs follow that
every one of the terms in them must needs be of exceeding large comprehension.

First therefore, Rules for interpreting the Law.
whereas we find these Laws of the Decalogue penned, some in the form of a
command, and most of them in the form of a prohibition, All the Commandments
forbidding any sin command the contrary duty, and commanding the duty forbid
the opposite sin.
and in every prohibition a command of all duties opposite to that which is
forbidden. For example; in the second Commandment, which under the name of
Images, forbids the inventing or using of any form of worship of man's devising,
there is withal commanded the worship of God according to his own will in the
use of the ordinances prescribed, and warranted by his Word, as prayer, and
hearing of the Word, receiving the Sacraments, etc. And in the third
Commandment, under the prohibition of taking Gods name in vain, is commanded
the taking up of it with all holy reverence and fear.

Secondly, The Law besides the outward act requires the obedience of the heart;
but withal the inward obedience of the heart to the Law which requires it,
Romans 6.17. and the letting out of all the affections of the soul in the
performance of it, as Psalm. 119.167. the Prophet professes that his soul had
kept Gods Testimonies, and that he did love them exceedingly: whence it is that
both our Savior Christ, and his Apostles after him, both comprise all duties
commanded in the Law under the name of Love, being an affection of the heart,
and tell us that the holy affection of love is the fulfilling of the Law, Romans
13.10. implying that whatsoever the act be, which we perform, yet if it proceed
not from that holy disposition of the heart, And the use of all helps to any
duty commanded;
it is not answerable to the Law. Again, together with the duty commanded in
any Law, there is required the use of all helps, and means which may further
us thereunto; on the other side, where any sin is forbidden, there the inward
root of that evil, And forbids the original corruption of the heart with all
motions flowing from thence.
even as far as the original corruption and Propension of the heart thereunto,
with all the evil thoughts, and motions of the mind that flow from thence,
are forbidden. Thus our Savior interprets murder to reach not only to the
outward violence done to the person of our neighbor, but to the hating of them
inwardly in the heart, yea, even to rash, and unadvised anger toward him. And
he extends adultery as far as the lusting after a woman in ones heart, Mat.
5.22, 28.

In the Third place take special notice of the names which God gives unto
every sin forbidden in the Law, 3. We must judge of sins as God in his Law
judges of them; anger is murder; lust, adultery, etc.
by which we may easily judge, both how God himself values it, and how he
would have us to value it. As in the sixth Commandment, where he forbids
anger, and malice, he calls them murder: In the seventh, where he forbids
lust, and wantonness, he calls them adultery: In the eight, where he forbids
idleness, fraud, mercilesnesse to the poor, he names them all theft. Now God
we know is the only impartial Judge of all things, and we are sure he speaks
of things as he judges of them, and consequently seeing he calls the thoughts
and motions to sin, by the names of the acts of it, we learn so to judge of
our sins, not as the world judges of them, but as they are weighed out unto us
by the balance of the Sanctuary, not small, and scarce worthy the observation,
but foul, and abominable. Thus whereas men think vain thoughts scarce worthy
the least censure, David hates them, Psalm. 119.113. and whereas we take no
notice of idle words, our Savior tells us we shall answer to God for them,
Mat. 12.36. This valuing and esteeming of sin according to the foulness of
it, as it is just in it self, so is it of singular use unto us, as well to
make sin so hateful unto us, Which will move us,

1. To tremble at motions to sin.


that we may fly from it as from a Serpent, trembling at every motion, or
allurement thereunto; as also to bring us to an abhorring and loathing of our
selves, Ezekiel. 36.31. 2. Loath our selves.

3. To esteem and embrace Christ.


and lastly to raise up our hearts to an high esteem of Jesus Christ, hungring
and thirsting after him, and admiring and adoring the riches of Gods mercy in
giving him out of his free love to be a means of purchasing our peace, and
taking away from us the guilt of so many foul and abominable transgressions.

A Fourth direction for the making a right use of the Moral Law, 1. In respect
of the authority, all Commandments are equal.
wherein we are to take special notice of three things. First, that in respect
of the authority that commands, all the Laws are equal, as S. James tells us,
2. In respect of the object, the Commandments of the first Table are groatest.
James 2.11. upon which ground he infers in the same place, that whosoever
offends by transgressing of any one of these Laws, is guilty of the breach of
all the rest, because he offends against that authority by which all those Laws
are established. In the second place, in respect of the objects of the duties
commanded in that Law, the Commandments of the first Table are of grcatest
importance, according to our Saviors own determination, Mat. 22.38. because
the services therein required are more immediately directed unto God, and
consequently his honor is more immediately concerned in them, then in the
duties of the second Table, in the observing whereof, although we honor and
serve God, yet our services therein are immediately directed to men.
Consequently, infidelity, love, fear, and dependence on the creature, we are
to abhor as the sins of the highest nature, by which above all others God is
most dishonored, although the world judge of them far otherwise. Lastly, 3.
The negative binds more strongly then the affirmative.
the negative Commandments bind us more strongly then the affirmative, in this
respect, because the negative oblige us always, and to all times (as a man is
not to commit Idolatry, to blaspheme Gods name, etc. at any time) whereas the
affirmative Commandments, although they bind us always, yet they bind us not
to all times, as though one is still bound to pray, hear, etc. yet he is not
found to perform them at all times.

Fifthly, The promises and curses belong to every Law, although they be not
expressed.
and threatenings of wrath, and vengeance expressed in every Commandment, and
annexed thereunto, yet that which we find expressly set down in some of the
Laws, we must understand, and conceive to belong to the rest of the Laws, in
which there is no such thing expressed, even a curse denounced against every
one that confirms not all the words of the Law, (that is, every Commandment,
and every duty required in any one of them) to do them: And a blessing
promised to the keeping, and yielding obedience to the whole Law. Both which we
must not limit (as some do) to outward and temporary blessings, And are not
only temporary, but spiritual and eternal.
and curses, but must extend beyond them to those which are spiritual, and
eternal, even the pouring out of the full measure of the wrath of God upon the
body and soul of every person who is a transgressour of the Law, and that to
all eternity; and the rewarding of every man that yields sincere and constant
obedience in every thing which the Law requires, with all manner of blessings
upon soul and body for evermore.

Sixthly, Yet they must not be the ground of obedience;
be annexed to the whole Law, yet our ground of yielding obedience to that Law
must not be so much either the hope of the one, or fear of the other,
(although by reason of the infirmity of the flesh, both for the awing, and
quickening of our hearts, we may make profitable use of both, But subjection to
the authority that commands.
with the Prophet David, Psalm. 119.120, 166.) as the submitting of our selves
to the righteous, and holy will of God, whose we are wholly, and therefore owe
unto him, all that we can do with our best abilities, whence the Psalmist
presents his earnest request unto God, to teach him to do his will, Psalm.
143.10. that is, both what God wills, and because he wills it. And the way to
interest our selves in Gods Promises, is (as the Apostle tells us, Heb. 10.36.)
The doing of his will. Indeed as the Lord is our God, by the strongest, and
justest of all titles, both because we are his creatures, and beyond that, his
redeemed ones, so the manifesting of his will unto us, either in his Law, what
he would have us to do, or in his dispensations toward us, what he would have
us to be, ought to be the ground of our submission, both to do what he
commands, and to be what he ordaines concerning us, in the course of his
Providence. Upon this ground it is that as well those glorious works, For want
whereof all works though never so specious are abominable.
done according to the rules of moral honesty, by the heathen, who neither
knew God, nor his Law; As also, the like actions done upon the same grounds by
many amongst us, that carry the name of Christians, cannot possibly be accepted
by God, because though those things done, be the same that he commands in his
Law, yet the will and command of God, is not the ground upon which they are
done, but rather a respect to civil honesty, and often a desire to honor our
selves by conforming thereunto, so that (to speak truth) we do therein not so
much the will of God, as our own will.

Seventhly, Take notice of the method of the Law.
God before he gives any one Commandment, lays before us the interest that he
has in us, that he has purchased us to himself, and therefore we are his,
and consequently to be ordered and disposed by him, according to his own will.
This method teaches us a leston, without which no service of ours is accepted,
that all our services must be tendered unto God as duties, as we are taught to
do by our Savior himself, Luke 17.10. which as it reserves unto God the
honor of his free grace, when he rewards our services, for which he owes us
nothing, seeing they are all but debts, and duties, so withal it takes away
all our boasting, even in our best services.

Again, Joshua observes in renewing the Covenant betwixt God and his people,
immediately before his death, Josh. 24.15. putting them first to choose what
God they will serve, which when they had done, then he presses them with the
duties of his service, verse 22.23. And indeed this is the most effectual of
all motives, both to draw us on to all duties of obedience, and to hold us fast
to continue therein, that they are services to that God whom we have chosen and
set up to our selves for our God. Neither can there be an higher aggravation of
any sin against God and his Law, then this, that we have thereby in a sort
cast off Gods yoke, and denied the Lord to be our God.

This foundation being once laid, which we may hold communion and fellowship
with him, which he appoints to be only in such ordinances as himself has
established, and no other way expecting blessings from him, and rendering our
services to him in them alone. In the third Commandment, God requires us to
make public profession of this Covenant that we have made with God, but still
in sincerity and uprightness of heart, always mentioning his name, whether by
way of attestation in an oath, or upon any other occasion, with such reverence
and fear as becomes the Majesty of so great and holy a God. The fourth
Commandment appoints the time, not only of meeting together in public, for
Gods worship, but besides that of sequestring our selves from al worldly
employments, that we may enjoy an holy communion with God, in those things that
are spiritual and heavenly.

The same method that the Lord uses in setting down the Commandments of the
first Table, First, he establishes authority, which is the bond, and
foundation of civil society, in the fifth Commandment. Secondly, he provides
for the safety of men's persons, forbidding murder, or any wrong or hurt
tending thereunto, in the sixth. Thirdly, in the seventh Commandment, under
the name of adultery, besides the prohibiting of all uncleanness in the
propagation of posterity, the Lord forbids the inordinate use of any creature,
as meats, and drinks, etc. Fourthly, the eight Commandment provides for the
support of community by honest labor, and discreet and charitable distribution
(after the necessities of our selves, and ours are supplied) of the profits of
our labors for the relief of our neighbors wants. Fifthly, in the ninth
Commandment God establishes truth among men, without which commerce in civil
society cannot stand. Lastly, in the tenth he settles propriety in such things
as God by his dispensation has shared and allotted out unto every man apart,
so that no man may so much as in his thoughts reach out after any thing that an
other man possesses by a just title, but may content himself with his own
portion.

Eighthly, The Laws of God, and they only, bind the conscience.
and not only by the power of the commander. So that those Laws which are given
by God, being once made known unto us, we are bound to acknowledge them to be
just and holy, (as the Psalmist does,) Ps. 119.39.128, 140. as manifesting the
will of God which is the rule of righteousness and holiness, and upon that
ground to embrace them, and submit unto the^, and to esteem our selves
unrighteous, and wicked, if we swerve from them. But as for the laws of men,
though we are bound to submit unto them, because they have upon them the stamp
of that authority, which God has established and set over us, yet neither are
we bound to judge the Laws themselves to be righteous, and holy, nor
consequently to esteem our selves unholy and wicked if we yield not obedience
unto them, unless withal we despise that authority that comma^ds them, or be
an occasion of disturbing the public peace, for the conservation whereof the
authority, and power of the Magistrate was ordained.

Lastly, Our subjection to the law must be, 1. Voluntary. 2. Upon knowledge.
must necessarily have these four conditions. In the first place our
subjection thereunto must be every way free, and voluntary, such as the Prophet
David professes his was, Psalm. 119.30, 173. In the second place that it may be
so, this free choice of ours must be firmly grounded upon the clear, and
distinct knowledge, of the justice and equity, Psalm. 119.128. of the purity and
holiness, Psalm. 119.140. of the absolute perfection, Psalm. 19.78, 119, 96.
yea, farther of the goodness of those Laws, and judgments, Romans 7.12, 16.
Psalm. 119.39. Thirdly, this obedience must be constant, 3. Constant and
perpetual.
both in the duration of it for ever, Psalm. 119.112. and in the continuation of
it without interruption, Psalm. 119.117. and that not only in our steps, (which
yet we must desire to have well ordered, Psalm. 119.133.) but in the whole
course of our ways, 4 Exercised, 1. With all our strength. 2. Mixed with
faith, and spring from love.
Psalm. 119.5, 59. Fourthly, our obedience to this Law if it shall be accepted,
requires two qualifications: first, that in the practice thereof we put forth
the uttermost of our strength and abilities of our souls, with holy David,
Psalm. 119.34, 106.131. which God requires, Deuteronomy. 10.12. and 11.13. Secondly,
that we mix it with faith, without which, it is impossible to please God, Heb.
11.6. and love, which is the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13.10.

Now let all that we have spoken be laid together: first, that the Law is of so
large extent, that it regulates not only men's outward actions, but besides the
very inward thoughts of the heart, and that so far that it prescribes a rule to
the very first motions that arise therein, though they be not seconded either
with deliberation, or consent; nay, beyond all that it exacts rectitude and
uprightnes in the very frame and disposition of the heart, commanding not only
consent unto the law, but withal practice answerable to the rules thereof.
Secondly, that it strictly requires the putting forth of all the strength, and
the utmost ability of all the faculties of soul, and that in every part of
obedience, yea and so far that it requires, that both in the substance of the
duty, and in the manner of performance, and in the end at which we aim, we
come fully home to that measure of perfection, that the law requires. And
lastly, that it lays an everlasting curse upon every one that comes short of
the full performance of every thing contained in the law. Let (I say) all these
be laid together, and seriously pondered in the heart, and it will easily be
discovered, that, considering the weakness of our present condition, by which
the fulfilling of the law is made utterly impossible to us, one of the
principal uses of the law must needs be that which the Apostle says before
us, Gal. 3.24. to be a Schoolmaster to lead us and drive us to Christ, to seek
from him that righteousness which may justify us before God, which we have
not in, or of our selves, and that satisfaction by which he fully discharged
our debt, which he took upon himself, when he made his soul a sacrifice for
our sins, and thereby wholly freed us from that curse of the law, which our
disobedience thereunto had brought upon us.

So then we see that the moral law has a double use unto us: A double use of
the moral law. 1. To be our guide, and rule to walk by.
The first to serve for a rule to guide us in the whole course of our practice,
(in which respect holy David used it as a lanthorn to his feet, and a light
unto his steps, Psalm. 119.105.) unto which we are to come as near as possibly
we are able, considering our ways that we may turn our feet to Gods
testimonies, Psalm. 119.59. and using our uttermost endeavors to make our
practice fully conformable thereunto, laying those judgments always before
us, Psalm. 119.30. calling our selves daily to account, and laying all our
actions to that perfect rule which will easily discover unto us our errors and
failings in all the course of our conversation, which when we have bewailed in
the bitterness of our spirits, and taken shame to our selves for our gross
and manifold neglects, our hearts are kept in a low frame, and we are fitted to
walk humbly before our God with reverence and holy fear, and in all meekness
toward our brethren, and are withal moved to engage our selves by new
purposes and promises, to walk more faithfully, and watchfully with God for
time to come. 2. To show us the great need of Christ, and to drive us to him.
The second use of the Moral law unto us, is, to show us the great need of
Christ by whose righteousness only (and not by our own) we are justified
before God, and by his satisfactions and sufferings are delivered from the
wrath to come: By the consideration whereof we are brought to prize and value
Christ above all things in the world, to use all endeavors to get a sure
interest in him, although it should be with the loss of all things besides,
and to cleave fast unto him who is our life, living in him by faith, (as the
Apostle speaks, Gal. 2.20.) giving up our selves to live wholly to him, who
has died for us, and redeemed us unto himself, that we might serve him in
holiness all our days.

Thus far then of the Moral law, Of Laws ceremonial.
the next kind of laws which we are to consider, are those which we call
Ceremonial, because they prescribed the rules of those ceremonies, which God
appointed to be used in his worship by the Jews until the coming of Christ, of
whom many of them were shadows. Now wholly taken away in use of them.
Now although all those rites and ordinances are by Christ's coming wholly
taken away, so that we are no longer obliged to observe any of them in the
worship of God, nor indeed can use many of them, without the denying of Christ's
coming in the flesh: notwithstanding seeing it has pleased the Lord to leave
both them, and the Judicial laws upon record, amongst those holy writings
which he has thought fit to preserve, and to commit unto the Church to be kept
for posterity, to the end of the world; we cannot conceive that he has taken
so much care to preserve them in vain, nor indeed for any other end then that
which is the scope of the rest of the Scriptures, Yet may they be of use to us
in reading them.
that they might be for our learning and instruction. What instructions
therefore we may gather to our selves by reading these laws, we are now to
consider. And that the rather, because many men upon this opinion and
supposition, that these laws are now utterly abolished to us Christians, 1. In
that they were shadows of Christ, it proves that from the beginning there was
no salvation but in his name.
as containing those things that concern them not, or at least read them in
such a perfunctory manner, without searching into them, that they receive no
profit, nor instruction by them at all.

That we may therefore show what instructions the reading of the ceremonial
law may yield us, we must first take notice that these ceremonies may be ranked
under two heads; For they are either figures that represented to the Jews
Christ to come, as did their Passover, sacrifices, scapegoat, etc. or they
were outward shadows of inward sanctification, such as were many of their
washings, separating, and cleansing of leapers, etc. As for the former sort of
these, which under diverse types point us out Christ to come, we are more
particularly to observe that they represent him as a sacrifice for sin, a lamb
slain from the beginning of the world; the scapegoat sets out the fruit of his
suffering, the utter removing from us, carrying away our sins into the
wilderness, that they may never appear nor be remembered against us any more:
the like representations we have in many of the rest. By which we learn that as
from the beginning there was no other name by which men might be saved but only
the name of Jesus Christ, promised to our first Parents, expected by the
Patriarchs, and both to them after they were formed into a state, represented
many ways although under figures and shadows, so they were to expect salvation
by him no other way but by his death, nor any other salvation then by taking
our sins upon him, and thereby making our peace with God his Father. This
consideration is a great means to strengthen our faith, when we are compassed
with so great a cloud of witnesses, testifying that truth which we believe, in
all ages from the beginning.

The second sort of ceremonies are such as are under the figures of washings,
2. As under legal washing sanctification is shadowed, we are taught to cleanse
our selves in drawing near unto God.
legal separations and purifications, and the like represented to the Jews,
that inward purity and cleansing of the heart, which God requires in all his
people, especially those that draw near unto him in the performance of such
duties of his worship as he has commanded: unto this the Psalmist alludes in
that expression of his, Psalm. 26.6. as likewise does the Prophet, Isa. 1.16.
Now although we are freed from those outward ceremonies and the observation
thereof; notwithstanding, seeing we are every way as much bound as the Jews
ever were, to labor after inward holiness, and the cleansing of our selves
from all filthiness both of the flesh and of the spirit, and the keeping of
our hearts and consciences pure and undefiled, we may and ought by the reading
of these laws to be stirred up to the practice of that inward duty of
sanctification, which those outward ceremonies represented; especially when we
draw near unto God in those holy exercises of prayer, that we may lift up holy
hands, as we are exhorted, 1 Timothy 2.8. and in hearing, purging out of all
naught inesse and superfluity of malitiousnesse, as we are warned, Jam. 1.2.
that we may receive the word with meekness, into honest and good hearts, Luke
8.15. in which only it is fruitful, and so in other like duties.

In general all those ceremonies of what kind soever, 3. The burthensomnesse
of those ceremonies may encourage us to more cheerfulness in our more easy
services:
whether types of Christ, or shadows of inward holiness, being every way so
burdensome, as Saint Peter affirms, Act. 15.10. both in respect of toilsome
labor, and of the great charges and expense about them: And when all was done,
being so dark and obscure that the Children of Israel could not look unto the
end of that which is abolished, (as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 3.13.) that
whole frame of service and worship wherein the Jews were exercised, being
compared with those ordinances which Christ has left unto us, so easy, so
cheap, so few in number, and yet so plain, that now we behold as with open face
the glory of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.13, 14. the reading of that law of ceremonies,
and the comparing of their manner of worship in them with ours, may teach us
two things: Acknowledging thankfully the liberty purchased to us by Christ;
First, to raise up our hearts to a thankful acknowledgement of Gods great
mercy to us, who has been pleased by Jesus Christ, to take off that heavy yoke
from our shoulders, and to set us at liberty in comparison of them, Galat. 5.1.
which should be a great inducement unto us, not only to bear, but to take up
that easy yoke (as he himself calls it, Matthew. 11.29.) and to be constant in
the cheerful use of those holy and quickening ordinances, which Christ has
left unto his Church, and that without any weariness at all, or any murmuring
at our condition.

Secondly, And bewailing our blindness in this clear sunshine of the Gospel,
but had not the things themselves, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 10.1. and even
those shadows too, but in carnal ordinances, as they are called, Heb. 9.10.
whereas we now have the things themselves, and those also represented unto us
in a more spiritual way: Let it be in the reading of those ordinances, and
comparing them with the writings of the Evangelists and Apostles (wherein both
Christ's himself, and the things freely given us by God in him, are so fully and
clearly set before us, that he that runs may read them) be an effectual means
to move us to reflect upon our selves, that bewailing our blindness in so
clear a light, shining out unto us like the Sun in his strength, and our
deadness of heart in the use of these spiritual and quickening means which the
Lord has so graciously afforded unto us, May be stirred up to labor for more
knowledge as having more effectual means to obtain them.
we may with all earnestness and constancy labor to attain to a greater
measure of knowledge, faith, and of every other grace, and unto more
fruitfulness in every good work, especially unto more life and fervency of
affection in the duties of Gods worship.

One thing more it may be fit for us to take into consideration in the reading
of the ceremonial law, which is this; 5. Though we use not the ceremonies
themselves, yet we may draw rules from them for our direction.
Howsoever those ceremonies be abolished, yet wheresoever they are directed to
an end, which is common to us with them there, though we observe not the
ceremony it self, yet we from them draw a rule which may be of use unto us in
the duties of our worship: As for example, our Ordinances and the Jewish agree
in this, that as they are holy, so they ought to be kept holy, and free from
pollution, by excluding unclean persons from the use of them. The care of this
under the law was committed to the Priests who had the charge of the holy
things, and are therefore justly taxed for neglect of their duty in not keeping
strangers and uncircumcised persons from the sanctuary, and from those holy
things that were offered therein, Ezekiel. 44.7, 8. Now seeing our ordinances are
in all respects as holy as those of the Jews were, the charge of keeping their
holy things undefiled, cannot but extend unto us that are Christians. And
seeing that charge was part of the office of the Leviticall Priesthood, unto
which our Ministry under the Gospel succeeds; how can we deny that the care of
keeping our Sacraments, and other ordinances from pollution by the promiscuous
admission of unworthy persons to partake of them with us, ought to be a
special part of the care of the Ministers under the Gospel, as it was of the
Priests under the law?

Having then hitherto discovered what instructions we may draw out unto our
selves from the consideration of the ceremonial Law in general, therein, as
being a work not altogether so necessary, nor altogether suitable to that
brevity that we aim at in this short Treatise. Thus much only is fit to be
intimated by the way, that where the signification of those ceremonious shadows
is plain and evident, it will be both a delightful and profitable exercise, to
take special notice both of the things signified by them, and of the shadows
themselves that represent them.

In the last place we are to take into consideration those laws which we call
Judicial, Of the Judicial laws given by Moses,
given by God unto the Jews for the ordering of their civil State, which are
but deductions out of the moral law applied and fitted to the present State of
the Jews, and by consequence binding no other State to the observation of them,
but that alone; yea now, Which by the dissolution of the Jewish State are made
void:
that State to which they were given is utterly dissolved, quite made void and
taken away. Notwithstanding, seeing these laws as well as the ceremonial, are
left upon record unto the Church of God, Yet being left upon record unto us, we
may draw from them some directions for our selves.
we are to judge of those as well as we have done of them, that they are
preserved unto us for some special use (as the Apostle tells us, that
whatsoever things were written before time were written for our learning, Romans
15.4.) the rather, because we know that God has suffered some writings of holy
men, as Iddoes History, 2 Chronicles. 13.22. and Henochs Prophecy, Jude 14. to
perish, as not esteeming them so necessary for the use of the Church, as those
books which are preserved and left unto us to this day.

Let us therefore enquire what instructions we may gather unto our selves, 1.
We must acknowledge that God has a special hand in civil government.
Not to insist upon particulars, out of the consideration of them in general
there will arise these four observations: First, in that God took so much care
for his own people, as not only to give them rules for his own worship, but
besides to leave with them directions and laws for the ordering of their civil
affairs, we may take notice that even the disposing of civil government
belongs unto the Lord himself, by whom Kings reign and Princes decree justice,
Prove. 8.15, 16. and the Apostle tells us, that the powers that be are ordained
of God, Romans 13.1. Neither are the rulers only from him, but the government
also; as they judge by him, so he judges among them, Psalm. 82. and howsoever
men seek the Rulers favor, yet every man's Judgment comes from the Lord, Prove.
29.26.

It is true that in this the Jews had a peculiar privilege above any nation on
the earth, Psalm. 147.20. under which name Moses comprehends both the Judicial,
and Ceremomiall Law, Deuteronomy. 5.31. Notwithstanding we have sufficient warrant,
that the Lord has the same care of his Church in any State, that he had of the
Jews then; so that the Laws in any Nation, as far as they are just and
equal, are to be esteemed the Laws of God, and the judgments executed by
them, come from the Lord. Whence we are taught, as to pray unto God for those
that are in authority, that we may lead a peaceable life under them, 1 Timothy
2.2. So when Rulers so govern, that the righteous may flourish in abundance of
Peace, (as it shall be in Christ's Kingdom, Psalm. 72.7.) that they that do
well may have praise, and wrath may be executed upon those that do evil, Romans
13.3, 4. the honor and praise for such agreement must be returned to God
alone.

A Second Rule that we may frame unto our selves out of the consideration of
the judicial Law, 2. All lawmakers must ground their laws upon Moral Precepts
as God does his.
arises from the precedent that God himself has given us, in the framing of
that Law; the precepts whereof are but so many deductions out of the Moral
law, applied unto that state of the Jews. Whence all lawmakers may take a
pattern in making their laws, to square them out by no other rule, then that
which God himself observed in the making of his Laws for his own people. So
that although States in making their Laws may make use of Christian Prudence,
in applying them to times, places, persons, and emergent occasions; yet we must
be sure that all such laws must have the Moral law for their foundation, which
being right and equal in all things, Psalm. 119.128. is withal the fountain
of all justice and equity.

A Third use which we may make of the consideration of the Judicial Law, 3.
Though those laws bind us not in particular, yet they do in the general
grounds of equity on which they are founded.
is to set it before us as a Rule to guide us by, although not in the
particulars thereof in which it is applied to the Jewish state, yet in the
general grounds of equity, whence those particulars are deduced, and whereat
they aim. For example, the Lord commands his people to make battlements about
their houses, Deuteronomy. 22.8. the reason whereof he expresses in the same place,
was the preventing of danger to men's lives, if any should fall from thence in
walking upon the roof thereof, unless there were some such means to prevent
it. Now although we have no cause in building our houses to build such
battlements about them, seeing our houses being not slat-roofed as theirs were,
have no such walks on the tops of them, from which men falling might endanger
their lives, yet we are by the scope and end at which the law aims, taught in
general to use the best means to prevent all danger to our neighbors person,
which our care and providence might foresee.

Lastly, people, we can do no less then endeavor, to bring our Civil
Government as near as may be unto that, in all Cases wherein our State, 4. We
must endeavor to bring our civil government as near as we can to that
pattern.
and theirs agree. As for instance, whereas the Lord thinks it sufficient to
punish simple theft with restitution of double or four fold, Exodus 22.1. we
may do well to consider whether our laws be not too strict in punishing bare
theft, (at least in women) with death without remedy. On the other side seeing
God appoints death to be the punishment of adultery, Levit 20.10. Deuteronomy. 22.22.
we have just cause to think our laws defective that pass it over with a
lighter censure. For who can better judge of the quality of offenses, and
punishments fit for the restraint of them, then God himself? Neither can we
excuse our selves by this, that those laws being Judicial are now taken away
and made void unto us, seeing where our case is the same (as adultery and
theft are the same in what state so ever) there our rules of judgment in all
equity ought to be the same.

In general it will be very needful to observe carefully the equity and
righteousness of all these laws, as well Judicial as Moral, 5. In those as
well as in the Moral laws, we must take notice of Gods equity and justice.
as the Psalmist acknowledges that all the Testimonies which God has
commanded are righteous, and very faithful, Psalm. 119.138. Right concerning
all things: ver. 128. that we may thence conclude that he is a righteous God
whose judgments are upright, Psalm. 119.137. a God without iniquity, just, and
upright, Deuteronomy. 32.4. and may with the more care and diligence endeavor to
bring both our hearts and practice to a full conformity to those just, and
equal Commandments, both in our general and particular callings, seeing the
Lord in all his ordinances aims only at that end, as is evident by all those
Laws wherein there is nothing prescribed but equity and justice.

Of those subjects or matters which the Scripture handles,

Now for the first of these, The principles or faith are plain.
they describe unto us both God himself, and his Son Jesus Christ, and the
things which are freely given unto us by God in him, as the Apostle terms
them, 1 Cor. 2.12. and are for the most part of them expressed in so clear and
plain terms, and therefore so easily understood, according to the literal
sense of them, that being in themselves rules of faith, as the Commandments
are rules of practice, any man that reads and observes them carefully, may
easily without further direction discover what they teach us. Only because they
are in themselves of a spiritual nature, things that neither eye has seen,
nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, 1 Cor. 2.9. (he
means a natural man, who can neither comprehend, nor much less approve them,
1 Cor. 2.14.) they need a light above nature, to enable us to comprehend them
as we ought. But being spiritual, in reading them we must 1. Deny our own
wisdom;
Wherefore we are seriously to be exhorted, to come to the reading of them with
humble minds, wholly laying aside, and denying our own wisdom, and with
earnest prayers begging at Gods hand the light of his Spirit, for the revealing
unto us those wonderful Mysteries, (as David prays that God would open his
eyes, 2. Beg the help of the Spirit to reveal them to us spiritually.
that he might behold wondrous things out of his Law, Psalm. 119.18.) and that
not only to discover them unto us in a rational way, but to manifest them unto
us spiritually, that we may taste, and see the things that God has given us (as
the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 34.8.) which is the only means to affect the heart,
as the sight of Christ's day filled Abraham's heart with joy, John 8.36.

In the next place for the Prophesies, In the Prophesies observe,
(in which the Law with the Sanctions thereof is applied to the state of the
Church, as it was in the times of those Prophets) the first thing to be
observed in them is the answerableness of Gods dispensations in the Government
of his people, 1. That Gods dispensations to his Church are answerable to his
Law.
to the Law that he gave them, whereof the Prophet Daniel takes special
notice, Dan. 9.13. This observation both justifies God, when he is found, not
to go beyond the conditions of the Covenant, which he has made with his
people, and consequently to be just even in his chastisements and judgments
which he brings upon his own, Neh. 9.33. And besides is a great means to awe
the hearts of his servants the more with the terror of Gods judgments, when
they observe that Gods threatenings are not vain words, but are made good in
real performances, as the treading down, and putting away of the wicked like
dross, caused David to be afraid of Gods judgments, Psalm. 119.118, 119, 120.

Secondly, 2. Gods unwillingnesse to grieve his people, forewarning them of the
evils to come;
and tenderness of their good, and unwillingnesse to grieve them, Lam. 3.33.
Hos. 11.8, 9. manifested by sending his Prophets both to reduce them to
obedience, by counsel and fair means, from their wicked ways, wherein they
walked contrary to God, (as Moses terms it, Levit. 26.23, 40.) and withal to
warn them of the danger that hung over their heads, if they persisted in their
rebellious courses. And indeed upon this ground God justifies both his
compassion toward his people, and the righteousness of his judgments in
taking vengeance even upon his own people for their rebellions, from which
neither experience, nor advice and counsel could reclaim them, nor any other
means, but the pouring out of the fury of his wrath upon them, 2 Chronicles. 36.15,
16, 17. And aiming at their good in the judgments that he brings upon them.
which yet withal he does both in respect to their good, and purging out of
their dross in the furnace of afflictions, Isa. 1.15. as also to his own
honor, much impeached by his peoples evil courses, 2 Samuel 12.14. for which if
he should forbear to take vengeance on them, he might be judged partial, or
an approver of evil like unto wicked men, as God himself speaks, Psalm. 50.21.

Thirdly, 3. In pointing out particularly the kinds, the time, and instruments
of such judgments God manifests. 1. That they come not casually, but were the
strokes of his hand. 2. That they were certain and already prepared.
his judgments against his people for their rebellions against him, but
withal foretells the times, the instruments, the manner and measure of these
calamities, which he threatens to bring upon then; partly, that they might
acknowledge those sad events to be not so much the effects of the power and
rage of men, as of the righteousness of a just God, rewarding them (as he does
all men) according to their deeds: and partly to assure his People of the
certainty of those judgments threatened against them, set out before their eyes
with the whole manner and order of Gods proceeding therein, with all the events
that should follow, as being prepared and decreed by God already. These
Prophesies then thus answered with proportionable effects give us sufficient
ground to conclude, that in the judgments executed by God upon his Church,
nothing is left to chance or second causes, but the work is ordered by the
wisdom and counsel of God beforehand, (as it was in the crucifying of our
Savior Christ, Acts 4.18.) the consideration whereof may both keep us from
murmuring either at the instruments, or events of whatsoever befalls us, as it
did David, Ps. 39.9. 2 Samuel 16.10. and besides may raise up our hearts to
expect a comfortable issue of the work, how unpleasant soever it seems at
present, because God has the managing of it, who cannot fail in bringing any
work that he takes in hand to a good issue in the end.

Fourthly, 4. In these general afflictions yet God takes special care of his
faithful servants, 1. Either sparing them;
wherein God seems to power out the fury of his wrath upon his people, yet he
takes special care of such as are faithful in his Covenant, whom he makes up
amongst his Jewels, Mal. 3.17. either sparing them in the general destruction,
Ezekiel. 9.4. or preserving them like the three Children in the midst of the
fiery furnace of affliction, as he did the godly in the Babylonish Captivity,
2. Or preserving them in the midst of those afflictions that come upon the
Church.
whom he carried out of their own country for their good, Ier. 24.5, 6. and was
a little Sanctuary to them when they were scattered among the Heathen, Ezekiel.
11.16. So that by their own experience they found that promise made good unto
them, Romans 8.28. That all things shall work together for the good of all those
that love God.

Fifthly, 5. Gods scope in these afflictions is only the purging of his Church.
we must especially observe what scope the Lord aims at in the chastisements
of his Church, which we shall find to be, not to destroy it, but to purge it,
Isa. 27.9. That when the Dross and Tin are taken away, and purged out, by
casting his people into the Furnace of affliction, that is, when the wicked are
consumed out of the midst of them, by the wrath of God, he may restore the
Judges as at the first, and the Counselors, as at the beginning, that they may
be called a City of righteousness, Isa. 1.25, 26. For which cause when he
smites his Church, he debates with it in measure, and staieth his rough wind in
the day of the Eastwind, Jsa. 27.8. destroying not his Church, as he does her
enemies, verse 7. Her he smites with rods, but them with Scorpions. So that his
people out of experience may truly acknowledge, that God punishes them far
less then their deserts. Ezra 9.13.

Sixthly, 6. Which when he has done he returns to them in mercy.
and humbled his peoples uncircumcised hearts, (in such manner as is expressed,
Jer. 31, 18, 19.) the Lord will remember his Covenant, Levit. 26.44, 45. and be
jealous for Zion, Zach. 8.2. and rejoice over his people to do them good, Ier.
32.41. not only in outward blessings, but more especially in cleansing them
from their sins, Ier. 33.8. and changing their hearts, Ezekiel. 11.19. and
planting his fear, and writing his Law in them, Ier. 31.38, that they shall
not depart from the Lord, Ier. 32.40. and shall at last be able out of their
own experience to say with David, I know that thou in very faithfulness have
afflicted me, But not for their sakes, but for his own Names sake.
Psalm 119.75. And all this he will do not for their sakes, Ezekiel. 36.25.26,
32. but for his own Names sake, ver. 22.

Seventhly, 7. And when he has used the Churches enemies to purge it, he
poures out his wrath upon them to the uttermost.
as the Rod of his Anger, Isa. 10.5. and has by their hand performed his whole
work upon Mount Zion, verse 12. those Prophesies assure us, that God will not
fail to call them to account for their pride and cruelty, Isa. 47.6, 7, 11.
and their plagues when they light upon them shall not be like the chastisements
of Gods people, but shall be like the breaking of a Potters vessel, even a
total and final destruction, Isa. 14.21, 22. Ier. 90.39, 40. and that in
favor of his people to avenge them upon those that have ruled over them with
rigor, and used them without mercy, Ier. 51.35.

Eighthly, 8. He supports the spirits of the godly by happy times to follow,
especially under the Gospel.
the Prophets intermix the threatenings of Gods Judgments, with many sweet and
gracious promises of happy times to follow after those sharp trialls that they
were to undergo, for the supporting and staying up of the hearts of the godly,
which though few of those to whom they were uttered should live to see, yet if
their zeal unto Gods honor, and tender love unto his Church whereof
themselves were members, could not but raise up their hearts, to embrace and
rejoice in those sweet comforts of Gods gracious promises to his Church,
supporting their drooping spirits, by carrying on their thoughts to look beyond
the present sad condition, which they were to undergo, to fix them upon that
happy estate which was to follow, as the Apostle supported his spirit, in those
manifold afflictions, wherewith he was exercised, by looking not at the things
which are seen, but at the things which being to come, are not seen, 2 Cor.
4.16, 18. But above all this, the Prophets most insist upon, and labor to set
out that glorious enlargement of his Church by the calling in of the Gentiles,
with the blessed and happy estate thereof, under the government of Jesus
Christ, whom with the fruits of righteousness and peace, which he shall
establish in his kingdom, both the Psalmist, and the rest of the Prophets
describe, and set out unto us at large.

These which we have mentioned, How to affect our hearts in the reading of
these Prophesies.
whereof we are to take notice, in reading the writings of the Prophets,
wherewith if we mean thoroughly to affect our hearts, we must not only be
persuaded, that these things which were written beforehand were written for our
learning, as Saint Paul speaks, Romans 15.4. but must besides set them before our
eyes, as precedents and examples, as he represents and applies them, 1 Cor.
10.6. So that in reading of these Prophesies delivered to the Jews, we must
represent them to our selves, not so much as the people of such a Nation, but
under the notion of the Church of God, which now claim to be as they were at
that time. So that not only any people, that is owned and esteemed to be a
Church of God, but besides any particular person, that is a member of that
Church, ought so to hear, and read the words of these Prophesies, as to apply
them to themselves in particular, to take themselves taxed in their reproves,
threatened in the judgments denounced against them, and comforted in their
promises; seeing we know, that all these are directed to, and executed upon the
Jews as not being such a Nation, but as being the people and the Church of God.
So that in them as in a pattern, there is laid before us, the course and rule
of Gods administration toward his Church, in what Nation of the world soever
it be planted.

Having now in brief considered what use may be made of the reading of
prophesies, How to make use of examples recorded in Scripture.
we have now left us in the last place, to be considered, only the examples of
the actions of men, what use we may make of them for our own instructions, and
how far we may follow them by way of imitation in the course of our practice.
Now it must be remembered, that we have already taken notice of the actions of
men, in relation to the Providence of God, dispensing either in mercy, or
judgment to every one according to his deeds. We are now to consider the
actions of those which are godly, how far they may be of use to us for
instruction.

First, Examples are not the rule of our practice but the Law.
we must lay down this an evident truth, that we have no rule, but the Law
only, that can warrant us in any thing that we do. That is our
righteousness, if we observe to do all the Commandments of the Lord our God,
as he has commanded us. Deuteronomy. 6.25. The things that are revealed belong to us,
and to our children, that we may do them, Deuteronomy. 29.29. As for the Apostles
exhortations to us to be followers of him, 1 Cor. 4.16. Phil. 3.17. they must
be understood with the limitation expressed, 1 Cor. 11.1. Be followers of me,
as I also am of Christ. Now these examples which we are to take notice of, are
either the examples of Christ, or of holy and godly men.

Concerning the examples of Christ, In the examples of our Savior
that we may know what to imitate in them, we must confider in him his Deity,
his Offices, and his humane nature, in which he was made under the Law, Gal.
4.4. What he did by the power of his Deity we cannot imitate.
In respect of his Deity, he did many things unimitable by us, ^s all his
Miracles, which were wrought by his Divine power, of which men are unfurnished,
and and some other acts of his which he did by his Sovereign power, And what
he did by his Sovereign power we may not.
as Lord of all. As when he sent his Disciples to fetch away another man's Ass,
Mat. 21.2. this was just in him, which was Lord of all things, to command that
which was his own; but leaves no warrant for us to imitate it, being forbidden
in the Law to meddle with that which is another man's.

As for those things which were acted by our Savior, What he did by virtue of
his Offices, they may imitate that are called to those offices:
by virtue of his Offices; some of them may by fitly proposed for imitation, to
as many as are called unto the same offices, so far as those offices are
communicated to men. For it is true, that unto the offices of a Priest and
Prophet God has left a succession of men in his Church, but not to do and
execute all that Christ himself did, and might do by virtue of those offices;
Unless in the office of his Priesthood, when he offered himself a sacrifice
for sin.
especially in that office of Priesthood, wherein he offered up himself unto
his Father a Sacrifice for the sins of his people, which none could do but
himself alone. As for the offering up of Prayers unto God, the teaching and
instructing of the people in all the Counsels of God, reproving of man's wicked
lives, clearing the truth of God from the corrupt glosses of false teachers,
they are duties wherein all that are called by God unto those public offices
of instructing the Church, not only may and ought to imitate Christ, but are
bound withal to striv as much as they may, to come up to those holy examples,
that he has left unto them.

But wheresoever amongst our Savious actions we find recorded unto us, The
examples of his obedience to the law we must make use of:
any example of his obedience unto the Law, there we have not only sufficient
warrant to imitate him therein, as going before us in the way of Gods
Commandments, but besides may draw from such actions of his a strong motive to
double our endeavors, To stir up our selves to the like obedience having him
for our pattern.
to tread in the steps wherein he walks before us, and to submit with all
readiness to those duties, which we find practiced by the Son of God
himself, in obedience to his own Law, which seeing he gave unto his Church,
he might by all right have dispensed with at his pleasure, which himself
allead geth, Luke 6.5. in defense of his Disciples, challenged by the Pharisees
for breaking the Sabbath, that if it had been a breach of the Sabbath, he being
Lord of the Sabbath had power to dispense with it.

In the next place for the examples of godly men, Men's examples must be
followed no farther then they are warranted by the Law.
we have no warrant to follow them farther then they are warranted by the Law,
which (as we have showed already) is the only rule which we must follow. And
even in such actions of theirs, we have many cautions, which we must take with
us for direction, that we may not misapply their examples, as we shall see by
and by.

First therefore, we must consider, some things which the Scriptures approve in
them, And that only in the body of the action, not in the circumstances also.
they approve in the body of the action, but not in the circumstances thereof.
For example, the Hebrew mid-wives are commended for saving alive the
men-children of the Israelites, yea, and rewarded too by God himself, Exodus
1.20, 21. But whether they are approved in their defense, which they make unto
Pharaoh, (which can hardly be excused from a lie) it may be very questionable.
Rebecca did well in endeavoring to establish the blessing upon the head of
Jacob, to whom it belonged by the decree of God, that settled it upon him
before he was borne, Genesis 25.23. But it is not so certain, that the way by
which she brought her husband to give him the blessing, by deluding him, was to
be justified. At least, if Jacob did well in desiring the blessing, and may be
some way excused in following his mothers counsel for obtaining it, he cannot
be commended, much less imitated, in telling his father a flat lie, Genesis
27.19. that he was Esau the first borne. In such examples we may lawfully
imitate the faith both of the midwives and of Rebecca, 2. We may not imitate
actions approved in men, if they were done upon special command.
which in it self was commendable, in an unlawful way.

Secondly, some actions in Scripture are approved which yet we may by no means
imitate, as being justifiable by a particular commanded from God, to do what
they did, though it were not according to the general rule of the Law. As the
Israelites borrowed Jewels of Gold, and Jewels of Silver, of the Egyptians
by Gods express command, Exodus 11.2. which they never paid again; yet we
know, that to borrow and not pay again is the Character of a wicked man, Psalm.
37.21. Yea where there is no outward and verbal command from God, yet some
times men by a secret instinct of the Spirit are warranted to do that which
without it had been unlawful, as it was not lawful for the Apostles to call
for fire from heaven to consume those Samaritanes, that refused to receive
Christ, Luke 9.54. because Elijah had done the like, 2 Kings 1.10, 12.

Thirdly, 3. Where we follow examples of good men, we must consider whether our
case and theirs be alike in all things.
whether they be alike in all circumstances. For circumstances in actions do
much vary the nature of them, as we know. Wherefore our Savior to justify his
Disciples rubbing the ears of Corn on the Sabbath day, by David's example of
eating the shewbread, shows the case of his Disciples to be the same with
David's, that they did it to relieve their hunger, as David had done, Luke 6.3.
Otherwise we have no warrant to disobey Magistrates commands, in lawful or
indifferent things, because the Apostles refused to obey the rulers at
Jerusalem, in a case where they had a command from Christ to the contrary, Acts
4.19.

Fourthly, 4. Where we imitate a good action we must withal strive to imitate
the faith, zeal, etc. wherewith it was acted.
in taking precedents from the actions of godly men, it is not enough to set
before us the act done by them, but we must with all strive to imitate their
faith, zeal, and other holy affections, which they manifested in doing it, and
the right end at which they aimed therein. For we know that the works of men
have their just estimation from the inward disposition of the heart, from
whence they spring, and from the end to which they are directed. The end of the
Commandment (says the Apostle) is Charity out of a pure heart, and a good
confidence, and faith unfeigned. And the scope of all our actions ought to be
Gods glory, Mat. 5.16. 1 Cor. 10.31.

Lastly, 5. Lastly, we may not make the example, but the Law the ground of
imitating the best men.
we must not make their example, the ground of our action, but the Law only,
which they were guided by, and which is the only rule, that must be our
direction, as we said before. The only use which we are to make of examples is,
to provoke and stir us up and to encourage us to such duties of Obedience as
we see godly men have been enabled to perform, assuring our selves that if we
put to our endeavors, the same power of the Spirit of grace, that wrought in
them, will be present with us to assist us in the like performances.

FINIS.
AN EXPLICATION Of the following DIRECTION For the Reading of the BIBLE over in
a year.
With an EXHORTATION to the necessary Use and Practice thereof.
THE scope of this Direction is, to guide thee in the Annual reading of the
holy Scriptures. The way of it is plain and familiar, because it most concerns
the weak. Each page has the figures for the day of the Month set in the first
place, which serve for the three Months that are in that page. Each days task
is three Chapters: two in the Old Testament, and one in the New, so long as the
New does last. And this order is constant, excepting in the Psalms: where,
because some are so very short, there is sometimes two, sometime more to be
taken together at one reading. Only the hundred-nineteenth, because it is too
long for one reading, is divided into four portions: Six parts apeece for the
two former, and Five a piece for the two latter: which portions exceed not the
length of an ordinary Chapter.

As for the day which is supernumerary in the Leap years (that is, which is
above 365.) I rather leave to thy Discretion and Piety how to employ to Gods
glory, and thy own solace, then prescribe any thing.

2. For the time: It is very requisite to observe it strictly; that is, to read
one Chapter in the morning, another at noon, and the third at night: so thou
shall never want heavenly matter to take up thy thoughts. But, whatever is
omitted in the day time, must be made out at night. If it so fall out, that
some days or weeks task be omitted, (as by sickness, or the like) when thou
come to it again, double the daily task till the loss be repaired. And
whereas the Lords day is here made only equal to other days, in its task and
service; thou must ever make it a Feast of Fat things, by adding to it a
Portion in some Book or other, which thy soul most affects: be it Isaiah, or
the Epistle to the Romans, or any of the Gospels, etc. But the Psalms in this
respect, may not wholly be omitted; this day being a singular day above others,
for singing and rejoicing.

3. For good success, and proficiency in this holy employment; pray constantly
to him that has the Key of David, to unlock thy Understanding, and use such
helps as the Lord affords thee. And when thou Doubtest, fail not to go to
the Master of the Assembly, Eccles. 12.11. Seek the Law at his mouth, for so
thou ought to do, Malac. 2.7.

To help a bad memory, do this; read with Leisure and Intention; Meditate with
Delight, (this feeds the soul) Confer with others at all opportunities,
especially, with those whom God has set near thee, or given thee in Charge,
as Psalm. 34.11. Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7, 8, 9. and c. 11.18, 19, 20.

Apply the Promises to thy self with joy. Consider the Threatenings with Fear
and Trembling, Isaiah 66.5. Psa. 119.120. But above all Helps, if thou would
have thy profiting appear indeed, when soever God has taught thee any Duty,
fall straightway in hand therewith, to Practice it thence forward.

4. This course (if carefully observed) will speedily bring thee acquainted
with God and his whole Counsel, revealed in his Word. It will inform thee of
his good will toward thee, and what great things he has done for thy soul;
and likewise, what duties he requires at thy hand. It will forewarn thee of all
the enemies that way-lye thee: and of their great wrath, malice, subtilties,
and power: and not only so, but (which is all in all) it will furnish thee
with Wisdom, to foresee, with Courage, to stand, and Power, to withstand, and
Armor, (even the whole Armor of God, Ephesians. 6.10, -- 17.) wherewith to
encounter and overcome, the World, the Devil, and the Flesh. It will inform
thee of the endless Joys, and ineffable Treasures of Heaven, that thou may
covet them earnestly, and inherit them: and also, of the insupportable
Torments, and unquenchable Fire of Hell, to avoid them. By this thy
Conscionable Practice, the work of the Minister shall be more profitable unto
thee, and less grievous to him: the word of God shall dwell richly in thee;
and also thou shall be able to render a reason of the Faith that is in thee,
whereas without this Diligence, he that is Ignorant, does often live and dye
so, even under a Powerful Ministry.

By this means (God blessing it to us) Christ's kingdom shall come into our
hearts with Power, and his Scepter (which is his Word) will bear Sway, and Rule
in all private Families amongst us: even in those Families which hitherto have
forgotten the Name of their God, and walking on still in Darkness, as without
God in the World, Have counted those great things of Gods Law, as a strange
thing, Hos. 8.12.

5. If these Motives avail not to win thee to a liking of the Word, and the
Practicing of it; consider further, what need thou have of it, and what it is
which thou despisest, in rejecting it. Thy heart is as hard as a stone in thee,
but this Word is as a hammer, that breaks the Rock in pieces, Jer. 23.29. It
is also a salve, to heal and cure a broken and contrite heart, Psalm. 107.20.
All holy zeal, and Spiritual desires, are extinct in thee, but this Word is a
Fire to kindle Holy Affections in thee: it is his Furnace to purge out the
dross of thy Natural Corruptions: Yea, it is as water to wash away
uncleanness, John 15.3. In a word, the Virtues and Operations of it are
innumerable: and for its worth, man cannot utter it. It is strengthening, as
Bread: quenching thirst after sin, as Drink: Chearing, as Wine: Sweet, as
Honey: Enriching as Gold. Quick and Powerful, sharper then any two-edged
Sword. It is the word of Gods power, even, The power of God unto Salvation, to
every one that believes, Romans 1.16.

6. Up then and be doing. Work out thy Salvation. They that stand all the day
idle, receive no wages: and the ignorant have no promise of life: but they that
are wise, that turn many to righteousness, shall shine as the Stars for ever
and ever. The hand of the Diligent makes rich: but the field of the man void
of Understanding, is all grown over with Thorns. Ignorance of the Scriptures,
is the mother of Error, Matthew. 22.29. leaving a gappe open to all Lewdness,
Riot, and Exorbitancy.

Think thou to have Eternal life in the Scriptures, and yet art not
acquainted with them? The Promise is, Seek and you shall find. And thou may
seek Eternal life, and Jesus Christ (the Author and giver of Life) where he
is to be found, he commands thee to search the Scriptures, Ioh. 5.39.

To go further yet; our Savior intimates to us, that the Jews would never
have troubled him so often with slight questions, if they had used to read the
Scriptures as diligently as they ought. And when they posed him, he usually
sent them to read the Scriptures for their answer. So Luke 10.26. he returns
one to learn his Duty, What is written in the Law? How read thou? And so
others of them, Mat. 12.3. Have ye not read what David did? And verse. 5. Have
ye not read in the Law? etc. So likewise Matthew. 21.16.

So that the reading of the holy Scripture, is a Duty that our Savior pressed
often. And his exhortation (before quoted) John 5.39. is to all. Neither should
thy worldly employments hinder thy performance of this Duty, for even the king
(though he might plead the greatest hindrances of any whatsoever, even the
weighty affairs of his Kingdom) was not exempted from this daily task, the
reading of the Word of God, Deuteronomy. 17.19.

Here is both Precept and Promise. Yea, this Practice has a Blessing, Rev.
1.3. Blessed is he that reads, etc.

7. And that thou may not be discouraged, either through thy own incapacity,
or its obscurity; know, that this course of exercising in the Word of God, is
blessed with happy success from the first meddling with it, and that even to
the weakest, Psalm. 119.130. The entrance of thy words gives light: it gives
understanding to the simple. But if after all these Incitements, thou count thy
self unworthy of eternal life, and wilt not lay hold of it; I must also put
thee in mind (ere I leave thee) that where these Blessings take no place, there
the Curse enters. When they that search the Scriptures find Eternal life,
they that neglect them will find Eternal death. When the Wise and Diligent
enter into their Masters Joy, the Slothful and Foolish will be thrust into
Hell.

Consider what the Scripture says, and the Lord give thee Understanding in all
things.

January A. February D. March D. 1 Genesis 1, 2. Mat. 1 13, 14. 4 2, 3. 16 2 3, 4.
2 15, 16. 5 4, 5. 17 3 5, 6. 3 17, 18. 6 6, 7. 18 4 7, 8. 4 19, 20. 7 8, 9. 19
5 9, 10. 5 21, 22. 8 10, 11. 20 6 11, 12. 6 23, 24. 9 12, 13. 21 7 13, 14. 7
25, 26. 10 14, 15. 22 8 15, 16. 8 27, 28. 11 16, 17. 23 9 17, 18. 9 29, 30. 12
18, 19. 24 10 19, 20. 10 31, 32. 13 20, 21. Joh. 1 11 21, 22. 11 33, 34. 14 22,
23. 2 12 23, 24. 12 35, 36. 15 24, 25. 3 13 25, 26. 13 37, 38. 16 26, 27. 4 14
27, 28. 14 39, 40. Luke 1 28, 29. 5 15 29, 30. 15 Lev. 1, 2. 2 30, 31. 6 16 31,
32. 16 3, 4. 3 32, 33. 7 17 33, 34. 17 5, 6. 4 34, 35. 8 18 35, 36. 18 7, 8. 5
36. Deuteronomy. 1.9 19 37, 38. 19 9, 10. 6 2, 3. 10 20 39, 40. 20 11, 12. 7 4, 5. 11
21 41, 42. 21 13, 14. 8 6, 7. 12 22 43, 44. 22 15, 16. 9 8, 9. 13 23 45, 46. 23
17, 18. 10 10, 11. 14 24 47, 48. 24 19, 20. 11 12, 13. 15 25 49, 50. 25 21, 22.
12 14, 15. 16 26 Exodus 1, 2. 26 23, 24. 13 16, 17. 17 27 3, 4. 27 25, 26. 14
18, 19. 18 28 5, 6. 28 27. Number. 1.15. 20, 21. 19 29 7, 8. Mark 1 22, 23. 20 30
9, 10. 2 24, 25. 21 31 11, 12. 3 26, 27. Acts 1 April G. May B. June E. 1 28,
29. 2 5, 6. 4 12, 13. 3 2 30, 31. 3 7, 8. 5 14, 15. 4 3 32, 33. 4 9, 10. 6 16,
17. 5 4 34. Josh. 1. 5 11, 12. 7 18, 19. 6 5 2, 3. 6 13, 14. 8 20, 21. 7 6 4,
5. 7 15, 16. 9 22.2 King. 1. 8 7 6, 7. 8 17, 18, 10 2, 3. 9 8 8, 9. 9 19, 20.
11 4, 5. 10 9 10, 11. 10 21, 22. 12 6, 7. 11 10 12, 13. 11 23, 24. 13 8, 9. 12
11 14, 15. 12 25, 26. 14 10, 11. 13 12 16, 17. 13 27, 28. 15 12, 13. Gal. 1 13
18, 19. 14 29, 30. 16 14, 15. 2 14 20, 21. 15 31.2 S. 1.1 Cor. 1 16, 17. 3 15
22, 23. 16 2, 3. 2 18, 19. 4 16 24. Judge. 1. 17 4, 5. 3 20, 21. 5 17 2, 3. 18
6, 7. 4 22, 23. 6 18 4, 5. 19 8, 9. 5 24, 25. Ephesians. 1 19 6, 7. 20 10, 11. 6 1 Chronicles. 1, 2. 2 20 8, 9. 21 12, 13. 7 3, 4, 3 21 10, 11. 22 14, 15. 8 5, 6. 4 22
12, 13. 23 16, 17. 9 7, 8. 5 23 14, 15. 24 18, 19. 10 9, 10. 6 24 16, 17. 25
20, 21. 11 11, 12. Phil. 1 25 18, 19. 26 22, 23. 12 13, 14. 2 26 20, 21. 27
24.1 Kin. 1. 13 15, 16. 3 27 Ruth 1, 2. 28 2, 3. 14 17, 18. 4 28 3, 4. Romans 1
4, 5. 15 19, 20. Col. 1 29 1 Samuel 1, 2. 2 6, 7. 16 21, 22. 2 30 3, 4 3 8, 9. 2
Cor. 1 23, 24. 3 31 10, 11. 2 July G. August C. September F. 1 25, 26. 4 12,
13. 9 25-29. 6 2 27, 28. 1 These. 1 Esther 1, 2. 10 32-35. 7 3 29. 2 Chr. 1.2 3,
4. 11 37-38. 8 4 2, 3. 3 5, 6. 12 41-44. 9 5 4, 5. 4 7, 8. 13 47-50. 10 6 6, 7.
5 9, 10. Jam. 1 53-56. 11 7 8, 9. 2 These. 1 Job 1, 2. 2 59-62. 12 8 10, 11. 2
3, 4. 3 65-68. 13 9 12, 13. 3 5, 6. 4 69-70. 14 10 14, 15. 1 Timothy 1 7, 8. 5
72-74. 15 11 16, 17. 2 9, 10. 1 Pet. 1 76-78. 16 12 18, 19. 3 11, 12. 2 79-82.
17 13 20, 21. 4 13, 14. 3 86-89. 18 14 22, 23. 5 15, 16. 4 90-93. 19 15 24, 25.
6 17, 18. 5 97-102. 20 16 26, 27. 2 Timothy 1 19, 20. 2 Pet. 1 104-106. 21 17 28,
29. 2 21, 22. 2 107-109. 22 18 30, 31. 3 23, 24. 3 112-116-119. 1 prt 19 32,
33. 4 25, 26. 1 John 1 7. p. 13. p. 18. p. 20 34, 35. Tit. 1 27, 28. 2
120-125-130 21 36. Ezr. 1. 2 29, 30. 3 135-137-140 22 2, 3. 3 31, 32. 4 144.
147. Pro. 1 23 4, 5. Phil. 1 33, 34. 5 2 3 4 24 6, 7. Heb. 1 35, 36. 2 John 1 5
6 7 25 8, 9. 2 37, 38. 3 John 1 8 9 10 26 10. Neh. 1. 3 39, 40. Jude 1 11 12 13
27 2, 3. 4 41, 42. Rev. 1 14 15 16 28 4, 5. 5 Ps. 1. to 5. to 2 17 18 19 29 6,
7. 6 9. to 11. to 3 20 21 22 30 8, 9. 7 15-18. 4 23 24 25 31 10, 11. 8 19-22. 5
0 0 0 October A. November. D. December. F. 1 26 27 28 2 3 4 35 36 37 2 29 30 31 5
6 7 38 39 40 3 Eccl. 1, 2 3 8 9 10 41 42 43 4 4 5 6 11 12 13 44 45 46 5 7 8 9
14 15 16 47 48. Dan. 1 6 10 11 12 17 18 19 2 3 4 7 Cant. 1, 2 3 20 21 22 5 6 7
8 4 5 6 23 24 25 8 9 10 9 7 8. Isa. 1 26 27 28 11 12. Hos. 1 10 2 3 4 29 30 31
2 3 4 11 5 6 7 32 33 34 5 6 7 12 8 9 10 35 36 37 8 9 10 13 11 12 13 38 39 40 11
12 13 14 14 15 16 41 42 43 14 Joel 1, 2 15 17 18 19 44 45 46 3. Amos 1, 2 16 20
21 22 47 48 49 3 4 5 17 23 24 25 50 51 52 6 7 8 18 26 27 28 Lament. 1, 2, 3 9.
Obad. 1. Jon. 1 19 29 30 31 4 5. Ezekiel. 1 2 3 4 20 32 33 34 2 3 4 Mic. 1, 2. 3
21 35 36 37 5 6 7 4 5 6 22 38 39 40 8 9 10 7. Nah. 1, 23 41 42 43 11 12 13 3.
Habak. 1. 24 44 45 46 14 15 16 3. Zeph. 1. 2 25 47 48 49 17 18 19 3. Haggai 1,
2 26 50 51 52 20 21 22 Zach. 1, 2. 27 53 54 55 23 24 25 4 5 6 28 56 57 58 26 27
28 7 8 9 29 59 60 61 29 30 31 10 11 12 30 62 63 64 32 33 34 13, 14. Mal. 31 65
66. Jer. 1 2 3 4

The End.
ERRATA.
Page 45. lin. 24. for power, rea. Proof. p. 83. l. 1. for your r. our p. 104.
l. 3. for and. r. all. p. 127. l. 8. for how we should r. how should we. p.
147. l. 22. for. but, r. by. p. 168. l. 10. for unanswerablenesse, r.
answerablenesse. p. 192. l. 24. for walked, r. walled. p. 198. l. 9. for
righteousness, r. righteous. p. 206. l. 26. for grounded, r. governed. d. 215.
l. 18. for faith, r. truth. p. 231. l. 1. for mention Gods Resting too, r.
mention Gods Resting, yet implies man's Resting too. p. 334. l. 8. for which now
claim. r. which we now claim.

Misquotations.
Page 5. l. 15. Hab. 113. p. 26 l. 25. Heb. 11.3. p. 28. l. 5. 1 Cor. 2.9. l.
14. 1 Cor. 1.23. ib. Ioh. 3.16. p. 48. l. 3. 1 Ioh. 1.5. p. 58. l. 13. Hab.
1.13. p. 77. l. 31. Act. 16.14. p. 82. l. 10. Ioh. 3.17. l. 13. Acts 2.17. p.
99. l. 14. 2 Timothy 2.13. l. 17. v. 152. p. 104. l. 28. Mat. 19. p. 107. l.
18.119.16. p. 109. l. 10. Ephesians. 1.18. l. 27. 11.15. l. 31.13.2. p. 117. l.
23.131. p. 120. l. 8. Gal. 2.20. l. 12.101.6. p. 121. l. 26. Psalm. 34.8. p.
122. l. 11. Dan. 9.23. l. 12 Ioh. 12.28. p. 123. l. 13. 2 Timothy 4.17. p. 126. l.
2. Psalm. 55.17. l. 3. Psalm. 119.147. l. 27. 1 Timothy 4.15. l. 29. Ioh. 5.39. l.
32. Prove. 30.2. p. 127. l. 10. Psalm. 119.59. p. 128. l. 8. Isa. 66.2. p. 129.
l. 27. Prove. 4.21. p. 135. l. 4. Isa. 8.20. l. 8. 2 Timothy 3.15.136. l. 2.43.13.
p. 138. l. 16. Josh. 24. p 141. l. 6. Ioh. 16.13. p. 147. l. 14. Psalm. 119.39.
p. 149. l. 1. Psalm. 119.40. p. 150. l. 14. Ioh. 5.39. p. 158. l. 13. Deuteronomy.
6.25. p. 165. l. 17. 1 Timothy 4.10. p. 174. l. 29. Psalm. 103. p. 175. l. 1. Psalm.
119.71. p. 180. l. 31. Ioh. 10.15, 18. p. 184, l. 28. Ioh. 18.4. p. 191. l. 13.
Mark. 10. p. 193. l. 22. Genesis 50.20. p. 230. l. 4. Psalm. 95. p. 317. James 1.21.


