ENTHUSIASM Above ATHEISM: Or, Divine Inspiration and Immediate Illumination
[by God Himself] Asserted. And the Children of Light Vindicated: In Answer to a
Book, entitled, The Danger of Enthusiasm Discovered.

By George Whitehead.

Job 32. 8. There is a Spirit in man, and the Inspiration of the Almighty
gives them Understanding.

Printed in the Year 1674.

AN Introductory Epistle.
Serious Reader,
IT is not for Disputation or Contention sake that we thus appear in this
Controversy, but singly for the Truth's sake, and the Information of the
Honest-Hearted, who are enquiring after God's Way of discovering himself to the
Soul: And that they may not be stumbled by those Groundless, Blind and Confused
Assaults that some ambitious and scornful Minds do make against God's Immediate
Way of Illuminating, Inspiring and Teaching his People, who obey and follow
that True Light which lights every man that comes into the World, even in an
Immediate Way in some degree, which we assert in Opposition to mere man's
Teaching, and to that dark and unlearned State, wherein People have been kept
ever learning under Humane Traditions and Un-sent Teachers; for this we are
misrepresented to the World, as opposing God's Teaching by Instruments, or
true Ministers, which is a gross Perversion; for though we have often called
people to cease from man and man's teaching (who speaks Divinations of his own
Brain, and not from the Mouth of the Lord) that they might wait upon God to be
taught; yet not to cease from or reject Christ's Ministers, or his speaking by
them; but have owned Christ's Teaching both immediately and instrumentally, as
he pleases, by his Light and Testimony, in order to bring man to God, who is
Light, and the All-sufficient Teacher: it being written in the Prophets, That
they shall be ALL TAUGHT OF GOD, which is his very Way and Method of drawing
men to his Son. Joh. 6. 45.


But our Opposer of Embusiasm (as he styles our owning Immediate Illumination
or Inspiration, without man's Teaching) he confines Immediate Revelation from
Christ to the first Promulgators of the Gospel, and says, God's ordinary Way
and Method of trans-mitting the Knowledge and Faith of the Gospel p. 24.
downwards to others successively was by such men's teaching it to others, as
had themselves learned it of the Apostles, or others that taught the same
Doctrine.

Herein he talks like a Papist, however he is pleased to revile us with
Incivilities, and toc ompare us to Orders among the p. 5.
Papists: But this his Method of transmitting the Knowledge of the Faith
successively in Opposition to immediate Illumination and Inspiration, we can no
more allow of as any real Proof of this man's Ministers being truly called and
authorized to preach (nor yet that he and his Fraternity have this way received
the Knowledge of true Faith, which stands in the immediate Power of God) then
we can own the Pope to be Peter's Successor. Surely the Virtues and Fruits of
God's Spirit, which are necessary to the true Ministry, are not successively
derived to them by outward Tradition: Besides, the successive transmitting the
Apostles Doctrine to Posterities, does no more prove the Priests Ministers of
the Gospel (as he calls them) then it proves the Quakers or any others p. 123.
(who have the same Doctrine) such Ministers.

Its true, that Timothy, Titus, and others, who had Gifts in them for the
Ministry, were approved by Paul and others of the primitive Elders for the
Work; pa. 24.
but this is no Proof that this Opposer's Ministers are either so gifted or
approved.

But if we run them backward to prove their Race and Call successively, its
most likely to stop and center in the Pope, if they will persist in denying an
immediate Mission or Illumination from God as their VVarrant.

Whilst this Anti-Enthusiast construeth Christ's enlightening every man that
comes into the World, Jo. 1. 9. to be only with natural Light, a created
Light, p. 15, and 41, 24, 33.
unto which he opposes Gospel Light and the Faith of Jesus Christ, he is
inconsistent with himself, in granting, that by this Light (which he also
calls the Faculty of Reason and Understanding) man may know that there is a
God, and that he is to be worshipped, and that it may possibly be a Light
sufficient to direct the Heathen to as much as God expects from them; As also,
that most of the Precepts of the Gospel are desirable in pa. 79.
themselves, viz. to love and worship God; to Repent of that which has been
ill done; to be Sober, Chaste and Temperate; to do to others as we would be
done to our selves, in Point of Equity, Fidelity and Charity; to be Humble and
Meek, Patient and Contented, and the like, etc. and these with theer certain
Relation to a future happy State. And that there is no man that acts according
to the best Reason of his Mind, but would choose p. 80.
these things, etc.

Observe, Serious Reader, here, that this universal Light of Christ in man,
which he calls Reason, directs men to choose those Precepts of the Gospel, which
tend to their future happy State; and why then he should deem this Light
(wherewith Christ enlighteneth all men) but natural and created? we see neither
Reason nor Scripture Proof from him, that there should be two such inward
Lights, as a Gospel Light peculiar only to some, and a Created Light, common to
all, that directs man to choose those Preceprs of the Gospel which tend to a
future Happiness (no more then he shows for two kinds of inward Darkness) This
Distinction appears both Unscriptural and Contradictory; and the most gross
Contradiction, to render this Universal Light as not sufficient to direct men
to believe in the Son of God, when it p. 42.
shows those weighty Precepts of the Gospel, which tend to a future happy State.

Again, Our Antagonist, as if he were set upon it, to divert peoples Minds from
this inward Light of Christ, and from attending thereto for God's immediate
Teaching, he perverts the Scripture, where on 2 Pet. 1. 19. he says, That the
Mind of God touching Salvation, before and under the old p. 76.
Covenant, was but obscurely made known by dark Prophecies, which are therefore
said to be a Light shining in a dark Place.

Which is, as if in the Days of the Gospel and New Covenant the Apostle Peter
directed Believers back to those dark Prophecies under the Old, to take heed
thereunto, as unto a Light shining in a dark Place; or as to read his words
after this man's sense thus, viz. We have also more sure Dark Prophecies under
the Old Covenant, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed (And what then is not
so sure as they?) Whereas it was that living Word or Light of Christ in them,
whereunto they did well to take heed, as unto a Light shining in a dark place,
until the Day dawned, and the Day Star arose in their Hearts: This inward
Light, though for a time it shines as in a dark place in man, yet it leads
them that believe and follow it to the Day of Christ, who is called the Bright
and Morning Star, and who is the only Way and Rule to all the Children of the
Light.

But this Writer, as but a mere Literal Professor, and Traditional Outside
Christian inveyes against those that (he says) have vented high Speculations,
and almost or p. 98.
altogether unintelligible Notions, and new-coyned Phraises and Expressions
concerning the Work of God in the Soul, and of Union with Christ, and Communion
with God, of living by Faith, and walking in the Spirit, and that these have
been accounted Evangelical Preachers: And tells us, That this Way obtained a
great Reputation among a great many of Christian Professors, and that many
Persons have been tempted hereby, etc.

Here the serious Readers may take a View of the man's Ignorance and Scorn,
thus to slight and contemn those Serious and Seriptural Expressions, of the
Work of God in the Soul, Union with Christ, Communion with God, living by
Faith, and walking in the Spirit; such Phrases as these he counts
unintelligible, and new-coyned: You may easily perceive what little
Understanding he has in the Mysteries of God, and how much void of the true
and spiritual Speculation concerning the Dispensation of the New Covenant, and
Spiritual Condition of true Christians therein.

Again, This Opposer concludes, That if we do not make the Doctrine of Christ
in the Scriptures the adequate Rule of the Motions and Inclinations of our p.
110.
Minds, and Actions of our Lives, whereby to know when they are of God, and
when not; we have then no certain Rule to go by, but are continually liable to
most Horrible Mistakes.

See here how he has shut out all Divine Light, Spirit, and God's immediate
Teaching, both from being in us, and from being any certain Rule (though we do
not oppose what the Spirit teaches, to Christ's Doctrine; for the Spirit
teaches the same immediately) Yet what is it but to promote Atheism, to
exclude God, and Christ, and Spirit, and Light within, as no certain Rule, and
to exalt the Scriptures above them all, and to give the Scriptures that high
Epithete which no where they give themselves, as, Adequate Rule of Inward
Motions and Inclinations; Whereas the inward Light of Christ, which makes
manifest all things that are reproved, is therefore the most suitable Rule to
try inward Motions; for unto this Light he that does Truth comes, that his
Deeds may be manifest that they are wrought in God; and it is the same Light
that reproves the Evil Deeds of those that hate it, see John 3. 19, 20, 21. It
is not two kinds of inward Lights, one Natural, and another Spiritual.

The kind of Language which this Writer treats us withal and applies to us, is
such censorious, harsh and scornful Stuff as follows, viz. Enthusiasts, called
Quakers; Narrowness, Austerities and Incivilities; Deceived; Proudly exalt, and
justify your selves; Great Absurdities; Your great Talk of your Light within;
abused that 1 st Chapter of John, verse. 9. Your Enthusiastical Notion (viz.
touching the Light of Christ within) You stumble; Your Wild Notion of men's
being guided by the Internal Teachings of the Spirit, without Outward Teaching;
Your bold and confident Assertion, Enlightened; not in your pretended Way, a
very ill Mind; False Accusers; Romish Factors: You Dissemble; Tergiversation
and Shuffling; Pretenses for a Blind; Your Enthusiasm; Enthusiastical Fancies;
Your Spiritualizing Baptism, and the Lord's Supper; So there is a Spiritual
Baptism; and an Eating and Drinking with Christ in his Kingdom.
Your invented Mystery of the Redemption of the Seed See Isaiah 53. 10, 11.
Psalm. 22. 30. Jo. 6. 39. Gal. 3. 16. and 4. 19.
in men; Your New Notions and Speculations of your being taught only by the
Light within; No Light in you; Desperate Error; New Mystical Notions; Taught of
God immediately; These Dreams, Fancies and High Conceits; You have cried down
the Bravery and Pride of the World, which others retain; Voluntary Humility;
Vainly Pust Up; A Rough Garment to deceive; Ravening Wolves Your own Conceits;
Inward Pride; Overvaluing your selves; Groundless Confidence; Strangely
deluded; Your Whimsi^s and Fantasies bring a Scandal upon the Christian
Religion, to encourage Romish Agents; Your Newaffected Modes and Phrases did
insensibly lead you from one Noval Conceit to another, until you have exceeded
all Bounds of Sobriety, and become perfectly Drunk; Your New Taken-up Way not
Spiritual, but Carnal; More Selfconceited, Proud and Disdainful, etc. With more
such hard Language and manifest Untruths (together with plain Contradictions)
has this Opposer of Immediate Illumination treated us; for which, I say, the
Lord grant him Repentance and Forgiveness.

We have Information of his Name, and what an uncertain Temporizer he has been
in his latter years about Religion; but understanding that in former times he
has had a Sincerity in him, and believing that he has sought after Good Things
and more Spiritual Matters formerly then now, we forbear publishing his Name at
present (seeing he was not willing to it himself) desiring that he may secretly
consider these things, and this following Answer; and that the Lord may give
him Understanding, to acknowledge his Truth: For, God knows, we would not have
him dye under the Guilt of his Apostasy, and Iniquity he has brought upon him
by his Groundless and Fruitless Opposition against God's Truth and People.

The Substance of the following Answer was written soon after his Book came
out, but the Accomplishment and Publication was hindered by other Matters of
more Weight interposing.

I desire the Reader to take notice of one Instance that makes for us, and
against our Opposer (on the behalf of God's immediate -- Mission, Inspiration
and Teaching) out of the Book of Martyrs, namely, J. Huss, on the behalf of
Joh. Wickliff, Act. Mon. v. 1. f. 593.
gives this Testimony, speaking of Preachers invisibly sent of God; and that
invisible sending of God is much better then the sending of Men, and of the
private Law, which by the Instruction of the Holy Ghost is written in the
Heart; and that the Private Law is much more worthy then the Public: this he
speaks of Augustine in his Sixty Fifth Book of Question unto Orosius, and
further adds, For the Spirit of God is a Law, and they which are moved by the
Spirit of God are led by the Law These are also said to be the Words of Pope
Urban, pleaded by Jo. Huss.
of God; And who is he that can worthily Resist against the Holy Ghost?
Whosoever therefore is led by the Spirit of God, albeit his Bishop does say him
Nay, let him go freely; for the Law is not appointed for the Just Man: Where
the Spirit of God is, there is Liberty; and if ye be led by the Spirit, ye are
not under the Law. From whence he infers thus, viz. Behold, here it is
affirmed, that the sending by God through Inspiration is not bound under the
Bondage of the Law; for that Law is more worthy then the public Law: Secondly,
That the Law is made for Transgressors and Offenders, and not for the Just:
Thirdly, That whosoever is led by the Spirit of God, although his Bishop stand
against him, he may proceed unto a better Life. Whereby it is evident, that a
Deacon or Priest disposed to preach, and being led by the Spirit of God, may
freely preach the Gospel of Christ, without the Spiritual License of his
Bishop: it is evident for so much as it is good that a Deacon or Priest do live
well, and preach fruitfully, Ergo, he may proceed from Idleness unto the Labor
and Office of Preaching, and so unto a better Life.

See here how plainly these things make for us, and against our Opposer, and
his Gainsaying the Immediateness of Christ's saving Illumination, and the
sending the Spirit to guide all Christians by its immediate Motions, wherein
his Opposition P. 47, 61.
tends to Atheism, and to reject the Saving Knowledge of God and Christ; for
that which may be known of God is manifest in man: And the true and living
Knowledge of him is by the Revelation of his Son, the Enjoyment of whose
immediate Power and Presence is beyond all Outward Teaching, Words or
Expressions.

Again, It manifestly tends to Atheism to conclude, that no Divine or Saving
Illumination is immediately conveyed to man's Soul by his Maker but only by
such mediums, as the Scriptures or Man's Teaching; for then what is Man? and in
what Capacity is his Soul before he either know the Scriptures, or have man's
Teaching? or if there be nothing of a Divine Nature, Life or Light in men
immediately from God, who have not those Outward Means, how are their Souls
Immortal, and capable of Future Rewards? And what better then a Beast does it
render man (as to a future Condition) to suppose he has no Divine Life and
Illumination from his Maker, but only that all must be infused into him
Instrumentally, through his natural Organs or Sense? And how should he receive
a Gospel Ministry or Advantage by it, if he have no Gospel Light in him, before
conveyed to his Soul immediately by his Maker himself?

To conclude this Introduction, let these Positions be seriously considered:

First, to Deny the True God, who is Light, is Atheism.

But to Deny his Immediate Light in Man, is to deny the John 1. 4. 9.
True God.

Secondly, To oppose that which gives the Knowledge of God, and his Glory in
the Face of his Son (and therefore to be without his Knowledge) is Atheism.

But to oppose God's Immediate Illumination, or In shining Light in man, is to
Oppose that which would give him the Knowledge of God, and so to 2 Cor. 4. 6.
be void of his Knowledge.

Thirdly, To Deny the Immortality of the Soul is Atheism.

But to deny the Immediateness of his Divine Life [which is Light] in the Soul,
by which it immortally subsists, is to Deny the Soul's Immortality.

Fourthly, And to go about to stop the Mouth of God from teaching his People
Immediately, is the very Way to introduce and set up Atheism.

Because of this Anti-Enthusiast, his opposing the Immediateness of Divine
Light, Teaching, and Illumination of God's Omni presence, and his immediate
Life in the Soul (without which the Soul cannot Immortally subsist, either in a
State of Happiness, or as to its own Being) I therefore conclude him, and all
who are of his Opinion, to be therein guilty of Atheism; which I desire the
Lord to give him and them a Sense of unto Repentance, and the Acknowledgment of
the True and Living God, and Jesus Christ, and his Light within unto Salvation.

From a Lover of Souls, G. W.
London, the 22th of the 5th Month, 1674.
ENTHUSIASM Above ATHEISM: OR Divine Inspiration and Immediate Illumination by
God himself Asserted.
Sect. I.
Divine Inspiration and Immediate Illumination Asserted.

BY his Title [The Danger of Enthusiasm] We must understand [The Danger of
Immediate Illumination from God, or God's Immediate Teaching, the Spirit's
Immediate Direction and Working, Immediate Revelation and Inward Teaching of
God's Spirit or the Light within, the Spirit's teaching Men Immediately by
Internal Illumination and Operation, etc.] According to his own Explication:
(...); affler numine, an Inspiration. Entheatus, numine afflatus; (...), in quo
Deus est, ab (...) et (...) Deus, Divine inspired. See the Copious Dictionaries.
See Danger of Enthus. page 13, 14, 16, 40, 46. and 60. So that he should have
styled his Book [The Danger of divine Inspiration] and then his Blindness would
more plainly have appeared, then by that hard Word [Enthusiasm] which we are
not to understand in this Controversy, according to the Heathen's Acceptance
of it, as In^pired by their Gods, nor as their Infused Oracles, received and
taught by their Idolatrous Priests or Sacrificers; for these we never owned in
Principle nor in Practice; but [Enthusiasm] taken simply, as a divine
Inspiration or Breathing into by a Deity, we do assert and contend for in the
best Acceptance. However the Word has been used in Scorn and Contempt by
Popes and their Agents, against Men professing divine and immediate
Inspiration, who have opposed the Apostatized Church of Rome, and the Pope's
limiting People to believe and worship by Tradition.

His accusing the Quakers with being guilty of changing God's Method of
bringing Men

Salvation, is as false as his Title contemptuously applied against us, For our
asserting divine Inspiration and the Sufficiency of the Spirit's Teaching, and
that Men ought to wait upon God's divine Illumination, that they may be all
taught of God, as he has promised: This can be no changing of God's Method;
but in Order to the fulfilling of his own Promise, which is God's Way and
Method, That all his Children shall be taught of him. The old beaten Path of
the Christian Doctrine, p. 9. leads us to God's Immediate Teaching, which they
that oppose, are all out of the Chr^stian. Doctrine, and Enemies to it.

As for E. Buroughs his saying, His pure Spirit is put into the inward Parts
to be the Rule and Guide of Life in all things; and only by the Teaching of the
Eternal Spirit, is the living God known in the Creature, etc. And W. Penn's
saying, that our Belief concerning the Scriptures, is that inward Testimony,
that we have received from the holy Light within us, to the Truth of those
Sayings; wherefore the Scriptures are so far from being the great Rule of Faith
and Practice, that the Light of Christ within is both our Warrant and Rule for
Faith in and Obedience to them.

And is this either contrary to God's Method, or quite different from his Way,
as this Man grounds his Objections, let the spiritually minded judge, how he
has opposed the very Tenor of the New Covenant, and God's Promise therein;
namely, his Spirit put into the inward Parts, which should guide into all
Truth: And this Opposer himself confesses, That Christians are said to be one
Spirit with Christ; and by this Spirit and Temper, when given us, we know that
we dwell in him, and he in us; and if any Man have not the Spirit of Christ in
some Measure, he is none of his, p. 119. This is the Man that undertakes to
overthrow Enthusiasm, and does not own God's Immediate Enlightening and Teaching
in these Days; but counts it contrary to his Way and Method; but now it is by
the Spirit, that we know that we dwell in him, and he in us; and he that has
not the Spirit of Christ, is none of his: See how the Man has broke the Neck
of his own Cause; and surely, if God dwell in us, and we in him; and his Spirit
be our Rule to know this, he must not be limited to Silence, or to a being mute
from immediately teaching those who are confessed to be made one Spirit with
him: And what gross Ignorance is it to limit God's Teaching or Saving
Illumination to a Mediate or Instrumental Way of Man's Teaching, as this Man
does, in his denying an Immediate Way of Saving Illumination, p. 47. which is
all one, as if he should tell us, that though God dwell and walk in his People,
yet still they are either Strangers to him, or else he is silent from speaking
to them, except when they hear outward Preaching, etc. And what is this but to
limit the Holy One, and set him and his People at a Distance, when they are his
Tabernacle, and he dwells and walks in them?

That God, Christ, the holy Spirit, do by Immediate Illumination of our Minds,
and without external Teaching by Scriptures or by Men, show us, or reveal to
us, what we ought to do; and that the Children of God are taught of God, and
need not any other Teacher, p. 13, 14.

This he excepts against, as quite different from God's Method and Way;
wherein he has opposed plain Scripture Testimony; They shall all be taught of
God; they shall not teach every Man his Neighbor, etc. But the Anointing which
ye have received abides in you; and ye need no Man to teach you, but as the
same Anointing teaches you of all things, etc. We do therefore assert the
Sufficiency of this Divine Illumination or Heavenly Unction, as being of it
self able to show and reveal to us what we ought to believe and do in all
things; for that it was sufficient, both to make true Prophets and Preachers,
and to enable the Holy Men of God to give forth what they spoke, as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost: And without the Inspiration of the Almighty men cannot
truly understand the Scriptures; yet we do not confine the Holy One only to
Inward Teaching, or an Immediate Way; though the Sufficiency thereof to them
that are turned to it, we do assert; yet by this Divine Inspiration or
Immediate Teaching God has been and is pleased to call out Instruments to
testify and preach forth what their Eyes have seen, and Ears heard, and Hands
handled of the Word of Life, even the same Word of Life which they have
received; and this only is the effectual and powerful Preaching, which flows
from the Word of Life or divine Unction within, and not that which comes only
by Tradition, Reading and Hearsay, without the Spirit's Guidance. And
therefore while we own the holy Scriptures, and outward Teaching, as proceeding
from divine Illumination and the immediate Unction within, and as a Proof of
the Sufficiency thereof, the Man wrongs us, in his endeavoring to begeta
Suspicion of us, as if we had an aching Tooth against outward Teaching, of as if
the Work and Office of the Gospel Ministry it self were the Eyesore to us; as
also with dissembling the Matter, heaping Contradictions, with Tergiversation
and Shuffling, p. 83, and 92, and 94. And why so? but because we teach People,
give forth Books, etc. While yet it is our Judgment, That Men may be
sufficiently taught of God himself by his Light and Spirit within, now under
the New Covenant, p. 93. But how proves he this either a Dissembling or
Contradiction, when we do not pretend to preach, teach or write without God's
Teaching and Aid, wherein we proclaim the Sufficiency thereof, exciting Men to
turn from Darkness to the Light, and from Satan's Power to God; for Power,
Life, Spirit, Illumination and Teaching immediately, as he has taught us;
which is no more Contradiction then was in the Prophets, Christ or Apostles,
who preached and proclaimed the same thing, as that all God's People and
Children should be taught of him; and the Anointing which they had received
from the Holy One should teach them so, that they should need no Man to teach
them, but as the same Anointing taught them of all things (a plain Proof of its
Sufficiency)

His supposing, that we direct Men to a Natural Light in them, p. 15. is not
true, but contrary to his own Citation before of our Words, That God's pure
Spirit, and the Light of Christ within us, as both our VVarrant and Rule for
Faith, and Obedience to the Scriptures; which therefore cannot be a Natural
Light in them.

He grants that Jesus Christ himself revealed the Gospel to his Apostles; and
after his Ascension, he, by sending them the Holy Spirit, immediately inspired
them with the clear Knowledge and Understanding of it: But for us to assert
Immediate Inspiration, and the sole Sufficiency thereof, he deems now a
changing of Gods Method, which he confines to Man's Teaching and the
Scriptures; and yet in plain Contradiction to himself, he is made to confess,
That the Scriptures attribute it (viz. the saving Work of Grace) to God, to
Christ, to the Holy Spirit, p. 18. And further says, Indeed the Work of Grace
in Men is most properly attributed to God, to Christ, because he is the
principal Cause of it, and all other but subordinate; yet the Effect is some
times attributed to subordinate and second Causes also, though less properly,
p. 19. So that we, in attributing the saving Work of Grace in men to God, to
Christ, we take the most proper Way and Method; how then is this contrary to
God's Way and Method? And our referring Men to his inward Light, to be
immediately taught by him, does both show our owning his making Use of
Instruments and outward Teaching, in order thereto, and as subordinate; as
also, that they shall be sufficiently taught of God, when they are come unto
him to depend upon his Teaching, as his Instruments are in their Ministry: And
this man has confessed a Concurrence of the Operation of his Grace and good
Spirit, together with the rational Evidence of the Truth of the Gospel, to
persuade Men, p. 15. And is not this Grace and good Spirit Immediate, when it
operates in the Hearts? and though God is pleased to make Use of Instruments
for the Help and Advantage of the weak, it follows not, that either there shall
be always need of such a mediate Way of Help, or that he will not immediately
teach and operate in these Days; for that were still to limit him and his
People to a Distance one from another; whereas it is confessed, That the Work
of Grace in M^n is most properly attributed to God, and less properly to
subordinate and second Causes: But says this man, The Holy Spirit works the
saving Change in Men still, by the Word of the Gospel, as communicated to
Men's Minds by the Scriptures, or by Men's Teaching the same Doctrine which is
contained in the Scriptures. And this in Opposition to our Way (as he calls it)
of God's own Immediate Working, p. 16. where observe: First, He limits the
Spirit's inward Work, either to the Scriptures or men's Teaching, which excludes
all that have not the Scriptures or men's Teaching, from the saving Work or
Change in them; and confines all God's People, as Children under Tutors and
Governors, that they may be always learning; and then when shall they know
the Truth? And of whom do their Teachers learn, and receive the Understanding
of the Scriptures? 2dly, To his saying, That the Doctrine contained in them is
the Rule of Faith and Practice: He should rather have said, A RULE subordinate
to the great Rule of Faith and Practice, to wit, that divine Light which was
the true Prophets and Apostles Rule, in giving forth the Scriptures, and is now
the true Believers Rule, in truly believing, understanding and obeying the
wholesome Doctrine contained in them, which none truly own, but they who believe
in the Light, and follow and walk in the Spirit, which the Doctrine of Christ
and his Apostles directs men to.

His accusing us with opposing men's being enlightened and taught by Christ, to
their being taught by the Scriptures, is not true, unless he intended the
Scriptures without Christ's Light within; for we assert his immediate
Illumination and Teaching, in Opposition to men's preferring the Scriptures
before the Spirit, and excluding its immediate Teaching in these Days: we do
not oppose Christ's Enlightening men to the true Knowledge or Understanding of
the Scriptures, which proceeded thence.

His rendering the Spirit and the Word two several Causes that produce the same
Effect, viz. God's Working savingly upon men, and his calling the immortal Seed
of the Word, 1 Pet. 1. 23. The Sword of the Spirit, and God's great Instrument
or Means, by which the Spirit does its Work upon Men (meaning the Scriptures)
p. 18, 19. In these is he greatly mistaken: For, first, The Spirit and the Word
are no such differing Causes; for they are one; and the immortal Word was
before the Scriptures. 2dly, This Spirit or living Word does work upon men,
both with and without the Scriptures, as it pleases: Howbeit, the Spirit is
immediate in its inward Manifestations and Discoveries, and is only God's Gift.

And while this man has granted, That Christ is God, and God every where
present, and so in all Men, p. 20. He must grant an Immediateness, both of his
Presence, Light and Teaching in Man, or else he allows man no Pre-eminence
above a Beast, and endeavors to limit God to Silence in man, unless when he
hears outward Teaching or Scripture, which cannot profit him without God's
immediate Teaching and inward Speaking.

His accusing us with jumbling about Christ's being in all Men, and saying,
that in Respect of his vertual Presence as Mediator, as when he rules and
operates in Men's Hearts by his Authority, and by the Evangelical Law; in this
Sense he is not in all Men, p. 20, 21.

And when did we ever say, that he was in this Sense in all men, that is, as
ruling, etc. or to dwell in the Hearts of all men by Faith? But while it is
granted, that as God Christ is every where present, and so in all men; it is
granted, that he is in all men in some Sense, and his Presence is immediate;
and though he does not rule in wicked men's Hearts by his Evangelical Law and
dwells not by Faith in the Hearts of Unbelievers; yet by his Light he reproves
them for Sin often, and immediately in their Consciences, and his immediate
Reproofs daily pursue the Transgressors, who rebel against his Light; and
there is both Virtue and Power in his Presence, immediately to torment the
Wicked, and refresh the Righteous; therefore he is not always confined to
speak by the Instrumentality and Agency of second Causes, as this Opposer
darkly imagins, who neither rightly knows our Principle to state it, nor does
clearly state his own; but runs into a Multitude of Tautologies, and
Repetitions, and Contradictions, that a Body has something to do to find out
the Matter he drives at, though one search his Book with a great deal of Care,
Memory and Perspicuity; as for Instance; He confesses both the Work of the
Spirit, and Christ dwelling in the Heart, and a being made one Spir^^ with him;
as also to a supernatural Revelation and Illumination in the Way of Salvation,
and the Presence of God every where, and in all Men; and yet opposes the
immediate Operation of Christ in men, but says, He does not teach Men now
immediately in Person, p. 21. Where has he a Scripture for God's Teaching in
Person? Unsavory Expressions, not according to sound Words.
And who says he does? But if he teach men immediately in Spirit, as to be
sure he does his own who hear his Voice, it is sufficient. And this man
confesses in Rev. 2, 3. That it is seven Times said, He that has an Ear, let
him hear what the Spirit says to the Churches; as every Man in the World
has, that is not deaf; as also He adds, That when it (the Doctrine) is
communicated to them by VVriting, as where it is so by Preaching; yea, says
he, I had almost said or by He had almost said Truth.
immediate Revela^ion, p. 28. Reader, observe here how uncertain, variable and
unstable this man is in his own Judgment and Principle; for one while he
opposes immediate Revelation or Enthusiasm, as none of God's Way or Method
now; another while he does assent to the hearing of the Spirit, or receiving
its Doctrine by immediate Revelation; and so then the Controversy he seems to
place, not so much upon immediate Revelation, as the Belief, Obedience or
Disobedience of the Doctrine and those Revelations, which he confesses, It Is
possible Men may have from God, as Balaam had, and Judas and other Workers of
Iniquity, that prophesied and cast out Devils in Christ's Name, had, p. 28. But
now you who deny immediate Revelation to the Church of Christ in these Days;
do ye not therein render the Church inferior to Balaam, Judas, and those
Workers of Iniquity; nay, I may add to Adam after the Fall, who heard the Voice
of God; and to Cain, to whom also God spoak: And I cannot understand how this
Man can really own the Doctrine of Christ and the Apostles to be a Rule, much
less the Rule of Faith and Christian Practice, as he asserts, p. 22. while he
says, That Christ Jesus does not savingly enlighten all those, who yet are
savingly illuminated, neither by natural Light, nor by supernatural Revelation
in an IMMEDIATE Way; and adds, Then it follows that such are enlightened by
supernatural Revelation, MEDIATELY or instrument. ^^, p. 47.

Note here, Reader, that he pretends to own supernatural Revelation, but not
in a immediate Way, and a being savingly illuminated, but not immediately; and
yet pretends to own that Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, which directs
both to God's Teaching, and Hearing, and learning of the Father, and coming to
Christ for Life, hearing what the Spirit says, and to wait for the Revelation
of Christ from Heaven, and to look for the Appearance of the great God the
Father, whom no Man knows but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him:
And therefore this man's denying, that Christ Jesus does savingly enlighten, or
afford supernatural Revelation in an immediate Way, has at once excluded and
denied both the Knowledge of God and Christ: and this is the very Way to bring
in Atheism; for what shall assure us either of the Knowledge of God, Christ,
Scripture or true Preaching, if immediate Illumination be denied us? And yet
this man (to his own Confutation) pretends, not to exclude the concurrent
Operation of God's Spirit upon the Heart, p. 18. But how should we believe,
that he really owns the Christian Doctrine, contained in Scriptures, to be any
Rule at all, either of his Faith or Practice, while he opposes the very thing
which it directs us to, viz. The New Covenant, the Spirit's Teaching, immediate
Illumination, etc.

Sect. II.
Of the Divine Unction, Light, New Covenant and Use of the Ministry.

ANd this Opposer will have his Sense and Meaning upon some plain Scriptures,
contrary to their very Import; as upon 1 John 2. 20. But ye have an Unction
from the Holy One, and ye know all things. And again, ver. 27. But the
Anointing which ye have received of him, abides in you; and ye need not that
any man teach you, but as the same Anointing teaches you of all things, and is
Truth, and is no Lie; and even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him:
About this he appears very much puzzled, and cannot tell how to wind off the
plain Words on the Behalf of the Anointing, and its full and plentiful
Teaching: And after he has spoken doubtfully about the Sense of this
Scripture, he concludes our Notion of the holy Spirit's Teaching Men, that live
under the Gospel, cannot be the Sense of it; when the Words are plain, Ye need
not that anyman teach you, but as the same Anointing teaches you of all
Things: Nor would this render the Design of John in this Epistle and other
Writings needless, p. 64. while his Epistle and Writing proclaims the
Sufficiency of the Anointing, wherein he writes both to little Children, young
Men and Fathers; and what he writes, was, as he had received from the
Anointing, and not merely as Man's Teaching, and argued no Defect in the
Anointing at all, but rather exalts it, and tends to encourage others to
continue in it, to abide in the Truth; it being confessed, That both the Apostles
and other Believers were established in Christ, by the Anointing of God upon
them, from 2 Cor. 1. 21, 22. As also, That they were induced at the first to
believe the Doctrine to be from God, because they perceived the Anointing of
God to be upon them that preached it, p 66, 67. So that here it is confessed,
that Believers Establishment in Christ (both Preachers and Hearers) was by the
Anointing of God upon them (as he which stablisheth us with you in Christ, and
has anointed us, is God) and that they were induced to believe the Doctrine to
be from him, because that they perceived that Anointing to be upon (or in) the
Preachers: Surely then there was a spiritual Eye opened in them, so to
perceive. And this is our Method, both for believing, obeying, and saving Men,
which one while this Man has opposed, as contrary to God's Way; another while
he confesses to it; but then he darkens the Matter again upon the Words, Ye
have an Unction from the Holy One, and ye know all Things; he gives this
Meaning, viz. Not that by this U^ction the commmon Christians were immediately
inspired with the Knowledge of all Truths; but that by it they were assured of
the Truth of all things which the Apostles had taught; and further adds, It is
not said, that this Anointing did teach them all Things, but that it did teach
[of] all Things, that is, of or concerning the Truth of all Things, to which it
was a Witness or Evidence, p. 66, 67.

He seems to lay a great stress here upon the Particle [Of] as if the Anointing
did only teach them Of, or concerning those Doctrines which the Apostles
preached, but not the Doctrines themselves; and then who taught the Apostles to
preach? Was it not the Anointing? And did not several Gifts flow from one
Spirit? But the man overlooks the Words of the Apostle cited by him, viz. Ye
need not that any man teach you, but as the same Anointing teaches you: and
did not this Anointing teach the Believers in the Apostles Absence, and when
they had not their Epistles read among them? Or was it only a Witness or
Evidence to what they spoke or preached? Or did it abide in them, not to speak
to them in the Absence of the Apostles and their Epistles, but only in their
Presence? What a strange Limitation would this be, that indeed endeavors to
stop the Mouth of the Anointing? And his denying, that by this Unction the
common Christians were immediately inspired with the Knowledge of all Truths,
leaves the Matter still doubtful on his Part, and seems at least to be a Sense
twarting the Apostles Words, Ye have an Unction from the Holy One, and ye know
all Things. He should have told, whether he believes that the common Christians
(as he calls them) were inspired with any Truths necessary to Salvation? If he
denies this, then he bids adieu to all divine and saving Knowledge, as to those
Christians: Whereas the same God that anointed the Apostles to preach, and
established them in Christ, did both anoint and establish those Believers, to
whom they preached; so, their Ministry was effectual only through that
Anointing, which enabled them to preach; And we never denied the Apostles
Preaching, in order to direct men to that Anointing: All which still prefers
the Anointing as the principal Means and Rule, and owns true Preaching, as in
Subordination to it; But does not therefore oppose or deny the Anointing's
immediate Teaching, or Sufficiency to save them that believe in, and obey it:
And because all are not converted, or come to this divine Unction within, or
Dispensation of the New Covenant; God has been, and is pleased to make Use of
such effectual Means, and to accommodate his divine Truth to men's low
Capacities, by Preaching and Demonstration of the Spirit, as may be for their
Help and Advantage, in order thereto: So that the Controversy is brought to
this narow Compass, viz. our present Opposer pretends to own supernatural
Revelation and divine Illumination; but not now in an immediate Way, but only
in a mediate Way of Preaching and Scripture.

We own and assert divine Illumination and supernatural Revelation in an
immediate Way; as also, that God is pleased to make Use of such mediate Ways
and Means, as are attended with his Presence and divine Illumination, without
which no outward Means can be effectual, or to any real Advantage to the Soul.

This Opposer reckons that God operates now only in a mediate Way; we own, that
God works both immediately and mediately; as also we assert, the sole
Sufficiency of the Spirt's immediate Illumination and Teaching, both as the
Ground of the Effectual Ministry, and of saving Knowledge to all that receive
it, and attend upon it. And this is the direct and proper Way and Method of
God's bringing Men to Salvation, as is assented to one while; but another
while, saving Illumination in an immediate Way, is denied by this contradictory
Opposer, p. 47. though in Contradiction to himself, again he confesses, Christ
is the Light of the World by his Spirit, by his Word, by his Works, both
miraculous and exemplary, p, 48. whereby he has granted Christ to be the Light
of the World, both in an immediate and in a mediate Way: How then not in an
immediate Way (manifest Confusion) And yet he charges us with abusing at
unawares that first Chapter of John, ver. 9. And why so? Because we own Christ
to be that true Light that lights every Man that comes into the World, in an
immediate Way, which is no Abuse; seeing, 1st, the very Life that was iin hm is
the Light of men: 2dly, He attempts not to prove that men universally are
lighted in such mediate Ways, as he proposes; as namely, by the Scriptures
outward Teaching, Works and Example, seeing all men have not the Scriptures,
and but few knew Christ's Works and Example.

His Accusation of impertinently alleging of Joel 2. 28, 29. cited by Peter,
Act. 2. 17. Behold the Days come, says the Lord, that I will pour out my
Spirit upon all Flesh, etc. He convinces us of no Impertinency herein, while
from hence we assert this pouring out of the Spirit to be immediate; as, I will
pour out my Spirit, says the Lord: Is not this immediate (as done by himself?)
But says he: It is not to direct every one what to believe and do without
outward Teaching; but to qualify Persons extraordinarily for outward Teaching:
It is to enable them to prophecy, etc. p. 49. Hereby he has confessed some
Persons to be extraordinarily qualified for outward Teaching and enabled to
prophecy by the Pourings out of the Spirit: It seems he owns the Teachers and
Prophets to be immediately taught, but the Hearers may not; so that from this
Man's Method, the Danger of Enthusiasm is not in the Enthusiasts themselves,
but in their ordinary Sort of Hearers or weak Christ^ans, as they are counted,
whom he goes about to keep always in that weak State, ever learning, and never
allows them the Privilege of their Teachers, that is, to be Teachers
immediately illuminated and taught: And what is this, but to maintain a Trade
of Preaching, that People may be always paying? which is not to desire, that
all the Lord's People were Prophets; nor, with Paul, to pray, that God would
give them the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the Knowledge of Christ,
Ephesians. 1. 17. nor to bring People to the divine Anointing within, that is
sufficient to teach them: Neither does this man appear in the Apostle's Mind,
who said, these things I write unto you, that you may have Fellowship with us;
and truly, our Fellowship is with the Father and the Son: Whereas this man's
Method tends to keep the Hearers from this Fellowship, which is in the divine
immediate Light of God and Christ.

He seems highly to commend God's Way and Method of Salvation, as to the
Plainness and Fullness of the Revelation thereof under the New Covenant, by
which it is fitted to every Capacity, and the innate Goodness of the Laws
thereof, fitted to attract and draw men's Wills to accept, embrace and choose
them. These says he, Are the Things, I conceive, foretold in that Prophecy,
Jer. 31. cited in Heb. 8. under those Expressions of God's putting, giving or
conveying his Laws into the Mind, and writing them in the Heart; so that they
shall not teach every Man his Neighbor, and every man his Brother, etc. p. 81.

A plain and ample Confession, 1st, To the New Covenant and the innate Goodness
of the Laws thereof: 2dly, To God's putting his Laws into the Mind, and writing
them in the Heart: 2dly, So that they shall not teach every man his Neighbor,
and every man his Brother. These are sufficient to overthrow all his Work
against immediate Illumination, immediate Teaching and Revelation and his
confining God's Method of Salvation now to a mediate Way of Teaching and
Illumination. To his Addition, That it is not then said, that they shall not be
taught neither by Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors or Teachers; but they shall
not teach every man his Neighbor, or every Man his Brother, p. 81. But who
these Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors or Teachers are, that he would have us
always depend upon for outward or mediate Teaching, he does not show us; nor
who they are that pretend to be such by Virtue of an immediate Call or
extraordinary Qualification, which he has seemed to grant before (which surely
comes not by Succession from men) He does not tell us who he means, as thus
called and qualified, as the true Apostles, Evangelists, etc. were, who were
sent of God, and endued with divine Virtue and immediate Gifts for their Work,
which neither Baptist, Independent nor Presbyterian-Preachers do now pretend
to, as heretofore, when they bore the Reproach of extemporary Praying and
Preaching by the Spirit, for which they are yet reproached as Phanaticks,
though undeservedly.

However this man's Work appears very lame, while he proclaims a mediate Way
of Teaching and Illumination by the Scriptures, Orall Tradition, and by
Apostles, Evangelists, etc. p. 47, 73, 81. as God's Method unto Salvation; and
all this to oppose an immediate Way of Enlightening thereunto. Now suppose we
should believe the former with him, in Opposition to the latter; yet still he
leaves us in the dark, and at a Loss, in not directing us to those Apostles,
Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors and Teachers, truly qualified and called, as
where, or among what People they are: As if he should tell us, that the Way to
Heaven, is, to follow certain Guides; but not at all direct us where to find
those Guides: But although we confess, that God does with Power endue and send
forth his Messengers to preach the Gospel; yet this no Way does oppose his
immediate Illumination and Teaching of his People, under the New Covenant, but
is a lively Proof and Testimony thereof; seeing they are immediately
illuminated and inspired for that Work, and their Ministry received from the
immediate Light and Teaching of God within, tends to direct men to him, that
they may be taught of him; and therein are helpful to men: in order to turn
them from Darkness to the Light, which no ways does imply any Defect in the
Light within, but an Alienation in man's Mind, till he be converted; for there
can be no Defect or Insufficiency n God, because he makes Use of apt
Instruments, suited to men's Weakness, and causes his own Works to praise
him; for he will not have his Works idle and useless. Now the Difference
between God's immediate Illumination or inward Work of Power, and his working
instrumentally by Ministers or Preaching, lies here; the one is the Cause, and
the other an Effect; the one is the absolute Way or Rule of knowing God, and
building up in his Knowledge; the other a subordinate Help for Direction to
that Way and Rule: He who is the true Light lights every man that comes
into the World: This is not said of his Ministers, but they are sent to direct
and turn men's Minds to the Light: I will pour out my Spirit upon all Flesh,
says the Lord: But so is it not said of his Ministers, though they direct to
wait for it, I will write my, Laws in their Hearts says the Lord; but the
doing of this is not asscribed to his Ministers, though they bear witness
thereof: Ye have an Unction from the Holy One; it is not said, Ye have it from
the Ministers. though it attend their Ministry, and they are taught thereby,
and direct others to it, and to abide in it: He that establishes us with you
in Christ, and has anointed us, is God, who also works all our Works in us:
It is not said, that his Ministers do so establish, anoint and work all in us,
though they be instrumental in God's Hand, to direct men to God and Christ (who
is with them) in whom is Life and Salvation, and from whom every good and
perfect Gift comes; and to whom be the Glory, and not to man.

From all which let it be seriously minded;

First, The Eternal Word, which is the true Light, lights every man that
comes into the World, in an immediate Way.

2dly, That the Promise or more plentiful Effusion or Pouring forth of the
Spirit, is also from God himself, and so in an immediate Way to be made good
and fulfilled unto them, who walk in and obey that Measure or Degree of his
divine Light or immediate Inshining, as it is in their Consciences.

3dly, God also works savingly by his Spirit, Light and Power, in an
immediate Way, in the Hearts of his People, both by illuminating their
Understanding, opening their spiritual Eyes, reviving their Souls, and
delivering them from under the Power of Darkness and Sin, giving them Victory
by Faith over Temptations, leading them through the spiritual Warfare and
Travils, and making them more then Conquerors, in all which they have their
Dependnece immediately upon God, who is a present and immediate Help in Times
of Trouble, as all that truly wait upon him in his immediate Light and
Discoveries, do experience.

Sect III.
The Prophecy and Testimony of the New Covenant and Gospel Dispensation rescued
from our Opposer's Perversions.

BUt to that Prophecy, They shall not teach every man his Neighbor, and every
Man his Brother, etc. Jer. 31. This Opposer says, Though the Phrase here used
seem absolute in Sound, yet it may well be understood in a comparative Sense,
bringing Instances, with his restrictive Meanings upon Joh. 6. 26. Hos. 6. 6.
Ephesians. 6. 12. upon the Particle [Not] as not so much, not only, wherein the
plain Scripture is not his Rule, but his Meaning unfairly added to limit this
Prophecy, besides the Extent of the Words; for says he, p. 82. The Meaning
may be, that they shall not so much need to do it, that is, teach every man
under the second Covenant, as under the first; yet he would have them always
teaching and al was learning, in a mediate Way only. But indeed, says he, the
Words and Phrase used here, seem to be a Strain of Elegancy often used in
Scriptures, when to set forth the great Abundance and Plenty of Things,
Expressions are used improperly and hyperbolically, in reference thereunto, and
(...)e not to be understood properly, but figuratively.

Observe here, serious Reader, that the plain Text of Scripture, foretelling
God's writing his Laws in the Hearts of his People, that they shall teach no
more every man his Neighbor, and every man his Brother, saying, know the Lord,
but all should know him: This he slightly turns off with this Meaning, or [May
be] that they shall not so much need to teach every man his Neighbor, saying,
know the Lord under the second Covenant as under the first; yet implying, that
they shall still much need to say, know the Lord under the New Covenant, though
not so much as under the Old: But how agrees this with the plain Words, I will
be their God, and they shall be my People; and they shall no more [or they
shall not] teach every man his Neighbor, and every man his Brother, saying,
know the Lord; for they shall all know me, from the least to the greatest? see
Jer. 31. 33, 34. Heb. 8. 10, 11. But these Expressions, the man reckons, are
used improperly and hyperbolically; and what is his Rule for thus censuring the
plain Words of the Prophet and Apostle, and reflecting upon them, equally with
us, as improperly proposing God's Method and New Covenant Way, to be his own
immediate Teaching and Knowledge of himself, wherein they shall not teach every
man his Neighbor; and yet in Contradiction to himself has confessed, That the
Work of Grace in men is most properly attributed to God, to Christ, etc. p. 19.
His Instances for such limited Meanings upon several Hyperbolical Expressions
(supposed) in Scripture, if granted, prove not these very Texts so improper or
hyperbolical as he renders them; and he evinceth not what his Rule is for thus
rendering these particular Texts improper and hyperbolical, which so
plentifully make for God's immediate Way of Illumination, Teaching and VVorking
under the New Covenant: If he say, other Instances of Scripture compared are
his Rule herein; I must deny that they prove these very Texts liable to such an
Exception or Limitation as he puts upon them: If he say that Reason is his
Rule, then he owns another Rule, as Judge and Determiner of the Sense of the
Scripture, then the Scriptures themselves: But if he pretend the Spirit to be
his Rule in this, then the Scriptures are not: Howbeit, the Spirit will not
contradict its own Sayings in the Scriptures; and we do not own his limited
Sense, Restriction, or private Interpretation of such an eminent Prophecy, as
this of the New Covenant; for no Prophecy of the Scripture is of any private
Interpretation; for the Prophecy came not in Old Time by the will of man, but
holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. And they who deny
the immediate Illumination thereof, are not like, truly to understand those
Prophecies and Scriptures that proceeded thence.

And to his asking, Why we should so much as once imagine, that th^se Words of
the Prophet should foretell, that under the New Covenant, there should be no
need of teaching by man's Ministry, when the whole Current of the New
Testament, both in Precept and Example, show the contrary, p. 82, 83. Which is
as much as to say, that the whole Current of Scriptures of the New Testament
shows, that there will be need under the New Covenant of Teaching by man's
Min^sty, which is to allow the New Covenant no Pre-eminence above the Old; for
in the Time of the Old Covenant the Priests Lips were to preserve the Peoples
Knowledge (which yet was not exclusive of all immediate Teaching) whereas in
the Dispensation of the New, Christ is both our King, Priest and Prophet, who
is given for a Covenant unto the People, for a Light unto the Gentiles, and to
be God's Salvation unto the Ends of the Earth: Therefore to conclude, that
there will be always need of Teaching by man's Ministry under the New
Covenant, is contrary both to the Tenor of the New Covenant the Tendence and
End of Christ's Ministry (Which was not of of man) and to John's plain
Testimony, Y^ have an Unction from the Holy One, and ye know all Things; the
Anointing which ye have recived of him, abides in you, and ye need not that
any man teach you, but as the same Anointing teaches you of all things, and is
Truth and is no Lie; and even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him.
Mark here, he sole Sufficiency and Absoluteness of the Anointing to those who
walk in the Light of it, and obey it.

Sect. IV.
Our Clearness from Error and Incongruity about the Light within, and our
Opposer justly chargeable with both.

IT is true, that we affirm the Light of Christ within to be an absolute Rule,
teaching men that follow it what they ought to know, believe and do; and that
it is necessary to call upon Men to believe and obey it, forasmuch as many do
not: But I must look upon this man's Inference upon us in this Case [as
supposing for Truth that which is a manifest, gross, and most dangerous and
pernicious Error] to be unjust, viz. That we suppose, it is not as well
necessary to teach men by the Scriptures and by the Ministry to know and
believe what is necessary to their Salvation, as it is to persuade them to do
what is necessary therete, p. 83, 84. Which falsely supposes a Defect in the
Light and in our Ministry, directing thereto: Whereas the Light of Christ is
able to teach men, to know, believe, and do what is necessary to Salvation (and
to open the Scriptures) as Christ said, Believe in the Light, that ye may be
the Children of the Light. And how could they be such if the Light did not
teach them, both to know, believe and practice what is necessary to Salvation?
yet that many men are not come into the Light, though it shine in their
Darkness, is very plain, while they rebel against the Light, and know not the
Ways of it, because they abide not in the Paths of it: But what is this to
those who are come into the divine Light, and holy Unction within? As for his
charging us with Incongruity of Opinion and Practice, dissembling the Matter,
Tergiversatton and Shuffling, Inconsistency of Pretenses and Practices,
Pretenses for a blind, a perfect Piece of -- p. 93, 94, 95. What Is now the
Matter, this man appears so envious and reviling? where is the Incongruity? but
that men being taught of God himself by his Light and Spirit within, now under
the New Covenant, need not be taught by men; and yet for all that, we take upon
us to teach the People our selves, p. 93.

Here is no more Incongruity then in God's Teaching, both immediately and
instrumentally, in both which his own Power appears and operates: We take not
upon us to teach People our selves, nor to hold forth man's Ministry; but
Christ teaches in us and by us (also showing forth his own Praise in a
Testimony) without him we can do nothing, and hi^ Presence goes along with us
in a living Ministry, both to open the Scriptures, and to show men their Duty,
both in believing and obeying what is necessary: and so our Gospel is not of
man, nor by man, but from Christ, and therefore not guilty of this man's unjust
Imputation, either of pernicious Error or Incongruity.

As for being against all other men's Teaching but our own, p. 94. And yet for
the Teaching of the Light within: Unto this I say, we are satisfied that our
Ministry is from God and his Light, and have no Reason to have any men's
Teaching whatsoever imposed upon us, which does not flow from the Light, nor
from God's immediate Inspiration and Teaching, which they opposing, their
Ministry is but of man, and by the Will of man. And therefore it is no
Inconsistency in our Principle and Practice to confess to the Teaching of
Christ's Light within, and to teach others as that teaches us, in order to
turn them to the Light, that they may be taught, as we are; and so to deny all
mere men's Teaching, who are not taught by the Light within, but gainsay God's
immediate Teaching in these Days, as this man does; who also falsely accuses
us with this Error, viz. That God does by a Light, created in every man,
sufficiently teach them what they ought to believe and do, p. 87. But this is
his Mistake and false Foundation, on which much of his Structure is framed; as
also in p. 15. and p. 41, 42. he takes it for granted, that it is but a natural
Light in men that we direct them to; but this is contradicted by himself, in
his confessing, That it is God, Christ, the holy Spirit, by immediate
Illumination of our Minds, that does show us what we ought to believe and do;
and that this is our Notior, p. 13. But his is, not by God's immediate Teaching
and Operation, p. 40. So, be sure, God was not with him, in his Study, as his
Teacher, in bringing forth his Book against God's immediate Teaching and
Operation: And the man is grossly mistaken, in concluding it to be a created,
natural Light in man, whilst he confesses, We ground our selves much upon Joh.
1. 9. where it is said of Christ, That was the true Light which lights every
man that comes into the World, p. 41. whereas that true Light was neither
created nor natural, as a Thing made; for in him was Life, and the Life was the
Light of men, Joh. 1. 4. This Life was not created nor natural in that Sense,
but supernatural and divine: However, this man gives us his Sense of this
Scripture cited, viz. That Christ indeed as God, Creator, does enlighten every
man that comes into the World, with the Faculty of Reason and Understanding, by
which he may know that there is a God, that he is to be worshipped, and that he
is placable, and the Difference between moral Good and Evil in many things, p.
42.

And this he calls Natural Light, supposing it sufficient to direct the Heathen
to as much as God expects from them; but not sufficient to direct those that
live under the Gospel, to believe, and do what they are bound, viz. To believe,
Jesus to be the Christ, the Son of God, and Savior of the World, and that upon
Pain of Damnation, p. 42.

Serious Reader, Consider the Tendency and Import of these Things; as, first,
He grants, that Christ enlightens every man that comes into the World with such
a Light, as that he may know that there is a God, that he is to be worshipped,
and that he is placable: And 2dly, grants this, a Light sufficient to direct
the Heathen to as much as God expects from them. And is not this then in order
to Salvation? If they obey what God expects from them, shall they not be saved?
See the man's Contradiction, having before denied, that Christ lights every
man, in order to his Salvation without outward Teaching; when here it is
granted, he enlightneth every man, even the Heathen, with a Light sufficient to
direct them to as much as God expects from them: But 3dly, in calling this a
natural, created Light, he egregiously errs; for how should the Heathen or any
man else, know that there is a God, that he is to be worshipped, and that he is
placable, or be directed to as much as God expects from them, by that which is
natural and created, when the Things of God are beyond the natural man's Reach
and Understanding, and only to be discerned spiritually? 4thly, Whereas this
man supposes two such different Lights from Christ in man, viz. the one which
he calls the Faculty of Reason and Understanding in the Heathen, sufficient to
direct them in the Knowledge and Worship of God, and to as much as he expect
from them; and the other in them that live under the outward Preaching of the
Gospel; the first saving only to the Heathen, the second only to the professed
Christians; the first sufficient to give the Knowledge of God and his Worship,
the second the Knowledge of Christ and Salvation by him. I must deny his
Distinction of two such Lights in men, as unscriptural an unsound; and I must
tell him, he has brought us no Scripture Proof to convince us thereof, that
there are two such different Lights in man, thus limited or distinguished, the
one as from God to Heathens, the other as from Christ to Christians; and yet
both directing to the same End, to wit, Salvation. This kind of mangled
confused Work is fit to darken Peoples Minds from the Knowledge of God and
Christ, and Salvation; whereas that first Chapter of John is plain, without any
such confused Distinction about the Light, or Division between God and Christ,
as this man makes about the Light; for there it is, In him was Life, and the
Life was the Light of men, ver. 4. And that was the true Light that lights
every man that comes into the World, ver. 9. Mark here, this Life or Light of
Christ is but one and the same forever, the Light of men throughout all
Generations; yea, he was that true Light that lights every man that comes
into the World, whose Life or Light cannot (without Blasphemy) be deemed
natural and created: Besides, it appears gross Confusion and palpable
Contradiction in this Opposer, to conclude that Light not sufficient to direct
men to believe Jesus to be Christ, the Son of God, and Savior of the World,
which yet is sufficient to direct the Heathen to as much as God expects from
them, that is, to moral Goodness, to know and worship God; and consequently, to
lead them to Salvation; for in every Nation, he that fears God and works
Righteousness, is accepted: Now how they should know and worship God, and be
saved, without some living Knowledge and Belief of his Son, Jesus Christ, I
cannot see nor understand, since that by no other Name under Heaven can men be
saved; and he that believes not the Son of God shall not see Life, but the
Wrath of God abides on him, Joh. 3. 36. cited by this man, who also confesses
the Son of God to be the Savior of the World, p. 42. Again, no man comes unto
God, but by his Son, who is therefore universally held forth, and given for a
Light to the Heathen, to be God's Salvation to the Ends of the Earth; and it is
the World's Sin that they believe not in the Son of God, and for this his
Spirit reproves them. But since it is granted, that the Heathen by that Light
of Christ in them, may know and worship God, and practice good Morality, and as
much as God expects from them; its granted, that they may be godly, and serve
God by the Light in them: but how any should be godly Men and no Christians, I
must confess we are yet to seek, and not like to have any Scripture Proof
thereof from our Opposer, or any else of his Persuasion; for it were as
uncharitable to judge all void of Christianity, who have not the Name
Christian, as it were untrue to reckon all Christians, who have but the Name
and Profession of Christianity, seeing that it is not the Name or Profession
outward that makes true Christians, but the divine Life, Power, Unction and
Possession of the Nature of Christianity inwardly; as he is not a Jew that is
one outward, but he is a Jew that is one inward; and Circumcision is that of
the Heart in the Spirit, and not in the Letter.

And as for this man's Knowledge of Christ, that he has by Oral Tradition, and
that he reckons is derived down successively by outward Teaching without
immediate Revelation or Illumination, p. 47, 84. It is no living or saving
Knowledge; and such Method as this man proposes for the Knowledge of Christ (as
in Opposition to his Immediate Enlightening) is not God's Means: He talks
something like a Papist; and his Work against immediate Illumination tends to
divert peoples Minds from God's inward Illumination, and and from waiting for
the Revelation of his Son in them: And what is this, but to lead People to be
subjected under the Pope and Traditions, although many of the Church of Rome
have confessed to the Truth of divine Illumination and immediate Inspiration
more then this man has done, though in Practice, she manifests her self to be
both apostatized and estranged from the divine Light within.

Sect. V.
His silly Temporizing, in espousing the Hireling Priests Quarrel against us.

AS to his wishing, That we did not give too much Occasion to suspect our
Integrity, accusing us with making sad Outcries aginst the public Ministry,
p. 88, 89, 90, 91.
one as well as another, without Distinction: and that we seek to make them
odious to the People for their taking Money of them, as Rewaerd of their
Labors; and that we compare them with the false Prophets and bad Priests of
old, of whom it is said, that the Priests preach for Hire, and the Prophets
divine for Money; and then he alleges the Priests under the Law taking Money
or Moneys worth, as the Provision that God made for them, which was Tithes; and
says he, when their Tithes were detained and kept back from them, God
accounted himself robbed.

To all which I answer, that we have great Reason to cry out against that
Ministry and those Priests, who preach for Hire, Lucre, Tithes, or forced
Maintenance, contrary to the Practice of Christ's Ministers, who as they did
freely receive, did freely give: And such as preach for Hire, and force
Maintenance, suing men at Law for Tithes, and imprison such as cannot for
Conscience sake to Christ pay them Tithes: such Priests are unnatural and
hard-hearted, not at all like Christ's Ministers, who coveted no man's Meat,
nor Drink, nor Gold, nor Silver, nor Apparel; but alas, these covetous Priests
trouble and cumber men in Courts for Tithes, and cast men in Prisons and Holes,
to the Ruin of many poor Families, and causing diverse to suffer in Goals till
Death, as they have done diverse times for a small value; these Priests value
their Tythe-Pigs, etc. more then they do the Lives of innocent men: Oh
unnatural, inhuman Hard-heartedness and Cruelty itself; and oh gross
Hypocrisy, for such as are guilty thereof, to call themselves Ministers of the
Gospel and Messengers of Christ, who are thus unlike him and his Ministers! As
for those that robbed God in Tithes and Offerings; these were in the time of
the Law and first Covenant, when there was a Commandment from God for both, and
to bring the Tithes to the Storehouse, that the Fatherless, Mal. 3. 8, 9, 19.
Deuteronomy. 14. 28, 29:
Widows and Strangers might be relieved, as well as the Priests; and they
robbed God, who did not bring their Tithes to the Storehouse.

But Christ Jesus the everlasting Priest, is come, and has changed the
Priesthood that took Tithes, and made of Necessity a Change also of the Law,
and a disannulling of the Commandment: See Heb. Chap. 7. But I shall say little
here about this Oppression of Tithes; let the Nation's long Experience thereof
speak, and I refer the Reader to these Treatises, viz. A. P. his great Case of
Tithes, and F. Howgil's great Case of Tithes; and so to consider the Rise and
Continuance of them.

And it is such Priests as this man himself declares against, that we disown;
as namely, such as are departed out of the Way and caused many to stumble, whom
the Lord has made contemptible and base before the People, who have not p. 90,
91.
kept his Ways, but have been partial, And so the false Prophets that have
seen Vanity, and divined Lies, saying, Thus says the Lord, when God has not
spoken (and these are highly guilty thereof, who now oppose God's immediate
Inspeaking) and have done so to get Peoples Money by pleasing them, in
prophesying Peace to them, when the true Prophets prophesied of Judgment, and
were persecuted for it, Ezekiel. 22. 25, 28.

But says he, It Is possible and too probable, that there may be some, who for
Worldly and Fleshly. Respects may p. 91.
greatly fall short of a faithful Discharge of their Duty toward the Souls
under their Charge: And if there be any, that by daubing with untempered
Mortar, do betray them; I am no Advocate for such, they shall bear their
Burden. And yet he is an Advocate for the Tyth-taking Priests and Ministers,
who receive Money of the People, as a Reward of their Labors: And thus he
varies, shuffles, wheels about and insinuates, like a manpleaser and
Temporizer; one while he talk, like an Anabaptist concerning the Light within
as natural, p. 41, 86, 87.
created; and his tying up the Spirit's Baptism to its Effusion in miraculous
Gifts: Another while, like one turned back to the National Priests: Another p.
56. p. 88, 89, 90, 123. p. 47. 84.
while, like a Papist, or one popishly affected, for Oral Tradition and a
Knowledge of Christ derived successively by outward Teaching from the first
Preachers: Another while he talks like one Atheistical, in rendering that Light
spoken of in p. 41, 42.
Joh. 1. 9. (which lights every man that comes into the World) but a natural
Light and not sufficient for Salvation.

But again, to what he grants of the Corruption of some public Ministers, who
are wordly and fleshly Daubers and Betrayers, I shall grant to what he further
adds, That it is unreasonable and Unchristian to condemn the Righteous with the
Wicked, and to censure all for somes sake: This indeed were unchristian, but
unjustly cast upon us, p. 92. Howbeit, I shall proffer him fairly, that if he
can show us such Ministers, as are Righteous, men fearing God and hating
Covetousness, that teach the same Doctrine the Apostles taught, which the Light
of Christ within witnesses to, p. 88. And that can prove their Call and
Authority to preach, to be from Christ, and that approve themselves as his
Ministers, in all Humility and Faithfulness, we shall own them; but while we do
not find such among the public Parish Priests and Ministers, who force Tithes
and Hire from People; we ought not to be blamed for our Separation from them.

Sect. VI.
Our Opposer's Confusion and self-Contradictions collected and examined.

THis Opposer of Enthusiasm has run himself into manifest Contradictions,
whereof these following are some.

He seems to plead for Christ's injoyning his Followers to be humble and lowly
in Heart, to esteem others better then themselves, to speak Evil of no man, in
Meekness to instruct, to overcome Evil with Good, and not to judge, and the
like, p. 6.

And yet in Contradiction to himself, he takes upon him to judge and vilify
us, to speak Evil of us; yea, to have been walking in Darkness, and to be but
carnal, etc. p. 9. Does he not here judge?

That all the Children of God are taught of God, and need not any other
Teacher. This our Sense and Method he opposes to God's Way, as being quite
different, p. 14. And says, that God's Way and Method of directing men what to
believe and do, is not by his immediate Teaching and Operation, p. 40.

But in plain Contradiction to himself, he confesses, That the Scripture
attributes it (to wit, the Work of saving Grace) to God, to Christ, to the holy
Spirit, p. 18. and says, Indeed the Work of saving Grace in men is most
PROPERLY attributed to God, to Christ, p. 19.

That the Light, mentioned Joh. 1. 9. which lights every man that comes into
the World, does enlighten men by natural Light; and that Christ, as God, does
enlighten every man that comes into the World with the Faculty of Reason, and
affords no other Light to the Heathen, then this natural Light, as he calls it,
p. 41, 42.

Yet in plain Contradiction, he grants, That the Scripture speaks of Christ's
being [in] men; and Christ and God every where present, and se in all men, and
that the essential Presence of Christ, as God, is present to every man, p. 20,
21.

Observe Reader, how plainly he has broke the Neck of his Cause here: For if
Christ, as God, be essentially present in all men, and to every man, and this
God be Light, then the Light that is in every man is not natural nor created,
as he has affirmed the Light of Christ, as God, to be: And as for his
Distinction between the essential Presence of Christ and his virtual Presence,
p. 20, 21. it is unscriptural: Neither can we believe, that the Presence of God
and Christ are so distinguished or divided, as this man implies, viz. That
God's essential Presence should be in all men, and yet not Christ's virtual
Presence: What Scripture has he for these Words? Is there any Virtue in
Christ's Presence, that is not in God's Presence? Is not the Father, Son and
Holy Spirit one Being, though different as to Relation and Degrees of
Manifestation? But how plainly contradictory is it, one while to confess
Christ's being in men, his essential Presence, as God, to be in all men; and
yet that his Light in the Heathen (or greatest Part of men) is natural and
created. O monstrous Inconsistency!

He affirms, that the Form of Doctrine delivered to the Christians, to wit, the
Scriptures, was to be the Rule of Faith and Christian Practice, to rule and
govern themselves by, p. 22, 23.

And yet confesses, That those who are sincere, make it their daily Care and
Endeavor, to walk according to the Light and Guidance of that Rule that has
its Seat in their Conscience, p. 40.

Observe. Here he has found another Rule then the Scripture, to wit, the Light
in the Conscience: Though it is true, the Apostles Doctrine contains Rules; but
the Light within that gave it forth, was The Rule, the Chief or Highest Rule,
for Guidance and Power, and that wherein was the Power of Rule and Government
to all true Christians.

He gives this Judgment against us, viz. That in Truth there is no Light in us,
how much soever we vainly boast of it, he says, p. 40.

And yet has confessed, That the essential Presence of Christ, as God, is in
all men; and that Christ does enlighten every man with a Faculty of Reason or
natural Light: by which he has acknowledged some Light to be in every man,
though it is true, they that speak not according to the Word, it is because
there is no Morning in them; yet it follows not, that there is no Light at all
in them; for there may be some Light in them before the Morning.

Upon Joh. 1. 9. he says, that there is no such thing, as that Christ so
enlightens all men (as with what he ought to believe and do, in order to his
Salvation) without outward Teaching, can be proved, p. 41.

And yet confesses, That Christ indeed, as God, does enlighten every man, by
which he may know, that there is a God, that he is to be worshipped, that he is
placable; and that this may be a Light sufficient to direct the Heathen, to do
as much as God expects from them, if they live up to it.

But in Contradiction again, He calls this a natural Light, not sufficient,
etc. p. 42.

Observe. What! A Light sufficient to give the Knowledge of God and his Worship,
and that he is placable, and to direct the Heathen to as much as he expects
from them, and yet not sufficient to enlighten men with a Knowledge of what
they ought to believe and do, in order to Salvation? Is not this palpable
Contradiction, That Men may by the Light within be directed to acknowledge and
worship God, and to as much as he expects from them; and yet not be saved?
These can never hold together any more then that the Light in the Heathen may
be sufficient to direct them to as much as God expects, and yet not to believe
in his Son for Salvation, according to page 42. As if God did not require all
men to believe in his Son, when their not believing in him is the very thing
for which his Spirit reproves the World of Sin; and he that believes not in
the Son of God is condemned Note, That men's not believing in the Sou, and their
rejecting his light within, are equivalent, and bothtend to the same End
already, because he has not believed in the Name of the only begotten Son of
God. And this is the Condemnation, that Light is come into the World, and men
love Darkness rather then Light, because their Deeds are Evil, Joh. 3. 18, 19.
So that it is evident; That Light is come into the World, that men may believe
in the Name of the Son of God, and escape Condemnation.

Again, he errs in saying, Paul knew of no such Way to propagate the Faith (as
immediate Revelation, and inward Teaching of the Light within) after it was
once set on foot in an extraordinary Way, p. 46.

And this he has contradicted, in his confessing, That the Work of Grace in
men, is most properly attributed to God, to Christ; and that the Scripture
attributes it to God, to Christ, to the holy Spirit, p. 18. And also he had,
almost granted, that the holy Spirit may be communicated to men by immediate
Revelation, p. 28.

Observe. So then God may and does work by his immediate Power and Spirit, for
the begetting men into the true Faith, and it is only this Spirit, immediately
attending true Ministers, that makes their Preaching effectual for the turning
men to the Word of Faith in their Hearts.

Whereas the Tenor and Stress of this man's Work is against Enthusiasm in the
best sense, even against being savingly illuminated in an immediate way; and
says, that the plentiful Effusion of the Spirit is far from giving any
Countenance to our Opinion of the Spirit's being given to teach men immediately
by internal Illumination, page 60. And on John 16. 13. he accounts that this
is not a Promise to guide all Christians by its immediate Motion, but a Promise
to his Apostles, page 61.

And yet in Contradiction to himself in this, and in Concession to the Truth,
he in words assents to the Operation of God's Grace and good Spirit, page 15.
And that men are said in Scripture to be born of the Spirit, to be born of the
immortal Seed of the Word, page 18, 19. But then he is nconsistent again, in
accounting these different Causes, he has also confessed the essential
Presence of Christ as God, to be in men, p. 20. And that in Revel. 2. and Chap.
3. it is seven times said, He that has an Ear let him hear what the Spirit
says to the Churches, p. 27. And that Christ's Ministers are Ministers of the
New Testament; not of the Letter, but of the Spirit, p. 33. That he accompanies
their Ministration with the Presence of his Grace and Power, p. 38. And also he
asserts to the inward Assistance of his Spirit, p. 41. And says, It is the
Spirit that bears witness, because the Spirit is Truth, p. 55. And on 1 John
2. Ye need not that any man teach you, but as the same Anointing teaches you;
he grants that the Apostle's Meaning must be, That they needed not from him, or
any other man any teaching, that could give them greater Assurance of any thing
then that Anointing gave them of Jesus his being the Christ, and of the Truth
of that Doctrine; that Anointing being God's Witness from Heaven, page 68. And
that the Spirit doubtless is not wanting to assist the sincere Endeavors of
men, in searching after the Sense of the Scriptures, p. 69.

Howbeit, for men to be guided by the internal Teachings of the Spirit, without
outward Teaching, this he calls our Wild Notion; And yet cites Romans 8. 14. As
many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God, p. 71. And Gal.
5. 18. If ye are led by the Spirit, ye are not under the Law, p. 73. And Paul
exhorted, Ephesians. 2. Be filled with the Spirit, in order to their speaking to
themselves in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, Ephesians. 5. 18, 19. p. 74.
And he cites Acts 26. 17, 18. viz. Unto whom I now send thee, to open their
Eyes, and to turn them from Darkness to Light, p. 85. Now I ask; If this
Darkness was not within, that they were to be turned from? And if this Light,
they were to be turned to, was not also within in some Degree, and that in an
immediate Way? And also, Did not the Apostle turn the Gentiles to the Light,
that they might receive Forgiveness of Sins, and an Inheritance among them that
are sanctified by Faith that is in Christ?

Further, he confesses to the Truth in these words, If all good Christians
then had been guided by an infallible Light within, they would not have needed
to have bin taught and re-taught what were the first Principles of the Oracles
of God, as some of them were, Hebr. 5. p. 105. Is it not plain here, that he
has placed the Fault or Deficiency upon those that needed so to be taught, as
being awanting to themselves (not following the Infallible Light within) and
not upon the Light it self? but justified it as a sufficient Rule and Teacher;
and that they that are guided by it need not men's Teaching. And he also
confesses, That the Humble God will teach, and the Meek he will guide in
Judgment, Psalm. 25. And also, that the Spirituality of Christians is such, that
they are Partakers of the spiritual and divine Nature, or Likeness to Jesus
Christ in Purity, in Lowliness, Humility, Meckness, and in Love to God, and
Charity to men, in Peace and Gentleness, in Contempt of the World, etc. on the
Account of which spiritual Qualifications Christians are said to be one Spirit
with Christ; and by this Spirit and Temper we know that we dwell in him, and he
in us; and if any man have not the Spirit of Christ in some measure, he is none
of his, page 119. Is not this a plain Confession to the Immediateness of
Christ's In-dwelling in us? And does not he then teach us by himself
immediately? It is also confessed, We are also exhorted in a due Sense of our
own Weakness and Insufficiency, and of the great Need we have of the constant
Assistance of God's holy Spirit in all, to make instant and important
Supplication to God for it, p. 122. Here he plainly grants to the Necessity of
Divine Inspiration and immediate Assistance of God's holy Spirit; which plainly
overthrows and confuteth the Body of his Work to the contrary.

And further observe, that in his Postscript he confesses, That he has not so
plainly represented the Nature of Faith, which is the condition of the New
Covenant; and that he that Believes and considers Christ's Doctrine, must needs
be under the Influence of the most powerful Motives to Repentance of a bad, and
lead a good Life: And that Faith works that Change in men, by which they become
new Creatures, are born of God, and sanctified; and that it does evidence to
the Soul of things not seen; and that a Believer is described by his coming to
Christ, John 6. 35. For men's coming to learn of him is the Effect of their
believing him to be the Son of God; and Believers are described by the
Receiving of Christ, John 1. 12. As many as received him, to them he gave Power
to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name; and that
Believers are described by their trusting in Christ or relying on him, Ephesians. 1.
12. p. 135.

Now mark, serious Reader, how he has confessed to the Truth of Believers
coming to Christ to learn of him, receiving Christ, trusting in, and relying on
Christ: And what is this but a Confession to a Believer's immediate Enjoyment
of Christ himself, and his immediate Teaching and Assistance: For if men come
to Christ, to learn of him, or be taught by Christ himself; is not this
immediate, and the End of Outward Teaching, to those that come to this Blessed
Attainment: See how the man has justified that Enthusiasm (as he calls it)
which he he has bestowed so much Pains against.

Now Reader, by this time thou may see where the Stress of the Controversy
consists, and that it is not about the word [Enthusiasm] but about the Doctrine
of God's Immediate Way of Enlightening and Working; which this man in a Way of
Opposition is pleased to term Enthusiasm, and the Quakers, Enthusiasts, for
owning that Doctrine.

Some other more particular Fling sand Groundless Objections he has against us
of less moment, which I pass by as Trifles not deserving my Time and treating
about.

G. W.

A Postscript by another Hand.
ENthusiasm all along used by Plutarch in Discourse about Apollo's Nu^n or
Prophetess ceasing to give Oracles in Verse, and about the ceasing of Oracles,
which was in his time, about Anno 100. after the Apostle John's Decease; this
word Enthusiasm he uses to that Divination and Inspiration, which the Heathen
Oracles gave through their Priests.

Clemens Alexandrinus writes, that in his time, which was almost 200 years of
Christ, Divine Inspiration was in their Assemblies: For in his 3d Book of his
Paedagogu^, cap. 11. thus he complains of some, who did not abide in that which
they had tasted in the Assembly, nor walk in it, and worthy of it, or else
dissembled it; says he, These putting away the inspired Thing ((...)) of the
Congregation, after their Departure thence, are like them with whom they
converse; or else they are found to be such as they were not thought to be.

Eusebius, lib. 9. Eccl. Hist. says, Prophesying continued till Constantine's
time, which was above the 300 year. of Christ his words are these, If any man
inspired by the Grace of God should speak unto the People, they all with great
Silence, fixing their Eyes upon him, gave such Attention, as if he had brought
them some Errand from Heaven. See Jacob Acontius, Satan's Stratagems, p. 128.

The same Clem. Alex. says, Stromat. lib. 5. Exodus 33. Moses says, Show me
thy self; evidently noting, that God cannot be taught to men, nor expressed by
words to men; but that he can only be known by that Power which is of himself.

The same, lib. 2. cap 4. Paedagog. says, Before sleep it is a holy thing to
give Thanks to God, as enjoying his Bounty and Favor, so as we go to sleep
divinely inspired.

The word is, (...) divinely, inwardly; for he is a Greek Writer. Of (...)
contracted is made (...), whence comes the word (...), Enthusiasm, not
Enthysiasm, as it is in the Latin Dictionary, of (...), which is another word
signifying sacrificing. I have found where the Mistake is by s^arching the
Greek; so it must be written Enthusiasm.

There was a Sect called Enthusiasts, which Theodoret speaks of in his 4 Book
of his Ecclesiastical History.

The word in the Scripture is (...), theopneustos; the Scripture is called so,
2 Timothy 3. 16. (...), graphe theopneustos, Scripture breathed of God; scriptura
a deo spirata.

Spencer of Prophecy, p. 110. A Synod in Germany, called on purpose against
vulgar Prophecies, declined it, saying, Yet no Church, or Consistory, or
University had altogether rejected or condemned such kind of new Prophecys; and
why would we be first?

Cyprian. Epist. 71. says, Many things are better revealed to several.

Clemens Hom. a very ancient Book in the primitive Times, says, That Operation
is more certain then Vision, see p 726, 728.

See Book of Martyrs, 2 volumn, of the Prophecy of Huss; and certain others in
the History of Luther. 3 vol. of Dr. Sands, John Rogers, etc. John Fox himself
touching the Lady Hennage's Recovery; see his Life.

Bishop Jewel foretold the Reformation, Bp. Ridley's Burning, and his own
Sickness, and then the precise day of his death; see his Life.

THE END

