THE CHRISTIANITY OF THE PEOPLE Commonly Called QUAKERS ASSERTED.

Being a brief Account of their Faith in Relation to diverse Matters wherein
their Christian Belief is Questioned.

Published in behalf of the People of GOD called Quakers by some of them.

Luke 6. 22. Blessed are ye when Men shall hate you, and when they shall
separate you from their Company, and shall Reproach you, and cast out your Name
as evil for the Son of Man's Sake. Acts 24 14 After the way which they call
Heresy, so Worship I the GOD of my Fathers. Printed in the Year, 1696.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THere has been of late Years many Aspersions cast upon Us, whereby the People
in some Places (especially in the West of this Nation of Scotland) have been
much stirred up against us, and much hard and cruel Usage have we Suffered; and
have often been in danger of our Lives, both in our Meetings and in the
Streets, and sometimes in our own Houses: And since the Sitting of the Late
General Assembly at Edinburgh, what a mighty Clamor has been among the People
through a great part of the Nation concerning us? Some saying, we must be all
Excommunicated, and that none must Converse or Deal with us, others saying, we
must all be Banished, The rude Multitude that abuse us often threatening us with
the General Assembly, and taking occasion from thence (especially in our
Meeting at Edinburgh) to be more Wicked, Profane and Loose in their Carriage
toward us than they were before: And the only Reason that is given for this
Confused Noise about us, and for all the Cruel and Unchristian Usage we meet
with, is it not the same that was alleged against the LORD and his People by
their Adversaries and Persecutors in former Ages? that is, under pretense of
being Deceivers, Deluders, Heretics, Schismatics, possessed with the Devil
etc.?

Did not the Chief Priests and Pharisees tell People that Christ was a
Deceiver, and that he had a Devil? John. 7. 47. Mat. 2. 63. Luke 11. 15. John
8. 48. and did not the People revile and persecute Him under that pretense; and
were not the Apostles accounted Deceivers, Turners of the World upside-down,
and deemed unworthy to Live upon the Earth; 2 Cor. 6. 8. Acts 27. 50. And was
not Paul called a Pestilent Fellow, a Mover of Sedition, a Ringleader of the
Sect of the Nazarines? etc. Acts 17. 6. Acts 24. 5. And were not all the
Revilings, Scoffings, Stonings, Imprisonments, and other hard usage that they
met with, inflicted upon them under those hateful Names and Epithites
aforementioned; whereby the dark Priests, benighted Elders and Proud Pharisees
and others stirred up the People against them? and did not the Heathens put
Wild-beasts Skins upon the Christians to make them appear like Beasts that the
Dogs might be stirred up to Devour them?

And was it not under the black and detestable Names of Heretics; Deluders,
Schismatics, ( and sometimes of) Socerers (or Witches) That the Popish Clergy
incensed the People against the Ancient Protestants, prohibiting them all Trade
and Commerce, exposing them to cruel Scoffings and Revilings, and at last
Murdering many Thousands of them ( as may be seen at large in the Books of
Martyrs) Was ever Christ or his Apostles found in such cruel practices or
stirring People up thereunto. Did he not rebuke those Disciples that desired
the destruction of some that would not receive Him, telling them they knew not
what Spirit they were off, and that he was not come to destroy men's lives but
to save them? Joh. 9. 55, 56. And were not the Stoners, Abusers, Scoffers and
envious Murdering Persecutors, and the Priests and Teachers that stirred them
up thereunto, such as were filling up the measure of their iniquity and drawing
down the Righteous and terrible Judgments of God upon themselves? Mat. 23. 32,
33, 34, 35, Acts. 7. 51. 52. So our earnest desire is, that they who have shown
themselves so eager to be found in such cruel Practices in this our Age, may
seriously consider what Spirit they are off, and whose Steps they are treading
in, and that they may Repent before it be too late.

Now we having often been wrongfully accused (and from thence hateful Names
put upon us) with denying the Trinity, the Holy Scriptures, that we undervalue
the Merits and Sufferings of CHRIST; Some saying, we deny His Divinity, others
saying, we deny His Humanity, The Ordinances, The Resurrection, and the Great
Day of Judgment etc.

We have therefore found a Concern upon us to Publish a brief Relation of what
our belief has been and still is concerning those and other weighty points of
Christian Doctine, and so leave it to the serious Consideration of the
empartial Reader what ground there is for that mighty Clamor that has been
and yet continues against us, and whether it be not like theirs of Old that
cried out, Men of Israel Help? etc. Acts 21. 28.

The CHRISTIANITY of the People commonly called QVAKERS Asserted. Being a Brief
account of Their Faith in Relation to several weighty Matters, wherein Their
Christian Belief is Questioned.
Question. What Is your Belief concerning the Blessed Trinity, as our Term is?
Answer, Our Belief is, that in the Unity of the Godhead there is Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, being those Three Divine Witnesses that bear Record in Heaven,
the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit; and that these Three are One,
according to Holy Scripture Testmony. Mat. 28. 19. 1 John 5. 7.

Quest. Do you Believe the Divinity and Humanity of Jesus Christ the Eternal
Son of God, or that Jesus Christ is truly God and Man?

Answ. Yes, we verily believe that Jesus Christ is truly God and Man, according
as Holy Scripture Testifies of Him, God over all blessed for ever, he true God
and Eternal Life, the One Mediator between God and Men, even he Man Christ
Jesus. Joh. 1. 1. 2. Romans 9. 5. 1 John 5. 20. 1 Timothy 2. 5.

Quest. Do you believe and expect Salvation, and Justification, by the
Righteousness and Merits of Jesus Christ, or by your own Righteousness or Works?

Answ. By Jesus Christ his Righteousness, Merits and Works, and not by our own,
God is not indebted to us for our deservings, but we to him for is free Grace
in Christ Jesus, whereby we are saved through Faith in Him not of our selves)
and by his Grace enabled truly and acceptably to serve and ^ollow Him as He
requires; He is our All in All, who works all in us ^at is well pleasing to
God. Romans 3. 24. Ephesians. 2. 8. 9.

Quest. Do you believe Remission of Sin, and Redemption through the Sufferings,
Death, and Blood of Christ?

Answ. Yes, through Faith in Him as he Suffered and Died for all Men, ^ave
himself a Ransom for all, and His Blood being shed for the Remission ^f Sins;
so all they who sincerely believe and obey Him, receive the Benefits ^d blessed
Effects of his suffering and dying for them, they by Faith in His ^ame, receive
and partake of that Eternal Redemption which he has ^tained for us, who gave
Himself for Us that he might Redeem us from (...) Iniquity; He died for our
Sins, and rose again for our Justification; and if (...) walk in the Light as
He is in the Light, we have fellowship one with another; and the Blood of Jesus
Christ His Son cleanses us from all Sin, 1 John 2. 2. 2 Cor. 5 14. 1 John 1. 7.

Quest. Do you believe and own the Divine Offices of Jesus Christ in his Church?

Answ. Yes, verily we sincerely believe and own Christ, not only as He is the
Light of the World, enlightening every Man coming into it; but also that he is
given for a Leader, and for a Commander. And that He is both King, Priest, and
Prophet to and over His Church and People. He is the Minister of the Sanctuary
which the Lord pitched, and not Man, and we are to hear Him in all things. Isa.
55. 4. Zech. 9. 9. Heb. 3. 1. Deuteronomy 18. 15. 18. Heb. 8. 2.

Quest. Do you believe or own Baptism as Essential to Christianity, or
necessary to Salvation, and for the Ingrafting us into Christ and His Church?

Answ. We believe and are fully persuaded, That Baptism which is Essential to
Christianity, and the saving Baptism, or the Cause without which none can be
true Christians, or saved, is the Inward Spiritual washing of Regeneration by
the Word of Life. This is the saving Baptism into Christ and His Church, which
produces the Answer of a Good Conscience toward God, of which the outward was
a Figure, 1 Pet. 3. 21. This is that One Baptism of Christ by one Spirit into
that one Body, whereof Christ is Head. Ephesians. 4. 5.

As to Dipping or Sprinkling Infants, or Young Children we find no Precept or
Precedent in Holy Scripture for the practice thereof, and therefore we cannot
think our not believing it Essential (or necessary) to Salvation, or making
Christians; a sufficient Argument to prove us no Christians (unless it can be
proved that none are saved without it, and that all are saved that have it.)
Considering also what is positively affirmed in the 39 Articles of the Church of
England as in the 6th. Article, That whatsoever is not Read in the Holy
Scriptures, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required of any Man, That
it should be believed as an Article of the Faith, or be thought requisite or
necessary to Salvation. And in the 20th. Article, That the Church ought not to
Decree or Enforce anything against or besides Holy Writ, to be believed for
necessity of Salvation; And in Article 21. That things ordained by General
Councils as necessary to Salvation, have neither strength nor Authority, unless
that they be taken out of Holy Scripture. And in the Westminster Confession of
Faith professed by the Kirk of Scotland Chap. 20. It is Said. God alone is Lord
of the Conscience and has left it free from the doctrins and Commandments of
men, which are in any thing contrary to his word [i. e.] The holy Scripture or
beside it, if matters of Faith or Worship so that to believe such doctrines or
obey such Commands out of Conscience, is to betray true liberty of Conscience,
and the requiring of an implicit faith, and an absolute and blin^^ obedience.

Quest. Do you believe or own the Lords Supper, either as a sign of the Love
that Christians ou^ht to have among themselves, or as a Seal of the Saints
Communion and Commemoration of Christ's Death for us, or as Figurative of
Christ's Body and Blood Spiritually received by Faith?

Answ. The Supper of the Lord we own, and tenderly consider in a twofold Sense,
1. In the Figure. 2. In the Substance. 1. That our Lord Jesus Christ at his
Supper with His Disciples, did Eat the Passover (which was for the Fulfilling
and Consummation of the Fasts under the Law:) see Luke 22. And at this Supper
He did take and Minister Bread and the Cup to his Disciples (for there was no
Transubstantiation) saying, This do in Remembrance of Me; and said the Apostle,
As often as ye shall Eat this Bread, and Drink this Cup, ye show the Lords
Death till he come, 1 Cor. 11. After this they did more clearly know His
coming: and Christ after the Spirit; Jesus Christ in them. 2 Cor. 13. 5. and 5.
16. 2. And Christ sald to His Disciples, I will not Drink henceforth of this
Fruit of the Vine until that day I Drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom,
Matthew. 26 29. And likewise of the Bread, I will not any more Eat thereof, until
it be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God, Luke 22. 16. And he further said, I
appoint unto you a Kingdom as my Father has appointed to me that ye may Eat
and Drink at my Table in my Kingdom, etc. Luke 22 29. 30. In these things we
believe he spoke Mysteriously, and that every Member of his Spiritual Church,
does daily Spiritually partake of His Body and Blood by Faith, as the Cup of
Blessing which we Bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? And
the Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? For we
being many are ONE Bread, and ONE Body, for we are all partakers of that ONE
Bread, 1 Cor. 10. 15, 16. 17. The Son of God says, Behold, I stand at the Door
and knock, if any Man hear my Voice, and open the Door, I will come into him,
and will SVP with him, and he with me, Rev. 3. 20. And Wisdom calls to the
Simple, Come, Eat of my Bread, and Drink of my Wine, Prove. 9. 4, 5. And says
Christ, The Bread of God is He that comes down from Heaven, and gives Life
unto the World, I am that Bread of Life; my Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood
is Drink indeed, He that Eats my Flesh, and Drinks my Blood, dwells in
Me, and I in him, John 6. We believe that all who thus do truly partake of
Christ by Faith, are in true Communion and Love among themselves, which they do
want, who are only in the outward Observations of Sign and Shadows.

Quest. Do you own the Seals of the New Covenant?

Answ. Yes, as the New Covenant is Spiritual, so are the Seals thereof (as they
may be Termed) proper to it, and therefore we believe they stand not in any
external Shadow, Sign or Figure, but in Spirit and Substance, the Seals of the
New Covenant (which is Inward and Spiritual) must needs be the Evidence,
Testimony and Work of the Holy Spirit, giving us Assurance through Faith of our
share and Interest in that Covenant. See what the Holy Scripture says in this
Case; see 2 Cor. 1. 22. Who has also Sealed us and has given us the earnest
of the Spirit in our Hearts. Ephesians. 1. 13. After that ye believed ye were
Sealed with that Holy Spirit of Promise. And Ephesians. 4. 30. And grieve not the
Holy Spirit of God whereby ye are Sealed unto the day of Redemption.

Our Christian Sense and Belief in these Matters may be briefly summed up in
what follows, viz.

1. We believe, That the spiritual appearance, and living enjoyment of Christ
in spirit, is above all outward signs, shadows, or figures, or (...)
Remembrance only of him thereby. And that Christ more clearly discovers himself
by his spirit in the New Covenant, then by any outward Representations in the
Old, or thereunto appertaining.

2. That the One Baptism of the spirit, is a seal or confirmation of the New
Covenant to true Believers, and of them in it; and so is their spiritual Eating
and Drinking with him in his Kingdom a certain assurance, Seal or Evidence of
their spiritual Communion with Him, and in Him.

3. As all outward shadows and figures were of a decreasing nature, so there is
the substance thereof, which they pointed at, and wherein they ended, though
the names given to the shadows were carried along to the substance also, that
it might the more plainly appear in Scripture how the shadows were fulfilled in
the substance Christ; as in the Old Covenant there was outward Circumcision of
the flesh; in the New, there is the Inward Circumcision of the Spirit. In the
Old, there was diverse Washings or Baptisms Heb: 9: 10: In the New, the One
Baptism of Christ; in the Old, the Feast o^ the outward Passover kept with
unleavened Bread, and other Feasts observed etc. In the New Covenant, Jesus
Christ is our Passover, and the Feast i^ to be kept with unleayened Bread of
sincerity and truth; and here the O^ Bread of Life is known and received.

4. We do not read nor find in Scripture, that One outward Type o^ shadow, was
a Type of another Type outward, but always of the thing Typified ot shadowed
forth, which was the substance and end of that shadow or Type, as may be shown
at large, if any undertake to show us any shadow or thing that is figurative in
its own nature (mentioned in Scripture) which they suppose we cannot show the
substance of, under the same Name or Title.

Quest. Do you believe and own the Holy Scriptures contained in the Books of
the Old and New Testament, to be given by Divine Inspiration, and to contain
all Matters of Doctrine and Testtmonie, etc. necessary to be believed and
practiced in order to salvation, and Peace with GOD?

Answer. Yes, we do, and by the assistance of the Grace and good Spirit of GOD,
which gives the true understanding of the Mind of GOD, and meaning of Holy
Scripture, we always desire to live in the Faith, Knowledge and Practice of
them in all things appertaining to Life and Godliness, Holy Scripture being
given by Divine Inspiration, is profitable for Doctrine, Correction, and
Instruction, that the Man of GOD may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every
good Work, able to make the Man of GOD wise unto Salvation, through Faith in
Christ Jesus.

A Further Declaration of what our Christian Belief and Profession has been
and still is, in Respect to JESUS CHRIST, the Only begotten Son of GOD, his
suffering, Death, Resurrection, Glory, Light, Power, Great-day of Judgment etc.
WE Sincerely Profess Faith in GOD, by his only begotten Son JESUS CHRIST, as
being our Light and Life, our only way to the Father. Heb. 12. 2. 1 Pet. 1. 21.
Joh. 14. 6. 1 Timothy 2* 5.
That GOD Created all things, He made the Worlds by his Son JESUS CHRIST; He
being that Powerful and Living Word of GOD by whom all things were made, Ephesians.
3. 9. Joh. 1. 1. 2. 3. Heb. 1. 2.
And that the Father the Word and the Holy Spirit are one in Divine Being,
inseparable; One true living and eternal GOD* blessed for ever. 1 John 5. 7.


Yet That this Word or Son of GOD in the fullness of time, took flesh* became
perfect man according to the flesh, descended and came of the Seed of Abraham
and David Romans 1. 3, 4.
but was miraculously Conceived by the Holy Ghost and born of The Virgin Mary
Mat. 1. 2. 3.
and also further declared to be the Son of GOD with Power according to the
Spirit of Sanctification by the Resurrection from the Dead. Romans 1. 3, 4.


That in the Word (or Son of GOD) was Life and the same life was the Light of
men, and that he was and is that true Light, which lights every man that
comes into the World Joh. 1. 4, 9.
and therefore that men are to believe in the Light that they may become
Children of the Light Joh. 12. 36. Isa. 2. 5.
Hereby we believe in Christ the Son of God as he is the Light and life within
us, and wherein we must needs have sincere respect and honor to (and belief in
Christ as in his own unapproachable and incomprehensible Glory and fullness 1 Timothy 6. 16.
As he is the Fountain of Life and Light, and Giver thereof unto us* Christ as
in himself, and as in us being not divided.

And that as man Christ dyed for our sins and rose again, and was received up
into Glory in the Heavens 1 Pet. 3. 18. 1 Timothy 3. 16. Mat. 19. 28. and 25. 31.
Luke 9. 26* and 24. 26.
He having in his dying for all bee^ that One and great universal Offering and
Sacrifice for peace. Atonement and Reconciliation between God and Man; Rom 5.
10. 11. Heb. 2. 17. 18. Ephesians. 2. 16. 17. Col. 1. 20* 21. 22.
and he is the Propitiation not for sins only but for the sins of the whole
world 1 John. 2. 2. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. Heb. 2. 9.
we were reconciled by his death, but saved by his Life.

That Jesus Christ who sits at the right hand of the Throne of the Majesty
in the Heavens, yet is he our King, High Priest and Prophet Zech. 9. 9. Luke
19. 38. John 12. 15. Heb. 3. 1, 6. Deuteronomy. 18. 15, 18. Acts 3. 22. and 7, 37.
(...) his Church, a Minister of the Sanctuary and of the true Tabernacle which
the Lord pitched and not man: Heb. 8. 1. 2.
He is Intercessor and Advocate wit^ the Father in Heaven and there appearing
in the presence of God for us Heb. 7. 25. Heb. 9. 24.
being touched with the feeling of our infirmities, Sufferings and sorrows, and
also by his Spirit in our hearts, he makes Intercession according to the Will
of God, crying Abba Father. Romans 8. 2, 6, 27, 34. Gal. 4. 6.


For any whom God has Gifted Ephesians. 3. 7. 1. 13, 14, 10.
and Called sincerely to Preach Faith in the same Christ, both as within and
without us, cannot be to Preach two Christ's, but one and the same Lord, Jesus
Christ 1 Cor. 8. 6. Chap, 15. 3, 8.
having respect to those degrees of our spiritual Knowledge of Christ Jesus in
us John 15. 26. and Chap. 16. 13, 14, 15.
and to his unspeakable fullness and Glory John 1. 16.
as in himself in his own entire Being wherein Christ himself and the least
measure of his light and life as in us or in Mankind are not divided nor
separable, no more than the Sun is from its Light. And as he ascended far above
all Heavens that he might fill all things Ephesians. 4. 10.
his fullness cannot be comprehended or contained in any finite Creature Col. 1.
19. and 2. 9.


But in some measure known and experienced in us as we are capable to receive
the same; as of his fullness we have received Grace for Grace, Christ our
Mediator received the Spirit not by measure, John. 3. 34.
but in fullness but to every one of us is given Grace according to the measure
of the Gift of Christ Ephesians. 4. 7.


That the Gospel of the Grace of God should be preached in the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost Matthew. 28. 19.
being One John 1. 1, 2, 3. 4.
in Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, and indivisible (or not be divided) in the
great Work of Man's Salvation.

We sincerely confess (and believe) in Jesus Christ both as he is true God and
Perfect Man John 1. 1, 2. Romans 9. 5. 1 John 5. 20. 1 Timothy 2. 5.
and that he is the Author of our living Faith in the Power and Goodness of
God, as manifest in his Son Jesus Christ, and by his own Blessed Spirit (or
divine Unction) revealed in us 1 John 2. 20, 27. and Chap. 1. 1.
whereby we inwardly feel and taste of his goodness 1 Peter 2. 3. John. 6. 33,
35, 51, 57, 58.
life and Virtue; So as our souls live and Prosper by and in him. And the
inward sense of this Divine Power of Christ and faith in the same, and this
inward experience is absolutely necessary to make a true sincere and perfect
Christian in spirit and life.

That divine honor and worship is due to the Son of God John. 5. 23. Heb. 1. 6.
and that he is in true faith to be prayed unto, and the Name of the Lord Jesus
Christ called upon as the primitive Christians did 1 Cor. 1. 2. Acts 7. 59.
because of the Glorious Union or oneness of the Father and the Son John. 10.
30. 1 John. 5. 7.
and that we cannot acceptably offer up prayers or praises to God the Father,
not receive a gracious answer or blessing from him but in and through his Dear
Son Christ.

That CHRIST's Body that was Crucified was not the Godhead, yet by the Power
of GOD was raised from the Dead, and that the same CHRIST that was therein
Crucified, ascended into Heaven and Glory Luke. 24. 26.
is not questioned by us. His Flesh saw no Corruption Psalm. 16. 10. Acts 2. 31.
13. 35. 37.
it did not corrupt, but yet doubtless his Body was changed into a more
Glorious Phil. 3. 21.
and Heavenly Condition that 'twas in when subject to diverse Sufferings on
Earth; but how and what manner of Change it met withal after it was raised
from the Dead, so as to become such a Glorious Body (as it is declared to be) is
too wonderful for Mortals to Conceive, Apprehend or Pry into, (and more meet
for Angels to see) The Scripture is silent therein as to the manner thereof,
and we are not Curious to Enquire or Dispute it, nor do we esteem it necessary
to make our selves Wise above what is written 1 Cor. 4. 6.
as to the Manner and Condition of Christ's Glorious Body as in Heaven, no more
than to Enquire how Christ appeared in diverse Manners of Forms Mark 16. 12.
John 20. 15. 1 John 20. 19. Luke 24. 36, 37. and Chap. 24. 31.
or how he came in among the Disciples the Doors being shutl or how he vanished
out of their sight after he was risen: However, we have cause to believe his
Body as in heaven is changed into a most Glorious Condition far transcending
what it was on Earth, otherwise how should our low Body be Changed, so as to be
made like unto his Glorious Body Phil. 3. 21.
For when he was ou Earth and attended with Sufferings, he was said to be like
unto us in all things, sin only excepted Heb. 2. 17. and 4. 15.
which may not be so said of him as now in a state of Glory, as he prayed for,
John 17 5.
otherwise where would the Change be both in him and in us?

True and living Faith in Christ Jesus the Son of the Living God Joh. 14. 1.
has respect to his entire Being and Fullness, to him entirely as in himself,
and as all Power in Heaven and Earth is given unto him Matthew. 28. 8. Chap. 11.
27. Joh. 17. 2. Heb. 1. 4. Chap. 2. 8.
and also an Eye and Respect to the same Son of God John 14. 23. and 17. 21,
22, 23, 24, 26. verse^
as inwardly making himself known in the Soul in every Degree of his Light,
Life, Spirit, Grace and Truth, and as he is both the Word of Faith and a
Quickening Spirit in us 1 Cor. 15. 45. Romans 10. 7. 8.
whereby he is the immediate Cause, Author, Object and Strength of our Living
Faith in his Name, and Power, and of the Work of our Salvation from Sin and
Bondage of Corruption; and the Son of God cannot be divided from the least or
lowest Appearance of his own Divine Light or Life in us, (or in Mankind) no
more than the Sun from its own light; nor is the sufficiency of his Light
within by us set up in opposition to him the Man Christ, or his Fullness
considered as without us, nor can any Measure or Degree of Light received from
Christ, as such, be properly called the Fullness of Christ, or Christ as in
Fullness, nor exclude him so considered from being our Complete Savior for
Christ himself to be our Light, our Life, our Savior John 1. 4. 9. and Chap.
3. 19^ and Chap. 12. 35, 36, 49. and Chap. 8. 12.
is so consistent, that without his Light we could not know life nor him to
save us from sin, or deliver us from darkness, condemnation or wrath to come:
And where the least degree or measure of this Light and Life of Christ, is
sincerely waited in, followed and obeyed, there is a blessed encreass of Light
and grace known and felt, as the path of the Just it shines more and more
until the perfect day, Prove. 4. 18. Psalm. 36. 9^ Col. 1. 23.
and thereby a growing in Grace and in the knowledge of God and of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ has been and is truly experienced, and this Light, Life
or spirit of Christ within (for they are one Divine Principle) is sufficient to
lead into all Truth, having in it the diverse Ministerations both of Judgment
and mercy, both of Law and Gospel, even that Gospel which is Preached in every
intelligent Creature under Heaven, it does not only (as in its First
Ministeration Manifest Sin, and reprove and condemn for sin, but also excites
and leads them that believe in it to true Repentance and thereupon to receive
that mercy, Pardon and Redemption in Christ Jesus which he has obtained for
Mankind on those Gospel terms of Faith, (in his name,) true repentance and
Convers^^ion to Christ thereby required.

Now, though we had the holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament and (...)
a belief of Christ crucified and raised etc. We never knew the mystery thereof
until we were turned to the Light of his Grace and Spirit within us, We knew
not what it was to be Reconciled by his Death, and Saved by his Life, or what
it was to know the fellowship of his Sufferings, the Power of his Resurrection,
or to b^ made comformable to his Death, we knew not until he opened our eyes,
and turned our minds from darkness unto his own Divine Light, and Life within
us.

Notwithstanding we do sincerely and greatly esteem and value the Holy
Scriptures; Preaching and Teaching of faithful divinely inspired, gifted and
qualified persons and Ministers of Jesus Christ as being great outward helps
and Instrumental in his hand and by his spirit for Conversion where God is
pleased to afford those outward helps and means as that we neither do nor may
oppose the sufficiency of the Light or Spirit of Christ within to such outward
helps, so as to reject disesteem or undervalue them, for they all proceed form
the same Light and Spirit and tend to turn Peoples minds thereunto and all
center therein.

Nor can the Holy Scriptures or true Preaching without be Justly set in
opposition to the Light or Spirit of God or Christ within; for his Faithful
Messenger are Ministers thereof being sent to turn People to the same Light and
Spirit i^ them.

Acts 26. 18. Romans 1. 2. 2 Cor. 4. 6. 1 Peter 2. 9. 1 John 2. 8.

It Is certain that great is the Mystery of Godliness in it self in its own
Being (...) excellency, namely that God should be and was Manifest in the
Flesh, Justifie^ in the Spirit, seen of Angels, Preached unto the Gentiles,
Believed on it the World, and received up into Glory.

And it is a great and precious mystery of Godliness and Christianity also the
Christ should b^ spiritually and effectually in men's hearts to save and deliv^^
them from sin, Satan and bondage of Corruption, Christ being thus reveall^^ in
true Believers and dwelling in their hearts by Faith, Christ within the ho^^ of
Glory, our Light and Life who of God is made unto us, Wisdom, Righteou^^ness,
Sanctification and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30.

And therefore this Mystery of Godliness both as in its own Being and Glor^ and
also as in men (in many hid and in some revealed) has been and must be
Testified, Preached and believed where God is Pleased to give Commission (and
prepare Peoples hearts for the same) and not in man's will.

Concerning the Resurrection of the Dead, and the Great day of Judgment yet to
come, beyond the Grave or after Death, and CHRIST'S Coming without us to Judge
the Quick and the Dead; (as diverse Questions are put in such Terms) what the
Holy Scriptures plainly declare and testify in these matters* we have great
reason to Credit and not to Question, and have been always ready to Embrace
with Respect to CHRIST and his Apostles own Testimony and Prophecies.
1. FOR the Doctrine of the Resurrection; If in this Life only we have Hope in
Christ, we are of all Men most Miserable, 1 Cor. 15. 19. We sincerely believe
not only a Resurrection in Christ from the fallen, sinful State here, but a
Rising and Ascending into Glory with Him hereafter, that when he at last
appears, we may appear also with him in Glory, Col. 3. 4. 1 John 3. 2. But that
all the Wicked, who live in Rebellion against the Light of Grace, and Die
finally Impenitent, shall come forth to the Resurrection of Condemnation. And
that the Soul or Spirit of every Man and Woman shall be reserved in its own
distinct, proper Being, (so as there shall be as many Souls in the World to
come as in this) and every Seed; (yea every Soul) shall have its proper Body as
GOD is pleased to give it, 1 Cor. 15. A Natural Body, is sown a Spiritual Body
is Raised; that being first which is Natural, and afterward ^nat which is
Spiritual; And though it is said, this Corruptible shall put on Incorruption,
and this Mortal shall put on Immortality, the Change shall be such, as Flesh and
Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of GOD, neither does Corruption inherit
Incorruption, 1 Cor. 15. Chap. We shall be Raised out of all Corruption and
Corruptibility, out of all Mortality; and he Children of GOD and of the
Resurrection shall be equal to the Angels of GOD in Heaven, Mat. 22. 30. Mark
12. 25. Luke 20. 36.

And as the Celestial Bodies do far excel Terrestrial; So we expect ou^
Spiritual Bodies in the Resurrection shall far excel what our Bodies now are,
and we hope none can Justly blame us for thus expecting better bodie^ than they
now are.

Howbeit, we esteem it very unnecessary to Dispute or Question how the Dead are
Raised, or with what Body they come? But rather submit that to the Wisdom and
Pleasure of Almighty GOD.

Secondly, For the Doctrine of Eternal Judgment.
GOD has committed all Judgment unto His Son JESUS CHRIST, and He is Judge of
both Quick and Dead, and of the States and Ends of all Mankind. John 5. 22. 27.
Acts 10. 42. 2 Timothy 4. 1. 1 Peter 4. 5.

That there shall be hereafter a Great Harvest which is the End of the World; A
Great Day of Judgment, and for the Judgment of that Great Day the Holy
Scripture is clear, Matthew 13. '39, 40, 41. Chap. 20. 15. and 11. 24. Jude 6.
When the Son of Man comes in His Glory, and all the Holy Angels with Him; Then
shall He sit upon the Throne in his Glory, and before Him shall be gathered all
Nations etc. Matthew 25. 31. 32. to the end compared with Chapter 22. 31. Mark
8. 38. Luke 9. 26. and 1 Corinthians 15. 52. 2 Thessalonians 1. 7, 8. to the
end. 1 Thessalontans 4. 19. Revelation 20. 12, 13, 14, 15.

That this Blessed Heavenly Man (this Son of Man, who has so deeply Suffered
and Endured so many Indignities and Persecutions from his Adversaries, both to
Himself and his Members, and Brethren) should at last* even in the Last and
Great Day, Signally and Manifestly Appear in Glory and Triumph, attended with
all his Glorious Heavenly Host and Retinue, before all Nations, before all his
Enemies, and those that have denied him* this will be to their great Terror and
Amazement; that this most Glorious Heavenly Man and his Brethren, that have
been so much Contemned and set at Naught, should be thus Exalted over their
Enemies and Persecutors in Glory and Triumph, is a righteous thing with GOD;
and that they that Suffer with Him, should Appear with Him in Glory and
Dignity* when He thus Appears at Last. CHRIST was Judge of the World and o^ the
Prince thereof when on the Earth, John 9. 39, and 12. 31. He is still Judge of
the World, the Wickedness and Prince thereof by his Light, Spirit and Gospel in
Men's Hearts and Consciences, John 16. 8, 11. Matthew 12. 18, ^0. Isaiah 42. 1.
Romans 2. 16. 1 Peter 4. 6. And he will be the Judge and ^inal Determiner
thereof in that Great Day appointed; GOD having appointed a Day wherein he will
Judge the World in Righteousness, by that Man whom he has ordained.

Christ foretold, it shall be more tolerable for them of the Land of Sodom and
Gommorah in the Day of Judgment, than for that City or People that would not
receive his Messengers or Ministers etc. Matthew 10, 15. and ^ee Chap. 11. 24.
and Mark 6. 11. Luke 10. 12. 14. It is certain that GOD knows how to deliver
the Godly out of all their Trials and Afflictions, and at last to bring them
forth, and raise them up into Glory with CHRIST; So, he knows also how to
reserve the unjust and finally Impenitent unto the Day of Judgment to be
Punished, 2 Peter 2. 9. He will bring them forth unto the Day of Destruction,
Job 21. 30. The LORD can and will ^eserve such Impenitent, Presumptuous and
Rebellious Criminals as bound under Chains of Darkness (as were the fallen
Angels) unto the Judgment of the Great Day, Jude 6. Matthew 25. 30. It Is not
for us to Determine or dispute the Manner how they shall be so reserved; but
leave it to GOD, He knows how.

Something further Relating to this Doctrine of the Resurrection and eternal
Judgment.
AT the last Trump of GOD and Voice of the Arch Angel the Dead shall be raised
incorruptible, the Dead in CHRIST shall rise first, 1 Corinthians 15. 52. 1
Thessalonians 4. 16. Compared with Matthew 24. 31.

Many are often alarmed in Conscience here by the Word and Voice of GOD who
Stop their Ears and slight these warnings; But the Great and ^inal Alarm of the
last Trumpet, they cannot Stop their Ears against, nor ^scape, it will
unavoidably Seize upon and further awaken them finally to judgment; They that
will not be alarmed in their Consciences to Repentance ^or out of their Sins
here, must certainly be alarmed to Judgment hereafter, whosoever do now
wilfully shut their Eyes, hate, Contemn or Shun the Light of CHRIST or his
appearance within shall at last be made to see and not be able to Shun nor hide
themselves from his Glorious and Dreadful appearance from Heaven with his
Mighty Angels as with Lightning and in flaming Fire to render Vengeance on all
them that know not GOD and obey not the Gospel of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, 1 Thessalonians 7. 8. Matthew. 24. 27. Luke 17. Dan. 10. 6. Job 37. 3.

And though many now Evade and Reject the inward Convictions and Judgment of
the Light and shut up the Records or Books thereof in their their own
Consciences, they shall all be at last opened and every one Judged of these
things Recorded therein according to their Works, Revelation 20. 12, 13, 14, 15.

FINIS.
Published in behalf of the People of God called QVAKERS by some of them.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Any sober Enquirer that Desires to be further informed concerning the
Principles and Doctrines of the aforesaid People, and to see how they clear
themselves of the Calumnies and Envious Aspersions that are cast upon them by
their Adversaries may be pleased to read Their Confession of Faith and
Catechism, and The Apology for the true Christian Divinity, also the Apology
Vindicated being an Answer to John Broun, Truth Cleared of Calumnies, William
Mitchel Unmasked, all Written by Robert Barclay; a little Book called The Key
by G. P. a Book Written by One Elizabeth Bathurst, Rusticus and Clericum being
a late Answer to William Jamison by John Robertson etc.


