THE PATH of the JUST Cleared; AND Cruelty and Tyranny laid Open.

Or a Few Words to you Priests, and Magistrates of this Nation, (who say we
deny the Scriptures, and that we are Antichrists and Deceivers, and that we
deny the Word of God,) Wherein your Oppression and Tyranny is laid Open, which
by you is unjustly acted against the Servants of the Living God, who by the
World which hate the Light of Christ, are in Derision called Quakers.

Wherein also is something declared both to Judges and Justices so called,
concerning Contempt of Authority.

Also the Ground and Cause of the Imprisonment of George Whitehead and John
Harwood, who are Sufferers for the Innocent Truths sake, In the Goal of Bury in
Suffolk.

Also a Copy of a Paper, which a Servant of the Lord called Richard Clayton,
was moved to set upon a Steeple-house Door at Bury in Suffolk, for which he was
caused to be whipped by one Thomas Waldegrave, Justice of Peace in the said
County.

But though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not be unpunished; but the Seed
of the Righteous shall be delivered,

Prove. 11. 21. From the Spirit of the Living God in me, whose name in the flesh
is George Whitehead, who for Sions sake cannot hold my peace, but testify
against her Oppressors: who am a Sufferer as aforesaid, the 4. day of the 7.
month. 1655.

Also, A Paper against the sin of Idleness, which we declare against, and live
out of; and are diligent serving the Lord, though that sin be cast upon us, yet
it we deny, with all other sins and ungodliness, which is contrary to the
Gospel of Christ.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black-Spread-Eagle, near the West
End of Paul's, 1655.

THE Path of the JUST cleared: AND Cruelty and Tyranny laid Open. See what
Christ we own, and who are Antichrists.
THat Christ we own and witness, and are partakers of his Sufferings, Isa. 42.
6. and 49* 9
who was promised for a Covenant unto the people, for a light unto the Gentiles,
to open the blind eyes, this is he who was before Abraham was; who said, Joh.
8. 58
Before Abraham was, I am; who was in the beginning which was the Word, by
which all things was made, which Word became flesh, and dwelt among the
disciples, and suffered at Jerusalem, Jhon 1.
and witnessed a good confession before Ponce Pilate; whom Pilate delivered up
to the Jews, and the chief priests and elders, whom they mocked and
despitefully used, Joh. 17.
and put to death concerning the flesh; but is raised up by the spirit, Joh. 5.
22.
and ascended into glory, which glory he prayed for, even that glory whereby he
was at first with his Father glorified in, Joh. 10. ^3.
wherein he is glorified in his Saints, and is God over all, God blessed for
ever; and he that has him, has the father also, and has life; and he that
has not the Son, has not life; for he is the light of the world and in him is
no darkness; and He is the Way the truth and the life; 1 John 5. 12. and 8. 12.
and he that follows him shall not abidein darkness, but shall receive the
light of life. And this is the true light, which lights every man that comes
into the world, Joh. 1. 9.
which John who was a man sent from God was a witness of, and we are witnesses
of, and do not deny the Word, nor the Scriptures; but they who persecuted him
even the Scribes and pharisees, and the chief priests and elders of the people,
who had a profession of the Scriptures, Joh. 7. 19.
of Moses words, and the prophets words: they did deny the Scriptures, even
Moses who wrote of Christ, so did not believe Christ, Joh. 5, 47. and 8. 37.
and so denied him who was the Word which became flesh. And so his word did not
take place in them, because they did not believe that he was the Christ, but
looked for another Christ to come in pomp like themselves, but against their
pride he did cry, and said, Woe unto the Scribes and Pharisees, who were called
of men Masters, stood praying in the Synagogues, had the chiefest places in the
assemblies and greeting in the markets: and laid heavy burdens upon the
people. Mat. 23. and 10. 8. 9.
But he said to his disciples, Be not ye called masters: and when he sent them
forth he forbad them to take money or bag or Scrip: but freely ye have
received, freely give: and many of them had no certain dwelling place, 1 Cor.
6. 4, 5, and 11. 24.
but suffered persecution and hunger and nakedness and prison and stripes and
perils, and were chargeable to no man: but where they had sown Spiritual things
they said, if we sow to you Spiritual things, Heb. 11. 36, 37.
it is a small thing if we reap of you carnal things. But these were not the
world, for the world was persecuters and revilers, Joh. 16. 2.
and haled them out of the Synagogues; and such as Christ sent we own, and the
Scriptures we own, and Christ come in the flesh we own and witness; but you
Magistrates and you Priests of this nation who are upholden by such as
persecute and hale out of the Synagogues, and imprison, and whip, and
despitefully now use such as are sent freely to witness forth the truth, and for
that Christ, and against Antichrist, and deceivers, such as Christ cried woe
against: here, you priests of this nation, Mark. 12. 38.
who are found in their steps which Christ cried woe against, even the steps of
the Scribes and Pharisees, and you Magistrates, Justices, Judges, and Rulers,
who uphold such, and persecute, imprison and cause to be whipped: and fine such
as are sent to bear witness against them that are found in Scribes and Pharisees
steps; Math. 23.
who lay heavy burdens upon the people, and are called of men masters, stands
praying in the synagogues, and have the chiefest places in the assemblies: you
are filling up the measure of their iniquities, who persecuted Christ, and
upheld them which Christ cried woe unto, and them who persecuted the true
prophets, Isa. 6. 11.
who was sent to cry out against the false prophets, these cried against such
as sought for their gain from their quarters, Mica. 3. 11
and such as were hirlings, and such as bare rule by their means, and taught
lies, who said they were sent of God; ^er. 5.
when God never sent them but man, before they were sent: and these were the
prophets who cried against the false, Ezekiel. 34. 3.
who said; thus said the Lord, and Hear the Word of the Lord. But God never
spoke to them: but Jeremiah who cried against such was not a proud man, nor a
covetous man, as the priests of England are now, who are in these steps before
mentioned, which the false prophets were in. But Jeremiah was mocked, and they
were stoned and some killed, and Jeremy was set in the stocks for witnessing
forth the truth against the false prophets; Je. 38. 6.
and put into adungeon and here we are witnessed by the true prophets, Christ,
and his Apostles, who ever witnessed against deceivers, and such as lived in
pride and coveteousness: and Amos who was a true witness for God, witnessed
against the abomination of rulers, and people; he was not made a Minister by
the will of man, nor upheld by a carnal weapon, Amos. 7. 10.
nor an outward Law* but when he prophesied against the house of Jeraboam, then
Amaziah, the priest of Bethel complained to Jeroboam the King against Amos; and
said, the Land was not able to bear his words, and bad him flee away into the
Land of Judah, and prophecy no more at Bethel; for he said It was the Kings
Chapel, and the Kings Court, as you may read, Amos 7, 10, and ^o you priests
of England complain: moreover many of you do swear to the Magistrates against
us, who are witnessed by Christ, the true Prophets, and Apostles: both in our
sufferings, and testimony which is against all deceit and deceivers; ^o you
Priests and Magistrates cause us to suffer, because we are offended at the
truth, which witnesses against all deceit, without respect of persons, whereof
they that are sent of God were witnesses: and so by you some suffer
imprisonment, some whipping, some stocking, and some you imprison and fine 10,
or 40, or 50, Marks, and they that stone and hale out of the Synagogues, their
hands you strengthen against the innocent, and execute your law upon them, who
are redeemed from that which the law takes hold upon, who do witness against
transgression, where ever it is by the truth which respects no man's person.

And here the end for which you are brought forth, is to witness for God and to
the establishment of Judgment, and mercy, and righteousness and peace, which
takes away all occasion of outward punishment, and carnal weapons, where it
comes to be established, and set up in the hearts of people; and this they who
come to witness set up in them which they that own the Light of Christ are
witnesses of, dare not act in their own wills, in Tyranny, and Cruelty, against
the innocent who are freely sent to witness forth the truth against all deceit
and cruelty, and oppression which is acted in this generation, even among you
Priests and Magistrates, both Judges Justices and Rulers, whose ears are open
to hear the complaints of these proud and co^ou^s priests, who make great
petitioning and complaints against us, who suffer by the cruelty of you, who
cause su to be sent to prison, when you can charge su with the breach of no
known Law, and cause some to be whipped, and some to be fined, as aforesaid,
and the priests that complain for the help of Magistrates, to have this people,
called Quakers, suppressed because they are afraid that their Tithes and
maintenance should fail them, and they come to lose their gifts, and rewards;
because we cry against such as Isaiah cried against, who seek for their gain
from their Quarters; as you may read, Isa. 56, 11, and against such as bear
rule by their means, which Jeremiah cried against; Ier. 5. and such teach for
hire, and divine for money; which Micah cried against, Mica. 3. and against
such as Christ cried woe against, as you may read, Matt. 23. and we cry against
such as go in Cains way and Balaams, which Jude cried woe against Jude. 11. And
here they are afraid that their riches and honor should fail them, whose
riches is earthly, and honor is earthly: and here you Magistrates uphold such
as the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles cried against, and causes the
innocent to suffer by your wills, contrary to the Law of Justice* and equity;
and so are filling up the measure of your iniquities, who persecuted the true
prophets of Christ and his Apostles; and you may consider by the Light in your
consciences, what Reformation and Just government is established by you, who
have long professed Liberty, Justice, and equity; when now this is the end of
your profession, and praying, and your fasting, and your days of thanksgiving,
even persecution, and oppression, and strengthening the hands of evil doers
against the innocent, and so neglect the fast which the Lord requires, read
Isa. 58. 6. Is not this the fast that I have chosen, says the Lord, to loose
the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to Let the oppressed
go free, and that ye break every yoke, but instead of this, ye strengthen the
bands of wickedness, and goes on in your cruelty, and oppression. Ah woe, word,
is the end of your profession, who are so acting in your Cruelty, and Tyranny;
against them who for conscience sake cannot bow to your wills, but witness
against the deceit which is acted in this Nation, both among the Priests and
People: therefore among you Ruand Magistrates is this Scripture fulfilled.
Psalm. 2. 2.


The Rulers take counsel together against the Lord, and his Anointed; and the
blood of the Saints shall be required, at your hands who persecute, even the
blood of all the holy men of God, who suffered, from Abel until this generation.

Oh, be ashamed of your profession, and you fair pretenses of reformation,
since the Bishops were cut off, who now are acting in the same cruelty that
they acted in, and yet you can speak against them, and their Tyranny, and you
found in the same; Oh fear and dread the living God of heaven and earth, whose
Judgment and wrath and fiery indignation slumbers not, Rev. 6. 10.
for these things: Oh the blood of the righteous cries in the ears of the Lord
of hosts, for vengeance against you persecuters; your prayers and pretenses, of
serving the Lord, is abomination unto him, and your Sacrifices is wearisome
unto the Lord, and grievous unto him, as the Sacrifices and oblations of the
Rulers, of Sodom, and people of Gomorrah was, which the prophet Isai cried
against, who said unto them Your new moons and your Sabbaths, and your calling
assemblies I cannot away with: it is iniquity, even your solemn meetings says
the Lord; Isa. 1. 13.
your new moons and appointed feasts my soul hates, they are a trouble to me,
I am weary to bear them when you spread forth your hands, I will hid mine eyes
from you, yea when you make many prayers, I will not hear, your hands are full
of blood, Isa. 1. 15. Therefore all you that act in persecution, and cruelty,
and oppression, read your selves both Priests and Rulers, to be in that
generation which Isai and the rest of the prophets did cry against, Ezekiel. 16.
49.
and are partakers of their sins; and now you live at ease in pride and fullnes
of bread, as Sodom and Gomorrah did, and the end of your profession liberty and
freedom is oppression and Tyranny, as was in the Bishops time, to those that
cannot stoop to your wills, when as you ought to have Judged the cause of the
oppressed, and to have undone the heavy Burdens, and to have let the oppressed
go free. Therefore hear the word of the Lord, ye Rulers of this Nation, who
Join with the priests, who go in the way of Cain to envy, and run greedily
after the error of Balaam for gifts and rewards; you Join with them who go in
the steps of the false prophets; and of them which Christ cried woe against,
who are called of men masters, stand praying in the Synagogues, have the
chiefest places in the assemblies, Mat. 23.
and the greetings in the Markets, and lay heavy burdens upon the people, and
devour widows houses; and so here the cause of the widows, and opressed you
do not judge: therefore the Lord may justly say of you as he said of that people,
which he had set in a fruitful place, Isa. 5. 7.
when I Looked for Judgment behold oppression, therefore repetn of your
cruelty, and undo the heavy burdens, and let the oppressed go free: for if
you still refuse, and rebel against the Lord, which is a God of truth and
equity, he will cut you off, and give you your portion among all the oppressors
and persecuters, whom the Lord in his indignation cut off, the Lord of hosts
has spoken it, and what will ye do in the end of your persecution, when the
Lord calls you to an account; will not the Lord avenge his quarrel upon Sions
oppressors, Is. ia 1. v2.
and ease him of his enemies? Therefore, remember you are warned, lest you are
pertakers of the plagues, who go on in persecution and oppression, who pervert
true Judgment, and despise equity, and so have your portion with the workers of
iniquity. So to the light in all your consciences I speak, which loves equity
and true Judgment, and is the condemnation of all the practices before
mentioned, which are contrary to it.

And the condemnation of all them, that live in them, by which light are
witnessed who walk in the light, and to it we are manifest, whether you hear
or forbear*

A few words to you both Judges and Justices so called, that say we contemn
Magistracy, and are not subject to Authority, and Government, because we cannot
put off our hats, nor bow to you when we are called before you.
THe Powers that are ordained of God, Answer.
who are sent of him, for the punishment of transgressors, and for the
encouragment of them that do well, these we own, and are subject to them for
conscience sake; knowing that such are not a terror to good works, but to evil;
for such execute the law in righteousness, Romans 13. 3, 4.
upon them who are guilty of the transgression of it, for because of
trangression the Law is added and there the Law is executed in its place, and
in righteousness; and so those that execute the Law in its place, they are for
the establishment of righteousness and peace; and, contrary to the Law of
Justice, and equity, dare not act in their own wills, nor for their own ends:
and herein they seek not themselves, nor their own glory, nor honor, but the
glory and honor of God, who is honored and glorified among them who act in
truth and righteousness, and love the Lord; and to them our souls are subject.
But you who act in cruelty and persecution as before mentioned, who execute
your law upon the innocent, you do not encourage them that do well, but
encourage them that do ill, and strengthen the hands of evil doers, and make
strong the bands of wickedness, who indite, and fine, and imprison those who
cannot for conscience sake bow to your wills, nor put off their Hats, to
satisfy your corrupt wills: wherein you are seeking your own honor, and not
the honor of God: and because that many cannot for conscience sake, act these
heathenish customs, to satisfy your vain minds, and your fleshly exaltations,
wherein you act in pride and highmindedness, therefore by you many are fined,
and endited, and imprisoned contrary to any Just Law, and contrary to the Law
of the Nation: and no such vain custom can you prove that ever any of the
Saints did act, when they were brought from vanities to serve the Living God;
But the world and the conformities and fashions of the World they were brought
to deny, and by the same Spirit are we brought to deny all these heathenish
practices, and to witness against the World who live in them; and because we
witness against the World, that the deeds thereof are evil, therefore we are
hated, and by the World suffer: and here ye Magistrates who plead for these
things, and cause the innocent to suffer, for denying them, you act in the
costumes of the world contrary to the Light of Christ, which condemns the World
with its deeds and says that we contemn Magistracy and Authority because we
cannot stoop to your wills, in these customs; here you falsely accuse us, for
Authority we do not contemn, for by the Spirit of the Living God, whereby we
are Transformed, by the renewing of our minds, we do deny the conformities of
the world as the Apostle said; Ro^. 12. 2.
Be not ye conformed unto this World, and the same Apostle did not contemn
Authority, but said, Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, and,
Rulers are not a terror to good works but to evil, but he speaks not of
pulling off the hat, nor bowing, neither gives he liberty to any of you to
persecute and imprison them who cannot, for conscience sake, bow to your wills,
nor put off their hatts; for he was imprisoned, and persecuted, and did suffer
by that generation you are in, who suffered stripes, tumults and imprisonment,
and many perils, and of his sufferings are we pertakers: and the cloak that you
have for these vanities, will not hide you: for you say that though you have no
written Law of the Nation, for puling off hats, nor Scripture to prove it, yet
you say that it is the custom of the Nation; as bowing etc and that the very
heathens do bow, and that the Egyptians bowed; I answer, so is drunkenness, and
Lying, and Swearing, persecution, and fighting, and Quarreling, accustomed in
this Nation, which many that act in, go unpunished, which the righteous Law of
God takes hold upon: but the righteous Law of God speaks not of putting off a
hat, therefore be ashamed of your actings, and be ashamed of your customs, who
makes a Custom a Law, to act in envy and cruelty, against the servants of the
Lord. And when you allege, that Jacob bowed to Esau, and called him Lord, and
that Abraham bowed to Seth, who was a Heathen. I answer, that which was acted
by them, when they bowed, was not a command to you and that you might seek
honor one of another, who profess your selves to be Believers and Christians,
to imitate these heathenish customs, though for a time Jacob and Abraham bowed,
and Jacob called Esau Lord, who was the elder, but when the elder was made to
serve the younger, he was not Lord, but servant: and so out of Esaus state, and
the Heathenish nature, we are redeemed, and the one Lord, who is the true God,
we witness: so out of the many gods, and many Lords, which are in the World,
we are redeemed, and how can ye believe and seek honor one of another, for
the true God is no respecter of persons; John. 5. 4.
and he that respects persons, commits sin: and so by you that seek
eye-service, and honor one another, Jam. 2. 9.
is not the Lord hououred. But ye seek that to your selves, which belongs to
God; and this is He, who reigns over the house of Jacob, and is greater then
Abraham. Let the heathens bovv to him, who has redeemed us out of the
heathenish nature, for he will break the limits of the heathen, and dash them to
pieces, and all your limits, who live in envy, and rage in the heathenish
nature; and plead for their customs, and would limit the righteous to walk in
their steps, and to bow to your proud flesh,: for as I live, says the Lord,
every knee shall bow to me, and every Tongue shall confess unto god; as you may
read, Romans 13. 11. Isai. 45. 23. Phil. 2. 10. Therefore bow to the Lord of
hosts, and let proud flesh stoop before him, who seeks honor to your selves,
which belongs to God, Fear before the Lord, and tremble, at which Name every
knee shall bow, and every tongue confess to the glory of God. Then examine what
will be the end of your Earthly glory, whose honor must be laid in the dust:
who seeks your own glory, and not the glory of God: whose honor and glory we
seek, and not the honor of man: and therefore we cannot stoop nor bow to your
pride, nor conform to your vanities, which are acted in your wills, contrary to
the pure Law of God; which respects no man's person: and here you act for your
own ends, and punish the servants of the Lord, who for his sake cannot submit
to your deceit, and heathenish vanities; you act contrary to the Law of God,
and the Law of the Nation, and for the Lords sake act not, neither were you
sent of God to this end, therefore accuse us not for contempt of Authority,
neither say that we are not subject to every ordinance of man, for the Lords
sake: for to every Ordinance of man, which are for the Lords sake, we are
subject: whether it be to supreme, or unto* Governors, as unto them that are
sent by him, for the punishment of evildoers, and for the praise of them that
do well. But you who are sent to judge of Causes, between man and man,
according to the truth, and equity, by an outward Law, which takes hold upon
transgression, and now execute power upon them, who by the Law of the Spirit of
life are made free from the Law of sin, and death, and so would usurp Authority
over the consciences of the people of the Lord, whose consciences is exercised
by the Light of Christ, which condemns the World with its deeds, and so you go
beyond your limits, to judge in things pertaining to God, who is Judge, and
Lawgiver: and so here you act in frowardness, contrary to the Light of Christ
in you, and so would lord it over Gods heritage: and here let the Rulers among
the heathen, which Christ spoke of, condemn your practices, who said, the Kings
of the Gentiles exercised Authority over them, but ye would exercise Lordship
over us, who are not Heathens, but Christians.

Therefore, ye Magistrates of this Nation, see whom you are acting for, and
what order is set up by you, and whose glory it is you seek, and who it is that
you seek to exercise Authority over: for when the Judgments of God comes upon
you for acting in your wills, and in your cruelty, against the innocent, you
will witness them to be Just by that of God in your consciences, and your Just
reward. And know that in as much as you persecute them, whom Christ has sent,
you persecute Christ: therefore now while the Lord does not speedily execute
his Judgments upon you, consider your ways, and see what you act, and whom you
act for, as you will it eternally answer.

The ground of John Harwoods and my imprisonment; that Innocence may be
cleared, and the wicked bear their burdens.
UPon the 30 day of the 5th month, being the 2d day of the week, I and my two
Brethren, Jo: Harwood, and Richard Clayton,, passing through a town called
Bury, in Suffolk, about 5 Miles from Halstead, in Essex, where we were at a
meeting the firstday before, in the fear and service of the Lord, and passing
by the steeple house, in the said Bury, Richard Clayton, was moved to set up a
paper upon the steeple house door, and John Harwood* and I passing on a little
before, and seeing some people of the said Bury, coming to Richard Clayton,
where he was seting up the paper, and so we passed back to them, who stayed
him, and were about him reading the paper; who could find nothing contrary to
Scriprure in it: so John Harwood, and I, being to speak a few words to the
people there present in the name of the Lord, exhorted them to turn to the
Lord from the vanities, and wickednesses they lived, in, which several of them
was made to confess the truth of which was declared to them, and the mouths of
many who were in rage, were stopped, and so we passing from the people there
present there came a Constable* called Richard Hum, who stayed us, and said, he
had a warrant to stay us: so we demanded to see his warrant, but he had none to
show, but said he had order from the Justice, and so carried us two before
Harbert Pellam, called Justice of peace, in the said Bury, whose office is for
Essex: so first I was carried before him, and he examined me, and then John
Harwood, of our names, and country, and abode, where we had been, and what
money we had when we came out of our own countries: which we answered as we
were moved, and had freedom; and many other vain questions he asked in his
b^sie vain Light mind, which were not worth mentioning: and when I was moved to
speak a few words, concerning his rage* and filthiness, which he uttered forth,
he said, he sent not for me to preach: but he could lay no transgression, nor
the breach of any known Law to our charge: but in his fury, and rage, sent us
by the Constable and some others with him, to one Thomas Walgrave, who is
called Justice of peace at Smalbridg in Suffolk, about half a mile from the
said Bury, whose office is for Suffolk: so when we came before the said
Walgrave, we were carried into the house, and they first examined Richard
Clayton, of his name, and country, and where he had been, and what was the
cause of his coming into that country, and who sent him, which he answered as
he was moved; and some other vain Questions were asked him: and when he had
examined him he then examined me of my name and country, and where I was born:
and how long I had been acquainted with Richard Clayton; and where I first met
with him, which I answered according to my freedom, and some other vain
needless Questions were asked not worth mentioning; so he could lay nothing to
our charge, concerning the breach of any Law: we being free born English men,
and not Chargeable to any; so then John Harwood was brought before him: and
Richard Clayton, and I, commanded to go out of doors with a keeper, so the said
Waldegrave, asked John Harwood, if he would answer him all the Questions that
he should demand of him. But Jo. denied to be limited to his will, but as he
had moving: so the said Harbert Pellam, being there present, who before had
examined us, and had our examination in writing: John Harwood told Walgrave,
that Pellam had his examination in writing, and bad him, if he had any thing to
accuse us of, to declare what he had against us: so then the said Waldegrave
being in a great rage, would not suffer him to speak, but caused him to be
haled out of doors: so he and the said Pellam, consulted a great while
together: so after a time, Walgrave came forth, Psalm. 2. 2.
and spoke to John Harwood, and in a fury put off his hat, and cast it down,
and asked him his name, and country, which Questions John ansvvered: so he
came to me, and asked me if I would work at hay: so I denied to be bound to
such taskmasters: for I was in that Calling whereunto God has called me, 1
Cor. 7. 20.
wherein I was chargable to no man: for he had nothing to do, to lay any task
upon any of us, who was brought out of Egypt, from under Pharoahs Taskmasters;
so he went in, and sent out a Warrant to imprison John Harwood, and another: to
have Richard Clayton whipped at Bury, and sent from Constable to Constable,
till he came at his outward being: so he charged the Constable, to keep me that
week, till another Justice came from the Assizes at Bury; so we demanded of him
what Law we had transgressed. But he would show us none, neither declared unto
us any transgression that we had acted. But called the paper that Richard
Clayton set upon the steeple-house door, a seditious paper, and nonsense,
which he could not prove, nor show any thing in it, contrary to the Scripture.
But he would scarce suffer us to speak, but did stamp, and rage, and caused us
to be haled out of doors, so we were had back again to the said Bury, and
according to the Warrant, Richard Hum, the said Constable, the same night in
the open street, whipping Richard Clayton, he being stripped naked to the middle
about the wast, so presently after he had whipped him, he sent him away that
nighr, according to the warrant: and John Harwood, and I was kept at an Inn in
the same town that night, and early in the morning, John was sent with 2. men
to the prison of Bury, St. Edmonds in Suffolk, about 16. miles from the said
Bures, so until the next day, under the Constables custody I remained, so in
the morning there came a warrant, from the said Waldegrave, to the Constable,
to send me to the said prison of Bury: so accordingly I was sent the same day,
where we remain in bonds by the cruelty of these called Justices, to wit,
Harbert Pellam and Thomas Waldgrave, and are not convinced of the breach of any
known Law, of the Nation. But in patience we suffer, and in our sufferings,
have peace; our bonds being unjustly laid upon us, by them who profess Justice:
but here they, and their profession is seen, and with the light of Christ
condemned to be contrary to the law, justice, and equity.

Therefore let the supreme, and governors, who are in Authority, consider for
all your professing Liberty to tender consciences and Religion, what Liberty by
you is brought forth: when as we, who are sent of the Lord, to bear witness
unto pure religion, and to witness forth a good conscience, and our labor and
travel is, that justice and equity might be set up, and deceit confounded: and
also we being free born English men, may not have freedom, to pass the
highway about our lawful calling. But have such bonds, and snares, laid upon
us both contrary to the Law of God, and the law of the Nation; and contrary to
that liberty which has been promised to them professing Godliness by the
supreme of this Nation. As in the act for the government of England, Scotland,
and Ireland, in Article, 36. That to the public profession held forth none
shall be compelled by penalities, or otherwise, but that endeavors be made to
win them by sound doctrine, and the examples of a good conversation.

Article. 37. That such as profess faith in God by Jesus Christ, though
differing in Judgment, from the doctrine, worship or discipline publicly held
forth, shall not be restrained from: But shall be protected in the profession
of the faith, and exercise of their Religion, so as they abuse not this Liberty
to the civil Injury of others and to the actual disturbance of the public
peace on their part; provided that this liberty be not extended to Popery or
Prelacy, nor to such who under the profession of Christ hold forth and practice
Licentiousness.

Article 38: That all laws, statutes, ordinances and clauses in any law,
statute, and ordinance to the contrary of the aforesaid liberty, shall be
esteemed Null and ^oyde.

Now let the Supreme, and Magistrates, see and examine what performance there
is acted by you, of these solemn promises which has been promised for the
liberty of Godliness in this Nation, when such injustice is winked at, and
acted by you who profess justice, and are set in authority to act according to
the law of justice and to remove unjust causes: when now both contrary to the
law of God, and contrary to your own law, you cause the servants of the Lord to
suffer Whipping and Imprisoning, them which you cannot charge which the breach
of any law: here be ashamed of your unjust actings, ye oppressors and
persecutors of the innocent, and know that at your cruelty the Lord will not
wink, but though you join hand in hand you shall not go unpunished, and the
very heathens may condemn you that whip and act contrary to your own law,
against them, whom the law condemns not: for when they were ready to Whip
Paul, he said to the centurion, Is it lawful for you, to scourge a man that is
a Roman and uncondemned, and said he was free borne, and so both the centurion
and the chief Captain, who bound Paul were afraid, after they knew that he
was a Roman, and caused him to be loosed: but though we be freeborn English
men and uncondemned by the law, you are not ashamed to Whip and act in cruelty
against us, therefore see what equity is owned by you, and see whethe^ you do
as ye would be don by, yea or nay: and let al^ people who have any fear of God
in them, see you^ shame and envy, you utter forth and have acted again the
innocent. For they who are authorized to bear th^s sword of justice, ought not
to be a terror to good work-but to the evil, and says the Lord by his
prophet David he that rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God,
and such who rule in the fear of God, are not persecutors of the innocent, but
does defend and preserve, such as these men before mentioned whip and
persecute. For the law which because of transgression is added, does not take
hold upon the innocent, which no law has transgressed. So ye who have acted
your cruelty upon the innocent, who in the sight of God, are free from the
breach of any known law, who according to your own law, by you ought to be
protected; here you are found transgressors of the law, which because of
transgression is added, and with it are condemned, and with the light of Christ
you are seen to be the Magistrates, which bears the sword in vain, who
turns the edge of the sword against the righteous seed, which you ought to
turn against the wicked, that the land might be emptyed of transgressors and
evil doers: for the law was not made for the righteous, but for the lawless
and disobedient; which law is witnessed by us, (to be good in its place*) who
suffer by the wills of unreasonable men, contrary to the law of God and the law
of the Nation: for we who profess faith in God, by Jesus Christ, and through
faith has victory obtained over that nature, which leads into the
transgression of the Law, ought according to your own law, to be protected in
the exercising of our religion, but you instead of protecting us, whip and
imprison us. And here let your own law be a witness against you, and be
ashamed of your unjust actings, but the Lord of God of Heaven and Earth, (who
is our protector) who is righteous, who bears not the sword in vain, who will
execute the judgment upon the transgressor, who will reward you according to
your works, before him you shall not be able to stand in judgment, in the day
of your account, therefore come down to the light in your consciences, which
calls for justice and equity, and awake to righteousness, all ye that li^e in
your Pride and presumption, and therein act against the innocent, for the day
hastens wherein you will be found out by the righteous judgments of God: for
the cry of the innocent, which is oppressed by you, has entered into the ears
of the Lord of Sabbath, who will come quickly and reward every one of you
according to your deeds. Therefore repent of your cruelty before the evil day
come, least you be found guilty of the blood of the innocent, when the Lord
calls you to an account: for know this that when the Lord comes to plead with
you, that of God in all your consciences, will witness for God in his
righteous judgments; therefore by that light which is pure in your consciences
learn your condemnation, and own it upon those things before mentioned, which
are contrary to the light, that peradventure you may be hid in the day of the
Lords wrath.

From us who are sufferers in outward bonds, for the testimony of a good
conscience, for the innocent truth sake, which shall stand for ever a witness
against all cruelty, and bloody persecutors, in which truth we have assurance
and peace in our sufferings, who are counted by the world deceivers yet true,
persecuted but not destroyed. Our names according to the flesh are George
Whitehead, John Harwood etc.

From Bury Gaol this 14 of the 9 Month,

A True Copy of the Paper which Richard Clayton was moved to set upon Bures
Steeplehouse door, for which he the said Thomas Waldgrave, called Justice of
peace caused him to be whipped which he the said Thomas Waldegrave called a
seditious paper and nonsense.
IF you do set up such Ministers as seek for their gain from their quarters,
you do set up such as the Prophet disapproves, Isa. 56. 11: And if you do set
up such as do bear rule by their means, you do set up such as the Prophet
Jeremiah, and the Lord disapproves, Jer. 5. And you that set up such as seeks
for the wool, and make a prey upon the people, you set up such as the Prophet
Ezekiel disapproves, Ezekiel. 34: And you that set up hirelings, set up such as
Micah disapproves, Mica. 3. And you that set up such as are called of men
Masters, stands praying in the synagogues, and have the chiefest places in the
assemblies, you set up such as Christ disapproved Math. 23: And you that set up
such as are given to filthy lucre, you set up such as the Apostle disapproves 2
Pet. 2. 14. And you that set up such as persecute, and cause people to be sent
to prison for speaking the truth in the synagogues, you set up such as go in
Cains way Jude. 11, And you that set up such as receives gifts and rewards,
the wages of unrighteousness, you set up such as mind earthly things, whose
God is their belly, which the Apostle disapproves; Phil. 3. 10. And you that
set up such as strives to keep out Gods laborers out of his Vineyard and keep
up such which Christ and the Apostles disapproves; and you that set up such as
would not suffer another to speak that stands by, when any thing is revealed,
but sends him to Prison if he do, you set up a persecuting Spirit, full of
disorder, and are judged by the Apostles life and doctrine, (who was a Minister
of Christ) both you that set up, and them you do set up, (who said they might
speak one by one) and so you all by this Spirit are judged to be in the Spirit
of error, and to be such as would quench the holy Spirit, and would limit the
Spirit of God, and despise prophesying and dare not try all things, manifesting
your selves to be haters of the light, and disapproved, with the Prophets and
Apostles, and their practices and life: and you that sets up such as gives
people, David's Quakings, Tremblings, Cryings, Roarings, and Tears, and
Prophecyes, and prayers and praises, in Meeter mixed together, you set up such
as have not the Spirit of understanding to sing with the Spirit and with
understanding, which Spirit brings to know the time of praising, Praying,
Groaning, and Crying, and Trembling, and Quaking, and Prophesying: the Spirit
of understanding witnesses, these things in their places, but you give
Scoffers, and Scorners, and Drunkards, and Swearers, and Threatners, and
Persecuters, David's conditions to sing, for he was scoft at when he was in such
conditions, and these do so now at these that are in such conditions.

And if you set up such as takes Tithes, you set up such as the Apostle denied,
for the Apostle said, the Preisthood was changed, and the law was changed also,
Heb. 7. and if you set up such as is before mentioned, you set up such as are
contrary to Scriptures, and plants no Vineyard, nor labors in the Vineyard;
for first they must plant a Vineyard, before they eat of it.

To all you-Rulers, Gentry, Priests, and people in the Nation, who accuse us,
you call Quakers, for idleness; Take notice of your envy, you have against Gods
Laborers.
WHereas by many of the Magistrates, Priests, and People of this Nation, we are
accused of idleness, who are sent by the Lord of the Harvest into his Vineyard
to dress it (as the Disciples of Christ ever were) and are faithful and
diligent in his work, who has called us, (as the true Ministers, sent forth by
Christ, were in all ages) and are not idle, but do (as they did) by the same
spirit, bear witness against all such as live in idleness, and profaneness,
as the most part of these people do, who accuse us: such, as live in pride and
wantonness, who work not at all with their hands, accuse us of idleness, who
have a Cloud of witnesses for our practice; for the holy men of God traveled
from place to place, (as we do) as they were moved of the Lord, and they were
sent (as we are) by the Lord; to testify against such ungodly practices, as
the people of the world live in; and the same Generation in nature, hated and
persecuted them, as do hate and persecute us; And by the same holy spirit, ye
are tried and found to be the idle persons, who accuse the Servants of the Lord
of idleness, who are in the work of the Lord, laboring in his Vineyard. You
Magistrates, Gentry, Priests and people, who sport your selves in the daytime,
and wantonly lives upon the earth, feeding your selves with dainty dishes,
Dives-like, wasting the Creatures of God upon your lusts, devouring the
Creation, decking your selves in gorgeous attire, that you may be set up and
esteemed of, above your poor brethren, and so are found Gentiles in nature,
exercising Lordship over your brethren persecuting and imprisoning them, who
are redeemed out of that nature you live in, who cannot bow and worship you (as
the Heathen do;) but know this, you Gentiles, Priests and people, who lives in
these practices, (in envy, pride, idleness, and fullness of bread.) The day
draws nigh, wherein you an account must give to the Creator, for your envy and
cruelty, and for the Creatures which you have wasted, and do waste and devour,
upon your ungodly lusts; and in the day of account, you will houle and lament,
for the misery which will upon you come; for, to the mighty God of Heaven and
Earth, the Creator of all things, you an account must give, for your pride and
idleness, fullness and gluttony, which you have lived in, and do live in, and
your reward you must receive, according to your deeds and practices, your
outside formal profession will not at all avail you, in the day of the Lord:
And you shall then know, who have lived in idleness, whether you who are found
in the sins of Sodom alive, or we whom the Lord sends amongst you, to declare
against such practices, and to forewarn you of the evil, which is to come upon
you, who are found in these practices and does in life and word bear true
testimony against you, who live in, and practice such things daily, as is
before mentioned. And many of you are grown so dainty, and so curious in your
Diet, and Apparel, that you scarce know what to eat, what to drink, or what to
put on; and so causes the whole Creation, to groan under the weight and burden
of your corruptions: who lives in idleness, whose belly is your God, who glory
in your shame: And here both Priests and Gentry, who accuses others of
idleness, are caught in their own snares: You who accuse us for idleness, who
are in the work of the Lord, or you your selves, who are found in the work of
the enemy of God, let the honest hearted judge, who live in idleness: you who
are enemies to the Servants of God, which labors to have such practices
destroyed, as causes the wr^^h of God to remain upon such as act in these
things before mentioned. All your coverings which you can make, will not hide
you; for the righteous judge, who will plead the cause of the innocent, will
find you out, in the day of his fierce wrath, which is coming upon you, which
you cannot avoid, nor escape: your high thoughts, nor your greatness will not
save you though you esteem never so highly of your selves, and scorn and der^de
your poor Fellow Creatures, counting them inferior to you. And many of you
think us not worthy to live upon the earth: we seem so vile and base in your
scornful eyes. But know this, you proud, high minded, self-conceited ones that
God is no respecter of persons, who has chosen the (despised) poor of this
world, to be heirs of eternal salvation and has left you for utter
destruction, except you speedily repent; for woe will come upon all you that are
covered, and not with the Spirit of the Lord: therefore now be you warned, and
while you have time, prize it; for the mighty terrible day of the Lord draws
nigh: therefore repent, and forsake the evil of your doings, (you Sodomites)
before the evil which is determined against you, come upon you: the day of your
Calamity hastens, the Lord is righteous in his judgments, who a short work
will make upon the earth, and he will reward you according to your works: you
who are workers of Iniquity, must depart from his presence, and into utter
darkness must be cast; for the living dreadful God of life and glory, is of
purer eyes, then to behold iniquity: therefore cease, cease, from your pride
and vain glory, ye high-minded self-conceited ones, and sit down in dust and
ashes, lest the door of mercy be for ever shut against you, and you perish
eternally. Remember you are warned in your life time,

From Edmonds Bury Goal, the 19. day of the 6th month, 1655. By a Servant of
the Lord in outward bonds for the truthsake, in scorn by the profane world,
called Quaker, whose name in the flesh is, JOHN HARWOOD.


