A SERMON Preached to the NATIVES OF THE County of WARWICK, AND City of
COVENTRY, IN THE Church of St. Mary Le Bow, London, November 14th. 1695.

By THO. WHITE, Preacher at Stratford Le Bow in Middlesex, and Prebendary of
Litchfield.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Hodgkin; and are to be Sold by John Whitlock, near
Stationers' Hall, 1695.

TO Mr. Ralph Palmer. Mr. William Edwards. Mr. Thomas Burnivill. Mr. William
Hegg. Mr. Thomas Kirkum. Mr. Adam Morroll. Mr. Richard Morroll. Mr. Samuel
Knowles.
Stewards of the Warwickshire Feast.
Gentlemen,
It Is usual for the Printing of a Sermon, to plead the Importunity of some or
other, as if that must atone for all its Weaknesses and Defects.

I wave this as an old fashioned Apology and out of Date.

Besides, I would not be so Unkind to my Countrymen, if I were guilty of a
Fault, to make them Accessaries, and draw them into a Participation of my Guilt.

I am very well satisfied no Man can think Meaner of this Undertaking than he
who undertook it; and if I have done neither Honor nor Service to your Native
Country, yet I meant so well, and intended it, I would certainly have done it
if I could. I am,

GENTLEMEN, Your Obliged Servant and Countryman THO. WHITE.


PSALM lxxxvii.5, 6. And of Zion it shall be said, This and that man was born
in her, and the most High shall establish her.

The Lord shall count it when he writes up the people, that this man was born
in her.


WE are here assembled this Day, as for other good Ends and Purposes, so to
celebrate the Country and Place of our Birth.

The Historian, indeed, when he describes any Place or Province, entertains us
with the Commodiousness of the Situation, the Sweetness of the Air, the
Temperature of the Clime, the Fertility of the Soil, the Variety and Abundance
of all Things for the Necessities and Convenience of Humane Life: But it looks
Foreign to the Office of a Preacher, who considers not so much the good
Qualities of a Place as the People; the Piety and Prudence, the Truth and
Honesty, the Moderation and Peaceableness, the Charity and Usefulness of those
that were born there.

The Holy Writer of this Psalm, whence I have borrowed my Text, gives a high
and honorable Character of Zion upon both Accounts, as well for the Excellency
of the Place, as the Natives also.

First, She is extolled for her great Force and impregnable Strength; Verse 1.
Her Foundation is in the holy Mountains.

Her Situation likewise was so sweet and inviting, that the Almighty seems
pleased with the Prospect; Verse 2.
for, The Lord loves the gates of Zion more than all the dwellings of Jacob.

Verse 3.
Glorious things are spoken of thee, thou City of God.

Psalm. 122.1.132.5, 14.
She is called, The house of the Lord; the place of his rest; the habitation of
the Mighty God of Jacob; Psalm. 48.2.
the city of the great King; and, the joy of the whole Earth.

Glorious are these Sayings, but greater, if possible, is that said of her in
my Text; That she was the Birthplace of Saints, and the Children of God; For
of Zion it shall be said, This and that man was born in her, and the most High
shall establish her.

These Words, I confess, properly and literally speaking, describe Zion, not
for the Nation or City of the Natural, but the Place of a Spiritual Birth,
where many were born to God, and made his Children by Adoption and Grace.

This the foregoing Words fully prove, where it is said, I Will make mention of
Rahab and Babylon to them that know me; Behold Philistia and Tire, with
Ethiopia; This man was born there; That is, It shall be spoke to the Honor of
these Barbarous Nations, who were Aliens to the Hebrew Commonwealth; without
the Covenant, without the Promise, and without God in the World; that now they
are incorporated in the Church, made Natives of Zion, Fellow-Citizens with the
Saints, and of the Household of God.

It Is usual we may observe in sacred Scripture, to mention with Respect the
very Place and Instruments of a Man's Conversion to God from an evil Course of
Life; nay, it is so Natural, that we cannot but think well of those who have
been Instrumental to our Spiritual Good, so kind and civil to our Souls, as to
reduce them from Error and Ignorance, Popular Mistakes, and Prejudice to the
Knowledge of God, and Establishment in the Truth.

St. Paul speaks great things of those Instruments by whose Ministry some were
born into the Heavenly Life; How beautiful are the Feet of those that preach
the Gospel of Christ, and bring glad tidings of good things? Romans 10.15.

Nor were Persons only, but Places likewise, in repute upon the same Account.

Jericho stands upon record in the Gospel of St. Luke, for the Place where
Zacheus the Publican was called by our Savior, Luke 19.1.
and of an Heir of Perdition, a Child of Wrath, was made a Son of Abraham.
Verse 4.


Antioch, once a Place of Note and Eminency, though now decayed, yet lives in
Apostolical History, for the Christning of the Disciples, who were called
Christians first at Antioch, after the Custom of the Greeks, Acts 11.26
who called the Sect by the Founder's Name.

Thus I observe, that where we first received Religion and the Faith of the
Gospel, in a sense is the Place of our Birth, as well as that where we first
drew our Breath.

However, I shall consider these Words in the largest Sense they are capable
of, as they denote the Nation and Province of our Natural Birth, as well as
that where we were born into the Knowledge of, and Acquaintance with God; and
then these two things they will offer to our Observation.

First, That there is a great difference in Places as to the forming Men's
Manners, and a right institution of Life.

Second, That true worth and Goodness does an Honor to a Country, and reflects
a Reputation to the Place of one's Birth.

To each of these I shall speak briefly, and then end with something proper to
the Occasion of our Meeting this Day.

First, That there is a difference in places as to the forming Men's Manners,
and a right Institution of Life: Of Zion it shall be said, this and that Man
was born in her.

The whole World is indeed a Divinity-School, where the Dominion and Government
of God is learnt; Romans 1.
The invisible things of God being plainly seen by the things that are made,
even his eternal power and Godhead; yet notwithstanding there are some Places
and People more peculiarly interested in the Tuition of the Almighty.

Zion was illustrious above all the Regions of Judaea, all the Towns and Cities
of Gallilee, for the Divine Oracles, whence Men were taught to Reverence and
Fear the God of Israel.

Rahab and Babylon, Tire and Aethiopia, were eminent in the Records of Time for
Wealthy and Populous Countries: But for all that, in Jewry was God known, his
Name was great in Israel, in Salem was his Tabernacle, and his dwelling in
Zion. Psalm. 76.1.2.

In the great Towns and Cities of the Jews, were the Seats of the Prophets;
here dwelt Rabbi's and Expositors of the Law; here were erected the Schools of
Religion and learning; here were their Synagogues and Houses of Prayer; here
their Altars and Places of Sacrifice.

So that the Natives had all the Advantages of enriching their Minds with
Wisdom, to make them useful in their Generations, and to procure them Favor
with God and Man.

Such a mighty Opinion had the Jews coneceiv'd of their great Towns and Cities,
that they dispis'd all inferior Places, in Competition with them, for Virtue
and Wisdom; they usually, in disdain, called such as were not of their Stamp,
Terrae Populum, The People of the Earth, or if you will take it in the
Pharisees own Language, John 7.49. This people who knows not the Law are
cursed.

Philo Judaeus in his Book concerning special and particular Laws, tells us
that the Hebrews gave the Cities of the Priests, who professed the Law,
preference to all others, yea, moreover, that the Towns of Sacrifice were held
to be more Religious than any besides.

And it is easy enough to conceive, that Religion and Goodness should thrive
most in those Places, where they have the Advantage to be recommended daily by
Precept and Example, Custom and general Approbation.

Where shall we seek Wisdom? Where shall we find Understanding, but in the
Schools of the Prophets? Where shall we find Devotion, if not in Synagogues and
Houses of Prayer? Where shall we meet the Divine Presence, but between the
Cherubins, the Place where his Honor dwells?

Thus in the Judgment of the Jews, Places of Religion and beneficial Converse,
have a mighty Power in forming Men's Manners, and governing the Actions of there
Lives; yea, we find that they were so prejudiced against those little Towns and
Villages where were no Synagogues, and Places for Sacrifice, that they would
not admit any good Thing could be done in them, or any good Man come from them.

And this was one Reason (though not to be justified) our Blessed Savior
himself found so little Favor from his Countrymen, because of the Obscurity
and Ignobleness of the Place of his Birth.

Hence came those reproachful Reflections of the Pharisees and their Admirers.
John 7.41.52.
Shall Christ come out of Galilee? Look and see; For out of Galilee arises no
Prophet.

A Country so poor and despised, never yet sent a Man forth endued with the
Spirit of Prophecy, and now they believe it never would.

Nay, honest Nathanael, who for his Plainness and Simplicity, was so beloved of
our Savior, that he gave him the Character of an Israelite indeed, and without
guile; John 1.47.
was notwithstanding so prejudiced against the City of our Blessed Lord; that
when Philip invited him to see the Messiah, Jesus of Nazareth the Son of
Joseph, he forthwith makes this Reply, John 1.45.46.
Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth?

For to come from Nazareth was a Proverbial Kind of Saying for a Man that was
useless, and good for nothing: especially amongst the Men of that Generation,
who adored only the Pomp and Splendor of Riches, allowing few for Wise and
Prudent besides the rich and prosperous; nor any for Good, but such as were
very Great in the World.

Mat. 23.2
That who sat in Moses's Chair were resolved to keep their Seat; wherefore to
secure Reverence to themselves, the scattered amongst the People such Sayings
as these.

That the Spirit of Wisdom rests not upon the Heads of Poor Men.

That the Rich and Mighty upon Earth are the Favorites of Heaven; so that
according to their Scheme, if a Man be shattered in his Fortunes, or however
brought into Poverty and Contempt, no more ado but write upon his Doors, Psalm.
71.11.
Forsaken of God, take him and persecute him, for there is none to deliver him.

These were the Men who stumbled at the Humility of the Messiah when he came
amongst 'em; for they said, as it was prophesied of them, Isa. 53.2, 3.
He has no form nor comeliness, and when we shall see him there is no beauty
that we should desire him.

The Place of his Birth and Parentage were such Stumbling Blocks in their way,
that they scorned to receive Rules of Life, or be taught Civility and good
Manners from the Carpenter's Son.

To their great Sanhedrim, which consisted of Rulers, Judges, Priests, and
Chief of the People, they fixed the Shecinah, the Divine Presence, yea the
Spirit of Judgment they so appropriated to themselves, that if any would seek
for Instruction, it must be in their Courts and Consistories, and not amongst
poor Plebeians in the Sea-Port-Towns of Galilee.

This that I have said, shows that the Instances of Piety and Wisdom were rare
and unfrequent in the mean and contemptible Parts of Galilee, but does on no
hand justify the Infidelity of the Jewish Nation in rejecting the Messiah,
that Mighty Prophet, who was born there; nor should any Man of true Worth and
Greatness, be despised in the World, purely for the Obscurity of his House and
Family, and Place of his Birth. And this brings me to the second thing I
propose to treat of, Namely,

The Lord shall rehearse it when he writes up the people, that this man was
born in her.

It was common to the Jews, to inroll the Names and Doings of their Worthies,
in some public Court of Record, that they should live to Posterity, and that
Generations to come, might call them blessed. To this the Psalmist alludes when
he says, The Lord shall write up the people.

And not unlike to this was the Usage of the Primitive Times of Christianity,
who inserted into the Dyptichs of the Church, the Martyrs and Confessors of the
Faith; and then at the celebration of the Eucharist recited their Virtues, with
their Names and Countries.

I acknowledge no Place of it self is capable of Respect and Honor, further
than it is related to such Men, whose Merits and glorious Atcheivements have
given it Credit.

For what Reputation can a City or Country have more, than that it has been
the Birthplace of some of the Worthies of the World, or those of whom the
World was not worthy?

All the Reputation of a City or Province, is, that it has a Place in History,
that it lives in the Archieves and Registry of time, that it shall be talked of
with Love and Delight, and mentioned with Esteem to the World's End; and this
is the Credit good Men do to their Country, and the Place of their Birth; and
upon the Score of Virtue, there is a Respect due to them both, if we shall
appeal,

First, To the general Sense of Mankind;

Secondly, Consider the Natural tendency

First. It has been the general Opinion Jews, Pagans, Turks and Christians,
and their Practice confirms it, that there is an Honor due to such who have
been the Authors of any public Good to the World; their Memories they have
celebrated with Praise, and registered the Land of their Nativity.

The ancient Jews ever preserved a great Esteem of the Towns and Countries,
Houses and Dwelling^ of their Patriarchs and Prophets; Chaldea was celebrated
for the Country of Abraham; and Zoar (though a little one) for the City of Lot's
deliverance.

Whenever they recited the Deeds of their Ancestors, 'twas commonly after this
Manner, Let his Name be blessed, and his Memory abide to the Life of the World
to come: From the Jews it is probable was this derived to the Gentiles, who
instituted Feasts to the Honor of their Gods, and held the Places in Reverence
that gave them Life.

Whenever they talk of their Founders of Cities, their Restorers of Liberties,
their Generals and Leaders of Armies, their inspired Poets and Orators, they
are sure to mention the Nation and Country whence they came, as if they loved
the very Ground they trod, and fansied a peculiar Generousness in that Air
where those Heroes breathed.

Secondly, If we consider the Natural Tendency

The righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance, Psalm. 112.6
and the glory of his house shall not be forgot.

Indeed Men may set up their Names by Villainous Actions; they may be talked of
when they are dead, for Fools and Knaves, Tyrants, Oppressors, Murderers and
Destroyers of Mankind, and of such it is said oftimes in Contempt, Lo, there
was his Dwelling, the Possession of Fraud and Violence; Lo, there his Folly
and the Place of his Birth; but to be buried in everlasting Obscurity, is
better by far; yea, what our Savior said to Judas may be applied to such, it
had been better for them if they had never been born.

Whereas in the Works of Righteousness and Goodness, there are the Seeds of
Immortality, which though depressed will spring again with a fresh Verdure, and
out live all the Pleasures of Sin, which last but a Moment; in a Word, as
Virtue and Righteousness, will embalm the Names of the Just, and make them
fragrant to Posterity, so will they preserve the obscurest Parts of the Earth
from Oblivion and Contempt.

True Worth and Religion will hallow a Cell, and ennoble a Cottage; when
Wickedness and Wrong will make the Rafters of the most stately Structure crack,
force the very stone out of the wall to speak, and the beam out of the timber
to answer it: Hab. 2.11, 12.
Woe to him that builds a town with blood, and stablisheth a City by iniquity.
Yea, it will it cause to be written upon its very Portico's and Gates, The
Glory of this House is departed, and like Filth and Ordure, will stick upon the
Walls, though cieled with Cedar, and painted with Vermillion. So then as long
as there is any Sense of true Honor and Greatness, any Difference preserved
betwixt Good and Evil; good Men and the Place of their Birth, will live in
Credit and Reputation; For of Zion it will be said, as long as the World
stands, This and that man was born in her, and the most high shall establish
her.

The Consideration of what has been said, should provoke us to a grateful
Sense of the Mercies of God, who has cast our Lot in a good Land, in a
civilized Nation, by the planting of the Christian Faith.

We were not born of Cannibals and Savages, as many in the barbarous parts of
the Earth, but of Christian Parents, who dedicated us to God betimes; and we
have been ever since instructed in the Ways of the Lord, and taught the
Judgments of our God.

Take away Religion, Laws, Institution of Behavior, what a dismal Prospect
would be the Land of our Nativity? In a very little time, it is to be feared,
we should return to our primitive Barbarity; be as Rude in our Manners, as
Idolatrous and Apish in our Worship, as our Saxon Progenitors were before us.

But blessed be God, we have had both Place and Conversation to form our
Manners aright, and conduct our Lives: Now if the Jews gloried in their great
Towns and Cities, because they had Synagogues and Places of Sacrifice there, we
have this ground of boasting all the Nation over: Every Parish amongst us in
this Sense may be called a Jos. 21.16.
Bethshemesh, the City of a Priest; and every Country Village has its
Synagogue, the House of Prayer and Sacrifice; so that if we would attend the
Offices of Devotion with a Zeal answerable to the wise Provision the Church
has made for us, our Prayers might come before God early in the Morning when
we look up; and the lifting up of our Hands would be as surely accepted as the
Evening Sacrifice: if we are not wanting to our selves, we may know something
of Religion, and be every one taught of God from the least to the greatest: But
if we will not take the Advantages God affords us for the improving and
bettering our selves, we can reasonably judge no otherwise, but that as our
Sins are aggravated, so our Stripes will be increased and multiplied; For he
that knew his master's will and did it not, shall be beaten with many stripes;
and to him that knows to do Good (or may know if he pleases) and does it not,
to him it is Sin; it is Sin with a Witness.

However, as a Testimony of our Gratitude to God for the Honor of our Birth,
and the Advantage of Education, let me recommend but these two things.

First, To keep a warm, lively Sense of

To live without God in the World is our degeneracy in the highest Measure and
Proportion.

To alienate our selves from him by wicked Works, is the worst sort of
Sacrilege we can commit; for our reasonable Souls are Gods Peculiar, made for
him, and fitted to attend upon him; fix therefore upon that as the greatest
Credit to any Nation or Country that leads us to God, and makes us most
acceptable to him.

In the last Place, as a farther Testimony to every good Thing, provoking one
another to Love and good Works.

For in Truth, if it were not upon the Account of Friendship and Charity, this
Day's Meeting were an unlawful Assembly, little better than a Rout or a Riot,
in the common Sense and Construction of the Law; but Piety and Charity will
sanctify an Assembly, and make your Meeting together for the better, and not
for the worse.

That therefore I would leave with you (my Friends and Countrymen) is, as to
promote Friendship and Kindness among your selves, so to let your poor
Countrymen taste the Effects of your Liberality and Bounty toward them.

Ye of this Society and County, without Ostentation be it said, have made the
best improvement of these Feasts of Charity of any other in the Nation besides.

How many poor Children have been fetched from the Towns and Villages where ye
were born, and put to honest Callings in this City; so that from being relieved
themselves, in a little time have been made capable of relieving and comforting
others.

This is an excellent sort of Charity, and the good Effects of it are
conspicuous in every Age.

How many began in this great City in as mean Circumstances as those who wear
the Liveries and Badges of your Charity this Day?

And who knows but those poor Children may have such Seeds of Virtue in their
Natures, that in a little time they may exchange their Places for yours, and be
as useful in the times to come as you have been in the Generations before them.

For this is no Reflection upon any Man; nay it is so far from it, that it is
much to a Man's Credit, when his Parts and Prudence with the blessing of God,
and not his Paternal Inheritance has made Rich.

Abundant Examples there are of such who from a small Figure once, have arrived
to the chief Magistracy of this City; and of others who from Schools and
Hospitals of Religion and Learning, have in time arrived to be useful and
considerable Men in Church and State.

It is inglorious only to grow Great by Frauds and Perjuries, Extortion or
Oppression, or to thrive by any Sin: But it is no way infamous from Low
Beginnings to take one's Rise, while Sobriety and Honesty, Diligence and
Industry, are the Means to Advancement.

The Heathens, who made Honor a Goddess, however they did in that, yet did
wisely in this, that they made Virtue the Step to her Altars, and would allow
none for Men of Honor, who had not first been the Sons of Wisdom.

We may indeed be thought to move counter to the Custom of the World, if we
take these Steps: But assure your selves, that they who take others, will find
in the End that they made more haste than good speed.

Let the World judge Things as they please, yet upon this you may depend, that
nothing but Religion and Piety, Justice and Charity will reflect a Reputation
upon you and your Country: For never any, I believe, whether Philosophers or
Heralds, who have treated, (...), of Dignity of Birth, or Titles of Honor, but
made Virtue a constitutive Part of true Greatness and Gentility.

The Children of God were Zion's Crown and Glory: This was her boasting, that
the Servants of God were born in her.

In the Gospel, Bethsaida of Galilee is famed for little else but the
Birthplace of Peter, Andrew, and Philip, the Disciples of the Lord.

How many Towns and Villages in Africa, and other Parts of the Earth, of whom
there is nothing remains, but that they were the Seats and Habitations of some
Ancient Bishops, Martyrs, and Confessors of the Christian Faith.

Nor have the Pagans been backward to pay all Respect to the Birthplace of
their Worthies.

Seven Towns, we are told, contested the Honor of Homer's Birth.

And when Alexander came against Thebes, sacked the City, and sold the Citizens
to the Number of Thirty Thousand, yet he remembered poor Pindar's House, and
Offspring, and excepted them the Common Calamity, Plut. in vit. Alexandri.
out of Respect to his Name and Memory.

Tully in his Book against Verres, tells us, that when he, with his wicked
Accomplices, laid their Sacrilegious Hands upon the Gods, and the Sacred Things
of the Temple at Delphos; the Inhabitants were much enraged for the Sake of the
Religion, and Antiquity of the Place, and adds besides, that the Persians, when
they overran Greece, and threatened Destruction to the Gods and their
Worshippers, yet in the midst of their Millitary Rage and Sanguine Zeal, spared
Delos, because 'twas the Birthplace of Apollo, the God of Wisdom and Eloquence.

Nay, on the contrary, we read how Infamous some Places have been, for the Sins
of the Natives there.

Tire and Sidon, Sodom and Gomorra are stigmatized in Sacred History for
Gluttony, and fullness of Bread, for their great Contempt of God and Religion.

Crete is branded for Lying and Deceit, for Inhumanity and Cruelty, Titus 1.12.
St. Paul quotes it out of one of their own Prophets (so they are called who had
the Poetic Fury) The Cretians are always liars, evil beasts, slow-bellies.

To conclude therefore, if we have any Love of God, any Respect to our Native
Country, any Value for the Memory of our Friends, Let Us resolve to devote our
selves to the Service of God, and to serve one another by Love.

And now since we are returning to the Amicable Enjoyment one of another, in
the House of Feasting, let there be no Spots in your Feasts of Love, let
Charity be the chief Steward, and Sobriety the Ornament of your Guests: Then
that Saying of the Preacher may take Place, Ecclesiastes 9.7, 8. Let thy
garments be always white, and let thy head lack no ointment.

Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry heart, for
God accepts thy work.

FINIS.

