AN ABSTRACT, by way of INDEX, of some very sound, and some other Antichristian
Passages, Collected out of G. Whitehead's and W. Penn's Books, plainly
contradicting their late Creeds, one Signed by W. Penn at Dublin in Ireland, on
which the B. of Cork has made some seasonable Remarks, another Signed by G. W.
called a few Positions of the sincere Belief, and Christian Doctrine of the
People called Quakers, both Printed this present Year School.
First out of George Whitehead's Books.

See his Book the Dipper plunged. p. 13. Nature of Christianity page 18. p. 29.
JEsus Christ God Man not Scripture Language.

2. Christ did satisfy as both God and Man, say the Presbyterians, etc. Which
says G. Whitehead is all one as to say God satisfied God.

3. Christ's outward appearance not to be looked for again.

p. 41.
4. That Christ existeth outwardly Bodily without us at God's Right Hand, what
Scripture Proof has he for these words?

Light and Life within p. 51. Truth defending the Quak. p. 23.
5. His second coming in the Flesh we do not read of.

6. Christ, whose Person is above the Clouds, and a Christ within, but how
provest thou two such Christ's, says G. W.

p. 65.
7. Faith in Christ without Men, contrary to the Apostles Doctrine.

p. 66.
8. The Blood of Christ's Humanity, the Apostle does not tell us of; Christ's
Blood is Spiritual.

p. 7.
9. That which is spoken from the Spirit of Truth, is of greater Authority than
the Scriptures.

p. 9.
10. They do not pray for pardon of their Sins.

p. 22.
11. Christ's coming in the Flesh, but a Figure or Example, a saying of R. Hubb:
justified by G. W.

Light and Life within p. 16. p. 17.
12. The shedding of Christ's Blood without, so much stress laid upon, blamed by
G. W.

13. The Flesh and Body which Christ took, was not Christ.

p. 24. 47.
14. The word Co-creator with the Father, Blasphemy, etc. and yet in [the
Quakers plainness] the same G. W. owns Christ the Son, and the Father to be
Co-workers, p. 24.

p. 26.
15. Christ or the Spirit in his People, the Beams of Christ without us,
nonsense.

p. 38.
16. The Quakers see no need of directing Men to Jesus Christ, or his Blood, as
it was outwardly shed at Jerusalem for Justification, etc.

p. 43.
17. We are not justified by the shedding of Christ's Blood that was let out by
the Spear.

p. 40.
18. Because that Blood is not in being.

p. 65.
19. A short Dialogue between G. W. and W. B. etc. about Christ's Body and
Blood, whether in Heaven without us, and opposed by G. W.

p. 56.
20. The Blood of the Covenant Spiritual and Inward.

p. 58.
21. Christ's Blood which was outwardly shed, not more or another than that of
the Childrens.

p. 59. 60.
22. Not the Antitype or Substance signified by the Blood of Beasts shed under
the Law.

p. 8.
23. To look to Christ Crucified at Jerusalem and in Heaven, and to be revealed
in us by his Spirit, is a contradiction, says G. W.

Christ ascended above the Clouds p. 21. 22. p. 29. p. 69.
24. Christ's Body of Flesh visibly to come again not Scripture words.

25. The Personal being of Christ without us, like the Anthropomorphites and
Muggletonians conceit

26. Christ remote in Person in his Body of Flesh not Scripture words.

Answer to T. Danson's Synopsis p. 18. Antidote p. 28. Divinity of Christ p.
57. Voice of Wisdom p. 36. Innocence Triumphant Article 10. Christian Quaker p.
353.
27. Christ's Soul and Body not created.

28. The Light within sufficient to Salvation without any thing else, viz.
without the Man Christ Jesus and Faith in him.

29. God satisfied himself the infinite value, Ransom was in himself, etc.

30. Infinite Righteousness effected in us.

31. The Name of Jesus Christ belongs to every Member of the Body, but not so
amply as to Christ the Head say the Ministers among the Quakers.

32. The Resurrection of the Body that Dies, Calvin, etc. mistaken, see also
p. 359. 360.

33. The deceased Saints look not for the Resurrection of their dead Bodies.

Light and Life within p. 70. Christian Quaker p. 59. p. 72.
34. Bodily Eyes to be made Spiritual, strange Doctrine.

35. They that are turned to the Light ought solely to depend on it.

36. Faith in Christ within opposed to Faith in Christ without us, and T. Hicks
blamed by G. W. for expecting to be saved by Jesus as a Person without him.

p. 100.
37. G. W.'s Paraphrase upon Phil. 3. is he, shall change the Body of our
lowness or humility; or our suffering Body comprehends the whole suffering
Estate of the Church.

p. 100.
38. The Resurrection of the Just, is not only from Sin, but to an arising out
of a suffering Estate into Glory, thus he expounds Philip. 3. 21.

Light and Life p. 18. p. 49.
39. The stress of Man's Duty is in obeying the Light Within.

40. Christ was very God-man, that the Manhood suffered G. W. calls it
confusion and contradiction to say that God did not suffer, and where are these
Terms in Scripture.

p. 55.
41. Where do the Scriptures say, that the shedding of Christ's Blood outwardly
was the meritorious cause of Salvation.

p. 64.
42. The shedding of that Blood to lay the meritorious cause or stress of
Justification upon, is false Doctrine.

p. 69.
43. A very blind and ignorant Man that reckons Bodies Celestial and Bodies
Terrestrial all one in Matter and Substance, p. 69.

p. 44.
44. Christ in us offers up himself a living Sacrifice to God, for us, by
which the Wrath of God is appeased to us, vindicated by G. W.

Quotations out of W. Penn's Books.
See W. P.'s serious Apology, p. 146. The Guide mistaken p. 25.
1. THat the outward Person that suffered was properly the Son of God we utterly
deny.

2. Christ Co-essential and Coeternal with his Father, etc. of being made Man,
of his dying, rising, and ascending into Heaven, etc. confused Babble, and by
rote canting, by paths of vain Tradition and Invention, results of Factious and
corrupted Councils, says W. P.

p. 26.
3. That Christ took upon him our Sins, and has satisfied the Justice of the
Father he makes 12 Queries; 1 Query, whether Christ suffered as God, or as Man;
if as God he makes 6 Queries, and 2 Queries if as Man, and 3 Queries if as God
and Man; [and all this to oppose Christ's satisfaction, any of these ways.]

p. 30.
4. Thus says W. P. having endeavored an enervation of his four Fundamentals,
which are set down at large in the aforesaid Book, from p. 21. to p. 30. which
the impartial Reader may judge, whether they deserve an enervation or
confuration or not.

Answer to a foolish Libel, p. 18. Quakerisme a new Nickname for old
Christianity, p. 12.
5. If there be any other Christ, than he that is crucified within, he is a
false Christ, a Passage cited out of G. F.'s great Mystery vindicated by W. P.

6. No need of Preaching what is not to be again says W. P. [so then by this
the Life, Death, and Sufferings, Resurrection and Ascension of Christ, needs
not to be Preached, and a great deal in the Bible is to be laid aside according
to this Maxim of W. P.]

^ 6.
7. Faith in the History of Christ's outward Manifestation, a deadly Poison,
these Latter Ages has been infected with.

Address to Protestants, p. 119. 2 Edition. Presace to R. B.'s Works, p. 36.
supposed to be W. P. and approved by G. W. Rejoinder p. 335.
8. Moral Men are to be reckoned Christians; what is Christ but Meekness,
Justice, etc.

9. Regeneration a greater Mystery than the Manifestation of the Son of God in
the Flesh; [and that but supposed with three if's to be a Mystery.]

10. Christ in the Gentiles a greater Mystery, than Christ as he was made
manifest in the Flesh. It Is strange that should be counted most mysterious
which was the Introduction to the Mystery, and those transactions counted most
difficult, that were by the Divine Wisdom of God ordained as so many facile
Representations of what was to be accomplished in Man.

p. 335.
11. In short it is to exclude the true Mystery of Godliness, which is Christ
manifested in his Children.

The Christian Quaker p. 97.
12. One outward thing cannot be the proper Figure of another, nor is it the way
of Holy Scripture so to teach, the outward Lamb shows forth the inward, etc.

p. 98.
13. The Seed promised is Inward and Spiritual, and is Christ as he is the
Divine Word of Light and Life; that was in the beginning with God and was and
is God over all blessed for ever.

Rejoinder, p. 179.
14. To deny the Locality of Heaven and Hell not very offensive, and that it
looks too Carnal indeed Mohammedan, (viz. to assert it)

Reason against railing, p. 9. Christian Quaker, p. 99. and 104. Reason against
railing, p. 138.
15. Christ's Satisfaction totally excluded.

16. That Holy Person Born at Nazareth, [but it should be at Bethlem] (and
Jesus born at Nazareth, and so T. E. has it in his Truth defended p. 161.) was
instrumentally a Savior.

17. Is the joy of the Ancients now in Glory imperfect, or are they in Heaven
but by halves; but why must the Felicity of the Soul depend upon that of the
Body. Is it not to make the Soul a kind of a Widow, to be without its beloved
Body a better sort of Purgatory.

p. 134.
18. If a thing can be the same and notwithstanding changed; for shame let us
never make so much stir against the Doctrine of Transubstantiation for the
absurdity of it, is rather outdone than equalled by this Carnal Resurrection.

The invalidity of J. Faldo's Vindication, p. 369.
19. It Is sown a Natural Body, it is raised a Spiritual Body, etc. I do utterly
deny that this Text is concerned in the Resurrection of Man's Carnal Body at
all; but the States of Men, under the First and Second Adam, Men are sown into
the World Natural, but they are raised Spiritually through him, who is the
Resurrection and the Life; and so they are Sons of the Second Adam, etc.

Reason against railing, p. 150.
20. What was a Commandment to any Servant of God in old times is not to us,
that such are not Commandments to us unless required by the same Spirit anew.

Serious Apology, p. 148.
21. And indeed says W. P. this we deny, viz. Justification by the Righteousness
which Christ has fulfilled in his own Person for us (wholly without us) and
boldly affirm it in the Name of the Lord to be the Doctrine of Devils, and an
Arm of the Sea of Corruption which does now deluge the whole World.

Rejoinder to J. Faldo, p. 284.
22. That Christ offers himself in his Children in the Nature of a mediating
Sacrifice.

23. W. Penn's serious Apology, p. 148. Death came by actual Sin, not
imputative, therefore Justification unto Life, came by actual Righteousness,
not imputative. Note Reader how far this contradicts his late Doctrine of
Justification, in his Primitive Christianity, and late verbal Testimonies, and
in his late Creed published at Dublin in Ireland.

Some Additional Passages Collected out of 2 Books of G. W.
Divinity of Christ, by G. W. p. 55. 56.

THomas Vincent a Presbyt. Minister is brought in by G W. saying, -- Though God
separately cannot satisfy, because he cannot suffer, and Man separately cannot
satisfy, because the Satisfaction would not be of infinite value, yet as
God-man he satisfied; to whom G. W. thus answers -- who is it that God cannot
satisfy? Is it himself? Can he not satisfy or please himself? Is he ever
divided or displeased with himself? -- Is this any less than Blasphemy? Let but
the indifferent judge in this case. [Note Reader, how he thus argues against
the satisfaction of Christ to Divine Justice, and renders the sound Argument
for it, used by all Orthodox Christians, no less than Blasphemy?

Again page 56. whereas T. V. had affirmed that Christ as God could not suffer;
he answers, as to his saying, that God cannot suffer is in one sense not
true, though he intended as to Death, yet the Spirit of God has suffered, and
has been grieved by Man's transgressions, and for this he cites, Isai. 63. 10.
Amos 2. 13. Hosea 11. 8. 9. Psalm. 95. Genesis 6. 6. Psalm. 78. 40. Isaiah 1. and 7.
13. and Isa. 43. 24. 25. -- and he concludes -- so then surely God could
satisfy himself, seeing it was for his own sake that be blotted out
transgressions, and here the infinite value, ransom, and satisfaction was in
himself; and what patience, forbearance, long-suffering and forgiveness, as was
signified by Christ and testified of by his outward Suffering and Death) was
really in Being in God before, and in the fullness of time a signal testimony
thereof given to Man to induce him to receive the free Love and Grace of God,
and Life and Salvation in the Son of his Love. [Here Note Reader first, that
whereas all Orthodox Christians understand all these places cited by him here,
and other the like places of God, or the Spirit of God being grieved by Men's
sins, God's suffering, his repenting, being grieved, being pressed, being
wearied with Men's Sins, metaphorically, but not literally, as where the
Scripture speaks of God's Mouth, Eyes, Ears, Hands and Feet, and soles of his
Feet, that it is only metaphorically, in condescension to humane capacity and
frailty, and not that God has really any such bodily Parts or Members; G. W.
contrary both to Scripture and true Reason, and all Orthodox Christians, by
perverting the Scripture, will needs have it, that God, or the Spirit of God
did and does really suffer by Men's Sins, without a metaphor, for the dispute
betwixt T. V. and G. W. here is about the real suffering of God, and not a
metaphorical suffering, for it was needful that Christ did really suffer for
Men's Sins And not metaphorically only.
(even as really as Men suffer) and that both in his Soul and Body, in order to
which suffering, it was needful that Christ should be Man, because as God he
could not suffer, as T. V. argued, and though Christ God-man suffered, yet he did
not suffer in his Godhead at all, or as God, but only in his Manhood, and as
Man, and his being God, gave the infinite value to his Sufferings as Man, and
seeing G. W. expounds all the abovementioned places strictly, and not
metaphorically, by the same reason he is obliged to turn Muggletonian, and
expound all the places of Scripture that mention God's Mouth, Heart, Eyes,
Ears, Hands, Feet, strictly and literally, without any metaphorical sense; yea,
his Notion that God suffers really and not metaphorically is as absurd, as that
of Muggleton, and necessarily infers Muggletonisme. 2. That he makes this
satisfaction to Divine Justice, to be altogether in God: and Christ's Humanity
or Manhood, as he was Born of the Virgin, to have no hand or share in; and yet
elsewhere, he renders it absurd that God satisfied God, see above number 2. 3.
That he makes God's Forgiveness, to be signified by Christ, and testified of by
his outward Suffering and Death, in the quotation above given, but not that it
was purchased by Christ, for this he has disputed against most eagerly. 4.
That though G. W. in some of his late Prints seems to own Christ's Humanity, and
particularly in his late Creed, yet he has let us know, what he means by it,
not the true earthly nature of Man, having had an earthly Body such as Man had,
at his Creation, as any part of him. For all such bodily nature (as coming from
humus the ground, whereof Christ consists as Man, he plainly denies in that
Book, whereof he is thought the Author, Called a Testimony for the true Christ
and his Light in confutation of R. Cobbet printed 1668.
but if not, the second days Meeting, whereof he is a Member is accountable for
it, being given out by their approbation, and he and they profess to be of one
Faith, but as humanity signifies Meekness, Gentleness, Mercifulness, as
opposite to Cruelty, in this last sense, he owns Christ's Humanity. Judge
Reader! can there be a greater fallacy or greater Jesuitish equivocation under
Heaven? and in his Christian Quaker he most fallaciously distinguishes betwixt
Christ his having Flesh, and Bones, and consisting of it, the word consisting
only implying his Flesh, and Bones to be a part of him, and not the whole
Christ.) 5. Whereas he quoteth Dr. Stillingfleet present Bishop of Worcester,
as being greatly on the side of G W. and other Quakers, in opposing Divin. of
Chapter from p. 85. to 90.
the Doctrine of Christ's satisfaction, as God-man, for which it is hoped he
has no ground, (...) were to be wished that Dr. Stillingfleet would in Print
vindicate his Reputation, from this infurious imputation cast upon him by G. W.
and that after the worthy example of the present Bishop of Cork in Ireland, Dr.
Stillingfleet and others of best note in the Church of England, would impugn
those gross and vile errors rampant in the Quakers Books, particularly in the
Books of G. W. and W. Penn, notwithstanding of their seeming Orthodoxy in their
2 late Creeds and conformity to the 39 Articles, (in point of Doctrine) to the
Church of England, for surely their so doing would be as commendable, and would
do the like service to the Truth of the Gospel, as the pious and learned works
of Augustine, and other Ancient Woe thies against the vile Heresies of Pelagius
and others, in those early times.

Again in his p. 11. of his Answer to T. Danson's Synopsis of Quakerisme, T.
Danson having affirmed, that Christ did satisfy, as well agendo as patiendo p.
12. To this he answers, 1. If satisfaction consists as well agendo as patiendo
are not Christ's Inward and Spiritual Operations included in his doing or works
for Man's Salvation? How then can Man exclude them? and think himself wholly
acquitted, and yet in his Sins, by the Suffering and Death of Christ without,
as a full compensation, and satisfaction in his stead? [Note again Reader, how
though before he placed that satisfaction wholly in God, yet now he would divide
it, and make one part of it to consist in what Christ did outwardly for us, in
his Body of Flesh, when upon Earth; and another part of that satisfaction to
consist, in the Inward and Spiritual Operations or Works, which Christ works
in Men, which is grosser, than any Popery, or at least, the grossest of any
Popery. in this case; for though the Papists maintain, that Men are justified by
good Works, wrought by the Spirit in them, and which the Spirit helps Men to
work, and that these good Works are meritorious of Justification, yet we do not
remember, that we ever heard or read, that any of the Popish Authors, make the
good Works of the Saints, wrought in them by the help of the Spirit, any part
of Christ's satisfaction to Divine Justice, for they distinguish betwixt
Christ's satisfaction, and Men's Justification; the satisfaction of Christ
consisting in those Actions and Sufferings of his, which were only his, and
wherein Men had no part, nor share, according to that. Isaiah 53. I have tread
the Wine Press alone, etc. and God has laid on him the iniquities of us all.
But according to G. W.'s notion, Men have a part or share in that satisfaction,
for the good Works that Christ by his spirit Works in Men, are the Works of
Men, and not the Works of Christ, or the Spirit only, yea formally considered,
they are only the Works of Men, for it is not Christ in Men, nor the Spirit,
that believes, repents, obeys, but it is Men that believe, repent, obey by the
help of Christ and his Spirit, which works of Men, not perfectly answering the
perfection of God's Law cannot be any satisfaction to Divine Justice. Here he
confounds Christ's satisfaction, which only belongs to Christ as his work,
without us, and the work of San^tification needful to be wrought in us, by the
help of the Spirit, which ought to be distinguished, and are plainly
distinguished both in the Scriptures and generally in Christian Authors; for
though Men's Sanctification is no part of satisfaction to Divine Justice, yet it
is altogether necessary in order to make Men capable of the Spiritual Blessings
purchased to Men by Christ his satisfaction for them.

Again G. W. in his part of the Christian Quaker, answers to his opponent,
having said, that Sin itself cannot cause God to alter his purpose, p. 270.
this he says, is not only a great mistake to say, Sin cannot cause God to
alter his purpose, (as in this case) but also gives a great liberty to
Hypocrites, who believe they are eternally Elect Persons, to continue in Sin
and Presumption; and he plainly asserts that God's declared thought or
intention may be altered, as the condition of Men changes from evil to good,
or from good to evil, for which he cites Jer. 18. 3, 4, 5, 6.

Note Reader, how G. W. who is so ready to charge his Opponents with Blasphemy,
is guilty of it too much, making God, like mortal Men not only capable of
suffering, but of altering and changing his thoughts and purposes, so making
him mutable, with whom there is no variation, nor shadow of turn, grounding his
false notion on his perversion of Jer. 18. 3, 4, 5, 6. as if it were to be
understood strictly, and after the manner of Men, which ought to be understood
in a metaphorical sense only; and is there no other way, to deal with
Hypocrites, and beat them out of their false hopes, and persuasions, but by
rendering the unchangeable God, like to changeable Men. If it be once granted,
that God's Thoughts, and Counsels, and Purposes can be changed, we have no
certainty, but that his whole declared Word, and revealed Will may be changed,
yea, not only what he has promised, but what he has sworn may be changed,
which is expressly contrary to Scripture, that says, that both his Word and his
Oath are immutable things, and if so, then surely his Thoughts Heb. 6. 17, 18.
are no less immutable, yea the immutability of his Counsel is expressly
mentioned Heb. 6. 17. his Romans 11.
gifts and calling are without Repentance, his Counsels of old are Faithfulness
and Truth, Isai. 25. 2. his Word is for ever settled in Heaven. -- Again, for
the Lord of Hosts has purposed, and who shall disanull it? Isa. 14. 27. But
according to G. W. Men can and do often disanull it, and change it; as for the
instances in Scripture of either promises not performed, or threatenings not
executed, they were and are conditional, and do all either express or imply
some condition, not in the will and purpose of God, but in Men, whose
conditions do often change, and therefore the veracity of God is sufficiently
demonstrated, without any change or shadow of change in the Thoughts or
Purposes of God. And indeed such who hold that God can change his Thoughts and
Purposes, must consequentially hold that he has not an infallible and perfect
knowledge of all future things, and accordingly such who professedly hold the
last, hold the first; for if Men had an infallible knowledge of future events,
they had no need to change their thoughts, the changes of Men's thoughts and
designs, do naturally proceed from their want of the knowledge of future
events, but no such defect can be in God, and therefore no change, all manner
of change being contrary to the Nature of his Infinite perfection.

POSTSCRIPT. containing a Request to the Friends of G. W. and W. P.
Friendly Reader,
PLease compare the late Creeds of those two Persons, and the abovementioned
Passages ^^irly collected out of those two Men's Books, which for most part are
more amply set down (...) G. K.'s Three Narratives, especially his last, (...)
thou will find them most expressly contradi^ory and inconsistent one with
another, which ^fficiently shows the great disingenuity and fal^^^y of many of
the Teachers and Writers a^ong the People called Quakers, who say, they (...)
not changed, but are the same as ever since they (...) a People, in their
Doctrins and Principles (...) Faith, as God and Truth is the same, and
par^^cularly of G. Whitehead who does say in the end (...) his late Creed,
Printed at London School. having ^^is Title; a few Positions of the sincere
Belief and ^^ristian Doctrine of the People called Quakers, (to (...)
misrepresentations and calumnies about the (...)) containing Twelve
particulars. These things we sincerely believe and own, and we know no Doctrine
or Principle (preached, main^^ined, or received among, or by us since we ^ere a
People) contrary to these beforementioned, nor do we own any contrary
thereunto; Surely he who can reconcile, and render consistent the Articles of
those Creeds, with the Passages abovementioned, fairly collected out of their
Books, and many more that might be collected, can reconcile the greatest real
contradictories, Truth and Error, Light and Darkness, Christ and Antichrist:
But G. W. (as he has formerly expressed himself in Print thinks to save his
Infallibility, by telling the World, he sees cause otherwise [now] to word the
matter, though he and his Brethren have the same sense still as formerly, i. e.
whatever their seeming belief now is, yet their sense is the same, as is
expressed in all their former Books, and in the Passages above-quoted, they are
semper idem, still the same, and still they hold, the Light within every Man is
sufficient to his Salvation, without any thing else, i. e. without Christ's
Death and Sufferings, and mediation for us in Heaven, and Faith in him, all
which are something else (to be sure) than the Light within, either Saint or
Heathen.

In the Conclusion, the more sincerely minded among the People called Quakers
are earnestly requested, that they would effectually deal with thief two Men.
G. Whitehead and W. Penn, to make an Index expurgatorius, and raze out of their
Books those and many other the like, and as bad Passages, that are to be found
in their Books, seeing it is as clear, as the Sun shine at noon, that they do
manifestly contradict their pretended late Creeds, and Professions, and without
the doing of which, they cannot in justice be reputed sincere, in their late
Profession, seeing they profess they are not changed, but have the same Faith
and Doctrine as ever they had: And if G. Whitehead and W. Penn should be
prevailed upon, by the importunity of the more sincere-hearted among that
People, and that God should turn their hearts, to so good a work, as fairly and
freely to retract their former Errors, and either disown their former Books, or
make an Index expurgatorius, to purge out whatever is a miss in them, their
Example (being the Principal leading Men now among the Quakers, since the
decease of G. F. R. B. S. Crisp, and others) would have a great influence on
their Brethren to do the like, and both to approve them, and join with them, in
so good a work, and it might be hoped that in a short time some general
Reformation would ensue among that People, in Doctrine, that would greatly
contribute to sanctity of Life. But if this be not done, and that timely, what
may be expected, but an extraordinary breach to happen, and an open spiritual
War among themselves, things being come to such a Crisis, that if this Remedy
be not applied, the Divisions and Contentions that will ensue, in all
probability, will make a great scattering and desolation among them, however
some ignorant Persons among them glory in their Unity, Strength, and Increase.

Given forth by some Friends of Truth, belonging to the Meeting at Turner's-
Hall, and some Friends in the Country in unity with them.
London the 10th. School.
FINIS.
^^^don, Printed for the Author, and are to be Sold by B. Aylmer at the Three
Pigeons over against the Royal Exchange, Cornhill, and C. Brom at the Gun at
the West End of St. Paul's. 1699.


