George Whitehead's PROTESTATION against Francis Bugg's PERSECUTION and Abuse
of the People called Quakers, his (Quondum) Beloved Friends; occasioned by his
late scandalous Paper, styled, Some Reasons, etc.
Memorandum,
1st. THat the said Francis Bugg, to his perpetual Infamy, invented and
divulged in print a famous Piece of scandalous Forgery, in his extra judical
Judicature, Trial and Condemnation of diverse Honest Men of Good Reputation in
and about the City of London, as Perjured Persons, for their Testimony against
some of his notorious Falsehoods and Perversions, staging them as set in a
Pillory, Pictured, under the Title Perjury, with the first Letters of their
Names over their Heads; as the notorious show thereof, may be seen at large in
the said Bugg's New Rome Arraigned, Anno 1693. And the Persons thus defamed,
their patiently forbearing, hitherto to enter their particular Actions of
Defamation against him, he has ungratefully requited, by his persisting to
accumulate Calumnies, and repeat Reproaches against the said People, to render
them obnoxious.

2dly. The said Francis Bugg has also been detected for his presumptuous
Impiety and Piece of insolent Forgery, in his diabolically inventing, forming
and divulging a Sermon in George Whitehead's Name, stiling the same G.
Whitehead's Sermon, to ridicule, defame and scandalize him and the said People,
and their Annual Meeting, which he terms their Convocation; in which notorious
Piece of Forgery and profane Romance, he the said F. B. uses the Sacred Name
of God and Christ, the Light within, etc. adding there unto, another Piece of
abominable Forgery and Impiety, in William Bingley's Name, as if he preached in
Confirmation of the other. This profane impious Romance, may be seen at large,
in Francis Bugg's Book, styled, The Pilgrim's Progress from Quakerism to
Christianity; and answered by G. Whitehead, in his Book Entitled, The Rambling
Pilgrim, or Profane Apostate Exposed, Anno 1700.

To his often repeated false Story against G. Whitehead, viz. That he put in
his Answer upon Oath, i. e. To a Bill exhibited in the Lord Mayor's Court,
April 9. 1695. And not only so, but that they (i. e. the Quakers) can take a
Legal Oath to serve their private Interest; and that there are many Instances
thereof in the Courts of Chancery.

Answ. I who was Defendant, as I did (in my former Answer to F. B.) deny that I
put in my Answer upon Oath, so (in good Conscience) I do still; for neither did
I take an Oath, or Swear at all; for I openly signified, that for Conscience
sake I could not Swear; and it was made appear that the Suit was vexatious; for
I produced an effectual Release from the Plantiffs, under their own Hands and
Seals, pleaded by Counsel in Court in bar of their unjust Claim; and my Answer
was accepted only in these Words, viz. I verily believe my Answer is a True
Answer: And if Jurat was Recorded or Endorsed, that was none of my Act; for it
has been a known Form, that some Clerks have used and entered Jurat, or Juratus,
when no Oath, Imprecation or Ceremony of an Oath has been taken or used by the
Persons concerned; and I am not of Opinion that Verily is an Oath, as some are.

As to F. B's. old refuted unjust Imputations against the said People, viz.
That they are mortal Enemies to the Christian Religion, denying Jesus Christ of
Nazareth to be the Christ, the Son of God, vilifying and contemning the Holy
Scriptures, Contempt of Authority, etc. with many more injurious Aspersions of
the like Nature, often repeated by him; unto which our plain Answers have long
been extant; being printed and sold by T. Soul in White-Hart-Court in
Gracious-Street. But this implacable Adversary will Not be answered; he will take
no Answers, but repeat accumulate, and multiply his refuted Calumnies over, and
over; turn and modelize them into several Shapes; sometime into History,
sometime into Dialogue, sometime into Catechism, sometime into a Sermon,
Profane Romance, Scandalous Trial, etc. and all or mostly but the same
Scurrilous Rubbish, like a mercenary Agent, he will be at work to defame and
scandilize the People called Quakers: And when he hears of any of them
attending the Parliament, he goes about peeping and prying, like a busy Body,
in other Men's Matters; and if he hears Relief in any Case is proposed, or
requested by them; then he rakes up some of his old repeated Calumnies and
Slanders (which he can easily do out of his old Books and Pamphlets stuffed
therewith) to asperse and persecute them with lying Papers, thereby imposing on
(and abusing) Authority; which has been his Practice for many Years since he
left the Quakers, and turned Persecutor against them. It has been manifest of
old, that invidious and perfidious Apostates, are the worst sort of Persecutors.

It appears, this Adversary would have no Favor shown the said People, which
is an Indication of his Persecuting Spirit, and Implacable Envy. Thus he treats
the People called Quakers, since he was above 20 Years in Communion with them,
and they esteemed his Beloved Friends; his Dear Friends, etc.

Friend F. Bugg I wish thou may yet find a Place of Repentance before thy
approaching Judgment comes inevitably upon thee.

However know this, That thy Reverend Abetters will never gain Honor or Credit
to themselves by thy irreverend Actions, nor be thy Advocates before the Bar
of Divine Justice, (where you must all be accountable) nor will all their
Bounty toward thee, excuse thy presumptuous Impiety before the Righteous Judge
of all.

The QUAKER's PROTESTATION Against Francis Bugg's PERSECUTION, etc.


