TRUTH TRYUMPHING IN A SUFFERING TIME OVER Deceit and Falsehood.

OR, William Prynn's Book of Quakers Unmasked, clearly detected, and the
Innocence of the People Vindicated from the Gross Abuses and Injuries done
them by him.

This is occasioned upon W. P. his said Book (with his Additions to it in Reply
to John Audland) being lately divulged.

This for the Information of the NATION: By G. W.

Printed for the Reader.

Truth Tryumphing in a suffering time over Deceit and Falsehood.
COnsidering the mighty power and good hand of our God in preserving and
prospering us in his way and work, and how he has enlarged the borders of his
Sanctuary amongst us, and how far short our persecutors have fallen of
effecting their evil designs against us, whereby they have sought our Ruin and
Destruction from being a people, which the Lord God has prevented and
frustrated, notwithstanding the many Enemies, Persecutions, Afflictions, and
Trials we have met withal and do undergo: If the hearts of the wicked were not
set in them to do wickedly, because Judgment is not speedily executed upon
them, they might consider their way, and cease joining hand in hand against the
seed of the Righteous, and not smite with the fist of wickedness, nor so beset
the Righteous on every side, as if they would swallow them up quick, and
destroy them from amongst men; for whilst Satan is permitted to make use of
some of his Instruments to belie, ^lander, and reproach us^ and to render us as
odious as he and they can, that they may stir up and Instigate others of his
Instruments to persecute and oppress us by outward Penalties, Sufferings,
Imprisonments, Banishments, and what not, to the utmost of their power. Now if
the Lord God h^d not been, and were not on our side, what would become of us?
Who could sustain us in all these troubles but he alone, whose faithfulness
fails not, and whose Love is continued unto them that fear him and hold their
Integrity in him, and walk in his way and path, and abide in his truth which is
the same still, and changes not, and such do not gad abroad to change their
way, but do confide in his name and power in which is our defense, in the midst
of all our Trials and Afflictions; and in his Salvation we have Joy and Triumph
over all un^lean spirits and lying tongues, and over all the deceits of false
hearts, hypocrites, time servers, men-pleasers, and deceitful workers, who ^eek
to curry favor and ingratiate themselves in with the powers, and such as be
uppermost, by railing^ reviling, and belying the persecuted and despised people
of God, who are so deeply exposed to suffering at this day (which course of
proceeding against the sufferers is a work of as base a spirit as is amongst
men) among which Railers and Revilers, I fi^d one William Pryn^e, Esquire (so
written) not one of the least, as hereafter is briefly made manifest in the
sequel hereof, upon exam^nation of his false Charges and Accusations (together
with his p^etended proofs thereof) against us [the suffering people called
Quakers] which being so very gross and apparently false, I would be as brief
as I may about t^em.

And now mark the Title of Will^am Prynne his Book, and his Charge upon which
he grounds his matter against the Quakers (so called) viz. The Quakers unmasked
and clea^ly de^ected ^o be but the Spawn of Rom^sh Frogs, Jesuits, and
Fra^ciscan P^p^sh F^yers, sent from Rome to seduce ^he i^^ox^ca^ed and
g^dd^-head^d E^glish Nation. I answer, how false and slanderous this accusation
is thousands in this Nation may judge, as also our Life, Cove^sation, Doctrine,
Writings and Testimonies and the suffering of several of our Friends under the
Pope both in France and Rome, where some till they dyed did manifest this
Charge to be false; and how can any suppose the rest of this matter to be truth
which is grounded hereupon, when the very ground of his Book is a ^^ie, which
though it has been detected several years ago, yet i^ is now reprinted and
enlarged, and brought forth as if it were still pertinent to us and the English
Nation; which he says is ^n^oxicated and giddy-headed, and so he has not only
set himself as a Judge over us, but over the whole Nation, and in his first and
second pages tells of multitudes of R^mish Wo^ve^, Locus^s, Ca^er^^llars of all
Sects, Order^, as Jesuits, Franciscans, Benedict^nes, Dom^nican^ and the like,
come f^e^ly over in whole Troops from For^aign Seminaries and Cell, that act
their several ^a^ts and Pagean^s on the Th^a^re of our d^st^acted English
Church and S^ate, to bring both of them to Ruin under al sorts of disguises
without any wa^ches or searches at all, to seclude or detect, etc. Mark here
how he hat^ ce^sured and reflected upon the English Church and State, and is
not ^his a di^paragement and reproach to the Government ^hereof, which had we
or some called Sectaries spoken thus much, what would it have been deemed^
would it no^ have been counted Seditious, if not worse? And if this be true
that he says, (which I refe^ to the judgments of both Rulers and People of
England.) what reason have we to conform to such a distracted Church, that
these he counts Romish wolves, Locusts and Jesuits have so much power over (if
his words be true) or any to be compelled thereto^ for would you not count him
a madman that would follow a distracted Woman for his guide and leader
(especially in matters of Salvation) or them madmen that would compel others
to follow such a one?

And now le^ us ex^mine his p^oof for his aforesaid Charge and Accusation
against the Quakers^ which is an Information of George Cowl^^^aw of Bristol,
taken upon his Oath 22. of ^anuary 1654. which he informs from one Coppinger
(as he says) a Friar of the Fra^ciscan Company, who should tell this Cowl^shaw
that he had been a^ London for some Months, and had been at all ^he Churches
and Meetings^ public and ^rivate that he could hear of, and that none came so
near him as the Quakers, etc To which I answer, Cowlisha^'s Oath of a bare
report (if it be true that such a thing was reported) was no sufficien^
evidence to convict the Quakers (so called) of being guilty of W. P. his Charge
aforesaid, nor for him to pass such a severe Sentence and Judgment upon them,
nor to go about to instigate the Magistrates to persecute or suppress them as
he has done: For if another should come and swear that W. Pr^nne affirmed that
the Q^akers are but the spawn of Romish F^o^s and (...); does it prove his
Affirmation or Charge true? He has showed himself worse then the very heathen
in this thing, to take a man's Information against people behind their backs, as
sufficient for their conviction, whilst the accused were not present to answer
face to face before their accusers: For the Romans Law did not condemn any man
before a fair hearing and trial, and should men proceed thus illegally, or this
manner of inveighing against a people, be admitted of, or owned as rational;
then who could escape his false censures and unjust judgments. For Christ told
his followers, that men should revile them and persecute them, and say all
manner of evil of them falsely for hs names sake. Now if any should have sworn
that they had all manner of evil spoken of them, could that be sufficient to
prove them guilty of all manner of evil? No sure, but the quite contrary, he
told them they were blessed ^hen they so suffered. And further, mark his
Information from ^oppinger; That being at a Meeting of the Quakers, he there
met with two of his acquaintance in Rome which were of the same Franciscan
Order and Company, that were now become chief Speakers amongs^ the Quakers, and
that he himself haed spoke amongst them in London about 30. times, and was well
approved of amongst them; To which ^ say, these things being known to be so
notoriously false, as many in this City know, that little need be said to them;
neither need we go about to prove a Negative or denial of them, for bot^ the
weakness and fallacy of his matter is very apparent, and had he ^amed these he
calls chief Speakers, it would further have appeared that he had notoriously
belyed the Quakers, because all those that are owned as Ministers or Speakers
amongst them (who have gone forth publicly in the work) are so apparently
known, that many would have been able to have confu^ed this false Information
of their being either Jesuits or any whit ^elated to them in their way or
Orders; but it seems the concealing of their names was in policy to make the
Lying story more credible, which how apparently it contradicts it self, any
tha^ are rational may judge: where after Coppinger told Cowli^^aw that none
came so near him as the Quakers, and that t^o of the Franc^scan Order was chief
Speakers amongst them, and that he was well approved of amongst them; yet after
this, page 4. That this Coppinger told him two or three times, that if he d^d
love his Relgion and soul, he should not hear them, etc. Look here what
Contradiction here is^ and how plainly the Quakers are hereby cleared from
being such as before they were Charged to be, and that they do not own either
the Friars or Jesuits; neither are their Speakers such, for if they were, could
it be a likely story that a ^ranciscan Friar should dissuade a man from hearing
them, and that a^ he loved his Religion and soul; see what is become of ^.
Prynn^ story and proof against the Quakers, and whether it be sufficient
thereupon to give notice to those in present power to proceed against them
under pretense of preventing such dangerous growing mischiefs which
unrighteously he charge upon the Qua^ers. And thus a lying^ slandering, and
persecuting spirit ha^h uttered forth its Rancour and Venom against an
Innocent people; and should the Magistrates be led by him and such malicious
spirits, as to be persuaded and ruled by them, what would become of the
peaceable Subjects, and of this Nation in general? Though he, and such
Time-servers, Hypocrites, and Men pleasers who can turn any way with the times
for their own Ends and Pre^erment, are Instruments fit enough ( Iudas-like) to
serve the persecuting spirit, and to do the persecutors work and drudgery
against the poor and despised people whom the Lord is with; but they whose work
and service is managed by such, let them mark the End of their work in the day
of the Lambs wrath, when they that have taken Counsel together against the Lord
and his anointed shall have a recompense of reward according to their doings,
and when the Kings of the Earth, great and mighty men and chief Captains, and
both every bond and freeman, shall hide themselve in the Dens, and in the
Rocks of the Mountains, and say to the Mountains and Rocks, Fall on us and hide
us from the face of him that sits on the ^hrone, and from the wrath of the
Lamb, Rev. 6. Here neither Masters nor Servants, that have a hand in this work,
and have but the Mountains to fly to, shall be able to hide themselves.

And as touching the exception that John Audland gave against Cowlishaw's
Informa^ion and Oath aforesaid, as proving it untrue; where ^. A. said, That
two of them reproach^ully called Quakers, came from the North in the Month of
June, and came into Brist^l the 12. day of the Month called ^uly, 1654. Which
plainly enough proves the Information from Coppinger and Cowlishaw false; where
Coppinger in the Month of September spoke of their being to come to Brist^l
within a Month or three weeks following, and the other denying that any
Quakers had been in Bristol before their discourse in September, whereas two of
them were there above a Month before, in the Month called July, and had
Meetings, where they did publish the truth. But William Prynne to color over
and gloss this false Information against the Quakers, to make the Nation
believe it for truth, he says of these two, called Quakers, being at Meetings
at Bri^^o^ on the 13th. of July, That that was unknown to Cowlishaw and most
others, etc. And that they spoke to ^h^se people not under the ^ame or notion
of Quakers, but only of Anabap^ists and Independents, and that in September^ or
at that time they began to take upon them the ^ame of Quakers, etc. To which I
reply, now m^rk what silly shuffling he has ^ere made to prove the former
Information an^ Oath true, a^ if its being unknown to Cowlisha^ that they were
in Bristol in July, did prove his flatly denying them to have been there before
Sep^em^er true: For his not knowing that they were there manifests that he
spoke both unadvisedly and without knowledge, and gave that in upon his Oath
which was false, which seems to be done more out of prejudice against the
people called Q^^kers, then either honesty or truth: So as ^. A. is neither
guilty of slander nor double Lie in his detecting this Information and Oath of
^owlis^aw, as falsely W. P. has accused him, for who but one in prejudice and
enmity, would have given such a confused and false Information upon Oath
against us. [But '^is no strange thing to us to be reviled and sworn against,
for as Da^i^ said, Mine ^e^em^es repr^a^h me all the da^, and they that ^re m^d
against me are s^orn against me, Psalm 102 8.] And how ap^arently false is it
also to say that they spoke to those people th^n not under the name or notion
of Quakers, but only of Ana^aptists and Independents, and that they began to
take upon them the name of Quakers at the time of September, which is a double
falsehood; for they were known to go under that name in the North long before
they came to Bri^^ol, as also Coppinger, as he says in September, told of
being at a Meeting of the Quakers in London, and at all the Churches and
Meetings public and private; and they did not take upon them that name as
falsely is said, but it was put upon them at first by persecutors and scoffers,
as I. A. has well said of us whom the world reproachfully calls Quakers^ who
were not moved of the Lord to come to seduce the people of Bris^ol, as falsely
W. P. accuses I. A. with averring, page 35. Wherein his slander is so apparent
that he that runs may read it: And as for John Au^la^d whom he has reviled^ he
was a faithful Servant of Christ and true Prophet, who lived and die^ in the
faith, and whose Memorial will be forever blessed^ when William Pry^n^ will be
had in contempt and perish among the wicked Hypocrites and Men pleasers, whose
end shall be a^cording to his works, and whose portion will be amongst those
spoken of in Rev. 21.8. ^f he repent not. And in his repro^ching them for
coming together as he says like the Franciscan Friars, And as the Quee^s
Franc^s^a^s did here of late. Is this a ^ufficient Argument against us? Did not
the Disciples of Christ for a time go two and two togethe^? And what i^ the
Franciscans or any in the Apostasy did or do imitate such a practice, does it
follow that all are wrong that do it, or that it is to be condemned in it self
when practiced by such as are true Ministers? And so comparing his accusing us
in several things with what Copp^nger said, whom he makes the Original of his
Information and matter against us, they appear to be very like, and both
strangers to us and our principles; for if Co^pinge the Franciscan Friar (as he
says) told his ^nformant (who gave his Information upon O^th against us) that
if he did love his Religion and Soul he should not hear us, how like the
Franciscan Friar W. P. is, and how he helps them in their work: For it seems
they would not have men to hear us, no more would he, but would have us
persecu^ed and suppressed by the Magistrates.

And farther, mark how after he has positively from the Lying story concluded
the Quakers to be Jesuits and ^ranciscan Friars, he says page 5. Th^^ which
gives great Ca^se o^ suspicion, tha^ they are ei^he^ disgu^sed Franciscan
Friars, or their seduced Disciples, etc. Mark here how poorly he comes off, and
how silly and feeble his matter is, is easy to see, who now makes that a
suspicion which before he had so positively concluded: And if I. A. did not
write Grammatical sense in coupling two Verbs singular with [US] a p^ural as W.
P. says, then it appears he is not a Jesuit, nor such a one as he has accused
him for; for such were wont to be deemed great ^chollars by the ^riests and
others; but it seems I. A. did stand more upon the truth of his matter then
strictness in words: And another of William Prynns proofs against the Quakers
so called, is, That their coming out of the No^^h is a shrewd Argument of their
badnesse, and for it brings that Scripture, Jeremiah 1.14. Chapter 4.6. Chapter
6.1, 22. That out of the North an Evil shall break forth upon all ^he
Inhabitan^s of the Land, and great destruction shall be from the North. In
which he has perver^ed these Scriptures, for this was intended to Jerusalem
and the Land of Iu^ah, Ier. 1.15. And proves nothing against us, as to prove us
either Jesuits, Popish Priest, or Recusants: But and if that great Destruction
spoken of shall come upon this Land, and that North from whence it shall come
be Westmerland, as William P^ynne applied that Scripture, then how shall he and
such as he escape, who has so much reviled the North, saying, All Evil comes
from the North; But he might otherwise have con^idered what has been said and
Pr^phesied concerning the North, and how accordingly tidings a^e gone forth of
the North which does trouble the beast, Dan 11.44 And now the persecutor and
his followers, such as he is, are t^oubled, when those are come forth of the
North that shall spoil Babylon, and the Lord will gather his Seed out of the
North Countries and all Countries where it has been scattered, Ier. 23.8.
Will^a^ P^ynne might have stopped his mouth from reviling the Innocent Servants
of the Lord, and his faithful laborers whom he has sent forth of the North,
and his Seed which he has raised up in these Northern Islands.

Again, W. P. Says Westmerland is well known to have abounded with I^suit^,
Popish Priests, Friars, Re^usan^^, and persons popishly affected, ever si^ce
the Reformation; Witness the Rebellion of the Ea^l of Westmerland, and the
Northern Pa^ists under him, ^o advance the ^opish Relig^on, and destroy Queen
Elizabeth, and the Protestant Reformation, Anno 1569. With the late power of
the Lord William Edward, Ducket, Legborne, -- Fleming; and other Popish
Families in that Count^. I answer, This proves nothing against the Quakers, so
called, whose innocence and peaceable deportment both in Westmerland and other
Counties, does clear them in that particular: And therefore, to accuse the
innocent, because some ^f anot^er judgment (or such as we disown) have been
Rebellious, this is no good Argument nor proof against them. And ^s for the
power that some Popish ^amilies (or these aforesaid) had or have there, which
he mentions, that's no proof against us; for from whence had they their power,
and in whose name did ^r do they exercise it, whom he mentions as his proof for
Westm^rland abounding with Jesuits, how will W. P. answer this if he be called
in question; yet I do not believe but that he wrongs Westm^rl. in accusing that
County with abounding with Jesuits, Popish Priests, etc. ever since the
Reformation (as he calls it;) And as for his concluding that they may justly
fear an Emanation of Jesui^ical, Franciscan Frogs, and Emissaries from
Westm^rland. Now ^o ^his, I say his groundless fear proves nothing against us,
no more ^hen his ^ormer frothy stuff against u^, and his Fears and Jealousies
he pretends against the Quakers arise but from his own evil ^eart, whose
confusion and the groundlesnesse of his stuff is evident, whilst one while he
concludes the Quakers to be such, at another while he does but suspect or fear
them to be (as he pretends,) And his saying that Mr. Tillam a Popish Priest (as
he says of him) avers in Print that these Quaking Agonies were a^rived from
the Fran^iscan Friars, etc. Mark what silly proofs he brings against us, this
Tillam is a man that has writ against us, and has been always opposite to us
and our principles, which if he be a Popish Priest (as he says) then this
proves that we are no Papists, nor in any of their Orders, as he slanderously
accuses us; but rather W. P. is very much addicted to Popery, he has so much
taken up their work with Coppinger and Tillam against us. And as touching
Quaking and Trembling, or Shaking which W. P. in page the 7th makes his chief
proof against us, and says, Tha^ nothing in his judgment more clearly detects
the Popish Friars, Priests, and Jesuits to be the principle Inventors, Erectors
of Acters, Rulers, and Speakers amongst our Quakers, and other new Sects.

Answer.
Here again without any ground or reason he has slandered us, and has showed
himself ignorant of the Scriptures and the power of God, who regards such as
are poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at his lord, Isa. 66.2. (Which
we are real witnesses of) and how many of the Prophets and holy men of God did
quake and tremble, the Scriptures do evidently testify.

And in page 20.21. One of W. P. His main Arguments against the Quakers to
prove that the Jesuits, Priests and Franciscan Friars have a principal hand in
erecting and promoting them, is, that Ignatius Loy^l^o the Father of Jesuits,
and first Founder general of their Order (as he says,) P^e^ended a Divine call
from God, and cast off his costly Ap^arel, which he gave to the p^or, Cloa^hed
himself in course sackcloth, wandered up and down professing the study of
poverty, penance, mortification, and contempt of the world, leading a most
Aus^ere life for a time; mostly eating little else but course bread, and
drinking nothing but cold water, and p^eaching often Gratis in the open
Streets, and without any Ordination or License at all from the Bishops or
Clergy, exhor^ing them to Repentance, etc. And is not this the very practice of
our Quakers and Shakers now, who exactly imitate him herein (he says.)

Answer.
What of all this, what ever Ign^t^us was in himself, we ^eed not dispute that:
But were these things evil in themselves that he professed, as Mortification,
Contempt of the world, Pre^ching Gra^is in the open Streets, Exhorting to
Repentance, etc. If they were not evil, but Lawful in themselves, what does it
prove against the Quakers that they are Jesuits or Deceivers; No sure, for then
it will reflect upon all that profess and ^old the truth in Righteousness,
and so it proves as much against all the Servants of God as us; because some
has professed and withheld the truth in unrighteousness: And then all
Christendom that profess Christ are Papists, because the Pope and Jesuits
profess him, is this William P^ynns Logic, he might have spared his Labor of
such silly work as this: Much more might be (...) she^ ^i^ Absurdities herein,
but let the Judicious judge o^ his Ma^ter. And what a silly busi^esse is it for
^im to ^ell us of Igna^^^^ hi^ Pre^ching o^^en Gratis in the open S^ree^s
without Ordi^^tion from the ^ishops, for needed he Ordination from the^ to
Preach Gratis; No sure, for it is those Priests that seek fat Benefits and
Living^, Tithes and filthy Lucre for their Preaching, that must have Ordi^ation
from ^he Bishops; but did not this man ^^^merly speak and write against
Bishops? And in his 8th. page accuses our Books of Invectives against their
Minis^ers, Church, Presbyterian Government, etc But it seems as if he were not
aware of this, it being w^it when that Government was up, or how it might
reflect upon his present interest with the times; which though it be now come
forth with his Additions as Frothy, Vain, and Foolish as his first part of his
Book; but considering how much talk we have heard of this our Opposer, and of
his former suffering with Bur^on and Bastick, and having his Ears cut, he might
have showed more tenderness to us, and such as are under suffering then he
has done; and not so have slandered and reviled us: But this we have seen,
that such as play the Hypocrites in turning with the Times, and seeking to
gratify them in power upon every turn, by persecuting the Innocent, they grow
the most hardened and benumbed in their Consciences, and the fitter to do Judas
his work; And in page 15.16. William P^ynne tells the Magistrates of
suppressing all Heresies and Errors, By Law and penalties, and of the Civ^l
Magistrates Coer^ive power and Jurisdiction in Matters of Religion, and bids
them search after, restrain, secure, and pers^cute all romish Foxes, Wolve^,
etc. A^cording to our Laws and Statutes in force against them, etc. And be as
vigilant to secure Gods and our Churches cause and interest, etc.

Answer.
But he intended this against us called Quakers, and we do not own him to be
any Competent witness or Judge against us, (though he has assumed both,)
neither is his Evidence true, but altogether false against us; and he a
slanderer and forger of mere Falsehoods, and has also showed a very malicious
and inve^erate spirit, in going about to cause men to be persecuted, or
compel^ed by penal Laws for matter of Conscience or Judgment; for that way of
Compulsion is neither the way to suppress Errors or Heresies, nor to convince
the Judgments either of such as are Papists or others, but the way to make them
Hypocrites like himself: (And its more meet to endeavor to convince an^
reclaim Jesuits, and such as be in Error to bring them to Repentance, then to
destroy them, for that's the way to bring them sooner to Hell, if they be
destroyed, and perish in their Error) and how is their Churches cause secured
by this way of Compulsion or prosecution of penal Laws against men that di^sent
in matters of Conscience or Worship (though such as are crimin^l Offenders, as
Plotters and Conspirators the ^ivil Law reaches) when he confesses the English
Church is distracted, page 21. And that Ignatius his Disciples (or the Jesuits)
have made most Christian Kingdoms Churches (especially our own of late years
says he) both to quake, and tremble, and shake them in pieces, as in his 22.
page Now mark here also what a sad Church this is which he would have men
forced to; a Church that's made (by those he himself counts deceivers both to
quake and tremble (this is he that has so much Reviled for quaking and
trembling as being derived from Rome, and the Popish Priests and Jesuits
because thereof) and such ^hurches as are shaken in pieces in thi^ manner are
not built upon the Rock, nor such as against which the Gates of Hell cannot
prevail: And such Churches as these that cannot stand without carnal force and
Compulsion, we have no cause to Conform to; for it appears plainly that their
Weapons, and Arms and Defense are no^ of God but of man, not Spiritual as the
Saints and true Churches were, but Carnal. And how is it in the Magistrates
Coercive power to suppress Errors and Heresies, and to secure the Churches
cause, when they do not pretend to Infallibility of judgment in spiritual
matters; And was there not great persecution under the Presbyterian Government,
how did that secure their Church? And did not we greatly suffer by them? And
how has our opposer contradicted himself in this matter, where he in the same
16. p. gives 4 Cautions recorded in the Gospel (as he says) as the best
preservatives against seducers quoting Romans 16.17, ^8 2 ^^m. 3.13, 14. Ephesians.
4.14. 2 Ioh. 10.11 2 ^hes. 2.9 Now mark, if these Scriptures must be the best
preservative against seducers, which do not tell of the Magistrates Coercive
power in Religious matters, nor of their suppressing Errors and Heresies. (See
also page 32) How (...)own himse^f, as also considering what this W. P^ says
page 27. of Gregorius Baderus^ provincial of the Jesuits, etc. and their
Counsels, and seconded with their practices in Ejecting, Imprisoning,
Banishing, Suppressing and Persecuting all the Protestant Ministers in Bohemia,
in the years 1602, 1607, 1621, and 1652. So it appears the Papists used this
manner of proceeding, and would not W. ^. do the same, as Imprison, Banish,
etc. This might convince him what Spirit and Church it is that is guilty of
persecution, and is maintainted by it, and by such manner of proceeding as
Imprisoning and Banishing men for their Consciences; that it is not the true
Church nor Spirit, as also all that profess to be Protestants may take notice
of these proceedings, and what a blemish and disaragement it brings upon both
their Church and State, to follow such harsh and cruel proceedings against men
for their Consciences.

And moreover both the Government and people of this Nation of England may
farther take notice how W. P. does reflect upon them, and consider whether or
no his matter tends to the peace and good of the Church and State thereof. Mark
in his 4. and 5. page he tells us of Multitu^es of Rom^sh Emissaries and Vermin,
Franciscan Friars and Jesuits, etc. That they have their several m^ssions and
directions into all parts from their Generals and Superiors, residing commonly
in London, where they have a Consistory and Counsel sitting that rules all the
affairs of the things of England, besides fixed officers in every Diccese, etc.

Answer.
Both Magistrates and people of Englan^ may here mark what a sad State he
represents them and this Nation in, if all the affairs of the things of England
be ruled by the Council of the Romish Emiss^ries, etc. And whether this does
not tend to raise troubles and dis^ractions in this Nation; and his quoting
Cr^mwells Speech in the painted Chamber, Sept. 4. 1654. As if Cromwell was a man
of great Credit and Esteem with him: But if he should say that this was writ in
the time of the former power, then why does his Book come out now, being
printed in 1664. with Additions to it of like nature, and has he not owned the
Presbyterian Government, what Confusion is he fallen into? But in his
Postscript, page 32. He speaks to our present Governors and Sword men, and
their Posterity against tollerating these Jesuitical Fiery Treacherous Agents,
which unjustly he would make them believe us to be; so as its evident he
reflect^ upon the present Government in this particular; And in page 25.26. W.
P. in his Postscript, tells of the Jesuits sending forth their Emissaries and
Agents, etc. To be present ^n the Senates, Parliaments, and Councils of those
of the Reformed Religion, etc. And in page 32^ of their predominating in most
Councils and places, etc. To which I say, if this be true, that the Emissaries
of Rome predominates in most Councils and places of those of the Reformed
Religion, or those called Protestants; then this proves that we called Quakers
are no Papists, nor Jesuits, nor Romish Emissaries, nor derived from thence;
for if we were, we should not suffer as we do, if his words were true that they
have so much power and predominancy; and if the Church, Religion and State of
Englan^ will soon be utterly overturned, and all disunited one from another by
the Popes Emissaries, if they be not speedily repressed (as he says) page 5.
and 32. (it seems then their Church is not in the unity of the Spirit) and what
a weak miserable estate does he here represent the Church and State of Engl. to
be in: And whether or no this his representing the Pope and his Emissaries to
have so much power and predominancy in the Church and State of England doe^ not
plainly tend to encourage them to proceed and endeavor the obtaining of the
sole power and Government i^to their own hands; do but mark the tendency of his
matter, and whether it can rationally be deemed safe for this Nation or
Government to admit of such as this W. P. ^o be in any place of tru^t, either
in Parliament or other, or to divulge ^uch principles, who does represent them
in such a sad S^ate, as if they were almost all over-swayed by the Pope: And
thu^ gives encouragement to him and his Emissaries, which tends to incense a
great part of the Nation who are dis-^ffected with that way of Popery, and to
make Commotions, Tumults, and Divisions, which unjustly he would Charge us
with; howbeit we who are called Quakers are clear and Innocent from owning the
Pope or his Supremacy, or power, or having any such union ^r correspondency
with his Emissaries, Priests, or Jesuits, as to know any such things of them as
their having such Councils, order and sway in this Nation, as W. P. signifies,
which intimates that he has more correspondency or privacy with them then we,
for we know no such things, therefore is it not fit that he should be called in
question before Autho^ity to discover what he knows of such things; and those
whom he accuses to come face to face, that things of this kind may be made
manifest and brought to Light, and what is wrong be disproved of according to
Equity and Truth, and the Nation better informed if he has misrepresented the
State thereof in these matters^ and that he may give forth a recantation
thereof: And note that throughout W.P his Pamphlet I find many more gross
slanders, lies, stories, absurdities, and abuses against ^s called Quakers and
others, some of which are as follows.

Page 2. As false it is that the Quakers are derived from profane Belshazar,
Dan. 5.9. and those that David prays against, Ps. 6.9, 2^.

False it is that they are brought into and set up in England by Franciscan
Friars and Jesuits.

Page 3. False it is that they are the chief Speakers among the Quakers. Page
4. False it is that the Romish Emissaries and Vermin are the chief Speakers and
Rulers in most separate Congregations: And this is intended to set the
Magistrates to persecute them, which shows a malicious Spirit. Page 5. False it
is that the Quakers have done much hurt in Bristol: False it is that they
endeavor to draw people into Parties, Factions, Sects, etc. Page 6. A falsehood
and slander it is that they persuade people to desert their lawful calling and
employments, and to embrace an idle monkish lasie life, etc. False it is that
they refuse to show any honor or humble deportment toward Magi^trate^, for
our harmless deportme^t and subjection to them either actively or passively,
shows the contrary, though it stand not in the vain and foolish ceremonies and
complement^ which men in the lust of the eyes and pride of life use: but in
reality and substance. False it is that it is the Quakers Doctrine that the
Saints are able to stand perfect in their own power, for their perfection is in
Christ who is Gods power, and this perfection we must own, though Antichrist
and his followers deny it. Page 8. And an old lie and slander it is that the
Quakers use enchanted potions, Braclets, Ribbonds, Sorcery and Witchcraft to
intoxicate men. Page 10. False it is that some of the Quakers going (...) for a
time (which was a sign against Hypocrites and wicked persons) was derived from
the Pagan Idol Priests or the Devil (see Isa. 20.) And as for John Gilpin who
turned into lying Imaginations and wickedness wherein he was denied and
rejected by the Quakers, he and his relation and conversion (or being
reclaimed) to the Priests was sufficiently manifest in and about Kendal and
that Country, as also the Priests of N^w Castles book against us, Called the
p^rfect Pharisee, has been answered and confuted long since, and what is
become of Samuel Hammond and the rest of those Priests now? Seeing W. P. gives
such great credit to them for his proof against us. Page. 11. Also a gross
slander it is that the Quakers are guilty of blasphemous erroneous opinions
derived from the very Devil himself, or that they are Heretics, Schismatics,
or Seducers. Page 18. Also his rai^ing against some Women amongst us that has
sometimes spoken the truth publicly, instancing Pope Urbane the III his
excommunicating and totally suppressing by his Bull, Anno 1631. some Women who
did preach publicly in England an^ elsewhere^ this manifests how like or near
akin he is to the Pope; howbeit this does not overthrow Women's proph^^ying or
preaching the truth when led thereunto by the Spirit, according to the promise,
Joel. 2.28, 29. And the Apostles not permitting the Women at Corinth to speak
in the Church, 1 Cor. 14. was upon a particular occasion of their forwardness
and usurping, and not for a general rule to bind all to, page 20 and 24. Also a
gross abuse it is to call us Imps of Satan, and say that we study and practice
the art of Magic, Sorcery, and consult with the very Devil himself. Page 38.
Also that Heaven, Hell, and the Resurrection of the dead is denied by any
Quakers (or any that are really of us) we look upon as a mere Forgery to render
us odious, and that which in it self in not owned by any of us; and his quoting
the Diurnals for his proof (it is not the first nor last lie in the Diurnal)
and many more slanders and falsehoods are cast upon us which I omit mentioning,
with many rambling impertinent stories in his book, gathered out of Popish
books and Histories which do not touch us.
Now W.P. it is a wonder that thou should so much accuse us with Railing, and
did not see thy own Railing and Reviling of us like one in outrage, whose
matter against us clearly appears to be grounded neither upon reason nor truth,
but merely proceeding from a malicious Spirit which it is high time for thee to
repent of, if any place of repentance be to be found for thee; for thy injuries
and abuses done to us, all sober people that sees them are ashamed of.

Eccles. 10.1. Dead flies cause the ointment of the Apothecary to send forth a
stinking savor, so does a little folly him that is in Reputation for Wisdom
and Honor.

London the 7 th. Month 1664.
THE END.

