A Serious Exhortation TO AN Holy Life. OR A Plea for the absolute necessity of
Inherent Righteousness in those that hope to be saved.

By Tho. Wadsworth, Preacher to the Church at Newington-Butts in Surrey.

Heb. 12.14. Follow peace with a^l men, and holiness, without which no man
shall see the Lord.

LONDON, Printed by R. I. for Andrew Kembe, at St. Margarets Hill in Southwark;
And are to be sold under St. Marga^ets Church on New-Fishstreet Hill. 1660.

TO My poor Parishoners of Newington-Butts, Whose souls are precious to my God
and Savior, and I dare say to me.
SIRS,
THe remembrance of the strange Providence of my God, that were apparent in
bringing me to be your Teacher, and have bearn me company ever since in the
work of my Ministry amongst you, makes me think, I was born, and still
continue in the Land of the living for your sakes, for the service of your
immortal souls, to help forward your salvation from that consuming burning
wrath that hangs over your heads, till Christ be formed in you, and your
natur^s changed from what is earthly and sensual, to that which is divine; This
Exhortation to an Holy life I send you, as being very confident, that without
it, not one of you shall ever see the face of God but to your shame and
confusion; if I press it hard upon your consciences, blame me not, for it is
my full belief, you must be damned without is, and my love and pity to you
constrains me to do my best to prevent so sad a judgment. If you wonder how I
dare venture to speak so much to you in Print; I tell you I dare do any thing
for your sakes, yea hazard the reputation of my discretion, rather than be
thought defective in my care to your never dying spirits. It comes not seldom
to my thoughts, and lies not a little pressing on my spirits, Ah what shall I
do more for poor Newington to help them toward Heaven before I dye? somewhat I
have done already, as many of you can bear me witness, when with prayers and
tears, not only publicly, but from one house to another, I have beseeched you
to be reconciled unto God, and it is my greatest grief I have found these six
years since my coming amongst you, that I have done no more; but alas, what
shall I, or what can I do more? I would you could but tell me; shall I come
and live in all your Families, that I may be continually present to instruct,
pray with, comfort, reprove, and over-see you? this is all impossible, I am but
one man, and can no more multiply my presence, than I can my persons; or shall
I daily follow you from house to house? How can it be? my more public work is
great abroad, and not small at home, besides the care of a selected people lies
upon me, that presses more than most men imagine, except them that feel it,
and I am but a man, and have but the strength of man, subject to bodily
infirmities with my brethren. But however, I shall promise to do my best in
this kind as I have begun, and to supply the want of my constant presence with
you, I have sent you my whole heart in Print, that it may speak to you when I
am absent; it is but little, yet I intended it should have been less, but it is
well it is no more. Do but you accept it as kindly as it is offered, and
improve it as faithfully, as it was conscientiously penned, and I shall desire
no more, being very confident it will then run and prosper; Which is the thing
that is most earnestly prayed for,

By him whom the Lord has made your Teacher, Tho. Wadsworth.

A serious Exhortation to an Holy Life. OR, A Plea for the absolute necessity
of Inherent Righteousness in those that hope to be saved.
Matthew. 5.20. I say unto you, That except your righteousness shall exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, you shall in no case enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven.


STay Reader, Thou have perused the Text, and can not but see that it
concerns thy eternal life, or death. I prithee answer me this one Question,
and then in the fear of God read on.

Reader, Thou art a dying man, or woman, Tell me when thy breath is gone, thy
eyes closed, thy bell has towled, and thy body coffined up for the grave,
Then, Then, would thou rather have thy soul in Heaven, or Hell, in joy, or
torment, with God, or Devils? For Gods sake make a pause, and give me thine
answer before thou do proceed. Tell me, art thou one that carest not whither
thou go, or make no matter whether it be to heaven or hell? Is either of
them to thee indifferent? And art thou resolved to persist in this
indifferency? If it be so, Sinner, I advise thee throw down the book, and as
thou love thy soul, read not a letter more; For I so love and pity thee, as
to those sorrows, that within a few days, nay a few hours thou must certainly
endure, that I am loath that this sheetshould help to wind thee up for Hell, or
any ways conduce to increase thy pains, or augment thy torments: For know
Sinner, This is the nature of that Gospel of Christ which we preach or write,
that it either softens or hardens; It is a savor of life to life, or of death
to death, to him that reads or hears it: It will either prepare thee for
Heaven, or ripen thee for Hell? for of that very Jesus by whom only thou can
hope for salvation, it was prophesied, Luke 20.34. Behold this child is set for
the fall and rising again of many in Israel.

Reader, persuade thy self of this, That Jesus Christ, and his written or
preached Gospel, if they prove not means to the raising thee from that state of
sin and death, wherein by nature thou lie, they will prove the instruments of
that fatal fall, that thou shall never recover to eternity: and of this very
nature are these lines thou art now perusing (being I am confident according to
the mind of God) I say therefore again, if thou art one that have lived an
unrighteous, ungodly life, and resolvest not to change, I beseech thee cast by
the book, and do not read it, for why should it do any thing to promote thy
ruin?

But if thou are a man or woman that can not dare to think of being damned,
but tremblest at the very name or thought of it; if thou do heartily desire,
when thou leavest this poor, empty, miserable world, to exchange it for that
full, rich, and glorious Kingdom of God above, then come away, and I will lead
thee into the path of life, and tell thee what a man or woman thou must be,
and what a life thou may and must live, if ever thou hopest to live in that
desired and incomparably blessed inheritance of the Saints.

Hoping now I have got a serious attentive soul to speak to, for such Reader, I
presume thouart, let me first make bold to press thee to a revew of the text.

I say unto you, Except your Righteousness exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, ye can in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

This verse is a part of that Bible, that thou and I, and all the Christian
world do take to be the word of God, which is as free from any lie or falsehood
as the Sunbeams are from darkness; I shall not therefore injure thee so much
(as if I did mistrust thee) to ask whether thou beleevest this portion of
Scripture to be true or false, but rather do thou believe, that it is so
written there as here it is transcribed, if thou doubtest, take thy Bible, and
turn to the Chapter and the Verse: if thou will take it for granted, on my
word, I profess, I have not, I would not deceive thee for a world.

The first part of the Text opened.

(I say unto you) To you, Who are those? Why those that were present at that
time, in which Christ was preaching this Sermon; they were his Disciples, his
followers, such as owned him for their Savior, and called him Lord and Christ;
in a word, they were such as thou professest thy self to be that art my Reader.

2 I say unto you, who is this (I)? It was he^ that preached the Sermon, Jesus
Christ, it was Christ and not Matthew that did record it; it was Christ, and
not I, that am about to plead withthee at this time for thy life. And now thou
know the Author, I presume the Text will have some authority upon thy heart.
I hope thou will not say of Jesus Christ, as the profane worldlings say of us,
his Ministers, that we are a company of prating saucy fellows, and they hope,
that all is not true that we say, and they are confident that God is more
merciful than we Preachers would make them believe. But think Reader, it is
not I, nor any Minister on earth, that is the Preacher in my Text, it is Jesus
Christ the Master of us all, and can thou hope it is not true that Christ
here tells thee? were not this all one, as to hope Jesus Christ is a liar, and
is not this to make thy self a blasphemer? or dare thou be so impudent to
say, or think, that God is more merciful than Christ has made him? what can
thou think thy gracious Savior would deceive thee, or that the Son of God
would make false reports of God his Father, he tells thee the contrary, if thou
have a mind to believe him, Joh. 12.49. I have not spokex of my self, but the
Father which sent me, he gave me Commandment what I should say, and what I
should speak. And will thou dare yet to unsay all his sayings, though he tells
thee, he says nothing, but what God his Father commanded him? If he tells
thee plainly, Except thy righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees, thou shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of heaven, Will thou boldly contradict all, and say, that notwithstanding what ever Jesus
Christ has said, I yet hope to be saved? yea though thou have no
righteousness at all, or such as falls short of what the Pharisees had; will thou give the lie both to God the Father, and the Son?

No sinner, no, I know thou have not such hard thoughts of the Savior of the
world, to think he is a liar. Thou call him Jesus Christ, and confessest
him to be the Son of God, and that it is impossible he should lie; yea I know
thou will confess he here speaks true, and what he speaks, he speaks to
thee, That except thy righteousness exceeds that of the Pharisees, thou can
by no means be saved. Do thou believe it? Answer me: Do thou verily
believe, That except thou A. B. by name, provest a more righteous man or woman
than ever any Scribe or Pharisee was, thou can in no case enter into heaven?
Come Come, I know thou beleevest it; as thou love heaven, then, and thine own
soul, I entreat thee pronounce these words after me, but speak them seriously
to thine own conscience. I, A, B, Who am reading this book, do in the presence
of God, that searches my heart, and will judge me at the last day, do
unfeignedly believe, that except I am by the power of the Spirit, through the
preaching of the Word, made a more righteous man or woman than ever any Scribe
or Pharisee, yea and this before I dye, I never hope by any means to enter into
the Kingdom of heaven, but must assuredly, as now I am reading, within a few
days be in everlasting torments, where I shall weep and wail, and gnash my
teeth without all remedy.

Have thou confessed so much? yea, and unfeignedly? yea, as in the presence of
God the searcher of thy heart? Yea.

Well said: Now let me tell thee, thou have taken one step toward heaven,
thou art half way there already. Ah sinner, be not so much thine own enemy, as
to withdraw thy foot, and recall thy words! why should thou repent that step
that is taken toward a Kingdom that is so blessed, or draw in that breath
that has filled thysails, and will make thy voyage to heaven both quick and
easy, if it continue? For know Reader, that when thy soul is once thoroughly
convinced of that righteousness that is absolutely necessary to salvation, half
the work of thy conversion is done, the new creature is half formed in thee,
and thy soul half saved: but when that righteousness is attained, that is, when
it is brought down into thy conversation, and thou live righteously, then is
conversion finished, the new creature perfected, thy salvation secured, and
thou art made a blessed man or woman.

But thou will say, What am I the nearer for all this, if I neither know how
righteous these Pharisees were, nor what a righteousness it is, wherein I must
exceed them; pray will you tell me how righteous they were, and how much more
righteous I must be than they.

Answ. I will tell thee, but if I do, I must have another promise from thee,
and I profess, as in the presence of the living God, if I thought that thou
would not grant it to me, I would not tell thee what those things mean, but
rather out of pity to thee, suffer thee to lie and dye in thy ignorance; tell
me, will thou promise God and me, that when I have told thee what the
righteousness is that thou must seek, will thou by the help of God endeavor
with all thy soul and strength to live that righteous life this Doctrine will
call for.

But stay (say thou) There is no haste, tell me what it is first.

Answ. What do thou scruple? Art thou afraid I will deceive thee, and make
it harder than it is. Reader, to put thee out of doubt from that, I protest
solemnly, as I shall answer it before the Judge of quick and dead, before whom
I am confident I must give an account of what I say or write, I will to the
best of my understanding, make it to be a righteousness, neither more nor less
than what Jesus Christ has made it, nor will I show thee any thing but what I
will give thee sufficient Scriptureproof for. What say thou now, will thou
promise?

What do thou stick at man? Remember what thou have confessed already: Did
thou not confess just now, that thou did verily believe, that thou can not
possibly be saved, except thou shall become more righteous than any Pharisee,
and do thou now doubt whether it is best for thee to endeavor to exceed
them? What, art thou resolved to sit down short of heaven? Ah sinner, this is
not ignorantly, but wilfully to destroy thy self. Tell me then, will thou
resolve to live a more righteous life, or will thou not? thou dying man or
woman, either resolve, or read no more. I profess I did not write these lines
to dally with thy soul, if I had thought that all my Readers would have proved
so obstinate, I would not have lost that little time I spent in writing what
thou now art vewing, nor created thee the trouble of so much reading. Let God
bear witness betwixt thy soul and mine, whether I am not more desirous to have
thee saved, than thou art to save thy self.

The Sinners Resolve.

Why then, I do resolve, as God shall help me, I will endeavor for the
future, with all my soul and strength, to seek that righteousness, what ever it
be, you shall discover from the Word of God, to be his Will, and so my duty.
Nay I further do resolve, That neither flesh nor blood, nor any sin, nor lust,
or worldly interest whatever, shall hinder me from seeking a portion in the
Kingdom of my Savior. Bear witness, O God, I am in as good earnest as ever I
was in all my life.

I, say thou so, Let me then tell thee for thy comfort, thou art not far
from the Kingdom of God.

But to keep thee fast to thy resolution, that thou may neither give thy God
nor me the slip, I do here adjure thee by thy God and Savior, by thy immortal
and precious soul, by Heaven, the Crown, and all the weights of glory that are
there, yea by every thing that is, or should be dear and precious to thee, not
to dare to draw back, and eat thy words again. And to tie thee yet up faster to
thy resolved vow, read Heb. 10.38. But the just shall live by faith, and if any
man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. Oh that now it might be
spoken of thee what follows in the next verse, 39. But we are not of them who
draw back unto perdition, but of them that believe to the saving of the soul.
Mark finner, if thou drawst back from so just, righteous, and holy resolution
thou have made, thou will fall into perdition if thou hold on, thou art
passing forward to the salvation of thy soul, if hell does not affright thee,
let heaven persuade thee to keep fast to what thou have just now promised.

The second part of the Text lies in the discovery of two particulars.

1 Wherein did the righteousness of the Pharisees consist, which thou must
resolve to exceed.

2 What is that righteousness of life, that will set thee above the Pharisees,
and put thee into a saving condition.

Of the first, What the Pharisees righteousness was.

1 The Pharisees was one of the strictest sect, or the most precise society of
men among the Jews, they were most nice observers of all the outward points of
worship, according to the Law of Moses, and therefore had the esteem of their
Countrymen for the most Religious people amongst them; I know thou will
believe the Apostle Paul if he tells thee so much, for he was one of them
himself before he left them by being converted to Jesus Christ. Take his own
words. Act. 26.4, 5. My manner of life from my youth, which was at first among
mine own Nation, at Jerusalem, know all the Jews, which knew me from the
beginning (if they would testify) that after the most straightest sect of our
Religion, I lived a Pharisee. Mark that well, the Pharisees (says Paul) were
Religious, yea straightly Religious, yea most straightly Religious, that is, as
to the outward parts of the Jewish Religion, which consisted in being
natural-born Jews, children of believing Abraham, admitted into the visible
Church by Circumcision the eighth day, in being constant Preachers or Hearers
in their Synagogues. But all this was not enough to speak them righteous enough
for the Kingdom of heaven, for remember, Except thy righteousness exceed
theirs, thou can in no case enter. Christ has said it, and thou must believe
it.

2 The Pharisees were right in their judgments in many or most of the
practical truths in Religion, they held that the only true God of Israel was
to be worshipped: That it was a most heinous sin to theeve, to commit murder
or adultery, or to forswear a man's self, to lie, or bear false witness against
a neighbor, or to be drunk, or to be a glutton. This must be all true of
them that they held these things as sins, yea and that they did forbear those
grosser sins; I prove it thus, 1 Because Jesus Christ permitted his own
followers to hear them preach, yea and bid them do what they taught, Matthew.
23.1, 2. Then spoke Jesus to the multitude, and to his Disciples, saying, The
Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses seat (the meaning is, that they were
Preachers of the Commands of God delivered by Moses) all therefore whatsoever
they bid you observe, that observe and do, but do not after their works. But
secondly, I prove that they abstained from grosser sins, at least to the
outward act, 1 They abstained from drunkenness, and gluttony, I gather from
that blasphemous reproach they cast upon our blessed Savior, in calling him a
Winebibber and a Glutton, which speaks that they accounted them most
disgraceful sins. 2 If they had not abominated the act of murder, adultery,
perjury, with drunkenness, and the like, and so refrained from them in their
lives, it were impossible they could ever have got that repute amongst the
Jews of being the most strict religious sort of people in all their Country;
who would ever have thought a society of Drunkards, or Gluttons, or
Whoremongers, or perjured persons a strict religious sect? as the Apostle Paul
confesses they were reputed. From this that has been said, thou may easily
see, that thou may be neither Rogue nor Whore, nor Thief, nor Drunkard, nor
Liar, and yet be out of a state of salvation, as these Scribes and Pharisees
were, though guilty of none of these sins.

3 These Pharisees were more righteous yet, for they were strict observers of
the Sabbath day, so far as to abstain from all bodily labor, and to attend on
the worship of God, in reading, praying, preaching, or expounding the Word of
God, this was their Sabbath days employment in their Synagogues or Churches,
and Christ permitted (as I showed before) his own Disciples to hear them, and
to observe their Doctrine, and do it; but as for doing any servile work on this
day, they reckoned it a greevous sin, yea if it were but dressing any provision
to eat; and therefore you have them quartelling with the Disciples of Christ
for pulling ears of Corn on this day, and rubbing them in their hands to
satisfy their hunger, Luke 6.1. And i^ came to pass on the Sabbath, after the
first, that Jesus went through the Cornfieldsd, and his Disciples plucked the
ears of Corn, and did eat. And certain of the Pharisees said unto them, Why do
ye that which is not lawful to do on the Sabbath day? Mark Reader, See how
strictly righteous they were? Sabbaths must be kept, strictly kept, nothing
must take up the day with them but reading, preaching, praying, expounding, no
one must dress meat on that day, though to satisfy his hunger, thou will say
perhaps, Is it possible for men to be more righteous? Nay stay there, for I
will show thee presently, wherein thou must exceed them in all this, or in no
case shall thou enter into Heaven.

4 Yet farther, they were a sort of men, that for the encouragement of
Religion, and upholding the external form o^ worship, in paying Tithes
(commanded by God in the Law of Moses) were precisely just or righteous, and
Jesus Christ confesses as much unto them, Matthew. 23.23. Woe unto you Scribes,
Pharis^es, Hypocrites, for ye pay tithe of Mint, and Anise, and Cummin. These
were the least of herbs that were titheable, and it was disputable by many of
their Lawyers whether they were titheable or not, yet the Pharisees for their
part, lest they might seem to ^ob God and his Church in the least, resolved to
pay them, and Christ approves of them in that particular, b^ telling them,
These things ye ought to have done; but he adds withal, by way of reproof,
Ye have omitted the weightier matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy, and Faith;
and here their righteousness fell short. So Reader think, thou may be an
incourager of Religion in the place where thou art, may give freely and
liberally to the maintaining of a godly Minister where thou live, which the
Lord Christ approves of, and commends, yet except thou do somewhat more,
this will not do, thou may still remain in a state of perdition.

5 They were charitable to the poor; This likewise thou have acknowledged from
the mouth of Christ, Matthew. 6.2. When thou do thine alms, do not sound a
trumpet before thee, as the Hypocrites do (meaning the Pharisees) in the
Synagogues, and in the streets, that they may have praise of men, verily, I say
unto you they have their reward; that is, the value of many a penny, or
shilling they threw into the poors box at Church, and many piece of bread at
their doors, many a penny, or teaster they distributed by the high ways and
streets, and many a beggar cried out after them, God bless you Master, and yet
they were all this while but Pharisees, and cursed of God, for the text is
plain, that they shall never be saved, it says, They have their reward
already. Oh therefore Reader, dare not to sit down here, unless thou intendest
to bear them company to the gates of hell, where thou may easily enter with
them, but it is impossible ever to get out.

6 They were more righteous yet, for they were a praying people, and Christ
confesses as much, Matthew. 6.5. And when thou prayest, thou shall not be as
the Hypocrites are (meaning still the Pharisees) for they love to pray standing
in the Synagogues, and in the corners of the streets, that they may be seen of
men, verily I say unto you they have their reward.

See here again, the Pharisees pray, love to pray, and yet Christ is
peremptory, that they shall have no reward but that on earth, which speaks him
resolved to deny them heaven. Reader, still consider, thou may be one that
prayest in thy Family to stop the mouths of thy friends and servants, thy
godly neighbors, and Minister, that none of them may think or say, thou art an
ungodly man or woman; thou may come to Church, and clap thy hat or hand
before thy face to be seen of men to pray, yet thou may be no better than
an hypocritical Pharisee, out of a state of salvation.

7 Lastly, The Pharisees believed the Resurrection of the dead, the blessed or
miserable state of souls after this life (wherein they exceeded the Sadduces,
who believed no Resurrection) yea and hoped, or were confident if it fared well
with any at the Resurrection, it would with them. Concerning their beleeef, in
the great Article of the Christian faith, I mean the resurrection, thou need
no other proof of it, than their taking the Apostle Paul's part against the
Sadduces ( Acts 23.6, 7, 8.) says Paul, I am a Pharisee, the son of a
Pharisee, of the hope and resurrection of the dead I am called in Question.

Object. But was Paul a Pharisee? How could Paul then be saved, if no
Pharisees are saved?

Ans. Paul calls himself a Pharisee, because he was one, and his father was
such an one, till he was converted to Christ. But says he, I am still such
an one. Answ. True, he was so, but not absolutely in all parts, for he
preached Christ, whom the Pharisees crucified, but in this single point he
kept still a Pharisee, in holding the Refurrection of the dead, which the
Sadduces denied, and therefore the Pharisees strike in with Paul against them,
saying, verse. 9. We find no evil in this man, but if a Spirit or Angel has
spoken to him, let us not fight against God. Who would but think that such men
as these were good? 1 How tender do they seem to be in opposing God in any
revelation of his will and mind? 2 They take an Apostles part for teaching the
true doctrine of the Resurrection. 3 They express much zeal in opposing the
Sadduces for their Heresy. 4 They make a clear profession of their faith in
the point of Angels, Spirits, and the Resurrection, and consequently of the
immortality of their souls, and their hope of a blessedness after this life;
yet still remember they were Pharisees, and that Christ has said it, Except
your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye
can in no case enter into the Kingdom of God.

Oh Reader, take warning, and do not dare to venture thy eternal life upon such
a shallow, sandy righteousness as the Pharisees did.

Thus have I finished the first particular, in showing thee what the
righteousness of the Pharisees was. Now Reader, pull up thy spirits, and gird
up thy loins like a man, I will show thee now the mark that thou must shoot at,
the Garland thou must run for, and the Crown thou must fight for, the
righteousness that will bear thee up above the clouds, and set thee safe in the
Kingdom of Heaven, among the spirits of just men made perfect, if thou
resolvest to seek after it, which through the grace of God thou may
assuredly attain to.

Second Part, showing, what is the righteousness of the Saints, that exceeds
that of the Pharisees.
1 THe Pharisees, as righteous as they were, did not acknowledge Jesus Christ,
nor entertain him as the Son of God, and the Savior of the world: Now if thou will acknowledge him as all this, and answerably resolve to believe in him,
rely upon him for pardon and strength against sin; if thou will love him above
thy father, mother, son, daughter, house, land, living, above thy sins and
lusts, and wilt readily part with them all at his command, thou have done
something the Pharisees never did, thy righteousness shall be more than
theirs, and thou shall enter into heaven, when they shall be shut down into
hell.

2 The Pharisees believed it a sin to commit Murder, but they did not count it
murder to be angry with their brethren or neighbors without a cause, and to
call them Fools or Racha. Now Reader, if thou will strive and struggle all
revenge and unlawful passion out of thy heart, thou art more righteous than
ever the Pharisees were. Reader, see thou to it, it must be done, without thou will be content to be no more righteous than the Pharisees were; do not
dispute it, Christ will have it so, Matthew. 5.22. I say unto you, that whosoever
is angry with his brother, without a cause, shall be in danger of Judgment,
and whosoever shall say. Thou Fool, shall be in danger of Hell fire. If thou will have it more clear, consider 1 John 3.15. Whosoever hates his brother is
a murderer, and ye know that no murderer has eternal life abiding in him. As
thou likest the casting into hell fire, or being accounted a murderer, in the
judgment of God, of being void of eternal life, give way hereafter to thy
proud, peevish, revengeful passionate nature.

3 The righteousness of the Pharisees condemned the act of Adultery to be a
sin, but they did not think that a lascivious look, and a lustful defire of the
heart after a woman was a sin. Now Reader, if thou will resolve to conquer the
desires of thy lustful eyes and heart, thou have attained a righteousness the
Pharisees never had; stick not at it sinner, this Command, as the whole yoke of
Christ is easy, and may be born, Christ will have it, and thou must do it, if
thou resolvest to exceed the Pharisees, Mat. 5.28. I say unto you (says
Christ) whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, has committed Adultery
already with her in his heart. Now think, if thou will still give way to thy
lustful eyes, and heart, know this, that the Adulterer God will judge, and thou
may be such, though thounever do commit the act.

4 The Pharisees thought it only a sin to forswear themselves; but the Command
of Christ is, Swear not at all, Mat. 5.34. except it be in cases that are
true, certain, and certainly known, lawful, possible, and weighty, wherein the
glory of God, and the welfare of thy neighbor, is considerably concerned, but
ordinarily before a Magistrate, and then an oath is lawful. This I must prove,
because it is so stiffly denied by some in this age, inconsiderately enough The
only Objection which they have is founded on that of our Lord Christ's, Matthew.
5.34. But I say unto you swear not at all; which saying I confess, if broken
off from the scope of Christ in his whole discourse, seems to intimate so much,
that it was not only the corrupt profane use of Oaths that he condemns,
but that he intended an utter abolition of the use of all, how ever
circumstantiated.

Ans. 1 I grant that from this Text, not only perjury, but that swearing is
forbidden.

2 I farther grant that all manner of swearing by any creature is expressly
forbidden, as by Heaven, Earth, Jerusalem, by thy head, and that in no case
what ever is it lawful to use them, and the Lord Christ gives you the reason
why.

But 3 I deny, that from this Text may be proved, that it is unlawful to swear
by God himself before a Magistrate, or in the cases above expressed; My reasons
are these.

1 Because the Lord Christ does not mention that oath which was only lawful
amongst the Jews, but takes up in chiding them for perjury in general, and for
oaths by creatures in particular, which Hierom noted long since. Considero
(inquit) quod hic Salvator non per Deum jurare prohibuerit sed per Caelum, per
terram, etc.

2 Because the God and Father of our Lord Jesus did constitute the lawfulness
of swearing by his Name, Deuteronomy. 6.6.13. and 10.20. Thou shall swear by the Name
of God. Exodus 22.1. The oath of Jehovah shall be between you. Now is it
probable that the Son should make that unlawful, which the Father made lawful?
Is not this to establish the old Manichaean heresy? That taught that the God
of the Old Testament, and the God of the New, were as contrary as light and
darkness, and their work was to contradict each other? If any reply, that it is
a granted case, that Christ abolished the Cer^monial Law, that under the
Mosaical dispensation was in force at the appointment of his Father, and why
may he not then abolish this?

I answer, But then it must be well proved that an oath was a ceremony, and
then I pray tell me, what it was a type of? But secondly, I have far more
ground to think it one of the Judicial Laws, as being highly subservient to put
the other Laws in execution, which in many cases might have been suspended, or
not with so clear justice executed, without an Oath to render the testimony
evident.

3 Because he expressly says of himself, I came not to dest roy the Law, but
to fulfill it; and can you persuade your self, that he can say he will not,
and yet o it? was not there once a Law for swearing, have I not proved it? But
can Christ be said to fulfill that Law by an utter abolishing of it? he being
the Substance, came in the room of all the Ceremonies, which were shadows; but
prove that an Oath is a shadow, and I have done.

4 I argue a genere, from the nature of an Oath it self, (which if well
understood) it is very unlikely that the Son of God should take away the use of
it. An Oath is an appeal to God, wherein he is beseeched, as the only
searcher of hearts, that he would bear testimony to the truth, and would
punish the swearer if he know him to bear a false testimony: but that all such
appeals to God should be prohibited and condemned by Christ, can hardly be
affirmed without blasphemy.

5 Let me reason from the end and use of an Oath, which will farther discover
it was never the intent of Christ utterly to abolish all oaths. 1 An Oath then
is that whereby men give to God the praise of his highest Wisdom, that sees
into the secrets of their hearts, and sees into every corner of them what truth
or falsehood lodges there. 2 And it yields him the glory of his Omnipotency,
whereby it is acknowledged, he is able to punish the perjured. 3 It honors
his Justice and Mercy, because thereby men acknowledge that he will infallibly
defend truth, and be a revenger of falsehood. Lastly, It is the bond of
politic order, and humane society, neither of which can long continue without
faithfulness and truth, nor could there be that dispatch of strifes and
controversies, Exodus 22. Heb. 11.6. To condemn therefore every Oath, seems to
detract from Gods glory, and to destroy humane society, and we may be sure
the Son of God would neither be the Author of the one, nor of the other.

6 Can it be thought without madness that Christ would condemn the commended
examples of the Saints in Scriptures? not only of the Patriarchs, but also of
the Apostles, yea and God himself, their solemn Oaths so frequently recorded,
as signs of their great zeal and devotion, that it were endless to enumerate
them, see that of Paul's, Gal. 20. before God, I lie not. And so 2 Cor. 12.19.

7 I might add as farther proof, that the Prophets very often foretold, that
God by his new Church under the reign of the Messiah, should be honored by
the Oaths of his people, as Isa. 65.16. He that swears in the earth shall
swear by the God of truth. Isa. 19.15. In that day shall five Cities in the
land of Egypt, speak the language of Canaan, and swear to the Lord of Hosts.
And can it yet be imagined, that when Jesus Christ gave birth to all other
Prophesies, he should render this abortive, and render that unlawful, which
was foretold to be one of the glories of his Kingdom?

But to conclude Reader, after all that has been said, this is plain, that all
manner of Oaths, except in the aforesaid cases, are unquestionably sinful, and
must be refrained, if thou intendest to excel the Pharisees, which is certain,
that thou must, or forgo all thy hopes in Heaven.

5 The Pharisees paid Tithe most justly for the maintaining the outward form of
service to God, but in their more ordinary civil matters, they were most
unconscionably unjust, and fraudulent, witness the poor widows houses they
devoured, and to hide the matter from the world, they made long prayers. But if
thou would be more righteous than they, let thy purse be open for the
promoting the service of thy God, but seek not to repair thy layings out, by
unjust oppressive cousening ways of trading, this is to rob Churches to build
Hospitals, or to pick thy Customers pocket to make an oblation to God, or to
steal a sheep to make a sacrifice, be not such an one, lest God send thee to
hell for thine offering.

6 The Pharisees, as thou have heard, were strict observers of Sabbaths, but
their covetous, proud lives spoke them disobedient to the God of Sabbaths; so
that if thou conscientiously wilt endeavor to live over in the week days,
what thou learnest of God on the Sabbath day, thy righteousness excels theirs.

7 They gave alms, but with an intent to be seen, and praised of men: Give
thou thine alms, but out of an unfeigned love to God, and thy needy brethren,
and still thy righteousness is greater.

8 They believe the immortality of the soul, and the resurrection of the dead,
but yet their earthly, sensual living, spoke as if they understood no higher
life than this that is merely mortal. But if thou will believe thy soul shall
never dye, and therefore always live here on earth, as if thou were upon the
borders of Eternity, expecting a departure into another world, in all
temperance, justice, mercy, faithfulness, there is then as much difference
betwixt thy righteousness, and theirs, as betwixt the clear Sun, or the
brightest star, and a clod of clay or dirt.

9 Lastly, This rotten frame of external righteousness, they thought sufficient
to answer the severest Law of God, and to bring them off acquitted, and fully
justified at the final judgment; they dreamed not of a Saviors blood, or any
necessity for the bloody sacrifice of the Son of God for the expiation of sins.
But if, sinner, thou will resolve for thy part to roll thy faith, and all the
garments of thy inward righteousness in the blood of Christ, and never hope to
find acceptance for the most precious life of faith, and holiness that can be
lived by thee, but by the mediation of a Savior, then have thou hit the mark,
and answered fully the expectations of thy Saviors call, who called thee to a
righteousness above the Pharisees; here it is, and here thou must resolve to
live and dye.

And now I have showed thee what a man or woman thou may, and must be, if
ever thou hopest to be saved; remember now the Vow thou made to God before I
showed thee what that Righteousness is that thou must seek. And I now claim
thy promise, and challenge thee on thy Vow to tell me what thy purpose is to
do in these particulars that I shall ask thee.

Art thou resolved from thy soul to love the Lord Jesus with all thy heart and
strength? Will thou reckon neither of sin, nor lust, nor life dear to part with
for him? and in a way of obedience will thou trust to him for his free
remitting all thy sins? Will thou endeavor to live a more strict life, and
more spiritual than ever Pharisee did? Will thou not only account of Murder to
be a sin, but will thou abhor all unlawful anger against thy brother, or the
calling of him Fool without a cause, and will thou think so doing a degree of
Murder? Will thou condemn Adultery, not only in the act, but likewise in the
eye, and heart, and be rather willing to pull out thy right eye, than wound
thy conscience and offend thy God? will thou keep the Sabbath, not only in the
letter, but in the spirit, and in truth.

In a word, will thou resolve to pray unto thy God, and bring thy heart in to
thy prayers? will thou conscientiously endeavor in thy calling to maintain thy
self and family, and to be able to relieve thy poor brother by thy charity,
and will thou do both out of pure love to God, and thy neighbor, and not for
the love of praise from men? will thou believe the immortality of thy soul, the
resurrection of the dead, and the blessedness of those that dye in the Lord?
and will thou endeavor a fellowship in that Resurrection by walking with God,
and living a holy, innocent, humble, chaste, sober, heavenly, believing life?
What say thou man? What amazed!

Sin. Ah I cannot, I dare not, I will not promise any such thing: Here is a
task indeed, enough to break any man's heart, and to make me live miserably all
my days; I would your book had been burnt, before it came into my hands, or
within my doors: What, no hopes of entering heaven without such a righteous
life! It is better you were hanged, and the whole generation, of such Preachers
as you are.

Answ. But sinner, Ah sinner, why so impatient, I am not thine enemy, I tell
thee but the truth, I speak the truth in Christ, I lie not; Christ has said
it, and I dare say it again, Except thy righteousness exceed the righteousness
of the Scribes and Pharisees, thou can in no case enter into the Kingdom of
heaven: If this single Text is not a witness sufficient, thou shall have it
confirmed by the mouths of one or two more, read Heb. 12.14. Follow peace and
holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. So 1 John 3.2, 3. Beloved,
now are we the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be, but
he that has this hope purifieth himself as he is pure. I could add an
hundred Scriptures more, but here are witnesses enough to arraign and condemn
thee: What say thou now? What will thou now yet wish me hanged, for telling
nothing but what Christ, and Paul, and John has told thee? No, no, thou were
but in a passion, I do freely forgive thee; But oh that my hanging could keep
thee from damning; how far better that I were hanged, and a hundred such
Preachers as I am, so we could expiate thy sins, and prevent the ruin of thy
soul and body for ever. Were I tied to a Gibbet I should be quickly out of my
pain, but if thou go to hell thou will never be out of thine; I should be
quickly dead but thou will never dye as to thy torment; Sinner believe me,
nothing but love to thy precious soul makes me deal so plainly with thee.

Sin. But how can I persuade my self you love me, when you would put such a
yoke of righteousness upon my neck, that I, nor my Fathers could ever bear?

Answ. It makes no matter whether thou think I love thee or not; if I do
not, I am sure thou will confess that Jesus did; why man! it is not I, but he
that does thus endeavor to put this holy yoke upon thy neck, and does entreat
thee to wear it for his sake, Matthew. 11.29, 30. Take my yoke upon you, and
learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and you shall find rest to
your souls, for my yoke is easy, and my burden is light. And what is this
yoke, but the holy, righteous nature, and life, which I have been all this
while explaining to thee?

But say thou, Do I in conscience think that the Commands of Christ may be
thus obeyed, and such a righteous life lived?

Answ. Yea in my very conscience, I do think it, that both this life may, and
is lived by thousands, yea by all that are in a present state of salvation:
Nay, I verily think that all the Commands of Christ, may, and are by all sound
Christians obeyed (excepting some particular acts that with them are not
ordinary) yea and with such an obedience, that quoad speciem, though not quoad
gradum, is perfect, that is, their love, or fear, or faith to God and Christ,
have the true genuine nature of these graces, and such as the Command calls for
yet I confess, none loves, or fears, or believes so much, but there might be
several cubits added to the stature of these graces: But Reader, it is not my
desire to trouble thy head with speculations, I have got unto thy heart, and
there I will keep. If thou will then have thy question answered, when her the
Commands of Christ may be obeyed in thy life, look 1 John 5.2, 3. By this we
know that we love the children of God when we love God, and keep his
Commandments; for this is the love of God (or herein it consists) that we
keep his Commandments, and his Commandments are not greevous. See how the
Apostle tells thee, they may not only be obeyed, but that to them that love
God, they are not greevous; if thou will neither believe Christ, nor his
Apostles, I despair of finding credit with thee; but I will not cherish so hard
an opinion of thee, I know thou beleevest them both: me thinks I see thy heart
relenting, and about to yield the cause; Does not thy heats begin to cool, and
thy anger to me abate? Do thou not begin to see how much thou have been
deceived in the matters of thy soul, and to tremble to think how many of thy
neighbors have been deceived with thee? Art thou not ready to say to me as
King Agrippa once did to Paul, Thou have almost persuaded me to be a
Christian? Me thinks I see thee kiss the book, bedew it with thy tears, and
hear thee bless God that directed it to thee, or thank the friend that put it
into thy hand.

Tell me then, What is thy resolution? I cannot, must not let thee go, I have
thy promise already, and God will have the performance, or will have thy life;
I have already told thee wherein a greater, better, and far more noble
righteousness consists, than ever the Pharisees understood, I expect thy answer.

Sinner. Oh Sir, Pray have me excused, I am convinced there is truth in what
you say, but I have such a Trade, such a Family to look after, such company and
ways I have been many years engaged in, I can have neither time to read, or
pray, or fast, to think of God, or Christ, or heaven, or hell, or death,
judgment, or any thing else; my pride, my passion is so strong, and I so used
to it, I cannot master them; If I lie not, nor equivocate, if I cheat not, nor
over^reach my brother, I cannot trade, and so I cannot live; though I have a
good mind to what you say, and am convinced it is my duty, yet I do not think
for my part, I shall ever attain to live, no not so righteously as the
Pharisees did.

Answ. Is this thy last, and utmost resolution? Will no reason, nor Scripture
prevail with thee? Can neither man nor God persuade thee? then no more sinner,
but expect thy doom, these excuses shall not, must not serve thy turn; read it
in the last clause of my Text, Thou shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. Can thou read so sad a sentence and find no tear to drop, nor groan
to fetch? the poor Rogue at the Bar is more tender of his life, and afraid of
the Gallows, than thou art of thy soul, or hell; What is thy heart a rock, or
thy eyes flint? Art thou past all sense or feeling? Thou shall not enter into
heaven, is that nothing? But perhaps thou do not understand what shutting out
of heaven means, lest thy ignorance should undo thee, I will instruct thee.

The third part of my Text, showing the misery of being shut out of heaven, in
three particulars.
1 TO be shut out of heaven means all this, Thou shall not see thy God in
heaven, nor behold his glory, thou shall neither love him, nor be beloved of
him; thou shall not see, nor live with Jesus Christ, the best friend that ever
thou had; thou shall never see, nor understand the blessedness of those
Angel-spirits that be there, nor enjoy the fellowship of the Saints on high;
thou shall never taste of the River of pleasures that run out of the throne of
the Lamb, nor behold the sweet light that streams in floods from his
countenance; thou shall never hear him call thee blessed, or pronounce thee
just, nor bid thee welcome to the joy of thy Master.

Pish, say thou, And is this all? it is even as good as nothing, thou never
heardest, or saw, or tastedst, or did e^joy any such things as these on
earth, and yet thou say thou livedst happily enough without them, thou ever
foundest more pleasure in an Alehouse, than in a Church, and admired the melody
of a wanton lascivious song above the harmony of a Psalm; a cup of wine, and a
good feast at a Tavern, has ever been more delicious to thee than the blessed
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ; yea the smiles of a wanton Harlot
have been more indearing than the love and kindness of a tender Savior; if the
loss of heaven be no more than the loss of seeing, or enjoying God, Christ,
Angels, Saints, in a glorious union of the Spirit, fare them well all, give me
but the full streams of my sinful pleasures, though I swim in them to hell.

Answ. But stay sinner, sure thou art not in good earnest, think again, thou
dare not say so once more, I have better hopes of thee than so, thou art sure
not so far gone, certainly thou have some reason left, the light of thy
conscience is not quite put out, surely thou art no Beast, nor Devil.

Sinner. Well, it is no matter what I am, I am resolved to hazard all for this
beloved gold, these pleasant cups and dishes of wines, meats, and sensual
pleasures, if I should not say so, I am resolved to do so, for this sinful life
I will not part with, though I lose an hundred Kingdoms of heaven, and as many
Crowns as there are stars, and as rich a glory as God himself can pretend to
give me: Give me to live on earth in sin, and what care I for God, or heaven,
and all his happiness?

Answ. Me thinks yet sinner, I cannot believe thee, this is but a bravado,
thou dare not say so in cool blood, no nor if thou were on thy deathbed; I
never heard a Rogue at a Gallows say so (though while he was at liberty, was
perhaps as desperate a wretch as thy self.

If yet thou think thou dare both say, and do so) hear me then once more,
thou have not heard the worst, at least not all that shutting out of Heaven
implies, it signifies thus much more.

2 If thou art shut out of Heaven, thou must be shut out of earth too, the
Paradise above shall not only be kept against thee with a flaming sword, but
thou shall lose the happiness of cursed Cain, of being a vagabond upon the
earth.

Sinner, the time is coming, and then will be, that all thy gold and silver,
with rich apparel, with all thy house and lands, livings, with all thy meats
and drinks, thou must leave behind thee to be devoured by the merciless
flames that shall consume the world, what will thou get then to delight thy
liquorish palate, or to quench thy drunken thirst, or to cover thy rotten
carcass, or to satisfy thy beastly unsatiate lust? I pray thee Reader think,
am I telling thee a fable? or art thou a dying man or woman? Is not thy life
most, or much of it spent already, how often more do thou think will the
clock strike round, before it strikes the hour that thou must dye? art thou
sure of the morrow? does not the bell hang in thy Parish-steeple that must towl
thy knell? does not thy coffin and thy grave stare thee in the face, and tell
thee we must shortly have thy body? and do not thou then know for certain,
that all the fuel of thy sensual pleasures, and so the pleasures themselves,
must be left behind?

What say thou now Reader, how do thou like shutting out of heaven, when
thou must not only lose the delights there, but all that are upon the earth?

What is thy mind yet changed? speak man, thou have time yet given thee to
make thy choice; will thou endeavor to be more righteous than the Pharisees,
or sit down content to be shut out of heaven? Thou foolish sinner, why do
thou delay thy answer, what difficulty can there be in the question that I ask
thee? heaven thou know, and righteousness thou know, for I have told thee
what they mean already: Ah that man's heart should be so sottish to make it a
doubtful case, whether it is better to choose heaven with righteousness, or hell
with wickedness!

Me thinks I hear thee begin to cry out, Good Lord, what a straight has this
book driven me to: I did not think these foolish Preachers had half so much
reason on their sides, I begin now to think it is hard to hear them, or to read
them without being of their minds, though I care not much for heaven, yet I am
loath to lose heaven and earth together. What shall I do? there is nothing can
keep me out of heaven, but an unrighteous wicked life, but how shall I leave
my sin? I know not, I am not used to read and pray, and repent in tears, and I
care not to begin; but I am used to swear and lie, and drink, and whore, and
them I cannot leave, but if I do not I cannot enter into heaven, what shall I
do? Oh that I might dye like a beast, and lie in a benumbed state of death for
ever, free from all sense or feeling of any joy, so I might live on earth but
as I list: Oh my dear works of darkness, I do so love you, that I could be
willing to be a dog, or any other beast at death, so I might but have your
company while I live.

Reply. Ah Fool, Fool, Fool! What Devil has been the Priest, to espouse thee
so nearly to thy filthy, stinking, rotten sinful life, that neither Christ, nor
his Ministers can persuade thee to a divorce? Thou senseless sinner, have thou
not too justly provoked thy Maker to repent that he made thee a man? what,
content to dye like a beast, and lose the glorious privilege of an immortal
life, for a base filthy sin! how much pity is it that ever thou were man or
woman, and not rather a dog or toad? thou art a disgrace to the humane nature;
but thou wretched desperate sinner, I tell thee thou shall not have thy wish,
because thou art so unwilling to live like a son or daughter of God on earth,
thou shall not have so much happiness to lie down in thy grave like a dog, thou
shall assuredly go to hell, and so to torment, therefore shutting out of heaven
speaks more sadness than I have acquainted thee with.

3 Lastly, Consider this, if thou will not resolve to live more righteously
than ever any Pharisee did, Assure thy self, that Jesus Christ that shuts thee
out of heaven, shall shut thee up in Hell, that tongue that pronounces the
righteous blessed, shall pronounce thee cursed, and he that bids them enter
into the joy of their Master, shall command thee to descend into torments with
the Devils, there shall thou receive the stroke of his iron rod, that shall
dash thee in pieces, and bear the strokes of his revengeful arm for thy abusing
of his tender and long-suffering mercy. There shall thou feel the worrowings of
an enraged conscience, and suffer the tortures of devouring flame, and this for
ever and ever.

Reader, If thou art obstinate, deceive not thy self, God will not be mocked,
and in his punishing thee for sin, he will not seem to be in jest; for as
the Lord lives, and as thy soul lives, there is not a tittle of what I say,
but what is contained in thy Bible; if I show it thee to be there, thou will
not sure question whether it be true; Read then, and let thine own eyes bear
witness, Matthew. 25.41. Then shall he say unto them on the left hand, Depart
from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his
Angels, Mark. 9.47. And if thine eye offend thee, that is, thy sin as dear as
thy eye hinder thee in the way to heaven, pluck it out (that is, cast it away,
and leave that sin) It is better for thee to enter into the Kingdom of God
with one eye (yea with no eye) than having two eyes to be cast into hell fire,
where their worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched. Rev. 21.8. but the
fearful (that is, such as fear to part with sin, and life, and all for Christ)
and unbeleeving, and abominable, and Murderers, and Whoremongers, and
Sorcerers, and Idolaters (such are covetous men) and all liars, shall have
their part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, this is the
second death. Rev. 20.10. And the Devil that deceived them, was cast into the
lake of the fire, and the brimstone, where the Beast and the false Prophets
are, and shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8.
When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels in
flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with everlasting
destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power.
Now thou have read all these Texts, I cannot think thou will unsay them all,
thou have the witness both of John and Paul, and Christ himself; I am sure
their testimony will pass in the Court of Heaven, and there it is, and only
there, that thou must take thy trial, receive thy sentence, and be sent to
this dreadful punishment; what have thou more to say?

The Sinners last Refuge.

I have here read, say thou, That there is no salvation without I live an
exceeding righteous life, it is plain Scripture, I cannot deny it; and surely
my drunkenness, my swearing, lying, whoreing, neglect of praying, reading, do
not speak me an exceeding righteous man; What shall I do? shall I think my
self in so miserable estate, that if I dye before I change my life, I must go
to hell? Oh I dare not; what then? to leave my sins? I will not, but how then?
shall I keep them? if I do, the Scripture is plain, I cannot go to heaven;
truly I know not what to say; but perhaps there may be some way to heaven that
the Scripture does not tell us of, I resolve to venture it at least, and I know
I shall have many to bear me company, and thus I will satisfy my self, and
continue as I am.

Answ. A poor shift: Thou hopest God will find a way to save thee, that he
has not revealed, that is in plain English thus, thou hopest that God has
told thee by Jesus Christ, that except thou art more righteous than the
Pharisees, thou can not be saved, yet he intends the quite contrary, and
will save thee and others, though thou live more wickedly than ever the
Pharisees did: What is this but to put God the Father and Jesus Christ at
variance, and make them contradict each other? yea to think so impudently of
God, that he sent his only Son into the world to deceive and cheat it in a
company of untruths, as this would be one, if it should ever be, as thou art
bold to hope.

But I have somewhat in my Text still behind, that will spoil thy hopes, and
convince thee of this wicked imagination; says my Text (Ye shall in no case
enter) mark that (in no case) what do those three words mean? Do they not
plainly signify, that God has shut up all other ways to heaven, or that
there are no means left by which thou can possibly escape the misery of the
damned, but only this of becoming righteous?

1 Perhaps thou think to hide thy self in the Grave, and to lurk close in
the corner of that dark room.

But Fool, never think of it, for the doors of those chambers of death shall
all fly open, the Trumpet shall sound, and thou amongst the rest shall arise,
and stand up before him.

2 Perhaps thou conceivest a way to escape by crying for mercy: Ah sinner, that
will not do neither, for then it will be too late, there is no room for
repentance, nor for mercy, when thou have once left this earth.

3 What, do thou think to plead the blood of Christ? It will be answered by
Christ that shed it, that he shed it only for the penitent, believing, godly
sinner, and thou art none of those.

4 Do thou think then to fly from the Justice of God the Son, to the Mercy
of God the Father? and if thou should, I tell thee, he would send thee back
again unto Christ his Son, and with all acquaint thee, that he has committed
all Judgment to his Son, and is resolved to spare none that his Child Jesus
will not save, and thou art sure already of this, that Christ his Son will save
none, but such whose righteousness has exceeded that of the Pharisees. Read my
Text, has he not there said it, and can thou think that upon his
Judgment Seat he will deny this Sermon, or this part of it that he preached
upon the earth? Shall so great a Judge as Christ, make a Law, and publish it on
the earth, and then upon the Bench deny he never said so, or then repent it?
no, no Sinner, it is impossible he should deny himself, or his word.

Now Reader, if thou be a man or woman, whose heart and life is not yet
changed, if thou have not a righteousness above the Pharisees, in what a sad
case do thou see thy self, or at least thou may, if thou were not blind;
whither can thou turn thy self, but thou must see hell and damnation before
thee, and ready to devour thee?

Sinner. Oh Sir, What shall I do to be saved?

I tell thee how? there is one way left thee to salvation, and but one, and my
Text has told it, Endeavor to be exceeding righteous in thy life, and that
is the way to life; let thy love and faith to God and Christ Jesus, let thy
sincere obedience to all his Commands to the utmost that tou art able, let thy
thoughts, thy words, thy prayers, thy alms speak thee a more righteous man or
woman than the strictest Scribe and Pharisee that ever breathed upon the earth,
this, this is the way to heaven. If after all this thou art resolved to
continue as thou art, thy blood be on thine own head, I have discharged my
duty.

Sinner. Lord have mercy upon me! What a blind wretch have I been, thus to
mistake my way! and think I have been going to heaven, when I now see plainly I
am in the broad road to hell! Well, I thank God. I am not yet swallowed up of
that gulf, Mercy has hitherto kept me out; and I am resolved to abuse
longsuffering mercy not an hour longer. It is but leaving my drunken
companions, and my filthy Harlots, and who would not leave them to gain the
love of God, and my blessed Savior? It is but leaving my lying, swearing, and
turning my curses into prayers and blessings, and what harm is there in prayers
and bessings? I am sure they will please my God better, and trouble my
conference less. It is but loving my neighbor as my self, but especially my
God and Savior, with all my heart, soul, and strength; and to account of gold
and silver, friends, credit, and my sins, as dung and dross in a compare to
them, and I am sure, that they are better than them all, and so they deserve as
much and more of love from me: It is but to pray, praise, and thank them for
the offer of eternal life, and to rely upon the blood of Jesus for pardon and
acceptance, and I am sure that Jesus Christ will prove my fastest friend.

Well, my resolution is this, God, men, and Angels, shall see I am another man;
Heaven shall see me more on my knees in my Closet; it shall be my next work
when I have read out this book, my Family shall see and hear me more in
reading, and praying, I and my house shall serve the Lord, and all my
neighbors shall see me walk in those very ways that I have formerly most
profanely laughed and scoffed at. I know it will be my turn now to be
scorned, and derided by others, yea some of my familiar drunken companions; but
what care I? Christ suffered more for my sake, and I remember holy Paul, that
was once a persecuter of honest hearted Christians, was afterward content to
be persecuted for being such an one himself. But let them laugh on; I am sure,
I am a dying man, and if I keep on to follow Christ, I shall shortly be in
heaven, and then above their scorns, where I am sure they will never come, if
they repent not, and seek a righteousness above the Pharisees.

I have read what this righteousness is, and now I will try it in my life,
there is no more time for talk, I will up and do.

Caution.

Yea, and do so, thou Son or Daughter of God, for so I dare call thee, if thou
hold this resolution to the death. Only let me caution thee (...) whilst
thou art so set and resolved upon the work, Remember that of thy Savior, Joh.
15.4, 5. As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the
Vine, no more can ye, except ye abide in me. I am the Vine, ye are the
branches, he that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much
fruit; for without me ye can do nothing. And so Phil. 2.13. For it is God
that works in you, both to will and to do, of his good pleasure. Again, Romans
8.26. Likewise the Spirit helps our infirmities, for we know not what we
should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us
with groanings that cannot be uttered. 1 Cor. 10.12. Let him that thinks he
stands, take heed lest he fall.

By these Texts I would put thee in mind of thine own weakness, and
self-insufficiency. Set to the working out thy salvation with fear and
trembling, but look up to Christ thy treasury, that has a stock of grace and
strength for thee to spend upon till death, and to all eternity; and now let
me entreat thee to form thy conclusion thus with the holy Apostle, Philip.
4.13. I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me. Thou may
with Christ do wonders, but without him just nothing. Ask and thou shall have,
seek and thou shall find, knock and it shall be opened.

And lastly, I say unto thee, Watch and pray, lest thou enter into temptation.

Now the Lord bless thee, and make thy root to spread on the Mountain of the
Lord, let his dews fall upon thee, and give thee to flourish as a pleasant
branch in the Vineyard of thy God. Let not that curse come ever near thee? It
is a barren tree, cut it down, why cumbers it the ground? but be thou ever
laden with fruit, that death may find thee mellow, and ripe for Heaven.

A Postscript.
I Am sufficiently aware of what exceptions the more curious may make against
the management of this small Discourse, as

1 That I have observed a method somewhat too loose.

2 That I have handled the Species before the Genus, that is, spoken to the
nature of inherent righteousness, without giving any account of righteousness
in general.

3 That I have scarce touched upon the other species of righteousness, which
lies in the active and passive obedience of our Lord and Savior.

4 That I have not handled fully the nature of inherent righteousness, that is
the subject of the whole, having neglected in a manner the explication of any
of its affections.

And lastly, that I have insisted too little on the Doctrinal part.

Answ. It may be some satisfaction to thee that I know my defects before thou
tellest me of them; but thou must know,

1 That I intended to have delivered my whole mind on this subject in one
sheet, to make it as little chargeable as I could.

2 That I intended it for the meaner sort of my people, whom by long
observation I have found them to understand me least, when I think I speak
best, and most accurately.

3 I do not conceive my method so loose as thou may imagine, seeing I have
all along kept close to the parts of the Text (and if I mistake not) they lie
together in as good a posture as the nature of things in their dependency can
well bear.

4 And as to my speaking so little to the righteousness of the Saints as is
treasured up in the active and suffering life and death of the Lord Jesus,

I reply thus,

1 I have not wholly omitted it, but have besprinkled the whole with blood,
that the attentive Reader may plainly see, that I little dreamed that the
purest inherent righteousness could be meritorious.

2 And I was bound to follow the intendments of the Text that points most
directly at the righteousness of the souls and spirits of men that must act
them in their lives.

3 And I knew, that it is this inward righteousness the common people I speak
to, see less need of, and it is their ignorance of this, which is the ordinary
rock on which they split, and it was my duty here to help to save them if I
could.

If this will not satisfy thee, I cannot help it, I writ not to please all,
but to profit some; if the Lord shall please to bless it to that end, it will
content me, though it does not thee.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books sold and Printed for Andrew Kembe; at his Shop at
St. Margarets Hill in Southwark.
A View of holy Scriptures, by Mr. Hugh Broughton, Fol.

Ancient Funeral Monuments within the united Monarchy of Great Britain,
Ireland, and the Islands adjacent, their Founders, and what eminent persons
have been interred.

The Gospel Covenant, or the Covenant of Grace opened, by Peter Buckly,
sometimes Fellow of Christ's College in Cambridge.

Gods holy mind, in ten Words, or ten Commands, which he himself uttered, and
taught his Disciples, by Questions and Answers, by the late learned and
faithful Preacher Mr. Elton, late Pastor of St. Mary Magdalen Bermondsy, near
London, 4o.

Arraignment of Error, by Doct. Samuel Bolton, late Master of Christ's College
in Cambridge.

Bounds of Christian Freedom.

The Exposition of the five first Chapters of Ezekiel, with the other three
parts, 4o.

All Mr. Henry Smiths Sermons gathered into one Volume, with his Life' and
Picture.

Mr. Dod on the Commandments, 4o.

Military Discipline, the exactest way, or the young man's Artillery, wherein is
shown the posture both of Musket and pike; Whereunto is added the postures and
use of the half Pike joined with Musket, by Col. Will. Barriff.

The Art of Dialling, or Court of Arts, By S. M.

Mr. Slater on the fourth of the Romans, 4o.

Also on the book of Malachy.

Dariotts Judgment of the Stars; containing the whole Art of Astrology.

Hudsons Vindication of the Church Catholic visible, and the priority thereof,
in regard of particular Churches.

Also an Addition, or Postscript to the Church Catholic visible.

Mr. Cradico^s Sermon preached at the Spittle, 4o.

The Guard to the Tree of Life, by Dr. Samuel Bolton, late Master of Christ's
College in Cambridge.

Octavoes.
Mr. Goodwin on the Sacrament. On Family Duties. On the Sabbath. Bradshaw on
the Sacrament. Mr. Ford of the singing of Psalms. Bakers Arithmetic. Mr.
Tippin of Eternity. Dr. Sibbs on Canticles. Amesius upon the whole Book of
Psalms, and the two Epistles of Peter. Francis Spira.
School-Books.
Farnabies Phrases. Farnaby on Seneca. Farnaby on Juvenal and Persius. Farnaby
on Martial. Farnabies Epigrams, Greek and Latin. Dux Grammaticus, by Mr.
Clark. Matropedius de conscribend is Epistolis. Vigerius Idiotism. Graecae
Lingua Ovids Metamorphosis, Grammatically translated by Mr. Brinsly.

