A SERIOUS ACCOUNT In XXXV Evident Reasons, (To all who desire Satisfaction)
Why the People of the Lord, called QUAKERS, cannot go to Worship at those
places called Churches and Chapels; And to inform the Magistrates and
Ministers, That such Conscientious People (as are separated from these places)
ought not to be compelled (from their Peaceable Meetings) to their Worship and
Churches, so called.

BEING A short DISCOVERY of the Way, Worship, and Principles of the true
Ministers and persecuted People of God, in several Exceptions against the
Practices, Worship, and Principles of the Priests, both of the Presbyterians,
and Episcopal-men, and others of the same affinity: in some of which Principles
the Presbyterians are the rather concerned; but in others of them, both are
concerned in the general.

By Geo. Whitehead.

London, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Sign of the Blackspread-Eagle and
Windmill, in Martins Le Grand, 1661.

THE CONTENTS Of the following REASONS.
1. COncerning the true Worship and Meetings which God has called us to; and
of what he has called us from. 2. Of the Education of the Priests. 3. Of their
humane Learning. 4. Of Tithes and forced Maintenance. 5. Of the Priests
Unreasonableness, in spoiling men's goods. 6. Of their Persecuting and
Compelling men. 7. Of the manner of their Preaching. 8. Of the manner of their
Worship. 9. Of their Sinning in their best Performances. 10. Of the Trade of
their Preaching.
Then the falsehood of the Priests and Professors Principles.
1. Concerning the Light. 2. Their confusion about the Light. 3. Of the Offer
of Salvation. 4. Of the Death of Christ. 5. Of Perfection. 6. Of the Priests
Exhorting to endeavor after it. 7. Of Election and Reprobation. 8. Of Original
Sin. 9. Of the Serpent, and the forbidden Fruit. 10. Of Justification, and of
Sanctification. 11. Of the Believer's Faith, and its Work. 12. Of the Priests
meanings upon the Scripture. 13. Of the Gospel. 14. Of the Foundation and only
Rule. 15. Of Swearing. 16. Of Revelation and Inspiration from Heaven. 17. Of
Sprinkling Infants. 18. Of Bread and Wine, which they call the Lords Supper.
19. and 20. Of the Church and Seal of the Covenant. 21. Of Bishops and
Presbyters. 22. Of the Priests Ordination. 23. Of the Common Prayer Book. 24.
Of the Priests gross Ignorance about their Public Baptism. 25. Of the true
Church and its Head.
I. Concerning the true Worship and Meetings which God has called us to; and
of what he has called us from.
THe LORD GOD of Truth and Righteousness has gathered us by his mighty Power
out of the worlds Ways, Worships and Traditions, which were never set up by the
Power of God, and from the Priests and Teachers of the world, which are made
and set up by the Traditions and Wills of men, who preach for filthy lucre and
gain; which thing was ever abhorred and denied by all the true Ministers and
holy People of the Lord, who feared God and hated Covetousness in all Ages; as
also we are brought by the Power of the Lord God out of the Worlds Temples, or
Houses, (which are falsely called Churches) and brought into the Worship of God,
which is in the Spirit and in the Truth, Joh. 4. Which Worship Christ taught,
when he foretold the end of that Worship which was at Jerusalem, in the Temple
which once God commanded to the Jews under the Law; which, with the outward
things that pertained to it, and to the Priests and Worshippers in that Temple
(as outward Music, Instruments, Singing, Tithes, Offerings) were all to cease,
as Figures, or Types, when a more inward and mysterious Way and Worship in the
Spirit was brought in and revealed by Christ, to the Saints and Christians of
the New Testament; who (as they grew in the power of God to enjoy the enduring
Substance and end of Figures and Shadows) they grew out of these outward things
(that were but as Figures) into the knowledge of the glorious Gospel, and the
Mystery of its Fellowship, which outshined and transcended all these shadows
under the Law. See Heb. 9. and chap. 10. which Gospel and Mystery we are come
to know and witness, to the praise and glory of our God. And to this Testimony
did the holy Apostles and Ministers of Christ bear large Witness; as did the
Martyr Stephen, when he preached Christ (whom the people were to hear in all
things; and he that would not hear, was to be cut off, Deuteronomy. 18.18. Act. 7.37.
and 3.23.) and called them stiff-necked and uncircumcised in hearts and ears;
who were in their blind zeal for the outward Temple, and so witnessing to
Christ the substance and end of the Temple, He told them, The most High
dwells not in Temples made with hands; and for his Testimony he was stoned to
death, Act. 7.47, 48, 51. And so we being brought to hear and learn of Christ
the Prophet, whom the People were to hear in all things, lest they were
destroyed; and being made a spiritual house, Church, and living Temples in
which God dwells and walks according to his Promises, 2 Cor. 6.16. who has
brought us out from the Idols Temples, false Worships and Teachers: we may not
uphold nor join with that Worship that is upheld in these places, which the
world calls Churches and Chapels, which God never commanded nor set up; but
the Papists and such as were apostatized from the Life of the Saints into men's
Traditions and Inventions; neither ought the Magistrate to compel us to these
places of Worship against our Consciences; but as it is the just duty of the
Civil Magistrates to punish evildoers, and to be a praise to them that do
well, ( Romans 13. 1 Pet. 2 14.) So they ought rather to protect (than hinder)
our peaceable Meetings, which are in the Worship into which God has called us
by his Spirit. And whether our Meetings be in houses or fields (we being
brought to meet together in the Name and Power of Christ) we meet according to
the Example of the People of God and true Christians in the primitive times,
when they were brought both from the Jews Temple, and from the Gentiles Temples
and Worships, and sometimes met in houses, sometimes abroad in the Fields, and
upon Mountains, sometimes by the Seaside, etc. as many examples might be
mentioned. See Matthew. 5.1. Joh. 20.19. Act. 10.27. chap. 12.12. and 16.13. and
20.8.20. and 28.30. Heb. 10.25. Mal. 3.16. So, would it have been just or
righteous to have persecuted these Christians for meeting in houses, and to
have termed their Meetings Conventicles? or to have made any Laws against them
for the breaking of their Meetings, and for imprisoning them for meeting in
houses, as many of the People of God have been dealt with for no other cause,
but for being in their Example and Life? And it is as much against our
Consciences, and the Law of God in us to deny to meet together in the Name of
Christ (wherein we have long and often met) as it was against Peter and John's
Consciences to deny to speak in the Name of Jesus, when the Rulers among the
Jews did so command them, which they could not obey, but chose rather to obey
God, than man, Act. 4.18, 19. As also it was against the Prophet Daniel's
Conscience, to obey King Darius his Decree, which was, That whosoever should
ask a Petition of any God or man for thirty days, save of the King, should be
cast into the Lions Den: But Daniel, contrary to this Decree, did pray to his
God as he was wont to do, Dan. 6, 7, 9, 10. and we might as well be commanded,
not to speak any more in the Name of Jesus, or, not to call upon the Lord, as
to have our peaceable Meetings (which are in the Name of Christ) broken, and to
be halled violently out of our Meetings when we have been calling upon the Lord
in Prayer; as many of us have been thus dealt by, and not suffered to enjoy our
Meetings, to call upon the Lord in them as formerly.

II. Of the Education of the Priests.
ALso it is against our Consciences to go to worship with the World at these
places called Churches and Chapels, because the Lord has brought us to see
the Education and fitting of the hireling Priests to their Ministry at Oxford
and Cambridge, to be set up in the Apostasy, when there was a degenerating from
the state of the true Church of the Saints: And the way they are made
Ministers, is contrary to the way the true Ministers of Christ were made; for
they were not made Ministers by natural learning of natural Languages, Arts,
Sciences, Traditions, Inventions of men, and studying the several kinds of
Philosophy, and learning out of old Authors; nor ordained according to man's
will, as the Priests are, who by their natural industry and study attain to
their Learning and Knowledge, as the natural man may do, who knows not the
things of the Spirit of God; and as Pilate and other Learned men, who knew not
God nor Christ, had the learning of Tongues, Joh. 19.19, 20. But the true
Ministers of the New Testament received not their Gospel of man, nor were made
Ministers by the will of man, but by the Gift and Revelation of CHRIST in them,
in which they owned and approved one of another, Gal. 1. 1 Pet. 4.10. But these
Priests have told us that Revelations and Inspirations from Heaven are long
since ceased, contrary to Christ and his Apostles Doctrine, and so show
themselves to be both out of the knowledge of God (which is revealed to the
Saints, Matthew. 11.27.) and never sent of God or Christ: and therefore it is
against our Consciences to sit under their Ministry, which they never received
(nor had Commission for) from God.

III. Of their Humane Learning.
AS also the Apostle (who preached not in the words which man's wisdom taught,
but in the words which the holy Ghost taught) said to the Church, Beware, lest
any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit, after the Traditions of
men, after the Rudiments of the world, and not after Christ; and bad Timothy
avoid opposition of Science, falsely so called, Col. 2.8. 1 Timothy 6.20. 1 Cor. 1.
and chap. 2. And when the Word of the Lord prevailed among the Jews and Greeks,
where Paul preached, many of them which used curious Arts, brought their Books
together (which were counted worth fifty thousand pieces of silver) and burned
them openly, Act. 19.18, 19. so that the Priests idolizing natural Learning,
and crying it up with their Philosophy, natural Arts and Sciences, as their
means to fit them to their (Trade of) Preaching, is in the darkness of Apostasy
and Antichristianism, contrary to the Life and Word which the Apostles and true
Ministers were in, and preached; which Word was before natural Learning and
Languages were, and Plough-men, Herds-men, Fishermen, and the like, were made
Ministers of the Word among the People of God of old, Exodus 3.1. 1 King. 19.19.
Amos 7.14. Matthew. 4.18, 19, 20, 21. though humane Learning we own to be of use
in its own proper place, as a natural thing, but not to be made an Idol of, as
the Priests do.

IV. Of Tithes and forced Maintenance.
THe Lord has brought us to see, that the Priests taking Tithes and forced
maintenance from people, is contrary to the Doctrine, Practice and Example of
the Ministers of the Gospel; neither do they live of the Gospel, when they
force Tithes and Maintenance from people by an outward Law of man, or help of
the Magistrate to compel people to pay them; for the true Ministers who lived
of the Gospel, and whose words and works agreed; they preached the Gospel
freely, and labored to keep it without charge, as Christ commanded, Matthew.
10.8. 1 Cor. 9.18. And their Maintenance was freely administered to them, in
that love which their Gospel had begotten in the hearts of such as received
them, without compulsion or persecution; as, where they had sown spiritual
things, there they might reap of their carnal things for their relief. Also the
Apostle preached the end of that Law and Priesthood of Levi, which upheld
Tithes, and who received them for their service done at the Tabernacle, and out
them, the Fatherless, Widows, and Strangers were relieved, Numb. 18.21. Deuteronomy.
14. but this was under the Law, which Christ ended, and changed that
Priesthood, Heb. 7. Neither is Melchizedeck's receiving the tenth of the Spoils
which Abraham once freely gave him (when he returned from the slaughter of the
Kings, Genesis 14.) any example for the Priests yearly forcing the Tenths of men's
Labors and Estates from them, and their taking Easter Reckonings, Midsummer
Dues (so called) and making Bargains with people for so much by the Year for
preaching, and yet saying they are Christ's Ambassadors: This is exceeding
gross, and contrary to the practice and example of the true Ministers of
Christ. And therefore we cannot own such covetous men to be our Teachers, for
the Apostle bad turn away from such, 2 Timothy 3.5. for they are guilty of them
that went in Balaam's way for reward, and of the sins of the false Prophets and
Priests in Israel, who preached for filthy Lucre and Hire, and sought for their
Gain from their Quarters, Isa. 56.11. Jer. 5.31. Micah 3.11. And these Priests
are like Eli's Sons, who were sons of Belial, in their taking away men's goods
by force, 1 Samuel 1. and not like Samuel, who could challenge all Israel to
testify against him, whose Dr, or whose Ass he had taken, or whom he had
oppressed? or, at whose hands he had received a gift to blind his eye
therewith, and he would have restored it again? but none could accuse him* but
justified him as free from these things, 1 Samuel 12.3, 4. As also it was the
false Shepherds that fed themselves, and not the flock; and with force and
cruelty ruled over them as the Priests do, Ezekiel. 34. and against such the Lord
was as he is against them now.

V. Of the Priests Unreasonableness, in spoiling men's Goods.
ANd what shameful work have these Priests made in their suing many honest men
at Law for Tithes, and spoiling their Goods, and fraudulently taking away Goods
many times more than the Tithes demanded; As also they have cast many into
Prisons for Tithes, several of whom have dyed in Prisons; And thus have they
dealt by many that are separated from them, whom they do no work for, nor
preach to, and such as can buy none of the Priests ware, nor spend their money
for that which is not bread; knowing the Fountain of LIFE [whereto all that
thirst, may come freely, and freely drink, without money or price] and the gift
of the Spirit of God within, and a part in his Wisdom, which is not to be
bought nor sold for Silver or Gold, Isa. 55. Job 28. So thus the Priests
forcing Tithes and Goods from them they do no work for, is both contrary to all
Equity, Reason, or Scripture, and their grievous oppression upon the Poor and
the Nation, has caused the Nation to groan, and the Land to mourn.

VI. Of their Persecuting and Compelling men.
ANd the Priests in showing themselves to be envious men, and persecutor's, and
going about to compel conscientious men (that differ from them in Judgment) to
their Worship and Religion, by an outward Power or Law of man; and in their
Instigating Magistrates to persecute such as cannot for Conscience Sake join
with them; Herein they have greatly showed themselves to be out of the way of
the Gospel and true Ministry; for the way of the Gospel and its Ministers, is,
to convince Gainsayers, and to beget men into the love of the Truth, through
the meekness of Love and Wisdom, and so to convert them; and not to use
Persecution and compulsion to force them to an outward conformity against their
Consciences and Faith, nor to seek to be Lords over men's Faith, 2 Cor. 1.24.
as the Priests do; wherein they have showed themselves to be in the way of the
persecuting Jews and Papists, and not in the way of the Gospel Ministers; for
neither Persecution, Carnal weapons, nor outward compulsion, can convince of
error, nor convert men to the love of the Truth; for they that may be thereby
made conformable to an outward Profession or Worship, it is but in hypocrisy,
whilst they are not convinced in their Consciences of the thing to be true
which they are compelled to; and this is but to make men Hypocrites, and no
further can it bring them; For whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin, Romans 14.23.
And they who can alter their Religion by outward compulsion, or for fear of
suffering, will change as the Times and Governments change, as many of the
hireling-Priests themselves do; who when their Gospel will not bear them out
against their opposers, then they fly to the Magistrates and Persecutors for
help; when as the Ministers of Christ, wrastled not with flesh and blood, but
with Principalities and Powers, and spiritual wickedness in high places; and
their weapons were not carnal but spiritual, and mighty through God, to the
pulling down of strong holds, Ephesians. 6.12. and therefore we finding the Priests
contrary to them, and in the way of the proud Persecutors, and of the Beast
which made War against the Saints, and set up the compelled Worships, and many
of them in the way of Cain, who hated his Brother for his Religion, Joh. 3.12.
1 Jude, v. 11. we are commanded of the Lord not to uphold them, nor join with
them.

VII. Of the manner of their Preaching.
ANd as for the PRIESTS Preaching what they have invented and gathered out of
Authors and Books, and not from the Spirit or Revelation of Christ within; and
their following such a form in their Preaching, as dividing a Text into parts
and branches, and from their own humane knowledge raising Doctrines, Reasons,
Uses, Motives, Arguments, Consequences, Applications, etc. They speak in the
form and words which man's wisdom does teach, like heathen Orators, and they
preach by an Hour-glasse what they have gathered and imagined. This the Priests
manner and way of Preaching is contrary to the Preaching of the true Ministers;
for they ministered as they had received the gift of Christ, (1 Pet. 4.10.) and
what Christ revealed in them, and sent them to preach; and they preached not
the words which man's wisdom taught, nor used the cunning sleights and devices
of men, but preached in the power and demonstration of the Spirit of Christ, (1
Cor. 2. Ephesians. 4.14. 2 Pet. 1.16.) which is not to be limited to men's forms and
inventions, nor unto an hourglass; and therefore it is against our Consciences
to sit under the Priests invented preaching by an hour-glasse, it being so much
contrary to the Saints preaching, who were Ministers of the Spirit of the New
Testament in the Revelation of the Mystery, which is CHRIST within the hope of
Glory.

VIII. Of the manner of their Worship.
ALso it is against our Consciences to join with the Priests and their hearers
in their formal and dead Worship at their Steeple Houses, as their formal
praying in their wills, either in a form of their own inventing, or by the Book
of Common Prayer, which was devised by men, and then having a Clerk to say
Amen: which manner of worshipping we never read of in the Scripture that the
Saints used; nor that the Saints in the Churches of Christ did ever sing
David's Prophecies, Prayers, Complaints, Lamentations, in rhyme and meeter (as
Priests and People now do) which were put into meeter by Thomas Sternhold, John
Hopkins and others; nor that ever the Churches of Christ had drunken Clerks to
give them forth what Psalms they were to sing, or to give them such a tune to
sing by as the Priests and their hearers now usually have, whose songs shall
become howlings, Amos 8.3. but the Saints and true Christians in the primitive
times did pray with the Spirit, cried Abba, Father, by the Spirit of Adoption,
and they sung with the Spirit, with grace and understanding, and made Melody in
their hearts to the Lord, as the Word that dwelt plenteously in them, led them,
Romans 7.6. chap. 8.15, 26. 1 Cor. 14, 15. Ephesians. 5.19. Col. 3.16. and so the
Saints served God in the newness of the Spirit, and not in the oldness of the
Letter; and such did not set a company of proud, covetous, persecuting, or
profane people of the world to sing David's Confessions, Prayers, Complaints,
and of his Fastings, Roarings, and Tremblings in meeter in a Steeple-house, or
Masse-house, as the Priests and their Clerks do, who many times cause scorners
and proud ones to sing, That they are not puffed in mind, they have no scornful
eye, Psalm. 131. And such as are given to sporting and wantonness, to say, that
all the night long they wash their bed with tears, (See Psalm. 6. in the Rhyme)
and such as feed themselves without fear, and spend the creatures upon their
Lusts, and live in Fullness and Fatness, to sing, that they fast their flesh to
chaste, and that they weep and moan; and that for grief and pain of heart in
sackcloth use to walk, (Psalm. 69.11, 12.) when many of them do walk in their
gaudy Attire, and in therr Silks, Ribbons and Lace: and thus they use Falsehood,
and show themselves as Mockers of God, to whom they sing many more Lies than
these; And thus their Leaders cause them to err. Therefore this confused and
false Worship at these places, called Churches and Chapels, which is neither
practiced with the Spirit of Christ, nor with understanding, we cannot own it,
nor join with the World in it; for the Lord himself has taught us his Way and
Worship, which is contrary to the Worlds.

IX. Of their Sinning in their best Performances.
ALso the PRIESTS have often said in their Confessions, that they sin in their
best Performances, as in their Preaching, Praying and Worshipping; and that
they had need to pray, that the sins of their holy Duties, and iniquities of
their Holy things may be forgiven: from which it follows, that they may pray
for Forgiveness all their lifetime, and be no better, in that they sin in
their praying, or holy Duties, as they confess; so that always when they pray
or preach, they sin, and have the sin thereof to crave forgiveness for; And
therefore it is contrary to our Faith to join with them in their sinful worship
and performances, or to give them money for them: for the true Ministers and
Saints performed their Duties to the Lord in his Spirit and Truth, and preached
the Truth as of sincerity; and as of God, so spoke they in Christ, in whom is
no sin, 2 Cor. 2.17. 1 John 3.5.

X. Of the Trade of their Preaching.
ANd so we finding the Priests, both of the Presbyterians and Episcopal men (so
called) so much in error, both as to the manner of their Education to their
Ministry, and in covetous practices, envy, pride, and false worship, we have
just cause to deny them, who are brought up to be Teachers as natural men to a
Trade, and make a Trade of Preaching (and so serve not our Lord Jesus Christ,
but their own bellies) And this appears the more against the Priests, in that
when I queried the Priests and Scholars of Cambridge about their Degrees: viz.
Why they have these names, Batchelers of Arts, Masters of Arts, Batchelers of
Divinity, Doctors of Divinity? etc. To this they answer thus, viz. By the same
Reason that some are made Apprentices, and some Journey-men, and some Freemen,
and some break, etc. This their Answer is in their Book against us, called, A
Gag for the Quakers. And thus the Priests have showed what Tradesmen they are.
Also, Sixty one Priests in and about the City of London, in their Seasonable
Exhortation (as they call it) directed to their Congregations, They say in the
Third Particular, That other Causes and Symptoms of God's Wrath hanging over
their heads, is, The frequent disappointment from time to time of all hopes of
coming to any settlement in Government in the Nation, occasioned by strange
Confusions (which they say) is a clear Evidence, that God has in displeasure
darkened their eyes, and hid Counsel from them, etc. From which it follows, 1.
That the Priests depend not upon the Lord for support and maintenance in their
Trade of Preaching, but upon the Magistrates. 2. And when they think the
Magistrates are at any time like to fail them, then their hearts begin to fail
them, and fear surprises them, as when they, called Protectors and their
Parliaments, were overturned; after which time the Priests made this sad
Complaint. 3. The Wrath of God hanging over the Priests, and God having in
displeasure darkened their eyes, and hid Counsel from them; we may not go to
follow them, nor seek Counsel at them from whom it is hid.

But some will object and say, We know that the National Ministers are corrupt
enough in their Practices, and that they are proud and covetous; but we must do
as they say, and not as they do: What have you against their Doctrine?

Answ. Their corrupt and evil practices give occasion enough for them to be
denied and turned away from; as the Apostle commanded, to turn away from such
as have a form of Godliness, but deny the power, 2 Timothy 3.5. and the Lord has
called to come out from among such, and be ye separate, and touch no unclean
thing, and I will receive you says the Lord: But the Priests of the Nation do
not only deny the Power of Godliness in their Practices, but also the true form
of Godliness in their Doctrines and Principles, as they are in errors about the
principal things that partain to Salvation, as is hereafter showed concerning
the Principles of the Priests and Professors, both of the Presbyterians,
Independents, and others of the same root, who have long been in fashion and
esteem in the Nation, in many of whose Principles, the Episcopal men (who for a
time have been less in fashion) are one with them.

The Priests and Professors Doctrines and Principles, are false about the
principal things, that pertain to Life and Salvation.

I. Concerning the Light.
THe Priests and Professors, who affirm, That All men have not a Spiritual or
saving Light of Christ in them; and that every man has not such a Light given
him from Christ, but that the Light in every man, is a natural Light, etc. This
their Principle is contrary to the Scriptures of Truth, and to Christ and his
Apostles doctrine; for as God is no respector of persons, who gives to all men
liberally and upbraideth not, Jam. 1.5. So he has given Christ a LIGHT into
the World, that whosoever believes in him, might not perish, but have eternal
Life, without exception, Joh. 1.4, 9. and chap. 3.16. and 12.46. Tit. 2.11.
Romans 5.18. And the LIFE of Christ is the LIGHT of men, who enlighteneth every
man that comes into the World, without respect of Persons; whose LIFE, or
LIGHT is not natural but spiritual; the spirit is Life, the least measure of
which Light is pure and unchangable, convincing the Creature of Sin, and
leading man from Sin, where it is owned in the Love of it: and therefore as the
LIGHT in every man is spiritual and pure, and the least measure of it being the
same in kind with the greatest, it is saving to them that believe in the Light,
and condemning to them that wilfully reject and hate it, Joh. 3.19.

II. Their Confusion about the Light.
AGain, greatly have we seen the Priests and Professors confounded about the
LIGHT of CHRIST in every man; some of them saying, that the Light the wicked
have, is but a natural or created Light; and some of the Priests say, it is a
blurred Light, a dark Light, a Light of natural reason, etc. others saying
that, the Light that is in every man, is both natural and Spiritual, when as
the LIGHT of Christ in every man that convinces of Sin, and reproves men for
Iniquity, is Spiritual and unchangeable, being of and from CHRIST, and leads to
Him, who is the same, yesterday, to day, and for ever. And notwithstanding the
Priests, that have counted the Light in every man but natural, and not saving,
yet some of them have affirmed that Christ gives to every man a supernatural
convincing Light, as GOD, touching the Law-Truths, but not as MEDIATOR,
touching the Gospel Truths. And thus have they confounded themselves, and
blindly distinguished about the LIGHT, for the LIGHT of GOD within, which leads
to the Truths of his Righteous Law within, it being supernatural, is spiritual,
as the Law is, and is the LIGHT of CHRIST the MEDIATOR, in whose hand the Law
is, which by his Light is manifest in man, and, where obeyed, it is a
Schoolmaster to lead to Christ the Mediator, who with his Light is one with
the Father, not divided, and has all things given to him of the Father. And
thus with the LIGHT we are come to see over the Priests Babylonish Confusion
and Ignorance of CHRIST and his LIGHT, about which they are most confounded and
do greatly err, as is apparent.

III. Of the Offer of Salvation.
ANd the Priests and Professors who affirm, That Salvation is offered to All
men, but not intended for all (as free for them) but only for a few, In this
they greatly show their Ignorance and Error; for this would make the offer of
Salvation and Grace to the greater part of people to be but in hypocrisy, as a
cheat or a mock, as is the Priests pretending to offer CHRIST to all, and
bidding all believe, when they do not believe GRACE to be free for all, nor
that All may believe, but that God has determined the greater part of people
otherwise, when as GOD would not the death of a sinner, but rather to return
and live; and Christ would that All should come into the knowledge of the Truth
and be saved. And God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world, but
that the world through him might be saved, Ezekiel. 18.32. and 33.11. Joh. 3.17. 1 Timothy 2.4. So that the Grace which saves is free for all, having appeared to
all men without respect of persons; but men's turning from it into
Lasciviousness, and perversely rejecting the Salvation that God offers to them
is the cause of their condemnation; as this is the Condemnation, that Light is
come into the World, and men love Darkness rather than Light, because their
deeds are evil.

IV. Of the Death of Christ.
ANd the Priests and Professors affirming, That Christ dyed not for all men in
the world, but only for a few, is contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, who said,
That Christ dyed for All, that as many as live should not live unto themselves,
but unto Him who dyed and rose again; and that Christ gave himself a Ransom for
all, to be testified in due time; and tasted death for every man; and is the
Propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but for the sins of the whole
World, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. 1 Timothy 2.6. Heb. 2.9. 1 John 2.2. Which was a true
Testimony of the free Grace and Love of God, which is extended to all men in
Christ Jesus; So that the Priests preaching which is otherwise we may not own,
nor be Disciples under it.

V. Of Perfection.
ALso the Priests in preaching against Perfection and Freedom from Sin in this
Life, and pleading for sin to remain in all the term of Life, In this they do
greatly err, and this their preaching and pleading for sin, is both against
the Scriptures, and against the Commands and Promises and Work of God; and
against both the preaching and praying of Christ and the Saints (who were to
receive whatsoever they asked in the Faith in Christ's Name, Mark 11.24.) as
also this sinful Doctrine of the Priests for Sin and Imperfection, is against
what the Saints attained to by the Power of God before their decease; For, 1.
God commanded his People to be perfect with the Lord their God, and to love him
with all their heart, soul and might, Genesis 17.1. Deuteronomy. 18.13. chap. 6.5. and
10.12. Mat. 22.37. And, 2ly, God promised to wash and cleanse his People from
all their filthiness, and that they should be all Righteous, and do no
Iniquity, Ezekiel. 36.25. Isa. 60. Zeph. 3.13. And, 3ly, Christ exhorted his to be
perfect, as their heavenly Father is perfect; and prayed that they might be
perfect in one, as he and his Father were one, Matthew. 5.48. Joh. 17.22, 23.
And, 4ly, The Saints preached to present men perfect in Christ, and exhorted
them not to sin, but exhorted them to the perfecting of Holiness in the fear of
God, 2 Cor. 7.1. Col. 1.28. Ephesians. 4.12. And, 5ly, Christ is made manifest to
destroy Sin, and to cleanse his People from all Sin, 1 John 1.7. chap. 3. And,
6ly, the Saints who passed through the Law, and ^horow the Warfare, till they
had fought the good fight of Faith, witnessed Victory over Sin, and the body of
Sin destroyed, and came to a perfect man in Christ, that they could do nothing
against the Truth, but for the Truth, as the Apostle said, 1 Cor. 13.8. Romans
6.6. Col. 2.11. 2 Timothy 4.7. And here the Saints prayers and desires to God came
to be fulfilled, who prayed that his Kingdom might come, and his Will might be
done in Earth as it is in Heaven, where no sin is. So that the Priests do
greatly err, and strengthen many in their sins, by preaching against
Perfection, which Perfection is Christ's work; and contending and pleading for
Sin, which is the Devil's work, which they are in; and therefore we cannot own
them as our Teachers.

VI. Of the Priests Exhorting to endeavor after it.
ALso the Priests exhorting men to endeavor after Perfection, and to labor to
be clean, when they do not believe that such a state is attainable, Their so
exhorting men is but in unbelief and hypocrisy, as is their praying to God to
make them clean and righteous; and that his Will may be done in Earth as it is
in Heaven, when they do not believe that they may be clean from sin in this
Life, nor that the Will of God may be done in Earth as it is in Heaven. This
their praying is in unbelief, and so they ask and receive not, Jam. 4.3. So
that their preaching and praying which is not in the Faith, is neither
effectual nor available with the Lord; For whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin.

VII. Of Election and Reprobation.
ANd the Priests and Professors, who affirm a particular Election and
Reprobation of particular persons from eternity, and yet pretend to offer
Christ to all, and bid all believe; as also they take money of all in general
that hear them, for their preaching to them, Herein do they greatly err, and
show their preaching, and pretended offering Christ to the greater part, to be
but in hypocrisy and deceit: For, how should they receive Christ, or believe
in him, if God has determined them from eternity to be condemned or
reprobated? Herein the Priests would make God a respecter of persons, and then
they may be silent from their preaching to them to believe, if all may not
believe; and people need not spend their money to the Priests for their
deceitful preaching to them: for, what God has determined shall come to pass,
without their Trade of Preaching for Money. But this I say, that the Saints
were elected of God through the sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the
Truth, unto obedience, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. 1 Pet. 1.2. and their Election stood in
the Seed, which obtained the Promise, which was before the World was: And the
cause of men's being reprobated, is, their Disobedience and Rebellion in the
Evil seed, against that which may be known of God, which is manifest in them:
For even as they liked not to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over
to a Reprobate mind, Romans 1. And many that may be saved, and may enter into
Rest, may come short through unbelief and the deceitfulness of sin. And some
that have escaped the pollutions of the world through the knowledge of God, if
they shall return thither again, and be entangled therein, their latter end is
worse than the beginning. See Isa. 1.16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Ezekiel. 18.20, to the
end of the Chapter. Heb. 4. and chap. 6.5, 6. and 10.26. 2 Pet. 2.1, 20, 21,
22. So that the cause of man's destruction does not lie on God's part, nor is
the fault his, but men's Iniquity and Rebellion against the Grace of God given
them, and wilfully submitting themselves to the Wicked One, who is the Author
of all Iniquity.

VIII. Of Original Sin.
ANd whereas the Priests accuse all men, except Christ (both the Wicked and the
Righteous, and the Infants who never actually committed sin) to be guilty of
Original Sin, more or less, from the first Parents, etc. To this I say, that
it was the Devil that was the Author and Original of all Sin, and cause of
men's being guilty of Sin, when they transgress the Righteous Law of God
within, and are in the state of Adam in the transgression, and in that
unrighteous nature by which all in that state are the Children of Wrath; but it
was not barely the first Parents eating of the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge,
and so their sinning alone that made men guilty, or by nature the children of
wrath [ Though by one man (who is the Man of Sin) Sin entered into the world,
and Death by Sin] but men being naturally subject to the power of Darkness in
themselves, and, their coming under the nature, which brings death and the
guilt, and causes the curse upon them; For death has passed upon all men, for
that all have sinned, Romans 5.12. and has reigned from Adam to Moses, over them
that have not sinned after the similitude of Adam's transgression: But the
Righteous, who are begotten again into the Divine Nature of the second Adam,
and come to be of the Seed which the Blessing is to, which is of Abraham; such
are brought to see the Devil and his works destroyed, and are come out of the
first Adam's state and nature, which was in the transgression, Gal. 3.9. 2 Pet.
1.4. 1 Jo. 3.

But whereas some of the Priests have affirmed, That Infants in the Mother's
womb, and such as have not actually committed sin, are guilty of Original Sin
from Adam by Imputation, which, they say, is enough to condemn them.

To this I answer. That Sin is not imputed, when there is no Law, Romans 5. and
the Law was added because of transgression: What then? have Infants in the
Mother's womb the Law? or, are they then capable of the Law that was added
because of transgression? for it is the righteous Law, or Light of God within
every man, that causes Sin to be imputed where that Law is transgressed: So
that of this Law the Priests have (in this, as in many other things) showed
themselves to be exceeding ignorant: And though the Curse follow the Seed of
the Evil-doer, and such as are estranged from the womb, who are in that
rebellious nature which causes the Wrath to come upon them; Yet some were
sanctified in the womb, and some filled with the Holy Ghost (and so sanctified)
from the womb, Jer. 1.5. Luke 1.15. and some were perfect from the day they
were created, until the Iniquity was found in them, Ezekiel. 28.15. And this
Proverb shall not be used, That the Fathers have eaten sour Grapes, and the
Childrens teeth are set on edge; but every man shall dye for his own Iniquity;
every one that eats the sour grapes his teeth shall be set on edge, Jer.
31.29. The soul that sins, it shall die, Ezekiel. 18.4. So that we have greatly
seen the Priests Ignorance about Original Sin, and the Imputation of it, and
their accusing the Righteous as being guilty of it.

And now with the Light of the Lord (who it is that fashioneth the Child in the
womb) are we come to see the two Seeds, and the two Births; the one of which is
shapen in Iniquity, and conceived in Sin, and this the Judgment and Hatred of
God follows, and takes hold upon; but the other has the Lord covered in the
womb, and written all its Members in his Book when they were not fashioned,
Psalm. 139. And where this Birth is brought forth, the Lord makes him to hope
when he is upon-his Mothers breasts, for he is cast upon the Lord from the
womb, Psa. 22.9, 10.

Now all that come to the Light of the Lord, and to witness the Key of David
(who saw these two Seeds in him before he came to the Victory, or had the Evil
seed cast out) such must come to see and be sensible of these two in them, and
when each acts or speaks in them before they come to see the Warfare
accomplished, or the Victory obtained in the Righteous Seed over the contrary:
And such as can truly discern these, and the nature of each Seed, they can read
what Jacob and Esau is in the Mystery; the one of which God loves, and the
other he hates; and here that is seen wherein men are Children of Wrath, and
that wherein they become Children of God, and inherit his Blessing.

IX. Of the Serpent, and the forbidden Fruit.
ALso the Priests Ignorance and gross darkness has appeared, who have
affirmed, That the forbidden Fruit, which the Serpent tempted Eve to eat of,
was an Apple: From which Dream of theirs the picture of a Snake, and an Apple
in its mouth in a Tree, with the image of a Man and a Woman, are set up at the
beginning of Bibles, and in many other places; from which some have imagined
that the Serpent which beguiled Eve was a visible Creature or Beast of the
field, which for that time had power to speak, and to present an Apple to
deceive Eve withal; when as God said to Man and Woman before the Fall, Behold,
I have given you every Herb, bearing seed, which is upon the face of all the
Earth; and every Tree, in the which is the fruit of a Tree yielding seed, to
you it shall be for meat, Genesis 1.29. and the fruit of such a Tree that bears
seed, is an Apple; So that could not be the Forbidden Fruit. And the Serpent
was that which tempted Man from the simplicity of the Truth, and through
subtilty led him out from the Innocence and Life (wherein God had placed him)
to feed upon the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge, which was desirable to the
Carnal or Woman's part, that was not content with the pure, innocent and simple
Being wherein God at first placed Man over the rest of the Creation, and
wherein he was more peculiar and near to the Lord than the other Creatures, and
might have fed upon the Tree of Life, which was above the Serpent and his
subtilty, and beyond that knowledge of good and evil which that got into which
went out from the Life of Truth and Innocence, and which let in the Temptation
and Subtilty that betrayed the Simplicity in Man; and brought in the Enmity,
Disobedience and Misery, which caused the Curse to come upon him: and when the
Enmity and Disobedience was entered into the Devil (who before was called the
Serpent, who abode not in the Truth, and whom Cod for his Rebellion cursed, and
said, Upon thy Belly shall thou go, and Dust shall thou eat) he got power over
the Creature, and rules in the Children of Disobedience. And of this Serpent
who beguiled Eve, the Apostle was jealous, left that the Corinths should be
deceived by him, and their minds corrupted and led away through his subtilty,
from the simplicity of the Gospel which was in Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2, 3. Now
where the Seed of the Woman, which is CHRIST, is received, he bruiseth the
Serpents head, who has led Man out from the Life and Simplicity of Truth; and
so CHRIST the Promised Seed being received and made manifest in Man, he frees
Man from the Devil and his Power, and redeems him out of the disobedient
nature, and so from the Wrath and Curse, and brings him to have dominion over
the Serpent and his enmity, and to see through all his Subtilty and
Temptations, and to know Victory over them, and to inherit a Kingdom, into
which no unclean thing can come, and which none can enter into but such who
follow Christ Jesus the true Light (in whom the wicked one has nothing) through
the work of Regeneration and Renewing, till the New Birth be born in them, and
the New Creature in Christ be brought forth; where the Man and the Woman (who
is not without one another in the Lord) are restored in the Seed: and who come
to witness this, must deny themselves, and forsake their own corrupt knowledge,
thoughts, and imaginations, which they and the Priests have run into about
these things, which have been hid and sealed from them, as in Parables, as they
^re from all such as are disobedient to the Light of Christ in them, which is
the true Key, which opens where no man can shut, and shuts where no man can
open.

X. Of Justification, and of Sanctification.
ANd those Teachers and Professors who affirm, That Justification is before
Sanctification, and that men are justified by the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness when they are sinners; and say, that Righteousness which
justifies is not within them, but the Righteousness which sanctifies is within:
And so they tell of two Righteousnesses, one that justifies, and another that
sanctifies. Herein they show their Error, and Blindness, and their Doctrine to
be contrary to the Doctrine of the Apostles, who preached, that it was not the
hearers of the Law that were Just before God, but the doers that should be
justified, Romans 2.13. So that here men were not justified, while sinners and
unsanctified, but when sanctified and obedient to the righteous Law of God
written in their hearts; and the Righteousness of the Law did Christ fulfill in
them, that walked not after the flesh, but after the Spirit; which some Priests
falsely say is meant, that the Righteousness of the Law was fulfilled in Christ,
and not in Believers persons, when it is expressly said, -- that the
Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, Romans 8.4. As also, the
Apostle desired to be found in Christ, not having his own righteousness, but
that which was through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness of God by Faith;
by which he knew Christ and the power of his Resurrection, and fellowship of
his Sufferings, and was made conformable unto his Death, Phil. 3.9, 10. So here
he witnessed Sanctification and Justification through one and the same
Righteousness, which was imputed to him in the Faith of Christ, which was in
him; and said he, -- but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God, 1 Cor.
6.11. So here they were not justified when sinners, but when washed and
sanctified by the Spirit of God from sin, by which Spirit they were justified,
and this was within: and so God does not justify men in their ungodliness, but
from it; and no where does the Apostle tell of two Righteousnesses, one without
to justify, and another within to sanctify, as many of the Priests and
Professors do.

XI. Of the Believer's Faith, and its Work.
ANd the Priests and Professors, who affirm, That the work of Sanctification,
and the Believers Faith is Imperfect in this life; and that the Believers have
Sin mixed with their Grace. In this they do greatly err; for the Believer's
Faith and Grace is the gift of God [ from whom every good and perfect gift
cometh] which saves them, and purifieth them from sin; and Faith purifieth
their hearts, and overcomes the world, Act. 15.9. 1 John 5.4. and so this
Grace and Faith is pure, (or else how could it purify?) and the work of it is
perfect, and its fruits pure. And the Saints witnessed the Blood of Christ
(through Faith) to cleanse them from all sin, and a perfecting Holiness in the
fear of God, till they were complete in Christ, and sanctified throughout, 2
Cor. 7.1. Col. 2.10. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. So that Sanctification came to be perfected
in them, as the Work of God is perfect. So that the Priests and Professors,
which profess Faith that is mixed with Sin, and so imperfect, and which is a
Faith without Works, and so a dead Faith, that leaves them still in their sins,
we deny it; for the Faith of God's Elect, which is of Christ, is pure in the
least measure of it; and from that Faith are Righteous Works and Fruits brought
forth of its own nature and kind; for that Faith which does not purify, and is
a Faith without Works, is but a false and dead Faith, ( Jam. 2.20.) which the
sinful Priests and Professors are in.

XII. Of the Priests meanings upon the Scripture.
ALso the Priests do greatly show their Error and Confusion in giving their
sundry invented Meanings to the Scripture, contrary to what the words of
Scripture do import, (in many places, as they say;) and in saying they must
reconcile the Scriptures to themselves by their Meanings, wherein they
intimately accuse the Scriptures to disagree, and to be false and imperfect in
many things. And many of the Priests contradict one another in their meanings
upon Scripture; when as the Scriptures of Truth were given forth from the
Spirit of Truth in the Saints, and cannot be broken, Joh. 10.35. 2 Timothy 3.16.
which Spirit is that which must open the Scriptures, and give men the true
understanding of them, ( Joh. 16.13.) and not the Priests confused and invented
meanings and senses, which proceed from the spirit of Error in them; who have
denied that they have the Infallible Spirit, or Inspiration in them from
Heaven, from which the Scripture was given; when as it is the Inspiration of
the Almighty that gives understanding, Job 32.8. So that they who have not
that, have not the understanding of the Scriptures; and such we cannot own to
be our Teachers, who being out of that Spirit which the holy men of God were
in, it is evident they know nothing but what they know naturally; and in these
things they corrupt themselves, Jude, v. 10.

XIII. Of the Gospel.
ALso the Priests have showed their Error and Ignorance about the Gospel, in
calling the four Books of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, the Gospel; when as the
Gospel is Everlasting, being the Power of God unto Salvation to every one that
believes, Romans 1.16. And the Gospel was preached to Abraham, before the four
Evangelists were, Gal. 3.8. And there is not to be another Gospel preached than
that which is the Power of God, which the Apostles preached; for he that
preaches another is to be accursed, Gal. 1.8.

XIV. Of the Foundation and only Rule.
ANd the Priests, in affirming the Scriptures to be the Foundation and only
Rule of Faith and Life, and the Word, etc. They affirm contrary to the
Scriptures themselves, and contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, who said, That
another Foundation can no man lay, than that which is laid, which is Christ
(who is the Foundation of Faith) 1 Cor. 3.11. though the Priests have preached
another; and though one while they profess the Scriptures to be their Rule, yet
another while they set their meanings above them, as to reconcile them, and act
contrary to them; and thus show their Confusion: but it is the Spirit of Truth
that leads into all Truth. And so the Saints had the Rule of Faith and Life
before the Scriptures were written, as had Abel, Enoch, Abraham, Moses, etc.
And the Gentiles who had the Law written in their hearts, who had not the
letter of it without, had a true Rule of Life in them, as many have who cannot
read the Scriptures; and whereunto the Saints had attained in the Spirit and
Life of Christ, they were to walk by the same Rule, Romans 2.15. Phil. 3.16. 2
Cor. 10.13, 14, 15. And the Word was in the beginning, and was in the hearts of
the holy men of God before they spoke forth the Words, or writ the Scriptures,
wherein are the words that God spoke, which are a true Declaration of those
things that were surely believed amongst the Saints: but the Word of God lives
for ever, and was before the words or writings of Scripture without were, Psalm.
119.11. Joh. 1.1. Luke 1.1. So that the Priests who have so much showed their
Ignorance about the Gospel, the Foundation, the Word, the only Rule, and yet
say, they are Ministers of the Gospel, and of the Word, we have sufficient
cause never to own them as our Teachers.

XV. Of Swearing.
ANd the Priests in pleading for Swearing, and teaching men that it is lawful
for them to swear, chiefly bringing Heb. 6.16. for it; and some of them telling
people that Swearing is a part of the Worship of God. The Priests herein have
showed themselves to transgress Christ's Doctrine, and teach others so to do,
and so they have not God, 2 John ver. 9. for Christ who is the end of the Law
for Righteousness, and the end of the Shadows under it, he said to his
Disciples, It has been said by them of old time, Thou shall not forswear thy
self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine Oaths (which Oaths were under the
Law, and in their time were commanded of God, and were not vain nor needless
Oaths, nor by the Creatures.) But in opposition to these Oaths, as ending them,
Christ said, But I say unto you, Swear not at all, neither by Heaven, nor by
Earth, etc. Mat. 5.33, 34. Now he that swears by Heaven, swears by the
Throne of God, and by him that sits thereon, Matthew. 23.22. So that, from
Christ's Command, we are now to swear by neither: And the Apostle James (as
confirming to the same Testimony) said, Above all things, my Brethren, swear
not, neither by Heaven, nor by Earth, nor by any other Oath; but let your yea
be yea, and your nay, nay, left you fall into condemnation, Jam. 5.12. And as
to that of Heb. 6.16. where it is said, For men verily Swear by the Greater, and
an Oath for confirmation, is to them an End of all Strife; which the the
Priests object for Swearing. In this they are very dark; for the Apostle does
but mention this, as a Practice which had relation to the Jews, who were under
the Law, and such as were in the Strife, but he gives no Command for Swearing,
neither does he vindicate it, any more than he does receiving of Tithes, in his
saying, here men that die receive Tithes, Heb. 7.8. which was but a mentioning
that as a practice which the Jews upheld, as was the other of Swearing; for he
witnessed the Commandment disanulled, by which Tithes were received, and the
Priesthood changed by which they were upheld, Heb. 7.12, 18. So that the bare
relation of a Practice is no command for it, nor vindication of it. And the
Oath which God swear to Abraham, wherein he makes known the Immutability of his
Counsel to the Heirs of Promise, is greater than man's swearing to end strife:
for where that Oath of God is received and fulfilled, the Blessing to the Seed
is manifested, and the Strife is ended, and the ground of it removed; and of
this Oath and Covenant, men's swearing to end strife without, was but a figure,
type, or shadow. And as to the Priests saying, that Swearing is a part of the
Worship of God: From this then it follows, that it is an easy thing for
Drunkards and Profane Persons to be in the Worship of God, if Swearing be a
part of it; for what case is it such cannot swear in, either by the Lord, or
otherwise? and then they might as well say it is part of the Worship of God to
transgress Christ's Doctrine, as say Swearing is part of his Worship; (Surely
this is a bad Worship which the Priests preach and set up) for Christ commanded
not to swear at all, and he is the End of all Strife, about which the Swearing
was, and the End of the Law, and of the Oaths under it for Righteousness; and
the Word of that Oath by which he was made a Priest, which was since the Law,
is the substance and end of all Oaths, Shadows and Ceremonies that were under
the Law: For the Jews under the Law confirmed their Testimony to end strife and
controversy, by Swearing, and bound themselves by an Oath (or sometimes by
Vows and Curses) to walk in the Law of the Lord, Nehem. 10.29. But the
Christians in the Gospel and New Covenant are bound in Conscience by the Power
and Law of Christ in them (which is a greater Bond than Swearing) to do to all
men as they would be done by, and to perform Equity and Righteousness (in that
Love which is the fulfilling of the Law) in the sight of God and man, without
swearing Oaths, which were but a Figure or Shadow of this Inward Bond or
Covenant, confirmed by the Oath of God to the Seed of Abraham, which the true
Christians are of, who witness the substance and end of all Oaths without, and
of the Iniquity and Strife which occasioned the Oaths.

XVI. Of Revelation and Inspiration from Heaven.
ANd the Priests affirm, That Revelation and Inspiration from Heaven is ceased,
and deny that any now may attain to Immediate Teaching, or hearing of God's
Voice from Heaven. Herein have they taught people Errors and Falsehoods, and
showed that they never knew God, nor are any of his Ministers: For no man
knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him, Matthew.
11.27. And the Righteousness of God was revealed from Faith to Faith in the
Gospel, which is the Power of God, which Paul preached, Romans 1.16, 17. So they
in saying, That Revelation and Inspiration is ceased, have preached another
Gospel than that which Paul preached, and therefore are to be accounted
accursed, Gal. 1.8. And all the Children of God are taught of Him, and so hear
his Voice, Isa. 54.13. Jer. 31.34. Heb. 8.11. So that the Priests who have
neither heard the Voice of God, nor received his Inspiration, nor the
Revelation of his Son, and yet say they are his Messengers, and Christ's
Ambassadors, they have showed their deceit and hypocrisy, and themselves to be
such as the Unbelievers, Joh. 5.37. who had neither heard the Voice of God at
any time, nor seen his Shape: And they that have not the Spirit of Christ, are
none of his. So they are none of Christ's Ambassadors, but Antichrists, and
therefore we deny them.

XVII. Of Sprinkling Infants.
ANd whereas the Priests do sprinkle Infants (and some of them have dipped
them, and used the sign of the Cross in doing it) and call that the Baptism
into the Visible Church, etc. Herein have they showed themselves ignorant of
the true Baptism, and have set up a false and Popish Baptism, which they have
neither Command, Precept, nor Example for in the Scriptures of Truth, either
from Christ, or any of his Ministers: For the Baptism of Water, which John (who
was a Prophet and a Forerunner of Christ) had a Command from Heaven to
administer, was to them that confessed their Sins; and this was to cease, as
being a Figure of the inward Washing and one Baptism of the Spirit, 1 Cor.
12.13. Ephesians. 4.1. 1 Pet. 3.21. for the Saints were all baptized by one Spirit,
into one Body, which was the Church, and did not call sprinkling (or baptizing)
Infants, the Baptism into the Church, as the Priests do; Neither do we read in
Scripture of Godfathers and Godmothers among the true Christians, to be the
Infants Sureties, and to promise that they should forsake the Devil and all his
Works. Thus we see the Error of the Priests, and how their Worship is in vain,
who teach for Doctrines the Traditions of men, Matthew. 15. And how thereby many
that have had the name of Christians, have been captivated and led in great
ignorance, and neither they nor their Teachers have forsaken the Devil, or all
his works, notwithstanding their pretended promising to do it, when they are in
Sin, which is the Devil's work; and contend for it, telling men, that none can
be clean or free from sin on this side the Grave: and thus they show their
Confusion and Error.

XVIII. Of Bread and Wine, which they call the Lords Supper.
ANd neither do we ever read in Scripture, That Christ's Ministers did give the
people of the world Bread and Wine in a Steeple-house at certain times of the
year, and call it a Sacrament, the Communion, and the Lord's Supper, and preach
it up so to continue in the Church, as the Priest do. Herein do the Priests
make an Idol of outward Bread and Wine, and keep people in shadows instead of
bringing them to the substance: For, 1. they have no proof in the Scripture to
call Bread and Wine a Sacrament, but from the Papists. 2. The true Communion
stands not in outward Bread and Wine, but in the Body and Blood of Christ,
which is the substance and end of outward Figures and Shadows. 3. The Bread and
Wine which the Priests give People in Steeple Houses at Easter, and Appointed
times (like the Papists) cannot be the Lord's Supper; for Drunkards, Covetous,
Proud and profane Persons, who are in their sins (and so eating at the Table
of Devils) can receive their pretended Sacrament of Bread and Wine, who cannot
eat at the Table of the Lord, 1 Cor. 10.21. nor come to his Supper, as to sup
with him, and he with them, as they do who open to him when he knocks, and
receive him, Revel. 3.20. 4ly. Neither is it proper to call a little Bread and
Wine (which people receive on the daytime) a Supper, it being more like a
Dinner; for in this the Priests are both out of the Form of Christ, and the
Saints Practice, and out of the Power; for it was in the Night in which Christ
was betrayed that he was at Supper with his Disciples, (not with the World)
and gave Them (not the World) the Bread and the Cup, to show forth his Death
till he come: And at his Supper he ate the Passover with them, according to
the Law, Matthew. 26. Luke 22. which the Priests do not so much as truly imitate:
but the Passover, and these outward things were but Figures, and to cease as
other Figures under the Law were, which Christ passed through in the days of
his flesh, and fulfilled them, and blotted out the handwriting of Ordinances,
and nailed it to his Cross. So that after Christ had suffered and fulfilled
the Figures [that related to that state under the Law] and did manifest his
Coming, and the Power of his Resurrection in the Saints, these Shadows and
Figures were not of force by a Law, though some of the Churches did use them
for a time by permission; But the Apostles labored to bring them from off
these Shadows and outward things, to the knowledge of the Mystery of Life
within; for, said the Apostle, If ye be dead with Christ from the Rudiments of
the World, why as though living in the World are ye subject to Ordinances, etc.
Touch not, taste not, handle not, which are all to perish with the using, after
the Commandments and Doctrines of men, Col. 2. Ephesians. 2.15. So Christ through
suffering made way for a further dispensation of the Mystery of Life, than was
in the Shadows or Figures; and they who were come into this Mystery, were come
to witness, that the Bread which they brake, was the Communion of the Body of
Christ; and the Cup which they drank was the Communion of the Blood of Christ,
1 Cor. 10.16. and Christ the living Bread is in the Saints, 2 Cor. 13.5. and we
are come to sup with him, and he with us, and so are come to his Table and his
Supper, which Drunkards, Covetous Worldlings and Earthworms [who can receive
the Priests Sacrament so called] cannot eat nor drink at; and by the knowledge
of the Mystery, which is CHRIST WITHIN, are we come to see beyond the Shadows
and Figures, and beyond the Traditions and Inventions of men, which the world
are doting about; And we may not turn back again, from the Substance into the
Shadows, nor into the Traditions of men, like the world, nor yet eat with them
in their Idol-Temples, (or Popish Mass-houses) contrary to the Apostle's
Doctrine, 1 Cor. 8.10. 2 Cor. 6.17.

XIX. Of the Church.
ANd the Priests in calling a Steeple-house (or Popish-Masse-house) a Church,
do err contrary to the Scriptures; for the Church is the Body of Christ, and
the Church is in God, built up of living stones, Ephesians. 1.22, 23. 1 Thessalonians. 1.1.
but so are not the Popish Masse-houses, which the Priests do falsely call
Churches.

XX. Of the Seal of the Covenant.
AS also, they do err in counting that they are the Church of Christ, from
their Infant Baptism (which is Popish) as imagining themselves thereby to be
baptized into the Church, and calling that the Seal of the Covenant; when as
the Saints were baptized by one Spirit into one Body, which was the Church, and
they were sealed with the Spirit of Promise unto the day of Redemption, Ephesians.
4.30. 1 Cor. 12.13.

XXI. Of Bishops and Presbyters.
ANd all that go under the names of Bishops, and Presbyters, and Elders, who
are out of the Spirit that the holy men of God were in, who gave forth the
Scriptures, and are ordained or instituted and set up by the wills of men, who
are neither truly called, ordained, nor qualified according to God's Will; They
have gotten the names, but are out of the true nature, which the Saints and
Elders in the true Church were in: for covetous, proud, lordly men and
Persecutors, who would lord it over God's Heritage, and over men's Consciences
and Faith, such are out of the life and state of the true Ministers, and so are
of Antichrist; for the true Elders and Bishops were such as were endued with
the Power and Gift of God, which brought them into the blameless Life, and to
show forth a good Example to others, and so made them apt to teach others; And
these Bishops were not given to Wine, nor strikers, nor greedy of filthy Lucre,
nor Brawlers, nor Covetous, nor lifted up with Pride, but patient, 2 Timothy 3.
And the Apostle Peter, who was a true Elder, and a Witness of the Sufferings of
Christ, and a partaker of the Glory that was to be revealed, he exhorted the
Elders to feed the Flock of God, taking the oversight thereof, not by
constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind, neither
as Lords over God's Heritage, but being Ensamples to the Flock; and such were
to receive a Crown of Glory that fades not away, 1 Pet. 5. and such were
instrumental in the hand of God to gain and convert others to the Truth: but
where we find Ministers of a contrary spirit, and in contrary practices, though
they go under the same names that the other had, we cannot own them: And
therefore these lordly, proud, envious, covetous and persecuting Ministers are
to be denied, whether they go under the names of Bishops, Elders, Pastors or
Teachers; for it is not the names that make men true Ministers, but it is the
gift of God, which brings into the true nature and life of Righteousness: yet
we read not in Scripture of Archbishops and Lord Bishops, that were set up in
the true Church, nor of Deans, Archdeacons, Prebends, Chapters, Curates, etc.
nor that the Ministers of Christ, as Peter, Paul, Timothy, Titus, or any others
of them did wear Surplices in their Worship; nor that they kept a company of
Singing-Boys or Queristers in the true Church, to sing in Surplices in a Popish
House, or to repeat an invented form one after another; but these things were
invented and set up in the night of Apostasy, when men were degenerated from
the Life and Worship of the true Christians, and fallen into Antichristianism
and Popery.

XXII. Of the Priests Ordination.
ANd when the Priests could not prove their Education and fitting to their
Ministry at Schools and Colleges by natural Learning to be according to the
Scriptures and practices of the true Ministers, then have they fled to that of
1 Timothy 4.14. [to prove their Ordination by the laying on of hands to be right]
where Paul said to Timothy, Neglect not the Gift that is in thee, which was
given thee by Prophecy, with the laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery (or
Company of Eldership) and this have the Presbyterian Priests brought to prove
themselves true Ministers; and yet these Priests have told us, That immediate
Teaching, Revelation and Prophesying is ceased; and so they have overthrown
themselves, and showed themselves to be neither truly called nor ordained;
neither are they fit to ordain others; and the Scriptures they bring for
themselves are against them: for Timothy and the Elders in the true Church were
truly qualified and made Ministers by the Gift of God, and the Revelation of
Christ in them; which Gift was given them by Prophecy, and that they were not
to neglect; so they did not say, that Prophesying, Revelation, and immediate
Inspiration were ceased, as the Priests do; but the true Elders, in the laying
on of Hands (which they did in the Power of God, and not in man's will)
approved of such for the Ministry, whom they knew were fitted for the work of
it by the Gift of God in them.

And Peter and John were Elders in the true Church, 1 Pet. 5.2. 2 John 1. 3 John 1. but they were not brought up at Schools and Colleges to their
Ministry; neither did they say, that Revelation and Prophesying was ceased,
like the Priests, but were Fishermen, who through following Christ and his
Revelation of Life and Power, came to be fishers of men, and true Ministers; so
that such as are out of their Doctrine, Life and Spirit, as the hireling
Priests are, who are set up and ordained by the wills of men as corrupt as
themselves, are neither fit to ordain others, nor to minister to others.

And such as do hate and persecute men for their Consciences, would compel and
force all to be of their Church, and to conform to their Worship, though it be
never so much contrary to their Consciences; and though they have counted them
Heretics, Deceivers, Seducers, and what not? yet if they could force them
outwardly to conform to their Worship, they should be received, and help to
make up their Church; and what a confused Church of Hypocrites that would be,
may be easily judged: but, I say, their lording it over men's Consciences, and
compelling them to their Worships, and persecuting men for their Religion, is
never the way to convince them, nor to gain them to God, what outward formality
soever they may force them to by an outward Power; for, it is the gentle, meek
and tender Spirit of the Lamb, that must appear in Ministers, and convince and
regain People to God, and into the love of his Truth, or else they are not fit
Instruments for God's work.

XXIII. Of the Common Prayer Book.
ANd we do not read in the Scripture of a Common Prayer Book that the Saints
ever had to direct them how to pray, and to sing; for they prayed with the
Spirit, and sung with the Spirit; but the Common Prayer Book was devised by men
since the Apostles days, much of which is agreeable to the Masse-Book, from
whence it had its derivation, though some of the Ceremonies of the Mass are
left out; yet after the Preface, near the beginning of the Common Prayer
(touching those Ceremonies that were reserved in their Church) it is said, that
those Ceremonies have been devised by men, etc. Now we being led by the Spirit
of God, and therein brought to worship him, we must not follow man's devices
and invented Ceremonies, for they are not truly called the Divine Service; but
the Service which is in the Spirit of God is divine, and not the following of
men's Devices.

And is it not evident, that they that set up the Common Prayer Book were
Popish, from their saying (in their Commination against sinners) That in the
Primitive Church there was a Godly Discipline, that at the beginning of Lent
such persons as were notorious sinners, were put to open Penance, and punished
in this world, that their souls might be saved, etc. Was not that Discipline
Popery, which there they called Godly? and which Discipline they much wished
might be restored again, instead whereof they pronounced several Curses.

XXIV. Of the Priests gross Ignorance about their Public Baptism.
ANd what Ignorance is it for Teachers (at their public Baptism) to say, That
God by the Baptism of his beloved Son did sanctify the flood Jordan, and all
other Waters, to the mystical washing away of Sin? when as many are sprinkled
or dipped when Infants, and washed with outward water, who are yet unwashed
from their sins; as Drunkards, Swearers, Liars, covetous and profane Persons.
And yet to say that Infants, by their Sureties, must faithfully promise
obediently to keep God's Commandments, and that they will forsake the Devil and
all his works, the vain pomp and glory of the world, with all the covetous
desires of the same, the carnal desires of the flesh; and that they will not
follow nor be led by them; and then for them, called Godfathers, to answer, as
in the Infants name, and say, I forsake them all, [ viz. the Devil and all his
works] when as the Infants are not capable of any such Promises, neither do
they that promise so for them, fulfill what they promise themselves. And after
they say, that the Children have promised to forsake the Devil and all his
works, etc. those called Godfathers and Godmothers, must see that the Infants
be taught (as soon as they can learn) what a solemn Vow, Promise and Profession
they have made, [what Confusion and Darkness is this?] And yet notwithstanding
all this promising to forsake the Devil and all his works, and after that, by
this Baptism (so called) they say they are regenerate and grafted into the Body
of Christ, and say they are made the Children of God, and Inheritors of the
Kingdom of Heaven; (notwithstanding all this) both Priests and People confess
that they have offended against the holy Laws, and followed the desires of
their own hearts, and that there is no health in them, and cry (as they do
often) Lord have mercy upon us, miserable offenders. And thus they confound
themselves, and break their Promises of forsaking the Devil and all his works,
and of obediently keeping God's Commandments, when as they daily break them,
and so are in the Devil's work, who is the Author of all unrighteousness; and
such Teachers, as in whom there is no health, are none of Christ's Ministers,
neither can we own such for our Teachers: for who are Ministers of Christ, have
his Spirit dwelling in them, and so have health in them. And how can such
absolve men from all their sins, (as they say in their Visitation of the Sick)
who themselves are miserable Sinners, and have no health in them?

XXV. Of the true Church and its Head.
MUch more of the Priests Ignorance, Errors and Superstitions, both in their
Doctrines and Practices might be showed, which I omit mentioning for the
present, here being so many Reasons as may satisfy the Reasonable, why we
cannot join with them in their Worships at their Steeple Houses, nor own them
in their Ministry: for the Lord has united us by his mighty Power, and
incorporated us into the true Body, which is the Church of CHRIST, whom he has
espoused and married unto himself, to be as a chaste wife unto the husband; and
Christ is the Head and Lawgiver to his Church; and therefore we cannot join
with the false Church, that is made up of such members as profess they be
married to Christ, and yet they know neither the true Baptism into the true
Church, nor the true Communion of the Body, which is the Church; nor have they
ever heard his Voice, as to be married to him; neither were they ever clothed
upon with the Wedding Garment, to wit, Christ's Righteousness, but are in their
own Righteousness, and the Traditions and Devices of men, which are but as
filthy Rags, which they have set up without, instead of the Life and Mystery of
Godliness within; and such are in Babylon, drinking of the Whores Cup, and
following the Beast, which has long born up the Whore, which has persecuted
(and drunk the Blood of) the Saints, and which is come in Remembrance before
the LORD, who is confounding Babylon: So who are espoused as a chaste Virgin to
Christ, and married to Him, and come to know Him their Head and Lawgiver, must
not commit Adultery with the Whore, nor drink of her Cup anymore, nor join with
the false Church; for Christ is the Head of his Church, even as the husband is
the head of the wife; and the wife is bound by the Law to her husband so long
as he lives; so that if while her husband lives she be married to another
man, she shall be called an Adulteress, Romans 7. Ephesians. 5.23. So that Christ
being the Head of his Church, as the husband is the head of the wife, his
Church is not to set up another Head than Christ over it; and so neither to own
the Pope, as Supreme Head of the Church, nor any man else, but CHRIST,
according to the Scriptures of Truth.

So blessed are they who own the LIGHT of CHRIST in their hearts, that they may
follow Him into the City of our God, where the Lord God and the Lamb may be
their Light and Teacher, that they may no more be carried away captive in
Mystery Babylon, the false Church and her whorish practices; neither be any
more deceived by her Sorceries, nor drink any longer of her Cup.

Written in Norwich Castle about the latter end of the second Month, 1661. G. W.

THE END.

