THE RARITIES OF RUSSIA WITH THE Interest of England In point of Trade with
that Country: Which occasioned the magnificent Entertainments of the RVSSIAN
AMBASSADORS;

1. By Queen Elizabeth, Anno 1589. 2. By King James, November 5. 1617. 3. By
King Charles the Second, 1662.
Which are here described:

By WILL. WHITE Merchant.

LONDON, Printed for the Author. 1662.

THE PARITIES OF RVSSIA and MVSGOVIA.
THe Commerce and correspondencie of humane nature subsists by this: Viz. that
each proper Country has a want which another Countries Commodity may supply;
and a supply which another Country may want: so that one part may not say to
the other, I have no need of thee: Fruitful Europe may not say to barren
America, I have no need of thee; nor rich America to poorer Asia, I have no
need of thee: the fertile South cannot say to the North, I have no need of
thee; nor the North to the South, I have no need of thee: that there should be
no Schism in the great body of the world, but that the several Parts of it
should have the same care one for another: And seeing mankind is but one
family, (for God has made of one blood all Nations of the earth, for to dwell
upon the face of the earth, and has determined the times before appointed, and
the place of their habitation) the World a great house, sundry Countries
several rooms, it is fit that we who are in the Parlour should know the
out-lodgings of this great house; and the world be acquainted with it self,
before it be dissolved from it self at the day of judgment. That part of the
world called Russia or Muscovia (which has thought it its Interest to court us
with an Ambassador civilly, whom we have thought our interest to entertain
honorably) has these peculiar Rarities and Commodities.

CHAP. I. Of the Soil and Climate.
RVssia or Muscovia, formerly called Sarmatia, called so from Busse, in that
Language to divide, because it was divided among eight Brethren and Sisters,
lies Northward to Lapland and the North Ocean, Eastward and Southward toward
Tartaria, Westward and South-Westward toward Lithuania, Livonia, and Poland,
having thirty Shires far more large, though thinner inhabited then England,
which are divided into four Jurisdictions, called Chelfirds, or four Ports:
This Country is in length four thousand five hundred sixty five miles, and in
breadth three thousand nine hundred and thirteen; a vast compass if it were
well peopled, that would hardly be well governed by him, or well endured by his
Neighbors: Indeed the soil being slight and sandy all over, and Northward very
barren, is much of it a Desartwood for wild Beasts, rather then an habitation
for Men; only the Emperor garrisons the borders, least an Enemy presuming upon
the solitude, might think to have a fair and clear footing for foreign Enemies
to fasten on this Country, and from thence easily to invade the neighboring
Dominions (a thin Meadow being quickly mowed:) And moreover the Cham Tartar
will neither himself plant Towns to dwell there, living a wild and vagrant
life, nor suffer the Ruff, who is far off, to people those Ports; though no
doubt so vast a Country would maintain its people, if the wildness thereof
were tamed with husbandry: but these people scorning that their ground should
be better civilized then themselves, never suffer it to be manured, being more
willing to provide their bread with the Sword then with the Plough: but for
seventeen hundred mile Northward, Westward, and Southward of Moscho, it is
fruitful and pleasant for Pasture, Corn, Wood, Water, etc. in great plenty:
this Country is like a piece of Cloth fine in the woof, and coarse in the
lists; fruitful in the body of it, and barren in the borders. For five months
together, viz. from November to April, the whole Country is covered with Snow
a yard or two deep; and with Frost a yard thick, so cold, that if you hold a
Pewter-dish in your hand, your fingers will freeze to it, and you must leave
your skin behind you at parting: If you throw water up into the air, it comes
down ice: if you breath, it will be so thick that it is ready to stifle you
with the cold: so that it is usual for poor men to fall down in the streets and
marshes; and the Beasts not enduring the weather in the Deserts, come in troops
upon the Cities, and make them Deserts too: Yet toward Summer the Country is
so fresh and flourishing, the Trees (which are for the most part Fern and Bent)
so sweet and beautiful; the Flowers so various; the Meadows so green; the Birds
(especially the Nightingale, which sings more loud and artificially there then
in other Countries) so merry, that you would think Paradise were started up
there on a sudden: The reason of which sudden Verdure is this, that the Snow
(which keeps it warm in the Winter, clothing it against the Frost) melting in
the Spring, does drench and soak the ground, that it is, as I told, of a
slight and sandy mould; and then the Sun shines so hotly upon that, that it
draws out the Herbs and Plants in that great plenty and variety as is at
once our wonder and our pleasure; the Country besides having the advantage of
Springs, Rivers, and Lakes, which are some sixty, some eighty, some an hundred
miles in length; and the Summer there is as much over-hot as the Winter is
overcold. Their Rivers are 1. Volghu, arising out of the root of an Alder-tree,
and in two hundred miles improving an English mile in breadth. 2. Neper, called
formerly Boristher, is that which divides the Country from Lithuania, and
falls into the Euxine Sea. The third is Don a Taxais (the ancient bounder of
Europe and Asia) which runs through the Cham Tartars Country into the great
Sea, the Lake called Maeotis, by which a man may go from Moske to
Constantinople. The fourth is Duina, some hundred miles long, which falls
Northward into the Bay of St. Nicholas, and has great Alabaster Rocks on the
banks toward the Seaside; and other Rivers, the least as big as the Thames in
bigness, and in length far bigger: The Pole at Moscho is 55. degrees, 10.
minutes.

CHAP. II. Of the Native Commodities.
1. THeir Fruits are Apples, Pears, Plums, Cherries, and Cidern like a
Muskmelon, but more sweet and pleasant, Cucumbers, Goords, Rasps, Strawberries,
and Hurtilberries, and many other Berries in Woods and Hedges.

2. Their Grain is Wheat, Rye, Barley, Oats, Pease, Buckway, Isnythu, a grain
like Rice, which they sell at three pence a bushelmost commonly, unless rather
by reason of the Nobilities monopoly then the Earths barrenness, there
happens a dearth, and then their Corn is twenty pence a bushel.

1. But the Commodities wherewith they enrich themselves, and pleasure other
Countries, is, first Furrs of all sorts, as Buck, Fox, Sables, Dun Fur,
Mortrones, Ermines, Miniver, Bever, Wulverin, Squirrel, whereof there is
transported out of the Country by the Merchants of Turkey and Christendom to
the value of seven hundred thousand Rubbels.

2. The second Commodity is Honey, whereof besides an exceeding great quantity
spent in their ordinary drinks, which is Mead of all sorts, and other uses, a
good quantity is carried out of the Country to the neighboring parts which
have need of it: God has not given all Commodities to one, to elate it with
pride, and none to other Countries, to deject them with pensiveness, but there
is some kind of equallity between the profits of Countries, to continue
Commerce and balance Trade in some proportion.

3. The third Commodity is Wax, whereof there has been transported a millions
worth abroad: this Wax is the cask, where Honey is the liquour, and being
yellow by Nature, is by Art made white and green; for sight the clearest, for
smell the sweetest, for touch the cleanliest; useful in Law to seal
Instruments; in Physic to mollify Sinews, ripen and dissolve Ulcers; the
ground of all Searcloaths, called so from Cera Wax: Here are Lakes of Honey
found in hollow trees; and Combs eight foot long: the Heaths have the worst
Honey, and the Champion the best: the finer the Wheat and the Wool, the poorer
the Honey: the best Honey is lowest in the vessel: The best Oil is at top, the
best Wine in the middle, and the best Honey is in the bottom: It opneeth
Obstructions, clears the Breasts of those humors that fall down from the
Head, looseneth the Belly, and has other good qualities not to be reckoned in
a Winters day.

4. The fourth Commodity is Cow-hides; Adam's first shute was of leaves, his
second of leather. It is a common observation, that when Wheat is dear Leather
is cheap; and when Leather is dear, Wheat is cheap: their Losh or Buffehide is
large and fair; their Bull or Cow-hide (for they have no Oxen nor Weathers) is
small; there has been transported by Merchants an hundred thousand Hides.

5. The fifth is their Mead, a drink made of Water, Honey, and other
Ingredients most wholesome for Man's body: Pollio being an hundred years old,
and asked by Augustus Caesar by what means especially he had so long preserved
his vigor both of mind and body, answered, Intus mulso, foris Oleo, By taking
Metheglin inward, and Oil outward.

6. The sixth Commodity is Tallow, whereof they transport a great weight; their
pasturage being so good, their fasts so many, and their use of Tallow so
little; there has been shipped of this commodity two millions worth to
foreign parts.

7. As their Beasts fat yields them the sixth, so their Fish the seventh
Commodity; viz. Train-oyl, which they draw out of the Seale-fish, the Sturgeon,
the Sterledey, the Sevengu, etc. which they take thus; before Winter they leave
their Boats near the Bay of St. Nicholas, and at Spring they come and find the
fish haunt and sholes, and so environ them and kill them by force, giving
warning to all the Companies by firing a Beacon when they have discovered a
haunt.

8. Their eighth Commodity is Sturgeon and other Seafish, caught in those
Northern Seas in abundance: the little head and Swines back is the sign that
these fish are in season.

9 The ninth Commodity is Flax and Hemp, which has amounted to 800000.
yearly, this is sold for cordage, so necessary for us, that it is a common
Proverb when Hemp is spun, then England is done; when all that necessary
Commodity is employed so that there is no more left for Sails and Cordages,
England (whose strength consists in Shipping) would be reduced to a woeful
condition; and I wonder there is not more Hemp sowed among us since our Land
affords so much strong and deep ground proper for the same; here is excellent
Flax which well husbanded would find Linen for the Rich, and living for the
Poor.

10 Their tenth Commodity is Salt, their best Salt is a Stararouse in very
great quantity, where they have great store of Salt-wells about 200 miles from
the Sea; at Astracan Salt is made naturally by the Sea water casting it up in
heaps, and so it is dug down, and carried away by the Merchants; this is
most essential to man's livelihood, without which neither Sacrifice was pleasing
to God, nor meat savory to man, it is placed on the Board with bread, to show
that they are equally necessary to man's sustinance; and it is observed that,

1 Some Countries have Salt without flesh within many miles, as in the South
part of Africa;

2 Some have plenty of Flesh but no Salt to make use thereof, as in many parts
of Tartary;

3 Some have Flesh and Salt, but the Flesh utterly incapable of seasoning as at
Nombre de Dios;

4 Some have Flesh and Salt but the Salt so dear that common people cannot
compass it as in France;

5 Some have Flesh, caple of Salt, and Salt at an easy rate as they in Muscovy
and we in England, Foelices bona si sua norint. --

10. The tenth Commodity is Tar which they make out of their Fur Trees, in
the Country of Duyna and Smolexsho, whereof much is sent abroad.

11. The leventh Commodity is Oak, when the Spies were sent into the Land of
Canaan among other instructions given them, they had order to make enquiry
whether there was Wood therein or not, this Country affords abundance of
Wood, excellent for Shipping and other uses.

12 The twelfth Commodity is Barley white large plumpe and full of Flower, it
is (though not so toothsome) yet as wholesome as Wheat it self, and was all
the staff of Bread which Christ's Body leaned upon all his life, eating to
attest his Humanity, Barley loaves to evince his humility.

13 The next Commodity is Diamonds in blackness and hardness for short of the
Indian, yet set with a good foil (advantaged hypocrisy passes often for
sincerity) may at the first sight deceive no unskilful lapidary, as their
luster is less then Orient Diamonds, so herein they exceed them that nature
has made both their face and their dress by whom they are pointed and
polished.

14 Amber-greese so precious a Commodity as is fixed to no place in the World,
as too great a treasure for any one Country to engrosse, and therefore it is
only fluctuating and casually found by small parcells, sometimes in one place,
sometimes in another, yet much of it is found upon the Coasts of Muscovy; it is
by some thought to be the sperme of a Fish; by others the royling of sea water;
by others a gum growing on the sea shore, however it is very refreshing for
the spirits, and Sovereign for the strengthening of the Head, besides the most
fragrant scent, for stronger in consort, when compounded with other things,
then when singly it self.

15 The fifteenth Commodity is Metal which of all sorts is found with much ado
in these parts especially Iron and it is elder brother steel extracted from the
same Oar, differing from it not in kind but in degree of purity as being the
first running thereof, it is more hard and brittle then the Metalls of other
Countries.

16 Fish tooth called Ribazuba, the powder whereof is good against poison,
which makes Beads Knives, and swords, Hafts for noble Men and Gentlemen, two
foot in length, and weigh eleven or twelve pound a piece.

17 Near Dudia is a soft Rock called Slude which cut to thin pieces serves
instead of Glass and Horn and gives a clearer light,

18 They have Fallow Deer, Roe Bucks great store their Staggs are stately
Creatures, jealous and revengefull, insomuch that a Stagge unable for the
present to master another, who had taken his Hind from him, waited his
opportunity, till his enemy had weakened himself with his wantonness and then
killed him; their Flesh must needs be good whose very Horns are accounted
Cordial, besides there is a concave in the neck of a green headed slagge, when
above his first crosting wherein are many worms some two inches in length,
very useful in Physic and therefore laid up by many discreet persons.

19. There Beasts of strange kind are the Lash, the Ollen, the wild Horse, the
Bear, the Wolvering or Wood Dog, the Lyserne, the Beaver, the Siabt, the
Martron, the black and dun Fox, the white Bear toward the seacoast of
Pechora, the Gurn-state, the Miniver, their Hores and Squirells which are of
the usual color in summer, but the one turns white, and the other Gray in
Winter, some Heathen have causlesly complained of nature as a step mother to
Mankind, because other creatures come into the World clothed with Furs and
Feathers whilst man is exposed naked to the world, I say a causeless charge
because what the Beasts have by nature we wear by art, the Furre they wore when
alive, we wear when they are dead.

20 For Birds they have diverse of the principal kind, as Hawks, Eagles, the
Ger-faulcon the slight Faulcon, the Goshawke, the Tasset, the spar-Hawke the
storke, the Crane, the Teddor, the Pheasant and Patridge, and the great Owl;
Muscovy may be called the Aviary of the World, where the wild Foul are
remarkable for, 1 Plenty, so that some ten thousand small Birds have been
caught at a draught; 2 Variety no man being able to give them their proper
names, except one should get Adames Nomenclator of Creatures; 3 Delsciousnesse,
wild Foul being more dainty and digestable then tame of the same kind as
spending their grossy humors, with their activity and constant motion in flying,

21 They have all fresh water Fish, as Pikes, the fresh water Wolves, and
therefore an old pond-Pike is a dish of more state then profit to the Owners;
seeing a Pikes belly is a little Fish Pond, where lesser of all sorts have been
contained, although tyrants are short lived, yet Pikes live six score years,
this Fish they say cheweth the Cud, is fine and wholesome, and the less the
sweet carps which were brought thence to England in King Hen. the 8th. time;
Trouts, pleasant and wholesome Fish as whose feeding is pure and cleanly in the
swiftest streams and on the hardest gravel, they are in their Perfection in
May, and yearly decline with the Buck, Eeles which loves not the Russe as well
he loves them, so true is the Italian Proverb give Eeles without Wine to your
exemies Pilchards, plenty whereof are taken in these parts, persecuted to the
shore by their enemies the sunny and Hawke, till in pursuance of their revenge
they all become a prey to the Fisherman, their numbers are incredible,
employing a number of poor people, in pulling, gutting, splitting powdering and
drying them, and then with Oil and a Lemon, they are meat for greatest Noble
man amongst them, Tenches Fish that love ponds better then Rivers, and Pits
better then either; it is pleasant in Tash and is called by some the Physician
or surgeon of Fish, it cures the Pike, and therefore the Pike they say spares
it; and other Fish, as the Bellonga, the sturgeon, the severign, and sterledy
out of the rows of which four Fish they make great store of caveare, they have
White and Red sammon, a dainty and wholesome Fish, and a double riddle in
nature.

First for its invisible feeding, no man alive having found any measure in the
maw thereof: secondly for its strange leaping and shooring it self out of the
water an Incredible height and Length: and they say it increases from a spawn
to a full grown fish, within the compass of a year: plenty of these in their
ports though not in such abundance as in Scotland, where servants they say
Indent with their masters, not to be fed therewith above thrice a week -- The
Herring, a fish though Contemptible in its self, Considerable in its company,
swiming in such sholes that what the Whale has in bigness the Herring has in
Number: yea red Herrings which in England are eated for sauce, to quicken the
appetite, serve in these ports for food to satisfy hunger.

The last Commodity is Fustian Kersy and other kind of Stuffes made chiefly in
those Ports and thence brought hither.

CHAP. III. There Religion.
AS for their religion for which we ought to entertain them: Its not depraved
by superstition, Idolatry, and usurpation of the Church of Rome: but according
the poorer way of the Greek Church, they own the scriptures and the 4 first
counsels together with to the purer ways of the primitive times: they are
governed by one Patrion of Chio, and works, by 4 Arch Bishops, by threescore
Bishops with there assistants, there Clergy are very ignorant and unwilling to
take any pains to teach the people, but they read a Lyturgy, and administer
the sacraments: there Lyturgy begins with these words, Bless O heavenly
Pastor, meaning Christ, In the name of the Father, etc. Lord have mercy upon
us, etc, then in Chancel, says the Lords Prayer, and a donology to the
trinity: then the Psalms for the day, then they read Chapters: the
Commandments, and Athanasies his Creed; and then they pray: there children are
Baptized within 8 days after they are born: the Sacrament of the Lordssupper is
administered but once a year a little before Easter, very solemnly all going to
it with confession of sins: the bread is put in the wine and so administered:
there was one endeavor to unite them to the Church of Rome in the year 1588.
but it failed because of the many Corruptions in doctrine and discipline which
they found in that Church. And at the same time, and ever since they have
endeavored to make leagues offensive and defensive. With all Christian Princes
that they might be able to grapple with the great enemy of the faith, the
Turk, to the advancement of Religion, the propagation of the Gospel, and the
conversion of the world: if any object that Religion is not to be beaten into
turn with the Dint of sword, yet it may be Lawful to open the the way force,
for instruction, catechizing, and such other gentle by means to follow after:
however if we do not offend the Infidel, we may defend our selves and a
preventive war, grounded upon a just fear of Invasion is Lawful. Its best being
before hand with an enemy, Least the medicine come too Late for the malady: In
such dangers to play an aftergame is rather a shift then a policy, especially
seeing war is a tragedy, that always destroys the Stage whereon it is
acted: It is the most advised way, not to wait for the enemy, but to seek him
out in his own Country.

They own the Scriptures in their own Language, they leand too much on the
authority of the Church: they hold a justification by faith, working by love:
they think a man cannot be assured of his salvation un^ill he dye, they make
some difference of meats and drinks: they hold a necessity of Baptizme as
without which no salvation: the allow priests marriages: they own 3 Sacraments,
the one of Baptizme, the other of the Lords Supper, the third of extreme
unction: they honor the English way of profession: in so much as one of them
said to a servant of Mr. Fletchers, who writ the history of Russia: that God
had given to England light to day, and might give it to morrow if he please to
them: for Marriage: The persons to be married are not to see one another until
they are married: There friends must woe for them: and when they have agreed of
a dowry, they are married in the Church after the manner of other Churches: but
the bride and the bridegroom are to be very modest, a great while after the
marriage: and the woman is to have so much dowry as she has children: In a
word they agree with us in the most weighty points of Religion: whereupon the
Papist condemn them for Haereticks and Castawayes, and killing more then a
third of all Christians, (as Cain did a quarter of mankind with a blow) with
this their uncharitable Censure: but we must not with Rash judging throw all
into the pit of hell, whom we see walking near the brink thereof.

CHAP. IV. The Borderers of Russia, with whom they have most to do in War and
Peace.
THat we may know our Interest in a good Correspondence with Russia; we are to
understand who are the People that the Russia has most to do with in War
and Peace; and so we may know what use we may make of them in our Dealing with
Foreign Nations; In Asia they have to do with the Tartar, In Europe with the
Polonian, Swede, Hungarian, and Dane, where these Russia may do us many
considerable services; being ready (as occasion serves) to use their Interest
of Power over, or friendship with these Nations to our advantage: Queen
Elizabeth made use of the Muscovite to divirt the Emperor from assisting the
Spaniard, in the Year, 1588.

CHAP. V. Their warlike Furniture.
FOr the Encouragement of the soldiery, every Soldier in Russia is a
Gentleman, and none gentlemen but the soldiers: and when any is of years he
presents himself to the great constable who admits him to the service, and
allows as much Land as his father had: for there is Land to maintain the
Army, and all that are not of the Army must use some vulger ways to live for
they are allowed no Land: the Emperor has 15000. Horsemen for standing
pensioners: and he has 110. Noblemen who are to find amongst them 65000.
horsemen with all necessaries meet for the war after the Russia manner: and
these 65000 Horsemen are to march to the borders of the Chrim Tarter: whether
there be wars with the Tartars or no, and whereas it might be thought
dangerous for the Noblemen to have so good forces under there Commands the
Emperor prevents all Inconveniences, 1. By changing their noblemen as he
thinks good. 2. By making them live and depend upon him, they being such as
have but a small Estate of their own. 3. And they are seldom soldiers
themselves, there charge being only to see the Army Paid. If there be need of
any greater number, he entertaines those men that are out of pay, and given
charge to his Noblemen, that hold Lands of him to bring into the field every
man a propoportionable of his servants and such as till his hand. with their
furniture according to the just number he intends to make, when the service
being done presently Lay in their weapons, and return to there servile
occupations again, of footmen he has 12000. whereof 5000 guard Mosco: and two
thousand attend at Court: the rest he disposes of in his Garrisons, until he
has occasion for them in the field: And receive for Sallery 6. pound a year
apeice, besides twelve measures of Rye, and Oales; They employ some 12000.
strangers, Poland, Dutch, Scotch, etc. upon the borders of Tartary, and some
Mercenary Tartars upon the borders of Poland and Sweden, thinks it policy so
to use their service upon Contrary borders; the General is usually a nobleman
of great extraction, but of mean parts: For in this point, they are very wary
that nobility and power meet not both in one, especially if they see wisdom
withal or aptness for policy to make up the defect In the General, there is
some other joined with him as Leivtennant general of far less nobility, but
of far more valor and experience then he in Marshall affairs: who orders
all things that the other Countenanceth. And he is assisted by 4 Marshals of
the field, and these fear have two under each of them, that twice a week at
least muster and train their several wings or bands, and give justice for all
faults and disorders Committed, in the Camp: They have a great Master of the
Ordinance and a Scout-Master General who has a 1000 men about him to spy
abroad; all these Officers must attend the General every day, to put him in
mind of those things that may concern their offices.

Upon any War the 4 Lords of the Chetsfinds sends their summons to be
Proclaimed in the chief Towns of the Empire to all Gentlemen's Sons to meet at
the boders at such a place, and at such a time to be there Enrolled by certain
Officers appointed by the high Constable.

If any man makes default, and fail at the day he is punished very severely;
When the Soudiers are assembled they are divided into Bands and Companies, and
those Companies are reduced into 4 legions under the four great Field Marshalls
who are all under him, who has a Commission with instructions for the present
service, they are armed but slightly with Bow and Arrow and a sword, and here
and there one with a Coat of Male; the chief Commanders go very richly with
their Saddles of cloth of Gold, their Bridles fair bossed and tasseled with
Gold and Silk Fringe, bestuded with Pearl and precious stones themselves in
very fair Armor of shining steel yet covered commonly with cloth of gold, and
edged round with Ermin Furre, with a steel Helmet upon their heads of great
price, these swords, Bows, and arrows by there sides, their Spears in their
hands, with other Helmets, and the Horsemens Septer carried before them; the
footman has nothing but his piece in his hand, his striking hatched at his
back, and his Sword by his side; every man is to provide for himself
sufficient for 4 months, and if need be to give order for more to be brought
to him from his Tenant that tilleth his ground to the Camp, they are prepared
to be Soldiers before hand their provision is dried bread and Bacon with other
dried flesh or fish after the Duch fashion: The Russin is not so hard to
perform an enterprise as he is to endure hardship, courage in execution fails
him partly because of his servile condition which will not suffer any courage
to grow in him, and partly for lack of due honor and regard, which he has no
great hope of what soever service or execution he does; their marching or
leading is without order, only they keep in 4 legions, and so thrust onward in
a hurry, tuhrsting rather to their number then their order, when they give any
charge they make a great hollow and noise with Drums and Trumpets, and Swords
brandished over their Heads, their Footmen (because commonly they want order in
leading) are usually placed in some ambush or place of advantage, where they
may most annoy the enemy with least hurt to themselves; they have Castles of
boards of 3, 4, 5, 6, or. 7 mile length to defend them on both sides from
Arrows, in which they stand and have room enough to charge and discharge
their pieces and to use their other Weapons; it is close at both ends, and made
with Loop-holes on either side, to lay out the nose of their piece or to push
forth any other Weapon, it is taken in pieces and laid on Carts, sparred
together, and drawn by Horses that are not seen, be covered with these carriage
as with a pant-house, when it is brought to the place where it is to be used
which is chosen out by the walking general, it is planted as much as the
present use requires, sometimes two miles long sometimes more, which is soon
done without the help of any Carpenter, because the Timber is so framed to
claspe together one piece within another, as is easily understood by those that
know the manner of the Russia building, because of their disorder, the Russia
are observed better at defending a Town or castle, then at an open War in an
open Field; it is thought there is no Prince in Christendom has better
provision there the Russia Emper our; as may partly appear by the Artillery at
Mosco, where are of all sorts of great Ordinances, all Brass pieces very fair,
to an exceeding great number; a piece of gold stamped with St. George hanging
on the Sleeves is the reward of the greatest service; Colonies are filled with
garrisons, the Inhabitants being permitted upon their good behavior to till
the Land for the use of his garrisons which are maintained at the charge of
those Inhabitants.

The Emperor of Russia is of an Hungarian extraction upon this token; The Russe
Government.
That the Emperor once committing some Bullion to an English Goldsmith, said
to him, look to thy weights, For my Russes are all thieves; at which the
Englishman smiling, the Emperor asked him what he smiled at, says he, when you
said the Russe were all thieves, you forgot that you were a Russe; nay, says
he, you are deceaved, I am no Russe but a German: He was Duke a great while,
till about an hundred years ago he took upon him the Title of Emperor, about
which time there was like to be great alteration in the Russe Estate because of
a failure, in the time the Emperor being barren: And his brother like to be
made away, his nurse who tasted his meat being poisoned, His Inauguration.
this Emperor being inaugurated by the Patriarch and Clergy with the applause
of the Nobility, Gentry and people, and prayed for him solemnly; thus,
Preserve, O Lord, under thy holy protection, keep him that he may do good and
holy things; Let Justice shine forth in his days, that we may live quietly
without strife and malice, this in a soft voice to which he adds a loud, Thou
art the King of the whole world, and the Savior of our souls, to thee the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost be all praise for ever and ever; then he puts on
the Robe and the Cap in the Name of the Father, etc. then the Deacon adds many
years to the Noble Juan, Good, Honorable, beloved of God, Duke of etc. whereto
the other Priest answers, many years, many years to etc. then they thundered
out many years to the Noble Juan, Good, Honorable, beloved of God, etc. He
has a very long Title at his Coronation of half a sheet, which all Ambassadors
must repeat; on a good token that when Master Flecher in Queen Eliz. time had
audience, he used but two or three Titles, whereupon the Chancellor never left
chasing till he gave his Interpreter order to repeat the rest.

All power is in the Emperor and his Counsel, Power.
and a few of the Bishops to deceive the people who think all is well that
goes through the Bishops hands, who prescribe to the Parliament what they
shall do; all places are bestowed by the Emperor himself or his chief Favorite
and relation during his pleasure only, he executes a man without judgment or
trial: all pardons are from the Emperor, wherein the Empress usually appears
very much.

The Parliament confists of twenty Noble men, The Parliament.
and as many Bishops with the Emperor himself; no body representing the people
who are looked upon as servants and slaves, the Clergy men being asked their
opinion say; The Emperor and his Counsel are of great wisdom, and they are not
able to advise them: they can only pray for them according to their duty and
calling; then one of them asks the Emperors mind; the Secretary tells them,
that the Emperor desires them to speak their minds freely; then without any
pause they consent, and then the matter agreed on is drawn up by the
Secreiaries to Proclamation to be published throughout the Empire.

The Nobility hold all they have from the Emperor, Policy.
and they are kept under by emulation one of the other which the Emperor
cunningly improveth to the weakening of the Nobles, who have liberty to destroy
and undo one another upon private quarrels, that they may not be able to cope
with the Emperor; the Emperor pretends to wafile some select men in the book of
his Favorites which he shows to others, that they may envy and undermine them;
which begets a mortal hatred betwixt them to pleasure the Emperor: he moreover
removes them from Country to Country, that they may never gain any love,
authority, or popularitie, and their Estates are not above 2000 l. a year.
There are four Provinces, and four Officers belonging to them, who attend the
Emperor with all the business of those Provinces, and communicate to the
Provinces by their under Officers the Emperors pleasure concerning them, these
Governors hear, determine, and execute all in the Provinces by Deputies, unless
there happen a hard case which they refer to the Emperor and his Council; none
governs where he is known, or where his Estate is.

These under Officers are permitted to rack the people, because they must give
their account at the end of their Office, when all that they have taken returus
to the Emperors Coffers; few of them but come to the whip when they have done,
under pretense of being punished.

There eight special persons of worth and valor placed in the four bordering
Towns, who have large Commissions, because sometimes their occasions are such
by the sudden Invasion of an Enemy, that they have not time for direction: the
City of Musko it self is governed by the King and Council, only for buildings,
impositions, keeping the streets clean, there are some inferior Gentlemen
appointed with the Aldermen and Constables; the Noble men are newly raised, and
the people so cowed, that there is no likelishood of alteration; besides the
Emperor keeps the soldiery to himself by rendering them odious to the people,
with whom therefore they never can Close against him; to satisfy the humors of
some Noble men, he makes them Connsellors more for state then any use he makes
of them; having some privadoes whom he consulteth day by day about the
important affairs of the Kingdom; others coming sometimes who are of greater
birth then wisdom, taken in as may seem for that end, rather to furnish the
place with their honors and presence then with their advice or Council. Of the
Council are thirty one besides two Lord Secretaries: the matters they debate
are such as are brought to them by the Lords of the Provinces from their
several quarters, and the chief Officers of every Office of Record, who may
come into the Councel-Chamber, and inform them as occasion incident to his
Office does require; besides many private causes by way of supplication in
great numbers are considered by them; they sit about seven a clock in the
morning, Mundays, Wednesdaies and Fridaies.

Revenue.
The rents are gathered by the Steward of thirty six Towns with the Crown lands
and hundreds belonging to them; these rents are paid partly in money, partly in
grain, partly in provision of flesh, Fish, and Foul, the surplus whereof is
sold by the Steward to the best hand, and runs into the Emperors Treasury,
which amounts to, 200000 l. a year, which pays wages and Salones, besides this
there are sour Officers over the Taxes, gathering first Tagla or an imposition
on every measure of grain. 2. The Podal imposed on every hundred in the Realm,
both which amount to 400000 l. a year, besides these are Officers for the
Custom which amounts to 340000 Rubbles, or makes a yea 160000 Rubbles, being
gathered by the first Table of Customers 90000 to the second, and 70000 to the
third, besides this there is a Mullit arising from every Process in the Courts
of Justice, which amounts to 30000 Rubbels; the Remainder of Land Rents after
the Army is paid amounts to 200000 l. yearly, so that there comes a million of
money clear, all charges paid to the Treasury in the Castle of Musko, where the
Emperors Money, Plate, Jewels, Scepter, and bags sealed with the Emperors seal;
besides forces and other commodities, with confiscation, that amounts to 500000
l. more, which are so great that a late Emperor would say, That people were
like his Beard, the oftener shaven the thicker it grew, or like sheep that must
be shorn once a year at least, to keep them from being overladen with their
wool.

Policy to improve the Revenue.
1. These Emperors wink at the Officers exaction, until their time is expired
that they may have it; they suck the people, and the Emperor sucks them, and
seems to make them a public example (saying, These good people are they that
would eat you like bread) that they might confiscate their goods, which a late
Emperor did, calling an executioner, and bidding him kill a goose, and he cut
off the man's legs first, then his arms, then his head, and there (said the
Emperor) is a goose ready dressed.

2. They make a show of want, as this Emperors Father did, who being left very
rich, coined his plate and sold it, that he might seem to want money, whereupon
presently out comes a Tax.

3. They encourage the subject to bestow upon Monaste^ies all their wealth
which they take upon occasion without any noise: this I was told, that Juan
Vasilnwick, resigned his Kingdom to one, whom he adviled to recall all Charters
given to Monasteries, which done he assumed the Government as if he disliked
this, and was content to renew their Charters, reserving to himself as much of
their Lands as himself thought good, whereby he got 30 millions of money.

4. They send Messengers to engage the Commodities of the Provinces, buying
them at small Rates, and selling them at what they list. And so for foreign
Commodities as I remember in the year 1645, when I traded in Baltic Sea: and
they make a Monopoly of the Commodities he receives for Rent or Custom, and to
enhance the price o^ them: And none must sell their Commodities till the
Emperors be all sold.

5. He sets up Drinking-hours, when men spend all their Estates, from which
none may be called away, lest they hinder the Emperors Revenue, where they lay
up some twenty pound a man, and vow not to brave the Pot, until they have spent
all, as they say, for the honor of the Emperor,

6. A Nobleman feigns himself robbed, and the City is fined 10000 Rubbles for
its misgovernment.

7. They send for what cannot be had, as for a peck of Flies to Musco, and then
fine the Inhabitants because they do not what cannot be done.

8. One Emperor fined his Noblemen 30000 Rubbles because he missed his hour one
morning. Their exactions are so great, that I have seen so metimes when they
have laid open their Commodities for a liking, to look still behind and about
them, whereof asking the cause, I found it to be this, That they doubted some
of the Emperors Officers might be in company, and so a train were laid upon
them to prey upon their commodities: Therefore they drink and idle away the
time (though able enough to endure labor) caring for no more then from hand to
mouth. Yet there are some Merchants very rich there, dwelling far from Court,
and worth 300000 Rubbles a piece, as I knew their brethren of late. The people
are ignorant, that they may be more fit to be Slaves: Therefore in the year
1643 they removed all strangers to the borders, least they should teach the
people better Manners, Quallities, and more Wit. And none is to aspire higher
then his Fathers Trade.

9. Justice.
If any one is injured, he makes his supplication either to the Court of
Aldermen, or the other two Courts, and thence has a Writ for the other, who
appears and pleads his own Cause, and if Evidence cast him either by Witnesses,
or by the Plaintiffs kissing the Cross upon the matter, he is sent to the
Sergeant, who irons him and cudgels him on the shins from Eight till Eleven
every day, till he pays the money. Their Bills are these: I William White owe
Juan Vasilevel Godonor 100. Rubbels of going money of Musko without Interest,
until the Council Sunday: and if not paid then, I must pay five for six: upon
this are witnesses Gab. Jacovile sin, An. 1662. This Bill have I written
William White with my name to it. In criminal affairs they examine by tortures.
and refer the Party to King and Council.

10. They rise about four in the morning, and worship, Their private behavior.
and then to business, and then to their wives, and then to Dinner, where their
food is rather plentiful then curious, with which they drink plentifully, after
which they sleep two hours daily, which would kill them, but that they sweat it
out in hot Baths: out of which they can go to the cold air, yea and water too
in the winter time. They allow their women money for paint: They wear Caps
close to their heads, and are shaven, unless they be in displeasure with the
Emperor when they let their hair grow: Over the Cap he wears a wide Cap of
black Furre, with a long Bonnet within it. About their necks, Colors beset
with Pearls and precious stones. Next over his shirt, (which is curiously
wrought, because he stripeth himself in the Summer time) is a light garment of
Silk made down to the knees, buttoned before, and then a close Coat buttoned,
and girt with a Persian Girdle, whereat he hangs his knives and spoons: over
which he wears a loose Garment of rich silk, furred and faced about with gold
lace: Their noice is infinite, who cry, Give me and kill me.

Russian Embassy ^ent. in (...) Eliz: ti^^^^
The Russe makes small regard of his word, neither believes what another
speaks, nor speaks any thing worthy to be believed: however the English have
upon the account of Trade in the Baltic Sea, and interest in the Northren
parts, made very much of their Ambassadors here three times.

11. I. In Queen Elizabeth's time, Anno 1589. By K. James
who sent the Master of the Ceremoney with the Lord Treasurer, the Lord
Chamberlain with a great Court-train to meet him at the Tower, from whence he
was conducted by the Aldermen in Scarlet, with the several Companies in chains
through the City to Durham-house, where they were entertained at the Queens
charge, until they were conducted by the Earl of Essexes andience, which they
did in all humble manner, as they said to the second maid in the world, --

II. In King James time, November. 5. 1617. a Russian Ambassador with his
Assistant the Counselor of Muscovy, was received at Tower-Wharf by the Lord
Cempton, having been first received at Graves end by Mr. Richard Smith chief of
the Muscovy Campany: They were welcomed at Landing with the Ordnances of the
Tower and Ships, and were met on Tower Hill by the Aldermen in Scarlet, and
other Citizens in velvet Coats and Chains of gold, and thence conducted to his
house in Bishopgate-street, whence they presented the King and Queen with 4000
l. sterling in gifts.

Now he has been entertained in like manner attended by 12000 men in arms, K.
C. 2d.
and has had audience, and presented the King with Cordage, Furs, Beasts and
Birds, worth 1500 l. intending to treat with his Majesty about the Northren
Affairs of Trade, Peace and War.

His Majesty sent the Master of the Ceremonies, with many Coaches more of the
Nobility to conduct him to the City, whence he was met by the Aldermen and
Citizens on horseback with Trumpets: the City all along being lined with 25000
Trained-band and Auxilliaries: and he was conducted to York-house, whence he
was conducted to Audience, December. 1. 1662. which he made in very humble manner,
stooping and knocking his forehead against the ground before the King, who sat
in great State, environed with the Nobility, as the Sun with stars: the Glory
of his friends, the envy of his foes, and the wonder of the world.

FINIS.

