THE Law and Light WITHIN, The most sure Rule or Light, which shows the right
use and end of the Scripture, MANIFESTED In opposition to several false
Principles inserted in a Book Entitled Scripture Light the most sure Light, by
William Bridge, the Great Pastor and Reverend Father, so accounted, of the
Church at Yarmouth in NORFOLK.
Confuted by George Whitehead.

HAving lately viewed part of William Bridge his Book aforesaid, who has long
been esteemed an Eminent Teacher among many of the Professors, and them called
Independents in England, and having in his Book found many false principles and
sinful Doctrines, contrary to the Scriptures of Truth, it was upon me in the
fear of the Lord to lay open some of his Principles, that the Ignorant may be
instructed, and the Professors of Yarmouth and els-where may not trust in
delusion nor in deluders, but cease from man whose breath is in his nostrils,
and no longer esteem of any above what they are, but turn to the Spirit of the
Lord as it appears in them, which Spirit searches all things, and leads them
into all truth who are willing to be guided by it, whereby they may try all
things, both Spirits, Doctrines and fruits, and hold fast that which is good,
which Spirit they that hate it and resist the movings of it when it moves
against their ungodliness and errors, it will be a witness against them unto
condemnation, and they shall remain in darkness, and have their portion in
darkness; So let the Professors and People of all sorts consider these things
in the fear of God.

First I shall lay down one particular for a truth which Will. Bridge has
inserted in his book in p. 12. but it is against himself and such as he is,
where he says,

Pr. That a knowing learned man it may be can utter more of the Scripture then
he feels, but a good man feels more then he can utter.

Answ. This is a Testimony against himself and his Brethren the Priests, who
are learned men, who utter many things not in the true feeling which the good
man is in; so they are not the good men, for they walk contrary to that which
should bring them into the feeling of truth in the inward parts; and I shall
here prove that William Bridge is out of the true feeling when he utters such
Doctrines as he has done contrary to the truth.

Pr. From 2 Pet. 1.19. We have also a more sure word of prophecy whereunto ye
do well to take heed, W. Bridge says the Apostle does here prefer the written
word before a revelation from heaven, now if he do prefer it before a Divine
Revelation, then it is not to give place to the dawning of some special Light
and Revela^ion in the heart, p. 4.

Answ. In this he has both perverted the Scripture and affirmed that which is false, for the Apostles preferred Divine Revelation before the writings, as
having the things of God revealed in them, before they spoke them forth or wrote
of them, and Peter says, The prophecy came not in old time by the will of man,
but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost, 2 Pet. ^.2^. so
that they first had the prophesies of Scripture revealed in them by the holy
Ghost before they were written, and that word which the Apostle directs to was
the word of prophecy which was before the words were written, nigh in the
heart, and gave place to the dawning of a special Light and Revelation in their
hearts, for it led them to the dawning of the day and the arising of the
day star in their hearts which was Christ, for whose Revelation they hoped
through the word or spirit of prophecy in them, and such did not deny the
giving place to the dawning of the special Light and Revelation in the heart,
as W. Bridge in his blindness has done, see Mat. 11.27. 1 Pet. 1.13. 2 Pet.
^.19.

Pr. He says p. 9. I Will tell you says the Apostle what ye shall do whilst ye
are in the dark, even take heed to the word written.

Ans. That Is false, the Apostle says no such words, neither says he the word
is written but living, and they were to take heed to the word of prophecy which
they had as a Light that shined in a dark place, until the day star arose in
their hearts; now they that are in the dark do not understand the Scriptures,
then how should they take heed to that they know not? but the light in the
heart which shines in darkness, before it shine out of darkness it gives the
true understanding; Again William Bridge is exceeding dark in counting the word
of prophecy the writing or Scriptures of the Prophets, for the Apostles words
or writings which testifies of Christ as he is come are as sure as the Prophets
writings (or more) so that if he had intended the more sure word to be the
Scriptures without, he would rather have said ye have a more sure word of the
Apostles to take heed unto; and again, the Scriptures does not shine to them
that are in darkness, because they understand them not, but the light shines
in darkness though the darkness comprehends it not, and the least measure of
the light of Christ being waited in by any one, it prophesies of a greater
manifestation of light, and leads them that believe in it to the Revelation of
Christ, the power and glory of the Father, so that this light in them is more
sure to them then a voice or vision which another has heard or seen which they
have not, a manifestation of which light or spirit is given to every man to
profit withal, John 1.4, 5.9. 2 Cor. 4 6

Pr. In page 7. he says, A good man may live and dwell in a place or Town
where no means of grace are, in a poor dark ignorant corner of the World.

Ans. This is false Doctrine, for the Grace of God which brings salvation has
appeared unto all men, Titus 2.11. and this grace is not without some means of
it as it does convince of sin, and teaches to deny ungodliness and worldly
lusts, and it appears with the means of it as to convince of sin and to teach
righteousness, as thousands do and shall witness, and they who will not be
taught by it, with it they shall be left without excuse.

Pr. In page 7. he says, David thirsted after Ordinances, saying, my soul
thirsts after thee O God to see thy Power and thy Glory, Ps. 63.1, 2.

Ans. David in thirsting after God and his power and glory, thirsted after that
which is beyond all carnal or visible Ordinances, and shall remain when all
such your Ordinances shall fail and have an end; but now see how plainly
William Bridge has in this contradicted himself, for if the Scripture be
preferred before Revelation from Heaven, and be not to give place to such a
Revelation in the heart as he has affirmed, then what needed David have
thirsted to see the Power and Glory of God, for that is revealed in the hearts
of believers, Ephesians. 3.20.

Pr. In page 9. and 10. A very good man may be much in the dark, (temptation
time is a dark time) yet this Scripture light he has always by him, to the
law and to the Testimony.

Ans. A very good man is born of God and walks in the light, and though he be
tempted enters not into the temptation, for the wicked one touches him not,
as John said, and that is the most sure light to him which keeps him out of
temptations, which light was before the Scriptures were, and the Law is light,
and the testimony is the Spirit of prophecy which was in the Saints before
they wrote the Scriptures, which are not the light but testify of it.

Pr. page 7. Joseph when Mary was first with child, he did not know what to do
in the case till the Angel of the Lord appeared to him.

Ans. Which flatly contradicts his former words, for then the Angel of the Lord
and what he revealed to Joseph was more sure to him then the Scriptures of the
Prophets, for they did but foretell of Christ, but the Angel convinced Joseph
concerning Christ, that he must not put away his wife as he would have done, as
by the Scripture, touching fornication which she was not guilty of, as the
Angel convinced him, Mat. 1.19. so that Revelation was more sure then the
Scripture.

Pr. page 10. Wicked men have the light of the Scripture as a blind man has
the Sun, the Sun is in the firmament over the head of the blind man, yet it is
not light to him.

Ans. Here again William Bridge has contradicted himself, for then the
Scripture is not the most sure light to the wicked, because the wicked are as
far from understanding the Scripture, as the blind man is from seeing the
light of the Sun, by this man's words, and yet he bids them that are wicked in
the dark take heed to the word written, which is no better then to bid a blind
man follow the light of the Sun, but that is the most sure light which shines
in the hearts, and opens the blind man's eyes, and brings to Divine Revelation,
which the Scripture without does not, but testifies of the light and of
Revelations, which the light of Christ brings to.

Pr. page 12. The Scripture light is the most excellent safe and sure light, it
is the light of lights; there are many false lights in the world.

Ans. God is the light of lights, the Father of lights, James 1.17. and not the
Scripture, for it is the writing not the light, and if God be the Fountain of
lights, from whence did these false l^ghts come? surely William Bridge has
spoken here much out of the feeling, for that which is false is not the Light,
though deceit may transform like the light, but no deceit is really light.

Pr. page 12. In looking in the Scripture, this great looking-glass, ye see the
truth* that are therein contained concerning God and Christ, there is God seen
especially, and Christ seen, there also you see your selves and your own dirty
face, this is that manifesting light under Christ.

Ans. Here is confusion and false Doctrines added to confusion, for if the
wicked have the Scripture but as the blind man has the Sun, how should they
see their dirty faces in the Scriptures, or see the truth, or God or Christ in
the Scriptures, when the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain God, 1 Kings 8.27.
much less the Scripture, and he that would here divide the Scripture light from
Christ, as if the Scripture light were one and Revelation were another, he is
blind, for the Light which the Saints have in Scripture is in them, and is the
light of Christ, without which the Scriptures cannot be understood, so that is
the manifesting light which gives the true understanding of the Scriptures, and
the Letter or Writing not the light.

Pr. page 15. Scripture Light is the highest Light, Scripture Dispensation the
highest Dispensation, the Dispensation of Visions and Revelations was of a
lower rank.

Ans. Herein has William Bridge both shown his ignorance and contradicted his
brethren the Priests, for many of the Priests do account the Dispensation of
the Prophets and Apostles of Christ, which was a dispensation of visions and
revelations, far higher then theirs who now have the Scriptures, but do not own
revelations to be manifest in these days, when as no man knows the Father
but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him, Mat. 11.27. so William
Bridge in his counting visions and revelations of a lower rank then the
Scripture, he might as well say that the knowledge of God and Christ which is
revealed, is lower then the letter, when as they were in a Scripture
dispensation, and had the letter of the Law and Prophets who persecuted Christ,
and Paul was there when a persecutor, but when he received the dispensation of
God given him by revelation, whereby he was made a Minister, he knew that which
was above or beyond the Scriptures, even Christ revealed in him the mystery,
and so preached him unto the Gentiles, and did not slight divine revelation,
nor set the letter above it as William Bridge has done, Gal. 1. Col. 1.27. 2
Cor. 13.5.

Pr. page 15. If God should now speak unto you by Visions or Visional
Revelations, how would you know that this were the voice of God but by the
Scripture, and who does not know that the Devil will speak an hundred truths.

Ans. Here his gross ignorance of the voice of God is seen, for God is able to
manifest his own voice to them that have not the Scriptures without, as he did
before they were written, and the sheep of Christ knows and hears his voice;
what does William Bridge believe that the Sheep of Christ must all go to the
Scripture without, and try his voice thereby, when the devil can speak
Scripture or a hundred truths? then what must try the devils voice, and how
then must they try voices and spirits that cannot read the Scriptures; now all
that own the Spirit of Truth which searches all things, whereby words voices
and Spirits are to be tried, they may soon see the Priests ignorance in these
things.

Pr. Page 18. I am to be so far from desiring God to speak in this way of a
vision, as I am bound rather to be backward to it.

Ans. Here William Bridge his desires are contrary to the true Ministers
desires, for they went on to Visions and Revelations, and preached what God had
revealed by his word in them, but in this he has manifested himself to be
like the Priests of old, from whom the vision was departed, and the day was
become dark over them that they might not have a Vision, and where there is no
vision the People perish, Mica 3. 2 Cor. 12.1.

Pr. Page 18. If any have a revelation to try or confirm any Gospel doctrine,
it is a delusion of Satan.

Ans. Which is quite contrary to the Apostles doctrine, for they taught them
that had revelation to try all things and hold fast that which is good. 1 These.
5.21. And by the revelation of Christ they witnessed the doctrine of the Gospel
confirmed and fulfilled in them, and this is no delusion, so that this Priest
might as well have said that the knowledge of God is a delusion, for it comes
by revelation and confirms Gospel doctrine.

Pr. Page 27. He says the Light and Law within us here is Imperfect, the Law
of Grace within, and the Light within is not able to convince others.

Ans. Which are both false, for the Law and Light of the Lord is perfect, and
by this Light within are many convinced of their evil deeds, and reproved for
them, and things that are reproved are made manifest by the Light, and who ever
speaks to the convincing others it must be from the Light within which is
perfect, as every gift of God is perfect, Ephesians. 5.13. Col. 3.16.

Pr. Though the Law and Light and Spirit within us be a principle of good, yet
it is not the Rule of our goodness or Lives.

Ans. Herein William Bridge has plainly contradicted himself, for he
confesses in page 28 that the inward Law and Light discovers those heaps of
sin that are in the Soul, and does not only incline a man unto what is good,
but it inables him thereunto; then I say, that the inward Light both
discovering sin, and inclining and inabling man to that which is good, it must
be the rule of their Lives, for the Spirit of Truth leads into all truth,
John 1.6.13. which is more then the Scripture will do, though we truly own the
Sripture in its place as it testifies of the Truth, and against sin in the
general, yet the Light within must be the more sure Rule, for it shows unto
particular men their particular sins, and shows unto them wherein they are
guilty, and opens their eyes and shows them the way to Life which is Christ,
who enlightens every man coming into the World, and this is more then all
outward words or writings.

Pr. In page 29, William Bridge says, If the Law and Light and Spirit that is
in me be my rule, then I may do any thing without sin, I may whore, be drunk,
steal or any thing without sin, but the Law, Light and Spirit may command me to
do such things as these.

Ans. Here Is heaps of confusion and horrible blasphemy, for before he confessed
that the inward Law and Light does both incline a man to what is good, and
inables him to it, and that it is a great help to us in our way to Life, and
against this William Bridge in page 29 says, that the Law or Light or Spirit
within you is Christ in you, so you may see how horribly he has blasphemed
against Christ, in making him the author or commander of whoredom, drunkenness
and stealing, as by his words appear, when as Christ condemns all
unrighteousness, and all that own Christ in them for their guide and rule, they
witness that he is come to condemn sin in the flesh, and not to lead them into
whoredom and drunkenness, nor any sin, for he purges thoroughly them that
receive him, Mat. 1.21. and 3.12. Rom 8.1, 2, ^.

Pr. If the Law and Light and Spirit that is in me be my Rule, then I am my own
rule, and so I am God.

Ans. This is false and absurd, and contradicts his own words, for he confessed
that the Law or Light or Spirit within is Christ, now then if Christ be my
Rule, I am not my own Rule, nor am I God; for he that has Christ to rule him,
is not ruled by himself but by Christ in him, whereby he is come to deny
himself and to follow Christ.

Pr. Page 30, He says, the Scripture is the first ground of our Faith and Hope.

Ans. Then Christ is not your ground nor hope who are out of the Apostles
doctrine, for they witnessed that another foundation could no man lay then that
which is laid, which is Christ, who was in them their hope, and the Author and
Finisher of their faith, 1 Cor. 3.^1. Heb. 12.2.

Pr. Page 32. Humane Reason is a beam of Divine wisdom, yet if it be not
enlightened with a higher Light of the Gospel, it cannot reach unto the things
of God.

Ans. Here Is both falsehood and absurdity, for a beam of Divine Wisdom is not
Humane but Divine, as the Wisdom is from whence it comes, and a beam of Divine
Wisdom need not higher light then that Wisdom, by which Wisdom the things of
God are reached and known, now he is exceeding blind who cannot discern Humane
reason which is earthly and corruptible, from the Divine Wisdom, which is
Incorruptible and eternal.

Pr. Page 33. It Is Revelation Light from the Gospel that does bring to Heaven.

Ans. So now at length he has granted to the Truth; but in this he has
overthrown all his former doctrine against revelation, wherein he did set the
Scripture above Revelation, and would not have Scripture to give place to the
dawning of the special Light and Revelation in the heart; But now is the Light
of the Gospel which is the power of God revealed in His People, which has
discovered the blindness and Ignorance of all such blind leaders who are
ignorant of the Light and Law of God within, and who are against the knowledge
of God in their preaching against Divine revelation, concerning which William
Bridge has so largely shown his gross darkness and blasphemies; And this may
be a warning to all his hearers, and all professors who are not wilfully blind
to be awakened and cease from such blind watchmen and pastors, who have long
fed themselves and not the flocks, and come to Christ the true Shepherd and
Pastor who will feed his flock Himself.

This in tender love was I moved to give forth for the simple ones sake that
they may be undeceived; and let none at the reading hereof be offended at what
I have charged against William Bridge aforesaid, for I am willing (if the Lord
so order me, and give me an opportunity) publicly to prove that he leads the
people besides the ways of God, and teaches error in stead of Truth; this I
am willing to prove to his face if the Lord so order me, if William Bridge
would stand a fair dispute with me publikly, and stand to his own doctrines;
many more of whose false doctrines I could manifest in his book, which at
present I omit

THE END.

