A Brief Answer to F. Bugg's Brief Reply to the Considerations Humbly Offered
by the People called Quakers, Relating to the Bill for Restraining the
Licentiousness of the Press.
IT has been the known Practice of the said F. B. of late Years, not only to
Buisy himself to Interrupt our Applications to the Parliament, by his Abusive
Pamphlets, but now strives to have us debarred of the Liberty of the Press,
that he may more easily Misrepresent our Christian Profession, and Calumniate
us without Detection, as appears in his said pretended Reply; and therefore the
more Necessity that we (the said People) should not be debarred of the Press
for our Just Defense, according to Holy Scripture, that we may not be Defamed
(in our Christian Reputation) as Seditious or Blasphemous.

According to his usual Method, he begins with a perverted Quotation upon our
Considerations, thus, viz. [Yet, say they, to Limit the Press, we conceive
Unsafe.] Instead of [to Limit Religious Books to a License, etc.] Thus he
stumbles at the Threshold, and Imposes on the Reader. And as false it is, That
the Quakers are Guilty of Printing and Publishing Seditious and Scandalous
Pamphlets; and as unjustly Inferred, that therefore a Restraint on them they
think Unsafe.

1. Of Kingly Government, about Earthly Kings, etc. he gives Curtailed and
Broken Quotations, but not the Dates of the several Papers, he mentions, which
(however Perverted) we take the General Import thereof to mean, That our Lord
Jesus Christ is King over true Christians Consciences, and his own Spiritual
Kingdom (which is not of this World) and not Earthly or Persecuting Kings, as
are mentioned.

2. Of Parliaments; We find not F. Howgill fairly Quoted, but grossly Abused,
by leaving out what he says for the good Intention of Parliaments.

And is it reasonable we should Answer for the Opinion of the Council of
Officers (against the House of Lords) in the Commonwealths days, or what any
one told them thereof? See Truth and Innocence, page 64.
Or is it a good Argument, that because the Corruption and Bad Lives of Earthly
Kings and Governments, as also their Ends, are upon Record both in History and
Sacred Writ, that therefore all such History and Writings (or Citations out of
them) are Seditious? Or because some have Writ against the Oppression of former
Persecuting Kings and Parliaments, were it a good Inference that therefore the
Quakers ought not to have Liberty of the Press to Defend their Religious
Persuasion, Christian Profession or Innocence? when they have not the least
Design of Sedition or Scandal against the Civil Government, or Constitution of
Parliaments; though to tell of Respect of Persons, and not Equality in Chosing
Members, be Quoted as Seditious, yet it is no new thing; Undue and Partial
Elections not unknown to Parliaments, who have Endeavored to Reform the same.

3. Of the Holy Trinity; Thereby being meant, that, in the Deity, there are
Three Bearing Witness in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, i. e.
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, which are One God Blessed for ever,
the Scripture Terms thereof are not Questioned, but owned by the People called
Quakers, See Rambling Pilgrim, p. 45, 46.
what Disputes or Reflections soever have been (about Unscriptural Terms and
Distinctions) they were never by any of us applied or intended against the
Blessed Deity or Divinity of Father, Son, or Holy Ghost.

4. Of Christ our Blessed Lord, the Eternal Son, or Word of God, his Body that
Dyed, is called in Scripture the Body of Jesus; and it is said he Suffered and
was put to Death in the Flesh, 1 Pet. 3. 18. Not in his Divine Nature, for that
never Dyed. This was W. P's. Sense, See Truth and Innocence, p. 71, 72. And D.
P 's. Vindic. Verit. p. 89, to 110.
That the True Ministers do not Preach Christ without Only, as he is in Heaven
(and Glory) above, but also as he is in Men's Hearts, is an Undeniable
Christian Doctrine. The Word Only being omitted (in one Edition of William
Smith's Primmar) is made an Accusation against us (as if we denied Jesus to be
Christ) though the same Word Only be inserted in his Works in the same place.
Thus unfair is this Adversary.

5. Concerning the Holy Scriptures. We Hope our preferring Christ the Word, and
his Spirit to the Letter of the Scripture, and yet owning the Holy Scriptures
to be given by Divine Inspiration, and preferring them before all other Books,
may not be Offensive, or render us Incapable of the Liberty of the Press, or of
our Consciences.

If one should Argue thus against us, Some of your Ancient Friends Writings are
Perverted and Misconstrued, (and thereby made Offensive) therefore you must
Write no more: Or, some of you have spoken something amiss, or that Offends Us,
therefore you must never speak more. Would this be fairly Argued? Yet we don't
see our Adversary make better Work on it against Us.

Under the Title of the Holy Scriptures, F. B. sets, the Letter is Death-
Beastly Wares, etc. as if the Quakers so Term the Holy Scriptures Beastly Wares
(Oh! Horrible); this has been often Charged upon him, and Refuted as a gross
Slander and Forgery, and not found applied to the Scriptures in his own
Quotation; though he persists repeating the same, and in such foul Aspersions,
as, that the Quakers Vilify the Scripture, Blaspheme the Blessed Trinity,
Reproach Christ's Ministers. (But, F. B. did thou so, when a Quaker 25
years?) Boldly in Print tell the World, that such as turn from them, and
Embrace the Christian Faith, are the worst of Apostates, worse than Francis
Spira and Julian the Apostate. Quoting John Whiting's Book, [Judas and the
Chief Priests,] Preface and p. 5, 6. wherein F. B. Notoriously Wrongs both the
People called Quakers, and J. W. also, who never told the World so. And to his
Charging the said J. W. with false Stories of G. Keith; J. W. says, he has
several Certificates to prove the Truth of what he related concerning G. K. in
his Preface, under the Hands of such as were Witnesses of the same, ready to
Produce as Occasion may offer.

His Story by the Fire side against Edward Dikes, Junior, of Bury St. Edmonds,
and his Constructions on the Words We and You, are so Ridiculous that it is not
worth insisting on. He again Clamours out their Blasphemies (against the
Quakers) upon a Passage Aledged against our Deceased Friend Edward Buroughs,
terming him as Horrible an Impostor as Mahomet, about the Sufferings of the
People of God; which yet (he says) he could never find any of them so Defend;
though the same be fully Answered and Explained in Vind. Verit. p. 206. F. B's.
Story of G. F. hiring Two Jews for 80 l. we reject as his own Forgery.

But no better Treatment, or Manner of Answering, do we expect from a Mercinary
Scribbler, than Reiterated Perversion, Forgery, Curtalizing and Confounding
Quotations, whereby the Best of People and Books have been grossly
Misrepresented. Therefore the more Need of the Liberty of the Press for Just
Vindication. Passing by several other Abuses and Falsehoods, for Brevity sake,
we Refer the Reader to our following Answers to F. B's. Books, etc. viz.

1. Judgment Fixed. Printed 1682. 2. The Quakers Answer to a Scandalous Libel.
1690. 3. Innocence against Envy. 1681. 4. The Contentious Apostate, and his
Blow Refelled. 1691. 5. The Contentious Apostate Recharged. 6. A Charitable
Essay, in order to allay the Outrage of a Contentious Apostate. 1693. 7. The
Quakers Vindication against Francis Bugg's Calumnies, 1693. 8. Innocence
Triumphant over Insolency and Outrage, 1693. 9. A Just Enquiry into the
Libellers Abuse, 1693. 10. The Counterfeit Convert, a Scandal to Christianity,
1694. 11. An Answer to Fra. Bugg's Presumptious Impeachment, 1695. 12. A Sober
Expostulation with some of the Clergy, against their Pretended Convert Francis
Bugg his repeated gross Abuse of the People called Quakers, 1697. 13. A
Rambling Pilgrim, or Profane Apostate Exposed. [Wherein he is Detected of
gross Calumny, Forgery and Propaneness.] 14. A Just Censure of Francis Bugg's
Address to the Parliament, against the Quakers.
For the said Books Enquire of T. Soul, Bookseller, in White-Hart-Court in
Grace Church Street, London.

By G. Whitehead, And others Concerned.
A Brief ANSWER to Francis Bugg's Reply, to the Quaker's Considerations Humbly
Offered.


