The True Light expelling the Foggy Mist OF THE PIT, AND The gross Confusion
and Blasphemy of the Beast, which is gone forth against the Light of Christ and
the Scripture within; from an old Professor, called Francis Duke of
Westminster, in his Book styled, An answer to some of the Principal Quakers,
who therein boasts as if he had a great skill in Divinity. So that his pretended
Divinity in the said Book is here discovered, and the true Light and Scripture
within here vindicated from his gross Aspertions cast upon the Light, and them
that walk in it.

By GEORGE WHITEHEAD.

Revel. 13.6. And he opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme
his Name and his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the sign of the Bull and Mouth near
Aldersgate, 1660

Some of Francis Dukes gross Aspertions and Blasphemies against the Light
within (which is the Light of Christ) the Reader may see as follows.
THe said Francis Duke affirms the Light within to be a fancied Idol Light, in
his eight page.

And that the Light within is a lousy Christ, or a Virmine bred of an addle
brain, and that it is a whimsey, page 19

F. Duke has set the Cat that sits in the Chimney Corner above the Light
within, p. 21. and says, That the Light within is a mere cheat, p. 26.28. That
the Light within in villainies, surmounts all the Antichrists, p. 40. That the
Light within justifies the Roman Antichrists. That the Light within is a
stinking Idol, p. 62. That it is but a shadow, p. 65. and a cheating Light, p.
66. And nothing but stench and rottenness, p. 83. And yet this F. Duke knows
not what our Light within is according to his own words, p. 20. and 21.

Thus has F. Duke like the beast blasphemed against God and Christ and his
Light, Rev. 13.6. For God is light and the Father of light, 1 John 1.5. Jam.
1.17. and he dwells and walks in his people, 2 Cor. 6.16. and Christ is the
true light which inlightneth every man that comes into the world, and the free
gift of God has come upon all men, that they may believe and come to know him,
John 1. Romans 5.18. Tit. 2.11.

Also this F. Duke has often reviled us, and called us a pack of Villans as
base as ever the earth bore. Also he has often belyed and slandred us, and
falsely accused us, with saying that the soul of man is God, and with nullifying
the Scriptures and the Lord Jesus Christ, and says, a Friend of ours said,
that Judas is now as happy as Peter; all which with the rest of his multitude
of lies and blasphemies are denied by us, and will fall upon his own head,
though I have mentioned but a few of them.

The answer to the said Francis Duke his Book.
THere is a Generation that knows no shame, and because that judgment is not
speedily executed upon them, therefore their heart is set in them to do
wickedly, who have made lies their refuge, and with falsehood have they covered
themselves, one of whom is the said Francis Duke, as clearly appears in what he
has writ against the light within and against us who walk in it, so that any
unprejudiced person that reads his Book may so soon see the grossnesse and
absurdity of it, that to such it will manifest it self without answer; yet for
the Truth sake, that it may the more appear in its own authority and clearness
over deceit and wickedness, I shall briefly note the Heads of Francis Duke his
work, and first show the falsness of his four Particulars wherein his pretended
answer or Book does consist, as follows.

1. Particular F. D. accuses us, That we would bring all men to believe that
the light which is in every man, is the Divine Nature of God or Gods essence
now in part, but when they leave this world, that all shall be Gods in full
perfection.

To which I answer, This is false, and herein are our words perverted, for we
do not affirm that the light which is in every nan is the Divine Nature, for
the light is that which leads into the Divine Nature; neither do we affirm,
that when every man leaves this world, they shall all be Gods in full
perfection, as our accuser implies; as also F. Duke in thy fifth page, thou
have wickedly and falsely accused us of denying that there shall be any
individuals of men to be damned or saved after this life, but that all shall be
involved in the essence of the infinite Jehovah, which things were never owned
nor affirmed by us; and as touching the light in every man being the Divine
Nature, we do not so say of it, but as Christ is the True light that
enlightneth every man that comes into the World, so his light in every man is
that which begets as many as believe in it, into its own nature which is
divine; but they that hate and reject the light of Christ in them, it will be a
witness against them to their eternal condemnation.

2. F. Duke accuses us, That we would bring all men to believe that the same
light in them is the only true Christ, the second Adam, the Redeemer of the
world, and that our Lord Jesus Christ is an outsid Christ, and no Christ but a
name only.

To which I say, The latter part of this particular is exceeding false and a
slander, that we never owned nor affirmed that the Lord Jesus Christ is an
outside Christ, and no Christ but a name only; This absurd slander I return
back upon thee who invented it, for no other Light or Christ do we own and
preach but the Lord Jesus Christ and his light, who is the light of the World
without respect of persons, and he is known in every one who believe in his
light, know you not how that Jesus Christ is in you except ye be reprobates, 2
Cor. 13.5.

3. F. Duke says, That we would bring all men to believe that this light in
them is the only true Scripture and standing rule, for faith and life, and not
the old and new Testament, the Sacred Oracles of God.

I answer, Here is also an absolute falsehood in this particular; we do not seek
to bring all men to believe that the light within them is the only true
Scripture, but the light of Christ in them, is that which writes the true
Scripture within, and without the knowledge of which light, the Scriptures of
the old and new Testament cannot be understood, nor the right use and end of
them known, for it opens them, and therefore the Scriptures and sacred Oracles
of God we own, being in the light that gave them forth.

So whereas F. Duke in his 28, 29.35.36. pages, affirms, That the written
Scriptures are the only standing rule for faith and life to the Church, and
the only infallible rule.

Wherein he has affirmed that which the Scripture does not, and so has
therein denied the spirit of Truth, and its guidance to be the rule of Faith
and Life, when as it is the spirit of Truth that leads into all Truth, John
16.13. Romans 7.6. And this F.D. his assertions tends to exclude all the Holy men
out of the Faith and Life who believed before the Scriptures were written, as
also he would shut out all the believing Gentiles as unbelievers, who had not
the law or Scripture without, and thus he would limit God and all his people to
the letter or Scripture without, as the only rule for their Faith and Life,
when as they served him not in the oldnesse of the letter, but in the newness
of the spirit.

And yet this F. Duke to discover his confusion, has granted That the
Scriptures as they are an humane expression, as written or printed with Ink and
Paper by the art of the Writer or Printer so considered, they are but dead
letter, p. 33.34.

Wherein he has plainly confuted himself, for if the Scriptures as they are
written or printed in Ink or Paper, be but dead letter, then the light or
Spirit of Truth must write and open the Scriptures within by inspiration, and
the light and Scripture within which so often F. D. has reviled and blasphemed
against, is preferred before the dead letter without; So then how can the
Scripture or dead letter without, be the only Rule for the living faith and
life of the Saints, as often F. D. implies? And yet we do not make null the
Scriptures without, as falsely he has accused us, but in owning the Light
within do witness the fulfilling of Scripture without.

4. F. Duke also says, That we and our Friends would bring all men to believe,
that if they follow and bring themselves to be guided by the light which is
within them, it will bring them to perfection even in this life.

To which I say, Here are words also in this particular which are falsely put
upon us, for we do not tell all men of bringing themselves to be guided by the
light within them (as if they could do it of themselves) for that must be done
through the drawings of God by the light in them, and not by thenselves; And
all that deny the attainment of perfection by the light of Christ within which
is perfect, they deny the work of Christ, and the Saints Ministry and life, for
Christ is able to save to the utmost all that come to God by him, and his blood
cleanses them that walk in his light from all sin.

Now the rest of F. D. his Book that is grounded upon these four said
particulars, how should the matter of it be good when it is founded upon so
much falsehood as is in all these particulars.

Also F. Duke, Thou have done exceeding foolishly, falsely and wickedly in so
often accusing us with John Tauney, and what he has writ in his Book of ten
Epistles, and reckoning him as one of the principal Quakers, for its known that
we who are scornfully so called, never owned him as one of us, and its known
that he has both spoken and written against us; So whereas thou have writ much
of thy Book against J. Tauney, it does not touch us, for he was none of our
Friends, as often thou have falsely said, neither do we own his corrupt
Principles.

And where in page the 43. thou have confessed That thou thy self art an Idiot,
and a poor Idiot, p. 80. And yet boasts That thou art taught in Jehovahs Law,
and that thou will not turn thy back to the most learned of us all in Divinity.

Indeed it is the trick of a fool or Idiot to boast and to be confident as thou
art, but they that shall hereafter read and see thy Divinity, they will judge
thee no better then an Idiot indeed.

And how have thou proved against us as thou say, That we would bring all
men to believe that the light in every man is God himself? When thou thy self
have confessed, p. 9. That Jehovah fills Heaven and Earth, and all created
Natures with his Divine Nature; And in p. 11. thou have confessed, That God is
in every thing, and excluded out of nothing, and that he fills Heaven and earth
by his essence, in p. 14.

Wherein thou have in part granted to truth against thy self, for if God be
excluded out of nothing, and fill Heaven and earth by his essence, then what we
say of his light being in every man is true, for God is light, and then why
have thou so much in many other places wrangled against us for Preaching this
light of God in every man, and so blasphemed against it, as thou have done in a
horrible gross manner as further is discovered.

And where thou say thou will destro^ our fancied Idol light, our no true
Scripture within, our no true Christ within, our no true God within.

To this I say, in thy calling our light within an Idol thou have blaspemed
against God and Christ, for God and Christ is the light who dwells in his
people, and Christ is in them, whom we own and witness and no other.

And thou in saying thou will destroy our no true Christ within, our God
within, have not only blasphemed against God, but also have grossly confounded
thy self in denying the true God in us, seeing in other places thou have
confessed that he is in every thing and is excluded out of nothing, but fills
Heaven and Earth and all Created natures with his divine nature, and that his
light extends in all men, page, 18. so that the true God and Christ cannot be
excluded out of us: so as for thy threatening to destroy our light, our
scripture, our God and Christ within (who is the true God) the Reader may see
how thou have attempted to destroy God and Christ and his light. wherein pap,
19 Thou say thou concludes that our fancied light within (as thou calls it)
is no Scripture, no Christ, no God; only it is a lousy Christ, or vermin bred
in our own addle brain thou say. I answer, Oh what gross blasphemy and
impudency have thou showed thou art in here! To count Christ or the Light
within a lousy Christ or a vermin, and thou have openly and grossly appeared
against the Apostles doctrine who preached Christ within the hope of glory, who
is the mystry that has been hid from Ages, and the Law of God is written in
the hearts which is Scripture within, so did ever any except an idiot and
blasphemer give forth such unsavory words against Christ the light and the
Scripture within as thou have done? And wherein page 21 thou accusest John
Chandler, as being seconded by Theaura John, in saying that the flesh of
Christ's body profits no more then your own flesh nor the words spoken of him;
as also thou chargest James Naylor, with seconding this in the third place in
which thou have wronged both John Chandler, and James Naylor and shamfully
belyed them; for these exppessions thou accuses Theaura John. which are denied
by I. C. and J. N. and the rest of us, and thy pretended proof against J.N. as
seconding T.J. words is his saying of our light, Christ within, that it is but
one in all unchangably just, equally holy to which thou F. Duke. replyest in
these thy words, viz. Truly James ye might more properly atribute all this to
the Cat that sits in the Chimney corner, for that is some thing, but this light
in the dark Lanthorn of your brains is an Idol. To which I answer, you may see
here how ignorant this F. Duke is of the light of Christ within, who in his
esteem has set the Cat in the Chimny corner above the light of Christ, which
is but one in all (which is the light that we speak of and preach) for he has
here (as his words plainly implies) accounted it more proper to say, that the
Cat that sits in the Chimny corner is but one in all, unchangably just, equally
only, then to say so of the light; in all what blasphemy scorn and contempt
has this Idol powered forth against the light, was there ever an Idiot that
writ such stuff as this before? you may see this great pretended divine; and
what such divinity he boasts of who thus has uttered forth his malice and
blasphemy against the light of Christ which is but one in all; and yet this
pretended divine F.D. has acknowledged in page 20. That Christ is every where
in respect of his divinity, when but in this 21. page he has esteemed the Cat
that sits in the Chimney corner above the Light in all, as if it were more
proper to say that the cat that sits in the chimney corner is but one in all,
unchangeably just, then to say so of the light of Christ in all, and thus he
has blasphemed against the light of Christ and sought to put him to open
shame, but thereby has openly shamed himself; And whereas we preach and
witness to the light of Christ and the Scripture or Law of God in the heart
(and have charged some with getting the imitation in stead of the thing) this
does Francis Duke compare to an ape, who (he says) looking upon a Glasier that
was setting up a great Glass window, and observing how he drove in the tacks
with his hamer, did (whilst the glasier was gone to dinner) get up upon the
Ladder, took the hammer and fell to work (as he falsely says we do) and broke
the glass window all to pieces, to which he compares the preaching or owning
the Scripture within.

To which I answer, here you may see Francis Duke his malice against the
Scripture within, and his ignorance of it, and how he has cast reproaches and
contempt upon the Scripture within, as counting our walking according to, and
preaching of the light and Scripture within no better then an Apes breaking a
glass window (as he in his vain story declares) wherein he might as well have
reproached the true Prophets and Apostles as us, for they owned the Light and
Scripture within, and the word of God was in their hearts; and the Scriptures
of truth were given by inspiration of God and so were in the saints before they
were given forth in paper and ink, and says the the Lord I will write my Law
in their hearts and put my spirit in their inward parts, Romans 10.8. 2 Timothy
3.16. Jer. 31. Heb. 8 Romans 2.15
and the Gentiles who obeyed the Law of God in them showed the work of the Law
written in their hearts; so here was Scripture within which F. Duke like an
Idiot has despised, who has better esteem of the Cat that sits in the Chimney
corner, and can better discern the Cat and the Ape then he can the light and
the Scripture within

Again, Francis Duke in p. 40 lays down these words against the light within,
without exception, in this wise, viz. Truly many antichrists have done
villanously, but thou O light within in villainies surmounts them all, for as
Jerusalem justified Sodom, so thou light within do justify the Roman
Antichrist.

To which I answer, here the language and blasphemy of the beast which
blasphemeth against God and his Tabernacle plainly appears. So see the
blasphemy and confusion of this Idiot F. Duke how absolutely he has blasphemed
against the light within without exception, and yet in other places of his Book
he has confessed that God fills Heaven and Earth by his essence, and that he
is in every thing, and that God enlightneth every man that comes into the
world, and has spoken of the same Light in all men extending to the rational
union and comunion with the divine nature, and that Christ is every where in
respect of his divinity, in pages 9. and 11 and 14. and 18. and 20. In which
things there is some truth though against himself, for God and Christ is light,
and they are one in the Saints; so that F. Duke in charging the light within to
surmount all the many Antichrists in villainies, and with justifying the Roman
Antichrists and with having abominations, is as much as if he had charged God
and Christ (who is the light within) to surmount all the Antichrists in
villainies and with justifying the Roman Antichrist. And then when he, like the
beast, has uttered all this blasphemy against God and Christ, he brings a
piece of an Esop's fable against the Light, and says, O thou light within, she
(meaning the Church of Rome) abhors thy abominations, except it be in the case
as the fox loves to here the Crow sing.

Thus has F. D. showed his scorn, lightness contempt and blasphemy against
the light within, and yet in page 20. this F.D. says to Theaura John, that he
nor no man else knows what our light within is, and such like to John Lylburn
page, 12. so that he not knowing what our light within is, and yet so often
having spoken so grossly against it as he has done, he has spoken evil of the
thing he knows not, as the natural bruit Beasts did who were to be destroyed as
the Scripture says, 2. Pet. 2.12. So that all that this Francis Duke has
written against the light within is done in his ignorance, as a man without
understanding, who would appear wise, and yet therein appears a fool and an
idiot, so that had he been silent and done nothing, his folly had not so much
appeared, but fools love to be meddling.

And whereas Christ said he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood dwells
in me, and I in him, John. 6.53.56. To this F.D. gives his meaning thus, viz.
That is (says he) as the Sun dwells in the eye by its beams, and as the eye
dwells in the Sun by its shining, which his comparison is unequal, for Christ
dwells in the Saints hearts, and his life is manifest in their mortal bodies
which is much nearer to them then the Sun in the Firmament.

And what is it thou say is in Jesus Christ, which is neither in an
Episcopal Church Government, nor in Presbiterian, nor in an Independent
Government, nor in a Rebaptism, nor Calvinism, page, 21.

What is it, the Communion with the divine nature thou speaks of before? or
what is it? How darkly have thou here spoken? and seeing thou have judged all
these Churches and professions, what art thou thy self? and what particular
Church or people that is standing do thou own? what do thou own the Church
of Rome, seeing thou have set her against the light within? but the light
witnesses both against her and thy abbominations and blasphemies.

And whereas thou art pleading for such pretended respects as bowing one to
another from Abraham's bowing himself to the ground (as thou say Genesis 18. And
from David's falling on his face to the ground and bowing, 1. Sam. 20. And
Abigals bowing her self on the ground, 1. Sam. 25. With several others, which
before Christ came in the flesh and not after among the Christians in the new
Testament; and why do not you who are in pride, and respecting persons, as well
fall down on your faces to the ground every time you meet one another as bow
and cringe and complement one to another from these examples (which are not a
Law) thou quotest for bowing, seeing these examples are as well for falling
with your faces to the ground as bowing? but you can make use of some part of
Scripture to serve your lusts and ends, and leave out what you your selves
will, but the faith of Christ is not held with respect of persons, neither can
they believe that receive honor one of another and seek not the honor that
comes from God only, John. 5.44. James. 2. And yet we honor all men in the
Lord without respect of persons, which honor stands not in vain and heathenish
complements which serve to satisfy the proud vain minds.

And where provest thou by Scripture that the Devil the old Serpent is an
Apostate Angel, as thou affirms he is, and that the Devil actuated a dumb
beasts tongue (to wit the Serpents tongue) that he spoke most perfect Hebrew to
dissolve the union which the first parents had with the divine nature, as also
thou affirms? Seeing the Devil was that Serpent that deceived Eve.

What would thou make the people believe that the dumb beast or creature was
the deceiver? and what then was the forbidden fruit which the Serpent tempted
man to eat of, and would thou have it that the Devil and the dumb beast are
as wise as the divines (so called) in speaking most perfect Hebrew? surely the
Serpent has much deceived thee, and thou never knew the state of an Apostate
Angel who keeps not his habitation in the power of God.

And whereas in page 39.40. Thou accounts that the good Angel that acted
Balaams Ass to reprove his madness does make use of us, and actuates our
tongues and pens to repove the madness of the generality of the Ministers of
our Lord Jesus Christ for neglect of their studious pains and labor in the
sacred oracles of God, or a sneaking Covetousness, or their proud strife and
vain glory, or seeking praise and glory with men rather then with the infinite
God.

In which thou have spoken falsely, the Ministers of Christ are free from these
things, as sneaking covetousness, pride, strife, vain glory and the like, for
them whom we reprove for these things are the covetous hireling Priests of the
Nation (who it seems thou intends in thy words) who are not the Ministers of
Christ, for thou have confessed that thou art confident in England there was
never more men to talk of God, but art afraid never fewer to walk with God,
which is a great shame for the Priests and such as thou art, to make so much
talk of God, and to bring forth no fruit to God, and how have thou shamed the
Priests and their hearers in this thy confession?

And what have the people of England given such vast sums of money and hire to
the Priests for, if there were never fewer to walk with God then now? and then
what good have the Priests done with all their preaching, if they have brought
none to walk with God all this time?

And where thou accusest us as f^r having our tongues and pens actuated by the
old Serpent, and say that he is our Teacher, and that he is in our mouths,
and pens, in this have thou lied and thy own words contradict thee, for then
how does the good Angel actuate our tongues and pens, and make use of us as
thou have confessed, but thy folly in this as in the rest of thy durty stuff is
easy to see, as is thy saying that the good Angel shall leave us alive in
everlasting torments which thou say shall be our wages for our work in
gathering the seed of God. Wherein thou have showed thy self an enemy to the
seed of God, and to his work of gathering them who are of that Seed.

And what confusion have thou uttered in saying, That after right believers are
cleansed from all sins, guilt and punishment by Christ's blood, yet there
remains sins in them, therefore in this life (thou say) They can do no
perfect good? Which is absolute contrary to the Scriptures, see Psalm. 119.1, 2,
3. Isa. 60.21. Zeph. 3.13. Mat. 5.48. 1 Pet. 2.21. and 4.1. 1 John 3. to the
10. verse.

And where provest thou, That though the soul of man be a spirit, yet it
perceives not the Nature of Angels, as thou say? For does not the spirit
search all things, yea the deep things of God? And does not the soul that is
quickened by the spirit of God therein perceive the Angels of God and their
nature, when they can perceive the Nature of God?

And whereas thou say, That Angels perceive not the spiritual and naked
essence of God, but by the help of some created manifestation.

Where provest thou that by Scripture? Do not the Angels see the face of God
continually? Surely F. Duke in seeking to appear wise above what is written, by
intruding into things he has not seen, has discovered his ignorance, folly
and profaneness.

And where thou F. D. say That we would bring man's will to be Gods own
essence; And say, That J. Naylor in his Book, Love to the Lost, page 60. l.
16. says, Man's free will is the Plant of God, the Will of God, the Mind of
God, the Heart of God.

In these have thou shamefully belyed us and J. N. his words, for in that very
place mentioned in J. N. his Book, he speaks of him that is born of the spirit,
the Plant of God, who has the Will of God, the Mind of God, the Heart of God,
and not that man's free will is the Plant of God; but J. N. plainly discovers
how the will of him that is born of the flesh is in bondage.

In like manner have thou shamefully belyed John Rouse, in saying, That he said
to thee, that God may do as much by any other man, as he did by Christ Jesus
who lived and died at Jerusalem. As also in many other things have thou
notoriously belyed us, as all unprejudiced persons who reads thy Book, will see
and be ashamed of thee for so doing.

And whereas in thy rambling stuff which thou writes to John Lilburn (who is
deceased several years ago;) then say, We deny the Trinity. To this I say,
We do not deny the Godhead, nor any thing pertaining to it, but own the three
that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, and these
three are one; but whereas from Deuteronomy. 6.4. thou say, Our Elohims is one
Jehovah, and afterward telleft of a second Elohim, and a third Elohim. To this
I say, is not Elohim God according to thy own confession? and is it proper to
say there is a first God, and a second God, and a third God, as if there were
three Gods, (and one before another) as thy words implies? And where provest
thou the word Elohims? Is it not Elohim? And that of Deuteronomy. 6.4. which thou
bring, proves not thy confusion and nonsense, for there it says, the Lord
our God is one Lord.

And to prove the Scriptures to be the Word of God (which thou say is that
which declares the Mind of God to man) thou instancest, How God conveyed his
mind to man, and what God said unto Adam, to Cain, to Noah, to Abraham.

To this I say, The Scriptures of Truth are Writings, and a Declaration of
these things that were surely believed amongst the Saints, Luke 1.1. Acts 1.1.
but God conveyed his Mind by his Word, unto these mentioned, before the
Scriptures were written; So that which conveighs the Mind of God to the mind of
man, is the word of God in the heart, which was in the beginning before the
Scriptures were written, John 1.1. Romans 10.8. Deuteronomy. 30 14. Now we own that in
the Scriptures are the Words of God, which were spoken forth from the Word of
God, which was in the Saints hearts; as also in another place thou say The
Scripture is these words of God, which we own, but in this as in other things
have thou confounded thy self.

And where thou say, The Scripture is the ground of your faith, p. 73. and
that the Word of God in the Scriptures was the ground of Christ's Faith, p. 74.

I answer, Herein have thou discovered thy ignorance of the true faith and the
ground of it, as also thou have set the Scriptures above Christ, in counting
them the ground of his Faith, for he is the Author, the ground and foundation
of the Saints Faith, and from that faith were the Scriptures given forth to be
believed and fulfilled; so Christ and his Faith (which is the Faith of Gods
Elect) was before the Scriptures were written, for another foundation can no
man lay, then that which is laid which is Christ Jesus.

And thy saying, That Christ kept his mind close to the word of God in the
Scriptures that were written by Moses, to repel the Tempter and his
Temptations.

I Answ. Here again thou have set the Scriptures above Christ, as if he had
received his power from the Scriptures to repel the tempter, when as it was
through faith and patience in the power of the Father which was in him that he
overcame the tempter, and in the authority of that power he spoke Scripture as
they do who are in it, for cannot the Scriptures he made use of in the faith,
but they must be the ground of faith? how comes any then truly to believe what
is written in the Scripture?

And where thou say, we affirm there is no word of God but that light which
is in man. In this thou have accused us fasly, for it was from the word of God
which is the light in the heart that the words of God in the Scriptures of
truth were given forth.

And whereas in page. 77. Thou say, that the Devils and all damned
Creatures, their being, life and motion is in God.

I Answ. How is the Devils being, life and motion in God, when as the Devil
abode not in the truth, but rebelled against God, and was a lier and muderer
from the beginning? what is the Devils motion in God when he moves to lying,
and murdering and the like? And the Devil is the power or Prince of darkness,
but God is light and in him is no darkness at all. So how blindly and foolishly
have thou appeared in these things for the Devil.

And now whereas thou art telling of four things in which God does manifest
himself to us, thou say the first is the fabric of the Creation, the second
is the Scriptures, but thirdly thou say that which does manif^st most of
all, and is therefore light is the spirit of God.

And fourthly thou say there is in all men a light within which enlightenth
every man which comes into the world which is the spirit of God.

I Answ. By this account thou might as well say there are many more things then
four by which God manifests himself, for what thou mentions as a third and a
fourth thing, is but one, as if thou had said the third thing which does
manifest God most of all is the spirit of God, and the fourth thing is the
spirit of God, what an Ignoramus art thou to utter such nonsense as thou have
done? But whereas thou ownest That there is a light in all men which is the
spirit of God, and that he does write the effect of the Law of God in the
hearts of all men, from whence they do by nature the things contained in the
Law, which show the effect of the Law written in their hearts, and it was
written to this end, that from this light within (suitable to the Scriptures)
they might come to Christ that he might give them life, or on the contrary, if
they by custom in sin extinguish this light within, this will leave them in
their own consciences without excuse, thou say.

To which I say, If there be in all men a light, which is the Spirit of God,
and which is to lead them to life in Christ, or leave them in their consciences
without excuse, if they continue in sin according to thy words, then have thou
granted to the thing which we say of the Light of Christ in all men, and then
why have thou so much reviled and scorned us and the light which we preach,
which is the way to Christ, and to eternal life in him? Which at length (after
thy many, scofs, blasphemies and revilings) thou art made to confess to,
though to thy own confusion and condemnation; and by this light in thee shall
thou be left without excuse in thy own conscience, and condemned for ever if
thou continuest in thy wickedness, scorn and blasphemy. I reject the rest of
thy many lies and false doctrines, which are in thy puddle of dirt, in thy
slanderous confused book, as not worth mentioning nor further wading in, and it
were well if thou and such as thou art would own this Scripture in the feeling
of the Light which gave it forth, where the Apostle says, who is a wise man
and endued with knowledge, let him show out of a good conversation his works
with meekness of Wisdom, but if ye have bitter envying and strife in your
hearts, Glory not and lie not against the Truth, Iam. 3.13, 14.

From a Friend to the Truth of God which is professed and owned by his people
called Quakers.

THE END.
ERRATA.
Page 3. line 21. for nan r. man, p. 4. l. 4 for that we, read for we, p. 7. l.
33, for this Idol, r. this Idiot.


