THE Popish Informer REPREHENDED For his False Information against THE Quakers
Meetings: IN REPLY To a most Envious, Abusive, Seditious, and Irrational
Pamphlet, styled, An Answer to a Sedit^^^^ Libel, as he most falsely terms the
late Innocent Declaration from the People of God, called, Quakers, against all
Seditious Conventicles, etc. [Wherein their Innocence is cleared, and herein
vindicated.]

Unto which is annexed, A brief Recital of some Accusations cast upon the said
People, by one H. Thorndike, one of the Prebends of Westminster, in his Book,
entitled, A Discourse of the Forbearance, or the Penalties which a due
Reformation requires.

And thou, O God, shall bring them down into the Pit of Corruption; the Bloody
and deceitful men shall not live half their days, Psalm. 55. 23. Printed in
the Year, 1670.

WHereas there is extant a certain Scandalous malicious Pamphlet, tending to
increase Persecution against-the Innocent People of God called, Quakers,
(without any name or Author subscribed) wherein our late innocent Declaration
is styled, A Seditious Libel; and our Meetings termed Seditious Conventicles;
and we accused of Dangerous Practices, etc.

To Which we Answer, That we shall not need much to vindicate, our selves
herein: First, because our innocence and clearness from these unjust charges is
so manifest to our Nation and Neighborhood. Secondly, because this false
Informer and Accusar has not brought forth any matter of either proof or
validity against us; and because he has scandalized our Declaration, as being
as Seditious Libel, and so slandered us therein, we may again give a hint of
the nature and tendancy of our Declaration so accused, that it is a Declaration
against all seditious Conventicles and dangerous practices of any who under
color or pretense of tender Conscience have, or may contrive Insurrections,
this is the Title; as also in our Declaration, the Worship of God in his Spirit
and Power, the peaceable Truth, and seeking peace with all men, and meeting
together to worship God therein, according to Christ and his Apostles, is
vindicated, and a Testimony given against all Sedition, Conspiracy, contriving
Insurrections; as also it is judged gross Hypocrisy and Dissimulation for any
to pretend tenderness of Conscience, and a Religious exercise, and under that
color intend a quite contrary thing, as to contrive Insurrections, etc.
Concerning which we, who are called Quakers, can say, in the presence of God,
we are free and clear from all such things in the sight of God, Angels and Men:
Thus far is signified in our Declaration. Now let the moderate Reader judge,
whether this Testimony of ours be seditious yea or nay, as this false Informer
has accused it? or whether his Pamphlet and Information herein be not
absolutely seditious against the Government, and common good of the Nation; for
herein he has accused us of Sedition, for our declaring against Sedition,
dangerous practices, and contriving Insurrections: And whether herein he has
not appeared more like a Popish Emissary, then a good Subject?

Whereas this Informer accuses us, as follows, viz

Inform. The Quakers do not exercise any part of Divine Worship, according to
the Liturgy, etc.

Answ. The Divine Worship is in the Spirit and in the Truth, and therein we
meet, we wait, we call upon God, as his People of old did, who knew not how to
pray, but as the Spirit helped their infirmities, and this is according to the
Spirit of Truth, which the Liturgy refers and directs men to, and the
Scriptures direct us to this Spirit of Truth, to follow its guidance and
teaching; and dare this Accusar plainly affirm, that the Liturgy, and Practice
of the Church of England do not allow of this? has not he herein accused the
Church of England? then what Church does he belong to? and does not the word
Liturgy of the Church, signify, The public Work, Action, or Service of the
Church? and can any reasonably confine it only to Reading Confessions of sins,
and Prayers? for is there not both a Prayer before Sermon, and Preaching also
used in the Church, which are not particularly recorded in the
Common Prayer Book? Besides, this our Accusar, though he would show himself
both a Divine and a Lawyer, yet he is good at neither Law nor Gospel; for the
words of the Act, viz. Any Assembly, Meeting, or Conventicle under color or
pretense of any Exercise of Religion, in other manner then according to the
Liturgy of the Church of England, etc. the sense hereof he ties up to this,
(says he) It must be according to the form and method there prescribed, that
is public Prayer, in places set apart; there being in the Liturgy prescribed
Forms as well for private as public Worships, etc. as if he would tell us,
that the religious exercise that is according to the Common Prayer, is the
Common Prayer it self; and so unless we have it read, we are hereby deemed to
be under a color of religious exercise not according to it, which is gross
nonsense and ignorance; for that which is according to ^he Liturgy is not the
Liturgy it self; besides the words color or pretense of any exercise of
Religion, relate to the Title and Preamble of the Act, as not being the real
manifestation of Worship, but a Cover to carry on some contrary, design or
intention of Sedition or Insurrection; for the Title of the Act, is, An Act to
prevent and suppress seditious Conventicles; therefore, not to prevent and
suppress peaceable harmless Meetings, which are really for the Worship and
Service of God, in the Spirit and Truth. The Preamble which ought to be the Key
and Reason of the Law, is against the growing and dangerous practices of
Seditious. Sectaries, and other disloyal Persons, who under pretense of tender
Conscences, have, or may at their Meetings contrive Insurrections; hereby the
words Color and Pretense are sufficiently explained; and that it ought not to
be inflicted upon people who are really of tender Consciences toward God in
their exercise of Religion and Worship, which we being concerned in, have not
in the least, forfeited the liberty to tender Consciences so often promised by
the King, both in his Letters from Breda, and diverse Declarations since.

Again, whereas this Informer accuses us of a seditious and blasphemous
Pamphlet, published in the year 1664. without repeating either any Sedition or
Blasphemy in it, or showing by what Author, etc. Let the indifferent Reader
note his envy and malice herein, and how disingeniously he has dealt by us.

And now to prove our Practices dangerous he proceeds thus.

Inform. That they have been dangerous Germany has well experienced, by the
rebellion of David George, the first of your Sect. Such another was John of
Leydon, and Cobbs faction in England.

Answ. This Informer would make the Magistrates believe strange Stories against
us, if they would be but so easily drawn to dance at his Pipe, and do the
Devils drudgery of persecution for him, as his malicious spirit would have
them; and if they were so credulous as to believe his notorious Lies and
forgeries against the Quakers; where he tells them of the Rebellion in Germany,
bringing it as an instance against us, though most unjustly and impertinently:
As also his calling David George the first of our Sect, which is a most
manifest and absurd Falsehood and Abuse; for as History mentions of him, he was
about the year, 1544, and held (as recorded) very blasphemous licencious
doctrines; as that he was Christ the Messiah; and declared Polygamy (or the
having many Wive,) to be free and lawful: And further (its said) Embroyled the
lower parts of Germany in Tumults, As in Ross his View.
which things both our righteous Principles and innocent Lives do utterly
testify against. And as for John of Leyden, who lived also about the same
time, who is said to have had his Meetings all in the night time) he is
represented as one of the same Principle, to allow of the same gross evil of
Polygamy. whose extravigancies, pride, and presumption, in his causing Wars,
and Disturbances, and assuming Kings-ship (as recorded of him) our Religion and
Example do also condemn as repugnant to the very Nature and Life of
Christianity.

And besides, where does History or intilligent Persons relate that either
David George, John of Leiden, or Cobs Faction, were accounted Quakers in their
time? Do but see the malice and falsehood of this Accuser and Informer, thus to
render such our Presidents, whose Example we never followed; and if he could
nominate thousands of rebellious Persons, does it appear just in him to
endeavor the prejudicing, and instigation of the Rulers against such as are
Innocent and Peaceable, both in their Principles and Deportments: Surely such
cruel and partial Informers as this, who has no more sense either of the
common good of the Nation, nor what is consistant with human Society, nor yet of
their Innocence whom he accuses; but would have People disturbed and
persecuted for their Consciences, upon his mere false suggestions, and evil
surmises, would bring the Nation to a sad pass, if they had their wicked wills,
who have neither Truth, Reason, nor hnman Policy, in their seeking to blow up
the Coals of Sedition, Strife, and Persecution amongst their Neighbors, which
is never like to compose differences in matters of Religion and Conscience, but
to make them wider and more incomposible.

Inform. There is Sedition and Rebellion employed in the Doctrine you teach at
your Conventicles: You preach against Dignities, and Titles of Honor; calling
them Antichristian contrary to the Scripture, etc.

Answ. Here is an Accusation of an implicit Sedition and Rebellion in our
Doctrine; but no proof, only a false Accusation added, That we preach against
Dignities, which is a gross Slander; for both Dignities and Dominion we own,
knowing that its Truth and Righteousness which only does Dignifie and make
Worthy and honorable; it is Virtue and Wisdom makes honorable and worthy; and
all Titles that are proper thereunto, which truly express either the Virtue,
Dignity, or Worth of Rulers, and their Dominion, we never opposed; but
flattering, complemental deceitful Titles, which tend but to please men, and
gratify proud spirits, we utterly deny, as that which our Maker would condemn
us for, should we use them: This Informer had dealt more ingeniously, had he
told us what those (he calls) Titles of Honor are, which the Scripture
commands, and which he says, we call Antichristian.

Inform. To the King belongs Obedience; you must obey his Laws, and those
either actively or passively; but you are content with neither. Whatsoever is
commanded by Authority, if it be not contrary to the Word of God, must be
obeyed actively, and not passively. Passive Obedience is only required when
things contrary to the Word of God are commanded.

Answ. It is a false Accusation, That we are content with neither; for we obey
both actively and passively; Actively so far as stands with our Peace of
Conscience, in the Sight of God, and otherwise we are passive, as our patient
suffering so deeply, has amply showed: Howbeit, this Accusar has implied,
That there may be Laws or Commands contrary to the Word of God; it is well he
will allow the Word of God any room, in saying, Whatsoever is commanded, if it
be not contrary to the Word of God, it must be obeyed actively: So then it
follows, that whatsoever is contrary must not; for indeed, the Word and Law of
God are indispensable; and God has placed an equal and just Law of Reason in
man's heart, Whereby we call for Justice, and Equity.
which neither Statute, Presciption, nor Custom ought to prevail against; but
if any be brought in against it, they are to be holden for void, and against
justice, and so no Laws according to Doct. and Stud. Cap. 2.

And no man of what estate or degree soever, has Power to dispense with God's
Law, 28 H. 8.

And now, what is according to the Law of God, or not acaccording to it, the
prejudiced persecuting spirit is no meet nor competent Judge to be sure: but
the patient suffering Spirit and Mind, that dwells in the true Light, being
qualified with Graces and Ornaments of the Spirit of God, which are, Love, Joy,
Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance,
against which there is no Law, Gal. 5. Whereas the fruits of the flesh are
contrary, as, Hatred, Variance, Emulation, Stife, Sedition, Heresies, etc.
above all which the Spirit of Truth, and its Fruits are exalted, and followed
by the Children of Light, who are born after the Spirit, who are persecuted and
oppressed only by such as are born after the flesh; and herein are you,
malicious Persecutors, manifest of what seed and birth you are, see, Gal. 4. 29.

Inform. It is not necessary that all things commanded by Authority must have a
command, or president in Scripture; for many things are left indifferent to the
discretion of God's Vicegerents, as Kings, etc. A Power is likewise in the
Governors of the Church, to impose such things as they shall find necessary to
be observed in the public Worship of God; and this we may infer from those
words of the Apostle, The rest will I set in order when I come.

Answ. To the first part, Nothing essential to the Worship of God can truly be
deemed indifferent, nor differently left to men's discretion, for the Law of the
Spirit of Life is the true and infallible Rule to Believers in the true
Worship, and men's judgments ought to be subject thereunto; but as for this
notion, of things indifferent in the Worship of God; it has been an inlet to
much Idolatry and Superstition amongst Apostates and pretended Christians:
However, it is a gross impiety, as also an interfering with their own
Principle, for any to persecute others merely for things which themselves deem
indifferent, which in moderation might better be dispensed with, then
rigorously to enforce them. To the second part, This Informer seems to set up a
second sort of Governors in the Church, besides (or above) Kings, as having
power to impose things in worship, without either Scripture or President
thereof, which is rank Popery, tending to encourage Popery, and to bege^ People
into an implicit faith, and acceptance of unwritten Traditions, from those he
counts Governors of the Church; but herein he has plainly opposed the
Protestants high esteem and preferment of the holy-Scriptures. And his instance
of the Apostle, The rest will I set in order when I come, will make nothing for
his purpose, to bring dissenters under all the unscriptural Impositions and
Ceremonies of these he calls Governors of the Church: whether he means the
Pope, his Cardinals, Bishops, and Clergy, he has not told us; or whether he
means some oth^^ (...) kin to them in their Traditions: But herein he has but
(...) begged the Question, as if he took it for granted, that conscientious
Dissenters must presently, upon his bare word, believe that these Imposers he
now pleads for, are in the same Power and Authority and Example with the
Apostles and Ministers of Christ in former days; but Dissenters must have a
better demonstration then this man's bare word for it, or the Persecution and
Cruelty he would instigate to, but he has greatly erred in these matters; for
the true Church had one Head and Lawgiver even Christ, and wherein the true
Ministers and Elders thereof did give directions, either for ordering affairs
or to follow them; It was not from a mere imposition nor outward force, nor yet
as Lords over Gods Heritage, neither to have dominion over their Faith, but in
the unity of the Spirit of Life, as Fellow-Helpers in Christ, and as being
manifest by the powerful evidence of his Spirit even in their Consciences; so
said the Apostle, Be ye Followers of me as dear Children, even as I am of
Christ: Now such Children as he begot into the Faith knew it their duty to
follow him, as they knew him a Follower of Christ; but this is no ground for
either the Pope, or his Clergy, or any that are popish in their unwritten
Traditions, to impose them, or force them upon such as are none of their
Children, for that is but a mere usurpation at most, and but Antichristian.
Inform. Honor the King, but this you preach against.

Answ. This is an absolute Slander, for the Fear of God, to which the true
Honor of Kings is joined, we have always owned* and preached up, desiring that
the Fear of God might not be slighted, nor such wicked actions, pollutions, and
corruptions committed in the Nations as do both greatly provoke God, and
dishonor the King and Government. True Honor is a substantial thing, not
consisting in feigned complements, nor deformed cringes.

Inform. The best Language he (to wit the King) can get from you is Thou and
Thee, as if he were your Fellow; this error of yours, etc.

Answ. Is Thou and Thee such bad dishonorable Language? Why do thou then use
thee and thou to God in thy Prayers (if thou have so much Religion to pray at
all?) But have thou not herein accused the Prophets and Apostles with ill
Language and with dishonouring Kings and Rulers, by using Thou and Thee when
they spoke particularly; for was it not the Language of Moses to Pharaoh, who
was a King, The Lord God has sent Me unto Thee, saying* Let my People go that
they may serve me, but hitherto Thou would not hear. And Exodus 7. 16. And how
long will Thou refuse to humble thy self before me? let my People go that they
may serve me, Chap. 10. 3. And did not the Prophet Nathan say to King David,
Thou art the man? 2. Sam. 12. 7. And did not the three Children answer
Nebucadnezar the King, Be it known unto Thee, O King, that we will not serve
Thy gods, nor worship the golden image which Thou have set up? Dan. 3. 16, 17,
18. And did not Paul use the word Thee to King Agrippa? Act. 26. 2, 3. But if
this Informer had but remembered his Accidence, and the difference between
Singular and Plural he need not have counted Thee and Thou to one such ill
Language.

Inform. Serve none else but him who has called you from a Worldly to a
Spiritual Employment (This is the meaning he gives to the words, Call no man
Master, etc.

Answ. If true Ministers must only serve Christ who has called them, then
Christ's Followers are not to be imposed upon, at men's wills or discretions, (so
called) but to obey and follow Christ, who is their Leader, Master, and
Governor; and this breaks the neck of this Accusers stuff against Quakers.

Inform. The next thing that belongs to Caesar is Tribute* we shall not deny
but that you pay Taxes* because you are compelled* etc.

Answ. Our paying Taxes is not from compulsion, or wrath, but for Conscience
sake, our end and intent therein being honest and reasonable as in the sight of
God; for the upholding of Government, for the execution of Justice and
Righteousness; our desires being that Rulers might be a terror to Evildoers,
and a praise to them that do well; for the preservation of men in their
respective Proprieties, Rights, and Liberties; so that in our paying our Dues
we have a Testimony for God, and may with a good Conscience clame our Rights
and Liberties as men, and ought also to have our Freedom as Christians, whilst
we give to God his Due, and to Caesar his Due, which neither this Accuser nor
all the Devils Agents besides can justly detect us in, though to prove that we
do not give to God those things due to him, he goes on thus.

Inform. Here you fail; what has been once dedicated to God, and set apart for
the Maintenance of his Service and Worship, does belong to God.

Answ. This [doth belong] is a false Assertion, for those many ordinances of
Divine Service under the Law, with the Sacrifices, Offerings, diverse Washings,
and many Shaddows, which belonged to the outward Tabernacle and Temple, have
been dedicated for the Service of God in their time, which now are ended in
Christ; as the Tithes are, which were given to the Priests, for their service
at the Tabernacle, Numbers* 18* which had an end, the substance of all being
Manifest in Christ.

Inform. God has assigned this payment to his Ministers, They that wait at the
Alter should live of the Alter, and they which preach the Gospel should live of
the Gospel* so that whosoever refuses to pay Tithes to the Ministers does not
give to God the things that belong to God.

Answ. Here he grossly perverts that Scripture, 1 Cor. 9. 13. 14. rendering it
as if living of the Gospel were in the same manner of the Priests living of the
Alter under the Law; whereas at the Altar they pertook of both Tithes and
Offerings, must they therefore live upon Tithes and Offerings under the Gospel?
where is then the difference between Law and Gospel? and how are Offerings
ended under the Gospel? and a tenth part of the Tithes of the Children of
Israel was to be offered up a Heave Offering unto the Lord, Number. 18. 26, 27,
28, 29. But as for the words [even so] they relate not to the manner of living
of the Alter: but to the Lord's Ordaining, as even so has the Lord ordained,
that they that preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel, 1. or. 9. 14. so
the Gospel makes way for the true Minsters Maintenance, which is not a forced
Maintenance, neither is it Tithes or Offerings; for as is fully testified in
Heb. 7. the Priesthood being changed there is made of necessity a change also
of the Law; the Sons of Levy who received the Office of the Priesthood had a
Command to take Tithes of their Brethren, but this is ended as it is said;
there is a disanulling of the Commandment going before; so this man might as
well have accused the Apostle with failing to pay to God his Due, as have
accused us in the matter of Tithes, seeing our Testimony is one and the same:
But this Informer shows himself to have little regard to Scripture, whilst he
can plead the discretion of Magistrates and imposition of Governors, for
things in matter of Worship, which he has neither Scripture Command or
president for, especially among the primitive Christians and Apostles.

Inform. His Worship in Spirit and Truth is but the lesser part of his due. It
is obedience God desires rather then Sacrifice or Worship; God commands you to
be obedient to Authority.

Answ. Let the Reader mark here how absurdly he reasons; First, implying a
Worship of God in Spirit and Truth, without obedience which cannot be; for that
Worship which stands in Spirit and Truth is Obedience, for Truth admits of no
disobedience. Secondly, his deeming the true Worship of God to be but the
lesser part of his due; and Obedience to Authority to be the greater* herein he
has blasphemously set up an Authority above God, and so man above his Maker;
for it is outward Authority his words intend; but he is greatly mistaken, for
we in worshipping and obeying God in Spirit and Truth, which is our principal
Duty, do not oppose nor resist any Authority, or wholesome Laws, which have a
dependence upon the Authority and Law of God.

Where we said, We do not meet to plot or contrive Insurrections.

Inform. We have but your bare word for it.

Answ. This is false, you have more then our bare word (viz.) our innocent
behavior, and harmless deportment, evidently mani^ested through the many
Afflictions, Persecutions, and Cruelties that we have patiently undergone since
we were a People, and all for the Testimony of our tender Consciences toward
God; therefore it is evident that we have but this man's bare word for proof,
that our Meetings are either seditious Conventicles, or tending to
Insurrection, and if he were not wilfully blind he might see the contrary
openly evinced by our Christian Conversation, in the peaceable exercise of our
Religion and Conscience.

Inform. It is true, there is danger enough in your small meetings, but much
more in your greater meetings of hundreds; for by lessning your meetings, we
may better secure both Church and State; for ten or twelve can make no great
disturbance in a place; a Constable may suppress these; but where five or six
hundred more shall meet, and finding an opportunity, make an Insurrection may
set a whole City on flames, etc.

Answ. What danger has this man seen in any of our Meetings, either small or
great? we challenge him, and all such malicious Informers in the World, to
prove any danger or hurt by us in our Meetings? Besides, has not he herein
struck at the Parliaments allowing small meetings, of four Persons above the
Families, besides all such as are under the age of sixteen years, as i^ therein
they allowed of dangerous and seditious Meetings, which we are confident they
do not believe concerning us called Quakers. And as for this Accusers judging
our greater Meetings, of hundreds, to be much more dangerous, and therefore
would have them less^ed; what ground or reason has he for his evil surmise in
this, seeing when our Meetings are large, our doors being open, many mixed
people may come and behold us and our order? that if we were of that ill mind,
as to contrive Evil or Sedition, we could not have opportunity; we should be
the maddest Plotters that ever were, if we should be so public and obvious
therein; but the Lord has redeemed us out of all such occasions both public
and private; we have given no occasion of either fear, suspicion, or jealousy
to our Persecutors in those matters, it is their own guilt, and envious
persecuting spirits that attract fears and troubles, the Witness of God
persuing them for their injuries, and injustice, who afflict the Innocent, and
oppress the Poor and Needy, for whose sake God will arise, and plead their
Cause.

Inform. Your antic tricks in your silent Meetings, etc.

Answ. What antic tricks thou Slanderer and Scoffer? though we have often
waited in silence together upon God, and received comfort and benefit therein,
from him by his Spirit wherein we wait and worship him: And what have thou
against this, thou bloody-minded Informer? And what color or pretense of
Religious Exercise have thou, to inform against these harmless silent Meetings?
Where is the color or pretense? and what exercise provest thou therein, that
the Act takes hold of? And what plotting or contriving have thou ever heard or
seen in any such Meetings, or in any of our Meetings, tending to set the City
on flames? And as for antic tricks, if the Devil had not blinded thee, and
such as thou art; thou might have made those ungodly Meetings at Play Houses
the subject of thy Information, and not the innocent pious Meetings of the
People called Quakers. For is it not obvious, what impudency, antic whorish
tricks and postures appear upon Stages, at Play Houses, in and about the Cities
of London and Westminster, to draw out the minds of People into vanity, and a
whorish spirit, as Women without the appearance of Modesty or Sobriety in their
behavior, and men dect in women's Apparel, to be examples of whorish postures?
besides the many vain shows and sights to affect and gratify the vain wonton
eyes, minds, and spirits of Youth, to draw them into impudency and debauchery,
such abominations as is a Reproach to the Profession of Christianity, and a
shame to the Nation.

And to that of Mal. 1. 11. In every place Incense (or Offerings) shall be
offered unto my Name; This Informer gives this meaning, That this has relation
to the calling in of the Gentiles. The Coming of Christ and Convertion of the
Gentiles by his Gospel (i. e.) in every Country or Nation (To which we say, Why
should we be deprived of this privilege in our Country and Nation, where so
much of Christ and Gospel is professed?) But then he adds, In places dedicated to
my Name, the public Places of God's Worship, his Houses, dedicated set apart
for his peculiar Service, etc.

Reply, But what Houses does he intend? are they Steeple Houses, which were
dedicated for the Mass? were these the Houses which he says God put into their
heart to build him? it appears they are; and to them he would have all
compelled: but herein his Popish Spirit and Principle does appear; for did not
the Papists build those Houses he pleads for, (for their Worship) as he thinks
God put it into their hearts to do? but, can he think that in every Country
where the Gentiles are called in, there must of necessity be such places or
Mass-houses? or must the poor Ministers of Christ forbear to go into those
Nations, to preach where there are no such consecrated by Pope or Bishop? And
then must the Gentiles in those Countries be unpreached to, uncalled and
unconverted till such Houses are built and dedicated? I hope the Reader will
easily see the obsurdity and ignorance of this malicious Informer herein, who
also adds, that is, Every place cannot be taken in the general sense; for then
it will take in Hell, where Sacrifices shall never be, etc. Wherein he most
absurdly reasons; for the subjects of this Prophecy were neither in Hell, nor
to come there, being the converted Gentiles, as he confesses. And who is so
ignorant of Scripture, as to think that Christ and his Apostles were confined
always to meet in the Jews Temple and Synagogues; for did they not meet on
Mountains, by the Seaside, and in Houses. And did not many hundreds of the
primitive Christians meet together, and that at such places as were not
dedicated or consecrated, as the Mass-houses are? And did not Christ set up the
true Worship in Spirit and Truth above the worship at the Temple of Jerusalem,
where the Jews thought m^n ought to worship? and was not that Temple a Figure?
and where i^ there any Precept or Command in Scripture for the building such
another, and compelling people thereto to Worship: answer by plain Scripture,
or else stop your Mouths [you Persecutors about Religion] the true Christians,
who are Jews inward, worship God in the newness of the Spirit, and not in the
oldness of the Letter; they waited in the Spirit, they prayed in the Spirit,
they sung in the Spirit, they had the Spirit of Grace and Supplication powered
upon them, according to promise: And this Worship was divine, and not invented
nor divised, nor framed up, nor yet performed in the will of man, What, and
whence then was their Liturgy? Let the holy Scriptures answer. And does not
the Lyturgy of the Church of England allow of the Holy Scriptures of Truth, and
the Example of the primitive Christians therein recorded? Let Truth and Reason
answer.

And whereas this Accuser says, touching our Diffinitions in our Postscript
(viz) upon the words Seditious, Disloyal, etc. That they agree very well with
our Practices, and that we are guilty of all either in Posse or Esse, and
therefore ought to be prevented.

Reply, As this most partial and prejudiced Informer has all along set himself
in his Pamphlet, as both our false Accuser and unjust Judge; so herein from his
own groundless and evil surmise has insinuated a most unjust Conclusion of
guilt upon us as being Seditious and Disloyal (that is loving Discord and
Treachery) wherein God and our Country knows he wrongs us; but his proof of all
against the Quakers amounts to nothing farther then an envious application of
an old story of David George, and John of Leyden, etc. and to an envious
conclusion, of being guilty either in Posse or Esse; but whether this be any
sufficient evidence either to convict or prevent us; we leave to the just
Witness of God in all Consciences, and to the consideration of all unprejudiced
impartial-minded men, both Rulers and others.

London, the 3d day of the 4th Month cal^^^ June, 1670. From some of the
People of God, called, Quakers.
Here follows a Recital of some envious Information and Accusations against the
Quakers (by H. Thornedike, Prebend of Westminster-Church, so called) in his
Book, called, A Discourse of the forbearance or the Penalties, which a due
Reformation requires.
WHEREIN His unchristian and inhumane Spirit and Principle is discovered; and
hereby he has showed himself no better then the Jewish Priests, Popish
Prelates, and other Merchants of Babylon.
PAge 177. Says this Prebend, But now, as for the Quakers, we are no more to
reckon them among Christians, then the Gnonosticks and Manichees of old, then
the Mahumetans at present.

Reply, Here is no proof of any evil against the Quakers, but ^eer railing and
misrepresenting them; for they were never of the Principle of the Gnonosticks,
Manichees, nor Mahumetans; See what they held; Ecc. Cron. 567.
first, concerning Gnonostici or Gnostics, they are recorded for Heretics
which swell^d in p^ide (by some called Barbarites, by reason of their beastly
life) Epiphanius says, the Valentines called themselves Gnostici, and that all
women among them were common, etc. Now how most unjustly this Prebend has
compared us, (called Quakers) to such, let all that know us and our Principle
judge* for all such Debauchery, and ungodly Practices, and Ran^isme we utterly
deny and abhor, they more suit the Spirit of many of his own Fraternity, who
are owned as Sons of the Church, and more justly might be compared and applied
unto them who are possessed with the Spirit of Whoredom, among whom Whoredom and
Drunkenness increase, who for all that (being capable to put into Priests
mouths) remain unexcommunicated.

And as for the Manichees its recorded, Ecc. Cron. f. 599.
they had their appellation from one M^^^s, a Heretic, who called himself
Christ, and who said that Christ was not truly born, but fantastically; and
that he taught, that there were many Gods; and that the Sun was to be
worshipped; and that the Souls of men went from one Body to another, etc. But
these things were never believed, nor taught, nor owned by the Quakers: and
therefore this prejudiced Prebend's instance and comparison herein, together
with that of the M^h^metans against us, is most false, and malicious, and
unjust; and hereby he can never unchristian the Quakers; for their Christianity
both in Life and Principle stands over him* and all such false Accusers.

Preb. For they do openly own the dictates of their own Spirit to be as much
the Word of God as the Scriptures; acknowledging the Scriptures so far as they
please.

Reply, This is also a false Accusation, for it is not their own spirits, but
the Spirit of God which they follow the dictates of, which agree with the holy
Scriptures, by which Spirit of God the Revelations of the Mystery of Life and
Salvation in Christ is given unto us, and we have received power, not only to
profess, but to order our conversations according to the holy Scriptures.

Preb. Introduce the pretenses of their own Revelation where they think fit.

Reply, This is also an evil suggestion; for it is not such pretenses, but the
Revelation of Jesus Christ in reality, that by his Spirit is introduced amongst
us.

Preb. For when the private spirit is equalled with Gods Word, the last
dictate, as in men's last Wills must of necessity take place.

Reply, This is also false, as it is intended against us, called Quakers; and
no less then a Popish Accusation cast upon us, this being the very phrase of
Papists against us, as calling the Spirit of Christ by which we are led a
private spirit; whereas indeed it is the universal Spirit which convinces the
World of sin, and leads the true Believers into all truth; and in this
universal Spirit we worship God, and have good will to all men.

Preb. The Quakers follow everyone their own [spirit;] therefore are the more
contemptable.

Reply, This also is a false and contemptable Accusation cast upon us, the same
with the former; for we prefer the Spirit of God, and its leadings, and not our
own.

Preb. Certainly, did they see that they cannot be reconciled, but as so many
Runnagadoes, they would bethink themselves before they went on in their madness.

Reply, Envious men are blind, and void of true Judgment, and are ready to
stumble at Noonday; and though they have eyes, yet cannot see; for we have
received Grace, by which we are reconciled and redeemed from folly and madness;
by which Grace we are taught to deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to
live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present evil World.

Preb. This their Position is not reconcilable to civil trust, always
oblieging them to the most desperate acts of Treason and violence to their
Country, that they can imagine their own spirits to dictate.

Rep. As this Position charged upon us (of following our own private spirits)
is utterly false, so are also these Consequences, and they savor of a popish
and blood thirsty spirit, that would bring Persecution and violence upon us;
therefore we challenge and charge this Prebend to prove (if he can) when, and
where we were perfidious, either in matters of civil trust, or ever brought
forth acts of Treason or Violence to our Country; we charge it upon him, as a
most malicious and envious instigation against us.

Preb. It cannot be beyond the merit of their madness, that they are made Servi
penae, by Law, as the Romans Law calls it; That is, That they are transported
to work in the Plantations -- the Law is to provide for such People.

Rep. Here is still more Railing and Instigation to Cruelty and Persecution: No
doubt but this man, if he had Power, or Horns long enough he would be cruel
enough; we may expect the very mercies of such to be cruelty; he would have us
made Servi penae indeed, but we desire more competent Judges then such as he,
who is not content with our ancient English Laws already made; but would have
crueller to bring us under servitude and vassalage in Foreign Plantations;
whereas many thousands of conscientious Dissenters, both Quakers and others,
have estates already sufficient to live upon, which they have honestly labored
for* But if this cruel Prebend's counsel might take effect against us, it
appears we must have our Estates taken from us, and then be exiled as Slaves
and Drudges: But does he design, that he and his Companions shall have our
Estates, or part of them, to spend upon their lust? Surely, it is obvious what
misery he, and such as are of his Gang would bring upon this Nation; a
considerable part whereof does conscientiously dissent from this Prebend's Way
and Religion, who has thus shown his inveterate, proud, imperious persecuting
Spirit most repugnant to the equal Law of Christ, which enjoins him to do to
all men as he would they should do to him: Besides, what pride and presumption
is it in him to take upon him to prescribe the Magistrates such a way and
manner of proceeding against Dissenters, so contrary to the wholesome fundamental
Laws* Privileges and Rights of English men.

Preb. They must fail of civil trust of Subjects, that is, that their
Testimonies be not taken in Law, That they be disabled to sue at Law; That they
be disabled to make Wills, or to get by Wills; or anything else within the
effect of civil trust; And this must also be the penal^^ of the Leviathan, and
all that may follow him* either into Apostasy or Atheism.

Repl. This envious Informer would have us excluded out of all our rights at
once, though without any just ground or reason: Let but all that are unbyassed
in this Nation see what ranchor cruelty and injustice resides in this man's
spirit, Leviathan (crooked Serpent) like, thus ^o seek to deprive freeborn
English men of their rights and privileges, and that without any proof or
ground for his Accusations, accusing us of failing of the civil trust of
Subjects, when as we have been found more trusty and faithful then many of his
Coat, who have temporized, crept, and changed with every Form and change of
Government, for Self Ends, Gain, and Preferment.

Preb. For they who declare themselves as freedom to forswear the Christian
Faith can never be held by any Bond of civil Trust: It must be also the Penalty
of all Sects that may rel^ps. It may be a Q^estion, Why the Kingdom should be
counted a Christian Kingdom, if the Laws of it set not some Mark of Infamy upon
the Enemies of Christianity, which only the enforceing of Ex^ommunication by
the La^ can do.

Repl. Who are to be marked as Enemies to Christianity? This man is no
competent Judge, for he has already abused true Christians (as such like)
seeking to instigate the Magistrates, to do his and his Brethrens Druggery of
Persecution against them. And when and where did we ever declare our selves at
freedom to forswear the Christian Faith? Is not this an envious insinuation of
thy own head and wicked heart, to make us odious? We hope we shall have a
better trial; end more impartial Judges, and more just Judgment than this man's,
before he gets us transported to work in foreign Plantations; but it appears,
all this man aims at is the enforcing severity upon all that dissent from his
Way* And what does he think will be the effect thereof? And how will such cruel
work compose the spirits of the People of this Nation? does he think to make up
a good Church or a complete Body, by driving men with force and cruelty into
his way and worship? Surely this is not the way to make sound Members, but to
add to the number of Hypocrites; nor is this the Way of Christianity: And where
did Peter, Paul, Timothy or Titus go about to instigate the Rulers to
Persecution, and to Transporting of men to be as Slaves and Vassals for their
Religion and Conscience? Or where did any of the true Ministers or Apostles
endeavor to exclude either Jews or Gentiles from their outward civil Rights
and Privileges, or from the benefit of the civil Law of their Nation? or
endeavor and seek to set such a Mark upon them merely for their Principle or
difference in Judgment and Opinions? Let this Prebend show us a President,
Precept, or Example among the true Christians in all the Scriptures of Truth
for this his work. As for Apostasy and Athism, it is not amongst us, but among
many professed and owned as Sons of that Church he is a Member of, who are run
into a spirit of Liberty and Debauchery, whereby the Earth is corrupted, and
the beauty of much of the Nation stained, and the profession of Christianity
scandalized, and made odious in the eyes of Mahumitans, and other Nations; but
as for these things, he and his Fraternity can connive at and overlook them,
while they can contribute to uphold them in their Pride, Idleness, and Fullness;
who notwithstanding cannot therein acquiess without envying the very Being of
others more rational, prudent, and righteous then themselves.

Well, you that appear in this cruel persecuting, domineering, Lordly spirit;
the Earth grows sick of you, and will assuredly vomit you out, and you will
become a byword and a hissing to the Nations, except you lower your Top-sayls,
and bow down to the equal, just Principle of God in you, and so come into some
lowliness, tenderness, and humility of spirit, out of the nature of the Beasts
of prey, into the nature of Sheep and Lambs. Otherwise God will greatly debase
you, and bring his Judgments upon you; the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it in
and through his Servants,

G. W. W. S.


Some few Errors and Defects, in Letters and Points have escaped the Press
through the expedition hereof, which the Reader may correct.
PAge 4. line 11. for Spirit, read Scriptures. p. 5. l. 31. r. Magistrates. p.
6. l. 5. r. wives. l. 33. r. humans. p. 8. l. 14. for stife. r. strife. l. 29.
for differently r. indifferently.

THE END.

