THE STATE OF THE FUTURE LIFE, AND THE Present's Order to It:

Considered By THO. WHITE Gent.

PSALM. 15. 11. Notas mihi fecisti vias vitae: adimplebis me laetitia cum vultu
Tuo: delectationes in Dextera Tua, usque in finem. LONDON, Printed by T. W. for
John Ridley, and are to be Sold at the Castle in Fleetstreet by Ram Alley. 1654

To the Reader.
LEast this petty Countriman of ours may seem to impose on the World, or that
emminent Name which adorns the Front: It Is judged a duty, to make It Is first
breath proclaim This but a Translation, out of that Latin Original, which a
powerful Sollicitour prevayl'd upon the well-furnisht Charity of this Author,
suddenly, to digest into a perfect Course of Meditations, for the Spiritual
exercise of the English Clergy.

And now, this free confession obliges it, wisely, to prevent a severer
censure, by detecting as ingenuously it is farther Imperfections: Presenting but
the just half of that Body; nor this, rigorously or verbatim, but with a fair
proportion of Liberty; Wherein, as the different genius of so distinct
Languages Vindicates It Is providence, thus, to secure the same clearness and
emphasis to the same very sense; so, in the other, the entire fitness of this
part, by it self, for the General use, may excuse it is separation from the
rest, which is but singular and concerns only the Clergy: Who may civilly be
referred to the Fountain, if they have any Appetite; whence a prudent
compassion has drawn this, only for such weak or nice Stomachs, soon clogged
with the sight of Variety, or more than is just necessary for their own present
Refection.

The Contents. Being these Considerations following.
TRue Felicity, or the perfect Happiness of a Rational Soul, is the Future
Life's Portion. 2. The Delight, which proceeds from the Knowledge and Vision of
Almighty God, infinitely excells all other. 3. The happy State of the Just's
Bodies, after their Resurrection. 4. The intolerable Pains of the Damned, for
the Loss of this happy Knowledge and Sight of God. 5. The unspeakable Pains
which the damned Souls shall suffer* through their own disordinate Affections.
6. Though the Bodies of the damned, by reason of their State, be incorruptible
after the Resurrection; yet shall not their Souls be exempt from Corporal
pains. 7. The Beatifical Vision is the Erd, whereat we ought principally to aim
in all our Actions. 8. Piety is conformable to Man's Nature: whence such as
live, according to Virtue, are most happy, even, in this World. 9. God highly
esteems our Felicity; then, how ought we to value It. 10. The great Benefits
Mankind has received by Christ's coming into the World. 11. Meekness and
Humility is the readiest way to Happiness, not only hereafter, but even in this
Life. 12. Fraternal Charity is the true Mark of a good Christian, and the only
sure way to eternal Happiness.
THE STATE OF THE Future Life, AND The Present's Order to it.
THE FIRST Consideration.
True Felicity, or, the perfect Happiness of a Rational Soul, is the Future
Life's Portion.

The First Point.
COnsider. Since Almighty 1. The future Life preferrable.
God has ordained, for Man, two sorts of Life; One, in this World, short and
full of Misery; the other* in the next, Everlasting* and, for those that live
well here, subject to no evil, and abounding with all good: It Is evident, this
latter is, infinitely and without all comparison, to be preferred.

The second point.
AGain. Considering 2. Because knowledge, there, more perfect.
that Knowledge is the Good of a Rational Soul; and that no one Object has the
least repugnance to any other, as to being known, but all (however opposite
among themselves) are perfectly consistent in the Understanding; the Soul, of
its own nature, if not checked, by union with the body, is capable of knowing
all things. Since therefore, through the Obstruction of the Body in the whole
course of this Life, she attains to the knowledge of but very few things, and
those one by one; whereas, in the next world, she shall be freed from all
impediment, being either alone, without the Body or absolute Mistress of it
It Is evidently consequent that, knowledge (the Souls good,) in respect of the
Object, mus^ hereafter, where it is no^ hindered, infinitely surpass it self,
here, whilst it is subject to the Body.

The third Point.
BUt, farther. Considering 3. God being it is sole Object.
that all Objects and things, both in their Nature and Number, are limited and
finite; except Almighty God, who alone, in his sole Essence, as in one single
Reality and Formality) contains them all and infinite other possibilities, in a
more united and infinitely higher kind; whence, He Is the sole Object that can
render our knowledge perfect, and that only Soul's good whose Vision and
Fruition can make us happy: Hence, again, it follows that, since this Object is
reserved for the next life, its Felicity is incomparably to be preferred,
before all the Goods and Happiness this life can promise, much less afford, us.

Conclusion.
COnclude, therefore, Therefore, only, to be minded.
and convince thy self that this one, only necessary, and Soul-satisfying Good
ought to be prosecuted and sought for, even with the neglect of all other
interests; that the greatest part of thy life, perhaps, hitherto, has perished
and been spent in vain: and resolve seriously to provide for the future, that,
of that little time which, peradventure, is left thee, no day, no hour, no
moment pass by, without some progress toward thy obtaining this sole Good.

The second Consideration.
The Delight, which proceeds from the Knowledge and Vision of Almighty God,
infinitely excells all other.

The first Point.
COnsider. Since all delight 1. All delight from the Intellect.
either consists in Knowledge, or, at least, absolutely depends on it; for, we
find, by experience, all the knowledge we have, (even sensible,) is perfected
in the Brain, by help of the Understanding: It follows that, All delight,
whether Intellectual or Sensual, proceeds from the Soul, as it is Intellectual;
and consequently, that delectation, which comprehends all Intellectual,
comprehends, indeed, all manner of delight: Wherefore, the Vision of God must
needs contain, in it self, all kind of sweet contentments, and infinitely
exceed all other delights.

The second Point.
AGain. All temporal 2. Whence, God transcends all Corporal Pleasures.
and worldly Pleasures consist in a certain Motion and transient succession,
which quickly slip away; and can have no greater stability than the time, by
which they are measured: nor indeed can that be long; for, neither are we able
always to eat or drink, etc. nor yet always attend or reflect (without which
it is impossible to take delight) what we do, whilst we are in these Actions.
But, on the contrary, that delight which flows from the Vision of God is
Everlasting, steady and unchangeable as any fixed and permanent substance, not
enjoyed by piecemeal, never interrupted, as, of necessity, all Corporal
pleasures are, in this life; but full and all together and needing no
attention, it self Essentially reflecting upon it self: So that, it alone
exceeds All worldly pleasures, as far as All time exceeds one Instant, the vast
Machin of the world the least Moat we discover in the Sun beams, or the highest
Angel a contemptible Worm, and infinitely more, beyond all comparison.

The third Point.
LAstly. All other objects 3. He only filling the Soul.
of delight may be comprehended by our Understanding, may be contemned by our
Will, as less than our Soul and not able to satisfy it: only Almighty God so
fills and oversatisfies, that, entirely possessing our Affections, He, as it
were, forces the Soul to love and delight, more than, of its own nature, it
possibly could; nor can it ever be weary of the good it enjoys, but still, with
its whole and more eager desire, will hug and cling to its beloved Object; so
that, a Soul which sees God seeks nothing else, but rests fully satisfied and,
as it were, lulled into a dear contentment, wherein it remains so absorpt and
wholly ravished, that it sweetly languishes and dissolves into Spirits and flames
of love, the better to inessence and incorporate it self into God* Thus, then,
thou feast clearly demonstrated this great-concerning Truth, that No delight
can be comparable to thy Beatitude; and that, it is no wonder to hear our
Blessed Lord and Master, in a manner, labor to express it, when He said,
Mensuram plenam, and confertam, and coagitatam, and supereffluentem dabunt in
sinus vestros, You shall be paid with good measure, heaped up, and pressed
down, and thrust together, and yet running over into your Bosoms.

Conclusion.
COnclude, therefore, Therefore, fully resolve for Him.
with a full resolution, by all thy works and best endeavors, and even, if
need be, with the hazard and loss of all other Goods, to purchase this hidden
Treasure, this precious Pearl, which at length, though late, thou have hit on;
and, to think nothing considerable nor to be cared for, in comparison of this;
to pity the unhappiness of those poor Souls that spend their whole Affections
in toys and trifles, of this Life, neglecting this only necessary good; and, to
rejoice in the secret of thy Bosom, that, being vouchsafed grace, now, to see
that the wisdom of this world is, in very truth, but folly, it has pleased thy
kind Lord to number thee, amongst those few that are truly wise.

The third Consideration.
The happy State of the Just's Bodies, after their Resurrection.

The first Point.
COnsider. When the 1. Gloriously qualified.
last day shall restore thee thy Body again, it shall be endowed with such a
degree of health, as will be most convenient for all thy operations, both
Spiritual and Corporal, accompanied with an incapacity of deficience or
Corruption, and with such an Agility as the most perfect disposition of the
Nerves can cause; with access of all possible swiftness, and a power of raising
or depressing thy self, at pleasure, as also of consisting with or penetrating
any other Body: to all which, thou shall have such a graceful Comeliness, with
so rare a Beauty of Light and Color, (whose like shall not be found in any
other Body but thine,) that, thereby, thou shall become an ornament to the
Universs; adding so peculiar a grace to all the rest, that, without thee, that
whole mass of glorious Bodies would seem, in a manner, lame and defective.

The second Point.
MOreover. All the 2. Universally honored.
laudable actions of thy whole life shall be known, to all the Men and Angels,
that are or ever were; who, admiring all and every perfection in them, (even,
to the least circumstances and thoughts that accompanied them) shall, from
their very hearts and by the force of truth, love and praise thee for them:
nay, the very Devils and damned souls shall honor thee, but with envy, grief,
and repentance; and, what may seem more strange, thy very sins shall be, then,
a glory to thee, both because thou o'recam'st and forsook'st them, and that,
even, in their commission, there was possibly some laudable circumstance, and
which avayl'd to thy salvation. So that, then, thou shall have so many Friends,
so many Admirers of thy Virtue, as there are Saints and Angels; so many
VVitnesses of thine Excellency, as there are damned souls and Devils, who,
obstinate in their own malice, by their Torments shall confess and increase thy
Glory.

The third Point.
Add to this. Neither 3. Entirely, complyd with.
the Devils nor damned souls shall be able, in any thy least Motion or Will, to
resist thee; all the Saints and Angels shall observe and comply with thy
desires, more punctually then any obsequious servant ever watched their Masters
eye; and, no Corporeal nature shall be able to contest with thee, but all Bodies
shall obey thee in what ever thou have a mind to* So that, there, thou shall
neither want Power, where none shall contradict thee, nor Riches, where nothing
shall be denied thee.

Conclusion.
COnclude then. Whatever Therefore, here to be sacrifiz'd up, in hope.
Good thou shall, here forsake, for God and Vertu's Love, will not be lost;
but, there, restored with Interest, whether Friends, Wealth, Honor, or
Dominion. Wherefore, doubt not, like a prudent Merchant, to venture thy Goods
to the Sea of Fortune, and storms of Persecution, whence, thou shall find an
indefectible Treasure laid up, in Heaven, for thee; or, like the good
Husbandman, to sow, in the Winter of Adversities (though with some reluctance
and sorrow) thy seed in Vertu's ground, expecting the precious fruit it shall
infallibly yield thee, in the Summer of Eternity: Having so firm an assurance
as the express Word of God, They that sow in tears, shall reap in j^y.

The fourth Consideration.
The intolerable Pains of the Damned, for the Loss of this happy Knowledge and
Sight of God.

The first Point.
COnsider. Man's Soul 1. Equal to the Inclination of a Soul's Nature.
being created for the Vision of Almighty God, (as properly, and more, than a
knife is made to cut, any Vessel to be filled, and all heavy things for their
Center;) and a knowing substance, when it wants the good for which it was made,
being very unquiet and full of Pain, and that so much the more as it is Nature
is more excellent, it is Force greater and Inclination more Violent* It must
needs follow that, such a Soul, (when it shall know what an infinite Good the
Almighty is, who alone is able to satisfy its Appetite,) will be filled with a
sorrow for so great a Joss, equal to the excellency of its Nature and the force
of its Inclination. Reflect, then, with what Violence a huge stone falls to
it is center, or a Mighty Bow of Steel, let loose, unbends its self, or Powder,
set on fire, breaks all to make it is way; and, be assured the sorrow of an
unhappy Soul (who, now, sees of what good it remains deprived) will be as far
more Violent than all these, as its Nature and Forces surpass the activivity of
the strongest Bodies.

The second Point.
AGain. When this 2. Aggravated, by the folly of her choice.
poor Soul shall be convinced, how slender, base, sordid, fading and almost
momentany all those things were, for which it contemned and lost this infinite
and only Good; that might so* easily have been obtained, even, with far less
pains than were, often* employed* on those transitory toys; and with far more
security, (since, none could hinder it but it self; no, not it self deprive it
self of this, when once possessed: but for those, there was not the least
certainty by never so great endeavors, to compass them, nor the least hope
long to hold them:) When the unhappy Soul shall be clearly convinced of all
this, will it not incomparably increase its grief and infinitely augment its
torments, its pains.

The third Point.
BUt, above all. Those 3. Especially, a Christian.
wretched Souls, who, whilst they lived in their Bodies, had received greater
Knowledge of this Beatitude, and (by the honor of being Christians) had heard
and believed, both that there was an eternal Happiness provided for them, (if
themselves would) and that it incomparably exceeded all temporal Goods and
worldly Felicity; yet see, on the other side, how they spent their whole lives
in running after Vanities and trash, as if they had been Pagans and ignorant of
Heaven: such must needs, out of this knowledge, fall into an incredible, yet
unprofitable, Repentance; and, according to our Saviors sentence, be beaten
with many stripes, as the VVise-man explicates, like great Persons, be greatly
tormented.

Conclusion.
COnclude, with fear Therefore, in time, prevent It.
and trembling; lest, what happens to many, and, perhaps, to most Christians,
may also be thy lot: and resolve, with a constant courage, to shake off quickly
the burden of all worldly Fears or Affections that hinder thy march to Heaven;
lest, when Death shall surprise thee, thou may not, peradventure, find time
for Repentance, nor be able to alter, in a moment, what thy whole life has been
used to.

The fifth Consideration.
The unspeakable Pains which the damned Souls shall suffer, through their own
disordinate Affections.

The first point.
COnsider. Since a 1. Missing their unalterable desires.
Soul cannot be without desires, but something it must Love; wherefore, if it
Loves not true Beatitude, it must needs desire false Goods: whence, it will
clearly follow that, The Souls of the Wicked, who dye without loving God, must,
after death, desire those same goods on which they placed their affections,
whilst they lived in this World; and, the Acts of a separated Soul being,
incomparably, more strong and violent than any it could possibly exercise in
the Body, Those Souls must be all on fire and, incredibly, burn with perpetual
longings after the goods of this life; which, notwithstanding, cannot be had in
that State, and yet, the desire of such is now grown natural to them; and
consequently as unchangeable and immortal as their Nature. They must,
therefore, be eternally tormented with a furious, yet fruitless, desire of
those things they can never obtain; whence follows a continual Desperation,
insufferable grief, and A version from the causes of so great evil, Viz. Hatred
against God and* Themselves, and a raging Madness, altogether inexplicable.

The second Point.
BUt, further. It being 2. Incompossible, in themselves.
almost impossible that he, who directs not his life to God, should so lettle
his Affections on any one temporal thing, as not to be distracted with
successive desires of, now, this, now, that, independent of one another; and
all those Acts, which, in this life, are successive and at several times,
being, in the next world, altogether and at once in the Soul: It must needs
follow that, such a Soul, in the next life, desires, at the same time, contrary
and incompossible things; and so, for ever, remains divided in and against it
self, always at debate and strife with it self and, as if, compounded of so
many furious beasts, as it has contrary Passions, perpetually biting and
tearing one another, without the least minute of rest; becoming, thus, to it
self a most bitter, spiteful and tedious enemy and, which way soever it turns,
still meeting new goads and spears that gore it to the very heart.

The third Point.
ANd, which is yet 3. Which they see Eternal.
more grievous than all the rest, When these unhappy Souls shall clearly see
that these evils, into which they have plunged themselves, shall never have an
end, can never be lessened with any success of time, nor admit of any the least
comfort, no, not so much as a little Oblivion or not thinking on them, for a
Moment; but shall always and all at once in a heap o'rewhelm and oppress them,
continually gnawing and eating, yet without consuming, their very Bowels: what
mountains of Calamities, what Etnas of despair must this needs draw upon them?
Do but reflect on your self, what a terror it is wont to strike, when you have
some time thought of this Eternity, by multiplying hundreds, thousands, and
Millions of years; which, notwithstanding, when you have gone as far as you are
able, is infinitely short of what Eternity is: and, then, tell me what effect
you think this sad consideration must needs produce in the damned; who, by the
excellency of their Nature and the State wherein they now are, cannot but
behold the horrid countenance of this their accursed Eternity, truly, and such
as, in it self, it is for ever.

Conclusion.
COnclude, then. Since Therefore, regulate the Affections.
our eternal misery flows from the habits and affections our Souls acquire in
this life, which if misplac't upon objects unenjoyable in the next, engage us,
above all possibility of relief, into everlasting sorrows and distractions.
Resolve, from this hour, from this very moment, to bid adieu to the vanities of
this world: and, as you cannot but know that, Nothing ought to be beloved but
for our last end, which is, God; so courageously strive to regulate your
Affections, and force them to be subject to this only rule of true Reason.

The sixth Consideration.
Though the Bodies of the damned, by reason of their State, be incorruptible
after the Resurrection; yet shall not their Souls be exempt from Corporal pains.

The first Point.
COnsider* As all pleasure, 1. Extreme sorrow including All.
in Man, proceeds from the Soul, so, of necessity, must all grief, too;
wherefore, as, in the highest delight, all kind of pleasure is contained, so,
in the extremest sorrow, all kind of grief is included: Since, therefore, all
the corporal pains we suffer are but several griefs in the Soul; it evidently
follows that, in damned Souls, where extreme sorrow reigns, no kind of pain can
be wanting. Whence, though their Bodies be in a state of Immutability, and no
material Instruments of Torment can work on them, after the Resurrection; yet
shall not they be free, even, from corporal pains: but feel, incomparably more
grievously than they ever could in this life, the torments of burning by Fire,
the gnawing of Worms and Serpents, the affliction of weeping and wayling, the
causes of gnashing the Teeth, and all Pains whatever have been showed to holy
Persons in their approved Visions.

The second Point.
AGain. When all their 2. With, Contempt on all sides.
wickednesses and most infamous Actions, when every Word and Thought shall, not
only, be written in their own Consciences, but laid open to the sight of all
the World; those wretched Creatures, of necessity, must then appear, both to
themselves and all others, most effeminate, foolish and wicked, and, by
consequence, most base and infamous; and thereby, most hateful, even, to
themselves, contemptible to God and his Angels, with all the Blessed Souls, nay
even, to the very Devils and all the damned crew; but especially, to those once
honored and beloved Companions of their wickedness, in this world, whom
either, whilst they lived, they had courted into their Sins, or been by them
allured and draw'n into their's; and, so, in an instant and to all Eternity,
become deprived of all, even, false Friendship, vain Honor, and whatever
seeming Goods they so passionatly affected and ambitiously sought for, in this
life.

The third Point.
LAstly, though their 3. All hightned, through the subjection of the Body.
Bodies, then, remain perfectly subject to their Souls, yet, even this
subjection, through the in^disposition of their Souls, can only serve to render
them more miserable and hateful; their Eyes and Countenances, framed according
to the horror of their guilty Consciences and tormented Thoughts, how can they
but be most ugly and abominable? the rest of their Members, in what strange
Postures, expressing the distraction of their Minds, beyond all Bedlams for
their mad and extravagant deformities? and, if any occasion of Action should be
offered them, without any Prudence or consideration, at the very first motion,
how prone to all wickedness and unable to resist any evil? Only, secure, by
their state of Immutabiliry: Unhappy Immutabiliry* which only serves them,
never to be changed from, but eternally to endure, Torments, that would quickly
dissolve any thing less than an immortal Body.

Conclusion.
COnclude, then. Whoever Therefore Love not thy self here.
loves his Soul, in this life (that is, inordinatly and according to Flesh and
Blood) truly loses it in the next world (as our Lord foretold,) and falls into
the evils which, here, he labors so much to shun: but, with a very
disadvantageous advantage; for, by fearing little ills, he falls into infinite
great ones and, by declining momentany sufferings, he runs into eternal. Take
up, therefore, (as the Apostle exhorts thee) this Buckler of Faith, and, by the
serious consideration of the next life's future evils, defend thy self against
the fyery Darts of thine Enemies: fight courage*

(...)things, put together, are any ways co^parable even to the least degree of
it: it is evident that, then, our whole life is best, when it is best fitted and
ordered for obtaining this End; and, if in any part it be ill or less well
disposed for It, so far it is vicious or, at least, imperfect. Wherefore, it is
the sole business of all prudent Persons, so to order their whole life, (to the
utmost of their power,) as may most directly and certainly lead them to
attaining this happiness: proportionating every Part thereof to the scope of
the Whole, and having, still, the End so considerately before their eyes, that
all their Actions may be squared and levelled to it.

The second Point.
SEcondly. Since the 2. That Best, which begets a Love to It.
chief and proper Action of a Man, toward his End, is the Love of it; and the
highest Good is, above all, to be loved: it is evident, Those actions and
endeavors, to This End, are best, which beget and breed in Our selves a strong
and solid Love to It. Now, there are two ways or Mediums to engender and
increase Love: One, by purging our hearts from all other Loves and Affections,
that so we may more freely and entirely attend to this we are in pursuit of;
the Other, by considering and Meditating on, as well the great Goods contained
in the End or thing we desire to Love, as the extreme Evils that follow or
accompany their Loss or privation. Wherefore, it is clear, Our chief labor and
study ought to be, so to order our life, that we may, both often and seriously,
think on this our End and the infinite Happiness it contains; and that, in all
we undertake, our Affections be not corrupted and adulterated with the least
Love of the things themselves, but our works be done purely for the Love of
this blessed End, and all our intentions aim at the increase of this Love.

The third Point.
THirdly. Since, by 3. Every deliberate Action, important.
every deliberate Action, we aim at some End or pretend the attaining some
Good; which we seek, either, purely for it self, without any farther reference,
or else, intend this as a means to some other: it is evident that, in every such
Action, we love something, as the last End for which we do it. If then, it be
not done for the love of true Beatitude (which is, the Enjoyment of God;) it
must needs follow, we do It only for the love of some false Good, as Pleasure,
Riches, or the like; and that, in every such Action, we love some false Good,
as our last End. Wherefore, it imports us to walk very cautiously with our God,
and purify (all we can) our intentions: seeing no consider^t action can be
surely indifferent, but either advances toward or swerves from our true and
only Felicity, His beatifying sight.

Conclusion.
COnclude, with tha^ksgiving Therefore, be careful and diligent.
to the Almighty, for this special favor of bringing thee, thus seriously, to
reflect on thy ways: And, if thou find that, hitherto, thou have been too
negligent, in a business of such consequence, strive henceforward to renew in
thy self the fervor of Charity, with so much more care and diligence as thou
have already lost time. Do what good thou can in the day of this life: for,
our great Master tells us, When the night of death shall come, it will be too
late to help our selves, but, such, as we are then found, must be our lot for
all eternity.

The eighth Consideration.
Piety is conformable to Man's Nature: whence, such as live, according to
Virtue, are most happy, even, in this World.

The first point.
COnsider. Since every 1. The mean's to Natur's end truly pleasant.
one's particular End is that of Humane Nature; and, it cannot stand with the
Wisdom and Goodness of our Creator, to have made our Nature other, than such
as was fit and conformable to obtain the End, for which it was created: it must
needs follow that the actions, by which we are to procure this End, are also
conformable to our Nature: And since, What is agreeable to Nature is pleasant
and delightful, it must follow again, that, Those Actions are very grateful and
sweet; and therefore a Pious Life, which consists of such Actions, is not a
crabbed and unpleasant, but, on the contrary, a life full of sweetness and most
apt to yield content: And, if some passages in it seem a little harsh, that
they are but Medicinal and whereby we are preserved from falling into others,
far more hurtful and worse to be digested; wherefore, that These also are
sweet in their effect, not only in respect of the Future Life, but even of the
Present, and, like a bitter Potion, to be swallowed, with a joyful hope of the
Health they induce.

The second point.
AGain. Since a Pious 2. Whence Virtue brings Peace and Vice disquiet*
life orders the whole course of our Actions to one end, so rendering them all
conformable to one another; it clearly exempts our lives from all inward
opposition and contradiction, and keeps us in perfect Peace with our selves:
whereas, on the contrary, a Vicious life (which precipitates us, according to
our Passions, to follow, now* this, now, that Concupiscence) must needs fill
our Souls with repugnant Affections, make us lead a life full of Contradiction,
and cast us into those very evils we seek most to fly. And, as all Vices are
contrary to our Nature, and cannot be kept subject to Reason's Rule; so are
they, of necessity, bitter and painful in their effects, pressing their
Followers still downward, from evil to worse, till, in death, they tumble them
at length, into Hell: where they shall justly complain that, They have walked
thither by difficult and rough ways, and even been wearied in their Iniquities.

The third Point.
THirdly. Since our 3. Piety not debarring, even, temporal Contentments.
Bodies are made for our Souls, and the Dispositions of the one for the
Operations of the other; it follows that, then, our Souls best operate, when
our Bodies are best disposed, and that Disposition of the Body is, truly, best,
which is best fitted to the Operations of the Soul; whence, it is an error to
think it well with our Bodies, when they are not fit to serve our Soul. And,
hence again, it follows that, even Those delights and comforts of the Body,
which God has created for it is necessary Recreation are not to be denied to a
Pious Life, in their due proportion; that, a Pious and Orderly Life, truly and
really, more abounds with corporal delights than the Life of the wicked, (as
appears to any that considers the inconveniences unavoydably flowing from
disorder:) and that, even They who abstain from those corporal delights, which
are enjoyed in Marriage and the possession of Riches; such find, here, other
far greater temporal Pleasures, incompatible with these, as, Honor,
Friendship, Knowledge, excellent Conversation and the like, which abundantly
supply the defect of those material enjoyments, and rende^ their Life more
sweet and happy, even in this world.

Conclusion.
COnclude, then, without Therefore, confidently proceed in It.
fear to commit thy self to God and a Pious Life: and know that the Almighty
has no need of thee, nor made thee for his own sake but for thine, that thou
might partaker that Happiness whereof He was, Essentially, full; and,
therefore, He were not wise, but would miss of his End, had He not prepared all
things convenient to render thee happy. Be thou, then, but confident, and
discreetly proceed, and thou shall quickly find, by experience, what a
difference there is between a wicked or negligent, and a truly virtuous and
devout Life; how much more pleasant, how much more full of comfort and delight,
this is than that; and, how, sweetly yet strongly, our wise Creator has framed
all the parts of our Felicity, conformable to each other and to the End, for
which he has ordained us.

The ninth Consideration.
God highly esteems our Felicity; then, how ought we to value It.

The first point.
COnsider. Since Almighty 1. Creating the World, nay Himself, for Man.
God is essentially happy, and in Possession of all Good; and therefore
incapable of the least new addition, by his Creatures: it is evident that,
whatever he has created, he made, not for his own, but for thine and thy
Brethrens sake; not to render himself, but thee and them happy; and, by
consequence, has valew'd your Felicity, above all the rest of his works.
Behold, therefore, Heaven, Earth, and Sea, and all the Creatures wherewith he
has stored and adorned them, created for thee and to bring thee to happiness,
nor cared for but as means to that End: And (which is yet infinitely more, even
beyond all amazement) see the Divinity it self humbled and impoverish't to
raise and enrich thee; Him, whom, but now, we concluded through his own
fullness incapable of increase, divested for thy sake, of all his Royal
Privileges, and clothed with all our miseries and infirmities: For, what know
we, amongst the whole mass of Creatures, so distressed and helpless as a poor
Infant newly born? what, so subject to all kind of contingencies, and
inconveniences? what, requiring so much care and industry, to nurse and breed
up to its perfection? Thank on every particular, and see, at how high a rate,
the unerrable judgment of the Almighty has valew'd thy happiness.

The second Point.
BUt again. Consider 2. Passing through so painful a Life and Death.
the whole Life and Death of this poor God, pillaged of his own, to purchase
thy glory. See a Life of three and thirty long years endured, in continual
necessities, labors, molestations, and contradictions. How often was it
necessary that this most meek and innocent Lamb, who never brake a bruised Reed,
nor quenched the smoking Flax, should (to give thee an example of Patience)
undergo the anger and indignation of his enemies? How often, to teach thee
Meekness and Humility, was He to be chidden, threatened, reproached and
blasphemed, without once opening his mouth to reply? What shall I say of his
Travayls, Sweats, Weariness, Lying without doors, Watching whole nights in
Prayer, Fasting, Poverty, not having a House wherein to shrowed his Head,
living on Alms, continual Dangers and Flying from one place to another;
especially in the last three years of his Life? O, but His End! Consider his
Anguish in the Garden, the manner of his Apprehension, his leading, or rather,
dragging from one Tribunal to another; all sorts of contempt, all manner of
insolent and abusive revilements: weigh the Pains he suffered in the most
tender and sensible parts of his Body; His being Betrayed by One, and Forsaken
by the rest of his Disciples; the doleful presence of his dearest Mother, and
other afflicted Friends: In fine, his ignominious Death, and the effusion of
the last drop of his Blood, for thy Redemption and eternal Happiness.

The third Point.
LAstly. Consider how, 3. Feeding us with Himself.
not content with all this, He spared not his Glorious Body, but ordained even
That, too, to serve as a means for thy Felicity: leaving himself to thee in the
Blessed Sacrament, under the forms of Bread and Wine; not only to be seen and
adored, but even to be handled, broken, chewed, swallowed and incorporated by
thee: for all this, is as truly, and really verified of him, invested with the
Accidents or forms of Bread and Wine, as it would be of the Bread it self, were
it taken before Consecration; and It Is connatural Accidents are, now, as truly,
Those of His Body, as they were of the Bread, whilst it continued such. Add,
now, to this, all the Injuries and indignities that are offered his Sacred
Person (as it lies veyl'd under those Accidents, for thy Love) whether by
Negligence, of inconsiderate Servants, or Malice of wicked Sinners: and see to
what a pitch his Charity to thee is heightened, which has made Him, in a manner,
prefer thee before Himself.

Conclusion.
COnclude, therefore. Therefore, value thy Salvatition.
Since thou neither may nor can doubt, but that the judgment of thy God is
most certain, impartial and unerrable; what care and esteem oughtst thou to
have of thine own Salvation? what Solicitude, to seek the means of attaining
It? what diligence to omit nothing in order to assure It? whereof thou see
him so industriously careful, who is no ways concerned (more than out of pure
Goodness) whether thou be a saved Soul or no; and yet, whom even Goodness
it self could not so transport, as to make him think any price too high to
procure thee Felicity.

The tenth Consideration.
The great Benefits Mankind has received by Christ's coming into the World.

The first Point.
COnsider, first. By 1. Rendered, easily capable of high Mysteries.
this most wise Economy and gracious dispensation of Christ, (great Steward of
God's house, the Church,) Mankind is made capable of admirable Secrets and high
Mysterys; and has attained a most certain knowledge of them: for, who so
simple, that cannot believe what is told him, when nothing else is required?
and what can be so firm and certain, either to our Senses or Understandings, as
the Word of God? for, since, by It, all other things were made, and, from It,
had their Natures; It, doubtless, in It self, is far more securely constant and
fixed, than the very subsistence of all created Beings, and those Causes, a
priore, that give a cert^inty to our Demonstrations. And, hence it is that, now,
whole Nations of People, learned and ignorant, wise and simple, every silly old
Woman clearly conceives and most firmly believes the Immortality of the Soul,
the Condition of the good and wicked after Death, the Eternity of Pains or
Pleasures that attend us, with other most important Verities; concerning which,
we find very little amongst the Philosophers, as, whereat, the greatest Wits of
them but groap'd, like blind Men.

The second Point.
AGain. By Christ's 2. Encouraged by His Example.
Example we are strongly encouraged to all Virtue. Can there be any so
faint-hearted, as not to dare Venture himself the same way he sees his Captain
pass before him; who, he is sure, both knows the best and securest Path to
salvation, and is so perfectly good that, even in his Voice, he cannot deceive,
much less counterfeit in his Actions? When, we see him, then, choose for
himself the same things he proposes to us, and tread out the way which he would
have us walk; nay, when we see him, not only, Live and Dye in this way, but,
Rise again and enter the Possession of those Glories he woos us to hope for:
can we any longer doubt* whether we should follow his footsteps, and beat the
same Path? or shall we not confidently aspire to the Happiness? he so
faithfully has promised and so dearly purchased?

The third Point.
BUt, above all. By this 3. Endeared by His sufferings.
Grace of Christ, our Charity to God is extremely heightened and by degrees
excessively strange and remarkable; for, First, whereas God was invisible and
inaccessible, even to our very thoughts, before; He Is, now, become a Man like
us, exposed to the apprehension even of our senses, that most easy and obvious
way of our knowing. Next, by this gracious condescendence, He has espoused all
the Titles that may endear our Affections; having made himself our Master, our
Friend, our Companion, our Brother, His Father to become ours, and himself a
Member of the same Body with us. And knowing that, as it is the greatest
possible testimony of Love, to suffer for a Friend, so it is the most effective
means to beget a mutual Love; our Heavenly Father (desirous to settle a perfect
correspondence, in That, betwixt his only Begotten, and us, his adopted Sons)
sent Him into this world to suffer, for our sakes, all kind of evils, all
manner of contempts, all sorts of injuries, miseries, torments, and a most
shameful Death, Sic Deus dilexit Mundum, ut Filium suum unigenitum daret pro
mundi Vita. To such a point did God love us, as to give up, even to death, for
our Life, his only, his equal, his coessential, and consubstantial Son. Nor was
This Son less forward and willing to accept, than his Father to enjoin him all
this, for us; but as his Apostle says, Dilexit me, and tradidit seipsum pro me.
He loved me, and so loved me, as to Live in miseries, and Dye with torments,
for me. Nor, did his love end with his Life: Since, though it was necessary to
withdraw his Corporal Presence from our senses, yet Love would not let him
entirely be absent; but wittily found* out this stupendous Invention, to
remain with us in the Blessed Sacrament, not only, to be seen and adored by our
Faith, but really, to incorporate and mingle his Flesh with ours, making
himself the nourishment both of our Souls and Bodies. In fine, by this his
Economy and the pouring out of his Holy Spirit, and changing, in a manner, the
whole World (at least, so far as concerned Men's Souls) through the innumerable
Miracles wrought by Himself and his Followers, to the Conversion of Nations; he
has rendered those things easy to us, by the custom of hearing and seeing them
done by others, which, before, seemed almost impossible and not to be imitated;
and so, taken away the greatest hindrances of our Love to him.

Conclusion.
COnclude, therefore. Therefore, inexcusably, be good.
Now there is no excuse left, but an absolute necessity imposed on thee to live
holily; the means thereof being rendered both so easy and familiar to thee, and
so laudable, too, amongst Men, that it is almost a shame and counted worthy of
reproach to live otherwise. What can thou, then, pretend, what allege, to
exempt thy self? No; Almighty God has so ensnared and hedged thee in, on every
side, with obligations to be Virtuous; that thou can not, now, without great
inconveniences, even in this world, be Vicious. All things invite thee, All
things allure thee, All things, in a manner, compel thee to be good: O follow!
and follow willingly.

The eleventh Consideration.
Meekness and Humility is the readiest way to Happiness, not only hereafter,
but even in this Life.

The first point.
Consider* Though 1. No Christian revengeful.
our Savior was vouchsafed us, both as a Master and Model of all Vertures, and
a perfect Pattern for all the Actions of our whole Life; yet two Virtues we
find, especially, particularly and, in a manner, only recommended to us,
Meekness and mutual Charity; the first he enforces on us, in these sweet words,
Learn of me, because I am meek and humble of heart, and you shall find rest for
your Souls. Behold, therefore, if thou will be a Christian, thou must very
carefully practice this Virtue* nor, indeed, can thou challenge that name
unless thou, at least, endeavor to become Meek and Humble; and, so far only,
thou may judge thy self to have profited in the School of Christ, as thou
find'st thy self advanced in the progress of this Virtue. Now, what is this
humble Meekness, so highly commended to us by our great Master? but A sweetness
of Disposition, which makes us not seek Revenge or render evil for evil, no,
not, even, in desire. That, then, thou art here commanded, is, When thou
suffer an injury, not to render nor wish any harm to the Person that did it;
unless, by way of correction, to such as are under thy charge, and even then,
to be sure the punishment be inflicted for Love of them, not thy self, for
their amendment, not thy satisfaction.

The second point.
COnsider. It Is irrational 2. All anger unreasonable.
and not becoming a Person of understanding to wish evil to another, because
he has offended thee. For as, if thou should fall into a Ditch or a stone
fall upon thee, it were unreasonable to be colerick at the Ditch or stone, and
seek revenge like a Dog: so, no less folly is it to be angry with a Person, for
doing thee a displeasure. Since, either it is done justly or unjustly: if
justly, thou oughtst to turn thine anger on thy self, for deserving it, and not
on the doer; if unjustly, then certainly he was unjust before he did it; and if
thou then, were not angry with him for being unjust, neither oughtst thou be,
now, for his doing unjustly: it being but natural and what, in reason, thou
should expect, that an unjust Person should do unjust things. Again: since no
humane Action or Desire is reasonable, which aims not at some good to him that
wills or does it; and Revenge ayms only at the Evil of the Offender, which is,
no ways, thy Good, but merely as a satisfaction of thy vindicative appetite: in
reason, thou oughtst not to wish another ill, but rather repress thine own
unreasonable Humor.

The third Point.
COnsider the Reward 3. Meekness, alone, sweetens Life.
promised thee by our kind Master, for Meekness. You shall find rest, says he,
to your Souls; and, in another place, Blessed are the Meek, for they shall
possess the Land; and again, In your Patience (that is, Meekness) you shall
possess (that is, enjoy) your Souls: Of all which, the sense is, that, besides
the Reward in Heaven, the greatest sweetness this present Life affords, viz. A
quiet and contented mind, is properly and peculiarly reserved for the Meek as a
recompense of their Virtue. Whereas, those that seek Revenge, are always in
contention and at debate with one another; which, for the most part, costs
their Purses well in Suits and Law-wranglings, and many times their skins, even
their Lives, too, in desperate quarrels: Besides, within, what tumults of
Passion are raised in their Souls? what cares, what fears continually disquiet
and torment them? that, they neither enjoy themselves, nor even the temporal
blessings God has given them. It Is Meekness alone, then, you see, affords
contentment and sweetens our whole Life.

Conclusion.
COnclude, then. What Therefore, strongly embrace It.
a good God we serve! who is so sollicitous, as for our Future, so even for
our Present happiness, that he is pleased, not only, most tenderly to recommend
and, with sweet words, allure us to it, but even, to introduce them by
exhibiting himself to us, as a Master and Pattern of those means, by which true
temporal comforts and contentments (as much as this present Life admits) are to
be obtained. What evasion can there be from such kindness? what excuse from so
important, so pleasant an Interest? No: either renounce the name of Christian,
or resolve to addict thy self seriously to the exercise of this Virtue.

The twelfth Consideration.
Fraternal Charity is the true Mark of a good Christian, and the only sure way
to eternal Happiness.

The first Point.
COnsider, first. Our 1. Appropriated to the Law of Grace.
Lord and dear Master, to fix on us a greater necessity and, as it were, a
double tie of mutual Love and Charity to one another, was pleased, not only, to
strengthen the old Commandment of loving our Neighbor as our self, by
commanding it anew as from himself, when he said, I give you a new Command, and
This is my Command, that you Love one another; but also, in most particular
manner, to recommend and appropriate it to the Law of Grace, as a special Mark
and Sign of Christianity, whereby true Christians are distinguished from false.
By this, men shall know that you are my Disciples, If you Love one another.
Since, therefore, true Love is never idle; nor consists in words only, but is
active, according to its power; it is evident, That which Christ commands us is
that we be always ready, as much as in us lys, to do good to all Men, but
especially to those that are truly Brethren, that is, good Christians.

The second Point.
AGain consider. Since, Wherein, every one has an advantage.
as the Apostle says, He that Loves his neighbor, has fulfilled the Law; it is
evident this mutual Charity ought to be embraced, not only, as a particular
Virtue, but, as the common Mother and producer of all the rest* For, if he that
loves his Neighbor has fulfilled the Law, the whole Law, then, is nothing but
of Love and doing good to our neighbor. Wherein admire the tender goodness of
God, whose care and providence tends wholly to this, That it may be well with
all and every one of us: See how, by that Law which commands thee to do good to
all thou can, by that very same Law, all and every other person is commanded
to do thee what good they can. O! how holy is this Law of Christ, which so
carefully provides for the welfare and advantage of all? but, withal, how
profitable, how gainful to thee? since, for that little good thou can do to
others, it obliges all others, readily, to do thee all the good they can; which
must needs be infinitely more than what thou art able to do for them.

The third Point.
LAstly. Consider the 3. The Touchstone of our Love to God.
beloved Disciple St. John's words, He that loves not his Brother, whom he
sees, how can he love God whom he sees not? and observe that the love of thy
Neighbor must be the Touchstone, where*on to try thy love to God, whether
indeed, it be true or a counterfeit and, as they say, but a Lip-love, having
God in thy Mouth, but in thy heart the World. For, if thou love not thy
Neighbor, it is evident thou love something else, that hinders thee from
loving him; which (because it cannot be God) must needs be some created good,
as Honor, Riches, Pleasure, etc. which thou love inordinately, that is, for
it self, and not in order to God; and so, clearly, as long as thou love not
thy Neighbor, thou have not God for thy last end, nor love him above all
things, as is thy duty; for, as much as thou love God, so much more,
doubtless, thou love those things he loves; amongst which, the chiefest (if
not the only thing, we know) is our Neighbor: whose love, even by Nature, is
so recommended to us, that, without friendship and conversation with one
another, our very lives would be tedious and miserable.

Conclusion.
COnclude, therefore, Therefore, improve It Is occasions.
with a serious and effectual Resolution, in Truth and Actions, to love thy
Neighbor; to contemn none, to refuse none in what thou art able to help them;
but, whatever good thou can do to any person (without prejudicing thy self
(even with a little prejudice to thy self, when it is much for his advantage) to
do it cheerfully and willingly: be glad when thou have obliged any, esteeming
that day lost wherein thou have done good to none: And, be certain, this
Practice will be so far from injuring thee, that nothing will more advantage,
nothing render thee more grateful and acceptable both to God and Man.

FINIS.

