THE PRACTICE Of CHRISTIAN PERFECTION.

Wherein Several Considerations, Cautions, and Advices are set down, For the
perfecting of the Saints, and completing them in the knowledge of CHRIST JESUS.

By THOMAS WHITE, Minister of the Word of God.

THESE. 3. 10. Praying exceedingly, that we might see your face, and might
perfect that which is lacking in your faith.

London, Printed by T. M. for Tho. Vere, at the sign of the Angel, at the uper
end of the old Daily. 1651.

The Dedicatory PRAYER.
LET not my Lord be angry, and I thy servant, which am but dust and ashes, will
speak unto my Lord.

Blessed God, unto the glory of thy Name I dedicate and consecrate all that I
have, and do, and think, and speak, and am, and in particular this Treatise,
beseeching thee to give me gifts, and strength, and wisdom, opportunity, and a
heart to serve thee, that I may not be as a broken vessel. And I beseech thee,
if thy servant has found favor in thy sight, grant that whenever any one
shall read this Treatise, thou will set in with such overpowring workings of
thy holy SPIRIT, that what they read may not be as a dead letter unto them, but
that Thou will so prevail with their hearts when they shall read it, that they
may both understand and practice the things that belong to their peaee.

Grant this, and more, for his sake in whom thou art well pleased. Amen.

To the Famous UNIVERSITIES of this Land, Grace, Mercy, Peace and Truth be
multiplied.
MEn, Brethren, and Fathers, when I consider that all men generally by Nature,
and Universities by design desire and endeavor to Know, and yet generally all
live cross to that principle when they come to act in the matters of God, I
cannot but be astonished: for though the knowledge of him be demonstrably the
most excellent, yet, as the Apostle observes, they like not to retain God in
their knowledge, Romans 1. 28. Arationall Tract of Insects, or any such thing, is
bought, and read, and studied, admired and commended, whilst the Word of God
is a Book which men are rather ashamed not to have, then delight to read and
understand. Now the great mischief of doting upon the knowledge of the Creature,
and despising the knowledge of the Creator, is, that as they did reprobate the
knowledge of God, so God did give them up to a reprobate sense, as the Apostle
speaks in the following words. Wherefore, since the insatiable desire of
knowledge and unsanctified learning is a snare, though it be looked upon as a
harmless and an innocent thing, and in that respect the more dangerous, I
shall crave leave to give some Christian advises for study.

Adv. I. Get holiness before you get learning: for,

1. Except you be holy your learning it self is defiled and defiles.

2. It puffs up, It builds not up.

3. You must never think by Learning unsanctfied to learn the things of God, 1
Corin. 2. 14. Nor will the Socinians distinction serve, that it is meant of
carnal debauched men, for it is not (...), but (...).

4. If it were no hinderer it were far better, but it is an utter Enemy; nay it
is not only an Enemy, but Enmity, yea enmities, Romans 8. 7. And indeed, an
enemy may be reconciled, but Enmity never. 2 Corinthians 10. 5. It builds
strong holds and Syllogisms against Gospel truths, and accounts the knowledge
of Christ an illiterate thing. Pardon me if I desire to know nothing among you
but Jesus Christ, and him crucified. If I wrote to those that despise Learning,
I should in that case show them many great advantages humane Learning gives
one, if sanctified, and that one might as well not make use of Riches as not of
Learning in the service of God: yet since I write to you, whose great business
is to get knowledge, I must say of that as it is said of Riches, If humane
Learning increase, set not your hearts upon it. And though for a man to be holy
is no hinderance but rather a furtherance to him in the getting of learning;
yet to be learned is a great hinderance to the getting of holiness, that is,
if he be first learned before holy.

5. Except you have holiness, you will be subject to run out to the wild and
ungodly studies of Jacob Boheme, Astrology, etc. for it is grace that directs
the choice and moderates the use of studyes.

6. That of our Savior carries all before it, Matthew. 6. 33. Seek ye first the
Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added
unto you. But alas! how unproportionable and unsuitable are the lives of
Christians to the rule of Christ, and how few do account it their business to
be Christians? But I have spoken of that in the following Treatise.

II. Advice. Take heed of making an idol of humane Reason: and that you do when
you make God and all his Truths do homage to it; when you set Reason in the
Throne, and bring Christ and his Truths to the Bar, to be judged by it. To
show the vanity of this, Consider,

1. How much Reason is puzzled in the works of Nature, as Reason calls them,
(for David says, God gives him his body, Psalm 139. And the Apostle says,
He gives to every seed its own body, 1 Cor. 15.) Can any Philosoer tell me
what it is to See, or Hear, and what those Species are they speak of? Nay, in
the Mathematics, where Reason sits in her Throne, yet even there are not only
many Problems which it cannot do, but also many Theorems which contradict known
Principles: That we should pass from one Extreme to another without passing by
the midst, is contrary to a Principle; and yet it is necessary to be so, as by
this Diagram shall appear. A right Line may make an Angle less then a right
Angle with a circumference, and an Angle bigger then a right Angle, but never
equal, as f b a is less then a right Angle, since it is but a part of f b d:
now if you can draw a line that shall make an Angle with the Circumference a b
equal to a right Angle, let it be b g. Therefore since g b a is equal to a
right Angle, it is equal to f b d: take away f b a, which is common to both;
therefore a b d and f b g are equal: but a b d is less then f b g. Euclid.
lib. 3. prop. 16. There is another doubt that no skill that I bave in the
Mathematics can resolve, viz. That a wheel of one inch the Semidiameter,
should measure nine yards, or any other distance in one revolution: Let there
be three wheels fixed to the same axis, the middlemost an inch semidiameter,
the two extreme wheels each three yards the Diameter, let the middle wheel run
upon a table, and the two extreme wheels upon the ground: now it is certain the
middle wheel slides not, nor stands still when the others move, and yet it
makes as long a line in its revolution as the others do.

2. Some things, even in the very wisdom of men would seem to be very folly,
if so be the reason of their actions were not discovered to us. I am confident,
that Sentence of Solomon concerning the two women would seem foolish, cruel,
and unjust, if one had gone away so soon as ever that Sentence had been
pronounced: for were it not very cruel and unjust to deprive a mother of her
child? an Infant of its life, for no default of either? and foolish, for would
not the living child be dead when it was divided into half? and so each mother
would have but two halfs of two dead Children in stead of one baving one whole
dead child. And it would have required no less then Solomon's wisdom to find
out the reason of that sentence, and it was one part of it to give such a
sentence that might least seem to do what he intended, lest the mother that
pretended to the living Child, discovering his design, might give such an
answer that should not discover what Solomon intended to manifest: So some of
the ways of God, the reasons of them are past finding out, except by the same
wisdom that contrived them; nay it may be, God does some things on purpose to
deceive humane reason, and that some of the reasons of his ways are so full of
wisdom, that were they revealed, we were no more able to understand them, then
a child of three years old, could understand some propositions in Euclid,
Vietta, Carts, Apolonius, or Archimedes.

3. It seems that God has So ordered matters, that except we love him and his
truths there shall be such objections, that the wit of man can never answer. I
shall give you an instance of this both in the speculative and practical part
of Religion, Deuter. 13. ver. 1, 2, 3. If we might discover the deceit of that
prophet by humane reason or wisdom, without the love of God being in us, how
could it prove whether we did love GOD or no, if we could find out the
fallacy of that deceit without love? 2. In the 2d of Thessal. 2. 10, 11. God
will send strong delusions, that those which love not the truth, be they never
so learned, shall not be able to know it; for if so be it were said they should
profess lies, it might be, that they knew the truth though they professed the
contrary; but it is said, they believed lies. Our savior gives this reason why
he would manifest himself to his Disciples, and not to the world, viz.
because the world did not love him, John 14. 22, 23. For none will unbosome
himself unto an Enemy, nor may thou think to master God by thy Learning, and
know him whether he will or no; for God must manifest himself, or else thou
can never know him, and he will not manifest himself to thee except thou
love him, though thou be never so learned or great a Politician, Mat. 11.
25. For you must understand, it is not a speculative knowledge, but a knowledge
of acquaintance. So in that sense is that saying of our Savior verified,
Matthew. 7. 23. And this knowledge of God is not got by study, but by prayer and
meditation, by an inward strict communion with God, and the friends of God the
Saints, but especially with Christ the Son of God, for he is the express image
of God the Father, etc. Can we be acquainted with a man whether he will or no?
nor can we be thoroughly acquainted with a wise holy man, that is, we cannot
know his wisdom and holiness without much observing and pondering his words
and actions; nor can we much observe and be acquainted with any with whom we
do not dwell and have private Conference. Thou may know God to discourse of
him, and to write learned tracts, yet if thou art not acquainted with God, at
the last day God will not know thee: Therefore be much with God; and to that
purpose, I have one humble and earnest request to you, though I need not be
very earnest to obtain so small one, it is, that you would spend an hour every
day in prayer, meditation, and searching out the inward spiritual corruptions
of your own heart, and an impartial examining what interest you have in
Christ, and such like spiritual exercises; do not you say, How can you prove
that we are bound to spend one hour every day? For 1. Suppose God, when you go
to prayers, should answer you so, How can you prove that I am bound to give you
such a mercy? Thou may cause God to carry himself as froward by this froward
answer; for it is said, With the froward he will show frowardness. 2. How will thou spend eternity in the admirings, adoreings and praysings of God, if an
hour spent so, is now so irksome to thee? how shall it then be thine Heaven, if
it be now thine hell? 3. Is it a friendly answer? If a friend should come to
desire a courtesy of you, do you so answer him? how can you prove that I am
bound to do it? 4. Consider, This is the question of a slave to ask; What must
I do? but the question of a friend and a child is, What may I do to please my
Father or my friend? 5. Keep this answer until the World or the Flesh come
unto thee; give this answer to those thine enemies, and not to thy God. 6. Do
thou stand out? Shall the great and holy God be ready and willing to meet thee,
and have communion with thee as often and as long as thou please, and shall
thou refuse? It should be his part, one would think, to be hard to be
intreatted, not thine: Shall he account it his riches to bestow mercies on
thee, and thou account it thy trouble to receive them? 7. Do but do that which
thou art bound to do; viz. Love God with all thy soul, with all thy mind, and
with all thy strength; and then thou will ask, not, Why so much? but, Why no
more? And indeed, when once thou have found the sweetness and profit, thouthy
self wilt not only continue, but increase these holy duties: and that is the
reason why I propose no more time, because I suppose this being spiritually
spent, more will follow of it self. David wishes us to taste and see how
gracious the Lord is, not because he would not have us feed on him, but because
if we once taste how good he is, he supposes it needless to wish us to feed
on him. 8. if thy friend comes to visit thee, thou will afford him an hour with
thanks: he comes in his own name, but I come unto thee in my fathers, desiring
thee to afford God as much; if thou deniest, that saying of our Savior belongs
unto thee, John 5. 43. I am come in my Fathers name, and ye receive me not; if
another come in his own name, him ye will receive.

To conclude, I desire to speak one word more as to humane Learning, which I
account of singular use for the understandiug of the word of God, and have
doted on it as much as any, and love it still, as much as I dare, for I account
the love of it dangerous, the use of it very advant ageous; and could I set
down how far I have gone in it with the same spirit that Saint Paul does set
down, ( Phil. 3.) his excellencies in leg all privileges and righteousness, I
would; but I account it safer for me to be thought wholly ignorant, then to
venture priding my self of that small knowledge I have: yet thus much I
conceive of humane Learning, that besides the incertainty of it, there are many
inconveniences incident to it. 1. Our thoughts are wholly taken up with it when
we are studying of it, which are not necessarily so in other employments; for
one may buy, and sell, and yet have our minds often upon GOD, even in the very
midst of those employments. 2. Men generally judge of the truths and ways of
Gods Worship according to that way of Learning wherein they excel: Those who
excel in the Fathers and Church Histories, are subject to admit of the Truths
and Ways of GOD's Worship, because they are attested and warranted by them:
Those who most excel in Philosophy and School Divinity, they make Reason the
touchstone to try even Gospel truths by; yet I do much esteem of these
Egyptian Jewels, so we make not an Idol of them, and fall down and worship
them. 3. And lastly, I find it as hard a thing to deny humane Learning as to
get it. Moses is much to be admired, who being brought up in all the Learning
of the Egyptians, yet preached so plainly as you may see in Deuteronomy: and
Paul, who preached so very plain, that his adversaries objected it against him
Consider what is said, and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

Your Servant in the Lord, THOMAS WHITE.

A DIRECTORY TO Christian Perfection.
MATT. 5. VER. 48. Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in
Heaven is perfect.
A Malicious Christian and a courteous Cynick, are expressions equally
including contradiction; yet notwithstanding, it is too manifest, that
thousands that honor themselves with the name of Christians, dishonor God,
and by their works deny their very name; for if the least injury be offered
them either in word or in deed, though in passion, how do they foame and rage,
like the troubled Sea, while they are revenged of the injury? But our Savior
here does abundantly condemn, and give rules to the contrary, from ver. 43. to
the end of the Chapter. A brief exposition whereof shall serve both for the
prosecution of the point, and introduction to the text. In the 43. ver. our
Savior says, That you have heard that it has been said, Thou shall love thy
neighbor, and hate thine enemy: our Savior does not say that ever it was said
so; for there is not any place in Scripture where we are commanded to hate our
enemy; and there are three things wherein their gloss is faulty.

First is, that they restrain the word Neighbor, to one of their own kindred
or nation, which our Savior fully confutes in the tenth of Luke, in the
parable of the good Samaritan.

Secondly, they leave out, as thy felfe.

Thirdly, they put in, thou shall hate thine enemy; whereas there is nothing in
the scripture for it, but many places against it: Exodus 23. ver. 4, 5. If thou
meetest thine enemies Ox or his Ass going astray, thou shall surely bring it
back to him again. If thou see the Ass of him that hates thee lying under
his burden, and would forbear to help him, thou shall surely help with him.
And whereas some say it was to be meant of an Israelite, if he be an enemy, but
not of those of other Nations, but that they might hate them; the contrary is
evident, Deuteronomy. 10. v. 19. Love ye therefore the strangers, for ye were
strangers in the land of Egypt.

Use. The use of this is, That every one should read the Word of God, for if he
only hears the Word, and searhes not the Scripture, he shall hear that many
things are said in the Word of God, which are no where there to be found; but
diverse times the clean contrary.

Argu. So the first argument against revenge is, that from the Alpha, and
beginning of Genesis, to the Omega and Amen of the Revelations, there is not
one syllable to warrant us in such practices, but they are diametrically
opposite to the doctrine of the Gospel, as you have it in the next verse; But I
say unto you: as if Christ should say, Whatsoever thoughts your own corruption
suggests unto you, or whatsoever men shall say unto you, it matters not, they
are likely enough to blow the least spark of contention into a flame; they
happily will tell you, that if you bear one injury you invite another. But I say
unto you, Love your enemies, besides, there is an Emphasis in the words, I and
you; for it has the same force to move us to love our enemies, Mat. 11. 33. He
that has loved us, and gave himself for us when we were his enemies, may he
not justly exspect and command from us that we should love our enemies? that we
should forgive an hundred pence when he commands us so to do, that has
forgiven us ten thousand talents. But to the further exposition of the
following words, we are to love our enemies, be they never so many we must love
them all, and be they never so much ones enemies, for here is no limitation put
either in respect of their number or enmity, or in respect of our love; it is
not said how much we should love them, to show that we should love them
without measure.

Reas. Now the reason why love your enemies is put first, is because that this
must have an influence upon all the rest; we must bless them that curse us, do
good to them that hate us, upon this very ground, and from this principle,
because we love them.

But if our enemies curse us, then we are not to content our selves wirh a bare
inward love to them, but we must show our love by our outward expressions; and
as our enemies increase in the manifestations of their enmity, so we must
increase in the manifestations of our love, and we must not only not curse
again, or be silent, and neither bless nor curse, but we must bless them that
curse us: nor is it set down how much, how often, nor when we must bless, that
we might put no limits to our blessing in any of these respects: and as before
it is observed concerning our enemies, be they never so many, and never so much
our enemies, we ought to love them; for the same observations may run through
all the rest of the branches of this precept, nor does our Savior wish us to
reprove those that curse us, but to bless them.

First, Because reproofs at such a time are very unseasonable; for doubtless
there is a time to reprove.

Secondly, Generally because reproofs at such times when people are cursing of
us, are a kind of revenge taken of them, especially, if it be before others;
for we lay open their shame.

Thirdly, Because this is the mildest, the secretest, and lovingest way of
reproof; for I remember, the rule is given, that one should not, if one hears
one speak a word of Latin wrong, tell him that he pronounces it not as it
should be pronounced, much less to tell him that he is an Ignorant man, but
speedily to take some occasion to speak that word right; so here, if thine
enemy speak false Christian language thy mildest way to show him his error, is
by speaking those words right which he has spoke wrong; for by thy blessing
him, thou do in a mild manner show that he should have blessed thee.

The next branch is, that we should do good to them that hate us: many are
willing to give good words, but they will not do any good deeds to their
enemies, they will serve God of that which cost them naught; but in the
Original it is not, Do good to them that hate you, but do well; to show us
that if we do our enemy good, yet if we do it in a churlish and scornful
manner, we do not observe his commandment: But if thine enemy shall have
blocked up this way, because he scorns to receive, or by reason of his
persecution has disabled thee to bestow any temporal courtesy upon him, then
take another way, and do him that courtesy which he cannot reject; for though
one cannot give a man money who will not receive it, yet one may pray, and ones
prayers may be powerful to do our enemies good whether they will or no; so
that thou can never be so impoverished by persecution, but thou art worth a
prayer; nor thine enemy can hardly be so obstinate, but thy prayers may fasten
blessings on him: do thine enemy as much good as thou can, and what thou
can not do, desire God to do for him. It follows, That ye may be the
children of your Father.

First, it is not meant as if we could love our enemies before we were Gods
children, or that this is the way to get adoption or regeneration; for he calls
God their Father when he wishes them to do thus, that they may be his children;
therefore the meaning may be thus: First, that you may be, id est, that you may
be known to be both to your selves and others; as it is said, We are justified
by works, id est, our justification is known to our selves and others by
works; or so that you may be children, is meant, that since two ways we are
the children of God, by adoption, and sanctification; in respect of
sanctification we may have the image of God renewed more and more in us, and so
in a qualified sense may be said more to be Gods children; and in that sense we
may attain to be more the children of God, id est, more like him.

Secondly, None can be the children of God unless they love their enemies.

Thirdly, That every one should strive both to be, and to know himself to be
the child of God.

Fourthly, That no man by nature is the child of God, since no man by nature
can or does love his enemy, as it follows, which is in heaven.

First, We can never love our enemies, so long as we are no more then the
children of our earthly father.

Secondly, That it is an heavenly thing to love ones enemies, and therefore ex
diametro, an hellish thing to hate ones friends, and therefore to hate Gods
people.

1. Because they are our friends.

2. They are heavenly.

3. This is the first motive to persuade to love, etc. And as it follows; for
he makes his Sun to arise.

First, This is that second motive to the duty, id est, Gods Example; and it
stands thus; If God who is greater then you, does bestow greater blessings upon
those that are greater enemies, and between whom and him there is a greater
distance, how much more should you love, etc?

Secondly, The Sun does not arise of it self, that knows not what it does, nor
is it of necessity that the Sun should arise; of necessity, it is in respect of
the Sun, not in respect of God, for he makes it to arise; so that the Sun
cannot choose but arise, but God might choose whether he would make it arise.

Thirdly, These common blessings come not by chance, as well as not by
necessity; it is by Gods providence that we enjoy them.

Fourthly, It shows the continual concurrence and power of God with natural
causes, it is not like a clock, which when it is once wound up, will go of it
self by the weight; but as a pen, that writes not without the continual
guidance of the writer; so God did not at the first create the World, Sun, etc.
and so without his actual concurrence to every particular act enable them to
do it, so that the Sun did not arise at the first moment of its creation more
immediately by the power and providence of God, then it does now, this advances
Gods goodness; for as one that has settled maintenance upon* an Hospital for
the poor, it argues not so much patience in him, to suffer the men there if
they abuse him to receive their settled stipend, as it does for him daily to
feed them with his own hand, and to put money into one of their hands, while the
other is lifagainst him.

Fifthly, Or may not he make it be taken in this sense? that all the creatures
of God are enemies to the wicked; the earth will not bear them, but open her
mouth and swallow them; the fire will not warm them, but consume them; the
Sun will not give light unto them, as it did once in Egypt, while they had
light in Goshen; but God, as it were, renuente sole, does make it arise upon
the good and the bad; it shows the great power of God, that not only the things
on earth, but all the creatures in heaven and earth obey him: he that can make
the Sun arise, what can he not do? Nehemiah 9. 6. As it follows; His Sun to
arise.

First, a fortiori, it is a Motive to us to do good to our enemies.

Reas. First, Because that which we give or bestow on them in respect of God,
we have no right to, we are but his Stewards, and what have we that we have not
received? we have the possession of al those things we have, but not the
disposing of them: in respect of the poor, to give them alms is charity, in
respect of God it is justice. But you see here the Sun is called his Sun, he
has a full title to it: if he therefore gives that which is his own, and is
Lord of, much more should we deliver that, of which we are only Stewards, when
he that is the Lord commands us.

Secondly, Consider what he gives; it is his Sun, the greatest of al temporal
blessings in the world; for we might longer live without food or raiment, then
without the benefit of the Sun; for without his heat all things would
immediately freeze to death: nay, not only by giving the wicked the benefit of
the Sun, they enjoy that heat which is necessary, for life, but they enjoy
the light of the Sun, which is a thing of ornament and pleasure, to make
their life comfortable, Eccle. 11. 7. Therefore if God gives the wicked things
of ornament, much more give your enemy bread, Romans 12. 20. No man not only
cannot, but does not offer to lay claim to the Sun: and as it follows, On the
good and the bad: some will say, how can it be otherwise? for if the Sun
shines upon the good, how can it but shine upon the bad also, since they are in
one Kingdom, in one Town, in one house? but God is not necessitated to bestow
this mercy upon the bad, though he bestows it upon the good; For de facto, God
did make it dark in Egypt when it was light for three days in Goshen, though
they were of the same Kingdom; the cloud gave light to the Israelites in their
March, and at the same time was darkness to the Egyptians, Exodus 14. 19, 20.
Besides, God can strike all wicked men with blindness, so that the Sun shall
be in respect of his light, as if it was not to them: and he might strike them
with such a burning fever as he threatens, Deuter. 28. 22. that for its heat
the Sun should be worse to them, then if it was not, and thousand other ways
known to the Lord.

Secondly, We see that by common and temporal blessings, the good are not
distinguished from the bad.

Thirdly, It follows that wicked and unjust men are Gods enemies, and curse
God, hate God, persecute God, and dedespitefully use him; or else it would not
follow from this example of Gods dealing with wicked men, that we should love
our enemies, etc. For one might say, it is true, God makes his Sun to shine
upon the bad and unjust, but though indeed they be Gods enemies, yet they do
not hate him, curse, etc. as mine do me.

Thirdly, That God may be said to bless, and do good to those that are bad and
unjust, Deuteronomy. 10. 17. Acts. 14. 17. And as it follows; He sends rain.

First, God bestows not one, but many blessings upon the wicked, he does not
only make the Sun to arise, but sends also the rain upon them; nay, by
bestowing this second blessing, he takes off that inconvenience which otherwise
would follow upon the enjoyment of the first; nay they do help mutually one
another; for the rain cooles the heat of the Sun, and the Sun warms the
coolness of the rain, and both together make the earth fruitful: from hence
we may learn,

First, To do great and many benefits to our enemies.

Secondly, Not to do them such courtesies that we know will bring mischiefs
upon them; and to do them good in one thing, on purpose to do them hurt in
another.

Thirdly, We should do good to those that do not only not thank us for
courtesies, but attribute it to others; for God does so, he makes his Sun to
shine, and his rain to fall, not only upon those that are so bad as not to be
thankful for them, but are so exceeding unjust as not to account God the Author
of them. The observations concerning Gods making the Sun to arise, etc.
Mutatis mutandis, may agree to this later part of the verse; this may also be
observed, that God does not only give temporal blessings to those that ask and
come for them, but he sends his mercies home to their very doors; for the
clouds that arise from the Sea, or other places, he causes his winds to carry
them to their habitations. Besides, this may be observed, that one reason why
our Savior instances in these blessings rather then in others, may be, not
only the reasons before, but this also, that we might never want a Motive to
our doing good to our enemies; for whether it raines, or shines, we have either
the instance of Gods making the Sun to shine, or his rain to fall upon wicked
men; as it follows, Upon the just and unjust.

First, It is not set down here as contradistinguished, as if there were some
bad that were not unjust, and some unjust that were not bad; nor is it meant,
God makes his Sun to arise on the bad, and sends his rain upon the unjust,
bestows some kind of these blessings upon some wicked, and the other kind upon
other wicked men, but he bestows both upon all; as before it is not meant, we
should love our enemies, but not love those that curse us; or bless those that
cursed us, but not bless those that hate us; but as when God commands us to
bless them that curse us, and does not say, do good to them that curse you,
it is because blessing is directly opposed to cursing; and so it is more likely
to make him that curses see his error, because contraries being placed one by
another, make each other more apparent, as it is before shown, and as it
follows; for if ye love them that love you: The former argument was from the
example of Almighty God, whom all confess in all things to do well; there he
brings an argument from them whom all condemn, and the argument stands thus;
You all desire and expect to be rewarded for your works, but none of you think
that the Publicans shall have any reward, therefore neither you, if you love
them that only love you, for so do they.

Secondly, It is good to make use of that evil opinion we have of others, as
a Motive to our-selves to be better.

Thirdly, That the wickedest man may have something good in him, but nothing
perfect; and as it follows; What reward have ye? Christ does not set it down
positively, that they have no reward, but by way of Question to show them that
it is not only his judgment, but their own, for he appeals to their own
consciences; and it shows the manifestnesse of the truth, since self-love does
cast such a mist before our eyes when we are to judge of things concerning our
selves, that except the truth does shine very bright, we cannot behold it; it
is not said, what great reward, but what reward: to show them that they should
be so far from expecting everlasting life, that they cannot expect any reward
at all.

Thirdly, It is not said, what reward shall ye have, but what have ye; to
show that they are not to expect so much as a temporal reward for loving their
friends.

Fourthly, They have temporal blessings as Motives to obedience, but none by
way of reward for obedience; for it is not said, What blessings, but what
reward have you; for if one say of your righteousness you do, Do not the
Publicaus the same? one may say of your blessings, Have not the Publicans the
same? Do not even the Publicans the same? The Publicans were such as used to
receive custom, tribute-money, and other taxes, and were men very odious to
the Jews, both for their injustice and oppression of them, and they were
generally Heathens, because the Jews did abhor to have any hand in the
oppressing of their own Nation; nay, our Savior joins them with Harlots,
Sinners, Heathens; and if you salute your brethren only, the word translated
salute, signifies to kiss and embrace; and our Savior does signify by it all
outward expressions of love.

Secondly, By Brethren is meant our near kindred and acquaintance.

Thirdly, this word only is to be referred as well to the former verse as to
this; and the observations ( mutatis mutandis) upon that may he applied to
this. And so I come to the words of the text, Be ye perfect, etc.

In the handling of these words, I shall show these things.

First, How we must be perfect as our Father which is in heaven is perfect.

Secondly, in the pressing of Christian perfection, three things I shall set
down. First, Several Considerations. Secondly, Several Cautions. Thirdly,
Several Rules or Advises

Before I come to the Exposition of the words, to show how we must be perfect
as our Father which is in Heaven is perfect, I must remove an Objection that
quarrels against the perfection of this rule of perfection; viz First, That
this rule is too high: Secondly, It is dangerous: Thirdly, That it is imperfect
and too short.

First, It is too high: for what man or Angel is able to be as perfect as God?
It is not compatible to any created nature, for that being finite, cannot
possibly be capable of infinite perfection; for his glorious name is exalted
above all blessing and praise, Neh. 9. 5. And the Lord is fain to dwell in
thick darkness, and thereby does connivere radios suae gloriae; and the Angels
also do cover their faces with their wings, or else they were not able to
behold his glory, their understanding would be dazzled: if therefore they are not
able to behold his glory in its full strength and vigor, how much less are
they able to attain it? how much less able are we that are sinful dust and
ashes, who are not able to behold (that which is darkness in comparison of
God) the Sun, to be perfect as God is perfect?

First, I answer, That we are here commanded to attain the same kind, not the
same degrees of perfection: it is not, Be as perfect as your Father; but, be
perfect as your Father; we are to go in the same steps, though not aequis
passibus, his example is the copy we should write by; though it be impossible
to write so curious an hand, yet we may write the same words etc.

Secondly, It is an advantage to have so perfect a copy set us, though we
cannot attain it, for who is there that learns to write, that blames the
exactness of the copy he writes by? And he that takes aim and shoots at
the highest point or Zenith of the Heaven, will shoot higher with the same
strength then he that shootes at a level, or any other point besides.

Thirdly, It adds to the holiness of any action, that we desire in that action
to be like to God, and upon that ground to desire to be holy because God is
holy.

Secondly, You may say, it is a dangerous rule, for we may not strive to be
like unto God in many things; we may not desire our own glory as he does; Adam
desiring to be like him, it was his sin and his fall. I answer to that, that
there are two kinds of perfections in God, communicable and incommunicable:
incommunicable are called those, not which the creature cannot have, but which
the creature ought not to have, as to do all things for its own glory; for a
creature may do all things for its own glory, but ought it not so to do; not
only because it is folly in the creature to do so; for glory is a thing of
ornament, and man is a poor creature that wants things necessary; and it is
folly for man to buy Jewels to adorn him, while he is ready to starve for want
of garments to cloth him; but it is because it is incommunicable to the
creature; that is, God and the creature cannot do things for their own glory
without thwarting one another; for if man do things for his own glory, then it
must needs follow that he does it not for the glory of God, and so thwarts the
end that God proposes to himself, and to all creatures, viz. his own glory:
so that here when our Savior commands us to be perfect as he is perfect, it is
meant, that we should endeavor to attain those perfections which our having
does not hinder his having of them, as holiness, patience, wisdom, etc. for
our holiness, be it never so great, makes not God less holy; but the more we
seek our own glory, the more we rob God of his.

Secondly, I answer, that all these kinds of perfections which are
incommunicable, are rather resultancies and consequences of perfection, then
perfections; for it is more proper to say, that because God is infinitely
perfect, therefore all the heaven and earth should praise him; then to say,
because heaven and earth does praise him, therefore he is infinitely perfect;
for the praises which are given unto him, are not the causes of his perfection,
but his infinite perfections are the causes of his praises.

Thirdly, It may be objected, That it is an imperfect rule, for it seems to
come short.

First, In respect of our relations; as of husband, wife, child, subject, how
can we have an example of God in these particulars, since he is not capable of
these relations?

Secondly, in respect of duties; we are to pray, to worship, to hear the Word.

Thirdly, In respect of graces; repentance, faith, hope, patience in
afflictions; all these are below him.

I answer, First, that though we have not an example of any of these from God,
considered in himself, yet we have of most of these from Christ, who was God as
well as Man; for we have an example, how to carry our selves in afflictions, of
obedience both to God and man, and those relations which our Savior left us no
example of in a temporal way, yet in a mystical way he has: though he was
not a Magistrate, nor an husband in a temporal way, yet in a mystical way he
is both Lord and husband to the Church.

And as for those graces which suppose sin, as repentance does, our Savior
has left us an example of those graces, which if we obtain, they will certainly
produce repentance in us, and enable to carry our selves in all duties and in
all our relations as becomes Christians; so that as one that should teach us
to write, and set us exact Copies, we should not quarrel with him and say,
that he has been a defective Schoolmasters, because that some of those words
that afterward we have occasion to write, were never in those Copies that he
set us; sufficient it is for him to vindicate himself and say, that I have
taught you all those Letters, and all those several joynings, which will spel
and make up that word that you are to write, whatsoever it be; so Christ has
left us an example of al those graces, which are able to spel and make up any
duty or grace we stand in need of. there are the ingredients, of which all
compositions may be made up, if we follow Christ in our love to God* and our
hatred to sin, our godly sorrow for sin will necessarily follow, and be made up
of these two ingredients, though Christ for his part had never any occasion to
use such a composition for himself, having never need of that physic: and so I
come, the jection being removed, to the prosecuting of the point, to show how
we should be perfect as our Father which is in heaven is perfect.

First, in respect of the kinds of perfections, they must be spiritual and
divine: carnal, corporal, or civil, or moral perfections are two low for a
Christian to look at, especially to make it his business, or the mark he
shootes at: moral virtues were the highest perfections of the Heathens; but
alas moral virtues transform us not, they change not our natures, but only
gild our rottenness; though one be never so good a natured man, as they call
it, if one has not the divine nature, one is but a tame Devil; for one is his
child, if ones nature be not sanctified, and our person justified, and so
become the child of God by regeneration and adoption; and the most
excellentest act that is merely, morally virtuous, is sin, and cannot please
God: Let me give a Simile to make this evident; A great Emperor commands his
Empress to come to him, as Ahasuerus did Queen Vasthi; his commands not
prevailing, he entreats her, after that sends his Letters full of love and
importunity, sends Ambassadors after Ambassadors, and lest those should fail,
sends her many gifts very rich and magnificent, and thus he continues week,
month, year after year, yet she utterly refuses; but after her rejecting and
slighting all these ways of love from the Emperor her husband, there comes a
base slave, from whose company her husband had especially forewarned her,
because she had formerly committed folly with him, and dishonored both her
self and the Emperor, this adulterer and traitor speaks but half a word to her
to go, and she presently without delay and with joy goes, when she perceives it
would please the slave. What do you think now? do you think the Emperor will be
pleased with her, coming upon those terms? this is the case of all men that are
no more then morally virtuous. God persuades us to be just, and to defraud no
man, he entreats us, sends the Ambassadors the Ministers unto us, gives us
mercy upon mercy, sends us his Word, his Epistles from Heaven, line upon line
to persuade us to do justice, or to be temperate: not we, for his sake we will
do nothing: The world comes, the world, which is a slave to Satan, for he is a
Prince and Ruler of the darkness of this world; the world, with which we have
committed so often spiritual whoredom, and against which God has so often and
seriously forewarned us; now only upon a supposition that we should please the
world if we are just or temperate, we will be intemperately temperate, if I may
so say, even to macerate our bodies with fasting, for a good look of the world;
we do indeed in being temperate or just, do that which God commands, but far
are we from pleasing him, considering the grounds from which we do it; for can
he be pleased that we should do more for a good look of the world, then we
would for all the ways of love that he took with us; nay indeed, never to do
any one action for his sake; nay but before his face at the same time when we
refuse all his entreaties, etc. to do it at the first word of the world;
therefore moral virtues, considering the ground upon which they were done, are
sins before God; therefore let us learn not to be virtuous as Philosophers
were virtuous, but holy as God is holy.

Secondly, The perfections of God are infinite, so must ours as far as it is
possible for creatures to attain; our desires of holiness must be without
limits, we must not set bounds to our holiness, saying, Hitherto shall thou
go, and no further: but we must always hunger and thirst after righteousness.

Thirdly, God has all perfections, or rather is all perfections: so we must
add to our faith virtue, to virtue knowledge, to knowledge temperance, etc. We
must receive from Christ grace for grace, as a child receives from his father
limb for limb, part for part; the same parts that the fathers body has, the
child's has also, the same for number, figure, and position, though neither for
strength, nor bigness: and as God is the act of all possible absolute
perfections, either in degree or in kind, so we should endeavor to have those
perfections that a creature of that kind is capable of.

Fourthly, As the perfections of God are both inseparable from God, and from
themselves, so should ours be also; our wisdom must be holy, our holiness
innocent, our wisdom zealous and our zeal wise; for we must not conceive that
some of Gods actions are holy, others, wise, but all are all; his wisdom is
holy, just, and good; his justice, holy, good and wise, and every attribute is
as inseparably united to all the rest of his attributes, as any of them are to
his Essence: as if there were an hundred Suns shining at once in the firmament,
one could not say that one of these Suns shined in this part of the air, and
another in that, but the light of every one of them would be in every point of
the air; nor could you possible take away the light of one of the Suns, and
leave the rest, unless you could take away the Sun it self: so it is in Gods
perfection: but thy glorious Name is exalted above all knowledge, above all
blessing, and above all praise.

Many men will be zealous, but without knowledge; others will be wise, but
without zeal; and so their wisdoms come to be no better then carnal,
sensual, and divelish: the former zeal was that zeal of the Jews, Romans 10. 2.
The other wisdom was the wisdom of Pilate; both of them crucified Christ.

Lastly, For I do not intend to be large in these parallels, but make haste to
press the great point of Christian perfection; we must be perfect as our
Father which is in heaven is perfect, notwithstanding all hindrances or
provocations to the contrary; though God by his wisdom governs and orders all
things, not a spire of grass, or blade of wheat grows but by him, 1. Cor. 15.
38. Not a sparrow falls on the ground, nor an hair from our head, but by his
providence; not a lilly is clothed in the field, nor a foul of the air is
fed but by him; yet notwithstanding such an innumerable number of creatures,
are both in respect of their essence and operations, nay even in respect of the
smallest circumstances of either, are acted, governed, and ordered continually
by his providence; yet he does no less know, love, and enjoy himself, then he
did from all eternity, before there was any creature for his providence to
watch over: so should we do, we should not have our thoughts less fixed on
God, or our love less fervent; our communion with God should be neither
remitted nor intermitted by the employments in the world; Mothers that have
their little children to look to, should be like the Angels, which always
behold the face of our Father which is in heaven, Mat. 18. 11. But I come (as I
promised) to the great business of this Treatise. viz. The pressing of
Christian perfection, which is almost forgotten, and nothing left of it but the
form of godliness; and I shall refer the whole discourfe to these three
heads.

First, Several Considerations.

Secondly, Several Cautions.

Thirdly, Several Advises.

Considerations.
1. Consid. Let us consider what the word of God speaks in this matter, 1 Cor.
10. 31. Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of
God: do we live up to the meaning of these words? let us consider a little of
it, and see the meaning of the words.

First, We are to glorify God in all our actions; that is, we ought in the
secret of our hearts to admire and adore him, to have high thoughts of him, and
sweet thoughts of him; and to express it fully, we ought to honor him as God,
Romans 1. Which he blames the Gentiles for not doing, That knowing him as God,
did not honor him as God: to honor him but as we would honor the holiest man
in the world, nay the highest Angel in Heaven, is nothing, and as great
derogation to his glory, as to give his glory to them; for to give the honor
due unto God to a creature, and to give that that is due unto a creature unto
God, are equally vicious: butlet us deal freely and openly with our own souls,
Do we do so much, as that which if we did no more we were guilty of that great
sin of the Heathens, which the Apostle in the forenamed place does condemn? do
we honor God as much as we do honor an Angel, or an holy man? let us but ask
our own consciences, and they will tell us. Would we do that in the presence of
either of them as we do in the presence of God; nay, of a child that is come to
that understanding to distinguish between good and evil?

Secondly, By these words we are enjoined that our words, actions, gestures,
and all our carriages should be such, as may be suitable and fit to raise up
those high thoughts of God in others, as we our selves have; for instance; in
prayer we ought not only our selves to admire and adore our good and glorious
God, but so to lift him up and hold forth his excellencies by our very
expressions, pronounciations and gestures, that they may be such as not only
may be suitable to our inward admirings of him, but fit to beget the same
thoughts in all that hearus; our loves should be like a flame, that takes hold
of all that comes near it.

Thirdly, We should, as much as in us lies, do all our actions, and speak all
our words with an actual intention by them to edify others, and to cause them
to glorify the Lord. Now, how far we come short of this, we may even be
confounded with shame to speak of it.

The second place that sets down Christian perfection, is Phil. 3. 20. We
should have our conversation in Heaven; we should think with our selves how we
should live when we come thither, or how those live that are there, or one
would live that should come from thence to live on earth again; how feelingly
would they speak of God? how fervently would they praise him? how would their
songs of praise be all flames of love? how are they continually taken up with
thoughts of admiration of the excellencies of God, of the love of God? let us
not dally with our selves or God, but consider with our selves whether we live
in any measure suitable to such a life. But to proceed, let us consider another
place, Ephesians. 3. 19. To say of such an one, that he is a godly man, the holy
Spirit of God is in him, that he is full of the Holy Ghost, that he is filled
with all the fullness of God: if one went upon such relations and expressions to
see him of whom they were spoken, doubtless one should come with great
expectations to meet with one that was wholly taken up with thoughts of God,
and if one spoke any thing to him of God, doubtless one would expect that he
should speak wonderful things of God, with so much admiration, such zeal, such
love, with such feelings, that his very word would be able to inflame our
hearts with love of God; but if when one came to see such an one, he should
entertain one with vain and idle jests, with discourses of the world, and spend
the whole day generally in recreations, and sometime when he has nothing else
to do, go and spend half an hour in reading, or in praying; and when he comes
from those duties (Iron will be red hot if it be put into the fire for any time)
speak as savourly and with as much delight of the vanities of the world, as if
he had spent his time not in prayer, but in admiring and gazing upon the beauty
of the creature; and if one should speak to him something of God, he should
answer one overly, would ye not think in your own souls, is this that holy man
you spoke of? is he that man that was full of God? But to proceed a little
further, 2 Cor. 3. 18* the Apostle says of himself, and of Christians in his
days, that they were transformed into the Image of God; that is, lived the life
of God, such a life as Christ lived when he was here on earth; nay, the grace
of God in them was in such an high degree, that it might be rather called glory
then grace; they lived as if they were of the Church triumphant, in respect of
holiness, though of the Church militant, in respect of afflictions; their
grace was of such an high degree, that it was more like glory, as was said
before, then grace; yet they did not content themselves with that neither, but
made a progress from glory to glory: Dear Brethren, are our Saviors words but
wind? and can we imagine that the lives of those that take upon them the names
of Christians, are any whit suitable to these expressions? many times have I
thought of that saying of Erasmus, That since men could not bring the world to
Christianity, they have brought Christianity to the world; and those
expressions and precepts that have been too strict to give us liberty to follow
the vanities of the world, we have found out vain distinctions and expositions
of the places, to make them signify no more then we do, and to quiet our
consciences, that they being deceived and laid a sleep, we might not be
troubled with their clamours. Our Savior says, That for every idle word we
must give an account at the last day, Mat. 12. 36. The words are so plain, that
it will ask one a great deal of labor to find out such an exposition as might
not be a continual accuser of us in all companies, in all discourses: our
Saviors example is the best exposition of this precept; we do not read in all
the Scripture, one word that he spoke, but was some way or other to
edification; and yet how loose are we in our discourses; as if there were no
such place of Scripture in the whole Bible as these words? surely, our time
would be better spent in praying to God for strength against our corruptions,
then in studying to find out excuses and intricate expositions of plain
places to justify them. But you will say, that it is true, these are excellent
things, if one could live so, it were a blessed life; but alas who can do it?

I answer; First, If thou say thou can not live thus, I ask thee how do
thou know? did thou ever try what might be done in this case? did thou ever
make it thy business? It may be thou have had some perfunctory and careless
desires, some cold prayers and faint endeavors; but did thou ever set thy
self to it? did thou ever spend as much time, so many thoughts, with as much
earnestness, to get acquaintance with God, as men in the world do in their
trades* to get a little thick clay? did thou ever pray with half that
earnestness for grace, as ambitious men do sue for places and preferments, or
a condemned man for a pardon? Did thou ever seriously, and from the very
bottom of thy heart and soul say, Well, by the blessing of God I will not speak
an idle word, nor employ my self in things that profit not: have thou said with
David? I have sworn and I will perform thy righteous Judgments, Psalm. 119.
106. or as in the 20. or with the Apostle; I fight not as one beating the air,
but I press through toward the mark, and forget the things that are behind,
etc. So that if thou shall say that one cannot live thus, I say again, there is
no question, thou can not live holily, doing no more then thou do; neither
the word of God, nor any one that knows the ways of God, ever said or thought
that thou could upon these terms do any thing to purpose in the attainment of
holiness: for our Savior plainly says, We must strive to enter in at the
strait gate; and, that many shall seek to enter in (with such seeking that comes
not to the height of striving) and shall not be able: if thou should bid thy
servant lift such a piece of timber, and he should go with his little finger to
lift it, and not being able, should tell thee, that he could not lift it:
would thou not think that he mocked thee, in stead of obeying thee? so when
we shall complain of Religion, that it is too difficult a thing, we cannot
attain it, and yet we will not so much as touch it scarce with one of our
fingers; may not God justly say, that we do but mock him, and unjustly murmur
against his commands, complaining of their difficulty, when we never tried, in
using the means he has appointed us, what might be done?

Furthermore, Let us consider how far many of Gods servants, whose stories are
recorded in the sacred Scriptures, have gone in this way of perfection; it is
said, that Enoch walked with God, and that Noah was perfect in his generations,
and walked with God. Can we possibly think that these Expressions import no
more then that sometimes when they had little or nothing else to do, they spent
their time in prayer and meditation of divine matters? or that they did no more
then usually men do, in the morning spend some small time in prayer, and then
take their leave of God all the day, as it were compounding with God for two or
three prayers a day? but does it not much rather import a sweet, constant, and
strict communion with God? for doubtless Enoch found so much sweetness in his
walk with God, that he could not be content with that communion that earth
could afford him. And of all the Patriarks before the Flood, we read of none
that lived so few years upon earth as Enoch did; and doubtless those years
which he did live were more tedious to him, to be so long absent from the full
fruitition of God, then if he had lived ten times as long and had not tasted of
those joys, in comparison of which the pleasures of this world are but as the
gall of Aspes. What think we of Abraham, Moses, David. and Daniel? with how
much faith, zeal, meekness, holiness, breathings after God did they live?
What high expressions of joy, love, and heavenly desires are there in the
Psalms? What, do we think all these holy Examples are set down in the
Scripture to find us matter of discourse? or that the wisdom of God set down
an idaea of holiness, as Plato has done of a Commonwealth? or were they not
set down for our imitation? thousands of expressions almost in the Psalms we
must make strange Hyperboles, and say, they were but David's Rhetoric; or else
we must needs acknowledge that he was a Giant in compariof us in spiritual
matters. O what heavenly spiritual frame of heart had he! surely his
righteousness in comparison of Christ's was but as filthy rags, but in respect
of ours a glorious robe: and now I pray, what reason is there in the world, why
we might not live as holily as they, but that we take it for granted, we
cannot, and so never strive; it is true, to think our selves holier then the
meanest Saint, is pride, but not to strive to be as holy as the highest Saint
is sin: what means had they to attain holiness that we have not? They had
prayer, meditation, reading, hearing; so have we: if their prayers and
meditations were more servent, and more heavenly, who must we blame, God is not
a barren wilderness unto us, and his grace is as sufficient for us, as for
them; they had Circumcision, and the Passover; the breasts of the new Testament
are as full of graces as those of the old; nay doubtless, in respect of means
they are far more abundantly glorious in our days then in theirs, in respect
of the knowledge of Jesus Christ, and the mysteries of salvation: may we not
say as our Savior does, that of all that was born of Women, there was none
like John the Baptist, and yet the least in the times of the Gospel, is, or may
be greater then he? and what enemies or hindrances have we that they had not?
Was Satan, the flesh, the world, all or either of these not their enemies as
much as ours? or had they better weapons and armor to fight against them then
we have? we have the armor of God, they could have no better; if you shall
say, you had a great family to provide for, weighty affairs and employments
lay upon you, and these are great hindrances: in all these they exceed thee,
and yet they were no hindrances to them in comparison of that, generally they
are to us; Abraham drew three hundred out of his family to deliver Lot, besides
what men, women, and children were left behind. Job had also a great family,
he was a Judge, and a Prince, and yet notwithstanding in all the whole world
there was none like unto him. So David had a whole Kingdom to look to, besides
continual wars, and yet how often did he pray, every day; how frequent was he
in meditation? without all question, did we make it our business to entreat the
Lord for strength and grace to serve him, were we frequent and servent enough
in such desires, did we seek for wisdom as for silver, and search for
understanding as for hid treasures, we might do wonders in religion, in
comparison of what we do. And if you shall say, that all these you speak of
are Prophets. I answer, what then? for the gifts of prophecy are not gifts of
sanctification, but of edification; they might have been as holy, and not have
been Prophets, and they might have prophesied, and yet been workers of
iniquity. But to return to what we spoke, surely if men had faith, and that
wrought by love as it should do; if we were as watchful over our ways as we
might be, if we were not wanting to our selves, and to God, (for he is not
wanting unto us) we might live many days, without doing or speaking any thing
that materially is a sin: I do assuredly know, that no one thought, word, or
action, but in some respect or other is sinful, either the ground is not
spiritual; or not so spiritual; the end is not heavenly, or not so heavenly;
we do not purely aim at the glory of God, nor purely do it out of obedience to
God, and in the name of Christ, etc. as we should; therefore I do not say, we
can live one minute without sinning against God; but one may live many hours
and days without doing such actions which materially and in their own nature
are sins: as now for those which are accounted gross sins in the world, and
are so, as adultery, murder, theft, blasphemy, swearing; it may be some of Gods
people live their whole life without actually committing any one of them. What
is meant by that that is said of Zachary and Elizabeth, that they lived
blameless, Luke 1. 6. And what is meant by that of St Paul, 1 Cor. 4. 4. That
he knew nothing by himself? well, certainly those that love not to keep a
strict communion with God, and love not the truth, may find excuses enough to
bolster themselves up in their careless walk; nay, let them take heed, least
they so provoke the Lord, that he sends them strong delusions to believe lies.
It may be, they will plead the infirmities and falls of the Saints, Noah's
drunkenness, David's adultery, Peter's denial, and so encourage themselves in
their own wickedness; surely these failings of the Saints are set down as
sands and rocks to avoid, not as our Compass whereby we should steer our
course: it is true, if after prayers and strivings against those sins, through
the strength of our corruptions we fall into some sin, we may take comfort from
the infirmity and failings of the Saints: but before our fall, what use have we
of such failings, but only rocks, as I have said: comforts they may be after,
but not encouragements before; otherwise our spots are not the spots of Gods
people.

2. Consid. The second consideration is, that no art, science, or trade
whatsoever, is attained without some years being Apprentice, or studying of
it; and can we imagine that we can attain to any measure of perfection in
Religion, without spending either time or thoughts about it, but making it a
thing merely by the bie? The unreasonablenesse of this conceit appears the
more, if we consider, that we have no such impediments to hinder us from the
attainment of excelencies in Trades, Arts, and Sciences; nay, those things that
are hindrances in the attainment of holiness, do further us in the attainment
of such kind of excellencies: to be an excellent workman in any trade, or to be
an excellent Physician, neither the world, nor our corruptions, nor Satan are
against it; the World generally does promote and employ such persons; when they
have an occasion to use any one of any trade or calling, they use the
skilfullest, and so they are an encouragement to them: and for our corruptions,
they do not hinder, but rather further, for we pride our selves generally in
such kind of excellencies: and if the World nor the Flesh be not, certainly
Satan is not against them neither; but against holiness they are all enemies.
Now if we should see a man rowing, having both wind and tide with him, and
should row with all his might, and yet with much ado come to such a place by
night, and the next day being to row back again against wind and tide, should
take no pains at all, but lie sleeping in the boat, as if the stream that was
against him, should carry him back of it self, we should much wonder at such a
man's folly. Much more then may we wonder, when men shall spend so much pains,
so many thoughts to get an estate; and in things concerning God and eternity,
should carry themselves as if they were either not worth having, or as if
holiness (like weeds) should grow of it self.

3. Consid. The third Consideration is, That there is no pain nor trouble in
it is self in Religion, nor no true pleasure nor profit in sin; or what pleasure
or pain soever there is in them, it is so short and so small, that it deserves
not the name of either: Do but truly and seriously consider, what pain or
trouble is there in spending an hour, in reading, meditating, or praying, I
speak to the most disadvantage; for indeed, one should rather say, what
wonderful delight there is in a strict and constant communion with God in such
duties: but let it be supposed it be troublesome, the trouble is nothing, but
the comfort and the benefit is exceeding great; when thou have spent a day in
humbling thy soul before God, I pray, next day, is it any pain or trouble to
you? in respect of them, it is as the way of a Serpent upon a stone, there is
nothing of the trouble that did accompany those holy duties does remain when
they are ended, but the comfort and profit of them thou may meet withal
twenty years hence: and so for sin, the pleasure of it is momentany, but the
guilt and sting of it is eternal; the poor empty pleasures of sin, what are
they while they do continue? but sure I am, they are bitterness at the last.
To have a guilty conscience, and a wounded spirit, but one hour in any
extremity, as poor souls in desertion or despair have, has so much horror in
it, that doubtless whosoever has had any experience in such things, would not
edure them for all the pleasures in the world for Methusalems age: But alas, we
look not afar off, consider neither the end of holiness, nor of sin; nay to
speak the truth, we consider not the essential excellency of the one, nor
filthiness of the other.

4. Consid. Fourthly, Consider that there is not the least sin, nor the least
holy thought that shall vanish into air, or into nothing; for if God shall call
us to account for every idle thought or word, shall not every holy thought or
word, through his mercy, tend to our good also? The wicked do treasure up wrath
against the day of wrath; as a man that should cast in every day many pieces of
silver and gold into a room for twenty years together, or more, when he should
come to look in that room at the twenty years end, he would find many a piece
which he had forgotten; so it is with one that treasures up sin, when the book
of conscience shall be opened at the last, day, and the baggs wherein God
sealed up his sins, as Job speaks, how many sins will he meet withal that he
never thought of, until that day? not one of them shall be lost that ever he
cast in: so surely it will be with thee that treasurest up prayers and holy
thoughts; God does as safely seal up them, as he does the sins of the wicked:
there is a book of remembrance writ of all thy good words, and there is a
bottle to bottle up all thy tears: now how easy is it for thee to cast into
this treasury a thousand holy thoughts a day? to what a numberless number
would they arise to in few years? and by these not any business is hindered;
thou may ride, thou may eat and drink, thou may sell and buy, thou
may walk for all them: now if every holy thought do add something to thy
grace here, and to thy glory hereafter, and since they do not hinder, but
sweeten and sanctify all employments, why do thou not treasure up these
against the day of the Lord?

5. Consid. Fifthly, Consider seriously the excellencies of the Scriptures; for
we are not sensible enough of their worth, nor do we firmly nor feelingly
enough believe that they are the Word of God: Suppose that by some infallible
arguments it might be demonstrated that there were a Prophet now in England,
with what extraordinary care and observation would you observe his words that
he spoke in the Name of the Lord: if when thou were pouring out thy soul before
God, humbly begging of him that he would discover to thee more the things that
belong to thy peace, and thou should have an Angel from Heaven coming unto
thee, as one did to Cornelius; or that our Savior should himself speak to
thee from Heaven, as he did to Paul, when thou shall say as he did, Lord, what
would thou have me to do? With what reverence and attention would thou
observe, and what obedience to a tittle would thou give to such Messages?
Would thou not mark every word, and every syllable? and would not vary
from them one jot. Well, thou should give no less reverence nor obedience
unto the Word of God, then unto them. If thy friend speaks to thee, or writes
to thee, so thou art sure that it is his hand, they are both of equal authority
with thee; and why should not the word of God immediately spoken from Heaven,
or written, be so too, of equal authority with thee? to have an Angel from
heaven to tell thee what thou should do, is a stronger temptation to pride;
but there is no more of reality in it to move thee to obedience, then there is
in the written word: nay, may I not say less? for the word of God is the rule
by which we must judge their Messages; and not their Messages the rule by which
we must judge the Word of God; for if an Angel from Heaven should preach another
doctrine, let him be accursed. Now there is no reason, thou believing the Bible
to be the Word of God, which we all profess, but thou should with as much
care endeavor to understand and practice what therein is written. If we will
do but as Luther did, that he might understand Romans 3. 25, 26. fast and pray
when we find any place of Scripture too difficult to be understood; or when
we found our corruptions so strong, that we obeyed not when it is understood:
If we sought the Lord by prayer and fasting (a duty generally neglected, and
by some condemned, though by the Apostles commended and practiced) surely, we
should both understand more of the mind of God, and live more suitable to what
what we know.

6. Considerat. Sixthly, Consider, that howsoever we esteem it, it matters not,
without question the enjoyment of God is infinite happiness: for, do but
truly and really consider wherein does the happiness of Angels consist; Does
it not consist in the vision, fruition, and union with God? Is not God their
all? and shall he not be ours when we come thither? How comes it to pass, that
it is not so now? Nay, it is so; but how comes it to pass, that it is not so
to us? Either the Angels are deceived in making of it their happiness; or we
must be deceived in not making of it ours: we cannot have the face to say, That
if the Angels knew what pleasure there were in eating and drinking, and other
vain and wicked pleasures of the word, they would never spend their eternity in
singing the praises, in beholding the face, and admiring the excellency of God;
yet though we are ashamed to say thus, yet by our lives we generally hold forth
this blasphemy, and proclaim it to the whole world; nay, let me raise this one
step higher, the blessedness, of God wherein does it consist? the creature is
not his happiness, but himself; and if God be enough for himself, shall be
not be enough for thee? of dust and ashes, his enjoyment of himself, is his
happiness; how comes it to pass that it is not thine? God does command,
invite thee, entreat thee to enjoy him; nay, indeed what is it that God
requires of thee, but this, even to admire, love and enjoy him in the secret of
thy soul? thou will not, thou preferrest every trifle before him; thou will go
and see a carnal friend for carnal ends, rather then spend thy time in the
enjoyment of him, who is the praise, and above the praise of men and Angels to
all eternity; pray to him, who only can discover his love and excellencies to
thee, that he would make thee taste of this hidden Manna; that he would draw
away the vail before thine eyes, that thou may be no longer ignorant of this
truth; that he would purge out those corruptions out of thy heart, that thou
may relish and experiment the sweetness of it.

7. Consid. Seventhly, Consider that we have three enemies, the world, the
flesh, and the Devil; Consider this, I say, fully and feelingly; for few there
are that live so much as a tittle of this truth: or who lives as if the World
was his implacable enemy? for, do we not generally into all our actions put
something of that poisonous ingredient, viz. a desire to please men, and to get
their good word and will? We ought not to scandalize any one, as much as in us
lies; we ought to be all things to all men; but it is that we may gain them to
God, not to our selves: If this truth was engraven on our hearts, That it is as
possible to go to heaven and please the Devil, as go to heaven and please the
world: I say, if we were fully persuaded in our hearts of that Truth, we would
neither wonder the World hates us, nor endeavor that it should love us: we
should not endeavor nor cast away our pains to do that which is absolutely
impossible: So then, if we resolve to be Christians, we must neither fear nor
care what the World can say of, or do unto us. And we should in all our actions
of Religion, not so much as once bring it into our consideration, to think what
men will say or do unto us, if we do so or so, except it be by their dislike to
help our selves to know what is right; for though it is not an absolute rule,
yet it is a general rule, that such a thing is right, because men generally
speak against it: certainly, our desires and endeavors to please men, is one
of the greatest snares in the world; for generally we live so that we enslave
our selves, and lose not only our Christian, but our natural liberty for men;
but indeed if it was no more but our outward liberty, it was nothing, but we
wound our consciences and offend our God, which is worth more then a thousand
Heavens.

Cautions.
1. Caut. First, Take heed of the perfunctory performance of holy duties; for
many mischiefs come by them.

First, They puff up, not edify; if thou powrest out thy soul before God in
prayer, feelingly, spiritually, and faithfully, thou never departest without
some spiritual profit; but if thou do it carnally and formally, thy prayers
are but wind, and they puff thee up; for thy carnal heart would plead these
carnal performances to thy conscience, and make thee believe, because thou
have many pieces of this counterfeit coin, that thou art rich and want
nothing, though thou art poor, and blind, and naked, and miserable; for thy
duties have not the right stamp, having neither the image nor superscription of
God upon them, being neither performed for the glory of God, nor by the Spirit
of God, nor in the name of Christ: and between carnal and spiritual duties,
this is the difference, that we usually pride our selves in the one, and are
humble by the other.

Secondly, Which follows upon the former, we shall grow weary in time of
performing carnal duties; for needs must we be weary of these things from which
we get no profit nor strength: when duties are dry breasts unto us, it is no
marvel if we are weary of drawing them; by spiritual duties we get strength;
and such prayers do enable us to pray more; but carnal prayers tire us.

Thirdly, Consider the same time is spent in the one as in the other, whether
thou hear or prayest with zeal and attention, or without, it takes up the
same time in the Public Congregatition, though not the same profit.

Fourthly, Consider that you spoil both, by mixing the thoughts of worldly
business with spiritual duties; for thy outward performance of the duty keeps
thy thoughts of business from coming to maturity, and the thoughts of worldly
things keep thy prayers from doing thee any good, so that they spoil one
another; I mean, of those wandering thoughts that we let lie in our duties, for
those that are resisted, and removed, and mourned for, do somewhat hinder, but
not putrify the duty; for as the Wise man says, That dead flies cause the
ointment of the Apothecary to send forth a stinking savor; if one takes out a
fly as soon as it is come into it, so much of the ointment that sticks about
the fly is lost, but the rest remains sweet and pure, as it was before: so
wandering thoughts spoil something of our prayers, though they be resisted and
removed, they make a little hole in our prayer, by taking up that time which
should have been filled up with better thoughts; but if they continue, they
eat up the fat of those sacrifices, and make the sweet odours of our prayers
noisome. But to conclude this Caution, if we were but in any measure sensible
of the Majesty of him to whom, and the necessity of those things for which we
pray, (to instance in that duty) for they are our life, and of the necessity of
having them from God; we need no other motives to deter us from perfunctory
performances.

2. Caut. Secondly, Take heed of worldly company, for whosoever delights in
that, will find that he never comes out of it but worse then he comes into it;
for when one goes into such a company among whom there is nothing spoken of
God, of Christ, or of the Spirit of the Word of God, and of spiritual
experiences, where there is no spiritual duty performed; except one be
exceeding careful to sequester ones mind from their discourses, and keep a
stricct communion with God in the secrets of our hearts, our graces, if they
were strong, would grow weak; and our corruptions, though they were weak, would
grow strong; and that spiritual advantage which you have got by many prayers,
you will find will be lost in a little time spent in such company, except their
discourses be as dry breasts unto you, and as Meshech and Kedar were unto David;
they must either be a grief or sin unto them, except in some cases, as in case
of business, thy particular calling, or charity, if thou come as a
Physician, either of their bodies or of their souls, then thou not only may,
but ought to come unto them; in such cases, our Savior did frequently eat
with Publicans and sinners, not out of any love he had to their worldly
conversation, but to their conversion; and this must be taken as a rule, He
that knows not how to be alone, knows not how to be in company with profit.

3 Caut. Thirdly, Take heed of idleness; for as the Wise man says, See thou
one wise in his own eyes, there is more hope of a fool then of him. For to
make such a man wise, there are two things to be done.

First, You must bring him to that, that he may know himself to be ignorant,
and then you must teach him wisdom; whereas he that is ignorant and knows
himself to be so, needs only the last; so he that is in any honest employment,
Satan has two works to do to make him sin.

First, He must get him to leave off what he is doing, and then persuade him to
the evil that he tempts him to: as a bowl that is running must be first
stopped, before it can be made to run the contrary way; whereas the bowl that
^ies still may without stopping be cast what way one pleases: a bird that is
flying one can hardly take any aim at, as one may at that which sits still; so
Satan cannot level his temptations so at a busy, as at an idle man: but I
shall not prosecute this common place of idleness, but my main design is to
give you caution against spiritual idleness; for that which is not taken
notice enough of, that is not avoidied nor mourned for enough, is that we think
that we are not idle, if we are busied in worldly employments, if we are
selling of wares in our shops, or riding of a journey, or busied in some such
employment of our particular calling. The man thresheth and plowes all day, and
thinks that he is free from idleness; but we should know, that if our thoughts
are not employed upon spiritual things when they may, it is the worst idleness
of all: and very few worldly businesses there are that stand in need of the
continual intentions of our thoughts upon them; for it is rather our love of
the world that fixes our thoughts upon worldly matters while we are employed
about them, then because they might not be done without half that intention of
mind: doubtless, there are many disseminata vacua, in all employments of the
world, which might and ought to be filled up with spiritual thoughts; and as
it is with Bees, though they gather honey from a flower, they leave it as
fragrant and as fresh as they found it; so we gathering and mixing spiritual
thoughts with and from our worldly business, we hinder it not at all; for as a
vessel that is full of sand will hold almost as much water as if there were no
sand in it; so when we are full of employments, we may hold a thousand holy
thoughts; and as a ship can hardly be so filled with chests or other lading, but
there will be so many corners unfild up, wherein Diamonds of such great value
might be put in, that they would be more worth then all the lading of the Ship;
so those thoughts of God and spiritual things which we might have in the midst
of our other employments, may be of far greater value then they.

Fourthly, Take heed of perfunctory and careless resisting of temptations; but
what thou do in that particular, as in spiritual things, do it with all thy
might; for to think and weakly to resolve against sin, will not hinder, but
aggravate thine offense; and it is one of the Devils policies, to let a man
alone to think of several Motives, and make some faint resolutions against
any sin, when he sees that he has him fast enough; for he knows, that the
more Motives and Resolutions we sin against, the more we are hardened, and
GOD is provoked: And as it is with a Town that is besieged, they will willingly
let so many of their enemies in, as they know they are able to master: so
Satan, when he sees that the Motives and Resolutions that enter into the soul
are too weak, he willingly suffers them to enter; for, perfunctory performance
of duties, and feeble resisting of temptations are equally dangerous, if the
later be not the worst; by the former we get no spiritual good, and by the
later we overcome no spiritual evil.

5. Caut. Take heed of making others sin, either by scandal, or being a
temptation to them by example or provocation; it is a good way, when one has
to deal with a passionate man, not only to prepare our selves for the Combat
by prayer and resolutions and keeping a strong guard upon our hearts, that we
may not be overcome with passion, howsoever he shall use us, either in word or
in deed; but to take special care and to use all means to keep him from
passion; for there is a wretched joy that our hearts are subject to take in the
sins of others, thinking them to be a foil to our innocence, to have others
very passionate when we are very meek; there is a secret delight that the heart
is prone to take, but it proceeds from a desperate pride in us, who desire to
have our excellencies made manifest, though with the dishonor of God and
damnation of our brother; but there is a great deal of hell in it, and charity
rejoices not in ill. 1 Cor. 13.

6. Caut. Take heed of studying high speculative points whatsoever; for when
our thoughts are exceedingly intent in finding out truths, all the fire is in
the top of the chimney, and none is left upon the hearth: generally high
speculations leave the heart cold without devotion; for generally there is a
great deal of curiosity and pride in such studies, for commonly we desire to be
accounted knowing men, in searching into whys and hows of Gods works and
truths; as why God made the tree of knowledge of good and evil, and how there
can be three persons, and but one God: therefore in all reading, join prayer,
whether it be in the reading of humane or divine things, and take special care
that the love of God go not out, nor grow cold in you. That which I have heard
of one, is a good practice, that whatsoever book he was reading, every leaf
that he turned over he would look what was become of his heart, and of God, and
would not begin till he had sent up some prayers to the Lord for direction.

Advises.
1. Adv. First, Concerning writing, many ways thou art to employ that for thy
advantage.

First, Write down all those spiritual passages out of Sermons, books,
discourses, wherein thou have found most relish and spiritual profit.

Secondly, Keep a Register of all the mercies that God has bestowed upon thee,
whether it be temporal or spiritual, but especially thy spiritual
experiences, and his manifestations of his love, if ever the terrors of the
Almighty was upon thee; the ways of Gods providence in supporting thee, and
how, and when, and in what manner he delivered thee. And so for the discoveries
of his love, and concerning the mercies God has bestowed upon thee, how, and
whether, and when he answers your prayers; as also all the special ways of
Gods providence to other spiritual persons, in temporalls or spirituals; and
when thou find thy heart dull and cold in love, or weak in faith, these
experiences of Gods goodness to thy self and others, will be an excellent
means to inflame and strengthen thee.

Lastly, Keep a Diurnall of thy life in respect of the spiritual passages of
every day; set down whether thou did awake with God, or whether the world
had the first fruits of thy thoughts, and how thou did perform spiritual
duties, whether with relish, fervency, or delights, or otherwise; mark and set
down when thy heart made any default, intermitting its communion with God, and
all the several sins that thou can take notice of, that thou have committed
that day, and what mercies thou have received; and when there is any mercy that
thou prayest for, some mark should be set until thou have an answer of that
prayer from God, and that day the Lord gives thee that answer, make a reference
from that day to the day of praying for that mercy.

2. Adv. Secondly, Choose some spiritual friend one or more, to whom thou
may wholly unbosome thy self in all spiritual matters; but a great deal of
caution need to be had in this particular, he need to be one of a 1000 that
thou choosest; thus thou need have a great deal of Experince of his
spiritual wisdom, humility, and experience of the ways of God; for be he
never so learned, though he understand all mysteries and all knowledge, though
he has never such excellent gifts of edification, yet if he be not an
experienced Christian, thou will little benefit either by his society, or
counsel; for when he speaks of spiritual and experimental truths, and the
discourses of such truths are the very life of the communion of Saints; I say,
that his discourses concerning such matters, be he never so learned, if he be
not experienced in them, will be without life or relish; he will seldom speak
of such things, but when he does it, it will be with so much heaviness, that
thou may clearly perceive he does speak but by rote, and of things he
delights not in; and for his advise in spiritual matters, it must needs be
very imperfect, for thousand cases may happen of which books speak nothing; and
having no other way to understand them, and direct thee, he will be at a loss;
as one that travels by a Map, and has no other way to guide himself, he will
meet with many turnings, that put him to a nonplus which way to take; whereas
he that has often traveled that way is a far safer guide: the truth is, we
have no knowledge of God, or no saving knowledge of him, but what is by
experience: To conclude therefore, if thou will choose a spiritual friend,
choose such an one as magnifies Christ, and the spirit of God, and his
teachings, and the word of God, and inward mortifications above outward, and
that is an experienced wise and humble Christian, and thou shall get a world of
good by the converse of such an one; for in doubts his wisdom and experience
will direct thee, in thy distresses he will comfort thee, when thou art
spiritually cold, his example and carriage in the performance of holy duties,
his discourses of heavenly things, and the flames of his love will set thee on
fire.

3. Adv* The third is diurnal examination, every night strictly to examine what
thou have done that day; we read of God himself that every day he looked over
his works: surely God has no need to examine his works, but it is writ for our
instruction, and doubtless the benefit and necessity of this examination are
very great.

First, We should find out our sins before they come to be customary, when they
are but a day old, and before they have taken root in us, and so they will
easily be pulled up, and by faith, repentance, prayer, and resolutions against
them, we shall easily get the victory over them, and through the help of God,
who makes us more then conquerours: it is very likely, by the blessing of God,
if David had not neglected the examining of his soul that day when he defiled
Bathsheba, he would have discovered that abomination, and he would never have
gone fo far as to have added blood and the rest of his abominations to his
uncleanness, and he would have watered h^s couch with his tears, which he had
defiled with his adultery.

The second advantage is, that we shall never lie in any sin unrepented of; and
there be many other inconveniences (besides bringing it to a custom) that come
by sin lying on our souls unrepented of; for it deads our prayers, cools our
love, hardens our heart, makes us that we cannot come to God with that joy,
with that freedom of spirit; as when one has done ones friend an injury, one
is loath to see him.

The third advantage is by dividing this great work of giving up our account,
and making all even betwixt God and our selves, the work will be very easy;
which if we shall not do it but at our death, or only yearly, it would be
exceeding difficult, and almost impossible: as if some Merchant who had very
great trading, should ballast his accounts of debts, receipts, of
disbursements, etc. but once in seven years, it would be an intolerable
burden; besides, many things would be forgotten; whereas it being done daily,
his accounts are perfected with more ease, and fewer defaults.

The fourth advantage is, that at thy death thou will have a world of comfort
by taking this course; for besides, thou art eased of that burden of having
all the accounts of thy life to make up then, thou have a clear way to answer
Satan, when he shall lay to thy charge any sins of thy former life; for if he
shall accuse thee, and say, do not thou remember, that such a year, and such
a day, thou did commit such a sin? thou may answer him, and say, it is
true, that such a day I did commit such a sin, but then that very night I
mourned for it, and went not to bed before I had my pardon sealed with the
blood of Christ to my soul; and when Satan shall not be able to lay to thy
charge any debt of which thou have not had an accquittance, nor any sin for
which thou have not had a pardon from the Lord, such fiery darts will have no
power to wound thee: and this examination thou may make thus: Consider all
the several hours of the day, and how thou have spent them; when thou did
first awake, what did thou think of? when thou were asleep, and thoughtest
not of thy self, God thought on thee, and thou were safe under the shadow of
his wings; When I awake, thou art with me, says David; was not God with David
when he was asleep? yes surely; for his being with him when he was awake,
showed that he was there before; for it is not said, When I awake thou come
to me, but art with me. Well, but what are thy thoughts when thou first wakest?
are they of God, or of the World? Thou shall much discover the temper of thy
heart by this; those that are our very familiar acquaintance, we suffer them to
come into our chamber before we are up: surely, God is a stranger to thee, if
thou think not of him, nor seek him on thy bed; then as the Apostle
says, If the first fruits are holy, the whole lump is holy: so generally, as
thy first thoughts are, such art thou all the day after: in the morning thou
say, it will be foul weather, says our Savior, for the sky is red and
lowering; so we may say of the day in respect of spiritual matters; if thy
morning thoughts be red and lowering, it will be foul weather in thy soul that
day: and when thou read over thy diary, thou shall find that those days
when that thy waking and morning thoughts were full of God, that all the duties
of that day, whether of thy general or particulat calling, were full of God
also. Well, what did thou think of afterward, did thou keep thy thoughts
close to God, until thy morning exercise? did thou dress thy soul, as thou
did dress thy body? Well, after that, what did thou do such an hour and
such and hour, etc? Or to help thee in this duty something more, examine at
night thy works, words, thoughts, what they were every hour of the day. For
thy works, consider what thy religious works, the works of thy particular
calling, and thy recreations were. For thy prayers, have thou not oomitted thy
seven times a day, if thou have attained with David to that number? or how
often soever thy set times are, have thou not omitted them? for I dare not
discourage any one in observing set times, as if that could not be don
lawfully. Well, how have thou prayed? have thou performed that duty as a task,
or as a means? have thou bound up thy devotion to such a number of times of
going to God? or have thou given God those prayers as a composition, or as the
rent of the day, that thou may do with the rest, and spend the rest in
vanity, as thou please? Or did thou not much rather perform that duty of
prayer as an act of communion with God for the present, and as an help for
communion with God for the future? Did thou not by thy prayers intend and
desire of the Lord power and strength not to depart from him? What were thy
prayers? were they faithful, fervent, reverent, humble? What returns of thy
prayers have thou had this day? Have thou endeavored to obtain those mercies
and graces that thou prayedst for? Thou mockest God, to pray for those things
thou endeavourest not for; and thou mockest thy self, to endeavor for those
things thou prayest not for. For thy Meditation and reading the Word of God,
how have thou performed them? What power have they had upon thy heart this day?
Have thou been more faithful, humble, charitable, etc? What resolutions did
thou make? and how have thou kept them? etc. Concerning thy reading the
Scriptures and meditation, most of the things which are spoken concerning
Prayer, may be applied to these also: as, Did thou meditate and read as a
task, or as a means? and so of the rest. Concerning the works of thy particular
calling, have they not justled out the works of thy general calling? have thou
not unnecessarily omitted thy set times for spiritual duties? or have not thy
thoughts been taken up too much with them? have thou not left off thy communion
with God? God may be with thee in thy shop as well as in thy Closet. Again, if
thou art a tradesman, have thou not took advantage of the necessity of the
seller, and bought too cheap, and of the ignorance of the buyer, and sold two
dear? have thou not sold thy conscience with thy wares? Concerning thy
recreations, have they not been unlawful recreations in respect of the kind?
have thou not made a sport of sin, making that a recreation which should be thy
grief? making that thy delight, which should make a Christian weep? have not
thy recreations been unlawful in respect of time? have they not been
unseasonable? have thou not used recreations, when thou should have put on
sackcloth, not being sensible of the afflictions of Joseph? or have not thy
recreations taken up too much time? have thou not made a vocation of
recreation? the best way is by prayer and by frequent communion with God, to
attain to that spiritual frame of soul, that thou may go to God as David
speaks, Psalm 43. ver. 4. to make God thy exceeding joy: so shall thy great
business and design that thou have in the whole world be turned into a
recreation; and thou shall need no other, but thou shall be as those that are
in heaven; it shall be thy eternal business and delight to admire and praise
God. What have thy words been? thou must give an account at the last day for
every idle word: how many have thou spoken this day? Where, when, and with whom
have thou discoursed, and what has thy discourse been of? Have thy words been
to edification? Remember what the Apostle says, That we must avoid foolish
talking and jesting, which is not convenient; Have thou not this day slandered,
or spoken ill of thy neighbor? if thou have, besides thy humbling thy self
before God, and asking pardon of him, make some recompense to thy neighbor,
and put up as many prayers to God for him, as thou have spoken evil words of
him. For thy thoughts, what have they been? Have not vain thoughts lodged in
thee? The fountain of all sin are our thoughts; if thou keep them close to
God, all the rest will follow, thy words and thy conversation will be
spiritual also: Have thou not had a thousand thoughts of God this day? if thou
have not, thou have lost that which is irrevocable: for though thou have a
thousand thoughts of God the next day, thy loss this day is not thereby
recovered; for thy having a thousand thoughts of God this day, does not hinder
thee from having a thousand thoughts next day, but rather further thee; the
more thoughts thou have of God, the more thou may have; and for thy thoughts
of God, what have they been? have they been fervent as well as frequent? have
thy thoughts of God been worthy of God? or have not thy thoughts of God been
such that thou should have had of the world, and thoughts of the world such
as thou should have had of God?

4. Adv. The fourth is Meditation, a duty of so great concernment, so much
profit, that nothing but experience can make one know the benefit of it; and
the man of the greattest devotion, and of the heavenlyest affections, that we
read of in all the Bible, though indeed, for matter of revelations, it may be,
something more is spoken of others then of him, I mean David, was exceedingly
versed in Meditation, and does speak very much of it concerning his own
practice, and commending it to others: you know very well, that he sets it down
as the only, or at least the chief exercise of the blessed man, to meditate in
the word of God day and night: he delights in the word of God, and therefore
meditates in it; and meditates in it, and therefore delights in it: One that
walks in a garden, sees the beauty, and may smell sweetness of the flowers
growing there; but it is the Be that gathers honey out of them: to read and
study the Scriptures, has a great deal of sweetness in it, but it is
meditating on the Scriptures that brings the sweetest and lastingest benefit:
the end of study is knowledge; but the end of meditation is also holy affection
and practice. Now that which I advise and direct in this particular, is, to
know how to read and meditate on the holy Scriptures to our greatest spiritual
comfort and advantage: and there are many Advises to this purpose.

First, Take the Bible, open it, and read it with the same attention,
reverence, and resolution to follow it, as if Christ living on the earth either
by reason of sickness, or some other occasion, not being able to go to him thy
self, thou should send some special friend with thy humble desires to
Christ, to advise thee what to believe and do, and Christ should send a Letter
to thee by that friend. How exceedingly would thou prize that Letter? how
would thou rejoice and long to read it? how strictly would thou observe
every syllable? Go, take the Bible, open it, and do likewise. We do not read
that ever Christ writ any thing with his own hand, save that which he wrote
upon the ground, John 8. and what that was we know not. And what might be the
reason? might not one, if not the chiefest reason be, lest we should dolize
that place of Scripture, and despise the rest in comparison of that: it is not
the hand, but the spirit of Christ that gives authority to Scripture: we have
strange opinions of the bodily presence of Christ; we think, had we lived in
his days, we would have gone to him, and acknowledged our sins, and craved
pardon and direction, and scarce doubt but we should have obtained both: but we
consider no^ we have as near and as certain a way to obtain them now as then;
nay, we have the same way as they had; for it was their faith that made them
whole, and by faith we may be made so too in respect of spiritual diseases. So,
if an Angel should bring a message from heaven to us, how would we observe and
follow it? The Scripture should be of as great power and authority with us, as
that Message, and indeed more; for if it were possible that such a Message
should contradict any thing in the Scripture, the Scripture must be believed
before it. But of this more largely in the fifth Consideration.

Secondly, Read every verse in the Bible with this consideration, that the holy
Spirit of God, when he inspired the Apostle, Prophet, or other Penmen of the
holy Scriptures to write that place, did particularly intend thy good in it;
for we must not conceive that the Scripture was written for their good only
who lived in those times when those several Books were published; but to all
ages, for every particular man that should live in those several generations.
The Scripture it self is plain in this particular; Romans 15. 4. For whatsoever
things were written before time, were written for our learning, that we through
patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. The
secret things belong unto the Lord our God, but these things which are revealed
belong unto us, and to our children for ever, that we may do all the words of
the Law.

Nay, we read of a particular promise made to a particular person upon a
special occasion; if any part of Scripture were not to extend to every
particular person that should live while the world lasts, one would think it
should be that; yet even that very promise the Apostle brings, even that, as a
promise particularly to be applied to every Christian: compare but these
places, Heb. 13. 5. Josh. 1. 5. The Scripture like a well made Picture looks
upon every one in particular, so directly, as if it looked upon none else: we
generally read the Scriptures as we hear Sermons, without a particular and
personal application of them; if a godly Minister should come home to any one
of our houses, and take one aside, and tell one privately and feelingly, you
profess your selves Christians, but there is little or nothing of Christianity
appears in your lives, you live not as becomes the Gospel of Jesus Christ; it
would startle us; we hear the same in the Pulpit, and we let it pass as a
thing not concerning us: if one should come from an house of uncleanenesse, and
hear a voice from Heaven, saying, Whoremongers and adulterers God will judge,
it would strike terror into that man's heart; he reads the same words in the
Scripture, and they are a dead letter to him.

Thirdly, Read the Scripture to a right end for which it was written, not for
custom, or that you might be able to discourse, and because you are ashamed to
be ignorant of those things which you conceive every Christian should know, and
having an occasion diverse times in company to talk of such matters, then you
would be loath to be able to say nothing; but consider what end the Scripture
was writ for, Ro^. 15. 4 Rev. 3. 10. 1 Pet. 2. 2. 2 Timothy 3. 16. and many other
places, set them down; our knowledge, our affectionss, and our lives are quite
out of frame, and thou must go to the holy Scriptures there to find out
directions to cure these distempers: and in a word, that thou may be able to
know, admire, love, fear, trust, and serve God more then thou do; thou
should never read any part of the word of God, without a particular
intention to advantage thy self in these particulars by thy reading.

Fourthly, Thou must humbly and earnestly pray to the Lord to give thee his
Spirit to understand what thou read in his Word; take heed of going with
thine own humane spirit, and in the strength of thy learning, to search out the
deep things of God; go to the shallowes of the works, which we call the works
of Nature, and thou shall find that thou art not able to fathom them; the
wind thou hear the sound thereof, but know not whence it comes, nor
whither it goes; and how can thou presume to understand the great mysteries
of God, which the Angels themselves desire to look into, without the help of
the Spirit of God which teaches wisdom secretly? let thy desires be fervent,
for the things written in the Word of God are thy life; desire the Lord to give
thee a powerful, spiritual, and experimental knowledge of the truths that
thou shall read.

Fifthly, Promise to the Lord that if he will but reveal to thee his will, thou will do it, and obey him in it, whether it be good or evil; Jer. 42. 6.
whether it be pleasing or displeasing to thine own will: we do not use to tell
any one a receipt to cure a disease he is sick of, if we know he is resolved
not to take it; nor do thou satisfy thy self with a neutrality, to find thy
self neither resolved to follow, nor not to follow what thou shall understand:
it is an hard thing when one whom God has loved so much, shall give no other
return of all his goodness but this, that he does not find his heart to hate
and rebel against him: many people do little better then use the Scripture as
a charm, they think by reading so many Chapters a day, they shall be cured of
all spiritual diseases: had they not as good think, that by hanging some
Chapters or two about their neck, they shall be cured of some corporal
disease? if one should have a receipt to cure the gout, and he should read it
over every day twice or thrice, and think thereby to be cured, though he never
took what was prescribed; so it is with him that thinks the bare reading of the
Word of God will do him any good without being, believing, and doing
accordingly.

Sixthly, When thou art thus prepared, read that place which thou intendest to
meditate of, and consider what the true meaning of the place is, to thy
understanding thereof before thou did crave the assistance of the Spirit of
God; but if the place be knotty and hard to be understood, pass it by, for
such places are not proper places of meditation, but of study; thou must choose
those places of Scripture as are fit for the affectionate, not the speculative
part of Divinity, such as may more affect the heart, then busy the brain to
understand it; and thou must not be curious to raise nice observations from the
words, but take those truths that lie open in the Text.

First, Because those truths that lie hidden in one place of Scripture, are
obvious in another.

Secondly, Because when the brain is much employed, the heart lies dead
without affections.

Thirdly, Because that time thou spendest in finding out curious observations,
may be far more profitably spent in working thy heart to holy affections and
resolutions, from some other truth that will presently occur from the words.

Lastly, It shows that there is not so great spiritual hunger after
righteousness as there should be; for hungry men do not use to stand and pick
bones, when they have meat enough to eat.

Seventhly, When thou have raised any observation from the words, then thou art
to put one of these three questions to thy self; Do I thus? Is it thus with
me? and, believe I thus? One or two, or all of these will belong to every Text;
some to all, and all to some, as Luke 12. 32. Fear not little flock, it is your
Fathers good will to give you the Kingdom: Do I thus? that is, for the first
branch, Fear not; do I fear? Then, Is it thus with me? am I little in mine own
eyes? am I one of Christ's flock? am I one of that small number that shall be
saved? Lastly, Do I believe this, that God will give the Kingdom of Heaven to
such?

Eighthly, If thou do find, that thou art, do, or believe as the Word
requires, give God the praise, humbly acknowledging that it is not thy doing at
all, either that thou art, or do, or believe what thou should: and if
thou find that thou pridest thy self in stead of being thankful, as if
they were from thy self, or that by any of them as thine act thou may be
justified, then do but think in how many other things thou failest, and how
even in these very particulars, if thou considerest either the measure, manner,
ground, and end, thou shall find them all to be defective, and thy best
righteousness not only to be ragged, but filthy too.

Ninthly, If thou find that either it is not with thee, or that thou do
not, or beleevest not as the Word requires, then,

First, Humble thy self before the Lord, and desire pardon and help for the
future.

Secondly, Seriously consider what is the reason (if it be that thou beleevest
not) why thou art not established in that truth: say to thy self, O my soul,
God can neither be deceived, nor deceive, and that this is his word that we now
read and meditate on, is more certain then any reason that can possibly be
brought against it; consider that generally the howes and whyes of Gods truths
and works are the things that stumble us; as, how can there be three persons
and yet but one God? and, why should God hate Esau, and love Jacob? in those
cases say to thy self, that for the whys and howes of Gods word and truths, it
is curiosity and pride to enquire of them, except God does reveal them, and we
ought to mortify our desire of knowing them: as that of our Savior takes
place in this case; Blessed are they that believe and see not.

Thirdly, Think with thy self, if thou can remember any other place or places
that confirms the truth that thou doubts of.

Fourthly, Know that that which thou art mainly to enquire of, is of the
meaning of the Word of God, not of the truth of it; for we are seriously to
consider, whether such a place holds forth such a point, not (it appearing to
be the plain meaning of the Text) whether it be true or no, if it be a thing
that thou do not which thou should do, or do which thou should not
do; then seriously consider what are the reasons and grounds of thy
disobedience, and thou shall find them to be either the pleasure, profit, or
honor of the world; and say, alas, O my soul, can we be so deceived as to be
put off with vanities, such as by experience we have known to be vanities, and
by faith much more? Shall we leave an Heaven of joys, the God of mercies? shall
we leave Christ, who has so loved us, that he left all, even the bosom of his
Father, and emptied himself of all his glory, and filled himself with our
misery? shall we leave all these for these, vanities which we must leave, and
will leave us? Consider the impediments that hinder thee from doing thy duty;
consider the temptations and occasions of thy sin; consider the means and
motives to avoid it: remove the impediments; avoid the occasions; use the
means; and think of the motives to do that which the Lord commands: but thou
must neither think to find out these, nor to use the means, or avoid the
occasions, etc. without imploring humbly and earnestly the direction and
assistance of the Spirit of God, to assist and direct thee in the premises;
for you must know, that you must find out and use spiritual Motives, or else
thy very avoiding of sin is sin, when it is done upon carnal grounds or
sinful motives.

Tenthly, When thou have finished all thy Meditations,

First, Thou art to entreat the Lord, that he would work all these truths upon
thy heart, and fasten them as a nail in a sure place, that his Word may not be
a dry breast unto thee, nor thou a barren wilderness unto it.

Secondly, Thou art to bless God for any spiritual frame of heart that is
either wrought or discovered in thee by this Exercise.

Lastly, Choose some special truth or point (in which thou are either most
defective, or wherein thou have found most relish, which thou have most
occasion to make use of that day) and keep it by thee to think of; and do as
those that walk in a garden of fragrant flowers, if one may have leave,
generally he takes some along with him, to smell to the rest of the day: do
thou bind up some spiritual truths out of thy Meditation, and do likewise.

Last Adv. The last great Advice, and that which must serve for an Antidote,
lest all the other Cautions and Advices being observed, they should be turned
into poison to us, is, that we should often meditate, and never be satisfied in
our souls, until we come to a clear Gospel experimental knowledge of Christ,
without which indeed, we are not worthy of the name of Christians; for are we
not called Christians from the very name? And doubtless, if we have not a right
knowledge of Christ, we shall make up a Christ to our selves of our prayers, and
fastings, and alms, and repentance; and woe be to that soul that at the last
day shall have nothing to trust to but his graces and duties, which will accuse
him in stead of pleading his cause: and two things especially we should
endeavor to know of Christ; first, the excellency of the person and mysteries
of Christ. Secondly, the love of Christ.

First, For the excellency of his person, though to say he was both God and
man, is indeed to include all; yet some few things I shall speak to manifest
this point.

First, That all his people do receive from him grace for grace; John 1. 16.
Now if we consider the vast emptiness and spiritual wants of the people of
God, we must needs conclude that he must be an Ocean of excellency that must
continually supply them.

Secondly, (For I shall be very brief, setting down rather heads of Meditation,
then Sermon-wise, to dilate upon them) Consider the dignity of his sufferings;
for they did satisfy the Justice of God, and that could not be satisfied
without something of infinite value; nor could it have been done by him save
only by reason of the dignity of his person.

Thirdly, Consider how he suffered; though the pains he suffered were exceeding
great, yet was it without any abatement at all of his love of, and confidence
in God; for while he satisfied the Justice of God by his passive obedience, in
suffering the penalty of the Law; he also satisfied and fulfilled the
righteousness of the Law, by his active obedience, which was a wonder full
thing, that in the midst of all his agony and all his Fathers anger, while he
was laying upon him the punishment of the iniquity of us all, and spared him
not, that even then there should be no abatement at all of his confidence in,
and love of his Father, but that he should love him and trust in him as much as
at any other time; for had there been any abatement, and had he not loved God
then with all his soul, with all his might, and with all his strength (and the
same may be said of his trusting in God) his sufferings could never have
satisfied for sin, but themselves had stood in need of forgiveness.

Fourthly, Consider that saying of our Savior, John 14. 9. He that has seen
me, has seen the Father: the speech of Philip is as if he should say; We
indeed see a great deal of holiness and wisdom in thy words and actions, but
would we could see the Father; surely there would be a world of holiness and
wisdom in his words and actions; if he would have lived amongst men as thou
Lord have done, surely then it had sufficed. Now our Saviors answer is as if
he should say to Philip, If the Father himself had taken humane nature, and
lived amongst men, he would not have spoke one word more, or otherwise, nor
done one action more or otherwise then I have done, he would not, nay could not
have spoke, or done more wisely then I have done; So he that has seen me, has
seen my Father.

Fifthly, Consider that those who have had the greatest and highest revelations
of divine things, have always had the highest esteem of, and have most
magnified Christ. Saint Paul, rapt into the third heaven, and saw and heard
things there, which was neither possible, nor lawful to be uttered; yet no man
speaks higher things of Christ then he, he desires to know nothing but Jesus
Christ, and him crucified; accounts all other knowledge but dross and dogs
meat; such knowledge as dogs and swine, reprobates may have; nay, one step
further, the very Angels in heaven, though they have the beatificall vision,
yet notwithstanding they desire to look into the great mysteries of the Gospel,
1 Pet. 1. 12. Therefore never think that thou have attained to any measure of
Christian knowledge before thou see an excellency in Christ, and an height
and depth in the mysteries of the Gospel; which if thou shall not do, say
within thy self, it is so evident that nothing is more in the word of God, that
Christ is the end of all the ceremonial Laws, and all the Prophesies of the
old Testament; that all the Prophets, nay all the Angels give witness; and the
Apostle clearly says, that there is no controversy of this matter of the
greatness of Gospel mysteries, and therefore that I do not admire them, it
certainly proceeds from my ignorance of them; for if it proceeded from
knowledge, without doubt the Apostles that had more knowledge then I, and the
Angels which had more knowledge then the Apostles, would never have desired to
have known more of them: And after thou have wrought this upon thy heart, and
art fully convinced of the truth of it, that there is no knowledge, not only
not so profitable, but not so sweet, nor so excellent as this, then humbly
beseech the Lord that he would show unto thee, teaching thee by his Spirit the
deep things of God, and that he would not only do it to inform and enlighten
thy understanding in, but to inamour thy will of the beauties of the mysteries
of Christ: we stand doting and gazing upon hamane knowledge, which is but like
a poor glowworme compared to the Sun of righteousness; but alas poor thing, it
has neither light nor heat, compared to the truths of the Gospel: and we must
look upon Christ as the only author and finisher of our faith, and justifier of
our persons; though we do all that has been mentioned, yet we must not so much
as make our doings, or not doings the least ingredient in our justification:
and as Solomon speaks concerning our wisdom, so we must do in the matter of
holiness; Lean not to thine own wisdom, says Solomon; not only not rely
upon it, but lean on it: we must not partly trust in our own wisdom, and partly
in the wisdom of God, but we must wholly rely upon his wisdom: so, we must not
partly rely upon Christ's merits, and partly upon our own; but wholly on Christ:
those sins which we do not commit, we are not innocent of; and those holy
duties that we do perform, we are not innocent in; therefore neither can we
escape hell, nor attain heaven by any thing that we do, or not do: and the
reason why we either avoid sin, or perform holy duties, or frequent
ordinances, is not because thereby we shall be justified, but that thereby we
may glorify God and Christ, and because therein we have communion with
Christ, and are made more conformable unto him, and made more capable of more
of Christ. When we go to some stately Palace, where we have appointed to meet
some deer friend whom we love with our whole soul, though we have never so
much entertainment there when we come, yet if we neither see, nor enjoy the
company of our so exceedingly loved and desired friend, we rather weep then
rejoice, notwithstanding the feasts and buildings which we taste and see:
Prayer, hearing the Word, the Lords Supper, are stately Ordinances and rich
Feasts; yet if we meet not Christ there, they are but dry breasts and barren
wildernesses to a soul that loves Christ.

Secondly, Now the main thing that hinders a poor soul from coming unto Christ,
is, that it is not clearly satisfied of Christ's love and willingness to
receive her: to this point therefore by the blessing of God I shall speak more
largely, and as clearly as the Lord shall enable me; this therefore may be said
to that point: Art thou not satisfied of the love and willingness of Christ to
receive thee? What can Christ say or do more then he has done? suppose Christ
from Heaven should bid thee write down what expressions soever thou would
or could invent, and bid thee call all the Saints in the whole world, and
all the Angels in heaven, and bid you consult together, and write down the
highest, fullest, cleerest, and largest expressions of love, and he will set his
hand and seal to them, would that satisfy? surely God and Christ have done
more; for the Holy Ghost comes not short of the expressions of love of
whatsoever the Angels in heaven could invent, thou have his hand and seal to
them in his Word; thou would be a* looser if thou should make another
draught of love for Christ to set his hand to, and take that in stead of the
expressions of love which he has already ratified and confirmed by his Word,
his Oath, his Seal, that thou mighest have strong consolation: Suppose that
thou should search the whole world to find out the fondest, lovingest and
tenderest parent in the world, and when thou have found her, thou should
observe with what love, care, and bowels of affection she carried her self
toward her little Infant, how she breaks her sleep, and even her very heart
when her child is sick, and never complains of her pains and costs, and never
thinks she can do or suffer enough for the little Infant: now if thou shall say
within thy self; O that I was sure that God loved me as much as this woman
loves her child: well, would that satisfy? then be satisfied, God loves thee
more: Isa. 49. 15. Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she would not
have compassion on the son of her womb? yea they may forget, yet will not I
forget thee: the Lord does not say, can women? but a woman, any woman: find out
that woman which thou supposest is the most unlikely to forget her child, yet
God is more unlikely to forget thee; nay it is more possible that all the women
of the world should forget their children, then God; for though the question be
put in the singular number, Can a woman? yet the answer is in the plural, not
she may, but they may, they all may. Further again; Suppose thou were at the
solemnizing of a marriage of the lovingest couple in the whole world, and
should observe with how much joy and love the Bridegroom carried himself
toward the Bride, even in the midst and height of all his nuptial solemnities;
would thou not be satisfied if thou did know that God did not only love
thee with that tender love of compassion with which the lovingest mother in the
world loves her Infant, but with that love of complacencie which the Bridegroom
bears to, and with which he rejoices over his Bride: whose love was equal
to their espousals? then be satisfied, for God does so; Isa. 62. 5. And as a
Bridegroom rejoices over his Bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee: Nay
surely, I may say, that the holiest Saint in the whole world, when by the
clearest discoveries of Gods love unto him, his heart is most enflamed; nay
further, that the highest Angel in Heaven does not love God so much, as God
loves the poorest and meanest Saint in the whole world; for God so loved the
world, it is such a sic, that there is no sicut for it, not that of the Angels
unto him; nothing can express it to the full, save only the greatness of the
gift which he out of his love gave to, and for his pleople, even the Lord
Jesus Christ.

To conclude, Do but consider what Christ has done, and if thou art fully
satisfied of that, thou can have no cause to have the least doubt of his
willingness to do whatsoever more is to be done for thee; for that which is to
be done is nothing in comparison of that which he has already done for those
that are his.

First, Nothing in respect of excellency, for the Apostle brings that in, He
will much more give us all things: also for God to give thee Christ, is much
more then to give thee Heaven: as to give thee Heaven is much more then to give
thee all temporal blessings, Mat. 6. 33. If one that ought thee 10000 pounds,
should have paid thee nine thousand nine hundred ninety nine, thou would
no whit doubt, but he will pay thee the residue, especially if it stood upon
the forfeiture of his credit; how much more shall thou assure thy self of Gods
doing for thee whatsoever is behind, since he has already done so much!

Secondly, The great matter of difficulty is over; indeed it cost Christ dear,
and God the Father dear to redeem thee; God spared not his own Son; Christ
spared not his blood, nor his life; he suffered hunger, cold, and nakedness,
and reproach, the painful and shameful death of the Cross to redeem thee; but
he lives for ever to make intercession for thee; he needs not rise off from his
throne, nor put off his robes of glory to carry on the remainder of thy work of
salvation; he sits at the right hand of God to make intercession for thee; The
Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on my right hand until I make thy enemies thy
footstool.

Thirdly, The great matter of wonder is over also: That a great and mighty
Monarch should marry a poor wretched and diseased woman, is a thing of great
wonder; but its not so great a wonder that having married her, should make her
partakers of all the glory and riches of his Kingdom; nay indeed, it was a
wonder if he should not. That Christ who is the Lord of glory should marry a
poor sinful soul is a wonder; but having married thee, that he should sanctify
thee, that he should present thee glorious, without spot or blemish, or any
such thing, is no wonder; nay it was a wonder if he should still suffer thee to
go in rags, and never adorn thee with the Jewels of his grace, and set upon thy
head the Crown of glory. Therefore comfort thy self with these truths: Now to
him that has done so much, and much more, be glory and honor for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

