THE CORONATION. A POEM.

By To: WHITE HALL, Fellow of Merton College, Oxon.

Divisum Imperium cum Jove Caesar habet. LONDON, Printed for John Playford. at
his Shop in the Temple, near the (...)

The Coronation.
GIve me an Eagles quill that dropped at Noon,
While she was gazing on the mounted Sun;
That I may write Great Charles his Name, and tell
The rescued Royalist that things go Well.
Hallowed be the Altar, let the smoke
Ascend, dismiss the heifer from her yoke.
Prepare ten Hecatombs, and let them all,
Be Crowned, and march in triumph from the staul;
For it is decreed, nor shall the joys we share,
Fall short of Caesar's Amphitheater.
Once more we are our selves again, and know
To whom to pay the Allegiance that we owe;
We know what Kingdom mean's, but Common wealth
Imposed upon us, and got in by Stealth.
We know what Crowns and Scepters mean, but States
Came from the Netherlands, and boggie flatts.
The good old way has an ingenious Face,
Since when the Countryman lost half his Grace:
He understands not Mushrome titles, he
Was born under a King, and so will die.
Let Us take a view how we have lived of late,
Since Moral honesty went out of date:
Or did we live at all? hardly in troth,
Esquire and Knights had but from hand to mouth:
Collectors had the rest, yet all were bent
And wished, and prayed still for this settlement:
Without which Law had not it is proper course,
Was put to shifts, run in an unknown sourse.
Two words has mended all, now out of Prison,
(Alas, they snffer'd too long Ostracisme.)
Kingdom and Realm, both which have Hid their head,
And seemed to Duck a while, yet were not dead:
The many-headed-beast has learned of late,
To put a difference 'twixt Realm and State;
And rather pay their Prince Corn, Oil and Wines,
Then to a Corporal, or his assigns.
Scripture will warrant Kings, and for that cause,
Our Bible was expiring with our Laws:
Which Year by Year grew less, that the Lay-Priest,
At last could Grasp and Clinch it in his Fist.
Squeezing the Nonconforming Texts no less,
Then when they underwent the Printing-presse.
If we reflect on Men and Manners both,
Amongst us lately, who'd not take his Oath,
'Twas time, the giddy World were kept in awe,
Sentenced, forthwith to Bedlam and fresh straw?
When 'twas a Crime to go to Church, and scarce
Allowable ones Prayers to rehearse
In Consecrated ground, but you might hint,
Or hold forth in the Church with a Chimny in it.
When Cunningly, and of their own accord,
Men Stole into their Graves, without a word:
When Plunging raised Men Higher, and the Funt
Was Superstitious counted, (out upon it.)
When mad Fanatic spirits took their swinge,
Merely, because, the Law was off of the hinge:
Things spawned in March, when nature is most proud,
And brings forth Creatures, Blind, and Lame, and Bowd;
Things, that if Aristole were with us,
Would mend his book de Animalibus.
As for example; -- see a Fellow come,
With Wax enough about his gouty Thumb;
To make a nodous tumor mend its pace,
Or Carbuncle spit venom in your Face:
See, and admire, this Fellow laying down
His Awl and Stirrup, is no longer clown;
But sit's upon the Bench, and winks and nods,
As gravely, as if sent us by the Gods.
Or see a learned Farriar, who in the morn,
Was at his lawful call, his Drench and Horn:
His beaten Ginger, and his Diapente,
Now Leader of a gang, of about Twenty.
And these of Nineteen minds, yet all combine
Against the Common foe, Church discipline:
It Is Tyranny cry's One, unwarrantable,
A Second, and a Third Abominable;
A Fourth, what holy Writ can for it plead?
Why Saucebox, where it does, thou can not read;
Or if ten thousand Texts were urged, you will say,
The Spirit meant them quite another way.
Obstinate ignorance! it is such a curse
That patient Job himself never knew a worse.
This Farriar is a Justice too; O yes,
His Conscience troubled him, till he was this;
And struts in his wide Hall, and scorns his Fellows,
Whom he has left behind to blow the Bellows;
Expecting when the Bridegroom, and his Bride
Shall by his Worship shackled be and tied;
These he together links (with his Hat on's head)
Using this form of Words, Kiss and to Bed.
Now must her lip take Custom, and Excise
From him in Velvet clad, to him in Frize:
But above all nothing so much a Martyr
As that poor Ell and half, her Wedding Garter:
The Saturnalian Riots were not such,
No such lascivious glance, or wanton touch:
Venus would blush, nay it would Pan incense
To be a Guest to so much Impudence:
Pallas defend me, and thy offspring all,
When Vulcan's made a Priest Canonical;
A Priest! why set aside his other faults
The Old Law put's him by, for Vulcan halts;
What! no distinction made? no difference
Betwixt his Sea-coal, and their Frankincense?
Is it all one to hammer out a Text,
And to Enucleate the same perplexed?
Yes, yes, the rout eryes, and again yes, yes
Our Farriar has a gift, and can do this;
He has a call too, well; no difference though?
No, no, the rout cries, and again, No, No.
Thus an impetuous torrent, right or wrong
Sweep's down the bank, and hurries all along;
Till Neptune roused at last begins to wag,
And puts the wind that caused it in a bag;
The Sea's not so unruly, does not roar
Or foam as does the Rout that humane Bore.
With indignation then the Valiant Monk
Took this same Hydra Elephant by the trunck,
And made him yawn; still holding by the Nose
The late triumphant huge Rinoceroes.
Appear now CHARLES THE GREAT, and let the Sun
Dance to behold his Rivals game thus won;
Exhibiting more minutes to each day,
And adding to his height a richer Ray:
Break out from your Eclipse, St. George is charm
Enough to guard your innocence from harm.
Ascend DREAD SOVEREIGN, Sir, your Fathers Throne
Maugre the spite of Fate, it is now your own;
Not by domestic force or foreign powers,
But by sollicitous entreaties yours;
And all the sons of Earth relenting, say
They cannot live without You here, one day.
So the parch't Earth the Sunbeam disallowes
Till over-flown with moisture, and with sloughs
An innundation comes, upon which fright
She that but gaped before, now cries outright,
Courting that Sun, with tears, which she of late
For his indulgent warmth began to hate.
FATHER of Us, and of our Country, You
Make out our simile, and illustrate too:
Great Jove's concern, and chiefest care, who took,
Your Sacred Self into his Sacra Iovi quercus.
Sacred Oak:
What to our Ancestors did food afford
To us proved better then a Iona's Gourd;
The Fame of which makes Ganimede look down
And wish himself (this day) Lord Mayor of London, who as the Coronation is
Cupbearer to the King.
Sir Richard Brown
But that the Gods, in Senate sitting, fear
He would no more return, but tarry here;
Who celebrating this great Festival
And Iubile, still for more Nectar call.
Eying the Male-contented Lad, lest he
Should steal the health down hither privately;
While this new settled Isle and neighbor Lands
Unanimously shout, and clap their hands:
While White Hall sounds by Tamisis rehearst,
Long live the mighty Heir to Charles the first.
FINIS.

