AN Expostulation WITH THE BISHOPS IN ENGLAND, Concerning their Jurisdiction
over the People of God, called QVAKERS; with a few wholesome words of
Exhortation and Advice tending to unite Them and Us in one true Spiritual
Worship.
FRiends,
Consider that many years are passed, wherein God's hand has eminently
appeared in diverse overturns, since the former Bishops were taken away, or did
cease to exercise that office in their respective Diocesses; whether because
they were discountenanced by authority, or for want of their Revenues, or for
want of love and faith in Christ (whom they said called them to watch over, and
feed his Lambs) we shall not now determine; Act. 20.28. Witness also the
Ecclesi^stical History of the Church for the first 300 years.
though we are persuaded that the Office of a Bishop or Over-seer, that is made
(...) by the Holy Ghost, is to watch over the Flock of Christ and ^eed them, as
well (if not more chiefly) in the most perilous times of Persecution, as in the
times of greatest Prosperity: For the Over, seers that were ordained by the
Holy Ghost in the Primitive times did watch over their Flocks, when they had
neither large Revenues, nor temporal Princes to uphold them, but were under
most grievous Persecution: But when men in Authority began to dislike your Way,
and the temporal Power and large Revenues which were annexed to your Offices
were taken away, we know not one of the Bishops that di^ stand in the Power of
God, willingly and of a ready mind, to watch over his See; but We the poor
Flock, were left to wander or become a prey to such as God did never send or
ordain to be his Ministers; who whilst they were countenanced by Authority,
endeavored with force and cruelty to rule over us, and did feed themselves
with the Fat, and cloth themselves with the Fleece, but did not feed us the
poor scattered Sheep, but with their covetousness and cruelty, alienated our
minds from them, whilst in sincerity we did seek the Lord God; And when he saw
that we were d^solate and forsaken, and none sought after us, then did he
remember the Promise that he had made of old, Read Ezekiel. 34.
declared by the mouth of his holy Prophet Ezekiel, and did both seek and
search us out from wandering upon the barren Mountains, and from amongst the
briars and thorns of the wilderness, which did tear the wool from off us, and
the Lord himself did become unto us a Shepherd, and has gathered us into his
Fold, where our souls find rest; and he feeds us in fresh pastures, so that
we have no cause at all to turn aside from following of him, for we are in
truth the Sheep of his hands, not at all gathered by your labors, nor by the
Priests whom ye have ordained and sent forth; neither has any one of your
Curates ever healed our wounds, nor strengthened us when we were weak and
diseased; therefore in Justice and Righteousness you cannot claim any Spiritual
Jurisdiction over us, nor at all blame us from separating from you, seeing you
were first separate for us; but if you have the mind of Christ, you will
rejoice that we meet together in his Name, Mark. 9.38.
and obey his Light in our Consciences, though we follow not you.

But if you object and say, you have Spiritual Jurisdiction over us, and may
justly blame us for separating from you, because that many of us when we were
Infants, were Baptized into your Church, and did enter into Covenant to
continue in the same, etc.

We answer, That then we were not at all capable to know or understand the
doctrine of your Church, and much less of true Faith and Baptism, and therefore
we could not then enter into any such Covenant as you speak of; but if you say,
that we did it by our Sureties, who did promise and vow in our names: We
answer, That to no such thing were we then capable of consenting, therefore you
must wholly look to the Sureties which your forefathers took; and if they
caused them to promise and vow that which they are in no wise able to perform,
you may do well to take heed of doing the like to others: And now that we are
come to years of discretion, till we can see your Church in the Life and Power
of God, and your Doctrine in all things according to Godliness, we cannot for
Conscience sake join with you.

Therefore (Friends) in all your Visitations, Mind the Apostles example, who
went forth only to visit those to whom they had preached the Gospel, that did
believe, and were gathered from the Jews Synagogues and Heathens Temples; Acts
16.36.
and do not you stretch your selves beyond your line, nor ambitiously seek to
be Lords over U S, whom ye have not convinced, nor labored at all amongst us;
for what have you to do to judge them that are without? Therefore take heed, 1
Cor. 5.12.
lest the Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls (who doubtless has Sheep which are
not of your Folds) do judge you as bold Intruders that would Lord over those of
his Heritage, John 10.16.
which he never committed to your charge. Therefore receive this advice from
Us, Job 31.21, 22.
who in humility do respect the Office of a Bishop, and can give double honor
to those Overseers that rule well, Prove. 28.21.
though we cannot give flattering Titles, nor respect the person of any man;
for in so doing, our Maker would soon take us away.

First, Luke 22.25, 26, 27.
you may see that there be no beams in your own, which may so blind you, that
you cannot discern Tares from Wheat, nor a Wolf from a Lamb. Therefore first
begin the work of Reformation in your own hearts and households, till ye be
wholly blamless as the Stewards of God, etc. according to the Apostles
Doctrine, 1 Timothy 3. and Tit. 2.7, 8, 9. and be not ye called Lords, because
Christ said to his Disciples, the Princes of the Gentiles exercise Lordship,
and their great Ones exercise Authority, but it shall not be so amongst you: 1
Pet. 5.1, 2, 3.
So in obedience to Christ be ye good examples to the Flock, that you and your
Ministers have convinced to your Way, and to all People, that you may have a
good report of them that are without; and be not lifted up with pride, lest ye
fall into reproach, and the snare of the Devil.

Secondly, Read Mat. 23.
but do not; nor be called of men Masters, nor have the chiefest seats in the
Assemblies, nor go in long Robes, nor lay heavy burdens upon the People, nor
devour Widows houses, nor for a pretense make long Prayers, Isa 56.10, 11.
nor use vain repetitions in their Prayers, as the Heathens, chief Priests and
Pharisees did, which Christ cried woe against; neither let your Priests preach
for hire, nor your Curates divine for money, Micha 3.11, 12 Jude.
which thing the Prophet Micah cried woe against; neither let them be such as
Isaiah called greedie-dumb Dogs, which can never have enough, but all look to
their own way, ^verie one for his gain from his quarter; neither let them be
such as go in the way of Cain, which will envy and persecute, nor such as go
in the way of Bal^am for rewards, nor such as will sell chaff for Wheat, which
have hearts exercised with covetous practices, 2 Pet. 2.14, 15.
nor such grievous Wolves as the Apost^es said will not spare the Flock (but
even sue people for wages, Act. 20.29.
whom they do no work for) neither let them be at all Hirelings, for Christ
said, such care not for the Sheep; but let them be such as do every way accord
with the Primitive pattern; Joh. 10.12, 14.
and let none of them be profane swearers, nor drunkards, nor idolaters, nor
adulterers, nor fornicators, nor gamesters, nor scoffers, nor such as speak
lies, and are given to lightness and foolish jesting; Mat. 12.34.
for how can they that be evil speak good things?

Thirdly, Reform your people, Jer. 15.19.
nor such esteemed Members as do live in covetousness, pride, envy, or malice,
Gal. 5.19, 20, 2^
nor any that is an extortioner, or an oppressor of the poor, fatherless and
widows, nor any that live in gluttony, drunkenness, rioting and excess, nor
any that be profane swearers, liars, cheaters, and cozeners, nor any which
abuse themselves with mankind, Ephesians. 5.3, 4, 5.
nor any that be murderers or man-slayers, nor any that be adulterers or
adulteresses; because such have no inheritance in the Kingdom of God, nor of
Christ. And you that profess to be Bishops or Overseers of the Church, 1 Cor.
6.9, 10.
which is his Body; let not any be admitted members, but such as are baptized
into it by the Spirit; Chapt. 1^.13.
for if any man have not the Spirit of Christ he is none of his, and such will
scoff like Ishmael, at the movings of the Spirit in those that are his. Romans 8
9.


Fourthly, Reform your Worship if you can, Mat. 15.^, 8, 9.
and let it not be made vain with the Doctrines, Commandments, Traditions and
invented Ceremonies (of men) which will all perish with the using; Joh. 4.23.
but worship God (who dwells not not in Temples made with hands) wholly in
Spirit and in Truth; if you have received the one, and know the other, Col. 2.2^
you will see that no other worship besides the Worship in Spirit, is either
decent, orderly, or accepted with God. Act. 7.4^.


And when you have so reformed your selves, your Officers, Priests and Curates,
your People and your Worship, till you be both in Word, in Spirit, in Worship,
and Conversation, one with the Primitive Christians, that men may join with
you, and not touch an unclean thing; then see if we cannot have unity and
fellowship with you: but in the mean time, let us quietly feed in our green
pastures, and follow Christ the Shepherd and Bishop of our souls, who leads us
to living Fountains of water; and take heed of cursing us whom the Lord has
blessed, lest it fall upon your own heads; for until you have sound Doctrine,
and the example of a good Conversation, with Christian love and charity, to
draw us to a conformity, ye may despair of hope to drive us by force and
cruelty; for the more of that ye do exercise upon us, the more shall we be
confirmed; Rev. 17.5, 6.
and it will also manifest your Church not to be the Lambs Wife, but rather a
Daughter of that mother of Harlots, that has drank the blood of the Saints and
Martyrs of Jesus.

Therefore consider of these things, and think not to settle your selves with
threatenings, excommunications, prisons and the like; for by such things ye
cannot convince gainsayers, that your way is right, nor at all shake them that
be in the Truth, though ye may fright Hypocrites, and make them come bending
under you for a season, till they can get over you; therefore it, will be your
wisdom to show your zeal in casting out the filth from amongst your selves, and
such as profess your way, and by a virtuous life and wholesome doctrine, seek to
win such as differ from you: For things are not now as they were thirty years
ago in this Nation; for Light is broken forth as the morning, and your steps
will be marked; Matthew. 7.12.
therefore wait that God may direct you the right way, to do unto all men as ye
would they should do unto you.

The 5th. of the 7th. Month, 1662. Having spoken the Truth in love, We rest
your Friends, desiring that in love ye may receive and read these lines, and do
not slight that which concerns your peace in them, because they are sent from
us that be in scorn called QUAKERS. JOHN WHITEHEAD. MARTIN MASON.


LOVE is a virtue that endures for ever,
A link of matchless jewels none can sever.
Had I the tongue of men and Angels too,
If Love were wanting what good could I do?
Love far surmounts all earthly Diadems,
Though decked with pearls, with rubies and with jems;
Love is the life of all things under th'Sun,
Love must the Laurel wear, when all is done.
Love's eye is tender, Love does gently draw
The mind to God, without a penal Law.
Love thinks no ill, Love never did invent,
Fines praemunire, Goals nor Banishment
For Innocents, Love has no spleen nor Gall,
Love's like the Royal Sun; Love shines on All.
THE END.

