IMPRIMATUR HEN. CLERK, Vice-Canc. Oxon.
Vade liber, veram Domino dicture salutem,
Dic age quae tantae sit tibi causa morae:
Haesimus ancipites praestet dare carbasa ventis,
An dare flammiferis haecperitura focis:
Dum tristis recolo haec, dum mecum haec mente revolvo,
Desuper auspiciis vox mihi, Macte, sonat;
Alt a licet sit materies, and digna cothurno,
Prodeat; in summis vel voluisse placet.
Sustentare suis se scit Scriptura columnis;
Tu vita, quod fert pagina sacra, refer.
R. W.

HISTORIAE SACRAE Veteris et Novi TESTAMENTI.

BIBLISCHE FIGUREN Darinnen die furnembste Historien, in heiliger Schrifft
begriffen, geschichtmassig entworffen.

FIGURES de la BIBLE Demonstrans les Principales Histoires de la Saint
Escriture.

BYBELSCHE FIGUREN Vertonende de voornaemste Historien der Heylige Schrifture.

FIGURES of the BIBLE in which almost every History of the holy Scriptures is
(...).

AMSTELAEDAMI ex Officina Nicolai Visscher.



EXASTION IEPON, SIVE JCONUM Quarundam extranearum (numero 258) Explicatio
Breviuscula and Clara.

Apprime Epheborum aliquot PRAENOBILIVM in Usum exculta, qua ad SS Scripturas
alliciantur.

Quibus singulis suum accessit Symbolum, cum Sententiola concinna EX AUTHORIBUS
GRAECIS and LATINIS Deprompta.

Being an Epigrammatical Explanation of the most Remarkable Stories throughout
the OLD and NEW TESTAMENT After each SCULPTURE, or CUT.

(...) -- Non hic Te Carmine ficto
Atque per ambages and longa exorsa tenebo, Virg.
Dat. Call. Jan. Anno Salutis M. D. C. LXXVII. OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD
LICHFIELD, Printer to the University,

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
THE Wisest of Men, and Princes too, after he had summed up all the Delights,
the Glories, the Treasures which the Great Ones possess, the Wise pretend to,
and all the World pursue; upon a due Estimate pronounces them all, to be
neither of the right Stamp, nor Weight; and subjoyns as the only Solid Good,
the sound practice of True Religion. An endless multiplying of Books he does
expressly censure as Grievous to the Writer, and perhaps not overbeneficial to
Reader, in order to that end which the Preacher propounds. How the Press has
since that time been taken up, and still is, with Books of all sorts, is not
unknown to any man, that can claim the least share in the Muses; with Books of
Modern Experimental Philosophy, Books of Arts, Books Historical, Polemical,
Theological, yes and Theologico-political too; for all whose sakes, and many
more, it is still sweating, and yet Labor and Oil is often lost. For my own
part, had I not a greater than Solomon to stay upon, had I not the Rock of Ages
for my Foundation Stone, I had utterly been discouraged in this Essay, since
the Purity of the Subject may engage Adversaries, with whom it may be accounted
Criminal, even to Enveagle to Virtue; in which, if the Lemmata, or Symbols
above, are not all punctually adequate and suitable to the Hexastichs beneath,
(in all which let the long rigor of the Season speak in the Printers defense,
if any Errata appear) yet however it may mind us what wholesome Precepts and
excellent Rules are left behind, even by Heathens themselves, which some
amongst them lived up to. I had not quoted Juvenal so often, but that it is to
be doubted there are those upon whom a tolerated Satyrist would work so, as to
shame them into Morality, when an Higher Authority would fail of it; and this
through a daring disrespect and undervaluing of the Book of Life, by which they
must one day be tried. And indeed, if we seriously, and in cool Blood,
consider, what Subject is, or can be more Amiable? In the Pentateuch the World
and the Church have their beginning; in Joshua and Judges, as in the Maccabees,
are Worthys whose Memorable Acts have been a Pattern to after ages for Rulers
and Commanders in Chief; Who more Rhetorical than Job in his true Grief? Who
more Pathetical than the Psalmist? What more Ravishing than the Canticles? Who
more Powerful in their Reproofs, or Comforts, than the Prophets both Great and
Small? (the predictions of the Sibylls we leave at large) and so for the rest,
as to each Books respective Transcendency. And if it be thus with the Old
Testament, what Tongue of Man or Angel can set out the New to its worth? Now
Reader, when our main aim and drift is to be concise and plain, in Scripture
Phrase, in order to the Training up of Ingenuous Youth, according to the Wise
Man's Rule, of Fearing God, and keeping his Commandments, as their whole Duty,
which without good in-sight into both Testaments is unattainable, and we having
some reason from the customs abroad, to believe that the more Generous
Striplings of this our Age, will be brought to the more frequent perusal of the
Word of God, have it better Imprinted in their Memories this way then any
other, (since the objects of the Eye do more sensibly affect the Heart, than
the strokes of Air impressing the Organs of Hearing,) I say this way, by
comparing and examining each Story, (...), in those few Noble Families where
the Cuts are, or may be extant, (as yet not made public amongst us) I modestly
hope our Endeavors may gain acceptance with some of the Better Sort,
especially such as have' the blessing of Children, like Olive Branches, about
their Tables, to the abundant Satisfaction and Contentment of

The meanest of your Servants in well-doing ROBERT WHITEHALL.

THE CONTENTS.
THe Chaos. Icon 1.

The Creation. 2.

The Protoplast. 3.

The Second Self. 4.

The Serpents Craft. 5.

The Curse 6.

The Ejectment. 7.

The Fratricide. 8.

Abel revived in Seth. 9.

The Translation 10.

Noab Entering the Ark. 11.

The Deluge. 12.

The Covenant. 13.

Noab Overtaken. 14.

Babel. 15.

God blessing Abram. 16.

The disappointment. 17.

Melchizedech's Blessing. 18.

Abrabam entertaining three Angels. 19.

Lot entertaining two Angels. 20.

Lot and his two Daughters. 21.

The Caveat. 22.

Hagar in Distress. 23.

The Tutelar Angel. 24.

Abraham's Trial. 25.

The Prosperous Journey. 26.

Abraham's Death and Burial. 27.

The Birthright sold. 28.

The Disapointment. 29.

Jacob's Ladder. 30.

The Hard Bargain. 31.

The Conflict. 32.

The Mutual Embrace. 33.

Dinah Deflowered. 34.

The Combination. 35.

Lovesick Tamar. 36.

The Modest Youth. 37.

The Interpreter. 38.

The Famine. 39.

Conscience awake. 40.

The Unwilling Grant. 41.

The Kind Midwives. 42.

The Tender Nurse. 43.

The Umpire. 44.

Moses Incognito. 45.

The Burning Bush. 46.

The Cruel Task-master. 47.

The Tyrant Plagued. 48.

The Deliverance. 49.

Pharaoh Drowned. 50.

The Repineing Israelites 51.

The Mutineers. 52.

Amalek Overthrown. 53.

Moses upon the Mount. 54.

The Tabernacle. 55.

The Tables broke. 56.

The Altar. 57.

The Spies. 58.

The Remedy. 59.

Balaams Ass. 60.

The Prospect. 61.

The Controversy. 62.

The Champion. 63.

The Memorial. 64.

The Siege. 65.

The Sacrilege. 66.

The Solstice. 67.

The Anakims cut off. 68.

The Requital. 69.

The Heroine. 70.

Gideons Present. 71.

Gideons Signs. 72.

The Super-numeraties. 73.

The Stratagem. 74.

The Discharge. 75.

Jephthahs Vow. 76.

Samsons Valor. 77.

The Resentment. 78.

The First Resurrection Type. 79.

Delilah's Fraud. 80.

The Levite's Case. 81.

The Anniversary, or the Surprised Virgins. 82.

The Dutiful Daughter-in-law. 83.

The Midnight Blush. 84.

The Ark taken. 85.

Dagons Downfall. 86.

The Rash Adventure. 87.

The Humiliation. 88.

Saul Anointed. 89.

The Panick Fear. 90.

The After Reckoning. 91.

The Giant. 92.

The Triumphant March. 93.

The Lawful Charm. 94.

The Matchless Friend. 95.

The Noble Enemy. 96.

The Pusillanimous Churl. 97.

The Safe Counselor. 98.

The Forelorn Hope. 99.

The Removal of the Ark. 100.

The Ambassadors Affronted. 101.

The Amorous Glance. 102.

The Recantation. 103.

The Counterfeit. 104.

The Revenge. 105.

The Unnatural Son. 106.

The Sycophant. 107.

The Impartial Magistrate. 108.

Solomon's Temple. 109.

The Dedication. 110.

The Acknowledgment. 111.

The Zidonian Goddess. 112.

The Fatal Countermand. 113.

The Usurper. 114.

The Recruit. 115.

The Fair Trial. 116.

The Desponding Prophet. 117.

The Archer. 118.

The Conditional Legacy. 119.

The Sad Event. 120.

The Strict Creditor. 121.

Gehazi's Cheat. 122.

The Extremity. 123.

The Incredulous Lord. 124.

Pride with a Fall. 125.

The Ghost. 126.

The Reformation. 127.

The Parracides. 128.

The Faithful Witness. 129.

The Unanimous Resolve. 130.

The Captivity. 131.

The Felo-de-se. 132.

The Diffident Prince. 133.

The Safest Course. 134.

Dagon Aloft. 135.

The Register. 136.

The Impolitick Statesman. 137.

The Black Book open. 138.

The Contented Wretch. 139.

The Sweet Singer. 140.

The Siraphick Dialogue. 141.

The Commissioner. 142.

The Warranted Reprover. 143.

The Prisoner set free. 144.

The Threat. 145.

The Mystery, or the Second Resurrection Type. 146.

The Vain Astrologer. 147.

The Fiery Furnace. 148.

The Stenographer. 149.

The Confederate Presidents. 150.

The Transitory Monarchs. 151.

The Adulteress. 152.

The Calm. 153.

The Whale, or the Third Resurrection Type. 154.

The Malcontent. 155.

The Prediction. 156.

The Petitioner. 157.

The Joint Soliciters. 158.

The Mischance. 159.

Raphael and Tobias. 160.

Tobit Comforted. 161.

The Brave Exploit. 162.

Susanna and the Elders. 163.

Bell and the Dragon. 164.

The Zealous General. 165.

The Concern at Stake. 166.

The Oppressor. 167.

The Competitors. 168.

Vindicative Justice. 169.

The Eclips. 170.

The Undaunted Matron. 171.

The Runagate in scarceness. 172.

The Discomfiture. 173.

GENESIS.
CAP. I. Icon I. The CHAOS.
Nullus adhuc mundo praebebat lumina Titan.
Geneses 1. 3. 6. 9. 14.



OUT of a rude and undigested mass
The glorious Lamp of Heaven created was:
No difference at the first 'twixt day and night,
Until the Almighry said Let there be light:
So after an Eclips his beams he darts,
And rays to the benighted world imparts.
The CREATION. Icon. 2. Cap. 1.
Nec nova crescendo reparabat cornua Phoebe.
Genesis. 1.



Herb yiedling seed, and fruit-tree her increase,
Was that with which God new-made Earth did bless.
Sun, Moon, and Stars; with Fish, with Fowl and Beasts
Our Infant world was stockt; but yet no guests;
Stars unobserved, their constant laws fulfilled,
The Beasts untamed, and Paradise untilled.
The PROTOPLAST.
Sanctius his animal, mentisque capacius altae
Deerat adhuc, and quod dominari in caetera posset.
Natus homo est

^



In Form, and Image, like His Own, the Lord
Created man, by speaking but the word:
With face erect, not to mind things below,
Or whence he came, but whether he must go;
The Prince, the Empire, and the Title good*
Had but the man in Honor understood.
The SECOND SELF. Icon 4. Cap. 2.
Una eademque manus vulnus opemque tulit.
G^. 2. 21.



Adam has in exchange of's Rib, a Wife,
The comfort of a solitary life;
The breach closed up, how should that do amiss,
Where God the Maker and Repairer is?
Flesh of his Flesh is Eve, Bone of his Bone,
So that the couple are not two, but one.
The SERPENTS CRAFT. Icon 5. Cap. 3.
Ipsa quoque immunis, rastroque intacta, nec ullis
Sancia unlneribus, per se dabat omina tellus.

Genesis. 3.



The Serpent, to make our he was a Devil,
Prompt's Eve to what seemed Good, intending Evil *
His charm's so strong while he does her entice
That for an Apple Man lost Paradise:
'T was well before, since Adam, you dare ear
The terms are hard, for you and yours must sweat.
The CURSE. Icon 6. Cap. 3.
-- pudet haec opprobria nobis
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.

Genesis 3. 17.



Under a shady bough, with pensive thought,
Ashamed to show his head, lost Adams brought,
His guilty hand now hide's his blushing face,
But cannot hide his crime, or his disgrace:
'T is sad for one to have been high before;
And know that he can never be so more.
The EJECTMENT. Icon 7. Cap. 3.
-- itum est in viscera terrae.
Ge^sis. 3. 24.



Turned out of pleasant and delightful Eden,
For tasting of the fruit that was forbidden,
He diggs into the bowels of the earth,
And find's his grave whence he received his birth;
Exile's a just reward for such as they,
Who when they are exalted, disobey.
The FRATRICIDE. Icon 8. Cap. 4.
-- rara est concordia fratrum.
G^ 4. (...)



When only Cain and Abel brothers were,
And the whole world had not another pair,
The firstlings of the flock acceptance gain,
For which is inoffensive Abel slain;
Worship by heaven approved made an offense;
Such early Wars the Church and World commence.
ABEL Revived in SETH. Icon 9. Cap. 5.
-- Uno avulso non deficit alter aureus. --
Genesis (...). 3.



After an hundred years, and thirty gone,
On Adam is bestowed another son:
Our chaste Progenitors were youthful then,
But now man's age is threescore years and ten:
Bounty at first the thread of life did spin
At length, but soon 't was she (...) by (...)
The TRANSLATION. Icon 10. Cap. 5.
-- superas evadere ad auras hic labor, hoc opus est.
Genesis. 5. 21



Enoch upright, and righteous in his ways,
And one that wrought repentance all his days,
God will not have the common way to die,
But be translated to Eternity:
Those who their contemplations fix above,
May seem to die, but rather do remove.
NOAH entering the ARK. Icon 11. Cap. 7.
Illi robur, and aes triplex
Circa pectus erat, qui fragilem truci
Commisit pelago ratem.



While crying sins aloud to heaven did call,
A floaring Inundation sweep's off all;
But Noah and his Family embark,
And save themselves from danger in an Ark;
Eight righteous Souls of all the rest survive,
When others sink, these keep mankind alive.
The DELVGE. Icon 12. Cap. (...).
Omnia pontus erant, deerant quoque littora ponto,
Mirantur sub aqua lucos, urbesque domosque.

Genesis 7 17



O how promiscuously the peccant World,
Towns, Cities, Men, Beasts are together hurled!
The lofty Oak, that out lives ten men's years,
Will not serve turn when angry Heaven appears:
Yet mercy in judgment move's the God of Love
For tidings by a Raven and a Dove.
The COVENANT. Icon 13. Cap 9.
Quid meruistis Oves?
Gen^is 1^



The Deluge past the gracious Lord repents
That justice should expect such punishments;
Therefore a Bow in the clouds assures, by rain
The world shall never be destroi'd again;
So willing God his own is to content
His word a Sign confirm's in the Firmament;
NOAH Overtaken. Icon 14. Cap. 9.
-- -- -- Quis custodiet ipsum
Custodem? -- -- --

Genesis 9. 21.



Noah, though perfect found, look's to his vine
More then himself, and is overcome with Wine:
This was too bad; but thrice accursed he.
Who his own Fathers Nakedness would see;
Noah s was a surprizal; Ham's offense
Has put a blott on Natures Cheek e're since.
BABEL. Icon 15. Cap. 11.
Affectasse ferunt regnum coeleste Gygantes,
Altaque congestos struxisse ad sydera montes.

Genesis 11. 4.



The Sons of Men grown insolent again,
Design to build a Babel, but in vain;
For while to th's key's they boast the top shall reach
They a confounding downfall from it search;
Diversity of Language undermind's,
Working by wonders, yet they wrought by signs.
GOD Blessing ABRAM. Icon:6. Cap. 12:
Dum Spiro, Spero.
Gene. 12. 4.



Abram in Exile, 'has a Promise made,
Of a more glorious Land then that he had;
The terms obscure indeed, but vouched by heaven
And Canaan but a type, yet Christ is given:
He that can steadfast in assurance rest,
'Has what he would enjoy locked in his breast.
The DISAGREEMENT. Icon 17. Cap. 13.
-- Nummi, Vos estis Fratres. --
Genesis. 13.



Abram and Lot fall out; (the rich forsake
Their dearest Friends when Mammon lies at stake;)
'T was for a spot of Turfe they disagreed,
(Men often covet most, when least they need)
The promise is renu'd, an Altar built,
Where faithful Abram more assurance felt.
MELCHIZEDECH'S Blessing. Icon 18. Cap. 14.
-- arma tenenti omnia dat qui justa negat.
Genesis 14. 18.



In Sidims Vale four Kings encounter five,
And the design on with much fury drive:
Lot taken Prisoner, Abram with his Binds
Of Soldiers, rescues him from cruel Hands:
Feasted with blessing both from King and Priest
Melchizedech, after whose orders Christ.
ABRAHAM entertaining three Angels. Icon 19. Cap. 18.
Arbuteos faetus, montanaque fraga legebant.
Gene. 18. 8



Three Angels courteous Abraham entertains
With old frugality, not sparing pains;
Calf, Milk, and Butter, then expostulates
The case on Sodoms side, with strong debates.
He makes his own terms, e're he makes an end,
'T was boldly done; but Abraham was Gods friend.
LOT entertaining two Angels. Icon 20. Cap. 19
Triste jaces Lucis, euitandumque bidental.
Genes: 19. (...).



Lot entertains two Angels, and next morn
Unnatural Sodom and Gomorrah burn,
As soon as he (in have) was got to Zoar
They are calcined that burnt in lust before:
The Law denouncing sentence let him die
Hell falls from Heaven to punish Sodomie.
LOT and his two Daughters. Icon 21. Cap. 19.
-- quidenim Venus ebria curat?
Gene. 19. 2^



Corn, Wine, and Oil, choice gifts; yet Lot's beguiled,
By whom both of his Daughters prove with Child;
Out of incestuous loins the Moabites
Have their extraction, and the Ammonites:
They tempted at a time when he was not
As yesterday, the good, old, sober Lot.
The CAVEAT. Icon 22. Cap. 20.
Men's aliud suadet, uideo meliora proboque,
Deteriora Sequor.

Genes. 20. 14.



The Patriarch, in fear, his Wife denies,
(Though dearer to him, then his very Eyes)
Abimelech, admonish't in a dream,
With royal gifts returns her back to him,
But not without a check; nor would he buy
Pleasures too dear from opportunity.
HAGAR in Distress. Icon 23. Cap. 21.
Occubuit matter, mediisque in montibus unum
Emori^nte sinu puerum complexa reliquit.

Genes. 21, 14.



Hagar in anguish and perplex't condition:
An Angel comfort's by Divine Commission:
With Bread and Water Abraham (Oh distress!)
Give's her the Child, to dwell in 'the Wilderness,
Unhappy Pilgrims! to inhabit where
No Food, or Raiment, but from Wolf or Bear.
The TUTELAR Angel. Icon 24. Cap. 21
Qui jacet in terra non habet unde cadat
Gene. 21. 15.



The Water spent, and no assistance nigh,
Under a Shrub the helpless Babe does lie:
Her tears are all is left, through anguish few,
With which her pining Cheeks she does bedew:
Her, at a distance, (loath to see him die)
An Angel shows a Well for a supply.
ABRAHAM'S Trial. Icon 25. Cap. 22.
-- sequitur non passibus aequis.


For proof of faith, Isaac, a promised seed,
By his own Father Abraham's hand must bleed:
The Wood laid on the Altar, and the Knife
Stretched out, a Ram saves trembling Isaac's Life,
Dispute must take no place, if God advise,
Obedience here does pass for Sacrifice.
The PROSPEROUS JOURNIE. Icon 26. Cap. 24.
Conjugium, pactaeque expectant tempora taedae.
Gene. 24. 15.



Abraham, first having prayed, does soon dispatch
His Man to bring his Son a proper match;
All things succeed: Rebecca makes no stay,
Returned they meet their Lord upon the way:
Her watering 'till the Camels all gave over
Was token of the blessing laid in store.
ABRAHAM'S Death and Burial. Icon 27. Cap. 25.
Linquenda tellus, and domus, and placens
Uxor, neque harum quas colis arborum
Te praeter invisas cupressus,
Ulla brevem dominum sequetur.



The Father of the faithful aged grown,
His Race now run, is gathered to his own:
His Monument prepared, Todg'd in a Cave
I'th'Field of Ephron, where is Sarah's Grave:
Corruption is our Mother, in our urn
To dust from whence we came, we shall return.
The BIRTHRIGHT Sold. Icon 28. Cap. 25.
-- Quis te, de ficiente crumena,
Et orescente gula, manet exitus?

Gene. 25. 28.



Esau for that he quick dispatch could make
Finds Isaac's favor for his Vensons sake:
But bringing a good Stomach from the Field's
For a few Pottage he his Birthright yields:
How wretched he whose thoughts on eating rest,
And Soul to the lowest Region is deprest?
The DISAPPOINTMENT. Icon 29. Cap. 27.
Front capillata est, post est Occasio calva.


Jacob, in subtilty, his Mother dressing
A Dish of Savory Meat, obtain's the blessing:
Esau deluded, (or supplanted rather)
With tears cries out (too late,) bless me too, Father.
Advice in a disguise in season came;
He should have sooner looked into his Name.
JACOB'S Ladder. Icon 30. Cap. 28.
Durum telum necessit as.
Gene. 28. 12.



Lo! Jacob in a vision Angels sees,
Ascending and descending by degrees;
His Pillow is a Stone, which after stood
A lasting Monument, his Vow made good.
He that his speculations 'has a-loft,
Makes all things easy to himself and soft.
The HARD BARGAIN. Icon 31. Cap. 29.
Dulcius ex ipso font bibuntur aquae.
Gene. 29. 6.



Jacob, approaching, to a Fountain, meet's
With Rachel, tak^s acquaintance, and then greet's;
Ask's her to wife, seven years being served before,
'Has Leah given: for Rachel serves seven more;
Love puts up foul Indignity and wrong,
To gain its dearest wish seems never long.
The CONFLICT. Icon 32. Cap. 32.
Cum duo certarent, victor uterque fuit.
Genesis (...). 24.



Jacob at Peniel Wrestle's until day,
Nor will he let the Angel go away,
Without a blessing, when he made a vow
His name was Jacob, but it is Israel now:
That Prayer effectual is, which often tried,
Delayed, repulsed, yet will not be denied.
The MUTUAL EMBRACE. Icon 33. Cap. 33
Inimicitiae ne sunto immortales.
33



Esau and Jacob, though in the womb they strove,
And fell out afterward, here they love,
They Meet, Embrace, and Kiss, they kindly Speak,
And Weep, each hanging on the others neck;
Revenge is Poor; one end for which we live,
Is to forget offenses, and forgive.
DINAH Deflowered. Icon 34. Cap. 34.
-- Nulla reparabilis art
Laes^ pudicitia est. --

Gene. 34. 25.



Dinah defiled by Shechem, Hamors Son,
Simeon and Levi hearing what was done,
All Males are put to the Sword, the City spoiled,
While in a boundless rage their choler boiled:
Upon a weak Maid to commit a Rape
It Is easy, not so easy to escape.
The COMBINATION. Icon 35. Cap. 37.
Nullae illos movere preces, lachrymaeque decor^;
Immites acuere animos.



Joseph repeat's his Dream, (from Visions) twice,
For which his Brethren turn his enemies;
By all of them he hated was before,
But that Rehearsal makes them hate him more;
They spare his life, cast him into a pit,
And selling him, Gods Hand was seen in it.
Lovesick TAMAR. Icon 36. Cap. 38.
Hei mihi quod nullis amor est medicabilis Herbis.
Genesis. 3^. 14.



Tamar, for Shelah not bestowed upon her,
Judah, her Husbands Father, brings dishonor:
Reward consent procures, and to oblige
A Signet, Staff, and Bracelets are the Pledge.
Her Doom from him is Let the Harlot Burn,
But altered, when he knew she had served his turn.
The MODEST YOUTH. Icon 37. Cap. 39.
-- Hic murus aheneus esto
Nil conscire sibi, nulla pallescere culpa.

Genesis. 39. 12.



Joseph, his Ladies fond Amors opposed,
By her falls charge in a deep Dungeon closed,
As once her Love, so now her hate can brave,
He free in Chains, she her own Passions Slave:
Delights are Momentary, Pleasures cloy;
It Is braver to abstain than to enjoy.
The INTERPRETER. Icon 38. Cap. 41.
Non sunt ii aut scientia aut art Divini,
Sed superstitiosi vates, impudentesque arioli.

G^ne. 41. 14.



Pharaoh once and again disturbed in Visions,
Tells Joseph what had puzl'd his Magicians;
The Dreams explained, a Famine's understood,
To his Advancement, and the public good:
He that could the Decrees of Heaven make known,
Deserved his being next an Earthly Throne.
The FAMINE. Icon 39. Cap. 42.
Fraus honesta,


'T is come, and Jacob sends his Sons to buy
In Egypt Corn, each one is called a spy,
And into Prison cast, but Simeons doom
Being to stay, the rest go laden home:
When provocations a Rich mind infest
Love knows not to dissemble, but in jest.
CONSCIENCE Awake. Icon 40. Cap. 42.
-- quos diri conscia facti
Men's habet attonitos, and surdo verbere coedit
Occultum quatiente animo tortore flagellum.

Genesis. 42. 6.



Joseph, Lord Governor all round about,
His Brethren crouch unto; (his Dreams are out)
Conscience let loose on ancient guilt reflects,
And vengeance, by delay improved, expects;
Vicissitude on humane things attends
But honor scorns advantage upon Friends.
The UNWILLING GRANT. Icon 41. Cap. 34.
Nunc gremio Ascanium genitoris imagine captus
Detinet --



With much reluctance, and grief of Heart
Jacob consents with his youngest Child to part:
Joseph the feasted strangers welcome makes,
Where Benjamin a five fold Mess partakes.
When Providence is at the Helm to steer
Nor Passenger nor Mariner should fear.
EXODUS.
The KIND MIDWIVES. Icon 42. Cap. 1.
Mersus profundo pulchrior evenit.
^



TThe Isralites the more they are oppressed,
Even to a wonder, are the more enoreast:
So fragant Herbs when trodden under foot
The higher grow, and take the deeper root:
Those Infants which the rapid brook should have
The Midwives, fearing God, from mischief save.
The TENDER NURSE. Icon 43. Cap. 2.
-- digit is a morte remotus
Quatuor --



Moses is born; the Tyrant Pharaoh's curse
Intended fails; his Daughter proves the Nurse:
A few slight flaggs preserve him safe and sound,
A man of God had otherways been drowned:
All Children prove not like their Parents, bad,
Though he no bowels, yet his Daughter had.
The UMPIRE. Icon 44. Cap. 2.
Non nobis solum nati, sed partim patriae.
Exodus 2. 11.



Grown up, he sees a Lord assault his slave,
Smites the Egyptian, does the Hebrew save;
Yet his dull Country could not from this sign,
The fate of Egypt, nor their own Divine:
The secrets of Gods will are seldom seen
To any but who have Gods servants been.
MOSES Incognito. Icon 45. Cap. 2.
Been qui latuit, been vixit,
Exodus. 2. 17.



Moses escaped from Pharaohs high disdain,
Unto a Priest and Prince of Midian,
By faith and gentle Arts his Daughter won,
And in his Pilgrimage obtained a Son;
'T is wisdom to retire when dangers nigh,
And good success attends sincerity.
The BURNING BUSH. Icon 46. Cap. 3.
Ite me ae quondam faelix pecus, ite capellae,
Non ego vos post-hac viridi projectus in antro
Dumosa pendere procul de rupe videbo.



To Moses, keeping Jethro's flock appeared
A burning Bush, and thence a voice was heard;
To Egypts Tyrant in Jehovah's Name
Have, and his Hebrew Slaves my Freemen Claim:
When Heaven insists upon it and Earth denies,
The Downfall must be great, if God arise.
The CRUEL TASK-MASTER. Icon 47. Cap. 5.
Hoc volo, sic jubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas.
Exodus 5 (...) 7



Pharaoh grows angry at the message Moses
And Aaron bring; he harder tasks imposes;
Brick must be made, (to keep them more in awe,)
And yet the Insidel denies them Straw;
Will above reason when it most intends
An others, in its own Destruction ends.
The TYRANT Plagued, Icon 48. (...) 8.
Naturam expellas furcalicet, usque recurret.
Exodus. 8.



The Nile flow's Blood, Vermin, and Insects swarm;
Beasts and Men rot; Heaven does the Meteors Arm;
The ninth Plague boundless Night brought, and removed,
Yet Pharaoh more in Stubborness improved:
When Hearts are once grown Adamantine hard,
They neither do themselves, nor God regard.
The DELIVERANCE. Icon 49. Cap. 12.
-- Peragit violenta potestas quod tranquilla nequit.
Exodus. 12.



The Passover, the First born slain, at last
The Bondmen are dispatched away in have:
After Four Hundred Years and Thirty, they
Are all brought out, on a most noted day;
Deliverance from oppression with control
Makes a new Man, and gives another Soul.
PHARAOH Drowned. Icon 50. Cap. 14.
(...)


See how the Rageing and Tempestuous Waves
Obedience pay, while God his chosen saves!
At holding up a Rod the Waves divide,
Strong as a Wall of Brass on either side:
But Pharaohs Chariots and his Horsemen find
It had been safer to have staid behind.
The REPINEING ISRAELITES. Icon 51. Cap. 16.
-- Ingratos ante omnia pone sodales.
Exodus 16, 4.



The great Salvation wrought, anon instead
Of Thanks, Complaints are made for Flesh and Bread;
Manna and Quails are plentifully sent,
The most ungrateful Rebels to content:
Such insolence for vengeance calls with wings,
Quick judgment, and a swift Destruction brings.
The MUTINEERS. Icon 52. Cap. 17.
Dicubi non aqua fit, si petra sicca dabit.
Exodus 17. (...).



Into a Wilderness the People brought,
Their next complaint is they shall die for drought.
They threaten their Meek Ruler, 'till he smites
A Rock, whence Water flows to the Israelites:
Strange Miracle! strange if the Multitude
Requite not favors by appearing Rude.
AMALEK Over-thrown. Icon 53. Cap. 17.
-- Quis sua praelia victus commemorare velit?


After Refreshment an Alarm comes,
The shriller Trumpets noise exceeds the Drumms;
While Holy Hands are up, Gods cause prevails,
But Amalek's when down, (Prayer never fails)
He that in earnest Supplication pleads
Less seen, does more then who an Army leads.
MOSES upon the Mount. Icon 54. Cap. 19.
Nitimur in vetitum.
^9. 3.



Mount Sinai in a flame, while all admire,
The People are forbid to venture higher:
They promise due obedience, none go up
But consecrated Moses to the top:
Gods presence may all reverence well require,
Who in his wrath, is a Consuming Fire.
The TABERNACLE. Icon 55. Cap. 25.
Decenter and in ordine fiant omnia.
Exodus 25.



The Heavenly Tent, by Gods own purpose pitched
With Types and Sacraments must be enrich't:
Ark, Mercy Seat, High Priest, and sp^inkling Blood,
(By penitent believers understood)
If a Decorum due was to the Law,
Who dares from Gospel Decency withdraw;
The TABLE'S Broken. Icon 56. Cap. 32.
(...)


The head strong Rabble giving ill advice
To Aaron, get a Calf to Idolize;
A golden Calf; Moses in great disdain
The Tables breaks; the Idolaters are slain:
So to be angry, so to show a zeal,
Was not to do a miss, but to do well.
LEVITICUS.
The ALTAR. Icon 57. Cap. 1.
Ut cognoscerent per quae peccant per eadem puniri ipsos.
^



ABihu, joined with Nadah, both conspire
To offer unto God unlawful Fire:
The high Priests Sons found guilty make it worse,
Their bold attempt called for a speedy curse:
How suitable the punishment and Sin!
They die by Fire, which their Offense had bin.
NUMBERS.
The SPIES. Icon 58. Cap. 13.
Non si male nunc and olim
Sic erit. --



MOses sends Messengers to understand
The excellency of the promised Land:
Clusters of Grapes denote a Land desired
By faith, with utmost Wars to be acquired.
Patience with perseverance win's the day,
'T is good to gain at last, though with delay.
The REMEDY. Icon 59 Cap. 24.
-- Latet anguis in herba
Number. 21. 6.



The Rout still mutinous, for their hissing Tongue
By winged Serpents Fiery Lances stunge
Chastis'd by Scorpions, look in ardent grief
Up to the Brazen Serpent for relief;
To murmur and repine is to increase
Perturbance of the mind, not purchase Peace.
BALAAM'S ASS. Icon 60. Cap. 22.
Omne animi uitium tanto conspectius in se
Crimen habet, quanto major quipeccat habetur.



King Balak plots Destruction to the Host
Of Israel, but his designs are crossed:
The dumb Ass speaking with Man's voice forbad
The purposes that he with Balaam had:
To Sacrifice and make the Altar smoke
For ill, was not to offer, but provoke.
DEUTERONOMIE.
The PROSPECT. Icon 61. Cap. 34.
-- Non est mortale quod opto.


MOses, from Pisgah, views the Land below
Of promise, into which he must not go:
He dies; the Mourning lasts out thirty days,
Succeeding ages celebrate his praise;
The Memory of the Righteous cannot die,
'Till time it self end in Eternity.
The CONTROVERSY. Icon 62. Cap. 17.
-- Coelo tegitur qui non habet Urnam.


The Israelites for Moses make great moan,
But where his Sepulcher is, as yet unknown;
The Devil and Michael are at hard contest
About his Body, while his Soul's at rest.
Upright and virtuous need no Tombs erect,
Their Monuments are the Hearts of the Elect.
JOSHUA.
The CHAMPION, Icon 63. Cap. 3.
(...)
Ias. 3. 2.



FRom Circumcision fresh, with Sword in hand,
Joshua dares bid an Armed Angel stand:
Jehovah is a Buckler and a Shield,
To animate his Volunteers in the Field.
He that Gods battles fights receives his pay
Before hand, and is sure to gain the day.
The MEMORIAL. Icon 64. Cap. 4.
Secuit aquas, and traduxit eos.
Joshua 4. 1.



The Brook divided, out of each Tribe one
For a Remembrance is to fix a stone
Where the Priests feet stood, to remain a mark,
While Forty Thousand wait upon the Ark;
Wonders exceeding reason, puzling sense,
Memorials well deserve in their defense.
The SIEGE. Icon 65. Cap. 6.
Maxima pendent a minimis. --
Iosu. 6. 6



Jericho shuts up her Gates, 'till at the sound
Of Rams-horm all the Walls fall to the ground:
Such means the High and Mighty one will use
His naughty adversaries to amuse;
Where City and Builders most accursed were,
Rahah the Harlot God is pleased to spare.
The SACRILEGE. Icon 66. Cap. 7.
(...)
Iasua ^t 8.



A pitched Field, Israel meets with a disgrace,
Cast lot's the cause on wretched Achan place:
'T was not so much the Talents, or the Wedge,
Or Garments stoned him, as the Sacrilege:
The public Curse of private avarice
A Nation shakes, and ruins Families.
The SOLSTICE. Icon 67. Cap. 10.
Sol tibi signa dabit


A mighty work in hand, the Moon and Sun
Stand still at Joshua's word, 'till it is done:
Great Hailstones witness where Five Kings are caught
And Hanged, with Twelve more to Perdition brought:
Let Potentates to fear and tremble learn,
When God and Nature join in One concern.
The ANAKIMS Cut off. Icon 68, Cap. 11.
Defendit numerus, junctaeque umbone phalanges.
Joshua 11. (...).



More Kings discomfited, the Ammonites
Assist the Hittites and the Jebusites:
Those from the Mountains and the Valleys fight
And with the Anakims are put flight.
Such as draw back when Gods cause lies at stake.
Do their own mercy, with the truth forsake.
JUDGES.
The REQVITAL. Icon 69. Cap. 1.
Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris.
Iud^. 4.



Under whose Table Seventy Kings, their Thumbs
And great Toes Chizzel'd off, did gather Crumms;
Adonibezek taken may subjoyn,
How justly am I paid in mine own Coin?
Astrea's equal balance even stands,
Justice' has Leaden feet, but Iron hands.
The HEROINE. Icon 70. Cap. 4.
Raro haec faeminea vidimus acta manu.


Faint Sisera betakes himself to sleep,
The Captain weary, it is profound and deep;
Jael, her sex excelling, strikes him dead,
His Temples nailed, not laid in Honors Bed;
Women are Tender, yet where they mislike
The avenging blow falls Heavy, when they strike,
GIDEON'S PRESENT. Icon 71. Cap. 6.
Saepe premente Deo, fert Deus alter opem.
^die: 6. (...).



The Israelites oppressed under Midian,
An Angel to deliver them send's Gideon:
His gift touched by him, as the Flame did rise,
Was of a present made a Sacrifice:
To evidence that from Heaven the orders came,
The Witness is a Spirit and a Flame.
GIDEON'S SIGNS. Icon 72. Cap. 6.
Abundans cautela non nocet.


An Angel unto Gideon makes it known
What Gods intention was to save his own:
Who, to confirm the matter to the full,
Asks, and has two signs in one fleece of Wool.
One Token from above might him amaze,
Reduplicated,' it was Transcendent grace.
The SUPERNUMERARIES Icon73. Cap. 7.
Satis est unus, satis est nullus.
Iud. 7. 2.



From Thirty and Two Thousand he is advised
To have his mighty Army modeliz'd
Into Three Hundred; he obeys, who knew
God saves alike by many, or by few:
To put in Arm's of Flesh our Confidence
Is to neglect and slight Omnipotence,
The STRATAGEM. Icon 74. Cap.7.
(...)
^



God having purposed Midian to subdue,
With Amalek and the confedera^e crew,
A stratagem of Pitchers, Trumpets, Lamps
Takes off their Manhood, and their Valor damp's.
Hope blasted, fear, despondency, with rage,
Wait upon such as without God engage.
The DISCHARGE. Icon 75. Cap. 9.
-- Poteris tutior esse domi.
^



Abimelech by a conspiracy
And Murder seat's himself in Majesty:
A piece of Mil-stone, by a Woman's hand,
Discharges him from Court-ship and command.
How weak are earthly Monarchs, and how frail,
Against whom Woman can, and Chance prevail (...)
JEPTHAH'S VOW. Icon 76. Cap. 11.
(...)


When as the Ammonites were all subdued
Jephthah speaks his intended Gratitude:
That Vow upon him was a sacred Tie,
His Daughter comes out first, she first must Dic.
Words cannot be recalled, and vows once made
Inviolable are, and must be paid.
SAMSON'S VALOVR. Icon 77. Cap. 11.
-- Tot sunt in amore dolores,
Que patimur multo spicula fell madent.

Iudic: 14. 5.



Samson in strength and vigor, his designs
Are for a Wife amongst the Philistines;
In's journie a Lion by the Throat he shakes,
Soon as returned, his Wife another takes.
To match amongst Gods enemies and theirs
Showed Samson's weakness greater far then hers.
The RESENTMENT. Icon 78. Cap. 15.
Virtus repulsae nescia sordidae.
Iudic: 15. 15.



Affronted thus, he is resolved to Burn,
By Firebrarnds tied to Foxes tails, their Corn;
For Father Burnt, and Wife, it comes to pass
A Thousand fall by the Jaw Bone of an Ass.
Those that provoke a Giant should bespeak
Their Graves, or else confess themselves too weak
The RESURRECTION TYPE. Icon 79. Cap. 16.
Respice quid valiant humeri, quod far recusent.


Barred gates of Gaza by the break of day
The Gyantean Ruler bears away:
Hired Delilah thrice her subtle charms repeats
To find his strength, thrice he her Arts defeats.
Importunate Solicitations force,
And that extort which often proves a Curse.
DELILAH'S FRAUD. Icon 80. Cap. 16.
Intolerabilius nihil est quam blandula pellex.


At last, laid in her Lap, they slight and scorn
The Man of might, lulled fast a sleep and Shorn:
Drawn in by cunning slights and treacheries
He pulls the House upon his Foes, and dies.
Unhappy Samson! thou before wast Blind,
Or had not put thy God out of thy Mind.
The LEVIT'S CASE. Icon 81. Cap. 20.
Hic amor est odio majus scelus. --


A Levite and his Wife for Gods House bound,
Having in Gibeah scarce a Lodging found,
Straight the Lascivious crew (not without strife
For both) to Vile Lust sacrifice her life.
All laws of Nations and of Nature fail
When Anarchy in Israel does prevail.
The ANNIVERSARY, Or the Surprised Virgins. Icon 82. Cap. 21.
Vivitur ex rapto. --
Iudic: 21. 16.



The Benjamites; except Six Hundred slain,
(A grief the rest ill knew how to sustain;)
To such as did survive, and had no Wives
Direction a supply from Shiloh gives.
When men for their transgressions quit their hold,
They must do as they may, not as they would.
RUTH.
The DUTIFUL Daughter-in-law Icon 83. Cap. 2.
Vivitur parvo been cui paternum
Splendet in mensa tenui salinum.



RUth, finding favor, Gleans in Boaz's Fields,
Beats out of Barley what an Ephah yields;
Parcht Corn and Morsels steept in Vinegar
With our Forefathers was esteemed good Cheer.
It Is dull to glut when life is but a Span,
A frugal Table feasts the Inward Man.
The MIDNIGHT BLUSH. Icon 84. Cap. 3.
-- Simplicitas digna favore fuit.
Ruth. 3. 6.



With Boaz Ruth claiming Kins-womans right
Lays her self humbly at his feet all night;
Such Modesty and Chastity in both
They well might after take each others troth.
Those that are Innocent and Pure in Heart
Even when they are together dwell apart.
I. SAMUEL.
The ARK TAKEN. Icon 85. Cap. 4.
Qui non vetat peccare, cum potest, jubet.
1. Sam: 4. 12.



IN one day Eli's impious Sons are Killed,
(The man of Gods words now are all fulfilled,)
To hear the Arc was taken makes him break
In a desponding Syncope his Neck.
Reproof for grand faults in a gentle strain,
Is to bid Children do the same again.
DAGON'S DOWNFALL. Icon 86. Cap. 5.
Adorate eum omnes Dii.
^



The Philistines the Ark of God have got,
Into the House of Dagon it is put:
That dumb, deaf idol, they so much adore
He Cringes first, then Sprawls upon the Floor.
He that shall worship that which Hands have made
Does forfeit reason, and himself degrade.
The RASH ADVENTURE. Icon 87. Cap. 6.
-- Audax omnia perpeti
Gens humana ruit per uetitum nefas,
Audax Japeti genus.

1. Sam: 6. 1.



Smitten with Emrods, they resolve to bring
The Ark back, with a Trespass Offering:
Those that into it look without respect
To what it was, sustain the sad effect.
Things Sacred are not for the Vulgar sort
Who when they are at best, take all in sport.
The HUMILIATION. Icon 88. Cap. 7.
(...)
1. Sam: 7. 9.



Abinadab the Ark (commanded) takes,
The Congregation their Confession makes,
By Prayer and Supplication; Samuel winns
A victory against the Philistines.
The way to be successful in the Field
Is upon God and his support to Build.
SAUL ANOINTED. Icon 89. Cap. 10.
(...)


The Prophet Samuel here Anointeth Saul,
(A goodly Person for his shape, and tall)
To prove that Gods decrees are constant still
Sign upon Sign confirm his sacred will.
When for a lasting Throne God sets apart
He looks not to the Stature, but the Heart.
The PANICK FEAR. Icon 90. Cap. 14.
-- Motae ad lunam trepidabis Arundinis umbram.
1. Sam: 14. 1.



Jonathan, unknown to his Royal Father smites
The Philistines, and resolutely fights;
A sudden Consternation does them seize,
And they against themselves turn enemies.
Infatuation will possess the Brain
Of Reprobates, and scatter all their Train.
The AFTER Reckoning. Icon 91. Cap. 15.
Quod differtur non aufertur.
1. Sam: 15. 33.



Amalek, long since devoted, now must fall
For their Old Grude, under the hand of Saul:
His sparing Agag, kept him but in store
'Till the Decision of that day was over.
Pride and Presumption are unlucky Signs,
Fortune, like Glass, cracks soonest when she Shines.
The GIANT. Icon 92. Cap. 17.
Monstrum horrendum, inform, ingens, cui lumen ademptum
Projicit ampullas, and sesqui pedalia Verba.

1. Sam: (...). (...).



The huge, Portentous, Domineering Gathist
Out-dareing Heaven and prateing like an^ Atheist,
The stripling David with a Stone and Sling
Knock's down, and brings his Head to Saul the King.
The resolute Christian when the cause is Gods
Sets out with Courage, and falls on with Odds,
The TRIUMPHANT March. Icon 93. Cap. 18.
Dicite Jo Paean, and Jo ter dicite Paean.


The Champion of the Philistines now dead,
They bear away his mighty Sword and Head;
All kinds of Music play, while Virgins fair
Trip it, and with their voices split the Air.
Weapons of War though in a Giants Arm
May Terrify the Truth, but never Harm.
The LAWFUL CHARM. Icon 94. Cap. 19.
Musica scit lenire Tygres, rabidosque Leones.
1. Sam: 19. Verse. 9. 12



While Music Saui with Emulation strikes,
In Anthem's David's praised, which saul mislikes;
Expecting one day by his hand to fall,
The Javeling cast at him, it stuck in the Wall.
Suspicion of a Rival gnaws, and frets,
And Rage unlimited with Disdain begets.
The MATCHLESS Friend. Icon 95. Cap. 20.
(...)
1 Samuel 20. 35.



David and Jonathan sworn bosom Friends,
The Son reveals the Fathers bloody ends;
An Arrow sent from Jonathan's true Bow
David directs, when Anxious, what to do.
A Friend exceeds a Brother; David must
Trust him, who his own Father could not trust.
The PUSILLANIMOUS Churl. Icon 96. Cap. 25.
Nullum numen abest si fit prudentia.
1 Samuel 25. 14.



David, put to it hard, beggs a recruit;
Nabal returns a Clownish answer to it:
Abigael in her Wisdom peace acquires,
All known, within Ten days the Churl expires.
Wisdom Reigns over all, and will be seen;
'T was that alone made Abigael a Queen.
The NOBLE ENEMY. Icon 97. Cap. 26.
(...)


Saul in pursuit of David, with express
Commands to Murder him in the Wilderness
He at his Mercy has; but Heaven appointed
He should not die, with touch not mine Anointed.
So generous Lions spare the prostrate Wretch,
If with his Belly to the Ground he stretch.
The SAFE COUNSELOR. Icon 98. Cap. 30.
Unde, nisi a te, Domine?
1 Samuel 30. 17.



David (as he was wont) consults the Lord,
If he should put the Amalekites to Sword
For spoiling Ziklag; God gives him his charge,
And he the Foes, his borders to enlarge.
When Military men advice want most
Who can direct them like the Lord of Host?
The FORLORN HOPE. Icon 99. Cap. 31.
Unasalus victis nullamsperare salutem.
1 Samuel 31. 4.



Saul and his Armor-bearer when they saw
Themselves past hope upon Mount Gilboa,
Fall on their Swords, where Jonathan and two
More Sons of Saul's bid all the World adieu.
Ah Jonathan the Kind! now thou art gone
David is half dead too, and left alone.
II. SAMUEL.
The REMOVAL of the AR^. Icon 100. Cap. 6.
Quam facilis rigidi cuivis censura cachinni?
2 Samuel 6. (...)



UZza for touching of the Ark which shook,
Is smitten in the place where hold he took;
Temerity where Gods presence still attends
No wonder if in Punishment it ends.
Michal for Scoffs when David danced his best,
Her Curse a Barren Womb is, and dry Breast.
The ^MBASSADORS Affronted. Icon 101. Cap. 10.
Ius legationis sacrum.
2 Samuel 10. 7.



The Messengers of David used with spite
Occasions War against the Ammonite,
With whom the Syrians taking part the fight
Is lost to them, and God maintains his right.
^mbassadors affronted leagues disown,
The public shared disgrace in what was done.
The AMOROUS Glance. Icon 102. Cap. 11.
Ex aspectu nascitur amor.
2 Samuel 11. 4.



David at Ease, upon a quick surprise
Rendering his heart to his ill-guarded eyes,
Hides sin with sin, Oh! where can Pride have place
If so much Frailty dwell with so much Grace?
Where Chronicles blazen his renown and praise,
The matter of Uriah nip's the bay's.
The RECANTATION. Icon 103. Cap. 12.
-- Haeret lateri lethalis arundo.


In words obscure and figurative Speech
Nathan does David of his Sin impeach;
He hides it not, but on his Knees repents
And in true penitential tears relents.
What aggravated when the Message came,
Was that he took the poor man's only Lamb.
The COVNTERFEIT. Icon 104. Cap. 13.
Quandoquidem accepto claudenda est janua damno.
2 Samuel 13. 1.



Amnon in love with Tamar, calls for Meat,
(Pretending Sickness) from her hand to eat;
He feeds not, but enjoys his Brutish Lust,
The heat allayed, she out of Doors is thrust.
Inordinate affections when they Burn
End in the snuffs of Hatred, Shame, and scorn.
The REVENGE. Icon 105. Cap. 13
-- Minuti
Semper and infirmi est animi, exiguique voluptas
Ultio. --

2 Samuel 13. ^3.



Absalom, understanding Tamar's case,
Resolves Revenge; appoints the time, and place;
At a Sheep-sheering, (all the Brothers met,)
Amnon is slain, to take off the regret.
Sense of an injured sister inward reaks,
'Till out like Thunder from a cloud it breaks.
The UNNATURAL SON. Icon 106. Cap. 18.
Simulata sanctitas duplex iniquitas.
2 Samuel 18. 9.



The Rebel Son against his Prince and Father,
First pays his vow, then up his Tropps does gather:
Hanged betwixt Heaven and Earth, the Traitors Heart
Is penetrated there by Joab's Dart.
Rebellion, and against a Parent wrought,
Is that which leaves an Everlasting blot.
The SYCOPHANT. Icon 107. Cap. 20.
Tuta frequensque via est per amici fallere nomen.
2 Samuel 20. 1^.



Joab intending Amasa to kill
By flattery and deceit obtains his will;
Dissimulation may effect foul ends,
But Barbaous they that use it to their Friends.
Turbulent Sheba a-side by Faction led
Raises the Seige, but with the loss of's Head.
I. KINGS.
The IMPARTIAL MAGISTRATE Icon 108. Cap. 3.
-- Sub judice lis est.
1 R^g. 3. 16.



TWo Harlots, being newly brought to Bed,
Strive for a living Child, and slight the dead:
By Solomon then the matter is decided
Against her who would see the quick divided.
Good Omen 't was that he was hence Renowned,
And this the Second time the King was Crowned.
SOLOMON'S TEMPLE. Icon 109. Cap. 67.
Materiam superabat opus.
1 Reg. 6. ^7.



Though God dwell not in Temples that are made
With hands, but Mansions that can never fade,
It Is fit that Structure be of Noble Fashion
In which with fear we work out our Salvation.
No Architecture can augment Gods worth,
Yet gratitude suggests to set it forth.
The DEDICATION. Icon 110. Cap. 8.
(...)


King Solomon at his Temples Dedication
Begins with solemn Prayer and Adoration:
Peace Offerings and Burnt Sacrifices follow,
To feast the People, and the House to hallow,
He that himself to seek his Maker sets
All other things into the bargain gets.
The ACKNOWLEDGMENT. Icon 111. Cap. 10.
Non equidem invideo, miror magis.
1. Reg. 10. 1



The wisest King that ever Scepter swayed,
Has from the Queen of Sheba homage paid,
Owning by Fame that She was to him sent,
But entertained to Her Astonishment.
That King whom the Almighty has inspired,
Is justly far and near to be admired.
The ZIDONIAN GODDESS. Icon 112. Cap. 11.
Non been convenient, nec in una sede morantur
Majestas and amor. --

1 Reg. 11.1.



Mounted on high, and Wisdom at Her feet,
See Astoreth, the Zidonian Goddess set:
So many Wives and Concubines had got,
And kept that Heart which longer God had not.
How slight and vain a thing is Flesh and Blood!
When left unto it self, expect no good.
The FATAL COUNTERMAND. Icon 113. Cap. 13.
Perditio tua ex Te.
^



A Prophet God with strict injunctions sends,
A Brother Prophet countermands pretends:
The ill-obedient proves a Lions prey,
Let no Authority known truth outweigh.
No Consultation stands against the Lord,
The safest Rule is to believe His word.
The USURPER. Icon 114. Cap. 16.
Servis regna dabunt, captivis fata triumphos.
^



Elah Carousing to excess, is slain
By his own servant Zimri; Zimris Reign
Omri cuts short; King Ahab him succeeds
As well in Empire as ungodly Deeds.
Succession placed in an illegal Line
Withers, and shrinks like fruit without a Rine.
The RECRUIT. Icon 115. Cap. 17.
Quas dederis solas semper habebis opes


Starved Ravens (Birds of prey) if God think good,
Shall for Elijah purvey daily Food:
The Widow who had little Oil before,
By giving that away, has endless store.
The just can live by Faith, when Victual fails
The unlook't for Ship returns with swelling Sails.
The FAIR TRIAL. Icon 116. Cap. 18.
(...)
1 R^. 18. 3^.



The numerous Priests of Baal implore his aid,
Whether he be a God the Trial's made;
They Cut, and Lance, they cry, and call amain,
God is but One and their Mock-god is vain.
What pitty'tis a Deity of note
Should have no mercy on his Priests sore Throat?
The DESPONDING PROPHET. Icon 117. Cap. 19.
Causa jubet melior superos sperare secundos.
^



Elijah laid under afflictions Rod,
Gaus'd by proud Jezebel, has help from God:
An Angel bids him hold his Resolution,
And bear up manful under Persecution.
The Cruel and Malicious take no rest,
An angry Woman is an Hornets nest.
The ARCHER. Icon 118. Cap. 22.
Quem saepe transit casus aliquando invenit.
1 Reg. 22. 29.



Ahab, as Graceless as his Wife, both foes
To good Elijah, into Battle goes;
He that in others Blood took such delight
Has Dogs lick up his own, in open sight.
The Shaft successful proved and Justice hit
The Mark, but one above directed it.
II. KINGS.
The CONDITIONAL LEGACY Icon 119. Cap. 2.
Aureus axis erat, temo aureus, aurea summae
Curuatura rotae.



ELijah with his Mantle does divide
Jordan, and in a Fiery Chariot ride;
At parting he his Spirit does bequeath
Unto Elisha while he stays beneath.
What cursed Simon Magus would have bought
Is here a Free gift, and Entailed for naught.
The SAD EVENT. Icon 120. Cap. 2.
-- Dociles imitandis
Turpibus and pravis omnes sumus. --

(...) Reg. 2. 23.



Elisha indefatigable grown
In serving of his God, and him alone,
The Children mock; go Bald-head up, up, go,
('T was all they said) Two Bears kill Forty Two,
Do not my Prophets harm was a command
Ill-bred ^dolaters could ill-understand.
The STRICT CREDITOR. Icon 121, Cap. 4.
-- Compressae copia Olivae.
2 Reg. 4. 1.



A pious Prophets Widow left in Debt,
When her Two Sons the Creditor did Threat,
Implores Elisha; Her store of Oil one Cruse
She into borrowed Vessels must infuse.
Reliance upon Providence sustains
And Satisfaction with Advantage gains.
GEHAZI's CHEAT. Icon 122. Cap. 5.
(...)
2 Reg. 5. 10.



Elisha when by Naaman ask't to Cure
His Leprosy (as loath to live impure)
It Is granted Gratis; but Gehazi's Lie
And Filching gives himself that Leprosy.
How just a Punishe^nt! the Hand now sore
Had not bin so, but that it Itch't before.
The EXTREMITY. Icon 123. Cap. 6.
Carmina secessum scribentis, and otia quaerunt.
2 Reg. 6. 18.



To enlarge the Prophets Schools a wonder's wrought
And Iron swimms, (which Nature never taught)
Samaria for her sins in such a straight
Women are their own Children found to eat.
Philosophy must herein acquiess,
And her self to a Nonplus put, confess.
The INCREDULOUS LORD. Icon 124. Cap. 7.
-- Buccae
Noscenda est mensura tuae. --

2 Reg. 7. 17.



Into their Host Four Lepers at twilight
Escaping bring news of the Assyrians flight:
Plenty proclaimed, a Lord cries God cannot do it,
He finds it true, when trodden Under-foot.
Not to believe when Heaven sends an express
Is not distrust, but a Fool-hardiness.
PRIDE with a FALL. Icon 125. Cap. 9.
Nil non permittit mulier sibi, turpe putat nil
Cum virides gemmas collo cicumdedit.



Gay Jezebel with an Embelish't Face,
Opens the Casement, with intent to gaze:
Had Zimri peace, quoth she, who slew his Master?
Headlong to the devouring Dogs they cast her.
Naboth was Murdered, she made Ahab strike
Blood answers Blood, and both are served alike.
The GHOST. Icon 126. Cap. 13.
Mors ubinam si non invenienda rogo?


The Moabites invading of the Land,
A dead man is observed upright to stand;
This was a Marvel, but yet not so much
If we consider what the Corpse did touch.
The Righteous end not when they die, but have
An Efficatious power even in the Grave.
The REFORMATION. Icon 127. Cap. 18.
Omnium rerum vicissitudo.
(...) 18. 4.



Good Hezekiah, second unto none
Came after, or before him that had gone,
Roots out Idolatry, removes high places,
Cuts down the Groves, and Images defaces.
Idolaters their worship first begun
In Groves, because ashamed to see the Sun.
The PARRICIDES. Icon 128. Cap. 19.
(...)
^



Thousands and Thousands of Assyrian might
Are by an Angel Cut off in one night;
S^nacherib at false worship gets his death
From his own Sons, to whom he gave their breath.
Unthought of Execution follows those
That trust in Graven Images repose.
The FAITHFUL WITNESs. Icon 129. Cap. 20.
-- Solemn quis dicere falsum,
Audeat? --



Kings are but mortal; Hezekiah lies
Upon his Deathbed, and to Heaven he cries
For longer life; the Sun is to attest
God cannot be unfaithful in the least.
When grim Death is with his Memento sen^
The best man wants more leisure to Repent.
The UNANIMOUS RESOLVE. Icon 130. Cap. 23.
Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis.
2 Reg. 23. 1.



Josiah set upon a Throne of State,
Does all his Priests and People Congregate;
Devoutly they with one consent and Heart
All swear from Gods laws never to depart.
A solemn League, (where Kings are first) does well,
And if performed, withstands the gates of Hell.
The CAPTIVITY. Icon 131. Cap. 25.
-- Quis talia fando
Temperet a lachrymis. --

2 Reg. (...)



Jerusalem begirt, and all her Glory
Concluding in a Melancholy story:
Huldah the Prophetess Destruction saw,
And told it, at the Reading of the Law.
Ah Zedekiah! could thou call to mind,
Thy Murdered Sons before they made thee Blind?
I. CHRONICLES.
The FELO DE SE. Icon 132. Cap. 10.
Quis furor est ne moriare, mori?


SAul asks the Kindness of his Armor-bearer
To Kill him, as the Philistines drew nearer;
Denied, he Kills himself; besmeared with blood
His Hairy Scalp on Dagon is bestowed.
To recollect bad actions, done before,
And not to be undone, torments the mort.
The DIFFIDENT PRINCE. Icon 133. Cap. 21.
Pauperis est numerare pecus.
^



Mistrustful David gives it in command
To number all his Warries in the Land;
He falls into Gods hands; the Plague begins,
But the Angel spares Jerusalem's foul sins.
Frail man! his politic contrivance past,
He must be put into Gods hands at last.
II. CHRONICLES.
The SAFEST COURSE. Icon 134, Cap. 20.
Permittes ipsis expendere numinibus, quid
Conveniat nobis, rebusque sit utile nostris;
Charior est illis homo quam sibi. --



JEhosaphat Environed round about
With Enemies, and in great fear and doubt,
His Resolutions are to God to go,
The end proves well, because he did do so.
They that assurance place in Heaven's support
May in the Forefront march, and Sca'e the Fort.
DAGON A-LOFT. Icon 135 Cap. 24.
-- Delirant Reges, plectuntur Achivi.
2 (...) 24. 20.



Dagon is up, Joash will have it so,
And all must to the stupid Image bow;
None but Old zachariah firm and fast,
Who rather would be Stoned then fail at last.
Who Martyrdom endures for acting right
Mounts above spleen, and may defy all Spi^
NEHEMIAH.
Cap. 3. Icon 136.
Non delebo nomen de libro vitae.


JErusalem (where God was most renowned)
Nebucadnezzar having razed to the ground,
While Nehemiah mourns to tell its fall,
They are Recorded who rebuild the Wall.
When War, and Desolation is our lot.
The memory of the just shall never rot.
ESTHER.
The IMPOLITIQUE STATESMAN. Icon 137. Cap. 5.
Nesallare cave, proximus ater erit.


TO Esther the Kings Scepter is extended,
The Jews and Mordicai by her befriended;
Malcontent Haman, in his pride and height
Scorns both, as standing yet a Favorite.
Ambition thwarted strives to do her worst,
And puffs the owner up, until he burst.
The BLACK BOOK OPEN. Icon 138. Cap. 6.
-- Tolluntur in altum
Ut lapsu graviore cadant. --

^



At dead of night, when Mortals take their rest,
Ahasuerus feels his soul oppressed;
The Books brought forth, the Gallows set so high
Proves the contrivers fatal destiny.
Nothing but discontent while he survived,
A nation had been lost had Ham^n thrived.
JOB.
The CONTENTED WRETCH. Icon 139. Cap. 1.
-- Foelicior hic qui
Nil cuperet, quam qui totum sibi posceret orbem.



SAtan allowed to punish Job with losses
Of Children, Goods, and other Worldly Crosses,
His answer is, though almost in despair,
Naked I hither came, shall go hence bare.
When man with Tempests is to Shipwreck tossed,
Contentment is a gift can nere be lost,
PSALMIST ROYAL.
The SWEET SINGER. Icon 140.
Paratum cor meum, O Deus, paratumest.


KIng David with his Harp in Symphony
Delights to hear Glory to God on high:
It Was Israel's Sweet Singer who best knew
To render to his God the Praises due.
Such as to Gods House take delight to go
Appease him for themselves, and others too.
CANTICLES.
The SERAPHICK DIALOGUE. Icon 141.
Ego sum dilecti mei, and dilectus est meus.


CHrist and his Spouse pathetically Cou^
Each other, with unspeakable Effort:
Their Dialognes are all of things above,
Until at last they both fall Sick of Love.
Affection heightened with a strong desire
Is restles 'till it is end it can acquire.
ISAIAH.
The CMMISSIONER. Icon 142. Cap. 6.
Domine, Labia mea aperias.


ISaiah is commanded to control,
A Seraphim comes to him with a Cole,
To touch his Tongue; he needs not be afraid,
Or shrink, that has the Almighty for his aid.
Had he forborne, and not kept vice in awe
He had not undergone the tearing Saw.
JEREMIAH.
The WARRANTED REPROVER. Icon 143. Cap. 1.
Omne in praecipiti uitium. --


THe Prophet Jeremiah in a Vision,
An Almond tree sees, (noteing Expedition;)
Impiery spread over all the Nations,
A seething Pot foretells their Desolations.
Sins multiply, and steal on by degrees,
Until, like Wine, men settle on the Lees.
The PRISONER SET FREE Icon 144. Cap. 38.
Veritas in puteo.
I^rem. 38. 7.



Denouncing Judgments boldly, as he ought,
Being by God himself his errand taught,
He Is thrown into the Dungeon; past all hopes
An Ethiopian draws him out with Ropes.
Extremity aloud for succor Cries,
And handmaid is to Opportunities.
EZEKIEL.
The THREAT. Icon 145. Cap. 1.
Noli altum sapere.


Four Cherubins and Four Wheels represent
Gods Glorious Majesty, and Excellent;
A Roll out of the Clouds is made a Type
To signify Iniquities were Ripe.
Into Gods awful Presence let none Pry
Till Mortal put on Immortality.
The MYSTERY, or the Second RESVRRECTION TYPE Icon 146. Cap. 37.
O Ossa arida, audite verbum Jehovae.
(...) 37. 1.



Ezekiel by the Spirit led, beholds
Dry Bones, which two fold Mystery infolds;
Judah to Israel joined by Gods Selection,
With an assurance of our Resurrection.
When Sap and Moisture fail he that said Live,
And thence Created, can Revival give.
DANIEL.
The VAIN ASTROLOGER. Icon 147. Cap 2
-- Quicquid
Dixerit Astrologus credunt a font relatum
Ammonis. --

Dani. 2. 25.



NEbucadnezzar Dreams, the Astrologers
Are to unriddle what import it bears;
They fail, and suffer for it, Daniel speaks
The Matter, and the Secret open breaks.
Though Magic some things may disclose ere done,
Secrets there are belong to God alone.
The FIERY FVRNACE. Icon 148. Cap. 3.
-- Vivite fortes,
Fortiaque in duris opponite pectora rebus.



Three resolved Heroes summoned to their Trial
Commanded to Fall down, give flat denial;
Cast into Furnace, heat forsakes the Fire,
But the Accessaries Burn when they draw nigheri
Plain Nature must her property forget
If the Almighty speak, be here no heat,
The STENOGRAPHER. Icon 149 Cap. 5.
-- e coelo descendit (...).


Belshazar Feasting all his Peers in State
Has in Three Words a prospect of his fate;
After much Wine ('it is strange) his Visage Pale,
O terrible Hand writing on the Wall!
Astonishment and Trembling is their hire
Who, laying God aside, to rule aspire.
The CONFEDERATE PRESIDENTS. Icon 150. Cap. 6.
Haec clementia non paratur art,
Sed norunt cui serviant Leones.



Wise Daniel acting as chief President
The rest to make away with him consent;
Cast into Lions Den, by their great power,
They hurt him not; the accusers they devour.
Envy with Hatred joined bears no allay,
But ruin plots the most Compendious way.
TRANSITORY MONARCHS. Icon 151. Cap. 7.
-- Mors sola fatetur
Quantula sunt hominum Corpuscula.

^



Those Four Beasts Daniel in a Vision saw
Denote Four Kings which kept the World in awe,
Whose Government and Reign stood for a time,
But Christ's is everlasting and sublime.
The Mighty, be their Lease for many years
It Is Canceled when unwelcome Death appears.
HOSEA.
The ADULTERESS. Icon 152. Cap. 1.
-- Turpiter atrum
Desinit in piscem mulier formosa superne.

(...)



God to Illustrate Typically how
With obstinate offenders it will go,
Hosea is to take to him a Wife
Of an Unclean and Profligated life.
No means from Heaven are wanting to express
The Shame and Punishment of Wickedness.
JOEL.
The CALM. Icon 153 Cap. 2.
Pascunt Iejunia mentem.


THe sounding of a Trumpet warns a Fast,
A Lamentation for Transgressions past;
Sion is comforted; the Godly find
Inward refreshment from a troubled mind.
Tranquillity of Soul, though it come late,
Is what the Wise will buy at any rate.
JONAH.
The WHALE, or the Third RESURRECTION TYPE. Icon 154. Cap. 2.
An piscatorem piscis amare potest?


JOnah refusing Gods command to embrace
Is swallowed by a Whale, for three days space;
Cast overboard (by his own free consent)
He knew he could not Sink, could he Repent.
His re-appearing as the third day ends
To the Holy Jesus's Resurrection tends.
The MALCONTENT. Icon 155. Cap. 4.
Saepe levant paenas, ereptaque lumina reddunt,
Cum been peccati paenituisse vident.

^



Jonah repineing sets him down to see
What would become of sinful Nineveh:
Sackcloth and Ashes dull the Keener Sword
And they find Pardon, though he find no Gourd.
Tears of Repentance wash off every sin,
And Reconcile as if it had not bin.
MICAH.
The PREDICTION. Icon 156. Cap. 5.
-- Veridicis-aetas praedicta Prophetis.


THe Prophet Micah shows he did foresee
Gods Irreversible revealed decree;
Christ's everlasting Kingdom is foretold
And none so long as He can Scepter hold.
From that time Earthly Kings remove here-hence
Shall never-ending Monarchy commence.
HABAKKUK.
The PETITIONER. Icon 157. Cap. 1.
Quosque abscondis faciem tuam?


HAbakkuk instant at his Prayers implores
Attention from the Godhead he adores;
The stout Chaldean Bands are made a Scourge
Gods Chosen People from their Sins to Purge.
Much is done by Contrition, and Remorse,
But the Importunate take Heaven by Force.
ZECHARIAH.
The JOINT SOLLICITORS. Icon 158. Cap. 1.
Credibile est junctas fortius ire preces.


AN Exhortation to Repentance, where
Both Man and Angel Sympathize in Prayer;
Jerusalem thy Comfort is at hand,
God cannot This, and muchless That withstand.
It Is bounden duty to Request below,
Hereafter we shall Reap what here we Sow.
TOBIT.
The MISCHANCE Icon 159. Cap. 2.
Nunquam aere gravis mihi dextra redibit.
(...) 2. 10.



WEll-meaning Tobit, when to rest composed
Has a Mischance before his Eyes were closed;
The Swallows from the Wall mute in his Eyes,
Whilst Anna, his Wife, works hard to get supplies.
A little got with Honest Care and Pains
Gives more content then vast Unlawful Gains.
TOBIT COMFORTED. Icon 161. Cap. 11.
Quantum quisque sua nummorum servat in arca
Tantum habet and fidei.



Tobias upon his return is met,
By his Blind, Father, who receives his debt
From Media, Tobias clears his sight
To satisfy him that the Tale was right.
Money at once and Eye sight to re-gain
Was beyond Expectation to obtain.
RAPHAEL and TOBIAS. Icon 160. Cap 5.
(...)
(...) 5. 6.



Tobias, charged by Tobit, steers his course
To Media, in hopes to re-imburse;
The Angel Raphael bears him company,
(For Man but little lower is then he.)
Country, nor Friends, Rest, nor Content, nor Health
Nor Life are thought on, where the end is Wealth.
TOBIT COMFORTED. Icon 161. Cap. 11.
Quantum quisque sua nummorum servat in arca
Tantum habet and fidei.



Tobias upon his return is met,
By his Blind Father, who receives his debt
From Media, Tobias clears his sight
To satisfy him that the Tale was right.
Money at once and Eye sight to re-gain
Was beyond Expectation to obtain.
JUDITH.
The BRAVE EXPLOIT. Icon 162. Cap. 13.
Invadunt urbem somno vinoque sepultam.


Puissant Holofernes with his Host,
Too confident, when no such cause to boast,
Dies by a Female hand, and steals away
E're he could Farewell to his Champions say.
His Head cut off, his Army is Perplexed,
Wine had the conquest first, and Judith next.
SUSANNA and the ELDERS.
Icon 163.
-- Merito suspecta libido est
Quae venerem affectat sine viribus. --



A pair of Elders Grave, at Noon day light,
In private, put Susanna into a fright:
The Garden Doors shut, and her Maids away,
Who should the fair Susanna share but they?
Youth runs the risque, if strength of Nature fail
It Is time our past offenses to bewail.
BELL and the DRAGON.
Icon 164. Cap. 1.
-- Qualia demens
AEgyptus portenta colit? Crocodilon adorat
Pars haec, illa pavet saturam Serpentibus Ibin.



CYrus, a Persian Monarch stands in fear,
And serves a Dragon, choakt with Pitch and Hair;
The like to Bell; whom when they offer Meat,
What He cannot do, his Priests make bold to Eat.
Self-interest first the World falls Dictates gave,
Men easily believe what they would have.
I. MACCABEES.
The ZEALOUS GENERAL. Icon 165. Cap. 2.
Decet Imperatorem stantem mori.
^



BRave Mattathias feelingly bemoans
Jerusalem, with deepest Sighs and Groans,
Slaies an Idolater, and at his Fall
Leaves Maccabeus Captain General.
The latest kindness we the Truth can do,
Is for it Nobly Death to undergo.
The CONCERN at STAKE. Icon 166. Cap. 3.
(...)
1. (...) 3. 10.



Stern Apollonius at a loss for Forces,
The Gentiles furnish him with Men and Horses:
Now Israel's concern lay at the Stake
Til Maccabeus the complotments brake.
If to the Test Man's cause with Gods be brought,
All Human Machinations come to naught.
The OPPRESSOR. Icon 167. Cap. 6.
-- Se
Judice ^emo nocens absolvitur. --

^



Antiochus the Tyrant, makes Confession,
And dying tells the World of his Oppression:
Whose Son, though kinder than his Father found,
Yet Sions Walls are levelled with the Ground.
When for our Selves, we work with all our Heart,
But when we Act for God, we Act in part.
The COMPETITORS. Icon 168. Cap. 10.
-- Nec fert Caesarve priorent
Pompeiusve parem. --

^



Demetrius waging War with Alexand^r,
Nor brooking to be thought a worse Commander,
Is slain; God Dagon and his Temple Burn
Together, and may serve to fill one Urn.
A Molten Image dignified with Dross
Should be Refined, though to the makers Loss.
II. MACCABEES.
VINDICTIVE JUSTICE Icon 169. Cap. 3.
Nulla fides piet asque viris qui castra sequuntur.
2. (...) 3. (...)



HEliodorus sent to bear away
The Treasure of a Temple for a Prey,
Is paw'd to the Earth; two Angels him Chastise,
And make him feel the Smart before he Dies.
The Sacrilegious Person is a Thief,
To whom nor Law nor Gospel grants Relief.
The ECLIPS. Icon 170. Cap. 5.
-- Bella horida bella.
2. (...) 5. 2.



The People of Jerusalem behold
Prognostic Signs, which were by Heaven foretold,
Antiochus his rage is read in the Skies,
Though scarce discernible for Prodigies.
Where Provocation moves, the angry Stars
Are kind to make known Famine, Plague, or Wars.
The UNDAUNTED MATRON. Icon 171. Cap. 7.
-- Stabat natorum in funere matter
Spectatrix, ferrumque videns, ignemque supinis
Artubus admotum, nihil aversata refugit.

2. Macha. 7. 1.



A Matron and Seven Children are destroyed,
For not committing what they would avoid,
By tasting Swines Flesh; for when Mortal Eats,
It Is Faith makes lawful, or unlawful Meats.
Who in his Bosom Right has for a Friend,
May Heavenward with the best assurance tend.
The RUNNAGATE in SCARCENESS. Icon 172. Cap. 9.
Sera venit, sed certa venit vindicta deorum.


Antiochus (whom the great Heart Searcher knew
Implacable against the worsted Jew)
Dies in a strange Land, Loathsome, Feared by many,
But, his Name rotting, not desired by any.
Extremity of want attends on all
That Fight against the Church, and wish her Fall.
The DISCOMFITURE. Icon 173. Cap. 12.
-- Galeatum sero duelli
Paenitet. --



To persecute the Jews, Timotheus draws
His Men of War up, to maintain his cause,
But valiant Maccabeus drawing nigh,
Smites Thirty Thousand of them Hip and Thigh.
If Ambiguities in Fighting lurk,
It Is the concluding stroke that Crowns the Work.
Finis. Vet. Test.
Nil parvum sapias, and adhuc sublimia cures. Hor. THE CONTENTS.
THe Genealogy. 1.

The Epiphanie. 2.

The Escape. 3.

The Infants Massacred. 4.

Baptism Instituted. 5.

The Sophister. 6.

The Orthodox Teacher. 7.

The Busy Body. 8.

The Indulgent Master. 9.

The Storm. 10.

The Paralytick. 11.

The Husbandman. 12.

The Executioner. 13.

The Weak Endeavor. 14.

The Reparte 15.

The Transfiguration. 16.

The Worldling. 17.

The Hierlings. 18.

The Advent. 19

The Intruder. 20.

The Bankrupt. 21.

The Great Assize. 22.

The Eucharist. 23.

The Conspiracy. 24.

The Arreignment. 25.

The Crucifixion. 26.

The Resurrection. 27.

The Hermet. 28.

The Indecorum. 29.

The Three Prophesies. 30.

The Salutation. 31.

The Neglected Guests. 32.

The Anthem, 33.

The Circnmcision. 34.

The Ecstasy. 35.

The Young Replicant. 36.

Virbius. 37.

The Contrite Heart. 38.

The Wayfaring Man. 39.

The Reproof. 40.

The Oracle. 41.

The bad Forecaster. 42.

The Spend-thrift. 43.

The Belly-god. 44.

The good Physician. 45.

The Seperatist. 46.

The Importunate Beggar. 47.

The Active Publican. 48.

The Agony. 49.

The Spiritual Touchstone. 50.

The Apparition. 51.

The Exaltation. 52.

Boanerges. 53.

The Wedding. 54.

The Querist. 55.

The Opportunity. 56.

The Miracle. 57.

The Legislators compared. 58.

The Earnest. 59.

The Traitor. 60.

The Grand Exemplar. 61.

The Ransom. 62.

The Assurance. 63.

The Mission. 64.

The Heavenly Almoners. 65.

The Hypocrite. 66.

The Beatifical Vision. 67.

The Proselyte. 68.

The Consternation. 69.

The Dream. 70.

The Release. 71.

The Stout Christian. 72.

The Shipwreck. 73.

The Perfect Number. 74.

The Throne. 75.

The Joy unspeakable. 76.

The Atonement. 77.

The Apostate. 78.

Eternity. 79.

The Witnesses. 80.

The Prodigies. 81.

The Spirits. 82.

The Antichrist. 83.

The Doom. 84.

The Immarcescible Crown. 85.

St. MATTHEW.
The GENEALOGY. Icon 1. Cap. 1.
Ultima Cumaei venit jam carminis aetas.
Mattheus



AN Angel to good Josesh makes appear,
The time of the Messiah drawing near,
Whose Genealogy in a straight line
With Blood of Kings and Prop^ does combine.
That Godhead should w^ Manhood so (...),
Makes Angels not to equal Man in height.
The EPIPHANIE. Icon 2. Cap. 2.
(...)
Mattheus



Kings of the East, Three Magi, come from far
Directed to their Savior by a Star:
Each from his Treasure choice st Presents brings,
To the great Lord of Lords, and King of Kings.
Gold, with Arabian Aromatique Gum,
An Offering to the great High Priest that is come*
The ESCAPE. Icon 3. Cap 2.
(...)


The Mother of the propitious Highborn Child,
The Virgin over-shadowed, undefiled,
Must with her Infant fly; O our defense,
Thy Favor, and thy Love are most Immense!
Who for the whole World was a Ransom meant
Betimes from Judah is to Egypt sent.
The INNOCENTS MASSACRED. Icon 4. Cap. 2.
Quid Violentius aure tyranni?
M^. 2. 16.



A Tragic Scene, Bethlehem with Infants strewn,
Proud Herod's guards with Milk and Blood embrew'd;
Yet, Rachel, let this news just grief assuage,
Thy Heaven-born Royal Babe has escaped their rage.
Had they completed their severe intent.
Christ's Blood, by Man, for Man had not bin spent.
BAPTISM INSTITUTED. Icon 5. Cap. 3.
-- Victor abolens baptismate labem.


Christ Holy Ordinances to maintain,
The Sacrament of Water does Ordain;
His Son Baptized God by a voice approves,
Whom for himself, in whom he Mankind loves.
Sprinkling Regeneration must precede
(For all of us in Trespasses are Dead.)
The SOPHISTER. Icon 6. Cap. 4.
Vae soli.


Christ, in the Desert, the sly Tempter finds,
(When Solitary we must guard our minds)
To knowledge in the Scripture he pretends,
And Quotes it too, but for his own falls ends.
Prince of the Air, turned Minister of Light,
Knows how to screw his notions to the Height.
The ORTHODOX TEACHER. Icon 7. Cap. 5.
(...)


Christ's Sermon speaks his Kingdom, who Inherit,
The Meek, the Merciful, the Poor in Spirit:
How sacred Pastors are, l^rn by this Sign,
Divinity it self is a Divine.
Tremendous charge! the Souls Christ did redeem
Are to his Priests committed all by him!
The BUSY BODY. Icon 8. Cap. 7.
Cum tua pervideas oculis male lippus in-unctis
Cur in amicorum vitiis tam cernis acutum?



Our Brothers Faults we are too prone to note,
Make Mole-hills Mountains, magnify a Mote;
Betwixt both parties then in open light,
The partial Microscope is not held right.
Who gives Reproof and yet Obnoxious stands,
May Quarrel, but has reason to Shake Hands.
The INDULGENT MASTER. Icon 9. Cap. 8.
O pietas! O prisca fides!


The Servant of a good Centurion sick,
To find a Remedy his Master's quick:
Acted by Faith, by which the Cur^ is wrought,
(But we are saved by Faith our Selves have got.)
Who has of all Physicians found the best
Let him believe, and set his Heart at rest.
The STORM. Icon 10. Cap. 8.
Qui venit hic fluctus fluctus super-eminet omnes.
Math. (...). 2^.



The Roaring Billows swell, a Tenth Wave roles
A First a Second, Second Third controles;
Faith staggers with the Man, by fear oppressed,
Nor can be found in an Apostles Breast.
Euroclydon may rage, 'till Courage fails,
But who makes Christ his Pilot safely Sails.
The PARALYTICK. Icon 11. Cap. 9.
Sicut accepistis Jesum Christum, it a in eo ambulate.
Math. 9. 2



A weak and feeble Wretch upon a Bed,
Unable to uphold his shakeing Head,
Get's up, walks, and the Bed on which he lay,
Py Christ's commanding strengthened, bears away.
Such Miracles our Lord was pleased to show
In whom all Power to whom all Praise is due.
The HUSBANDMAN. Icon 12. Cap. 13.
-- Non omnis fert omnia tellus.


A Sower at his lawful Calling, Sows,
And leaves to Providence what of it grows:
The Thorny, Stony, with the Highway ground,
Are such on which no Crop will e're be found.
Planting and Watering may together cease
If the Almighty give not an Increase.
The EXECUTIONER. Icon 13. Cap. 14.
Nemo malus faelix, minime corruptor, and idem.
Incestus, --

Math 14. 2



Herodias taxed with her Incestuous Bed,
Resolves to Dance off St. John Baptist's Head:
The Trunkless Prophet in a Charger lies,
Mother and Daughter glut their greedy Eyes.
When Resolutions hold to Act with Shame,
Unlawful Lust breaks out into a Flame.
The WEAK ENDEAVOR. Icon 14. Cap. 14.
De profundis clamavi.


Ship and Disciples tossed upon the Main,
Christ, to their rescue, Walks the liquid Plain,
Peter attempts too, at his Lords command,
But sinks, unless supported by his Hand.
Peter the Rock on whom Christ'sChurch was Built,
Did herein show a Frailty, not a Guilt.
The REPARTY. Icon 15. Cap. 15.
Velut mala Aurea cum figuris Argenteis est verbum dictum tempestive.


A Heathen suing for her Child possessed,
Slighted, then as a Dog, from Bread represt;
Yea, the Dogs, answers, Gather Crumms up Lord;
Christ does her Faith extol, her Suit accord.
Humility has Exaltation found,
When Pride and Self-conceit are cast to the ground.
The TRANSFIGURATION. Icon 16. Cap. 17.
(...)


Christ, to assure them of their Future state,
Lets Peter, James and John Anticipate,
Yet but a Glimps, at which Elias stays
With Moses to behold his brighter rays.
In highest Heaven the whole we shall Possess,
Here an excess of Glory might Oppress.
The WORLDLING. Icon 17. Cap. 19.
Ploratur lachrymis amissa pecunia veris.
Math. 19. 23



Babes, as incapable of doing Harms,
Our Savior Christ, embraces in his Arms;
The Rich man asks the way to Heaven, indeed,
But Money, thinks he, stands me in better stead.
Leave all, and follow! hard sentence! worldly wise
Mind not, to Covet is to Idolize.
The HIRELINGS. Icon 18. Cap. 20.
(...)


The Laborers in the Vineyard, these a Day
Those the last Hour, are equaled in their Pay;
Nor may we murmur, but admire-Gods will,
Gracious and just, who can do nothing ill.
To cut the Hireling short, is to deceive,
But who can blame if Overplus we give?
The ADVENT. Icon 19. Cap. 21.
Nunc licet ingenti dicere voce, Venit.
Math (...). (...)



Christ in Humility rides on an Ass,
All shout Hosanna, and bestrew the Pass:
The Buyers in the Temple are whip't out,
And made to heard abroad with their own Rout.
Due Reverence to the Church must not be lost,
Man is the Temple of the Holy Ghost.
The INTRUDER. Icon 20. Cap. 22.
-- Inter-strepit anser olores.
Math. 22. 2.



A Nuptial Table spread, while those admire
The Princely Banquet, these the Guests attire,
One without Decent Garment is condemned
To Manacles, the Wedding so contemned.
What preparation can be thought too great
When Christ the Bridegroom, and his Bride are met?
The BANKRUPT. Icon 21. Cap. 25.
-- (...).


A Rich Man setting out, not to come back
In have, resolves a Thrifty course to take;
Talents this Man has Five, that Two, this One,
And he that hides that Talent must have none.
Assiduous Management with Diligence,
Brings with it the contenting Recompense.
The GRAND ASSIZE. Icon 22. Cap. 25.
(...).
Math 25 31



When Christ shall be attended to his Throne,
And Sublunary Pomps all past and gone,
The Sheep are to be set at his Right Hand,
But the Lascivious Goats at his Left stand.
Then a Discrimination will be made,
No Subterfuge, no Corner, to evade.
The EUCHARIST. Icon 23. Cap. 26.
-- Ut ameris, ama.


Before his Passion, his Disciples set,
The Sacrament partake, first having Eat
The Pascal Lamb: O happy there St. John,
To have his Masters Breast to stay upon!
Though he had Honor to be next his side,
Communion of all Saints is here implied.
The CONSPIRACY. Icon 24. Cap. 26
Sibyll. Orac.
In manus iniquas infidelium veniet, dabuntque Deo alapas manibus incestis, and
impurato ore expuent vene natos sputus.




The Rulers, and chief Governors, conspire
How to accomplish their accursed desire:
When once it comes to this, one must betray,
The rest of his Disciples fall away.
Adversity a Touchstone is to prove
Sta bility distinct from common Love.
The ARRAIGNMENT. Icon 25. Cap. 27.
Sibyl. Orac.
Ipsa insipiens gens Deum tuum non
intellexisti, ^ed spinis coronasti.



A Court of Justice summoned, Christ Arraigned,
The People throng, nor will they be restrained:
Though Pilat wash, and no fault in him spy,
Yet Barabbas is saved, and Christ must die.
He that fore-warned falls Snetence dares Pronounce,
Is Judge, and Eexcutioner at once.
The CRUCIFIXTION. Icon 26. Cap. 27.
Sibyl. Orac. (...)


The Unrighteous Sentence past, without releif
Christ hangs betwixt one, and an other Theif:
Darkness, Vailrent, Graves open, Dead arise,
And the whole frame of Nature a disguise.
Infinity confined, and God-man dead,
The Fainter light well might obscure his Head.
The RESURRECTION. Icon 27. Cap. 28.
Scrutamini scripturas.


An Earthquake still the Angel to make known
The Resurrection, roles away the Stone:
Mary with the Eleven beholds the Lord,
Who sends them far and wide to Preach the Word.
The Gospel promulgation cries Repent;
The End for which the Son of Man was sent.
St. MARK.
The HERMET. Icon 28. Cap. 1.
-- Paulo majora canamus.
Marcus



JUdah's Triumphant Lion is set out
By him whose Emblem is the Lion stout:
St. John the Baptist clad in Camels Hair
As Messenger his way is to prepare.
The question put art thou the Christ or no?
He told the truth, and Sufferd for it too.
The INDECORUM. Icon 29. Cap. II.
Dicite, Pontifices, in sancto quid facit aurum?
Marc. 11 15



Christ with an holy Indignation Burns,
And Mony-changers Tables overturns:
His House is set apart to hear the Word,
No Burden must come there, but of the Lord.
Where Heaven has the peculiar claim and right
To Merchandise is doing it despite.
St. LUKE.
The THREE PROPHESIES. Icon 30. Cap. 1.
Mysterium quod absconditum fuit a seculis, nunc manifestum est sanctis.
Lucas



ST. Luke, Himself presenting with an Ox,
The Incarnation Mystery unlocks;
What was before the Worlds Creation laid,
Here Gods determinations are obeyed.
Elizabeth and Mary's Prophesies
Concerning Christ are joined with Zacharies.
The SALUTATION. Icon 31. Cap. 1.
Sibyl. Orac. (...).
Luc. 1. 22.



^ail, full of Grace! The Book before thee tells
Thy Heart is fixed on Heaven, and nothing else:
Blessed art Thou, and blessed is thy Womb,
From whence a Man-child, without man, can come.
Wonder of Wonders! so exceeding deep,
Angels dare only gently into it peep.
The NEGLFCTED GUESTS. Icon 32. Cap. 2.
Tu modo nascenti puero, quo ferrea primum
Definet, and toto surget gens aurea mundo,
Casta fave Lucina. --



Joseph, to pay his Tax, to Bethlehem tends,
With M^ry espoused, and when their journey ends
They put into an Inn, where Christ is Born,
No Grandeur, Stable-manger serves the turn.
Magnificence and State are for the great;
He came to put the mighty from their seat.
The ANTHEM. Icon 33. Cap. 2.
(...)


An Angel makes the harmless Shepherds know,
The looked for Prince of Peace was here below:
A Chorus Hallelujah heard to sing
To Lion, and to Lamb, to Priest and King.
That for us lost, Himself thus God should give,
Simplicity of Heart did first believe.
The CIRCUMCISION. Icon 34. Cap. 2.
-- Nemo dolorem
Fingit in hoc casn. --

Laice. 2. 21.



The Eight day come, the tender Child's content
To feel the Circumcising Instrument:
How kindly with us has the Father dealt?
The word was made Flesh, and amongst us dwelt.
Who any thing Unclean did never know
Did this for us, Polluted, undergo.
The ECSTASY. Icon 35. Cap. 2.
Nunc dimittis, etc.


Good aged Simeon, over-joyed, takes up
The strength of Jacob, and all Isreal's hope:
Depart in Peace was here the fittest Theme,
He first held Christ in's Arms, now Christ holds Him,
Extatique Exultation does him seize,
This life a Prison now, Death a Release.
The YOUNG REPLICANT. Icon 36. Cap. 2.
Philosophia est animi decus.


The Pharisaick Doctors Christ confutes
With Cogent Arguments, in Sharp Disputes;
Answers Objections, when they put him any,
Yet Beggs no question, though he ask them many.
Who should Discourse a point, or handle right,
But he in whom all knowledge was and light^
VIRBIUS. Icon 37. Cap. 7.
(...)
L^. 7. 11.



A Widows only Son at Naim dead,
After the Bier the weeping Mother's led;
The Bearers stop; a-rise, when Christ had spoke,
His Soul returns; the Bands of Death are broke.
He that Restorer was to be of all,
A Single one for instance does recall.
The CONTRITE HEART. Icon 38 Cap. 7.
(...)
Luc 7. (...).



A Pharisee Christ at a Dinner treats,
Where Mary Magdalen stays while he eats,
Half drowned in Tears; her penitent behavior
Gains her offenses pardon from our Savior.
A broken Contrite Heart, with swolen Eyes,
The God of Mercy never will despise.
The WAYFARING MAN. Icon 39. Cap. 10.
-- Iter ingressus gladium contumque timebis.


A Traveller has unlucky chance to fall
Into Theives hands, who rifle him of all,
And wound him; many passing by, at length
A good Samaritan repaires his strength.
To have no Sympathizing for distress
Humanity it self is to suppress.
The REPROOF. Icon 40. Cap. 10.
-- pauci dignoscere possunt
Vera bona. --

Luc (...) 38



Martha and Mary (Sisters) disagree
In stating wherein lies Felicity:
Martha is cumbred with the Worlds affairs,
Mary to Heavenly matters gives her cares.
Nature contented is with little Food,
Nothing too much for our Eternal good.
The ORACLE. Icon 41. Cap 11.
(...)


The Worlds Redeemer from the Devils Snares,
(Who ready stands to catch men unawars)
Casts out a Dumb one; for it Christ command,
Legion nor Beelzebub his word withstand.
That Oracle was not Dumb which spoke out plain
(Without a Trope) the Hebrew Child will Reign.
The BAD FORE-CASTER. Icon 42. Cap. 12.
-- Prudenter agas, and respice finem.


A Scraping Miser casts about to increase
His stock of Worldly wealth, and live at ease:
His Granaries too Scanty, and Barnes too Small,
But Mute he stands told whether he must fall.
When we possess what ever Heart desires
A little Room will serve when breath exspires.
The SPEND-THRIFT. Icon 43. Cap. 15.
Quem paenitet peccasse pene est innocens.


A Profuse Upstart spends what e're he had,
And then considers that his case was bad:
Making Acknowledgment in's own behalf
His Father Feasts him with the fatted Calf.
Abhorrence of a Misdemeanure past
Gains pity, and forgiveness at the last.
The BELLY-GOD. Icon 44. Cap. 16.
-- Voluptatem commendat rariorusus.


A Pampered Wretch, that Robbed each Element
To give his Craving Appetite content,
Less kind then Dogs to Lazarus at's Door,
Wants Water now, who Swam in Wine before,
Small Satisfaction in excess is found,
We are most uneasy, when we most abound.
The GOOD PHYSICIAN. Icon 45. Cap. 17.
(...)
Luc 17. 11



Ten Lepers cleans'd from their Impurities,
By Christ's true Magisterial remedies,
One of all these, with thanks returns alone,
That Men have grateful Hearts it is ten to one!
Who so unworthy is as not to own
A Courtesy, should have no future done.
The SEPARATIST. Icon 46. Cap. 18.
Ne attingito me, ego sum sanctior te.


A Pharisee, with Stentorian voice, and motion,
Out-words the Publican at his Devotion;
Who siniting's Breast is justified, we are
Neither to be Presumptuous, nor Despair.
Humility will purchase a good Name,
When Ostentation must draw off with shame.
The IMPORTUNATE BEGGAR. Icon 47. Cap. 18.
It clamor Coelo --
Luc (...) ^2



A Blind man, understanding Christ was nigh,
Is heard once and again aloud to Cry,
Ah mercy, mercy, Lord, mercy, he says,
His Eyes restored are, for his Eye of Faith.
Reiterated Supplications move
So Strongly, a Good man cannot choose but love.
The ACTIVE PVBLICAN. Icon 48. Cap. 19.
-- In est sua gratia parvis.
Luc. 19. 1



A Publican, Diminutive for Height,
Out-runs the rest, to have of Christ a sight;
And Heavenward gets by climbing up a Tree,
That him who brought Salvation he might see.
Christ dines with him: be he a Publican,
Alms and just Deeds make the accepted Man.
The AGONY. Icon 49. Cap. 22.
(...)


Christ, with submission to his Fathers will,
(Which he was always ready to fulfill)
Beggs that the Cup might pass, of Dregs brim full,
O how had then our Sins been White as Wool!
Even when his Soul with grief was sore oppressed
Thy Will be done on Earth, was his request.
The SPIRITUAL TOUCHSTONE, Icon 50. Cap. 23.
Sibyl. Orac.
Templi velum scindetur, and medio die nox
erit tenebrosa in tribus horis, and morte
morietur, tribus diebus somno suscepto.

Luc. 23. 25.



For Sins of Deepest Die, and Crimson hue
Who calls to mind Christ spit on by a Jew,
Bearing that Cross from whence a Theif is freed
And not his own Heart feel (if Flesh) to bleed?
So to the Shambles is the dumb Sheep brought
As was the Shepherd here, who us has bought.
The APPARITION. Icon 51. Cap. 24.
Sibyl. Orac.
Et tunc ab inferis regressus ad lucem
Veniet, Resurrectionis principio ostenso.

Lucs 24 13.



After his Resurrection Christ is seen
By two that his Disciples long had been;
They know him not, and there is good reason why,
They did ill-know him when he was to Die.
Few are contented to partake in Woes,
Self interest will to it self stick close.
The EXALTATION. Icon 52. Cap. 24.
(...).
Luc. 24. 49



All now Fulfilled, and the Great Ransom paid,
(Each individual Man has disobeyed)
When as the Comforter was to be sent,
Christ blessing his, ascend's the Firmament.
When Way, and Truth, and Life are fled and gone,
He that the Spirit ^as, is not alone.
St. JOHN.
BOANERGES. Icon 53. Cap. 1.
Qualem ministrum fulminis ali^em, etc.
(...) annes



ST. John the choice Disciple, though he Write
The last of all the Evangelists, his flight
Soar's high, whose Raptures are so to excess,
That nothing but an Eagle can express;
Whose Wing, the Writer with a Pen supplies,
To Treat of nothing but Sublimities.
The WEDDING. Icon 54. Cap. 2.
(...).
Joan. 2.



A Wedding Solemnized where many Dine,
christ works a wonder, and makes Water Wine:
Wine at a nuptial Feast is best allowed,
To clear an Aspect, and expel a Cloud.
They had been less astonished then they were,
Had they regarded the True Vine was there.
The QUERIST Icon 55. Cap. 3.
Scire hominis nihil est.


Christ, holding talk with Nicodemus, finds,
Our knowledge shallow is, and dark our minds:
Man's everlasting welfare, and true good,
Is not by sense and reason understood.
We blind^d are, and walk as in a maze,
Illumination is a spark of Grace.
The OPPORTUNITY. Icon 56. Cap. 4.
Fons perennis.
Joan. 4. 5.



A Woman, (a Samaritan by Nation)
Near Jacobs Well, finds (to her admiration)
A Well of Life, and learns her Creed in brief
From him, who was of all Instructers Chief.
He that could tell her all that she had done,
Was a sufficient Ground to build upon.
The MIRACLE Icon 57. Cap. 6.
(...)


Five Thousand Hungry Souls! Compassion moves,
Christ feeds them with Two Fishes and Five Loaves:
They Would make him King, t'extreames the Vulgar start,
Fill but their Belly, and you have their Heart.
Omnipotence no limits has, no stop,
To whom all things are as the Buckets drop.
The LEGISLATORS COMPARED. Icon 58. Cap. 8.
Deprendi miserum est. --
Joan 8. 2



One of the Weaker Sex, is caught in the Act,
Christ spares the Woman, but Reproves the Fact,
Moses Condemns Her, but that Law must cease
That Thundering came, Christ's Gospel is of Peace.
If Heaven should Strike as often as we Offend,
The Sinful World would soon be at an end.
The EARNEST. Icon 59. Cap. 11.
(...).
Joan. 12. 1



Lazarus laid under Ground, at his long Home,
Commanded to Arise comes out of's Tomb:
This was too hard for Mortal Man to do;
But he that Raised Himself can Raise Us too.
Such Energie proceeds from Power Divine,
From him who does with his Fathers Brightness Shine.
The TRAITOR. Icon 60. Cap. 18.
(...)
(...) 3



The Traitor Judas (pre-design'd to this)
Betraies his Lord and Master with a Kiss,
Peter (not always so Courageous,) here
Fights, and sends Malchus from him with one Ear.
Under pretense of Friend-ship to betray,
Is to be falls the most Notorious way.
The GRAND EXEMPLAR. Icon 61. Cap. 19.
Sibyl, Orac.
Dabit ad verber a simpliciter sanctum dorsum,
Christ prophetabis cujus te palma cecidit.

Joan. 19. 1



Jesus our Savior! Christ our Righteousness!
How did our Weight of Sin thy Soul oppress?
Since then our Scourgings upon thee were spent
Thy Church while Militant, must be content.
No Sorrow like to this, no Pain so great,
For us those drops of Blood did Jesus sweat.
The RANSOM. Icon 62. Cap. 19.
Velut Ovis coram tonsoribus obmutescens.


Clad in a Purple Robe (to cause Derision)
Christ bears his Crown of Thorns with meek submission
Let him be Crucified while they Cry out
The Magistrate is governed by the Rout.
So when a Breach is made the Torrent gains
Upon the Neigh-bouring Banks and drowns the Plains.
The ASSURANCE. Icon 63. Cap. 19.
Novi redemptorem meum vivere.
Joan. (...) 38



Ari^athea's Joseph has regard
To the sure recompense of the reward;
And therefore decently he Christ Interr's
With whom he is to Reign above the Spheres,
Duty performed with Love in manner fit
Has a Remuneration follow it.
ACTS.
The MISSION. Icon 64. Cap. 2.
(...)
Actor. 2. 1



Christ's Farewell promise of the Holy Ghost
To his, now like a Ship with Tempests tossed,
Is here made good: the Spirit Utterance gives,
This Man rejects the Gospel, that believes.
The way to our Salvation is abused
When Life is set before us and refused
The HEAVENLY ALMONERS. Icon 65. Cap. 3.
Orandum est ut sit men's sana in Corpore sano.


An Impotent Poor Cripple at the Gate
Of The Temple, asks an Alms, as there he sat:
Peter replys, Money I seldom see,
I the Name of Christ I give thy Legs to thee.
Who gives what he is Able to bestow,
Shall for the Will and Gift accepted go.
The HYPOCRITE. Icon 66. Cap. 5.
Rarus sermo illis, and magna libido tacendi,
Atque supercilio brevior coma; verius ergo,
Et magis ingenue Beribonius. --

Actor. 5. 1



A Compact made by two starch't Hypocrites
To keep the Church bare, and withold her Rights:
Trust not a Brother; there were ever they,
That put their Nay for yea, and yea for Nay.
Deceit effected through Hypocrisy,
Is to call God to witness to a Lie.
The BEATIFICAL VISION. Icon 67. Cap. 7.
Jugum meum est facile and Onus leve.
Actor. 7 54



The Sanction of the Law set up by Moses,
Foretold by Christ, who no such yoke imposes,
St. Stephen proving past, and of no force,
They Stone, upon his Knees, without remorse.
Beholding Christ stand ready to receive,
The Proto-martyr took a joyful leave.
The PROSELYTE Icon 68. Cap. 8.
(...).
Actor. 8. 25



An Ethiopian Eunuch, meanly fraught
With Literature, is to St. Philip brought,
And made a Proselyte of Christ; however
It Is better be a Christian late then never.
While we the Law endeavor to fulfill
Conversion is not in our Choice, or Will.
The CONSTERNATION. Icon 69. Cap. 9.
Si non errasset fecerat ille minus.
Actor. 9. 3.



Saul going to Damascus, is struck down,
And in a dreadful manner told his own:
Saul, Jesus Cries, do Persecute me Saul?
Yes, Lord, but Die'd for thee, when he was Paul.
O Depth of goodness! here with Kind constraint,
The Chief of Sinners made the Chiefest Saint
The DREAM. Icon 70. Cap. 10.
Theologia est animoe salus.
Actor. 10. 1



Cornelius, to inform himself the better
Which was the true Religion, sends for Peter:
Who in a Dream is told what God would do
Not for the Jew alone, but Gentile too.
No Industry too great, no Labor lost
To learn what will at last advantage most.
The RELEASE. Icon 71. Cap. 12.
Preces and lachrymoe sunt arma Ecclesioe.
Act. 12. 5



St. James Cut off at Cruel Herod's word,
St. Peter next is Destined to the Sword;
But Prayer guards him from Persecutions Storms,
And the Proud Wretch is eaten up with Worms.
Gods Glory taken to himself Profane,
His Rhetorique proves his Fall, his Tongue his Bane.
The STOUT CHRISTIAN. Icon 72. Cap. 14.
-- Per saxa per ignes,
Actor. 14. 7.



The Fiery Trial grown exceeding hot,
And all Compassion lost, or quite forgot,
St. Paul at Lystra is resolvd to stay,
To make a Cripple throw his Crutch away.
A good cause Perseverance propagates,
And fear of what may do us Harm, abates.
The SHIPWRECK. Icon 73. Cap. 27.
In longum nunc, Paul, vale. --
Actor. 27. (...)



The World is but an Inn, best Friends must part,
And this was Paul's case, though with heavy Heart:
Rocks, Quicksands, Gulfes, Waves dashing over and over,
Yet all well though a Serpent on the Shore.
To settle upon Earth we purpose wrong,
A Tabernacle has no Durance long.
REVELATIONS.
The PERFECT NUMBER. Icon 74. Cap. 1.
-- Numero Deus impare gandet.
A^oc. 2. 9



SEven Candlesticks Sev'n Churches represent,
By being of pure Gold, the truth is meant:
Those Asiatick Hieroglyphics gain.
Belief in such as own that Christ does Reign.
Types may of Heaven here some faint Shadows bear,
We shall view things hereafter as they are.
The THRONE. Icon 75. Cap. 4.
-- Inopem me copia fe cit.
Apoc. 4. 2.



If Eye and Ear, their Organs have too Weak
To See or Hear, how should the Tongue then speak
The bliss that Saints enjoy? or how St. John
Give us a definition of the Throne?
So when the Worlds Eye is most clear and bright,
Ours fail, as dazeled by too strong a light.
The JOY UNSPEAKABLE. Icon 76. Cap. 6.
-- Sed Luna videt, sed Sydera testes.
Apoc. 6. 1.



Conquest, War Plenty, Death, on Horse back sit,
And all things pass away when Christ thinks fit:
Joys Sublunary fade, all Worldly things
Must be dissolved when He his Summons brings.
Occult and Sealed up Sins will then lie bare,
Thrice happy they that in the Lamb have share.
The ATONEMENT. Icon 77. Cap. 8.
Pa cabunt ipsum thura precesque Jovem.
Apoc. 8. (...).



Seven Seals, Sev'n Trumpets, and Sev'n Angels, note
Plagues poured from Viols with Gods vengeance hot;
But one with Incense on the Altar laid
Makes an Atonement that they might be staid.
Gods attribute of Mercy most is seen,
When Justice has her Sword drawn out, and keen.
The APOSTATE. Icon 78. Cap. 9.
-- Terque quaterque rotatus
Mittitur ad stygias tormento fortius nmbras.

Apoc. 4. 1.



Proud Lucifer when the Fifth Trumpet sounds,
Is hurled down with such force that he rebounds:
Thus that Apostatizeing Angel fell,
(From highest Heaven to the profoundest Hell.)
To him the Keys of it are due, for Tophet
The Wicked share, be they King, Priest, or Prophet.
ETERNITY. Icon 79. Cap. 10.
(...)
Apoc. 10. 1.



Behold an Angel with a Book in's hand,
Prepared to Cut off Time, at Gods Command:
St. John receives the Book, and bid to Eat,
What few their Study make, he makes his Meat.
How ought we then Good Works to lay in store?
Man must survive when Time shall be no more.
The WITNESSES. Icon 80. Cap. 11.
-- Stirpem and genus omne nepotum
Exerent odiis. --

Apoc. 11 3



Two Witnesses, in Scarlet, Prophecy,
And by the Beast are both Condemned to Die:
Inveterate Malice opposition makes,
(And what it knows Destructive, undertakes.)
Where lies the conquest it is not hard to tell,
Sure they that Conquer Death it self, excel.
The PRODIGIES. Icon 81. Cap. 13.
Bellua multorum capitum.
Apoc. (...). 2.



St. John beholds a Beast rise from the Main
(The like to which none shall behold again)
With Seven Heads, and Ten Horns; an other birth
As monstrous from the center of the Earth.
No formidable Creatures so deterr
The Chosen, but at last they banish fear.
The SPIRITS. Cap. 16.
-- Nos penes est vasti custodia mundi
Queis jus vertendi cardinis omne datum.



The Ministering Spirits act, if God direct,
In order to the good of his Elect:
Vessels of Wrath upon their Foes are poured,
By which his Majesty's the more adored.
Had Virtue no Reward, no Torture Sin,
Man of all Creatures better nere had bin.
The ANTICHRIST. Icon 83. Cap. 18.
-- Fuerint solamina nobis,
Haec fuerint nobis praemia. --

Apoc. 2^. 2



Imperious Babylon here her downfall takes,
And Universal Monarchy now shakes;
The Cup of Trembling makes her Grandees faint,
But this is Satisfaction to the Saint.
The Sentence past, no hope of a Reprieve;
They gnash (too late) at what they must believe.
The DOOM. Icon 84. Cap. 20.
Flectere si nequeo superos Acheronta movebo.
Apoc. 20. 1.



The Devil for a Thousand Years in's Chain,
Was to be set at's liberty again,
But grown Out-ragious that his time was short,
Return he must to his Infernal Court.
Privation of that bliss the Righteous have,
Add's Torment to the Doom, God Satan gave*
The IMMARCESCIBLE CROWN. Icon 85. Cap. 21.
(...).
Apoc. 21 1



The New Jerasalem, that City above,
Where nothing dwell's but Purity, and Love,
Need's not the Lamp with which we first begun
Our bold attempt; Gods Glory Exceeds the Sun.
Ineffable Contentment grief expels
He being ours in whom all fullness dwells.
(...).
Finis Novi Test.

