THE Babylonish Baptist. OR H.G. Contradicting H.G.
In his Book styled, LIGHT from the Son of Righteousness; which is proved, mere
Confusion and Darkness.
Unprejudiced Reader,
WE have a Witness in Heaven, That we have Love to the Souls of all Men; and
bear no Ill Will to these Baptists: Howbeit, the Implacable Enmity of diverse of
them is such; that in Times of Quietness, it has been the manner of some of
their Chieftains, to be Quarrelling, and spreading their Confused Pamphlets
against us, and the Light Within confessed by us; as being Offended and Fretted
at our present Liberty, which we have Publicly to Confess the True Light;
though obtained through Deep Sufferings: Howbeit, the Fruitlesness of Coertion
has not been manifested by these Men's Valor, or Pretended Faithfulness in
Suffering Times. We see, the more they Strive, the more they involve themselves
in Babylonish Confusions and Self-Contradiction, to the Overthrow of their
Cause, and their own Discredit therein.

Some of the Baptists Doctrines and Contradictions, Collected out of their H.
G's Book in their own words, and briefly Observed as follows.
H. G. says, viz. I utterly deny, that this Light, which all men have from the
Glorious Creator, is a Saving Light, page 8.

H. G. in Contradiction says, I really believe, That the Lord Jesus, as the
Eternal Word, has given Light, or Enlightened all Men and Women that come into
the World, p. 8.

Animadversion, The Light or Life of the Eternal Word, which is the Light of
Men, John 1. 4. is Spiritual and Divine, as is that Word; and therefore Saving
to all that truly Obey it.

H. G. The great Darkness of these Men, who cry up Light and Power Within, this
Wile of Satan, and Cheat of Antichrist, p. 31.

H. G. Contra. The Lord Jesus, as the Eternal Word, Enlighteneth all men. This
Light is the Substance of the Law -- The Candle of the Lord: It does Convince
of Sin, p. 9. If Heathens follow it, they would shine in Just Living. The Work
of Faith with Power -- I do maintain, that Faith is required and must be
wrought with Power in the Hearts, p. 15, 16.

Anim. What Horrible Blasphemy is it then, to term our crying up the Light and
Power of Christ Within, the Wile of Satan, and Cheat of Antichrist? And how
plainly hereby Confuted? We have Cause to look upon those Heathens, that follow
the Light or Gift of God Within, to be More Godly and Better Christians, then
many of these Baptists.

H. G. observes from John 16. 7. That the Spirit or Blessed Comforter cannot be
the Savior, p. 46.

H. G. Contrad. Till the coming of his Spirit and Grace with Power in my Heart,
for the Binding of the Strong Man Satan, and Killing of my Corruptions, my Soul
was not brought out of the Horrible Pit, p. 16. Having wrought this Glorious
Work of Regeneration, p. 17.

Anim. Then its the Spirit and Power of Christ, that effects and works
Salvation through the Work of Regeneration, see Tit. 3. 5. which is not done
merely by Christ's outward Sufferings; though we cannot believe, that Satan is
bound in this man, while he is in Satan's work, Blaspheming Christ's Light
Within, and Belying us.

H. G. The Ordinance of the Lord's Supper you call Bread and Wine, p. 19.

H. G. Contrad. The Sign -- The Shadow ( speaking of their Ordinances) the
Substance being Christ, p. 53, 54.

Anim. Your pretended Lord's Supper then, is no more then Bread and Wine, the
Sign, the Shadow; and therefore their Continuation of no Necessity in the true
Church, which has received Christ the Substance, the Living Bread, who
Spiritually communicates his Flesh and Blood, or Fruit of the Heavenly Vine,
without your Shaddows; And this is our Lord's Supper, that we partake of; and
our Baptism is Spiritual, 1. Cor. 12. 13. Ephesians. 4. 5. and as in 1 Pet. 3. 21.
its said; to the which also the (...), Antitype, that now saves us, even
Baptism, agrees.

H. G. The End of this Ordinance does remain, notwithstanding the Pourings
forth of the Spirit; and therefore the Ordinance must needs remain; which is to
Confirm our Faith in the true Savior, and to keep up our Love to him, p. 21.

Answ, What Faith and Love are these of theirs, which are confirmed and kept up
by Bread and Wine? And what Idolatry and Diversion from the Spirit does their
Doctrine tend to herein? Surely the Holy Spirit can best supply the said End,
see Gal. 5. 22.

H. G. again is very Fierce and Rash for their Water Baptism (or Plunging
Peoplee in Water) where he says, Whosoever brings any other Gospel, let him be
Accursed, p. 24.

Answ. Hereby he has Cursed all the People of God, and Sincere-Minded, both
Protestants, and all others in the World, who Oppose, and come not under the
Baptists Dipping or Plunging people in Water: Lord forgive him; he is very
Uncharitable herein. For our Parts, we cannot believe their Baptism to be
either the Baptism of Christ, or Gospel, or of Necessity and Available to
Salvation.

H. G. denies the True Savior to be the Light and Power; I affirm ( says he)
that Jesus Christ is a Man, consisting of Flesh and Bone, p. 30, 31. Humane, p.
33. Finite, Weak, subject to Passion, as we are, p. 94. The Inward Power is not
the Christ distinct from the Humane Nature; the true Christ consisting of a
Body of Flesh and Bone, p. 31, 34.

H. G. Contrad. John declared plainly, that Christ was before him, being from
Everlasting -- He was before Abraham was -- The Son of God by Eternal
Generation -- Truly God -- David's Lord, p. 35. The Lord Jesus; The Eternal
Word, p. 8. The Emanuel, p. 32. Christ is the Son of the Living God, p. 33.

Anim. Therefore its both Unscriptural and Absurd to assert, That Jesus Christ
consists of a Humane Body of Flesh and Bone, or is Finite (seeing he is
before all things, and by him all things consist, Col. ^. 17.) and inconsistent
both with the Eternal Glory of the Son of God, which he had with the Father
before the World began, wherein he is Glorified; and his Body is Glorious and
Spiritual: They should have said, That he took upon him that Body prepared for
him; and not, that he consists (or is made up) of a Humane Body of Flesh and
Bone: but at length, they are made to grant the Deity of Christ, more then
formerly; though to their own Confutation, as before.

H. G. The principle of the Quakers concerning the Light within; the Impurity
and Vileness of which Principle I may further make appear, p. 48.

H. G. Contrad. The Word, considered as Creator, is the True Light, which
lights every man that comes into the World, page 48.

Anim. Its no less then Blasphemy to charge this Principle (to wit the Light of
the Eternal Word, the Creator) with Vileness and Impurity: For the Word, and
its Light, is both Divine, Eternally Pure, and Unchangeably Incorruptible.

H. G. God forbid that I should ever own their Principle of the Light in all,
that does so clearly tend to the razing out the grand Fundamentals of the
Gospel, p. 52.

H. G. Contrad. Praises and Halelujah to God forever, who has given us that
Witness in our selves, of which thou speak, p. 54, 55. which Witness (his
Sister spoke of) was the Light which Reproves for Sin, to own and believe in
the Light, that enlighteneth every man that comes into the World, p. 8. and 29.

Anim. See what a Sad Pass these Men are grown to; and what kind of Prayers
they offer to God, against his own Light, or Witness within; and how contrary
to the Gospel Spirit and Light they are.

READER,
IN their said Book, styled, Light from the Son of Righteousness, there are
also many more Absurdities, and Perversions of Scripture, with False
Accusations against ut; viz. of Denying the Man Christ, the Resurrection, and
many other things, which I have more fully answered elsewhere. But for
Expedition, this Paper was abstracted, to be sent into Barbados, where H. G's
said Book is like to be Concerned; as on the Account of his own Natural Sister
(as he calls her) whom Un-Naturally, and Un-Brotherly, he has Printed his Book
(in part) against, for her Wholesome Advice, in her Letter, to Own and Believe in
the True Light, which Enlightens every Man, etc. I have writ a Full Answer unto
their said Book, which as yet I forbear to divulge, being informed, that some
of the particular Baptists are about to bring forth more against us; which if
they do, I hope further to Examine them; not questioning but they will be, both
Inconsistent, and Contradictory, as they use to be, whilst they Contend in
their Prejudice and Envy, which Blinds them; The Lord give them a Penitent
Sense thereof.

London, the 27th of the 9th Month, 1672. From a Well-wisher of all men, who
desires to be at Peace with all, so far as it may consist with Truth. G. W.

THE END.

