IHS

URANIA, OR A DESCRIPTION OF THE PAINTING Of the TOP of the Theater at OXON, As
the ARTIST laid his Design.

By TO. WHITEHALL, Fellow of Merton College.

-- Pictoribus atque poetis
Quidlibet, etc. --
Licensed and Entered according to Order.

DIEV ET MON DROIT
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
royal blazon or coat of arms

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Ratcliffe and Thomas Daniel, and are to be sold by
them at their House in Newstreet betwixt Shooe-lane and Fetter-lane. 1669.

URANIA, OR A DESCRIPTION of the PAINTING Of the TOP of the THEATER at OXON, As
the ARTIST laid his Design.
THe day's our own! though some might seem to doubt*
Whether Augustus Caesar's days are out;
Had not the Lion, Bull, and savage Bear
Contended in his Amphitheater
With Bore, Rhinoceros and Elephant,
That did at once Spectators please, and daunt.
Or Creatures cruel and more fierce than these,
When Man to Man became a Sacrifice;
While acclamations with a grand applause
Endangered all to crown the Victors brows:
And the defeated Champion took his death,
Not from the Foe, but their unkinder breath:
Bleeding afresh, and grovelling in his gore,
More deeply wounded than he was before:
And all this heat, and all this noise, to tell
The World, This Day did Pilades prize well.
NO ROMAN Foyl here, nor Olympic Game,
Nor Table hanged up to Nemaean fame:
The Graces and the Muses more befit
A Patron both to Reason and to Wit:
Whose benefaction, whose munificence
Might upon Earth immortalize a Prince.
Immense as the Ocean, rich as the Indian Fleet,
Were Tagus and Pactolus sands in it;
Admired more than those Argonauts of Greece
When they brought home their weighty golden fleece.
None but a Noble and Heroic breast
Bestow's Gifts outlive Baggs condemned to the Chest.
Deathbed Donations are but cold and faint,
The Living only give without constraint.
Such Actions when they shall be scanned and read
Merit beyond the Egyptian Pyramid.
DRaw back the curtain then, and let us behold
A sight more welcome than Ben's misers gold*
Where first the ingenious Artist makes it known
He treads in no man's tract, his path's his own.
For though Antiquity be venerable,
Yet whereas anciently they had a cable
Or cordage from this pilaster to that
To knit together and keep tight the sheet,
For it is presumed their theater so large
(Though sooner built perhaps and at less charge)
That they knew not the expense of tile or lead
Against the injuries of weather over head:
So here a cord-mould gilded which does reach
In length and breadth cross to prevent a breach,
Supports a red large drapery, supposed
To cover all the roof where it is housed.
But now it is furld up by the Genii round
About the roof, by the walls, that those 'oth ground
May deem it is open air above, a way
For the Arts and Sciences 'ith' clouds to stray.
At whose solicitation Truth descend's
To their assembly, as unto her Friends:
And at this Festival observe eftsoons
How the other Genii sport with their festoones
Of bays and laurel, out of which they make
Ever green Garlands for their Lovers sake.
Which hieroglyphically seems to say
Rewards and Honor too attend this day.
TO make this Convents happiness complete
Their grand Disturbers must have a defeat:
Envy with Rapine and Brutality
By the Genii opposing them are made to fly.
Thrown headlong from the Clouds, and driven thence
By Prudence, Fortitude, and Eloquence.
This conquest to proclaim as Omen good
The Trumpet sound's and they disperse abroad.
THe day still ours, 'twill now be requisite
(As it is with Muster-masters after fight)
To rally up our force, and as by the pole,
Distinctly in order to run over the Role.
Where, lest we should by the Heathen be outdone
And such as deifie the Sun and Moon
Theology in reason must begin
As Spur to Virtue, and as Curb to Sin.
SEe then a Book with seven seals in her hand,
While she implores Truth on her part to stand.
On one side is the Law Moysaicall
Veiled, and the Tables we the Decalogue call,
Which lest we should neglect as slighting God
Truth points out to us with her iron Rod.
NExt (as inseparable) does appear
The Gospel with a Cross and Chalice, near
Her, History is holding up her Pen,
And dedicating it to truth, as men
Old writings left, and fragments which respect
Her Stories whence a Book she might collect.
VIew Poesy divine at the other end
With Harp like David's tuned to what he penned.
THen come the Mathematick Sciences,
Grounded on Demonstration, not on guess.
Astronomy with her Celestial globe
Adorned (as are the rest) with decent Robe.
With her terrestrial Orb Geography,
With Square and Plum-line stands Geometry.
Arithmetique and Architecture pass
Neighbors, and Perspective with Optic glass.
ON the other side Law seated like a Queen,
With Scepter and Records that long have been,
Patents and Evidences sure and strong,
With whom goe's Rhetorique hand in hand along
With an attending Genius to produce
The scales of Justice to prevent abuse:
A palm branch as an Emblem of Reward
For virtuous Actions, and as to regard
Of power to punish vice, or to remit
The Roman Fasces are the mark of it.
Physic by Aesculapiu's staff is known,
And Serpent twisted, ('it is a subtle one)
By her an Herbarist does Truth implore
To teach her Plants for every grief and sore.
A Chemist, with a bolt head, and before
Is placed a Chyrurgion, with his store
Of Instruments, all to dissect a brain,
Laid open, (O Minerva don't disdain!)
SOme more there are; see Logic taking hold
On Argument; and if she is baffled, scould.
Music, with a note-paper, and a Lute
A little Boy playing upon a Flute.
These two are Emblems (known to Apollo more)
Of the most antique Music heretofore.
PRinting is with a Box of letters, and
A Form that is ready set 'ith' other hand:
Where lest the Printing-presse should vacant lie
Are several damp sheets hanging up to dry.
In The middle, as descending from above
Truth in a cloud sits; (harmless as a Dove)
One hand a palm branch hold's for Victory:
In the other is the Sun in's radiancy.
So bright Truth seems obscured to us below,
But every figure yield's the brighter show.
And those three Prodigies we named before
Now weary of the place, are got to the door.
ENvy with snaky hair, hags breasts, squint eyes,
Pale venomous color, strong, but ugly thighs:
(Of which one disappear's, as if the beast
Had fed upon her self, to make a Feast)
With rivell'd skin, confounded at the sight
Of Pallas shield with Gorgon's head to affright.
To which she would oppose her angry snakes
But by precipitation downward make's.
THe same Fate Ignorance attend's Arts hater
Best represented to us by a Satyr
Scoffing at what she cannot understand,
But quelled by Hermes Caducean wand.
WIth grinning teeth, sharp fangs, and fiery eyes,
Besmeared with blood of Friends and Enemies,
Rapine appears: a flambeau and dagger are
His weapons of delight, with arm stripped bare.
Wolf-like devouring, lying still in wait,
Unseen 'till now, (except in 48.)
He Magistracy hate's, abhor's the Gown,
But an Herculean Genius strikes him down.
THese to the life are drawn so curiously
That the Beholder would become all Eye:
Or at the least an Argus; so sublime
A phant'sie makes essays to Heaven to climb.
That future ages must confess they owe
To STREETER more than Michael Angelo.
To the Most Honorable JAMES Duke of ORMOND His Grace, our most Renowned Lord,
and CHANCELLOR.
ILLUSTRIOUS SIR,
WHile Arms and Arts contend
Which of them most stands poor Urania's friend,
The Graces at a meeting all conclude
They own, with thanks, this fair vicissitude;
That what the Crosier and the Miter deigned
May by the sword and helmet be maintained.
So we successively have our Commander,
An Aristotle, and an Alexander.
Our Theater though it is beautiful, in you
Alone it lies to make it vocal, now:
And things inanimate so to inspire
As Orhpeus did with his enchanting Lyre.
Your various tongues may teach youth how to please
More than Quintilian or Demosthenes.
And when the Sophister is at a stand
Your Genius brings fresh topics to his hand.
TIme was when that same Antichristian word
Mecaenas sounded some outlandish Lord;
When half a dram of learning at one time
Was Language of the Beast (and no small crime)
Who then expected Exile and restraint
Should right the Muses when they made complaint?
Indulgent Providence! thou for their good
Have one at home preserved, and one abroad.

