Miscellaneous POEMS, With some Remarks on the Death OF King Charles the II.

And the Happy SUCCESSION OF King James the II. IN A POEM TO THE Magistracy of
ENGLAND.

By JOHN WHITEHALL.

-- Pictoribus atque Poetis
Quidlibet audendi semper fuit aequa potestas. Hor.
London: Printed for T. Salusbury at the Black-Lion-Post-Office between the two
Temple-Gates in Fleet Street, 1685.

To the HONORABLE Sir CHRISTOPHER BUCKLE, Knt. One of His Majesty's Justices
of the Peace for the County of SUSSEX.
SIR,
I Durst not have presumed to have prefixed so great a Name to such mean Poems,
had I not well experienced the easiness of Your Nature, and known it a far
greater difficulty to me to err, than to You not to forgive. Should I attempt
(an impossibility) to write Your Encomiums, I should hazard the second loss of
Your Favor, since I am certain that You are so far from courting public
Respect and Fame, that Your greatest Ambition is to live and die in silence.
But that will not, cannot be, for your Virtues (more powerfully than the Sun)
dart their Beams even through the thickest Cloud, and Your very Name is a
compendious Chronicle of Honor. There are but few Men who have not their One
particular Virtue, but fewer (like You) have All. In One we find a Meek Nature,
in Another Valor, in a Third and Fourth Learning and Loyalty; but in You they
are all conspicuous: And it were less necessary than difficult to distinguish
which Virtue is the most eminent. You need no greater Heralds of Your Glory
than these; however You have other Blessings (indeed vast and real Blessings)
Your happy Offspring, who honor their Extraction, and are living Monuments of
their Religious Parents. How then an You lie hid? You, whom even he late best
and greatest Monarch of the Earth, did so far observe, as to point You our to
no less a Dignity than the Guardianship of those two dearest Darlings of his
Soul, Religion and Peace. Happy King, breast with so tender a Servant; happy
Servant, under so gracious a Monarch: A Monarch, whose Graces, as they were
still the Praise, Wonder, and Admiration of the general World, so of You in
particular. Neither did You less imitate than admire them, and most especially
his Mercy; which encourages me to present these Poems to Your Worship, begging
both Your Acceptance and Patronage, under which I shall be able to withstand
the sharpest Censure of the impartial Critic. How happy should I be, if they
(like You) would weigh the disadvantages of my Learning! I cannot (like the
Prophet) thrive so well with Pulse and Water, as Princely Poets do with
delicious Libraries (...). I neither expect so much, nor wish it. No, my
greatest hope is, That You would vouchase me the acceptance of these Trifles,
and the utmost extent of my Ambition is to acknowledge my self

Your Honors most humble Servant, John Whitehall.

Miscellaneous Poems.
To the Honorable Magistracy of England, Short Remarks on the Death of King
CHARLES II. and the happy Succession of King JAMES II.
YE Wise, ye Great, ye Valiant Worthies, Hail!
Hail to the Gown and Sword!
True Friends and Servants of our breathless Lord
Why do ye look so drooping and so pale?
Why do ye start and tremble so?
Why do so many doubtful grow?
What more then what is done could we wish Heavn' to do?
Peace to the Sacred Dust. -- But wipe off Tears;
By this Mankind may see,
Death is impartial, frail Mortality,
And Monarchs have a limit to their Years.
II.
Most wondrous was the Nature of his Death,
And the distinction of his Fate
Was mavelous and great,
When he resigned his Breath.
Returns from Death are denied common men
But when His summoned Soul was on the wing
He sojourned back again
To give us all the blessings of a King:
Witness, y'Eternal Powers above,
How tender was this Monarchs Love!
Who would awaken after his decease,
Of Immortality himself divest,
And break his Welcome, his Eternal Rest,
To bless the wavering Land with happy Peace.
III.
Be cheerful then (Great Souls) let only such despair
Who do the Justice of their Monarch fear;
Such who can teach Rebellion with a Zeal,
Who inward motions of Sedition feel,
Who bless the Halcyon-days of Anarchy,
Who Plot, (but fruitless their Designs will be)
Both to confound the King and Empire too,
And the old Chaos of a Commonwealth renew:
Let them despond this day to see,
While Ye from Faction free
Enjoy your old Pindarique Liberty,
Whose Honors are engaged thus much to do,
To guard the King, whose Sacred Life's a Guard to You.
IV.
In the imagination of the Crowd
Britain like Daniel's short-lived Leopard fell;
And 'twould have pleased the Factious Rabble well,
Had Heaven so much allowed:
Into a wild Confusion, they
Would cast the shaken Nation; in a Flood
Of Royal Blood
Designed to have washed the Crown away,
And have brought Bondage in for Liberty,
Might such things heens'd be,
Might Art so much on Nature win,
To extinguish fixed Stars, or to keep Meteors in:
V.
But lo! our Monarchs care,
Who would not see the Empire ravished, and
By our forced Mother stand,
As though he unconcerned were:
But when with an extreme immoderate heat
He found the frantic world begin to burn and sweat,
YOU, ye Noble Souls, he chose,
Whose Loyalty should cancel those
Who a Friends name did bear,
Yet basely did design to play the Ravisher.
VI.
He did Himself (e're all was to Confusion hurled)
From Faction the Augaean Stables clear;
While He the Crown did wear
He calmed the stormy world.
Seditious Waves did cease to roar;
Fanatics and his Passions he had tamed so well,
'Twas difficult for either to Rebel:
His Justice conquered many, but his Mercy more.
VII.
He sleeps: however balance Grief with Joy,
For Providence designs not to destroy,
But the succeeding Prophet Heaven will
With the dead Prophet's Spirit doubled fill,
And here is Elisha for Elijah still.
How great the Wound? how healing was the Balm?
How fierce the Storm? how timely was the calm?
What two extremes of Joy and Grief we find?
As this weighs down, so that supports Mankind.
VIII.
With this well seasoned Act of Providence
It Is easy to dispense,
Britain may bear it with an even sense.
Propitious Heaven has been wondrous kind,
And has great Blessings for the Land designed,
To take the best of Kings, and leave the best behind.
Oh happy, mourning Isle,
Which have an equal cause to weep and smile,
Had not this humbling grief been here allowed,
Excess of Joy would have made Britain proud,
But it was mingled well,
How great a Monarch rose? how great a Monarch fell?
IX.
Happy Succession! He who the Crown does wear
Is more than barely of the Kingdoms Heir,
His Brother's Majesty's were all his due,
Honors to his vast Soul no limits are,
He will Inherit all his Virtues too.
Peace and Religion Darlings of the Dead,
His dearest best twin Favorites shall find
This Monarch (like his Promise) merciful and kind,
By him they will be (as his own Off spring) nourished.
This fresh Addition to our Triumph brings,
And makes me here engage Whitehall shall be the KING'S.
FAITH.
I.
WHat is this Faith, of which so little can
Work Miracles beyond the Faith of Man?
Which can destroy and save;
Substance of things we hope to have:
By which strong Devils have ejected been
The evidence of things unseen
Which seems it self to be
Almighty as the Deity:
By which we know, our Maker's word gave birth
Both to the Heavens, the Seas and Earth,
His Fiat brought this Fabric forth.
II.
It is the Soul and Wings of Prayer,
Which makes it swift as a Post Angel fly
The Embassage to bear,
It pierces the Almighty's Ear,
And allows God no power to deny.
Like Jacob it will plead, and not in vain,
But wrestle till it does the Blessing gain,
While Saul (a Stranger unto it)
Complains, and prays, and finds no benefit;
His heavy Prayer could not Heaven find;
Alas! he left his Guide, his Faith behind.
III.
With It what Miracles did Moses do?
It wonderfully did the Seas divide,
And fabricated Waves on either side,
While Israel passed through.
It smote the Crystal Flood,
And changed the Waters into Blood.
It did the Plagues on Egypt bring:
It smote the barren Rock, and made the Waters spring:
It did for Joshua like a Champion fight,
And Potent Kings were conquered by it.
What though Goliath did the Host defy?
Defiance was no Victory.
He wanted Faith, but well-arm'd David knew
The naked Giant could but little do.
V.
Through It the half-dead Sarah did Conceive,
She did The Almighty Promiser believe;
By It her barren Womb made fruitful, bears
A mighty Harvest in the Winter of her Years.
It cooled the Furnace, and the wrathful fire
From Azarias did retire;
Though sev'n times hotter it had heated been,
It was extinguished quite by powerful Faith within:
The lambent flames about did harmless glide,
Though violent they did appear,
(As those which did The Almighty hide,
When in the Flaming-Bush he did to Moses come,)
Yet innocent they were,
They had no power to consume;
For why! the Mighty Angel Faith was there.
V.
It did the Lions wrath command,
The half-starv'd Beast aloof did stand:
It stood amazed,
And on the Prophet gazed,
Bound at a distance by Faith's secret hand.
The raging Seas are hushed by it,
The storming Winds submit,
Their fury they
Aside do lay,
The angry Billows sleep,
And the fierce Waves are buried in the Deep;
Nature it self this Monarch does obey;
He stopped the Sun in'ts full career,
Charged it on Gibeon to stay,
His words were Chains, and bound it there,
It could not tow'ds the West advance;
So great's his Power every where,
His tuneful Voice will make the gouty Mountains dance.
VI.
To conquering Death all flesh must tribute pay,
Yet Death it self this Monarch does obey,
The Manacles of Tyrant Fate he breaks:
Death strives in vain
The captived Body to retain;
If He the Surge speaks,
The Dead a Strength and Liberty shall have
To burst the Fetters of the Grave.
By this was Enoch unto Heaven born,
He the old Road of dull Mortality did scorn;
Though difficult the Voyage seemed to be,
Yet Faithful He
The Straits and Land of Death did never see.
Elijah in this fiery Coach did ride,
His Faith the unattempted Whirlwind tried;
He mounted, and through tractless Air did fly,
Traveling upwards to Eternity.
PATIENCE.
I.
HOw fretful is Mankind, and vain!
He Will bay at Heaven, and complain,
And grumble for fair Weather, or for Rain.
Alas! he is insensible and blind,
And cannot view the good which Providence designed:
His life's uneasy, and with murm'rings filled,
He is with Summer scorched, and with cold Winter
He cannot live where crosses are:
Should he with cursing Shimei be tried,
He neither could the Language bear,
Nor the ignominious reproachful Stones abide.
II.
Man sees not as his Maker sees,
But wrangles still with Providence,
And bears no affliction with an even sense;
But with impatience does corrupt his ease;
It Is difficult his squeamish Soul to please;
To bear th'afflicting Rod he does not know;
Alas! he will either stupid grow,
Or with despairing die;
Between the Extremes he cannot fly;
He Will either madly soar too high,
Or desperately plunge his laden Soul too low.
III.
But Patience does enthroned in Ashes sit;
Her Substance wasted, Children dead,
Friendship retired, and Pity fled,
Yet she the Potsheard takes, and scrapes her Biles with it.
The Pomp of Death, and Funeral Obsequies,
Do not her steadfast heart surprise:
Though with increasing pain she is proved,
Her Anchor's fixed, she will not now be moved:
In vain the Devil does the storm foment,
In vain fresh Legions of Plagues are sent,
In vain they all temptations try,
She will not curse her God and die.
IV.
She knows that Heaven relieving succors has,
She knows its Mercy's sure,
It Is infinite, and will endure,
She knows, and pleads with mighty Faith;
She waits, and strives with God, yet is not bold,
Like the impatient sullen Israelites of old.
The frailty of the flesh she does expand;
She weeps, yet sheds no hopeless Tears,
She sighs till the Almighty hears,
And is ascertained yet to enjoy the promised Land.
V.
Monster Affliction may appear
In any shape, yet not astonish her.
So quick and piercing is her Eye,
In Iron Bonds she can behold
More Honor than in Chains of Gold,
And in a Dungeon can a glorious Crown descry:
Let Storms roar loud, and Tempests roll,
Let batt'ring Waves against her fly,
They shall not move her well-fix'd Soul,
They cannot do the Vessel wrong;
Her Faith has made her wondrous strong,
And Lord thy will be done, is still her strengthing Song.
VI.
Lead her to Flames, and show her Martyrdom,
She will no scruples make,
Nor tremble like the Fire to which she is come,
But cast a lovely smile, and kiss the welcome Stake.
What values she
Which road she sojourn to Eternity?
She with submission lives, and with submission dies
Begging th'acceptance of her self, the Sacrifice,
And shaking off Mortality,
Like th'Angel which to Manoah came
Ascends to Heaven in a Coach of Flame.
AMBITION.
I.
WHat is it that vain man affects to be?
Of nothing he was made, yet he
Swells big to reach the title of Deity.
He will forbidden methods try:
Through unattempted ways he will fly:
His restless Soul aims still to rise up higher,
He will above Mortality aspire,
Let loose the Reigns, and lash the Horses on,
Artless he will drive the Chariot of the Sun,
Though half the World with his Ambitious self expire.
II.
This Evil's Epidemical;
In The State Ecclesiastical
Most covet Dignity,
Inferior Priests would Bishops be;
The Countrey-Curate in the Pulpit loud
Preaches cramp words to the illit'rate Crowd,
Judges his Doctrine admirable, and grows proud,
Begins so small a Benefice to scorn,
And thinks he is to greater Honors born;
Throws by his Linsey-woolsey Gown,
One of prodigious Parts he is grown,
And aims at least to be
Chaplain in Ordinary
Unto his Majesty;
He thinks all Arts and Languages his own.
Thus he forgets how small he was at first,
And swells, like Aesop's Frog, until he burst.
III.
Thus watchful Students do embrace
All Arts and Sciences,
They Nature in her dark recesses trace,
Till they are familiar with her Mysteries:
From the Alphabet to Lilly they ascend,
Nor will they with great Aristotle end:
They will a further progress go,
Ambitious still to double what they know,
Till they are acquainted with the various worlds above,
Know how the great and lesser Lights do move,
Till they are so intimate with every Star,
That each one has its name particular,
Till mighty Plutarch's Knowledge they contemn,
And the wise Stagyrite's an Ass compared to Them.
IV.
The common Soldier would Lieutenant be,
Then Captain, and would yet rise higher,
And to the Generals Dignity
Is eager to aspire;
From thence, of greater Honors he takes view,
And will the Title of a Crown pursue;
He Will plead the merit of his Sword in War,
His Wounds, and loss of Blood,
And his ambitious thoughts so headstrong are,
They will not be withstood;
He will the Honors of a Monarch bear,
Nor rests his boundless Spirit there,
Still Crown to Crown, like Mountains, he will add,
One Kingdom on another cast,
Have that amotion which the old Giants had,
And will besiege the Mansions of the Gods at last.
How foolish was Empedocles, and desperate!
Who unastonish'd at the sight of Fate,
Left the old common Road,
Traveled to Death through Flames which never had been trod,
And damned himself with hopes to be esteemed a God.
V.
What are these Worlds of Honor worth,
That we are all thus eager to come forth?
Pharez and Zarah-like, still striving for the Birth?
From Earths maternal Tomb,
To the Earths fruitful Womb,
Man does return, and undistinguished lies,
Beggars and Kings, the Foolish and the Wise,
Valiant and Weak, the Great and Small,
By the impartial hand of Death together fall:
And yet man vainly tries
To be exceeding Valiant or Great,
Like Adam in his wisest, happiest state,
Serpent Ambition tempts him to be still more wise
Thus fell the mighty Lucifer of old,
To equal his Greator he was bold;
Ambition first did prompt him to Rebel,
Which pleased the Sp'rit so well,
That since from Heaven he fell,
He triumphs to be known the greatest One in Hell.
To the University of Oxford.
I.
HAil!
All Hail?
Masters of Sacred Sciences,
Fathers of Arts and Languages,
Ye who both Men and Things do know;
Who Have traced old coy Nature so,
That you are acquainted with her Mysteries,
Both things above, and things below,
From th'inehausted Womb of your most fertile brain
(With half a Parents pain)
Noble Offsprings do proceed,
In which the Mothers Beauty we may read;
Each fruitful day produces some great Birth,
Your Fiat makes new Worlds of Learning to jump forth.
II.
Thrice have I viewed, thrice wished to sojourn in this Land,
In which does stand
The unforbidden Tree of Knowledge; Thrice
Have begged to taste the fruit of this sweet Paradise,
Which (though by Nature Man imperfect be,
Yet) by a mystic Chemistry
Improves the Soul with so much odds,
That Mortals seem Immortal as the Gods.
O that I might possess
So great an happiness!
So faithfully I love, might I enjoy the state,
I could thrice Jacob's time for such a Rachel wait.
III.
Your Sciences I at a distance view,
I hear of Arts and I believe them true,
But what they are I never knew:
Thus of the Deity the Heathens have
Some glimpse, but yet not know enough to save
Philosophy, Astrology,
Divinity, and Chemistry,
Are glorious things, but all unknown to me.
Thus from afar
We view the Sun, the Moon, and Star,
That they are shining Bodies we discern,
But cannot their true Magnitude nor Luster learn.
IV.
I sue, and with no common Zeal I sue,
To gather Learnings Manna here with You:
O that I could but write
Sweet as the Mantuan Swan, or mighty Stagyrite!
My laboring Muse
Should the full strength of every sinew use;
I would not strive in vain,
But wrestle till I did the Blessing gain;
A powerful Verse might favor find,
And importunity might make some Angel kind.
II.
With vain ambition round the World I roll,
In vain I travel far
From Pole to Pole,
To seek where Riches and Preferments are;
In vain I after Honors go:
Alas! too well I know,
Those Heavens are shut, there is no entrance there,
Till I Am a Member made by being baptized here.
If in this Styx I might but dipped be,
I should from dangerous Ignorance be free,
And share of Immortality:
But now the World refuses me, among the Crowd
I cannot be allowed,
Like Metal when the Coin is base,
They will not let me pass.
Had I your Stamp, might I be Capp'd and Gown'd,
I then might pass the Universe around.
The Soul, to a good Conscience.
I.
Welcome! thrice welcome, Sacred Guest!
Thou Peace of Life, thou Balm of Death,
Thou Harbinger of an Eternal Rest,
How beaut'ous is thy Face! how fragrant is thy Breath!
Gabriel which to Mary did appear
The tidings of Eternal Peace did bring;
So Thou All hail! All hail! do sing,
And fill'st me with a Joy, but not a Fear.
Thus Gideon, Peter, Paul,
Conversed with Spirits Angelical;
Yet Thou to me
Do seem to be
The lovli'st Cherub of them all.
II.
Continue here this night, and be my Guest,
Thou shall not now depart,
Take up thy Lodging in my humble heart,
Like Lot I will prepare my Feast,
I will my Guardian-Angel feed
With the unleavened Bread
Of Virtue and of Holiness,
And not the Leaven of the Pharisees:
Oh tarry then this tedious Night,
Until the Dawn of long Eternity!
Thou only can me free
From the oppressing Sodomite,
And in the last Eternal Day,
When sinful Sodom's ready to expire,
It Is only Thou can lead me safe away,
From incensed Heavens wrath, and the impartial Fire:
III.
Oh bold and noble Champion! who
Joined to thy Sister Faith such Miracles can do,
Who can undaunted unto Prisons come,
Can view the Flames, and smile on Martyrdom,
Who can, like Paul, unconquered bear
Insulting Fates worst Tyranny,
And do enjoy the greatest Liberty
Then when the flesh does Fetters wear,
Who hourly do thy strength renew,
And unconcerned do all commotions view:
The Earthquake might
The unconverted Jayler much affright,
But thou art steadfast, fixed, and not astonished by it.
IV.
Thy flaming Sword thou brandisnest about,
To keep Pollution out;
Th'incestuous Strumpet could not move
Thee with illicens'd Love;
The heart of Joseph thou did guard,
And the Adultress thence was barred,
Oh beauteous Susanna! much in vain
The lustful Elders strove to gain
A conquest o'r thy Modesty and Fame,
To prostitute thy Honor and thy Name;
Though Malice did its fruitless self dilate
Thou did not tremble at the menaces of Fate;
If Daniel had not risen there
To make thy Innocence appear,
With Shadrach thou would choose in flames t'ave bin,
Rather than stain thy soul with the detested sin,
With welcome Death thou would not have been grieved,
But triumphed to have seen the Debauchees deceived.
V.
The mighty Thunders speak aloud,
And on the Mount descends a thick dark Cloud;
The sounding Trumpets rend the Sky,
And pointed Lightnings round the World do fly;
Sinai smoaks, for God is there,
The trembling Mountains do their Monarch own and fear.
Oh then! Oh who
Before Him dares appear!
Good conscience thou like Moses this can do,
Before The Almighty thou can go;
Thou can the holy Mount ascend,
Talk face to face with God, as with thy Friend,
While viler Souls astonished stand below,
They see the Lightning, and hear Thunder roar,
Yet for the Living God, the Golden Calf adore.
The Soul, to a bad Conscience.
WHence art thou, thou eternal Pain,
Thou restless Plague, thou stalking Shade,
Terrible Shadow, by Reflection made,
I charge thee hence again:
Why do thou pinch, and rack, and lash me so?
I do conjure thee let me go;
I Will set my self from all thy tortures free,
Thou fancied Devil I will stifle thee,
And triumph in my liberty;
I am not into such a weakness brought,
But I am able sure to grapple with a thought.
II.
In Bacchanalean Feasts I Will drown thy Rage,
The Royal Courts thy fury may assuage,
The Sports and Sweets of Love
May thee remove;
If not, I Will travel far
Into some Land beyond thy vast extent,
And tell the deceived World I Am innocent;
If thou pursue me there, and break my Peace,
If there thy rage increase,
Like Pharaoh, I will hardened be
As Plagues augment on me;
I Will unattempted Evils try,
Jesuits shall be more Innocent than I,
I will excel in wickedness, and matchless die.
I Will cast my self upon sins spacious Main,
And sail where yet no Nero ever has been,
Into strange worlds of unknown sin,
And never feel the qualms of Conscience again
I Will chain thee in some cavern of the Earth,
And if my wandering thoughts should err astray,
If they meet Heaven or Virtue in the way,
Do not attempt to enter forth,
For if thou do, I Will choke thee in thy birth.
III.
Why follows Caesar guilty Brutus still?
Why do so often appear,
To charge me with a well-remembred ill?
Thou sinkest there,
And risest here,
I fly from thee in vain,
Who wilt not suffer me one minutes peace to gain;
With friendly night wrap up that wounded breast,
Brutus his wound gapes wider than the rest.
Sink, sink, thou Shade, ten thousand fathom deep,
Be buried in Eternal Sleep;
Oh do not still pursue me, restless Ghost!
Hence thou Tormentor, hence;
Alas! in thee I Have lost.
The Sacred Peace of Maiden Innocence,
And here like Cain and Judas I do trembling stand,
Astonished at the action of my too rash hand.
IV.
I thought that charming David's tuneful Lyre,
Touched with his skilful hand,
Might thee command,
And urge thy evil Spirit to retire:
But now (alas!) I see
How vain all these attempts would be;
Contagious Wickedness is thy Disease,
Too long thou have incensed been
With loathsome, rank, deformed sin,
And none but Christ thy Fever can appease.
I Have tasted the forbidden Tree,
And by the bold presumptous Vice
Have made an Hell of Paradise,
And from thy presence vainly strive to flee,
And cannot hide my guilty self from God and Thee.
I Will kneel in Sackcloth, and I Will humbly pray,
That with the precious Flood
Of Christ's most meritorious Blood,
He Will wash my sins away;
I shall no longer then thy stings abide,
But them, together with my sins, I Will hide
In my dear Savior's wounded Side.
FINIS.

