The whole work of Love. OR: A NEW POEM. On a Young Lady; who is violently in
Love with a Gentleman of LINCOLN'S INN;
By a Student in the said ART.
LOVE is a thing that is not on Reason laid,
But upon Nature and her Dictates made:
Fancy I mean; for that prescribes the way,
For Love at last, to make her Holly-Day.
Our thoughts like Winds, that vary every Hour,
When blowing on a Thatcht-house, or a Tower:
Which is the Case, of this our Lady, then
Sometimes she is high, and then she is still again;
At last, Love is taken by its own Hook,
Like a Sea-nimph, near, to a purling Brook:
Changing its Waters, and its Element, Gay;
Love, it discovers all, to go to Play.
And then, Circkling about his beloved Arms,
And that for ever, on Loves Immortal Charms:
And goes into the Chamber, of the Marriage Bed,
There to take Pleasure, and lay down its Head.
Love like a Soldier, coming to the Field,
At length is Conquerr'd, and is forced to yield;
Since every thing, does unto a Center tend
The result of Nature, and of Friendships end.
Love is a God! and does what it pleases,
It Cures Wounds, and when it will, us eases:
The Master Spring, of each humane desire,
Love is an Angel, of the Angelick Quire.
But, now it seems: and that at the last,
Love, like a Seaman, does his Anchor cast:
Resolving in Port, for to Wash and Tallow,
Let the Seas be Green, Dark, Blew or Yellow.
^or she it seems; if any means be left,
Turns Pirate, and so commits a Theft.
Love him she will, or else this Life depart:
Love, is a thing beyond the Power of Art.
It is as strong as Death, we all do know,
It is a thing, that still does cure our woe.
Were It not for this, 'twould be no joy to Live;
And in the World: and that for to survive;
The Powers above! on us this gift does throw,
That so, all Pleasures, we may fully know:
Having tasted, that we Epicures, may turn,
And so for ever, in Loves fire to burn.
For, of all Annimals, Lovers are most blessed,
Since that is the Life, of humane happiness;
Without that, each Person's like to a Rat,
And has no Pleasure, except that of the Cat.
For Love's a thing, distinguishes us from Beasts,
It raises Honor, and our Vitals Feasts:
Plants us in the form, of Virtuosoes great,
And so does Crown, our frail and fickle State.
Therefore at last, Love now has fixed its Eye,
Upon a Gentleman, of much Gallantry;
Like to the Eagle, resolving for a Prey,
Takes up the Kite, and marches quite away:
And when that all her wild measures has sown,
Love is resolved, to make the Town her own.
Have him she will, and Marry him; at last,
Love shuts the Door, and then besure all is fast.
To sum up all, our Gentleman does say
He Loves not Bog-wiggs: and that on any Lay;
That his Mistress, most fine, such things should wear,
As the Tree does Fruit, in Summer of the Year.
He is a Man, for Nature: only so,
And in her Paths, with her would run and go:
Would not have her, each thing from Art exchane,
For all things, but Nature, are to him most strange.
So, if Love will have it, a Marriage to be,
We Will all come see the Ivy and Oak Tree:
Twineing together, by Natures Commands,
The thing is done, and the World claps Hands.
FINIS.
London, Printed by T. Haly, for the Author. 1682.


