Englands Lamentation. OR, The Outcry of the PEOPLE against Opression and the
Opressors.
The good man is perished out of the Earth, and there is none upright amongst
men; they lie in wait for blood, they hunt every man his Brother with a Net,
that they may do evil with both hands; and the great man utters his
mischievous desire, so they wrap it up; the best of them is as a bryar, the
most upright is sharper 2.3. then a Thorn bedge; The day of thy Watchmen, and
the day of thy visitation now shall be their perplexity. We may also lament
with Jeremiah, The Elders have ceased from the Gate, the young wen from their
Music, the Joy of our heart is ceased, Our dance is turned into mourning: the
crown is fallen from our head, woe unto us for we have 15. sinned. We may say
of our Elders, that for many years they could not fit in the Gate for reeling,
like Hoggs which have made themselves drunk with the Lees or Dreggs of Wine.
Oh! woe un^o us that we Englishmen should be so Ruled and Governed by such
beastly Swine, who have been routing their Noses in the dirt and filth of this
World as Swine does, preparing themselves for the day of wrath.

Micah 2.3.
Lam. 4. 15.
We did complain and ^tlive against a sprig of Birtch, but we have brought
upon our selves a Rod of Iron. Our Rulers has been like unto Mircuris Images
which look one way and points another in their Declarations, sometimes swear
very beautiful, but in their opperation like unto an Apple in the West-Indes,
which is very pleasant to the eye, and sweet unto the Nostrells; but poisons
the eaters, which makes and causes the good people to mourn.

Manchenel apple.
A common Liar who will believe, and a continual Thief who will trust; but poor
England has been plagued with both in their Governouts; who have broken all
Oaths, Covenants and Acts of Parliament; and contrary to the trust reposed in
them by the Good People of the Land, Tyrannically wrought into their own hands
other men's Estates and Lands; Yea, such Lands, as they pretended should be for
the use and benefit of the Public, have they converted to their own private
coveteous ends. Oh! how England groaneth under the burden of Treason,
Rebellion and Oppression! How is the Country charged, and Trading decayed, by
such treacherous, Rebellious cruel Governors, who who changes Government as
they please, and forces the good people of the Land to obey them; Drawing out
Armies from one place to another, marching up and down the Land for the
accomplishing of their own ends, their Honors and Opinions, to the utter
undoing of many thousands for want of Trading, in City and Country. The cunning
Artificer has no work, the Shopkeeper languisheth, all Arts and Sciences is
decayed. We may say, that since the breath of our Nostrels has been gone the
Mariner mourns, the Merchant languisheth; the Mariner for his practice, the
Merchant for his goods, and the Owner for his Ships. Misery and Callamity has
beset us, and will swallow us up, without scme remedy.

Secondly, How many have enriched themselves by the ruins of Noble persons,
and the sele of the late Kings Lands: such Members of the stump are known
better then they ought to be trusted; but how to have these Lands again from
such persons, for the Commonwealth, a King, or single person is not difficult,
if Law and Justice might be put in execution against the Committee of Safety,
for their opression, Treason, and Rebellion. First, for coming in a Hostile
manner with Horse and Foot, upon what pretense soever, to the Parliament, not
to demand 5 Members, but to bringforth, and to dissolve that which they
themselves did bring together, and did acknowledge to be a Lawful Parliament,
and received Commissions from them, and drew out an Army against Sir George
Booth to maintain them so to be, to the loss of blood and lin bs, and the great
impoverishing of the good people of this Nation; for less guilt of Treason,
Murder and Rebellion, then might be found in our Governors.

KING CHARLES had 3 Kingdoms rent from him, and his Life also, and with him the
Lands and Lives of most honorable persons, whose Lives are much lamented for
by the poor of this Nation, for their wonted charity, to cloth their backs,
and feed the bellies of the poor, who is so much oppressed by Englands
Tyrannical Governors; For these things our hearts are faint, and for these
things our eyes are dim; But shall England die to preserve such Tyrants to live,
to deceive and destroy the good People of this poor Nation, to make their own
Interest? Woe unto us, men has shed and lost their blood upon such mould which
has brought forth Weeds, to poison and famish them rather then fruits to feed
them. Our Governors has often pretended themselves to be men fearing God, and
of tender Consciences: and therefore did allow Liberty of Conscience, And we
find also, that they have taken to themselves Liberty enough, and have made
their Consciences wide enough to swallow up the poor of this Nation, saving
only such which are guided by the fame Spirit; which Spirit has declared it
self by the fruits thereof, which has been to make use of the Lives and blood
of men, to accomplish their own covetious ends; and that which adds to our
misery, is that from men we can expect no Reformation, Hippacrites are so mixed
together in this Nation. If we have a Free choice in this Nation for a Free
Parliament, though we know that to be most Legal, and the eyes of the whole
Nation is upon it, and does desire it for to be instrumental for to bring in
Commerce and trading in the Nations, and to remove burdens and opressions, and
to take off that Iron Rod off our Backs; but we never had, and we fear never
shall have, such free and full trading as England had, when all Christian
Princes sent Ambassadors to a Single person, which was a power to Treat with.
But for our changes, neither Prince nor Peasant can have fast hold with them,
who has been the ruin of poor distressed and distracted England; yet,
although we can put no more confidence in man, yet in the Mercy of God, we have
hope, that He which for our sins has thrown us down, in his due time will
raise us up; and that he who has so wounded us, will heal us with that
plaster that shall heal us. Se be it.

WILLIAM WHITFELD.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1660.


