A Few WORDS by way of QUERY; TO THE TEACHERS, and PROFESSORS, CALLED
PRESBYTERIANS, And INDEPENDENTS. WITH A Word of PROPHECY, in Verse.

ALSO A Word of Exhortation and Warning of love to them to haste out of
Babylon, the Mystery of Iniquity, into SION, the City of Holiness:

With A Word at last to those that were PERSECVTORS.

Written by one that desires the good of all men, and the Glory of God and his
Truth: JOHN WHITHOWSE.

Printed in the Year 1662.

A few Words by way of Querie, to the Teachers and Professors, called
Presbyterians and Independents, etc.
WHat was the ground of your Zeal, which carried you on in the Years lately
past, to preach and profess, as you then did, seeing now the carnal sword is
taken from you, it is greatly fallen in you, and you are fallen from that
Zealousnesse that then was with you?

Whether had you ever any command from God, the Higher Power, for the keeping
of your Lectures, and other of your Assemblings your selves together, to preach
and pray to God, as you have done? seeing now man commands the contrary, you
let them down.

Whether was your Ministers, and your Order of Ministering, ordained by the
power of God, seeing that by the power of man you are put to silence; and yet
not by force and violence only, but by words of command?

But if you say, We are put out of our Places and Churches, and cannot do as we
have done:

Then I Querie, Is not anoher Place as lawful as that? seeing Christ says,
Wheresoever two or three are gathered together in my Name, there will I be in
the midst of them? And also the Ministers of Christ, when they were put out of
the Temple and Synagogues, feared not to preach the Gospel, of which they were
made Ministers, though they were commanded of men to the contrary; yet they met
together in Houses, and other Places, as the Scriptures testify.

And have you not Houses that might serve for that purpose? And if God ever set
you on in his work, why do you not go on therein? not fearing vain man, who can
but kill the body: and take your Company that have owned you and your Ministry,
and have denied the Common Prayer long ago; and separate your selves therefrom;
and so bear a Testimony by your practice publicly against it. Or else, may it
not be said justly, That you are an hypocritical Company of Time-servers, who
in the Time of Liberty preached, and professed against it; but now, for fear of
Man, and what he may do, conform thereunto?

Whether did Daniel well or ill, and the Three Children also, in disobeying
those Kings Laws, in their days? and bearing a Testimony, as Living Witnesses
for the Lord, although Daniel was but one man, to stand against a King and
Nations Decree: and likewise the other, but Three against the Decree of the
mightiest King in all the Earth at that time; who thought no God could deliver
out of his hand? And had Daniel ceased praying openly, as many of you have
done, and Preaching also: and the other Three conformed to that worship, as was
then commanded, as many of you have done now, to a Worship of the like nature;
which is to say contrary to God: then had they not, I say, betrayed their God?
O then, consider what you have done, and are a doing: And also, How had the
Everlasting Gospel been published, if the Apostles had been of your spirit?
when the Chief Rulers of Jerusalem charged them to speak no more in the Name of
Jesus. And seeing you profess your selves to be Ministers and Servants of him;
How is it that your actions are so quite contrary to the Faithful Ones before
mentioned now you are tried in like manner as they were: Upon which ground; may
it not be concluded by all people, That you have had but the outside show, or
Covering of the Ministers and Servants of Christ, and have wanted the inside
nature all this while? Dan. 103, 16. Acts 5.28, 29. Some build on the waters,
and some build on the sand;
But naught but what is o'th rock in this day will stand;
For the waters will roll and toss, and the winds will blow;
And what is not grounded on the rock, the storm will overthrow;
For now the sheeps covering shall be ripped off the wolf;
And all deceit shall be cast down, into hells dark gulf,
Whence never more it shall arise, the simple to deceive;
For from all that has made them a prize, God will them bereave:
And they shall see, who is in the form, but wants the power; Eze. 34. Read the
whole Chap.

For they shall not stand in his trying hour,
Which is come, and coming on all professions them to try,
Whether they will suffer for their Religion, or to escape, it deny?


The false Church stands upon the sand, and waters; which are peoples,
multitudes, Nations, and tongues, Rev. 17.15. which are like the tossing Sea;
Isa. 57.20. But in the New Creation there shall be no more Sea, Rev. 21.1. And
yet the Kings of the earth shall bring their Glory into the Holy City new
Jerusalem therein, ver. 24. He that reads, let him understand; for verily the
time's at hand.

TO such as plead it lawful and good to conform to the Common Prayer, and
hear the Teachers thereof, I querie thus; Whether do you believe, that it is
the Spirit of God that leads and guides them to read and perform that Form of
worship which to the Common Prayer belongs? which if you believe not, then
how dare you join with them, seeing it is said, They that are not led by the
Spirit of Christ, are none of his? 1 Romans 8.9. And they that are not for us,
are against us, says Christ, Luke 9.50.

Ah! How dare you that profess to love Christ, join with those that are
against him, who says, My sheep hear my voice; and a strangers voice will they
not follow! John 10.5. Then if you join with, and follow those which you are
convinced speak not by his Spirit; do you not manifest your selves to be none
of his Sheep? and if not his spirit, then what psirit, then what spirit is it?
seeing there is but the Spirit of God, and the spirit of the Devil, that does
lead or guide the spirits of men: O consider, if you follow these, do you not
err from the Spirit of God, according to your own belief or Profession in
times past?

But if you say, You join not with them though you hear them, then I querie;
What do you amongst them? What does the Spirit of God lead you to hear and
conform with those that speak by another spirit? or do you think to benefit any
thing by them toward God, that you believe are contrary to God? and if
contrary to God, then they are of the Wicked one; and then the best of their
Words and Works are sin; for it is said, The sacrifice of the wicked is an
abomination to the Lord, Prove. 15.8, 21, 27. yea, and the plowing of them is
sin: And then do you not sin in joining with, or hearing them in their sin,
which is the fruit of darkness? And in so doing do you not err from the
Scripture? which you have professed your Rule; which says, Have no fellowship
with the unfruitful works of darkness, but reprove them, Ephesians. 5.11. and come
out from amongst them and touch not the unclean thing, says the Lord, 2 Cor
6.17. and I will receive you.

But if some of the Common Prayer Readers do preach sometimes according to the
form or manner of your Teachers which you own, and you think you may lawfully
hear them in that:

Then I querie, Whether they can serve two Masters in an hours time? or do the
Devils work in one half hour, and Gods in another? Or be the Ministers of
Antichrist, and of Christ, both in one hour? Or whether are they not of that
spirit, as those were, which the Apostle speaks of, who with good words and
fair Speeches deceive the heart of the simple? -- or may they not have a Form
of the words of Godliness, and yet deny, and be enemies to the power thereof.
And do you not deny the Apostles Exhortation in the Scripture, your professed
Rule, except you deny and turn away from them? 2 Timothy 3.5.

These things are not written to accuse you, nor to condemn any thing that is
good in you; but rather to provoke you to be zealous in it, and for it: Also to
put you in mind, to consider, That much of your zeal in times past sprung not
from the power of God, but from your own wills and strength; which is
manifested by the falling of it: Now the power and arm of flesh is fallen from
you, that which is of men will come to naught: But that which is of God, Men
cannot overthrow, Acts 5.38, 39.

So every one that has any sincere desires in you after God, or tenderness of
conscience in you in this day of trial, take heed how you conform or bow to any
thing contrary to that tender Principle in you: for if you do, it will murder
those desires, and also deaden and cool the true zeal that is in you; which
will not be the way for you to increase, but decrease to God. Therefore be
revived in the true zeal of God, which moves in you, against every appearance
of evil; and be zealous for Sion the City of Holiness, the habitation of God:
and come out of Babylon, the Mystery of Iniquity, and abomination of the Earth;
and partake not of her sin; for if you do, you must taste of her Plagues; the
Lord God will not spare you. For he will burn her walls, towers, and buildings,
both wood, stubble, and stones,
and against the walls will he dash and break al her childrens bones; Je. 51.58

And if then in or under her skirts you be found;
Then, with his terrible dart he will smise you to the ground:
Therefore out of her coasts see that you haste and fly; Jerem. 51.45.

For all that in her live and dwell, a perpetual death must die: ver. 57, 39.

But Sion shall stand safely, for in here is the corner stone, Isa. 28.16.61.9

And blessed shall that man be, that lays on it his foundation.
So all out of the darkness come, turn in unto the light, John 12 35, 36.

For without it you cannot see to lay your building right,
So the Lord direct all the true desires
After his life, through the wilderness; and all the cryers
Therein, whose faces are turned toward Sion, and make
All the hard things easy before them, and every crooked way strait;
That into Sions coasts they may come, where none are crossed, but blessed;
And a habitation they may know, even in the Land of rest,
Wherein the Sabbath day is kept, which never shall have end:
In these desires my soul does rest, in which I am your friend.


A word to those that were Persecutors in the time of their prosperity.
Remember you the days of your prosperity, how it was said often to you then,
That what you measured to others should be measured to you again.
But then you stopped your ears, hardened your hearts, and would neither hear
nor see:
But now a day of persecution on you is come, in which it fulfilled shall be:
For many by you were cast into prison, their goods also destroyed;
Of Justice, Equity, Mercy, or Law, by you they were denyd:
Now thus in this day to you don't, in this day it will be;
Unless you will turn to your vomit again, and own Idolatry.
Remember little Joseph was hated and persecuted of his Brethren: what was the
reason? Because their Father loved him best, therefore they grudged: also,
because the Lord showed more to him then to them; for which they hated him the
more, Genesis 37.5. and scorned at him, v. 19. and made a Conspiracy against him
to destroy him: yet the Lord was with him, and blessed him, and brougth them down
to bow before him; and yet notwithstanding all this which they did to him, he
loved them freely, and his bowels yearned towardeds them; and he gladly
received them in the time of their distress. O Remember and consider this, and
be not envious against little Joseph, whose love and bowels toward you
yearneth, which is, and shall be manifested unto you: For a famine is entered
into your land, and scarcity amongst your dwellings; But Joseph's habitation is
in a fruitful Land; for his Store houses are full, yea, and his fatt^
overflow: Therefore be not stiff in your minds, neither think it a disgrace to
receive at his hand; for you must bow, the Lord has said it, else you must
perish in this dry and gloomy day, wherein all the springs and rivers, but what
comes from the invisible, will dry away; at which Joseph shall drink, and be
kept alive, which as the Willows of the Brook shall make his soul to-thrive:
Therefore come in the simple love, take Joseph by the bend;
And he will lead you to the well, which does wide open stand:
Out of which the Streams of Life do run freely:
Where all may freely drink, for none needs to buy, Isa. 55.1.

Praises everlasting, Halelujah to Sion's King;
For out of him the living Rock,
the water pure does spring,
Which does refresh the weary,
and make glad the poor:
Therefore let him have the honor,
now, and for evermore.


He that has an ear to hear, let him hear, and fear. For he that loves
father, or mother, wife or children, houses or land, gold or silver, life or
liberty, or any thing else better then the Kingdom of God, in that state he
must never come there.

Now, he that conformes to Idolatry for fear of losing these things, the fame
is he that lovs them better than the Kingdom of God, The 1 Epist. of John. 2,
15, 16, 17. Jam. 4.4.

This is the hard Saying, that canseth the Earthly Mind to draw back.

John Whithowse.
Given from my hand the 19 day of the 8 Month, 1662.
THE END.

