A DISCOURSE OF THE LAST JUDGMENT: OR, Short Notes upon MAT. XXV. from Ver.
31. to the end of the CHAPTER. Concerning the Judgment to Come, and our
Preparation to stand before The Great Judge of Quick and Dead. Which are of
sweetest Comfort to the Elect Sheep and of most dreadful Amazement and Terror
to Reprobate Goats. And do Concern All to think Seriously upon, that they may
look the Judge in the Face with Comfort in the Great Day of His APPEARING. By
SAMUEL WHITING, Pastor of the Church of Christ at Lynne in N.E.

Eccles. 12.14. For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every
secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.

2 Cor. 5.10. For we must all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, that
every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he has
done, whether it be good or bad.

Acts 24.25. And as he reasoned of Righteousness. Temperance, and Judgment to
come, Felix trembled.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by S. G. and M. J. 1664.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
THE Judgment to come, as it is most Formidable and Dreadful to the Wicked;
so it is most Sweet and Comfortable to those that are truly godly, being the
Day of their Redemption, Luke 21.28. The Time of Refreshing Acts 3.19. and The
time of Restitution, ver. 21. when all shall be Restored which God has spoken
of, and when among other things, all our Losses shall be f^lly Restored; the
loss of the Image of God by the Fall: for, 1 Co. 15.49. As we have born the
image of the Earthly, so we shall bear the image of the Heavenly. Our lost
Comforts also shall be Restored, for we shall have everlasting Consolation, 2 Thessalonians. 2.16. Our lost Fellowship with the Father, Son, and Spirit some small
and little beginnings whereof we have here) shall be Restored, 1 John 3.2.
R^v^lat. 22.4. John 14.3. 1 The^^. 4.17.

Now had the main Subject of the following Discourse a better Head and Heart to
deal in and about it, it might be very advantageous to draw men seriously to
Repent, according to that in Acts 17.30, 31. and to quicken them up to watch
and pray always, that they may be counted worthy to escape those things that
are coming upon the wo^ld, and to stand before the Son of M^n, Luke 21.36. But
what I have, I offer to thy candid View, and to thy serious Thoughts,
concerning this great Subject of The Last Judgment.

Some Hints there are (and but Hints) which may make a gracious heart
cheerfully to desire after that Day, and elevate, and sublimate his Spirit
Heavenward. Some other things indeed are terrible, but to none but those that
love their Sins, and will not be persuaded to Confess them, and forsake them:
To such I would speak, as D^^el to Nebuchaanezza^, Dan. 4.27. Let my counsel be
acceptable to you, and break off your sins by Righteousness: Become new men;
let all old things p^ss away, and all things become new. Let Jesus Christ be
yours: Get a sure Portion and Interest in him; and if he that is to be your
Judge, be your Savior, this great Day, and the great Transactions then, will
not be dreadful to you. But if you will resolve upon it to keep your Sins, and
adventure the Los^ of Soul and Body to all Eternity for your Lusts sake; if the
Worm that d^^s not, and the Fire that is not quenched, will not startle and
awaken you; if you can grapple with Everlasting Burnings, and will be trying
Mastery with the Omnipotent One; if you provoke the Lord to anger, and think to
be stronger then he, and will be Fighters against God, and let Heaven, and all
the joys and City-priviledges of it, go for a thing of no^ght: Then I have no
more to say but this to you, My Soul shall weep in secret places for you; and
this Little Book, with what you have heard and known from other of the Lords
Worthies, shall Witness against you at the Last Day.

My hearts desire is, knowing the Terror of the Lord, to persuade men; and if
this small Script may but by the Blessing of God be Effectual to fit any of my
dear Contrymen to look upon Jesus Christ with Comfort at that Day, and that
they and I may, among the rest of the Sheep, be set at his Right Hand, and hear
that blessed Sentence of Absolution pronounced upon us, I have enough. Then he
that is in the Bosom of the Father, will put us in his Bosom, and reveal all
his Bosome-Secrets, and Bosome-Counsels, and Bosome-Consolations, and
Bosome-Love, and open all the Treasures that are with him, to enrich us to all
Eternity. Then we shall fully Comprehend the Breadth, and Length, and Depth,
and Height, and know the Love of Christ that passes knowledge, which the best
of us do but in part comprehend and know here: For when that which is perfect
is come, then that which is imperfect shall be done away.

Good Reader, I have given thee a short account about the Publishing of these
poor Labors of mine, beseeching the Lord that his mighty Spirit may go along
with them, that good may be done by them, and Souls won to him; and that he may
be glorified, when he comes to be admired in his Saints, and in them that
Believe, at that Day.

I have done, after I have said one thing more: If thou and I be made more
Spiritual and Heavenly, in our Looks, and Longings, and Breathings after
Immortality, by this Discourse, and be any way better fitted to meet the Lord
at that Day; if our Desires be more quickened after the sweet Views of his
Blessed Face, whom we yet never saw, but by an Eye of Faith; if after a few
tossings with Tempest in the Sea of this World, we arrive at those fair Havens
of Eternal Rest in a state of Glory, to sing everlasting Hallelujahs and
Praises to the God of our Mercy, To Him that sits upon the Throne, and to
the Lamb for ever and ever: Then we shall never repent neither thou that have
perused, nor I that have Published these unpolished Lines, but shall rejoice
that they have been brought to see the light.

Thine in the Lord Jesus, Samuel Whiting.

TO THE READER.
IT was Paul's excellency that He looked not at the things which are seen, but
at the things which are not seen. The unseen things of the world to come are
the only great things, compared with which, all that is in this world is but a
trifle. But such is the natural dullness of sinful men, and so much do we hang
upon present sense, that all sorts of means prove too little to realize to us
these future unseen things, and to get our Hearts ^ffected with them. What
Christ said to them, may be said (...) us (...); Hereafter shall ye see the Son
of Man sitting on the right hand of Power, and coming in the clouds of Heaven:
But because we do not see Him now, because we do not now hear the last Trumpet
sound, nor feel our selves appearing before the Judge in visible glory on his
Throne; How many do go up and down the world as if such a thing should never
be? How do men walk in the ways of their heart, and in the prejem sight of
their eyes, as if they had never heard ^r known, that for all these things God
will b^ing them into judgment! Yea which of us have not need to learn this
principle of the Oracles of God (for this is one of the first and ma^n
principles Heb. 6.1, 2.) viz. Eternal Judgment. Hence all manner of helps this
way are but needful, and every help herein should be highly prized.

And it is observable, that Divine Providence has so disposed, that two or
three Treatises should be published among us looking this way; Mr. Shepard on
the Parable of the Virgins. Mr. Wigglesworth's Poem. And now this present
Treatise.
as intimating that We in this wilderness, where worldly cares and pleasures
are apt to overcharge us, have more then ordinary need of that warning, to take
heed of forgetting this great Day of our Lords second Coming, and to Watch and
Pray always in preparation thereunto.

Christ himself when here on Earth, saw meet to insist largely and particularly
upon this Subject, as in the Scripture handled in the ensuing Sermons, and
other places, does appear. The Last Day is a word that was often in Christ's own
Mouth, John 6.39, 40, 54, etc. And so those Holy men of God, that have had most
of the Spirit of Christ in them, have been much in meditation upon, and in
calling others to mind this great Truth of the Judgment to come. Paul scarce
passes any one Epistle without express mentioning somewhat of it: see Romans
2.5. and 14 10. 1 Cor. 4.3, 5. 2 Cor. 5.10. Ephesians. 5.30 Philip. 16, 10. and 2.16.
and 3.20, 21 Colos. 3.4. 1 These 3.13. and 4.16, 17. 2 These. 1.7,-10. 1 Timothy
6.14, 15. 2 Timothy 4.1, 8. Titus 2.13. Heb. 9.27, 28. And the same may be said of
the other Apostles: See James 5.3, 7, 8, 9 1 Pet. 1.7. and 4.5. and 5.4. 2 Pet.
2.9. and 3.4,-12. 1 John 3.2. and 4.17. Jude 6, 14, 15, 24.

Neither were it difficult to make out the like Observation concerning the
Lords Choicest Servants in the Ordinary Ministry, both Ancient and Modern,
whose Minds and Mouths have been full of this Truth.

The Reverend Author of these ensueing Sermont, according to the precious
measure of the Grace and Spirit of Christ bestowed upon him, being one that
lives as much in another world, as most that are alive in this, has here given
us a t^ste of his holy Meditations upon this subject, which will be very
acceptable to the intell^gent and serious Reader. The Notes are short, and
concise, as being but the heads of what was prepared for preaching, without the
least thought of ever publishing any of them. And the Authors present pai^full
infirmity of body, suffers not any revisall or enlargement thereof. But the
Reader will find this advantage, to have much in a little room, and to le
easily furnished with variety of matter worthy of meditation, for want of which
many times men read much and digest little. Diekion in Epistbefore the second
part of Expos. of the Psalms
It is a good saying of one, that the Reading of many diverse heads without
some interlaced meditations, is like eating of Marrow without bread. But he
that shall take time to Pause upon what he reads (especially where great Truths
are but in a few words hinted at) with intermixed meditations and ejaculations
suitable to the ma^ter in hand, shall find such Truths concisely delivered, to
be like marrow and fatness, whereof a little goes far, and does feed and
nourish much. And as the Lord gives Variety of Gifts and ways both in
Preaching and Writing (wherein the manifold Wisdom and Grace of God is not a
little seen) so they are all for profit, and there is some singular excellency
and use to be observed in each of them. Neither will the Reader find this
subject and the Truths pointed to in this Scripture, any where so particularly
and distinctly opened and applied as in the following Sermons.

The Lord who has guided and inclined the Heart of this holy and now aged
Servant of his, out of Love to Christ and to the Souls of men, to permit the
publishing of these his Labors, Bless them to the good of many; that when he
shall have put off this Tabernacle, these things may be had in remembrance to
help on others after him so to run the same race of Faith and Love, as they may
obtain the same prize and crown of Eternal glory at the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ with all his Saints: In whom we are

The Friends and Servants of all that love Him in sincerity. John Wilson
Senior. Jonathan Mitchell.


A DISCOURSE OF THE LAST JUDGMENT, ON MATTHEW. 25.31. to the end.
Verse 31. When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy Angels
with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory:

32 And before him shall be gathered all Nations, and he shall separate them
one from another, as a shepherd divides his sheep from the goats.

33 And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left.

34 Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.

35 For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me
drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in:

36 Naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison,
and ye came unto me.

37 Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw me thee an
hungered, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink?

38 When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or maked, and clothed thee?

39 Or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee?

40 And the King shall answer, and say unto them, Verily I say unto you, In as
much as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye bare
done it unto me.

41 Then shall he also say unto them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye
cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels.

42 For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me
no drink:

43 I was a stranger, and ye took me not in: naked, and ye (...) me not: sick,
and in prison, and ye visited me not.

44 Then shall they also answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungered,
or athirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not
minister unto thee?

45 Then shall be answer them, saying, Verily I say unto you; In as much as ye
did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me.

46 And these shall go away into everlasting punishment: but the righteous into
life eternal.

IN these words we have a lively description of Christ's coming to the Last
Judgment: Wherein we have 1. The Preparation: 2. The Sentence. The former is
set forth 1. In the Glory of Christ the Judge. 2. In his Retinue. 3. In his
Magnincence, He shall sit upon his glorious Throne. 4. By his Power, All
Nations shall be gathered before him. 5. By his Separation between the Elect
and Reprobate. 6. By his Disposing of both sorts, the Elect to his right hand,
the Reprobate to his left. In the Sentence we have 1. What he pronounces to
the Elect: 2. To the Reprobate.

In the Sentence pronounced upon the Elect, we have 1. A description of them;
they are his Fathers blessed ones. 2. His sweet admittance of them into his
fellowship. 3. His possessing them of their Inheritance; which Inheritance is
set forth by the preparation of it of old. 4. The Reason he is pleased to yield
of all this grace of his toward them, taken from his own work upon them, in
showing mercy to his Members and Brethren, which he reckons as done to himself.
5. Their modest question to him, as if they could not own any thing that they
had done to him. 6. His gracious answer to them, and testification of his
acceptance of what they had done for him in the least of his Brethren, to Ver.
41.

In the Sentence pronounced against the Reprobates, we have 1. A description of
them; they are cursed ones. 2. His Abdication of them from his Presence, Depart
from me: wherein the punishment of loss is set fo^th. 3. The punish^ent of
Sense inflicted upon them, h^^d out under the notion of Fire. And 4. The
deration and continuance of that punishment; it is Everlasting fire. 5. The
preparation of it. 6. The woeful Companions they must have in the fire, the
Devil and his Anacls. 7. The Reason of all th^s, taken from their un
nercifulness to Christ in his Brethren and Members. 8. Their bold denial ^f his
Ch^rge of Unmercifulness, in the question they put, When saw we thee, etc. 9.
Christ's full answer to them, whereby he stops their mouths that they shall not
have a word to say against him. 10. The issue and result of all, both toward
the Reprobate, and toward the Elect: The Reprobate go into everlasting
punishment, and the Righteous into life eternal.

Doct. I. From the Preparation. That there will ^e a time when the Lord Je^us
sha^^ come in his Glory, his holy Angels attenaing on him, 2 The^s. ^7.
For opening of which, let me show 1. Wherein his Glory will then appear. 2.
What his holy ^ngels are to do at that day. 3. Why he will come in such Glory.
4. The Uses.

For the first. He will come and manifest himself (...). In the Glory of his
Power; then he will show what a powerful One he is, in raising up all that are
in their graves, and in conventing them before him, Joh. 5.28, 29. 2 Cor. ^ 10.
2. He will come and manifest himself in the Glory of his Grace and Mercy
toward his Elect ones, in receiving them to himself, Joh 14.3. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17.
3 He will come and manifest himself in the Glory of his Justice to both Elect
and Reprobat^, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7, 8, 9. 4. He will come and manifest himself in
the Glory of his Faithfulness, in making good to the full all his Promises to
them; for then there will be a full accomplishment of them all, Heb. 10.23. 1 Thessalonians. 5.24. 5. He will come and manifest himself i^ the Glory of his Kingdom,
for then he will show himself a glo^i^ us King, both in subduing his and his
peoples Enemies, and in treading upon the necks of them: as also in gathering
all his Subjects about him, and bringing them to the bent of his blessed will,
1 Cor 15.25, 26, 27. Mat. 6.10. 6. He will come and manifest himself in the
Glory of his Humane Nature hypostatically united to the Deity, Philip. 3.21. 1
J^h. 3.2. Time was when he was abased in our flesh, Philip 2.6, 7, 8. when he
was a disallowed Christ, 1 Let. 2.4 Acts 1.11. Isa. 53.2, 3. but then he will
come in his Glory; and though it were veiled upon earth, yet he will then show
forth the Glory that his Flesh and Humane Nature is invested wit^. 7 He will
come and manifest himself in the Glory of his Deity, Romans 14.10, 11. His Deity
was much veiled, and the glo^^ of it, in the days of his flesh, though
oftentimes it did show forth it self in the Wonders that he wrought, as J^h.
2.11. and 11.4, 40. but when he comes, the Glory of his Deity will then be
fully manifested, Apoc. 1.7. 8. He will come in the Glory of his Retinue: so
the Text. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7. Jude ver. 14, 15. Dan. 7.10. As other Kings have their
Noble Courtiers about them, and their glorious Retinue with them: so the Lord
Jesus at his coming shall have an innumerable company of Angels, which will be
a great glory to him. 9. He will come in his Glory by the glory that believing
Saints shall put upon him, 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. when he shall say, Behold, I, and the
children which God has given me, Hebr. 2.13. As it will be a pleasant sight to
the Father to behold; so it will be a great Glory to Christ. 10. He will come
in the Glory of his Father, Mark 8. ult. Matthew. 16.27. which what that is, see
Diodates Exposition.

Q. 2. What are his holy Angels to do at that day?

Answ. 1. To wait and attend upon him, as Nobles upon their Prince, Dan. 7.10.
2. To gather his Elect together, Mat. 24.31. 3. To gather the Reprobates out of
his Kingdom, and to cast them into a furnace of fire, Mat. 13.41, 42. 4. To
take up those of the Saints that remain alive upon earth at the Lords Coming, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. 5. To sever the wicked scorn the just, Mat. 13.49. 6. To be the
Lords Reapers, Mat. 13.39. in the Harvest-day, and to gather his Wheat into his
Garner, Matthew. 3.12. and 13.30.

Q. 3. Why will he come in all this Glory?

Answ 1. From his deep Abasement when he was upon earth, Philip. 2.5, 6, 7, 8,
9, 10, 11. 2. From the Glory wherewith he glorified his Father upon earth, Job.
17.4, ^. 3. From the Fathers committing all Judgment to the Son, Joh. 5.22,
23. 4. From the Oath of God for this; Romans 14.11. He has sworn this. 5. From
the Comfort of the Saints, 1 Thessalonians 4.17, 18. Joh. 14.1, 2, 3. 6. From the
Amazement and Terror of the wicked, which shall fee his glory, but yet be
abdicated from it, 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. This must needs be terror and torment to them.

Use. 1. for Information. 1. We see that the Lord Jesus, though on earth he was
deeply abased when time was, yet will one day show himself otherwise then once
he was, and appear in his Glory. We must not look for him as a Sufferer, but as
a Conqueror; not as one Humbled, but (...) one Exalted with Glory, Jam. 2.1. 2
Cor. 5.16. 2. We see that it matters not for worldly glory, whether we have it
or have it not, so we have a share in this glorious One, that will one day come
in his Glory. 3 We see how good it is to be a Servant to him who is such a
glorious One, and that we should use all means that we may be entertained in
his Service. Men labor to get into their service who are honorable ones, and
have any outward glory upon them; how much more should we get into the Service
of such a glorious One? Psalm. 116.16. 4. We see the misery of those that
forsake Christ and his Service, and backslide from his Ways, and that holy
Profession that they have sometimes made: these forsake him, that they would
gladly be entertained by another day, Matthew. 7.21, 22, 23.5. We see that we can
never put glory enough upon the Lord Jesus, for he is a glorious One in
himself, and will one day come in his Glory. Men use to put glory upon Kings
and Princes, and glorious ones in the world: Oh! but what Glory then should we
put on Christ that glorious One! Psalm. 2.12. 6. We see how desirable his
Coming should be to the Saints, for he will come in his Glory, Apoc. 22.17, 20.
When he was to come to be humbled for us, he was much desired after, Hag. 2.7.
Mal. 3.1. Oh how much more is he to be desired after, when he is to come in his
Glory! 7. We see that surely all his Redeemed ones shall partake of his Glory,
Coloss. 3.4. Joh. 17.24. ^. We see that he will be glorified in the Salvation
of the Righteous, and in the Damnation of the Wicked: for he will come in his
Glory, Prove. 16.4. 9. We see what great reason we have to esteem highly of the
Reproaches of Christ in his Members, as Moses did, Heb. 11.26. 10. We see what
great cause we have to endure the Cross, and despise the Shame we meet with, as
Christ did, Heb. 12.2, 3. for he will come in his Glory, and put glory upon us
after all our shame.

And in that the holy Angels shall be his Retinue, we see 1. That the Angels
delight in our holiness; for they are holy. 2. That the more holy we be, the
more we resemble the blessed Angels. 3. That Holiness becomes those places
where Angels are, Psalm. 93.5. 4. That Christ's Attendants are holy ones. 5. That
neither Christ nor his Angels can endure, nor will endure any polluted person
or thing, now or at that day. 6. That Christ Jesus is a great Master, that has
so many Angels to attend upon him. 7. That unclean persons will be abashed and
ashamed above others at that day. 8. We see that the Judges Great Ass^e at the
last day shall be with great state. 9. We see what cause we have not to be
ashamed of Christ and of his wor^^ here Mark 8 ult.

Use 2. for Terror: 1. To all those that have blasphe^ed him, and rej^cted
him, as Jews, and Turks, and other I^^idels in these d^yes. 2. To those that
neglec^ that great alva^ion Heb 2.3. 3. To those that have put reproach upon
him, Psalm 69 20. 4. To those that have not glori^ed him; when he comes in his
Glory he will be glori^ed in their destruction.

Use 3 for Humiliation: 1. That we have put any dishono^r upon this glorious
One any way. 2. That we have so few breathings after ^is Coming. 3. That
Afflictions are so grievous to us, Luke 24.26. 4. That we are so ^oth to die to
partake of his Glory. 5. That we are so much delighted with earthly things. 6.
That we have so few thought^ of this glorious One.

Use 4. for Exhortation: 1. To fit our selves for the Coming of this glorious
One. And for that end, 1. Look that we be in a justified estate. 2. Look to our
Sanctification, Heb. 12 14. 3. Be in continual expectation of him, Heb. 9. ult.
4. Watch and pray always, Luke 21.36. Mark 13.35, 36, 37. 5. Be we found well
doing, Mat. 24.44, 45. 6. Make sure of Vessel-oyl, as well as Lampoyl, Mat. 25
4. 7. Improve we our Talents well, Mat. 25.19, 20, 21, 22, 23. 8. Love his
appearing, 2 Timothy 4.8. 9. Be children of the light, 1 Thessalonians. 5.4, 5. 10. Be of
a merciful disposition, Matthew. 25.34, 35, 36.

2. To be diligent, etc. 2 Pet. 3.14. 3. To suffer with and for Christ. 2 Timothy
2.12. 4. To rejoice in hope to se^ this glorious One, Romans 12.12. 5. To get an
interest in this glorious One Job 9.25, 26, 27. 6. To be weaned from worldly
glory, Psalm. 131.1, 2. 7. To beware of dishonouring him. 8. To exalt him all
that may be and lift up his Name. 9. To be vile in our own eyes in all our
addresses to him 10. To admire with thankfulness that such a glorious one
should ever look after us. 11. To meditate much of his Glory. Ro^. 8.18. 12. To
be glorious Christians. From. 4.18. Philip. 1.27, and 2.15.

Use 5. for Cons^lation: 1. Against the dishonor pu^ upon Christ and his
Nembers. 2. Against all the affi^^^ions; what are they? 2 Cor. ^.17. 3. Against
all the base and unworthy affronts that wicked men put upon him and his. 4.
Against the falling away of backsliders from him; the Angels put glory upon him.

Doct. II. is this; That the Son of God in his Humane Nature which he has
assumed to the Deity, shall be the Judge of Quick and Dead. The Son of man
shall come in his Glory: So Acts 17.31. Ro^. 14.10. 2 Cor. 5.10. 2 Timothy 4.1.
Reasons. 1. From Gods Appointment, Acts 17.31. and his Appointment must stand.

2. From his raising him from the dead, Ibid.

3. From his Obedience to his Father in his Suffering, Philip. 6.7, 8, 9.

4. From the Fathers Authority that he has committed to him, Job. 5.27.

5. From the Oath of the Lord for this. Romans 14.10, 11, 12.

6. From the Covenant which the Father has made with the Son, Psalm. 110.1.

7. From the Victory that he has got over all his enemies. Conquerours are
Judges over them that they conquer, and do dispose of them: so Christ the great
Conqueror of his enemies, is to judge them and to dispose of them, 1 Cor.
15.25.

8. From the Comfort of his People: for hereby they are encouraged much, in
that they have him who is their Savior to be their Judge; and therefore the
day of Judgment is called the day of Refreshing to the Saints, Act. 3.19.

9. From the Terror of those that have Crucified and flain him. Apoc. 1.7. See
also an image and representation of this, Apoc. 6 15, 16, 17.

10. From his Kingly Office, which shall then be fully manifested, both toward
his servants in rewarding them, and toward his enemies in punishing them.

Use 1. for Information. 1. We see what great Honor ^^e Lord has invested our
Nature with, in not only assuming it to be united to the Deity in one Person
in Christ, but also to take it so united to be the Judge of Men and Angels.
What greater honor could be put upon our Nature? 2. We see what Glory and
Honor we should put upon God in our Nature, glorifying him both in our bodies,
and in our spirits, which are his 1 Cor. 6.20. 3. We see a reason of that in 2 Timothy 4.8. and that in Heb. 9. ult. the Saints may well love his appearing, and
look for him, and look with holy longings for him, seeing that he is to be
their Judge that is their Savior. 4 We see how Convincingly he will judge the
sinful sons of men of all that they have done against him; for he will judge as
he is the Son of man, Jude, ver. 14, 15. He will show himself in our Nature ^t
that day. 5. We see what cause we have all of us every where to repent,
according to that Command of God, Acts 17.30, 31. Impenitent ones will never be
able to stand before the Son of man at that day. 6. We see what cause we have
neither to judge not despise our Brethren, Romans 14.10. 1 Cor 4.5. Mat. 7.1.

Use 2. for Terror: 1. To those that have been the Berrayers and Murderers of
him, and that sat in Judgement-seats to Condemn him, he will at that day be a
Judge to them. 2. To those that despise his Words, and his Servants that bring
his Words: they do it to him, and how will they look him in the face at that
day? 3. To those that have given out hard speeches against his people, Jude,
ver. 14, 15. 4. To those that are ashamed of him and his words, Mark 8. ult. 5.
To those that are offended at him and his ways and Saints. 6. To those that
put this day far from them.

Use 3 for Humiliation to those 1. That have too few thoughts of this, that the
Son of man is to be their Judge^ for it they did, they would not be so
discouraged as they are, nor be so afraid of the Judgement-day. 2. To those
that are too apt to usurp Christ's place, in too rashly censuring, and passing
sentence upon others, for he it is that is to be Judge, Romans 14.10. 3. To those
that wound the weak Consciences of their Brethren, and so sin against Christ, 1
Cor. 8.12. 4. To those that have too little fellowship and Communion with
Christ here, it might be just with him not to have fellowship with them at that
day.

Use 4. for Exhortation: 1. To be upright before him, for he will have nothing
to do with Hypocrites at that day. Mat. 7.21, 22, 23. Luke 13.26, 27. 2. To
persuade men, 2 Cor. 5.10, 11. 3. To us Ministers to Preach, etc. 2 Timothy 4.1.2.
4. To beware of riotous courses, Mat. 24.48, 49, 50. 5. To be wise and faithful
to give portions of meat in du^ scason, Mat. 24.45, 46. 6. To us all, to Watch
and Pray a^wayer, Luke 21.36. 7. To take heed we have not a thought of our
Lords delaying his Coming, Mat. 24.48. 8. To kiss the Son, Psalm. 2.12. 9. To
get assurance that he is our Savior. How? (1) By our longing looks for him.
Heb. 9. ult. (2) By our obedience to him, Heb. 5.9. (3) By our faith and hope
in him, Heb. 6.19, 20. J^h. 14.1, 3. (4) By our fellowship with him, Genesis 5.22,
24. (5) By our constanc^ to him. Mat. 24.13. Ap^^. 2.10. (6) By our patient
suffering with him, 2 Timothy 2.12. 10 To take h^^d of those sins that strike
directly at Christ, Prove. 8.36. ^^at are they? 1. Refusing Tenders of Grace.
Heb. 2.3. ^. 12.25. 2. Sins against weak ones, 1 Cor. 8.12. 3. Hard speeches
against his Servants, Jude, ver. 14, 15. 4. Unbelief, Mark 16.16. 5.
Impenitency, Luke 13.3, 5. 6. Unmercifulness, Mat. 25.44, 45. 7. Security, Mark
13.36. 8. Deferring, Exodus 16.21. Prove 8.17.

Use 5. for Consolation: 1. Against all injuries that we meet with here, Christ
will right our cause at that day, Eccles. 3.16, 17. 2. Against fears of that
dreadful day, he that is our Savior will be our Judge, and that is comfort. 3.
Against the Riddles that were in his Providence, he will clear them all up at
that day. 4. Against the wickeds insultings over them here, Christ will take
their part at that day. 5. Against Satan's malice against us, Christ in our
Nature will condemn him and all his Angels. 6. Against faintings in adversity.

Matthew. 25.31. Then shall be sit upon the Throne of his Glory.
Doct. III. That Christ shall have a glorious Throne erected for him to sit
upon, when he comes to judge the World, 2 Cor. 5.10. Romans 14.10. Dan. 7.9.
For opening of which, let me show 1. Where this Throne will be set. 2. How it
does appear he shall sit upon such a Throne. 3. Why he will sit upon such a
glorious Throne. 4. The Uses.

For the first: The Place of this glorious Throne is by some thought to be in
the Clouds, Mat. 24.30. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. and it is very like it shall be there,
or in some vast and sp^cious place in the Air, which shall be able to contain
those i^^umerable Companies of persons that shall appear before him.

For the second: How it does appear that he shall sit upon such a Throne. It
appears 1. By the multitude of his Attendants. Dan. 7.10. for Princes fit upon
their Thrones, when they have such a Train about them. 2. By the Judgment that
he is then to give; and then do Princes and Judges sit upon their Thrones and
Seats, when they are to give Judgment, and to pass Sentence, 2 Cor. 5.10. 3.
By the Conventing of all Nations before him, Matthew. 25.32. 4. By the summoning
of them to appear by the sound of a Trumpet, and by the Voice of the Archangel,
Mat. 24.31. 1 Thessalonians. ^.16. 5. By the opening of all graves, Joh. 5.28, 29. and
those that were dead coming forth: The prisoners are brought forth, when the
Judge is to sit upon his Throne.

For the third; viz. the Reasons. 1. He is a glorious King, Psalm. 24.7, 8, 9,
10. and 47.2. Apoc. 1.5. 1 Timothy 6.1^. and 1.17. Apoc. 15.3. and therefore meet
he should heep the state of a King, and sit upon his glorious Throne.

2. He is the only Law giver, which is able to s^ve and destroy, Jam. 4.12.
and therefore meet that a Throne of Glory should be erected for him to give
rewards to the obedient, and punish the disobedient.

3. He is the Judge of all the Earth, Gen 18.25. and they use to sit upon their
Seats of Justice that are Judges on earth; much more he.

4. He will be so much the more terrible to his enemies, as a King upon his
Throne is, 2 Cor 5.10, 11.

5. He will be mavelous Comfortable to the Saints, when they shall see their
Savior which died for them, to be such a King upon his glorious Throne. Luke
21.28.

6. He will then show exact Justice: if other Kings upon the Throne deal
impartially, much more he, 1 Pet. 1.17. 2 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7, 8, 9. Rom 2.6, 7, 8, 9.

Use 1 for Information: 1. We see in what sense the Day of Judgment is called
The great Day, Jude ver. 6. It must needs be so, when Christ shall sit upon
such a glorious Throne, about such great things as Life and Death are, having
such Attendance upon him by such great Princes and Courtiers as the blessed
Angels are. 2. We see how desirable a day it should be to Believers that are
Members of Christ, for then they shall see their Head exalted, their King upon
his glorious Throne: see for illustration Isa. 33.17. 3. We see how despicable
all worldly glory should be to believing Saints, while they ^ix their eyes upon
this glorious Throne of Christ. Take Solomon's glory, or that of the greatest
Princes on Earth, and it is not so much as a shadow of this Glory, see Esth
1.4. We see that Afflictions are nothing, while we look a^ this Glory. Rom
8.18 2 Cor. 4.17. 5. We see what a rare sight it is to see Christ upon the
Throne, and therefore what diligence we should use that we may have a sight of
it with comfort. What striving and crowding is there to see an Earthly King
upon his Throne? Oh what striving should there then be to see this rare sight,
and to have the comfort of it! 6. We see the love of the Lord Jesus, in willing
and desiring this of his Father for us, Joh. 17.24. that we may partake of it.
7. We see what a glorious Throne he will have in the highest Heavens, if such a
Throne be erected in the Clouds for him, Apoc. 3.21. 8. We see what diligence
we should use in the service of Christ, for he is a King upon the Throne. 9. We
see how terrible the day of Judgment will be to Devils and damned ones, for
they shall see the judge upon his Throne. 10. We see that Tribunals on Earth
are an image of this. 11. We see what need there is o^ that, 2 Pet. 3.14. 12.
We see how good it is to stand for Christ now.

Use 2. for Terror: 1. To all dissembling Hypocrites, Christ upon his Throne
will disc^v^r them. 2. To those that have been prof^ne all their lives, how
will they be able to stand before this glorious Throne? 3. To those that have
been fearful to stick to Christ; Oh that Throne will daunt them! Apoc. 21.8.

Use 3. for Humiliation: 1. To those that have too few Meditations on Christ
upon his Throne. 2. To those that are taken with any erroneous Opinion; Christ
when he sits upon his Throne will show what price he sets upon his Truth, Mark
8 ult. 3. To those that faint in the day of trouble, Apoc. 2 10.

Use 4. for Exhortation: 1. To get a sure portion in him, and then we shall
rejoice to see him on his Throne, 1 John 2.28. 2. To despise all worldly pomp
and glory: what is that to this? 3. To fear to come before him in our sins and
in our rags, for he will not own us in such a state upon his Throne. 4. To long
after that day wherein we shall see this glorious sight. 5. To suffer with him
and for him cheerfully; for when he sits upon his glorious Throne, he will
reward us to the full. 6. To beg grace and mercy at the Throne of Grace, that
his glorious Throne may not dismay us, Heb. 4. ult. 7. To set up a Throne in
our Hearts to judge and condemn our selves; and then 1 Cor. 11.31, 32. 8. To
confess Christ here, Apoc. 3.5. Mat. 10.32. 9. To follow Christ here, Mat.
19.28. 10. To be of a Royal Kingly spirit, and to mind the great things that
are above, for we have a glorious One that will one day sit, etc. Coloss. 3.1,
2.

Use 5 for Consolation: 1. Against the Afflictions that we s^ffer for Christ, 1
Pet. 4.12.13. 2. Against the shame and dishonor in particular that we suffer
for him. Act. 5.4^ 3. Against want of great friends, which is a kind of glory.
4 Against Wealth and Riches, which is worldly glory, Genesis 31.1.

Ver. 32. And before him shall be gathered all Nations.
Doct. IV from the Preparation to the Judgment, is this, That all Nations
shall be gathered before the Lord Jesus at the Day of Judgment, Romans 14.10. 2
Cor. 5.10. Apoc. 20.12, 13. 2 Thessalonians. 2.1.
For opening of which, let me show 1. Who shall gather them. 2. By what means
they shall be gathered. 3. (...) what manner. 4. Why they shall be all gathered
before him. 5. The Uses.

For the first, Who shall gather them?

Answ. The Angels shall be employed about them in gathering them together, Mat.
13.19. and 24.31.

For the second, By what means shall they be gathered?

Answ. 1. By the Power of Christ, Joh. 5.28, 29. 2. By his Sovereignty, all
Nations being his Subjects; which Sovereignty will then be showed forth, and
none shall resist, for then he will show himself a King, Mat. 25.34. 3. By his
Commission that he gives out, Mat. 24.31. 4. By the signal Token of their
Summoning before him, Ibid. a great sound of a Trumpet. 5. By his own descent
from heaven with a shout, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. 6. By the will of Christ, Joh. 6.40.

Q. 3. In what manner shall they be gathered?

Answ. 1. Orderly; the dead in Christ shall rise first, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. 2.
Conspicuously, Apoc. 1.7. 3. Dreadfully to the wicked, 2 Cor. 5.10, 11. Apoc
1.7. Mat. 24.30. 4. Comfortably to the godly, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17, 18. Luke 21.27,
28. 5. Necessarily, there is no avoiding it, 2 Cor. 5.10. Romans 14.10. 6.
Suddenly and unexpectedly, 1 Thessalonians. 5.1, 2. Luke 21.35. 7. Speedily, Joh. 5.28,
29. as soon as ever the Voice is heard, they shall come forth: so 1 Cor. 15.51,
52. 8. Particularly; every person, one and another, man, woman and child, 2
Cor. 5.10. 9. Severally, of all sorts, ranks and conditions, High and Low, Rich
and Poor, Noble and Ignoble, Kings and Subjects, Masters and Servants,
Ministers and People, Parents and Children. 10. Certainly, Gods Word and Oath
is to it, Romans 14.10, 11.

Q. 4. Why shall they be all gathered together before him?

Answ. 1. That every one may receive the due reward of their works, 2 Cor.
5.10. Romans 2.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

2. That every one may give an account of himself to God, Romans 14.12.

3. That every secret thing, whether good or evil, may be brought to light,
Eccles. 12.14. The secret good that the Saints have done, that they may have
praise for it, 1 Cor. 4.5. and the secret evils that the wicked have done; the
secret Plottings, Conspiracies, Combinations in a way of wickedness; the secret
Murders, Adulteries, Thefts, false Witness; the secret Atheistical, Profane,
Blasphemous, Abominable Thoughts, and Ways, and Workings, this way and that,
which could never be discovered, which the vultures eye could never see: that
all these secrets may be made manifest to their shame and everlasting reproach,
dishonor, and contempt: therefore all Nations shall be gathered before the
Lord Jesus at the Judgment day.

4. That every knee may bow to him, Romans 14.11. that they that would not stoop
and bow to his Scepter of Grace, may bow and stoop, and be broken under his
Iron Rod, the Rod of his Justice and Severity.

5. That there may be an impartial dealing with every one of all sorts and
conditions, that none may have any cause to complain, but every mouth may be
stopped, Romans 3 19. for when all come before him, and see that he is no
respecter of persons, that he respects not the persons of Princes, nor
regards the rich more then the poor, Job 34.19. but all receive according to
their deserts, there can be no color of just complaint against him, but all
must needs say, It is just that is come upon them.

6. That there may be no vain Pleas preferred by any why they may not be
judged, all Nations shall be gathered before him, to let them all see the
unreasonableness of such pleas and excuses. There will be those that will plead
as Mat. 7.22. and Luke 13.26. but as Christ will reject them, so the godly of
all Nations (being of his mind) will look at them as frivolous pleas, for they
approve of what he says, and so judge with him, 1 Cor. 6.2.

7. That the wicked may have all the shame and contempt that can be cast upon
them, when their lewdness is discovered to all the Nations of the World, Dan.
12.2. Oh the confusion that will be upon all faces at that day! Oh the shame
that will then cover them that have lived and died in their sins, at that day,
when all the Nations of the Earth shall know what they have been! And surely,
they that have been so cunning to hide their sin, God will shame them to
purpose at that day.

8. That the godly may have all the honor that can be put upon them, All
Nations shall be gathered before him, that the godly of All Nations may know
and hear of what the Saints in all Ages have done, what holy thoughts they have
had, what gracious words they have spoken, what blessed works they have done,
what Prayers, Alms, Fasts they have performed, and all the good in any kind,
at any time, to any person, in any condition, that they have done. When All
Nations that have been in All Ages shall know this, Oh what height of honor
and renown shall the Saints have!

9. That he may separate one sort from another. But of that afterward in the
Text.

10. That he may show that in every nation, etc. Act. 10.35. 1 Pet. 1.17.

11. That he may deelare that in Isai. 40.15, 16, 17.

12. That he may show that he has some of all Nation^ where his Word has come.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see the mighty Power of the Lord Jesus, that all
the Nations of the World that ever were, or are, or shall be, cannot be able to
resi^t, but they must all, will they nill they, be gathered before him at the
Judgment day. Great is the power of one Nation in one Age, but much greater
the power of all Nations in one Age; but all Nations in all Ages have far
greater power then the other: But how great soever their power is, they will
not be able to put any of it forth at that day against the Lord Jesus, but must
be gathered all before him, and come to Judgment. 2. We see what powerful
Spirits the Angels are, and how they do excel in strength, who are to be
employed in gathering all Nations before Jesus Christ at the last day. Well
might the Psalmist say, Psalm. 103.20. We are not able to conceive how strong
and powerful they be. 3. We see what great incoura^ement we have in the
performance of secret duties and services, for they shall be made known one
day, and rewarded openly before all Nations, Mat. 6.4, 6, 18. secret Alms,
secret Prayers, secret Fasts, that none have known of, that no mortal eye has
seen, shall be made known before all the Nations of the World at that day. 4.
We see what great cause we have to beware of Hypocrisy, for it will come all
out at that day before the whole World, Luke 12.1, 2. There are those that can
feign themselves just men, and can smoothly and demurely carry themselves, as
if they were truly godly, and seem to be forward in the ways of God, and
out-stripped others, and yet have false and rotten hearts, and they may think
well of themselves, and others may think well of them, and yet be vile
Hypocrites, keeping some lusts that they will not leave: But these shall be
discovered before all the Nations of the World at that day, Prove. 26.23-26. 5
We see how happy the condition of the Saints will be at that day, for all the
World shall then know what they are. Here they have been censured for
Hypocrites and Dissemblers, for loathsome and vile persons as Christ himself
and John Baptist were, Mat. 10.25. and 11.18, 19. Job. 19.12. and have gone for
this and that and the other in the repute of men, and have had many ^rievous
Crimes laid to t^eir charge, as Tertullian speaks of the C^ristians in his
time: but at that day, when all Na^^ons shall be gat^ered before Christ, then
the whole World shall know what they are, and what wrong they have undergone
for Christ Jesus sake. 6. We see that all the wickedness of the wicked shall
then come out, though never so cunningly contrived, and secretly committed, and
u^derhand, and under board brought about; Murders in the d^rk, Adulteries and
other Filthinesses in the dark, all the Night-pranks, that they durst not do in
the day, that they would have been afraid that the Sun should have looked upon,
these shall be known at that day, when all Nations shall be brought before
Jesus Christ, Eccles 12.14. 7. We see that all unrighteous and ungodly persons
that have been ^^^meless in their ways here, shall be horribly asham^d and
confounded at that day, for th^n all Nations shall be gathered before him. Who
is able to conceive the shame that such shall then be filled with? Oh the
blushing that will be upon their faces, when all Nations shall know what vile
persons they have been! Dan. 12.2. If David's shame was great, when God
threatened to punish him openly, and before the Sun, ^ Sam. 12.12. Oh what shame
and dishonor will cover them, whose wickedness shall be made known before God,
Angels, and all the Nations of the World! 8. We see that all the Nations are
nothing to God, Isa. 40.17. Oh who would not then fear him! Jer. 10.7. 9. We
see how vain a thing it is for a man to resist and fight against God, when all
Nations cannot do it, Acts 5.39. 10. We see the miserable case of those Nations
that know not god at that day. Jer. 10.25.

Use 2. for Terror: 1. To all those that rejected Christ and his words here,
and would none of him, they must all be gathered before him, 1 Pet. 4.17, 18.
Hebr. 2.2, 3. 2. To those that have been vile in secret, Ephesians. 5.12. 3. To
those that have been cruel to his Saints. 4. To those that talk of his delay in
Coming, Mat. 24.48.

Use 3. for Humiliation: 1. That we breathe no more then we do after that day.
2. That we are so apt to fear men, Luke 12.4, 5. 3. That we are so apt to be
troubled at a company that rise up against us, 2 King 6.16. 4. That we glorify
and honor Christ so little, that has all Nations at his command.

Use 4. for Exhortation: 1. To tremble to sin against Christ Jesus, that will
convent all Nations before him. 2. To bow and stoop to his golden Scepter of
Grace, that all Nations see us not broken with his Rod of Iron, Psa 2.9, 12. 3.
To beware that we resist him not, nor the motions of his holy Spirit, nor
quench, nor grieve him. 4. To set up a Tribunal in our hearts before hand, that
though it go (...) with the most of all Nations, yet it may go well with us, 1
Cor. 11.31, 32. 5. To gather our selves together (...) a way of Repentance
before this great gathering day, Zeph. 2.1. 6. To get under Christ's gathering
wing, Mat. 23.37. 7. To gather with Christ, Mat. 12.30. 8. To Watch and pray
always, that we may be counted worthy to escape, etc. Luke 21.36. 9. To gather
in company with Saints here, in performance of such Duties as may fit us for
this great gathering day, Mal. 3.16, 17.10. To beware we gather not in company
with wicked men, lest we be scattered to our eternal ruin in that day. 11. To
disperse and scatter abroad what God has given us to the poor, Psalm. 112.9.
Mat. 25.34, 35. 12. To gather up all the words of Grace we hear into our
memories and hearts, if Job. 6.12. then, etc.

Use 5. for Consolation: 1. Against all the corrupt censures of wicked men
against the Saints; at that great gathering day they will be cleared. 2.
Against the false imputations that Satan brings against them, he shall be found
a liar before all Nations. 3. Against the tyranny of Antichrist, and those that
take his part: his wickedness will then appear before all Nations. 4. Against
those wicked deeds and hard speeches that ungodly men have been guilty of,
Jude, ver 14, 15.

Ver. 32. And he shall separate them as a shepherd, etc.
Doct. V. That Christ Jesus will at the last day separate the Elect and
Reprobate one from another: They are mingled together here in Town-Societies,
in Countrey-Societies; in Church-Societies, in Family-Societies, in all kind
of Relations, but then they shall be separated.
For the opening of which, let me show 1. How he will separate them. 2. Why. 3.
The Uses.

For the first: He will separate them as a Shepherd separateth his sheep from
the goats.

Q. 1. How is that?

Answ. 1. Prudently, making a difference between the one and the other: here
they are not so easily discerned to have such a difference made, the one is
taken for another, and we cannot so well distinguish between them, but at that
day there shall be a distinction made, Mal. 3.17, 18. 2. Warily and carefully,
so that there shall not be so much as one of the Elect among the Reprobate, nor
one Reprobate among the Elect: he knows all his Elect by their names, Job.
10.3. 3. Diligently, as the Shepherd looks up diligently all his sheep, that
not one of them may be lost, or missing, or mingled with the goats: so will the
Lord Jesus in this separating work look that none be wanting, John 6.39. For
else there could not be a due separation made. 4. Exactly and exquisitely: here
an exact separation cannot be made, no not in the best societies that are, let
officers in Churches be never so vigilant, let brethren be never so careful
who they admit into their Fellowship and Communion, yet some Hypocrites will
ge^ in and trouble Churches and defile and leaven them, 1 Cor. 5.6. but at that
day Christ will be exact in separating the one from the other, no wicked
persons shall thrust in among the elect saints: there will be an exquisite
separation then made, Psalm. 1.5. 5 Particularly one by one, he shall show that
this is a sheep and this a goat for every man must be Judged one by one, 2 Cor.
5.10. and therefore ye separation shall be one by one in a personal and
particular way. 6. Evidently and manifestly, so that it may be known which are
which; there is no sheep shall so much as seem to be a goat, nor no goat so
much as seem to be a sheep, they shall be evidently manifested what they are.
Esau shall not seem to be Jacob, nor Jacob Esau, it shall be as conspicuous as
the Sun at noon day who they are both of one kind and of another. 7. Openly
before all, so that though the wicked should be^ and plead never so hard to be
as the Righteous, yet a separation must be made between them and all shall see
it, for this separation must not be made in secret or done in a corner, but
every eye shall see it.

Q. 2. Why will the Lord Jesus make such a separation as that day? Ans. 1. For
the Terror and Amazement of the wicked, that they that abhorred the Saints
company in their life time, and would go with none but such as were like
themselves, may not so much as be admitted into the Saints company at that day,
they scorned the Saints fellowship when time was, and now they shall have none
of it, and this must needs amaze, and be a terror to them. 2. For ye shame of
hypocrites who were sometimes in company with the Saints, but not caring for
them, but secretly despising them in their hearts, are now to be for ever
removed from them, and this must needs fill their faces with shame, and cover
them with confusion as with a mantle before the whole World. 3. For the comfort
of the Saints, that they that have been troubled that they have been among the
wicked to hear and see their wickedness as Lot was, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. and glad of
the fellowship of Godly Pious ones, Psalm. 16.3. may now be for ever separated
from all the wicked, and have the fellowship of the Elect for ever: this must
needs rejoice their hearts. 4. For the welcome of the Saints together, some
whereof have known one another and seen one another, faces and s^eetly
conversed together upon Earth, and others of them never knew nor saw each
other: when they all meet together, Oh the sweet acquaintance they will take of
one another, the Blessed welcome they will give one to another, it will be a
comfortable meeting when they all thus meet together. 5. For the Augmentation
of the misery of the Reprobate who when they all come together shall be torture
and torment one to another, especially they that have been companions in
wickedness together when the whole Mass and pack of them come together and have
none but such as themselves are, Oh what a woeful condition will they then be
in, its unspeakable what their misery will be, inconceiveable what the torment
of their Souls will be, when they all come together at the time that this
separation shall be made between the Elect and them 6. For the glory of the
Lords mercy and Justice in the discovery of those who are Elect and of those
that are reprobate, for as his mercy is Glorified on the Elect vessels of
mercy, Ephe. 1.6. so his Justice is Glorified on the vessels of wrath, Pro
16.4. and both will be manifest in the day of this separation. 7. For the
manifestation of them, 2 Timothy 2.19. for he had need know those that are his,
that makes such a separation. 8. For the encouragement of the Lords people now
in a way of well-doing, for though at present there seem to be little
difference in some respects between them and others, Eccl. 9.2. yet then there
will be a difference made.

Use 1 For information: 1. We see that wicked men shall not all ways be an
amiction to the Saints, they shall not allwaies be thorns in their eyes, and
pricks in their sides, by being in company with them, for at the Judgment day
they shall never be troubled with them more, the Lord Jesus will make a perfect
separation between one and the other, they may trouble them here, and fret and
grieve their Spirits, but when the separation is once made, then they shall
never afflict them more. 2. We see how patient the Saints should be in all the
tribulations that they suffer for Righteousness sake from evil men, for there
will be an end of them in the day of separation, when neither they shall come
to us nor we to them, Jam. 5.7, 8. 3. We see how just the Lord is in his
dispensation of himself to evil men, they could never abide to keep company
with the Saints on Earth, and at that d^y they shall be separated from them and
never come at them more. It was a trouble to them to be with them at any time,
and they were never well till they were out of their company, and God is just
in parting them asunder for ever from them. 4. We see that though false-hearted
and hypocritical Professors cannot always be discovered here, yet they cannot
be hid then, when the day comes wherein Christ will separate between the Elect
and Reprobate, Some are more gross, and cannot be hid here, 1 Timothy 5.24, 25 but
some are more close, and they are left to be discovered at that day, as Mat.
7.22, 23. Luke 13.26. 5. We see that separation from true Churches, where the
Ordinances are, though some not so purely dispensed, where many Saints are, and
where the Lord is blessing, assisting, and breathing in those Ordinances and
Saints, is certainly not of God, if we can with freedom enjoy them: for, if
God be there, Shall mortal man he more just then God? shall a man be more pure
then his Maker? Job 4.17. The separation of Elect and Reprobate is reserved to
the great day, and who of us know who they be? see Jude ver 19. 6. We see that
though Hypocrites may get into Churches, and may be thought as good as the
best, and who but they: yet they shall not be able to get into the Church of
the First born, into the Congregation of the Righteous: They, as well as
others, must be separate from the Elect of Christ at that day. 7. We see what
need there is that we should separate our selves what we can from the courses
and company of evil men, that we know to be such, Number. 16.26. 2 Cor. 6.17. 8.
We see how tender we should be in censuring and judging others, for they may be
better then we think they are; till the day of separation we cannot tell what
they may be, Matthew. 7.1. Jam. 3.1, 2. 1 Cor. 4.4, 5. 9. We see that it is not
safe in time of temptation to conclude against our selves, or pass a rash
sentence against our selves, for we may be deceived. It is Christ that must
make the separation, and not we, Lam. 3.18. Psalm 31.22. 10. We see how
dangerous it is to forsake the assemblies of the Saints, and the company of
Believers: for if we do, God may justly separate between us and them another
day, Heb 10.25, 26. so Psalm. 122.1. and 26.8, 9. 11. We see how blessed a thing
it is to converse with Saints, and to be delighted in their fellowship, for
they shall all be together at the separation day. 12. We see that good men have
no cause to envy evil men, because outward things prosper to them, and
themselves are sometimes in adversity; for though the condition of evil men
seem better for the present, in the day of separation, it will appear far
otherwise, Psalm. ^7.1, 2. and 73.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 19, 20. Jer. 12.1, 2, 3.

Use 2. for Terror: 1. To those that despise the Saints, and will have none of
their fellowship here; they shall for ever be separated from them at the last
and great day. ^. To those that separate themselves from Church Assemblies
where the Saints are, and Ordinances duly administered and held up in their
Purity, had rather be at home, or in corners, with some of their own faction
and erring way, Jude, ver. 19. such may well fear that they shall never come in
company with the Saints at that day.

Use 3. for Exhortation: 1. To have no fellowship with the workers of iniquity,
Prove. 1.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. and 4.14, 15. Psalm. 1.1. for there must be a
separation made between the Saints and these, 2 Cor. 6.17. 2. To long for the
time when this separation shall be made, for here evil men are a great burden
to all Societies and places where they are, Apoc. 22.20. 3. To submit to the
will of God, if we be cast upon such places where evil men be; for the day of
separation is hasting, when we shall be never troubled with them more. 4. To
make sure that we be not of that number that shall be separated from the Elect
Saints at that d^y, 2 Pet. 1.10. 5. To converse with good men, and walk in
their way, Prove. 2.20. 6. To us Ministers, to separate between precious and
vile, Jer. 15.19. Ezekiel. 44.23. 7. To make a difference between men and men, in
our discharge of our duty to them, Jude, v. 22, 23. 8. To put a difference
between them in our beneficence to their outward man, Gal. 6.10. 9. To think
charitably of our brethren, 1 Cor. 4.4, 5. for we know not who they be that are
to be separate. 10. To take heed of Hypocrifie, Luke 12.1, 2.

Use 4. for Consolation: 1. Against the disturbances that Saints meet with from
the company of evil men, they shall not always be a trouble to them, but be
for ever delivered from them, as Moses said, Exodus 14.13. So here. 2. Against
that small difference that the Lord seems to put between his own and others, as
Eccles. 9.2. he will put a difference at that day. 3. Against all the Slanders
that are cast upon them, it will be well enough known what they are, when the
separation day comes. 4. Against the hypocritical censures of false ones
against the righteous, Jam. 3.1.

Ver. 32. And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, etc.
Doct. VI. is this That the Lord reckons of his Elect (...) his sheep, and of
Reprobates as goats.
We will speak of the first Branch first, That the Elect are sleep: so they are
often called, Job. 10, 3, 4, 11, 14, 26, 27.

For opening of which, let me show 1. In what respects they may be said to be
sheep. 2. Why his sheep. 3. The Uses.

For the first: They may be said to be Sheep, in sundry respects. 1 In that
they are marked out, for so are other sheep marked, and so are these, John
10.14, 27. 2 Timothy: 2.19. 2. Sheep are meek and mild Isay 53.7. dumb when before
the shearers, when in the Butchers hands, So was the Shepherd, and so are they
Psalm: 44.21. 2 Chronicles: 24.21, 22. 3. Sheep are serviceable to the owner, with
their milk and with their wool, and with their increase. So are the elect
Saints Acts 13.36. Romans 1.9. Acts 26.7. 4. Sheep are easily ruled by the voice
and whistle of the shepherd, So are the Lords elect ones, easily ruled, a word
from his mouth rules them John 10.27. 5. Sheep of all other creatures, are most
simple, and unable to defend themselves Mat: 10.16. and most subject to be made
a prey of. So the Saints Heb: 11.35, 36, 37. 6. Sheep are most acure and exact
in knowing their shepherd, so the elect Saints are very skilful, in knowing
Christ, John 10.14. 7. Sheep have nothing in them but is of use, their very
dung is not excepted. So all of the Saints is of use, even that that is the
worst of them, their afflictions, their Sins. 8. Sheep when they are killed
they are wholly for their Masters use, so the Saints when killed are wholly for
their Masters use and service, then they are wholly for him: though their bodies
be unserviceable, yet in their souls they are most serviceable. Hebr. 12.23.
9. Sheep keep together and feed together: so do the Saints love to be
together, Act. 2.44. Mal. 3.16. 10. Sheep do then most flock together in
stormy times, so do the Saints, they are most together at such times, love one
another best then, Mal. 3.16.11. Sheep are very obnoxious, to be devoured and
spoiled by dogs and wolves: so the Saints, Mat 7.15. Act. 28.29. 12. Sheep are
subject to great scattering, so the Elect to be scattered by persecution, Act.
8.4. Jam. 1.1. 1 Pet. 1.1.

Q. 2. In what sense are they his sheep?

Ans. 1. He has bought and purchased them 1. Cor. 6. ult 2. He has marked
them out for himself. 3. He leade^ them, Joh. 10. 4. He knows them, Joh.
10.14. 5. He laid down his life for them, Joh. 10.11. 6. He rules them by his
rod and staff. 7. He feeds them and causes them to lie down etc. Psalm. 23.1,
2. 8. He tenders them, Isai. 40.11. 9 He preserves them in dangers, Psalm. 23.4.
10. He sets his dogs upon them, Satan and his Instruments.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see that the Lord will not let his Elect want
pasture, Psalm. 23.1, 2. John 10.9. he will feed their souls with spiritual
food, Ezekiel. 34.14. 2. We see a reason why they are so apt to wander and go
astray: so do other sheep, and so do they, Psalm. 119. ult. Isai. 53.6. 3. We
see a reason why he will reduce them and gather them from their wanderings;
they are his sheep, and he will reduce them from their erring paths, Ezekiel.
34.12. 4. We see why he gives such charge to his Ministers to feed them, they
are his sheep, John 21.15, 16, 17. 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2. 5. We see that
surely the Lord will safely fold them up in his church here and in the kingdom
of glory hereafter Ezekiel 34. Hebr. 12.23. and that is a good fold indeed. 6. We
see that he will surely gather the scattered of the Jews together though they
have been so long dispersed, John 10.16, 2 Cor 3.16. Hos. 3. ult. Romans 11.25,
26. 7. We see the mercy of the Lord toward us and the freeness of his grace in
that be has passed by so many thousands of Men and Angels and has made us the
subjects of his Electing love, made us his sheep when there are so many
reprobate goats, Ephesians. 1.3, 4. 8. We see a reason of the patient suffering of
the Saints in all ages. 9. We see how precious the Saints should be to us they
are his chosen flock, and the sheep of his Pasture. 10. We see the miserable
condition of those that are cruel to the Saints and kill them, they shall one
day know whose sheep they were that they have been thus cruel to

Use 2 for Humiliation: 1. That we do so little resemble sheep. 2. That we are
rather woolves then sheep one to another, making a prey one of another. 3.
That we are so ignorant in not discerning sheep from goats and goats from
sheep

Use 3. for Exhortation: 1. To hear the voice of our bleised shepherd, John
10.27. 2. To follow him who goes before us and to be content to be led by him,
ibid. 3. To be of a meek and patient spirit in all our sufferings as becomes
the sheep of Christ, Hebr. 12.1, 2, 3. 4. To feed in our green p^stures and to
thrive under the means God afford; 2 Pet. 3.18. 5. To be thankful that he
folds us in his Church here Psalm. 23. ult. 6. To long to be folded up in
glory. 7. To pity those that want means that are faint and scattered as sheep
without a shepherd. Mat. 9.36. 8. To beware of woolves in sheeps clothing, Mat.
7.15. sheep know one another. 9. To converse together much especially in evil
times, Mal. 3.16. Act. 2.42, 44. 10. To be harmeless as sheep are, Phil. 2.15.

Use 4. for Consolation: 1. That he will not see any of them lost: John 6.29.
and 10.28. 2. That the Lord will be very tender over them, Isai. 40.11. 3. He
will save them from dogs and wolves and all that would prey upon them and
devour them. 4. That he will gather them together into one blessed fold, the
whole company of his Elect ones.

Having finished the first branch of the sixth Doctrine,

That the Lord reckons of the Elect as his Sheep, It remains that we come to
the second part, That the Reprebates are goats.

For the opening of which, let me show, 1. In what respects they may be said to
be goats. 2. The Uses.

For the first, They may be said to be goats in many respects. 1. Goats are
refractory and unruly creatures, all that know them, know this by them: So are
wicked men and reprobates, of refractory and unruly spirits, will not be ruled
neither by the Laws of God nor men, but break through all the f^nces that God
and men have set them: Hence they are called children of Belial, 1 Samuel: 2.12.
and children of the wicked one, Mat: 13.38. and of the Devil, John 8.44. and 1
John 3.10. 2. Goats are harmfull creatures, and make great spoil w^ere they
come, if they get into an orchard, they will do much mischief, and so in other
places, barking and pilling, spoiling and killing all sorts of trees: So are
wicked men and reprobates, harmefull creatures, Prove: 4.16, 17. Psalm. 55.15.
and 36.1, 2, 3, 4.3. Goats will do a great deal of harm in a little time, in
one half hour they will do more harm sometimes then they are worth, when they
come into some places: So it is with these men, Prove. 1.16. Rom: 3.15. Habak.
1.8. 4. Goats especially the great he goats, thrust with side and shoulder and
push the weaker cattle with their horns. Ezekiel: 34.21 He compares Tyrannical
men to such creatures, and indeed great men like the he goats thrust with side
and shoulder, and push with their horns against weaker ones, oppress and vex
them, Isai 3.14, 15 Micah 2.1, 2. and 7.3, 4. 5. Goats are wanton and
libidinous: So are these men, 2 Pet: 2.14, 18. Jude verse 8. Ier: 5.7, 8- Hos.
7.6, 7. 6. Goats are climbing creatures, sometimes will get up to the tops of
houses, and tops of rocks and mountains: So are these of a climbing aspiring
nature, of ambitious spirits Esther 3.1, 2. and 6.6, 7, 8, 9. 2 Samuel: 15.4. Acts
12.21, 22, 23 2 Samuel 17.23. Acts 8.9, 18, 19, 3 John 9. 7. Goats are wandering
creatures, straying from one mountain to an other: So these men, Psalm. 95.10.
Ezekiel: 44.10. Rom: 3 12. Ier: 2, 5. 8. Goats are unsavory and cast a stinking
sent where they come: So do these men, they are unsavory in their
communication, unsavory in their conversation, (...) 1 Cor: 15.32, 33. Ephesians.
4.19. Judges 19.22, there are some that are so unsavory, Isai 3.9. that they
defile all the places where they come, and cause Religion to stink, and the
name of God to be evil spoken of, Rom: 2.24. 1 Samuel 2.17. 9. Goats are more
useful when they are dead then when alive. So evil men when dead make some the
better for them, then some that fear God are bettered in their estates by them,
Eccl. 2. ult. then the poor sometimes have something by them, for Provverbs
28.8. 10. Goats will fight one with another: so evil men will quarrel one
with another, Drunkards at their cups, unclean persons will sight for their
Mistresses, proud persons will contend one with another for pre-eminence and
priority and for the wall, and who should sit highest at feasts, and in
synagogues, and the contention sometimes is so hot, that it comes to loss of
blood. 11. Goats commonly go together and care not to be with the sheep: So
evil men care for no other company but such as are like themselves, drunkards
go together, Isai. 5.12, 13. Adulterers go by troops, Jer. 5.7. Genesis 19.4.
robbers go by companies. Hos. 7.1. gamesters throng together. 12. Goats
commonly have one among them that is the chief, that leads the rest; so among
evil men, and at their several companyes, there is commonly one leading man
that the rest follow in a way of wickedness: Antichrist is ye leader of all his
party (...) Korah was the leader of all his rebellious company, Numb. 16.1.
Demetrius the Silver-smith was the leader in that Tumult at Ephesus, Acts 19.
Alexander the Copper-smith was the leader in that opposition against Paul, 2 Timothy 4.14.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see what dishonor evil men do put upon
themselves by their sins, in that they are compared to Goats, which have so
many evil properties, as have been spoken of. 2. We see the truth of that in 1
S^m. 2.30. God himself styles them Goats: they have put dishonor upon him, and
he will put dishonor upon them. But of that more in the next Note. 3. We see
that men make themselves brutish by their sins: Sin does un-man those that are
given to it. 4. We see how loathsome and unsavory evil men are in the nostrils
of God, in that he compares them to stinking Goats. Hence God is said to
abborre them. Psalm. 10.4. and their services, Isa. 1.11, 12, 13, 14. Hence
their thoughts are said to be an abomination to him, Prove. 15.26. and their
sacrifices, ver. 8. and their way, ver. 9. 5. We see how earthly-minded such
men be, and how sensual; for they follow the lusts of the flesh, and the lusts
of the eyes, and the pride of life, they have no serious thoughts of God, or of
Heaven, but all for the satisfying of their sensual appetites, and unclean
desires, and ambitious projects, and the like. They are Goats, 1 John 2.16. 6.
We see that they that are of a Goat-like spirit, will be in a sad condition in
the day of Judgment; it is a black Brand of a Reprobate. 7. We see what great
difference the Lord puts between men and men, as much as is between Sheep and
Goats. 8. We see that among evil men, they are the worst that are leaders in a
way of wickedness: The leader causes all the unruliness that is in the rest of
the Goats. 9. We see what a sad judgment it is to do much mischief in a little
time against our selves or others; it is a sign of a Reprobate and a Goat. 10.
We see that Reprobates may be known by others, it is easy to know a Goat; a
man of such a spirit, so continuing, we may say is a Reprobate. 11. We see that
the more mischievous any be in the places where they live, the more they
discover themselves to be reprobate Goats; for Goats are mischievous creatures.
12. We see that it is a dreadful sign of Reprobation, to be of an haughty and
aspiring nature, to climb high, and to seek great things in the world, Prove.
16.18. and 18.12. and may be a curb to all proud spirits, that would fain be
counted above the rest of their brethren: that spirit will undo any man,
whoever he is.

Use 2. for Terror: 1. To all wanton, lascivious, libidinous, and unclean
persons, if God give them not Repentance they are in a state of Reprobation, 1
Cor. 6.9, 10. Ephesians. 5.5. 2. To all those that thrust with side and shoulder, and
push with their horns those that are feebler then themselves, that abuse their
power to crush and afflict the poor, and such as have no power to withstand
them: it is a dreadful sign of Reprobation, 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. Zeph. 3.19. 3. To all
those that are unsavory in their communication, in their conversation, that
cast a stinking scent in all places where they come: these are branded by the
holy Ghost for Reprobates, they are like stinking Goats. 4. To all those that
are unruly ones, that will not be fenced in with any Pale of Gods Law or Man's,
but will break all bounds that are set to them, and leap over all hedges and
fences that are made to restrain them: this is a sign of Reprobation, Jer. 5.5,
6.

Use 3. for Examination: Whether we have not the properties of Goats? it
concerns us to look to it, for it will be sad to be found among the number of
Goats at that day.

Q. How shall we know?

Ans. Enough has been spoken for discovery already: but let me lay down two or
three Properties more.

1. If we be of the number of Goats, we shall discover it by the wild trips we
shall take, and by the wild leaps we shall make: for so do Goats they have
many a wild trip and leap; so such are unsettled, leap from place to place, and
keep not within their callings. 2. We shall discover it by the wildness of our
fancies; for Goats have wild fancies. 3. By the dangers we run into; for so do
Goats run into dangerous places, high Rocks, etc. 4. By the places we haunt;
for wild Goats have their haunts in lonesome desolate places: if we haunt bad
places, we had need fear that we are Goats.

Use 4. for Exhortation: To look to it that we be not found of this number at
that day: And for this end we are 1. To forsake the company of such: for Goats
will go together, Prove. 13.20. and 1.10, 11, etc. 2. To beware of filthy and
corrupt communication, Ephesians 4.29. Col. 38. and conversation, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. 3.
Be of an humble spirit, 1 Pet. 5.5. for Goats are high climbing creatures. 4.
Adorn we our Profession by a gracious Conversation; take beed we make not
Religion to be abhorred, and to stink for our sakes. 5. To keep within our
Callings, and not leap from one Calling to another, 1 Cor. 7.20. 6. To beware
of an unruly spirit, Jam. 4.7. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14.

Ver. 33. And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, etc.
Doct. VII. is this That the Lord Jesus will honor his Elect, and put
dishonor upon Reprobates at the day of Judgment. To be set on the right hand,
is a sign of honor, as 1 Kings 2.19. and to be set on the l^ft hand, a token
of dishonor.
Reasons of the former Branch 1. They are they that have ^onoured him in this
life, and he will honor them not only here, but in another world, 1 Samuel
2.30. 2. They have sought for glory and honor by patient continuance in well
doing; they have sought it in a right way, and they shall have it, Romans 2.7. 3.
They are vessels of mercy prepared for it, Rom 9.23. 2 Timothy 2.20. and therefore
shall have honor and glory bestowed upon them. 4. They are they that shall
have dominion over the wicked, Psalm. 49.14. and this honor is part of that
dominion. 5. They are the Brethren of Christ, and so acknowledged by him in the
Text, and John 20.17. Heb. 2.11, 12. and will not he honor his Brethren? 6.
They are the Children of Christ, Heb. 2.13. and he will think no honor too
great to bestow upon them at that day. 7. They are the Members of Christ, who
is the Head of his Body, 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 5.30. and he will surely put honor
upon his Members. 8. They are they that he has bought with an honorable
price, 1 Cor. 6.20. Acts 20.28. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19 And therefore He will be sure
to honor them. 9. They are the first fruits of his Creatures, Jam. 1.18. and
the first fruits are honorably received as a Present fit for Princes. 10. They
are fit for honor, they are wise men: Honor even in this world is not seemly
for a fool, Prove. 26.1. but wise men are fit for honor, they know how to use
it, to prize it, to praise God for it. 11. They are styled Excellent and
Honorable even in this life, Psalm. 16.3. Prove. 12.26. and therefore no wonder
if the Lord put honor upon them at that day, 1 Pet. 2.9. Apoc 1.6. 12. They
are they that shall bear his Image, 1 Cor. 15.49. 1 John 3.2. and therefore no
wonder if he honor them, and in testimony of it set them on his right hand.

Reasons of the latter Branch; viz. Dishonor on Reprobats. 1. They have
dishonored him and despised him in their life upon earth, and he will
dishonor and lightly esteem them at that day, 1 Samuel 2.30. 2. They have been
unfaithful Stewards, and unprofitable Servants, and how should their Master do
any other but put dishonor upon them: would any Master upon earth honor such
servants. Luke 16. 3. They are vessels of dishonor fitted for destruction, 2 Timothy 2.20. Romans 9.22. and therefore no wonder if he put dishonor upon them. 4.
They have used his members and brethren very dishonourably, put all the
disgrace and dishonor they could upon them, Mat. 5.10.11, 12. Joh. 16.33 and
15.20. Hebr. 11.35, 36, 37, 38. and can the Lord do any other but dishonor
them that have put such dishonor upon his precious ones? 5. They have been
ashamed of him and of his words, Mar. 8. ult. and if he be ashamed of them and
refuse to honor them it is not to be marvelled at. 6 They are loathsom^ones,
and as God brings shame and dishonor upon them here, as it is in Prove. 13.5.
so also at that day. 7. They are an abomination to the Lord in their thoughts
in their services, in their ways, Prove. 15.8, 9, 26. and is it not meet then
he should put dishonor upon them. 8 They are fit for nothing else but
dishonor, honor is unseemly for such fools 9. They are a dishonor sometimes
to all their kindred and friends, a dishonor to their families to their
neighbors to the places where they live; and what is meet to be the reward of
such but dishonor? 10. They are the shame and dishonor of their Lords house,
Isai 22.18. and is not dishonor then fit to be their portion? 11. They are
they that dishonor themselves dishonor their bodies by uncleaness by fond
attire, by long hair, 1 Cor. 11. and is it not meet that such should be
dishonored at that day? 12. They have been a dishonor to the Gospel, to the
religion they have professed, they have cast dirt and dishonor upon Churches,
and if so, what can they expect, but dishonor at Christ's hand at that day?

Use 1. of the first Branch for Information 1. We see that the elect Saints
need not be much troubled though they suffer some dishonor in this world, for
Christ will honor them at that day. Acts 5.41. and 16.24, 25. Heb. 12 2. 2. We
see how faithful the Lord is in his promise, in that he will honor them that
honor him. Hebr: 10.23. who would not trust such a faithful one? 3. We see
the blessed condition of the Saints of Christ, that He himself will put honor
upon at that day: Haman thought it a great part of his happiness, that he was
so honored by the King, and that he was in hope of more honor, Esthur 6.5, 6
But on how happy are they that Christ will delight to honor at that day! 4. We
see that we need never repent that we have been servants unto Christ, for we
have served such a master as will surely honor us. If he that waits on his
Master come to honor, Prove 27.18. much more they that wait upon such a master
as he is. 5. We see how contemptible the honor of the World should be, we
should trample upon it with disdai^, rather then lose the hope of Christ's
honor at that day. 6. We see that they that seeks Christ's Honor more then
their own shall be no loosers by it, for he will honor them at that day. 7. We
see with what diligence, and cheerfulness we should go about our Master,
service, for he will Honor us at that day. 8. We see how tender we should be
of the name of Christ, that no dishonor may come to him by our means, for he
will set us at his right hand with Honor.

Of the second Branch. 1. We see how Just the Lord is, and how equal his ways
are in putting dishonor upon them that have dishonored him, Ezekiel 18.25. 2. We
see the folly of those men, that seek Honor from men, and make it the chief
thing that they desire after, alas these little think of the dishonor, that
shall be put upon them at the day of Judgment. 3. We see the mischief that is
in Sin, it puts the greatest dishonor upon those that are given to it. 4. We
see the woeful estate of such Isai. 3 11. 5. We see that evil men shall find
that yt they can least bear at that day, and that is dishonor. 6. We see the
truth of that in Prove. 3.35.

Use 2. for Terror: 1. To all high Climbing ambitious spirits, that covet to
be above others. 2. To those that do all they can to dishonor Christ, they
shall have dishonor for dishonor.

Use 3. for Exhortation: 1. To Saints, 1. To Honor Christ Jesus, Psalm 2.12. 2.
To rejoice in hope of this honor Romans 12.12. 3. To long for the day when it
shall be. Apoc. 22.20. 4. To beware we dishonor not our selves but possess our
vessels in holiness and honor, 1 These. 4.3, 4. 5. To esteem highly of the
reproach of Christ, Heb: 11.26. 6. To do all that we can for him. 7. To suffer
any thing for him. 8. To stick constantly to him.

2. To evil men. 1. To tremble at the dishonor that shall then be put upon
them. 2. To give honor to the Lord by Repentance, Faith, Obedience. 3. To
despise worldly honors for Christ. 4. To hearken to Christ's voice. Prove. 1.22,
23, 24, 25. 5. To think of this day often to prevent this evil. 6. To desire
of God that whatever they have been formerly, they may not be found in that
state.

Use. 4. for Consolation. 1. Against the Worlds dishonor that is put upon us.
2. Against the honor that wicked men have put upon them here. 3. Against all
our fears lest we should share in the dishonor at that day. 4. Against
Satanical whisperers of Goat-like behavior in former times.

Verse 34. Then shall the King say to them on his right hand etc.
Doct. VIII. That before the dreadful Sentence of condemnation be pronounced
against the Reprobate, the elect Saints shall be absolved and acquitted. He
begins with them first.
Reasons. 1. They are appointed to rise first. 1 These. 4.17 and that may be a
pledge of their Sentence of absolution, to be first passed upon them. 2. They
are to sit with Christ to judge the world, and to judge Angels, 1 Cor. 6.2, 3.
and therefore it is meet they should be first absolved and acquitted before ye
sentence of condemnation be passed upon the reprobate. 3. The Lord will have
them to be without fear at that day: now if they should not be first in their
sentence of absolution, they could not choose but be afraid at the dreadful
sentence of condemnation upon reprobates: and therefore that the Judge may take
away all fear from them at that day, he first begins with them, and acquits
them. 4. That day is the day of their Redemption Luke 21.28. and if it were not
so, that they were first acquitted, it could not be so, for they would be in
captivity to trouble and trembling, and then it could not be a day of
redemption to them: 5. That day is a day of refreshing to the Saints, Acts
3.19. and that it may appear to be a day of refreshing to them, they are first
acquitted before the other are condemned. 6. The day is called the day of
Restitution, Acts 3.21. wherein all that the Lord has promised, shall be
restored to them, all their peace, all their comfort, all their pilviledges,
all their honor shall be restored to them at that day: and therefore they are
first to have the sentence of absolution passed upon them. 7. At that day they
are to have dominion over the wicked, Psalm. 49.14. and this is part of their
dominion, that they shall have the sentence of absolution first passed upon
them. 8. That day is the day they love, 2 Ti^: 4.8. The day they look for, Heb.
9.28. the day they wish and pray for, Cant. 8.14. Apo. 22.20 But soit would not
be if; Saints were not first to be absolved. 9 That day is ye day of clearing.
1 Cor. 4.5 wherein hidden things are to be brought to light, and the Saints are
to have praise of God, and when they come to be first absolved, then this will
be. 10. That day is the day of Christ, Phil. 1.6. and the day of God, 2 Pet.
3.12. wherein the Wisdom of Christ and the Justice of Christ shall shine
forth: and all these will appear manifestly, in passing the sentence of
absolution first upon elect ones. 11. That day is called the great day. Jude
verse 6. and that is one reason of it, in that the Lord Jesus will then make
his name so great in the admiring of his Saints, 2 These. 1.10. in the sentence
of absolution that he first passes upon them. 12. That day is the day when he
will reward his servants, Apoc. 22.12. and that is one principal thing in the
reward of his servants, that he does first cheer their hearts, in absolving
them, before he come to pronounce the dreadful sentence of condemnation
against the wicked.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see how tender the Lord Jesus will be of his
Elect^ones at that day, that he will take away all cause of fear from them, he
would have them without fear here, when they have most cause to be afraid,
Lam. 3.57. Isai 41.10. but at that day he would not have them to have so much
as a shadow of fear upon them, and therefore takes a sure course to prevent it
by absolving and acquitting them before be pass the sentence of Condemnation
upon the wicked. 2. We see how desirable that day should be to all ye Lords
Elect Saints, for it is the day wherein they shall be fully acquitted and
absolved by the Judge of quick and dead, well may they long and look for that
blessed day. 3. We see what love we should express to Jesus Christ, how can we
love him enough, that will at that day so lovingly absolve and acquit us, a
Malefactor would for ever love that Judge that when he might have condemned
him, will notwithstanding graciously acquit him, and that before he Condemn
others: So much more should we, 1 Cor. 16.22. 4. We see a reason why Christ
shall be so glorified in his Saints at that day, 2 These. 1.10. there is good
cause why it should be so, for he will first begin with absolving them, before
he do any thing else at ye day of Judgment. 5. We see why he should be the
first and chief with us, the first in our desires, and above all others in our
esteem, Psalm. 73.25. Cant. 5.10. for we shall be the first with him at that
day, he will first acquit us before he do any thing else at the great day. 6.
We see what great reason we have to justify and clear him in all his
dispensations of himself to us, in all the afflictions, troubles, and all the
evils that pass over our heads in this World, Psalm. 51.4. Nehem. 9.33. for as
he does here acquit us in his word, and by his spirit, so at that day he will
with his own blessed mouth pass the blessed sentence of absolution upon us, and
it shall be the first thing that he will then do. 7 We see that what the Lord
calls his Servants to, he will then surely enable them to, and remove that that
might hinder them, he calls his servants then to an honorable work, to Judge
the World, to Judge Angels, and that they may not be in the least surprised
with fear and so hindered, he takes that away and first passes the sentence of
absolution upon them, before he condemn the wicked World. 8. We see what
tenderness we should use toward his Saints and people, we should do what we can
to take them off from all their fears, such as are in temptation that are full
of fears, if we judge them such as Christ has acquitted and will acquit at
that day, we should do as he does, do what we can to take them off from all
their fears, 1 These. 5.14. Isai 35.3, 4. 9. We see the Wisdom and Justice of
Christ Jesus the Judge that he will have nothing to trouble his Saints with, it
is the wisdom and justice of an earthly Judge to encourage those that are
innocent and acquit them: So here 2 Timothy 4.8. 10. We see what great honor the
Lord will put upon his Elect Saints at that day in that he will acquit them and
absolve them before his Father and the Holy Angels and the whole World, it is
an honor to a poor man that is brought before an earthly Judge to be acquitted
before all the company that are present at the assize. Oh what an honor then
will ye Lord Jesus put upon them that are his Elect at that day whom he will
acquit before God, Angels, and Men, when the whole World shall be convented
before him: Such honor have all his Saints, if the Psalmist said so upon a
less occasion, Psalm. 149.9. much more may we say so upon this. 11. We see what
a mercy it is to be acquitted here, in the assurance of the pardon of our Sins,
Psalm. 32.1, 2. for it is a blessed pledge of our acquitting at that day. 12. We
see how cordially the Lord Jesus will absolve his Elect ones at that day, for
he it is that has satisfied divine Justice, and paid all their debts for them,
and therefore will heartily acquit them, and with much cheerfulness pronounce
the sentence of absolution upon them.

Use 2. for Terror to wicked men: For this must needs add to their Horror and
Amazement, that others are acquitted and themselves in a fearful expectation
of being Condemned. So it would be Horror to those who were to be Condemned in
man's Court, to see others acquitted first, and so it will be here, see Luke
13.28.

Use 3. for Humiliation; 1. That we are so full of censuring of this and that
body, how do thou know but that thou censurest them that Christ Jesus will
acquit at that day, Jam. 3.1. 2. That that day is no more longed for and
desired after, they that know they shall be acquitted, having gotten the Kings
pardon, long for the day of Assize? So should we.

Use 4. for Exhortation: 1. To make sure of the pardon of our Sins here, that
we may with comfort expect acquitting and absolution at that day, for Blessed
is he, etc: Psalm. 31.1, 2. 2. To make our calling and Election sure 2 Pet.
1.10. for they are Elect ones that shall be absolved and acquitted at that day.
3. To sigh and groan earnestly in our desires after that blessed day, Apoc.
22.20. Who would not desire to be acquitted and absolved by the Judge in the
Judgment day? 4. To thank Christ Jesus who has procured our pardon, and will
then fully absolve us, and acquit us, Ephesians. 1.7. Mic. 7.18. 5. To be the first
in duty and service unto him who begins with us first in that day in absolving
of us: see for illustration, 2 Samuel 19.11, 12. we had not need be last in our
duty to him, who makes us first in that day. 6. To honor the Lord Jesus by
believing in him who will thus honor us at that day. if 1 Pet. 2.17. then much
more are we to honor him. 7.10 wait patiently for his coming, Jam. 5.7, 8. 8.
To Judge nothing before the time, 1 Cor. 4.5. 9. To be wea^ed from men's
praises, for what are these to this acquitting? 2 Cor. 10.18. 1 These 2.6. 10 To
rulers in the Common Wealth to acquit those that are innocent, Deuteronomy. 25.1.

Use 5. for Consolation: 1. Against all rash private censures and Judgments
passed upon them w^ereby they are condemned of evil men, Christ Jesus will
absolve them at that day, 1 Cor. 4.3, 4. 2. against slanders more publicly
laid upon them, as Mat. 11.18, 19. Act. 28.22. 3. Against the unjust and
wrongful sentences that are passed in Judgment seats on earth Eccl. 3.16, 17.
if they condemn now and Christ acquit then, it is no matter. 4. Against all the
accusations of Satan, and all the false Charges that he has brought in against
them day or night Apoc. 12.10. if Christ acquit at that day, who is he that
shall Condemn? Romans 8.35. 5. Against all the fears the Saints have in their
own hearts, at that acquitting day and ever after they shall be free from all
their fears. 6. Against men's light esteem of them, they shall be honored with
the first, and they only at that day.

Doct IX. is this, That the Lord Jesus in the day of Judgment will show
himself a King to his People. The King shall say, etc:
For opening of which, let me show, 1. Wherein he will show himself a King. 2.
Why. 3. The Uses.

For the first, He will show himself a King. 1. In being invested with glory
as a King, Ver. 31. 2. In the attendance of his Courtiers. 3. In sitting as a
King upon his glorious Throne, Ibid. 4. In Congregating all his Subjects and
Enemies before him. Ver. 33. 5. In disposing them in their several places.
Ver. 33 6. In giving Sentence upon both; Ver. 34, 41, etc. 7. In rewarding his
Subjects, and punishing his Enemies, Ver 46.

For the second Why he will then show himself a King?

Ans. 1. From his Father. 2. From himself 3. From his Servants, both Subjects
and Enemies.

1. From his Father. 1. He has highly exalted him after his deep abasement,
Phil. 2.7, 8, 9, 10. 2. The Father is hereby glorified Ver. 11. 3. The Father
Judges none but has Committed all Judgment to the Son, Joh. 5.22. 4. The
Father has given him Authority to execute Judgment Joh. 5.27 5. The Father
loves the Son and (...) given all things into his hand Joh. 3.33. even all
power in heaven and earth, Mat. 28.18. 6. The Father delights to honor the
Son, and aims at his Honor in Committing all Judgment to him, Jeh. 5.22.23.
Phil. 2.9, 10.

2. From Christ himself, 1. He has fulfilled his Priestly and Prophetical
Office, and neither of them he will exercize at that day but his Kingly Office,
and therefore will show himself a King then. 2. He is the designed King by the
Father Psalm. 2.6. 3. He is appointed to Judge the world, Act. 17.31. 4. He has
foretold his Kingly honor at that day, Mat. 26.64. Apoc. 22.12. 2 Cor 5.10. 5.
He is Christ as well as Jesus, and therefore anointed to the Office of a King
as well as Priest and Prophet, Mat. 1.16. 6. He is already Crowned Heb. 2.9.

3. From his Servants, and that either Subjects or Enemies.

From his Subjects. 1. To comfort them, 1 These. 4.17, 18. 2. To give them rest,
2 These. 6.7, 8. 3 To reward them, Apoc. 22.12. 4. To exalt them to be
assessours with him, 1 Cor. 6.2, 3. 5. To own them as the blessed of the
Father, Mat. 25.34. 6. To possess them of the great inheritance of a Kingdom.
Ibid.

From his Enemies, 1. To terrify them, 2 Cor. 5.10, 11. 2. To bring every
thing to light, 1 Cor. 4.5. 3. To set their Sins in order before them, Psalm
50.21. 4. To convince of all that they have done and spoken against him, Jude
ver. 14, 15. 5. To turn them out of his presence with disdain, verse 41. 6. To
punish them for their wickedness with endless, easeless, remediless torments,
Mark. 9.44.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see how exceeding terrible the day of Judgment
will be to Hypocrites and Reprobates; for the majesty of such a King will daunt
them, his Looks will daunt them, his Words will daunt them and dismay them, his
Attendance will daunt them, it will be a dreadful day to them, 2 Cor 5.10, 11.
2. We see how comfortable it will be to the Saints to see their King, and to
hear the words of his mouth, and that their Savior is to be their Judge.
Surely the children of Sion will rejoice in their King at that day, Psalm.
149.2. 3. We see what need we all had to hearken to him as our Prophet now,
Mat. 17.5. and to get him to be our Priest to make reconciliation, and to
intercede for us; for then he will show himself a King to judge us. 4. We see
what cause we have to serve him awfully, diligently, sincerely and faithfully,
for he will come as a King at that day to be our Judge, Psalm. 2.11. Josh.
24.14. 5. We see the misery of those that reject Christ, and receive not his
words; they reject him that ^ust be then King and Judge, and those words of his
that they have not received, shall judge them at the last day, John 12.48. 6.
We see what need we had to live according to his Laws, and to beware we break
not his Commandments; for he will show himself a King, to avenge himself of all
those that transgress against him, Eccles. 12 13, 14. 7. We see how able he is
to reward all his servants; for he is and will show himself a King at that day:
His reward is with him, Apoc. 22.12. 8. We see what a glorious One we serve,
for we have a King to our Master, that will show (...) self a King at that day,
we need not be ashamed of his service. 9. We see that all his words at that d^y
will be with power, whether in his Sentence of Absolution or Condemnation: see
Eccles 8.4. 10. We see how ready and ^^eedy we should be in doing any thing
that is his will to be done: so do the servants of Princes and Kings. Ezra 7.21.

Use 2 for Terror: 1. To all those that have been rebellious against him
openly, and continued in their rebellion; how will they look this King in the
face? 2. To those that have been secretly treacher us and false to him, this
King will discover them at that day.

Use 3. for Exhortation: 1. To kiss this King, Psa. 2.12 as Sa^uel did Saul 1 Samuel 10.1. 2. To prepare to meet him, Amos 4.12. as Abigail did David, 1 Samuel
25. 3. To do him ^omage, and be subject to him: if we must be subject to the
higher powers here, Rom 13.1. Tit. 3.1. much more should we be subject to him.
4. To rejoice in him, Psalm. 149.2. 5. To love pureness of heart; if an earthly
King will be a friend for this, Prove 22.11. ^ow much more will this King? 6. To
thout forth his praises; people give loud acclamations to their King. 7. To
honor all his Children, for they are the children of a King: if we most Honor
a^ men, 1 Pet. 2.17. then much more the children of this glorious King 8. To
present him with the first and best of what we have, Mal 1.14. to present him
with the fervice of out first and best days. Eccles. 12.1.

Use 4. for Consolation: 1. Against the enemies of Christ and his people, in
that day he will destroy them all 2. Against the rebellions of our natures, and
of our heart; at that day there shall be no risings thereof any more. 3.
Against the hard Laws of Tyrants and their hard usage.

Positive Comforts: 1 That we shall ever enjoy peace in his Kingdom. 2. That
we shall be always in the presence of our King. 3. That he will be as willing
as able to reward his fervants. 4. That he will rule us, and bless us, and be a
defense to us. 5. That we shall be pleased with what he does: see 2 Samuel 3 36.

Doct. X. is this, That the Lord Jesus will at the last day welcome an his
Elect ones, and (...) them come to him to enjoy his sweet prejence.
Reasons. 1. From his Father. 2. From Himself. 3. From his Saints.

From his Father. 1. He has blessed them. So the text. But of that more
hereafter. 2. He has given his Son out of love to them, Joh. 3.16. and them to
him, Heb. 2.13 therefore no wonder if the Son be so willing to welcome and
receive his Fathers gift. 3. The Fathers pleasure is to give them the Kingdom,
Luke 12.32. and if the Father so honor them, the Son will honor them with a
blessed welcome into his sweet presence. 4. The Father has called them to the
fellowship of his Son, 1 Cor. 1.9. and therefore no wonder if the Son admit
such into his fellowship at that day. 5. The Father has delight in the sight
of the Lord Jesus and his children together, Heb. 2.13. and therefore no wonder
if he be so willing to bid them come to him. 6. The Fathers will is that none
of them should be lost, John 6.39 and if so, the Son cannot but gather them
together to himself.

2. From Christ himself. 1. He has promised, that where he is, they shall be
also, John 14.3. 2. He has prepared a place for them, ibid. that they may be
together. 3. He prayed for this when he was on earth, John 17.24. 4. He loves
them, Deuteronomy. 33.3. Psalm. 146.8. Gal. 2 20. and they that love, are never well
but when they are together. 5. He takes pleasure in his people, Cant. 2.14.
Psalm. 149.4. and if here, much more at that day, when all their rags are off,
when in their Robes 6. He shows himself and his Children as a pleasant sight
for the Father to behold, Heb. 2.13. and therefore cannot but at that day give
them admittance into sweetest fellowship with him, and say Come to them.

3. From the Elect Saints themselves. 1. They are Members of his Body, of his
Flesh, and of his Bones, Ephesians. 5.30. 2. They are his Brethren: so the Text: and
brotherly Communion he thinks is meet; Brethren love to be together. 3. They
have had fellowship with him on earth, 1 John 1.3. and are styled his fellows,
Psalm. 45.7. and will not he bid his fellows welcome at that day? 4. They have
been troubled for nothing more then his absence, Lam. 1.16. 5. They have desred
his presence when they have wanted it, Psalm. 42.1, 2. and 63.1, 2. and 84.1, 2.
Jerem. 14.8, 9. 6. They have longed earnestly for the full fruition of him,
Cant. 8. ult. Rev. 22.20. and have looked for him, Phil. 3.20

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see the great love of the Lord Jesus, that not
only causes us to come to him here in a state of Grace, but admits us, and
invites us to come to him in a state of Glory. What love is there like to this
love? Ephesians 3.18, 19. 2. We see the truth of that in John 6.37. Him that comes
to me, I will in no wise cast out. 3. We see what earnest denres we should
have, to have communion and fellowship with him here, for he will admit us at
that day into full communion and fellowship with him, Job 22.21. 1 John 13.4.
We see that the enjoyment of fellowship with Christ at that day, is the top of
Glory, and the Heaven of Heaven it self. Christ said all and enough, when he
said, Luke 23.43. To day shall thou be with me: and the Apotle in Philip. 1.23.
1 Thessalonians. 4.17, 18. 5. We see how earnestly we should sign and breather in our
desires after that day, to hear tha^ joyful word, Come. Well may the Spirit and
the Bride say, Come, Rev. 22.17. well may each faithful Soul say, Come, to him,
who will at that day say Come, to them, Rev. 22.20. 6. We see how ready we
should be to come at his call, to come to him in a way of believing, John 6.35.
to come to him in a way of Repentance, Isa. 21.12. to come to him in a way of
Obedience, Rev. 3.20. Well may we come to him all these ways, who will speak
that blessed word Come, to us at that day. 7. We see that we need not disdain
to come after him, and take up his Cross, for this sweet word Come, will be
comfort enough after all our sufferings with him, and for him. 8. We see how
joyfully we should call one upon another, to come and assemble together into
his House and Courts, Isa. 2.2, 3. M^cah 4.1, 2. Zech. 8.20, 21, 22. We may
well come to meet him there, that will at that day meet with us, and say Come
to us. 9. We see what great encouragement we have to invite him to come to
partake in our Services and Duties, as Cant 4. ult. This blessed Come of his at
the last day, should put us upon inviting him to come to what we provide for
him, his own precious fruits. 10. We see that the very meanest and poorest, and
such as are most despicable in their own and others eyes, shall be then owned
and accepted of him, and entertained into sweetest fellowship with him, for he
shall say Come to them, at that day.

Use 2. for Exhertation: 1. To come before his presence with singing, Psalm
100.2. And let this Come, put life and cheerfulness into all our Services in
public that are to be performed to him. 2. To come together in our more
private Services, as they did of old, Mal 3.16. 3. To come often before him in
secret Duties, Mat^h. 6.^, 6, 16. Let this Come, make us come and perform
secret duties. 4. To own him, and his Cause, and Saints, that will then own us.
15. To admire the Lords mercy to us, that he should give us any hope of hearing
such a joyful word, who have deserved to be for ever abdicated from his
presence. 6. To love his appearing: well may we do so, ^ Tim. 1.8. 7. To give
all diligence to make our calling and elect on sure, 2 Pet. 1 10. for Elect
ones shall never fall. 8. To have no fellowship with the workers of iniquity,
for they are no meet company for those that Christ will say Come unto at that
d^y. 9 To bewail our long delays in coming to him: He has said Turn ye, turn
ye etc. Ezekiel. 33.11. and. When shall it once be? Jerem. 13.27. but we have and
him stay long. 10. To pray earnestly that we may be in that number, Luke 21.36.
to stand before the Son of man.

Use 3. for Consolation: 1. Against the separation that others make from us: If
Christ will own us, and say Come, it is no matter. 2. Against men's separating us
from their company, Luke 6.22. 3. Against Christ's seeming derelictions here,
they may be the better born, if at that day he say Come to us. 4. Against
Satan's whisperings and false charges.

Positive Comforts. 1. That we are happy, if all go, if Christ s^y Come to us
at that day. 2. That if we never come to any thing in this world, it is no
matter if he say Come at that day. 3. That they are blessed that have a portion
in him, for he will then say Come.

Ver. 34. Come ye blessed of my Father etc.
Doct. XI is this That the Elect Saints are the Fathers Blessed ones, an^ shall
be pronounced such by the Lord Jesus at the last and great day.
For opening of which let me show, 1. Wherein they are the Fathers Blessed
ones. 2. How they come to be his blessed ones. 3. Why pronounced so. 4. The
Uses.

For the first: Wherein hey are his blessed ones?

Answ. 1. He Ble^^^th the^ wi^h all Spiritual Blessings in Heavenly places in
Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 1.3.^. He Blesses them with the Blessing of Peace. Psalm
29. ult. peace External. Psalm. 147.13, 14 Peace Internal, Rom 5.1. Peace
Eternal Isai 57.2. 3. He Bleseth the^ with his Favor, Psalm. 5.12. 4. He
blesses them with deliverance from their Enemies, Psalm. 3.8. Deuteronomy. 28.7. 5. He
Blesses them with success in their callings, Psalm. 1.3. 6. He Blesses them
with fruitfulness in the season of it, ibid, it is a season to have the Soul
afflicted in a Fast; they shall in that season bring forth that fruit: it is a
season to rejoice in a feast day, they shall bring forth that fruit in that
season: it is a season to consider in the day of adversity, Eccles. 7.14. a
season to pray in an afflicted condition, Jam 5.13. it is a season to sing
Psalm^ in an estate of Mirth, and to be Joyful in prosperity: they shall bring
forth these fruits in their seasons. 7. He Blesses them in their Families, in
their yoke fellows, in their Children, in their servants, and sojourners,
Deuteronomy. 28.4 8. He Blesses them with the great Blessing of Evernal Life. 9. He
Blesses them in their outward Estate, Deuteronomy. 28.4, 5, 8, 11. 10 He blesses
them in all places where they come, Deuteronomy. 28 3. 11. He blesses them in all
estates that they are brought into, prosperity is blessed to them, as to David,
and Solomon, and diverse others, Abraham, and Lot, with many more. Adversity is
blessed to them as to Job and Heman, and sundry more: see Romans 8.28. no wind
blows but brings them in profit, South Wind, North Wind make their Spices flow,
Cant. 4.16. 12. He blesses them of what rank and state soever they be of, and
in all their relations, high and low, rich and poor, Noble and Ignoble: P^rents
are related to Children, and Children to Parents, he blesses both, Genesis 17.7.
Psalm 15.13, 14, 15. Husbands to Wives, and Wives to Husbands, he blesses both:
how many blessed couples do we meet with in Scripture? Ministers to People, and
People to Ministers; how many blessed societies have there been, and are at
this day? 13. He blesses them in their Spirits and Souls, by being with their
Spirits by speaking in them, for it is the Spirit of their Father that speaks
in them, Mat. 10.20. by increasing his graces in them Psalm. 92.12.13, 14. Rev
2.19 14. He blesses them with his presence in his Ordinances Psalm 84.4.

Quest. 2. How come they to be his blessed ones?

Answ. 1. He has chosen them, Ephesians. 1.3, 4. 2. He has Adopted them, Ephesians.
1.5. 3. He has effectually called them, Rom 8.30. 1 Pet. 3.9. 4. He has
justified and pardoned them, and therefore blessed them Psalm. 32.1, 2. 5. He
has sent his Son to bless them, Acts 3.26. 6. Me has given his Spirit to
them, Ephesians. 1.14, 20, 22. 7. He has prepared a kingdom for them, so the text.
8. He has made us meet for this estate, Col. 1.12.

Quest. 3. Why shall they be pronounced such at that day?

Answ. 1. For the glory of the Father. Son, and Spirit, f^r these are glorified
by this. 2. For the honor of the elect, for it will be their great honor to
have this noble style put upon them at that day.

Use 1. For Information, 1. We see of what precious esteem the Saint should be
to us, for they are the Fathers bleded ones, their names should be precious,
their souls precious, their lives precious, their deaths precious, every way
precious they should be, for the Father highly priaeth them in making them his
blessed ones. 2. We see that we can never be thankful enough to the blessed
Father, never bless him enough who thus blesses us, Coloss. 1.12. Ephesians. 1.3,
4. Neh. 9.5. 3. We see that it is no matter though men curse us, as long as we
are the Fathers blessed ones, Psalm 109.28. David was never the worse for
Shimess cur^ing, 2 Samuel 16. being one that was blessed of the Father. 4. We see
what reason Governors have to bless those under them, 1 King 8.55. Numb
6.23-27. Kuth 2.4. Genesis 28.1, 3, 4. 5. We see how denrable that day should be
to u^ wherein we shall be pronounced the ble^sed of the Father, that will be a
blessed d^y indeed, Cant. 8. ult. Apoc. 22.20. 6. We see what great reason we
have to bless the Lords people, for they are the Fathers blessed ones: we
should bless them with our prayers, bless them with our salutations, bless them
with our hearty desires for them, every way bless them; for the Father has
begun to us, and led us the way in making them his blessed ones, Romans 12.14. 1
Pet. 3.9. 7. We see where is the original and rise of all our blessedness, and
whence it comes to us, it is from the blessed Father, he is the fountain of
it, we should never have been blessed had it not been for this blessed Spring,
Acts 3.26. John 3.16. 8. We see that the Lords Saints shall be blessed, for the
Father has blessed them: if Isaac said Gen 27.33. much more is it true here.
9. We see the vanity of those that hold that the Heathens were saved, and are
now blessed ones, how can this be, when they neither knew the Father nor the
Son by whom they must be blessed. 10. We see what reason we have to bless
those that curse us, for ^e are called to inherit a blessing and are the Lords
blessed ones Mat. 5.44. 1 Pet. 3.9. 11. We see how unlike they are to the
blessed Father, that curse those that he has blessed, see Psalm. 109.17, 18,
19. and we see the truth of that Genesis 12.3. 12. We see that all those
afflictions that we meet with here, should be nothing to us, for in the midst
of all we are the Fathers blessed ones.

Use 2. For Terror, 1. To those that curse them, Numb. 23.8. 2. To those that
pray not for them, nor bless them, but do all the despite they can against
them, 2 Samuel 16. Mat. 5.44. 3. To those that despise the Fathers blessing. 4.
To those that hate them for this blessing, as Genesis 27.41.

Use 3. For Exhortation, 1. To bless him that blesses us, Ephesians. 1.3. 2. To
delight in blessing them that are his blessed ones, Psalm. 109.17. 3. To honor
the Lord Jesus that will honor us at that day, and style us his Fathers
blessed ones, John 5.22 23. 4. To show that we are the Fathers blessed ones, by
being a blessing in all places where we come, Genesis 12.2. 5. To bless our
families, 2 Samuel 6.20. 6. To believe our selves, and stir up others in
temptation to believe that they are the blessed of the Lord, Psalm. 115.15. 7.
To detest the very thought of cursing him who makes us his blessed ones,
Levit. 24 15, 16, 23. If to revile or curse an Earthly Ruler be so great and
dangerous an evil, Exodus 22.28. Eccles 10.20. what is it then to have an evil
thought or word concerning the blessed God? 8. To beware we bless not with the
mouth, and curse inwardly, Psalm. 62.4. 9. To be far from envying evil men for
what they have, for we are above them in the Fathers blessing, Psalm. 73.3. 10.
To love the Father and Son.

Use 4. For Consolation, 1. Against the curses of sinful men, they shall not
take against us, Prove. 26.2. 2 Samuel 16.12. Neh. 13.2. 2. Against the
dreadfulness of the day of Judgment, we shall then be pronounced the Fathers
blessed ones. 3. Against our own sinful unbelieving thoughts. 4. Against the
misprisions of men, they think evil of us, but it matters not if we be the
blessed of the Father. 5. Against the forest afflictions and temptations, they
shall be blessed to us, Romans 8.28.

Verse 34. Inherit the Kingdom etc.
Doct. XII. is this, That the estate that the Saints are to enjoy in Heaven, is
a Kingdom. Luke 12.32. Iam 2.5. Luke 22.28, 29. 2 Timothy 4.18.
For opening of which, let me show, 1. In what respects it may be called a
Kingdom. 2. Whence it is that they are to be possessed of this Kingdom. 3.
What manner of Kingdom it is. 4. Why they shall have such a Kingdom. 5. The
Uses.

For the first, it may be called a Kingdom, 1. In regard of the height of
honor that they shall there be exalted to: for a Kingdom is the highest
honor upon earth; and hence it is called honor, Romans 2.7. 2. In regard of the
height of happiness that there they are advanced to, for a Kingdom is the
highest happiness in the world, and that Kingdom much more; they enjoy highest
happiness there. If they be happy that dwell in Gods house on earth, Psalm.
^4.4. much more they that dwell there. 3. In regard of the pleasures that there
they partake of, Psalm. 16.11. A Kingdom yields store of delights and
pleasures: so this Kingdom. 4. In regard of the Riches of it. A Kingdom
yields great wealth, the treasures of a Kingdom are unknown: so here, Luke
12.33. 5. In regard of the Dominion they shall have over the wicked, Psalm.
49.14. They that enjoy a Kingdom have dominion over all: so here. 6. In regard
of the Peace they have there; that is a Kingdom indeed where there is peace,
otherwise it is brought to desolation, Mat. 12.25. Now in Heaven they are all
at peace. Job 25.2. hence Isa. 57.2. 7. In regard of the satiety and fullness of
satisfaction that it yields: What is there that may not be had in a Kingdom?
much more may it be had there, Psalm. 17.15. If that be true in Psalm. 36.8. Oh
what abundant satisfaction is there in Heaven! 8. In regard of the stability of
their estates there: A Kingdom is a stable thing, much more this, Heb. 12.28.
9. In regard of the spaciousness of the place: A Kingdom is a spacious place,
John 14.2. 10. In regard of the just Laws and Rules that are observed there:
the will of God is there done, Mat. 6.10.

Q. 2. Whence is it that they are to be possessed of this Kingdom?

Ans. 1. By the Purchase of Christ, Ephesians. 1.14. 2. By the Appointment of Christ,
Luke 22.29. 3. By the Promise of Christ, Jam. 2.5. 4. By the Prayer of Christ,
John 17.24. Heb 9.24. 5. By the Possession of Christ for us, Heb 6.20. 6. By
the Preparation of Christ, Joh. 14.2, 3, 7. By the sweet Invitement of Christ:
so the Text.

Q. 3. What manner of Kingdom is it?

Ans. 1. It is an Eternal Kingdom, 2 Pet. 1.11. 1 Pet. 5.10. 2. It is an
Incorruptible Kingdom, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4. 2 Cor. 9.25. Mat. 6.20. 3. It is an
Undefiled Kingdom, 2. Pet. 1.4. Rev. 21. ult. 4. It is a Safe Kingdom, Mat.
6.20. we shall never lose our treasure there. 5. It is a Joyful Kingdom, Mat.
25.21, 23. 6. It is a Glorious Kingdom, Psalm. 145.11. 7. It is a Kingdom that
cannot be moved, Heb. 12.28.

Q. 4. Why shall they have such a Kingdom?

Ans 1. It is prepared of old for them: see the Text. 2. It is the Fathers good
pleasure to give it, Luke 12.32. 3. They are Sons and Heirs, Romans 8.17. 4. They
are preserved to it, 2 Timothy 4.18. 5. They are called to it, 1 Pet. 5.10. 6.
They have the earnest of it, Ephesians 1.14. 7. They are Conquerours, Rev. 3.21.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see what reason we have to prize the Lord Jesus,
by whom we are invested into this high, and honorable, and happy condition,
Mat. 13.45, 46. 1 Pet. 2.7. 2. We see what little reason we have to despise the
poor of this world, for Jam. 2.5. they are heirs of the Kingdom. 3. We see the
truth of that in 1 Pet. 2.9. Rev. 1.6. and 5.10. 4. We see what thanks we
should render to Christ Jesus for this great dignity, Rev. 1.6. and 5.9, 10. 5
We see what great minds we should have, and what great looks, for we are to
have a Kingdom, 2 Cor. 4.18. Col. 3.1, 2. we should not be taken up with these
low matters here. 6. We see what great cause we have not to fear the want of
outward things, for he has given us that that is better, Luke 12.32. 7. We see
what cause we have to exercise Faith, for our preservation to this happy
estate, 2 Timothy 4 18. 8. We see what reason we have to pray for the Coming of
the Lords Kingdom, Mat. 6.10. that we and all the faithful may share in it,
and be partakers of it. 9. We see with what rejoicing we should think of the
day of Judgment, for it is the day of our receiving a Kingdom, our
Coronation-day: Princes rejoice to think of the day of their Instalment into
their Kingdoms, how much more should we? 10. We see what preparations we
should make for this day: great preparations are made for the days wherein
Kings are Crowned; Oh what prepations should we then make? Mat. 21.44. Luke
12.40.

Use 2. for Terror: 1. To those that by their sins deprive themselves of this
estate, their loss is great, for they deprive them selves of a glorious
Kingdom: they are foolish Kings that provoke God to rend the Kingdoms on
earth from them, as Saul, and Rehoboam, and others have done; but no folly like
theirs, that lose for trifles such a Kingdom as we speak of, 1 Cor 6.9, 10. 2.
To those that despise the tenders of grace in the Gospel, and the ways of God
held out to them therein, they despise a Kingdom. 3. To those that walk like
Peasants rather then Princes, Philip. 3.19.

Use 3. for Exhortation: 1. To be of a Kingly spirit, having the great things
of a Kingdom in our eye and heart, Mat 6.33. 2. To be willing to suffer with
Christ, Luke 22.28, 29. 2 Timothy 2.12. 3. To make our Calling and Election sure,
2 Pet. 1.10, 11. 4. To let all go, rather the^ lose this Kingdom: Lusts,
Honors, Pleasures, Wealth, Life, Heb. 11.35. 5 To enjoy all here weanedly,
Psalm. 131.1, 2. 1 Cor. 7.-9, 30 6. To bless God for this great dignity, 1 Pet.
1.3, 4 7. To strive for it, 1 Cor. 9.25. what strife is there for earthly
Kingdoms? many battles are fought for them. 8 To have Grace, whereby we may
serve God acceptably, with reverence and godly fear, Heb. 12.28. 9. To be
Conquerours. Rev. 3.21. 10. To beware we go not with the multitude, for it is
the little Flock that have the Kingdom, Luke 12.3^. 11. To continue patiently
in well doing, Romans 2.7. 12. To be rich in Faith, Jam. 2.5.

Use 4. for consolation: 1. Against Poverty in the world, Jam. 2.5. (...)
Against Persecutions from the world, 2 Timothy 2.12. 3. Against Satan's wiles and
snares; he may disturb them in their peace, but cannot take their Kingdom from
them. 4. Against men's low esteem of them, and unworthy dealings with them; they
are esteemed and used as Peasants, but they shall be Princes.

Positive Comforts 1. That all their enemies shall fall. 2. That they shall
ever enjoy peace 3. That they shall be made truly great. 4. That they shall
never be moved out of their estate.

Ver. 34. Inherit the Kingdom, etc.
Doct. XIII. That the Kingdom that the Saints shall enjoy in Heaven is estatea
upon them as an Inheritance: So 1 Pet. 1.3, 4 Heb 9.15. Acts 20.32. and 26.18.
Ephesians. 1.11, 14 Coloss 1.12. and 3.24.
For opening of which, let me show, 1. In what respects it may be said to be an
Inheritance. 2. What manner of Inheritance it is. 3. Why they have it by
Inheritance. 4. The Uses.

For the first: It may be said to be an Inheritance, 1. In regard of the
pu^chase of it, Ephesians. 1.14. Christ has purchased it for us: Inheritances are so
netimes purchased; so this. 2. In regard of the gift of it: Inheritances are
made over by gift; so this, Acts 20.32. Coloss. 3.24. 3. In regard of the new
birth that we are partakers of, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4. Inheritances are often by birth;
so this: not by our first birth, (for that damns us) but by the second. 4. In
regard of the honor and dignity of it: Inheritances are honorable things that
are estated upon men, much more this; no honor like to this. 5. In regard of
the nonalienation of it: Inheritances are not alienated to strangers; so this
Inheritance is not alienated to others, but is the propriety of the Saints,
Acts 20.32. and 26.18. 6. In regard of the right of it to the first born:
Inheritances are the right of the first born, so this Inheritance, Heb. 12.23.
7. In regard of the Conveyance of it: an Inheritance is conveyed by the death
of a father or friend; so is this Inheritance conveyed to us by the death of
Christ, Heb. 9.15, 16. 8. In regard of the reservation of it, 1 Pet. 1.4.
Inheritances are reserved for the right heirs; so this.

Q. 2. What manner of Inheritance is it?

Ans. 1. It is incorruptible, 1 Pet. 1.4. 2. It is undefiled, ibid. 3. It f^des
not away, ibid. Heb. 9.15. 4. It is a goodly Inheritance, Psalm. 16.6. 5. It is
a large Inheritance, He^. 11.14, 16. John 14.2. 6. It is a costly Inheritance,
Heb. 9.15, 16. 7. It is a glorious Inheritance, Ephesians. 1, 18. 8. It is a
bountiful Inheritance, Col: 3.24. 9. It is a joyful Inheritance, Mat. 25.21, 23.

Q. 3. Why have they it by Inheritance?

Ans. 1. They are joint heirs with Christ, Rom: 8.17. 2. It is prepared for
them: so the Text. 3. They are called to it, 1 Pet: 3.9. and 5.10. 4. They have
the promise of it, Heb: 9.15. 5. They have the earnest of it, Ephesians: 1.14. 6.
They have the hope of it, Col: 1.5. 7. They have a taste of it in the peace and
joy that they have here in their souls, Rom: 5.1, 2. 1 Pet. 1.8. 8. The Lord
Jesus their Head has taken possession of it for them, Heb: 6.20. 9. The
writings are drawn, the Seals put to, the Witnesses are for the confirmation of
it, Heb: 6.17, 18. Ephesians: 1.13. 1 John 5.7, 8, 11. 10. They long for the day when
they shall come to be possessed of it, as other heirs do, Cant: 8. ult. Rev:
22.20.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see what a firm state the Saints shall enjoy in
Heaven, for its an inheritance; for what is held by inheritance is most firm,
and sure, and stable hold, they shall never be removed from their blessed
Tenure in Heaven. 2. We see what a peaceable possession we shall there enjoy:
Inheritances, of all other Tenures, are enjoyed most peaceably; they are most
unquestionable tenures, and therefore most peaceably possessed: so this; we
shall never be disturbed when we come in Heaven. 3. We see what desires we
should have after the possession of that estate: young heirs in minority long
to be at a full^ge, that they may possess their inheritances; so should we,
that we may possess ours. 4. We see in what esteem the Saints should be with
us, for they are great heirs, and shall have a great inheritance another day:
Great heirs on earth are esteemed highly; how much more should these? Psalm.
16.3. 5. We see what speedy endeavors we should use to get this inheritance:
other inheritances are too hastily gotten, Pro. 20.21. but we cannot be too
speedy in making sure of this inheritance, 2 Pet. 1.10, 11. 6. We see what a
rich and glorious estate the Lord has called his Saints unto in Heaven, it is
an inheritance, Ephesians: 1.17, 18. 7. We see a reason of the great Attendance that
the Saints have Heb: 1.14. Psalm: 34.7. and 91.11. 8. We see how weanedly we
should enjoy what we have here, for our inheritance is not yet come, Heb: 11.9.
9. We see why husbands should instruct their wives, 1 Pet: 3.7. 10. We see what
little reason men have to be much taken with the greatness of any earthly
inheritance 11. We see a reason of that joy in Heaven, Luke 15.7, 10.

Use 2. for Terror: 1. To those that sell away the hope of this inheritance
for trifles, as E^an did his birthright. 2. To those that desperately out
themselves of this inheritance by their gross sins, 1 Cor: 6.9, 10. Ephesians: 5.5.
Gal: 5.19, 20, 21.

Use 3. for Exhortation: 1. To bear afflictions in our minority patiently, for
our inheritance will shortly come to us: young heirs endure hardship in their
minority; so must we, Gal: 4.1. Heb: 12.1, 2. 2. To long to be at our full age,
to be po^sened of our inheritance: so do other heirs, and so should we. 3. To
make sure of this inheritance. And for that end, (1) Look to our Adoption, Romans
8.15, 16, 17. (2) Look to our Sanctification, Acts 20.3^. and 26.18. (3) Look
to our Justification, Tit: 3 7. (4) Look to our interest in the Covenant,
Galat: 3.18. (5) Look to our Patience, Heb: 6.12, 15. (6) Look we be
victorions, Rev: 21.7 (7) Look we get the earnest of it, Ephesians: 1.14, 4. To
endeavor to be meet for this estate, Coloss: 1.12, And for this end, (1) Be in
expectation of it, Heb: 11.20. (2) Be thankful for it, Col: 1.12. (3) Seek for
it, and defire after it, Heb: 11.13, 14, 15, 16. (4) Improve it; they are meet
for an inheritance that can improve it, Heb: 12.28. Col: 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 1
John 3.2, 3. (5) Let all go rather then Ios^ it, Heb: 10.34. (6) Seek it first,
Mat: 6.33. (7) Sufferfor it, 1 Pet: 5.10. 2 Thessalonians: 1.4.^5. (8) Rejoice in hope
of ^t, Rom: 5.2. and 12.12. (9) Take it by violence, Mat: 11.12. (10) Wait
patiently for it, Hebr: 10.36, 37. 5. To prize it highly: how do men prize
their inheritances? 6. To beware we part not with it: see 1 Kings 21.3. 7. To
lose our lives rather then let it go, ibid. 8. To estate our Children in this
inheritance, Prove: 13.22. 9. To be content though we have no earthly
inheritance; we are sure of that tha'ts better, Heb: 10.34. and 11.16. 10. To
rejoice in Christ Jesus the procurer of it, Phil: 3.4.

Use 4. for Consolation: 1. Against all earthly discouragements and wants. 2.
Against Satan's accusations: he shall not out us. 3. Against our own suspicions.
4. Against men's cavils.

2. Positive Comforts: 1. That we shall never be turned out of our inheritance.
2. That enemies cannot strip us of it, as I^am. 5.1, 2. 3. That within a little
time we shall enjoy it, Heb. 10.36, 37.

Verse 34. Inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the
world.
Doct. XIV. That the Kingdom that the Saints shall inherit, has been prepared
for them from all Eternity. For so this phrase here used signifies; as we may
see it in other places, Ephesians. 1.4. 2 Timothy 1.9.
For opening of which, let me show, 1. Wherein it was prepared for them. 2.
How. 3. The Uses.

1. It was prepared in the Counsel of God, the three Glorious Persons consulted
together from Eternity, to make men happy, and thought of this Kingdom that
they should inherit, Ephesians. 1.11. 2. It was prepared in the Eternal Purpose of
God, Ephesians 1.9. and 3.11. Romans 8.28. 2 Timothy 1.9. 3. It was prepared in the
Appointment of God, 1 These 5.9. 4. It was prepared in the eternal good pleasure
of God, Luke 12.32. Ephesians. 1.5. 5. It was prepared in the wise Conclusion that
the three Glorious Persons made in their consultation about them, the result of
which was this. 6. It was prepared in the liberal and free donation of it,
Ephesians. 2.8. Romans 6. ult.

Quest. 2. How has it been prepared thus of old for them?

Answ. 1. He promised it to Christ of old, Titus 1.2. 2. He ordained Christ to
be the procurer and purchaser of this inheritance of old, 1 Pet. 1.20. Rev:
13.8. 3. He has given it to us in Christ of old, 2 Timothy 1.9. 4. He has loved
us of old, Ier. 31.3. and from that love has prepared this inheritance for us,
Ephesians. 1.3, 4. 5. He has foreknown us of old, Romans 8.29. 6. He has ordained
us of old to this blessed condition, Acts 13.48.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see that this inheritance is not made over to us
by any merit of ours, for it was before we were, yea before the World was, and
what could we deserve when we were not in being? 2 Timothy 1.9. 2. We see the
unspeakable love of God toward us, that prepared such a blessed condition for
us before we had any being, Oh, the height, depth, ^and breadth, and length of
this love of his! it passes all our knowledge, Ephesians. 3.18, 19. well we may
admire it and adore it, but we cannot search it out, that which is said of God
himself, is most true of his love, Job. 11.7, 8, 9. 3. We see that God ^a's
been before hand with us in a preventing way of grace, 1 John 4.10, 19. we did
not begin with him in a way of love, but he began with us, else we had never
known what love had meant^ he gave us the first smile, and the first kiss. 4.
We see what a bountiful, and royal giver the Lord is, that prepared such a
royal inheritance for us, as a Kingdom is, no royalty like his, as no
unworthyness like ours, so no bounty like his, Ephesians. 2.4, 5, 6. 5. We see that
all the Lords Saints shall certainly come to the possession of their
inheritance, and shall not be hindered, or deprived of it, for it was of old,
even from everlasting prepared for them, Joh. 10.27, 28, 29. 6. We see how ever
mindful we should be of such an old friend, and that we should never forget or
forsake him, Thine own friend, and thy fathers friend, forget not, Prove. 27.10.
and if such an old friend may not be forsaken, much less such an old friend as
God is. 7. We see what preparation we should make for him in our hearts that
has prepared such an inheritance for us, Psalm. 24.7, 8, 9, 10. Rev. 3.20. 8.
We see what great cause we have to be thankful to him that has made us meet
for such an inheritance Col. 1.12. 9. We see what reason we have to prepare for
our Lords coming, and to get all things ready, all the graces of the Spirit,
all those Brace lets, and Jewels, and Earrings, and golden Abilliments that
may fit us for this Kingdom that is prepared for us, Mat. 24.44. Luke 12.35,
36, 37. 10. We see what preparation we should make to meet him at his house,
and especially at his Table, 1 Cor. 11.28. if he prepare a Kingdom for us, we
may well prepare for his coming now. 11. We see that Election is the foundation
of our Salvation. 12. We see the truth of that in 2 Timothy 2.19.

Use 2. for Humiliation: 1. That our desires are no more stirring after this
prepared inheritance. 2. That we have so few thoughts of Gods old love, in
preparing a Kingdom for us.

Use 3. for Exhortation: 1. To enjoy our earthly inheritances weanedly, for we
have another manner of inheritance prepared for us of old. This concerns rich
men. 2. To do as much good as we can with what God gives us to inherit here,
that we may make sure of this prepared inheritance, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19. Luke
16.9. 3. To poor ones that have little to inherit here, they have a Kingdom
prepared for them of old to be their inheritance, Jam. 2.5. 4. To all Godly
ones not to envy the Wicked their great matters here, for they have a better
inheritance prepared for them and coming in to them, Psalm. 73.3.24. 5. To
ascribe all to Gods grace herein, Ephesians. 2.5, 8. 6. To prepare our hearts in
every duty, in Prayer, Psalm. 10.17. in Preaching 2 Timothy 2.15. in hearing, Act.
10.33. in conference, Mal. ^.16. in meditation, Genesis 24.63. in drawing near to
the Lords Table, 2 Chro. 30.18, 19. 7. To love the Lord, that of old made such
preparation for us. 8. To prepare for such a state, (1) A royal spirit, 1 Pet.
2.9. (2.) An humble Spirit, Luke 18.14. (3.) A believing spirit Ephesians. 2.8, (4)
An holy Spirit, Heb. 12.14. 1 John 3.3. 9. To rejoice to think of meeting with
such an old friend. 10. To walk worthy of the Lord, 1 These. 2.11, 12.

Use 4. for Consolation: 1. Against being brought to nothing here, Saints have
nothing (in comparison) prepared for them in this world. 2. Against troubles of
yesterday that have come to us. 3. Against our poor services, we have it not
for them.

Positive Comforts. 1. That it is sure to them, being of old prepared. 2. That
it is most freely given to them, because prepared before they were. 3. That it
is a great inheritance. 4. That it comes to us from greatest love.

Ver. 35, 36. For I was an hungered, etc.
Doct. XV. is this, That none of the sins of the godly that they have committed
and repented of, shall be spoken of at the day of Judgment; but that which
they have done well here, shall be spoken of and mentioned in that day. All
that is said to be then spoken of, is concerning their good works, but not a
word of their sins.
For opening the first Branch, let me show, 1. How it does appear that none of
their sins shall be then spoken of. 2. Why their sins shall not be then
mentioned. 3. The Uses. And then we will afterward speak of the second Branch.

For the first: It does appear that none of their sins that they have committed
and repented of, shall be at that day spoken of; 1. In that they are washed
from their sins in Christ's blood, Rev 1.5. 1 Cor. 6.11. Joel 3.21. Psalm. 51.7.
and being thus washed from them, to what purpose should they then be spoken of?
2. In that their sins are blotted out, their Debts cancelled, Isa. 43.25. and
44.22. Psalm. 51.1. and Creditors do not reckon for such sums which are blotted
out, and do not so much as mention or speak of them. 3. In that they are all
covered, Psalm. 32.1. and 85.2. Neh. 4.5. and if they be covered, then sure they
shall not be discovered or spoken of at that day. 4. In that they are forgotten
and not remembered, Isa. 43.25. Psalm. 25.7. and 79.8. Jer. 31.34. Heb. 8.12. and
10.17. And if so, how should they then be spoken of? 5. In that upon search
they shall not be found, Jer. 50.20. and things that cannot be found, are not
mentioned nor spoken of among men a so here. 6. In that the Lord passes them
by, and makes them as if they had never been committed, Mic. 7.18. and if he
pass them by, surely they shall never be spoken of at that day. 7. In that all
their sins shall be cast into the depths of the Sea, Micah 7.19. and therefore
shall never come up more. Things cast into the bottom of the Sea never come up
more: so here. 8. In that the Righteousness of Christ is imputed to them, Romans
4.6, 7, 8. Jer. 23.6. 1 Cor. 1.30. 2 Cor. 5.21. Cant. 4.7. Now if his
Righteousness be imputed to us, then our sins surely shall not be spoken of at
that day. 9. In that they are born, and taken away by Christ, and laid upon
him, John 1.29. 1 Pet. 2.24 Isa. 53.6. and if he has taken them away, and born
them, then sure they shall not be mentioned against us at that day. 10. In that
the body of sin is destroyed in us, by virtue of our fellowship with Christ in
his death, Romans 6.6, 7. and our sins being killed and destroyed, how should
they be then spoken of or mentioned against us?

Q. 2. Why shall not their sins be then spoken of or mentioned?

Ans. 1. From the Lord Jesus. 2. From his Saints. 3. From their Enemies. 4.
From the Day it self.

From the Lord Jesus. 1. He has promised, John 5.24. that they shall not come
into Condemnation: and if so, to what end shall their sins be mentioned at that
day? 2. He has delivered them from the wrath to come, 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. and that
being so, there is no need that their sins should be mentioned. 3 He saves to
the utmost, Hebr. 7.25. and therefore from sin, and all the shame of it, which
the mention of their sin might bring upon them. Other men shall rise to shame,
Dan 12 2. but not they. 4. He hides their sins here, 1 Kings 15.^. Heb. 11.11,
31. Jam. 5.11. and if so, much more will he do it at that day. 5. He then comes
to be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in all them that believe, 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. but the mention of their sins would obscure that glory; and
therefore they shall not be at that day spoken of. 6. He then will fully acquit
them and absolve them, as I said before, and therefore will not then mention
any of them. 7. He will then present them faultless, Jude ver. 24.

2. From the Saints. 1. They have blamed and shamed themselves for them here,
Ezra 9 6. Dan. 9.7, 8. Jer. 3.25. and therefore he will not shame them at that
day. 2. They have not hid them here, but discovered them and acknowledged them,
Psalm 51.3. Jer. 14.7. Psalm. 32.9. and therefore no wonder if he hide them at
that day. 3. They have been burdened with them here, Psalm 38.4. Heb 12.1. and
therefore ^he will not burden them with the mention of them. 4. They have
loathed and abhorred themselves for them here, Ezekiel. 36.31. Job 42.6. And will
he then speak of them, to make them an abhorring to Men and Angels? he will not
surely do it. 5. They have fasted, mourned and wept for them, prayed against
them, withstood the motions that have been made to the commission of them,
bewailed them bitterly, Judges 2.4, 5 1 Samuel 7.6. Gal. 5.17. Romans 7.23, 24. and
can we think that he will then speak of them, or mention them to their
dishonor? 6. They have desired earnestly to be rid of them, and have counted
that day happy wherein they have ceased to sin, and that has been the chiefest
cause why they have desired to die, that they might sin no more, Phil. 1.23. 2
Cor. 5.4, 6, 8. And can it be thought then, that their sins shall be mentioned
at that day, that they desired so to be freed from? it cannot be imagined.

3. From their Enemies. 1. They shall not have any occasion to reproach them,
or Religion. 2. Nor to accuse them. 3. Nor to traduce the Judge. 4. Nor to cast
Hypocrisy in their faces to shame them. 5. Nor to grieve them, for they shall
not have any such thing bef^ll them at that day, Jude ver. 25. 6. Nor to
rejoice at the mention of them. 7. Nor to think better of themselves by reason
of them.

4. From the Day it self. 1. It is the day of the manifestation of the
righteous judgment of God; and being so, how should their sins be then spoken
of? for it would not be just to shame the innocent as they be in Christ. 2. It
is the day of their rest, 2 Thessalonians 1.7. and that it could not be, if their sins
were mentioned; it would be a day of dis-rest rather to them. 3. It is the day
of their exceeding joy, Jude ver. 25. and that could not be, if their sins
should be mentioned. 4. It is the day of their Coronation, 2 Timothy 4.8. and in
such a day it were no way suitable to make mention of their sins. 5. It is the
day of their Redemption, Luke 21.28. and it would rather be a day of their
Captivity then Redemption, should there be any mention of their sins. 6. It is
the day of the Consummation of the Marriage betwixt Christ and his Saints, they
are betrothed here, Hos. 2.19, 20. 2 Cor. 11.2. But the day of the
Solemnization of the Marriage is then; then Christ takes us to house, John
14.3. to himself, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. and the mentioning of their sins must needs be
unsuitable to such a day.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see how tender the Lord Jesus will be of the
name of his Saints at the last and great day, that he will not so much as
mention any of their sins against them. They have been tender of his Name here,
and he will be mavelous tender of theirs at that day, and will not blemish
them by charging any sin upon them, Jude ver. 24. Ephesians. 5.27. 2. We see what
great reason we have to justify and clear him in all his righteous
dispensations of himself to us, in afflicting us for our sins here, Neh. 9.33.
Lam. 1.18. Psalm. 51.4. for he will clear us, and not so much as mention any of
our sins against us at that day. 3. We see that they that are justified need
not be afraid of the day of Judgment, for there shall not be a word spoken at
that day against them, concerning any of the sins that they have committed
against him. 4. We see how loathsome and detestable every sin ought to be to us
here, and how we should accuse, and arraign, and judge our selves for them, for
they shall not be charged upon us then, nor any of them be so much as mentioned
against us, 1 Cor. 11.31, 32. 5. We see that we have no cause to censure or
judge our Brethren for their failings, for if they be Christ's, he will not so
much as mention any of their sins against them at that day, 1 Cor. 4.5. Jam.
3.1. 6. We see how ready we should be to forgive offending Brethren when they
repent, Luke 17.3, 4. for so does Christ, and so will be do at that day, and
not charge them with any of them. 7. We see that those sins that have been
committed by any of the Saints in the time of their unregenerate estate, are
not to be spoken of or mentioned to their disgrace, neither are they to be cast
in their teeth, nor they to be upbraided with them, for not one of them shall
be spoken of at that day, Acts 9.33, 14, 15. 8. We see what mention we should
make of the loving kindness of the Lord, as for other mercies, so for this,
Jude ver. 24.25. Isa. 63.7. 9. We see that there is no cause why we should be
much troubled when we are twitted and upbraided by evil men for this and that
evil that we have done, and sometimes for that that we have never done, Mat
10.11, 12. for however men use us here, Christ will use us better at that day,
not mentioning any of our sins against us. 10. We see that Satan's accusations
shall never hurt us, Rev. 12.10. for Christ will ^ot own or approve any of
them, for he will not so much as speak of any thing that they have done amiss
at that day.

Use 2. for Humiliation: 1. To those that are too severe Judges of others
failings, they have too little of the Spirit of Christ Jesus, and for, ^t that
they themselves are men, Jam. 3.1, 2. 2. To those that are too Inordinately
afraid of the Judgement-day, they are more afraid then hurt; we should rather
love and desire after it, 2 Timothy 4.8. Rev. 22.20. 3. To those that are hard to
pass by injuries and indignities put upon them: so does not Christ, so will he
not do at that day. 4. To those that are so ready to rip up and speak (too
disgracefully) of the faults of others here, how would such do if Christ should
take that course with them at the Judgment day?

Use 3. for Exhortation: 1. To honor the Lord Jesus, and be very tender of his
Name, who will so tender our names at that day, Psalm. 2.12. 2. To be often
thinking of this day, and meditating of it with delight, for no evil of ours
shall then be mentioned. 3 To make sure that we are of the number of those that
Christ will speak nothing against at that day. (1) Look to our Election, 2 Pet.
1.10. (2) To our Love, 1 Thessalonians. 3.12, 13. 1 John 4.17. (3) To our Abiding in
him, 1 John 2.28. (4) To a spotless and blameless carriage. 2 Pet. 3.14. (5) To
our Holiness, Heb: 12.14. (6) To our Uprightness, Isa 57.2. Psa. 49.14. (7) To
the improvement of our talents, Mat. 25.22, 23. (8) To our patient suffering of
afflicti^n, Romans 8.17. ^ Tim. 2.12. (9) To our patient continuance in
welldoing, Romans 2.7. (10) To our holding fast that we have, Rev. 3.11. 4. To
bear with quietness men's upbraidings, and the shame they cast upon us, Heb.
12.2, 3. 5. To rejoice in things falsely spoken against us, Matthew. 5.11, 12. 6.
To beware of shaming those here, that Christ will not shame at that day, 1 Samuel
20.34 7. To be grieved when any do, ibid. 8. To shame our selves for our sins
here, Ezra 9.6. 9. To speak boldly in the Cause of Christ, Mat. 10.32. 10. To
fear to speak a word against Christ, Mat. 12.32. 11. To love the Lord Jesus, 1
Cor. 16.22. 12. To seek to please him in all things, Tit. 2.9.

Use 4. for Consolation: 1. Against the evil speeches and slanders of men, Jude
ver. 14, 15. 2. Against cruel mockings, Heb. 11.36. 3. Against rebukes in
Judgement-seats. 4. Against Satan's accusations, Rev. 12.10. 5. Against hard
censures of Brethren. 6. Against false Witnesses in Courts of Justice.

Positive Comforts. 1. That that day will be a clearing day 2. That they that
sow in tears shall reap in joy, Psalm. 126.5. 3. That it shall be well with
them, Isa. 3.10. 4. That our blessed King is a merciful King, 1 Kings 20.31. 5.
That the worst state of the righteous, is better then the best of the wicked.
6. That we may well bear Christ's rebukes here.

The second Branch of the XV. Doctrine is now to be spoken of; viz.

That what the Saints have done well while they were on earth, shall be spoken
of, and mentioned in the day of Judgment. For opening of which, let me show,
1. How it does appear that it shall be so. 2. Why it shall be so. 3. The Uses.

For the first: How does it appear that what good they have done shall be
mentioned and spoken of at that day?

Ans. 1. It does appear from hence, in that every secret good thing shall come
into judgment, Eccles. 12.14. 1 Cor 4.5. 2. In that every good thing shall be
rewarded, 2 Cor. 5.10. Mat 6.4, 6.18. Rev. 22.12. 3. In that every man that
has done any good, though others have not known of it, shall have due praise
and commendation for it, 2 Cor. 4.5. 4. In that there shall be different
degrees of Glory, according to the different measures of good that men have
done; and therefore all must be mentioned and spoken of, Romans 2.6. Rev 22.12.
5. In that good has been called evil in the world, Isa. 5.20, and therefore all
that good that has been so traduced, and evil spoken of, shall be owned and
spoken of at that day. 6. In that the Saints here do vilify, and disesteem
their best works, Isa. 64.6. Phil 3.8, 9. and though indeed in themselves they
be nothing worth, as coming from us, yet as they are in Christ, so they are
good, and will be spoken of as such at that day. 7. In that it is not so easily
discerned whose works are good, in regard that Hypocrites may go very far this
way, but that day will declare which is which, which are good and which not. 8.
In that for every right work a man is envied of his neighbor here, Eccles.
4.4. 9. In that in sundry good works done here, it is not known who did them,
and this must not always be concealed.

Q. 2. Why shall that that they have done well be them spoken of?

Ans. 1. From God himself. 2. From the Lord Jesus Christ. 3. From the Saints
themselves.

From God. 1. He works them in us and for us, Isa. 26.12 2. He is glorified by
them, Mat. 5.16. Phil. 1.11. 1 Pet. 2.12 3. He will reward them, Romans 2.6, 7,
10. and how should this be, if they be not spoken of at that day? 4. He has
promised to honor them that honor him, 1 Samuel 2.30.

2. From the Lord Jesus. 1. He commends them here, Rev. 2.2, 3, 8, 9. and
therefore will do it much more hereafter. 2. He knows their works, and
therefore knows how to speak of them at that day, ibid. 3. He takes it well if
it be but in the heart, though it come not to outward act, 1 Kings 8.18, 19. Oh
how well will he then take it, when it is actually performed, and speak of them
at that day! 4. He loves them dearly, and where we love, we use to speak much
in commendation of what is done, much more will Christ at that day, Gal. 2.20.

3. From the Saints themselves. 1. They are his Members, Brethren. Fellows,
Friends, Spouse, etc. and therefore no wonder that he will speak all the good
of them that may be at that day 2. They have done what they have so done for
his sake, and out of love to him, and therefore it is no wonder if he make
mention of what they have done at that day. 3. They have aimed at the glory of
his Name in what they have done, and no wonder then if he speak of what was
done, at that day, John 15.8. 4. They have done it out of obedience to the
command of God and Christ, and that he cannot but make mention of at that day
5. They are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, Ephesians.
2.10. 6. They are his own blessed ones, therefore he will speak good of them
then.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see that none of the Saints need to repent of
any of the good they have done; for though it may be they may be requited with
evil here, yet the good we have done shall be spoken of at that day. 2. We see
what great encouragement we have to beneficence in secret, for though no eye
see it, nor any know of it, yet it shall be known at that day, Mat. 6.4. 3. We
see that a very little good done in sincerity, goes a great way with Christ
Jesus, and is of high esteem with him: how little is it that the best of us do?
what mites of service? yet these shall be spoken of too, Luke 21.1, 2, 3, 4.
how much more at that day? 4. We see what a good Master we serve, that will
reward his servants thus. 5. We s^e how lightly we should esteem the praises of
men, compared with this, to have what we have done spoken of by Christ at that
day. 6. We see that Christ takes notice of all our doings, for he will speak of
them at that day. 7. We see how humbly we should behave our selves, and how
meanly we should think of what we do, Luke 17.10. 8. We see what an honorable
thing it is to be doing good, for Christ will speak of it at that day. 9. We
see that the Lord takes us at the best, for all our best works are defiled. 10.
We see it is no matter of what mean account we be in the world, it shall be
otherwise at that day.

Use 2. for Exhortation: 1. To speak good of his Name, whatever befall us here,
1 Samuel 3.18 Joh 1.21. 2. To be unwearied in well-doing, Gal. 6.9, 10. 3. To do
all the good we can, Eccles. 11.1, 2, 3. 4. To love the Lord Jesus and obey
him, Psalm. 2.12. 5. To speak of his glory, Psalm. 29.9. 6. To mention his loving
kindness to us, Isa 63.7. 7 To think of all the good he has done for us, before
we were, and since; in Infancy, childhood, youth, riper times, and old age: and
never think we can speak enough of it to his praise. 8. To esteem meanly of
what we do in the best way for him. 9. To judge our selves unworthy of the
least of his mercies, Genes 32.10. much more of this. 10. To speak nothing of
what we do in commendation of our selves, 2 Cor. 10. ult. Prove. 27.2. 11. To be
ready to speak for him and his Cause upon all occasions. 12. To beware of
speaking evil of Brethren, specially when they do well, Jam 4.^1.

Use 3. for Consolation: 1. Against men^ misprisions of us and our works: it is
no matter what they say now, if Christ speak thus of them at that day. 2.
Against the blemishes and imperfections that cleave to what we best do; Christ
will take notice only of that that is good in us at that day. 3. Against all
that little worth we see in our services; Christ sees that, that be thinks meet
to speak of at that day. 4. Against Satan's fly blowing our works; be does what
he can to corrupt them, but Christ will accept and honor them, and pick out
what is good in them.

Ver. 35, 36. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat, etc.
Doct. XVI. is this, That works of Mercy and Bounty will be highly accounted
of, and rewarded by Christ at the day of Judgment.
For opening of which, let me show, 1. What these works of Mercy and Bounty be,
that shall be so highly accounted of and rewarded. 2. Why they shall be so
accounted of and rewarded. 3. The Uses.

For the first: Those works of Mercy and Bounty must be

1. For their Rise, Fruits of the Spirit, which is the principal Efficient of
them; and Fruits of Faith, the instrumental Efficient of them, Gal. 5.22, 6.

2. For the Person that works them, he must be a righteous and good man, Mat.
7.17, 18. and 12.34, 35. otherwise all the seeming good wor^s that others do,
are but shining sins.

3. For the Ground of them, 1. They must be done with respect to the
commandment of God; for if that be not eyed and regarded, that we do what we do
out of obedience to the commandment of God, all is nothing, 2 Cor. 9.13. Heb.
13.16. 2. Out of love to Christ in his Saints: so the Text. 3. Out of love to
the Saints, 1 Cor. 13.3. 4. Out of humility, for our fruit is from him, not
from our selves, Hos. 14.8. John 15.5. 5. With respect to the Pattern, Luke
6.36.

4. For the manner of Performance of them, 1. They must be performed with
readiness of mind, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18. 2. With a willing heart, ibid. 3. With
cheerfulness, 2 Cor. 9.7. Romans 12.8. 4. With simplicity, Romans 12.8. 5. With
liberality, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18. Prove. 11.24, 25. Isa. 32.8. 2 Cor. 8.1, 2. Eccles.
11.1, 2, 3. 6. With speed, 1 John 3.17. Gal. 6.10. Prove. 3.27, 28. 7. With
unweariedness, Gal. 6.9. 8. With abundance of compassion, Isa. 58.11. 9. With
secrecy, Mat 6.3, 1.

5. For the End of them, 1. They must be performed with an holy aim at the
glory of God, John 15.8. Mat. 5.16. Philip. 1.11. we must not aim at our own
glory in them, Mat. 6.1, 2. 2. They must be performed with an eye to their good
that we show mercy to, 1 Timothy 6.18. Luke 6.36. Tit, 3.8 3. They must be done
with an eye to the honor of the Gospel, Tit. 3.14. 4. They may be done with an
eye to our own good, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19. Eccles. 11.1. Luke 6.38.

Q. 2. Why shall they be so highly accounted of, and rewarded at that day?

Ans. 1. From the Promise of Christ, Mat. 6.4. 2. From the Lords love that he
bears to such, 2 Cor. 9 7. 3. From the delight he takes in such services,
Heb. 13.16. 4. From the nature of them, they are sacrifices, ibid. 5. From the
honor and glory he has by them, 2 Cor. 9.11, 12. 6. From the resemblance that
such have to him, Ps. 119.68. Luke 6.35. 7. From the Saints nearness to him,
who are relieved: so the Text. 8. From that in Mic. 6.8. to love mercy is good
in Gods account.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see that Popish works, that were not qualified
as we have spoken, for Rise, Person, Grounds, Manner, Ends, cannot be called
Good Works, not shall have any acceptance with God, or reward from him at that
day. 2. We see what a great grace it is to be of a truly merciful and bountiful
spirit, for the time will be, that the works that such perform shall be highly
accounted of, and rewarded at that day. 3. We see that on the contrary,
unmerciful ones shall be of no account, nor have any reward at that day, Jam
2.13. 4. We see what high account we should have of the works of mercy, for
Christ will have them in high account at the great day. 5. We see what great
reason we have to be forward in works of Mercy and Bounty, for he will highly
account of them, and reward them at that day. 6. We see why we should provoke
one another to love and to good works, Heb. 10 24. 7. We see what an high price
the Lord sets upon Faith, when as he accounts so highly of the fruits of it, 2
Pet. 1.1. 8. We see what an high account we should have of what Christ has
done for us, in that Bountiful, Charitable, and Merciful work of his, in giving
his life for us; we can never enough prize it and admire it, 1 John 4.9, 10. 9.
We see the mavelous grace of the Lord Jesus, that he will so highly account
of any thing we do this way: Alas! we deserve that he should loath us, and all
we do. 10. We see, that if our works of mercy be so accounted of by him; Oh
what account should we set upon his Mercy in Spiritual, Temporal, and Eternal
things!

Use 2. for Humiliation: 1. That we are so hardly drawn to come off with works
of Bounty and Mercy to his poor ones, 1 John 3.17. 2. To those that consider
not the loss of merciful men, Isa. 57.1.

Use 3. for Terror: 1. To those that are cruel to them. 2. To those that are
Hypocrites, Jam. 2.14, etc.

Use 4. for Exhortation: 1. To be of a merciful spirit, and to love mercy, Luke
6.36. Micah 6.8. we shall not be losers by it. 2. To encourage others in a way
of mercy. 3. To hope the best of merciful men, though we cannot see so much in
other things as we desire. 4. To those that are merciful, to long for that day,
for it will be then well with them. 5. To grow up in works of mercy more and
more, 1 Thessalonians. 4.9, 10. 6. To be unwearied in works of mercy, Gal. 6.9. 7. To
be patterns of Bounty and Mercy, Job 31.16-22. 8. To admire the Lords mercy,
that he should so far respect any thing that we do.

Use 5. for Consolation: 1. Against our many failings in our best works. 2.
Against the want of clear apprehensions of Gods love and favor: Works of Mercy
are fruits of Faith, and will be highly prized at that day. 3. Against others
hard conceits of us: look we to a spirit of Bounty and Mercy, and if we be
sincere therein, Christ will own us.

Verse. 35, 36. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat, etc.
Doct. XVII. is this, That the Lord does sympathize with, and is sensible of
the wants that his people undergo, in Meat, and Drink, and Clothing, and
Lodging, and of their Sicknesses and Imprisonments that they are cost into.
We will speak of them in order. And first speak of His sensibleness of their
want of Meat and Drink. I was hungry, I was thirsty.

For opening of which, let me show, 1. How it does appear that he is sensible
of their want of Meat and Drink. 2. Why. 3. The Uses.

For the first: It does appear that He is sensible of their want of Meat and
Drink; 1. In that he complains of his own hunger and thirst in theirs, I was
hungry, etc. as if he should say, It was not so much they, as I that have
suffered want in them. Look as he said, Acts 9.4. so here. 2. In that be takes
it kindly, as if it were done to himself, when these wants of theirs are
supplied: so the Text; which he could not do, if he were not very sensible of
these their wants. 3. In that be takes it mavelous offensively when these
wants are not supplied by those that know of them, and have ability and
opportunity to do it, and takes this unkindness as done to himself: so the
Text. 4. In that he puts it into the hearts of some to supply their wants;
though some be hard-hearted, and will not, as Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.10, 11. yet he
makes others tenderhearted, Prove. 11.2^. Psalm. 112.5, 9. 5. In that when they
are in greatest extremity, he sends in relief to them, 1 Kings 17.3, 4, 9, 10,
11, 12, etc. Judges 15.18, 19. 6. In that rather then they shall want, he will
send them away out of places of scarcity, to some other Land where they may
have supply, 2 Kings 8.1, 2. 7. In that he brings in supplies unexpectedly, 2
Kin. 7. the whole Chapter. Thus to Merlin in the Hay mow, and to the Roche^ers,
by supplying them with abundance of Shellfish, when straightly besieged. 8. In
that he has compassion on them in their wants Mat. 15.32. 9 In that he
satisfies and fills them, when he makes provision for them, Mat. 25.37. 10. In
that he gives them Meat sometimes by Creatures of a devouring nature. 1 Kings
17.6. Judges 14.8, 9.

Q. 2. Why is he that sensible of their wants?

Ans. 1. From himself. 2. From them.

From himself. 1. He is a merciful one. 2. He has promised that they shall have
enough, Job 5.20, 22. Psalm: 37.19. 3. He is their Shepherd, and therefore
tenderly sensible of their wants, Psalm. 23.1. 4. He is the blessed entertainer
of them, ver. 5. 5. He is their Head, Ephesians. 5 30. Col. 1.18. 6. He is a Father
to them, Heb. 2.13. 7. He feeds the beasts and fowls, Psalm. 147.9. and 145.15,
16.

2. From them. 1. They are near to him, Psalm. 148.14. 2. They are his Brethren:
so the Text. 3. They are great Heirs: so the Text; Luke 12.32. 4. They seek
their daily bread of him, Mat. 6.11. 5. They need these things, Mat. 6.32. 6.
They fear him, Psalm. 34.9, 10. and 111.5. 7. They are in Covenant with him,
ibid.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see what a tenderhearted one the Lord Jesus is
to his Saints, that cannot see them want Meat and Drink, but is sensible of it,
and suffers in it. If he be hungry in our hunger, and athirst when we want
Drink, surely he is a tenderhearted one indeed. 2. We see how sensible we
should be of any dishonor that is done to his Name by our selves or others, we
should suffer with him in it; as he said sometimes himself, Psalm. 69.9. with
Romans 15.3. so should it be with us, Christ's reproaches should be our
reproaches; if he suffer with us, we may well suffer with him. 3. We see that
sure he will be much more sensible of our Spiritual wants, Mat. 9.36, 37, 38.
Isa. 41.17, 18. 4. We see that he cannot choose but be very sen^ible of our
temptations, Heb. 2.18. and 4.15. 5. We see that hunger and thirst may be the
better born, for we are not alone in the suffering, but Christ suffers with us:
and if it be Solamen miseris socios, habuisse doloris, much more may it cheer
us, that we have such a companion as Christ is. 6. We see how sensible we
should be of the Saints wants, and how we our selves should suffer in them, and
sympathize with them; for so does Christ, and we should be of his spirit. 7. We
see how contrary they are to the Spirit of Christ, that are cruel to those that
want; these will give them nothing, spare nothing of what they have to relieve
them. But of that more hereafter. 8. We see how sensible we should be of their
condition that want Christ the Bread of Life, John 6 48. that Fountain of
living water, Jer. 2.13. Cant. 4.15. 9. We see how wonderfully the Lord Jesus
condescends to his Saints, that he will sympathize with them in their want of
Meat and Drink: Oh how low does he stoop to us in this! Isa. 113.5, 6. 10. We
see what Patterns of Mercy and tender-heartedness we should be to those that
want these things, after Christ's example. 11. We see the truth of that in Isa.
63.9. that in all our affliction he is afflicted. 12. We see that Christ's heart
in Heaven is toward his Saints, he has lost none of his bowels by going
thither.

Use 2. for Humiliation: 1. That we are apt to be so impatient in these wants,
when as Christ suffers with us. 2. That we are too insensible when he susters.
3. That we look up too little to Christ for supplies. 4. That we do not follow
that Rule, John 6.27.

Use 3. for Exhortation: 1. To poor ones, to be content in such a condition,
for Christ suffers with you, Philip. 4.11, 12. 2. To hunger and thirst more
after Christ; this will quench our bodily hunger and thirst, Mat. 5.6. John
4.10. 3. To look up unto the Lord for daily bodily supplies, for he is very
sensible of our wants, Prove. 30 8. Mat. 6.11. 4. To all, to be of a
compassionate spirit to those that are in want, for so is Christ, 1 Pet. 3.8.
5. To rejoice in our wants, for we have a blessed companion that is wanting
with us. 6. To be thankful to the Lord Jesus, who sympathizeth thus with us. 7.
To love him, that out of love thus suffers with us. 8. To suffer in all his
sufferings. 9. To long for the time when we shall hunger no more, neither
thirst any more, Rev. 7.16, 17. 10. To draw out our souls to the hungry, Isa.
58.10. 11. To be patient in our wants this way.

Use 4. for Consolation: 1. That bodily want of Meat and Drink, is no other
thing then may befall Christ's own Saints. 2. That though it be a burden.
Christ eases it to his Saints. 3. That he will make supplies, that is so
sensible of them. 4. That he will much more supply other wants. 5. That he will
satisfy the longing soul, Psa. 107.9 6. That they are happy that are Christ's
in the worst condition

We now come to the second part of the Doctrine, and that is this, That Jesus
Christ it very sensible of his poples want of lodging.

For opening of which, let me show, 1. How it does appear that it is so. 2.
Why. 3. The Uses.

For the first: It does appear that He is sensible of their want of lodging; 1.
In that he meets with them in that condition, and manifests himself graciously
to them, as he did to Jacob, Genes. 28. 11-16. He never had a more comfortable
manifestation of Gods goodness to him, then when a stranger, and without
lodging. 2. In that he Commands that entertainment be given to such, with
encouragement to those that do it, Heb. 13.2. 1 Pet. 4.9. 3. In that he
commends those that have given entertainment and lodging to them, 3 John 5.6.
Act. 28.7. 4. In that he liberally rewards those that give entertainment and
lodging to them, 1 Kin. 17 10. to the end. 2 Kin. 4.10. to 37. Genesis 18. 1. to
15. 5. In that he stirs up the hearts of some to be forward this way, in
entertaining and lodging his strangers, as Abraham, and Lot, and the Shunamite,
in the O. Test. and One siphorus and Gaius in the New. 6. In that he takes the
kindness of lodging them as done to himself. so the text. 7. In that he takes it
heinously when men do it not: so the text. 8. In that he makes it a property of
a Church Officer rightly qualified, whether Bishop, or Deacon, or Widow, 1 Timothy
3.2. Tit. 1.8. 1 Timothy 3.8 and 5.9, 10. 9. In that he saves their lives, and
sometimes their souls, that entertain his servants, Heb. 11.31. 10. In that he
recovers some from dangerous sicknesses, that have bin kind entertainers of his
servants, Act. 28.7, 8. 11. In that he promises a reward unto such, Mat 10.41.
12. In that he stirs up Barbarians to give them entertainment, Acts 28.2.

Quest. 2. Why is he so sensible of their want of lodging and entertainment?

Answ. 1. From himself. 2. From them.

From Himself. 1. He knows the hearts of strangers, that want lodging, having
been himself harbor less, Mat. 8.20. 2. He is acquainted with the weaknesses
of their bodies, and knows they need it; and therefore is sensible, and puts
himself in their condition. 3. He came to save men's lives, Luke 9.55, 56. and
therefore pities and suffers with them in a strangers condition. 4. He is the
Master of the house, Mark 13.35. that gives us all entertainment. 5. He is the
head, and therefore sympathizeth with his members. 6. He dwells in his people,
Ephesians 3.17.

2. From them. 1. They are his Sister and Spouse. 2. They are the apple of his
eye, Zech. 2.8. 3. They are his fellows Psalm. 15.7. 4. They are his brethren:
so the text. 5. They are his friends; Luke 12.4. John 15.15. 6. They are his
peculiar ones, Tit. 2.14.

Use 1. For Information: 1. We see the great Humility of the Lord Jesus the
Lord of Glory, that is so sensible of his servants want of a nights lodging,
that he himself looks at himself in such a condition with them. Oh how low
does he come down for our sakes! 2. We see what tender affection he bears
toward us; that tounts himself a stranger, and wanting entertainment, when we
are in that estate. 3. We see that surely he will entertain us well in his
house, with spiritual dainties, that is so sensible of our want of bodily
refreshings, for he will be much more sensible of our spiritual wants, Cant.
5.1. 4. We see what entertainment we should be willing to give to him, into our
hearts, and to open to him, Psalm 24.7, 9. Rev. 3 20. 5. We see how low we
should be willing to stoop to the Lord Jesus in doing the meanest offices for
him, or any of his, seeing such a mean thing as our want of a lodging or little
entertainment does so affect him. 6. We see that when we sometimes want lodging
or entertainment, we do not bear all the burden of it our selves alone, but
Christ sympathizeth with us. 7. We see that the eye of Christ is over us by
night as well as by day, for he is sensible of our want of a nights lodging. 8.
We see that Christ looks into all our houses, and sees what entertainment we
give, or give not to his people. 9. We see that the Lord Jesus never slumbers
nor sleeps, Psa. 121.4. but is mindful of us, that we may do both, and is as
if he wanted a lodging when we want. 10. We see that a nights lodging, and a
little entertainment in any friends house, should be of esteem with us; for
Christ sympathizeth with us in the want of it.

Use 2. For Humiliation, 1. That we have spirits too insensible of brethrens
wants in this kind, Judge. 19.18, 19. 2. That we are much more insensible of
Christ's standing at the door and knocking, Rev. 3.20.

Use 3. For Exhortation: 1. To be kind in entertaining strangers, for Christ is
sensible of their want of it, Heb. 13.2 Job 31.32 Judge. 19.20. 2. To be
thankful to the Lord and his people, when we as strangers are entertained by
them, as Elisha to the Shunamite, 2 Kin. 4. 3. To be sensible of the mercy in
our own houses, and the provision the Lord makes for us there, for if we were
strangers and wanted them, the Lord Jesus would be sensible of the want. 4. To
be sensible and ashamed of our unkind denials of opening to Christ, Cant. 5.2,
3. 5. To mourn for grieving the Spirit of Christ, and sending him sad away from
us. 6. To admire the mercy of the Lord, that he will vouchsafe to look into our
lodgings, and see how it fares with us there. 7. To entertain him with all our
bearts, Psalm. 101.2. 8. To make provision for our lodging strangers Philem. v.
22. 9. To be sensible of their condition, 2 Samuel 11.11. 10. To be sensible of
the case of persecuted ones, Heb 11.38. they want comfortable lodging.

Use 4. for Consolation: 1. Sure then none of Christ's shall perish, John 10.28.
for if he be sensible of their want of a nights lodging here, sure he will
never lodge them in Hell to all eternity. 2. That sure he will lodge them well
in his Fathers house, when he has them with him, John 14.2, 3. 3. That he will
Chamber them up there, Isa. 26.20. 4. That he will lodge them in his house
here, Psalm. 23.6. according to their desire, Psalm. 27.4.

We come now to the third Branch of the XVII. Note, That Christ is very
sensible of his peoples Nakedness and want of Clothing.

For opening of which, let me show, 1. Wherein it does appear that he is so. 2.
Why. 3. The Uses.

For the first: It does appear that He is sensible of their want of Clothing;
1. In that he stirs up some to be so pitiful to them, as to minister Clothes to
them, Job 31.19, 20. 2 Chronicles. 28.15. 2. In that he preserves their Clothes from
waxing old, when other helps fail, Deuteronomy. 29.5. Neb. 9.21. 3. In that he gives
it in charge that they shall be clothed, Isa. 58.6, 7. Jam. 2.15, 16. 4. In
that he enjoins the rich not to keep a poor man's Pledge all night, that he may
sleep in his own raiment, Deuteronomy. 24.12, 13. 5. In that he commends them that
have been pitiful to them, Acts 9.39. 6. In that he rewards them for their
kindness to them in clothing of them, Mat. 6.3, 4. If he that gives a cup of
cold water, Mat. 10.42. then much more be that gives Clothing to a Disciple
shall not lose his reward. 7. In that he sends them in Clothes by ways that
they think not of, 2 Kings 7.8, 15. 8. In that he takes it kindly when they are
clothed, and offensively from them that do it not: so the Text. 9. In that he
would not have them too solicitous about clothing, Mat. 6.31. which evidently
shows, that himself is sensible of their want of it. 10. In that he provides
means for our clothing, by those flocks that he sends to us. Psalm. 65.13.

Q. 2. Why is he so sensible of their want of Clothing?

Ans. 1. From himself. 2. From them.

From himself. 1. He knows that we need them, Mat. 6.32 2. He loves them, and
therefore cannot but be sensible of their wants this way, Deuteronomy. 10.18. 3. He is
the Master of the house, Mark 13.35. and the Master of the family, is sensible
of the families wants herein. 4. He would have us to be sensible of our
Brethrens wants, Luke 3.11. 5. He does moth-eat their garments, that have not
been sensible of the wants of his poor ones this way, Jam. 5.2. 6. He clothes
the Lillies, and therefore, cannot but be sensible of our want in this kind,
Matthew. 6.28, 29, 30. 7. He clothes them with better garments, Isa. 61.10.

2. From them. 1. They are members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones,
Ephesians. 5.30. 2. They are his Purchase, Acts 20.28. 3. They are honorable and
excellent ones, Psalm. 16.3. 4. They are of his household, Ephesians. 2. 5. They are
Heirs of a Kingdom, Jam. 2.5. 6. They are such as he delighted in from
Eternity, Prove. 8.30, 31. 7. They pray for these things, Prove. 30 7, 8. Mat.
6.11.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see how full of bowels the Lord Jesus is to his
poor ones, that counts himself naked in their Nakedness; and is so sensible of
their want of Clothing: Surely his Companions in Heaven are great toward them.
2. We see that surely he is sensible of our want of Spiritual Clothing, and
therefore gives it to us, Jer. 23.6. 1 Cor. 1.30. 3. We see the mavelous
humility of Christ, that stoops so low as to have regard to our Clothing, and
to sympathize with us when we want it. 4. We see what little reason we have to
be overcareful about it, for Christ is very sensible of our need of it, Mat. 6.
5. We see that when any are stirred up to help us with any Clothing in our
needs, we are to take it as a token from Christ, who is sensible of our want of
Clothing. 6. We see that when we are in Nakedness, as some of the Lords Saints
have been, 1 Cor. 4.11. 2 Cor. 11.27. we may be the more cheerful under such a
condition, for Christ is very sensible of it. 7. We see that when we put on any
new garments, we are to look at them as fruits of Christ's sensibleness of our
want of them. 8. We see that want of Clothing may befall sometimes the dear
Saints of Christ, for else how should Christ so sympathize with them? 9. We see
what a blessed prerogative it is to be among the number of Christ's Brethren and
Members, for when naked he is very sensible of it. 10. We see that they that
are cruel to the Saints, and deal hardly with them in point of Clothing, do
not care if Christ himself be naked.

Use 2. for Humiliation: 1. To those that are too little sensible of the Saints
want of Clothing; they have but little of the compassion of Christ in them. 2.
To those that let their Children go naked, when they might be clothed; Christ
looks at himself as neglected.

Use 3. for Exhortation: 1. To be of a merciful disposition to poor ones, and
clothe the naked, Job 31.19, 20. 2. To sympathize with those that want better
Clothing, Christ's Righteousness to cover their Spiritual Nakedness. 3. To
abhor their cruelty that take away the poor's garments from them. 4. To be
thankful to Christ for our Clothing, for it is out of his compassion to us that
we have our Clothes to cover and warm us. 5. To believe that we sh^all not want
Clothing, for Christ is sensible of our nakedness. 6. To be clothed with
Humility, 1 Pet. 5.5. for we cannot get Clothing except Christ pity us. 7. To
be content with what covering we have, as being a pledge of Christ's
sympathizing with, and sensibleness of our want of it, 1 Timothy 68. 8. To pray
for those that are kind to us this way, 2 Timothy 1.16, 17, 18.

Use 4. for Consolation: 1. That we shall not want such Clothing as the Lord
sees good for us, Psalm. 84.11. 2. That we have a blessed one that suffers with
us in our want of Clothing. 3. That surely none of his shall be found
spiritually naked at the great day, for he that is sensible of our bodily
nakedness, will much more cover the nakedness of our Souls, and provide
Clothing for them.

We come now to speak of the fourth Brench of the XVII. Doctrine, That the Lord
Jesus is very sensible of the Sicknesses of his Saints and people. I was sick,
etc.

For opening of which, let me show, 1. How it does appear that he is so
sensible of their Sickness. 2. Why. 3. The Uses.

For the first: It does appear that He is sensible of their Sickness; 1. In
that when he was upon earth, he was very ready to heal all manner of Diseases
of his people; and he has the same merciful Spirit now that he had then, Mat.
8.16 2. In that he directs his people to the use of such means, whereby they
come to get healing by his blessing; as Physical Herbs and Drugs, and other
Medicinal things, prepared by the skill of the Physician. Matthew. 9.12. which
though it be spoken in a Spiritual way, yet is it taken from Physicians of the
body. 3. In that he is pleased sometimes to heal, when the Physicians skill can
do no good, Mark 5.25-29. 4. In that he stirs up his people to pray for their
healing, and grants their desires therein: and this we have great experience of
Psalm. 65.2. 5. In that he commands that the Elders of the Church should be sent
for in such a case, with promise, that their Brayer of Faith shall save the
sick. Jam. 5.14, 15. 6. In that he is sometimes very speedy in working their
cure, Mark 5.29. John 4.50-53. 7. In that he has respect to their own Cries,
and cur^s them, Psalm 107.17-20 Job 33.19-26. Isa. 38.2 3, 4, 5. 8. In that he
puts forth his power for their cure, when there is little hope of cute, ibid.
9. In that if the Sickness be any thing sharp, he rebukes it, Luke 4.39. 10. In
that he comes to them, and visits them with his gracious presence, and the
Comforts of his Spirit to bear up their hearts in it. 11. In that he sends his
Servants to them to comfort them, with assurance of recovery, Isa. 38.4, 5. 12.
In that sometimes he gives them a sign of their recovery Isa. 38 7, 8.

Q. 2. Why is he so sensible of their Sickness?

Ans. 1. From himself. 2. From them.

From himself. 1. From the fulfilling of that Prophecy Isa. 53.4. with Mat.
8.16, 17. 2. He knows what sicknesses are, though himself was never sick. 3. He
knows our frame. Psalm. 103.13 14. 4. He is very pitiful, Jam. 5.11. 5. He does
not afflict willin ly, Lam. 3.33. 6. He has promised to have compassion, Lam 3
31, 32.

2. From them. 1. They need realing, and need pity in that case. 2. They have
pitied others, Psalm. 41.1, 2. 3. They are tender of his Name. 4. They are his
beloved ones, John 11.3. 5. They bear it sometimes for his sake. 6. They make
their moan to him, Lam. 3 56, 57.

Use 1. for Information: 1 We see what a tender one we have of the Lord Jesus,
that cannot see us sick, but he is as sensible of it, as if himself were sick
with us. Well may it be said of him, Himself took our infirmities, and bare our
sicknesses, Mat. 8.17. 2. We see how tender we should be of sick ones, and how
pitiful to them; for we should be of the same spirit with him, and he is very
tender over them. 3. We see how tender we should be of the Name and Honor of
Christ Jesus, that is so tender of us when we are sick. 4. We see that surely
he is very loath to lay sickness upon us, we do even compel him to it; for he
that is so sensible of it, that he says, he is sick in our sicknesses,
doubtle^s if there were not great cause, would not make us sick, Lam. 3.33. 1
Pet. 1.6. 5. We see that when we are sick, we should with more calmness and
quietness of spirit bear it; for Christ sympathizeth with us in it, and is very
sensible of it, Psalm. 39.9. 6. We see how low the Lord Jesus comes to us, to be
affected and afflicted with our sick-estate: see Psalm. 113.5. 7. We see how
sick of love we should be for him, Cant. 5.8. who out of love to us is sick in
our sickness. 8. We see how sick and grieved in our spirits we should be, when
any thing is done or said by others to grieve him. 9. We see what affection we
should have when he smites his people, Ier. 8.21. 10. We see that surely he is
much more sensible of their Soul sickness, Jer. 9.7. Mat. 23.37. Luke 19.41,
42. Mark 3.5.

Use 2. For Humiliation: 1. That our bowels move (...) (...) to sick ones, see
Psalm. 35.13, 14, 15. 2. That we are so little sensible of their souls
sickness, Jer. 9.1, 2. 2 Pet. 2.7 8. 3. That we are so impatient in our
sickness.

Use 3. for Exhortation, 1. To trust him for health in sickness, for he is
sensible of our sickness. 2. To love him, Psol. 116.1.2, 3 4. 3. To be sensible
of any thing that ^reives him, Psa. 139.21. 4. To be sick in the sickness of
his people see 2 Kings 13.14. 5 To be thankful to Christ Jesus that (...) so
low to us in our afflicted condition Isa. 38.19.20. Psalm. 30.11, 12. and
107.20, 21, 22. 6. To bear sickness patiently. 7. To serve him with all our
might in our health, that is so sensible of our sickness, Eccl^s. 9.10. 8. To
be willing to surfer any thing with him and for him, that suffers with us. 9.
To draw near to the Lord Jesus, and call upon him in times of sickness. 10. To
pray for si^^^^ones Jam. 5.14, 15.16. 11. To rejoice in our interest in Christ
Jesus. 12. To be the less troubled for sick friends.

Use 4 for Consolation: 1. Against our own sicknesses; Christ portakes with us
in them. 2. Against men's unmercifulness to us in our sickness; Christ is
merciful then to us. 3. Against Satan's cruel disposition to us in our sick
estate, for that time he chooses to afflict us most. Well, though he be cruel,
Christ is then sensible of our condition.

We are now come to the fifth and lost Branch of the XVII. Doctrine, and that
is this, That the Lord Jesus is very sensible of the Imprisonment of his Saints
and people. He counts himself in Prison in their Imprisonment.

For opening of which, let me show, 1. How it does appe^r that he is so
sensible of their Imprisonment. 2. Why. 3. The Uses.

For the first: It does appear that He is very sensible of this state of
theirs, and counts himself in Prison with them; 2. In to a he chears them, and
comforts them in that condiction, Act 16 24,25. So it was with many of the
Marty's while they were in Prison, they were as cheerful and full ^f comfort ^s
their ^earts could hold; as we see in Mr. Philpot, Mr. Rogers. and diverse
others: see also Rev. 2.10. 2. In that he prospers them in their work that they
have to do there, Gen 39.21.22, 23. Phile^ ver. 10, 11 2 Timothy 2.9. So Mr.
Tindall, Bradford, Doctor Sands and others, were prospered in Prison in their
holy Labors, to the Conversion of some there. 3. In that the Lord stirs up his
peoples hearts, earnestly to pray for them when in prison, Acts: 2.5. 4. In
that he uses means to deliver them, and oftentimes does it. Thus Peter, Acts
12.6-1^. So Paul was delivered, Acts 16. 5. In that he makes their enemies to
^^^d to them to let them go out, Acts 16, 5, 36. 6. In that he puts a fear into
their adverszaries, so as that they dare not keep them in, Acts 16.37, 38, 39.
7. In that he brings them out with honor, as ^e did Jes^ph, G^n. 41.1^ 40. So
was Paul brought out with honor acts 16 39 8. In that he gives them favor
with their Keepers, Genesis 39. ^, 22 23. Acts 16.33, 34. 9. In that he lets their
souls at liberty to Pray, and Hear, and Confer, and Meditate, in a beater
manner sometimes then when at liberty. 10. In that he makes them glory in that
condition, Philom. ver. 9. 11. In that others are bettered by it, Phil 1.14. 12
In that themselves are bettered by it, Hebr 11.36. Psalm. 105.18, 19.

Q. 2. Why is he so sensible of their Imprisonment?

Ans. 1. From himself. 2. From them.

From himself. 1. He knows what Prisoners undergo; many wants, many sorrows,
many tortures from cruel ones, Psalm. 105.18. 2. He hears their groans, Psalm.
102.19, 20. 3. He ^ees their ^ears. If Solomon consid^red the tears of such,
Eccles. 4.1. much more does he. 4. He stirs up others to sympathize with them,
much more therefore does it himself Jer 38.9. 5. He knows that it is from the
Devil that they are put into that condition, Rev. 2.10. 6. He knows what Bonds
mean, John 18.12. 7. He would have us pity them, Heb. 18.3.

2. From them. 1. They suffer Imprisonment for his sake and the Gospels, 1 Pet.
4.16. 2. They have done no evil Genesis 40.15. Jer. 37.18. 3. They are sometimes
ready to die in Prison, Jer. 38.9. 4. They need pity in that condition, being
in hunger, and thirst, and ^^ld, and n^kedness. 5. They are the Fathers blessed
o^es: so the T^xt. 6. They are his Members and Brethren. 7. They have been
pitiful unto others in that condition. 8. They are the apple of his eye, Zech.
2.8. 9. They pray for compassion in that condition Psalm 79.11. 10. They are in
a lonesome condition when in Prison, and apt to be sad, and this does alleviate
their grief.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see that the Prison, though it be a dark,
stinking, and uncomfortable place, yet may be born, for the Lord is very
sensible of our condition therein. 2. We see a reason of the joy of Martyrs,
and holy Confessions in former and later times, when in Prison, Christ's
^ympathy with them has caused them so to rejoice. 3. We see how happy they be
that are put in Prison for Christ's sake, for he is very sensible of it, and
suffers with them. 4. We see that Christ will not have any of his Servants long
in Prison, for he counts himself in Prison with them, Rev. 2.10. 1 Pet 5.10. 5.
We see that they that are active to put any of the Lords Saints in Prison, do
commit Christ to Prison in his account: and let them look to it how they will
answer it. 6. We see that when Prisons are opened, and Saints delivered out of
Prison, Christ cannot but take it well. 7. We see that they are of a merciful
spirit, that either are a means to keep the Saints from going to Prison, or are
a means to let them out: they are of Christ's spirit. 8. We see that Prisoners
of Jesus Christ are honorable ones, for Christ reckons that himself is
imprisoned in them. 9. We see that the Spirits of the Saints that are
imprisoned, shall be born up, that the Prisons noisomeness shall not be felt.
10. We see that surely be pities them that are cast into the Fire, Water, to
wild Beasts, that are Racked, Stoned, Sawn asunder, Slain with the Sword, and
otherwise cruelly dealt with, Heb. 11.37, 38.

Use 2. for Terror: 1. To those that put the Saints in Prison without a cause;
they do it to Christ himself. 2. To those that are put in Prison for
evil-doing; Christ's compassions are not toward them.

Use 3. for Humiliation: 1. To those that have little pity to Prisoners for
Christ's sake, they have too little of Christ's Spirit in them. 2. To those that
might deliver them, and forbear to do it, Prove. 24.11, 12.

Use 4. for Exhortations: 1. To be of Christ's spirit, in co^^iserating
Prisoners, 1 Pet. 3.8 Heb. 13.3. 2. To take heed we have not an hand in the
Saints Imprisonment for well-doing. 3. To bear Imprisonment cheerfully, if we
be called to it for Christ's sake. 4. To bewail ^t, if we have had an hand in
their Imprisonment formerly, Acts 22.19, 20. 5 To admire with thankfulness the
mercy of Christ, in sympathizing thus with us. 6. To glorify him, that has
delivered us from the woeful Prison of Hell, 1 Pet. 3.19. Isa. 42.7. 7. To do
Christ's work in the Prison, for he pities us there, Philem. ver. 10. 8 To loose
them from their bonds, as the Lord do^s, Psalm 146.7.

Use 5. for Consolation: 1. (...) Imprisonment, and all the noisome evils of
it. 2. Against the Devils cruelty in it, Rev. 2.10. Christ is merciful, though
he be cruel.

Positive Comports. 1. That they are not alone that are (...) up in Prison,
Christ is with them, John 16.32. 2. That we need not be moved at it, Acts
20.23, 24. 3. That the prison is better then a palace without Christ's presence.

Ver. 35, 36. I was an hungered and ye gave me meat etc:
Doct. XVIII. is this, That Christ takes the kindnesses done to his Saints when
hungry, thirsty, strangers, naked, sick and in prison, as done unto himself
We will take the several Branches, and handle them asunder, as we did in the
former Note: And first speak of the kindness in giving them Meat and Drink.

For opening of which, let me show, 1. How it does appear that Christ takes it
as done to himself, when they are relieved in their Hunger and Thirst. 2. Why
he takes it as done to himself. 3. The Uses.

For the first: It does appear that He takes it as done to himself; 1. In that
he gives it in charge to feed the hungry, and to give drink to the thirsty,
Romans 12 20. and if to an enemy this must be done, much more to those that are
the Saints of Christ. 2. In that he promises to reward that that is so given,
Prove. 25.21, 22. Mat. 10.42. Mark 9.41. 3. In that he pronounces such a man
blessed, Prove. 22.9. 4. In that he esteems it as the Fast which he ha^^ chosen,
without which other Fasts are not at all regarded Isa. 58.7. 5. In that he
commends bounty to the Saints, Luke 21.1, 2, 3, 4. 2 Cor. 8.1, 2. 6. In that he
complains when the poor are neglected these ways: so the Text. 7. In that he
blesses the seed of such as are bountiful to them in this kind, Psalm. 37.26.
8. In that he blesses their est^tes, Prove. 11.24, 25. 9. In that he takes such
away from the evil to come, Isa. 57.1, 2. 10. In that their righteousness
remains for ever, Psalm 112.3. 11. In that he honors such. Psalm. 112.9. 12.
In that he suffers neither them nor theirs at any time to want, Psalm. 37.25, 26.

Q. 2. Why does he take it so kindly when his Saints are relieved in their
hunger and thirst?

Ans. 1. From himself. 2. From them.

From himself. 1. It was his manner, though poor, Luke 8.3. 2 Cor. 8.9. to give
to the poor, John 13.29. and therefore he cannot but take it well when men are
followers of him. 2. He knows the state of such, and the hearts of such, having
been hungry and thirsty himself, and the worth of such refreshings. 3. He knows
that they have done it with an eye to the Commandment of Christ. 4. He knows
that they have aimed at the Glory of Christ in so doing. 5. He loves his
people, and therefore must needs take it kindly when they being hungry and
thirsty are relieved. 6. (...) knows that they have done it for his sake, out
of love to him, and that makes him take it so kindly at their hands.

2. From them. 1. They are his Members, Ephesians. 5.30. 2. They are his Brethren:
so the Text. 3. They are his Redeemed ones, 1 Pet 1.18, 19. 4. They are his
Jewels, Mal. 3.17. 5. They are his Spirits Temple, 1 Cor. 6.19. and 3.16. 6.
They are his peculiar people, Tit. 2.14.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see now kindly he will much more take it, when
we minister any Spiritual relief to those that want Spiritual food, if he take
it so kindly when bodily refreshing is ministered to them. 2. We see what a
small matter the Lord makes great reckoning of: what is a little Bread, or a
little Drink given to such? yet how little soever it is, the Lord makes great
account of it. 3. We see that surely he will recompense to the full all that is
so given to them, for he will be in no man's debt, Romans 11.35. 4. We see that if
he take a little Meat and Drink to hungry and thirsty ones so kindly, oh how
kindly will be take it from the Lords Ministers, that have been Instruments to
save many souls? he will take this as an high act of Mercy indeed, 1 Pet. 5.4.
Dan. 12.3. 5. We see what an high price we should set upon our Meat when
hungry, and upon our Drink when thirsty, for Christ sets an high price upon it.
6. We see with what thankfulness hungry and thirsty ones should receive what is
given them, for Christ makes great reckoning of what is so given. 7. We see
what great encouragement we have to be of a bountiful spirit to hungry and
thirsty ones, for it is not so much done to them, as to Christ himself. 8. We
see what a lovely thing it is to relieve those in want, for Christ himself is
fed in them. 9. We see that how secretly soever any relief is given to the
Saints, Christ takes special notice of it. 10. We see what tender love is in
the Lord Jesus, that will take so small a thing so ^indly at our hands. 11. We
see his wonderful humility herein. 12. We see that we should not endure to see
the Saints want.

Use 2. For Reproof. 1. To those that withold more then is meet. Prove 11.24.
Christ Jesus will count himself little beholden to them. 2. To those that
spend what they have upon their lusts, and will part with nothing to Christ in
his Saints. 3. To those that by fraud keep back that which is in justice due to
others, James 5.4.

Use 3. For Exhortation, 1. To come off bountifully to hungry and thirsty ones
in their needs, Christ will take it ^indly at our hands. 2. To bless the Lord
Jesus that be will take what we so do in such good part, for our goodness
extends not to him, Psalm. 16.2. 3. To accept with due acknowledgement what he
does in the least of his mercies, Genesis 32.10. 4. To love him that takes so
kindly what is done to us; whom should we love like him? Prove. 23.26. 1 Cor.
16.22. 5. To follow Christ, in taking kindnesses done to hungry and thirsty
ones, as done to our selves, Philem ver 12, ^7. 6. To be glad of an opportunity
for the relief of the Saints, Gal. 6.10. 7. To devise ways of liberality, Isa.
32.8. 8. To do what we do out of love to Christ, for else it profits nothing, 1
Cor. 13.3. 9. To bewail our former hard-heartedness, Luke 19.8.10. To love
mercy, Micah 6.8.

Use 4. for Consolation: 1. That surely the least of these kindnesses shall not
be forgotten, but all remembered and rewarded by him. 2. That the Saints shall
surely remember his kindnesses, and the multitudes of them, and one day give
him the glory of them.

We are now come to the second Branch of the XVIII. Doctrine, which is this,
That Christ takes it very kindly when his Saints that are strangers are kindly
entertained into our houses.

For opening of which, let me show, 1. How it does appear that he takes their
entertainment so kindly. 2. Why he takes it so kindly. 3. The Uses.

For the first: It does appear that He takes their entertainment very kindly;
1. In that be gives it in charge that we should do it, 1 Pet 4.9. Heb. 13.2.
and he cannot but take it kindly when we observe his charge. 2. In that he
commends those that are kind this way, 3 John 5, 8. 3. In that he makes
account that such are fellow helpers to the truth, ver. 8. and this the Lord
cannot but take kindly. 4. In that he does reward all such kind
entertainments; as we see he did to the widow of Sarepta, 1 Kings 17. and the
Shunamite, 2 Kings 4. 5. In that he stirs up the hearts of his Servants to wish
for their health and outward prosperity, 3 John 2. 6. In that he gives such to
thrive and prosper in their Souls, ibid. 7. In that he vouchsafes them the love
of his precious Saints, yea, the love of all them that know the truth, 3 John
1. 8. In that he gives them such blessings as they could not well expect, 2
Kings 4.14, 15, 16. 9. In that he has sometimes restored their children from
death to life, 1 Kings 17. 2 Kings ^. 10. In that he has honored them so, as
that they have entertained Angels, Heb. 13.2. 11. In that the whole Family is
blessed by it, Luke 19.9. Heb. 11.31. with Josh. 6.23.

Q. 2. Why does be take so kindly the entertainment that his people find?

Ans 1. From himself: 1. He loves and preserves strangers, Psalm. 146.9. 2. He
sometimes was a stranger himself, and therefore cannot but take it kindly what
is done in way of entertainment of them. 3. He hates and ^bhors the covetous,
that do it not, Psalm. 10.3. and therefore cannot but take it kindly when we do
entertain them. 4. He knows what comfort his Saints have when entertained,
Judge. 19.21, 22. 5. He takes pleasure in their prosperity, Psalm. 35.27. 6. He
knows that the want of entertainment has cost many a man his life.

2. From the Saints: 1. They give him entertainment into their hearts, Ephesians 3
17. 2. They are the delight of his eyes, Cant. 2.14. 3. They are the very
ravishment of his heart. Cant. 4.9. 4. They are his Fathers blessed ones: so
the Text. 5. They want entertainment very much, are sometimes in great distress
for want of it, Judge. 19.18, 19. 6. They praise him when they have it.

3. From the nature of Entertainment: 1. It is a fruit of their Faith, Heb
11.31. So in the Widow of Sarepta and the Shunamite. 2. It flows from Love, and
therefore we must not forget to do it, Heb. 13.1, 2. 3. It is a fruit of
obedience to the Commandment, 1 Pet. 4.9. 4. It is a fruit of Bounty: and see
Isa: 32.8. 5. It may be the preservation of life. 6. It refreshes them in
their weariness.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see what great delight the Lord Jesus has in
his Saints and People, in that he takes so kindly a little entertainment given
to them, Psalm. 143.4. 2. We see how kindly he will take it when we entertain
him into our hearts, Rev. 3.20. 3. We see what entertainment himself will give
such in his house here, and in his Kingdom hereafter, that takes it so kindly
when they are entertained into our houses, surely he will honorably entertain
them, Isa: 25.6. John 14.2, 3. 4. We see how much more kindly he will take it,
when we give that that may refresh and save the lives of their Souls. 5. We
see that the Lord takes special notice of small kindnesses showed to his
people, in that a little entertainment is so kindly taken. 6. We see how
kindly we should take it when the Lord bows the hearts of his people to be
courteous in entertaining of us, for Christ takes it kindly at their hands. 7.
We see that Hospitality is that that Christ loves and delights in, how then
should we love it? Titus 1:8. 8. We see that we can never love the Lord Jesus
enough, that takes it so kindly when we are kindly entertained, 1 Cor. 16.22.
9. We see a reason of the charge he gives us, 1 Pet. 4.9. and Heb. 13.2. 10.
We see tha^ they are not of the spirit of Christ Jesus, that are unthankful
when kindly entertained. 11. We see how humble and lowly in heart the Lord
Jesus is, that looks at strangers lodgings. 12. We see that love to Christ is
seen in a little.

Use 2. for Humiliation: 1. That any stranger should want entertainment, seeing
Christ takes it so kindly. 2. That there should be any of that spirit, that
will not acknowledge such kindnesses.

Use 3. for Exhortation: 1. To beware we forget not this duty, Heb. 13.2. why
should we? 2. To beware we forget not to be thankful for all the sweet
entertainment he gives us in his House, and at his Table. 3. To rejoice in hope
of better entertainment, Romans 5.2. 4. To ^mi^te Christ herein. 5. To open to
him, Psalm. 24.7, 9. Revel. 3.20. 6. To love hospitality, Titus 1.8. 7. To take
entertainments kindly, as Christ does, 2 Kings 4. 8. To be thankful to God for
Christ Jesus, in whom all our entertainments are sweetened to us. 9. To do what
we do in our entertainments, out of Faith, and Love, and Obedience. 10. To come
off liberally. 1 Timothy 6.17, 18. seeing he takes a little so kindly.

Use 4. for Consolation: 1. That Christ looks at strangers when harbourless. 2.
That he will take it very kindly when our hearts are open to receive his words
Luke 10.42. 3. That he will give blessed entertainment himself, that takes ours
so kindly, John 14.3. 4. That we shall not be losers by kindnesses to strangers.

The third Branch we are to handle of the XVIII. Doctrine, is this, That the
Lord Jesus takes it very kindly when his naked ones are clothed.

For opening of which, let me show, 1. How it does appear that he takes it so
kindly. 2. Why. 3. The Uses.

For the first: It does appear that He takes it kindly; 1. In that he rewards
them many ways that do it: (1) With long life, as we see in Job, Job 31.19,
20. with 42.17. (2) With honor, Psalm. 12 9. so Job 29 7, 8 9, 10, 21-25. (3)
With wealth and riches, Job 42 10, 11. All these also we may see in David, who
was kind to the poor and naked, 1 Chronicles. 29.28. (4) With comfort in
affliction, Psalm. 112.4. Isa 58.7, 8, 10. (5) With speedy health, ibids. (6)
With the presence of the Lord, and his protection, ibid. (7) With speedy
answer to prayer, Isa. 58.9. (8) With continual guidance from the Lord, Isa.
58.11. (9) With satisfaction in drowth, ibid. (10) With fatness of bones, ibid.
(11) With fruitfulness, flourishing, and delightfulness, as a watered garden
holds out. (12) With continual supplies of moisture of Grace, as a Spring of
water whose waters fail not, ibid. (13) With blessings upon posterity, they
shall be renowned, Isa 58.12. 2. In that he brings a good report upon them
after they are dead, Acts 9.39. 3. In that he makes their death to be lamented,
Acts 9.39. 4. In that he sometimes has raised some that have been thus
charitable from death to life, Acts 9.40, 41. 5. In that the very loins of the
poor bless them, Job 31.20. 6. In that the prayers of his poor naked ones are
poured out for them, 2 Timothy 1.16, 18. 7. In that many thanksgivings come hereby
to God, 2 Cor. 9.12. 8. In that he makes such to be longed after, 2 Cor. 9.14.
9. In that he gives to such all sufficiency always in all things, for
abounding in every good work, 2 Cor. 9.8. 10. In that he gives them to reap
bountifully, 2 Cor. 9.6.

Q. 2. Why does he take it so kindly?

Ans. 1. From himself. 2. From his Saints.

From himself. 1. He delights in mercy, Micah 7.18. and therefore cannot but
take this kindly. 2. He is the preserver of men, Job 7.20. and this is one way
whereby they are preserved. 3 He looks at it as an unspeakable gift, 2 Cor.
9.15. and therefore cannot but take it kindly. 4. He received such things
himself when time was, Luke 8.3. 5. He knows they cannot endure the cold
without clothing, ^sal. 147.17. 6. He cares for them, 1 Pet. 5.7. and
therefore takes it kindly when we thus provide for them.

2. From the Saints that are naked. 1. They cannot ask clothing, and therefore
if they be supplied with it, Christ will take it kindly. 2. They serve him with
their outward man, and their bodies are for him, 1 Cor. 6.13. 3. Their bodies
are part of his Purchase, he has bought them with his blood, 1 Cor 6.20. and
therefore must needs take it kindly when they are clothed. 4. They are his D
sciples and followers, and he cannot but take it well when they are clothed. 5.
They are thankful for clothing both to him and men, Psalm. 65.13. Job 31.20. 6.
They cannot comfortably be without clothing.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see what care we should all have to make
provision, not only for clothing for our selves and families, but to supply
their wants also that have them not: And therefore to provide Sheep, and
encourage those that look to them: if Christ take it so kindly, and will own it
at the last day, then we cannot be too forward to make provision for them. 2.
We see what a merciful one the Lord Jesus is, that takes care of his poor
naked ones to relieve them, and owns it as done to himself. 3. We see that
though all we have be his, and he might command it all, yet he is so loving
that he will take a little kindly at our hands, given to clothe his naked ones,
Psalm. 50. 4. We see that idle persons are most loathsome to Jesus Christ, that
clothe themselves with rags, Prove. 23.21. for he would have all his naked ones
clothed, and takes it kindly from them that do it. 5. We see how thankfully we
should take it, when he clothes us with the Robe of his Righteousness, Isa.
61.10. Jer. 23.6. 6. We see how kindly he will much more take it, when any of
us are instruments to cover naked Souls, and to apply Christ's Righteousness to
any such. 7. We see how humble the Lord Jesus is, that condescends to look
after the naked's clothes, 8. We see that Cloth workers are to be encouraged
by us. 9. We see that they are not of Christ's spirit, that can see the Saints
go in rags. 10. We see what a blessed thing it is to be the Saints of Christ,
for he takes that as done to himself that is done to them.

Use 2. for Humiliation: 1. To those that have it by them, and yet do it not.
2. To those that throw that into holes and corners, that would help to clothe
Christ's naked ones.

Use 3. for Exhortation: 1. To come off liberally to the poor this way, and be
of Jobs spirit, Job 31.19.20. And that we may be enabled to it, (1) Be diligent
Prove 31.19, 20. (2) Look how they go, Job 31.19. 1 John 3.17.18 the eye will
affect the heart. (3) Think not much even to make them garments, Acts 9.39. (4)
Spend not too much upon our selves, Luke 16.19, 20. (5) Love mercy, Micah 6.8.
(6) Follow that rule Luke 3.11 (7) Study liberality, Isa. 32.8. (8) Think much
of the day of Judgment. (9) Set our selves in their condition, Mat. 7.12. (10)
Think of evil times, Eccles. 11.2. 2. To those that are relieved, to be
thankful to God and man. 3. To love the Lord Jesus, that takes a little so
kindly. 4. To follow Christ, and take it kindly when clothed. 5. To husband our
clothes well, as a fruit of Christ's kindness. 6. To be glad of an opportunity
to clothe the naked.

Use 4. for Consolation: 1. Against men's ingratitude; Christ takes it kindly at
our hands, whatever they do. 2 Against our own unbelieving hearts, that are so
apt to distrust his acceptance of what we do this way. 3. Against Satan's
^anders, that we have done it out of base ends: Christ will speak of no such
thing at that day; only look ^e to our hearts.

The fourth Branch of the XVIII. Doctrine is this. That the Lord Jesus takes it
very kindly when his sick Saints are v^^ted by us, and will own it at the last
day as done to himself.

For opening of which, let me show, 1 How it does appear that he takes the
visiting of his si^k Saints to kindly. 2. Why. 3. The Uses.

For the first: It does appear, 1. In that he does not let the vints that evil
nen give to his sick servants, go without some reward, 2 Kings 13.14, etc. much
less when one Saint visits another. (...) In that the Saints are ever better by
such ^^^^s, both they that visit, and they also that are visited: for commonly
they pray together, and speak gracious words together, and so both are
bettered, Jam: 5. and such vi^its Christ cannot but take very kindly. 3. In
that the sick come by such visits to be healed. Jam: 5.14, 15. 4. In that by
such visits the sins which the sick have committed come to be forgiven: and to
be a means of such an act of charity as that, must needs be kindly taken by
Christ Jesus. 5. In that by such visits, the temptations that sick ones are
assaulted with, come often to be removed, and their hearts comforted. 6. In
that the Lord commonly orders it, that they that have visited others shall be
visited themselves. 7. In that the sick bless those that come to visit them,
Genesis 48.1, 2, 8, 9, 10, 15, 16. 8. In that he makes it a pledge of blessedness,
Psalm. 41.1, 2. 9. In that when such as have visited others come to be sick, the
Lord will graciously vi^^t such, Psalm. 41.3. 10. In that if it should be a
sickness to death, the living will lay it to heart, Eccles. 7.2.

Q. 2. Why does the Lord take visits so kindly?

Ans. 1. From himself. 2. From his Saints.

From himself. 1. He was willing to give such visits many times. 2. He looks at
it as an act of our kindness, and he cannot but take our kindness kindly: if he
be kind to the unthankful and to the evil, Luke 6.35. much more will he be so
to them that show kindness to his people. 3. He charge us to visit his sick
ones, Jam: 5.14, 15. 4. He pities sick ones, Mat: 8.16, 17. and therefore
cannot but take it kindly when we out of pity visit them. 5. He knows all their
pains, groans, sorrows, conflicts, combat^, temptations; and therefore a v sit
to them pleases him well.

2. From the Saints. 1. They need these visits; for in ^ick times Satan is
busy, Unbelief is bu^^e, Impatience is active and busy, and therefore need
help, and the more their need is, the more kindly he takes these visits for
their help. 2. They are the more indeared to those that visit them, and Christ
takes that well, when love is more increased and continued, Heb: 13.1. 1 Pet:
4.8. 3. They are most tender to the Lord then, Heb: 4.10. 4. They are not able
to do any thing for themselves, cannot stir sometimes to help themselves. 5.
They cannot speak nor call for help, Psalm. 77.4. 6. They are alone, and that is
uncomfortable, Eccles. 4.10.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see how compassionate and full of bowels the
Lord is to sick ones, that takes it so kindly when they are vinted by us. 2. We
see what a little matter done out of Obedience and Faith, pleases him; a visit
does it: not only those high acts, Heb: 11.8, 17, 18, 25, 26. and those ver.
35, 36, 37, 38. but such a small thing as a visit. 3. We see how readily we
should come off with this, seeing it is so kindly taken. 4. We see how kindly
sick ones should take a visit, for Christ does. 5. We see how kindly we should
take the Lords gracious visits to us, in sending Christ to us, Luke 1.78. 6. We
see how kindly we should take it at his hands, when he visits us with his
gracious Ordinances and Providence: he bewails the contrary, Luke 19.41-44. 7.
We see how kindly we should take it, when he visits our hearts and families
with his Presence, and Grace, and Spirit. 8. We see that sickness may be the
better born, se^in^ Christ has such regard to a visit given to sick ones. 9. We
see that we may not look at visitation of the sick as an arbitrary thing, but
as our duty, being so highly set by. 10. We see how desirable and acceptable
his last visitation should be to us, John 14.3, 18. and 6.22. 11. We see that
if we hazard or lay down our liv^s for the Brethren, 1 John 3.16 Romans 16.4. he
will much more take it kindly.

Use 2. for Hu iliation: 1. That we are so hardly drawn to visit sick ones,
when it is so kindly taken by Christ himself. 2 That such as are sick sometimes
are not so sensibly affected with the Saints visiting of them.

Use 3. for Exhortation: 1. To those that are in health, to visit them, and
pray for them, Jam: 5.14, 15. 2. To those ^^at are sick, to take it kindly when
they are visited, f^^ Christ does 3. To both whole and sick, to be thankful for
Christ's gracious visiting of us and ours with his Presence and blessing. 4. To
admire with thankfulness Gods goodness, in sending Christ to us; Luke 1.68, 69.
5. To visit him often with our holy Addre^^es to him, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. 6. To come
off with highest acts of love to him, seeing he so ^^indly takes such a small
matter as a visit.

Use 4. for Consolation: 1. That the Lord tenders his sick ones, seeing he is
so delighted in a visit of them. 2. That himself will surely visit them. 3.
That he will take ^^eater matters done to them kindly. 4. That he would not
have them left alone.

We are now come to the last Branch of the XVIII. Note, which is this, That
Christ Jesus takes it very kindly at our hands, when we come unto his
imprisoned ones.

For opening of which, let me show, 1. How it does appear that he takes this so
kindly. 2. Why be does it. 3. The Uses.

For the first: It does appear that He takes it very kindly when men come unto
his Saints in prison; 1. In that his imprisoned Saints pray for them and their
houses, 2 Timothy: 1.16, 17, 18. which is a pledge that he takes it kindly from
them. 2. In that they have their lives given them as a prey for this thing,
Jer: 38.7, 8, 9. with 39.16, 17, 18. 3. In that he restores such from sickness
to health, Phil: 2.25, 27. which is a pledge of the Lords kind acceptance of
it. 4. In that he would have such received with all gladness, Phil: 2.29. 5. In
that he would have such held in reputation, ibid. 6. In that he imparts some
Spiritual blessing to them by the Prisoners means, by their savoury and
gracious communication, Acts 16.31, 32. 7. In that he blesses them with off
spring of their bodies, which had none before; as the Keepers wife with whom
Dr. Sands was Prisoner, being kind to him, had a Son the next year, according
as he told her. 8. In that he takes such with their families into his Covenant,
as we see in the Jailer that was kind to Paul and Silas, Acts 16 33, 34. 9. In
that he fills them with joy in believing, Acts 16.34. 10. In that he record^
the courtesies that have been shown to his Prisoners in his own book; the
Keepers courtesy to Joseph, Genesis 39. Ebedmelechs to Jerem^ah, Jer. 38.7, 8, 9.
So Acts 27.1, 3.

Q. 2. Why does he take it so kindly?

Ans. 1. From himself. 2. From them. 3. From the work it self.

From himself. 1. He is kind to his Prisoners, and therefore takes kindly what
is done in kindness to them. 2. He comes to Prisoners himself, and chears them,
as he did to Paul, Acts 16.25, 26. and to Cuthbert Simpson in Q. Mariet time.
3. He sends his Angels to them, Acts 12.7, 8. and 27.23, 24. and 5.19, 20. 4.
He knows the sad condition of Prisoners, how vilely and unworthily they are
used, as Joseph and Jeremy were. 5. He desires mercy, and delights in it, Hos.
6.6. Micah 7.18. 6. He loses the Prisoners, Psalm. 146.7. and therefore takes
it Kindly when we come to them.

2. From them. 1. They are his choice Worthies, of whom the world is not
worthy, Heb: 11 36, 38. 2. They are among the most honorable of his believing
ones, Phil: 1.29. 3. They are willing to be bound for him, Acts 21.13. 4. They
rejoice that they are counted worthy so to be, Acts 5.41.

3. From the work it self. 1. It is the work of Christ, Phil: 2.30. and
therefore no wonder if he does so kindly take it. 2. It is an act of spiritual
fortitude and true valor, Phil: 2.25. 3. It is an act of true love both to
Christ and the Prisoners. 4. It is an act of greatest self denial, Phil: 2.30.
Rom: 16.3, 4.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see that though Prisoners be alone, and hardly
used, yet Christ has regard to them, for he owns what is done to them in way
of kindness, as done to himself. 2. We see with what acceptance we should
receive his kindness to us, in coming to us when we were every moment in danger
of being cast into the Prison of Hell. Oh! we should take this kindly at his
hands, Isa: 42.6, 7. 3. We see what a mercy it is, and how kindly we should
take it from him, when he comes to our Spirits when shut up, and sets them at
liberty, Psalm: 88.8. 4. We see what great encouragement we have to be kind to
Christ's Prisoners, for he owns and accepts it kindly at our hands, Heb: 13.3.
5. We see that he will much more take it kindly if any of us be instruments to
let go those that have been Prisoners of darkness. 6. We see, it coming to
P^^soners of Christ be so acceptable to him, how acceptable is it to be a means
of their enlargement, and to venture hard for it, as Romans 16.3, 4. 7. We see of
what an amiable nature and sweet spirit the Lord Jesus is, that takes a walk to
his Prisoners so kindly. 8. We see that we need not be much discouraged to go
to Prison for Christ's sake 9. We see that if he respect his Prisoners so, Oh
^ow will he respect them in his Palace of Glory! 10. We see that they that
commit his Saints to Prison, do them a greater kindness then they are aware of.

Use 2. for Hum^liation: 1. To those that neglect this office of love; Christ
takes it unkindly. 2. To those Prisoners of his that are not so thankful as
they should to those that come to ^^em; Christ takes it very kindly.

Use 3. for Exhortation: 1. To stir us up to remember those that are in Bonds,
Heb. 13.3. 2. To be very thankful when Christ comes to us in our imprisoned
condition. 3. To bless the Father for visiting us by his Son. Luke 1.68, 69,
78, 79. 4. To Prisoners, to take such kindnesses kindly, as Christ does. 5. To
be unwearied in doing for Christ, that takes it so kindly when we come to his
Prisoners. 6. To deliver Prisoners as we can, for he will much more take that
kindly. 7. To venture hard for them, Phil. 2.30. 8. To be willing to suffer the
Prison for him. 9. To be thankful and joyful in that estate, Acts 5.41. 10. To
honor the Lord Jesus in Prison.

Use 4. for Consolation: 1 That surely he will much more take it kindly when we
are at pains and cost for their Liberties. 2. That Christ will entertain us
when we come to him; he will take that kindly, John 6.37. 3. That though some
may vex at those that visit godly Prisoners, Christ will not. 4. That the
Prison cannot separate us from Christ's love, Rom 8.35.

Ver. 37. Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, etc.
Doct. XIX is this That they that are of a true merciful spirit to the Saints
of Chr^st^^n their a^^^^cted estate, are in a justified estate. They are
rig^teous ones, ^sa^. 112.9. Isa. 57.1 2 Cor 9.9, 10.
For opening of which, let me show, 1. How it does appear that they are in a
justified estate, or righteous, as they are here styled. 2. Why it must needs
be so. 3. The Uses.

For the first: It does appear that they are in a just fied estate, or
righteous; 1. In that Mercy is a fruit of Righteousness, 2 Cor: 9.10 Phil:
1.11. Psalm: 37.21. 2. In that it is a mark of Election, Coloss. 3.12. and Elect
ones are justified ones, Romans 8.30. 3. In that it is a pledge of our happiness,
Prove 14.21. Now there are none happy that are not righteous. 4. In that it is a
pledge of our honoring of God, I^rov. 14.31. and none can honor him truly but
justified ones. 5. In that it is a pledge of uprightness, Isa. 57.1, 2. and
n^ne are upright but justified ones, Luke 18.6. In that merciful ones shall
obtain mercy, M^tth. 5.7. Now none obtain mercy from God but justified ones:
see ^sal. 18.25. 7. In that merciful ones rejoice against judgment, Jam. 2.13.
and none can do thus but justified ones. 8. In that it makes us like to God,
Luke 6.36. and none can bear his image but justified ones. 9. In that mercy
argues the goodness of a man's condition, Psalm. 37.23, 26. and no man can be
called a good man, but he that is in a justified estate. 10. In that Mercy is a
pledge of Gods mercy to us in the forgiveness of our sins, for we cannot be of
a merciful spirit to others, till his mercy ha^ prevented us.

Q. 2. Why must it needs be so, that they that are of a merciful spirit are in
a justified estate?

Ans. 1. Because it is a fruit or Faith, by which alone we are justified, Romans
5.1. 2. Because it is a fruit of that wisdom that comes from above, Jam:
3.17. 3. Because it is that that God is well pleased with, Heb: 13.16. Mic:
6.8. 4. Because it is that that is the stability of a Christian, Isa: 32.8. 5.
Because it is that that is a man's exaltation and honor, Psalm. 112.9. A man's
Justification is so, Luke 18.14. 6. Because it is that whereby when we die we
enter into peace, Isa. 57.1, 2. 7. Because it is that that Christ will own at
the last day. 8. Because it is that that evidenceth the truth of our Religion,
Jam. 1.27.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see that works of Sanctification are good
evidences of our good estate before God: if they evidence a justified estate,
they evidence a good estate. 2. We see what great encouragement we have to be
of a merc^ful spirit, and to love mercy; for, if works of mercy be done from
right grounds, for right ends, and in a right manner, they argue that we are in
a justified estate, Mic. 6.8. 3 We see how unwearied we should be in doing
good, and showing mercy, for there is not a better argument of our integrity
and righteousness then that is, Gal 6.9. 4. We see what hope we may have of
some of our forefathers that lived in time of Popery, who were very boun^iful
and merciful to the poor; for though some did what they did thinking to merit
by it, as they were taught, yet it is to be hoped that some were of a better
spirit. 5. We see that all they that do not bring forth fruits of mercy and
good works, whatever pretense they make, or whatever they say of their Faith,
yet they are not justified in the sight of God, Jam. 2. 6. We see how good the
Lord is to those that the Lord is pleased to be^^ow a spirit of mercy upon; he
gives them in a comfortable pledge of their justified estate. 7. We see who
they be that Churches may safely ad^^it into their Fellowship: if we see men
and women of a merciful spirit, we may without fear admit them, for this ^rgues
a justified est^te. 8. We see who we should desire to make our ^osome friends,
and our intimate acquaintance, merciful men. 9. We see what an high price the
Lord sets upon works of mercy, in that he reckons of merciful men as righteous
ones. 10. We see how amiable and precious the Lords mercy should be to us,
seeing he prizeth our mercy so highly, which is but a fruit of his, Psalm. 36.7.

Use 2. for Humiliation: 1. That there are so few merciful men, Mic 7.1, 2.
Psalm. 12.1. 2. That those that are, are so little set by.

Use 3. for Exhortation: 1. To prize merciful men, as ^^d d^es. 2. To lay it to
heart when such are taken away, Is^. 57.1. 3. To join in fellowship with such.
4. To love mercy, Mic. 6.8. 5. To bless the Lord when he makes us of a merciful
spirit. 6. To remember to show mercy, Heb. 13.16. 7. To delight to see others
merciful. 8. To be afraid of an unmerciful spirit. 9. To follow after mercy,
Prove. 21.21. 10. To bear with frailties, if this be found in Brethren.

Use 4. for Consolation: 1. Against the corrupt censures and ^ard thoughts of
men: a spirit of mercy argues integrity and righteousness. 2. Against the
unbelief of our own hearts; unbelief may here stop its mouth. 3. Against evil
tidings; such a man as is merciful need not be afraid of them, Psalm. 112.7.

Ver. 37, 38, 39. Then shall the Righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw
we ^^ee an ^ungred, and fed thee (...) etc.
Doct. XX. is this, That the Elect Saints are so far from putting any
confidence in any thing they do for the Lord, that they cannot own any thing
that they have done, at that day.
Reasons. 1. From the Lord. 2. From themselves. 3. From the duties they perform.

From the Lord. 1. From his Infiniteness, which our ^inite works can no way
reach unto, Isa. 40.15, 16. and how the^ can we put any confidence in what we
do? or how should we own any thing that we have done in reference to him. 2.
From his Perfection and Sufficiency in Himself, we cannot add any thing to
him, Job 22.2, 3. and 35.6, 7, 8. Psalm. 16 2, 3. 3. From his Beneficence; for
whatever we do in the best way for him, is from him, 1 Chronicles. 29.14, 16. Isa.
26.12. 1 Cor. 4.7. 4. From the Purity of his Nature, which (...) not but abhor
our best services, as they come from us, Habak. 1.13. W^c to us, if we should
stand before him in our best works, Isa 64.6. Titus 3.5. 5. From his
Sovereignty and Greatness, Mal. 1.14. Psalm. 47.2. and what poor things are our
duties for such a Prince as he? 6. From his Command to us, Luke 17.10. 7. From
his Justice, which requires exact obedience. 8. From his Omniscience, 1 John
3.20.

2. From the Saints themselves. 1. They see no worth at all in what they have
done. 2. They desire pardon for their best works, N^b^m. 13.22. 3. They see
them all woefully defiled, Isa. 64.6. 4. They pray that God would not enter into
judgment with them for the best of them, Psalm. 143.2. 5. They see them at best
imperfect, 1 Cor. 13.9, 10. 6. They see that their Alms, though Sacrinces, Heb.
13.16. yet need an Altar to sanctify them, Mat. 23.19. 7. They acknowledge
themselves unable to stand, if God should mark their iniquities, Psalm. 130.3.
8. They acknowledge, though they cannot accuse themselves, yet they are not
thereby justified, 1 Cor. 4 4.

3. From the Duties they perform. 1. They have their spots. 2. They come hardly
off, M^t. 11.30. 3. They are such things as we are apt to be weary of, Galat.
6.9. 4. They are so performed, as that we have cause to be ashamed of them. 5.
They are at best but childish things, 1 Cor. 13.11. 6. They need covering and
washing. 7. They are only acceptable to God through Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2.5.
8. They cannot save us. Titus 3.5. Ephesians. 2.8, 9.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see what little reason any have to glory or
boast of any of their works of Bounty o^ Mercy that they have done, for at the
last day the Saints will be so far from this, that they cannot tell how to
own their best works. 2. We see what a folly it will be in Hypocrites to plead
their Works at that day, Mat. 7.22, 23. for if the Saints put no confidence in
their works that they have done, how poorly will Hypocrites come off that plead
theirs? 3. We see how lowly in heart Christians will then be at that day: here
we have our pangs of Pride sometimes, to overvalue what we do, but then we
shall have another spirit. 4. We see how loathsome our sins should be to us, if
our best duties be of so little worth that we cannot tell how to own them at
the last and great day, Romans 12.9. We should loath our selves for them, Ezekiel
36.31. 5. We see the vanity of many men, that will brag of their works, Prove.
20.6. 6. We see how inconsistent it is with a gracious spirit, to boast of any
thing we do, how good soever in it self the thing be. 7. We see how contrary to
the grain of Christianity, that Popery is, that affirms, That Good Works merit
Eternal Salvation: at the last day the Saints will own no such thing, nor any
gracious Saint now. 8. We see that confidence in any thing that we can do, will
never stand in the day of Christ. 9. We see that if our best works will be
undervalued then, how should we undervalue all we do now? Luke 17.10. 10. We
see that the Elect Saints will at that day ascribe all the glory to the Lord of
what they have done, and nothing to themselves, Psalm. 115.1.

Use 2. for Humiliation: 1. To those that tell others in a braving way of what
they have done, Mat. 6.1, 2. 2. To those that are too vain and luxuriant in
praising others, Prove. 27.14.

Use 3. for Exhortation: 1. To esteem little of our best works now, for we
shall so do at the last day, if we be the Lords elect ones, Lu. 17.10. 2. To
take heed that pride shep not in, and mix it self with our works of mercy, Mat.
6.1. 3. To long after that day, when we shall be of such an humble frame. 4. To
abhor the thought of having any confidence in our best works, Job 9.20, 21. 5.
To confess that all our righteousness is as filthy rags, Isa. 64.6. 6. To pray
that God would not enter into judgment with us, Psalm. 143.2. 7. To trust only
in the mercy of God through Christ Jesus, notwithstanding all our Good Works;
that is the safest, by the confession of Beliarmine himself, that great Champion
for Good Works: see also Gal. 2.15, 16. Romans 4.1, 2. 8. To rejoice in Christ
Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh Phil. 3.3.

Use 4. for Consolation: 1. To those that renounce their best works, so as to
put no confidence in them, it is a pledge of their Election. 2. To those that
have low thoughts of all their works of mercy that they have done. 3. To those
that plead and argue against trusting to Works for merit.

Ver. 37, 38, 39. Then shall the Righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw
we thee an hungered, and ^od thee? etc.
Doct. XXI. is this, That the Elect Saints at the last day will make so little
reckoning of what they have done for Christ in his Members, that they do as it
were forget what they have done in that kind.
Reasons. 1. From the Lord. 2. From themselves. 8. From their Works of Bounty
and Mercy.

From the Lord. 1. From his excellent Majesty, which we can never do enough
for; and therefore that little that is done for him, how can it come to mind?
it must needs be forgotten, Isa. 12.5. 2. From his Mercy and Goodness, he
forgets their sins, Isa. 43.25. Jer. 31.34. makes them ^s if they had never
been committed, Micah 7.18. and is it any wonder that they should forget their
best works done for him? 3. From the exact Perfection of Obedience that his
Justice calls for, Gal 3.10. Now we being able to do nothing exactly, how
should it be but that all we do should be forgotten? 4. From the Lords
fulfilling all Righteousness for us, and imputation of his Righteousness to us,
Romans 4.6, 7, 8. And how then should any thing of ours be thought of? Cant. 4.7.
5. From his fore-ordaining us to walk in this way of good works, Ephesians. 2.10.
and therefore he has been more in them then we; and how then should we remember
them in reference to our selves? 6. From his Acceptance of our will for the
deed, 2 Cor. 8.12.

2. From the Saints. 1. They are so taken up with thoughts of the Lords mercy
to them, that they cannot think of any mercy that they have shown to him in his
Members. 2. They are then so taken up with the Dignity and Honor that is put
upon them, that what they have done upon earth is out of mind. 3. They are so
taken up with his Praises, that what they have done cannot come into their
hearts to be once thought upon. 4. They are so humble and little in their own
eyes, that what they have done seems nothing to them. 5. They are come to man's
estate, and therefore forget what they did in their child ^ood, 1 Cor. 13.11.
6. They are now perfect, Heb 12.23. and therefore forget their imperfect
services, 1 Cor. 13.10.

3. From their works of Mercy. 1. They are all his works, and flow from him,
Hos. 14.8. John 15.5. Phil. 1.11. and therefore they must needs forget them, as
in reference to themselves. 2. They are little things in comparison of what we
owe him. 3. They are not worth remen bring, having been so full of fillings. 4.
They are done so secretly, that they are easily forgotten, Matthew. 6.1 -4.5.
They are done to so few, and so seldom, that they may well be forgotten. 6.
They have been done so sparingly, that those poor pittances cannot once so much
as come into their minds.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see that they are not the Elect ones of God,
that reckon up their good works, as the Pharisee did in Luke 18.11, 12. and
that number their Devotions: for at the last day the Elect, a^ though they had
forgotten all, will say, Lord, when did we feed thee? etc. a. We see how
conscious we should be of our falling short of our duty to Christ in his
Members now, for the time will come when we shall think that we have done
nothing for him. 3. We see how little it is that the best of the Saints do for
Christ here; so little, that they cannot think of any thing that they have done
that way. 4. We see that they that upbraid others with what they have done for
them, as they are unlike God, Jam. 1.5. so they are not of the spirit that the
Elect Saints will be of at the last day. 5. We see that they that are most
forgetful of what they have done for Christ in his Members, they come nearest
the perfection of the Saints at the last day. 6. We see that when we have done
all we can for Christ in his Members, it well becomes us to be little in our
own eyes, 1 Pet. 5.5. 7. We see that our kindnesses done to Christ in his
Members are very few, for they are easily all forgotten. 8. We see that
forgetfulness of what we have done for Christ in his Members, argues a truly
gracious heart. 9. We see that good works, though they be forgotten of us, lose
not their nature, for Christ before owns them. 10. We see that Elect Saints
will carry Humility to Heaven. 11. We see that they are not for Works of
Supererogation. 12. We see that surely they do not hold that they are saved by
their Works, for they are as though forgotten and out of mind, Ephesians 2.8.9.

Use 2. for Humiliation: 1. To those that now think too much, and speak too
much of their works, they shall be all forgotten at that day. 2. To those that
are so sparing in their beneficence, it must needs be forgotten it is so little.

Use 3. for Exhortation: 1. To this holy forgetfulness now of what we do this
way. Means hereof. (1) Remember we our sins more, and we shall be less proud in
remembering what we have done, Ezekiel 36.31. (2) Look upon our failings in the
Grounds. Manner, and End of our works, and we shall see more spots then beauty
in them. (3) Look upon what Christ has done for us, and all our doings will not
come into mind. (4) Look upon his Greatness, and all our doings will be
nothing to us but be forgotten. (5) Compare the Reward and the Work together:
As he said of sufferings, Romans 8.18. 2 Cor. 4.17. so here, our works appear as
nothing, when set before the exceeding greatness of the Reward. (6) Remember
his manifold mercies. (7) Remember what we did of old against him. (8)
Remember, that all we can do is Debt and Duty. 2. To be humble when we show
most mercy. 3. To love Humility in others that are merciful. 4. To abhor that
Popish Conceit of Merit. 5. To detest all thoughts of Works of Supererogation.
6. To love Christ's appearing, 2 Timothy 4 8.

Use 4. for Consolation: 1. Against wicked men's charging us with neglect of
Bounty and Mercy, they do no more then we shall one day do against our selves.
2. Against some pangs of vainglory which we mourn for; we shall be troubled
with none of them at that day.

Ver. 37, 38, 39. Then shall the Righteous answer him, etc.
Doct. XXII. is this, That the Elect Saints at the last day will wonder and
admire, that their Works, that they have made so little reckoning of, should be
so owned and accepted by the Lord Jesus. For so Interpreters make account that
this question is made of them, by way of wonder and admiration.
Reasons. 1. From the Lord himself. 2. From the Saints. 3. From their Works.

From the Lord. 1. He needs not us, nor any of our services, and therefore we
may then well wonder that he does so accept them, Acts 17.24, 25. 2. He is
above all our services; that which is spoken of one, is true of all the rest,
Nehem. 9.5. and being so above them, we may well wonder that he will accept of
them. 3. He was happy from all Eternity, when there was neither Man nor Angel
to serve him, Prove. 8 30, 31. and therefore they may well admire at this. 4. He
fills all in all, Ephesians. 1.23. Joh. 1.16. and is it not then a wonder that he
should own and accept any thing done by us? 5. He gives us that whereof we have
been bountiful, 1 Chronicles. 29.14, 16. 6. He puts it into our hearts to be
merciful; it is his own work, and therefore that he reckons of it as ours, and
accepts it as coming from us, we may well wonder at it.

2. From the Saints. 1. They are unsatisfied in what they do. 2. They sin in
their best actions, Isa. 64.6. 3. They take no notice of them themselves, Mat
6.3. and therefore may woll wonder that he should take notice of them, and
accept them. 4. They see that they too often have wanted bands and hearts to
give, and therefore cannot but wonder that he should so accept of them. 5. They
miss their opportunities of Beneficence too often, Gal 6.10. when they come off
to works of Mercy with delay and difficulty. 6. They want ability sometimes to
show mercy, are poor, and have little to give. 7. They give very little, Luke
21.1, 2, 3, 4. 8. They do it not with such in larged hearts as the Lord calls
for, Isa. 58.1^.

3. From their Works of Mercy. 1. They are nothing to what we might have done
according to our ability, 1 Timothy 6.18. 2. They are nothing in comparison of the
mercy be has (...) to us. 3. They are of no reckoning, compared with the
Reward. 4. They are nothing to what others would have done, if they had our
opportunities, 2 Cor. 8.1, ^. 5. They are nothing to what we should have done.
6. They are nothing to the mul^icude of our sins.

Use 1. for Information: ^. We see what cause we have to wonder at the Lords
acceptance of what we do here for him, for at that day we shall wonder at his
owning and accepting of the smallest kindnesses showed to his Members. 2. We
see that holy admications here at the prace of Christ toward us, is the
beginning of those blessed admirings that we shall have at that day. 3. We see
that we shall furely be filled with admiration at the riches of his grace in
pardening of our sins, and reconciling us to himself; for if we shall wonder at
this here mentioned in the Text, much more at that: if at the less, much more
at the greater, Mich 7.18. 4. We see how admirable the joys of beaven will be,
we shall be ravished in our spirits in the sense of them. If this here
mentioned be so admirable, what will they be? 5. We see that great will be the
humility of the Elect Saints at that day, for this holy admiration is a fruit
of it. 6. We see that the more humble we be in our holy admirings at the Lords
mercies, the more we come up to that perfection that is in another world. 7. We
see that the Saints make account that their best works are worthless things,
and deserve not to be accepted. Psalm 143.2. 8. We see how damnable their
condition is, that trust to the merit of their works for Salvation, Tit. 3.4,
5, 6 7. 2 Timothy 1.9. ^. We see how free God^ grace is in accepting us and our
services, Romans 4 1, 2. 10. We see that there are many wonders in the grace of
God, in accepting what we do for him.

Use 2. for Humiliation: 1. That we have so few of these holy admirings here.
2. That we are apt to have too high thoughts of our works: Alas! it is a wonder
of Gods grace that they should ever be accepted.

Use 3. for Exhortation: 1. To begin our wondering here, for we shall wonder at
that day. 2. To abhor the thought of being justified or saved by them, Isa
64.6. 3. To desire after that day that may fill us with these holy admirings,
Rev. 22.20. 4. To humble our selves for all our failings in our services to him
in his Saints, for we shall humbly admire their acceptance at that day, 1 Chronicles. 29.14, 16. 5. To walk ^^^edly from all that we have done, and not to
rest in any of our duties, for it will be a wonder to us one day, that they
should be owned and accepted. 6. To wonder that we can no more wonder at the
wonders of Gods grace toward us.

Use 4. for Consolation: 1. Against our shortness in our holy admirings here,
at the Lords accepting of our services, we shall come off better at that day.
2. Against the praises that vain glorious Hypocrites have for their works; we
shall have praise from God, which we shall wonder at.

Ver. 40. And the King shall answer, and say unto them, Verily I say unto you,
inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my Brethren, ye have
done it unto me.
Doct. XXIII. is this, That the Elect Saints of Christ are counted and reckoned
by him as his brethren: Joh. 20.17. Heb. 2.11, 12.
For opening of which, let me show in what respects they are his Brethren. 2.
The Uses.

Quest. In what respects are they said to be his Brethren?

Ans. 1. In that he and they have one Father; though as he is the second Person
in the Trinity he is the essenti^^ Son of the Father by Eternal Generation, and
they his Sons by Adoption and Grace, John 1.14, 18. 1 John 3.1, 2. 2. In that
they hear his Image, as Brethren are like one another, Romans 8.29. They bear his
Image here in Knowledge, Holiness, and Righteousness, Coloss 3.10. Ephesians 4.24.
and shall bear it more perfectly hereafter, 1 Cor 15.49. 1 John 3.2. 3. In that
they are joynt-heirs with him, Romans 8.17. as Brethren inherit their Fathers
Estate, though the firstborn has a double Portion. 4. In that they and he are
sufferers together, Rom 8.17. 2 Timothy 2.12. Coloss. 1.24. as Brethren are often
fellow sufferers. Romans 8.29. 5. In that he and they are fellows one to another,
Psalm 45 7. as Brethren are fellows and companions together, have fellowship one
with another, he has fellowship with them, Cant. 5.1. and they with him, 1 John
1.3. Rev. 3.20. 6. In that he and they entirely love one another, as Brethren
do: he loves them, Gal. 2.20. Ephesians 5.2, 25. and they love him, Psalm. 18.1. and
116.1. Ephesians 6.24. 1 John 4.19. 7. In that he and they are firmly ^^ited, so as
nothing can separate them: so are Brethren firmly linked and united, and so are
they, Hos. 2.19, 20 2 Cor 11.2. Ephesians. 5.30. John 15.2. 8. In that he and they
please their Father, John 8.29. 1 John 3.22. so do Brethren. 9. In that be and
they are sensible of one another sufferings and comforts: so the Text: Acts
9.4. The head in the natural body suffers, and rejoices with the members, and
the members with the head; so in the mystical body. 10. He and they partake of
one another provisions and feasts, as Brethren: be invites us, and we him,
Cant. 4.16. and 5.1. 11. He and they never forsake one another, as Brethren,
Heb. 13.5. Jor. 32.40. 12. He has done many brotherly offices for them: (1)
Laid down his life for them, 1 John 3.16. (2) He intercedes for them, Heb.
7.25. (3) Prepares a place for them, John 14.2, 3. (4) He will not leave them
comfortless, John 14.18. (5) Procures the Comforter for them John 14 16. and
sends him, John 15.26. (6) Gives them a grant of all they ask, John 14.13, 14.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see what great honor the Lord Jesus will put
upon his Saints at that day, that he will own them as Brethren: Great is the
honor of being the Brethren of a King: Oh what is it then to be the Brethren
of this King! 2. We see the great humility of the Lord Jesus, that will stoop
so low as to count and call (...) his Brethren: Earthly Kings make account that
they condescend in calling the chief Peers of the Land, their Cousins Oh but
how does this King condescend in calling not only the greatest, but the
meanest of his Subjects, Brethren! Psalm 113.5, 6.7. 3. We see that surely he
will never be wanting to us, to do those brotherly offices for us now that we
stand in need of, for he cannot forget his Brethren. 4. We see that though he
seem to cast us off in time of temptation, yet he will not do it long, for he
cannot withdraw his compassions from his Brethren, Heb. 2.18. and 4.15. 5. We
see that though he make himself strange to them, and speak roughly to them, and
deal harshly with them, yet there will be a time when he will not be able to
refrain himself any longer, but will (as Joseph did) discover himself to be
their Brother, Genesis 45.1. 6. We see that he cannot see them lack, Psalm. 34.10.
and 84.11. 7. We see that we had need to beware of offending him; for a Brother
offended is hard to be won. Prove. 18.19. and therefore serve him with fear, and
take heed of provoking him to anger, Psalm. 2.11, 12. 8. We see a reason of his
kind acceptance of what we do for him, he is our Brother. 9. We see that he
will not suffer us to be overmuch wronged, but will surely take our part
against our enemies, Luke 22.31. Mat. 10. 10. We see a reason why the Righteous
is more excellent then his Neighbor, Prove. 12.26. for such are Christ's
Brethren. 11. We see that his heart is toward ^s. 12. That he will never leave
us nor forsake us, Heb. 13.5.

Use 2. for Humiliation 1. That we have so little of His Spirit, are so unlike
to such a Brother. 2. That we are so unbrotherly to him. 3. That we are so apt
to start from him, Prove. 17.17. 4. That we are so little troubled for our
unkindness to him: see Genesis 42.21.

Use 3. for Exhortation: 1. To honor our elder Brother. 2. To suffer with him,
Romans 8.17. 3. To trace his steps, 1 John 2.6. as younger Brethren do. 4. To do
his Fathers will, Mat. 12.50. 5. To converse much with him, Job 22.21. 1 John
1.3. 6. To open to him, Psalm. 24.7, 9. Rev. 3.20. See Gen 24.31. 7. To love him
constantly. If brotherly love should continue between the Saints, Heb. 13.1.
then much more between Christ and us. 8. To trust in him: for though other
Brothers are not to be trusted sometimes, Jer. 9.4. Micah 7.5, 6. yet we may
safely trust him. 9. To take his part against those that rise up against him:
Brethren take one another part. 10. To get our elder Brothers garments on us.
See for illustration Genesis 27.15. so Jer. 23.6. 11. To deny none that Ask for
Jesus sake; he is our Brother. 12. To walk honorably, as having him to our
Brother.

Use 4. for Consolation: 1. Against afflictions and temptations, we have a
Brother that is sensible of them 2 Against our own unbelief; he will appear to
us. 3. Against hard Censures, and present dishonor.

Positive Comforts. 1. That he will come to us, John 14.18. 2. That he will let
us inherit with him. 3. That he will discover himself to us.

Ver. 40. And the King shall answer, and say unto them, etc.
Doct. XXIV. is this, That the meanest and poorest Saints, and most despicable,
and those that are of least reckoning and account with men, are of great esteem
with Christ Josus. He speaks honorably of the least, and counts them his
Brethren, as well as the greatest.
Reasons. 1. From the Lord Jesus himself. 2. From the Elect Saints which are of
least account.

From the Lord Jesus. 1. He has Chosen them, and more of them then he has of
greater personages, 2 Cor. 1.26, 27. Jam. 2.5. 2. He has taken their Nature
upon him, as well as the greater; the meanest that are of the seed of Abraham,
as well as the mightiest, John 1.14. Hebr. 2.16. 2. He has died for them, as
well as the greatest, John 10.11. Heb. 2.9. 1 Ti^^. 2.5, 6. 4. He has (...)
them with Faith, and made them heirs of the Kingdom, Jam. 2.5. 5. He has
undertaker to plead their Cause as a ^^ighty Redeemer, against those that deal
injuriously with them, Prove. 23.10, 11. 6. He has made them all, they are all
the works at his hands, least and greatest; and therefore they are not one
preferred above another, but the least of Saints are of as much account as the
greatest, Job 34 19. 7. He humbles himself to behold these, and to raise them
sometimes out of a low condition, Psalm. 113.5, 6, 7. 8. He has used them in the
greatest services: David a Shepherd, Amos an Herdsman, the Apostles that were
some of them Filbermen, in these great works. 9. He has remembered them in their
low estate, Psalm. 136.23. 10. He has rebuked Kings for their sakes, Psalm.
105.12, 13, 14.

2. From the least and poorest Saints themselves. 1. They have the Gospel
preached to them, and they receive it, Mat. 11.5. Zech 11.11. 2. They are
commonly such as are poor in Spirit, Mat. 5.3. with Luke 6.20. 3. They are they
that trust in the Name of the Lord, Zeph. 3.12. 4. They are they that bear his
Image, as well as the greatest. 5. They sometimes by their wisdom deliver the
places where they live, though they be not regarded for what they ^o, Excles. 9
14, 15. 6. They are cared for, and looked after, as well as the greatest, Psalm
68.10. 7. They are taken into Heaven when they die, whereas others, though
great, are cast into Hell, L^k. 6.22, 23. 8. They are called to have fellowship
with him in his Supper, to the participation of his Ordinances, that others
refuse to partake of, Luke 14.21. 9. They are such as in common Calamities
find more favor then others do, Jer. 39.10. 10. They are they that prize the
Lord Jesus more, and the mercies held out by him more then others. 11. They are
commonly most humble, and 1 Pet. 5.5. he gives grate to the humble. 12. They
are the care of Angels, living Heb. 1.14. and dead, Luke 16.22.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see that the meanest and poorest of the Saints
need not be discouraged with their condition, for however men esteem of them,
Christ Jesus has them in great esteem. 2. We see the sinfulness of those that
underv^lue and despise the poor^ Jam. 2. 1-6. they are not of the Spirit of
Christ Jesus, for he has them in high esteem. 3. We see that the least of
Saints are better and more honorable in their condition, then the greatest
among sinners. Prove. 12.26. for Christ Jesus highly esteems of them. 4. We see
the truth of that John 6.39. for he has the ka^^ in high-esteem. 5. We see how
exceedingly the Lord hambleth himself, in that he had in his eye the lowest of
Saints. Oh who is like to him in so doing! Psalm. 113.5, 6. 6. We see how little
the least should be in their own eyes, for they are highly esteemed of Christ
Jesus; and who are they that he should make any reckoning of them? 2 Samuel 7.18,
19. Genesis 32.10. 7. We see how unworthily they carry it that oppress the poor
Saints, and beat them to pieces, and grind the faces of the poor, Isa. 3.15.
He that thinks highly of them will be highly displeased with it. 8. We see what
cause these poor and least ones of the Saints have to set an high price upon
Christ Jesus, and highly to esteem of him that has them in that high esteem, 1
Pet. 2.7. 9. We see how full of holy admirings the least and meanest of the
Saints should be, that are had in such high esteem with the Lord, how should
they wonder at the Lords grace toward them? Psalm. 113.5, 6, 7. 10. We see the
truth of that in 1 Samuel 16.7. He sees not as man sees, etc. 11. We see what
high esteem we should have of the least of Saints, for Christ has them in high
esteem, and counts them his Brethren, 1 Pet. 2.17. Phil. 2.3. 12. We see that
it is no matter though we be mean, and despised of men, for if we be his Elect
ones, Christ highly esteems of us.

Use 2. for Humiliation: 1. That the poor among Saints are so little esteemed.
2. That Christ himself is no more in price with us, Isa. 53.3. 3. That we covet
so after worldly greatness, Jer. 45.5.

Use 3. for Exhortation: 1. To bless and magnify the Lord, Luke 1.46, 47, 48.
2. To do as the Lord does, and to esteem of the poor as of our Brethren. 3. To
come off bountifully to them, as being the Lords Brethren. 4. To bear our poor
estate contentedly, Phil. 4.11, 12. patiently, Jam. 5.7, 8. and cheerfully,
Heb. 10.34. for the Lord highly esteems of us. 5. To admire the Lords mercy,
that he will have any regard to such as we, that are less then the least of all
Saints, Ephesians 3.8. and chief of sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. 6. To prize him above all
other beloveds, Cant. 5.10. Psalm. 73.25. 7. To despise worldly greatness
without godliness, for the poor man's case is better, Prove 19.1. 8. To be very
humble, for he condescends to us herein much. 9 To long for the time of our
advancement from Christ. 10. To behave our selves as those whom Christ will
thus advance.

Use 4. for Consolation: 1. Against the worlds contempt of us: what need we
care for that? 2. Against the meanness of our estate, that hinders not, but
Christ esteems us highly for all that. 3. Against the great esteem other men
have in the world: what is that to the esteem of Christ? 4. against Satan's
whisperings, the old Serpents hissings, and the Devils persuasions that Christ
regards us not.

Ver. 40. And the King shall answer, and say unto them, etc.
Doct. XXV. is this, That what works of Mercy are done to the Brethren of
Christ, yea to the meanest and least of (...), Christ assures us upon his
faithful Word, that they are done to him. He does not only say it, but adds a
strong Asseveration to it in the word Verily; and therefore we may be assured
of it.
Reasons. 1. They are the friends of Christ, Luke 12.4. John 15.13, 14. and men
use to say when any are kind to their friends, (...) they take it as if it had
been done unto themselves; much more will Christ say so, who loves his friends
ten thousand times better then men do theirs. 2. They are the Brethren of
Christ. John 20.17. Heb. 2.11, 12. and Brethren will interpret the kindnesses
done to their Brethren, as done to themselves; much more Christ, who has more
brotherly affection then all the loving brethren in the world put all together.
3. They are the fellows of Christ, Psalm. 45.7. 1 John 1.3. and Companions are
so dear one to another, that they will account that what is done to their
Companions is done to them; much more Christ, who is above all the Companions
in the world for love. 4. They are the Members of Christ, Ephesians. 5.30. Coloss.
1.18. his very flesh: and how can he do any other but reckon of that that is
done to them, as done to himself? 5. They are the Spouse of Christ; and what
loving Husband is there, that takes not that that is done to his Spouse, as
done to himself? how much more Christ? Cant. 5.1. 6. They are the Children of
Christ, Heb. 2.13. and do not other Fathers take the kindnesses that are done
to their Children, as done to themselves? how much more Christ? 7. They are the
Subjects of Christ, and he their King. Rev. 15.3. and Kings are concerned
themselves in the welfare of their Subjects, much more this blessed King. 8.
They are the very apple of his own eye. Ze^h. 2.8. and therefore he must needs
be much concerned in the tender care that is had of them. 9. They are his
peculiar People, Tit. 2.14. Psalm. 135.4. Mal. 3.17. and how can he then do any
other, then take himself as much concerned in what is d^ne to them? 10. They
are they that he has given his life for, John 10.1^. and therefore are most
dear to him.

Q. But why may we be so assured of the truth of this?

Ans. 1. He is the faithful and true Witness, Rev 1.5. and 3.14. 2. He speaks
truth in all he says, and nates lying, Prove. 8.7, 8. 3. He uses a strong
Asseveration to give assurance of what he says, in that word, Amen, or Verily,
So it is. 4. He has said, that Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but not a jot
or tittle of his word sha^ fail, Mat. 24.35. 5. He commands that we should
speak truth one to another, and not lie, Zech. 8.16. Col 3.9. 6. He loves truth
and righteousness, Psalm. 45.7.

Use 1. for Infor^ation: 1. We see what a loving friend we have of the Lord
Jesus, he is all love and sweetness to his people, that takes himself so much
concern^d in the kindnesses and works of mercy done for them: What love is to
be compared to his? 1 John 4.8. 2. We see what great encouragement merciful
ones have to come off with works of mercy, for Christ will say, Inasmuch as ^e
have done it to the least of these my Brethren, ye have done it unto me. 3. We
see that works of mercy and beneficence, and what we minister to Christ's
Brethren, are not lost for Christ owns them, Eccles. 11.1. 4. That doubtless
works of mercy shall find a liberal Reward, for Christ takes himself as deeply
concerned in them; and he will never take any thing of us (though his own) but
will give us much more in lieu of it, Gal. 6.9. 2 Cor 9.6. 5. We see what our
duty is to Christ, to take the unkindnesses that are done to Christ, as done to
our s^lves, and to look at our selves as deeply concerned in them. 6. We see
that Christ and his Elect ones are one; so he makes account that says,
Inasmuch, etc. Oh what an honor and d^gnity is this! 1 Cor. 6.17. 7. We see
that we can never come off with love enough to him who is so full of love to
us: all the heart, and mind, and understanding, and strength of our love is
too little for him, Mark 12.30. 8. We see how nearly we should take our selves
to be concerned in the matters that concern his Honor and Glory, and the
advancement of his Kingdom; we should think we can never do enough for him in
these. 9. We see how willing Christ is to strengthen our Faith, in the words of
truth that he speaks, and that we shall have no doubting of the certainty of
them, in that he adds his Amen, or Verily, to what he says. 10. We see that
they that are unmerciful to the poor and afflicted Saints of Christ, give him
the Lie in what he here says, and do not believe his words, that are strongly
assert^d by him, 1 John 5.10. 11. We see how mavelous humble the Lord Jesus
is in his state of Glory, that counts that that is done to the least of his
^rethren, as done to himself. 12. We s^e that works of beneficence rightly
done, reach very f^r, not so much to the Saints on earth, as to Christ himself
who is in Heaven. 13. We see that we have no cause to repent of what is so done.

Use 2. for Humiliation: 1. To those that are hardly drawn to works of mercy;
these forget that Christ is concerned in them. 2. To those that turn away the
poor from their doors, they turn away Christ from them. 3. To those that have
done far less then they might have done.

Use 3. for Exhortation: 1. To come off liberally to hungry, thirsty,
strangers, naked, sick, and imprisoned ones, it is done to Christ, Isa. 32.8.
Acts 10.2. ^ Cor. 8.1, 2. Luke 19.8. 2. To give glory to Christ Jesus, that
thus owns what ^e do. 3. To own him and his Cause in hardest times, Luke 14.26,
33. 4. To be afraid of omitting any opportunity of mercy offered, lest we
should reject Christ himself, Gal. 6.10. 5. To take pains in our beneficence
these ways; all our pains are little, being for Christ Jesus, we should go
about doing good, travel for it, as Phil 2.25-30. 6. To run great ha^ards, that
we may show mercy, Romans 16.3, 4. Phil. 2.30. it is for Christ. 7. To bewail that
we have done no more, being for Christ. 8. To rejoice that we have done any
thing this way. 9. To rejoice in our suffering for our mercy to the Saints. 10.
To love mercy, Micah 6.8. it is for Christ. 11. To be unwearied in works of
mercy, Gal. 6.9. it is for Christ. 12. To work with our hands, that we may
give, Ephesians. 4.28. 13. To give of our own, Isa. 61.8. Luke 19.8. 14. To do what
we do secretly, it is for the Lord, Mat. 6.1, 2, 3

Use 4. for Consclation: 1. Against men's hard thoughts of us; if Christ say, Ye
have done it to me, it is no matter. 2. Against our own thoughts of the
littleness of what we have done; if Christ own it, all will be well. 3. Against
our defects, in that we have not done it to so many; Christ says, If it be
done to one, it is done to me. 4. Against our fears, because not done to
Ministers, or others of great esteem; Christ says, If it be done to the least
of these my Brethren, it is done to me.

Ver 41. Then sha^^ be say also unto them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye
cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.
Doct. XXVI. is this, That wicked men and Reprobates shall be cast out of
Christ's Presence, and be bid to Depart from him at the last day: Matthew. 7.23.
Luke 13.27. 2 Thessalonians. 1.9.
Reasons. 1. They have said to the Lord Depart from (...), Job 21.14, 15. and
theref^r^ (...) say to them (...) me, what wonder is it? See Mal. 3.14. 2. They
are wor^^^^ ^f iniquity, Mat. 7.23 Luke 13.27. and what ^ould (...) in his
prefence? they are n^ for nothing but to be c^^t out. 3. They are Cursed: so
the ^ext. And what should t^^y do in the presence of that Blessed One? 4. They
have departed from his O^dinances, Mal. 3.7. and what then c^n they ex^ect, but
that ^e should b^d them depart from him at that day? 5. They have been (...) to
hi^ in his Members and Brethren: so the Text; and h^ve troubled them, 2 Thessalonians
16, 9. 6. They ^ave had no fellowi^^ with (...) in any of his holy Institutions
here: they have been at his House, at his Word, at his (...), at private
Meetings it may be, have drawn near with their lips, and eats, and outward man,
but their hearts have been f^rre from him, Isa. 29.13. Jer. 12.2. and how can
they expect any other, but that he should put them ^arre from him at that day?
7. They have turned their backs of him, and of (...) way^s, Jer. 2.27. and 32
33. and if ^e turn them ou^ of his ^^e^ence at that day, what wonder is it? 8.
They (...) been rebellious to him, and never well, but ^^en t^^y were
conspir^^g and plotting so^e (...) him, and sindying so^e de^ign or other
against H^^, his Crown and (...) g^ity, and harching one rebellion or other
against him, Isa. 30 9. Jer 4.17. and 5.23 Eze^ 2.7. Deuteronomy. 9 7. and ^f this
King ^urn such R^bels out or his (...), it is ^o other then ^^ey might e^p^^t.
9. The would not ^^ve ^im to rule over them, Luke 19 27. and therefore ^f this
King turn them out of ^is Pr^^ence, what wonder is it? (...). They have
departed from is people J^^e ver 19. and have s^parated them from their
company, Luke 6 22. and (...) it any marvel that be bids them de^art at that
day? 1^. They have some of the^ departed from the Pr^f^ on ^f Religion that
they have m^de, gone backward, Zeph. 1.6. Heb. 10.38 39. and what can such ^^^k
for, but to ^ear hi^ say, De^art from ^e? 12. They have (...) of them (...)
ande to ^rooked ways, (subtle ways, S^rpentin^ way^s, curious ways, ways
that they cannot ^et on of) P^al. 125.5. and if he turn them going, what wonder
is it? 13. They have turned away their (...), from their Brethren, and hid
themselves from their own (...), contrary ^o I^a. 58.7 sent Widows away empty.
J^^. 22.9. (...) T^^y have gone away from so much as a form of godliness have
been openly ^a^e and scandalous so^e ^f them, Isa. 3 ^, 15. They have departed
from the truth of Christ, 2 ^et. 2.2, 16. They have abhorred his holy days,
wherein (if ^ver) Communion is to be had with him.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see how righteous the Lord Jesus is to the
Reprobates and wicked men, and how equal his ways are: they would none of him,
and he will none of them at that day; they bid him Depart, and he does the like
to them. 2. We see that evil men, though they brave it and flourish it here,
yet will be in an evil case at that day: for this departing from Christ has all
evil in it, Isa. 3.11. But of that more hereafter. 3. We see that the Lord
Jesus regards them not, nor any thing they do now in the best of their
performances; for if he did, he would not say Depart from me, at the last day,
Isa. 1.10-15. Hos. 5.6. 4. We see that the Presence of the Lord Jesus is of
greatest worth, the Heaven of Heaven it self; for it is the first and chief
thing that wicked men are deprived of, Luke 23.43. Phil. 1.23. 5. We see how
loathsome and detestable wicked men are to Christ, in that he will not have
them in his presence. We use to say of those things we abhor, that we would
have them gone out of our presence: and so those persons we loath, Get you out
of my company. Oh how does Christ then abhor all such, to whom he will say,
Depart from me, at that day! Prove. 15.8, 9, 26. 6. We see what need we had to
beware that we be not of that number. 7. We see how dangerous it is to be of
their company, for they must all be turned out of Christ's Presence, Prove.
13.20. 8. We see what great cause we have to make sure of our Union and
Communion with Christ here. 2 Pet 1.10. 1 John 1.5. that we be not for ever
cast out of his presence at that d^y. 9. We see what great difference the Lord
will put between his Elect, and Reprobates; the one sort shall be for ever with
him, the other for ever abdicated from his presence. 10. We see what difference
we should make between them, for Christ will. 11. We see what great dishonor
he will put upon these at that day: it is a great dishonor and disgrace to be
turned out of a Kings Presence, Esth. 7.8. 2 Samuel 14.24. Oh! but what is it to
be turned out of Christ's Presence! 12. We see how severe Christ will be to the
wi^ked.

Use 2. for Terror: 1. To all openly profane ones, that have despised his
Ordinances, wherein they should have had Communion with Christ here, they shall
be turned out of his Presence for ever, 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. 2. To all secret and
close Hypocrites, they are to have the like portion allotted to them. Man ^.23.

Use 3. for Ex^^rt^^ion: 1. To evil men. 2. To the Saints.

To Evil men. 1. To repent, that if it be possi^le they may not have this
disgrace put upon them. 2. (...) sure portion in Christ, and get admittance
into his fe^^^wship here, Prove. 1.22, 23. 3. To cast off their ev^^ ^ompany. 4.
To tremble to think of this day, while in their sins. 5. To love the fellowship
of Gods people. 6. To weep for the misery that is to come upon them, Jam. 5.1,
2.

2. To the Saints. 1. To beware of company with evil men, as ever we would
escape this evil. 2. To be content to suffer any disgrace, rather then to have
this. 3. To pity evil men, and be patient toward them; they have evil enough
coming upon them. 4. Not to envy them their honor here, Psalm. 73. 5. To make
sure that we are none of these. 6. To keep up fellowship with Christ here.

Use 4. for Consolation: 1. Against the Lordly Authority that the wicked have
here. 2. Against the trouble we suffer from them. 3. Against the evil that we
have by their being with us in our societies. 4. Against their contempt of us.

Ver. 41. Depart from me, ye cursed, etc.
Doct. XXVII. is this, That it is the greatest misery of Reprobates and wicked
persons, that they shall be separated for ever from Christ's Presence. Christ
begins with this, as being the very top of all their misery; and therefore in
the other places, as if this had all misery wrapped up in it, it is alone spoken
of, Mat. 7.23. Luke 13.27. 2 Thessalonians. 1.9
Reasons. 1. Because by this Separation from his Presence, they are for ever
deprived of the favor of God, and all hope of ever obtaining favor with him,
which must needs be the top of all misery: for, In his favor is life, and his
loving kindness is better then life, Psalm. 30.5. and 63.3. and therefore what a
death must it be, to be deprived of that? 2. Because this Separation from
Christ, is the loss of the greatest good in the world: for, he is our Summum
Bonum, our Chief Good, our All in All, C^loss. 3.11. Cant. 5.10. Above all
other Beloveds; and to be deprived of him, must needs be the top of all misery.
Hence not only the best of the Schoolmen, but the ablest of our Divines agree
upon it, That the Punishment of Loss is greater then that of Sense. 3. Because
this Separation from Christ's Presence, for ever deprives them of Happiness; for
our Happiness lies in our Communion with him. 4. Because it deprives them of
Conformity to him; for that depends upon our being with him, and viewing of his
blessed face, 1 (...). 3.2. 5. Because this Senaration from him deprives the^
of all that Joy and Comfort that is with him, Psalm. 16 ^^. 2 Thessalonians. 2.16. 6.
Because it deprives them of all satisfaction that they should have in him,
Psalm. 17.15. they must needs be unsati^fied altogether in their condition. 7.
Bec^^ u^^ t^is Separ^^ion from C^rists Presence deprives the^ of the blessed
Company of all the Saints and Angels, they shall never ^ee one Saint more; and
if so, it must needs be the top of misery. 8. Because it deprives them of ^ll
his Glory, which they might have been partakers of, John 17.24. They that were
so taken with worldly glory that they would have it any way, shall be de^rived
of all beavenly glory, Psalm 49.19. 9. Because it deprives them of the
revel^tion of all those Mysteries, that here by reason of our childish
condition we could not understand, which then will be unfolded, 1 Cor. 13.9-12.
10. Because i^ deprives them of all p^^^bility of Praising God, which is the
Saints happiness on earth, Psalm. 84.4. and will be much more in heaven. 11.
Because it deprives them of all the sweet smiles of his blessed face, and of
all the sweet e^braces that the Saints partake of in that Celestial
Bride-chamber and B^d of Love. 12. Because it deprives them of all those
City-Priviledges and Immunities which the Saints enjoy, Heb. 11.16. which, what
they are, no tongue can express, nor heart conceive. 13. Because it deprives
them of all the Treasures, Pleasures, Honors, Contentments of that Celestial
Kingdom. 14. Because it shuts them out of Paradise, Luke 23.43. And if it was
A^ams mifery to be shut out of an Earthly Paradise, Genes. 3.24. what a misery
is it then to be excluded from the Heavenly? 15. Because it deprives them of
those rare views of Gods M^^e^^y which the Saints shall have in him, 1 John
1.2. 16. Because it deprives them of that Rest that remains to the people of
God. Heb 4.9.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see how woeful their condition is that the Lord
casts off here, as Hos. 4.17. and 9.12 for it is a forerunner of his eternal
Separation of them from his Presence at the last and great day, which is the
top of all ^isery. 2. We see what cause we all have to fear, as Heb. 4.1.2. 3.
We see that the enjoyment of Christ's Presence must needs be the greatest
Happiness, for it is the greatest misery to be^d prived of it, Luke 23.43. 4.
We see what need we all had to get Christ with us, and to keep him with us,
Cant 3.4. for it is the top of the damned's misery, that they shall be
separated from him for ever. 5. We see a reason of the Saints mourning for his
^bsence from them, Jer. 14.8. Lam. 1.16. Well may they do so, for it is the
worst part of the damned's misery to be eternally separated from him. 6. We see
that the ^unishment of Loss, though men be not so sen^^ble of it now, yet will
sting ^^em most at that day 7. We see the ^iserable state of those that care
not for fellowship with Christ here, had rather have fellowship with their
lusts and lewd company; they slight that here, the want w^ereof will be the top
of all their misery at the last day 8 We see how good the Lord is to his
Saints, in ad^itting t^em to his blessed Presence here and hereafter; for it is
the very height of the damned's misery, to be bid Depart from him. 9. We see
that the Punishment of Sense, though it be intolerable, Mark 9.44, 46, 48. yet
or the two, is far more tolerable then the Punishment of Loss. 10. We see how
truly happy their condition is that enjoy Christ's Presence to all eternity, to
whom he will say, Come; for it is the damned's greatest misery to be depr^ve^
of his Presence. 11. We see the folly of evil men, t^^t wilf^lly run in such
ways as lead to such miser^, Jer. 2.17, 19. Romans 3.16. 12. We see how good it
is to draw near to Christ here, Psalm. 73.28. for it will be the wicked's
greatest misery to be separated from ^im.

Use 2. for Terror: 1. To those that fly from the Lords Presence, as Cain did,
Genesis 4.16. it will be the height of their misery at the last day. 2. To those
that have those that have Communion with him he^e, they will wish their Souls,
in their Souls state. 3. To those that seek not after his favor here, they
s^all be deprived of it for ever, Psalm. 10.4. and 73.27.

Use 3. for Exhortation: 1. To seek the Lord and his face, Psalm. 105.4. 2. To
bewail their case that have no followship with him, they shall have none of it
hereafter, and that will be their greatest misery, Luke 13.28. 3. To fly their
company that have no Communion with Christ here, lest we share in their misery,
Ephesians. 5.11. 4. To delight in those Ordinances most, wherein we have most
Communion with him; as the Word, Supper, Prayer, Meditation, Conference, 1 Cor.
11. Mal. 3.16. 5. To Watch and Pray always, Luke 21.36. 6. To take all
opportunities here of getting into his Presence, Prove. 8.34, 35. 7. To save as
many as we can from this misery. 8. To open to Christ at his calls and knocks,
Cant. 5.2. Rev. 3.20. 9. To evil men, to break off their sins now, Dan. 4.27.
10. To be pers^aded (2 Car. 5.11.) to love Christ's fellowship.

Use 4. for Consolation: 1. Against wicked m^ens^louts and jeers at us for our
fellowship with Christ here. 2. Against the losses we are at, it may cost us
much many ways our close walking with him; but they that look at the damned's
misery, and the escape that they make out of it, may well bear all this.

Ver. 41. Depart from me, ye cursed, etc.
Doct. XXVIII. is this, That wicked men are cursed, and Christ will pronounce
them cursed at the last day.
For opening of which, let me show, 1. Wherein they are cursed. 2. Whence it is
that they are so cursed. 3. The Uses.

For the first: Wherein are they cursed?

Ans. Both here, and hereafter.

1. Her^. 1. They are cursed in their Souls and Spirits, the curse of God is
upon them, Deuteronomy. 28.28, 34, 65. Mar^ 11.14. 2. They are cursed in their Names,
Prove. 10.7. Isa. 65 15. 3. They are cursed in their Posterity, Deuteronomy. 28.18. 4.
They are cursed in their outward Estate, Deuteronomy. 28.17, 18. Job 20.21, 22. 5.
They are cursed in all places where they come, Deuteronomy. 28.16. 6. They are cursed
in their Bodies, Deuteronomy. 28.21, 22, 27, 35, 59, 60, 61. 7. They are cursed in
their Yoke-fellows, Deuteronomy. 28.30. 8. They are curs^d in their Callings, nothing
prospers there, Psa. 1.3, 4. they sometimes take pains and get nothing; or if
they get any thing, God casts it away, Prove. 10.3. Eccles. 5.14. 9. They are
cursed in their Habitation, Acts 1.20.

2. Hereafter. 1. They are cursed with the Curse of Separation from the Saints,
Mat. 25.33. 2. They are cursed with the Curse of Abdication from Christ's
Presence: so the Text. 3. They are cursed with the Curse of Condemnation to
unspeakable Punishment: It is Fire, and a Lake of Fire and Brimstone ( Rev.
^1.8.) that they are sent into. 4. They are cursed with the Curse of the
fellowship of the Cursed Spirits of darkness. 5. They are cursed with the Curse
of the Continuance of this Punishment; it is Everlasting, Mark 9.44, 46, 48. 6.
They are cursed with the Remedilesness of the Punishment, Luke 16.24, 26. 7.
They are cursed with the Curse of Sorrow and Vexation, Luke 13.28. 8. They are
cursed with the Curse of Helples^^^^ in their condition, Luke 16.24, 25.

Q. 2. Whence are they thus cursed?

Ans. 1. From the Decree of Reprobation, Jude ver. 4. 1 Thessalonians. 5.9. Romans 9.22.
2 Pet. 2.14. 2. From the Glory of Gods Justice, Prove. 16.4. 3. From the Rigor
of the Law, Gal. 3.10. 4. From their Disobedience to the Gospel, John 3.18. 2 Thessalonians. 7.8, 9. 5. From their Unfruitfulness and Barrenness under the frequent
showers that they partake of, Heb. 6.7, 8. 6. From their Robbery of God, Mal.
3.8, 9. 7. From their Deceiving him in their Services, in bringing him the
worst when they should bring him the best, Mal. 1.14. 8. From their
Unmercifulness to Christ's afflicted ones: so the Text: Psalm. 109.16. 9 From
their love of Cursing, Psalm 109.17, 18, 19.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see what little reason we have to envy wicked
men for any thing they have in this world, for in the midst of all their
enjoyments, if they live and die such, they are cursed men, Psalm 37.1, 2. Prove.
24.19, 20. 2. We see how dreadful their case will be at the last day, when
Christ that came to bless his people, Acts 3.26. shall pronounce them Cursed.
3. We see how loathsome their fellowship should be, for they are cursed, and
shall be cursed by Christ at that day. Except therefore we would be cursed with
them, we must abstain from their company, Prove. 1.10-18. and 13.20. 4. We see
what need we had to make sure that we are the Lords Elect ones, 2 Pet. 1.10.
for all they that are not such, are cursed, and shall be such at the last day.
5. We see what height and depth of dishonor the Lord will bring wicked men
unto, in that he will pronounce them Cursed at that day. It will be dishonor
to set them at his left hand, and to cast them out of his Presence; but to call
them Cursed, adds to their dishonor. 6. We see the mischief of sin, the Curse
is the woeful fruit of it, Rom 6.21, 23. 7. We see what great cause we have to
fly from sin, as ever we desire to avoid the Curse. 8. We see the great love of
the Lord Jesus, that would himself become a Curse for us, to save us from
Death, and Wrath, and Curse, and Condemnation, Galat. 3.13. 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. 9.
We see that we need not be much troubled at what we suffer for Christ, as long
as we live, for the afflictions that we undergo here, are nothing to that Curse
that wicked men are cursed with to all eternity, 2 Cor. 4.17. 10. We see the
misery of those that love Cursing, Psalm. 109.17, 18.

Use 2. for Terror: 1. To those that are unmerciful to Christ's afflicted ones,
they shall be termed Cursed at that day. 2. To all Disobedient ones to the
Gospel, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8, 9. 3. To all Impenitent sinners, Romans 2.4, 5. 4. To all
Barren ones under the heavenly droppings of the Word, Heb. 6.7, 8.

Use 3. for Exhortation: 1. To be afraid of the Curse of Christ at that day,
and provide against it. And to that end, (1) Get a sure Portion in Christ, Acts
3.26. (2) Be of a merciful Spirit: so the Text. (3) Look well to our faith,
Gal. 39. (4) Be without guile, Psalm. 32.2. 2. To beware of meddling with any
accursed thing, lest we become accursed by it. 3. To beware of Friendship with
such. 4. To bless the Lord Jesus, that has Redeemed us from the Curse, by
being made a Curse for us, Gal. 3.13. 5. To wait for him from Heaven, 1 Thessalonians
1.10. 6. To pity evil men, for in the midst of all they partake of, they are
cursed, Luke 16.25. 7. To find out all Acbans in our Church and
Family-Societies, Josh. 7. 8. To devote such to Excommunication and the Curse,
as Christ would have cast out from us, 1 Cor. 5. 9. To beware of Cursing, for
it argues a cursed estate, Eccles. 10.20. Romans 1.2.14. Psalm. 109.17. 10. To
have the wicked in no account, they are cursed, Psalm 15.4.

Use 4. for Consolation: 1. Against the meanness of the Saints condition; it
will be worse with wicked men, for they are cursed. 2. Against the wickeds
tyranny over them, they would not change states with them. 3. Against their
wants, and the wickeds amuence and abundance. 4. Against the praises that are
given to wicked men, they are cursed with these, Luke 6.26.

Ver. 41. Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, etc.
Doct. XXIX. is this, That the Punishment that the wicked shall be cast into,
shall be of a fiery Nature; the Fire of Hell shall be their portion allotted to
them: Rev. 21.8. Mat. 3.12. Mark 9.43-48.
For opening of which, let me show, 1. In what respects their Punishment may be
said to be Fire. 2. Why they shall be so punished. 3. The Uses.

For the first: 1. Fire is a dreadful thing, Deuteronomy. 5.5. as we see in a
Scale-fire, it puts dread and terror into us: so this Punishment is a dreadful
punishment; and therefore its said, Heb. 10.31. It is a fearful thing to fall
into the hands of the living God: see also Luke 12.5. 2. Fire is of a storching
and burning nature, so the Punishment of the wicked in Hell is of a scorching
and burning nature, Rev. 21.8. 3. Fire is of a painful nature: if a man put his
finger but a little into the fire, it will pain him exceedingly; much more is
this punishment painful. If the smoke of their torment ascends up for ever
and ever, Rev. 14.11 then sure they have no rest, but are grievously pained in
this fire. 4. Fire is of a tormenting nature: so is this Fire, Luke 16.23, 24.
5. Fire is of a destroying nature: so is this punishment, Heb. 10.39 2 Thessalonians.
1.9. Matthew. 10.28. 6. Fire will make mentry for the extremity of the tortureof
it; so this punishment. If Isa. 65.14. they cry and howl here, Oh what will
they do in Hell! there they will cry and howl, weep and wail, and gnash their
teeth, Mat. 25.30. 7. Fire is of an insatiable nature, Prove 30.15, 16. so Hell
fire it is insatiable, Isa. 5.14. 8. Fire will devour the migatiest, Dan. 3.22.
so this Fire, Isa 30.33. 9. Fire will destroy multitudes, 2 Kings 1.10, 12. so
this Fire, Isa. 5.14. 10. Fire spares none that are cast into it, except God
miraculously suspend the act of it, as Dan. 3.27. so this Fire spares none,
neither man, woman nor child, all the wicked shall be burnt up in it, Mat.
3.12. Malac. 4.1. 11. Fire has sticks bundled up for it: so this Pire, Mat.
13.30. 12. Fire is intolerable; much more this Fire.

Q. 2. Why shall they be thus punished?

Ans. 1. From the Lord. 2. From them.

From the Lord. 1. His Displeasure kindles it, Isa. 30.33. 2. He has ordained
it of old. 3. He has made it deep and large. 4. He has made the Pile thereof
of fire and much wood ibid. 5. He has threatened this punishment. 6. He has
inflicted it upon many, as the old World, and Sodom, etc. 7. He is a consuming
fire, Deuteronomy. 4.24.

2. From them. 1. They have had many fiery lusts that they have provoked him
with; they have burned with anger, desire of revenge, with uncleanness, with
envy and mali^e, which have kindled this fire, Romans 1.27. Hos. 7.4. Jude v. 7.
2. They have kindled coals of Contention among their Neighbors, Prove. 26.21.
Jam. 3.5, 6. 3. They have made strange adventures into fiery company, Prove.
6.27, 28. 4. They have been inordinate in the use of inflaming creatures, Isa.
5.11, 14. Hos. 7.5, 6. 5. They have kindled a fire of their own, and compassed
themselves about with sparks. Isa. 50.11. 6. They have quenched the Spirit,
against that in 1 Thessalonians 5.19. 7. They have fired Churches and Commonwealths.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see what great cause we have to take heed of
provoking the Lord, and kindling his anger against us, though but a little,
Deuteronomy. 32.22. Psa. 2.12. 2. We see that there is no dallying with sin, of what
nature and kind soever, except we would dally with fire, and make nothing of
it to run into it: and Oh what folly and madness were it, to run into the mouth
of a devouring fire! yet so do they that daily with sin, and make a mock of it,
Prove. 14.9. 3 We see how fearful we should be to go in company with evil men,
for fear of being bundled with them, and cast into the fire of Hell with them,
Isa. 5.14. 4. We see what a fearful thing it is to fall into his hands, Luke
12.5. Heb. 10.31. 5. We see what friends they be to us, that dissuade us from
bad company and bad courses, they would save us from falling into the fire. 6.
We see what terrors we should use to reclaim some sinners by, Jude ver. 23. 7.
We see the misery of those whose punishment this must be: That was misery
enough that is recorded Mark 9.22. Oh but what is this then? 8. We see the
mischief that is in sin; that which is said of that one, Job 31.12. is true of
all. 9. We see the woeful state of those that laugh now, they will not laugh in
Hell fire, Isa. 5.14. Luke 6 25. 10. We see what a mercy of God it is to be
saved from this sore punishment. 11. We see what love we owe to Christ, who
delivers us from wrath to come. 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. 12. We see what cause we have
to beware of those sins that bring this punishment, Revel. 21.8.

Use 2. for Terror: 1. To all unbelievers, 2 Thessalonians 1.7, 8. Mark 16.16. 2. To
all impenitent persons, Luke 13.3, 5. 3. To those that give up themselves to
fiery lusts, they shall have fire for fire. 4. To those that rush into sin
without fear, Jer. 8.6. this fire will affright them.

Use 3. for Hum^^tation: 1. To the Lords Saints, that come too near this
devouring fire by the sins they fall into: How near came Lot, Samson, David,
Solomon, Peter? 2. To those that do not pity others that are every moment ready
to fall into this fire: we would pity such as had the Falling Sickness, and
fall into the fire, etc. how much more should we pity these?

Use 4. for Exhortation: 1. To forsake our most pleasing and profitable sins,
to cut off right hands, and pluck out right eyes, Mat. 5.29, 30. Mark 9.43,
etc. 2. To tremble to think of this punishment, and to fear to provoke him that
has power to cast into Hell, Luke 12.5. 3. To save as many as we can out of
this devouring fire. 4. To venture very far to pluck men as brands out of the
fire: what adventures will men make to pluck any thing of worth out of the
fire? 5. To quench all our fiery lusts by Repentance and Faith in the Blood of
Christ. 6. To be troubled to see so many wilfully run into it. 7. To fly from
it. Mat. 3.7. men haste out of the fire. 8. To admire the love of the Father,
that so loved the world, as to give his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes on him might not perish in this fire, John 3.16. 9. To be thankful
that any of us escape it, for we are all children of wrath, and heirs of Hell
by nature as well as others, Ephesians. 2.3. 10. To be far from envying at evil
men, they buy their pleasures dear, Luke 16.25.

Use 5. for Consolation: 1. Against those fires of affliction that the Saints
pass through, Psalm 66.11, 12. 2. Against our dwelling with fiery men, Psalm.
57.4. 3. Against the fiery tongues of men, Jam. 3.6. 4. Against the fiery darts
of Satan, Ephesians. 6.16. if we escape Hell fire, it is no matter for all these.

Ver. 41. Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, etc.
Doct. XXX. is this, That the fiery Punishment assigned and allotted for the
wicked, is everlasting: So Ver. 46. 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. Mat. 3.12. Mark 9.43-48.
Reasons. 1. From God. 2. From wicked men. 3. From the nature of Sin.

From God. 1. He is an Infinite One, and his Justice infinite, and finite
creatures cannot satisfy Infinite Justice which is offended; and therefore
what in their natures they cannot do, must be made up in the everlasting
punishment which they must undergo. 2. He is true in all his Threatenings, as
well as in his Promises; and therefore having threatened everlasting punishment
to them, he will bring it to pass, and lay it upon them, 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. 3. He is
a God of Severity, and will not bate them a farthing of the debt they owe him;
and therefore because they cannot pay it, they must be ever lastingly punished,
and lie by it to all eternity. 4. He is a jealous God, Deuteronomy. 4.24. and
jealousy in man will not spare in the day of vengeance, Prove 6.34. much less
will his jealousy spare in the day of his vengeance, but lay on punishment to
all eternity. 5. He is a God that will in no wise clear the guilty, Exodus 34.7.
and if they should not be punisted everlastingly, he must sometimes needs clear
them, and that he will not do. 6. He is a God that will repay the wicked to his
face, and a God to whom vengeance belongs, Deuteronomy. 32.35. Psalm. 94.1. Jer.
51.56. Romans 12.19. and being such a Sin-revenging God, he will revenge himself
to the full upon them.

2. From wicked men. 1. They would sin everlastingly, and not cease to provoke
him, if they should live for ever, Jer. 6.7. and if so, what wonder if they be
everlastingly punished? See Jer. 8.5. 2. They have deserved this, Romans 6.23.
and it is meet men should have their wages. 3. They anger him every day, Psalm.
7.11. and what wonder then if be panish them everlastingly. 4. They are
ordained and appointed to it, Romans 9.22 1 Thessalonians. 5.9. 5. They will go in the
way that leads to it, Matthew. 7.13. they will die, Ezekiel. 18.31. 6. They will
not repent, Jer. 8.6. they will not believe, John 5.40. they will not obey,
Jer. 44.16.

3. From the Nature of Sin. 1. It is (...), The transgrestion of the Law, 1
John 3.4. and that lays under a Curse Gal. 3.10. 2. It is a Debt, Mat. 6.12.
and a debt, if not satisfied, in the nature of it leads to the Prison: so this
debt to this prison, 1 Pet. 3.19. 3. It is a wry step, and that causes a fall:
so this wry step, this miserable fall. 4. It is a work, Mat. 7.23. and the
reward of this work, is this, Romans 6.23.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see the desperate adventures that sinners make,
that not only run into the fire, but into such a Fire as there is no getting
out of to all eternity. Woe to them, for they have rewarded evil to themselves.
2. We see how dreadful the condition of such is: Fire is a dreadful thing to be
cast into; but to be in it always, and never to get out, to be in it burning
everlastingly, what heart can think sufficiently of the dreadfulness of it? 3.
We see what great enemies ungodly men be to themselves, they bring everlasting
misery upon their Souls: No such enemy as such a man is to himself. 4. We see
what need we had to make sure work for our Souls, P^^^p 2.12. 2 Pet. 1.10. for
if we should mistake here, it would be the saddest mistake in the world, and
plunge us into the greatest misery. 5. We see the mischief of the first fin,
and what cause men have to bewail it, for that brought in this everlasting
punishment, Genesis 2.17. 6. We see what fools and madmen the most be, that for a
momentany delight and pleasure, will run into ever lasting fire. Well may
Solomon call them so often Fools, for no folly like this. 7. We see how
intolerable the sufferings of the damned will be, for who can abide ever
lasting fire? 8. We see the wretchedness of those men that are of their spirit
and way, that ye read of Rom 1.32. Those take pleasure to be cast into
everlasting fire themselves, and to see others also cast into it. 9. We see
what a dreadful God we have to do with, and how we ought to fear before him,
Dan. 9.4. 10. We see the truth of that in Mat. 16.26. 11. We see what need we
have to make peace, Isa. 27.495. 12. We see that it is no matter what Tyrants
do to the bodies of Saints, Luke 12.4.

Use 2. for Terror: 1. To all ungodly men: who can bear everlasting
punishment? 2. To all Hypocrites, that have made a show only, 2 Timothy 3.5. their
punishment will be everlasting. 3. To those that have delighted to draw others
into sin, they will have no delight in everlasting fire. 4. To those that scoff
at the Day of Judgment, a Pet. 3.3, 4.

Use 3. for Exhortation: 1. To think seriously of the eternity of this
punishment. 2. To get an interest and part in Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. 3. To
admire the mercy of the Lord, that any of us escape; for a Sentence of Death
was passed upon us all for the first sin, Genesis 2.17. and every one of our sins
deserve it, Romans 6.23. 4. To give no sleep to our eyes, nor slumber to our
eye^ids, till we see a way of escape. 5. To tremble to sin against him, who can
cast into such everlasting punishment, Luke 12.5. 6. To long for the time when
we shall be out of all fear of this. 7. To love the Lord everlastingly, that
saves us from this everlasting punishment. 8. To pity those that go in the way
that leads to this, and help them out: see Exodus 23.5. 9. To make sure of the
contrary, 2 Pet. 1.10, 11. 10. To be willing to bear afflictions of longest
continuance here, so we may escape this everlasting punishment. 11. To abhor
evil, Romans 12.9. 12. To abstain from all appearance of evil, 1 Thessalonians 5.22.

Use 4. for Consolation: 1. Against the Saints troubles here, there will be an
end of them, they are not everlasting. 2. Against Satan's temptations, they
shall not alwa^es be. 3. Against the pains of the first death.

Ver. 41. Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels.
Doct. XXXI. is this, That the Devil and his Angets are to suffer the
Punishment of everlasting fire: 2 Pet. 2.4. Jude ver. 6. Rev. 20.10.
For opening of which, let me 1. Give Demonstrations of it. 2. The Reasons of
it. 3. The Uses.

For the first: The truth of it does appear; 1. In that they are reserved in
everlasting chains to the Judgment of the Great Day, Jude ver. 6. 2. In that
they tremble to think of their punishment, Jam. 2.19. 3. In that they desire
they may not be sent into the place of their torment, Luke 8 31. 4. In that
they carry Hell about with them in their Consciences, Mark 5.7, 8. 5. In that
they are in expectation of it, Mat. 8.29. 6. In that the Lord, when he
pleases, can shut them up in the bottomless Pit, that they shall not do so
much mischief as they would, Rev. 20.1, 2, 3. 7. In that they bestir themselves
so much the more, by how much the time is shorter that they have to do mischief
in, Rev. 12.12. which shows that they make account of their punishment. 8. In
that they cannot endure to think of the Day of Judgment; they could not endure
to see Christ on earth, Mat. 8.29. 9. In that the Saints shall judge these
wicked Angels, 1 Cor. 6.3. 10. In that they are cursed of the Lord, Genesis 3.14,
15. if the Instrument, much more the Acter. 11. In that they fall like
Lightning, Luke 10.18. which is a pledge of their destruction. 12. In that they
despair of any Remedy, Heb. 2.16.

Q. 2. Why is this to be their Punishment?

Ans. 1. It is pr^pared for them: so the Text: Prow. 16.4. 2. They have sinned,
2 Pet. 2.4. and God will not spare the greatest that sin. 3. They are Reprobate
Angels; for there are Elect Angels, 1 Timothy 5 21. and therefore others are
Reprobate Angels: and they being subjects of Reprobation, no wonder if
everlasting fire be their punishment. 4. They never cease sinning, 1 John 3.8.
it has been their trade and way from the beginning, ever since they fell, to go
on in a way of rebellion against the Lord. 5. They have been the greatest
Martherers that ever were; after they had destroyed themselves, they destroyed
all the Race of Mankind, save only a few that the Lord Jesus has rescued out
of their hands, Gen 3. Romans 5.12. Joh. 8.44. 6. They go up and down seeking
whom they may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8. 7. They de^^e to have the Elect to sift them
as wheat, and to strike at their Faith, Luke 22.31. 8. They have done what they
could against Christ Jesus himself, when he was upon earth, to tempt him to
sin, though they could not prevail, Mat. 4.1-10. John 14.30. 9. They are the
^reatest Liars and Deceivers that are, John 8.44. Rev. 12.9. 10. They
maliciously oppose God and Christ Jesus, and blasphe^me the Spirit, and resist
his Truth, and Ways, and Saints and with all the spite they can, draw others
to do the like, and never cease these ways; and what wonder then if
overlasting fire be their portion? 11. They have kindl^^ all the fires of Lust
and Contention in Families, Churches, and Common-wea^^hs; and have led men into
fiery Company, and into damned Delusions; and shot fiery Darts into men's Souls:
No marvel if everlasting fire be their punishment.

Object. But how can fire hurt them, being Spirits?

Answ. 1. Hell fire will be of another Nature then the fire on earth, Isa.
30.33. 2. God knows how to make it seiae on Spirits, though we know not how.
3. The Souls of men, which are Spirits, shall be tortured in that fire, and why
then not the Devils? 4. The eternity of it adds to the torment of it.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see what great reason we have to fear sia, for
if we were Angels God would not spare us, if we sin against him, but cast us
down to Hell, 2 Pet. 2.4. 2. We see that the principal Ringleaders in a way of
fin, shall be sure not to escape the Lords severest punishment: these Apostate
Angels began all the evil that ever has been committed, and what their
punishment i^, we here see. 3. We see that the greatest among the sons of men
must not look to be favored above others, for the greatest of these Angels
escapes not, Isa. 30.33. 4. We see that they that follow others in a way of
sin, must look to share in punishment with them; the Devil and his Angels go
together: See Numb. 16. 5. We see what discontented and melancholy Spirits the
Devils must needs be, that know what their punishment must be. 6. We see a
reason of that in Jam. 4.7. God has made him of a yielding nature, as a fruit
of that first punishment, Gen 3.15. 7. We see what a great and dreadful God the
Lord is, Dan. 9.4. that casts Angels into everlasting fire. 8. We see that the
best of Creatures being corrupted, prove the worst: these Angels were made very
good. Genesis 1.31. but being corr^pted, fall into this great misery. 9. We see a
reason of the perdition of Apostates, Heb. 10.39. for it is so with Angels,
Jude ver. 6. 10. We see that those Angels that stand, stand by Grace, 1 Timothy
5.21. 11. We see what cause Elect men and Angels have to praise God, Psalm.
103.20, 21. 12. We see the mischief of sin, it casts Angels into Hell.

Use 2. for Terror: 1. To those that are the Children of the Devil, John 8.44.
1 John 3.12. 2. To Jesuits, that take up the Devils Trade of Lying, and
Murder, and going up and down, 1 Pet. 5.8. 3. To those that are great persons
that sin, 4. To all Apostates, whoever they be.

Use 3. for Exhortation: 1. To beware of falling, 1 Cor. 10.12. 2. To take heed
of drawing others to sin, and being drawn by them. 3. To take heed of Pride, 1 Timothy 3.6. 4. To beware of bearkning to the Derils sungestion, and tempt^tions,
for it is but to draw us with him into punis^ment. 5. To bewail the first sin,
that had plunged ^s all into everlasting fire, if God had not stepped in to save
some, Eccles. 7.29. 6. To abhor the Devils ways, Romans 12.9. as Lying, Deceit,
Murder. 7. To take the whole Armor of God, Ephesians. 6.10, 15 2, etc. 8. To be^
of the Lord that we may be kept, 1 Pet. 1.5. 9. To beware of trusting in Grace
received, for the Devils were once good, Genesis 1.31. 10. To take heed of being
first in sin, Micah 1.13. (...)

Use 4. for Gonsolation: 1. Against Satan's wiles and temptations, he must
dearly pay for them. 2. Against the longest troubles that he brings upon us;
his will be longer, Luke 13.16. 3. Against the Lords long forsakings of his
people, Lam. 5.22. What are these to the punishment of Devils?

Ver. 41. Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels.
Doct. XXXII. is this, That the Devil and his Angels sha^ he the woeful
Compantons of wicked men in Hell fire. They are to be ^^gether there to all
Eternity.
Reasons. 1. Wicked men are the Children of the Devil, John 8.44. Mat. 13.38. 1
John 3.12. and where should Children be, but with their Father? See Acts 13.10.
2. They do his works, John 8.44. and doing his works, they must have his
reward, to be with him in the place of T^rment. 3. They have had fellowship
with Devils here, they ave loved to be in places where Devils haunt, in
Taverns, Alehouses, Harlots houses, Isa. 5.11. Jer. 5.7. with such Company as
Devils delight to be with: and what wonder then if Devils be their Companions
in Hell fire? 4. They have some of them Covenanted with the Devil, given their
Souls to the Devil, entered into League and Familiarity with the Devil,
Consulted with the Devil, as Baliam, and Saul, and many others have done: and
what ca^such look for, but to be for ever with Devils? 5. They have been Devils
incarnate, John 6.70. and whose company should such Devils have, but Devils?
Rev. 16.14. 6. They give heed to Doctrines of Devils, 1 Timothy 4.1. and if they
will have Devils to be their Teachers, where should the Schol^rs be, but with
their Teachers? 7. They have Satan entering into them, and taking possession of
them, Luke 22.3. and he will be with those that he possesses, and they shall
be with him. 8. They do some of them worship Devils, Rev. 9.20. and they and
their Worshippers must be together. 9. They act some of them by the Devils
power, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. 10. They are taken Captive by the Devil at his will and
pleasure, 2 Timothy 2.26. and be will carry all such Captive to Hell with him, if
they Repent not. 11. They are blinded and hardened by the Devil, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4.
12. They walk after the Devil, Ephesians. 2.2. and how should it be otherwise then,
but that they should be Companions in Hell together? 13 They some of them have
offered their Children to the Devil in a cruel manner. 14. They have been the
Devils drudges, 2 Pet. 2.14. 15. They have believed the Devil the Father of
Lies, rather then the God of trath, Genesis 3.1-6. 16. They have destroyed
themselves, as the Devils have done.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see the woeful estate of all wicked men, that
must have such Companions as Devils are to all eternity. It is a kind of Hell
to be but a little while in company with some kind of men: Oh! but what an
Hell will it be to be for ever in company with Devils? When one Evil Spirit
does but haunt an house; Oh! how weary are men to continue there? What an
intolerable burden then will it be, to be for ever with many Legions of
Devils, and to be out of all hope of being delivered from them? 2. We see the
extremity of the wrath of God that the wicked undergo in Hell: See Psalm. 78.49.
3. We see what dreadful frights they in Hell must needs be affrighted with,
that are to have so many Devils amongst them to all eternity. The sight of a
Spirit, yea the conceit of the fight of a Spirit has daunted a company of good
men, John 6.19. Mat. 14.26. Oh what fears and frights must they needs be
surpriated with that are in company with such a multitude of wicked Spirits for
ever! 4. We see what weeping and gnashing of teeth there will be in Hell, for
who can do any other, that are to be with such company for ever? Mat. 25.30. 5.
We see how righteous the Lord is in his Dispensation to evil men; they would
needs do the Devils works, and be of his fellowship here, and therefore shall
be together in Hell to all eternity, Ezekiel. 18.25. 6. We see what a miserable
exchange they make, that forsake the fellowship of God, and his Saints and
Angels, to be for ever in company with Devils: No folly like this. 7. We see
how dreadful the company of evil men should be now, for it is a forerunner of
worse company, Isa. 5.14. 8. We see what a mercy it is to be delivered from
such Companions, Col. 1.12, 13. 9. We see what need we all had to hold up
fellowship with Christ here, 1 John 1.3. that we may escape the fellowship of
Devils. 10. We see how exceedingly the Lord abhorres wickedness, that he yokes
the committers of it with Devils. 11. We see what need we all have to repent,
Luke 13.3, 5. 12. We see what and Antichrist, and the Turk, and all Christ's
ene^^er must come unto, Rev. 20.9, 10.

Use 2. for Torrour: 1. To all that have been Companions in evil, they must go
to worse company. 2. To all Sco^^es at the Saints Meetings; they shall have the
fellowship of scoffing Spirits another day. 3. To all Hypocrites, who have not
cared for fellowship with God and his Saints here, they shall be linked with
Devils in fellowship to all eternity.

Use 3. for Exhortation: 1. To forsake the Devil, and all his works and ways;
as (1) Lying, John 8.44. (2) Mutther ibid. 1 John 3.12. (3) False Doctrines, 1 Timothy 4.1. (4) Deceit, Rev. 12.9. (5) Pride, 1 Timothy 3.6. (6) Envy, Genesis 3.1.2.
Job 1.9, 10, 11. (7) Malice, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. (8) False Accusation and Slander,
Rev 12.10. Genesis 3.1, 2, 3, 4. Joh 1.11. and 2.5. (9) Hypocrisy, 2 Cor. 11.13,
14. Acts 16.16.17. (10) Uncleanness, Mat. 12.43. Luke 4.33. 2. To walk with
God, Genesis 5.22, 24. 3. To rejoice in Christ Jesus, who saves us from the power
and fellowship of Devils, Heb. 2.14.15. 2 Timothy 1.10. 4. To wait for him from
Heaven, 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. 5. To love the Saints followship. Heb. 13.1. 6. To
beware we mistake not in one estate, 2 Pet. 1.10. 7. To work out our Salvation
with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12. 8. To abhor Witchcraft, 1 Samuel 28.9. 9
To bate Idolatry, and all Devil worship; for so Idolatry is, Rev. 9.20. 10. To
resist the Devil, John 4.7. 1 Pet. 5.8, 9

Use 4. for Consolation: 1. I^ solitary Conditions here, Psa. 102.6, 7 its
better then to be in company with Devils. 2. Against the reproaches of wicked
companions, 1 Pet. 4.4. 3 Apainst the Temptations of the Devil: if we resist
him, and escape his fellowship, happy are we. 4. Against his Accusations, Rev.
12.10. If we be not yoked with him, it will be well.

Ver. 42. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty and ye
gave me no drink:

Ver. 43. I was a stranger, and ye to k^me not in: naked, and y^ clothed me
not: sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not.


Doct XXXIII. is this, That there shall be nothing spoken of, that has been
good that evil men have done; but what evil has been found in them, that shall
be mentioned against them in the Day of Judgment. They have done sin things
that have been good for the matter; as it may be they have Prayed, Fasted,
given Alms, and done sundry other things that have bin materially good; but
nothing shall be spoken then of what they have so done; to mention shall be
made of any of them, but only of their ^ns.
We will first speak of the First Branch, and give Reasons of i^, and then make
Use; and after speak of the Second Branch.

Reasons. 1. Because though they have done some things materially good, yet
they have not done them well; they have not been done from a principle of
Faith, and so could not be pleasing to God: for, without says it is impossible
to please him, Heb. 11.6. 2. They have not done thea^ out of obedience to the
Commandment of God, but out of some other ground; out of Opinion of Meriting by
them, as the Papists do; or out of hope of deliverance the sooner out of
Purgatory, or from some other vain ground of their own, not eying the
Commandment at all: whereas the Saints make that their ground, Psalm. 119.4, 5.
3. They have not aimed at the glory of God in what they have done, as Philip
1.11. 1 Cor 10.21. but sought their own glory, Mat. 6 2, 5, 16. and how then
should such works be ever spoken of at that day? 4. They have done them from
some common work of the Spirit upon them, and not from ^^y special and saving
work, Mat. 7.21, 2^, 23. 5. They have done them in Hypocrisy, 2 Timothy 3.5. Mat
23.27, 28. Isa. 58.5. 6. They have been workers of iniquity, Mat. 7.23. Luke
13.27. even when they have done nost, Isa. 8.3, 4. 7. They have not done them
out of a principle of Love either to God or men, Luke 11.42. Matthew. 23.23. 8.
They have done them Boastingly, and have been proud of what they have done,
Luke 18.11, 12. 9. They have justified themselves in their doings, when their
hearts and works have been naught and the ninable in the sight of God; Luke
16.15. and how then should these be mentioned at that day? 10. They have had
their Reward already, they have been commended of vain men li^e themselves, and
that is all they are like to have, Matthew. 6.2, 5, 16. 11. They have done them
out of other men's Estates, which they have robbed, and crushed, and oppressed;
and how should such works be accepted? Isa. 61.8. Prove. 15.8. 13. They have not
done them seasonably, 1 John 3.17. 13. They have done them with a wicked mind,
Prove. 21.27. 1^. They have done them deceitfully Jer. 8.10. 15. They have done
them for ^ustome and falshion sake, not out of have to the thing done. Mic^h
6.8.

Use ^. for Information: 1. We see that whatever praise evil men may have (...)
men, they shall have none from God, and then all their praise from men will be
little worth, ^ Cor. 10.18. 2. We see what vain and deceitful works wicked men
set about, for it will turn to no account to them at the last day, Prove. 11.18.
3. We see a reason of that phrase in Heb. 6.1. whatever men do before
Repentance, it is dead work; dead in the end and issue, as well as in the rise
and beginning of it: At the day of Christ it will come to nothing, no mention
shall be made of it. 4. We see what little reason such men have to glory in
what they do, and to boast of this and that, and the other good work that they
have done: for alas! there will not be so much as a word spoken of any of their
works at that day. 5. We see what empty Pleas they will be at that day, Mat.
7.22, 23. Christ will not speak a word of them himself, and when they would, he
will take them up shortly for it. 6. We see what a mavelous difference God
makes between his own Saints, and others; the Saints shall have all mentioned
to their praise: so the Text; 1 Cor. 4.5. but there shall not be the least
whisper of praise of any thing that wicked men have done. 7. We see that works
materially good in themselves, that fail in the Ground, Manner or End, are not
Good Works in Gods account, they lose their Nature and Being; for there will
not be so much as any mention of them at that day. What will become then of all
the glorious Works of Papists and Hypocrites? 8. We see that to be proud of
such Works, is to be proud of nothing; for they are nothing, and will come to
nothing at that day: and yet how many are there that glory in a thing of
naught? 9. We see the truth of that in Prove 25.27. for men to search their own
glory, is not glory. 10. We see how miserably the hopes and expectations of
wicked men will fail them, Job 11.20. Prove. 11.7. 11. We see what dishonor the
Lord will put upon them at that day. 12. We see that we are not to envy them,
Prove. 24.19, 20.

Use 2. for Terror: 1. To all vainglorious Boasters of their good works, they
will not be mentioned at that day. 2. To all Hypocrites, that trust to their
works. 3. To those that expect great matters, as if they had been fruits of
Faith: Alas! they will not prove so at that day.

Use 3. for Exhortation: 1. To make no reckoning of wicked men's works, how
glorious soever they seem to be, for the Lord will make no account of them. 2.
To beware we trust not in our own Righteousness, Ezekiel. 33.13. 3. To take heed
of Hypocrisy, Mat. 23.27, 28. 4. To aim at Gods Glory in all we do, and not at
our own glory. 5. To abhor Popery, that teaches Justification and Salvation
to come by Works: all their glistering works will not be so much as mentioned
at that day. 6. To beware of praising wicked men, Prove. 28.4. 7. To look well
to our Faith, and to those works that we do, that they be done from a principle
of Faith, Heb. 11.8, 17. 8. To be humble in all we do, Luke 17.10. 9. To
contemn vile men and their doings, Psalm. 15.4. 10. To despise their gifts. Dan.
5.17.

Use 4 for Consolation: 1. Against all the wicked's glorying in their works;
the Saints have Christ to glory in, who will stand them in stead, when the
wicked's Works will fail them. 2. Against their outward greatness here, they
shall be of no account at that day. 3 Against the Popish Scoffs at Imputative
Righteousness; they term it A Putative Righteousness: it will stand in more
stead then their Works.

We are now come to the Second Branch of the XXXIII. Doct. That the evil that
has been found in wicked Men shall be mentioned against them in the day of
Judgment. The Text is full for it.
For opening of which, let me show, 1. What evil shall be mentioned then. 2.
Why it shall be mentioned. 3. The Uses.

Q. What evil is it that shall then be mentioned?

Answ. 1. All open evil in acts done in the body, 2 Cor. 5.10. Mat. 7.23. 2 All
open evil in speeches whether they be profane against God, or uncharitable
against men, or uncomely and unclean, contrary to the rule of piety,
righteousness, and sobriety, Tit 2.11, 12. These shall all be mentioned at that
day, Jude, ver. 14, 15. So all open, Idle, and unprofitable speeches, Mat.
12.35. 3. All open evils in neglect of their duties to God, themselves or
others: so the Text: all omissions of duties, as well as comminions of sins. 4.
All secret evils, Eccles. 12.14. as secret evil thoughts, of what kind soever
they have been, secret evil Speeches, secret evil Actions, secret Murders
secret Adulteries, and other uncleanness, natural or unnatural; secret Thefts,
secret prophanations of the Lords Name and Day, secret underminings of the
Ordinances secret combinings with those that would root out all Authority in
Church and Commonwealth; Secret Conspiracies against the Saints, as Isa.
83.3-8. In a word, all secret villainies, of what nature or kind soever they be.
5. All fained Holiness and Piety, which Hypocrites content them selves with, 2 Timothy 2.5. all dissembling love, contrary to Romans 12.9. all false and
counterfeit shows in Profession, Ordinances; all Vizards, and Phantasmes of
Religion without truth: All these shall be charged upon them, Job 27.8, 9. 6.
All cunning contrivances to hide their sin; All underhand and under-board
workings to appear other then men are: see Prove. 30.18, 19, 20. Mat. 23.27, 28.
7. All profane counting evil good and good evil, Isa. 5.20. 8. All Apostasies
from the Truth and ways of God, 2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22. 9. All Neutrality, and
Halting betwixt two Opinions, 1 Kin. 18.21. 10. All crooked dealings, Psalm.
125.5.

Q. 2. Why shall this evil be then mentioned?

Ans. 1. For their everlasting dishonor and contempt, Dan. 12.2. 2. For the
clearing of the Judge; for he will judge the world in Righteousness, Acts
17.31. 3. For the terror and amazement of wicked men, 2 Cor. 5.10, 11. 4. For
the manifestation of the Lords Omniscience: see John 21.17. Rev. 2.19, 23. 5.
For the manifestation of his Power and Wrath, Romans 9.22. 6. For their full
Conviction, and that they and all the world may see, that they have deserved
all the punishment that is to be inflicted upon them.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see what a vain thing it is for such men to hide
their sins here, for at that day they shall be discovered, Prove. 28.17. Luke
12.2. 2. We see how dreadful the thought of this day should be to them; for
then all their evil will come out, Acts 24.25. 3. We see what great cause we
all have to Repent, Acts 17.31. for if we do not, we shall hear of our sins at
that day. 4. We see that the Lord Jesus knows all that we have thought,
spoken, and done in secret; for even the secret sins that evil men have
committed, shall be mentioned and spoken of in the great day, Eccles. 12.14. 6.
We see that the wicked are reserved to the Day of Judgment, and they and
their deeds shall be brought forth then, Job 21.30. 2 Pet 29. 7. We see a
reason of the patience and longsuffering of the Lord toward the wicked, and
why he does not afflict them here: there is more behind, for he will discover
all their lewdness at that day, Psalm. 50.21. 8. We see what a mercy it is to
the Saints, to be rebuked and chastened of the Lord here, for it is far
better then to be rebuked and punished at that day, Rev. 3.19. 1 Cor. 1^.31. 9.
We see how true that is in Romans 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 10. We see that Princes and
Great Ones, that none dare Reprove now for their sins, shall not escape, but
shall have all laid open before them at that day, Job 34.19-22.11. We see that
neither Duties nor Privileges will secure such men, Mat. 7.22, 23. Luke 13.26,
27. 12. We see the great difference that shall then be put between the Saints
and the wicked: the former shall have only their good works, the latter only
their evil works mentioned at that day.

Use 2. for Terror: 1. To all open rebellious ones, how great soever, Psalm.
2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 2. To all secret Conspirators against Christ, his Ways and
Saints. 3. To all that hide their sins, and seek to justify themselves, as if
they had done to evil.

Use 3. for Exhortation: 1. To beware of Hypocrisy, Luke 12.1, 2. 2. To take
heed of secret sins, they will all come out at that day, Ephesians 5.12. 3 To the
Saints, to bear the wicked's scorns and contempts more patiently, for these
will be brought in against them at that day. 4. To take heed of idle words, Mat
12.35. 5. To judge nothing before the time, 1 Cor. 4.5. 6. To keep the heart
above all keeping, Prove. 4.23. 7. To beware we neither judge, nor set at naught
our Brethren, Romans 14.10. 8. To beware we be not found wicked ones at that day;
for if we be, all will come out. 9. To take heed of fellowship with them, Prove.
13.20. 10. To beware of hypocritical justifying our selves here, Luke 16.15.

Use 4. for Consolation: 1. Against the Slanders and Calumnies that evil men
now utter against the Saints, they must be accountable for them, Jude ver. 14,
15. 2. Against the secret practices of the wicked against the Saints; and their
cunning packings and plottings against them, so as they know not who has hurt
them; they will be all brought to light, one day.

Ver. 42, 43. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat, etc.
Doct. XXXIV is this, That the Lord Jesus will charge upon the wicked their
sins of Omission, as well as their sins of Commission, at the last and great
day. Their sins of Commission are spoken of in other Scriptures, but in this
their sins of Omission only.
Reasons. 1. Sins of Omision are transgressions of the Law, as well as sins of
Commission, 1 John 3.4. and every transgression of the Law must be charged upon
them, Galat. 3.10. 2. Sins of Omission are breaches of Gospel Rules also, and
disobedience to the Gospel will then be punished, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8, 9. 3. Sins of
Omission are such as Christ reproves men for here, Mat. 23, 23. Luke 11.42. and
therefore he will surely charge them upon them at that day. 4. Sins of Omission
are such as men's hearts will condemn them for, as well as sins of Commission, 1
John 3.20. 5. Sins of Omission come cross to the love of God, 1 John 3.17. and
what wonder then is it if the Lord Jesus charge them with those sins at that
day? 6. Sins of Omission, do directly strike at Christ, as we see in the Text,
and will not be charge home such sins at that day, Prove. 8.36 7. Sins of
Omission hurt others oftentimes as well as a man's self. A man may commit a sin
sometimes and hurt no man but himself by it: but by a sin of Omission he may
hort many others; as for example, there may be many that depend upon a man for
his Alms, and Charity, which if he omit, he robs them of their due, Prove 3.27.
So if a Magistrate should omit and forbear to do his duty, and a Minister his,
many may come to be wronged thereby, Eze. 34.3, 4. Isai. 1.23. 8. Sins of
Omission deserve death, as well as sins of Commission, Romans 6.23. and therefore
they shall be charged with them at that day. 9. Sins of Omission are fruits of
Adams Transgression, as well as sins of Commission; and that sin of Adam
imputed damns all, Romans 5.12. 10. Sins of Omission bring a man into bondage to
Satan as well as sins of Commission, 2 Timothy 2.26. and therefore will be charged
at that day. 11. Sins of Omission argue a daring spirit against God, and tempt
God as well as sins of Commission, Psalm. 78.19, 22, 41, 42, 56. 12. Sins of
Omission cause the Name of God to be blasphemed, as well as sins of Commission,
Romans 2.21-24. 13. Sins of Omission defile the Conscience as well as sins of
Commission, Tit. 1.15, 16. 14. Sins of Omission, if men be Professors, argue
that they are Hypocrites, if they be frequent, Mat. 7.3, 4, 5. And therefore it
is no wonder if they be charged upon them.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see what a dreadful thing it is to be guilty of
sins of Omission, they will be charged upon them all, whoever they be, at the
last day. 2. We see that Civil Moral men are in a poor case, and commonly dash
at this rock, and split themselves, for they care not for omissions of duties
so they keep themselves from gross pollutions. Paul was better then any of
them, Phil. 3.6. 3. We see what great need we all have to bewail our sins of
Omission, and to confess them before the Lord, that they may be forgiven to us,
and so never charged upon us at that day, 1 Job. 1.9. 4. We see the dangerous
estate of all Hypocrites, that either make no Conscience of performing duties
required in the first Table, or if they seem any thing to mind those, fail
shamefully in omiting duties of the second Table; for all hypocrites fail in
the one or in the other. Their state is dangerous, for sins of Omission will be
sadly charged upon them at that day. 5. We see what need we all had to beware
we be not guilty of these Omissions in our several places, and relations, as
ever we desire, that they may not be charged upon us at the great day. 6. We
see the greatness of these Sins of Omission in the Lords account, how lightly
soever men esteem of them. 7. We see that they that make most Conscience of
performing duties required, and are least guilty of Omissions, shall stand
before the Judge with most comfort. 8. We see that if Omissions will be so
charged at that day, oh where shall they appear that sin against the
Holy Ghost? Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. and 10.26, 27, 28, 29. 9. We see how tender we
should be of men of tender Consciences, that dare not omit any thing that they
know to be their duty. 10. We see that surely God will punish men here for
their Omissions if he charge them at that day.

Use 2. for Terror: 1. To those that make nothing of Omissions, so they keep
themselves from gross sins: alas! Christ will charge their Omissions upon them.
2. To those that despise, and deride those that are conscientious this way; it
had been better for them if they had been as conscientious themselves.

Use 3. for Exhortation: 1. To beware we omit no duties that God calls for,
either respecting God, our selves, or other men. 2. To pity those that we know
to be grossly guilty in omissions, they are like to hear of it another day. 3.
To all of us, to humble our selves for our omissions, and charge our selves
with them, 1 Cor. 11.31. 4. To all such to repent of these sins as well as
others, that they may not be charged at that day. 5. To abhor Hypocrisy, for
such as are Hypocrites, make light of Omissions, Mat. 23.23. 6. To the Saints
to admire the mercy of the Lord, that he will not charge their Omissions upon
them. 7. To fear before him, Psalm. 130.3, 4. 8. To rejoice, when any of ours
are Conscientious concerning duties to be performed. 9. To take heed of
forsaking the public Assemblies of the Saints, therein we should omit a great
duty, Heb. 10.25. 10. To do what we can to draw such men to repentance, and
acknowledgement of the Truth, Ezekiel. 18.32.

Use 4. for Consolation: 1. To those that make Conscience of doing things
Commanded, it will be well with them at that day. 2. To those that mourn for
their Omissions, they will not be charged upon them at that day, 3. To those
that love Christ's appearing, 2 Timothy 4.8. for no wicked men can do it, that are
to have their sins charged upon them, surely they that do it have their sins
forgiven to them.

Ver. 42, 43. for I was an hungered and ye gave me (...), meat etc.
Doct. XXXV. is this, That neglect of Mercy to the Saints in their necessity,
will Condemn those that are guilty of it at the last day, Jam. 2.13.
Reasons: 1. From Christ Jesus, 2. From the Saints themselves. 3. From the
nature of this Sin.

From Christ. 1. He is neglected in them: so the Text. But if that more
afterward, if the Lord win. 2. He commands mercy to be showed to them, Luke
6.36. and therefore the neglect of it is high contempt and disobedience to his
Commandment. 3. He has threatened condemnation to such, Jam. 2.13. 4. He
promises rewards to the Merciful, Mat. 5.7. Luke 6.37. and therefore will
punish the contrary. 5. He was of a Merciful spirit himself to such when on
Earth. Joh. 13.29. such therefore are unlike to him, that neglect Mercy; and
therefore he will condemn them. 6. He makes account, that not to show Mercy, is
to kill, and that deserves Condemnation.

2. From the Saints. 1. They are owners of our Charity, and Bounty, and Mercy,
it is their ^ue, Prove. 3.27. and not to give them their due, is a Condemning
sin. 3. They are great Heirs, Jan. 2.5. and to neglect them, must needs be a
Condemning sin: see for Illustration, Judge. 8.18, 19. 3. They are such as the
Angels minister 10, Heb. 1.14. and not only in their life, but after death,
Luke 16.22. and to neglect (...) as these great Courtiers minister to, must
needs be a condemning sin. 4. They are our own flesh, Isai. 58.7. and to
neglect Mercy to our own flesh; Is gross. 5. They are such as bless those that
are Merciful to them, Job. 31.20. 2 Timothy 1.16. and to neglect Mercy to such,
must needs be a Condemning Sin. 6. They are such as we should be forward to
remember in a way of Mercy; Gal. 2.10.

3. From the Nature of this sin. 1. Neglect of Mercy to the poor, argues that
the love of God dwells not in (...), 1 John 3.17. 2. Neglect of Mercy argues
that we love not the Brethren, for love will come off with any thing, it is
bountiful, 1 Cor. 13.4. 3. Neglect of Mercy, is the neglect of Justice, Prove.
3.27. 4. Neglect of Mercy, is the neglect of our own Salvation, 1 Timothy 6.18.
Luke 16.2. 5. Neglect of Mercy to the poor, speeds a man to Hell, Luke 16.23.
6. Neglect of Mercy is the very Character of a Reprobate, Psalm. 109.16.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see what the sad condition of unmercifull ones
will be; Condemnation is that that is to be their portion, and that has all
misery in it. 2. We see that they that are of an unmercifull spirit, though
they be often cursed by men, Prove. 11.26. yet there is no need of it, for they
are to be Cursed, and Condemned for it, in the last and great day. 3. We see
what little cause the Saints have to envy them for what they have, and what
they do, Psalm. 73.3. to 11.18, 19, 20. 4. we see a reason why unmercifull men
are afraid of the day of Judgment, they may well be afraid of it, for then
they must have the sentence of Condemnation passed upon them, Act. 24.25. 5. We
see if neglect of Mercy be so Damnable, oh what will become of those that
exercise greatest cruelty to the Saints by oppression Isai. 3.15. these will be
Condemned with a witness. 6. We see what a vain thing it is for such men to be
admired, and extolled of flatterers; what will this do them good, when they
shall be Condemned at that day? 7. We see they are miserable men that have much
of the World, and do little good with it, for they will lose their Souls by
this means, Job. 27.8. Mat. 16.26. 8. We see that unmercifull men, are more
cruel to themselves, then to those that they neglect to show Mercy to: for they
procure their own Condemnation by it. 9. We see that God pays them in their
own Coin, and gives them suitable punishment to their sin, Rev. 16.5, 6, 7. 10.
We see how hateful to God it is, to be of an unmercifull spirit.

Use 2. for Terror: 1. To all that neglect to show Mercy, they shall have
Judgment without Mercy. 2. To those that are cruel by defrauding, oppressing:
if they that give not to the poor shall be condemned, what shall become of
those that pluck from them, and are as the Pharisees? Mat. 23.25.

Use 3 for Exhortation: To take heed of unmercifulness, it is a Condemning sin.

Motives. 1. It is an Heathenish sin, Romans 1.31. 2. It is a Devilish sin, 1 John 3.10. 3. It is a sin that casts reproach upon God, Prove. 14.31. 4. It is a
sin that robs a man of his comfort. Phil. 2.1. 5. It is a sin that argues a
graceless heart, Psalm. 112.4. 6. It is a sin that argues a fearless heart,
Psalm. 36.1, 3. 7. It is a sin that will bring desolation, Isai. 47.6, 9. 8. It
is a sin that brings mischief upon a man's self, Prove. 11.17.

Means. 1. Takeheed of a Worldly Spirit. 2. Take heed of a sensual Spirit,
Luk 16.19, 21. 3. Take heed of an impletable Spirit, Romans 1.31. 4. Take heed of
an Hypocritical Spirit, Jam. 2. 5. Take heed of Idleness. Ezekiel. 16.49. 6. Take
heed of Pride, ibid. 7 Take heed of a Self loving Spirit, 2 Timothy 3.2, 3. 8.
Take heed of a senseless and inconsiderate Spirit, Psalm. 41.1. 9. Take heed of a
jolly, Merry, Voluptuous, Intemperate Spirit, Amos 6.5, 6. 10. Take heed of an
harsh, churlish Spirit, 1 Samuel 25.3.

Use 4. for Examination: whether we be not unmerciful; it concerns us to look
to it because it is a condemning sin.

Quest. How shall we know?

Answ. 1. If we be secure and think not of Adversity, Isa. 47.6, 7. 2. If we be
given to Pleasures, Ver. 8. 3. If we flatter our selves in our present
condition, Ibid. 4. If we look at our selves as the only goodly ones, Ibid. 5.
If we dream of outward felicity with perpetuity, Ibid. 6. If we lay not to
heart the end of unmercifulness, Ver. 6, 7.

Ver. 42, 43. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat, etc.
Doct. XXXVI. is this, That Unmercifulness to Christ's Members, when hungry and
athirst, when Strangers, Naked, Sick and in Prison, shall be deeply charged
upon wicked men at the last and great day.
I shall handle the several Branches asunder, as I did before: and first begin
with Unmercifulness to hungry and thirsty ones.

Reasons why this shall be so deeply charged upon them at that day. 1. From the
Nature of Hunger and Thirst. 2. From the Saints, whom they are unmerciful to in
their hunger and thirst.

First, From the Nature of Hunger and Thirst. 1. Hunger and Thirst both are
intolerable evils, if come to the extremity of them, they are of a killing
nature; Jeremiah was like to die with hunger, Jer. 38 9. and Samson with
thirst, Judge. 15.18. and to be unmerciful to those that are in this case, is
murder in an high degree; and therefore may well be charged home upon such at
that day as are guilty of it. 2. Hunger and thirst bring a long and lingering
death along with them, Lam. 4.9. and the longer and more lingering the death is,
the more painful and sore it is: it is to die many deaths; and therefore it is
that Famine is not called an Arrow, as the Pestilence is that kills quickly,
Psalm. 91.5. but it is called Arrows, and Evil Arrows, Ezekiel. 5.16. as if there
were many deaths in it. Now to inflict many deaths upon the Members of Christ,
and to let them die wounded with so many arrows, that is great unmercifulness
indeed; and therefore such may well have that sin charged home upon them at
that day. 3. Hunger and thirst in the extremity of them, will make men and
women unnatural to those they love most, yea sometimes to themselves, Deuteronomy.
28.53-57. 2 Kings 6.28, 29. Lam. 2.20. and 4.10. Ezekiel 5.10. Now to refuse to
give meat to them that are hungry, and drink to the thirsty, is to put them
upon unnatural courses, if God were not more merciful to them: and this sin
must needs be charged upon them at that day. 4. Hunger and thirst make men look
pale and ghastly, and so as to move men to pity. Now to be unmerciful to such
whose countenances bespeak pity and compassion, that must needs be a sin that
Christ will charge home at that day. 5. Hunger and Thirst exhaust the very
spirits, as 1 Samuel 30.11, 12. Now to refuse to give to those meat and drink,
who are almost expiring, and breathing out their last, is great cruelty. 6.
Hunger and thirst are warlike weapons Ezekiel. 5, 16 weapons of Destruction: Now
if men may keep off such things from their Brethren, and will not, it is great
unmercifulness, and therefore will be heavily charged upon them at that day.

2. From the Saints themselves. 1. They would bless them with their Prayers, if
relieved, 2 Timothy 1.16. 2. They would procure the Lord to be their debtor, Prove.
19.17. if succored. 3. They would bring a blessing upon their Posterity and
Families, 2 Timothy 1.16, 17, 18. 4. They would procure mercy for them at that
day, ibid. 5. They would receive them into everlasting habitations, Luke 16.9.
6. They would bring in more to them in outward then they take from them, Prove.
11.24, 25. 7. They would feast them with Spiritual dainties: Now to be
unmerciful to such, in not giving them meat and drink, must needs be charged
home upon them at that day.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see a reason why unmerciful men are so unwilling
to die, and to think of the Day of Judgment; they know that that sin of
Unmercifulness will be charged home upon them at that day. 2. We see a reason
why they have no peace in their Consciences, Isa. 57.20, 21. How can they, when
it shall go so ill with them at that day? 3. We see how loathsome that sin
should be to us, and how fearful we should be to fall into it. 4. We see what
severity they must look for, that take away meat from the hungry, and drink
from the thirsty. 5. We see that unmerciful men shall not want Witnesses to
^ome in against them; rather then so, the hungry Bellies and thirsty Throats of
the Saints shall bring in Evidence against them; as Jam. 5.1, 3. 6. We see what
desperate adventures wicked men will make for the saving of a little meat and
drink. 7. We see that unmercifulness, though it be not known to men, yet it is
to the Lord, and he will one day reckon for it. 8. We see the truth of that in
Prove. 11.17. The merciful man does good to his own soul; but he that is cruel,
troubles his own flesh. 9. We see how exceedingly the Lord abhors a covetous
unmerciful spirit, Psalm. 10.3. 10. We see how tenderly careful the Lord is of
the Bodies and lives of his Saints, that will charge it so home to them at that
day, that have not fed them. 11. We see how terrible he will be to those that
have been unmerciful to their Souls, Ezekiel. 34. 12. We see a reason why Satan
puts men upon it to be unmerciful, he knows they shall pay dear for it.

Use 2. for Terror: 1. To all those that give no meat to the hungry, nor drink
to the thirsty. 2. To those that violently snatch it from them. 3. To those
that give not the food of their Souls to them. 4. To those that hunt them, and
persecute them, when they seek meat to relieve their Souls. 5. To those that
kill them, John 16.1, 2.

Use 3 for Exhortation: 1. To fear to be of an unmerciful spirit to hungry and
thirsty ones. 2. To reprove it in others where we see it, as we have any
opportunity. 3. To be often thinking of the Judgment to come, especially when
any such objects as hungry and thirsty ones are before us. 4. To bless the Lord
if he have kept us from this sin, which will be charged so home another day. 5.
To detest their way that kill and murder the Saints. 6. To mourn for them that
are cruel to the Saints Souls, Jerem. 23.1, 2. 7. To tremble when the Lord
threatens a Famine of Bread for our Souls, Amos 8.11, 12, 13. 8. To be
merciful, Luke 6.36. and love mercy, Micah 6.8. 9. To break the Bread of Life
to hungry ones, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. John 21.15, 16, 17. 10. To justify the Lord in
taking vengeance upon cruel Rome, Rev. 16.5, 6.

Use 4. for Conselation: 1. Against all the Cruelty of unmerciful ones: see
Psalm. 58.10, 11. 2. Against all Romes Cruelty: Rev. 18.24. it will be required
one day. 3. Against the Saints hungry bellies here, they need not be too much
troubled, for they that have been unmerciful to them, shall be charged with it
at the last day.

Ver. 43. I was a stranger, and ye took me not in.
The Second Branch of the XXXVI. Doct. is this, That unmercifulness to the
Saints when Strangers, in not g^veing lodging, and entertainment to them, shall
be charged deeply upon the Wicked at the day of Judgment.
Reas. 1. From the nature of this sin, of non Entertainment. 2. From the
Saints, that are in this condition. 3. The Uses.

From the nature of this sin. 1. It is want of Humanity; such men do un-Man
themselves, forget that they are men: now to be without Humanity, so far to
degenerate as to loss the nature of man, must needs be deeply charged upon men
at that day. 2. It is want of natural affection, which is an Heathenish sin,
Romans 1.31. and that is very unbeseeming Christianity. 3. It is a manifest
breach of Rule, 1 Pet. 4.9. Heb. 13.2. and how then should it be otherwise, but
that it should be charged home upon those that are guilty of it? 4. It is that
that they would be unwilling should be done to them: and to do that to others,
that men would be loath should be done to themselves, is to despise the Law, and
the Prophets, and the Law of Christ himself, Mat. 7.12. Jam. 2.8. 5. It is
great cruelty, and argues much hard-heartedness, Judge. 19.18, 19. and will not
the Lord be severe to such, and reckon sore with cruel ones? 6. It comes cross
to the practice of holy men, Abraham, Lot, that good old man, Judge. 19.20, 21.
Lydia, Act. 16.15. Job chap. 31, 32. and many others. 7. It is worse then
Barbarism, Act. 28.2, 7, 10. 8. It is that that is very provoking to the
spirits of good men Luke 9.51, 52, 53, 54. and though they were too hot, which
Christ rebukes them for, yet the sin was great, and very provoking, although
the sweet disposition of Christ would not then punish it. 9. It is a confluence
of many sins, and the very sink that they come from, and run into, Pride,
Covetousness, Carelessness, Senslesness of others conditions, Barrenness,
Uncharitableness, Unbeleif, and these the Lord abhors. 10. It is the highest
degree of ingratitude to Christ for his bounty in outward things bestowed upon
them.

2. From the Saints in this condition: 1. They are very precious in the sight
of the Lord, Heb. 11.38. and not to entertain such must needs be that that will
be deeply charged upon men at that day. 2. They are in great danger of loss of
health, and life, in such a condition, and therefore not to be received then,
must needs provoke the Lord to lay his charge heavy upon such as have been this
way guitty at that day. 3. They are such as Christ has received to be of his
household, Ephesians. 2.19. and made of the household of Faith, Gal. 6.10. and not to
receive such to these men's houses, must needs be very provoking. 4. They are
such as Christ will receive to himself into mansions of gl^ry, John 14.2, 3.
5. They are such as bring God the Father, and Christ Jesus the Son, and the
holy Spirit with them, 1 John 1.3. and not to entertain such, is to shut out
these blessed guests; and who can be innocent that does this? Christ will
surely charge it home and home upon them at that day. 6. They have the Holy
Angels, their guardians, with them, Psalm. 34.7. Heb. 1.11. and not to entertain
such company, cannot be taken well at that day. 7. They are heirs of the World,
and all things are theirs in Christ, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. and therefore to deny
them a little entertainment, will be heavily charged at that day. 8. They are
the very pillars, and upholders of the places where they are, Joh 22.30. to
keep off Judgment, and to procure mercy, Genesis 19.22. Psalm 106.23, 30.

Use 1. for Information. 1. We see with what great Indignation the Lord takes
it at the hands of such men, when they are so hard-hearted to strangers. 2. We
see how nearly it concerns us to look to it, that we be not of such a Spirit.
3. We see how unworthy such men be to have any Saint to come amongst them. 4.
We see how unmeet it is to receive such hard-hearted ones into favor, or
familiarity with us. 5. We see how dreadful the day of Judgment will be to
such men. 6. We see how distastful it should be to us, to see any such
discourtesie used to the Saints, when strangers, for it is so distastful to
Christ, that he will one day charge it home upon them. 7. We see that for a
nights lodging, and a little entertainment spared upon strangers, wicked men
are willing to abide the severity of the great Judges condemnation. 8. We see
that cruel men, are cruel to themselves; they may kill the bodies of strangers,
but by this they cast away themselves for ever. 9. We see how deeply sensible
the Lord is of the unkindness done to his Members. 10. We see what Judgment
waits for them that oppress strangers, that misuse them, that kill them pillage
them, etc. if they that entertain them not, shall be so severely judged, where
will these appear? 11. We see that they will have a bad lodging themselves,
that do not lodge strangers; they must lodge with Devils. 12. We see what
Coveteousness brings men to.

Use 2. for Terror: 1. To all cruel ones to strangers, in denying them
entertainment: see Jam. 2.13. 2. To all those that grudge to do any Courtesy
for them, are hardly drawn to it. 3. To all that deal worse with them, oppress
them, pluck from them, revile them, do what evil they can against them.

Use 3. for Exhortation: 1. To Strangers, to take patiently what they meet with
in that condition, for the Lord Jesus sees it, and will one day require it. 2.
To be cheerful in want of lodging, and entertainment, for it was not only his
own case, Luke 9 51, 52, 53. but he will remember how they have been used, and
charge it sadly upon the wicked at the great day. 3. To think of the
entertainment that Christ gives them here in his house, at his Table, and of
that he will give them in Glory, and let that suffice.

2. To us all: 1. To abhor this Spirit in our selves, and others. 2. To be
thankful if the Lord give us open hearts, and open doors to receive such. 3. To
fear, and tremble at the least grudging in our spirits to receive such. 4. To
stand at our doors to observe weary, and way faring ones, and desire them to
come in, as Abraham did. 5. To be of Lydia's spirit, Acts 16.15. 6. To make
account that it is not only the Ministers duty, to be given to Hospitality,
Tit. 1.8. but ours, 1 Pet. 4.9. yea the poorest are not exempted, 1 Kings
17.10, 11, 12. 7. To pity their case that are hard-hearted, they are the worst
Enemies to themselves.

Ver. 43. Naked, and ye clothed me not.
The Third Branch of the XXXVI. Doctrine is this, That unmercifulness in not
clothing Christ's naked Members, shall be deeply charged upon the Wicked at the
last and great Day.
Reasons: 1. From the Nature of this sin. 2. From the Saints who are in this
Condition. 3. The Uses.

First, From the Nature of this Sin: 1. It is that that exposes them to
perishing, Job. 31.19. and thereby such are guilty of Murder, and therefore it
is no wonder if Christ will so deeply charge it upon wicked men at the last
day. 2. If it should not rise so high as Murder, yet it exposes them to
suffer much by reason of cold, which sometimes is so extreme that it cannot be
born, Psalm. 147.17. and the extremity of cold causes many sicknesses, some of
which are as painful, and bitter as death it self: see Job 24.7. 2 Cor. 11.27.
3. If neither of these should come, yet it exposes the Saints to uncomeliness;
for to be naked, and destitute of clothing, is very uncomely: and the Lord
would have us go comely, and looks at it as a sin in those that cause others to
go naked, Job 24.10. 4. It is that that godly men reprove in those that they
think are guilty of it, Job 22.6. It Is true, Eliphaz missed the mark, when he
charged Job with this; but yet it holds out, that he thought he was guilty, and
charge it home upon him. Much more will Christ charge it deeply upon them
that he knows to be guilty, at that day. 5. It is Inhumanity; and God would
have us, as in other cases, to show our selves men, Isa. 46.8. 6. It is
contrary to the Rule of the Gospel, Luke 3.11. 7. It comes cross to the
practice of the Saints, 2 Chronicles. 28.15. Job 31.19. Acts 10.39. 8. It breaks the
Law of Love, Romans 13.10. 9. It spoils the most Spiritual of all our Duties,
Isa. 58.3, 4, 6, 7. 10. It is an Abomination to the Lord, Ezekiel. 18.13. and
therefore no wonder if he charge it so home upon the wicked at that day.

2. From the Saints. 1. They are the Fathers Blessed ones: so the Text. 2. They
are Heirs of the Kingdom. 3. They are such as Christ admits into his blessed
Fellowship, and says Come unto. 4. They are his Purchased ones, Acts 20.28. 5.
They are they that the Lord has given Himself, his Christ, and his Spirit unto,
Genesis 15.1. John 3.16. 2 Cor. 1.22. 6. They are his Excellent ones, Psalm. 16.2,
3. yea, more excellent then others, Prove. 12.26. 7. They are the Delight of his
Eyes and Heart, Came. 2.14. Psalm. 149.4. 8. They are tenderly cared for by him,
Zech. 2.8. Isa 40.12. 9. They are the very Glory of Christ, 2 Cor. 8.23. 10.
They are Rich in their Poverty, Rov. 2.9. 11. They are clothed with the best
Robe and Garments, Isa. 61.10. 12. They shall be clothed upon with Immortality,
^ Cor. 5.4. Now not to clothe these, must needs be charged deeply upon wicked
men at that day.

Use 1. for Information; 1. We see the sad case of those, that having that by
them that would help to Clothe the Naked, which they make no use of, yet do
nothing that way. Christ will reckon with them for it at that day. 2. We see a
reason of the Judgment of God upon the very Garments of Cruel men, Jam. 5.1.2.
3. We see how unworthy they be of the Name of Christians, that will not Clothe
their own Families. If wicked men shall be judged that Clothe not other naked
Saints, what shall become of them that will not Clothe their own? 1 Timothy 5.8.
4. We see what wretched men they be, that are so far from Clothing Christ's
naked ones, that if they will have any Clothes from them, they shall pay twice,
if not thrice the worth of them: What will be the end of these men? 5. We see
that sure their state will be lamentable, that pluck away the Naked's Clothes
from them, Jo^ 22.6. 6. We see that the Lord Jesus cannot endure to see his
Saints go naked: for if he did, he would never so judge the wicked for not
Clothing them. 7. We see what wretched filthy ones they be, that will go naked
in a shameless way, when they have Clothes to cover them with, as the Adamites
do. And we see that surely Christ Jesus hates their deeds; for they are the
deeds of the N^cola tans, Rev. 2.6. 8. We see that if they shall be so
severely judged that Clothe not the naked Saints B^d^s, On what will become of
them that pluck the Rube of Christ's Righteousness from them, and would have
them patched with their own Rags? as Papists, that teach Justification by
Works. 9. We see what a mercy it is to have a spirit given us to Clothe
Christ's naked ones.

Use 2. for Terror: 1. To Rich men, that have enough to bestow this way, but
want hearts, Jam. 5.1, 2. 2. To those that drink away all that they should this
way come off with: see Prove. 23.21. 3. To those that do so love themselves,
that they will come off with nothing to the naked Saints.

Use 3. for Exhortation: 1. To take heed of all those sins that foment and
further this sin: as (1) Pride in Apparel; they that lay so much upon their own
backs, will not have to give to Clothe the Naked, Ezekiel. 16.49. (2) Costliness,
and superfluity of Diet, ibid. (3) Idleness, and excess in it, ibid. (4)
Insensibleness of the Naked's misery; A stony heart. (5) A Cruel Spirit. (6) A
Covetous Spirit, Luke 12.15. 1 Timothy: 6.10. (7) A rough and harsh Spirit, Prove.
18.23. (8) Unbelief, and inordinate fear of want: A man possessed with these,
will never Clothe Christ's naked ones. (9) Talkativeness, Prove 14.23. 10. Love
of Pleasure, Prove. 21.17. Such spend so much vainly, that they have nothing to
give. 2. To fear to be of such a Spirit. 3. To all such men, to weep and howl
for the misery that is coming upon them, Jam. 5.1, 2. 4. To bless the Lord, if
he has given any of us a better Spirit. 5 To come off with a Spirit of Bounty
this way, as ever we would escape this Judgment 6. To abhor this
Unmercifulness in our selves and others, Romans 12.9. 7. To judge our selves for
former unmercifulness, 1 Cor. 11.31.

Ver. 43. Sick, and in Prison, and ye visited me not.
The Fourth Branch of the XXXVI. Doctrine, is this, That unmercifulness to
Christ's sick Members in not visiting them, shall be deeply charged upon the
wicked at the last and great Day.
Reasons. 1 From the Nature of the Sin. 2. From the Saints in that condition.

From the Nature of this sin. 1. It argues that such men have forsaken the fear
of the Almighty, Job 6.14. and therefore it is no wonder that such shall be
charged with it at that day. 2. It argues that such men are not sensible of the
amicted estate of such sick ones, and that is a manifest bre^ch of Rule, ibid.
3. It argues that such men restrain Prayer before God, when they refuse to
visit sick ones: for sick ones have need of Prayers to be made for them, Jam.
5. 4. It argues that such men do not consider their own latter end; for their
very going to such an house of Mourning, would put them upon it to think of
their own death, Eccles 7.2. 5. It argues that they have no love to the
Brethren, for love would come off with a visit cheerfully, and willingly, 1
John 3.18. 6. It argues that they care not what becomes of others, so it go
well with them: And that they are exceeding lovers of themselves, 2 Timothy 3.2.
7. It argues a flighting of the hand of God upon others; and a forgetting that
Nunc tua res agitur, paries cum proximus ardet. 8. It argues want of love to
God, 1 John 4.20. 9. It argues a covetous heart; for therefore they refrain
visiting, because they would give nothing to them, and see Nehem. 13.1, 2. 10.
It argues that they dream of the Continuance of their own healths, and that
they shall not be sick.

2. From the Saints in that condittion. 1. They cannot help themselves; and to
deny a visit to such, must needs be great Cruelty. 2. They need visiting for
the comfort both of outward and inward man; and we are bound to attend both, 1 Thessalonians. 5 14. 3. They do even beg for pity, Job 19.21. and to be denied pity
when they desire it of us, is sad, and will be reckoned for. 4. They are such
as the hand of God has touched, Job 19.21. and therefore we should be touched
with the sense of their condition. 5. They are lonesome and disconsolate, and
cannot well want company. 6. They are such as Satan is apt to take advantage
against; for when the Saints are most alone, and weakest, then he bestirs
himself most, Genesis 3.1, 2. 7. They are such as God sometimes withdraws himself
from, as he did from Hezekiah, Isa. 38.13. 8. They mourn in that condition,
Isa. 38.14. and to be denied a visit at such a time, as it is grievous to them,
so the Lord cannot but reckon for it

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see that the Lord has respect to his lick
Saints, and dearly tenders them himself, seeing he will charge it so home upon
wicked men at the last day, that they have not visited them in that condition.
2. We see that if they that visit not Christ's sick Members shall be so severely
judged, Oh what will be the condition of those that are gl^d at such a
Calamity, and hope they shall never come out of it! Psalm 41.8. and 35.15. 3. We
see what need such men have to repent of such unmercifulness, and to charge
this sin upon themselves, by confessing and bewailing it, that they may not be
c^arged with it at that day. 4. We see that Sickneses are no arguments of Gods
rejecting of his Saints, for he is tender of them in that condition, and cannot
endure that any should be handhearted toward them. 5. We see a reason why God
orders it in his Providence, that such shall not be visited themselves when
sick: for he distastes them so, that he will charge it upon them at that day.
And this is a token of his displeasure against them. 6. We see that surely such
as are sick of love for Christ, Cant. 5.8. shall be very much tendered by them,
and he will not endure that any should be cruel to them. 7. We see how careful
we should be to enquire who are sick amongst us, and go and visit them, as ever
we desire to escape this severe charge of the Lord Jesus at the last and great
day. 8. We see that all such as have been guilty of this sin, must needs be
troubled in their Consciences for it, when they think seriously of it; for it
will be charged home upon them at the last and great day. 9. We see what need
we had to look after those that are sick of sin, and to tender convinced
sinners, as Christ does, Mat. 9.12, 13. 10. We see that if the non visitation
of sick ones will be so deeply charged upon men at that day, then surely
cruelty to sick ones in other kinds much more

Use 2. for Terror: 1. To all careless ones, that mind themselves only, and so
themselves be in health, care not how it goes with others are of Gallio^s
spirit, Acts 18.17. 2. To those that rejoice at others Calamities, Prove 24.17.
3. To those that Kill and Murder them without pity, as of late in Piemont: If
they that visit not sick Saints shall be judged, where shall such appear?

Use 3. for Exhortation; 1. To tremble at any neglect herein, it will cost men
dear at that day. 2. To repent of any such unmercifulnes in former times. 3. To
charge this neglect upon those that are guilty of it. 4. To hope the best of
those that make Conscience of visiting sick ones, though they have their
infirmities other ways. 5. To bless the Lord, that he has made us in any
measure tender this way, and thereby given us hope that no such evil shall be
charged upon us. 6. To be thankful that others have been tender over us in our
sickness, and thereby have declared their love not only to us but to Christ
himself. 7. To stir up our s^lves to the practice of the duty of visiting
the sick. And that we may be helped therein, (1) Labor to get a soft heart,
Ezekiel 36.26. (2) Remember that we may be sick our selves. (3) Think much of the
day of Judgment. (4) Remember that Christ counts himself sick in his Members.
(5) Get a bountiful Spirit. (6) Love the Saints. (7) Fear the Almighty. Job
6.14. (8) Remember the good that may be done by the Prayer of Faith for the
sick, Jam. 5.15.

Ver. 43. Sick, and in Prison, and ye visited me not.
We are now come to the last Branch or the XXXVI. Doctrine, and that is this,
That unmercifulness to Christ's imprisoned ones, shall be deeply charged upon
the Wicked at the last and great Day.
Reasons. 1. From the nature of this sin. 2. From the Saints in this condition.

First, From the Nature of this sin of not visiting Christ's Prisoners: 1. It is
an high contempt of Christ himself, for he says he is in Prison when they
are; and will not such a sin be charged home at that day? 2. It is great
hard-heartedness and cruelty; For no men in the world need more pit^y then
sometimes Prisoners do; they endure great trials, Heb. 11.36. Rev. 2.10. and
this is a great plague, Exodus 9 14. to be hard-hearted. 3. It is inhumanity;
and such a sin whereby men put off humanity, must needs be charged deeply upon
them at that day. 4. It is worse then Barbarism; for even Barbarians have been
kind to some of the Lords Prisoners, as to Paul, when he was a Prisoner, Acts.
^8.2, 10. 5. It is worse then Heathenism; for some Heathens have been kind to
the Lords Prisoners; as we see in Joseph's Ke^per, Genesis 39.21. so Acts 28.2, 16,
31. 6 It is that by which men resemble the very Devil; for he casts the Saints
into Prison, Rev. 2.1^. and would have them there to have no mercy. 7. It is
altogether inconsistent with the love of God, 1 John 3.17. 8. It is a
Trangression of that Commandment that we have from God, that He who loves God,
love his Brother also, 1 Ioh. 4.21. 9. It is that that is detestable to God,
Angels, and all good men: for all these visit these Prisoners, Genesis 39.21. Act.
12.6, 7, 8. 10. It is that that a man will loath himself for, it ever he
repent, Acts 16.33.

2. From the Saints in that condition: 1. They are in a lonesome condition, and
therefore stand in need of visiting. 2. They are under manifold temptations;
and others visits would help them in such a condition. 3. They are sorrowful;
we read of the sighs of Prisoners, Psalm. 79.11. and others visits would help to
alleviate those lighs. 4. They are dying men, Psalm. 79.11. and not to visit
dying men must needs be charged upon those that are guilty of it. 5. They are
meanly provided for in the Prison, 1 Kin. 22.26, 27. and not to visit them, to
minister something more comfortable for them for their Diet, is sad, and will
be reckoned for. 6. They have mean Lodging; many times a little straw, or it
may be a Pair of Stocks, Acts 16.24. 7. They are sometimes pined, and have no
meat at all, Jer 38.9. 8. They are starved with cold; as Mr. Latimer 9. They
are tortured sometimes, Heb. 11.35. 10. They continue long in this condition.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see that the Lords Prisoners are very dear to
him, in that he will charge unmercifull ones so deeply at that day, for not
visiting them in this their afflicted condition. 2. We see that he will surely
charge it home upon them, that have without cause put them into Prison, and
have dealt cruelly with them there, by Pining, Starving, Torturing of them. 3.
We see that surely the death of such Prisoners is very precious in his sight.
If the death of every Saint be precious, Psalm. 116.15. then much more precious
is the death of these Saints, that are Sufferers for him, 2 Timothy 4.6, 16. He
will charge the wicked's not visiting them, upon them; and therefore when they
shed their Blood, it shall be costly to them: He will have a price for that
Blood. 4. We see that the Saints way be content to be put in Prison, and to
suffer the Cruelty that sometimes they there meet with; for Christ takes notice
of it, and will deeply charge it upon unmerciful ones. 5. We see that the
closest Prisons cannot exclude Christ, nor shut out his love from his
Prisoners, Romans 8.38 39. 6. We see that if there be so much iniquity in a non
visit of Christ's Prisoners, that it shall be so charged; Oh what is there in
the Slaughter of so many as have been slain for Jesus sake in all Ages! 7. We
see that the worst state of the People of the Lord, even a Prison-condition, is
better then the best of hard hearted wicked, men, for these last must be
accountable for their Neglects of poor Prisoners. 8. We see that omissions of
small kindnesses to men in misery, though we think not of them as any great
matter, yet will be made so nothing of at that day. 9. We see how dear such
must pay for it, that have been and are of the Romish Religion, Rev. 18.24. 10.
We see that Prisoners for Jesus sake, though not visited by some men, yet have
many a sweet visit from him, for he will make up their defect.

Use 2. for Terror: 1. To those that visit not. 2. To those that vint them to
punish them. 3. To those that kill them in Prison. 4. To those that make their
life worse then death.

Use 3. for Exhortation: 1. To Prisoners for Christ's sake. 2. To others.

To Prisoners: 1. To bear patiently their Imprisonment, with all the miseries
attending that condition: their enemies shall pay dear for them. 2. To be
content with that lonesome condition, and to be without men's visits. 8. To
desire more of the Lords visits. 4. To be thankful when the Lord visits them.

2. To others. 1. To visit the Lords Prisoners, for it will be s^d with them
that do it not. 2 To abhor their Cruelty, that use them cruelly and
barbarou^ly there. 3. To pity their Tormentors, they must pay for it. 4. To
rejoice if we should be called to it, Acts 16.25.

Use 4. for Consolation: 1. Against such Sufferings, Acts 5.41. 2. Against the
fears of such Sufferings, Rev 2.10. 3. Against all the Blood that Rome has
shed. 4. Against the noisome Stink of the Prison, it is not H^ll; they shall be
saved from that Prison, and the Torments of it.

Ver. 44. Then shall they also answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an
hungered, or ath^rst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in Prison, and did
not minister unto thee?
Doct. XXXVII. is this, That wicked men would fain excuse their Unmercifulness
to the Saints, but their encusing of themselves shall be of no avail for them.
Reasons. 1. Why they would excuse their unmercifulness at that day. 2. Why
their excusing themselves shall be of no avail for them.

For the first: They would Excuse themselves 1. From the Pride of their hearts,
whereby they think better of their estate then it is: for Pride will frame
excuses; as it was with Saul, he had a good conceit of his doings, and
therefore made one excuse after another, to justify himself before the Lord
and Samuel, in the matter of destroying the Amalekites, 1 Samuel 15.13, 14, 15,
20, 21. So it will be with these at the last day. 2. From the Boldness and
Audaciousness of their Spirits. A bold audacious fellow, though he be guilty of
some foul fact, yet will frame many excuses, to do what he can to clear himself
before men^ so these, from a bold spirit, will frame excuses before the great
Judge. 3. From that wisdom that is in them to do evil, Jer. 4.22. they have a
natural subtilty in them, to have something to say in way of excuse for
themselves, and this subtilty they will use at that day. 4. From the shifting
spirit that is and will then appear in such; they would fain flee out of his
hand, and shift off the blows that are coming upon them, Job 27.22. 5. From
that want of understanding that is in them, of the nature of their sin of
unmercifulness to the Saints: they know not that it reaches so far as to
Christ himself. So the Text. 6. From the self-flattery that is in them, Psalm.
36.2. 7. From the hardening of themselves against that shame that their f^ces
will be filled with, Dan. 12.2. 8. From the dreadfulness of the Judgment that
is passed upon them, they would fain say something to excuse themselves. 9.
From the stifling of their Consciences; for then Conscience will accuse. 10.
From their Hypocrisy, which makes them feign excuses.

Q. 2. Why shall their excusing of themselves be of no avail to them at that
day?

Answ. 1. From the Judge. 2. From the Wicked.

From the Judge. 1. He is Wise, and knows how to takes off their filly Excuses,
Prove. 8.1. Jude ver. 25. 2. He is Just, 2 Timothy 4.8. and therefore will not be
put off with trivial Excuses. 3. He is True in his Threatenings, as well as in
his Promises, Rev. 3.7. and will fulfill them; and therefore their vain Excuses
shall not profit them. 4. He is a Great King: so the Text; and Excuses that
Malefactors make, will not take with Kings. 5. He is no Respecter of persons,
Acts 10.34. 1 Pet. 1.17. I ^ev. 22.12. and therefore cannot take their Excuses
to justi^fie the wicked. 6. He knows all things, John 21.17. is a^^ All-seeing
Judge, and therefore se^s through all their v^^in Excuses, and knows that
there is nothing in them.

2. From the Wicked. 1. They are Workers of iniquity, Mat. 7.23. Luke 13.26,
27. 2. They have ^een slothful Servants, Mat. 25.24-27. 3. They are
unprofitable Servants, Matthew. 25.30. and no Excuse will serve their turn. 4.
They bring such Excuses as are against themselves, Luke 19.22. 5. They are
Hypocri^es; and if God will not hear the cry of such in their times of trouble
here, Job 27 9. then sure he will not hear them speak for themselves at that
day. 6. They speak too late; for the Sentence being given, cannot be called in
again: and therefore no Excuse shall serve their turn. 7. Their Excuses are a
kind of challenging the Judge for untruth.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see the greatness of the folly of wicked men,
that think that their poor Excuses will stand them in any stead at the great
day, after the Sentence is passed: What folly like this? 2. We see that wicked
men will take hold of, and catch at any thing, though never so feeble, to shift
off and avoid punishment. A man ready to drown, will catch hold of sticks and
straws, that can no way help them: So here. 3. We see how loath wicked men are
to come to punishment, they would fain escape it and fly from it. 4. We see
that there is no dallying with Christ at that day: Men may sometimes be put off
with Excuses, but the great Judge will not. 5. We see that wicked men's
Confidence will deceive them, Job 18.14. it will be a broken Reed to them in
that day. 6. We see how necessary it is to get the Judge to be our friend now
in the day of Grace, for no Excuse will serve the turn at that day. 7. We see
how vain it is to make Excuses for sin here, for the day is coming when no
Excuse will stand in stead before the great Judge. 8. We see the Impudence of
wicked men, that dare charge the Judge himself with untruth at that day. 9. We
see what mischief there is in sin, when no Excuse will exempt men from
punishment. 10. We see how dreadful it will be to see the face of the Judge at
that day, who will not be put off with vain Excuses 11. We see how good it is
here to make Supplication to our Judge. 12. We see how inexorable the Judge
will be at that day; it will be too late then to speak.

Use 2. for Terror: 1. To all Reprobates: VVoe to them, none of their Excuses
will then be taken. 2. To all Unmerciful ones to Christ's Members; their Pleas
for it will no way help them. 3. To those that devise Excuses now; they may
pass with men to save them from temporal evils, but not with Christ at that day.

Use 3. for Exhortation: 1. To abhor that which is evil, Rom: 12.^. 2. To
take heed of Unmercifulness, for no Pleas will pass for that, Iam: 2.13. 3. To
Repent of former unmerciful dealings in our unregenerate estate, for the Judge
will take no Excuses for want of Mercy: so did Zacheus, Luke 19 8. 4. To beware
of making Excuses here for Unmercifulness, for they will not pass for current
at the great day. 5. To Judges in Courts, to imitate the great Judge, and to
hear no ^^eas for merciless ones. 6. To us all, to love Mercy, Micah 6.8. for
such may look the Judge in the face with comfort, Iam. 2.13. 7. To make sure
work for our Souls, for the Judge will not be put off with vain pretexts 8. To
Pray always, that we may escape the Judgment that will surely pass upon the
wicked.

Ver. 44. Lord, when saw we thee an hungered, or athirst, etc.
Doct. XXXVIII. is this, That wicked men do not know how far their
Unmercifulness to the Saints reaches: it reaches to Christ himself, but they
know it not. There is a greater guilt upon them then they are aware of.
Reasons. 1. From themselves. 2. From the Lord himself. 3. From Satan.

From themselves. 1. From that natural Stupidity and Blockishness that is in
them, 1 Cor. 2.14. Hence they are so often called Fools in Scripture, and
without understanding. 2. From their Madness, Luke 15.17. and men that are out
of their wits know not what they do. 3. From the Pleasure they have in this
sin; for that like a Bribe blinds their eyes, that they cannot see into the
mischief of it, and how far it reaches. 4. From, their want of considering
how near the Saints are to Christ: for did they consider that, they could not
but know that their unmercifulness to them would reach to Christ himself. 5.
From the willing ignorance that is in them, 2 Pet. 3.5. 6. From the false
Reasonings that they use to color and cover their sin with; as, that they are
Idle, and to give to them, would maintain them in their Idleness, and they may
want themselves, and have others lie upon them.

2. From the Lord Himself. 1. He in Judgment shuts their eyes, John 12.39, 40.
Isa. 44.18. 2. He is not bound to give them more understanding; he is free to
impart it where he will, and to deny it to whom he will. 3. He has reserved
them for wrath, 2 Pet: 2.9. Job 21.30. and in this way he lets them go to this
sad journeys end. 4. He has ordained them to destruction: so the Text; and so
leaves them to go hoodwinked to their Ruin. 5. He came into the world for
Judgment, that some that see might be made blind, John 9.39. 6. He reserves
something to tell them at that day to their cost, if they would not understand
it here.

3. From Satan: 1. He blinds them, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. 2. He keeps them in the dark,
knowing that that is the surest way to deceive them: he is the grand deceiver,
Rev. 12.9. and this way deceives them. 3. He hides the danger and the book,
and shows only the Bait. 4. He is a Murderer, and cruel Spirit, John 8.44. and
therefore uses all ways to draw men to cruelty and unmercifulness; and that
he may effect this, hides the danger of this sin from them, and keeps them from
knowing how far it reaches.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see the misery of unmerciful men, they know not
the greatness of the guilt that is upon them; their sin reaches further then
they are aware of, they think it is only against men, but Christ will tell
them another thing at the great day. 2. We see what a dangerous thing it is to
be ignorant of the nature and extent of sin, for it will be discovered in the
full latitude of it at that day. 3. We see that ignorance will be no sufficient
Plea or Excuse for wicked men at the great day, but will leave them altogether
inexcusable before the great Judge. 4. We see that unmercifulness shall never
hide it self under any shadow; but that that unmerciful men think to be a
shelter to them, shall wet them to the skin at that day: for they know not the
extent of it, yet they shall know how far that sin went, at that day. 5. We see
that those sins that men count little, are great sins in the Lords account. 6.
We see how hateful the sin of unmercifulness should be to us, that wicked men
make so little reckoning of; for there is more in it then they are aware of. 7.
We see how miserable their state will be that know that unmercifulness reaches
Christ himself, and yet go on in that way. 8. We see the great patience of
Christ toward unmerciful men, that though their sin reach him, yet does
forbear them in this world. 9. We see that men's condition being evil, if they
know it not, is so much the worse to them. 10. We see what a judgment of God
it is to be blind, and not to see the extent of the danger of this sin. 11. We
see that the greatness of some men's sins is not discovered to them till the day
of Judgment. 12. We see that they that will not know their sins here, shall
know them to their cost at that day.

Use 2. for Terror: 1. To ignorant Sots, that think they are not so bad as
they are, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. 2. To Unmerciful ones, though they know not the extent
of their guilt, yet their state is dreadful.

Use 8. for Exhortation: 1. To labor to know the worst that is in sin here,
for else the worst shall be told us in the lest and great day. 2. To hearken to
that counsel in Dan. 4.27. to break on our sins by Righteousness, and our
iniquities by showing Mercy to the poor. 3. To take them for our best friends
that rip up our-sins most, and show us the greatness of our guilt, and the
extent and latitude of our sins, for they will be told us that day. 4. To
abhor unmercifulness, for it will be set out in its colors at that day. 5.
To tremble to be ignorant of what we ought to know in knowing times. 6 To get a
considering heart, that we may repent of our former unmercifulness, Ezekiel.
18.28. Psalm. 119.59. 7. To pity hard-hearted unmercifull men, that know not the
full latitude of this sin of theirs, Luke 23.34. Acts 7.60. 8. To bless the
Lord, if he has let any of us see the foulness of this sin, and brought us out
of it, 1 Timothy 1.13. 9. To glorify God in behalf of others, Gal. 1.23, 24. 10.
To love the Lord Jesus, that has discovered the evil of this sin to us here.

Ver. 45. Then shall he answer them, saying, Verily I say unto you, In as much
as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me
Doct. XXXIX. is this, That the Lord Jesus at the last Day, will fully stop the
mouths of Wicked men, and have the last word, after which they shall speak no
more. This is plain here in the Text.
Reasons. 1. From Himself. 2. From the Wicked. 3. From the Sentence passed.

From Himself. 1. From his Wisdom and Knowledge, Col. 2.3. Jude 25. they are
not able to grapple with him; he will easily Nonplus and silence them, that
they shall not have a word to speak after him. 2. From his Majesty and Glory;
his words will daunt them and confound the m^ Look as the words of Kings have
power going a long with them, Eccles. 8.4. so his words much more. 3. From the
Rightness and Integrity of his words, Prove. 8.6, 7, 8. and right words are of
great force: How forcible are ^right words when men speak them? Job 6.25. much
more his right words, which he will speak at that day. 4. From his Throne of
Judgment that he sits upon, Prove. 20.8. A King sitting on the Throne of
Judgment, scatters away all evil with his eyes: so does this King much more.
5. From that in Prove. 16 10. A Divine Sentence (says Solomon) is in the lips
of the King; his mouth transgresses not in judgment: And if so, then surely
this Kings mouth transgresses not in Judgment: and such a mouth speaking to
them, must needs stop all their mouths. 6. From the End of his Coming to
Judgment, which is a through Conviction of all ungodly men, Jude ver. 14, 15.
7. From his power in his Ordinances, Matthew. 22.11, 12.

2. From the Wicked. 1. From the feebleness of their pleas: weak Arguments and
pleas are easily overturned; and such will be theirs at that day. So the Text.
2. From their Consciences, which will be their Accusers, and Witnesses against
them, and Condemn them, for if their Consciences do all this sometimes here,
much more at that day, 1 John 3.20 Romans 2.15, 16. 3. From the guilt that is
upon them: for guilt will stop any man's mouth. A guilty Malefactor has nothing
to say for himself: so here, Romans 3 19. 4. From the Terror and fear that then
will be upon them, 2 Cor. 5.10, 11. now fear will stop any man's mouth. 5. From
the shame that will then be upon them, Dan. 12.2. and that will stop their
mouths. 6. From the contempt that will be then upon them, ibid. and when a
man's person is contemned here, he will have little list to speak.

3. From the Sentence passed. 1. It is Righteous, Acts 17.31. 2. It is
Irrevocable, and cannot be reversed; much more Irreversible then that of the
Persian Kings, Esth. 8.8. 3. It is that that cannot be found fault with, Rev.
22.12. 4. It is fair and open before all, that the Equity of it may be
discerned: so the Text. 5. It is unanswerable, Job 9.3. and backed with strong
Reason.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see how miserably wicked men will be foiled and
worsted, in all that they thought would stand them in stead at the great day.
Alas! they shall not have a word to speak for themselves, after the Lord has
spoken to them: as Job says, Job 29.22. After my words they spoke not again.
So, much more will it be at that day. 2. We see what great Confusion of face
will be upon the wicked at that day, in that they shall be Non plus'd, and not
be able to speak for themselves. Men are confounded in their own spirits, when
in a Dispute they are baffled, and mated, and laid upon their backs, and so Non
plus'd, that they have not a word to say: Oh then what shame will this be! 3.
We see that the greatest among wicked men shall not be able to lift up their
faces at that day; as Job says of himself sitting in Judgment, Job 29.9, 10.
so much more will it be when Christ sits in Judgment. 4. We see how vain a
thing it is to devise Arguments to dispute against Christ at that day; for he
will be sure to have the last word, and put to silence all that oppose him,
Isai. 45.9. 5. We see the bottomless depth of the Wisdom and Knowledge that is
in Christ Jesus, that will be able to foil the whole World at that day. 6. We
see what need we all had to take words to our selves in a way of Confession,
and Humiliation, and Repentance, Ho^. 14.2. forotherwise we shall want words to
speak for our selves at the great d^y. 7. We see what an amazing day the day of
Judgment will be to Reprobates, in that their mout^es will then be stopped 8.
We see how dreadful their condition will be, that have opened their mouths
against Heaven, and the God of Heaven; for if others shall have their mouths
stopped, that have only omitted some Duties, and have not been so vile in
Commissions; Oh how will their mouths be stopped, that have opened them in
Blasphemy, and all manner of wickedness against the Lord! 9. We see the
greatness of the guilt of wicked men, and ^ow it will stare them in the face at
that day. 10. We see that they that have been so forward to Argue with God, and
to reply against his Righteous Dispensations, Rom 9.20. shall then have nothing
to say again him, or for themselves.

Use 2. for Terror: 1 To all b^^d faced talkers against God, and his Ways,
and Saints. 2. Against all the vain Pleas and Arguments that men think will
bear them out in their Wickedness 3. Against the despisers of Christ and his
Grace now.

Use 3. for Exhortation: 1. To open (1) Our hearts to receive him here, that
our mouths may not be stopped at that day, Psalm 24.7, 9. (2) To open our hands
to his Members. (3) To open our houses to them. (4) To open the Prison doors,
and look in to them. (5) To open our wardrobes to his naked ones. (6) To open
our bowels to his sick ones. (7) To open our mouths for the Dumb Prove. 31.8.
(8) To open Heaven doors by our Prayers. 2. To beware of speaking a word
against Christ here. 3. To let Christ's word take place here 4. To repent of our
too bold speeches against him, Job 42.3-6. 5. To speak all we can against our
sins here. 6. To beware of having a thought that our Words and pleas shall be
heard then, if we be wicked. ^. To inst^^y the Lord in all he says and does to
us here, Lam 1.18. for we shall do it then. 8. To take heed of wickedness, for
it will stop their mouths that are given to it, at that Day.

Ver. 45. Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these, etc.
Doct. XL. is this, That Christ will in the Day of Judgment assure all such as
have not shown mercy to his Members in their Necessities, that they have
neglected and disregarded Him.
For opening of which, let me show, 1. How it does appear that they have
Neglected him, in not showing mercy to them. 2. Why he accounts it so, and will
assure them that so it is. 3. The Uses.

For the first, It does appear from hence; 1. In that they are one with Christ,
both by a Conjugal Union, 1 Cor. 6.17. Romans 7.4. and by a Memberly Union, Ephesians
5.30. 1 Cor. 12.27. Coloss. 1.18. and by such an Union as the Branches have
with the Vine. John 15.4, 5. 2. In that they are Fellows to him, Psalm. 45.7. 3.
In that they are his Friends, Luke 12.4. John 15. 4. In that they are his
Brethren: so the Text; John 20.17. Heb. 2.11, 12. 5. In that they are his
Children, Heb. 2.13. 6. In that they are his Delight, Cant. 2.14. and his
Desire, Cant. 7.10. 7 In that they are his peculiar Treasure, Psalm. 135.4. and
Titus 2.14. and Malac. 3.17. 8. In that they are his Fullness, Ephesians. 1.23. He
does not count himself full without them. 9. In that they are his Glory, 2 Cor.
8.23. 10. In that they are his First Fruits, Jam. 1.18. which of all Fruits are
most grateful. 11. In that they are his Inheritance, Deuteronomy. 32.9. Micah 7.18.
Now these being neglected, that are so near, and dear, and precious to him, it
evidently appears that the Lord Jesus is neglected in them.

Reasons, why it must needs be that he accounts himself neglected in the
neglect of them.

1. From himself. 2. From them.

From himself. 1. He is full of Compassion toward them, having the Bowels of
many Relations in him, being Fellow, Friend, Brother, Husband, Father; and the
Compassions of these are full and large: much more are his. 2. He beholds them
in their Afflictons; and the eye affects the heart in men, Lam. 3.51. Oh how
does Christ's eye then affect his heart! Matthew. 14.14. and 15.32. 3. He is the
Comforter of his People, John 14.18. and cannot leave them Orphans, and
Comfortless: and therefore when men do not Relieve and Comfort them, it must
needs be that they do it not to him. 4. He is their Lord and Master, and
therefore cannot but take the neglect of them as to himself.

2. From them. 1. They are of his Counsel, John 15.15. 2. They are his Loyal
Subjects, Revelat. 1^.3. 3. They are Kings and Princes of his ^^aking, Rev 1.5,
6. 4. They are his Fathers Blessed ones: so the T^xt. 5. They are joynt-Heirs
with him, Romans 8.17. 6. They are to be with him for ever, 1 Thessalonians 4.17. and
therefore to neglect these, must needs be taken as a neglect of him.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see then that the neglect of Christ's Members is
not so slight a matter as men make account of; for it will appear otherwise at
the last day, when Christ shall tell them that himself was neglected in them.
2. We see that O^issions of Duties are sins that reach Christ himself; and, He
that sins against him, wrongeth his own soul, Prove. 8.36. 3. We see that
wicked men at the last day must not construe and expound their own misdoings;
but Christ well make Construction, and give his Expolition and Interpretation
of them. 4. We see how dangerous it is to forget to show mercy to the Saints
in their Necessity: such men forget Christ himself. 5. We see that merciless
men never make ^ccount to find mercy from Christ, for they will slew him none
in his Members, Janes 2.13. 6. We see how deeply they strike at Christ, that
are destroyers of the Bodies of his Saints, for, if they that relieve them not,
do it not to Christ himself; what do those to Christ, that Murder them by
hundred, and thousands? Psalm. 44.22. 7. We see that if Christ make such an
interpretation of those that are not merciful to their Bodies; Oh how much more
will he put such a Construction upon men's actions, that are cruel to their
Souls! Ezekiel. 34. 8. We see the wonderful Patience and Long-su^^ering of Christ
to wicked men, that so neglect and disregard him, Rom 9.22. 9. We see the
misery of wicked men, in that their Offenses are against him that they most
stand in need of to be their Friend. 10. We see that we had better to give to
twenty that are naught, then to deny one of Christ's Members: for in so doing,
we deny to give to Christ himself. 11. We see how formidable and dreadful it
will be to hear this, Ye did it not to me. 12. We see that Jesus Christ is ill
requited by evil men for all his mercy, for he cannot have mercy showed in his
Members to him.

Use 2. for Terror: 1. To those that Relieve not the Saints; thou think
that thou only relievest not a man, but Christ will tell thee another thing at
the great day, 2. To those that sake what they have from them by Oppression, by
Defrauding, etc. Oh what an Interpretation will Christ put upon this at that
day!

Use 3. for Exhortation: 1. To wicked men. 2. To the Saints.

To wicked men. 1. To tremble to think of the misery that is coming upon them.
2. To be wise before hand, to know what they shall hear at that day. 3. To
Repent of their Unmercifulness to Christ in his Members, to prevent this evil.
4. To deny none that need, lest they deny Christ himself.

2. To the Saints 1. To bear quietly and patiently men's Unki^dnesses, for
Christ takes them as done to himself. 2. To Pity and Pray for such men, that
they may become more Merciful. 3. To be far from envying of them. 4. To be
far from wishing any evil to them, for there is evil enough coming upon them.
5. To deny none that are poor our selves, lest we be unkind to Christ also. 6.
To mourn if we have been formerly unkind to Christ in them.

Use 4. for Consclation: 1. Against men's Unkindnesses, they are not so much to
us, as to Christ himself. 2. Against the Wickeds Prosperity here. 3. Against
the Ravening of Oppressors, that devour and swallow up the poor. 4. Against
outward Persecutions.

Ver. 45. Inasmuch as ye did it nt to one of the least of these, etc.
Doct XLI. is this, That the least of Christ's Saints and Members, are not to be
neglected and disregar^ed in their Afflictions and Necessities, for Christ
takes himself as neglected and disregarded in them, and win make it appear to
the wicked at the last day.
For opening of which, let me show, 1. Who these Least are that he speaks of.
2. Why they are not to be neglected and disregarded. 3. Why he will take
himself to be neglected and disregarded in any one of them. 4. The Uses.

For the first: By these least of Christ's Members, we are to understand, 1.
Those that are the least in age, the youngest of those that are his Members,
Mat. 18.10. 2. Those that are the n^eanest and pootest of them, for they are
counted among the least of them. 3. Those that are least in worth, either in
their own or others esteem, Genesis 32.18. 1 Sem. 15.17. 4. Those of them that are
of lowest degree and rank among them, they are reckoned as the least. 5. Those
that are least reckoned of, and most despised among men. 6. Those that are
least looked and sought after; and cared for, Jer. 30.^7.

Quest. 2. Why are they not to be neglected and disregarded in their
Afflictions and Ne^essities?

Answ. 1. They have had the same Price paid for their Ramone that others have,
1 Timothy 2.5, 6. 2. They are Christ's Members and Brethren as well as others: so
the Text. Christ calls poor Fishermen his Brethren, John 20.17. Heb. 2.11. 3.
They are Partakers of the Divine Nature, as well as others, 2 Pet. 1.4. 4. They
are Christians as well as others, and made Kings and Priests, Rev. 1.5, 6. and
5.10. 1 Pet. 2.9. Psalm. 45.16. 5. They are Heirs of the Kingdom, James 2.5.
Luke 12.32. 6. They have a blessed Guard about them, Mat. 18.10. 7. They are
the Lords Called and Chosen ones, as well as others, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 28. 8.
They are such as the Lord counts the world unworthy of, Hebrews 11.38. 9. They
are the Deliverers of the places that they live in, Eccles. 9.14, 15. 10. They
are the Lords excellent ones, as well as others, Psalm 16.3. Now these having
all this Honor put upon them, it is evident that they are not to be neglected
in their Necessities.

Quest. 3. Why wi^^ Christ take himself as neglected, in the neglect of one of
these?

Answ. 1. Because every one of these, helps to make up the Body of Christ, 1
Cor. 12.27. 2. Because as in the Natural Body, the Head cannot say to the Foot,
I have no need of thee, 1 Cor. 12.21. So here. 3. Because every Saint receives
Influence and Nourishment from Christ, Ephesians. 4.16. 4. Because every Saint is
knit to Christ, Coless. 2.19. 5. Because every Saint, yea the least and meanest
is an ornament and support to the Body; as the little Finger, the little Toe in
the Natural Body: so here. 6. Because the least and most feeble Members in the
Body are much more necess^ry, 1 Cor. 12.22.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see what necessity there is that every Saint be
pitied and tendered, for not one of these is to be neglected, Mat. 5.42. Luke
6.30. 2. We see that the meanest and poorest Saints, which the men of the world
look not after, are in highesteem with Christ, for ^e says, Inas^uch as ye did
it not to one of the least. etc. 3. We see that when poor fatherless Children
are neglected, not cared for, not provided for in their neceilities, the Lord
Jesus is neglected and is a surferer in them. 4. We see how great the
Condemnation of the world will be, that are so far from relieving every one of
the least of Saints, that they su^fer many to die for want of that relief that
they might minister to them, and no way hurt their estates by it. 5. We see
that the least of Saints, and those that are most despised of men, have one
friend that they may safely trust in, though it may be they cannot say they
have any friend to care for them in the world besides. 6 We see that if the
least of the Saints be not to be neglected, but Christ takes it as if himself
be neglected in them; Oh how will he charge it upon them that have neglected
them, that they have owed themselves unto, Philem. 9.19. 7. We see that great
is the price that Christ sets upon his least Saints. 8. We see that the lowest
condition, and most despised in this world, is no stop or bar to Christ's love
to his people: His love is great to the least of his. 9. We see that one of
Christ's Brethren, yea one of the least of them, is of more worth with Christ
Jesus, then all the wicked men in the world. 10. We see a reason why God gives
wealth to wicked men, that he may condemn them the more justly for not
relieving his least and meanest Members, Eccles. 5.13. 11. We see that wicked
men will damn themselves for a small matter. 12. We see how execrable and
detestable the Sin of Coretousness should be to us, Psalm. 10.3.

Use 2. for Terror: 1. To all those that rob the fatherless of their Right,
Prove. 23.10, 11. 2. To those that provide not for them; they do it not to
Christ. 3. To those that despise the poor, and minister not to them. 4. To
those that are of a covetous spirit.

Use 3. for Exhortation: 1. To Wicked men. 2. To Christ's least and despised
ones.

To Wicked men. 1. To see their sin, in despising and neglecting Christ's
poorest and meanest ones, to prevent this Judgment, if it may be. 2. To beware
of thinking lightly and meanly of any of Christ's Members. 3. To tremble at the
Judgment that is coming upon them. 4. To come off to every one of Christ's in a
way of mercy.

2. To these Saints, how little soever. 1. To be content with their condition,
how mean soever it be, they are dear to Christ. 2. To forgive those that are
unkind to them, for Christ will reckon with them. 3. To take to heart the
indignities that are offered to Christ. 4 To rejoice to think of the day of
Judgment, for then Christ will own them, though men do not now. 5. To walk
weanedly from the world.

Use 4 for Consolation: 1. Against the Saints necessities, and men's hard
heartedness. 2. Against the meanest condition that they are cast into. 3.
Against man's contempt, (...) Christ own us, it is no matter.

Ver. 46. And these shall go away into everlasting punishment: but the
Righteous into life Eternal.
Doct. XLII. is this, That the Sentence of Christ in Condemning the wicked to
Punishment, and in Rewarding his Elect Saints with Happiness, shall be duly
put in execution at the last Day. The Text is full for it.
We will begin first with the Sentence against the Wicked, and afterward handle
the other.

Reasons. 1. From the Sentence it self. 2. From the Persons Sentenced.

From the Sentence it self. 1. It is Irrevocable, and cannot be called back,
and therefore must be put in execution. Judges Sentences on earth are put in
execution: how much more his Sentence, that is Judge of all the earth? Genesis
18.25. 2. It is a deliberate Sentence, and well-grounded? so the Text; it is
not rashly and inconsiderately pronounced, and therefore must stand. 3. It is a
Sentence of Righteousness, pronounced by a righteous Judge, and therefore must
be put in execution, Act. 17.31. 4. It is a determinate Sentence, ibid. Heb.
9.27. and therefore cannot but be put in execution. 5. It is a Sentence that is
passed before the whole World, and therefore must stand. 6. It is a Sentence
passed by Him who is Unchangeable, and that will not alter the thing that is
gone out of his lips, Heb. 13.8. 7. It is a Sentence from Him that is God as
well as Man, and therefore must be put in execution, for he cannot deny
himself. 8. It is an Unerring Sentence, and therefore shall be put in
execution. Other Judges may err in their Sentence, but he cannot. 9. It is an
Impartial Sentence, for all of what ranks and conditions soever are sentenced.

2. From the Persons Sentenced. 1. They are guilty, Romans 3.19. and the Sentence
pronounced upon guilty ones is put in execution. They have deserved this
punishment, Romans 6.23. and therefore must be sure to have it. 2. They cannot be
then pardoned, the date is out; they must have their Pardon here, that get
Pardon. 3. They have no liberty to plead for themselves granted to them, Mat.
7.22, 23. Luke 13.26. having nothing justly to say why they should not be
Condemned, and the Sentence executed. 4. They have some of them looked for it.
Heb. 10.26, 27. 5. They are all Condemned already by the Law. Gal. 3.10. by the
Gospel, John 3.18, 19. in their own Consciences, 1 John 3.20. Tit. 3.11. 6.
They are Ordained of old to Condemnation, Jude ver. 4. appointed to Wrath, 1 Thessalonians. 5.9. and therefore Wrath must be executed upon them, Romans 9.22. 7. They
have passed rash Judgment against the Saints in th^i Censures, as Mat. 11.18,
19. Jam. 3.1. 8. They have some of them put their unjust Sentences against the
Saints in execution: and what wonder then if Christ's Sentence against them be
put in execution?

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see what a dreadful thing it is to be under the
Sentence of Condemnation, for it shall surely be put in execution, there is no
way to escape, 1 These. 5.2. all Pleas will be vain, all Excuses vain, none of
them will take at that day. 2. We see how sure Christ's words will be that he
will pronounce upon the wicked at the great day, they must be accomplished and
put in execution; These shall go away into everlasting punishment. 3. We see
that the Threatenings of Condemnation that the Ministers of the G^^spel
denounce, shall be all made good and fulfilled, for they shall be judged by
those words, John 12.48. and that Judgment must be put in execution. 4 We see
the mischief that sin brings upon men, it does not only cause them to be
Sentenced, but to have the Sentence put in execution against them: Oh how
should we then abhor that which is evil! Rom 12.9. 5. We see that as God
fulfils with his hand what he speaks with his mouth, in a promissory way, 1
Kings 8 24. So he does the like in a Condemning way, 6. We see that wicked men
are out of all hope in the day of Judgment, when the Sentence is once passed,
for it shall be put in execution. 7. We see what a pitiful thing it is to come
too late in a way of suing for Grace and Mercy, for there is no place then left
to find any favor. 8. We see what a dreadful thing it is to sin against the
Lord; for he is able to do all that he pronounces against evil men, and will
surely do it: and therefore great cause there is to fear him, Luke 12.5. 9. We
see how vile and abominable they be that scoff at Christ's coming 2 Pet 3.3, 4.
10. We see how detestable they be, that in a Blasphemous way wish God to damn
them; they shall be sure to be Damned, and when the Sentence is passed, to have
it executed.

Use 2. for Terror: 1. To all impenitent wicked persons, they cannot escape
the damnation of Hell; for how should they, when Christ's Sentence must be put
in execution against them. 2. To them that think to excuse themselves at the
last day ^ there is no place left for any excuse then: for, These shall go away
into everlasting punishment. 3. To those that defer their Repentance, and
think their time is before them: Death may come suddenly; and as Death leaves
men, so shall Judgment find them, Prove. 27.1. Heb. 9.27.

Use. 3. for Eubertation: 1. To be speedy and serious in a way of Repentance,
not to defer it, nor to be Idle and Negligent in a business of so great
importance; for if the Sentence be once passed, there is no calling of it in
again, Ezekiel. 33.11. 2. To tremble to sin against Christ, that will put his
Sentence of Condemnation in Execution, Prove. 8.36. 3. To come out of wicked
men's company, and forsake their ways, lest we be wrapped up in the Sentence of
Condemnation with them, and in the execution of it, Prove. 13.20. and 9.18. 4.
To hear the voiceof Christ now in the Gospel, who calls us to Repentance, and
Faith, and Fruits of new Obedience: for if we will not, we must be Sentenced,
and that Sentence must be put into execution, there is no avoiding it, Hebr.
12.25. and 2.1, 2, 3. 5. To mourn that any of us have made such desperate
adventures in refusing to return for so long a time, Christ bewails this, and
therefore we may well do it, Mat. 23.37. Luke 19.41-44. see also Jer. 13.27. 6.
To be thankful if any of us escape the Sentence, and the execution of it; for
there is Millions of men that shall not escape it. 7. To wicked men that
continue such, to look for no favor at that day; for they shall be sure to
find none, for, These shall go away, etc. 8. To Judges, to see to the execution
of their righteous Sentences: for Christ will to his. 9. To us all, to plead
hard now while the day of Grace lasts, and to make improvement of the precious
seasons of Grace; for if we stay till the Sentence be passed, there is no good
to be done, 2 Cor. 6.2. Heb. 3.7. 10. To pity those that go on in their sins;
for if they live and die in them, they leave themselves without all hope, Luke
19.41, 42. Jer. 9.1. 11. To strive to enter in at the strait gate, for many
shall seek to enter in when it is too late, and shall not be able; because the
Sentence must be put into execution, Luke 13.24, 25, 26. Mat. 25.11, 12. 12. To
take heed of sleeping in security, and dreaming of peace, and safety, 1 These.
5.2. for after the Sentence there is no hope but it will be put in execution.
13. To Watch and Pray always, that we may be counted worthy to escape all
those things that shall come to pass at the end of the World, and to stand
before the Son of Man, Luke 21.36. it much concerns us, seeing the Sentence
once passed, must be put in execution. 14. To fear to fall into the hands of
the Lord that will surely put his Sentence into execution, Heb. 10.31.

Ver. 46. But the Righteous into Life Eternal.
The Second Branch of the last Note, is this, That Christ's righteous Sentence
in rewarding the Right us shall be put in execution, for the Righteous shall
go into life Eternal.
Reasons. 1. From the Lord that gives the Sentence. 2. From the Sentence it
self. 3. From the Saints themselves.

From the Lord Jesus.. 1. He has purchased Eternal life for them, Ephesians. 1.14. 2.
He gives it to them, John 10.27, 28. 3. He has willed, and Prayed for it, John
17.24. 4. He has Ordained them to it, Act. 13.48. 5. He has given them a pledge
of it in their peace and joy here, Romans 5.1, 2. 1 Pet. 1.8. 6. He has showed
them the way to it, John 14.6. 7. He has promised it, 1 Ioh. 2.28. 8. He has
witnessed to it among the other witnesses. 1 John 5.6, 7, 8, 11. 9. He has
sealed them to it, 2 Cor. 1.22. Ephesians. 4.30. 10. He keeps us by his power through
Faith to it, 1 Pet. 1.5. 11. He cannot call back his word no more in a gracious
way, then in a threatening way, Isa. 31.2. 12. He has taken possession of it for
them, Heb. 6.20.

2. From the Sentence it self. 1. It is a true Sentence, and therefore must be
put in execution, for he is true, Rev. 3.11 2. It is a gracious Sentence: what
grace like his in this Sentence? 3. It is a Sentence from Counsel; and his
Counsel shall stand, Isa. 46.10. 4. It is a Sentence according to his good
pleasure, and he will do all his will, ibid. 5. It is a righteous Sentence, and
he will put that into execution, 2 Timothy 4.8. 6. It is a definitive Sentence,
and therefore must stand, he will never pass other. 7. It is a Sentence that
tends to the glory of his Name, and therefore will surely be put in execution.

3. From the Saints. 1. They are the Fathers blessed ones, and therefore the
Sentence must be put in execution; they must go into Life Eternal. 2. They have
brought forth the fruits of Faith: so the Text: and they shall receive the
fruit of their Faith, 1 Pet. 1.9. 3. They are Christ's sheep, and therefore must
be all folded up in glory: so the Text. 4. They love Christ's appearing, 2 Timothy
4.8. 5. They shall never perish, John 10.28. 6. They shall never be plucked out
of his or his Fathers hand, John 10.28, 29. 7. They have gone in the way that
leads to life, Mat. 7.13, 14 8. They have fought a good fight, finished their
course, and kept the Faith, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. 9. They are called and justified,
and therefore shall be glorified, Romans 8.30. 10. They have the earnest of it,
Ephesians. 1.14.

Use 1. for Information: 1. We see what a good Master we serve, who through his
Grace and Mercy gives a great Reward for a little work: How little is it that
we do for him! yet we see his Reward is great, for he gives Eternal life
through his Grace to us. 2. We see that we need never repeat of what we have
done for Christ in his Saints; for Eternal life will more then make amends for
it, if we had done ten thousand times more then we have done. 3. We see that
when Christ once acquits us, and counts us Righteous, we need never doubt of
partaking in life Eternal: if we make the former sure, the latter will be sure
to us. 4. We see what a blessed thing it is to have the Sentence of Absolution
pronounced upon us, for such as so have, shall go into life Eternal. 5. We see
how desirable the day of Judgment should be to all the Saints, for after the
ending of it, the Righteous shall go into life Eternal. How should we long then
for that day. Rev. 22.20. and love his appearing, 2 Timothy 4.8. 6. We see what a
mavelous difference the Lord makes between the Righteous and the Wicked, in
that these that are wicked go away into everlasting punishment, but the
Righteous into life Eternal. 7. We see what thanks the Saints should give to
the Lord here, for the hope they have of this great Reward of Eternal life, and
what thanks they will give hereafter to him, when they come to the possession
of it: They may well give thanks to him for ever for life Eternal; what should
they he thankful to him for, if not for this? 8. We see how unwearied we should
be in serving him and how we should think that we can never do enough for him,
that puts us into the state of eternal life, Gal. 6.9. 9. We see what sure work
we should make for our Souls, 2 Pet. 1.10. Phil. 2.12. for life Eternal is
worth the having, Heb. 4.1. 10. We see what a sweet condition the Elect Saints
shall enjoy in another world. We make account that this life is sweet: what
then is life Eternal? 11. We see how perpetual and durable the estate of the
Saints shall be in Glory, it shall never have an end, for the Righteous shall
go into life Eternal: there will be no period put to their Happiness, but when
they have enjoyed it never so long, many thousands of years, their happy
Condition shall so continue to all Eternity. It is such a flourishing
comfortable estate, that it never fades, 1 Pet. 1.4. Psalm. 16.11. 12. We see
the miserable condition of those that look after other things in the world, and
let go their hold of Eternal life: Oh what a pitiful bargain do such make!
Matthew. 16.26.

Use 2. for Terror: 1. To those that miss of the Reward of Eternal life, they
sustain the greatest loss in the world. Had a man all things about him that his
heart could desire here, if he did not enjoy a healthful comfortable life
withal, what would those things do for him? Oh, but for men to lose this Life
we speak of, what an unparalleled loss is it? 2. To those that hate the People
of God, they will with themselves in their estate one day, when they shall see
them possessed of life eternal. 3. To those that thought they ^ad hope of this
Eternal life, but their hope has failed them; this will be the greatest of
their misery, when they shall see others hare in it, and themselves thrust out,
Luke 13.23.

Use 3. for Examination: Whether we are of the number of those that mal go into
life Eternal. It concerns us to examine this, because if we be mistaken here,
we are undone for ever: it is the greatest mistake in the world; better to be
deceived in any thing, then in this.

Quest How shall we know that we are not mistaken, but sha^ certainly go into
Life Eternal?

Ans. 1. If we be of the number of Christ's Sheep, hear his voice, and follow
him, John 10.27, 28 Heb. 5.9. 2. If we be unwearied in well doing, and he
constant to him, Gal 6.9. Rev. 2.10. Romans 2.7. 3. If we seek the things that
are above, Coloss 3.1, 2, 4. 4. If we make sure of our Adoption, Heb. 2.10. Rom
8.17. 1 John 3.2. 5. If we endeavor to puri^ie our selves according to the
Pattern of Purity, 1 John 3.3. 6. If we be of a merciful Spirit to Christ in
his Members: so the Text. 7. If we walk uprightly, Isa. 57.2. Psalm 37.37. 8. If
we look to our Union with Christ in Effectual Calling, 2 Pet. 1.10, 11. John
17.2. 9. If we Watch and Pray always, Luke 21.36. 10. If we look to our Vessel
oil, as well as to our Lamp-oyl, Mat. 25.11. 11. If we improve our Talents
well, Mat. 25.21, 22. 12. If we labor hard about it, Heb. ^.11 Phil 2.12. 2
Pet. 1.10, 11. 13. If we l^y up for our selves a good Foundation by the fruits
of our Faith, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19. 14. If we fight the good fight of Faith, 1 Timothy 6.12. against the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, 1 Pet. 5.8, 9. 1 John
5.4, 5. Gal. 2.20. Rom 7.23. 15. If we be so happy as to be instruments of the
Conversion and Salvation of others, especially if we make it our great business
so to do, Dan. 12.3. Prove. 11.31. 16. If we attend upon the Ordinances, Prove.
8.34, 35. 17. If we be Righteous, and in a justified estate, which we may know
(1) By our peace and joy, Romans 5.1. 1 Pet. 5.8. (2) By our Communion with the
Lord, Heb. 11.5, 6. with Ge^ 5.22. 1 John 1.3. (3) By our good Works Jam 2. as
in A^raham and Rahab. (4) B^ our upright walking Isa 57.1, 2. (5) By our Looks
and Expectations, Heb. 11.^0. (6) By our living by Faith, Hab. 2.4. with Gal.
3.11, 12. (7) By our Sanctification, 1 Cor. 6.11. (8) By our Perseverance Prove.
10.25. Job 17.9. (9) By our increase in strength, Job 17.9. (10) By our
flourishing condition, Psalm. 92.12, 13. (11) By our fruitfulness in old age,
Psalm. 92.14. (12) By our Humility, Luke 18.13, 14.

Use 4. for Exhortation: 1. To be thankful to him that has Called us to this
happy condition, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13, 14. That we that are by Nature children of
wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. and have deserved eternal Death, Romans 6.23. should ever be
made partakers of Eternal Life, the Lord is for ever to be admired, adored, and
magnified for it. 2. To love the Lord Jesus, that has Purchased and Procured
Eternal life for us: Who should we love, if not him? 1 Cor 16.22. If any were
instrumental to save our life which is temporal, we would love him, and think
our selves bound so to do: Oh how then should we love the Lord Jesus, the
Author of Eternal life to us! 3. To live to him, and not to our selves, 2 Cor.
5.15. Who should we live to, if not to him who gives Eternal life to us? That
little time we have to live, is all too little for him: if we could live a
thousand years twice told, it were all to be given to him. 4. To be willing to
die for him, if he call us to suffer death for his sake, Acts 20.24. and 21.13.
If we had as many lives as hairs on our heads, he deserves them all. Those
noble Spirits, the Martyrs in former and later times, judged thus, and loved
not their lives to the death, Rev. 12.11. and so should we. 5. To bring as many
as we can to be partakers of Eternal life with us. It should be a trouble to us
to see any perish. We would not willingly see a Beast perish, but would help it
wh^t we could, and lift it out of its perishing condition: Oh how much more
should we do it to a Man, to any Man, especially to one that professes to be a
Christian, as we do, John 1.41, 45. and 4.8, 29. Luke 32.32. Cain churlishly
asked if he were his Brothers keeper? Genesis 4.9. but we must all labor to be
keepers one of another, and to do what we can to bring them to Eternal life;
and that we may so do, we are to bring them to Christ, for He that has the
Son, has life and he that has not the Son has not life, 1 John 5.12. 6. To
be very cheerful in all our sufferings; for what are those to Eternal life?
Rom: 8.18. 2 Cor: 4.17. What Is a little Persecution to Eternal life? What Is a
slanderous and false Tongue, and the burden of it, to Eternal life? What Is a
Scoff, a Scorn a Reproach, an hard Censure, a wound in the Name, a Loss in the
Estate, compared with Eternal Life? What Is the Prison, Stocks, Scourging,
Buffetting, to Eternal Life, as the Reward set before us? Let these things
therefore be cheerfully gone away with, they are not worth the naming, when
Eternal Life is mentioned. 7. To long for the time of our enjoyment of it,
Cant. 8.14. Rev. 22.26. Oh who would not give wings to his desires, and hasten
after Eternal life? What haste do some men make to get Riches? Prove. 23.4, 5.
they will fly in their desires after them, and sometimes make more haste then
good speed: for Prove. 28.20. He that makes haste to be rich, shall not be
innocent. What haste do men make in their desires after Honor? How did Haman
(when he had too much of it) still pursue it more and more? Esth. 6. and so do
many now that are of his Spirit, as if they should never overtake it, or have
enough of it. What haste do men make after the Lusts and Pleasures of this
Life, look out after them, and take care about them, and make provision for
them? There are (2 Timothy 3.4) that will have their Pleasures, though they lose
God, and Christ, and Soul and all, so eagerly are they set upon them: Oh how
should we then haste in our desires after Eternal Life! 2 Pet. 3.12. 8. To be
weaned from the World, and have our eyes, and looks, and hearts upon Eternal
Life, 2 Cor. 4.18. Heb. 11.9, 10, 13-16. So had the Patriarchs, Prophets and
Apostles, and so should we. Kites look downward, but Eagles look upward.
Carrion Crows are much upon the Earth, but Doves fly high toward Heaven: So do
Eagle and Dove-like Christians, Col. 3.1. Phil. 3.20. 9. To wait patiently for
it, Romans 8.23, 24, 25. If Eternal Life come at last, all will be well: If after
much Work, and Labor, and Suffering; if after many Conflicts, Combats,
Afflictions, Fears, Tremblings, Tears, Temptations, it come, happy they that
come to it. If after To^ings with Tempest, Waves, breaking Billows,
Water-spouts, Rocks, Shelves, Sands, we come at last to the Haven; Blessed men
that ever we were bornd Wait we therefore for it, Heb. 10.36, 37. 10. To
Meditate much upon this blessed Reward, and be much in holy Contemplation of
it: as the Lord spoke to Abraham, Genesis 13.17. that he should walk in the
length, and in the treadth of the Land of Canaan, that he might be comforted in
the Faithfulness of God to him and his seed; so should we by sweet Meditation
and Contemplation walk (as it were) in the length and breadth of the Heavenly
Country typed out by Canaan, where we shall enjoy this Happiness of Eternal
Life. 11. To fear lest we should fall short of it, Heb. 4.1. for who would not
be very loath to miss of Eternal Life? Now this holy fear will be a means to
prevent our missing of it: They who never fear the losing of it, shall never
make sure of it. 12. To study to enter into it, Heb. 4.11. it will be worth all
our study. Men study how to get the World, and plot and forecast devices how
they may compass and bring about their ends that they aim at in other matters;
but we can no way better improve our times and studies, then in this thing, to
make sure that we shall inherit Eternal Life. 13. To fit our selves for this
blessed condition. Q. How? Ans. (1) Begin it here in Grace, which is of an
Eternal Nature, John 4.13, 14. (2) Make sure of Christ, that he is ours: for
then we have Eternal Life, 1 John 5.11, 12, 20. (3) Be in a continual
Expectation of Christ's Coming, Heb. 9.28. (4) Rejoice in hope of it, Romans 5.2.
and 12.12. (5) Keep our selves in the love of God, Jude ver. 20, 21. (6) Be
lively Christians, Rev. 3.4. (7) Beware of defiling our Garments, ibid. (8) Be
Watchful, Mat. 24.42. Mark 13.37. (9) Be willing to Suffer, 1 Pet. 5.10. (10)
Keep up holy Communion, Jude ver. 20, 21.

Use 5. for Consolation: 1. In a Negative way. 2. In a Positive.

In a Negative way. 1. Against the shortness of our lives here: Some live but a
little while, die very young; and others that live longer, live but a while;
and they that live longest, enjoy but a span, or hand breadth, Psalm. 39.5. 1 Chronicles. 29.15. But for this short life here, we shall have Eternal Life in
another world. 2. Against the various outward Afflictions that we meet with
here: we may rejoice in the midst of them all, while we fix our eyes and hearts
upon that great Reward of Eternal Life. Romans 8.18. 3. Against the multitude of
inward Temptations that we often conflict with, which sometimes are
intolerable; for, A wounded Spirit who can bear? Prove. 18.14. But even these
also may be the better born, if we look at Eternal Life, which after all we
shall be made partakers of. 4. Against the malicious Attempts of Satan, to
deprive us of our part in Eternal Life; he shall never be able to do it: Though
he may oppose our Faith, and plant his chief Batteries against that, Luke
22.31. yet he shall not prevail; for, the Righteous shall go away into Life
Eternal.

In a Positive way it is Comfort likewise: 1. When life is taken away for
Christ's sake, the Saints do not so much lose their Life, as Change it for a
better, for Eternal Life, and that is an happy Change. 2. That our estate in
Glory will be a mavelous Comfortable estate; for it is an happy enjoyment of
Eternal Life. Some Comfort there is in life here, but we know not how great
that is, that is reserved there in Heaven, when we shall share in Life Eternal.
3. That we can never lose our happy condition in another world, for it is such
a Life as is Eternal, John 16.22. 4. That all our Labor about this shall be
well Recompensed. Other men may lose their labor, go away and get nothing; but
the Righteous shall have a sure Reward, for they shall go into Life Eternal.

The End.

