Several Remarkable Passages CONCERNING THE HOLLANDERS Since the death of
QUEEN ELIZABETH, Until the 25th of December, 1673.

SOME ANIMADVERSIONS THEREUPON, In answer to a scandulous Pamphlett called
Englands Appeal to the Parliament, from the Private Caball at white hall.

With the Continuation of the Case between SR. WILLIAM COVRTEN His Heirs and
Assigns AND The East India Company of the Netherlands, Faithfully recollected
by E. W. Armig: and rendered into English, French, and Dutch, for satisfaction
of his particular Friends, in England, France, and the Low Countriers.

Printed in the year 1673.

ANAGRAM Upon the Private Caball as white hall as it was delivered to the
States of Holland.
C lifford Lord high Treasurer of England, A shley Lord great Chancellor of
England, B uckingham Master of the Horse, A rlington Principal Secretary of
State, L autherdaile Chief Minister of State and Commissioner in Scotland.
ADVERTISMENT.
SIR:
SOme part of this little Book was Printed in Holland, and the other part in
the Spanish Netherlands, where the English Coppie was not understood by the
Printers, who have committed many faults, which may be plainly discovered, and
amended with a pen, The French, and Dutch, are better done, please to take
notice, that this is not published, or sold in any place, or designed to any
other purpose, then for particular Friends, who may find some thing in vacant
Hours, either for their Information, Reprehension, or Diversion. And that I
cannot appear at this time, and distance, under any other Carracter.

Then your distressed and humble Servent G. C.
Hague the 29 December, 1673. old Style.
TO THE NOBILITY, GENTRY, AND COMMONS, Inhabiting within the Counties of
Suffolk, Norfolk, Lincoln, York, and Northumberland.
THRICE HONORABLE. RIGHT WORP.ll etc.
I Intended to have given you some short remarques upon England, Germany,
France, Spain, and the Low Countries, since the first Alliances were
contracted between the Houses of Bourgundy, Austria, and Spain; But fearing
it might be unseasonable at this time, to mention the troubles, that followed
those Alliances, coming in with the inventions of printing and (...); The two
great Manufactures that have filled the world so full of Combustible matter.

I have confined my self to the beginning of King James his most peaceable
reign, over Great Brittaigne, annexing only a Cattalogue of the respective
Successions of Emperors, and Kings of England, France, and Spain, with their
several Marriages, since that Alliance, as also such other observations from
thence, which are sufficient to inform you, that now there is the same
opertunity, to make (...) selves happy, that (...) Enemies, had to make you
miserable, if the strattegems and designs, of some Evil minded men, do not
obstruct that Glorious enterprise, begun by His Majesty, to Chastize and humble
the Hollanders, that have lived ^oo many years upon the spoils of all
Nations, and raised their Chiefest support and ^^couragments, from your Coasts,
and Countries. Please to peruse this (...) without Passion or prejudice, and I
shall the next year supply you with a greater, wherein you may understand your
own errors, and (...) own interest, and that I am in plain English, a lover
of my Country, and yo^^ most humble

And devoated Serve.t E. W.
From my lodgings in the Hague December. 15. 1673.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE S.R WILLIAM HOOKER Lord Major of the City of London,
And THE RIGHT WOSHIPFULL Sr. HENERY TULSE, AND Sr. ROBERT JEFFERIES, Shreifs of
the said City, And the rest of the Aldermen, and Common Council there.
Right Honorable, and Right Worp.ll
HAving lately perused a scandulous Pamphlett, publicly sold in the Hague,
both in English and Dutch, reflecting upon the Councills and Actions of Kings,
and Princes, Entitled Englands Appeal, from the private Caball at white hall,
to the great Council of the Nation, The Lords and Commons in Parliament
Assembled. I perceived the Hollanders under a disguise, and the Authors of it,
to be as much mistaken in their accounts, concerning France, as they are of the
consequences of this war, and how the war begun, from whence they would
conclude that the Kings Ministers had dependences upon Foreign Courts, having
taken noe care of the Triple League, or the Protestant interest, wherefore I
briefly recollected these few Remarkable Passages, that may serve to vndeceive
some English men, who peradventure might be deluded by the appeal, and annexed
Sir William Courtens Cases, in several languages, to satisfy all Persons
interessed, that Common Justice is not to be found in the Low Countries. I
presume that your Lord.^p and the rest of your Brethren in the Honorable
Government, of the City of London, upon perusal of this small treatise, will
apprehend that the Hollanders, are not so high and mighty, as they are
insolent, and ungrateful. There are several fair prospects now from the
Netherlands (where nature is supported by art) toward London, that may make it
the most glorious City in the world. These short remarques, and
Animadversions, may help to refress your memory, in many things, and show you
in several Paragraphes that the Hollanders have gotten ground upon the
English, since the death of Queen Elizebeth, Notwithstanding all the
advantages, that God and Nature have given to Great Brittaigne, above all other
Kingdoms, and Nations, in the World. I leave the rest to your most grave, and
serious considerations and remain

Your very humble Serve.t E. W.
Hague December. 16. 1673.
Several Remarckable Passages concerning the Hollanders Since the death of
Queen Elizebeth until the 25. December. 1673.
With some Animadversions thereupon.
IN the year 1603. The States General of the united Netherlands write to King
James in a Kanting style, lamenting the death of Queen Eliz^beth; Insinuated
that her memory should remain Eternized in them and their posterity.
Congratulating his Majesty in the succession of her Kingdoms, hoped he would
continnue the like gracious aid and bountiful assistance to them and their
state for his own good and welfare of all Christendom, to the glory of God
and propogation of his holy word; And to that end craved a supply of Soldiers
to fill up the English and Scotch Regiments.

In the year 1604. King James considering how the affairs of State stood in
Europe, found it could be noe advantage to the Crown of England to enter into
a league with the Hollanders that were at strife with all their neighbors; His
Majesty made a peace with Spain, and remained neutrall in a common Amity to
both, yet at the same time demanded the money lent by Queen Elizebeth upon the
coutionary towns Which the Hollanders were not ready to pay in many years
after.

In the year 1605. The people in the Maritine Provinces of Holland, Zeland,
and Frizland, were so invective against King James pretending he favored
popery by making a peace with Spain, that notwithstanding the States General
had in that year set forth an Edict and Proclamation under great penalties and
punishments against all those that should speak ^rreverently of Kings and
Princes Especially of King James. Yet they could not bri^le their tongues. The
vulgar crying out, that those who were not for them, were against them.

In the year 1608. Sir R^^^ Winnwood, and Sir Richard Spencer adjus^ed the
accounts with the States General, and took further security of the States of
Holland for payment of the money due to King James* upon the cautionary towns
which amounted unto the (...) of 8184^8. Pound Sterling to be reimbursed to the
crown by several (...) payments. The States (...) all finding that (...) (...)
(...).

In the year ^^^^. King (...), and King (...) the IV of France being Me^^^^urs
for a peace between Spain and the United Prownces of the Netherlands, they
preva^led with both parties for a Coll^tion of Arms and a T^u^e for twelve
years, which was agreed should commence from the year 160^. whereby the
States General were acknowledged to be free countries, and had licenses
g^anted to trade unto the East Indies, where they had made some adventures
before without permission, and both the Mediators became guarantees for the
due performance of the Articles of that Truee; Yet the Hollanders being not
contented with that ^reaty imposed upon them as they sa^d by King James* they
entered into a league oftensive and de^en^ive with France, Fearing that King
James might obstruct their free fishing upon the Coast of England and Scotland
W^^^h by the (...) of nature and comm^n P^ b^^ngs to the Subjects of (...)
g^^at B^^^^^^gue.

A^ther the death of Henery the IV. the States General reneued their league
with L^wis the XIII. who took upon him the protection of the United Netherlands
and gave the States General the first title of HAUI^ ET PUISSANIS SEIGNEURS
LES ESTATS GENERAUX DES PRO^INCIES UNIES, and the States of Holland the first
St^le of GRAND ET PUISSAN^S SEIGNEURS LES ESTATS DE HOLLAND ET ^EST-FRIZE, then
those high and m^ghly Lords the States General and the great and mighly Lords
the States of Holland and West-^^^zland, made several resolutions and Acts in
their re^pective assemblies to receive noe Letters from any Prince or State
whatsoever, but whith the same style and address that the French King had done,
and made it known unto all the pub^^que M^n^sters then resident in the Hague
to give their Masters (...)
notice thereof accordingly (...) ver^^^^s the o^^ English proverb set beggars
on (...) back and they (...) ride to the (...).

In the year 1612. King James demanded 300000. pound Sterling of the French
King which was due to the Crown of England for several disbursments for
Henery the IV. and others, then Lowis the XIII. assigned the like sums of
money upon the States General, unto King James who voluntarily acquitted the
States theirof, whereupon the French King (seeing King James so generous)
acquitted twice as much more that was due to him from the States General.
T^^^^ Kindne^^^s are not remembered by the Hollanders and Animad.4.
Zelanders, neither is their ^^gratitude, forgotten by the English and French.

In the year after that King James and the Franch King had relea^ed the States
of those two great ^ummes of money, the High and mighly Lords sent their
Ambassadors to the Grand Seigneur at Constantinople, and to the great Duke of
Mos^ovia with whom they contracted Alliances of Commerce, settled their
Consuls and Factories at Aleppo, Alexandria, grand Cairo, and Smirna, Although
they noe sheep, woods, nor Mines, they would get woole, timber, and other
materials, and people from all parts of the Earth to work, and not be content
any longer with such a trade as they could naturally raise out of their own
Country by butter cheese and hemp, but would nigross all ^ine Manafactures of
silk woole and Mohaire besides their Navigation and Fisheries. Making Animad.5.
their Ch^^^e t^^nes, C^^ies of refuge fortend^r cons^i^n^^s and bandit^s of
a^^ Nations, who are protected there as ^r^e burgers being once admitted as
inhabitants.

In the year 1614. the States General made a Placcate to prohibit all English
Cloth Kersies and dozens that were died in the Cloth to be brought into the
united Provinces upon pa^ne of 25. gilders a Cloth besides the con^i^^ation of
the goods. Whereupon several persons in England made their Complaynt to the
Councell-Table but finding noe redress, the Merchant adventurers and Cloathiers
set upon making of Mixtures died in the woole rather then to lose all
advantages of dying, dressing, and flocks, woolen Cloth before that time being
worn in blacks, blewes, redds and other single colors dyed in the Cloth.
This National affront done Animad.6.
by the H^llonders in th^se days when King James had the Keys of their
Provinces in his Cus^^ly was a sufficient testimony of their insol^ncy and
ingratitude and a fair warning for England to ^ind^r the growth of such
Monsters that had so sone forg^tten Queen Elizebeth and so quickly sughted
King James.

In the year 1616. the Hollanders upon a Composition made concerning the money
lent by Queen Elizeb^th upon the Cautionary towns, prevayled with King James
to deliver up the Briel, Flushing and Rammek^ns after they had been 31. years
in the possession of the English, at which time the French would have given
double the mon^y for their redemption being forfeited to the Crown of England
for breach of Covenants by keeping the money so many years in their own hands
beyond their Contracts and Obligations. (...) not ^^ve (...) so (...) to
England either (...).
(...).

In the y^are 1^19. the States General having fomented the civell w^^s in
Germany, by assisting the cons^derate Princes of the union with their Council
and Arms against the house of Austria, upon preten^e that Hungary (...)
Bohemia were usurped against the peoples consent (and (...) H^^^ditary to the
Austr^an Family) that were (...) Kin^ ^^mes as Poland, and the Empire, the
S^^^^s General incourag^d ^redr^^k Pr^nce Pallatine to accept the (...) of
Boh^^^^, prom^ssing him the^r further assistance, before he had the con^ent of
King Iam^s his father in Law to intreague (...) in that war, yett the
Hollanders suftered him not only to be (...) out of hi^ new King^ome by the
Spanish and Imp^r^^ll Tr^^^^s, but also to be (...) from the Palla^inate his
own inher^tance, who ^l^dd with his Queen and her children to the H^g^e for
shelter, while the pore Prot^^ants in Germany had ^^^rty to b^gg in man^
Churches, and Even all this time the States Genera^^ that promoted the wa^r lay
(...) with their Arms. I^ the (...) and (...) had not a^t^rwards (...) i^to
the bew^^^s of (...)
(...).

In the year 1620 the Holland^rs la^d their bloody designs in the East Indies
where they comm^tted that h^rrid mas^a^re and sp^y^e at Am^^yna under a
pretense that the Eng^^sh Factors combin^d to s^^ze the dut^h Mag^^^nes and
war^ hous^s, whereupon they tor^ured the Merchants an^ murther^d others of the
Engli^h, consi^^a^ed their goods and houses, took away their Is^an^s, and
engrossed the w^^le spice trade at the Mulluc^o^s, contrary to their own (...)
and agreem^nt made with the English Company, pr^^end^ng they were (...) by
^or^e^ure; This ^^g^dy was so execrable that one of the dutch company who
could not digest so much blood and inhumanity writ the true relation of the
Strattagem and sent it over land to the English Factors at Aleppo, who
transmitted it to some Friends at Amsterdam, where it was printed in English
and dutch to the great Amazment of all mankind, then several of the Jews
sold their actions in the East India Company Esteeming their money not safe in
the hands of such a corporation that had drawn so much guilt upon themselves
by their most barberous cruelty, Foundations laid in blood cannot support a
fabric Ani^ad. 9.
^^rg, but the whole structure will sinck under its own burden.

In the year 1621. the truce with Spain being expired the States General
proceeded with their armies into ^landers and Brabant. And in the same year
they Established the West India Company by pattent, who watched for the Spanish
plate fleets, finding it a very profitible war, wherein they could both trade
and fight by the benefitt of English and French Ports, and shelter themselves
for ree^u^tes upon all accidents of wind and weather in English harbors,
without Salvage or To^age, Notwithstanding the Hollanders could not Animad. 10
retall^^^^ the (...) upon their (...) or assist the English with a Caske of
fresh wa^ (...).

In the year 1622. the State^ General p^^^eving that the massacre at Amboyna
had ^^de a (...) in Holland, they putt forth a proclam^tion (...) suppress all
(...) at subject promising rewards to any persons that could discover the
Author of the History, in the m^^^e time th^^r Emba^^adours ^usie^ themselves
at Whit^hall to take off the reproach and in^amy t^a^ ^^y upon Any. ^^ mad. ^^
them in England. Where the S^^yn^s of that blood will never b^ washed out.

The States General during the remaynder of King James his reign held
themselves secure against great Brittaigne (that could ob^^ruct their
Navigation and trade) by the d^versions given to His Majesty concern^^^ his
only Daughter and her children in Bohemia, the Cont^nuall Complaynts of the
Merchants trading to the East Indies, and the divisions and controversies
raised in England and Scotland by the seperat^^ts and Brownists that the
Hollanders had ^^rr^d up by their sed^tious practices and Pamphletts dispersed
in all his Majesty's D^min^on^ against the Government of Church and State.
Whereupon great numbers of people were grown so obstinate and uncharitable in
England, that rather th^n to Communicate with their Parochial Congregations
they, chosed to live in America amongst the Pagans thinking to find a nearer
way to heaven in new England then they were taught in great, Brittaigne, yett
they followed the Hollanders stepps, allowing God Almighty noe share in the
government, their Clergy being putt to pensions, with liberty to trade for
their better subsistence or to adventure their stocks in private men of war.
Seperatists and Annabap^^^^ being fallen from their first principalls, have
craftily learned Animad. 12.
to defend thems^^ves by arms, and like Hollanders and Zeelanders pretend they
may take any thing from the enemies of Christ Jesus.

In the year 1625. King James died and likewise Prince Maurice, then the
States General sent their Ambassadors into England to treat with King Charl^s
the first concerning a league offensive and defensive against Spain, which
they effected and agreed that it should continnue until the Paltzgrave should
be restored and the States General settled, however that for the space of
fifteen years neither party should treat upon any peace or truce without the
consent of both. This treaty being concluded at Southampton was signed the 25.
of November 1625. whereunto the States General annexed their prote^^ation in
these words following viz That if his Majesty should not be satisfied within a
prefixed time concerning the Massacre and spoil of his subjects at Ambo^na
committed by the Hollanders that then his Majesty / might seek satisfaction
by reprisalls or other wise Which notwithstanding the protestation, there was
noe satisfaction or reparation obtained during the reign of King Charles the
frst. As the Hollanders Animad. 13.
could never bring King James into any league, so King Charles could never
b^^ng the States General to any performance.

The next year after the treaty the States General in stead of Equipping out
Shpps against Spain, they send twenty Ships of war to ^^list the French King
at Rochell and the Isle of Ree, to the great oppression of the Protestants in
that Kingdom, where notwithstanding the new Alliance made by the Marriage
between the King of great Brittaigne and H^nri^tta Maria a Daughter of France,
Yett Cardinal R^^hel^^^u contrary to promises and agreements depressed the
Hugonetts at Home, but assisted the Protestant Princes with men and money a
broad, holding it to be the interest of France to keep under any rising party
there, but to encourage and strengthen them in all other places to oppose
Spain and the House of Austria their enemies.

The four entire subsidies given to King Charles the first in Animad. 14.
the beginning of his reign being expended with other moneys toward relief
of Nochell against the forces of France and Holland they both knew the depth of
his Majesty's p^^^se and the strenght of his arms during his time and took
their Meas^res accordingly / knowing that his revenue was not sufficient for
any action to question France or the States General for any s^oyles or
incro^thments upon his Majesty or his subjects whatsoever.

In the year 1630. the King of Spain desirous of a peace with England offered
satisfaction for wrongs and injuries done, then the King of great Brittaigne
acquainted the States General thereof and would have included them in the
treaty at Madrid according to the forementioned agreement, but the States
General upon the first rumor of an overture for peace, entered into a further
league with France, and agreed upon Articles with that Crown to devide the
Spanish Netherlands Equally between the French and the United States, and so
they left the King of England at liberty to do what he pleased with the
Spaniard, the States General refusing a peace with Spain upon any conditions
whatsoever; It was against the interest of Holland and their Religious
concernments to end Animad. 15
the war so long as there were plate fleets and other spoils to be had upon
such easy terms.

During the subsequent tenn years when the King of great Brittaigne was at
peace with France, Spain, the States General, and all the world in a common
Amity with the Crown of England excepting the East- and West India Companyes
of the Netherlands, a rebellion broake out in Ireland, the Scotts invaded
England, and the whole Kingdom divided into Factions, every man driveing on
his own particular interest, neglecting the public, during that long
vacation of Parliaments / while the Hollanders engrossed all manner of
Navigations and traffi^que, sailing Animad. 16.
in light built bottomes to English plantations. The native seamen were then
discouraged, port towns decayed, Clothing towns depopulated, trade
insenceably declyned, and the common people became miserable and pore in the
midst of plenty.

In the Conclusion of those tenn years the Queen Mother and Cardinal
Rich^l^^u being at difference about the slate of affairs in France she left
the Court and went to the Hague in Holland, and there proposed a match between
the Prince of Orrange and the Eldest Daughter of the King of great Brittaigne,
which motion Prince Henry Fredrick, entertained with high Esteem, then the
Queen Mother transported her self for England and effected the Marriage
accordingly. Upon hopes that Alliance might have balanced the Ani^^^. 17.
Cardinals interest with the Bernevelt fa^tion which was Uppermost in all the
States to the great prejudice of the Crown of England.

In the pear 1640. the long Parliament begun their usurpacion at Westm^^ster
where the Commons prevayled with the King to pass a bill that their assembly
should not be dissolved without their own consent; Then so^^ after they set
up for themselves and gave advantages to their brethren in the ^nited
Provinces to be enriched beyond Measure by the Civell dise^tions that followed
and were fo^ented by those factious parties that confederated themselves
together.

In this year 1640. the Portugalls renounced the King of Spain and declared
John Duke of Braguance the Lawful successoir of D^na Catharina, and Crowned
him their King, being the 1^. King of Portugal, and 4. of that name; Who was
Father to the pre^ent Queen of England. (...) the II. King of Spain, having
invaded Portugal usurped the Crown after the death of Sebastian that was
slain in Barbery fighting against the Mores in the year 15^8. The Portugalls
who (...) under the S^aniards for the ^ace of 60. years were not ^e much
oppre^ed by them in the East- and West Indies as they (...).
were by the H^^^anders who have mo^^ regard to (...) own (...) and (...)*
^^en they have to the orrig^^^^ rights or (...) of other men.

In the year 1643. The States General reneued their pla^^ate against English
Cloth, Kersies, and Dozens, under greater Penalties then before, with many
additions concerning the ^are, and at the same time spoiled M^ C^u^t^n and his
partners in the East Indies (...) their Acts of violence (...), as they did of
oppression at home, while the Subjects of England were weltring in their own
b^oud in many parts of his Majesty's Kingdoms. (...) (...)
(...).

In the year 1648. the long Parliament having run^ into all Extremes by
subverting the government of Church and state, they acted their bloody tragedy,
which I am unwilling to mention, but that I find the s^heane yearly represented
in my dutch Almanacks, and the impressions in Folio at Amsterdam with the names
of the R^gicides under the Sculptures, which they send unto all parts of the
world, insinnuating to the Pagans, and in^idells, that English men are the
worst of all Nations, not worthy of any trade or commerce, having murdered
their King at noone day, in the face of the ^onn, and so for their own Ends,
would s^andalize and reproach a whole Kingdom for the inveterate malice of
some particular men, that took away the life of their Lawful sovereign Lord
and King. Who they knew by the Maxims of their own Law could not err. An 20.


In this year 1648. the States General fearing that France upon the conquest,
and dividing of the Spanish Netherlands would betoo potent a neighbor for
them, they make a peace with Spain at the treaty in Munster against the
consent of the French King who would not be included in the said treaty; And in
the same year at that general treaty, there was a peace concluded between
the Emperor of Germany, The French, The Sweeds, and The German Princes, after
those intestine wars had continued thirty years, and the people in the
Pallatinate reduced to such Extremity, that they were forced to eat their
own children to satisfy their hunger. The Hollanders after they had drayned
the West Indies. An 21.
Spoiled the trade of Ant^^erpe, Gante, and Brugis, by Magnifi^ing Amsterdam,
Rotterdam, and Dort. They left the Spanish Netherlands to be a Bulwerke
between the^ and France, as the House of Austria remained a Bulwerke to
Spain, and that Monarchy the chief Fortress of Rome; But now all three are
became Auxilliaries to the Hollanders, for Propogation of Gods word at
Amsterdam amongst the Jews and in^idells there.

Sone after the peace with Spain, the States of Holland (against the consent
of the generality) would disband and Cashiere many English and French Regiments
of horse and foot; Although the Officers were Gentlemen's younger sonns, that
had spent their Youth and fortunes in the States service; The Prince of Orrange
refusing to do it without pentions granted them for their lives according to
the Custom of Arms, They shutt up the Comptores of Amsterdam, Delf and Dort
etc. assigned for their payments. This ingratitude ( Which Comprehends all
other vices) Moved the Prince of Orrange to send several of the chief Agents
in that design to the Castle of Lovestine ( From whence their party are called
the Lovestine Faction) and drew up his whole Armey in the year 1650. before
Amsterdam to apprehend the rest of their consorts, who were opposite to his
interest and the Alliance with the King of great Brittaigne* But was prevented
in his approach by the sluices that were opened to obstruct his March. Sone
after that attempt the Prince of Orrange dyed, and the Lovestine Faction made
this Epitaph upon him. De Prince is doodt, de gift is groot, gheen bli^der
maa^, in tachtentigh j^er. Which was sounge by their children about the Streets
and mentioned in the pulpitts for joy. But within eight days after his death,
there was another gift sent to the great comfort of man^y. The Princess Royal
was delivered of this young Prince of Orrange on the 14. of November 1650. new
style, against whom John de Wit and his faction in the States of Holland
framed an oath which every man was obliged to take before he could be admitted
into any office of the government, either as Burgermaster Belieu, Scout,
Schepen, or Pentionaris, the substance whereof was that they should not
directly or indirectly, advance the Prince of Orrange, or his interest, but
oppose it by all means possible. And the malice of the faction was such that
many of them sealed their resolutions with their own blood, making small
incisions in their hands whereout issued some dropps of blood into a glass of
wine which they drunk, and were not ashamed to show those marks of pyety to
their brethren, as toakens of their devotion. And would not suffer their
Ministers in the public congregations to pray for the Prince of Orange even
as Christians were obliged to do for their enemies. Yett ^e was not forg^tten
by the mean people, but has lived An 22.
to see two of the faction rewarded according to the Laws of Candy, where
ingratitude is punished with death.

In the year 1650. Custodies libertatis Angliae Authoritatae Parliamenti.
(that had se^luded half their own members, and voated down the house of
Lords) called themselves the supreme Authority of great Brittaigne, and were
styled ^oe by the King of Spain, the French King, the States General, and
many other Kings, Princes, and States. Those Keepers having stamped their
Coin with the inscription of God with us on the one side, and the Common wealth
of England on the other. Which proved a true motto ^f their dissolution. An. 23.


In the year 1651. The Keepers of the Common wealth of England. As their ^ist
Essay abroad, sent M^ Olvier St. John's, and M^ Strickland, their Ambassadors
extraordinary, with a great Equipage, and splendor, unto the States General
of the United Netherlands, the substance of their instructions being to
contract an everlasting league offensive and defensive against all the enemies
of both common wealths, and to borrow a considerable sum of money upon the
public faith of their Masters, to supply their present occasions, and for
incouragment thereunto, The Ambassadors told them of an Act of Parliament that
should Naturallize all the United Netherlanders* whereby they might have and
enjoy the same rights, and privileges, equally with free borne subjects of
England, But the old crafty States men in Holland, knowing that England would
draw away their best Merchants, and fishermen, into better Ellements And that
the public faith was already upon the taynters, they rejected the first
proposal and denied the second, presuming to continnue their privileges, they
had in the English seas, and harbors, upon their own terms. Then the English
Ambassadors told the States General, that they must pay for their Herring
fishing, and make satisfaction, and reparations, for the spoils and damages,
committed at Amboyna, and upon Sir William Courten and his partners in the
East Indies. Unto all which they persisted in the negative. Then after some
personal affronts, offered to the Ambassadors and their retinnue, by the Kings
party in the Hague, they returned re infecta to make their report to the
Council of State at Whitehall, who highly resented the indignity shown to
their supreme greatness, and suddenly resolved to chastise the Hollanders for
their contempt, without any formal declaration of war, and to that purpose
Equipped out a fleet of Ships. The States General doing the like, they were
demanded by the English Admiralls to strick their flaggs and lower their
topp-sayles, but the Hollanders refusing to give that acknowledgment unto their
younger brothers, they went both to it, Catch, that Catch could, almost three
years together, wherein the States General lost so many Ships, and were so
often beaten in solemn fights, that they sent their Ambassadors over into
England (to treat with Oliver Cromwell who was stepped into the Government under
the title of Lord Protector) to give him satisfaction in the premises. It
appeared then that although the Hollanders An* 24.
were insolent they were not invincible.

In the year 1655. Oliver Cromwell made an unprofitable peace with the States
General without disarming them, or taking caution against future spoils and
injuries, granting unto the Marritine Provinces (Holland, Zeland and Frizland)
the same priveledges in the English Seas streams, and havens, that they had in
former times. When they were under the Dukes of Bourgundy, and Archdukes of
Austria, notwithstanding* The Kings of England gave them the liberty of Free
fishing then upon the English Coast in consideration of the mutually assistance
their Lords and Princes gave against France. Amsterdam being then a pore
fishing town and content with the rest of the Hollanders to live upon their
honest labor and industry, with what they could get by fish and the product
of their own Country, as they did before the East- and West India Companies
were Errected, and before they had built so many Ships of war out of the
spoils of Spain, Portugal and England, Cromwell only compelled them to make
some reparations to the English East India Company, for the spoils at Amboyna,
and obliged them to refer all other differences concerning the English
Damages to Commissioners, which nevertheless they reglected to do, finding out
expedients, even in those days to evade their Articles. A Po^ that the
Hollanders have beyond any other Nations in the universe. An ^^.


In the year 1655* Cromwell appeared most dreadful to all parts of the
world, received noe addresses from Emperors, Kings, or Princes, but under the
style of dear Brother and most Screene highness, he concluded an Alliance with
France, made a war with Spain, assisted in the taking of Dunkirke as
Auxilliary, and kept it a principal, laid out for the Spanish plate fleetes,
Attempted Hispaniola, and by a mistake took Jam^aca, then runn himself out of
breath for want of money, and dyed. If usurp^rs in a divided Kingdom could An
^^.
^^ate the Hollanders, shake France, and make Spain tremble, what may not the
Lawful Sovereign do with his Lords and Commons united in Parliament against
the en^m^^s of the King of great Brittaigne, France, and Yreland.

In the year 1660* when a peace was concluded between France and Spain upon
the Match with the Infanta. The Lords and Commons in England invited King
Charles the second, to come and take possession of his Crown and Kingdoms.
The Hollanders then fearing another storm, they stricke in with the new
Ministers of State in France (finding Cardinal Mazarine under a cloud) but
however the States of Holland treated the King of great Brittaigne at the
Hag^e, in his return, and all the Commissioners of English Lords, and Commons,
in great glory, and least it should be forgotten they also register their
treatment in their Almanacks, with the gifts presented by the States to His
Majesty viz. Nine hunderd-thousand gilders in money* and to the value of eight
thousand gilders in Harlems ^amaske and ^iaper for His Majesty's Table linen
which altogether amounted unto 9200* pound Sterling. A small recompense for the
affront in bannishing his Majesty, and his Brother the Duke of York, and Duke
of Gloucester out of their Provinces during Cromwells usurpation, and for all
the Ships and goods they had lately taken with Spanish Comissions. And got
condemned to their own use as free prize at Oastend and other Spanish An 27.
Ports, Which ought to have bin puni^hed as Pyr^cy in the Hollanders and the
Z^ders by the Laws of Common Amity and Commerce.

About six months after the King was arrived in England the States General
sent M.r Simon van H^rne a Burgermaster of Amsterdam, and Director of the
East India Company, with M.r Michaell van G^gh their Ambassadors
Extraordinary, to his Majesty, to reneue the chief Articles of Cromwells
treaty, which was made persuant to the treaty between Philip Archduke of
Austria, and Henery the VII. in the year 1495. And withal to get a general
abolition and extinguishment of all Actions for spoils, injuries and damages
whatsoever, sustained by his Majesty or his Subjects, at any time before his
Majesty's most happy restoration, and gave such Documents alonge with them,
that if any objections, should be raised against the material points in
Cromwells treaty, or that his Majesty was not obliged, to allow the same, that
then they should insist upon the loss of all their Ships and goods, that his
Majesty's rebellious subjects, had taken from the States General and their
subjects during his Majesty's Exile in the late war.

In the year 1662. the States General concluded a treaty of Common Alliance
with the King of great Brittaigne, wherein the States were obliged to regulate
the trade of India, restore Pollerone and Especially to give satisfaction for
the two Ships the Bona Esperanza and Henery Bonadventura) as also to refer
other losses of his Majesty's Subjects unto Comissioners, who were to receive a
list of their damages, under several restrictions, and limitations of time
and place. Then the States General entered into a new league with France (never
intending to perform the treaty with England) insinnuating to the French King
and his Ministers, that the King of great Brittaigne resented several
affronts, that were done to him by the French during his Exile, and that he
might take occasion from thence to reclayme the two Provinces of Normandy and
Brittaigne the ancient inheritance of the Crown of England, which would make
him absolute Sovereign of the seas, and give laws both to France and Holland.
So they engaged France by that new league to protect them in their Fisheries,
and growing more confident in that Alliance, the States gave fresh occasions of
dispute upon the Coast of Africa, accompting Europe, Asia, and America, not
sufficient to maintain their pride and ambition, but they would also ingross
the trade of the other part of the world to affront the Royal Company of
adventurers in England, holding themselves secure by the French league against
all the force of arguments and Arms, that could be brought against them by the
King of great Brittaigne, which aludes to the dictates of Monsieur W^menem, and
others of the great and mighly Lords the States of Holland. That the States
General had sufficiently humbled the Spaniards, That the Princes bordering
upon the Netherlands were rich enough to make a feast but not able to maintain
a war; That even the French of themselves were noe more then a breakfast to
the States General, England only a Dinner; The Sweed and the Danes but a
Colation, boasting that those Kingdoms were wasted by such wars that had
enriched the States General. A most wonderful alteration within the memory of
man (in this age of wonders as the Appealants An: 28
Calls it) since the States of Holland and the States General sent their
Deputies to the public assemblies at the Hague with Roaken flesh and cheese in
their Rye sacks, out of netessity to save Expenses in harbors; That are now
able to contend with so many Kings and Princes.

Upon the last Alliance between France and the United Provinces, the French
King established an East India Company, Ordanning that it should be noe
indignity to any of the Princes of the blood or others of the Nobility in
France, to adventure and become participants in that trade. The Hollanders
being statled thereat fearing it might deminish their traffic, they sent
Monsieur John Tylliot, a Captain of horse in their Militia to make some
diversion and give Discouragments to that enterprise, who being well acquainted
at Paris, and in the French Court insinnuated in all Companies that they would
loose their principal stocks, which adventured upon any such long Voyages,
where the Hollanders would both undermine and overeach them in all their
undertakings, but for his pains the King committed him to prison, where he
remained two years and upwards until some return Ships came from the
East Indies to manifest the contrary. It is an old dutch principal, where the
An: 29
Hollanders cannot accomplish their designs by force, they will endeavor it by
any sinister means, which makes the States General so often pawn their
souls their faith, and reparation, in public treaties (to game time and
optunities of advantage) when at the same instant they intend shall never be
performed.

In the year 1665. the Hollanders having refused to perform the last treaty
with the King of great Brittaigne, and to make reparations to his subjects for
their losses and Damages according to the several and respective Articles of
the said treaty. Appeals were made by all men to the sword for Justice, and a
war was proclaimed by his Majesty against the States General, with an
Unamions consent of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, who granted many
Millions of Pounds Sterling to carry on that enterprise, which did neither
humble the Hollanders nor procure any honor or satisfaction to the King or
Kingdom ( Notwithstanding all the blood and treasure spent.) In any of those
points insisted and agreed upon in the year 1662. either concerning the Bona
Esperanza and Henery Bonadventure, list of damages, Polleron, or regulation of
trade in the East Indies, where the dutch have obstructed and spoiled the
English, and the Subjects of all other Kingdoms in Europe, either by fraud,
or force from the Freedom of Navigation, and Commerce, ever since they got
any footing there. More particulary Sir William Courten and his partners who
laid the same foundations for trading Voyages in the East Indies, China, and
Japan, from Port to Port. Wherein the Hollanders absoluty have gotten more by
their Navigations and force in those Countries, then they did by their goods
and money exported from Holland and Zeland, which is contrary to the Laws of
Nations and common Alliance; As their own Countryman Grotius tells them. Quod
Batavi ^ullum habent jus in Indos, Titulo Inventionis, belli, occupationis,
praescriptionis, aut consuetudinis.

Ergo quibusvis ad quosvis liberam esse mercaturam.

Whose rules the Hollanders will not observe any further then concerns their
lucre or advantage, as may be seen in the following relation. Notwithstanding
the English, the Portugalls, and the Spaniards traded thither and were settled
there many years before the Hollanders as is well known to all men that have
read any thing of History.

A True Relation of the Dutch East India Companies Affairs, and trade in
India, and parts adjacent in the year 1665. Reported by the commander in chief
sent home by the General at Batavia, with their sleete arrived in Holland Anno
1666.
THat Amboyna which yielded cloves was in a verry good condition. Banda bad
yielded a verry good cropp of mace and Nutmegs.

Pouleron which yielded the best Nutmegs of all the Is^and^ was dilivered unto
the English, but as soon as the news came to Batavia of the war it was taken
from them again:

Ternate that the King thereof is obliged by treaty to distroy all the cloves
to the end the Spanish should have n^ne.

Maccassar was to be feared the most of any Indians, the staple of all
foreign Commodities was there by reason of the small toll or Custom which is
paid n^^ Exceeding one per ^^nto, sandall wood and Tortell shell is that which
the place y^^^d^th most:

B^^a y^^ldeth red wood fit for dy^ing, as also sandall wood, and covrin a
sort of white shells which in many places are used in stead of many, there are
very good horses.

Solor and ^imor yeildeth sandell wood, tortell shell, and wax which is
carried to Ma^^a^^ar: Timer is for the most part Inhabited by portingalls their
is Bezoar and black amber to be found.

Borneo is rich with d^^monds, and pearl^s, whereunto the great Materan
pretends, but he is not obayed; here is pepper, Benjamine, camphire,
Aquilwood, calam^ack, B^z^ar etc. The diam^nds, are b^tt^ then on the coast,
but the Natives are tr^a^b^rous and blood th^^tye.

Mallacca (which belongs to the Company) is not the trade which is used to be
in Callac^^s, brought thither by the Moors, nor p^^p^r, which is now found at
Iam^y, on the west-coast of Sumatra, here is ^^d^o ponco (believed to be a good
medicine against ag^es) it is found in the heads of porcupines, and are s^^^d
^^r ^^^ hundred Rixdoll^rs and upwards.

Aichien reduced by the Company Anno 1664. ^^re is store of p^pper gould and
camp^^^^* bett^r th^n that of Japan, the Company ^ad three hundred pound ^aight
of gould here last year, there p^pper is to be sold to none, but the Company,
and that at a certain price.

Ci^o is pos^^st by the Company who protect the Inhabitants against those of of
(...), ^^re are great quant^ties of Oliphants, Rhinoceros, Tigers and other
beasts.

In Japan the Company have their trade on the Island Nang^sacky, where the
Chinese trade very much, it yields gould, silver, Alcomy, copper, camphire,
and lackworke, the Government of Japan is written and described in a treatise
by Caron.

In China the Company have but one Factory at Hocksieuw where trade is not
admitted without difficulty, Especially if the company send not an Ambassador
thither:

On the Island Formosa the Company have a place called Colang in hope to bring
the trade thither, the Island is governed by the Son of Coxmia.

In the Kingdom of Torquin there was in the year 1664* Averie great Crop of
silk.

The Kingdom of Cambodia from whence the company trades to Japan with small
profit, the Chief commodities are musk, Benjamine, sappan wood, Buck, and
Buff hides, their horns, and some Tinn.

Siam yields Buckskins which are carried to Iapan, and good store of Tinn but
the toll or custom is very high.

Bengale is under the Command of the great Mogol, where the company has a
peaceable trade for silk, fine callicoes musk and sugar.

In Cormandel they have several Factories, where they buy store of callicoes
and sell them through out whole India.

Massilipatnam yields diamonds from the Mine Golcanda, Gum Lack and Iron
besides other Marchandises.

At Pegu under the Government of Cormandell, are the best Rubyes of all India.

In Persia the company have two Factories, one at Camron, the other at Spahan,
where goods are sold at great profit, Especially sugars paying small t^lls,
but their silk is very dear. In regard of the contract made with the
Persians Anno 1651.

At Suratt and Gusarat the company ^ells great quantities of spices for
^allicoes and diamonds.

At Ceilon that rich Island for Cinnamons all was in good condition.

At Batavia the Garrison was about 2000. strong, where the company for want of
money, take it at Interest and pay one and a half and two per cent for a month.

In Batavia was a good Cargo to be sent home, but by reason of the wa^r with
England, six of the best Ships were kept there, that they might not fall into
the hands of the Enemy.

The English have little or no trade at Bantam, Maccassar, Iamby, B^ngale,
Cormandell, Surat, and Persia, Through want of money and commodities, wherewith
if the company were supplied, they would carry the whole trade of India.

The Cape bon Esperance was in good condition, the Garrison 500* strong,
laboring to finish the Castle, There they want Slaves to manure the Land, and
wood for fire and timber, the Vines and Olive trees grow there very well.

At Sumatra, from Jamby, Palamba^gh, Andrigoi, Achien, all Fa^^or^^s in the
said Island, where no other Nation now is admitted to buy p^pper.

At Queda from Perah Ligor is a reasonable trade for tinn, from Arracan they
have rice and Slaves for there service, at Batavia, from the coast of
Cormand^^l 250. Thousand pounds yearly in Callioes.

THe yearly returns from India Amounts unto twelve hundred Thousand Pound
Sterling and upwards, one year with another in time of peace. Their Equipage
and charge of goods last year sent amounted to -60000 pound Sterling.

The Overplus is divided unto the participants or employed in the payment of
debts.

The original stock of the Company was 600000. pound sterling: Amsterdam has
an half part of the stock, ^eland a fourth part, ^elf and stotterdam an
eight part, Horn and Enchusen and eight part.

They have 140. sail of Ships effective in service and 250^0. men: Mariners
and Land Soldgiers: The Company being first settled in the year 1602. have
improved themselves to a great ^eight ^p the deffects of the English.

All which was orriginally raised out of pickled Herrings, and Codd-fish, taken
upon the English coa^t ^^nce Queen Elizebeth took the Hollanders into ^^r
protection. Whereby they supplied not only themselves and France but s^rv^d the
vast armies of Austria and Spain, Sweeden and Poland, who made a great
consumption of those Fish; that increased the Hollanders wealth an^ strenght;
Which may be sooner retrenched by an Honorable peac^, and industrious Acts of
invitation, then by a treadious and distrutive war.

IN the years 1666. and 1667. there happned Several Remark-able things not to
be forgotten. The King of great Brittaigne having the year before granted
Special Letters of Reprisall against the Hollanders, unto Sir Edmond Tur^or
Knight and George Car^w Esquire: their Executors Administrators and assigns (in
consideration of the great losses and damages that Sir William Courten and Sir
Paul Pyndar had sustained by the United Netherlanders) to continnue Effectual
in the Law until the sum of 151612. Pound Sterling should be reprized from
the States General and their Subjects, or satisfied by the East India Company
of the Netherlands.

Whereupon several comissions were granted to diverse Captains (conformable
to the Letters pattents from his Majesty) who in persuance thereof brought in
many Ships, sailing from the enemies Ports, built in the enemies Countries,
laden with enemies goods, and bound to the enemies Cities and towns; Yett
they were colored, and claymed by English Merchants, or the Subjects of
neutrall Princes and States, who by Extrajudiciall proceedings, obtained such
orders and reports that cleared the said Ships and their ladings (excepting
those that were fraighted with salt Viniger and Ches^nutts, not worth the
duties and charge of contending) But during those prosecutions several of the
Captains detained some Ships according to the Customs of other Nations, to
be tried by judicial hearings in the Admiralty Court, upon presumptions that
the Ships and goods belonged to the French, Dutch, or Danes, all then in
confederacy and declared enemies to the King; Yett they were discharged even
upon those very Circumstances that in other countries English Ships and their
ladings, had bin often confiscated.

The claymours However, pretending their voyages were spoiled by bringing in
their Ships under those Letters of reprisall, which discouraged their trade,
they obtained a Proclamation to suspend the Execution of the letters pattents (
pro tempore) and likewise an order of the Councel-table dated at Mithtehall the
10. of August 1666. ( old stille) signed by several Lords of the Council to
gratify the Spanish Agents and their confedrates / Whereby M.r Car^w was
committed to the prison called the fleet, notwithstanding he offered to give
sufficient bail in any Court of Judicature, to Answ^re any pretense whatsoever
the claymours had against him which was denied, and M.r Carew forced to remain
a prisoner, until the most dreadful fire in London, had consumed all the
houses about him. But stopped at his own dwelling house in the Parish of St.
Andrews Holborne, where his several tenements adjacent escaped those flames
that perished his next neighbors houses. And it is very Remark-a^^^, That the
Pensionaris John de Witt^, M.r Carews grand adversary concerning the Letters of
Reprisall was Massacred at the Hague on the 10. of August 16-2. ( old still)
where Mr. Carew was then a prisoner, and by treating those burgers with wine
and brandy in his own defense, contributed much toward John de Witt^s
destruction, Nisew men's Hominum fats sortisque. An 30


Captain Tyrence Byrne in persuance of the said Letters pattents for Reprisall
being fitted out with a small frigate (by Mr. Jonathan Frest, the owner) seized
a fly boat nere Portland bay about the month of Ju^^ 1666. laden with French
Wine and salt, bound from France for Holland, which Shipp being brought into
Poole and from thence to Chichester, the Capt: sent to Mr. Suckley his own
proctor for a Commission out of the Admiralty Court (to examine the Master and
the Mariners of the prize) which was directed to the Magistrates and a
public Notary in Chichester, who found upon the Examinations, that the Shipp
was dutch built, the goods Consigned to Dutch men, and the Mariners to be
Hollanders borne and inhabitans there: Yett upon return of the said Commission,
Mr. Peter G^rrard and afterward Mr. Peter Victorine claymed the said Shipp and
goods, pretending they belonged to Mr. Michaell vander Planeken, Andreas vande
Bogard, and Mr. John Neitz of Brugis in Flanders, under the Notion of the Shipp
Godelieve, belonging to that City.

Then Sir Lyonell Jenkins Judge of the Admiralty Court decreed that there was
good cause of seizure, and ordered that the claymours might have the Shipp and
goods forthwith restored upon bail to abide the sentence of the Court upon
hearing the cause, which the Captors consented unto, but the claymours refused
it having brought their Action at Law against Captain Byrne and arrested him
by writ out of the Admiralty Court in 1000. pound damages, upon pretense of a
false seizure, breaking bulk, and making sale of some salt at Poole to buy
provisions for the men; Whereupon the Captain gave sufficient bail to Answer
the claymours, who reglected to give caution and take away the Shipp and goods
which were left with the Vice Admiral at Chichester for that purpose.

Sone after the Captain and his suerties that were bail for him, moved for a
prohibition, but Sir John Keeling then Lord Chief Justice of England, refused
an allowance thereof, notwithstanding by the known and established Laws of the
realm, such matters of fact alleged to be committed within his Majesty's
Ports, were to be tried in his Majesty's Courts of record by Juries, and not to
be brought into any Arbitrary way before incompetent Judges. Afterward the
claymors upon new attestations from the same Mariners, and some pretended
certificates sent out of Flanders, mentioning that the Shipp and goods belonged
to the Subjects of the King of Spain, which ought to have been certified by
Commissioners appointed out of the same Court, whereby the persons might have
bin interogated, yett a restitution was thereupon decreed by the Judge of the
Admiralty, and likewise confirmed by the Lords Comissioners for prizes, so
that the Shipp and goods were actually delivered by the Vice Admiral to the
claymors accordingly, and 150. Pound Sterling was left to be paid in Chichester
that the Master and the Mariners of the prize had expended, for which Captain
Byrne, and Frost were engaged and afterward sued.

Nevertheless Sir Walter Walker, and Mr. Franklinn, then advised the Claymors
without any discontinuance of their former Action against Capt: Byrne to
exhibit Articles in the Admiralty Court jointly against Sir Edmond Turnor, Mr.
Carew, Captain Byrne, and Mr. Frost, wherein they were charged with trespasses
and spoils for goods imbeazilled and plundered (by their own men.) And from
thence a sentence was drawn against them for 1800. pound damages, which was
pronounced by Sir Lyonell Jenkins in favor of the claymors, who insisted that
the said damages cheifely arrised by leakage and avarage, and so would make
double the profitt of their voyage by the seizure, more then if they had
escaped Captain Byrne. From which sentence the Captain and Mr. Frost appealed
to the ordinary deligates, but Sir Edmond Turnor, and Mr. Carew appealed
specially unto Sir Orlando Bridgman, then Lord Keeper of the great Seal of
England and prayed that some judges of the Common Law might be appointed as
adjuncts to consider of the Nullity of the said sentence, which Sir Walter
Walker, and Mr. Franklinn most vexatiously opposed by a Request, and insisted
that Sir Edmond Turner and Mr. Carew might be ordered to give bail to abide
the sentence of the Judges deligates, or that their Appeal might be rejected
which Sir Orlando Bridgman, irregulary appointed. Although noe caution was
given by them Prima instantia, neither were S^ Edmond Turnor, or Mr. Carew at
any time summoned or arrested in the said cause, or ever made any defense, or
were concerned therein. Yett the said Sir Walter Walker and Mr. Franklinn,
forced the said Sir Edmond Turnor and Mr. Car^w, to give extraordinary caution
to avoyde that impertinent sentence, which they threatened should be executed
upon their persons. And which still depends before the Judges deligates and
adjuncts. And ought to be declared null and void to all intents and purpoposes
against Sir Edmond Turner and Mr. Carew (admitting Captain Byrne, and Mr.
Frest, were guilty of any thing laid to their charge) And if the Subjects of
England should not be admitted to appeals A^. 33.
and revisions in such cases, they would be rendered in a worse Condition, then
any slaves in Spain or Turkey.

As it is against the Law both divine and Civil, that one person should be
punished for the offense of another, so it is as unreasonble that the claymors
should take any advantage (against Captain Byrne and Mr. Frest of their own
wilful reglect, or to seek after treble the value of all the goods, that
they cost in France, when there was good cause of seizure, which made them
liable to the charge and expenses of bringing up the Shipp, and making inquiry
after the confi^^ation. And it was Lawful for the Captain to prosecute for
the Shipp and goods, in the names of Sir Edmond Turnor and Mr. Carew persuant
unto the Letters pattents, without subjecting of them to any offense, they
being Turstees for a Corporation of Creditours and altogether passive in matter
of fact.

Captain Byrne and all other Captains had only power to Execute their
Commission according to the rules and Directions contained in the Letters
pattents, if they transgressed those Limitations it was their own Act, and not
Sir Edmond Turnors and Mr. Carews, The Maxim, Qui facit per alterum facit per
se, is relative to Civell Actions where all things are done persuant to a
Lawful Authority. Personal injuries, cannot be comprehended within any
deputation or Commission whatsoever, and it would be of evil consequence, if
such provisionall sentences should be confirmed and brought into Presidents.
Being contrary to Law, and the very express words of His Majesty's grant
declared in the said Letters Pattens wherein its mentioned in the last clause
of the Pattent, that this Royal Commission should be favorably interpreted and
construed in all respects to the benefitt and advantage of Sir Edmond Turnor
and George Carew, their Executours Administratours and assigns.

Captain Edward Lucy, and Capt: John Holiness, in prosecution of their
Comissions under the said Letters Pattents, did within the space of three
months, take, sink, and burn Nine Ships of the French, Dutch, and Danes, yet
they met with such discouragements at home, that rendered their enterprises
rather burdens to themselves and their Friends, then any advantage or profitt
to the Heirs Executous or Creditors of Sir William Courten, Sir Paul Pridar,
and Sir Edward Littleten, who were also blamed for spoiling the Kings enemies.
And Mr. Franklinn to show an absolute prejudice against Mr. Carew advised Mr.
Ioas Ever^yen (a dutch claymor) his brother in Law to arrest him in a vexatious
action of 1000. pound, by writ out of the Admiralty Court upon pretense of a
spoil done by Captain Heyden to a Hamburger in the month of August 1666. and
although sufficient bail was given into the Court to answer the Action, Yett
noe prosecution was ever made against him thereupon, nor any Costs paid him for
his vexatious trouble.

It is not difficult to register the names of several Hollanders, Frenchmen,
and Danes, that traded all the time of the late war in the names of Flemings,
and Hamburgers, and that had also their correspondence in England, to color
and protect their Ships and goods by collusive testimonialls, and Commissions
out of Flanders and the Hantz towns. Even as several Hookers and Dogger
boats of Zirrickzee, and Herring-buysies of Mazelandsluice, Scheydam, and
Anchusen, Fished freely as Oastenders and the Subjects of other neutrall
Princes, which encouraged the Kings enemies in those times of extremity;
Whilst His Majesty of great Brittaigne, labored under all the difficulties
imaginable that were brought upon the Kingdom, through the corruptions and
self interests of particular men.

In the year 1667. After the rage and fury of the sword, fire, and pestilence,
had abated, and the King was treating (in the territories of the Hollanders) at
Breda concerning a peace with the States General, France, and Danemarcke, the
States adventured upon a signal exployt to burn His Majesty's Ships at
Chattam, Supposing that English men could digest fire both by land and water,
then they tr^^^mph^ntly insisted, that the Act concerning Navigation was
dis^^^^ive to their Commerce, and therefore proposed to have a^ Articl^ to make
it void, presuming that such treaties might dissanull Acts of Parliament, as
well as Letters Pattents under the great Seal of England, but being advised to
the contrary, they prevayled only for a dispensation, that all goods coming
down the Rhyne out of Germany to the staple at Dort, should be admitted as of
their own growth, and transported to England in dutch bottomes; Then they
insisted upon a further provision to be made for tender Conscienci^s concerning
all English men, that should transport themselves, into the united Netherlands
for protection which was refused. Only in favor of Doctor Richardson, Minister
of the English Church at Leyden, it was consented unto ( Notwithstanding the
Yorkshire Plott) that all Preachers who were come out of His Majesty's
Kingdoms, should be free from any impeachment for treason, etc.

The Hollanders those conquerours (as they termed themselves) rested not
satisfied here, but projected several Articles in general terms to acquitt
and discharge ( de been esse) all Actions and pretentions whatsoever, that his
Majesty and his Subjects had against the States General and their Subjects
from the beginning of the world to the conclusion of that treaty, wherein
Pouleron was also to be suddenly relinquished that had been 40. years in
delivering up persuant to several former treaties, and the Soveraignity of
Surrinam to be surrendered, which had been only possessed some weeks by the
Zeland Capers, and retaken from them by the English.

Here was a strange providence and very remark-able concerning Surrinam and
Pouleron. This Surrinam was a Colony settled by the Lord Willoughby, wherein he
had expended all his patternall Estate; And this Lord Willoughby was the person
that had kept the lands and possessions of Sir William Courten and his Heirs
in the Island of Barbados, from the right proprietors under the pretense of a
lease from the Earl of Carlilse, as Lord Proprietor of the Carebee Islands,
who had by force supplanted Sir William Courten his tenants, officers and
Servants, after Sir William had settled a Colony there and had expended thirty
thousand Pounds Sterling and upwards in fortifications, buildings, and
planting, having first discovered, the said Island, and been three years in
quiet possession thereof.

Pouleron is an Island, that belongs to the Heirs and Successors of the
English East India Company, that first acquired the same by their joint stock;
and such an Island that was taken from them orriginally by vyolence ( which
creates noeright) and annexed to the Hollanders possessions; This Island was
wasted by the East India Company of the Netherlands, after Cromw^lls treaty,
and all the nuttmegg trees, were there distroyed by Capt: Kirkhove and his
Soldgiers in obedience to the Hollanders Commands, and the General of Batavia,
which trees were to have bin restored to the English again in the same
condition they were growing. This Island was after many long delays, delivered
to the English, but retaken the same year again by the Dutch East India
Company, without any satisfaction or price, for the spoil or the soil,
whereof the Hollanders, esteem themselves to be for ever acquitted and really
discharged, without any Act or deed from the orriginall proprietors, who could
not formerly agree, how to draw up a discharge for the 80000. pound Sterling
that Cromwell borrowed of them against their will, which the Hollanders had
paid, by Mr. ^illiam Garraways Solicitation, for other damages, An:32:
Nor consent to give him a reward, answerable to his pains for getting that
which they lost by their ingratitude.

Yet the States General by the treaty at Breda became obliged to regulate the
trade in the East Indies and to observe the former Capitulations concerning
Surrinam. Which nevertheless the East-and West India Companies of the
Netherlands afterward refused to perform. Knowing that they themselves do
govern the States of Holland, as the States of Holland do govern the States
General. The Deputies of the 18. respective Cities, which are sent to the
Assemblies of the great and mighty Lords the States of Holland, being Directors
or participants of the East- and West India Companies. The Diputies of the
respective Provinces, sent to the Assemblies of the high and mighty Lords the
States General, being also Directours or participants of the East- and
West India Companies. The respective Persons or Lords of the Counsels of the
States General, and the States of Holland; As also The respective Lords in the
several Collegies or Chambers of their Admiralties in Amsterdam, Rotterdam,
Midleburgh, North-Holland, and F^^zland, are likewise Directors or participants
of the East- and West India Companies of the Netherlands, and mostof them
Either Br^wars, Soap^boy^^rs, Sugerbakers, and their sonns, or Advocates, who
are also the Magistrates of the respective Cities, and ^^chivens in the
several Courts of Judicature, where the Subjects of Foreign Princes, cannot
expect Justice in any matters upon Civell Actions brought before them, wherein
their own interests are any ways concerned, being both parties and Judges
themselves, which is a most abominable and intolerable practice. ^specially
when Appeals are made from those Competent Judges (so termed) in the
respective Cities, unto the Provincial Court, and Superior Court at the
^ague, where there cannot be any other Creatures found a mo^gst them then of
the same mould, before whom the suites and Complaynts of many orphants and
widows have been delayed some 20. and some 30. years, and left still
undetermined; who have appealed to Heaven for bengance, which at last is fallen
upon the Hollanders for their fr^ude and oppression.

If Justice cannot be obtained in their Ordinary Courts of Judicature upon
civell Contracts and obligations between Englishmen and Hollanders, for
matters arising within their own Country, or for debts contracted in England,
It cannot be expected that any strangers should find releife against any
Director or participant of the East- or West India Company upon any cause of
action real or personal, for goods, lands, or money, gotten into their hands
and possession in foreign parts, for any spo^le or trespass whatsoever
Committed in the East- or West Indies. Where they make war and peace, at
pleasure.

Tantum Imperium Principis quam Patrimonium majus est. Ad Reges potestas omnium
pertinet, ad singulos proprietas.

And the Casuists affirm that a debtor although Judicially absolved, remaynes
a debtor, until he has given satisfaction.

Jus permaneat semper, nec unquam mutetur lex vero scripta saepius.

In the year 1668. The French King, in right of Maria his wi^e, Daughter of
Ph^lip the IV. pretending a title to the Spanish Netherlands, after the King of
Spaines death, entered into Brabant and Flanders with an Arm^y, and took
possession, of Ch^rleroy, Binch, A^^^^, Dou^y, S^^rpe, Tournay, Oul^^ard,
Li^le, Armentiers, Cortrick, ^^wxbargh, with the b^ylewicks Casteleines and
jurisdictions to them belonging, notwithstanding the Queen had renounced her
right and the French King barred himself (as the Hollanders say) by the
Pyreenean treaty. Which the Lawyers and divines of France, affirm to the
contrary, first in regard the 400000 Spanish Ducates were not paid by the King
of Spain, promised in marriage with the Infanta, which was the ground of the
Pyreenean treaty; And Especially for that the Soveraignity of those Provinces
could not be alienated, separated, or divided from the Crown by any Colaterall
Acts or agreements contrary to the Law of the Country. However a triple
Alliance was made between the King of great Brittaigne, the King of Sweeden,
and the States General, tending to reconcile France and Spain, and to oppose
the French King in his further progress into the Spanish Netherlands, which
triple league procured the treaty at Aken, and produced an accord that France
should for ever enjoy those places taken by his Arms, and an everlasting peace
was concluded (in terminis) confirming the Pyrenean treaty whereby France, was
to forsake Portugal, and leave that Crown to the Mercy of the Spaniards, and
Hollanders. Which An:33:
was more unjust, then the French Kings entrance into Flanders was
unreasonable. From whence it appears that public treatys are not like the Laws
of the M^ads and Pers^^ns. The strongest parties makes the best construction
and interpretation of all doubtful cases.

In the years 16-0. and 16-1. the French Forces being Exercized in the new
conquested Places of Flanders, and Brabant, the Hollanders were as jealous of
such neighbors, as the French were troubled at such attendance. The States
General having levied 50000. Soldgiers to watch their motions, by land and
water. Then Admiral van Ghent nere the Flemish-coast refused to strick sail
to the Royal Standard of great Brittaigne, that was carried in His Majesty's
own Brigadine, but Answered the demand most contemptuously with powder and
ball. Afterward the States General being as unwilling to give satisfaction for
such indignites and affronts to his Majestic, as they were for spoils, and
injuries to his Subjects* this present war insued wherein the King of great
Brittaigne, and the French King, have made an Alliance of mutual assistance
against the Hollanders, finding that those Crowns, had formerly taken wrong
measures to suffer the United Netherlanders, which they saved from extirpation*
to grow ^oe powerful and great, to contend with them and their Allies. Which
also confirme^ the An. 34.
English proverb, save a theife from the Gall-house, and he will be the first
that shall ^utt your throat, wher^fore the l^ague with France proceeds not
from such dang^rous counsels. As the Appealants to the Parliament would
suggest.

In the year 1671. John de ^^^^, Pensionaris of Holland, and his faction being
drunk with success in the former wars. Over - ruled that party in the States
of Holland, who advised to raise a great Army to oppose France by land, and
suddenly to invade the Bishopp of Munsters Country. And to make only a
defensive war against England by guarding their own Coast. But ^^^n de ^^^^
Argueing that the three Maritine Provinces (by reason of their sluices) being
impregnable by land, there was a necessity to keep the sea open for their
trade and Navigation, otherwise they would sone become beggars, wherefore his
Council was followed, and a great fleet out of hand provided to fight both
the English and the French, which the Hollanders (taking their advantage) did
engage on the first of June 1672. ( old sti^^) Wherein the Earl of Sandwich,
and Admiral van Ghent, with several others of both sides perished, when it
appeared that the French notwithstanding their natural courage, were better at
land then at sea, and the English alone, if they had persued the victory, might
have distroyed the dutch ^leete upon their own Coast, in that time of
consternation, The French English and Munster forces, having entered Gilderland,
Over^sell, and Utrecht, Yett the Hollanders out of an ambitious humor to keep
up their sinking reputation, exposed their prints to all parts of the world,
signifieing that they had beaten two glorious Kings at sea, and many English -
men ( to their shame be it spoaken) rejoyed at their own folly and
infirmities, Complying with the appeallants fancies. That from Cromwells
joining with the French, the destruction of Europe might take its date. The
Kingdoms of C^cillea and Naples, made Arragon, and Caste^le much lighter An. 35
then before. The West Indies, and the Netherlands putt into the s^ale made all
Spain of less weight. Princes that graspe at more then they can govern and
protect, make themselves unfortunate and their Subjects miserable.

In that year 1671. if the devil had not owed the Hollanders a shame for
their pride and insolency, they might have complied with England or France, but
notwithstanding they saw the dangers approaching, and had fair warnings given
them after the breaches of their faith, treatyes, and Alliances, yett in stead
of making any reconciliation with either, they persisted in the desiance of
great Brittaigne, concerning his Majesty's Prerogative in the seas, exposing to
sale their medalls and Prints of Chattam, their Pamphletts and pasquills of the
King and his Council, and likewise enraged the French, with their impositions,
menaces, and contempts painting the King between Mademoiselle de la Valiere,
and Mademoiselle de Montspan, with both his hands under their Petticoates, and
this in scription over his head, Louys le grand Conqueror, and at the same
time painted the Bishop of Munster riding upon a hogg, and his Coach drawn
with six wild Bores. Then by order of the King and Council at Whitehall, the
war was proclaimed, the Dutch Smirna fleet attacqued, and the Exchequer stopped
from payment of the Banckers assignments. Necessity has noe Law, and people
that An. 36*
cannot^ be conquered with Kindness, must be taken upon all advantages to make
them mannerly and honest against their wills.

In the year 1672. after that sea fight, when the United Netherlands were
invaded by the French, English, and Munster forces (the Women in the Hague
having before proclaimed the Prince of Orange, Captain General, the Burgers
and Boares in all the Cities and Dorpes voated him their Statholder, and the
States General in the first week of Julij 1672. were forced for their own
defense, to establish him in all the Offices and honors that his Ancestors had
enjoyed. Which the Prince of Orange willingly accepted for An. 37*
their safty in time of trouble, that would not pray for his welfare in time of
their prosperity.

In this juncture of confusion the King of great Brittaigne having a difficult
game in hand, wherein the Hollanders and Zelanders, were to be sufficiently
humbled, and the French not exalted, His Majesty sent the Duke of Buckingham,
and the Earl of Arlington his Ambassadors Extraordinary and Plenipotenciaries
to the French King, and the States General, who held some conferrences at
Utrecht, until the Burgers of Amsterdam had Cut the bancks of the Tie, and
opened the sluices to drown the land about that City, then the Magistrates
and inhabitants there protested against any further treaty declaring that they
would not do any thing upon a surprise. Conclu^ing* ^h^r^ they ^^ul^ not make
an honorable peace ^^ 38*
they would runn the (...) of a distru^^^ve ^^rr.

The French King in his proposalls to the States General at Utrecht, in^isted
that a Cathedral Church in every City of Holland should be allowed to the
Roman Catholics for Divine worshipp. The Romanists giveing these reasons for
it unto the Dome-Heeres there 1. That the Churches were all built by the Roman
Catholics 2. That the Major part of the people in those United Provinces
remained still Roman Catholics, 3. That the States had kept the possession of
those Churches eighty years from the Roman Catholics. 4. That the Protestants
in France, who denied the Popes supream^^y were allowed Churches wherein many
of the Netherlanders had free access. 5. And lastly that it was very scandalous
that the Roman Catholics should be confined to such pore consecrated meeting
places for the service of God in the chiefest C^tties and towns of the United
Netherlands, Yett all those Arguments would not preva^le with the Amsterdamers,
who pretended that it would be a badge of conquest over them, to alter any
thing of their government in point of Religion. And having gotten those Churches
by their victorious Arms with such congregations into them they would not so
tamely part with either. ^^* ^^.
The like congregations are not to be found in any other part of the world
(ga^hered together by the sword) regulated by the Civ^ll Magistrates as they
are in the United N^therlands.

During this confusion, the Maritine Plenipotenciary Cornelius de ^^tt who had
bin newly gratified with 36000. gilders by the States General for his good
service at sea in that Expedition, (where the Earl of Sandwich was fyred) was
contriving how to poison or pistol the Prince of Orange at land, and to that
purpose treated with one William Titchelaer a Chyrurgion at Peirshill (a tenant
under that Plenipotentary) to accomplish the design, Corn^^ius de Wit
insinnuating to him that the Prince being now made Statholder by the mean
people, they would not rest until they had made him Sovereign and
consequently subverted the Government of the Country, and that if he would
undertake the business to dispatch him, there were above thirty Lords in the
Government of Holland that would very well requite him besides he should have
3000. Pound Sterling for his premium, and for the better effecting the design,
some of the Lords in the States of Holland, should help him to an employment
in the leaguer to be nere the Prince. But the Chyru^gion notwithstanding he had
sworn secrecy to C^rn^^^us de Wit yett he could not be quiet in his mind
until he had revealed the conspiracy to the Prince. Whereupon Corn^^^us de
Wit being apprehended; The Court of Justice heard the evidence, and wa^ghing
all circumstances did on the 10. of August 1672. ( old s^^^^) give sentence
only for his banishment and the ^orfeiture of his Offices and Dign^ties, But
the Common people in the Hague Banished him and his Brot^^r An* 4^*
John de Wit on the same day into another world as m^mbers not fit to ^^ve
any longer in this.

The Prince of Orange sone after made some alteration amongst the Magistrates
of Amsterdam and other places; Then he gave his first as^ault upon the French
at Worden where he come off with loss and a d^^honorable retreat. In December
following he made an attempt upon Charleroy without success, when the Duke of
Lutz^^burgh with his forces from Utrecht burnt Bodegrave and Swammerdam, two of
the best Dorpes in Holland, and if the Frost had continnued 24* houers longer
they had burnt the Hague, where the people upon the first Alarm removed all
their plate Jewels and fine L^nnen to Delf, Layden, and Rotterdam. This being
done in the absence of the Prince, the Burgers begun to C^amour against him for
ill conduct, ^aying that they were all betra^ed, and that the Prince knew of
this war, when he was with his Uncle in England in the year 1670* (making
merry with venizon pasties) Although the Prince moved altogether by the States
order in M^llitary affairs, and had not so much command of the Treasury or
Militia, as to prefer a Soldgier or reward a servant. Princes walk An 4^*
upon narrow bancks, where their fortunes dipends upon such gidd^y peoples
^u^ours.

In the beginning of this year 1673. The King of Sweeden interposing as
Mediator between all parties, Proposed a General Treaty for a peace, and in
the interim a Cessation of Arms, the former was seemingly accepted by the
States, but the later absolutely refused, yett underhand they desired a
cessation with England at sea, for which they would have given 130000. pound
Sterling. The States General, finding themselves not able to digest the forces
of so many Kings and Princes, at one meal by land, without a free vent
backward by water for trade, Especially for bringing home An ^2.
their East India Ships, they lost this year which were of greater value then
the price offered for a Cessation.

The Hollanders perceiving their money was not so courrant in England as
formerly. They Appeared under this strange Carracter of Englands appeal to the
Parliament, which yett did not do their turn, The Commons gave the King
70000. pound per month, for eighteen months, toward the further expense of
the war, then the Hollanders made a sudden resolution in the assembly of the
States to raise new levies by Capital lending, to set out a great fleet,
which money was to be paid in before the first of April 1673. ( new style) and
was done accordingly. The people beng moved by a preamble in the Placcate, and
act for raising the money grounded upon the Lord Chancelors speech in
Parliament, Especially upon that expression ( Dilenda Cartago) which did
surprise the States of Holland, and Zeland, when they were at a straight for
ready Cash, their Cantores being empty, and their obligations of little value.
The Duke of Brandinburgh having lately Caldeized them out of 200000. pound upon
a contract for mutual assistance, whereby he was to send the States 12000.
foot and 8000. horse to be maintained at a joint charge, but nevertheless he
kept both the men and the money for his own defense upon a better bargain
with the French concerning Clefe, and Mark. Where several of his best Towns
had been long detained from him by the States. Here the Hollanders were paid in
their own coin, who never performed any part of a public treaty, further
An. 43.
then attended their own profitt or advantage.

Now while the States were chaffering about the place of treating, they were
using all means, possible to evade it, by contracting leagues and Alliances
with Spain, and Austria, to maintain the Protestant interest which the
Appealants to the Parliament say the Kings Ministers neglected, and rather then
they would submitt to England or part with any thing they had got by fraud
and violence, they send their Agents to Pomerania, Courland, Prusia, and other
neutrall Places, to raise both horse and foot to appear with an Army in the
field, as well as a fleet at sea to treat like, Sovereign Princes, with their
swords in their hands, Yet intending noe agreement but upon their own terms,
depending upon their brethren in England, and Scotland to accomplish their
designs, presuming that the Commons there would not have Hollands patience to
endure an exspensive war much longer. The States An. 44.
keeping to their old Principalls, that there was noe means so approved An. 44.
under heaven to weaken great Brittaigne, as by sowing sedition amongst the
people, with notions of introducing popery, or setting up an Arbitrary
Government by the French Alliance. Although they were not ignorant that it is as
impossible for a Roman Catholic to be King of England, as a reformed
Protestant to be King of France.

This last Summer the States General engaged the English and French fleets in
three sea sights wherein there was noe considerable loss of either side
(Excepting Sir Edward Sprague) being all fought nere the bancks upon the Coast
of Holland, Zeland, and Flanders, where the French were less useful at sea
this year, then they were the last, which encouraged the Hollanders still to
boast, and publish in all foreign parts, that they had beaten the two mighty
Kings again at sea in three most glorious Victories. This report made some
persons rashly to say, that the English were either traitors or Cowards,
Notwithstanding Admiral de Ruytter in the last sea fight writ to the States
that it was Gods great mercy, he could keep the sea to guard their Coast.
Although he could not guard the East India Ships upon the Coast of Norway, not
daring to adventure for their protection at sea, any further then the States
Armies and their Allies did by land for the releife of Mastricht, which was
surrendered within 14. days after the first storms made by the English and
French forces, that much surprised the Hollanders, to loose such a considerable
An. 45.
place in so short a time. Which plainly demonstrates to all the world, that
those who are Masters of the field, are Masters of the best garrisons, even as
they that were Masters at sea in the year 1667. were Masters of the Royal
Charles, and the London.

In the month of October last, the Hollanders with their Hackney Appealants,
degenerated English men, charged their Paper gunns again with new expedients
against the meeting of the Parliament, and Framed a Letter in a Dutch dress,
directed to the King of great Brittaigne dated the 25. of October 1673. ( stilo
novo) which they sent by a Trumpeter, after they had first distributed many
thousand copies in English and Dutch amongst their Friends and confederates in
England, and Holland, insinnuating how ready the States General had always
been to give His Majesty all reasonable satisfaction for avoiding the miseries
and Callamities inseperably attending the war, alleging that they thought
the triple Alliance had bound them eternally from any further rupture, adding
that now the Prince of Orange his interest and theirs being united together
with his personal m^r^it, those considerat^ns might inclyne His Majesty to
peace, making a deduction of all that had proceeded at Cologne, whereby they
waued the Lords Plenipotentiares, and appealed from the King unto his Subjects.
And at the same time industriously set on foot a clamor against the Marriage
between the Duke of York and the Duchess of Modena, Then the King prorogued
the Parliament until the 7. of Januarij next, and in the mean time answered
the States Letter from point to point with was sent back by the same Trumpeter.
Whereby it appeared that the States General had found instruments purposely to
deceive his Majesty's Subject, sand delude their own. An. 45.


Then the Appealants consulted with their consorts the Chief Ministers of
State in the Hague, how they should satisfy the Common people in England and
Holland concerning the Kings Letter, whereupon they made several remarques
reducing them under Nine heads, which they also published in printe, impudently
denying all that was asserted by the King in his Answer, and concluded with a
dispute concerning his Soveraignity in the English seas, absolutely denying his
Majesty's right to the Herring fishing. And affirmed that the Plempotentiaries
at Cologne having not shown any ground or cause of their war, it was
reasonable for the States General to declyne any longer treating there,
Especially upon conditions that were unlawful, and not sufferable for their
Subjects, much less to refunde the charge of the war, or to consent unto a
free trade in the East Indies, or to demolish any forts there.

In this Juncture, the Prince of Orange returned to the Hague with great joy
from the Frontiers of Germany, his fortune smiling upon him in the end of this
year, that frowned in the close of the last, Then the States of Holland,
Zeland, and Frizland, to stopp the peoples mouths proclaimed a day of public
thanksgiveing to be solemnized on the 6. of December instant reciting the
perticulars in all their Courants viz, First for the glorious Victories at sea
against the English and French. 2. For taking of Worden by surrender. 3. For
their good success against Bone and Rynebeck. 4. And lastly for the vigorous
procedings of the Spaniards upon the frontiers of France since their
declaration of war, on which day of thanksgiveing the Cannons in every City
roared, and the Predicants in very pulpitt, by order of their Superiors
handled the remarques upon the Kings Answer more then their texts, giving the
people some crombes of Comfort, that their Friends were working for them in
England, Scotland and Yreland, and their Enemies voluntairly leaving Utrecht,
Over-Issel, and Gilderland, upon terms of brandscatting, which brings to my
remembrance a very remarkable Passage, that I lately met with, on the Monthly
day of Humiliation in a Church at Amsterdam. I shall only make a short
repetition in a paragrafe or two of some raptures and ejaculations used in the
Ministers Prayers as nere as possible can be rendered in English out of the
Dutch talk, which I have here also incerted. The first Predicant after he had
made a breife confession of the great and manifold sins and transgressions of
the congregation, he Expostulated in a familiar peticionary way with God
Almighty as fallows. O Here in ghenade aensie^t uwe dienaeren de Staten van
Hollandt; even volck verhoren uyt alse Natien om u te dienen end uwen Heylighen
Naem groot te maken / wy bidden u o Here aensiet den wijn-stock die uwe handt
gheplant heeft in dese Dereenighde Nederlanden / end en laet niet toe dat den
wilden Beer often Beesten van het veldt het uyt-wortelt. O Here omme dat ghy
ous gheesten van verstant hebt ghegheven te kennen de voordeelen die wy hebben
/ end de swackheden van onse vpanden / moeten wy daerom vergaen.

O Lord in mercy look upon thy servants the States of Holland, a people chosen
out of all Nations to serve the, and magnify thy Holy Name, look down we
beseehe the o Lord upon the vineyard, that thine own right hand has planted
in these United Netherlands, suffer not the wild Bore or Beasts of the field
to pluck it up. Oh Lord because those have given us spirits of understanding to
deserne our own advantages, and our enemies infirmities must we therefore
perish.



His Text was in the 16. Cap. of Exodus from the 12. Verse to the 21. After his
Sermon he desired the Congregation to singe the 80. Psalm, then the other
Minister stepped into the Pulpitt, and when the Psalm was ended, he uttered
himself as follows. O Here stort uwen zeghen op de Staten van Hollandt ouse
wettighe Souveraynen / end de Staten vande Dereenighde Provincien haer
gheconfedereerdens de Hoven van Justitie / de Camer van ^^eke^inghe / end de
Achtbare Magistraten van dese Plaetse / behoudt end beschermt den Pri^s van
Oraignien ousen Capiteyn Generael / end gheeft hem victoric over all sijue
vya^den; O Here om dat ghy ons in weynighe jaeren hebt ghegheven macht en^
middelen om ons selven so te water als te land te beschermen teghen de macht
end boosheyt van ouse vyanden / moeten wy daerom vernietight worden / doet met
ons Here naer uwen will / doch verlost ons dit mael uyt de hauden der
Moabiten end Philistijnen / ma^^kt ons onderdaenen van uwe ghenade / op dat wy
instrumenten moghen zijn van uwe heerlijckheydt / O Here often het u gheliefde
de heart vanden Coninck van groot Brittaignien te openen / end de gheesten van
sijnen grooten ^^aedt in it Parliament te verstercken dat Sijne Majesteyt
bewoghen mocht werden tot soodanigen vrede't welek bestaen mochte met het
welvaeren end reputatie vande Staten van defe Dere^nighde Nederlanden.

Pour down thy blessings O Lord upon the States of Holland our lawful
Sovereigns, and the States of the United Provinces their consederates, the
Courts of Justice, the Chamber of Accounts; and the Worp.ll Magistrates of this
Place, Preserve and defend the Prince of Orange our Captain General, and give
him victory over all his enemies; O Lord because thou have afforded us means
and strenght in few years to defend our selves by sea and land, from the
malice, and power of our adversaries, must we therefore be destroyed, do with
us Lord what pleases the, only this time deliver us from the hands of the
Mohebites and Philistines, make us the Subjects of thy mercy, that we may be
the further instruments of thy glory: Oh Lord that it would please the to open
the heart of the King of great Brittaigne, and to stir up the spirits of the
great Council in Parliament, that His Majesty may be inclyned unto such a
peace that may consist with the welfare and reputation of the United States,
in these Netherlands.



His Text was taken out of the 10. Chapter of Judges from the 6. Verse to the
17. and after a teadious and impertinent discourse upon that Subject, he
concluded the day with an exhortation to Charity for releife of the distressed
brethren, whereof one bagg is usally taken by the Predicant to dispose amongst
the pore Isarellites, and the other two are distributed by the deacons amongst
the aflicted in An: 474
the tribe of Judah: Many such precious men, Slipps of the same vine were
lately planted in England, which brought forth sower grapes, that set the
peoples teeth on Edge.

Its possible these notions may not affect all Englishmen, or inclyne them to
believe, that there was any necessity of a war, to reduce or humble these
godly Hollanders; Which induces me to tell you in plain English, I knew the
time when it was as difficult to get a good farm, or a house for a tenant in
England, as it is now to get a good tenant for either, since the Hollanders by
their seditious practices are grown so populous and so great. I knew also
the time when Ipswich, Hadley and Buildstone flourished as much as Harlem,
Leyden, and Delf. And when Ratcliffe and Limhouse flourished as much as Surdam
and Dordr^^ht. And do believe there was a time when Orford, Dunwich, and
Alborough, and other ancient Seaport towns upon that Coast, had not their
Privileges granted, only to Catch Oysters, Macharell, and Sprats, where the
bancks are washed away with the waves, and their Havens stopped up with sands,
while the Fishermen from Anchuysen, Schiedam, Zirrickzee etc. in Holland,
Zeland and Frizland, take the Herrings, Haberdine and linge with their Busses,
Hookers and Dogger boats to increase their strenght and means to dispute the
right and Privileges of free fishing upon the English Coast. Which brings me
also to tell you what the Hollanders say in some of their remarques upon the
Kings Answer to the States Letter, but in another style then formerly they
writ to King James in the beginning of his reign. An. 4^.


In their first Remarque they say that Titus Livius and all the Roman Emperors
gave medalls in gold upon their conquests and Victories. And cite a Text of
Scripture in Exodus 17. and 15. That Moses erected an alter when Ameleck was
beaten calling its name the Lord is my Banner, where the verse following says
the Lord has sworn that he will have war with Ameleck from one generation to
another. In the fourth remarque they say it is not true that the States were
obliged to send Comissioners into England to regulate a trade in the
East Indies, only the King of great Brittaigne proposed a reglement, which was
so absurd, that the English nation would have a trade equal to the
Hollanders, which was fomented by the French, and for fear something might be
undertaken by the French against their State, they sent Monsieur van Bewninghen
for England to remove all sinister impressions, that the French proposalls
might have made upon his Majesty against the Triple Alliance, and offered for
the preservation of the peace of all Christendom, to make a defensive, and
offensive war against France for the further confirmation of the Triple
Alliance, which was rejected and a league made since with France contrary to
the Triple League (which the French Ministers presumptiously called The Beggars
agreement.) And in their Ninth, Remarque which concerns only the Herring
fishing, they say can any body lay claim or make pretense to wha the never
yett possessed, was it not indeavored in the year 1635. by King Charles the
first, His Majesty's Father to introduce a tribute by forcing the same with
some Ships of war, which is repugnant to the long and free custom of
Fishery, that for these last 140. years (Persuant to the treaty made in the
year 1495. between England and their State) has bin continually and quietly
practiced and enjoyed until the year 1635. as aforesiad.

Now I appeal to the greatest Champions for the Hollanders in any part of His
Majesty's Dominions, Whether they can hear without grief, and Astonishment
such impudent Arrogant expressions belehed out up the States and their
Predicants, and Audatiously applied to themselves, with reflections upon the
King and his Kingdoms, or whether they can with patience hear the States and
their mercinaries to give the King of great Brittaigne the ley concerning the
East India trade, or be persuaded that the only way to priserve the peace of
Christendom was to join with the Hollanders in an offensive and defensive
war against the French King, that has lately consumed for much treasure, and
wasted so many families of the Nobility, and gentry toward the Chastizing of
those high and mighty Lords, and great and mighty Lords, that took their titles
from a French Complement, and were protected by the French Kings against all
their Adversaries for the space of sixty eight years together, or whether they
can contain themselves any longer when they hear those States affront the
King of great Brittaigne in that peremptory manner to tell him, that the Crown
of England was never possessed of the herring fishing, or that the late King
his Father had not force of Arms in the year 1635. to obstruct their right to
the herrings upon his own Coast, where they claim the privilege of free
Fishing by prescription of the treaty Anno 1495. which was 77. years before
they were acknowledged to be free Countries, and had the liberty of the English
Coast in Compensation of the leagues offensive and defensive against France,
who were then the Hereditary Enemies of the Crown of England.

But it is objected by their Friends that if the Kings Subjects should eat any
quantities of herrings, barrel codd, or stoc^fish, there would not be such a
consumption of beife, mutton and veale in his Majesty's Kingdoms, which brings
up the rents of Land. And it is pretended that the King is at noe loss by the
Hollanders, Zelanders, and Frizlanders fishing for herring and ^odd, upon his
own Coast which otherwise would be lost for want of taking, and all the
Cloisters, Monasteries and Religious houses in the Spanish Netherlands,
Germany, Poland, France, Westphalia etc. would be left distitude of provisions
which up the strick^ rules of their Religion do abstain from flesh several
weeks in a year, and several days in every week which in England, Scotland
and Ireland, since the Reformation the Protestants are not obliged to do.

As to the Kings Right to the Herring fishing. It admitts noe dispute, being
upon his own Coast. But if any man gives nourishment to a vulture, or huggs a
serpent in his bosom, he may be distroyed for his kindness and eredulity, As
for the Herrings and Codd, that would be lost for want of Catching, and the
Monasteries and Cloisters left destitude for want of provisions, it is a great
fallacy. There would be noe less fish taken if all strangers were obliged to
pay the King a yearly tribute for an acknowledgment of that right, which the
Laws of God, the laws of nature, and the laws of nations, appropriates to the
King of great Brittaigne upon his own Coast: And it would not undervalue the
price of Lands, or lessen the value of mutton beife or veale, if more Herrings,
Codd, and ling, were Eaten in England, but rather increase the public
Treasury, the rents of Lands, and the particular Estates of all trades men. And
for encouragement to the Fishing trade at home, if Every Inkeeper Alehouse
keeper, and vintener in England, should be obliged to buy a barrel of pickled
Herrings once a year. The Hollanders do esteem every stranger, that comes to
inhabit in their united Provinces to render unto the public yearly (viis et
modis) 5. pound sterling at least, although he be of a mean Capacity, there
being so many Excises / Verpounding: Poll money, Chymdy money etc. That from
every Burger who expends 150. pound per annum in his Family a third part of it
goes to the States for public uses. And if the Fishing trade were ushered in
again to the ancient sea port Towns of Suffolk, Norfolk, Lincoln, York
and Northumherland, from whence the first Herring fishers carried it unto
Anchusen in North-Holland, upon certain privileges granted them there (as may
be seen both by the records in the Statehouse and Three Herrings given in an
Eschutchen for the Arms of that City) It would multiply His Majesty's
Subjects by drayning other places to come where they might take the Fish freely
nere their own doors, and find as good, and as quick marketts from thence, as
they do in Holland, Zeland, and Frizland, where they yield ready money into
all parts, after the Fishermen return home from their trading voyages of the
first herring season.

Midsomer Herrings taken by the Hollanders upon the English and Scotch Coast,
are so fatt and delicate, that they are sold in all the 1^. Provinces and
parts adjacent for 1. and 2. stivers a Herring. And in the later and of the
year toward L^nt, when the fat^nes is almost cousumed with the salt and
pickle, those English Herrings are s^alded in fresh water, and ^aten for great
da^ties with vinger, oil, and p^pper, in Harbors, Cloisters and other places.
There are H^rrings in great abundance upon the Coast of Holland, Danemarke,
and Norrway, but very lean, and in the Zuyder-sea from Amsterdam, to the
Texell, they are taken in such quantities, that the pore people buy 40. and 50.
for a stiver by the name of Pan-herrings, which are not fit for pickle,
therefore the Hollanders runn to the Coast of England, and Scotland, wh^re the
Fishing, is more advantageous to the States, then the silver Mines in the
West Indies is to the King of Spain, or the spice trade to the East India
Company of the Netherlands. And the reasons are very plain, and obvious unto
all intelligible men viz: First in regard of the great numbers of Handicrafts,
and trades men that are employed and maintained by the Fisheries, which
increases the public revenue with their infinite payments they make to the
Pactors of wine, bear, etc. where 28. several excises are paid at the eating
of an egg.

Secondly from the great multitudes of seamen that are bredd up by that
employment, and made ^itt both for the service of Marchant-men, and men of war
for the defense of their Country.

Thirdly by the great tra^^ique that is raised from the product of Herring and
Codd-fish, which draws yearly 250000. pound Sterling in ready money from other
parts into the United Provinces, besides the staple Commodities of those other
ajacent Countries, so that the United Netherlands do multiply the ^^ock of
their own Country yearly by those Fish, which they have for Catching from the
English Coast, and runns into all their Cantores and Treasuries, and from
thence out again to build their store houses, whar^es, Castles, ^luices,
Ships, Dikes, dambes, bridges etc. Wherefore it was high time as well to look
into their strenght, as into their ways of acquiring it. And to question them
for their breach of league^, and treatyes, for fear of further assaults, and
surprises.

The only Argument that Cato the Elder used in the Senate of Rome for
distroying the City of Carthage, was from a simillitude ^e used concerning ^n
^^*
green Figgs, that were growing in Carthage whit^in four days before, which
he brought into the S^nate, when the ma^^er was in debat^, from whence he
^^p^l^d* that it was not ^afe, to ^av^ (...) great, and ^^^ dangerous a
neighbor ^^^ n^r^, that mig^t surprise them, before they could ^^ rea^h to
defend themselves. Then reflecting upon the contracts and Covenants* ^^^ often
vyolated by Carthage. The old stomans burnt and razed that City to the ground.

But out of the Ashes of Carthage, there ^prunge up those Pirates of Tunis ^n ^^
and A^g^^rs, that have proved more troublesome unto all Europe then the
Carthagiman^ were greuious* to the old Romans. The Zelanders have followed
their exemples, since the trade went from Midleburgh to Amsterdam, upon the
loss of Sluice in ^landers, when the general Merchants that removed, could be
noe longer secure there, and the Merchant adventurers ret^red to Delf, then to
Rotterdam, then to Dort, now nowhere, since their Charter is broken, and the
English staple of Cloth, exposed to contempt that was once accounted the glory
of England.

As to the spice trade which the Hollanders have ingross^d by secr^^t fraud,
and open vyolence. The States General cannot be so va^ne to believe, they
shall enjoy it any longer then there may be an opertunity to take it from them
again, notwithstanding they have strenghtned themselves in the East Indies,
not only to trade, but to fight there, which is a new way of Mar* handizing,
that the English were not accustomed unto.

POl^ron, Amboyna, and Jaccatra (now called Batavia) were all the p^ss^ssions
of the English, and the spice trade, was by Covenants and contracts divided
between the English and the Dutch Companies. The Ships Bona Esperanza, and
Henery Bonadventura, belonged to Englishmen, and were taken from t^em in time
of peace, by the East India Company of the Nettherland? who have not yett given
any satisfaction or reparation ^or the ^ame, or for the damages sustained by
the loss of their voyages, but are left to the proper ^^emedies.

The product of Fish and spice, have brought the Hollanders all things of the
growth of other Countries. And by consequence thereof, they have not only
brought down the price of English Tinn, and the staple goods of English
Plantations, but have also lessned the value of all English Woolen
Manufactures, by their li^^y Woolesy, and Fastaine ^^uffes, wherewith they now
do furnish the Boares, and Boarines, which formerly used to wear good English
Cloth, and the better sort of ^^opell Aparrell themselves with ^ilks,
Mohaires, ^^amletts, and velvetts, purposely to discourage all English woolen
Manufactures, and encourage their own, where they are cheaper wrought with
pickle herrings and buttermilk, then they can be made in England with good
beife and strong bear. The Hollanders now are resolved to give noe more for a
pound of English woole in the Cloth, stuff, or stockings, then they think it
worth the working, or for English lead or oar, then they esteem the labor of
digging, and smelting, and ^oe employ their Factors in England to buy it
accordingly, Although they ^ell their nuttmegs cloves and mace, at their own
prices, more then treble advantages, and their ^ine threads for 30. per cent
profitt and upwards.

And because the Weavers* Spinners* ^nitters and other people in the
Netherlands (whose necessity makes them sparing and laborious) should not stand
still for want o^ work* they are not only furnished from Scotland with woole
upon sheep s^ins (cu^ Privilegi^) but indirectly with English woole / welsh
and Irish woo^es in great quantities. And directly with Spanish wooles in
English bottomes * and Cotton woole which is fallen from a noble to Ni^e pence
as su^ars etc. are si^c^ Sur^^^^m was surrendered to the Zelanders And since the
new England Ships with diverse others d^tchified English men* are yearly
fraighted from ^ir^inea and Barbados that never arrives in old England / but
carried with side winds into ^olla^d and the East Countries whereby His
Majesty is not only defra^ded of his Custumes, and his ^eam^n di^couraged* but
the goods undervalued which ought to he menaged to greater advantages of the
King and his Kingdoms.

It is Convenient now to show you, when the house of Bourgundy became allied
with the house of Austria. And Austria with Spain, ^s also their respec^ive
successions, and likewise the several successions in the Crowns of England,
and France. And consequently when the Hollanders, and their confederated
Provinces of the Union, revolted from Spain and Austria, and made themselves
Sovereign States; And after some observations thereupon, give you a more
particular answer to Englands appeal. And so for this present year conclude.

A brief description of the first Alliances betvveen the Houses of Bourgundy,
Austria, and Spain, with the several successions of Emperors, Kings of
Spain, Kings of England, and France, since that Alliance.
Philip Duke of Bourgundy the 30. Earl of Holland, Zeland etc. That first
^^s^^tuted the Order of the Golden F^ce, dyed in the year 146^* leaving
Charles his only Son and heir, his Successor* who was s^aine at the battle
of Nancy, and left Maria Duchess of Bourgundy his only Daughter and heir,
that Married Maximillian Archduke of Austria, Son and heir, of Fredrick
Emperor of Germany, by whom she had Philip her only Son, that Married Jane
the Daughter of Ferdinand and Jsabella, King and Queen of Arragon and Castile.

Emperors of Germany.
Maximillian the first that Married Maria de Vallois, Duchess of Bourgundy,
begun his reign Anno -- 1493 Charles the fifth Married Jsabella Daughter of Don
Emanuel King of Portugal, and begun his reign Anno -- 1520 Ferdinand the first
Married Anna Ulad^slai Daughter of the King of Hungary, and Bohem^a, begun his
reign Anno * 1558 Marua^llian the second Succeeded his Father, he Married
Maria the Daughter of Charles the fifth his niece, and begun to reign Anno --
1564 Rodolphus Succeeded his Father Maximillian, he dyed without Issue, and
begun to reign Anno -- 1576 Mathias Succeeded his Brother Rodolphus, he
Married Ann the Daughter of Ferdinando Archduke of Austria, and dyed without
Issue, begun his reign Anno -- 1612 Ferdinando the second Succeeded his nephew
Mathias, and Married Ellenor Sister to the Duke of Mantoua, he begun his reign
Anno -- 1619 Ferdinando the third Succeeded his Father, he Married first the
Infanta of Spain, and secondly the Daughter of the Duke of Tuscany, begun his
ra^gne Anno -- 1656 Leopoldus the Son of Ferdinando King of Hungary, was
Married first to Margaret the Daughter of Philip the IV. King of Spain, and
Secondly to the Duchess of Insprugh, * after she had unkindly treated the Duke
of York,* begun his reign Anno -- 1658
Kings of Spain.
Philip the first in the Right of Jane his wife, Daughter of Ferdinando and
Jsabella King and Queen of Arragon and Caste^le, begun to reign Anno -- 1501
Charles the first Succeeded his Father Philip, and was also Elected Emperor of
Germany by name of Charles the fifth, begun to reign Anno -- 1519 Philip the
second Succeeded his Father Charles, and Married first Queen Marie of England,
and afterward Elizebeth the Daughter of Henery the second, King of France, and
begun his reign Anno -- 1556 Philip the third Succeeded his Father, and
Married Anna the Daughter of Maximilian the II. Emperor of Germany, he begun
his reign Anno -- 1598 Philip the fourth Succeeded his Father, he Married
Isabella the Daughter of Henery the IV. King of France, and after her decease
Marie Anna the Daughter of Ferdinando the third, Emperor of Germany, begun his
reign Anno -- 1621 Charles the second Succeeded his Father Philip, who was
begot of Marie Anna, began to reign Anno -- 1665
Kings of France.
Lewis the XII. descended in a directt line from Charles the V. surnamed the
Wise, Married Anna the Widow of Charles the VIII. and Daughter of the Duke of
Brittaigne, begun to reign Anno -- 1499 Francis the first Succeeded, and
began to reign -- 1516 Henery the second Succeeded his Father, he Married
Catherin de Medecis Daughter of the Duke of Tuscany, begun to reign Anno --
1547 Francis the second Succeeded his Father, he died without Issue, begun his
reign Anno -- 1559 Charles the nyneth Succeeded his Brother and died also
without Issue, he begun to reign Anno -- 1560 Henery the third Succeeded his
Brother, quitting the Kingdom of Poland, he Married Louysa de Vaudamont and
died without Issue, and with him Ended the race of the Vallois, he begun to
reign Anno -- 1574 Henery de Bourbone Surnamed the IV. Succeeded. His first
wife was Margaret de Vallois, for want of Issue by her he Married Maria de
Medecis, Daughter of the Duke of Tuscany, he begun to reign Anno -- 1590 Lewis
the XIII. Succeeded his Father, he Married Anna the Daughter of Philip the III.
King of Spain, begun to reign Anno 1610 Lewis the XIV. Succeeded his Father,
he Married Marie the Daughter of Philip the IV. King of Spain, by his first
wife, that was the Daughter of Henery the IV. and Grand Father to the French
King that now is, who begun to reign Anno -- 1643
Kings and Queens of England.
Henery the seventh followed Richard the third, whom he slew at the batle of
Bosworth, being of the house of Lancastar, he Married Elizebeth, Eldest
Daughter of King Edward the IV* descended from R. Plantagenet Duke of York,
the first and next heir to the Crown, and thereby ended the Civil war
between York and Lancaster, he begun his reign Anno 1458 Henery the eight,
Succeeded his Father, he had six wives, first, Katherin, Infanta of Spain,
Widow of his brother Arthur, Mother of Queen Marie, second, Ann of Bullaine
Mother of Queen Elizebeth, third, Jane Se^mour Mother of King Edward the VI
fourth, Ann of Cleef, fifth, Katharin Howard, sir, Katherin Parr, he begun to
reign Anno -- 1509 Coward the sixth Succeeded his Father, who died without
Issue, he begun his reign Anno -- 1546 Marie Succeeded her Brother, she
Married Philip the second, King of Spain, and died without Issue, she begun to
reign Anno -- 1553 Elizebeth Succeeded her Sister, and Married not, she began
to reign Anno -- 1558 King James of Scotland *descended from a Daughter of
Henery the VII.* Succeeded her. He Married Ann the Daughter of Fredrick the II.
King of Denmark, he begun to reign over great Brittaigne Anno -- 1602 Charles
the first Succeeded his Father King James, he Married the Daughter of Henery
the fourth, King of France, and begun to reign Anno -- 1625 Charles the second
Succeeded his Father, and Married Katherin the Daughter of John the fourth,
King of Portugal, begun his reign Anno -- 1648
WHEN the Hollanders in the year 15^2. first took up Arms under the Conduct
of William of Nassaw Prince of Orange, for defense of themselves and their
liberties against Philip the second, King of Spain, who sent the Inquisition
into the Netherlands. The States of the seven United Provinces, continued Nine
years in open war, before they absolutely renounced the King and his
Government. The Prince of Orange being murdered at Delfe in the year 1584.
Prince Maurice his son succeeded him at 18. year old, then the States of
Holland, with the United Provinces, offered the Soveraignity of their Countries
unto Henery the third, King of France, upon any conditions he pleased to accept
them, who refused to be troubled with those people or their Country. Then the
States of the Union, made their humble addresses and applications to Queen
Elizebeth (who had used her mediation to the King of Spain for a
reconciliation without effect) offering the Soveraignity of their Countries
likewise unto her Majesty, who also refused the same, but in the year 1585.
took upon her the protection of them and their Provinces. The Zelanders in that
Juncture gave their medalls in Gold and silver with these in^criptions,
Luctor, et Emergo. On the one side, and Deo favente Regina, on the other. Whose
protection. The Queen* continued for 17. years in open d^fiance of Spain, and
the House of Austria; And then dyed.

IT is observed, when the Hollanders were upon Framing their Government, they
continued many months in Consultation, whither to setle the Roman Catholic
Religion, or the Reformed Religion would be most for their profitt and
advantage, at last they concluded that the Reformed Religion, would most
consist with their Religious concerment^, in procuring aid and assistance from
other Princes and States against Spain. And that a tolleration of all other
Religions would most increase their Common wealth: So it was indifferent to
the Hollanders, which Religion to Chose, they took their measure of Religion
by their interest. Then the Jews that were banished out of Portugal, Itally
and Spain, (for denying Christ and his Doctrine) the ancient Merchants of the
world, were joyfully received at Amsterdam. The Roman Catholics, the
Lutherans, the Arminians, and people of all other persuasions, had the like
free entertaiment in Amsterdam, and the other Cities, and Towns in the United
Provinces, but the Reformed Hollanders (whose Godliness is their greatest gain)
overeached them all.

Its also observed that the Hollanders never atempted any thing of foreign
Comerce considerable, until the Jews and other Nations amongst them, first
projected their East- and West India trade, they were content before their
Reformation with the traffic they could raise upon saltfish, butter, cheese,
and linen weaving. King James had nickt them in the beginning of his reign,
if their party in England had not strongly opposed it. And to the shame of the
English Congregation^ in the Netherlands be it spoken, The King of great
Brittaigne has not greater enemies in the world then are planted in those
assemblies, Notwithstanding the affront and indignity that the Magistrates of
Midleburgh have shown to English men in appointing them such a convenient
place for their Church (in that City) being part of the house were the
Ideotts fools and made men are kept, however the States do pay the Minister
in regard those preachers, are obliged to uphold the Doctrine of the
Netherlands* and the members of the Congregations do all contribute much more
to the public charge by excises etc. then the Dutchmen do in England where
they pay their own Ministers themselves. I shall amongst the number of the
selected members, that were admitted into the English Congregations, in Holland
and Zeland, mention only two Families. Mr. Jacob Pergens of Amsterdam, and his
Family being one, and Mr. Peter Boudaen of Midleburgh in Zeland and his Family
the other. Mr. Pergens was borne at Cologne in Germany, afterward he inhabited
in the City of London, and was made a free Denizon of England, in the
beginning of the late King Charles his reign, then he transported himself to
Amsterdam, where he was made a Director of the West India Company, and so
remaynes to this time. Mr. Boudaen was borne at Antwerpe, who lived also in
London, as a Factor, and was likewise made a free Denizon of England, then he
transported himself unto Midleburgh aforesaid, where he was made an Elder of
the English Church, and a Director of the East India Company, unto which
office, his son Peter Boudaen after his Fathers decease, was chosen, and John
Bo^daen his Brother a Scheepen, who follows the Capers employment, and the
stepps of Mr. Pergens and their Ancestors, whose practices and unjust dealings,
are brei^ely set forth in the several Cases hereunto annexed. Wilful
fraud, and forgery in private Persons, is punished with death, both in France
and the Spanish Netherlands. An 51.
But where it his found in Ministers of Civil Justice, the very Pagans exposed
them to the most Exquisite tortures, and ignominious deaths. How far the
Civell Magistrates of Holland and Zeland are guilty of fraud, and oppression,
time will show.

Wherefore I have made a perfect Cattalogue of the several, and respective
Lords, and Magistrates in the Government of Amsterdam, and Midleburgh, with a
description of their respective Offices, and places in the several Judicatures
for this present year (16^3.) being a true pattern of all the rest of the
Sovereign Cities, and Towns, in Holland, and Zeland, which have their
several and respective Privileges, whereby may be seen, the Frame and model
of their independent structures, and goodly Common weath, and how Geometrically
every thing hangs together, yett those Soveraignities, do not agree well
amongst themselves. Amsterdam is ag^^nst Leyden, and Leyden against Harlem,
Rotterdam against Del^e, and Del^e against Dort, etc. Yea likewise the Imperial
Provinces, do not well accord one with another, Holland is against Zeland, and
Frizland, against Holland, and all the rest against those three Marritine
Provinces.

Magistrates of Amsterdam Anno 1673. Governing.
Burgermasters.
JOhannes H^dde. These are Elected every year Dr. Gillis Valckenier. Cornelis
Geelvinck, Here van Castricum. on Candlemas day 2. of Febr. Johan Huydekooper,
Here van Ma^seveen.

Scheepenen.
Cornelis Backer. Johan Appelman. Mr. Johan Corver. Nicolas Witsen. Hendrick
Roeters. Leonard Ranst. Aegidi^s Santin. Jacob ^ad Neck. Jocobsz. Hendrick
Becker.

Drotescape s^aden or Common Council these are relected for life.
Dr. Nicolas Tulp. Mr. Johan Corver. Barnard Schellinger. Cornelis Graeflandt.
Mr. Johan Rendorp. Johannes Hudde. Nicolas Pancras. Mr. Vincent van Bronckhorst
Jacob van Neck. Dr. Johan ten Grotenhuys. Cornelis Geelvinck. Mr. Jacob
Borreel. Dr. Gillis Valckenier. Leonard Ranst. Cornelis van Vlooswyck. Mr.
Nicolas Witsen. Nicolas van Loon. Mr. Nicolas Roch. Dr. Roelent Ernst. Louys
Trip. Gerraert Hasselaer. Nicolas Opmeer. Mr. Hendrick Hoo^t. Coenraet Klinck.
Cornelis de Vlaminck, van Outs-H^orn. Johan Appelman. Isaac Commelyn. Jacob
Jacobsz Hinloopen. Michiel Tielens. Cornelis Backer. Hendrick Becker. Mr.
Coenraet van Beuningen. Dierick Blom. Mr. Johan Huydekoper. Aegidius Blom.
Jacob van Neck Jacobsz*

Bewinthebbers or Directors of the East India Company elected for life.
Johan Munter, Burgermaster. Cornelis Gravelandt, S^hepen. Daniel Bernards. Mr.
Johan Huydekoper, Burgermaster. Johan Hulst, Schepen. Nicolas vande Cappelle,
Schepen. Mr. Lambert Reynst, Idem. Jeronymus de Haes. Cornelis van Vlooswijck,
Idem. Dierick Tulp, Schepen. Hendrick Brauwer of Leyden. Pieter van Loon.
Nicolas Pancras, Burgermaster. Dr. Gillis Valckenier, Burgermaster. Hendrick
Scholten. Isaac Hochepiet, Junior. Cornelis Backer, Schepen. Cornelis Silvius.
Pieter de Graef. Hendrick Becker. Mr. Pieter van Dam, their Advocate.

Bewinthebbers or Directors of the West India Company elected for life.
Jacob Pergens. Johan van Erpecum. Johan Rijckaerts. Nicolas van Beeck. Dierick
Spiegel, Schepen. Mr. Arnout Hoo^t, Schepen. Hans Bontemantel, Schepen. Isaac
van Heuvel. Mr. Cornelis Kloeck, Schepen. Mr. Pieter Schaep, Schepen. Mr.
Michiel ten Hove, their Advocate.

Burgemasters, Schepenen and Raden elected in Midleburgh the last of July 1673.
to serve for the following year.
Burgermasters.
Mr. Willem Brauwer. Mr. Christiaen Thibault.
Schepenen or Judges. ^aden or Common Council. Mr. Gillis Munninex. Johan
Schorer. Johan le Sage. Johan Lampsen. Mr. Iacobus Pec^ius. Mr. Fredrick
Huyssen. Mr. Ioris Breast. Johan Boudaen. Benjamin Rawle. Mr. Pieter Duvelaer.
Mr. Gualterus vander Poort. Isaac Vervaecq. Mr. Sampson de Keyser. Johan
Blondel. Mr. Johan Honinck. Mr. Johan Becker. Steven Voet. Dr. Gelenus Tresel.
Laurens Willemsz Verpoorten. Mr. Johan vande Poele. Mr. Johan Petri vanden
Brande. Dr. Anthom Everaer^s. Mr. Aegidius Malliaert. Mr. Arnout vanden Helm,
Pensionaris.

Lords of the Admirallity in Zeland.
Reynier vander Beke, of Midleburgh. Cornelis Pous, of Sirickzee. N.
Eversdijck, of Tergoes. Bonifacius Vryberghen, of Terto^n. G. Inghels, of
Flushing. Pieter Munninex, of Terveer. Van Beveren, of Dort. Borst van Waveren,
of Amsterdam. Panhuysen, of Uytrecht. Daniel Fannius, Fisead. Johan
Steengracht, Secretary. Memorandum.
That in all Admiralties there are 3. Lords of other Provinces joined.

Directors of the East India Company for Zealand, are 12. elected, to serve for
their lives, and have stipends with other perquisites, worth respectively to
every man, 300. pound Sterling par annum.
Johan le Sage, Burgermaster. Gillis Mun^nex, Burgermaster. Alexander de Munck.
Pieter Boudaen. Arnout vanden Helm, Pensionaris or Recorder of Midleburgh.
David van Reyghensberghe. Willem de Nastauw, H^^r^ van Odij^k, Premier Noble.
Willem Brauwer, Burgermaster. Daniel Fannius, Fis^^^ of the Admirallity. Jacob
van Hooren, Burgermasters. of Flishing. Apollinius Ingels, Burgermasters. of
Flishing. Cornelis Kien, of Terveer.
Directors of the West India Company for Zeland.
van Midleburgh.
Johan vande Poele. Johan Lampsen. Johan Rodemaecker. Johan Ronberghe.
van Vlissiaghen.
De Here van Hecke. De Here van Peeren.
van Tervere.
De Here Lendert Tyssen.
van ter-Tolen.
De Here Johan Gripskercke.
Den Advocaet vande Compagnie.
De Here vander Heyde.
Memorandum.
That the Magistrates of Midleburgh and Flushing, will not trust any of their
moneys, upon the securities of lands, houses, or Comptores in Zeland, for fear
of the Common people, who they have betrayed into the war, but remitt the
greatest parts of their Estates, to London, Amsterdam, and Antwerpe, where they
find trusteefor the same, to employ their moneys, at interst Mr. Daniel
Fannius, and G. Engels, have gotten 15,000. pound sterling by this war, and
the last, Mr. Engels upon the his late marriage before the war gave the account
of his Estate to be 4000. pound sterling, now its valued at 80000. pound as by
his rates in Assesments and taxes appears. They, and the Bouda^ns are the
Chief parchasours, in surrinam, and have many considerable plantations there.

THe Burgermasters of the Cities, in their several Jurisdictions, account
themselves Sovereigns. The Pensionaris, is the Recorder. The Schepen, are the
Judges, who with the Burgermasters do hear, and determine all causes both
Civell, and Criminal; The Raden are the Common Council. Out of whom, and the
College of the Riders^hape, which is their gentry, or Nobility, that have one
voice in the 19. The Deputies are chosen, which they send to their Assemblies
of the States of Holland, who levys money, upon extraordinary Cases, from their
respective Provinces. The Deputies sent to the States General, are chosen out
of the same people, who are only stipendaries of the Provinces, and do noe
Acts of state, but by the directions and consent of their respective
Sovereigns, which they serve. The Lords of the Admiralty, who are the Judges
of all Sea affairs, and from whom there is noe appeal, but to the States
General, are likewise selected out of those Magistrates and people. The
Gecomitteerde ^aden or Council of the States of Holland* who continue at the
Hague all the year, and act according to their instructions, as a Court of
Judicature in all Cases concerning the public revenues, and deal in matters
concerning the Militia, and payments of money, as also for bringing in the
several repartitions, allotted upon the respective Cities, and divisions,
toward the public charge of the Country, are also chosen out of these and
such like worthy members.

The Provincial Court of Judicature of Holland and West-Frizland, which
consist of a certain number, are also elected out of the Common Counsels etc.
And sent from the respective Cities, and continues all the year at the Hague
(excepting the times of their vacations) unto whom appeals are made from the
Scheepen, or Competent Judges of the Cities. Then after a teadious time of
trouble, and Expense, if Sentences be Irregulary given by the Provincial Court
(as very often times they are) Appeals are made from them unto the Hoghen
^aedt, or Supreme Court of Judicature at the Hague, who are likewise chosen,
out of the Persons aforesaid, and sent from the respective Cities to the
Hague, who also remaynes constantly there, and have an influence one upon the
other, being of the same principalls against all Forraigners. Then after their
Sentences definitive, if the Plantifes, or defendents, have not expended all
their patience, money, and creditt. They may have revisions of their lamentable
Cases (upon security for Costs) to some part of the Supreme Court of
Judicature, and 3. or 4. of the Deputies of the States General, who are, fae
similes, and Governed by the people. And after all this time spent, and
oppressions laid upon strangers, if they should complain to their respective
Princes, or their Ambassadors abroad, or Ministers of State at home; The
Hollanders impudently reply, that they are Sovereign States, and who shall be
Competent judges, in Civell Actions, between them and other Sovereigns, or
the Subjects of both, in such Cases, but some neutrall Prince, which cannot be
found, that will intermedle with such a perverse, and wicked generation, as the
Holland Sovereigns are, being so teadious in their resolutions, so
tumultuous in their practices, and so uncertain in all their treaties, and
contracts, that noe Prince can have any due ` Performance of agreements, from
so many Sovereigns and Soveraignities, without a real caution given by the
Generality, that might be a cheque upon them, both by sea, and land, which may
be obtained in this Juncture by the King of great Brittaigne to all intents and
purposes. Where the Soveraignity, is in the Common people, there is noe sense
of An* 52*
Honor or honesty. And where Roberies, and spoils, have been often committed,
at noone day, there cannot be any security, without greater Caution.

The Personal Security, of those Sovereign Provinces, and of the Sovereign
Cities, are of little value, since the Lords of Midleburgh (who have got so
much by privatering) that were all obliged to make good their Banck of Lending,
or Lumbard, cannott be made liable to answer, the pore orphants, Widows, and
others, whose moneys are drawn by those Magistrates out to the value of many
hundred thousand pounds Sterling, and now the Lumbard is become Banckrupt, the
pore people, and Creditors, are ready to perish for want. And the Banck of
Amsterdam is not infallable, where so many bills of exchange are paid, with
paper ticketts, there being not half so much money in specie, as the Banck,
has taken in upon Creditt.

There is noe reason that the King of great Brittaigne should take the word of
those States, who cannott ( as they are Soveraigues) prevail with any of their
own Subjects, to trust them with 100. pound in money or goods, to be paid by
the public, although they would give their obligations for it, unless they
would oblige themselves as private persons, whose Estates are visible in
actions, as Directors, or Participants, of the East- and West India Companies;
That are so unwilling to part with any thing to Strangers, upon any terms
whatsoever, which they have gotten into their hands, and possessions, by
unrightuousnes, as appears by the three several Cases following. Yett
neverthclcss, the Appealants to the Parliament say. It is the interest of great
Brittaigne, to support the Hollanders and their Government.

The Continuation of the Case between Sir William Courten, his Heirs and
Assigns, AND The East India Company of the Netherlands, concerning the Ships
Bona Esperanza and Henery Bonaventura* to the 23. of December. 1673.
With some Considerations annexed, and Octjections answered.
SIR William Courten late of London Marehant, Endimion Porter, Esquire, John
Weddal, Nathaniel Mountney, George Townesend, Thomas Kynaston, Merchants, and
diverse others Participants with them, set forth several great Ships, laden
with money and Marchandizes, for the Coast of India, China and Japan, in the
year 1636. 1637. and following years, for trading voyages, persuant to their
Letters Patents under the great Seal of England.

After the death of Sir William Courten, William Courten his Son and Heir, and
the surviving Partners, set forth the said Ships Bona Esperanza and Henery
Bonadventura ( inter alia) in the year 1641. forsupply of their Factories, and
to bring home their Effects from India and Parts adjacent.

Afterward William Courten, being indebted to diverse Persons, in several
great sums of Money, amounting unto 100000. Pounds and upwards, for which Sir
Edward Littleton, his Brother in Law, stood obliged; The said William Courten
did by his indenture and Bill of sale, dated the 26. day of April 1642. grant,
and assign, all his Interest, and share of stock, in the said Ships and
Factories in India, to Sir Edward Littleton, for his indemnity from the said
debts, provided the surplus should be returned to the said Courten.

Afterward William Courten, and Sir Edward Littleton, reciting the first Bill
of sale, and a great debt of 24800. Pounds due to Sir Paul Pindar, they grant
and assign unto Sir Paul, all their Interest and share of stock, in the Ships
Bona Esperanza and Henery Bonadventura, with all Freights, proceeds by a
tripartite Indenture, and Bill of Sale, dated the 19. of December 1642.
Provided that the surplus, should be applied toward the discharge of Sir
Echrard Luttuten's engagements.

On the 25. of June in the year 1643. the said Ship Bona Esperanza with her
lading, was taken in an hestile manner, in the Streights of Mallacca, in her
passage from Goa toward Maccao in China, by two Ships of war called the
Vendilo and Portugallo, commanded by Captain Vermerren and Captain Gecland (and
the Lieutenant of the Fort at Mallacca belonging to the East India Company of
the Netherlands, under a pretense that Mr. Courten and his Partners, traded
with the Portugalls their Enemies, not withstanding there was a Truce made
between the King of Portugal, and the States General, for ten years in all
parts of the Indies and Europe, which was concluded at the Hague on the 12. of
June 1641. by Don T^^^^^ de Mendoca Furtado, Ambassador from Don John King of
Portugal.

In the same year 1642. the Officers of the said East India Company took the
Ship Henry Benadventura with her lading into their possession, near the Island
Mauritius, and converted both the Ships and Goods to their own use, to the loss
and damage of Mr. Courten and his Assigns, and the rest of the Partners, the
sum of 85000. Pounds Sterling, as by the proofs taken in the High Court of
Admirallity in England appears.

On the 5. of September 1644, the Proprietors having addressed themselves to
the High Court of Admirallity, and procured an Admonition to be given unto
Monsr. Albertus Joachimy, the States Ambassador then resident in England,
Intimating that they intended to examine Witnesses, ^^ perpetuam rei meinortam,
concerning the spoils and damages of the said Ships and lading; Which
Admonition was also affixed upon one of the Pillars of the Royal Exchange,
where it remained eight days publicly, to the end that the East India Company
of the Netherlands, or any Person for them, might retain a Proctor to cross
examine any of the said Witnesses, if they pleased.

In the year 1647. Sir Paul Pinder makes a Procuration or Letter of attorney to
Jonas Abeels of Amsterdam Merchant, dated the 11. of Feb. 1647. old ^^^le, and
also sent him an authentic Copy of the said tripartite indenture, attested by
Joshua Mamet of London Publicq Notary.

In the year following William Courten being insolvent by reason of other
losses, absented himself and went privately to the Hague to Mr. Jacob Pergens,
who was not ignorant of the Premises in every circumstance, having received the
perticulars of the damages amounting unto 85000. Pound, yet nevertheless to
imbroil the Subjects of both Nations, he persuaded Mr. Courten to make another
Bill of sale dated the 22. of February 1648. reciting therein that Mr. Courten
being indebted to Mr. Pergens in several sums of money, he granted and
assigned all his right and interest in the said Ships and lading to him the
said Pergens, Provided that Pergens should pay the surplus over and above his
pretended debt to such person and persons lawful clayming under Courten, which
bill of sale was signed by William Courten and Jacob Pergens, and attested by
Domini^^ue Coulyn, David Goubard, and Solomon vander Heyde publicq Notary in
the Hague.

In the month of May following, Gerrit Coren, Publicq Notary at Amsterdam by
order of Jonas Abeels, insinuated his Procuration from Sir Paul Pindar, and the
Original bill of sale from William Courten and Sir Echrard Littleton, to the
Directors of the East India Company, interdicting their payment of any money
for Courtens share, and stock in the Ships and lading aforesaid, to any person
or persons whatsoever, but unto the said Jonas Abeels, in right of Sir Paul
Pyndar, protesting that if they did other wise, it should be no discharge unto
them; which insinuation and Protest was done by the said Notary Publicq, on the
25. of May 1648. in the Assembly of the said Directors at their Chamber in
Amsterdam, in the presence of Ian Iansen and Adrian Nys witnesses thereunto.

In the Month of October following, Jonas Abeels caused to be arrested in the
hands of the said East India Company, all such sumes of money, as should be
found due from the said Company concerning the said two Ships and their
lading, that out of the said moneys, Sir Paul Pindar share, and proportion
should be paid in the first place, to him the said Jonas Abeels in his
quallity; which Arrest was made the first of October 1648. by Goosen Daniels,
Bode or Messenger; And a second Arrest was made by Willem Iansen, Bode or
Messenger, in November following both which the Court declared to be valid.

Notwithstanding all these Admonitions and proceedings, the Directors of the
East India Company at their Chamber in Midleburgh on the 18. of September 1649.
made an underhand agreement with the said Jacob Pergens for ^5000. gilders,
upon Caution given by the said Jacob Pergens and Peter Boudaen of Midleburgh
Merchant, to save the said Company harmeles and indempnified from Sir Paul
Pindar, and others concerning the said money, or any after claymes.

Jonas Abeels on the 1^. of May 1650. understanding of the underhand agreement
at Midleburgh, summons the Directors of th'East-India Company before the
Magistrates of Amsterdam, and declares against them that they should be
condemned to pay the 85000. gilders to him in right of Sir Paul Pindar with
damages for the same until, effectual payment.

Then the Directors of th'East-India Company, summoned Jacob Pergens, and Peter
Boudaen, on the 13. of September 1650. to indempnify them from Sir Paul Pindar,
for the said money, and free them of all Costs accordingly, as by the Acts of
the Court appears. In the same year 1650. Sir Paul Pindar dyed, and soon after
Jonas Abeels dyed also So the right of Action remained in statuquo.

In the year 1654. William Tonnes, Executor of Sir Paul Pindar, and several of
the Proprietors and Adventurers, exhibited their claim for the Original loss
and damages of 85000. Pound Sterling, before the English and Dutch
Commissioners at London, appointed by the Treaty made between Oliver Cromwell
and the States General, which by provisoe in the said Treaty was referred to
the Protestant Cantons of Switserland, if the said Commissioners did not
compose the same with in three months.

Afterward the Proprietors, and Adventurers, applied themselves to Mr.
Secretary Thunder, for a Commission to be directed to the Protestant Cantons,
who answered that most of the Proprietors, being Delinquents, by Act of
Parliament, for adhering to the late King, whereby they had forfeited their
Estates, they could not expect any protection from his Highness Oliver Cromwell,
therefore persuaded them to desist from any further Prosecution ( protempore.)

In the year 1660. upon His Majesty's most happy restoration, several of the
Proprietors and adventurers, on the behalf of themselves, and the rest of the
Interested, made their address to Sir Edward Nicholas, Principal Secretary of
State, to move His Majesty to recommend their case, concerning the Ships Bona
Esperanza, and Henery Bonadventura, to the States General for satisfaction and
reparation.

Whereupon Sir Edward Nicholas having informed the King, the true state of the
case, and also intimated to His Majesty what great services and sufferings Sir
William Courton and Sir Paul Pindar, had undergone for the Crown of England,
both in the time of King James, and the late King, as also of the particular
sufferings of Sir Edward Littleton, and several of the other Proprietors, His
Majesty was graciously pleased to direct his Letter under his sign Manual, to
the States General, signifying that the said spoils and damages being
committed against the Laws of common Amity, upon his Subjects, who had merited
so much from the Crown, he Earnestly required the States General to make
satisfaction to the Persons interessed and injured, according to the proofs
made in his high Court of Admirallity, signifying also that he was obliged in
Justice and Honor to see it effected accordingly.

In persuance of which Letter, and several Orders of the Councell-Table for
Instructions to Sir George Downing, who was then Envove Extraordinary for His
Majesty at the Hague, diverse Memorialls, Answers and Replies, passed between
him and the States General, in the year 1662. concerning the said spoils and
damages of those Ships Bona Esperanza and Henery Bonadventura, wherein the
States General denied not the matter of fact, but would have Evavaded any
other satisfaction to the Proprietors and Participants, then what the
East India Company by Combination, had given to Jacob Pergens upon his
fraudulent practice as aforesaid.

In the year 1662. the States General having instructed Mr. Simon van Hoorn,
and Mr. Michiel van Gogh their Ambassadors in England, to get the said
spoils and depredations concerning the said Ships to be mortified, and
Extinguished in the Treaty then depending at Whitchall, his Majesty declared
he would break of the said treaty, unless satisfaction and reparation should
be made for the said Ships, according to the said Letter of recommendation, to
the States General at the Hague as aforesaid.

Whereupon there was a particular Erception in the 15. Article of the said
Treaty concluded at Whitchall the 4. of September 1662. that the damages
concerning those two Ships, Bena Esperanza and Henery Bonadventura should not
be comprehended in the Extinguishment and mortification of former losses and
injuries in the East Indies, but reserved for reparation according to his
Majesty's Letters of Recommendation as aforesaid, and Expressed in these words
poterint litem inceptam prosiqui etc. which agreement was also attested under
the Hands and Seals of the late Duke of Albermarle, the Earl of Manchester,
the Lord Hollis, the Lord Bartlet, Sir George Carteret, Sir Edward Nicholas,
and Sir William Morice, Commissioners that Treated with the States Ambassadors.

In the year following Sir George Downing in persuance of the said Treaty, held
a Conference with the Pentionaris John de Wit and the Deputies of the States
General, in the presence of Mr. Peter van Dam, and two of the Directors of the
East India Company, in the Chamber of the States General, to adjust the said
damages, But in stead thereof the Company made several impertinent
constructions, upon the Law of England, in the Case of Sir Paul Pindar and Sir
Edward Littleton; Nothwithstanding the said Company had the Opinions by them,
under the hands of Sir John Glynn, Sir John Maynard, Sir Edward Turner and
Master Sergeant Baldwyn, affirming that William Courten had nothing in him to
grant to Jacob Pergens, after the Bills of Sale to Littleton and Pindar, which
made them absolute Proprietors by the Law of England; Only there was a
possibility left in Courten, call them to Account, after their debt should be
paid, which opinions were also confirmed by Sir G^^^s S^^^t, Sir William
Turner, Sir Walter Walker, and Sir Timothy Baldwyn, Doctors of the Civil Laws,
and, delivered to Mr. Peter van Dam the Advocate of the East India Company.

Then John de Wit offered 30000. Pound sterling upon Account of all the
Proprietors and persons interessed, reserving the Civil right of Action
against Jacob Pergens and Peter Boudaen, for the 85000. gilders paid upon their
caution as aforesaid, which offer was not satisfactory, so the General dispute
remained also in stato quo.

Afterward Sir George Downing, did by his last Memorial upon that Subject,
dated the 14. of October 1664. give the States General a peremptory day to
clear that business, intimating therein how ill the King resented it to be so
slighted, and that His Majesty would not prostitute his Honor any further,
but Govern himself accordingly, yet all proved ineffectuall.

Then the Proprietors with others, addressed themselves with a list of damages
to the House of Commons in Parliament. The Bona E^peranza and Hen^ry
Bonadventura being placed in the front of all demands, whereupon the Commons
voted to assist his Majesty, with their lives and fortunes in acquiring
satisfaction and reparation, ( And soon after a declaration for General
Reprisalls, was ordered by the King and Council against the States General
and their Subjects) And several millions of Pounds Sterling, were granted to
his Majesty in Parliament for the prosecution thereof.

In the year following; The Earl of Shrewsbur^, Sir Johan Wolstenholme, Sir
John Ayton, George Carew, and William L^^yd Esquires, and others Interessed,
made application to his Majesty by petition for Especial Letters of Reprisall
to remain in force against the States General and their Subjects, until the
Orig^nall loss and damages, concerning the Bona Esperanza and Henery
Bonadventura, should be reprised, which was referred to the Judge of the
Admirallity and his Majesty's Advocates General, and several other Doctors of
the Civil Law, to Examine the whole matter, and to report their opinion, what
was fit for His Majesty to do further for his Subjects releife in that Case.

After several Consulations, and debates, had between the said referees
concerning the premises, Doctor Exton then Judge of the Admirallity Court, Sir
Robert Wiseman, Sir William Turner, and Sir Timothy Baldwyn, made their report
to his Majesty, that in this case of spoils, there was no remedy, left but
Especial Reprisalls to continue in force against the States General, and
their Subjects until the debt and damages (which they sound upon the proo^es
to arrise unto the sum of 151^ 12. pound sterling should be recovered with
Costs, or a Composition made for the same, between the East India Company of
the Netherlands, and the parties interessed, whereof the said Company, were
obliged by the Law of Nations to take notice thereof.

In persuance thereof, Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England dated
the 19. of May 1665. were granted unto Sir Edmond Turnor, and Mr. George Carew
(Administrator of Sir Paul Pindar their Executors Administrators and Assigns,
on behalf of themselves and all the Interessed, to continue in force
accordingly, With this Especial clause and Provisoe therein contained, that
notwithstanding it should happen that a p^ace and agreement should be made
between His Majesty, and the States General* for the General Reprisalls,
Yet is should be lawful for the said Turnor and Carew, and their Executors and
A^^gn^s, to putt the said Letters Patents in Execution for Especial
Reprisalls, from time to time, until they had recovered the said debt of
151612. pounds with all (...) Charges, or that the East India Company of the
Netherlands, should Compound with the Proprietors, and other persons Interessed
in the same.

In the year 1666. Mr. James Boeve delivered a Copy of the said Letters
Pattents to Mr. Peter van Dam, at the East India Chamber at Amsterdam, and
requested him, to move the said Company, to compose the said debt and damages,
in an Amicable way, rather then to leave it in dispute from Generation to
Generation, to the prejudice of the States General and their Subjects.

In the year 1667. during the Treaty at Breda, the States General having
surprised the Kings Ships at Chattam, several of the Proprietors friends in
the Hague, moved the Pentionaris John de Wit, to incite the States of Holland,
and the East India Company, to give some Honorable satisfaction, for the
Ships Bona Esperanza, and Henery Bonadventura (which had bin so solemnly
debated in former Treaties) being more for the Interest of their Country, then
to insist upon such scandulous Articles, as they had framed, and sent to Breda,
concerning the said damages, which could not extinguish the debt, or make void
the Letters Patents, to Turnor and Carew, any more then to disannull the 35.
Article of the States Patent to the East India Company of the Netherlands,
whereby they make peace and war, with all Princes and States whatsoever at
their pleasure from the Cape Bona Esperanza, to the Streights of Magelanus, Yet
John de Wit and his Accomplices, persisted in their projects, and would not
hearken to any other advice.

In the year 16-1. the States General having made several Breaches of the
Treaty at Breda, and denied Common Justice to his Majesty's Subjects in their
ordinary Courts of Judicature, in Holland and Zeland, several of the
Proprietors, and Interessed Persons in the sa^d debt and damages, made fresh
applications to his Majest^e by petition, and prayed that his Majesty would
please to insist upon reparation and satisfaction, in an Extraordinary way
according to the merits of their causes, and Especially for the debt of 151612
pound ascertained under the Great Seal of England as afore^^^d, which said
petition was by order of Council, referred to the Lords C^mmissioners of the
Treasury and the two principal Secretaries of State, who made a report to His
Majesty. That the States General (...) bin refractory in several Articles of
the Treaty at Breda, his Maj^st^ and his Subjects, were at liberty both in
Justice and Equity, to require full satisfaction and reparation in Mr. Courtens
Case, notwithstanding the said Treaty at Breda.

In persuance thereof his Majesty was graciously pleased on the 7. of July
1672. to recommend the debt of 151612. pound with damages, by his Letter under
his sign Manual, sent by the said George Carew, to his Grace George Duke of
Buckingham, and the Right Honorable Henery Earl of Arlington, his Majesty's
Plenipotentiaries, and Ambassadors Extraordinary to the French King, and the
States General, then upon a Treaty at Uytrecht, requiring the said
Plenipotentiaries, to insist upon satisfaction accordingly; declaring therein
his care to protect his Subjects, in their Just rights, as well, as to assist
them in the recovery thereof. But the said Treaty taking no effect, the said
Plenipotentiaries removed from Uytrecht before Mr. Carew arrived at Amsterdam.
Then Mr. Carew returning for England in Company with Mr. John Sherland, the
Fiscall General, by order of the States of Holland, Committed them both to
Prison, on the 6. of August 1672. as Criminalls upon pretense, they were
Enemies to the Country, and Charged Mr. Carew, as a seditious person in seeking
after Justice in the premises, and detayned them both close prisoners, in the
gevangen port, where they are subject to many affronts and reproaches, upon
every rencounter, and Alarm in the Country, and also obstructed in the Just
prosecution of the debt and damages aforesaid, which is by an Especial order
of the Council board dated at Whitehall the 2. of May 1673. recommed to the
Lords Ambassadors Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiaries at Cologne, intimating
therein, that the case of the Adventurers, and Creditors of Sir William Courten
being already fully stated should be first insisted upon, in the list of all
Complaints, wherefore the Letters Patents were exempli^ied, and sent to Cologne
accordingly, a true Copy hereafter follows.

A Copy of the Letters Patents for Especial Reprisalls (from the King of
Great Britain, under the Great Seal of England) against the States General
and their Subjects, Inroled in Chancery Anno 1665.
CHARLES the Second by the grace of God, of England, Scotland, France Ireland
King, Defendour of the Faith etc. To all Christian People to whom these
presents shall come, Greeting: Whereas our loving Subject, William Courten
Esquire deceased, and his Partners anno 1643. by the depredation and hostile
act of one Geland, Commander in chief of two Ships belonging to the East India
Company of the Netherlands, was between Goa and Maccao, in the Streights of
Mallacca, deprived and most injuriously spoiled of a certain Ship named the
Bona Esperanza, and of her Takle, Apparel, and Furniture, and all Goods and
Lading in her, upon a very hopeful trading Voyage to China, which were carried
to Batavia, and there all, de facto without due Process of Law confiscated;
And that also in the same year another laden Ship of Our said Subject, called
the Henery Bonadventura, being come on ground, nere the Island Mauritius, was
there both Ship and Goods seized upon, by some of the Officers, and Ministers,
and others under the command of the said East India Company, and utterly
detained from the right Owners. And whereas the said William Courten and his
Assigns in his life time used all possible endeavors to recover the said
Ships and Goods, and to procure further Justice against the Malefactors, and
yet could obtain no restitution, or satisfaction, whereby they became to be
much distressed, and utterley undone in their Estate and Credit: And that
thereupon, and upon the most humble supplication and Adresses of Francis Earl
of Shrewsbury, and William Courten Esquire, Son and Heir of the said Sir
William deceased, Sir John Ayton, Sir Edmond Turnor Knights, George Carew, and
Charles Whittaker Esquires, on the behalf themselves and diverse others
interessed in the said two Ships, Bona Esperanza and Henery Bonadventura, and
in the Estates of the said Sir William Courten deceased, Sir Edward Littleton
Barronet, and Sir Paul Pindar Knight deceased, that We would take their Case
into Our Princely consideracion. We out of a just sense We then had, and still
have of their unjust sufferings in that business, both by Our own Letters under
Our sign Manual to the States General of the United Provinces, and by Sir
George Downing Knight and Barronet, Our Envoy Extraordinary, to whom We gave
Especially command so to do, required satisfaction to be made according to the
Rules of Justice, and the Amity and good correspondence, which We then desired
to conserve with them firm, and inviolable. And whereas after several
Addresses made to the said States General by Our said Envoy, and nothing
granted effectual for relief of Our said Subjects, (whom We take Ourselves in
Honor and Justice concerned to be satisfied and repaid) We lately commanded
the said Sir George Downing to intimate and signify to the said States, that We
expected their final Answer, concerning satisfaction to be made for the Ships
and Goods, by a time then prefixed and since elapsed, that We might so govern
ourselves thereupon, that Our aforesaid Subjects might be releived according to
Right and Justice; And yet no satisfactory Answer has been given, so that We
cannot but apprehend it to be, not only a fruitles endeavor, but a
prostituting of Our honor, and dignity, to make further Application, after so
many denyals and slightings. And whereas John Exton Doctor of Laws, Judge of
Our High Admiralty Court of England, upon Our Command, to certify to Us the
value, and losses, and damages, sustained by the said William Courten, and
Partners whose Interest is now vested in Our loving Subjects Sr. Edmond Turnor
Knight, and George Carew Esquire, and Partners, has upon full Examination and
proofs thereof made by witnesses in Our High Court of Admiralty, reported and
certified under his hand that the same do amountt to the sum of one hundred
fifty one thousand, six hundred and twelve pounds.

Now know ye. That for a full restitution to be made to them for their Ships,
Goods and Marchandizes, of which the said William Courten, and the Assigns of
the said William Courten and Partners, were so dispoiled as aforesaid, with all
such Costs and Charges as they shall be at for the recovery of the same, We by
the Advice of our Privy Council, have thought fit, and by these presents, do
grant License and Authority under Our great Seal of England, unto Our said
Subjects Sir Edmund Turnor, and George Carew, their Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, for and on the behalf of themselves, and other Persons Interessed
as aforesaid, to equippe, victual, furnish, and to set to Sea from time to
time such and so many Ships, and Pinaces, as they shall think fit. Provided
always that there be an entry made, and recorded in the Admiralty Court of the
Names of all Ships, and Vessels and of their Burden and Ammonition, and for
how long time they are victualled; And also of the Name the Commander thereof,
before the same or any of them be set forth to Sea; And with the said Ships,
and Pinaces by force of Arms to set upon, take and apprehend any of the Ships,
Goods, Monyes and Marchandizes of the said States General, or any of their
Subjects, inhabiting within any their Dominions or Territories wheresoever, the
same shall be found, and not in any Port or Harbor in England or Ireland (...)
be the Ships and the Goods of the Parties that did the wrong. And the said
Ships, Goods, Monyes and Marchandizes, being so taken and brought into some
Port of Our Realms and Dominions, an Inventory thereof shall be taken by
Authority of Our Court of Admiralty, and Judgment shall be given in Our Court
of Admiralty, by the Judge or Judges thereof, for the time being, upon proofs
made before him, or them, that the said Ships, Goods, Wares, Marchandizes, or
Money, did belong to the States General, or any of their Subjects as
aforesaid. That they shall be lawful prize to the said Sir Edmond Turnor, and
George Carew, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns as aforesaid, to
retain and keep in their or any of their Possessions, and to make sale, and
dispose thereof in open Markett or howsoever else to their and every of their
best Advantage and Benefitt, in as ample manner as at any time heretofore, has
been accustomed by way of Reprisall, and to have and enjoy the same as lawful
prize, and as their own proper Goods, so that neither Captain Master nor any of
the Company that shall serve in his own Person, or shall promote and advance
the said enterprise in manner an form aforesaid, shall in any manner of wise
be reputed or challenged for any Offender against any of Our Laws. And that
also it shall be lawful for all manner of Persons as well Our Subjects, as any
other to buy the said Ships, Goods and Marchandizes so taken, and apprehended
by the said Captains, Masters, and others, and adjudged as aforesaid, without
any damage, loss, hinderance, trouble, molestation, or incombrance to befall
the said Buyers, or any of them, in as ample and lawful manner as if the
Ships, Goods, Wares, and Merchandise had been come, and gotten by the lawful
Traffic of Merchants, or of just prises in the time of open War. Provided
always that all Ships, Goods, and Merchandise taken by virtue of this Our
Commission, shall be kept in safety, and no part of them wasted, spoiled or
diminished, or the Bulk thereof broken until Judgment have first past as
aforesaid. That they are the Ships and Marchandises, of the States General, or
some of their Subjects as aforesaid. And if by color of this Our Commission,
there shall be taken any Ships, Goods, or Marchandises, of any of Our loving
Subjects, or the Subjects of any Prince, or State in good League, or Amity with
Us (except the States General) or their Subjects, as aforesaid, and the Goods
therein laden, sold, and embezelled, or diminished, or the bulk thereof broken
in any Place, before they shall be adjudged to belong to the States General,
or some of their subjects as aforesaid, That then this Commission shall be of
no sufficient Authority, to take the said Ships, Goods, and Marchandises, or to
warrant, or save harmles such as shall receive, buy or intermedle therein, but
that both the prises so taken, and the said Ships of War, shall be confiscated
to Our use. And further We do hereby declare that it is Our will and pleasure,
that this Our Commission shall remain in full force and power to all intents
and purposes, until the said Sir Edmond Turnor, and George Carew their
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, as aforesaid, shall by virtue thereof
have by force of Arms apprehended, taken, saised, recovored, and received from
the said States General, or their subjects, one hundred fifty one thousand six
hundred and twelve Pounds, according to the appraisement to be made by
sufficient Appraisers upon Oath nominated, and authorized, in Our said Court of
Admiralty, of all such Ships, Goods, Wares, and Marchandises, as shall be taken
from the said States General, or any of their subjects, by virtue of this
Commission, or shall other ways receive satisfaction of the Debt aforesaid, by
Composition to be made between those of the East India Company of the
Netherlands, and the said Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns as aforesaid; Notwithstanding it so happen, the
present difference between Us, and the States General, depending upon general
Reprisalls, may be agreed and composed, and that in the interim a Peace and
good Correspondence may be renewed between Us and the said States General; In
which case nevertheless it is Our will and pleasure, that in the execution of
this Our Commission, no violence shall be done to the Persons of the said
Subjects of the said States General, but only in case of resistance, and that
after in cold blood the subjects of the said States General, if hurt or
wounded shall be used with all convenient office of humanity and kindess. And
further Our will and pleasure is, that although it shall happen that all
hostility between Us, and the States General and Our respective Subjects shall
cease, yet this Our Commissions shall remain, and be in full force and power,
to the said Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew, their Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, as aforesaid, by virtue thereof to apprehend,
take, and seize by force and Arms, so many more of the said Ships and Coods of
the States General, or any of their said subjects, as besides the said sum
before mentioned, shall cuntervaile, satisfy, and pay all such Costs and
charges as the said Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew, their Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns, as aforesaid, shall from to time make proof to
have disbursed and paid toward the equipping, manning, paying, furnishing, and
victualing of the said Ships, so licenced, and Authorized as aforesaid, by this
Our said Commission, to be equipped, manned, paid, furnished and victualled by
the said Sir Edmond Turnor and Gegorge Carew their Exeecutors, Administrators,
and Assigns as foresaid for the purpose aforesaid. And Our will and pleasure
is, and We do hereby require, Our Judge or Judges of Our High Court of
Admiralty for the time being, and all other Officers of the Admiralty, and all
other Our Judge or Judges, Officers, Ministers and Subjects, whatsoever to be
aiding and assisting to the said Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew, their
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, as aforesaid in all points, in the due
Execution of this Our Royal Commission, and to proceed to adjudication and
adjudge all Ships, Marchandises, Monyes, and Goods by virtue hereof to be taken
according to Our Princely intention hereby signified and expressed, and to take
care that this Our Royal Commission be duly executed, and favorably
interpreted, and construed in all respects, to the benefit, and best advantage
of the said Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew their Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, as aforesaid. In Witness whereof We have caused these Our
Letters, to be made Patents. Witness Ourself at Westminster the 19. day of May
in the 17. year of Our Reign.

BY THE KING.

TO make a retrospect into all the former proceedings of this case, or to doubt
the validity of the grant, after all matters, were brought into a solemn Act
of Letters Patents, under the great Seal of England; were not only to question
his Majesty's Sovereign Power, and Prerogative Royal, in the protection of
his Subjects, but to arraign the Judgments and opinions, of all the Kings
Ministers of State, Judges, and public Persons, that debated this business in
Counsels, in Creatyes, in Parliament, and inferior Courts of Judicature,
before this special Commission was granted.

As the King cannot be deceived in his grant, so he cannot do his Subjects any
wrong, wherefore in most Patents the Clause (quantum in nobis) is incerted.

It Is a maxim in Law that which belongs to another Man, cannot be taken from
him without his own consent.

In the year 1639. Sir William Boswell gave a Memorial to the States General
in the Kings name, to have satisfaction and reparation for the spoils and
damages done in the East Indies to his Majesty's Subjects. And another
Memorial was given at the same tune to that purpose in England, unto Mr.
Albertus Joacnymy the States Ambassador then Resident in ordinary there, unto
both which Answers were given, that they could not treat with the King for the
Damageo done to the East India Company of England, who might question them for
the same herafter, so the matter rested ^^ sta^^ quo.

This Patent was not made underhand, as Mr Pergens (who had no right) made the
agreement with the East India Company of the Netherlands. Neither was the
Company ignorant of the precedent grants to Sr. Edward Littleton, and Sr Paul
Pindar before they treated with Mr Pergens, any more then they were of this
Patent when they treated at Breda. Yet they had the considence by advice of
John de Wit to frame their Articles rencounter to the Laws of God, and
Nature, impertinently using the words of mortifying, obliterating,
extinguishing. and disannulling all offenses, damages, losses and injuries
whatsoever sustained by the subjects of either side, at any time whatsoever
before that treaty: And that all actions, preteations, and grants whatsoever
for the same should be void, and for ever renounced, and revoaked, giveing
every man liberty to take advantages of his own wrong, which treaty was soon
cancelled by new breaches, and his Majesty left at liberty as if the treaty
at Breda had never been made.

What is repugnant to reason and Justice is void in it self, as (felo de se)
and distructive to all civil Society, and being John de Wit and his Brother
were the first that used the words, mortification and extinguishment in any
Treaty of Dtate, which God himself abhors in such cases having decreed that
the offender shall restore three fould for what is wrongfully taken, which
unplyes the damages sustained for want of that which was taken away from the
Persons inured.

Those two de Wits were mortified and extinguished not only for using such
Arrogant expressions, but as a just reward to such Persons that indeavored to
add force to violence, and fraud to oppression, and treachery to both.

Noe man will deay, but that the King of Great Britain, in diverse cases, may
suspend the Execution of Law, in his own Kingdoms, but in no case can give, or
take away any man's right, without a compensation.

The Hollanders have a great power beyond the Cape Bona Esperanze, and have
lately had the boldness to affront his Majesty in his own Seas but to strike at
the Laws and Customs of England, threatnes not only his Majesty's prerogative,
but shakes the very foundation, and Common Intrest of every individual
Subject, which is nearer and dearer to them then their lives and fortunes.

IT is necessary now to show what Presidents there are in former Treatyes,
between the Belgic Provinces and the Crown of England, cencerning spoils,
damages and losses before the seven United Provinces were a Commonwealth; and
since they have been made a Republique.

In the xxix 'th Article of the Treaty made between King Henry the the seventh
and Philip Duke of Austria and Burgandy concluded at London the 24. of
February, 1495. it was agreed that all and singular Letters of Reprisall,
marque, and countermarque, which were granted by the said Prmees or their
Predecessors, either out of their high Courts of Chancery or other inferior
Courts should be held in suspension, without further Execution to be done
thereupon nisi super ea^um meritis habita cognitione indicta, ad ho^ per^^psos
Principis specialiter deputandum, alitur fuerit ordinatum. So that there was no
mortification or extinguishment of the right, only a suspension of the
execution, but yet if there were special matter in the merits of the cause
made known to the Princes respectively, they ordered it otherwise until
Satisfaction was given to the parties greeved:

ANd if either of those Princes had the like occasion given, as his Majesty (in
this case) they would have entay^ed a Commission, to Eternity if reparation
were not found, or the matter composed.

Charles the first (of that name) King of Great Britain, granted a special
Commission for Reprisall, under the Great Seal of England, unto Mr. Pawlet on
the behalf of himself and other Merchants of London, who had sustained losses
by the Spaniards to the value of 30000. pounds Sterling in time of Peace, which
Commission was to continue until satisfaction of the debt and damages: And at
the Treaty concluded between the King of Spain and the King of England at
Madrid in the Year 1630. Care was taken by the Spaniards to satisfy the
remamder of the debt not recovered by reprise, as appears by the accounts
stated in the Admiralty and the record thereof enrolled in the Chancery.

In the xxx. 'th Article of Oliver Cromwels Treaty concluded with the States
General in the Year 1654. which was made in conformity to the Treaty with the
Archduke of Austria aforesaid. It was agreed that at the delivery of the
satification of the said Treaty four Commissioners should be nowinated on both
sides to meet at London the 10. May 1654 to examine and determine all
differences and injuries committed from the Year 1611. to the 18. 'th of May
1652. as well in the East Indies. as in Greenland, Muscovia, and Brazill, or in
any other place All the said particulars of losses to be delivered in writing
to the said Commissioners before the 18. of May and none after And that what
shall not be concluded within three months by the said Commessioners shall be
referred to the Protestant Cantons of Switzerland, which were to be
Arbitrators, and to conclude the business within six months following, the
form of an instrument being agreed upon for that purpose; Nevertheless there
was only 80000. pound Sterling paid to the East India Company of England, for
the spoils and Damages at Amboyna and ^650. Ponnds to the widows and Orphans
of the English Factors murdered there

And in the xxij. Article of the Pyrenean Treaty concluded between France and
Spain on the 7. of November 1659. it was agreed that all debts and Damages
contracted before the war, which upon the said day of the Publication of this
Treaty, shall be found not to have bin actually paid unto others by virtue of
Judgments given upon Letters of confiscation or Reyrisall, shall be bona fide
satisfied and paid. And upon the demand and persuites, that shall be about
them, the said Lords and Rings shall give order unto their Officers, to render
as good and speedy Justice unto the Forraigners, as unto their own Subjects,
without any distinctions of Persons.

By all which it appears there was no such words Mortification or
extinguishment used, or others to bar any man's right of action for any things
done or committed before the war.

In the xv. Article concluded at Whitehal. between the King of Great Britain
and the States General on the 4 of September 1662. John de Wit and his
Faction, insisted and indeavored to have all the Damages, Spoils, and
depredations in the East Indies mortified and extinguished to that day,
Argueing that the Treaty with Oliver Cromwell: And the Creaty between Sir
George downing and the East India Company at the Hague in the Year 1659. where
by they paid the further sum of 50^00. pounds sterling for the Ships the
Pelican, the Fiedrick, Francis and Ionn taken from English Merchants since
Oliuers Treaty. should excuse them for the Damages they had done to Courten
and his Partners Anno 1643. yet nevertheless a particular exception and proviso
was made in the said 15. Article, that satisfaction should be given for the
ships Bona Esperanza and Henry Bona Adventura. according to his majesty's
special recommendation as aforesaid, being a distince matter, from all other
spoils and depredations, committed by the East India Company of the
Netherlands.

In persuance whereof, the two following Years being spent in fresh
applications and addresses to the States General, the States of Holland, the
Directors of the East India Company, and to several Participants without
effect.

All Circumstances then considered there was one stepp further made in this
special case, more then was in the Amboyna business to intayle the claim by
Letters Patents for a perpetual Reprisall until satisfaction and reparation
should be recovered for the debt and damages sustained, which if it had not
been granted, his Majesty had lessened his own honor and greatness, as well as
his power and prerogative for the protection of his Subjects in their Just
rights, as also in assisting them in recoveris of the same.

FRom whence this Conclusion, naturally follows the premises, that there is no
Appeal, Manifesto, Treaty, Guifte, or reward whatsoever, or any other way or
means under Heaven, to mortify, extinguish and discharge the debt and damages
concerning the Bona Espranza and Henry Bona Adventura, but by satisfaction and
reparation given to the persons interessed, and injured, whereby a sufficient
discharge may be had.

The Case between George Carew Esquire, Administrator of Sir William Courten.
And The Heirs of Sir Jacob Cats, late Pensionaris of Holland.
SIR Jacob Cats became bound in the City of London, unto Sir William Courten
of London Knight, by a writing obligatory dated the 29. of July 1631. in the
penalty of 3000. Pounds, conditioned for the payment of 2080. Pounds on the 12.
of February following, according to the Custom of England.

The money was not paid but continued at interest during Sir William Courten's
life, who dyed in the year 1636. indebted to several Persons, for diverse
great sums of money, and leaves William Courten Esquire, his Son and Heir his
sole Executor.

William Courten the Executor having contracted many debts of his own, became
insolvent, and absented himself in the year 1643. from his Creditors, and also
from the further administration of his Fathers Estate; but before he left the
Kingdom, Mr. Jacob Pergens, a free Denizon of England inhabiting at Amsterdam,
addressed himself to Mr. Courten for satisfaction of some money, due to him
from Sir William Courten, and Mr. Courten himself, as Pergens pretended.

William Courten the Executor by a Letter of Attorney, and Assignment, dated
the 31. of October 1643. grants and transfers the said Bond of 3000. Pounds
unto Mr, Pergens, with power to sue Sir Jacob Cats, for the said debt, and
damages, to his own use.

In the year 1645. Jacob Pergens summons Sir Jacob Cats (then Pensionaris of
Holland) into the Provincial Court at the Hague, and declares against him for
the said money; During the said controversy Sir Jacob Cats applies himself to
the Commissioners concerning Banckrupts in England, who had a Commission
(grounded upon the Statutes in such cases made and provided) to inquire after
Mr. Courtins particular Estate for satisfaction of his own debts, but being
advised that the Commissioners had no legal Authority to intermedle with Sir
William Courtins Estate, which was liable in another right, for the payment of
his own proper debts, Sir Jacob Cats d^^ined from any further Treaty with them.

Nevertheless, the Commissioners by their writing Authentic, prohibited Sir
Jacob Cats to pay any money to Jacob Pergens upon the said Bond. Then Pergens
soon after obtained an Order out of the Provincial Court, to cite and
admonish, the Commissioners in England, if they had any right, or pretense to
the said Bond, or money due thereupon, they should institute the same before
the said Provincial Court at a day certain, or be condemned in perpetual
silence, whereupon the Commissioners appeared by their Advocate, and Procureur.
Then Pergens by an insinuation prohibited Sir Jacob Cats from payment of any
money to them, or to any other, or to make any agreement with them; Yet
notwithstanding ^de been esse on the 18. of July 1653. Jacob Pergens procured
an Assignment of the said Bond from the said Commissioners for 400. Pounds, to
the end they might let their Process cease, whereby Pergens might proceed
against Sir Jacob Cats, which he did accordingly.

But pendente William Courten the Executor dyed intestate in Italy, whereby the
action abated against Sir Jacob Cats, according to the known rule in Law: Quod
a^to personalis moritur cum persona.

Afterward upon the Kings most happy restoration, Letters of Administration
of the Goods, and Chattels, Rights, Debts, and Credits of Sir William Courten
with his Will annexed, were granted on the 14. of July 1660. to the said George
Carew; yet notwithstanding Jacob Pergens who had formerly by another fraudulent
praclise, gotten into his hands 85000. gilders from the East India Company,
upon another pretended a (...) from the said William Courten; prevayled with
the Provincial Court on the 4. of November 1661. to give Sentence in the said
cause against Sir Jacob Cats, and condemned him to pay the said money, due upon
the said Bond, unto Jacob Pergens, and interest thereof at 8. per cent. Soon
after Sir Jacob Cats dyed, and his Heirs appealed from the said Sentence to the
supreme Court af Judicature at the Hague.

Then George Carew, in his quality as Administrator, intervened in the said
cause, before the Lords of the said supreme Court, in the month of May 1662.
where having by his Request in writing exhibited in Court, made known his right
and property to the said money, and concluded in his Demand, that Pergens
should be condemned to acquiess in the cause, and deliver up the Bond, as
having no right to the Money, by the said Assignments from Mr. Courten, or the
Commissioners, conformable to the Laws of England, where the debt was
contracted and the Bond made, and also demanded that the Heirs of Sir Jacob
Cats, should be ordered to pay the Money, due upon the said Bond, to the said
George Carew, in his quality as Administrator of Sir William Courten, the same
being an unadministred effect of Sir William Courten's Estate.

Then the Advocates of both sides, desired time to consult concerning the Laws
of England in that point, and to inform the Court therein accordingly.

The Case being drawn up, and agreed by the Advocats of both parties, several
of the Judges in England, gave their opinions upon the same, under their hands,
before Major Wright and Mr. Dani^ll, public Notaries, which was transmitted
to the supreme Court of Judicature of Holland: Wherein was assirmed that by the
L^nv of England, the Bond of Sir Jacob Cats, could not be granted, or assigned
to Mr. Pergens, either by the Executor, or Commissioners. That after the death
of William Courten * Executor in Aut^r dr^tt* the action against Sir Jacob Cats
abated, but when the Administration was granted to Carew, the said action was
properly to be revived by him, as having the only right in Law to the said
debt, the property being not changed by any Act of Mr. Courten or the
Commissioners, but remained as assets liable to the Testators debts* according
to the nature and priority in Law, and the intervention of Carew in the said
cause, was a continuance of the said action, Carew having the right of
prosecution to revive the same, allowing the said Pergens in equity his costs
of suit.

Then Pergens made a d^latory and impertinent exception, that he was a Burger
of Amsterstam, although his dwelling house was in the Hague, and pretended he
ought to be first impleaded before his Competent Judges at Amsterdam, and not
in the Hague before the supreme Court of Judicature, where the suit depended:
whereupon the Court rejected Mr. Carew^ suit, and decreed that the Here van
Car^^ss^, and the rest of the Heirs of Sir Jacob Cats, should pay the said
Money to Pergens, with mitigation of the Interest, and that Pergens should give
them Caution to be saved harmless against Mr. Carew, which was respectively
done to the apparent wrong of Mr. Carew, and several of His Majesty's good
Subjects in England, that claim under Mr. Carews administration, diverse
proportionable dividends of Sir William Courten's Estate unadministred.

Wherefore they appeal to the King of great Prittam, for protection, and means
to recover their just rights, being of most dangerous consequence against the
Law of property, to suffer Foreign Courts of Judicature to ^tr^nch upon the
Laws of England, or to wrong the Judicature thereof. And the rather for that
the Lords of the supreme Court at the Hague, were preadmonished by several
learned Advocates there, as follows:

1. That Mr. Carew being a Stranger, was to be admitted at his ^st ^^st^^ce by
the instructions of their own Court. 2. That the Lords of the Court, were
p^s^^^vely obliged to give judgment according to the Law of England, where the
M^ was lent, and the Bond given. 3. That by the Laws of Nations, all Courts of
Justice were to give Sentences, in Cases of Contracls, according to the Law of
the Country, where sich Contracts were made. 4. That the supreme Court, was the
proper place of Judicature in this Case of Intervention, and that if they did
not admit Mr. Carew prima instantia, they would do him most apparent ^justice,
and ^rong both the Judicature of England, and of the United Netherlands; Yet
the Pensionaris John de Wit bing a Kn^s^^n to Mr. Pergens and his wife,
prevailed with some of the Lords of the supreme Court, to d^^y Mr. Carew that
ordinary Justice; which ought to be administered to all Strangers, whereby he
has suffered to his damage 5000. Pounds Sterling and upwards.
The Case between the Executors and Administratois of Sir William Courten, late
of London Knight, deceased; AND The Heirs and Executors of Sir Peter Courten,
late of Midleburgh in Zealand Knight, deceased.
IN the Year 1606. Sir William Courten, Sir Peter Courten, and Mr. John Money
of Londen Marchans *who m^d Margaret Courten the ^^d^^^^ of Mathias Boudaen
entered into a ^^ad^ of Partnershi^p, and dealt to several parts in Europe,
Africa, and America, with a a^ stc^k; whereof the ^s part b^nged unto Sir
William Courten, and a fourth part unto cach of the other two.

In the Year 1630. Sir Peter Courten, who kept the general Books of Trade dyed
at Midleburgh afer^, having made Mr. Peter Boudaen his Nephew late of
Midleburgh Merchant his H^tr, and Fxi^^tor, who tcok (...) of (...) the said
^ke, and of all Sir Peter Courten, F^^ate, with the Shipping, Goods and D^ts,
b^nging to the Company, amounting unto a hundred thousand pound sterling and
upwards.

In the Year 1631. Mr. John Money, at the Request of Sir William Courten, went
from London to M^burgh, to s^tle the accounts of Trade with the said Peter
Boudaen, w^h had not been made even since the year 1622. but ^e Mr. Money had
p^ed the accounts, be ^d on the 17. of October 1631. at the said Peter Boudaen^
^^^se, where ^^ made a ^l (as it is pretended and thereof ^pp^mted Sir William
Courten, and Peter Boudaen Executors. Nevertchless the (...) of the said (...)
upon suspicion of fra^, and forgery, being afterward (...) in England where it
was (...) in (...) s^^m^^ Letters of (...) of Mr. Jehn Money's E^, were granted
by the (...) Court unto Hester White, alias de Wire, Kt^man and next H^^r at
Law to Mr. Money. The Pror^gative Court for diverse reasons adjudg^rg that Mr.
Money died intestate, and left a considerable Estate behind him.

In the Year 1636. Sir William Courten (...) the ac^ts of Partnership were s^d,
or the Monus ^^^ to ^^n from the said Peter Boudaen w^^^ (...), and (...)
William Courten, his Son and H^ir, his (...) Ex^cut^^ (...) D^^t^ to many
Orphants an^ (...)d^w* (...) S^^ William Courten upon (...) Trade to the
Ea^^-In^^^: And upon his d^at^-b^^ (...) Mr. Jacob P^rg^n^* ^ the presence o^
Sir William Cur^^u^, to (...) Mr. Boudaen to (...) the said a^^^mpts of the
Company, (...) much of Sir William Courtens (...) con^^^l^d.

In the Year 1643. William Courten the Executor, by reason of s^vera^^ ^^ (...)
in the E^^^-In^^^, and ^^ing charg^^ with great d^^^s at Inter^^^, b^cam^
(...), and (...) him^^^f from the administration of ^^s (...), and (...) into
Italy, wh^^^ ^^ d^^d int^state, l^aving (...), and the accounts of the
Partnership uns^^^^d.

In the ^ear 1646. the Lady Katharine Courten directed Mr. John Moon, to send
all ^^^h Books and Papers, as r^ma^^^d in her Husbands (...), unto Mr. David
Goubard at M^l^^burgh who had been formerly ^ Servant and accomptant for Sir
William Courten to compare them with the other Books, that ac^ompts might b^
stated accordingly. But Mr. Boudaen f^^^seeing it would d^minish his credit,
ref^^^d to make any balance of the said accom^^^, taking a^vantage of the
iniquity of the (...), and Mr. Courtens (...), and a^terwards by (...) means,
got into his hands several of the Books and Papers bel^nging to Sir William
Courten, and r^f^sed to d^^iver ^^^m again.

In the Year 1652. Hester White exhibited ^^r (...) to the Magistrates of
M^^^^burgh against Peter Boudaen, to have an ac^^mpt of John M^n^ys Estate, out
of ^^^ general B^^ks of the Trade, that were kept by Sir Peter Courten*
Whereupon Mr. Boudaen exc^pted against her quality as Administratrix,
pretending that Administration was granted into her surrupticiously, although
he was (...) cit^d, and admonished to prove the pretended ^^ill of Mr. Money,
by wit^neses* That he had ^^nt unto Sir William Courten to be r^gi^^r^d ^^
(...)* Which he refused to do by Commission, suffering administration to (...)
to Mr^. White* Yet the Magistrates of Mid^eburgh declared Mrs. White not
receivable in her quality, as yet, which no Nation in the World, e^^r ^^^ the
^ik^, in such Ca^es before.

Mrs. White being grieved th^r^* t^, appealed from the Sentence of the (...) at
(...), to the Lords of the supr^am Court of Judicature at the (...), were a^^^r
^o^^ y^^r^ (...) and expen^es, the s^pr^am Court gave S^nt^^^^ on the (...)* of
May 1657. That provided, the said Peter Boudaen (...) oblige himself, to
sati^fy all Pr^t^nders, whether Creditors, (...)* or others, that might pretend
to the Estate of John Money, that th^n the Administratrix was not greived by
the Sentence of the Magistrates of Midl^burgh. But in case of refu^al, they
condemned him to d^posite all the Books of ac^^mpts, papers and writings
^^^onging to the Partnership, that the accounts might be stated accordingly.
However, reserving such right as any person or persons, might pretend to the
validity, or invalidity of the last Will, and Testament of the said John Money,
which was a di^^tory and imp^rtm^nt Sentence, and not to the matter in ^ssue.

In the Year 1660. s^on after the King of great Britains most happy
restoration, Letters of Administration of Sir William Courtens Estate with
^ill annexed, were granted to George Carew of Richmond in the County of Surrey
(...), ^by the consent of the grand child and Heir of the said Sir ^^illiam
Courten* who addressed himself in the year f^llowing to Mr. Boudaen, Mr.
Pergens, and Mr. Goubard, (they being all then in the Hagu^^ and (...) them,
that the accounts of the Partnership might be ^etled, for satisfaction of all
Parties concerned, especially the Orphants and ^^iddows unto whom Sir William
Courten died ind^bt^d: But Mr. Boudaen impertinently (...), that he would do
it, provided Mr. Carew would give him (...): ^^ an^^^r ^^^ demands to the
Estate of Mr. John Money* whose Estate did not (...) Boudaen, but Mrs. White,
who is appointed Administratrix thereof as aforesaid, and ^ath a suite
depending in the high Court of Chanc^ry for the same, by virtue of her Letters
of Administration.

In the Year 1662. George Carew, in his quality as Administrator to Sir William
Courten, gave procuration unto Mr. James Bo^ve, to question the said Peter
Boudaen concerning the said accounts, and to recover all such (...) of money as
should be found due unto Sir William Courtens Est^t^. ^^hereupon Mr. Boeve
i^sinuated his power and Authority unto the said Boudaen, and in a friendly
manner desired the ^ight of Sir Peter Courtens Books, Papers and writings in
his Custody relating to the said accounts, that from thence the ball^nce might
be made at a joint charge. Yet Mr. Boudaen refused to com^ly therein, Then Mr.
James Boeve instituted an action before the Magistrates of Midleburgh on the 6.
Sept^mber 1662. and concluded in his demand, that Peter Boudaen should be
ordered to give him free ^gr^ss and regress to the said Books, Papers and
writings, or in case of refusal, that he should be condemned to (...) the said
Books, and writings into the S^cretary-office of the said City, there to be
insp^cted, and the said accounts stated at a joint charge. Whereupon the
Magistrates, of Midleburgh were pleased to i^^^st, that Mr. Boeve should give
cau^^^n for Costs. Which was never demanded before in any Court of Judicature
in such Cases of Partnership, especially from Executors, and Administrators,
that seek to be releived for their Testator^ good^, who are not by Law
chargeable with Costs: Nevertheless Mr. Bo^^e being a Burger there himself*
gave caution. Then the Magistrates rejected it, and demanded other caution,
presuming that he could find none of the City, that were Zelanders, who would
be bail, which pro^ed ^o^ accordingly, and the Court refusing all English men,
the cause rested in (...) ^u^. But Pendente (...) Mr. Boudaen died, an^ le^t
h^^ Son^, and Daughter, liable to answer the said accounts out of the real and
personal Estate, left unto them by Peter Boudaen, and S^r^ Peter Courten.

(...) Mr. Carew addressed several Letters to Mr. Peter Boudaen and John
Boudaen, (...) of the Sons of the said Peter Boudaen deceased, and (...) to
move them to (...) the said accounts of the (...), ^^ ^r^^^nt all further
trouble and (...), which still they refu^^^ ^^ (...) a^^ overture^ in that
kind, both from Mr. Carew and ^^^ (...). Knowing that ^^ being a st^ange^ in
Midleburgh, and they (...) Magistrates there, that Mr. Carew (...) not expect
any (...)* or (...), ^^^r^ ^^^ cause of action* s^i^^ remayn^s before the (...)
and (...) of Midleburgh, who r^f^s^ to proceed thereupon.

Wherefore the said George Carew, Appeal^s to the King of great Brittaigne ^^^
Common Justi^e therein, against that grand fraud and oppression of the
H^^^anders, and the Zelanders.

Against high way men, and Pirates* Particular Persons may make some de^ence
upon att^^q^^s* by (...) or f^ying* but to ^all i^to the hands of unrightous
^en, under an Arb^trary power, is a m^st miserable greivance, if there were not
a^y protection to be ^ound from those Princes, who ought t^ vindi^ate their
Sub^ects interests, in mainta^^^g the rights and prerogatives of their Crow^es.

Where invasions are made upon the Laws and Customs of Kingdoms, noe man can
be sa^e in his own propert^. Yett the^se Hollanders and (...)* those
mi^crea^^s (that have a ^ied frau^e to vyole^ce, and one oppressio after
another* upon all strangers^* (...) themselves now wit^^^ the reach o^ England,
Scotland, France and Ireland* they have (...) degenerated m^^ to ap^eale unto
^^^ Parliament* for them* at (...)* I leave the c^^es, and ^^a^es ^^ the
Widd^^^, and the ^atherless, and the sadd (...) of many (...)* wh^^^ b^ead have
bee^* Laten, so many years by the Hollanders and Zelanders.

NOw I have given you some account of the Hollanders, in their Empire, their
Government, their practices, and administration of Justice; I shall briefly
conclude, with an Answer to their railing appeal *addressed in an English
style, by their mereinary confederates, under the Notion of Englands Appeal to
the Parliament, which is a strange Contradiction in itself. The Parliament
being the body representative of England, whereof the King is the head; And
although, that Dutch appeal from the sword, be Answered generally in the
premises, yet I shall give some more p^rticular answers to several points,
for your further satisfaction in the conclusion.

Cardinal Nichelieu, held it for a Maxim, that a Sovereign Prince has noe
Kindred ^oe near unto him, in the world* as the Generallity of his own
Subjects, implying from thence, that the greatest happiness of a King, consisted
in the prosperity of his Kingdoms, And Cardinal Mazarine was of an opinion,
that an honest man ought not to be a slave unto his word, implying from thence
(aluding to Portugal and Spain) that it was better to vyolate a promise in
diverse Cases, upon any emergent contingences, then to prejudice many millions
of people, by keeping it; The Motto non nobis nati sumus, is more properly
applicable to such public Ministers, then to private persons.

It was held for a great virtue amongst the Pagans, for any man to love his
country, certainly then it must be a Damnable vice amongst Christians, for any
man to hate the land, wherein he took his first breath. And there cannot be a
greater demonstration of that iniquity, then to wound the Honor, and
reputation of those Princes, who represents the glory, wisdom, courage, and
conduct of their Subjects, and Servants. There is noe perfection in man,
neither do I believe, that all the best Councillors of Princes, are either
saints, or Angels. Yett I am confident that those, who sit upon the topps of
Mountains, can see further then they, that stand upon Mole hill^. And that the
Caball at white hall (as they are termed in the appeal* gave the King of great
Brittaigne, the most wholesome Council, for the honor, and interest of
England, that ever was given within those walls, concerning a war with the
Hollanders.

Advised in such a Juncture of time, that the States General Hectored both
England, and France, and boasted in the French Court, that the King of great
Brittaigne, had neither money, nor creditt, to ^e^t out a man of war. And in
that Juncture, when the Comedians, and public Harbors in the United, and
Spanish Netherlands, had their Screenes, and Sceans, painted with the Trophies
of Chattam. And even in that Juncture, when the Council of Spain, had
rejected any nearer Alliance with Great Brittaigne, or to give His Majesty any
Assistance whatsoever against the Hollanders, that had so lately, insulted
over him, and his Kingdoms.

The Appealants make a great noise, with their Flourishing language, against
Englands Alliance with France, and the prodigious growth of that Kingdom,
(Since the Leagues and Alliances continued so long between France and
Holland, against Spain, and England) and now they fear the dreadful conquest
of the United Provinces, and the Spanish Netherlands. And say in their 15. 18.
and 19. Summary hints to the Parliament, that there will be an unavoydable
breach with Spain, in case the Alliance with France continues, and how fatal
the consequences of a Spanish war will be, and then impertinently propounds,
how much greater the danger will prove, if France should conquer Spain,
Germany, and the United Provinces, and lastly says, there is noe care taken of
the Triple League, or of the interest of England, and the Protestant Religion.

Noe man will deney, but that Charles the fifth was the greatest Monarche that
ever reigned upon the face of the Earth. Yett he did (some years before his
death) surrender the Crown of Spain and the Seaventeene Provinces, to his
Son Philip the second, and the Empire of Germany, to his Brother Ferdinando,
that was chosen King of the Romans; Charles the fifth being wearied out with
the divisions, and troubles, amongst the Netherlanders, and the German Princes,
concerning the Privileges of the Empire, and their respective Provinces.
Philip the second, was also wearied out, with the dissentions in the Low
Countries, and assigned the 17. Provinces unto Albertus and Isebella who
continued in a state of war, with the Hollanders, during their lives. And how
a French Monarch should expect any greater conquests by all his Arms, I cannot
apprehend, or understand.

The Dukes of Bavaria and Brandingburgh, who stands yett neutrall, and other
Princes of the Empire, would unite their forces effectually, if they did forsee
the danger of what the Appealants, vainly suppose. The Northern Kings, and
their neighbor Princes in the continent would unite, and hinder such a
prodigious grows of France, if the King of great Brittaigne should suffer
such a progress. Which is an Idle circumstance to Imagine.

The Interest of England is navall power, and it is certainly the advantage of
His Majesty, and his Crowns, to continue (by all means possible) the war
against the Hollanders, until their Fishermen be forced to go and inhabit
again upon the Coast of England and Scotland. And the rest of the Merchants,
and Mariners, be constrained to give better caution, for their good behavior
for the future, Or be compelled to burn their own Ships of war for a peace,
as the Carthagineans did 500. of their Ships and Galleys, at the end of the
second Punick war.

How many times France, has been almost subdued by England, many Cronicles,
and records sufficiently testifies, even when England, was not so populous,
nor so prompt to Arms, and when they had greater diversions from the Scotts,
that are since united to the Crown, and to give English men their due, all the
former conquests of the Hollanders, were gotten by the blood and valor of the
English, whose courage was not abated, when the Duke of Monmouth and his
Regiment, made the first assaults and storms, at the taking of Mastricht. It
is granted that the French may be as subtle, false, and insolent, as the
Hollanders, but they are universally more generous, and being so different in
their humors, and their habitts, from the Hollanders, there is noe great fear
of any accord between them, Especially since the breach, is made so wide.
Yett there is an opertunity for the King of great Brittaigne, to putt a cheque
upon the French, in the Spanish Netherlands, by possessing a place in the
Hollanders power, which at present is a Curb both unto Flanders and Brabant,
and ought to be rendered to England (as a precaution) from the Hollanders upon
this treaty at Cologne, to prevent any mischeife, that may happen from France,
Spain and Holland, Jointly, or severally, hereafter.

All men of understanding, or knowledge in History, will confess, that the
French Kings, had the Soveraignity of Flanders, before the batle of Pavye, and
that appeals before that time, were made to the Parliament at Paris. Which
after Francis the first renounced the Soveraignity to Charles the fifth (for
his ransom being taken Prisoner in that batle) all appeals in Flanders are
made to the Chamber at Mechelen. But whether a Sovereign Prince, can by Law
renounce any Soveraignity, or prerogative of his Crown, without a general
consent of the Kingdom, or Principallity, that orriginally chose their Kings,
to protect, and defend them, who granted the Soveraignities to their Princes
and their Heirs, Is a question that I shall not undertake to resolve.

Or whether the Kingdom of Sicily, that was divided by the Mediteranean sea
from the Continent of Jtally, could be transferred to the Crown of France, by
the Donation of the Queen. Which afterward upon the persuasion of several
Herm^ts, under the notion of Religion (employed by the Spaniards) the people of
Sicily, were animated to murder the French at their Vespers, to redeem
themselves from servitude, and become Subjects to the King of Spain.

Princes have their passions, and are more sencible of their honor, and
interests, then other men, who looks noe further, then their own private, and
present profitts, and advantage. It is most certain. The Infanta of Spain,
the French Kings wife Daughter of P^i^ IV. King of Spain, and (...), Daughter
of Henery the IV. King of France is the undoubted Heir of Flanders, as Charles
her Brother by a second venture is the undoubted Heir of Arragon, and (...).
Admitting the portion had been paid, to the French King that was Promised in
Marriage with the Jnfanta, which was the ground of the Pyreenean treaty, the
consideration of so much money, had ^eem^^ a good ^arr unto his claim, and
progress into the Spanish Netherlands, But to have neither money nor (...),
w^^^ a Kings Daughter, that pr^t^nds to so much of the world, as the King of
Sp^, w^ a man of a ^^aner s^^r^t, then a French King But whether it would be
better or worse for England, if the French King, should get possession of all
the Spanish Netherlands, any man of a reasonable Capacity is able to Judge.
Yett it is most certain, that it would be better for the Gentry, Burgers and
Bores, to be under one Master, that have lived miserably, so many years,
between the French, and the Spaniards, where the Spanish Governors and their
insolent Officers, will keep them (...) enough, although there were not so
many begging Religious Or (...) g^t them, who would get most of the Lands, as
well as their bread, if there were not strickt Laws in Flanders and Br^bant,
against that sort of b^gg^ng, and that manner of giving away their Lands; Where
the Magistrates do admit several Cloy^t^r^, and Convents of English Nunns,
and fryas, professed in (...) begging Orders, conditionally they shall maintain
themselves pay excises, and other duties, and not hinder the charity to their
own regulars, from both which, the Hollanders, like the box keepers at
Spearings ordinary, getts the greatest profitt, that brings the provisions to
the talbe, which consumes all at last.

The United Netherlands are unwilling to part with the Coverts, and
advantages, they make of their Frontiers in Flanders, and Brabant those two
Maritine Provinces of the Spanish Netherlands) both in times of peace, and
war, who speak the same language trade together, Cape together, confederate
together, and can at pleasure, evade the 21. Article of their Honorable Treaty
at Breda, without discovery; Newport, Ostende, and Flushing, being so near
together. And there general Port, at St. Donas standing open to them, over
against Sluice, upon all occasions of necessity. Who can also become free
Burgers in the Cities of Brabrant and Flanders, gra^^s with exemptions from
taxes, and other Charges, which are imposed upon English men, and their goods
contrary to former treaties, between England, and Spain, viz: Convoy money,
Pound-gelt, Last-gelt, House-gelt, besides Custom and Excizes. purposely to
drive English Merchants, and all English Woolen Manufactures, out of the
Spanish Netherlands, and to encourage the Hollanders, that strives to
undermine, and undersell, the English, in all parts.

And now (...) ^eme destning^ men, should di^^^ver the s^^ke in the grass, the
Hollanders ^ry out j^st of a Dragon, that is read, to d^v^ure them, and their
Diana Trade, calling to the House of Austria, Spain, Danemarcke, the German
Princes, and about all to their con^iderates in England, Help, Help, for the
Lords sake, our Religious concernments, are all at stake, our three principal
foudations, F^, and navigation, that supported us aganist (...), in the world
are sincking The English, and French, will open the Sc^, and Sass van G^^nt, to
spoil our Navigations, and Traff^^que into the Spanish Netherlands, and
Germany, as they have done already by prohibiting our Ships from their
Foreign plantations: 2. They will (...) our Herring and Co^^ fishing, upon
the Coast of England and Scotland, and 3. lay open the East India Trade, to the
Freedom of the English and French Companies. And because the Hollanders would
have noe stone unturned to effect their designs, they instruct the Spanish
Ambassador, at London, to find out, some fit instruments, to insinnuate at
all Coffee houses, the danger of the Protestant Religion, by introducing
Popery. 2. The setting up an arbitrary power, and 3. The unavoydable breach
with Spain, if the Alliance with France should continue. And while these
things are infusing into the Common peoples Brains, in England, the Spanish
Governor Monterey, and his officers were drinking to the Confusion of the Duke
of York, and his Majesty's Navy Royal.

All English men, and others, of any experience, knows that the Protestant
Religion in England is fortified, and barracadoed, with so many Acts of
Parliament, that it is impossible, for any Ingineers to undermine, or shake it
with all the Canons, or Batteries in the world. The Common Laws of England,
have the same fortifications, which protects every man's life, and estate. Those
grand Charters are all Canon proof. As to the English interest abroad, so
much threatened, upon the unavoydable breach with Spain, The Arguments, are
against the Hollanders, and their Allies. The King of Spain is a child, and
the Emperor of Germany none of the wisest Princes, that ever reigned, yett
they may both understand, that a Spanish war with England, in this
conjuncture, would be more fatal unto Spain, then Dangerous unto Great
Brittaigne. England is able to subsist of it self, and if they would forbear
trade for a time, to pursue their victories, all Nations would be suddenly
reduced, to want and necessity.

The pore and proud Spaniards, would not have a Herring, or a pilchard for
their slaves in their viniards, but feed their swine with their fruits, and
wine, while English men drink good Ale and syder, and the Seigneurs want bays
for cloaks, to cover their rags, and their Women long vayles to cover their
Modesties. Then comes a crew from Amsterdam, Leyden, and Rotterdam, that were
raked out of the sinckes of all Nations, Echoing alloud, help, help, for
heavens sake, an harmeless people, that knows not where to live, and serve God
after their own ways. At last comes another generation (the best of all the
pack) crying hold, hold for Jesus sake we are old upright North-Hollanders,
and Frizons, that getts our liveing, by Fishing, and Dayaries, who ought not to
suffer for the cheats, forgeries, and dissimulations, or the insolences, and
rapines, of our East, and West India Sovereigns, that have introduced
themselves into the Government, since the death of Queen Elizebeth.

Noe man that is in his Wits, and knows Holland, will believe that those
people, should out of their turffe mines, muddy, and sandy ground (half the
year under water,) honestly get such means, to trouble, and molest all
Europe. And then by the Triple League think to secure themselves from all
their Robberies and Murders. A three fold cord is not sone broken, but a
Triple Alliance, that hanges in a silver Chain, if one linck be broken, the
whole league falls to the ground. The States General, and all their
Sovereigns, cannot be so impertinent, to think, that any Prince, should be
obliged, to their treaties, after they have made as many breaches, as there are
Articles contained in them.

King James found them beggars, and King Charles the II. does them noe wrong
to leave them Beggars, or deal by them as Great Princes, do by their
unfaithful stewards, take away their unjust gains, and leave them a
competency to live upon:

The Authors of Englands appeal, begins with a ridiculous fable of a Lion, a
Bull, and other beasts, and concludes presumptiously, with a seripture Phaise
Calling heaven, and Earth to record, that they set life and death before you,
blessing, and cursing, etc.

O England, England, there is a divine providence, that governes the world, and
affairs of men. Many are the troubles, miseries, and Callamities, that were
brought upon you, through your own errors, jalousies, and mistakes. Blessings
do now attend you; And there are opertunities, putt into your hands, to
perpetuate your own Glory, by your own Actions. As Nature has made you
renouned by her fair Ornements; Great Brittaigne is encompassed about on every
side, with the Mighty Ocean, wihich carries her floating Towers out of the best
Ports, and Harbors in the world. Replenished in the several seasons with all
kinds of Fish, that particularly visitts the English Coasts for supplies, when
at all times the flowing tides runns into your rivers and streams, to fetch
fresh water for the thirsty Mariners. Your Hills and Downs, are inamilled with
flocks of sheep and goats. Your barren soyles are stored with rich mines and
quarries. All your Counties, and shyres, are like the Choycest landshipps,
Complicated with Stately Cities and Towns, sumptious Castles, and buildings,
woods and groves, amongst riveletts, Meadows, Arrable land, and pastures.
Where nature has outvied art, to make you beautiful and happy; Whilst other
Nations want those conveniences, and your staple Commodities. And as a further
addition to your happiness, you are blessed with a Prince that studies to
establish those felicities upon a most sure foundation, to you and your Heirs
for ever. Whose bodies and minds are made suitable to the Drett, and elements,
of your Country, from whence I may without vanity say of England. Ne quisquam
Ajacem possit superare nisi Ajax.


Now I appeal unto heaven and Earth, Whether it would not be an Act of Justice
and honor for the Lords and Commons in Parliament, to move the King,
effectually to insist upon such a sum of money from the Hollanders, that might
make full satisfaction, and reparation, for the debt and damages, concerning
the two Ships Bona Esperanza, and Henery Bonadventura.

Or whether there ought not in Policy and prudence, to be a Summary way agreed
upon in this treaty, to end all suits at Law between His Majesty's Subjects,
and the Sovereigns of Holland and Zeland, depending before them, that are both
parties and Judges themselves.

Or whether it would not be an Act of injustice and ingratitude in the whole
Kingdom of England, to suffer the Heirs of Sir William Courten, and Sir Paul
Pyndar to live in exile, (under the Curse of the old Law) deprived of all their
Fathers inheritances, whose Estates are kept from them, by violence and
oppression. That had done so much for their King, and Country in the
improvement of trade, and Navigation. That had so aften supplied Ambassadors
abroad, after Sir Paul Pyndar himself, had continued eleaven years at
Constantinople, in the service of King James, and the Turkey Company, wherein
he much advanced the Levant Merchants. That have made such additions, to the
Crown, and Revenues of His Majestie^. That did leave other Nations, from
whence they brought vast sums of money into His Majesty's Kingdoms, to be
made such presidents of misfortune. If their posterity should be still for
saken, where they ought to be releived.

FINIS.

