AN ACCOUNT OF THE PROCEEDINGS IN THE House of Commons, In Relation to the
Recoining the Clipped Money, and Falling the Price of Guineas. TOGETHER With a
Particular List of the Names of the Members consenting and dissenting.
In Answer to a Letter out of the Country.
SIR,
I Received Yours, Aug. 14. and I hold my Self bound upon many Accounts to
comply with your Desires, and to give you the best Satisfaction I can; and in
the first place, I must freely acknowledge to you, that how astonishing soever
the Difficulties the Country labors under may seem to you, they are not at
all surprising to me, for I never expected otherwise, than that the Grand
Project of lowering the Guineas, and the Recoining our Silver, at this time,
when such vast Quantities, and in truth all our good Money, had already been
transported, into Holland, Flanders, Spain, Italy and Germany, must needs have
a terrible Aspect on a Nation exhausted before, and drawn down to the last
Degree. For a Man of half an Eye might easily perceive, that the great Pains
and Labor the Court was at to gain an Act of Parliament for sinking our Gold,
and putting a new Face on our Silver, was only to qualify them for Travel, and
as necessary Preparations for the Journey they were designed for, for they only
staid at Home, because our Gold was too high, and our Silver too low, either
light in weight, or base in Metal, and when once these Obstructions were
removed, they would be ready to cross the Seas to their Fellows, and become
Denizens of another Country. And if a Kingdom has not a third part sufficient
Cash left to manage the Trade, and Interest of it; in such a Case to form a
grand Design to diminish that by one half, by Coinage, and abatement of the
current Value, and after that to send Abroad three Parts of four, even of that
half, can visibly tend only to impoverish the Rich, to starve the Poor, and to
put the whole Nation at a Stand; it throws all the Remnant of our Money into
the Hands of the Government, destroys all the Credit of the Nation, and at the
same time leaves nothing to encourage and drive on Trade, nor to supply the
Necessities of private Men and Families, and will in a short time reduce us to
the Primitive State, not any more to buy, but to barter and exchange, to
commute what we have for what we want; and those who want, and yet have nothing
to exchange, will ca^ve for themselves, and take it where they find it. These
were the Thoughts I had of this Bill before it passed, and am therefore the
less surpised, when I see them, for the most part, already made good, and in
truth they are obvious to any Man, and I cannot believe but the warmest
Sticklers for it saw these Effects and Consequences, as clearly and plainly as
those that opposed it, for what Ends soever they engaged so fiercely to promote
it. And this brings me to the other Branch of your Letter, (viz.)

That the Country feeling these Effects, are provoked to very great Anger
against the Parliament, and can hardly restrain their Hands from offering
Violence to the Persons, and Houses of the Members. Now, Sir, I must plainly
confess to you on this Head, that I think (in the General) that the Country
are in the Right, and have placed their Wrath on a true Object. For tho the
Root of this Project lies much deeper; yet it could never affect the People,
but by them, and as passing through their Hands, It had indeed another Head and
Original, but the Mischief derived to the People by it is purely through them. The
Country, when they choose them, they look upon them as their Trustees, and that
they ought to take care (especially in the matter of Money) that the People
receive no Damage, but if through their Default either by their Connivance,
Partiality, Fear, Negligence, and much more by a corrupt Activity, the good
People of this Nation are brought into Danger, they will charge it upon their
Representatives, and so far they are right; they do but what is Equal and Fit;
for no Man can think himself hardly dealt with, if he is charged only with his
own Actions; if therefore the Members will vote, and the Parliament enact
things the most intolerable and grievous, they must be contented to bear the
blame on it, and take the Curses of the People for their Pains. It will not be
sufficient here for any Man to say, that He was misled, imposed upon, or
frighted; for tho these may excuse in a private Capacity, and Ignorance and
Mistake may atone for Personal and Private Miscarriages, yet if Men will take
upon them great Trusts, if they will load themselves with other Men's Concerns,
and take upon them the Charge of a Nation, they are Responsible for the
Failures that pass through their Hands, and must not take it ill, if when the
People find themselves Suffering by their means, they lay it at their Doors,
for it was Original Fraud for them, when they wanted Wisdom and Resolution, to
take upon them a Post that required so great a measure of both. It would be a
ridiculous Excuse in a General: for the loss of an Army, that he was afraid, or
mistaken, whereas the very Station requires and implies the direct contrary
Qualities, the highest Circumspection and Valor, If therefore Men will be
representing a Nation, they are bound at the same time to provide themselves
with suitable Abilities; and if through want of Wisdom, Caution, Courage, and
other necessary Qualifications in a Senator, they are prevailed upon to join in
pernicious and destructive Votes, they are justly accountable for what
miscarries under their Hands; for although in point of Malignity there is some
difference between the active and busy Members, those who pursued this matter
with the utmost Diligence and Application, and those who were lead on to give
their Concurrence, yet in point of Danger, it is all one, and the People are
undone, as well by the Supineness and Cowardice of some, as by the Forwardness
and Zeal of others; as a Nation may be as soon ruined by ill Conduct, as by
Treachery. So that so far as every particular Man had a share in laying this
heavy Oppression upon the People, so far he must expect to bear share in their
ill Will; and the People do Justice to their Representatives, as well as to
themselves, by imputing to them all that present Misery and Calamity they now
groan under. But then here is the Fault, they are apt to lay this Charge
promiscuously, without Discretion or Distinction, as if every Gentleman that
sits in that House was equally chargeable with all the Proceedings, whereas
it is a Collective Body, made up of Gentlemen of differing Tempers and
Dispositions, and there were a great many very worthy Patriots, who wisely and
honestly considered the case of the People, and with great Courage and Prudence
opposed these Proceedings to the utmost of their Power, although they were at
length overruled by a Majority, which they could not help, and had used all
their endeavors to hinder. And it is the highest Injustice in the World to
ascribe that to them which they were so far from concurring in, that they
opposed to the last, and the utmost Ingratitude for the People to repay them
with Hatred, only for endeavoring faithfully to serve them, tho they were not
able to effect it. But this arises from two Causes, the one is the Station and
Circumstances of the Generality of the People, they have no opportunities to
know the particular Proceedings in Parliament, nor means to distinguish between
their Faithful Representatives, and others; for tho the Votes are Printed, the
Yeas and Noes, the Names of the Persons concurring and dissenting are not, and
the Nation has no way of knowing that but by particular Information. And I
confess I have often wondered that those Gentlemen who had so signally
distinguished themselves in Parliament, should hitherto suffer themselves to
lie under the common Obloquy and Hatred, and not endeavor to remove it by
informing the respective Counties, Cities, and Boroughs, of their Honest and
Faithful Care to preserve them from those terrible Inconveniences which they
foresaw these Proceedings would inevitably bring upon them. Another cause of
this sinister and undistinguishing Construction, is the Artifice of the Leading
Men, and the Great Sticklers, who having themselves been the Sole Authors of
these unhappy Circumstances, and at the same time being sensible how very
ungrateful and prejudical they are to the People, are very industrious to keep
the People Hoodwinkt, hoping thereby to pass undiscerned and undistinguished in
the Crowd, and that they may escape well enough so long as they lie in Common,
and have no particular Mark set upon them; nay, in good truth some of these are
not contented to do all the Mischief themselves, but think they have not played
the whole Game out, 'till they have laid the Blame on other Men's Backs; and I
cannot forbear remarking to you, that, at this very time, in several Cities and
Counties, perhaps in all, these very Men who were the most active and forward,
and made it their Business to bring this dreadful Desolation on the Kingdom,
are washing their Hands and wiping their Mouths, and craftily insinuating into
the credulous Multitude, that the present Calamities are purely owing to the
other Members, and that they, honest Men, are harmless and clear of the whole
matter, and so think to escape themselves by diverting the Stream of the
Peoples Rage on innocent Men; and thereby hope to gain too Points, both to
cover their own Guilts, and at the same time to satiate their Revenge, by
exposing to popular Fury those who would not be as bad as themselves; even as
Joseph's Mistress attempted his Chastity, and then transferred it to him to
hide her own Crime, and to be revenged on him for his Refusal. This must be
consessed to be a high slight in Politics, but it is great Pity but it was
turned upon them, by setting things in a true Light, that is, by giving a full
State of this Matter, that the People may know their Friends from their Foes,
and plainly see whom they are to thank for this consuming Act, which has
devoured our Trade, and in a short time will swallow up all the Money in the
Nation. And this leads me to the Third and Last part of your Letter: And that
is, you desire from me an account of the Management of this whole Affair in
Parliament, and withal you desire me to be very particular and express,
because, you say, you have been apt hitherto to err with the Multitude, and you
think it becomes every honest Man to rectify his Mistakes, and to have a right
Opinion both of Persons and Things. And in order to your entire Satisfaction in
this Point. I shall First give you the plain Matter of Fact, and lay before you
a short Abstract of the Progress of this matter in the House of Commons. And
Secondly, I shall give you a List (as far as my Memory serves) of all the Yeas
and Noes, that is, of all the Persons who consented, and who dissented, who
were for, and who against, the finking of the Guineas, etc. whereby you will be
fully enabled to judge uprightly of this Matter to translate the Opinion of
Persons and Things to their true Objects; and, according to the English
Proverb, To lay the Saddle on the Right Horse.

As to the First of these, when I have repnesented to you the several Steps and
Movements of this matter in Parliament, and laid them together before you, you
will have a direct view of the whole, you will at once see the Original, the
Rise, Progress and Perfection of it; you will easily perceive the Struglings of
the Members, and how at length the Court Party carried it; you will see what
Overtures have been made to scour and uphold the People with respect to it,
and how those have been rejected; and in short, you will have before you the
Methods, or (in Parliamentary Langnage) the Ways and Means, whereby the Country
has been brought into these desolate Circumstances; and then, in the Second
Place, by the particular List you will see by whom.

Be pleased then to observe, that at the opening of the Parliament, the King
recommended to them the redressing the ill State of the Coin; and in pursuance
of that, Martis 10 Dec. 1695. Colonel Granvil reports from the Committee
appointed to consider the State of the Nation, several Resolutions relating to
the Recoining of Clipped Money, and putting a stop to the Currency of it after a
certain time; which were agreed unto by the House. And 14 Dec. an Address was
agreed upon to his Majesty, pursuant to the said Resolutions; and 17 Dec. the
Chancellor of the Exchequer (Mr. Mountague, to whom the said Resolutions were
chiefly owing) reported the Address, and likewise the King's Answer to it, That
he would issue his Proclamation accordingly with all convenient speed; and at
the same time Mr. Mountague presents a Bill to the House for regulating the
Coinage of the Silver Money. But when the Proclamation was issued, the Days
appointed by it for putting a stop to the Currency of Clipped Money were so
sudden, (and the same done, as is said by the Advice of Mr. Mountague, contrary
to that of the major part of the Council) that an immediate Stop and great
Difficulties ensued in Trade and Commerce; which being represented, and every
Gentleman sensible of it, 31 Dec. they resolved on the morrow to consider in a
Committee of the whole House farther of the State of the Coin, and for
preventing the Stop of Commerce during the Recoining of Clipped Money. And after
some Debates on several days, Jan. 9. Colonel Granvil reports from the
Committee of the whole House, who were to consider of the State of the Coin,
several Resolutions (very different from the former) which were agreed unto by
the House, and a Bill ordered to be brought in upon them. These Resolutions are
very considerable; and among the rest. That the Recompense for supplying the
Deficiency of Clipped Money, shall extend to all Clipped Money which is Silver,
although of a coarser Alloy than the Standard.

That the Collectors and Receivers of his Majesty's Aids and Revenues be
enjoined to receive all such Moneys.

That a Reward of Five Bound per Cent. be given to all such Persons as shall
bring in either Milled or broad unclipt Money, to be applied in exchange for
Clipped Money throughout the Kingdom.

That Commissioners be appointed in every County, to pay and distribute the
Milled and broad unclipt Money, and the new coined, Money, and to receive in
the clipped Money.



These Sir, you see, are wholesome Rosolutions, very profitable for the Country,
and (if persisted in) would have supplied them with good Money, and have kept
Trade on foot; and by them you see the Temper of the House at that time, what
good Inclinations they had to the Country, and what Care was taken that they
should be no Losers, nor their bad Money to lie on their hands to be useless
and unprofitable. But this, it seems, was too advantageous to the People to be
ripened into an Act, and was at the same time (particularly what related to the
Exchange of Clipped Money, and supplying the Deficiency of it) opposed by Mr.
Mountague, Mr. Clark a Commissioner of the Excise, Sir W. Young a Commissioner
of the Customs, Sir J. Elwel, and others of the Court-Party. However,

21. Jan. the Bill upon the foregoing Resolutions was read the second time, and
committed to a Committee of the whole House: But then a new Artifice was
started, and the Price of Guinea's brought into play, although that Point could
not be gained at that time; for a Motion being made, and the Question put, that
it be an Instruction to the said Committee that they do consider the Price of
Guinea's; It passed in the Negative.

But this Artifice failing, another was ready at hand; viz. To put off this
Committee from sitting, which was done for several days, notwithstanding the
honest Patriots got some Resolutions passed in order to it; as Febr. 4. an
Instruction, that the said Committee do consider of a farther Encouragement to
be given for bringing in Plate to be coined, and broad Money in order to be
exchanged for Clipped Money. And Feb. 6. another Instruction to receive a Clause
to prohibit the Use of Place in Public Houses: which was consented to, upon
the Consideration of exchanging the Clipped Money. So that hitherto the Case of
the People was considered, and there were Endeavors to make Provision to
exchange their Clipped Money, that so they might have had a Sufficiency of good
Money, to drive on Trade, to pay their Rents, and to supply their Families.

But now the Price of Guinea's was started again, and Feb. 10. it was resolved,
That this House will on Thursday next resolve it self into a Committee, to
consider the Price of Guinea's. And on Thursday, Feb. 13. the House (to make
sure work) resolved it self (twice the same day, one immediately after the
other) into a Committee of the whole House to consider of the Price of
Guinea's, and came to a Resolution; which Resolution Mr. Palms reports Feb.
15. and was agreed unto by the House, viz. That no Guinea's do pass in any
Payment at above the Rate of 28 Shillings. I must acquaint you, that at this
time there were warm Endeavors used to have reduced them to 24 Shillings, and
Mr. Palms behaved himself with such Partiality to them of his Opinion, as was
never seen in Parliament, and he deservedly checked for it by the old Members.
His Son (who can scarce tell ten) is one of the Tellers in the Exchequer; but
it is sufficiently understood that Place was given with regard to the Father,
who contrived this way to save his Honor, after the repeated Declarations he
had made in Parliament against Places.

However, this Fall of Guinea's did not satisfy; they must be brought one step
lower: And accordingly Feb. 28. upon the Report of the Bill for continuing
several Duties granted by former Acts upon Wine, Vinegar, Tobacco, etc. to
which the Clause about the Price of Guinea's was added, according to the
Resolution Feb. 15. After a long Debate, several Gentlemen were unwarily drawn
in, to admit that Guinea's should not pass in Payment at an higher Rate than 26
Shillings, upon Assurance then given, That the Court would acquiesce, and not
seek to reduce them lower; and the Clause was so amended.

But did the Court acquiesce? No such matter; but instead of that, pursued with
all Vigor the sinking Guinea's much lower, and at length gained it: and not
only so, but by several Artifices prevailed to throw out all that related to
the Exchanging with the People broad or milled Money for their clipped Money;
insomuch that on March 10. the Title was changed, and whereas it always before
stood in the Votes with this Title, The Bill to Encourage the bringing in of
Milled, Broad, or Vnclipt Moneys to be exchanged by Commissioners in the
several parts of this Realm, with the Common People for their Clipped Moneys, and
for the Encouraging of Persons to bring Plate into the Mint to be coined. Now
all the first part was struck out, and from the 10. of March, and ever after,
it bore only this Title, A Bill for the Encouraging of Persons to bring Plate
into the Mint to be coined.

By this time you see the People were likely to be in a hopeful Condition, and
to shift with their Clipped Money as well as they could. And here you see the
Root of that Decay of Trade, that Desolation among the Poor, that Stock of dead
and unprofitable Money that lies upon Men's hands. Why, Sir, their Faithful
Representatives took all Care to stop it from passing, and to give Twelve
hundred thousand pound to supply the Deficiency of it, but never thought of
supplying the Deficiency of the Country; nay, actually opposed it to the
utmost. And it seems as if these Gentlemen had formed a Design that the Country
should have no Money, or (which is the same thing) none that will pass in any
Payment; for although the Parliament left a Liberty, and permitted Six pences not
clipped within the Ring, and Shillings with the greatest part of the Letters, to
pass in Payment, whereby a proportion of Trade was carried on, and the People
supplied in some degree, yet now these are as useless, and lie as dead as the
other: And if you will enquire into the Occasion of this Stop of such passable
Money, you will find it to begin at the Collectors for the Tax; they first
refused to receive it, and from them it was derived to others: and I need not
remark to you, that the Sub-Collectors are under the Conduct of the
Head-Collectors, and the Head Collectors under the Direction of the Treasury
and Exchequer; the principal Officers of which were the chiefest and warmest
Sticklers in the Case now before us: so that the Persons who would not have the
Peoples Clipped Money exchanged for good Money, are the very same who have put a
final Stop to the Currency of their other Money.

But whatever becomes of our Silver, we have yet our Guinea's passable at 26
Shillings. But now comes the last and finishing Stroke of this sweeping
Project; for at the Report of the Bill (with half its Title) for Encouraging
bringing Plate to the Mint, etc. March 9. a Clause was offered by the Lord
Coningsby about settling the Price of Guineas. This Clause settled them at 22
Shillings, and the Consideration of it was put off till the next day: and March
20. the Clause was rejected; but March 26. the Lord Coningsby offered his
Clause again, at the third reading of the Bill; and after many hours Debate, it
passed by a small Number.

And thus, Sir, I have given you a plain and impartial Account of the
Proceedings relating to this Matter; and you plainly see by what Methods this
Consumption is brought upon us. It needs no Animadversions, and I shall make
none; you have the Matter of Fact before you, and you may judge as you see
Cause: only I crave leave to tell you, that the Party who carried these,
struggled hard to have had all Clipped Money pass by weight immediately, and
Guineas reduced to 21 s. and 6 d. and none of the Loss to have been born by the
Public. Mr. Mountague, Chancellor of the Exchequer, had eminently a share in
these things, who delivered this as his Maxim, That he had rather do Wrong than
do nothing. And whoever considers the Resolutions taken, will find him faithful
and true to it, and pursuing it in several Instances. He had a great many
partners, as you must observe by the carrying their Point, particularly all
that had any Interest in the Bank, Places at Court, Civil or Military, etc. But
this is more proper in the next Head, viz.

To give you a List (as far as my Memory will serve) of the Members Consenting
to these Votes, and Dissenting from them, under the Parliamentary Title of
Yea's and No's: where (for your Information) I defire you to observe, that
those under the Title Yea's are the Members who voted for these Proeeedings,
those under No's, who voted against them; or, in other words, the Yea's are
those who sunk the Guineas to 22 Shillings, etc. the No's those who opposed it.

YEA's. NO's. Bedford-Shire.
Lord Edw. Russel.
Bedford-Shire.
Will. Duncomb. Will. Harrar.
Berks.
Rich. Nevil. Lord Fitzharding. Sir Will. Scawen. Sir Will. Rich. Sir Hen.
Vane. Tho. Tipping.
Berks.
Sir Humph. Foster. Will. Jennings. Sim. Harcourt.
Bucks.
Th. Wharton. Sir R. Atkins. Chapter Godfrey. Sir Th. Lee. Ri. Beak. Ja. Herbert.
Ja. Chase.
Bucks.
Sir Rich. Temple. Alex. Denton. Mountag. Drake. Edm. Waller. J. Backwell. Sir
Ja. Etheridge.
Cambridge.
Lord Cutts. Edw. Russel. Dr. Oxendon.
Cambridge.
Hen. Boil. Jo. Pepys. Is. Watlington.
Chester
Sir J. Manwaring.
Chester.
Sir Rob. Cotton. Sir Tho. Grosvenor.
Cornwall.
H. Boscowen. Sam Travers. Russel Roberts. Chapter Godolphin. Wa. Moyle. Rob.
Molesworth. Ja. Kendal. Hu. Fortescue. Hen. Trelawney. Ja. Vernon. Fra.
Roberts. Ja. Mountague. Geo. Booth. Sir Bev. Granvile.
Cornwall.
Jo. Speccot. Lord Hide. Bern. Granvile. Jo. Hoblyn. Fra. Buller. Chapter
Trelawney. Alex. Pendarvis. J. Manley. Dan. Elliot. Hen. Fleming. J. Tredenham.
Lym. Tredenham. Sir W. Coryton. Fran. Gwyn.
Cumberland.
Sir Geo. Fletcher. Sir J. Lowther. Will. Howard. Ja. Lowther. Goodw. Wharton.
Cumberland.
Sir Chapter Gerrard.
Derby.
Lord Hartington.
Derby.
Sir Geo. Clark. Lord Hen. Cavendish. J. Bagnold.
Devon.
Edw. Seyward. Sir Jos. Tyley. A. Champneys Sir Tho. Trevor. Courtney Crocker.
Sir W. Young. Lord Rob. Russel. Lord Ja. Russel. Sir Row. Gwyn. Sir J. Elwel.
Devon.
Fr. Cortney. Sam. Roll. Sir Edw. Seymour. Edw. Yard. Joh. Granvile. Geo.
Parker. J. Burrington Nic. Hooper. Sir Will. Drake.
Dorset.
Hen. Henley. Tho. Freke. Joh. Knight. Sir Steph. Evans. Sir Mat. Andrews. Edw.
Nicholas Tho. Earl Tho. Trenchard.
Dorset.
Tho. Strangways. Tho. Freke. Lord Ashley. Mich. Harvey. Rich. Fownes.
Durham.
Hen. Lyddel.
Durham.
Sir Will. Bows. W. Lampton.
Essex.
Sir Fr. Marsham. Sir Is. Rebow Irly Mountague. Sir Tho. Middleton.
Essex.
Sir Eliab Harvey. Sir Tho. Daval.
Gloucester.
Sir Ra. Dutton. Rich. Dowdeswel.
Gloucester.
-- Stephens. Rob. Pain. J. How. Rich. How. Sir Fr. Winnington.
Hereford.
Sir H. Crofts. Lord Coningsby. J. Dutton Colt.
Hereford.
Rob. Price. Tho. Foley.
Hertford.
Sir T. Pope Blount. Sir W. Cooper. W. Cooper.
Hertford.
Tho. Halsey. Geo. Churchill.
Huntington.
Hen. Mountague.
Huntington.
An. Hamond. Rich. Mountague.
Kent.
Phil. Sidney. Sir Tho. Roberts. Geo. Sayer. Sir Cloud. Shovel. Sir Jos.
Williamson. Tho. Rider.
Kent.
Sir Joh. Banks. Caleb. Banks.
Lancaster.
Ja Stanley. To. Kirby. Tho. Molineux. W. Norreys. Jasp. Maudit.
Lancaster.
Leigh Banks. Tho. Brotherton. Sir Rob. Bradshaw. P. Shackerley.
Leicester.
Geo. Ashby. Sir Edw. Abney. A. Palmer.
Leicester.

Lincoln.
W. Monson. Per. Bertie. Sir W. York. Sir Ed. Ayscough. Chapter Bertie. Ph.
Bertie.
Lincoln.
Lord Castleton. Sir Tho. Hussy. Sir J. Bolles. Sir W. Ellis.
Middlesex.
Sir J. Wolstenholme. Chapter Mountague. Sir Steph. Fox. Sir Rob. Clayton. Tho.
Papilion.
Middlesex.
Sir J. Fleet.
Norfolk.
Sir H. Hobart. Sir J. Turner. Ja. Slowan. Sir To. Howard. Edw. Walpool.
Norfolk.
Sir Jac. Astley. Fran. Gardener. Tho. Blofield. Geo. England. Sam. Fuller. Sir
J. Woodhouse.
Northampton.
Sir St. Andrew Saint-John. W. Brownlow. Chapter Egerton. Hen. Morden. Tho.
Andrews.
Nothamprton.
Tho. Cartwright. G. Dolben.
Northumberland.
Geo. Nicholas. Sir Henry Bellasis. Ra. Gray. Sam. Ogle.
Northumberland.
Will. Forster. Sir W. Blacket. Will. Carre.
Nottingham.
Sir Scroop How. J. White. Rich. Slater. W. Pierpoint. J. Thornhaugh. Sir Fr.
Mollineux.
Nottingham.
Sir Geo. Markham.
Oxon.
Sir Will. Trumball. Sir Thomas Littleton.
Oxon.
Lord Norreys Sir R. Jenkinson. Hen. Finch. Sir Edw. Norreys. Tho. Rowney. Ja.
Bertey.
Rutland.
Bennet Sherrard.
Rutland.

Salop.
Lord Newport. Chapter Baldwin. Sir Will. Forrester. Rich. Moore. Chapter Mason.
Salop.
Edw. Kynaston. And. Newport. J. Kynaston. Sir W. Whitmore. Sir Edw. Acton.
Geo. Weld.
Somerset.
Sir Tho. Day. W. Blathwait. Edw. Clarke. To. Hoar. J. Speak. Sir Tho. Travel
Somerset.
Sir J. Smit. Sir J. Trevilian. Edw. Berkley. Sergeant Coward. Nath. Palmer. J.
Sandford. Sir Fr. Windham J. Hunt. Sir Chapter Carteret.
Southampton.
Lord Winchester. Lord W. Pawlet. Nich. Hedger. An. Morgan. Sir Hen. Colt. Sir
To. Cotton. Lord Cornbury. Tho. Door. Christ Stokes. J. Smith.
Southampton.
Fred. Tilney. Sir Ben. Newland. Hen. Holmes. An. Sturt. Ja. Worsely. Tho.
Done. W. Etterick.
Stafford.
Sir M. Biddulph. J. Lawton. Tho. Guy.
Stafford.
J. Gray. Hen. Page. To. Burdet. Phil. Foley. Tho. Foley. Sir J^ Lev. Gower.
Sir Hen. Gough.
Suffolk.
Chapter Whitaker. Sir To. Rich. H. Heveringham. Tho. Felton. Sr T. Barnardiston
Chapter Cornwallis. J. Harvey.
Suffolk.
Sr S. Bernardiston Sir J. Barker. Sir Hen. Johnson. W. Johnson. Sir To.
Davers.
Surrey.
Sir Rich. Onslow. Den. Onslow. An. Bowyer. Tho. Howard. M. Thompson. Foot
Onslow. Sir J. Thompson. Geo. Bridges.
Surrey.
Chapter Cox. Sir J. Parsons. J. Parsons. Geo. Woodroffe.
Sussex.
Lord Ranelagh. J. Machel. Tho. Pelham. Hen. Pelham. H. Priestman. Nich.
Burbon. Edw. Dummer.
Sussex.
W. Elson. Sir W. Morley. J. Lewknor. J. Perry. W. Stringer. Sir Tho. Dyke. J.
Conyets. Lord Walden.
Warwick.

Warwick.
W. Bromley. A. Archer. Geo. Bohun. Tho. Gery. Lord Digby. Fran. Grevile.
Westmorland.
Sir J. Lowther. Sir Ric. Sandford.
Westmorland.
Sir W. Twisden. Sr Chr. Musgrave
Wilts.
Sir T. Mompesson Tho. Hoby. Sir J. Hawles. Sir Cha. Raleigh. Hen. Blake. Alex.
Popham. Craven Howard. Goodw. Wharton Chapter Fox. Tho. Neal.
Wilts.
To. Hide. Chapter Morley. Will. Ash. To. Bertie. Rich. Lewis. Sir E. Ernly. Will.
Harvey. Hen. Pynnel. Tho. Bennet. W. Daniel.
Worcester.
Will. Bromley. Chapter Cox. Sir Ja. Rushout.
Worcester.
Edwyn Sandys. Sam. Swift. Hen. Parker.
York.
Chapter Osborn. Sir W. St. Quintin Christ. Stockdale Lord Irwin. Sir Chapter Hotham.
Jonath. Jennings. Tho. Frankland. Sir H. Goodwick. Sir W. Strickland W. Palms.
Sir W. Lowther. Rob. Monckton.
York.
Rob. Byerley. Sr M. Wentworth Sir Mic. Wharton
Cinque Ports.
J. Poultney. To. Austen. Sam. Western. Sir J. Austen. J. Brewer. Sir Ph.
Boteler. Sir Bas. Dixwel. Ja. Chadwicke. Ed. Burnt. W. Campion. W. Loundes.
Cinque Ports.
Tho. Frewen. Sir W. Twisden.
Wales.
Sir To. Puleston. H. Nanny. Lord Lisburn.
Wales.
Sir W. Williams. Edw. Jones. Jeffrey Jeffreys. Rich. Vaughan. Sir R.
Middleton. Edw. Brereton. Sir J. Conway. Tho. Mansel. Edw. Vaughan. John
Jeffreys. To. Harley.


And now, Sir, I have, I think, fully answered all your Desires; you have the
state of the Case, and the Persons concerned; the Action and the Actors: and if
you will give your self the Trouble to tell over the Names, you will find that
(after all the Artifice and Endeavors) the Odds was not extraordinary on the
Court side: and you may be satisfied, that there were a great many Gentlemen
who were, and still are, very careful of the Good of the People for whom they
serve. However, you have the whole Case before you, and now you are empowered
to make a just and righteous Judgment both as to Persons and Things: and if you
do not, that is not my Fault, but yours. I shall conclude, like a Divine, with
a Sentence of Scripture; He that justifies the Wicked, and he that condemns
the Just, even they both are Abomination to the Lord, Prove. 17.15. I am, Sir,

Yours, etc.
London, Aug. 20. 96.

