THE BENEFICE. A COMEDY.

By R. W. D. D. Author of ITER BOREALE. Written in his Younger Days: Now made
Public for promoting Innocent Mirth.

-- Ridentum dicere verum
Quid vetat?
Licensed and Entered.

LONDON, Printed, to be Sold by R. Ianeway, in Queens-Head Court in
Paternoster Row. M.DC.LXXXIX.

TO THE READER.
It Is now several Years since these Papers, of the most Ingenious Dr. R. Wild's
first fell into my Hands. Which (having been the occasion of so much Innocent
Mirth and Diversion, not only to my self, but to all I ever communicated them
to) I thought fit, at length (lest I should seem either Envious or Injurious to
others) not any longer to engross the Pleasure of them wholly to my self; but
to invite the Public to share in this, no contemptible Privilege, by the
Publication hereof: Which, without the least Diminution, Addition, or
Alteration, is here presented to thee in the Author's own Words.

A further Recommendation being needless, to what will so assuredly Recommend
it self, being Read; I shall only add, That if Pure Wit, Harmless Jest, True
Mirth, and Good Design are taking, I need not doubt but what follows here,
will highly Please, and Oblige thee to the Publisher,

Farewell.

Dramatis Personae.
INvention. Furor Poeticus, An Humorous Poet. Pedanto, A Schoolmaster.
Comaedia, A Girl. Ceres, The Goddess of Harvest. Marchurch, The Patron of a
Living. Ursley, His Kitchen Wench. Mar-Pudding, A Cotquean; Nephew to
Marchurch. Book-Worm, A Young Divine. Sir Homily, An Old Curat. Hob-Nail,
Marchurch's hind-Servant. Phantastes, A mere Scholar, newly come from the
University. Goodman Scuttle, A New-English Basket-Maker. Two Watchmen. A
Schoolboy. Tinker, and a Gypsy his Wife.

Scena profi^gentis arbitrio.

THE BENEFICE.
ACT the First.
Behind the Curtain a Schoolmaster at study writing, with many Books before
him; and a little Boy under him with his Grammar in one Hand, and Bread and
Butter in the other. [Enter Invention and Furor Poeticus.] Invention comes in
Studying. After a Pause, he steps back and calls Furor Poeticus. Invention.
FVror, Furor. So -- Ho -- Ho. (...), -- (...).

Enter Furor, Panting and Blowing.
Furor. Good Master Invention -- Oh -- You are too quick for me. You are in as
much haste as a Scholar to get a Wife, or an Heir to Sell his Land. Hey Presto
-- Whip and away; your Brains are as nimble as if Projections and Monopolies
were alive again.


Invent. Come Furor, you know I have a deal of Work to do; since my name was
Invention, I never knew such a busy time. -- Let me see my Table Book; What
Business have I to dispatch? [Pulls out his Table Book.] Ho! Bodkin the Tailor,
I must invent for him new Fashioned Breeches, with a Tippet here behind to turn
up, that Gentlemen may go to Stool and not Untruss. Item, I must invent a Plot,
how the Papists may escape the Purgatory of the Parliament.


Furor. I have a Plot for that. Let them put their Heads through an Hempen
Rosary, and say three Ave Mary's with a Wry-mouth; and I Will be their Bondslave
they need not fear afterward.


Invent. Memorandum, I must invent a Plot how the Scots may get more Money,
when that they have is gone.


Fur. Pish -- That Is easy. Let them come for it.


Invent. Arm's for a Welch-Man.


Fur. Two Trees Rampant, and another Crossant, a Ladder Ascendant, an Hangman
Couchant, the Rope Pendant, and the Fields Sable, etc.


Invent. To help a Chambermaid to her Maidenhead.


Fur. If she be Handsome, she shall have mine.


Invent. Memorandum, Parson T. M. must have a Sermon made against Christmas,
Pret. 2 s. 4 d. Hem. -- Mr. etc. would learn to Preach after the New Cut.


Fur. And that is not the short Cut, I Am sure.


Invent. Item, I must find out a Cure for one that is sick of two Livings.


Fur. Let the Incumbent sweat three Weeks for Anger; suck his Thumbs with
Patience; be soundly Cup'd twenty four Hours: After that, take the Wax of an
old Commission for a Divine to be a Justice of Peace; and to it add a Quart of
Abel's Wine, a Pound of Brumfield's Soap that has escaped a Scouring, with an
handful of Goring's Tobacco-roots; mix them with the Oil of Lambs Grease, boil
them in a Corner'd-Cap from an Archbishop to a Bishop, from that to Dean, from
that to an Archdeacon, from that to a Prebend, and so to a Commissary (if you
can Decoct them so low) then strain it through a Lawn-Sleeve; let it cool: Fiat
Emplaistrum. Lay this to one of his Temples, and his Plurisy will leave him.


Invent. Item, I must find out, How many Religions there be in London. -- Item,
Whether Strafford be dead with his Head off. -- Item, I must make Verses for a
young Gentleman, upon a Louse that was found in his Mistress's Head, six Foot
long, upon the fifth of November last.


Fur. -- Avaunt Six-footed Monster, if I catch thee, My Pollux Onix quickly
shall dispatch thee.


[Invention looks about him.] Invent. Brother Furor, where are we? -- What
Place is this? It should be a Conventicle, with so many Heads and Faces in it,
and all together in a Barn too.

[Boy behind the Curtain] As in presenti perfectum format in avi.


Invent. Hark -- Here Is a School, I think. [ Furor peeps within the Curtain.]


Fur. Ay, and here is the old one in his Form, as sad as if he had two Livings,
and had Sold one of them: He looks as Melancholy, as if some Woman had
Scratched him by the Face, for whipping her Boy; Or if he were studying to
Decline. -- Hist -- Hist. -- Come hither little Boy.

[Enter Boy.]
Boy. Now Gentlemen, what is your Pleasure?


Fur. Prithee what is thy Master studying on? He Is so close at it.


Boy. Why, He Is making a Play, for an Exclusion.


Invent. And has he done it?


Boy. Done it! I think he has gnawed three Quills to the Hilts for a Line or
two. The Frost has gotten into his Nose I think; and till his Brains be
thawed, we shall not have a Drop more done in it. I think, if the Clasps and
Keepers of Hope, did not hold up the Breeches of Discretion, He Would do it in's
Hose: And yet he has all the Play Books in the Country to help him. Like the
Cuckooe, he sucks other's Eggs: Here he steals a Word, and there he filches a
Line, as we Boys do for Theams. He has studied himself out of his Wits about
it, and if it should not take, (I hope it will not) I believe it will be his
last. He Will run away for shame.


Invent. And why do thou hope it will not take?


Boy. Why? Because I have never a Part in it. -- But he shall come short of a
Christmas Dinner, my Mother says. Kissing goes by Favor, she says. -- Pray ye
Gentlemen step in to him, while I run home to Breakfast. Exit Boy.


[Invention draws the Curtain aside.] Invent. By your leave Sir, -- God bless
your Learning.


Fur. Apollo bless thy Brains, thy Brains so fickle,
And Souse them in pure Heliconian Pickle.

Invent. Marry, and Soust Hog's Head is no ill Meat, Furor.


Pedanto. Gentlemen you are welcome. Ye take me at a hard Task here.


Fur. Why? Prithee Pedanto what is thy Negotium?


Ped. Why Gentlemen, my Trade is to teach Wild-Geese how t^ fly in the Figure
of Criss-Cross-Row. -- That is to say in English, I am a Schoolmaster; and
here against Christmas, I am blowing my Nose for a Dialogue.


Invent. A Dialogue? What Is that? It Is neither Prologue, nor Epilogue, nor
Tragedy, nor Comedy, nor Pastoral, nor Satyr, nor Masque, nor Morrice-Dance. --
What Is a Dialogue?


Ped. Why Gentlemen, a Dialogue is a Poetical Pudding, or the Muses Hodg-Podg;
a Discourse like that between Dr. Faustus and the Devil, or two or three Men in
a Pig-Market. -- That Is a Dialogue.


Invent. May I be so bold as to peruse your Library?


Ped. Yes Sir, if you please; see the Books I have borrowed for the Business.


[Invention takes up the Books, looks in them, and speaks.] Invent. Plautus.

A subtle Diver into Man, and yet
The fate of Poets, Poverty and Wit;
Pimp Mercury, and Cuckold-making Jove,
Amphitrion's Horns, and Alcamena's Love
Could not find out a better Quill, nor we
A better Father for our Poetry.

Fur. And yet he came off in his last Act, like a Costive Man from the Stool,
without wiping. His Splay-feet were too broad for Verse. He Would been a pretty
Fellow, but that they fed him with Mill-Corn and Pottage. -- So take him Jailer.


Invent. Ben. Johnson.

Great Brick-bat Ben, the Envy of thy Days!
Thy only English Brow deserves the Bays.
Others did wear the Ivy-Bush as Sign,
Not of their Wit, but, Lattice-face, and Wine.
But thy Industrious Brain (great Ben!) did seem
To make the Laurel, which thou wore, grow Green.
Thine are the Tragicks and the Comic Lays;
And you are th'Refiner of our Drossy Phrase;
And so thy Alchymy, I dare be bold,
Has turned our baser Metal into Gold.

Fur. Pretty! Pretty! -- An ordinary Wit would make him Piss and Stink at
th'Stake like an old Bear. -- And then damnable tedious and costly too. --
Every half quarter of an Hour a glass of Sack must be sent of an Errand into
his Guts, to tell his Brains they must come up quickly, and help out with a
Line. -- So take him Jailer.


Invent. Shakspear.

His Quill as quick as Feather from the Bow!
O who can such another Falstaff show?
And if thy Learning had been like thy Wit,
Ben would have blushed, and Johnson never writ.

Fur. Pish. -- I never read any of him but in Tobacco-papers, and the bottom of
Pigeon-Pies. -- But he had been a Curate to the Stage so long, that he could
not choose but get some ends and bottoms; -- I, and they were his Fees too; --
-- But for the fine and true Dramatick Law,
He was a Dunce and scribled with a Straw.



Invent. Beaumont and Fletcher.

The Muse's Twins; and in our English Sphere
Castor and Pollux, so they did appear.
It Is thought, when they were Born, Appollo's Will
Was to divide th'Two-top't Parnassus Hill,
That Beaumont (Lofty Beaumont!) might have one,
And Fletcher take the other for his Throne.

Fur. A pair of Journey-Men. They write both with a Quill. -- -- Thus have I
seen two Greyhound Puppies play
With one another's itching Tails all day.
A couple of Cowards. Part them, and like two Worms, they would shrink in their
Heads. Marry, -- Take them together, and let them spit in one another's Mouths,
and they would do smartly. They would Club for Verse. One find Rhyme, and
another Reason. -- So take them Jailer.


Invent. Tom Randolph's Poems.

A sweeter Swan did never Sing upon
The Downy Banks of Oily Helicon.
Methinks, I see the Fates and Muses fight,
Who Is Chaplain Tom should be; and in despite,
Like Jealous Lovers, bring him to his Hearse,
That they might kiss his Chin, and read his Verse.

Fur. -- 'Twas Tom a Bedlam, not Tom Randolph sure,
His Wit's too Violent long to endure.
Pity! so rare a Fancy should have found
An Helicon so deep as to be drowned.
Tom's dead and every Muse has vowed to be,
For Stafford's sake, a Stafford's Niobe.
Take him Jailer.


Invent. These Authors are as good as you can have. -- Have you done the
Dialogue?


Ped. Alas! Gentlemen, I am allowed no fuel to my Sacred fire of Poetry; but I
am fain to Curb and Curtail my Fancy. I scorn a Dialogue, as I do Toys and
Pamphlets. -- I had intended to have had my Scene, Delphos, Apollo and the Nine
Muses should have been in a Masque. -- But we have no Clothes, unless we would
dress them like Gypsies, or Butter-Queens with Baskets on their Arms. -- I
would have had an Oracle, Priest, Poet and Notaries. -- And that Oracle should
have told Fortunes; All these Poet's Ghosts should have come in their
Winding-Sheets; -- But in truth, we have not so much Linen in the Town as
would have dressed them. -- I had much ado to borrow an old Doublet to act a
Tinker in; and am fain to pay for Hair to make Beards of, as if the Horse-Tail
was the Golden-Fleece.


Fur. Difficile est Satyram non scribere. [He overthrows all the Books.] Must
Poet's Fancies thus be starved and tortured!
Avaunt, ye Bastards of Parnassus Mount!
Forswear the Stage! Undoff your Comic Sock.
Which, being sold, this Ignorant Age will scarce
Bestow the washing of th'Illiterate World!
Poets were once Crowned and Godded too;
Now not a Penny to buy them Ink withal,
And no more Sack than what they take in Spoons,
[He snatcheth away the Quills.] As dying Men do from your dirty Nurses,
Away with that same Quill, away with it Boy.


I would some Prentice would light on it to cross his Master's Debt-Books when
he is Drunk. Or some Elder-Brother find it, to Subscribe to Ten in the Hundred.
Or it would serve a whole Corporation to set their Marks to a Petition against
Bishops. May it be so full of Teeth, as to write a Libel first, and then the
Sentence against the Libellor's Ears. -- -- But to lie sucking of the Fingers
thus,
Making a Plot fit for the Theater,
Or Roscius to present, and have no Scene,
No Clothes, no Properties, no Candle scarce!
It Is this makes Furor mad, makes Furor fret;
Wit, that should nothing want, does nothing get.



Ped. But my Credit lies at stake, Gentlemen. There Is never an empty Head of my
Trade hereabouts, but ventures to be Witty; and therefore something must be
done; and something in English too, because here is Gentlemen will be present at
it; and something for the Times; and all out of Nothing.


Invent. And something shall be done. -- Furor, shall we conjure?


Fur. Furor shall conjure; and I Will raise the Poets, and charm their Quills to
write a Satyr for thee. A Satyr, that shall Sting, and Lash, and Scratch; sharp
like a Razor, that shall make Men hang themselves. And those Nine Brats of
Helicon, shall leave their Horse-Pool, to come and grease thy Buskins with
their Sweat.


Invent. -- Speak, -- shall it be a Tragedy or a Comedy; a Pastoral or Satyr?
Invention can do any thing.


Fur. Furor Poeticus can do more, you Rogue. I made an Alderman a Poet once,
and he never said Grace afterward, but it was in Rhyme; nor wore his Holy Day
Breeches but in Meeter.


Ped. Then for Apollo's sake, charm open that Trunk; there lies Comaedia, a
most Pretty Girl. There she lies Fettered in that fatal Trunk, and has done
ever since Dialogues came in, and Latine-Speeches under every Sign-post. --
Raise her good Furor; raise her from her Vrn. -- -- And every Year one Act in
five, shall be
A Sacrifice unto this God and thee.



Invent. I Will wake her; and then thou shall get her out.


Fur. Do. --


[Invention with a white Wand goes about the Trunk, and says.] Invent. The
Muses scorn to give their Eyes
To Morpheus for a Sacrifice,
Therefore Comaedia quickly rise.
Upon Parnassus I do know
Drowsy Poppy never did grow,
No nor Anadine below.
Comaedia do no longer snort,
Awake, and thank Invention for it.

Comaedia within. Oh -- Oh -- Oh. -- Who calls?


Fur. Come now, I Will get her out, I Will warrant thee. Come out you Slut, or else
I Will Knock
For Vulcan to break op'e the Lock;
And he shall rend thy Comic Sock,
Or make thee Dance without a Smock.
Come out, for Furor's in a Rage
To see such Goblins on a Stage;
Come drink good Sack and Claret,
And thank Poeticus Furor for it.



[Enter Comaedia.] Com. What? My Servant Invention! And Furor my Companion! --
Thanks to you both for my Liberty. -- Who is this?


Invent. A true Well-wisher to your Ladyship, and one that desires your Help.


Com. I am a Stranger to this Place and him. The Prentices Seven Champions
scared me so, that I fled hither for safety. -- But he being a Friend of yours,
I Will do what he will command me.


Fur. A cast of thine Office, sweet Rogue. -- Sirrah, speak to her. -- Let him
kiss thy hand, Wench. -- Come. -- Swear him first. -- Come you little Pedanto;
if you be a Poet, -- you shall Swear, -- That you will never Drink but till two
a Clock in the Morning. -- Item, -- You shall never be Master of more than one
Suit at a time; and lie in Bed while that is Loused, and put into the Fashion.
-- Item, You shall keep three or four to admire you, and so pay for the Shot.
-- Item, Endeavor to get more Comaedians. -- Item, Get the Pox in Policy, that
no Man may make a Bridge of your Nose. -- Item, Be sure to die in Debt.


Ped. I will do my Endeavor.


Com. You two pass your words for him?


Both, Yes, yes.


Ped. This is, fair Lady, but the second Year of Schooling, and I am not
provided with old Verses and Knacks, as they are at Stamford, and those stale
Places, (where Verses on the Fifth of November, do serve an Apprentiship before
they be set free) therefore I implore your Aid.


Fur. Hang Anagrams, and Acrosticks, and Singing Rhymes, like Pipers at a Wake;
-- Tho'st have it.


Com. I am not in Tune now. But something I will do for you now; more
hereafter. [ Ceres speaks from above.] What bold Attempt is this, ye Mortal
Shapes,
And Brats of Impudence? Do you not know
This place is Ceres's Temple? And that you dare
With your foul Feet trample on my Threshing-floor!
What makes this Concourse here? Where are my Taskers?
My Threshers that do sacrifice their Sweat
And brawny Hands to Ceres? Out with these Candles,
Or I will blast them. Will you fire my Stacks?
And make me die a Martyr? -- Brother Jove!
Lend me a Thunderbolt. --



Fur. A fools Bolt is soon shot. If we burn this Barn, I Will get her more Barns
if she will let me. -- This is Ceres, and she is woondy angry because we are upon
her Ground. -- We must please her; No Ceres no Barley, no Barley no Malt, no
Malt no Ale, no Ale no Poets. -- We must please her.


Com. Invention speak to her.


Invent. Let us stand all together.


Fur. Surely she lives like Cats and Owls, by catching of Mice. -- Ask her, who
eat up her Oats in the High-fields last Year.


Invent. Peace.


Ceres. What? Are ye Dumb? Answer me. What Is your Business? Know ye not that I
can Curse your Lands?


Fur. For 2 pence you shall Curse all the Lands that we four have.


Ceres. And charge the Fertile Fields to teem no more.
The Crooked Plowman may go slice the Ocean
And sow the frothy Furrows of the Sea,
With as much hope of Harvest, as his Clods,
If I command the Hoary Earth to be
No longer Occupied. -- Provoke me not.

Invent. Great Goddess of our Harvest and great'st Plenty!
Your Frowns can make Invention barren too
As well as Grounds. Religion drives us hither.
This innocent Multitude, that here is set,
Meet not for Mutiny. They Are no Rebellious Rout.
But here they are set to see Children play Men,
And Boys wear Beards. This Lady, young and soft,
And Phoenix downy like, is Comaedia.
Innocent Wench! Not hurt a Mouse within your Walls,
You shall not loose a Cob-Nut by our Sport.

Ceres. Why come you here to Act it? Look a Stage
That may deserve such glorious Spectators.

Ped. Great Goddess! I am that unhappy Man
Unworthy Shepherd of a pretty Flock,
But have no where to Fold them, but in the Temple.
I am a bold Incroacher on the Gods,
And steal their Freehold; But against my Will.
And tho we learn and weep, and bleed and play,
Among the Untomb'd Ashes of our Fathers*
And with profane Feet, trample over their Urns;
Yet there to vent our Folly, and build our Stage,
Were to challenge Thunderbolts from Jove.
We rather choose to hazard Ceres's frown,
Than yield. -- That we hereafter may confess,
That Ceres was the Muses Patroness.

Fur. Do, do, -- And I will promise you a Days-Work in Harvest.


Ceres. Is Mirth all your intent?


All. Yes, yes.


Ceres. Then go about it quickly. You Are Welcome. --
-- And I will be an Actor in your Play,
There Is none but Ceres shall your Prologue say.

[They all Sing.] SONG.
1.
MNemosyne no more shall be
The Muses Mother Crowned with Bays,
We have found one more kind than she;
It Is Ceres best deserves our Praise.
It Is she, it is she
Henceforth shall be,
The Muses kindest Landlady.
2.
Parnassus is but barren Ground,
Apollo but a Beardless Boy;
In Helicon we'll here be drowned,
But Ceres she shall be our Joy.
It Is she, it is she
Deserves the Knee
For this Days gracious Liberty.
It Is she, etc.
[The PROLOGUE spoken from above by Ceres.]
GAllants ye'r Welcome, Ceres bids ye so,
And has a Blessing for you, er'e ye go.
You that are Clergy, if you will Merry be,
I Will see your Tith-Shocks paid more Honestly;
And he that Cheats you, this shall be his Pain,
Above all Knaves, to be A Knave in Grain.
If Married Men will Laugh; For them I pray
May on their Heads fall Cornu-Copia*
But he that from hence Discontented goes,
May a whole Harvest of Corns grow on's Toes.
And you Good Women, if you will sit and see
Both Wives and Maids, you shall all Fruitful be:
You that Good Fellows are, but like our Sport,
And you shall have the price of Malt fall for it.
In this, my Blessing to you all appears,
I Will give you Corn, if you will lend us Ears.
Fall to then Gallants; I confess your Fare
Is course and homely, but you Welcome are.
You Are Welcome; and in this your Welcome stands,
That you would soundly ply your Mouths and Hands.
Exeunt. ACT the Second.
[ Enter Marchurch reading a Letter.] Marchurch. A Fever? -- I would it had
been the Plague, or a whole Kennel of Diseases. -- Yet the Fever is a good
sound Card. -- Out upon them; these Parsons live for Wagers, I think. --
Fourscore and odd! -- His Parish have been weary of him this thirty Years, and
I these Forty. -- Three or four that have bought a Tith-Pig in Poke have paid
for the Advowson, and are all Dead, and now, God be thanked, he has found in
his heart to be Sickish. -- If the old Rogue die -- Ha, ha, ha, what a Flock of
Flesh-Crows, Learned Creatures in Black Coats, shall I have Nawing about me,
like so many Jack-Daws about a Steeple. I Will get that Oath against Symony well
oyled and greased, that it may go down glib with the Gudgeons.


[ Enter Ursely to him, Big-belly'd.] Vrs. Do ye hear, Sir? let me not Lie-in
here. Your Kinsman Marpudding will never endure me. He Is never out of the
Kitchen, prying up and down. I Am so fearful of him lest he should spy my
Belly -- [She cries.] -- I know that it cannot be helped now, But -- but -- you
would be doing with me. -- I would, -- I would, -- I had been in my Grave.


Mar. Come, come, Wench, leave your crying, Fool; I know thou have Brains in
thy Belly. -- No body knows of it, does there?


Vrs* No, no, Sir -- But I would I had taken of that Savin in time you gave me;
but now it is too late.


Mar. Come, come, Girl, -- [He looked about him, and Kisses her.] -- Here,
here, you Slut, buy thee some Clouts, and keep close, -- I Will make it the
bravest Bastard in England, and yet there are great ones abroad too. -- What?
If all fail, I Will make him my own Clark; and if he come once to have a twang in
the Law, I Will warrant --.


Vrs. Yea, Sir, But you will divide the Money that he should have for Warrants. I
had rather that he were made Priest and then Clark. -- Hold still, your Ruff's
unpin'd, -- [She kisses him.] -- Sir, I hear Mr. Parson's a dying; -- you may
put me and my Belly to some poor Minister; Alas! all will be a case to him. --
Look you here, -- [She pulls out a black Hood and puts it on.] Do I not look
well in it? -- I shall make a Gentlewoman quickly. -- I look as well as some
Body. -- I pray, Sir, -- I even long to be in my Pew, and my loose Gown, and to
take the Wall.


Mar. A pretty Woman, -- Go thy way Wench, I Will think on thee; but here we are
in danger to be seen. -- I fear nothing but that the old Pitch-barrel has Fire
in him still. -- If he recover this Fit, the Devil's in him. -- I would he
might live to see all Learning called in, and his Chancel turned into a Barn,
for me to lay my Corn in, and he and his Tribe die all mad in poor English. --
Go thy way, Wench, -- [Kisses her again.]


Vrs. Do I not kiss better in my black Bag? -- I pray, Sir, remember me. Exit.


[Marchurch remains alone.] Scena Secunda.
Mar. Si non Cast tamen fault; It is the Statute Henrici Vicesimo. -- Hum,
hum, give me a Wench with a Dishclout in her Mouth for my Money. O, a
Kitchin-wench will melt sweetly, and she is cheap too. They may talk; but I
would aslieve smell Coal-dust and ashes, as Civet and Perfumes. Hang
Catamountains, give me a Pole-Cat; she is cheap, she is cheap, and has sound
Buttocks. -- Come to London, and there must be Wine, Oysters, Lobsters,
Sturgeon, Canary, Anchovis, Patagia's (out on it, one Pie cost me five Pounds) a
Periwig for Mr. Bawd, a new set of Teeth for old Whore Grandmother, with a Pok.
-- Come, come, three penny worth of Lechery is enough at a time in Conscience.
If this Wench would but Deliver it once as her Act and Deed, I would make it
and her presently go off with a Presentation. -- And yet it is a Good Living.
-- I had an hundred Pieces, my Wife a Satin Gown, and my Man a new Livery, for
one worse than this by a good deal. -- I cannot tell what I should do. -- Let
me see this Letter again, -- it does me good to read that the old Priest is a
dying. -- I could find in my heart for good Luck, to send him a Mess of
Porredge and Mercury.


[He stands reading to himself.] [Enter two Watchmen.] Watch. 1. Come Neighbor
Dungo, -- it has often even grieved me to see how negligent Watchmen are in that
great Office they are in; setting their Rusty Holberds against profane
Alehouse Doors, till they, being even Drunk, have charged them to aid them Home
in the King's Name. Since I am called to the Place, I will do the best
Demeanor to bring these paltry Alehouses into Reformation.


March. How now Friends, -- how now, -- what are ye Watchmen these dangerous
times? Ha?


Watch. 1. Yes, if it may please your good Worship.


Mar. Well, Christmas is coming, I hope you will Watch your time to bring me my
Capons and Pullets.


Watch. 1. I have a couple of fine Fowl for your Worship, God bless 'em.


Mar. Ay, well said Neighbors. -- Do you know what a Trust the King has
committed to you?


Watch. 1. La'ye there now, we are next to the King. ( aside.)


Watch. 2. No, indeed Sir, not so well as we ought.


Mar. Well, I think I shall be Mayor next Year, and therefore I have made a
Speech in readiness; and, tho I say it, a very Learned one. -- Come, it may do
you good. -- Suppose now I was Mayor, and you my Servants. -- Suppose your
Bills were Maces, and I, having drunk my Gill of Muskadine, and polished my
Venerable Beard, were set. -- Hum, hum, -- hum, -- thus I begin. -- Mark
Neighbors, I pray you.


Watch. 1. Sir, our Ears are even open, and do desire as it were to be
attentive to you.


Mar. Whereas, or forasmuch as the chief Man in a Kingdom, whom the Latins
call Rex, We, A King, -- Hum -- cannot, or is not able to see all places, like
the Bird which the Poets call Argus with his hundred Eyes; -- He therefore has
appointed under him two Officers, the one a Magistrate, the other a Governor.
-- Do you mark, -- and these two are the Rat-Traps of the Kingdom, as it were,
baited with the soft Cheese of Justice, to take those who gnaw holes in the
Commonwealth, the Cubbard of the Kingdom. -- And these two, like those two
Friends I read of in Profane Writ, Caesar and Pompey, are to join together, --
Hum -- Fratres in Malo, as one says, Brethren in Coats of Male, to keep off
danger. -- And forasmuch as I am called to one of these Duties under the Vulgar
Title of Mayor, give me leave to tell you according to the Statute of Richard
the Sixth, what a Mayor is. A Mayor is a Magistrate with two Legs, Sadled and
Bridled for his Masters service, very stable without stumbling, being foremost
in a Team of Aldermen. -- Now this Mayor comes to his Office two ways, either
he is Chosen or Elected. For you must know, two Places are capable of a Major,
the one a Corporation, the other a Body-Politick; Chosen by two sorts of Men,
the one Brethren, the other Fraternity. -- Since therefore I am Elected, I will
not Nod away my time, but spend it as that famous Cateline did, when he was
Mayor in Rome, and in punishing Usury an Hundred and sixty Years ago. -- And so
Brethren, hoping that some of you will help me, and other some of you assist
me, I rest, -- God save the King.


Watch. 2. The King? -- I say, God save your Worship. -- I Am but an ignorant
Man, but in my opinion it is a rare Speech; is it not Neighbor? -- Our Vicar,
for all his black Coat, has not such a word in his Belly.


Mar. Well Friends, I think this will do, -- If the Fools had chosen me
Burgess, I would have Speech'd it in better Stuff than this is. -- All Is one,
-- Caetere quaecunque volunt, go, look to your Business.


Ambo. God bless you, Sir, and many a good Mayor's Speech may you make. [Exeunt
Watchmen.]


Mar. alone. Well, -- this Wenches Belly is a vile Pull-back, But -- here comes
my Nephew. -- What Bookish too? Cookery or Houswifery I trow. [Enter Marpudding
reading.] Well, he is worth twenty Wenches. I think the best Porridg-maker in
the World. I Will listen a while.


Marpud. Ha -- How to make a Hen lay twice a day, after Saint Andrews. But a
Cock to his Crew,
That at Treading is true;
For it is that which they say,
Does cause the Hen to lay.
And when your Hen has laid her Egg,
She Will Cackle and stretch out her Leg.
Then fill her full of Grain,
And something she will Lay again.


Well, I Will make our Maids look after the second Laying, or I Will -- A pretty
Book this is, -- I wonder why it sets not down what Egg-shells are good for. It
goes to my Heart to see so many Egg-shells thrown away and broken. -- How to
make good Pottage for Servants. -- Ay marry -- [Reads.] Take green Puddle out
of a Bog,
Thickened with the Spawn of a Frog:
Let there be a Dishclout in it,
And of Barley Flower a Pint -- Marry this is costly.
Bullocks Liver is good stuff,
Boil them till they be enough:
The Duck-weed Liqour being green,
Is like Pot Herbs quickly seen.
The Dishclout will both fat the Pot,
And make Brewiss too I wot.
The Liver will make it of Meat to taste,
And if they will not eat it, let them fast.]
Well, I Will have this by heart.


March. Why, how now Nephew! What Book have you got there? The Practice of
Piety.


Marpud. Piety? No. -- The Practice of good Housewifery, I trow, an excellent
Book this is. -- I pray you, Sir, speak to your Servants, they call me
Cotquean, and I know not what, if I look but a little after them. Would you
think they cannot Fry a bit of Pudding without Butter. -- There Is your Maid
Vrseley, your Kitchin-wench, is more Sauce than Pig; and they cozen me too: For
I Will be sworn I grop'd the Hens this Morning, and there were a Dozen of them
with Egg, I Am sure, and I can find but Five. -- Your Scotchman Hob too, since
he came into England, has learnt to pare his Cheese. -- Uncle, Uncle, they are
Corn-fed; pray you Chide them.


March. I will John, I will. -- What have we to Dinner I pray you? -- Let us
spare a little. Next Year I must be Mayor, and then we will be Liquorish.


Marpud. Why, there is Sassages which you left cold last Night, and good warm
Milk-Porredg. I was a making a Pudding too, but I came to look you. The Parson
is dead, and there is one stays with a Letter to speak to you; Pray order it so,
that I may have something too.


March. Good News, good News, I Will warrant you. [Exit March.]


Marpud. Well, I must read good thrifty Cookery against next Year, [He pulls
out his Book again] -- How to wash Clothes without Soap; Take Hogs-dung a good
deal -- [ Enter Ursley stirring a Pudding.] -- What do you follow me for? Can I
never be at quiet? What do you want, I wonder?


Vrs. Want? I would my Quarter were come out, I would see you hanged e're I
would dwell here. Your Uncle sends word he will have a Minister Dine here, and is
this a Pudding fitting? Never an Egg in it, nor a bit of Suet. For love of God
give us some, and some Money for Plumbs.


Marpud. Plumbs? -- Yes, -- Do you long? -- Come, come, you stir it handsomely!
[He takes it from her and stirs it.] I Will make this a good Pudding, I Will
warrant you. -- Here go you and put these Onions into the Pot. -- [Gives her
some Onions out of his Pocket.]


Vrs. Nay then, take Apron and all. -- [She pulls off her Apron, and he spies
her great Belly.]


Marpud. Ha! brave Whisking! What, are you with Child? As I Am an honest Man,
big Bellied! -- This is good Gear.


Vrs. Yes, Sir, that I am with Child, and to your cost too. -- (Aside.) [I'll
vex him since he has spied it.]


Marpud. Mine you Whore! What, would be seen?


Vrs. Goodly Mr. John, how strange you make it! Well, I Will never trust Man
again! -- You Have forgot what you did to me, I warrant you; but I have something
to show for it: You are like to be a Father, I promise you. Do you remember the
Pantry last Lent, when you wanted a bit of Flesh?


Marpud. O you impudent Jade! When? What? Where? Did I ever touch you?


Vrs. Did you not? How dare you stand in it? -- Did you not? -- And did not I
tell you I was with Child, and longed for a Turnip, which you gave me, and bid
me keep close?


Marpud. O damned Whore! I was accursed that ever I had to do with thee, you
Queen!


Vrs. It seems you had knowledge of me then; well, -- your Tongue will not
suffer you to Lie.


Marpud. Husie! -- Did I ever meddle or make with thee?


Vrs. Make with me! -- Ay that you did. -- We joined to make a Child.


Marpud. I join, you Strumpet? The Devil is in thee.


Vrs. He was when you were in me, but never else.


Marpud. A Pox on your Pudding, -- [He throws it down] -- Husie, I Will go tell
my Uncle.


Vrs. Nay, I Will be there before you. He and all the Town shall know it. -- They
know partly you are never out of the Kitchen, prying up and down after my Tail,
snooking in every Hole; -- Cotquean! Who should do it but you Sirrah? -- [She
offers to go out.]


Marpud. Nay, but stay Vrsley; one word. Did I ever touch you? No, never in all
my Life. -- You will undo me for ever.


Vrs. Did you? Ay, and did not I tell you I would find another Father? -- And
so I will yet, if you will be ruled. -- Meddle or not Meddle, how will you help
your self if I lay it to you? -- Come, come.


Marpud. Ay, that is true; you may undo me if you will, but I hope you will have
more honesty.


Vrs. Yes, yes, I Will teach you to meddle in Women's Matters. -- I swear, unless
you will give me the Keys of all, I will open all.


Marpud. Well Vrsley, I could never have smelt out this Plot. -- But name me
not, and I will.


Vrs. Will you let me have Butter?


Marpud. Ay.


Vrs. And Oat-meal?


Marpud. Ay.


Vrs. And Plumbs; or any thing?


Marpud. Ay.


Vrs. Well, look ye do; I have that will keep you in awe. Give me the Pantry
Key now.


Marpud. Well, would I had never seen it. -- Will you not wrong me?


Vrs. No, if you will hold your Tongue, and take no notice, but I must bind you
to the Peace; for if my Master know it, I Will lay it to you.


Marpud. A Pox of all your Gipsy Jades. -- Must I be thus Tongue-ti'd for
nothing. -- There Is a good Pudding spoiled too.


Vrs. Ha, ha, ha, -- come, few words to a Bargain. -- Will you hold your
Tongue, and I will hold mine?


Marpud. Here is the Keys. -- The Devil take 'em. -- Fare you well. -- I Will be
Revenged. Exit.


Vrs. So, so, a brave Plot! Now I Am provided with all things against the Hour;
and this Gudgeon is in a Net safe. -- If I can but be laid and up again, to go
off with the Living; all is Right.


Exit. ACT the Third.
Enter Bookworm alone, as from the Patron. Bookworm. HA! True, true old
Menander! (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
The Blood and Life of Man is powerful Gold,
Of which you have none I dare be bold;
You may a while Breath, or Move, or Walk, or so,
But for a Dead Man, amongst Men you will go. It Is so, it is so.


Greek, Hebrew Fool! how have I spent my time?
My precious Midnight-hours? Ten tedious Winters;
Burnt out a thousand Lamps; out-watch'd the Moon,
When she sat longest up and been most pale;
My constant Candle was a surer Friend
To Watchmen, Bellmen, and the Drowsy Weights;
The Ominous Night-crow, envying my Light,
Would try to scare me from my Aristotle,
Beating her self against my Window Bars,
Whilst I within have leaned upon this Elbow
Searching Philosophy, as dark as Night,
And conning Plato, as Boys do their Grammars;
Brooding each Line, and sitting on each Verse,
As close as Moth or Canker, till mine Eyes
With so much Labor, often would sweat a Tear
Upon my knotty Task. At last. (God wot)
My Father dies, and leaves two hundred Pounds
More for his hopeful Boy, to buy him Books.
And robbed his other Sons to make me Rich.
Then did I mount the Spears, and pose the Stars,
Catechize Planets, what their Natures were,
I left an hundred of my Angels there.
Then did I search the Oracle of Heaven,
And plumed the Ocean of Divinity;
Provided still against the Day
I should be called to do the Church some Service.
But -- now I see I studied Poverty,
And purchased Beggary at too dear a rate.
Coming to Marchurch for this Living
With Learning, Manners, Orders, Bishops Letters;
O, Sir, (says he) Bishops are out of Credit;
And for your Learning it will serve in the Belfrey
To teach young Children: But the Living's gone --
Unless your Money call it back again.
Why, Sir, (said I) I Will give four hundred Pounds,
I Am sure my Knowledge cost me little less.
A Pox of Knowledge (cries the greedy Churl)
You Scholars are too troublesome. Farewell.
What shall I do? I cannot Curse him, nor my self. Poor Wretch! he knows not
the price of Virtue; and I do too well. -- It Is dear, it is dear, the Money I
have spent would have bought me Land or Living, House or Wife; it would have
maintained me in Scarlet and Livery, and lasted a while in Hawks or Horses; I
could have Sworn it away, or Drunk it either, or Played it out for Pots at
Shuffleboard or Billiards: -- But it is gone, and I as far to seek as Men in
Leather-breeches at the Statues. -- Here Is all is left. -- Some thirteen
Shillings. It is in vain to grieve. -- I Will pawn my Clothes and buy some
others, and with my little Sum of Money go trade in Toys and Pamphlets. -- A
Profession that will get more Money than Disputing. And tho I have Read much,
and Studied long,
I will give all my Learning for a Song. Exit.



Scena Secunda.
Enter Marchurch and Sir Homily. March. Is he Dead, are you sure?


Sir Hom. Yea indeed, as Sylva Synogaga says very well upon that very place. E
vivis exirit, he is Dead.


March. Dead, Sir Homily? Why, a Dog is dead. Fie upon it, are you a Scholar,
and no better Expression in your Mouth?


Sir Hom. Why truly your Worship's Observation is very good; for tho the
English read it Dead, yet the Geneva Translation, which we most follow, renders
it Departed; so that he is not Dead only, but Departed also, if please your
Worship.


March. aside. [I made this Mungrel once a promise of the Living, and now he is
come for't] -- Please me Sir Homily? Yes, it would please me if you would
depart too; I shall never have such an Honest Man as he that is gone. -- Aside.
[A very Knave.]


Sir Hom. I desire your Worship to consider my Suit.


March. Why, what is your Suit?


Fur. [His Suit? Ha, ha, ha, -- it is a very poor one. -- That Is ready to
Depart, I Am sure.]


Sir Hom. Even, Sir, that you would be pleased to stand my friend Amicis
opitulari, as the Master of the Sentences has it.


March. Pitulari? -- Pray thee Fellow leave this Canting; I understand no
Latin, but Summa Totalis.


Sir Hom. Why, Sir, the Summa Totalis is, That I may succeed him in your Living.


March. In the Living? Why, how dare you think of such a thing? With what Face
can thou ask it? There Is never a Scholar of you all deserves such a Living.
Aside. -- [Ay, this Fellow has been Curate, and taught School here this dozen
Years; he may have Horn-book'd himself into some Money.] -- Hark you, Sir
Homily, How long have you been Curate here? -- A good while, I trow?


Sir Hom. Why Sir, as I remember, some twelve Years. I bought these Clothes
then, and they are almost worn out now.


March. Well, Sir Homily, you are a Moneyed Man, they say; Can you lend me ten
Pieces?


Sir Hom. Alas Sir, Opus est mihi Viginti minis!


March. Come, come, Opus and Vsus must go together with me; and Viginti minis
be in the Dative Case too. -- Beside, Sir Homily, How dare you come to me for
the Living?


Sir Hom. Why Sir?


March. How often have I heard you* with blushing, rail and complain against me?
against Usury principally? Which I put up a good while and said nothing: But I
must have one will be quiet and peaceable, and Preach but once a Month.


Fur. [One! -- within this twelve Months you might have had an Hundred would
have Preached but once a Quarter.]


March. Again, Sir Homily, the Women of the Town cry out against you
exceedingly; you have almost killed their Children with Whipping of them. -- I
can tell you; you have made a Rod for your own --


Sir Hom. I warrant you, Sir, I can please the Women, I can have both their
Hands and their Voices.


March. Ay, their Voices to scold at you, and their Hands about your Ears. --
Come, Sir Homily, I must use your own Language. now; -- If you have the Living,
Untruss, untruss.


Sir Hom. What Sir?


March. Why, your Purse-strings; nothing else.


Sir Hom. Why Sir, I have nothing but a little AEs in presenti, as the
Schoolmen say; but you promised me once, when I was a Witness for you at the
Assize, that I should have it for nothing.


March. Nay, if you be at Promises, I promise you, you shall come short on it.
Come, come, you are a saucy Knave Homily. The Living is now mine; and therefore I
give you Warning here to provide for your self, you shall be no longer Curate
here Sirrah. -- Get you gone.


Sir Hom. Nay, I beseech you Sir.


March. Nay, I beseech you be gone, or I Will beat that Latin Nose of yours, to
your English Face.


Sir Hom. Latin Nose? You ventured far to have said a French Nose. -- Will you
not be as good as your word, Sir?


March. Yes that I will, Sirrah, -- [Beats him.]


Sir Hom. Farewell Canker. -- Have I this payment for my Service! Exit.


March. So, I Am glad I am delivered of this Bryar. If Vrsely can but be
Delivered well, we are safe. Why, this is it to countenance a Scholar! A
Chimney-sweeper shall have it first; or any thing that goes in Black. This
Fellow, if I should give it him freely, (as God forgive me that ever I should
have such a thought) would be the first Man that would make Vrsely do Penance,
and me help to Repair Paul's. No, no, if I can get but an honest Book-learn'd
Fellow, that will come off with more Gold and less Latin, it is right. -- I Will
look to this Rascal; I know he will come anon and recant, and offer Money too.
-- But I Will serve him a Trick. [He knocks with his Stick] Why Hob, -- why
Hobnail there. --


Hob answers within, I Will come anon.


March. There comes a Fellow that I Will set upon the Service; a Northern-Fellow
that has got well under me. I Have made him Constable this Year. He Is a Fellow
that never could endure any thing in Black, but a black Jack or Pot; -- as
brave a Scarecrow as ever hung upon a Dunghill.


Enter Hob. Hob. God give you a good e'ne Master, did you call?


March. Ay Hob, ay.


Hob. I was at Mumle-ty-Peg with a Barley Bag-pudding below. Much good do it me.


March. What news from the Field, Hob?


Hob. Why, there is Brock, your Grisle Mare, cannot Gang for Kibes. We must get
some Brimstone, and Train-Oyl, and anoint them I trow. -- We have plowed all
the Land next the Dike-Nook to Day.


March. But hark you Hob, you must undertake a Business for me to day, and do
it lustily.


Hob. What Is that, marry?


March. Why this is it Hob; Our Parson's Dead.


Hob. Marry, the Dule rest his Cragg. -- He did so spose me a while agon, I
could not con him an Answer: He asked me who gave me my Name?


March. Nay hold, but here me speak. There Is Curate Homily.


March. Nay hold, but hear me speak. There Is Curate Homily. --


Hob. Ay, as Honest a Man as ever break Crust.


March. Pish, pish, a Knave, a very Knave.


March. That Is no matter, tho he be a Knave, he is an Honest Man for all that.


March. Nay, be quiet a little Hob. He was here awhile ago, Railing and
Complaining against you mightily.


Hob. Against me! The Dule on him! What does he ken of me?


March. Why, he says, I let thee have too cheap a Pennyworth of thy Farm; and
that thou art so Covetous. -- Besides he comes to claim the Living of me; I
think he was Drunk too.


Hob. Hark you Sir, I am Constable, and I Will have a pair of Stocks made with
ten Holes, and he shall have Tithe; and if he have not his Pass about him, I Will
set fast his Hands by the Heels.


March. No, I Will tell you a better way. Stand you here with your Whip, whilst I
go down and watch for him; I think he will come this way presently again; if he
does, Yerk him soundly, and forwarn him my Ground.


Hob. Well, let me alone. -- I Will louk the Sloven. -- I Will sponge his Gaskins.


March. Prithee do, soundly; spare him not. Exit March.


Hob. I Will warrant you Master. -- I have not quite Dined yet. -- This
Marpudding cuts us vile short; I'se womble in the Crop still, but I shall have
the better Stomach to him. -- Abuse me and my Master! -- What the Dule harm
have I done him? I'se gar mumble the Sloven if he Gang this way, I'se line his
black Coat for him; -- I'se make him past standing two Hours a Sunday to spoil
our Victuals. -- Here he comes, I'se step and listen a little.


Enter Sir Homily. Sir Hom. Well, Fallere fallentem non est fraus, so says my
Author. He that does promise make, and then deceive,
To cozen him's not Knavery, by your leave.


What an Ass was I, to think Learning would get a Man a Living? If Parnassus
was this Churl's ground, he would plow it up, and make the poor Muses gather Stones
out on it, as they do Irish Women. -- O, if I had come with my thirty or forty
Pieces, I should have been some Sundays bidden to Dinner to my own Tithe-Pig.
-- Marry, and then I might have set at the lower end of the Table with the
Folks, and have said Grace. -- No, no, I am resolved to have a Plot, if I could
meet with Hob.


Hob aside. [ Hob will meet with you presently.]


Sir Hom. Yonder are two more Scholars that he has turned away. -- Faith, I Have
got a Plot will fit his Worship; and may hap, make him turn his Ruff into a
Band, otherwise called an Halter.


Hob. Hey, ho, whirry: [ Whips Sir Hom.]


Sir Hom. Nay, good Hob, good Hob.


Hob. How now Sirrah? Plain Hob? Do you know who you speak to? It might be Mr.
Constable Hob in your Mouth, Goodman Curate, you show your Manners.


Sir Hom. Nay, pray, what do you mean? Will you kill me?


Hob. No, Sirrah, I will Fley you alive. -- Abuse me, and my Master no more,
Sirrah. -- You say I have my Farm too cheap; But you shall pay dear enough for
it. [Whispers him.]


Sir Hom. O, no, never in my Life. I am come to speak with you for your good.


Hob. Ay, Sirrah, this is for your good too. -- Ha?


Sir Hom. Nay, hold, I Will make thee a Man, -- a Gentleman.


Furor. [Faith he seems to be no very Gentleman, by his Whipping thee.]


Hob. Come, quickly, make me a Gentleman straight. Come get up, I Will give you
leave.


Sir Hom. Why, thus it is, -- Our old Parson's Dead, and the Living is in your
Masters Disposing. He will not part with it without Money, and I have none my
self, or if I had, he will not let me have it. If you will make your self, now
venture for this Living. -- None now can have two Livings a piece. The price of
Steeples will fall. It Is but thirty or forty Pieces (as you are a Moneyed Man,
I Am sure) and you are made for ever. You cannot miss of it. And what a brave
thing is it to be a Parson!


Hob. Ha! -- Cuds-foot it is a brave Plot. But how can that be? I am not
Book-learn'd above my single Psalter. I must read Prayers with a Feskew.


Sir Hom. No, no, trouble not your self about Prayers. -- Can you lie long in
Bed with an handsome Wife? Eat good fat Pigs? Ride a Hunting? That Is all you
shall do; ler me alone with the Service; I Will be your Curate.


Hob. This is good Gear. -- But how must I do for Sermons?


Sir Hom. Paw, waw! What do you talk of Sermons? Talk what comes at
Tongues-end, cannot you?


Hob. Ay, but I have no Latin to spout at him, if he spose me.


Sir Hom. Latin? -- It is that which undoes many a Man. Take heed of that while
you breath. I Will learn you a word or two shall serve, I Will warrant you.


Hob. Ay, but he will ken me to be Hob, his Man, I doubt.


Sir Hom. No, no, you shall have a false Beard on, that shall make you look
very Grave; and I Will lend you my Clothes; I Will put on a Gray Cloak and wait on
you, as your Man; and you shall call your self by some other Name. Never fear,
I Will warrant you speed. I Will stand behind you, and tell you. -- Be sure to show
good store of Money, and Bargain with him presently.


Hob. Why, methinks I feel my self creeping into a Gentleman ( Mr. Doctor
Parson Hob) already. I may be a Bishop before I die. Why, what a vile Knave was
I, to whip so Honest a Man? Here, Sir Homily, besworn you shall whip me now,
because I whipped you. -- Besworn you shall. -- Nay, Cuds-digs you shall.


Sir Hom. Nay, but your Clothes are thicker than mine; mine are but thin.


Hob. Why, I Will strip me to the very Sark.


Sir Hom. No, no, I Will forgive thee freely. -- Let Us go and dress our selves
quickly. [Offers to go.]


Hob. Nay, stay -- hark you. -- Great words butter no Parsnips. -- I'se not buy
a Pig in the Poke. -- Have you seen the Comedy?


Sir Hom. What Comedy?


Hob. Why, the Comedy you ken, -- The Living.


Sir Hom. Why, it is worth an Hundred Pounds a Year, Man.


Hob. What, must I wear this Gray Hat too?


Sir Hom. No, you shall have mine; It Is a Steeple-crown'd, and it will do
better for a Gentleman.


Hob. I had rather you would teach me a little Latin now, I'se con't, be-like,
as we gang.


Sir Hom. Why, in your Discourse, if he ask you who you are, you may say Ego
sum Clericus.


Hob. What Is that?


Sir Hom. I am a Clark.


Hob. Clark? Why, I thought I should have been Parson; must I be but Clark?


Sir Hom. Pish. Why, then thou shall say, Ego sum Presbyteros.


Hob. What Is that, -- Bread and Butter?


Sir Hom. No, it is Greek and Latin too, -- I am a Priest.


Hob. Ay, marry; I would have the Priest forget that ever he was Clark.


Sir Hom. And if he use you well, cry Gratias ago Domine.


Hob. So. -- But if he ask how Old I am? --


Sir Hom. Why, cannot you tell that?


Hob. No, by my troth, it is so long ago, that I'se forgotten.


Sir Hom. Why, then you may say, I am about Fifty; and the elder you are, the
cheaper you will have it.


Hob. -- Ay, that is true. -- Come let us gang. -- But what is the Latin thing?


Sir Hom. Why, Gratias ago Domine.


Hob. Oh, oh -- Gratias ago Homily.


Exeunt. ACT the Fourth.
Enter Bookworm like a Ballad-man. Bookw. HOW shall he Sing, whose Throat is
hoarse with care?

Or he keep Time, whose Heart Strings broken are?

Alas! how shall I sing that am so much out of Tune? I had rather confute
Bellarmine, or turn Aquinas into English Verse. Yet this is better than the
Mill of School, where they grind Grammar Toll-free; and the poor Master turns
round in's Accidence till his Eyes drop out. Nay, faith, it is better than a
Parlour Lecture, tho not so sweet and gainful; where the Men with their smooth
Chin, and Velvet Caps, stand damning the Tongues; Unless the Hebrew escape,
because, like Women, it does backward fall. All Learning, to Reprobrates, is as
ungodly as Logic. -- But I shall forget my Knacks. -- Come, come, come. New
Almanacks, new Almanacks, new Almanacks new -- Who buys an Almanac? without
Saint-Days, and Ember Weeks in it, or any superstitious Feast-Days that end in
Mass, Christmas, Candlemass -- Who buys an Almanac, with a new Chronology of
Memorable Accidents? -- Since the Conquest, one Year. Since the Rising in the
North -- Since Hallifax went to the Tower -- Since Finch and Windebank departed
this Nation -- Since Doctors Commons were enclosed -- Since the Scots had Money
-- Who buys an Almanac, with new Fairs and Markets. -- As for Example -- Upon
the thirty first of February, there shall be a Fair throughout all England; At
which there will be sold Northern-Cloth that will not shrink; Sponges that will
not Drink. Tradesmen may buy Consciences. Whore's Maiden-heads, and Frenchmen
Noses. There will be also Tongues tip't with true Latin for Attorneys; and Pens
that will write true English for Gentlewomen. Extemporary Prayers without
Tautologies. Fellowships for Scholars, and Scholarships for Fellows; and
Benefices so plentiful, they shall go a begging. -- Come, who buys an Almanac?
Memorandum; There shall be great Eclipses in the Star Chamber, by reason of the
happy Conjunction of the two Houses with Sol. The Sea of Rome will be at so low
a Tide, that it shall not come up to Labeth. There will be also great
Thundrings among great Ones,m and that will cause great Lightnings among the
Subjects, which will clear the Air mightily. -- This Year also, Lords will have
but one Lady; Ladies but one Face; Doctors will preach twice a Day, and their
Curats eat Roast-meat; Scholars will be all of one Opinion; England of one
Religion; Birds all of a Color, and Shrove-Tuesday will fall upon a Monday. --
But these things will not be seen of us in this Kingdom. -- There will be also
strange Apparitions -- Two Phoenix's -- Three blew Beans in a blew Bladder.
Four silent Women -- Six true Tailors. Ten Maids at One and Twenty. Twelve
Honest Men of a Jury. Lawyers will plead for Nothing. Poets will purchase Land,
because Sack will be at a Penny a Gallon. Courtiers will pay their Debts. May
Day will fall on the 12 th of August. -- Come -- Will no Body buy my Almanacks?


Fur. Alas, poor Scholar! He shall take some Money of me. Hear you, Friend, What
is the price of that Book?


Bookw. But two pence, Sir.


Fur. Sack, at a penny a Gallon, say thou?


Bookw. Yes.


Fur. If this be true, 'Faith I Will quaff burnt Sack.


Bookw. And if it be not true, 'Faith burn my Almanac.


Fur. There Is Six pence for thee; give me the rest in Books. -- Have thou not
pretty Knacks?


Bookw. Yes, here is a Cobler's Sermon, (I have but one of them of thirty left
since morning) And Father Phillips philip'd too -- New come out.


Fur. Well said; give me them.


Bookw. -- Almanacks, Almanacks, Almanacks, New -- Let me see. It Is cold; I Will
go spend my twopence at the Ale house, and hear what News, and come again. [
Exit and Redi^t.] -- God save me; Here comes Fantastes of our College: A pretty
Scholar, yet a mere Animal. -- He comes for the Living too. Faith, I Will sit
down a little while and see the Issue.


Enter Fantastes like a Scholar, with one Boot Russet, and the other Black.
Fur. [Alas! here comes another Aristotle in a black Cover. -- Ha, ha, ha, his
Boots are of two several Opinions, or else of two several Universities; The one
of Cambridg, the other of Oxford. -- God bless him; what a fatal Cap he has
on! It looks as if it had served an Apprentiship at the Gallows, to teach those
that are hanged Blind-man's Buff.]


Fantastes opens his Box. Fantastes. Let me see my Colledg-Letters? -- Oh, safe
-- My Orders? Oh, safe. -- My Petition -- Oh! -- Come, I Will read it over once
more. -- First, I must premise two Legs (that is the least) -- But how if there
should be Gentlewomen? I never kissed any Body in a black Bag in my Life.


Fur. [What? Man? Set a good Face on it. You are not the first Scholar that
kissed a Lady.]

They say, they will turn their Cheeks -- And then I Will do, Quicquid in Buccam
Venerit* -- I do not remember any thing in Aristostle concerning Kissing.


Fur. [Unless in his Posteriorum.]


Fant. 'Faith, I Will turn and blow my Nose, if any come by, as if I did not see
them. And for my Hat -- Here, thus -- Or rather thus -- Nay, better thus: Most
Propitious Patron:
AS I was Equitating in these Rural Dimensions, the intelligence of the Vacuity
of your Worship's Ecclesiastical Donation, did dexterously occur and perforate
my Auricles; And forthwith, gratifying my Beast with a Measure of Pinguifying
Provender, I did approperate to your resplendent Habitation, to impenetrate the
Beneficial Presentation to me, A profound Aristotelian. -- Sir Fortune has not
Beatify'd me with Mundane Promotions, neither have I conglomerated any
Terrestrial Substance; But if you please, with your perspicuous Luminaries to
contemplate and perscrutate these Testifications, you shall be animadverted of
my Deportment in the Oxfordian Society, in my modification for Literature. Here
is moreover in this Membrane with the cerous Assignments, the Episcopal Assign
to gratify your Supplicant, (ponderating the Premises) you shall vivificate the
mortiferous Essence of my Intellectuals, and invocate into this Domical one
that will not contaminate your Family; but perprecate the Deities for the
longitude of their Benediction upon your Propagation: And remain,

Your Incarcerated Creature, Fantastes.


There Is Rhetoric in every word, I Am sure.


Fur. [In troth, I hope some body will take him for a Conjurer, and beat him
soundly; or else throw him into Goal for Coining false English, and then he
will be Incarcerated indeed.]


Fant. I fear nothing but that I come too late. These Livings, they are like
Herrings. They are Novelty, but they will not keep long.


Fur. [I fear yours will be a Shotten one.]


Fant. These scurvy Boots, -- How shall I make them both of a Color? -- I Will
black them with the inside of my Coat.


Enter Goodman Scuttle. Scuttle. Now verily and indeed, I am glad that I am
called out of New England: The Brethren there do multiply too fast, and the
Sisters are not plentiful in their Benevolence toward us, so as they be here.
-- And then many of them do Back-slide from what I did there deliver to them.
-- Truly I will quite leave my Basket-making, unless now and then a Cradle for
some Elect Babe. -- Sure if I do not get this Living (as Marchurch, by report,
is a Carnal Man) I can by my Shorthand, and Repetition, get a Competency. --


Fur. [This Fellow has the Living's fresh scent in his Nose, too.]


Fant. How now? Who Is this? Nay, as long as he is not in Black I care not. --
It may be he is some Servant in the House. -- God save you, Sir.


Scut. ( aside.) God save you? Ha! -- Truly Popery at the very first word.
These University Men are all in some measure corrupted with it. For tho I know
I shall be saved, yet he knows not what I am. He might have said the same to
some Reprobate Hell-hound, and to him it is Popery. -- I will not answer so
vain a Word.


Fant. Do you live here I pray you?


Scut. ( aside.) Truly, this Arminian's business is revealed unto me. He comes
about the Living as well as I; and being wicked as he is, I ought to deceive
him for the Churches good. I will Lie unto him. -- Yes, Sir, I do Inhabit here.


Fant. Inhabit here! -- Nay, if you can vary the Phrase, have at you. -- Is the
Regulator of the Domicil segregated from his Negotiations, I pray you, Sir?


Scut. Ah Sir! these Popish words become you not. -- They edify not. -- If I
were to write you a Sermon, I have not a Character for such words. I pray you
speak teachably and plainly.


Fant. Is the Gentleman of the House at home, can you tell me?


Scut. No indeed, he is not at Home; he is newly rid Abroad.


Fant. When will he return again?


Scut. Not this Week I believe. What Is your Business, I pray you, with him?


Fant. Is his Living void, can you tell me?


Scut. Ha! -- I thought so. -- Yea, truly it is void; but it is in vain for
such as you are, to look after it.


Fant. Why so?


Scut. Why truly, you are profane Men, and Idolatrous, and can do nothing but
with Study and Popish Books. -- I wonder what you should do at a College so
long. -- No good I warrant you.


Fant. What! We read Philosophy, Logic, Divinity. -- We learn the Tongues --
Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, to fit us for the Church; and all little enough.


Scut. Ah! -- I thought that would be your Answer. -- Does not the Pope the
like? I dare my self Preach with you for the Living; and he that gives over
first, shall lose it.


Fant. What Trade are you, Sir? -- You talk madly. -- Ah! such as you are have
undone us all.


Scut. Nay, you vile Priest, such as you are. -- And I intend to get this
Living. -- If such Wretches as you are get it, you must be Parson and have
Tithes. -- No, no. -- I Will at Composition and stand to their Benevolence.


Fant. O, Domine, is it come to this! [Surgit Bookworm.]


Bookworm. [I'll set them together by The Ears.] -- Come -- Who buys a Ballad?

[Sings.] God prosper long our Noble King, etc. --

Who buys a new Ballad? [He sings again.] I am confirmed a Scholar can,
Be this or that, or any Man;
And Ovid taught all Students this,
To make a Metamorphosis.
And when he cannot change a Groat,
He Will turn his Skin and change his Coat.



Scut. Do you hear, Sir Scholar? You Black-Coats can be any thing, and
Temporizers. I Will buy it of him. -- Honest Man, pray let me have that Ballad.
-- Have you any thing against Bishops?


Bookw. Yes, Sir. -- There is Little Laud in Limbo, and Lambeth Fair, and Rome
for a Cornered Cap, and the Character of a Bishop.


Scut. I shall think the better of you Ballad-men hereafter. -- The price of
them?


Bookw. Two Groats.


Scut. Very cheap. -- If I get the Living, I Will have thee my Clark.


Fant. Hang you Rascal. -- I Will venture in* -- I Will serve your Turn.


Scut. Nay, Sir, I Will give them a Character of you, you Popeling, I Will be there
as soon as you, I warrant you. [They justle at the Door.]


Exeunt. Bookw. These are brave Times! -- I Will lay Ten Pound the Basket-maker
carries it away. Exit.


Enter a Tinker singing. Tinker. When Alexander crossed the Seas,
King Pippin and Diogenes.
Mul'd Sack is good to cure the Fleas.
Tom Tinker lives a merry Life,
And is of the mending hand,
A Copper Nose, a Brazen Face,
He has at your Command.
Come, come, Have you any Work for a Tinker? -- Have you any Bellows or Bowls
to mend? Any Dishes, Kettles or Skillets, or old Frying-Pans to mend? -- Come,
come, I can mend Platter-Faces, or Cracked Maiden-Heads, or Tipped
Cuckold's-Horns. Who will buy a brave Candlestick? -- My Wares are all sound,
but I must crack of them, to make them sell the better. He that uses this
Candlestick shall do more with a Week, than another with a Quarter; and he that
tells his Gold by this Candlestick, without ever a Candle in it, shall not find
it Light. -- I Will warrant, this was the Candlestick Diogenes sought for an
Honest Man with. -- I was offered Moneys enough for it two Years ago by an old
Blade, to set upon an Altar in his Chancel: But now Conformity burns and stinks
in the Socket, and Wax-Candles wax dim, and are like to go out in a Snuff; yet
it serves a Papist to light him to Rome. For the Pope's Fire begins to burn
Blew, and it is thought he wants a pair of Tongs to turn up his
Purgatory-bottom-Cake. -- Come, who buys it? That the Tinker may have some
better Metal to melt into Ale. He that will chaffer, shall have this Prolonger
into the Bargain. -- O brave Prolonger! -- If Patents and Monopolies had had
Prolongers, they had not gone out yet. -- You that are the Lights of the Church
have Extinguishers enough, but your two Steeples like double-wick'd-Candles, wont
Prolongers. -- Ship Money, Star Chamber, High Commission, Michaelmas Term, --
all want Prolongers. -- But I shall prolong the time, and take nothing. -- But
who comes here? -- Another Black Coat. -- Sure here is some Carrion
here-abouts, I see so many Crows stirring! -- Have you any Work for a Tinker?
Enter Fantastes.


Fant. This is as brave as can be. -- I Will set him on Work now. Jovial Tinker!
Where Is the best Liquor? -- Ha?


Tink. God bless your Learning, Master. There is good Liquor,
I never Drunk quicker;
And if thou wilt follow me;
Thou'st find Chink,
And I Will find Drink,
And so we'll Merry be. --


Master will you set a poor Tinker on Work?


Fant. Alas! What Work should Scholars have for Tinkers?


Tink. What? -- Master, will you give me leave, -- You are but Tinkers your
selves, many of you.


Fant. As how prithee!


Tink. How? -- Why you keep such a Hammering of a poor Text, before you can hit
the right Nail on the head; -- and then in stopping one Hole, you oftentimes
make two. --


Fant. You Are a mad Blade.


Tink. Nay, and none but Scholars and Tinkers carry all their Tools about them,
to mend this Brass and Iron Age.


Fant. Hark thee, Tom, can Fight lustily?


Tink. Ay Faith, therein we differ. -- You Black Coats are Cowards, and we are
not. -- Yes, I can play at Quarter-staff a little.


Fant. Will thou be true to me?


Tink. Will I not Bully? Hector, try me.


Fant. Why, Sirrah, here is a Living void here in Town, and I am come to try my
Fortune for it. Here, even now, I met with a Roguish Sniveling New-English
Basket-maker, that does abuse me and all Scholars as past -- Would thou think
that he is gone in here to get the Living from us all


Tink. Does he snivle in the Nose, Master?


Fant. Ay, Tom, that he does.


Tink. By Jove, I Will sell him a pair of Snuffers.


Fant. Stand here and watch for him, and search his Pockets* and thou shall see
what Authors he reads. -- Look you -- There Is Twelve-pence for thee, and meet
me half an Hour hence at the Alehouse, and whether thou speedest or not, I Will
give thee half a dozen of Ale, and we'll Laugh and be Merry.


Tink. Hark you Master, I Will make him down on his Knees, and pray for Bishops
e're I have done with him. -- Let me alone.


Fant. Be sure you Pay him soundly. -- Spare him not. Exit.


Tink. This is Handsome! -- A Basket-maker get a Living! -- He had best bring a
pair of Hilts with him. -- I Will have a bout at Wastrels with him. -- I Will teach
him how to baste a Pulpit. -- Here he comes. -- I Will listen awhile what Tune
his Nose is in, that I may mend it.


Enter Goodman Scuttle. Scut. Ah, as very a wicked Man as ever I came near, a
very Reprobate, not any good word came from him. -- But he must have Money,
Money. -- It Is a thousand pitties that such good Men as we, should be put aside
by such Carnal and Unsanctify'd Patrons.


Tink. Have you any Work for a Tinker? -- Yo -- Friend, -- Will you set a poor
Tinker on Work?


Scut. Away, away for Banbury. -- I have no Work for such Fellows as you are.


Tink. Yea, but Sirrah, Rascal. -- I Will Work for nothing. --


Beats him. Scut. Oh, -- Murder, -- Murder. -- Will you kill me?


Tink. Sirrah, It is revealed unto me that you have a mind to Preach, and to
leave your Trade. -- Thus and thus -- and then thus, you must thump the
Cushion. -- [Beats him.] -- Come on you Knave. -- You told never a Lie to day
for the good of the Church, did you?


Scut. Yea indeed, but I Will do so no more. -- Pray spare my Bife.


Tink. Sirrah, Will you lead me to a Cup of good Ale?


Scut. Ay, ay.


Tink. And to a pretty Wench?


Scut. Ay, so it may be private.


Tink. And will you love good Scholars?


Scut. Ay, indeed.


Tink. And pray for Bishops?


Scut. Ay, and Archbishops too.


Tink. Nay, now I see you are a dissembling Knave. I Will have you Silenced
In Faith. -- You gaped for a Benefice. -- Now gape, [gags him] so now let me see
what is in your Pockets.


Scut. Awe, awe, awe* -- [He feels in his Pockets, and pulls out a Book of
Characters.]


Tink. Ay, I Will keep you in awe. -- How now, what is here? A Book of Characters!
O Sirrah, you write Characters do you? I Will pay you in Words at length. --
Here Is good Gear indeed. -- Come on. -- Now get up* -- So -- let me see. --
[Pins his Book on his Back.] Come, I Will give you Induction, you have your
Orders about you. -- Come, Sirrah, or I Will choke thee.


Scut. Au, au, au. -- Exeunt.


Enter Marchurch alone. March. Oh, the blessed'st days that ever came! I think,
when I was Born, all ill Fortune was lulled asleep, and the fatal Planets were
in a Swoon. -- I never saw that wrinkled Brow of Fortune. Her clearer Face has
always shined upon my Days. -- Nay, -- Now, -- just now* -- When I looked to
have been Branded for ever, for this same Vrsely, I think there was a Mask or
Vizard drawn over the Eyes of the World. -- My Servants and People, all from
Home. -- And Vrsely had no sooner spawned, but there comes a Gypsy
Beggar-woman to my Door, who for Twenty Shillings took away the Bastard with
her. I made her a sufficient Pass to carry her far enough. In troth Vrsely's
was an excellent Plot to keep my Nephew in Aw. -- If it be possible, I Will Marry
her off with this Living. -- One, two, three, four, five Black Coats, but not a
Penny among them all. -- I wonder what is become of Hob! -- He has paid Homily
soundly, they say. -- [Draws out a Letter*] -- Here Is a Letter. Good News; I
hope, some Chapman for the Living. -- [He opens the Letter.]


Enter Hob dressed like a Parson, and Homily as his Man. Hob. Cud's Noun's, Sir
Homily. -- Here Is my Master.


Sir Hom. Peace, peace. You must not call me Homily, but Jack.


Hob. Why then, Jack Homily.


Sir Hom. Nay, that is worst of all. Call me plain Jack.


Hob. Why then Plain Jack. -- Come, stand close. -- Fifteen Years old am I
say thou?


Sir Hom. Pish. -- I say Fifty.


Hob. Fifty. -- How many Twenties is that?


Sir Hom. It Is twenty to one, you will spoil all.


Hob. Now, now. -- Come stand close by me good Homily. -- O, Jack I would say.
-- You, -- Hear, -- Ho, Honest Man. -- Hark ye me. -- Hear. -- Does not Mr.
Marchurch live here, I'se pray?


Sir Hom. O, that is well done.


Hob. Cud's duds -- He Will know me.


March. Lawye now! -- Here Is another, that makes Six. -- Marry he has a Man
waits on him. -- Yes Sir, Mr. Marchurch does dwell here: Would you speak with
him?


Hob. Yea, marry would I. -- I'se come forty Miles to speak with him. -- God
speed Plough.


March. I am the Man, Sir, Marchurch is my Name.


Hob. Jack, Jack, must I ask him, Who gave him that Name?


Sir Hom. No, no. -- Tell him, you are a Suitor to him for the Living.


Hob. Why, Sir, -- Goodine to your Worship. -- I'se hear you have a Living in
your Gift. I'se a poor Minister, Sir, and shall be bound to pray for your
Worship, and you shall give it me. I Will live like an Honest Man among you.


March. Alas, Sir, you are a mere Stranger to me, but by your Language, you
seem to be a Northern Man.


Hob. Yea Sir, I was Born in Cumberland, and had a good Living in the North
(tho I say it) but when the Scots came last Year, I was fain to fly, and make
Money of what I had.


March. Nay, if you have Money, have at you, as errand a Clown as you are.
[Aside.] Why, Sir, a Cumberland Man, say you? I have a Tenant here in Town,
your Countryman; his name is Hob, -- an Honest Man.


Hob. Cuds duds, cuds duds, cuds duds, -- Jack. -- ( Aside.)


Sir Hom. Sir, I pray you speak louder, my Master is somewhat Deaf. -- He hears
you not.


Hob. God-a-mercy, Jack. -- Why Sir, Hob say you is his Name? There is a famous
Cudgel-player of his Name.


March. I pray you, Sir, what may be your Name?


Hob. What Is my Name? -- My Name, -- my Name is -- Richmond. My Father was a
good Gentleman, I'se sure.


March. That Skil's not worth what your Father was; your own Parsonage shows
you to be a Man sufficient.


Hob. Yea, Sir, but your Parsonage would do it better.


March. Why, Sir, I must needs confess, there is a pretty Living in my Hands.


Hob. Yea, Sir. -- There Is something in my Hand too. --


Shows him Money. March. Why, I hope that you and I shall shake Hands
presently. What University are you of?


Hob. Oxford.


March. Have you taken your Degrees there, Sir?


Hob. Degrees? -- I have spent an Hundred Pounds there by Degrees.


March. Was you ever Fellow of any House?


Hob. Yea, marry, now and then, Fellow of an Alehouse.


March. The Canon does not require any thing, but that you be able to speak a
piece of Latin.


Hob. Latin! -- yea, that I can, Twenty pieces of better Metal than Latin. --
Hang Latin, it is good for nothing but Dripping-pans.


March. You say right. -- There is a great deal of Popery in it. -- You have no
Living as yet, Sir, I pray you?


Hob. No, indeed, Sir, -- you are my first Chapman. -- I have not bidden a
Penny to any Man but your Worship. Pray use me well, and you shall have more of
my Custom.


March. Marry, and I have another Commodity for thee, if thou be'st not
Married. -- ( aside.) How Old are you, Sir, I pray?


Hob. Why, Sir, -- Ise two Twenties and Ten. -- Fifteen.


March. That Is nothing, you Parsons live long.


Sir Hom Coff, and make your self Sick. -- ( aside.)


Hob. Alas, Sir, I am Old and Crazy. Ho, ho, ho, -- Hold my Head, Jack. -- Oh,
Sick.


Sir Hom. O, admirably well done. -- ( aside.)


Hob. Oh, ho, ho, -- I am so troubled with the Coughing of the Lungs, it will
even kill me.


March. I hope it will, e're long. -- ( aside.) -- Alas, Sir, I am sorry to see
you so Sickly. -- [Pulls out an Aquavitae-bottle.] Here, Sir, -- I pray you
drink a little of this. -- I never go without my Bottle.


Hob. Oh, ho, ho, -- God thank your Worship. -- It will even fall again into
your hands before seven Years come to an end.


March. Why, Sir, because I see you are so Sickly, and likely to be an Honest
Man among us; hark you. -- Whispers him.


Hob. Fifty Pieces! Marry, God bless us, you had need lend me your
Aquavitae-bottle again; this gangs cold to my Heart. Fifty Pieces!


March. Ay, Twenty down now, and I Will take your word for the rest.


Sir Hom. Offer him Twenty, offer him Twenty. -- Do, do. --


Aside. Hob. Why will Twenty fetch it down now upon the Stubs? Here it is in
good Gold. If I live tway Years more, I'se give you Ten Pounds more if I like
my Bargain. What, Sir, Livings are fallen now.


March. In truth, I thought mine would never have fallen. Ha, ha, ha. -- These
are dangerous Times. -- I shall have some Chaplain or other come with the
King's Title and cozen me, or some Mischief, if I keep it in my Hands. -- (
Aside.) -- Are you a Married Man, Sir?


Hob. No marry not I, Sir.


March. If I use you well, I hope you will not speak on it.


Hob. No, no, I'se be as Mum as a Lawyer without his Fee.


March. I hope you will live Peaceably among us, and not go to Law, or present
any Man?


Hob. Yea marry, I'se present your Worship with a Tith-Pig, or so.


March. You say well for that. -- But hark you, Sir, you shall allow me two or
three Quarters of Wheat every Christmas.


Hob. No, no, Sir. -- You shall not catch old Birds with Chaff. -- Is it a
Bargain? Here Is my Money, will you strike me Luck on it?


March. Come, give me your hand, Mr. Parson. -- It Is done. -- Your Name is Mr.
Richmond, you say.


Hob. Yea, Sir, that is my Name.


March. Well, Sir, God give you Joy* -- I will go write your Presentation, and
about two Hours hence I will expect you.


Hob. Very well. Our Horses are at yonder Alehouse; We'll come to you anon.


March. You shall be Welcome.


Hob. Jack, Jack, -- What Is the Latin thing? Aside.


Sir Hom. Why, Gratias ago Domine. -- Aside.


Hob. Gratias ago Homily* -- Exit cum Homily.


Manet Marchurch solus. March. Ha, ha, ha, -- How bravely have I taken my old
Black Jack by the Ear, and drained him! What an interest have I got in this
Verb Impersonal. -- If I should have made an Hue and Cry from In Speech to For
the due joining, I should not have found such a Participle in Rus. -- Well, let
him be what he will, (as I think he is not guilty of much Learning) let him be
Pulpit-Monger, Desk-Thumper, and Sermon-Braker (as I think he has as few new
ones, as any here) if he be able to set out a Stave in a Psalm right (as he is
Old enough) I care not. -- I Will humor him till he is safe, and then, may-hap,
I may pin Vrsely on his Back.


Fur. [Nay, rather pin him upon her Belly. But if you geld him so as you begin,
he will be able to do nothing; you have taken away his Gold now, and his precious
Stones will be next.] However I am glad, I have cracked the Flea Homily. --
I Will in, and expect my Animal. Exit.


Surgit Furor. and Canit. 1.
I Have been a Jovial Rambler,
And have Traveled many Nations.
I have seen
How Men have delighted in,
Several Transformations.
Yet still do I cry,
Let them chop, let them change Boy,
Let them turn and never spare;
But to see a Lurch,
That Is put upon the Church,
O this fetches off my Hair.
2.
Old Proteus stands amazed,
To see himself put down,
Copernicus
Did prophesy of us,
When he said the World turned round.
Yet still, etc.
3.
Your Rich Men turned to Lions,
Your Rich Men, an Ass in Fashion,
Married Wives wear Fox-skins,
And their Husbands Ox-skins;
Oh, ho, it is a Juggling Nation.
But still, etc.
4.
I have seen a Beggar in Scarlet,
Made a Master of a Gaffer,
No Gentleman bred,
Become one of the first Head,
At which I am a Scoffer.
Yet still, etc.
5.
I have seen a Deck of Religions,
Packed and Shuffl'd most rarely;
The Papists in a Dump,
'Cause Puritan is Trump,
And swears they Deal not fairly.
Yet still, etc.
6.
I have been in many a Parlour,
Where Sermons have been Plenty,
I heard a Ladkin Pray,
Both a Night and a Day,
And yet could scarce tell Twenty.
Yet still do I cry,
Let them chop, let them change Boy;
Let them turn and never spare,
But to see a Lurch,
That Is put upon the Church,
O, this fetches off my Hair.
ACT the Fifth.
Enter Furor. Furor. A Carter get a Living! -- I Will put a spoke in his Wheel.
-- (If it were Carter upon Seton, it would have been another matter) -- Who of
both, he had better have bought the Schoolmasters Place, and then all would
have been but a Whipping still; but now he will never be able to set out a
Psalm right without Whisling; or say Grace without Rhymes for's heart. -- But
see where he comes. -- How now, Drunk! -- He has been Preaching over a Black
Pot already. -- I marvel what is become of his Man Homily! He is not his own Man
I Am sure. -- Well, I Will to my Kennel once more, and mark the Catastrophe.]


Enter Hob Drunk, with a Pipe of Tobacco in's Mouth. Hob. Cuds duds -- Curis
Tobacco! -- Room there for Parson Hob. -- Mr. Marpudding can be hanged e're he
can do thus. [Puffs, Whisles, and Sings.] Come on, and let us be Merry,
And why should we be Sad?
We'll have a Living anon,
Whether it be good or bad.


Whoop, Ha. -- Well sung Parson Hob. -- Sirrah, Boy, drive your Cart that way.
[He Reels.]


Fur. [Thou'lt overthrow presently; thou have thy Load. -- Whoist.]


Hob. I Will have my Frock died Black, and it will make a good Cassock. --
[Open's his Primmer.] -- I must learn to Read against Sunday. -- G -- r -- a --
c -- e. -- Grace. -- B -- e -- f -- o -- r -- e, -- Before. -- M -- e -- a --
t, -- Meat. -- Grace before Meat. -- O brave Doctor Hobs! -- Pease-Porridg hot,
Pease-Porridg cold. -- Pease Porridg nine days old, -- spell That with four
Letters. -- First begin with the Horn-book, the Horn-book, the Horn-book. And
then go on to the Primmer -- (And so far I Am advanced.
And here good Fellow's an Health to thee, and an Health to thee,
There Is no deceit in a Brimmer. --


Why -- where is my Man Homily? -- How Letcherous are these Black Breeches the
Rogue lent me! -- [Whoops and Sings.] But still she replies, good Sir let it be,
If ever I have any Man, Black Coat for me. How proud am I?



Fur. [Ay -- your Pride will have a fall presently.]

You -- Sexton -- Whip the Dog out of the Parson's Pew there. --


Fur. [Spew there.]
Whoist there -- Hob -- [Falls down.]
[So, so -- The Living's fallen again already.]

Hob. I'se Parson of the Parish; I think the Clark is mad. -- The Sexton Chimes
all-in. -- Fie, fie -- What a lean Tith Pig is this? -- [He falls asleep and
snores.]


Fur. [What, cannot you be contented to Fall, but you must fall asleep too? --
It Is hard Rising for a Churchman, when he is once down. Thou had need, I Am
sure, sleep soundly; thy Coat has not had a Nap this seven Years.


[ Enter Sir Homily.] Sir Homily. Did ever any Man serve such a Master? -- A
Parson too? -- Ha, ha, ha, -- Parson Hob! -- After we went down from old
Marchurch, even now Hob for joy, would needs have me to the Alehouse; where
after a while Tippling on it soundly, I put a Powder into his Drink to Fox him,
and to make him Sleep securely. He steals away from me. -- I know he is so far
gone, that he cannot be gone far. -- [Spies him.] -- Ha, ha, ha, Have I found
thee? -- Malus Pastor dormit sapinus! -- But it is no Talking. -- Now if ever,
good Fortune stand to me! -- This is the time that Marchurch expects him to
come for the Presentation. -- As long as I have been in Town, they know not my
Name. They call me Sir Homily, but my Name is Richmond; and that I gave him for
his false Name. -- His Cloak and his false Beard, I Will make bold withal, to
Disfigure me. -- Above half the Money he has paid, and the other shall never
be paid; for he knows (and shall do better if I speed) what Symony is. -- I Will
try if I can Act him, and get it. -- And if thou have not hanged thy self
before I come again, I Will wrangle it out well enough with thee, I Will warrant
thee. -- Exit.


Enter a Gypsy Woman with a Child on her Back. Gypsy. I wonder what is become
of my Tinker? -- This will make us good Sport. -- Here Is Twenty Shillings to
Bous and Ken this Christmas. -- I hope his Gold is not so Light as his Whore.
-- Ha, ha, ha. -- Here Is a Pass too that will carry us all England over, in
spite of Stocks, and Whipping-Posts. -- She sings. Lullaby, Lullaby Baby,
Lullaby,
Sweetly Sleep and sweetly Slumber;
Sweetly Sleep and make no Moan,
Thee as mine I must now Number,
Tho indeed you are not mine own.



Fur. [Not thine own? -- I hope it is no Bodies in this Company. -- I Will lay my
Life, It Is a Chip of the old Block; Marchurch supra Vrsely, newly Printed.]


Gypsy. Ho yes. -- If any Man or Woman, in Town or Country, will buy a Barn.
-- [Spies Hob.] -- How now? Who Is this? -- It Is a Scholar.


Fur. [Ay marry, if all that went in Black were Scholars, there would be a
great many more than there are.]


Gypsy. A Scholar, as I live. -- If I had not taken this from the old Letcher
now, I should have sworn that it had been thine. -- However I Will look no
farther for a Father. -- [Takes the Child from her Back.] -- Ha! -- He Is fast
asleep. -- By the complexion of his Clothes, he should have no Money. -- But I
fear no Colors; I Will search him. -- [Searcheth his Pockets.] -- Oh, -- Rich,
Rich -- very Rich. -- Surely he has had two Livings, and sold one of them. --
Well, I Will take your Money, but I Will leave you a sufficient Pawn here. -- [She
lays the Child by him.] -- Ha! -- I have no Shoes to hang on my Feet; what if
I should take his Boots? -- I have known Women wear the Breeches, why not the
Boots too? -- But stay, let me smell at him. -- Hang him he smells of Drink. --
He Is full enough. -- I Will off with them. -- [She pulls off his Boots.] -- Nay,
a right Scholar, he wears them but for want of Stockins. -- I Will e'ne change
with him. -- He Will make Legs better by half in my Shoes than in his Boots. --
Come, hanged -- he shall have the Skin too. -- I Will cover him with this Sheet.


Fur. [An incomparable good Plot! -- God-a-mercy little Comaedia! -- If the
Basket-maker were here, he might now make a Cradle.]


Gypsy. I Will not stay to put them on here, till I have got further. -- To the
Auditors. -- Look you Gentlemen, if any of you have such a Commodity to put
off; Twenty Shillings is my Price; but I Will use you kindly. -- This is the last
time of asking. -- Exit.


Hob wakes, and stretches himself. Hob. Oh -- oh -- Come Hosts, what is to pay?
-- Starts up. -- Oh my Boots! -- Where the Dule have I been Barefoot and
Bare-leg'd. -- Oh -- my Beard's gone! -- My false Beard has deceived me, --
Ha! -- what is -- what is -- a Child! Oh -- I Am undone -- undone, -- undone. --
Sure I Am brought a Bed! -- I wondered my Belly did so ache -- and I was with
Child. -- Oh -- what an He Whore am I! -- Is this the Living I stood for so
long! -- Oh, oh, -- It Is mine. -- I have heard them say, that Parsons have
commonly first a Child, and then a Living afterward. -- And it is so indeed;
for I remember my Breeches were Leacherous. -- Let me see. -- Surely it cannot
be mine. -- Oh, oh -- yes. -- It is mine, -- now it is mine. -- They say when
they have a Child they Travel with it; and I warrant I traveled all Night with
it, and that has worn my Boots to a pair of Shoes. -- I remember I said to
Homily, that I was with Child till I had got the Living. -- It Is so indeed. --
Oh, it is mine, I doubt -- I did so dream of a Christning to Night.


Fur. [Why then I pray you, Name the Child*]


Hob. Stay, -- How can it be mine? -- Can a Man be with Child? -- Unless it
should come with Drinking. Ay, ay -- It was that -- It was that. -- Too much
Drinking will make a Man Big bellied. -- I warrant, I spued it up. -- Oh what a
Drunken Whore am I! -- [He feels in his Pocket.] -- Oh -- Mad -- Mad -- Undone
-- Undone -- My Money, My Money -- Why, -- I Am not only delivered of my Child,
but of my Purse too -- O -- this Rogue Homily! -- What shall I do? -- Would the
Steeple were in his Belly. -- O -- hang his lousy Clothes --

[Puts off his Clothes.] -- My Master will see me hanged e're he will give me
my Money again. -- And then this Bastard of mine too. -- Stay, I am Constable!
-- May I not command my self to hang my self? -- I should have in these
Breeches an Halter, and there is a Beam will fit my turn. -- Here Is a Sheet.
I Will do Penance in it, as I hang, for my Whoredom. -- Oh what a drunken Whore
am I! -- Come on -- Is this all the Bell-ropes I must have?


Enter first Watchman. 1 st Watch. Our Landlord, and Mr. Marpudding will think
I am run away, if I bring not my Christmas Capons. I would the Bones were in
one of their Bellies, and the Feathers in the other.


Fur. [Nay, would he himself were a Capon -- Alas! poor Hob, how hard is he at
his Devotion!


Enter second Watchman. Watch. 2. O Neigbour Dungo, we are undone, if Mr.
Marchurch be here before us -- Come, come, yonder is at the Alehouse, Gypsies,
Tinkers, and Ballad-singers, roaring; and the Constable Hob, the Clown, is
drunk himself some-where -- Come, come -- Let Us go rout 'em.


Watch. 1. Say ye me so? -- I may venture my Basket here till I return -- Come
on. -- Exeunt.


Hob. Ah -- I confess I deserve this Death -- I have been a Drunkard, and
covetous Churl, and would have cheated my Master of his Living. Besides, I once
kissed a Wench behind the Stable-door; and now I am a Whore. -- Ah Hob, thou
art a Whore! -- I did not think thou would have come to this. -- [He puts the
Rope about his Neck, and sings.] Good People all give ear a while to me,
And let my End all your Examples be.
When I was Drunk, then I was got with Child.
I bought a Living, but I am beguiled.
All honest Men, I pray, take my Advice,
Meddle not with Parsons not in any wise:
Follow your Trades, and do not soar so high,
For at the last you will repent like I.
Forty good Pounds in seven Years I got,
But now it is gone, and Money I have not.
To ring my Bells, by this time I did hope,
But now I ring my Hands, and hang byth' Rope.
So, now I forgive all the World -- but Homily.



[ Enter Homily.] Sir Hom. So, Policy has got that which Prayers could not. --
I have it here -- But stay -- what have we here -- A Basket? -- [Looks into
it.] -- Two fat Capons and some Beef for this old Marchurch -- I hear a
whispering in the Town of a Bastard of Vrsleys; It must needs be his or
Marpudding's; and if it be so, -- I Will keep him in awe. -- But stay, -- Who
owns this? -- He is not far off here -- [Spies Hob] How now! -- Parson Hob
doing Service in his Sunplice already! -- Why Hob -- Hob, Mr. Hob.


Hob. I am a little busy, -- I pray leave me.


Sir Hom. Nay -- but Master -- do you not know me?


Hob. No Gentleman -- Poor Parson Hob now -- [Look on him.] a Dule on thee, is
it thee? I pray let me alone. -- You will cozen me of this Preferment too
presently.


Sir Hom. Nay -- Pish -- Hob! -- Why did you steal from me at the Alehouse? --
For this? -- Where have you been?


Hob. Where? -- Why, committing Fornication with a Jug of Ale I-trow. Look you
here -- [He points to the Child.] -- I am a Whore, -- I fell asleep, and when I
was awaked, I found my self delivered of this Bastard -- My Boots are gone --
and my Money all gone -- and this Sheet left me for a Winding Sheet. -- This was
your Plot. -- You would make me a Parson and be hanged. -- Will you be my
Curat, and do this for me?


Sir Hom. What -- hang my self? No indeed, nor you shall not neither. -- Come,
come.


Hob. Do you see that?


Sir Hom. I Will lay my Life this is Marchurch's Bastard, however it came here.
-- Away Fool -- Your Child? -- If it be, I will keep it.


Hob. Will you?


Sir Hom. Ay, that I will, and set all right and straight again if I can, --
Help you to your Money again, and take this Child. -- Will you be a Parson, or a
Plowman.


Hob. -- Parson! -- No -- Zuckers -- They shall have an hundred Livings a piece
first. -- Would I had my Gold again.


Sir Hom. Why then, Hark you. -- Did you fall asleep here?


Hob. -- Ay, Drunk, -- like a Rogue as I was.


Sir Hom. Why, you would needs go to the Alehouse; It was not my doings. --
And what, when thou wakedst, thou found'st this Child, and thy Pockets picked,
and thy Boots gone?


Hob. -- Yea marry did I. -- And what of all this?


Sir Hom. What? -- I smell a Rat -- This Bastard, Sirrah, is Vrsleys. -- I Will
venture a Wager thy Master got it.


Hob. How Is that! -- Cuds duds, she was main saucy with him as ever I saw.


Sir Hom. Nay, it is so I warrant thee. -- Hear but me. -- Will you be but
contented to let me have the Living, if I rid you of it, and get you your Money
again?


Hob. -- Will I not? -- Yea, and love thee all the days of my Life for it.


Sir Hom. Why then to tell the truth, I have got it. -- I found thee here
asleep, and took thy Cloak and thy Beard from thee, and went in thy Name, and
sped well. -- There I heard a whispering of this Bastard; and Vrsley could not
be seen. It Is so, I Will warrant thee. -- I Will give thee good Bonds for thy Money,
and something beside.


Hob. -- Yea. -- But I must be hanged, now or never, for I have confessed my
Sins.


Sir Hom. What do do with that Primmer; was it thine?


Hob. -- Ay, it is mine. I got it to learn to read my Letters against I should
be Parson.


Sir Hom. And what, -- thou would have made a long Letter of thy self? --
Come -- look you here; This Basket some Body has left -- [Peeps aside.] There
are two Capons a going in it to your Master. We Will put this Chicken too under
the Capons, and leave it.


Hob. Ha! -- I think thou wilt prove an honest Man.


Sir Hom. Ay, ay, -- Come -- pull your Block-head out of the Noose. -- [Pulls
out his Head.]


Hob. -- So -- Shall I live?


Sir Hom. Ay, and richly.


Hob. Why then I will un-confess all my Sins again. -- I never was a Drunkard,
nor Covetous, nor Parson, nor kissed any Body behind the Stable-door -- Not I.


Sir Hom. Come now look you here Sir. -- [He puts the Child into the Basket.]


Hob. -- Ha, ha, ha -- These Black-Coats can put off Children to other Men --
Ha, ha, ha -- How I shall laugh anon, when I am Hob again, to see Marchurch
have an Heir -- Marpudding will knock it in the Head within's two days, if it
offer to eat any thing. -- And will you give me your Bond for my Money too?


Sir Hom. Ay, that I will.


Hob. -- Come on Sirrah Hob -- Your are a Rogue -- But I will let you live a
while longer.


Sir Hom. Go thou into my House, and put on my Boots; by that time I Will come.
-- But I Will scout here a while to see what this Basket will do.


Hob. I Will go -- But stay -- If you give me Bond, I must have Witnesses. --
I Will go no further. -- [To the Auditors.] -- Pray, Gentlemen, set your Hands to
it. -- Methinks this is better than making out of hand with my self by half. --
Exit.


Manet Homily. Sir Hom. What a Fool was this! -- If Men should hang themselves
when they are cheated of their Money, what dangling would there be this
Christmas? -- No sooner Parson but suspended. -- I will be honest. The Clown
shall have all his Money again. -- But this Primmer shall go in to teach the
Baby too. -- But whist -- Here comes Dungo. -- It Is as I said. -- I Will scout
and listen.


Enter Dungo the first Watchman. Watch. 1. Oh -- That Is well. -- My Basket is
safe. -- Ha, ha, ha. Yonder is a Gipsy-woman at the Alehouse -- A pretty Woman
indeed; and two Scholars which have been here for the Living, they do so smooth
her up. -- She Is a Fortune Tellers too. -- She called me Gentleman, besworn. --
Yet she said I should have some ill Luck come unto me. -- I was afraid of
nothing but my Capons, and they (I see) are safe enough. -- Now truly they are
very fat. How heavy they be! -- However I Will away. --


Enter Marchurch. March. So that Cure is cured. -- I never met with such a
Clown in all my Life as my new Parson. He Is gone to the Bishop. -- It Is well
the Times are as they are, he would be stayed else for a Dunce. Let him look to
his Flock, but I Will fleece him I Will warrant him.


Dung. Good'ine to your Worship.


March. How now Neighbor, What have you there? -- Ha?


Dung. A couple of Christmass-Capons for your Worship -- I love to keep touch.


Mar. Why, it is honestly done. -- Are they Fat?


Dung. Fine fed Fowls -- if it please you.


Fur. [Yet not better fed than taught. There Is a Primmer among them, will bring
you to your Psalms of Mercy.]


Dung. Here Is one, a good tender Bird, of your Worship's own breed, your
Worship may do well to keep it.


Mar. Ay, and so I will. -- My People, Neighbor, are not at Home to bid you
drink, -- But here is a couple of Pence for you. -- Give me the Basket.


Dung. I thank your Worship. I hope they will prove well, and give you Content.
-- By your leave. Exit.


Mar. Farewell, farewell. -- Oh, I love this young Flesh at my Heart. -- My
Nephew, since the Keys were gone, and he in danger to be a Father, is grown
very kind. I Will in, and Vrsley is pretty hearty, she shall dress one of them
and we will be merry. -- Exit.


Fur. Gramarcy Invention, This is even as I would have it.


Homily comes forth. Sir Hom. This is sweet Revenge! -- I Will now to Horse, and
away to the Bishop. -- When I return, if his two Capons be alive, I Will pluck a
Feather with him. I Will have an Order of Penance for him, and make him pay Hob
his Money again for Simony: -- But I hope he will prevent all, and hang himself --
When I return, then shall I tend to sing,
I Will take possession, and my Bells shall ring;
Shall ring these Changes; and at every Knell
Marchurch shall cry, It is his Passing Bell.
And if with Bells my self I cannot deal,
I pray you lend your Hands to ring a Peal. -- Exit.



Fur. Why so, -- Is not this better than a Dialogue, or some stewed Prunes? --
I Will in, and Fox little Comaedia's Nose for this, and send you out an Epilogue.
-- Exit.


The EPILOGUE.
All Is well that ends well. This, tho not allowed,
Yet like light Gold, it may go in a Crowd.
I know the Folks are pleased; they think it rare,
Because it glitters. -- But you Touch-stones are.
Our trembling Author wishes that it might
Rather have gone a Trust, than pay what is Light.
Sir Homily in's Pars'nage doubtful sits,
Lest you put in your Quare Impedit's.
Marchurch will bargain for a Plaudite,
If you will strike Hands, it is made. -- Hum -- Simonie.
His Cotquean Nephew bids you, without stud'ing,
Be fair-condition'd, and eat Bread with Pudding.
Hob swears, if he were Parson, he would know
Whether Laughs were due to him, or no?
The Basket-maker to this Point will stand:
In taking Jest you must not use Shorthand.
Nay more; the Tinker (so it be by stealth)
Has made him swear, that he will drink your Health.
Your Palm'stry is more than the Gipsie's skill;
Can tell your Fortune, whether Good or Ill.
Ceres, after the Epilogue, speaks from Above. Looking for Barley here, I hope
you have found,
With AEsop's Cock, some Jewel on the Ground:
And if you have; Truth, let it so appear
Like Jewels, let each word hang on your Ear.
The Sport was Innocent, and if I Would had
A worthier Stage, I should have been more glad.
Hower'e, these shall be welcome to this Place
Each Year, and Ceres takes it for a Grace.
FINIS.

