Antichrist's strongest Hold overturned: OR, The Foundation of the Religion of
the People called QUAKERS, Bared and Razed, In a DEBATE had with some of them
in the Castle at Lancaster, AND IN An Additional Account of the Light within.
Wherein is showed, 1. That their first Principle is a Lie. 2. That their Christ
is not the true Jesus. 3. That their Idolatry is worse and more dangerous then
Jeroboam's or the Papists. 4. That their Principle denies the great mystery of
godliness, departs from the Faith, and leads to give attendance to the doctrine
of Demons.
Here also is showed the occasion of their Rise and Growth, together with the
right way of discovering their secret delusions. Lastly, the best things that
the best of this people pretend to own, are here mentioned and allowed.
Hereunto is annexed an APPENDIX, Wherein their evil language is discovered, and
compared with the language of the false Prophets. All which is published (at
the desire of certain friends, some of whose Letters are prefixed) for common
benefit, By J. W.

1 Timothy 4. 1. Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the later times some
shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of
devils. 1 Ioh. 5. 21. Little children, keep your selves from idols. 2 John 7.
For many deceivers are entered into the world, who confess not that Christ is
come in the flesh: this is a deceiver, and an Antichrist. London, Printed for
the Author, in the year 1665.

An ADVERTISEMENT, To all the faithful followers of the Lamb in Lancashire, in
and about Manchester, Warrington and Lancaster; And to all in every place that
love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, to whose view the following Discourse
may come.
AS it was my desire and disposition (during the time of my imprisonment
amongst the people called Quakers) to live peaceably, and to avoid contests
with them; So when I was forced (for truths sake) to a debate with them, and
afterward to give forth a relation thereof, together with an account of the
light within man, there was not the least intention, or inclination in me to
commit my papers to the Press, until many friends (having perused them) did (as
appears by the first letters prefixed to the following discourse) with many
arguments urge me to make them more public; Which thereupon I resolved
speedily to do, and to that end did review, and transcribe them, with some
enlargement, as they are hereafter in this book presented.

Afterward it being suggested by some, that it was not a season to print
against this people, being great sufferers, lest it should add affliction to
their bonds; I did thereupon lay aside my papers for diverse months; And was the
more easily inclined thereto, not simply because they are sufferers, But, 1.
For that they (which is much more the duty of others who own the truth as it
is in Jesus, and that worship which is prescribed by himself) do stand fast in
the defense of their liberty, publicly owning that worship which they judge
(though erroneously) agreeable to truth, notwithstanding any humane Law to the
contrary: And, 2. That in respect of the powers imposing upon them without
warrant from the Lord, (though in respect of the wrong they do to the man
Christ Jesus, to his Gospel, and to their own souls, they be far from
innocence) they suffer as Innocents, as (if thus understood) they do often
truly call themselves. And hence it is, that (in greatest probability) the Laws
made against them, and their prosecutors, have not hitherto had, nor will
hereafter have any better success, then the persecutors of the Innocent in all
ages have had, whose violence was never blessed to convert any from the error of
his way, but has always been an effectual means as to confirm and strengthen
the persecuted in his way, (yea, though a mistaken and erroneous way, as is
evident in this people at this day) so to bring swift and inevitable
destruction upon themselves.

Yet notwithstanding, being again called upon, and desired by diverse to go on
with this work, I had these following Considerations encouraging thereto.

1. Many judicious and sober persons, who judge the work may be for common
benefit, do call for its publication.

2. The discourse is not levelled against their persons, nor against any
appearance that is commendable in them, but only against their Errors and
miscarriages; Nor are those in power stirred up against them; but on the
contrary, their violence is witnessed against.

3. An endeavor to recover some out of the snare of the devil, and to prevent
the apostasy of others (which are aimed at in this undertaking) is such an
absolute duty, as may not be suspended, out of fear that some who have the
sword in their hand should take advantage thereby to abuse their power.

4. By how much this people are carried out to suffer above many others, and by
this fair show in the flesh are apt to glory in their way, as the only way to
life, and that many (unable or negligent in the trial of spirits and
principles) are liable to be snared and taken by them; by so much it seems more
necessary, at this time, to discover the sandy foundation upon which their
whole building stands, and how pernicious it will prove to their souls who
build thereon, that Satan's deep design in drawing men thereto being unveiled
poor weak and unstable souls may better discern that their glorying in their
sufferings, yea in giving their bodies to be burned upon the account of such a
foundation, is vain.

5. Lastly, and especially, in as much as the principle contended against, does
not only deny the man Christ Jesus, and make void his sufferings, death, and
blood, with their effects, but that Satan hereby would dethrone him, and by
this most subtle way of changing himself into an Angel of light, would get into
the Temple of God, and show himself as God, that he may be worshipped as God; I
account it my duty (what ever the effect may be) to be found faithful to my
dear Head the Lord Jesus Christ, in discovering (according to the measure of
light received from him) this secret and last design of his and his peoples
grand adversary; to the end that he may (through the blessing of the blessed
and only Potentate upon these weak endeavors) receive such a blow, that
neither he nor his ministers who be transformed as the ministers of
righteousness, may proceed any further.

Thus, dear friends, you have an account of the principal motives which (after
some delay) have prevailed with me to present these Papers to public view.
It Is probable the old enemy, whose strong-hold is here undermined, will rage
yet more against me, and be active in the spirits of some to follow me with
such language as you may read in the Appendix; but I matter not the judgment
of man's day; the Lord who searches the heart knows, that the honor of his
Name, and the undeceiving and saving of precious souls, is more to me then a
name among men, yea then my own life. But I beseech you, let no prejudice nor
reproaches cast upon me, or this Work, hinder you from a serious perusal of it.
It Is likely many of you may be as sheep scattered without a shepherd; and your
adversary, who goes about like a roaring lion, will seek all advantages against
you; and his ministers will be (in this dark hour of temptation) the more
industrious to make merchandise of your souls. Oh Remember the Apostles
exhortation, 2 John 8. Look to your selves, etc. Believe not every spirit, but
try the spirits whether they are of God, because many false prophets are gone
out into the world. And among all the deceivers that Christ foretold should
come, there are none more subtle, nor lead into more pernicious ways, then the
leaders and teachers of this people, with whom I have to do. O consider what
need you have to be always upon your watch; take heed, whom and what you hear;
and in a special manner be careful that you bottom upon a right foundation,
Jesus Christ, God and man in union, who in his own person without us, has
wrought a great salvation; having finished transgression, made an end of sin,
abolished condemnation and death for us. And if any man, or an Angel from
Heaven, should not bring this doctrine, and point you unto a crucified and
glorified Jesus for access to God; receive him not into your house, neither bid
him God speed. Neither let it suffice you, thus to behold redemption wrought
for you in the person of the Mediator without you, but mind his coming down
in spirit into your hearts to manifest this redemption, and to live and work in
you as a quickening spirit; and let it be your care, as to live, so to walk in
the spirit.

And the Lord grant that you being rooted and ^uilt up in him, and stablished
in the faith, may henceforth be no more Children tossed to and fro, and carried
about with every wind of doctrine, by the slight of men, and cunning
craftiness whereby they lie in weight to deceive; but may keep your selves in
the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal
life: so prays

Your Brother and Companion in Tribulation, and in the Kingdom and patience of
Jesus Christ, J. W.
Mo. 1. the 15 day, 1665.
Here follow two LETTERS from several Friends to the Author, desiring the
Publication of this Dispute, etc.
Dear Friend and Brother,
WE received yours with the enclosed Manuscript, containing a relation of a
Debate you had with the Quakers, An account of the Light within, and An
Appendix: all which we have as we could perused, but yet not so as we intend
and desire; only did hastily run it over, being willing as many as could
conveniently might see it or hear it, before we set upon the transcribing of
it, for then it must of necessity lie still a while. And lest we might either
discourage, or not comfort you in so good a work (as we can bless the Lord for
from our hearts) by making no return till we have got it writ over; we thought
it meet to give you a few Lines from a few of us, so signify the receipt of
it, also our acceptance of it, and hearty agreement with you in it; and do
believe the good hand of the Lord was in it, to make your condition a necessity
upon you, by his wise-ordering providence, to encounter this strong man in his
strong hold ( the light within) with which this spirit of delusion has run
through the dark world, and by it kindled some sparks upon the relics of old
Adam, but brought nothing to light of a crucified Savior, nor of the blood of
his Cross, by which we have peace with God: but contrariwise, has reviled us
in making mention of this way of peace, rather glorying in their own cross,
then in the Cross of Christ, keeping a catalogue of their own wounds and
sufferings, filling all places with Prints of them; but never mention the
sufferings, wounds and death of him through whose stripes we are healed; which
has been to us as another Gospel then that which our Lord brought to light,
and was afterward preached by his disciples, and glorified in by good Paul,
when others glorified in the flesh: this is that Gospel we have heard and
received, (through the workings of his grace) how that Christ died for our sins
according to the Scriptures, and that he was buried, and that he rose again the
third day according to the Scriptures, and ascended far above all the heavens
of this creation into heaven it self, there to a ppear before God for us our
blessed High Priest, and only Advocate, to whom we desire always to look, that
we may not sin against him: this is our Kings highway, in which the way faring
man, though a fool, shall not err. We confess there is a righteousness that is
more agreeable unto man, unto which he is more inclined (as that liquor which
this vessel of the natural man had first in it) we hope without offense we may
say) not only then this righteousness of Christ by faith, but then
unrighteousness: and upon this spark may this light fall, and make man to walk
in the light of it, but shall never place man again in that garden of Gods
presence with him, making all things delightful to him, out of which after man's
fall God drove him, and has ever since placed such a guard as shall for ever
keep man from coming that way. Nay, an as it were in this matter may not be
admitted under the administration of the Gospel; nor is there any name given by
which we shall be saved but that Name which is above all names, unto which all
things shall bow: this is the Fathers Christ, and our Jesus, who when he came
in the flesh was not ministered unto, but did himself minister, and became a
servant: but our God, who also is Christ's God, has highly exalted him.

This Gospel we have never heard nor felt from these folks, but on the contrary
derided with scornful expressions, when we have gone about thus to argue any
thing with them; and in stead of words of soberness, in the evidence of
Scripture Light, we have had such returns as you have met with, as many in this
County can evidence clearly for us, as their own Papers do for you, under their
own hands. Nor are we willing to rip up the remembrance of things upon any
other account, then if it be the Lords will some among them might be reduced,
and the Lord may give them repentance unto life; and do hope there may be such
a blessing in this Labor of yours, God having directed you not to insist upon
any thing less then their All, viz. That the light with which every one is
enlightened that comes into the world, is not a saving light: this is that which
we have believed, but have not had ability to bring it forth in so orderly a
way, fit for public view, as we find the Lord has enabled you; but rejoice
to have this opportunity to set to our assent to what the Lord has given forth
by you, and further desire you would permit it to the Press. And these two
things move us to desire this from you: partly, that we have not seen any thing
in Print that has met with their Masterpiece as this does; as also the
persons undertaking have one way or other had something of disadvantage, as you
have hinted in your Appendix: nor have they owned those good things in them,
which ought to be owned: and we can say we could wish not only for our selves,
but for all that call upon the Name of our Lord Jesus, that our conversations
among men might more glorify our Father in heaven. And then the other reason
is, inasmuch as the Lord has made you instrumental, and given you utterance
for us in this place, where these people (so far as we can understand) had
their first gathering into a company. And if they may yet hear, or others fear,
and that spirit of Antichrist discovered, that the Lord alone may be exalted,
and our glorying may be together in the Cross of our Lord Jesus, whom we may
design to exalt together, though we be made but as a footstool to this end, we
have the desire of our hearts.

Excuse this unintended tedious Scribble, and pass by the Errata's of it, which
are many, and accept of our thankfulness to your for your pains: and we hope we
shall not be negligent to acknowledge the grace of God to you in this matter,
and continue to present you to the Lord in that liberty he has given us of
access to the Father through him, in whom we are

Your faithful Brethren, though weak ones, in the faith of him who is the Head
of all things, and true Heir, W. L. J. R. J. S. R. S.

Mo. 6 the 1 day, 1664.
Dearly Beloved in our Lord Jesus,
HAving with much satisfaction perused the Papers of your dispute at Lancaster,
with the people called Quakers, we desire hereby heartily to bless the Lord on
your behalf, owning his singular goodness in that his gracious leading in this
service of truth, whereby beside your suffering and witness for your holy
profession he called you to, we now see the further ends of the Father in
sending you to that place; that even there, where as we have heard this people
had their first rise in this Nation, they should receive so eminent a discovery
and foyl; having also by his good Spirit so directed and enabled you to deal
with the very spirit and Principle, and that with the principal of their party
(then prisoners with you) whereby that mystery of iniquity, and spirit of
Antichrist is (blessed be his Name) very much detected, and that not only by
the uncontrollable evidence of truth from the light of his holy Word, but by
that arrogant, proud, frothy, raging, ridiculous, vain, erring spirit, so
abundantly discovered all along herein from themselves; which we entreat you
for the Truths sake to make public with all speed, that word being worthy to
be weighed by you for encouragement, 2 Timothy 3. 8, 9. where the Apostle
prophetically speaking of such corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith,
like Jannes and Jambres resisting the truth, says (for encouragement) They
shall proceed no further: for their folly shall be made manifest, as theirs
also was: the making manifest of whose folly being the way to stop^t the
proceeding and growth, which we are persuaded is as acceptable service as any
of the Lords servants can engage in; and the rather, because under the specious
pretenses of humility, self-denial, justice, righteousness, moderation, patient
suffering, they have abundantly gained ground and reputation to the spreading
of their detestable errors, and by their fair words, and feigned speeches, have
greatly deceived the hearts of many simple ones; and more especially in such an
evil day as this, wherein the pride, vanity, formality and apostasy of too too
many professors of truth has appeared: but we have a long time through grace
been enabled to discern their deceivings, and to see through the depth of their
cheat, and fully satisfied that these following Scriptures evidently foretell
them, and that accordingly they are now sadly manifest to the fulfilling
thereof, Viz. 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14. For such are false apostles, deceitful
workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ: and no marvel,
for Satan himself is transformed into an angel of light; therefore it is no
great thing if his ministers be also transformed as the ministers of
righteousness: whose end shall be according to their works. Matthew. 24. 4, 5.
And Jesus said unto them, Take heed that no man deceive you: for many shall
come in my Name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many. And there shall
arise false Christ's and false Prophets, and shall show great signs and
wonders, insomuch that if it were possible they shall deceive the very elect.
Behold, I have told you before. 1 Timothy 4. 12. Now the Spirit speaks expressly,
that in the later days some shall depart from the says, giving heed to
seducing spirits and doctrines of devils, speaking lies in hypocrisy, having
their consciences seared with a hot iron. 2 Pet. 2. 1. But there were false
prophets also amongst the people, even as there shall be false teachers among
you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that
bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction: and many shall follow
their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken
of. 1 John 4. 1, 2, 3. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits
whether they are of God, because many false prophets are gone out into the
world. Hereby know ye the spirit of God: every spirit that confesses that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God; and every spirit that confesses
not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God: and this is the
spirit of Antichrist, whereof you have heard that it shall come, and even now
already is in the world. 2 John 7, 9. For many deceivers are entered into the
world, who confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh: this is a
deceiver and an Antichrist. Whosoever transgresses and abides not in the
doctrine of Christ, has not God, etc.

Oh how visibly manifest are these Scriptures fulfilled in this generation now
among us! who under pretense of Christ's Apostles, Ministers of righteousness,
Angels of God, men immediately inspired with the Spirit, in the very state of
perfection, crying up Christ within, they blaspheme, traduce, deny the man
Christ Jesus the Son of God, both in his name, nature, offices, doctrine. How
do they introduce another Gospel, Ministry, Spirit, other Ordinances, another
justification, Salvation, Resurrection, another Heaven, Hell, then the
Scriptures witness to! Nay, how many have called themselves Christ the Son of
God, and have undeniably these characters of the Antichristian spirit foretold
by John upon them, denying not only the doctrine of Christ, but Christ himself
to be come in the flesh, under pretense of his being come in their flesh; and
have eminently manifested themselves to be the sons of Hymeneus that
blasphemer, 1 Timothy 3. 19, 20. with 2 Timothy 2. 17, 18.
who said the resurrection was past already, overthrowing the faith of some:
which Hymenean doctrine was attested not many days since by some of their
number, to one of us, in a Conference with them, and that before several
witnesses, saying, The dead bodies that lie in the graves are not to rise
again, neither are we to expect any other resurrection, heaven, hell,
judgment, then what is within us, and past upon us here. To whom it was
replied, that then their faith and hope was vain, and they were yet in their
sins, and in a damnable estate: and why then did they suffer, if the dead rise
not? and that such doctrine undeniably led to sensuality, to eat, drink, and
play, etc. wholly razing out all principles both of morality and Christianity:
which is well known to be their principle, though the cunning among them
subtly gloss it over, knowing what offense it generally gives. Oh that the
poor deluded sincere among them might see the gulf they are plunged into, and
that your endeavor might be blessed to the opening their eyes, and undeceiving
them. Surely if that one Scripture was weighed by them, it might be of use,
That men may give their bodies to be burnt, and all their goods to the poor,
and profit not, and be but as sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal: and that is
the principle from which, and the end whereto every work is done, that renders
it acceptable.

And Oh that this may be blessed to keep all upright hearts from falling into
Luke 17. 23.
this ditch. It is the express word of our Lord, Go not after them, neither
follow them. Prove. 19. 27. Cease, my son, to hear the instruction that causes
to err from the ways of knowledge. Surely principles, spirits and doctrines
are to be weighed and tried as well as conversation: 1 John 4. 1.
and them would these seeming Angels appear Devils; for Satan can come forth as
an angel of light. But how do they rage, and like the waves of the sea foaming
out their own shame, when brought to the Word for trial! which is no small
discovery of their spirit: this is one of the trials God has suffered to come
upon his people, as Deuteronomy. 13. 3. to prove whether they will love the Lord their
God with all their heart and all their soul. How long has the Pope by all his
power and policy endeavored to get the Bible from Professors, and not
prevailed! but this spiritual Antichrist does it speedily and effectually. But
let grace be magnified, that keeps any out of their snares: and let it be
seriously laid to heart, that so many are snared and taken in their net.

And lastly, since Singularity and Conversation is so taking to propagate
Error, and such damnable Error too; how should it provoke the children of
Truth, that prize and would promote it, to press more after an excellent
conversation, that the poor world seeing their good works, viz. the humility,
love, patience, meekness, zeal, courage, temperance, holiness, wisdom, gravity,
may glorify their heavenly Father. And let such a foolish people shame and
provoke his people therein at this day, Phil. 4. 8. and, as you well observe,
let the good in them be owned and imitated, and their evil detected and avoided.

And that the good Lord who has so far guided and blessed you herein, may still
continue so to do, to the advancement of his glory, and furtherance of truth,
as you have designed, and we heartily desire, is and shall be the prayer of

Your unworthy Brethren, fellow^labourers, and Companions with you in the
Faith, Kingdom and Patience of our Lord Jesus, J. D. N. S.

London this 10 day of the 1 month, 1665
The Reader is desired (before he peruse these books) to amend with his pen
these errors and mistakes of the Press: smaller errors, as of adding or
substracting letters, or mistaking the stops, the sense will somewhat help him
in.

PAge 14. line 30. after these words, in that day, add Neh. 9. 30. p. 17. l. 2.
for u and nshaken, read and unshaken. p. 20. l. 3. for (...) read (...). p. 25.
l. 32. for adopted, read adapted. p. 26. l. 8, read a law. p. 30 l. 32. for
shall read should. p. 31. l. 18. read that he is guilty. p. 40. l. 4. read all
things are wrought. p. 43. l. 2. add after these words, the word was with God,
and the word was God. p. 47. l. 20. for thankfulness read faithfulness. p. 63.
l. 4. read seriously consider.

To Randolph Hunter and Thomas Hardy, Deputy-Gaolers of the Castle at
Lancaster, to be by them communica^ed to any who may desire satisfaction
concerning the difference between the people called Quakers, and J. W.
Loving ^riends,
HAving peru^ed a Paper published and put into the hands of one, or both of
you, by the Quakers so called* touching a dispute between them and the Baptists
at Lancaster Castle, and finding it confused, partial, and in some passages
untrue, t^nding to the reproach of truth, and the swallowing up the simple in
errors; for the vindication of the one, and out of tender compassion toward
the other, I have given forth the following Relation, whereby the sober and
unbiassed Christian may perceive that I was provoked to the debate, as I am to
this account, by the forementioned paper, and the high boastings of some of
this people since that meeting.

Though I have more to say in defense of the truth I plead for, then was
mentioned in that debate, yet I only set down such Arguments as were then
propounded, though here more distinctly and fully then the confusion of that
meeting would allow.

As for the detecting of their personal carriages, I mention nothing but what
was first publicly expressed or acted by them; and I the rather do it, that they
may consider and take shame to themselves, if peradventure God may give them
repentance, and that others may be warned to take heed of that spirit that
sends forth such bitter and unsavory fruits:

And that the simple and tenderhearted among them may be reclaimed from the
error of their way, I have given an additional account of the Light in every
man, showing (according to my measure received from the Lord) what it is, and
the utmost use of it; with a particular explication of several Scriptures,
especially John 1. 9.

Furthermore, if any of them shall yet persist to maintain their errors, here
you will find an offer further to debate the difference betwixt us before any
person in the Commission of Peace.

Lastly, l^st any should account me an enemy to every thing this people hold
and practice, and thereupon should trample upon that which is good and
commendable, together with their errors, here is an account of several
particulars allowable in them, for which I am ready to suffer as well as they.

If the whole seem too tedious for your perusal (which indeed is much larger
then was first intended) by the Marginal notes you are directed to the several
branches of the Discourse, and so you may either read all, or that part wherein
you chiefly desire satisfaction.

^o. Wigan.
3d M. 10. d. 1664.
A true Relation of the occasion and manner of a debate held in the Castle at
Lancaster, the 17th day of the first Month (vulgo March) 1663-64. between J. W.
and George Fox, John Stubs, and many others of the People called Quakers, about
the Light within. Together with true Copies of diverse Letters and other
Writings which passed between them and me. Also an Additional Account of the
Light that is in every man, showing what it is, what it can do, and what it
cannot do; wherein Henry Wood and others may find that which answers their
Queries.
HAving been Prisoner at the aforesaid place diverse weeks, upon the 23. of the
12 th Month (commonly called February) I was put into a Chamber near unto many
of the aforesaid people, being also prisoners; their way and mine leading
through a common Hall, we passed by one another peaceably about 12. The first
occasion of the debate.
days, viz. till the 5th day of the next Month; upon which day one Thomas
Curwen said unto me (as I quietly passed through the Hall) Friend, leave off
thy deceiving the people; thou art a Deceiver. My answer was mild, to this
purpose; Say thou so; consider well what thou have said, and whether thou
can make good thy word, and tell me as I come back, whom I have deceived, or
wherewith I have deceived any, or how thou can prove me a Deceiver? As I
turned from him, he further uttered these words, Thou teach the way, and
know it not thy self. By which I supposed he would have made good his
assertion, viz. That I was a deceiver. At my return I told him, and some other
of his Friends, That I looked upon his censure to be very rash and g^oundless,
and that little of truth would be found in his saying, That I taught the way,
and knew it not my self; inasmuch as it is not possible for any man to teach
that which he knows not. But instead of proving what he had said, he passed
more censures upon me, as, That I was a stranger, and that he knew my voi^e to
be voice of a stranger. Likewise William Wilson, another of them, used some
harsh expressions toward me, I having said, They neglected some Ordinances of
Christ, as Baptism, and breaking of bread: He told me I upheld beggarly
rudiments: So I left them, and went to my Chamber. The same day toward evening
a Letter was brought to me by one of these people, subscribed with the Name of
Tho. C^rwen, a true Copy whereof follows.

Their fir^^ Letter.
Friend, John Wiggans, whereas thou was offended because I called thee a
Deceiver, and said thou teached the way to others, and knew'st it not thy self:
Although the words seem to be improper to thee, yet thou may read how the
Apostle said, Some preached Christ who was the way, the truth and the life, and
yet such who so preached him, knew him not, but were, alse Apostles,
transforming themselves as the Ministers of Righteousness. And now I would have
thee mind, whether thou thy self be not in their footsteps who thus preached
Christ, and so a Dec^iver: And answer me these Queries as follows.

1. Whether thy way never fell?

2. Where be all the daubers?

3. Whether all the Ministers of Adams house in the fall, daubed not with
untempered mortar?

4. Whether or no while a man's upon the earth, he shall be made free from the
body of sin and death, while he is on this side the grave?

5. And whether Christ does enlighten every man that comes into the world with
a saving Light?

6. Whether is bread and wine, Christ the substance?

7. And how long have thou taken bread and wine in remembrance of Christ's death
till he come?

8. And whether or no when he is come, thou will take it in remembrance of him?

9. And which is the nearest, to take a thing in remembrance of his death, or
to come into his death?

10. And whether or no thou think to come any nearer to Christ, than to take
bread and water in remembrance of him?

11. And whether or no do thou think to come any nearer to Christ's death,
than to take bread and wine in remembrance of his death, and so keep alive in
the old nature? And is not this the deceiver?

12. Have thou known the death, the pangs and the sorrow? And art thou become a
fool for Christ's sake? And is the wisdom of the world foolishness to thee? And
in what place buriest thou thy own?

13. And how comes thou to receive that which is foolishness to the world? and
how wast thou wakened out of sleep? and when did the grave open? and when did
the Prisoner show himself forth?

14. And when did the tongue of the dumb sing?

15. And when was the tongue of the firstborn silent?

16. And when wast thou come to thy wits end?

17. And how often have thou watered thy couch?

18. And what is the tongue of the learned?

19. And what is the gray hairs?

20. And what is it that Antichrist and the false Prophets r^vened from? and
where was it?

21. And when did the keeper of the house tremble, and the strong man bow
himself?

22. And have thou the same power and spirit to baptize, and give bread and
wine, as the Apostles had? and have thou heard the voice of Christ, as they did?

23. And seeing thou take offense at me because I called thee a Deceiver,
what is the true way, and where is it? and whether all mankind be enlightened
by it? and whether it be in man, or out?

24. And whether or no thou have seen it, or heard it, or heard the voice of
God, or seen his shape?

Answer me these Queries in a Scripture way, in writing, and bring forth thy
deeds to the light, or else I do intend to stick a Copy of them on the door to
morrow.

From thy Friend, Thomas Curwen.
1. M. 5. d* 1663/4.
Directed, For John Wiggans, These.


Having perused this Letter, and perceiving the advantage that was sought by
limiting so short a time for the answering his queries, and by threatening to
stick a Copy of them upon the door the next day, if they were not answered; tho
most of the queries were frivolous, and matters of more weight were under my
consideration, yet lest my silence should occasion boasting, to which they are
very propense, I presently drew up the answer following to that query which
concerns the foundation of most of their mistakes, viz. The Light within.

Thomas Curwen,
An Answer to that first Letter
I received a Paper (a few hours ago) subscribed with thy Name, wherein thou (or
some one for thee) writes that I was offended because thou calledst me a
deceiver; and said, I taught the way to others, and knew it not my self; It
becomes persons that say they have received the anointing from the holy one,
even the same Spirit that was in the Prophets and Apostles, and gave forth the
holy Scriptures, always to speak forth the words of truth and soberness: When
thou calledst me a deceiver, I did not say I was offended, nor did I give cause
for thee to mention this word in thy paper: But this I demanded of thee, and do
still, That thou make it to appear whom I have deceived, or wherewith I have
deceived any, or else there will be little of truth or soberness found in thy
saying. And as for thy saying I taught the way to others, and knew it not my
self, by which thou would have proved me a deceiver, it will be hard for thee
or any of thy friends to find truth in it; for no man can teach others to know
that which he himself knows not; and therefore I say (as thou writest) thy
words are at best improper. And whereas thou writest that I may read how the
Apostle said some preached Christ who was the way, the truth and the life, and
yet such who so preached him, knew him not, but were false Apostles,
transforming themselves as the Ministers of Righteousness; I would have thee
soberly to consider whether thou have dealt truly and faithfully with the
Apostle in relating his own words: And tell me where thou read, That the
Apostle said, That some preached Christ who was the way, the truth and life,
and yet knew him not? It Is true, the Apostle speaks of false Apostles,
deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ; but
these preached not the true Christ, the way, the truth and the life, but as the
Ministers of Satan, they rather taught another Jesus, and another Gospel than
the Apostles had taught; and as I am willing to take a ^aution from thee, or
any other man that gives it in love and meekness, so I would have thee and the
rest of thy friends, in fear and meekness to consider, whether ye set not up
another Christ than the Apostle preached. As for thy 24 queries, I shall not
satisfy thee, 2 Timothy 2. 23.
or any other queriest to answer their questions, which tend rather to strife
than edification, though I have in readiness to answer thee or any other man
that shall in love ask me a reason of the hope that is in me: And though I
think it not meet at this time to answer all thy queries, yet whereas thou
ask? Whether Christ does not enlighten every man that comes into the world
with a saving Light? I answer, That the Light wherewith every man is lighted
Subjective.
that comes into the world, is not a saving Light; and this I shall (through
the strength of Christ) be ready to maintain against thee, or any of thy
friends who hold the contrary, where, and when a meeting may be had in a
peaceable and quiet way, and before compe^ent Witnesses. As for thy threatening
to stick thy paper upon the door, I value it not, but would have thee seriously
to consider, whether that expression proceeded from the holy Spirit. This is
all at present from

Thy Friend, Jo. Wigan.
1. M. 5 d. 1663-64.

A second Letter from Tho. Curwen.
His second Letter to me.
The next morning being the sixth day of the first month, the following Letter
was brought to my hand, with this inscription,

For John Wigans. John Wigans, Whereas I sent thee a few Queries to answer, but
thou seems to have slighted, and passed by all except one, that is to say the
first Querie, whether Christ does enlighten every man that comes into the world
with a saving light. And thy answer is, That every man which comes into the
world is not enlightened with a saving light. And this thou will maintain
against me, or any of my friends, who hold the contrary, when, and where a
meeting may he had in a peaceable way, before competent witnesses, and this is
to let thee understand, that I, and some of my friends with me, if the Lord
will, does intend to give thee a visit tomorrow, about the first hour, or
second, in thy Chamber to treat about this above mentioned both with thee, and
all who is of thy ju^gment, that may come to thee: but yet I let thee know,
this cannot serve for all my Queries, for I intend to set the Paper upon the
door according to my word.

from thy friend Thomas Curwen.
This sixth day of the first Month.

According to his word his Queries were the same day set upon the Hall door,
The Queries set upon the door
though he had no regard to make good his word concerning me, nor yet to clear
himself from the wrong done to the Apostle, who no where uses such words as he
fathers upon him. In the evening therefore of the same day I writ the following

Answer to his second Letter.
An Answer to his second Letter.
Thomas Curwen, In thy seccond Paper which was brought to my hands this day,
whether with a purpose to disturb is best known to thy self. Thou do not make
good thy word, spoken concerning me, nor yet acknowledge thy mistake therein,
nor the abuse done by thee to the Apostle, however I am more inclined to pass
by the weaknesses of others, then by multiplying words (as were easy upon such
an advantage) to occasion more strife. Thou tells me that. thou and some of thy
friends, do intend to give me a visit to morrow, about the first, or seccond
hour in my Chamber to treat about the fifth Querie: I am willing to meet thee
and any of thy friends, to treat (in a spirit of love and meekness) about the
said point; and after that about any other wherein we differ, but thou art
mistaken, if thou think that I shall leave it to thee to appoint time, and
place at thy pleasure, and therefore thou wast over confident (to say no more
of it) to nominate my Chamber, the day, and hour, except I had invited thee, or
agreed thereto; know therefore that I take no notice of, nor shall I observe
any meeting, till upon discourse with thee, or some of thy friends, we have
mutually agreed about a place, and such a day as my friends can come upon, to
morrow they cannot, when this is done, bring whom thou will, for truth (which
we all pretend to seek after) neither fears multitudes, nor great words, as for
thy setting ^hy Paper upon the door, thou had done some right, if thou had
set my Letter by it, but thy practice does favor (in several circumstances) of
a fleshly spirit (as I can show at better leisure) and will reflect more upon
thy self, and friends, then where thou did intend it; and if I be disposed
that way, it will not be difficult to answer thee in thy own kind; but God has
called us to peace, and I am taught to study to live peaceably with all men,
and further then I am provoked to appear in the defense of truth, shall
endeavor to leave off contention before it be meddled with, Prove. 17. 14. Nor
do I intend hereafter to spend much time in answering thy jangling Letters.

From thy friend John Wigan.
1. M 6 d. 1663-64.

The next day being the seventh day of the Month in the afternoon, Thomas
Curwen and William Wilson came to my Chamber, Their carriages toward me in my
Chamber.
and urged me to nominate a time and place for the intended meeting; and
withal; did break forth into many heavy censures against me, in such a
magisterial way (as John Coward then present can witness) that I was forced
twice, or thrice to entreat them to leave my Chamber, telling them that I would
appoint no meeting with them, but with some others of their company, whom I
jugded to be more sober men, at last they left me, saying, if I did not appoint
a time, they would take it for granted that I durst not meet.

Being thus provoked to a meeting, in the evening of the same d^y I writ the
following paper, and sent for Richard Cubhan, and Richard Johnson to agree with
them upon a day, and place, and upon the matter, therein contanied.

My offer to meet them upon conditions.
Thomas Curwen, I am willing to meet (thee, and thy friends in the Hall near
thy Chambe^ (if the Lord permit) upon the next fifth day, about the third hour
(vulgo nine of the clock) and there shall endeavor (by the Lords assistance)
to maintain, That the light that is in every man that comes into the world, is
not a saving light, or, that Christ does not enlighten every man that comet
into the world with a saving light.

1. Provided, that whatever is asserted by any man, be proved by the
Scriptures; and that nothing be determined but according to the Scriptures.

2. That the meeting may be peaceable and quiet without railing, or reproachful
speeches, and that the whole debate may be carried on in a spirit of love and
meeknese.

3. That the meeting may be orderly, aod without confusion, that is that one
may have as much time allowed him to speak in, as another, and that but one
speak at once, and that none disturb him that is speaking.

4. That the meeting continue three hours and no longer, or at most not to
exceed four hours, because of the occasion o^ friends afterward. If these be
consented unto, let him that is appointed to treat with me, subscribe his name
to a true Copy of this, and send it to

Thy Friend, Jo. Wigan.
1 M. 7 d. 1663-64.

The above-written I sent by Richard Cubhan and Richard Johnson, to be
considered by them, and the rest of their Friends: They not agreeing to every
thing therein, the next morning sent up a Paper, a Copy whereof follows.

Their agreement to mee^, with some alterations of the conditions.
John VVigan, I and my friends are willing to meet* thee and thine in the Hall
near our Chamber (if the Lord permit) upon the next fifth day, about the ninth
hour in the fore part of the day, and there shall be ready to give thee a
meeting according to thy own appointment, and to hear thy assertion, as thou
have said thou will maintain either against me or any of my Friends, that is to
say, That Christ does not lighten every man that comes into the world with a
saving light:

1. Provided, That what ever is asserted by any man, be proved by the
Scriptures, and that nothing be determined but according to the Scriptures.

2 That the meeting may be peaceable and quiet; and that the whole debate may
be carried in the Spirit of love and meekness.

3 That the meeting may be orderly, and without con^usion, (that is) that every
one may have convenient time to speak; for we cannot limit any.

4. That the Meeting be not limited to an hour, but as either side has freedom
to pass away.

From thy Friend, Thomas Curwen.
1 M. 8 d. 1663-64.

Though this Paper differ from that which I sent to them, in several
considerable points, yet lest they should have any occasion to say (as I heard
some gave out) That I durst not meet them, I assented to their paper, and the
same day sent another writing,

A Copy whereof follows.
My assen^ ^o their alterations.
Thomas Curwen, I am willing to meet thee and thy Friends in the Hall near thy
Chamber (if the Lord permit) upon the next fifth day, about the third hour, (or
as thou writest, about the ninth hour in the forepart of the day) and there
shall give you a meeting, being earnestly urged by thee and thy Friends
yesterday in my Chamber to appoint time and place, and there shall endeavor
(in the strength of the Lord) to maintain this assertion, viz. Christ does not
lighten every man that comes into the world with a saving light, against any
that hold the contrary.

1. Provided that what ever is asserted by any man, be proved by the
Scriptures, and that nothing be determined but according to the Scriptures.

2. That the meeting may be peaceable and quiet, that the whole debate may be
carried on in a Spirit of love and meekness.

And whereas I had in my former paper, put in these words, Without railing or
reproachful speeches, I am content they be left out, hoping the thing will be
observed.

3. That the meeting may be orderly and without confusion, that is, that every
one may have convenient time to speak, and that none be limited: And I added in
my former paper, That but one speak at once, and that none disturb him that is
speaking, which I desire may be obseeved.

4, That the meeting be not lim^ed to an hour, but as either side has freedom
to pass away.

From thy Friend, Jo. VVigan.
1 M. 8 d. 1663-64.

Our mee^^^ng disappointed by the Jailer.
The day appointed being come; and the Judges coming into the Town the same day,
the Jailer prevented our meeting.

Whereupon another day was agreed upon, and the writing following subscribed.

The meeting abovementioned being disappointed by the Gaoler^, we are agreed
on both parties, that it be the first morning after the Judges go from this
Town, about the time above said.

Jo. Wigan, Thomas Curwen:


The meeting begins.
Upon the seventeenth day, (the Judges being gone the day before) we met in the
place appointed, where I briefly declared the occasion and end of the meeting,
also the four pa^ticulars agreed upon for the manner of the debate, and then
propounded the assertion, which I was to maintain, viz. Christ does not lighten
every man that comes into the world with a saving Light; and desired to know
who held the contrary, viz. That Christ does lighten every man that comes into
the world with a saving light, for against such had I undertaken to maintain my
assertion.

John Stubs answered, I hold the contrary, viz: That Christ does ligthen every
man that comes into the world with a saving light: Before I could enter upon
the proof of my assertion. Richard Cubhan stands up, and would have altered the
state of the question, requiring me to prove that which I had writ in my first
Letter to Thomas Curwe^, namely, That the Light wherewith every man is lighted
that comes into the world, is not a saving Light. This I told him I owned, and
should be ready to make good when we had debated the other, which we were
agreed upon, as appeared by their own paper. With much ado he was persuaded,
and I proceeded to proof, premising first, that the question was not, Some
things prem^sed in order to the debate.
Whether there be some light in every man that comes into the world; nor,
Whether Christ does lighten true believers with a saving light, forasmuch as I
denied not, but did affirm, That there was some light in every man that comes
into the World, and that true believers are lighted with a saving light; but
that which I had undertaken to prove by the Scriptures, was, The Assertion to
be proved. ^* Argum
That Christ does not lighten every man that comes into the world with a saving
light.

My first argument was laid down thus.

Christ lightneth no man with a saving light, but by his Spirit.

But Christ does not give his Spirit to every man that comes into the world:

Therefore he does not lighten every man that comes into the world with a
saving light.

The first proposition is clear from the great; promise of the New Covenant.
Isa. 59. 21. As for me, this is my Covenant with them, says the Lord, my
spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not
depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy Seed, nor out of the mouth
of thy Seeds seed says the Lord, from henceforth and for ever. And from the
promise of Christ, John 14. 16, 17. And I will pray the Father, and he shall
give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, even the
Spirit of truth, etc. And from the end of his giving the Spirit, namely, to be
a Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation unto them, for the acknowledgement of Christ,
and to enlighten the eyes of their understanding, that they might know what is
the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in
the Saints, Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. and to lead them into all truth, John 16. 18.
Howbeit, when the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all truth.
Neither is there any other way by which Christ does infuse a saving Light into
any man, but by his Spirit, 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11, 12. But God has revealed them
unto us by his spirit, for his spirit searches all things, yea the deep things
of God, even so the things of God knows no man but the spirit of God. Now we
have received, not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God,
that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God. It is only
by the unction of the Spirit received from Christ, and no other way that men
come to see and know these things, 1 John 2. 20. But ye have an un^tion from
the holy and, and ye know all things.

The assumption is proved from Jud. 19. Some are natural, not having the
spirit; and from John 14. 17. Even the spirit of truth whom the world cannot
receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him; but ye know him, for he
dwells with you, and shall be in you. And from Romans 8. 9. But ye are not in
the flesh, but in the spirit, if so be that the spirit of God dwell in you. Now
if any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his. From all which
Scriptures it is evident, that some have not the Spirit of Christ. Many other
testimonies I had to produce for the further clearing of this proposition, Viz.
That Christ does not give his Spirit to every man that comes into the world.

Joh. Stubbs Answers.
But here John Stubbs began to answer, not denying either Proposition, but as
disliking the proof of the Assumption, he spoke to that Scripture, Jude 19. and
said, Those that had not the Spirit were such as had gone in the way of Cain,
who had not obeyed, but resisted the Spirit; and so lost it.

Where by the way it may be observed. That when a Scripture pincheth them, they
will not stick to give a meaning of it, and such a one as may best suit their
purpose.

My reply to J. Stubbs*
But, I replied, That it could not be that those ever had the Spirit of Christ,
because they were (...), sensual or natural, for the same word is so rendered,
1 Cor. 2. 14. who never had the Spirit, but are opposed to the spiritual or
regenerate man, ver. 15. And therefore it is said, The reason why a natural man
cannot know, nor discern the things of the Spirit, is, Because he has not the
Spirit. The disorderly carriage of somo
The natural man receives not the things of the spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned; but the spiritual man discerns all things. Now the reason why one
discerns, and the other cannot, is because one, viz. the spiritual man has
received the spirit; the other, viz. the nat^ral man has not the spirit, as
appears 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11, 12. To this purpose, as far as I can remember, was my
Reply. And now, (notwithstanding our agreement that the debate might be
orderly, and without confusion, and my desire that but one might speak at once)
great disorder began; for whereas I expected to have reasoned with one, or at
least but one at once, diverse took liberty to speak one after another, and
sometimes many at once, running from the matter in hand, to other points, and
many asking new questions, that it was hard for me to get convenient time to
speak. Who were obstreperous.
Besides, they were so obstreporous, especially George Fox and Margret Fell (as
many can testify) that they seemed to some (when not able to elude the plain
Scriptures brought for the proof of the Assertion) yet resolved to word it for
victory. Geo. Fox asserts the Spirit of Christ to be in every man.
George Fox coming in about the time I was replying to John Stubbs, gets up to
a seat with one foot, and to the table with the other, whereas I and others
were standing on the ground about the Table, he did not at all take off the
strength of those Scriptures alleged by me, but his endeavor was to prove,
That every man that comes into the world has the Spirit of Christ; in the
management whereof he used many under valuing and taunting expressions toward
me, and several times went from the Table with these words, The least, or
meanest Babe will answer thee; as if the presence of their Leader, or rather
Misleader, was not needful; and which is yet worse, he did miserably wrest and
abuse several Scriptures, which he would have forced to have spoken in his
dialect, calling upon the people for attention, as if his work had been more to
preach to them, than to answer my Arguments; as many of the Scritures made use
of by him, as I ca^ recollect, I shall give an account of, as also of my
answers.

That which he would have made out, The first Scripture brought to prove his
Assertion.
was, that every man that comes into the world, even wicked men have the spirit
of Christ, one Screpture alleged by him, or some other was 1. Cor. 12. 7. The
manifestation of the spirit is given to every man to profit withal.

My answer was, Answer.
that the persons there written to by the Apostle, were members of the Church of
God, which was at Cori^th, which were sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be
Saints Cap. 1. 2. And that if every one of these had some manifestation of the
spirit, it will not follow, that every man that comes into the world has
either the manifestation of the spirit, or the spirit it self, and that the
Apostle speaks not of every man that comes into the world, but only of every
man that by one spirit was baptized in to one body, and had been made to drink
into one spirit, is very evident from the whole scope of that Chapter, and
especially from the 13. ver. For by one spirit we were all baptized into one
body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free, and have
been all made to drink into one spirit, and ver. 27 now ye are the body of
Christ, and members in particular.

The same word (...) is used in the same manner in the 11 Chap. 21. Every man
takes before other his own supper, that is not every man that comes into the
world, but every man of you who come together into one place ver. 20. So that
this scripture concludes nothing for their purpose.

The second Scripture brought to prove their Assertion.
Another scripture brought to prove his assertion was Neh. 9. 20. where it is
said that God gave his good spirit to instruct the Israelites.

Answer.
Ans. 1. Israel was Gods Church, his chosen peculiar people. Ex. 19. 5. and if
he did give his good spirit to them, it will not thence follow, that he gave it
to all other nations, even to every man that comes into the world, the
scripture is express that he dealt not with any nation as with Jacob and
Israel.

Psalm. 147. 19. 20. He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his
judgments to Israel. He has not dealt so with any nation, and as for his
judgments they have not known them, and therefore, he gave not his good spirit
to any other nation, for if they had had the unction of his spirit, it would
have showed them his word, and made known his judgments unto them, 1 John 2. 20.

Not all Israel, but such only as are born of the spirit, have the (...)
2. Though it be said he gave them his good spirit, it will not follow that
every particular, or individual Israelite had this good spirit, but only such
as were Israelites indeed, Joh. 1. 47. such as were Jews inwardly Romans 2. 28.
29. and were born after the spirit, Gal. 4. 29. All are not Israel that are of
Israel, Romans 9. 6. and to such only that saying in Neh. 9. 20. must be
referred, thus Moses had that good spirit, and God promises to take off the
spirit which was upon him, and put upon the seventy elders, Numb. 11. 17. Thus
Joshua was a man in whom was the spirit, Numb. 27. 18. and had another spirit
then many others had, and was fitted thereby for the conduct of the
congregation, Numb. 27. 16. and if this scripture Neh. 9. 20. will not prove
that every particular Israelite had the spirit, much less will it prove that
every man that comes into the world has the spirit of Christ.

A third Scripture.
A third scripture alledeged, Isa. 63. 10. and Acts 7 51. where it is said, the
people rebelled, vexed, resisted the holy spirit, hence they would conclude
that wicked men, have the spirit of Christ.

Answer.
Ans. though it be true that believers, who because they are sons, have the
spirit of the Son sent forth into their hearts, Gal. 4. 6. may and often do
grieve the spirit, Ephesians. 4. 30. yet all that do vex and resist the spirit have
it not; for Christ says plainly Joh. 14. 17. the world cannot receive him,
therefore has him not, yet the world do vex and resist the spirit of God,
speaking in the Prophets, Apostles, or other servants of God, by slighting, and
rejecting, their reproves, exhortations or counsels, or by undervalluing and
not regarding the wondrous works of God wrought by the power of his spirit;
thus when Stephen says, Ye do resist the holy ghost, it was the spirit in him
by which he spoke, compared Acts. 6. 10. and they were not able to resist the
wisdom and the spirit by which he spoke.

In like manner they had resisted the spirit in the Prophets, Which of the
prophets have not your fathers persecuted, etc. ver. 52. thus when the mighty
power of God was put forth in signs and miracles in Egypt, and the wilderness,
Numb. 14. 11. 22. and they believed not his spirit, (not in themselves) but put
forth in those mighty works, and speaking in Joshua, and other faithful
witnesses for God in that day; thus the spirit of God was vexed in Noah, and
Lot, by the wickedness of the old world, and of Sodom, Genesis 6. 2* Pet. 2. 7. 8.
and not in the wicked, who being strangers, and without God in the world, were
not the habitation of God through the spirit, Ep. 2. 12. 22*

A fourth Scripture.
A fourth scripture was urged Joh. 10. 7, 8. but if I depart, I will send him,
(viz. the comforter] unto you, and when he is come, he will reprove the world
of sin etc. therefore say they, he must needs be in the world, and in every man
that comes into the world.

Answer.
Ans. 1. By this promise which Christ makes to send the holy ghost after his
departure, it is evident enough that this scripture can be no proof of their
assertion, to wit, that every man that comes into the world has the holy
ghost; for if every man had him when he came into the world, what need was
there he should be sent to them, after Christ's ascension, nay rather, this
shows they had him not before he was sent, and so not till^ after Christ's
departure, which destroys their opinion.

2. But seccondly this promise is made particularly to the disciples of Christ,
( I will send him unto you) and not to the world.

3. As for that saying, when he is come, he shall reprove the world of sin etc.
admit it were granted (as it is not) that when he came, he was within every man
reproving him, this would contribute nothing to the proof of their assertion,
for then he would only be in every man after Christ's ascension, not in every
man that comes into the world since the fall, or since Christ's manifestation in
the flesh, which is the point they should prove. But further I say, That when
the Holy Ghost (according to the promise) was poured out upon the disciples, he
so mightily wrought in them, and by them, in bearing witness to the
resurrection of Christ, Acts. 2. 32. and in doing many wonders and signs, ver.
43. that the world was hereby justly reproved, and yet the Holy Ghost was not
poured out upon all flesh, (that is as was urged upon all mankind) or every
individual man, but only upon such as were thereby enabled to repent and
believe, Acts 2. 38. 39. Then Peter said unto them, repent, and be baptized
every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and
ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, for the promise is unto you and
your children, and to all that are a far off, even as many as the Lord our God
shall call, And Jo. 38. 39. He that believes on me, as the Scripture has
said, out of his Belly shall flow Rivers of living water. But this spoke he of
the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive, for the Holy Ghost
was not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet glorified; so that it is
apparent in several respects, that this Scripture proves not their assertion.

A fifth Scripture.
Further it was said that Balaam was a wicked man, and yet he had the spirit of
God, and saw the starr of Jacob, Numb. 24. therefore every man that comes into
the world, has the spirit of Christ.

Answer.
Ans. It is one thing to have the spirit of the Son, which is the great promise
of the new Covenant. Isa. 50. 21. dwelling in a man, 2 Timothy 1. 14. and another
thing to have the spirit of God come upon a man at some particular time, and
for some particular work, thus it was with Balaam, and thus with Saul, and his
messengers, 1 Samuel 19. 20. 21. 23. but this proves not that every man that comes
into the world, has the sprit of Christ, for the Scripture does not say, that
these men had the spirit of God before it came upon them; only these Scriptures
do show that God can, and sometimes does by the power of his spirit, impress
upon a wicked man, and make him to declare some future glorious things for his
own praise, and his peoples comfort, as Dan. 4. 1. 2. 3. Joh. 11. 50. 51. may
be seen, neither is it said in that place Numb. 24. 17. (that Balaam saw the
starr of Jacob, but I shall see him, but not now, I shall behold him, but not
nigh; but when every eye shall see him Rev. 1. 17. but it will not follow
hence, that he had the faith of Job to see him his Redeemer Job 19. 25. 27. nor
the spirit of the mediator, the man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2 5. which only dwells
in believers, 2 Timothy 1. 14. that good thing which was committed unto thee, keep
by the Holy Ghost, which dwells in us; no more then the Angel of the Lord
that spoke in the Ass with man's voice, Numb 22. 28. 2 Pet. 2. 16. dwelt in the
Ass, though that is utterly false which this people has published in their
Paper, viz. that he was a Baptist, which said that Balaam had no more spirit
then his Horse.

A sixth Scripture.
Some of them asked what was that which caused Judas to bring the money again;
and made him repent, implying (as I apprehend them) that it must needs be the
spirit of Christ.

Answer.
Ans. There is a light and law in every man that convinces and reproves of sin,
(except of not believing in Christ) Romans 2. 14 15. for when the Gentiles which
have not the Law, do by nature the things contained in the Law, these having
not the Law, are a Law unto themselves, which show the work of the Law written
in their hearts, their concscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the
mean while accusing, or excusing one another; and this made Judas bring the
money again etc.

But this light, or Law, in every man is not the spirit of Christ mentioned
Joh. 16. 7. 8. which was promised to be sent to reprove, or convince the world
of the sin of not believing in Christ etc. for he was not come while as Christ
was not ascended, John 16. 7. 13. but of this light, and Law in every man, I
shall speak more, after the rest of my Arguments to prove my assertions, are
laid down.

None of the Scriptures brought by them weaken my Arguments.
By these brief Answers, it may appear with what little success these
Scriptures were brought, to prove that every man, even the wicked and
unregenerate, have the spirit of Christ, and that notwithstanding all that was
said, the plain and positive Scriptures, brought brought by me, to prove the
contrary, viz. That all men have not the Spirit of Christ, do remain firm ^and
^nshaken* there being nothing more plain than Christ's own words, John 14. 17.
That the world cannot receive the Spirit of Truth. And the Apostles, Romans 8. 9.
Jude 19. That some are in the flesh, are sensual, not having the Spirit of
Christ.

As I could get liberty, other Arguments were propounded for the proof of that
which I had undertaken to make good, viz. That Christ does not lighten every
man that comes into the world with a saving Light, which are as follow; though
in that confused Assembly they could not be so orderly, and with that
enlargement urged, as they are here set down.

2. Arg.
Whom Christ enlightens with a saving Light into their hearts, he causes the
Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ to shine, to give the knowledge of the
glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, according to the testimony of Paul, 2
Cor. 4. 6. For God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has
shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in
the face of Jesus Christ. He brings life and immortality to light through the
Gospel, 2 Timothy 1. 10. And he does no otherwise manifest the Grace of God, our
Reconciliation, Peace and Salvation, but by the light of the glorious Gospel
shining in our hearts; and he that wants this Gospel Light, has no
saving-light, but is lost, 2 Cor. 4. 3. But if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to
them that are lost.

But Christ does not cause this light of the glorious Gospel to shine in the
heart of every man that comes into the world, for the Gospel is hid to some,
and the light of it does not shine in their hearts, as the Scripture testifies,
2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. But if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost; in
whom the God of this world has blinded the minds of them which believe not,
lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ who is the Image of God, should
shine unto them.

Therefore Christ does not enlighten every one: that comes into the world, with
a saving light.

3 Arg.
Whom Christ enlighteneth with a saving light, to them is given an
understanding to know the Father, 1 John 2. 13 -- Ye have known the Father. And
the Son, 1 John 5. 20. And we know the Son of God is come, and has given us an
understanding that we may know him that is true, And the Spirit; John 14. 17.
Even the spirit of Truth whom the world cannot receive, because it sees him
not, neither knows him; but ye know him, etc. And the things that are freely
given them of God, 1 Cor. 2. 10, 12. But God has revealed them uuto us by his
spirit -- Now we have received not the spirit of the world, but the spirit
which is of God, that we might know the things that are freely given to us of
God. So Matthew. 13. 11. He answered and said unto them, ( viz. his Disciples)
Because it is given unto you to know the myst^ries of the Kingdom of Heaven,
but to them it is not given. That Light only is saving which discovers these
things; to which agrees that saying of Christ, John 17. 3. And this is life
eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom
thou have sent.

But there are some who know not the Father nor the Son, John 16. 3. And these
things will they do unto you, because they have not known the Father nor me,
Matthew. 11. 27. No man knows the Son but the Father, neither knows any man
the Father save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. Nor the
Spirit, John 14. 17. Even the Spirit of Truth whom the world cannot receive,
because it sees him not; neither knows him, nor the things of the spirit, 1
Cor. 2. 14. But the natural man receives not the things of the spirit of God,
for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned. They have not the Spirit, as was proved before,
therefore they cannot discern spiritual things ((...)) spiritually. Yea
further, they cannot discern nor know these things, because their understanding
is darkened, Ephesians. 4. 18. and as to these things, they are mere darkness,
Ephesians. 5. 8. Yea, the light that is in them, is darkness, according to the
words of Christ, Matthew. 6. 23. If therefore the light that is in thee be
darkness, how great is that darkness? And Christ himself gives another reason
why they cannot know these things, Matthew. the 13. and the 11th, Because it is
not given to them; It is given to you to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of
Heaven, but to them it is not given. And in Matthew 11. 25. he tells us plainly
it is because they are hid from them. And at that time Jesus answered and said,
I thank thee O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid these
things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes.

Therefore Christ does not lighten every man that comes into the world with a
saving light.

4. Argum.
To such as Christ enlightens with a saving Light, he also gives a spiritual
life, such he quickens, regenerates, and makes new Creatures, such as the Light
is, such is the Life in men, Joh. 1. 4. And the Life was the Light of men: If
the Light be saving, that is, effectually and eventually saving, it quickens
and regenerates, and makes a new Creature, according to that in 2 Cor. 3. 18.
But we all with open face beholding as in a Glass the glory of the Lord, are
changed into the same Image from glory to glory; as by the Spirit of the Lord
this saving Light and Life and given together, as John 8. 12. Thou spoke Jesus
again unto them, saying, I am the light of the world, he that follows me
shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life: A man cannot have
a saving Light to see the Kingdom of God, except he be born again, John 3. 3.
Jesus answered and said unto him, Verily, verily I say unto thee, Except a m^n
be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. And hence it is that Christ is
a live-making Spirit, 1 Cor. 15. 45. because whosoever is enlightened with a
saving Light, is also quickened, together with Christ, Ephesians. 21, 5. You has he
quickened, etc, even when ye were dead in sins, has he quickened us together
with Christ.

But Christ does not quicken and regenerate every man that comes into the
world, every one is not a new Creature, some are born of the flesh, John 3. 6.
and are in the flesh. Romans 8. 8. So then they that are in the flesh cannot
please God; some are dead in sin, wherein they walk according to the course of
this World, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2. and have not life, 1 John 5. 12. -- He that has not
the Son, has not life; yea, some do dye in their sins, John 8. 24. I said
therefore unto you, that ye shall dye in your sins; for if ye believe not that
I am he, ye shall dye in your sins.

Therefore Christ does not lighten every man that comes into the world with a
saving light.

5. Arg.
Whom Christ enlightens with a saving Light, to them he also gives Faith; the
words of Christ are plain, John 12. 46. I am come a Light into the world, that
whosoever believes on me, should not abide in darkness: Mark, where there is
no Faith, there is an abiding in darkness, and so no saving Light; Faith is the
Organ of the soul, to receive and let in a saving Light: An unbelieving soul is
a dark and ignorant soul; hence it is that Christ who is ((...)) the beginner
of Faith, Heb. 12. 2* when he gives his Spirit to illuminate the understanding,
and to fill the soul with his mavelous light, he does also by the same Spirit
give and work faith, (for it is his gift, Ephesians. 2. 8.) whereby the soul is
capacitated to receive him as a glorious light to dwell in the heart. And thus
Christ by his Spirit and Faith, and no other way, dwells in the heart,
irradiating the whole soul with the bright beams of his glorious light,
according to these Scriptures. John 14. 16, 17. I will pray the Father, and he
shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever; but ye
know him, for he dwells with you, and shall be in you. Ephesians. 2. 22. In whom
you also are builded together for an habitation of God through the Spirit: Ephesians.
3. 17. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith.

But every man that comes into the world has not Faith, 2 These. 3. 2. For all
men have not Faith; none believe but such as are ordained to eternal life, Acts
13. 48. And as many as were ordained to eternal life, believed. None can come
to (or believe on) Christ, but such as the Father draws, John 6. 44. No man can
come to me except the Father which sent me, draw him; nor has every man that
comes into the world, Christ dwelling in him, some are without him, Ephesians. 2. 12.
That at that time (viz. when they were Gentiles in the flesh) ye were without
Christ in the world: Some have him not, 1 John 5. 12. He that has not the Son,
has not life In a word, believers only have Christ dwelling in them, John 6.
56. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in
him.

Therefore Christ does not enlighten every man that comes into the world with a
saving Light.

To these last Arguments I remember not any thing brought by way of answer to
weaken any one proof, No Answers given to weaken my Arguments.
but that which was their last and chiefest Refuge, was that Text John 1. 9.
That was the true Light which lights every man that comes into the world, as
if the bare urging, or rather wresting of this one Scripture, were sufficient
to overthrow all that I had said; For, is not he the true Light, say they? And
is not he a saving Light? And does not he lighten every man that comes into the
world?

As I was replying to this Scripture, Their harsh censures wherewith the meeting
was concluded.
diverse of them took liberty to pass many heavy censures upon me, which (before
I speak to that Scripture) I shall here set down, that the Spirit by which they
are acted, may better be discerned.

Margaret Fell said, Thou art a miserable Creature.

James Brown with great fierceness, Thou art an Enemy of God.

Thomas Davenport said, (but very mildly) Thou have denied Christ to day.

Richard Cubhan said, Thou have denied the Lord that bought thee; and would
undertake to prove that I was one of those false Prophets mentioned 2 Peter 2.
1. And so the Meeting ended.

Since which time I have also met with many harsh censures and reproaches: The
fruit of that spirit by which this People are led.
The Caoler told me Margaret Fell said I had spoken many blasphemies.

George Fox said, Thou art not a rationable man ( that was his own word.)

John Baley a youth in the Town, said, The eternal Judgments of God will fall
upon thee, and burn thee up as chaff; thou art worse than a Drunkard.

James Park in my own Chamber said with great vehemence, Thou art a liar, and a
Deceiver, and the Curse of God will be upon thee in thy Bedchamber, and
Closet, and wherever thou go, and thou suffers as an evil doer: And
afterward sent me a Paper with his Name subscribed, wherein he has these
expressions; -- John Wigans, Thou full of subtilty, Thou enemy of the Light of
Righteousness, Christ Jesus, will thou not cease to pervert the right way of
God, the path of Life? Thou art from the Door, thou art a Thief and a Robber,
thou art a blind Guide; Thou Monster; Thou strange Birth of the Flesh; Thou
conceive^ Chafe, Thou brings forth Iniquity, and drinks it up; Thou foolish
builder, and despiser of the Light, the true Light; thou art in the darkness of
thy clouded understanding, contemning the Son of God, and setting at naught the
love of God to the world; thou art a doing despite to the true Light, and the
Spirit of Grace, accounting it an unholy thing; Thou art a blind Leader of the
blind in the ditch, keeping people in the fall, and in the ditch; woe unto thee,
thou suffers as an evil doer.

Henry Wood in a Letter to Evan Price, calls me his Priest; with much more of
this kind of Language (which I forbear to mention) have I been followed from
day to day.

My answer to these great swelling words of vanity, An Answer to their Censures.
is, That I am taught not to strive, but to be gentle to all men, 2 Timothy 2. 24
and that I have otherwise learned Christ, than to render railing for railing,
Railing not to be rendered for railing.
1 Pet. 3. 9. Yet may I not say to them (as once Christ did to his Disciples)
Ye know not of what spirit ye are. Are these the fruits of the Spirit of
Christ? Let them show if they can, where it is written, That he, or any acted
by his Spirit, called men, Christ not the^e example.
even the worst of his Enemies, Monsters, or strange birth of the flesh; or
where he ever spoke an untruth, or falsely accused any; yet thus they deal with
me; for besides that they are not able to prove me a Thief, a Robber, a
Deceiver -- It is utterly false that I am any man's Priest, Their lies and false
accusations
or that I suffer as an evil doer; which thing nevertheless they positively
assert; but I am moved with compassion toward them, and shall not further
insist upon these things, for I pass not for man's day, my judgment is with the
Lord in this matter, and I am also persuaded the Lord will in due time rebuke
every evil Spirit, whereby some simple-hearted ones may (for a time) be
ensnared and led captive by him at his will; only here it may be necessary to
enquire what in most prob^bility may be the occasion of these high and
peremptory censures. The chief occasion of their censure.


Surely I know no other, (nor do they declare any other) cause then this, viz.
That my Assertion and Arguments brought from Scriptures to prove it, do strike
at the very Cornerstone of their building, which being removed, the whole
superstructure must unavoid^bly fall to the ground.

That which they boldly affirm with highest confidence in their words, What
they call the Light with in.
and Printed Books, and which is their foundation, is, that the light which is
in every man that comes into the world, is Christ, the Redeemer and Savior,
the Lord that bought them, the Eternal, and just one, the tried precious corner
Stone, which God has laid in Sion, the Spirit, yea the true infallible Spirit
that was in the Prophets, and Apostles, the door, the way, the truth and the
life, in a word, the (...) spirituale, the All that is to be known and
believed; What is their first lie.
and this is their [(...)] first lie; now because I cannot call this the true
Jesus (as indeed it is not) and worship an Idol, (as they do) therefore am I
charged to be their Enemy, and Christ's also, in the forementioned censures,
and in much more of the same kind.

To the end therefore that the grand deceiver with his deceipts, Three reasons
of the additional discourse of the Light within.
yet hid under a disguise may be more easily detected, and that truth (being
cleared from mistakes) may be better discerned, and that many simple hearts,
who being yet ignorant of Satan's devices, are captivated, and led away with the
errors of the wicked into pernicious ways, may be more effectually undeceived
and reclaimed, I shall endeavor briefly and plainly to show,

1. What the light in every man is.

2. Of what use it is, and the utmost it can do.

3. What it cannot do -- That if God peradventure may please to give unto any
Repentance, to the acknowledging of the truth, they may be recovered out of the
snare of the Devil, etc. 2 Timothy 2. 25, 26.

For the better understanding of that which is to be spoken of the light in
man, Five particulars premised.
it is necessary that these things following be premised.

1. That God is light, 1. Jo. 1. 5. and dwells in the light which no man can
approach unto, 1 Timothy 6. 16. and is the fountain and original of all light.
And hence

2. That all light is of God, all light is Gods light, that is, it is his
offspring, he is the Author and efficient cause of it, and thence is called
the Father of lights, Jam. 1. 17. And yet

3. That all light is not God, for there are created lights; light was the
first distinct part of the whole creation, Gen 1. 13. He made two great lights
to rule the day and the night; he made the Stars also, Genesis 1. 16. which are
called Stars of light, Psalm. 14. 8, 3. Now what God creates, forms or makes,
that is not God.

4. As External, proper, sensible light is Gods creature, so also is internal
light, intellectual light, invisible light, both in Angels and men; the
Angels, those ministering spirits, those flames of fire, those star-like
sparkles of light, are Angels of light, 2 Cor. 11. 14. yet they are but
derivative lights, lighted up by the Father of lights, and spirits, Ja 1. 17.
Heb, 12. 9. created by him, by whom all things were made, Col. 1. 16. For by
him were all things created, that are in Heaven and that are in Earth, visible,
and invisible, whether they be Thrones or Dominions, or Principallities, or
Powers, etc. So the spirit of man is a light in man, an invisible light, called
the candle of the Lord, Pro. 20. 27. formed in man by the Lord, Zach. 12. 1. of
which more will be said afterward.

5. As all derivative lights which God has made, are subordinate to himself,
so are the inferior one to another; the light in man when he was at his best,
was far inferior to the light of wisdom and knowledge in Angels, Psalm. 8. 5.
the light in Angels is far inferior to the light in the man Christ Jesus, as he
is the anointed Savior, and sustains the office of a Mediator; he, as such, is
the Sun-light, far above all other lights, lighted up by the Father of lights,
in him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2. 3.

These things being premised, I come to show what the light in every man is.

The light that is in man may be considered either,

1. With respect to the will and affections; A twofold light within man What
the light within is, as it respects the affections.
and so it is that inward peace, comfort, joy and gladness, which is opposed to
the darkness of inward trouble, grief and sorrow; and thus I find the
Scripture frequently speaking of light and darkness, metaphorically, as Psalm.
97. 11. Light (that is joy) is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the
upright in heart. Isa. 50. 10. He that walks in darkness, and has no light, is
one that has no peace, no comfor, no consolation; when the Jews were
delivered from Hamans conspiracy, they had light, and gladness, joy, and
honor, Esth. 8. 16. so Job 18. 5. the light of the wicked (that is their joy
and comfort) shall be put out; the Church says, Micah 7. 8. When I sit in
darkness, the Lord will be a light unto me, that is, of joy and comfort.

Or secondly, What the Light in every man is as It respects the understanding.
the light in every man may be considered, (and so it is spoken of in this
question) with respect to the intellectual powers, the mind and understanding;
and thus it is, the spirit of every man which is in him, the Father of lights
and spirits, does form a spirit in every man, Zach. 12. 1. Who forms the
spirit of man in him, or as it is Genesis 2. 7. The Lord breathed into man the
breath of life, and man became a living soul, agreeable to that of the Apostle,
1 Cor. 15. 45. The first man Adam was made a living soul; so that without this
spirit, he could not be a man; now this spirit in every man is the light in
every man, according to the testimony of that Scripture, Prove. 20. 27. The
spirit of a man is the candle of the Lord, that is, a candle which the Lord
has set up in him to see by, whereof he is the Author and efficient cause.

Mark Reader, The Spirit, or lig^t in every man is no^ the Lord.
this spirit or light in every man, is not the Lord, but a candle lighted up by
the Lord; this inter^al light, in the little world man, is no more the Lord,
then the external lights in the firmament are the Lord; nay, it is so far from
being the Lord, the Sun light, that it is lesser, and inferior to the light in
other creatures, namely the Angels, as was hinted before, their light of
wisdom, reason, The light in every man is infer^or to the ^ight of Angels.
and understanding does far exceed man's, as the wise woman's words to the King
do import, 2 Samuel 14. 20. and my Lord is wise, according to the wisdom of an
Angel of God, to know all things that are in the earth; and so do those words,
Rev. 4. 8. they are full of eyes within; moreover as this light in every man,
is inferior to other lights, so it is limited and ^^unded as to the use, and
exercise of it, and cannot extend it self beyond its bounds, as will appear by
that which follows.

Again, Vis ratiocinativa a (...) facultas intelligendi.
this spirit of a man, or light in every man, is the reason, and the
understanding of a man, which in the state of man's created integrity, was an
ascendant light, shining with pure Beams of light, whereby he was ad^pted to
know his God that made him, and the end why he made him, What the Light in Adam
before the fall could do.
and how to answer that end, that is, to know him as God, and glorify him as
God, by yielding just, and perfect obedience unto him; this was the end of Gods
making man, that he should serve him, as David argues, Psalm. 95. 6. Oh come let
us worship, and how down, let us kneel before the Lord our maker, for he is our
God etc.

And Psalm. 100. 3. Know ye the Lord he is God, it is he that made us, and not
we our selves, and the end of Gods making us expressed ver. 2. Serve ye the Lord
etc.

Of this light we may understand Christ to speak, Math. 6. 23. If therefore the
light that is in thee, be darkness, how great is that darkness? that is, if thy
intellectual eye be blind, how great is thy blindness.

Together with this light set up in man, There is a Law written in every man's
heart
which showed him his Creator, and that he was to be served, and how he was to
be served, it was necessary that Law should be implanted, and written in his
heart, (which Law is called light, Prove. 6. 23.) whereby the will and mind of
his Creator, was impressed upon him, and made known unto him, so that by the
Spirit, or light set up in him, he could reflect upon this Law, as a rule to
every motion, and operation, and understand the reason, and reasonableness of
it; yet here by the way it is to be observed, that this Law is not God, This
Law is not God.
God is the Lawgiver, or the Law-writer, whether in the fleshly Tables of the
heart, or in Tables of Stone, but the Law giver, Proved.
or the Law writer, is not the Law, nor e Contra etc.

The Law was written in the natural man's heart, to be a Rule, according to
which he was to obey and worship his God, therefore it is not to be called God,
and worshipped as God; its true that the Law, (as also the light) as it is in
God the fountain of Wisdom and Justice, is God; but the Law exhibited, and in a
manner ineffable, and beyond expression impressed upon, and formed in the heart
of man, is not God, as the thing formed, is not the former of the thing. Now
God says of himself, Isa. 45. 7. I form the Light, etc. even as it is said of
him, Zach. 12. 1. Who forms the spirit of man within him. And Genesis 2. 7. And
the Lord God formed man; the Hebrew Root (...) formavit, is the same in all the
three places, importing, that the things formed are not God that formed them;
the like may be gathered from other words, which signify to create or make
Though the Hebrew words (...) creavit, formavit, fec^t, may have a different
signification, as appears in Isa. 43. 7. in which verse they are all used: yet
this may be gathered from them all, that the the thing created, formed or made,
is not the Creator, etc.
; the Law of God written in man's heart, is begotten of God, proceeds from him,
is his offspring, as all lights whatsoever are from him, and lead to him, and
thence it is that he is called the Father of Lights, Jam. 117. but it is not
the Father of Lights who is an infinite and incomprehensible Fountain of
perfection and glory, but a borrowed ray or beam of Divine Glory, confined to
its Orb, and limited to its uses (as all other lights are) beyond which it
cannot go. And thus the Scripture seems frequently to distinguish between God
and his Law, as Psalm. 1. 2. But his delight is in the Law of the Lord. Psalm.
37. 31. The Law of God is in his heart. And Psalm. 40. 8. Thy Law is in my
heart. 2 Chronicles. 12. 1. it is said of Rehoboam, He forsook the Law of the Lord.
In all which places there is a clear distinction between the Law or Rule given
to man, and the Author of it; from all which it is evident, that the Law
written in man's heart, is not God.

And thus have we an account of the fullest light that was in man before his
fall.

The sum whereof is this; A summa^y account of the Light^ in man before the fall
He had the light of a clear understanding to know his Creator, and his whole
will contained in that Law which was written in his heart, and the Light of
Reason to see how just and equitable it was to yield perfect obedience to his
will; and thus he could look his God in the face, and come into his presence
with delight, and serve him with gladness.

But all the Light that man had in his Created integrity, The Light in man
before the fall could not manifest a Redeemer.
whether set up in his Spirit, or in the Law implanted in him, was not
sufficient to manifest or make known unto him a Redeemer; for as in that state
he had no need of a Redeemer, so his Light had neither commission nor power to
make one known to him; even as it was with the Angels which never fell, they
having no need of redemption, (notwithstanding all their light) had never known
the Redeemer, but by means of the Church which stands in need of him, Ephesians. 3.
10. To the intent, that now unto the Principalities and Powers in heavenly
places, might be known by the Church the manifold wisdom of God; so 1 Pet. 1.
12. Which things the Angels desire to look into. And as their Light, so the
Light which Adam had before his fall, was so limited and bounded, that it could
not extend it self then (nor now, if any had as great a measure as he had)
further then to show how man being perfectly obedient to the whole will of his
Creator, might live for ever in the happy fruition of him, as such.

Since the fall of man, The Light in man since the fall, not such as it was
before the fall.
this Candle of the Lord in him (that is, his Reason and Understanding) is
become exceeding dim in comparison of what it was before, as the Scripture
testifies, Ephesians. 4. 18. Having the understanding darkened, being alienated from
the Life of God through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness
of their heart; In the fall the Devil got into this Candle, the mind of man,
whereof he has ever since kept possession, and will keep it still, except a
stronger than he cast him out; he is the Spirit that works in the children of
disobedience, and so blinds their minds, and darkens their eyes, that they
cannot look up to God, or discern the things that concern his glory and their
own happiness; but their Candle does mostly give light downward, to things
below, Ephesians. 2. 2. Wherein in time past ye walked ac^ording to the course of
this world, according to the Prince of the Power of the Air, the spirit that
now works in the children of disobedience. 2 Cor. 4. 4. In whom the God of
this world has blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of
the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto them.
Insomuch that it may be said of every man in the fall, how wise soever he may
conceit himself to be, That he is a vain, empty man, born like a wild Asses
Colt, Job 11. 12. and that he is in respect of man in his Innocence, but a
beast; in regard of his ignorance, man that was made like unto God, has made
himself by his fall, like unto a beast, according to that of Solomon, Eccles.
3. 18. I said in my heart concerning the estate of the sons of men, That God
might manifest them, and that they might see that they ^ themselves are beasts.
Yet is not this Light wholly extinct, for then he could not exist, but would
cease to be a man; where there is no spirit of a man, there is no man.

So likewise the Law written in man's heart, The Light and Law remaining in fallen
man, is sufficient to render God righteous when he judges the disobedient
which at first was plainly to be read, is not so oblitterated, but that there
is sufficient left to render God righteous in his proceedings against men, who
do hold that measure of the knowledge of God (which is left in them) in
unrighteousness, and to leave them inexcusable before him in the day of the
revelation of the righteous Judgment of God, Romans 2. 5, 6. I say, there is so
much of the Eternal Power and Godhead manifested and made known to men by the
things that are made, that such as like not to retain God in their knowledge,
nor to glorify him so far as they do know him, shall be left without excuse in
the day when God shall render to every man according to his deeds, according to
Romans 1. 18, 19, 20, 21. For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against
all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in
unrighteousness, because that which may be known of God is manifest in them (or
to them) for God has showed it unto them; for the invisible things of him from
the Creation of the world, are clearly seen, being understood by the things
that are made, even his Eternal Power and Godhead so that they are without
excuse: Because that when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, etc.

In as much therefore as there is a Light remaining in every man since the fall,
though far inferior to that which was in man in his innocence, I shall
endeavor in the next place further to declare these two things:

1. What this remaining Light can do, or what the utmost uses of it are. And

2. What it cannot do.

There is a fourfold use of the Light that is in every man since the fall. A
fourfold use of the Light in every man.


1. To make manifest:

2. To direct.

3. To convince.

4: To feel after God.

First, 1. To make manifest.
This Light (as the Scripture testifies) searches all the inward parts of the
belly, Prove. 20. 27. The Spirit of a man is the Candle of the Lord, searching
all the inward parts of the Bedy: That is, Whatsoever is most secret in our
minds; for as in the Belly natural conceptions are wrought and shaped; so in
the Mind Moral Conceptions of good or evil, are wrought and shaped. To this
also agrees the saying of the Apostle, (1 Cor. 2. 11.) What man knows the
things of a man, save the spirit of a man whech is in him? That is, No other
man knows what his own thoughts are, or what they are working, but his own
understanding. This Spirit of a man sees all the inward motions and outward
actions of a man, with a direct act of the understanding, which is called
Science; and this simply considered, makes not any thing that is discovered,
good or evil: And this is the first use of the Light that is in every man, viz.
To make manifest the things of a man to himself.

Secondly, 2. To direct
This Light in every man is useful for direction in a double respect:

1. As it looks upon the Law written in his heart, it presents unto him the
principles of Justice, Righteousness, Equity, Soberness, and other Moral
Virtues, and shows him what is right to be done, according to that of the
Apostle, Romans 2. 14. For when the Gentiles (that is, unconverted Gentiles)
which have not the Law, do by nature the things contained in the Law, these
having not the Law (that is, formally published and preached unto them) are a
Law unto themselves: Which show the work of the Law written in their hearts,
their Conciences also bearing witness, etc.

2. As it looks upon the works of the Creation, which are seen, such clear
beams of the Godhead may be understood by the things that are made, as might
direct and induce man to glorify God as God; which the same Apostle, Romans 1.
18, 19. makes the ground of the Righteousness of God in that dreadful
Revelation of his Wrath against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men,
(who ever they be) who hold the Truth in unrighteousness; Because that which
may be known of God, is manifest in them, (or to them.) But how or where has
God manifested this to them? The Apostle answers in the next words, Verse 20.
For the invisible things of him from the Creation of the world, are clearly
seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his Eternal Power and
Godhead, so that they are without excuse. So that, though every man have not a
Light in him that is able to save him, (as will be further cleared hereafter;)
yet he has so much as will make him guilty, and leave him without excuse.

Thirdly the light in every man is useful for conviction, 3. To convince.
for though (as was said before) when it looks upon the things of a man with a
direct act, it makes nothing good, or evil, yet when it reflects upon the Law
within, which shall be the Rule of every motion, and operation, and compares
the Action done, with that Law, the goodness, or evilness of it is discovered,
according as it bears conformity, What Conscience is.
or non-conformitie thereunto; and now Science, or a bare knowing of an Action
done, is become Conscience; for this reflex Act of the soul is called
Conscience; that is, a knowing, together with something else, as when the
understanding considers what is done, in conjunction with a Law, according to
which it ought to be done; thus the Spirit of a man, which is the Candle of the
Lord, does manifest the deed done, and the Law discovers the quallitie of the
Action, according to that of the Apostle, The knowledge of sin is by the Law.
Romans 3. 20. By the Law is the knowledge of sin; were there not a Law, there
would be no Transgression, and were not the Law looked upon, and the Action
compared with it, there would be no such thing as Conscience; but when deeds
are laid before the Law, as a Glass shows not only the face, but the spots
that are in it, so it will give a true report of their regularitie, or
irregularitie, of their goodness, or badness; and suitable thereto will its
Sentence be, and Answerable to the Sentence the Law pronounces, will be the
excusations or accusations of the person, according to Romans 2. 15. Which show
the work of the Law written in their hearts, their Consciences also bearing
witness, and their thoughts mean while excusing, or accusing one another.

Hence I say it comes to pass, that when a man, a mere natural man, refuses
to follow this light of direction, in doing what is right, What is the Lord
Witness in all men.
he is convinced in himself that he guilty, his Conscience troubles him, and
judges him, and is a Witness for the Lord that he is righteous when he
judges, according to that saying of the Apostle, Romans 3. 19. Now we know that
what things soever the Law says, it says to them who are under the Law; that
every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God, or
be subject to the judgment of God, not having a word to object, why Sentence
should not be executed, because they have Transgressed.

This light was that which manifested to Adam his Transgression, What it was
that manifested to Adam and Juda^ their transgression.
convinced him of his guilt, tormented him with fear, and made him hide himself
from the presence of the Lord, Genesis 3. 10. I heard thy voice in the Garden, and
was afraid, because I was naked, and I hid my self; and as it was then, so it
has been ever since, and will be still, that if any man transgress that Rule,
and Law that is written in the heart of every natural man, there is a light set
up in his conscience which will accuse him, be a witness against him, torment
him, and condemn him, according to that testimony before mentioned, Romans 2.
15. and 1 John 3. 20. this manifested to Judas his sin, and caused him to bring
again the money, and confess he had sinned.

And more then this is not needful by way of Answer to H. W. or any other
person, demanding where that witness is that does condemn, and what that was
which caused Judas to bring again the money, and to confess that he had sinned,
in that he had betrayed the innocent blood.

Fourthly, 4. To feel after God as Creator.
there is yet a further use of this light, common to all men, it does not only
make manifest, direct and convince, but is able also to know much of God as a
Creator, and Law giver, at least his eternal power and Godhead, by the works of
the Creation which are seen; Romans 1. 19, 20. and to feel, and seek after him,
as such, Acts 17. 27, 28. That they should seek the Lord if happily they might
feel after him, and find him, though he be not far from every one of us, for
in him we live move, and have our being etc.

Thus for the light in all men, or common to all men good and bad, believers
and Infidels, may go and serve for the fore mentioned excellent uses, even
since by trasgression man fell from his created integrity, the sum whereof is
briefly this.

Every man has a light springing up with him in his natural birth, The su^ of
that which the Light in every man since the fall can do.
whereby he is enbabled to see himself quite through, and to know all his own
inward motions, and outward actions, and to look upon things that are made
without, and upon a Law of works within, written in his heart, and thereby we
know something of his Creator, and of his own duty, what is right to be done,
^^d not only so, but by reflecting upon that Law, he may see the regularitie,
or inregularitie of his own actions, and according to their conformity or
non-conformitie thereto, may have peace, (a legal peace) or trouble in his
conscience, and this it may do where Christ as the way, the truth, and the
life, is not so much heard of, thus it was with Adam, the light, and Law within
him first convinces him of sin; troubles, and torments him so, that he runs to
hide himself from the presence of God, Genesis 3. 10. I was afraid, and hid my
self, before the promise of grace was held forth in the seed of the woman, ver.
15.

And thus having declared how much is to be acknowledged concerning the light
within common to all men, The Light in every man is a great, an excellent and
necessary Light.
whereby it evidently appears to be a great, an excellent, and in many respects
a very necessary light; I proceed to speak of the second branch namely,

What the remaining Light in every man cannot do. 2. What it cannot do since
the fall.


But first by the way it ought to be remembered, that the light whereof we
speak, (whether we respect the Candlelight of man's spirit, or the Light of the
Law written in his heart) is a natural Light, It is a n^tural light.
that is a Light that is in the nature of all men; for though it be true, that
if this Light be considered abstractly, and apart, Perse, or sensu diviso.
or with respect to its Author, and efficient cause, the Father of Lights and
Spirits, it is Spiritual, in which sense not only the Law as the Apostle
speaks, Romans 7. 14. but all Light whatsoever may be called Spiritual; yet when
this Light is considered as united to its subject, Subjective, or sensu
Composito:
and by the Law of Creation, according to the good pleasure of the Creator, put
into the nature of man, for the enabling him as a man to perform that obedience
which God requires of him, for his own glory, thus it is a natural Light, or a
Light flowing from the principles of nature, without which (as was said before)
there could not be a man; so that as there is a natural man, (1 Cor. 2. 14.) a
natural mind, a natural understanding, a natural conscience, so is there a
natural Light in man.

This is evident from the Apostles words Romans 2. 14. For when the Gentiles
(that is unconverted Gentiles) which have not the Law, do by nature the things
contained in the Law, these having not the Law, are a Law to themselves. Mark
here, they do the things contained in the Law, but how? the Apostle answers,
((...)) by nature, that is, by the Light of nature, or by natural internal
Light, there being no other inward guide, but Light; so when the Apostle says,
1 Cor. 11. 14. Does not nature it self teach? etc. It must be understood of
inward Light, which is natural; and it remains, that I show what this Light
cannot do.

Notwithstanding this Light of nature, remaining in man since the fall, In what
respects the light within every man is Insufficient.
be an excellent Light, and very useful, as has been said, yet in several
respects it is ^o deficient, and useless, even in those things that concern his
everlasting happiness, that unless the help of a greater Light be given in for
his relief, he will perish everlastingly.

For first, 1. It cannot bring, any man to life
it is utterly unable to bring any man to life that does most exactly obey, and
follow it, its true the Law which is a Light in a natural man's heart, was
ordained to life, that is, to be a Rule, which if man had obeyed, he should
have had life as a just and equal reward of his obedience, according to that of
the Apostle, Romans 7. 10. The Commandment which was ordained to life, etc. and
Romans 4 4. Now to him that works, is the reward not reckoned of Grace, The
tenor of the Law of Works.
but of debt. And this was the tenor of the Law, Do, and live, as the Scripture
testifies, Romans 10. 5. For Moses describes the righteousness which is of the
Law, that the man which does those things, shall live by them: But when sin
entered into the world by Adam, and death by sin, and so passed upon all men,
for that all have sinned in him, according to Romans 5. 12. Wherefore as by one
man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all
men, [(...)] in whom all have sinned.

Now I say, Adam is driven out of Paradise, and a flaming sword that turns
every way, guards the way of the Tree of Life, that neither he, nor any of his
posterity (over whom the death reigned, though they had not sinned after the
similitude of Adam^ transgression, Romans 5. 14.) could enter into the Life by
the Gate of doing or working, as the Apostle teaches Romans 3. 20 Therefore by
the deeds of the Law there shall no flesh be justified in his sight; for now
all being under sin, Romans 3. 9. and subject to the judgment of God, Romans 3.
19. the Law can only make known the transgression to the sinner, Romans 3. 20.
for by the Law is the knowledge of sin, but cannot offer the least help, grace,
mercy, compassion or life, it wounds him, and leaves him, but pours in neither
oil nor wine, that is the work of Jesus Christ the good Samaritan, by whom
comes grace and truth, John 1. 17. it knows nothing but pure Justice, can speak
nothing but wrath and the curse to the offender, according to that Romans 4. 15.
Because the Law works wrath; and Gal. 3. 10. Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things which are written in the Book of the Law, to do
them. Nay, though Adam after the first transgression had turned, or any of his
posterity should turn to the Candlelight of their own spirit within them, and
by the help thereof to the Light of the Law written in their hearts, and should
most exactly obey it as their Rule, and never offend it more, which
neverthelesels since the fall it is imposble for any man to do; yet so weak is
the Law, that it could not give them life, as the holy Spirit testifies, Gal.
3: 21. If there had been a Law given which could have given life, verily
righteousness should have been by the Law. And Gal. 2. 21. If righteousness
come by the Law, then is Christ dead in vain. I say, such is the weakness of
the Law, that it cannot give life, not in respect of it self, (for it is holy,
just and good, Romans 7. 12. and able to give life to the doers of it) but in
respect of its subjects, who through the weakness of the flesh, cannot fulfill
it, Romans 8. 3. For what the Law could not do in that it was weak through the
flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin,
condemned sin in the flesh.

Secondly, 2. It cannot discover the Redeemer, it knows nothing of the Gospel
Mystery.
As the Light of which we speak, cannot give, nor lead to life, so it knows
not, nor can make any discovery of the Redeemer, who only can give life; it is
not acquainted with the precious Gospel-Mysterie hid in God, it knows nothing
of the good pleasure and purpose of Grace in God to restore fallen man to life
and communion with himself by Jesus Christ.

For the clearing whereof, let it be observed, That the Scripture does
abundantly testify,

1. That God purposed in himself from Eternity to restore man to life by Jesus
Christ, Which is cleared in several particulars.
and no other way (who therefore is most rightly callled the repairer of the
breach, the restore^ of paths to dwell in, Isa. 58. 12. and the restorer of
life, Ruth 4. 15.) And

2. That Christ only can give a new life; and 3. That he only is the way to
the Father, as may be seen in these few instances, Ephesians. 1. 4. According as he
has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world -- 5. Having
predestined us unto the Adoption of Children by Jesus Christ unto himself,
according to the good pleasure of his will. Chap. 3. 11. According to the
Eternal Purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord. That Christ only
can give life, see 1 Cor. 15. 45. And so it is written, The first man Adam was
made a living soul, the last Adam was made a quickening spirit. John 10. 20. I
am come, that they might have life, and that they might have it more
abundantly. Ver. 28. I give unto thee Eternal life. John 6. 57. He that eats
me, even he shall live by me. 1 Jo. 5. 12. He that has the Son, has life,
etc. And he also is the new and living way to the Father, Heb. 10. 19, 20.
Having therefore Brethren, boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of
Jesus, by a new and living way whic^h he has consecrated for us, through the
vail, that is to say, his flesh. None knows the Father but the Son, and he to
whomsoever the Son will reveal him, Matthew. 11. 27. Nor can any come to the
Father, but through this new and living way. There Is no other entrance into the
Paradise of God, and to the Tree of Life, but only by Jesus Christ, Rev. 2. 7.
And therefore such Teachers as (excluding the Mediator) do affirm, That as Adam
fell from God by departing from the Light within him, even so is he recovered
and restored by returning and yielding obedience to that Light within; do lead
people from Christ Jesus the true way, to the Law, that old deadly Gate,
through which it is impossible for any of the sons of Adam to enter and live.
They that would lead men unto God by a perfection of obedience in themselves,
and not by says in a crucified Christ, as the only way into the holiest,
instead of bringing them into. Heaven, to life and peace with God, do shut up
the Kingdom against them: No man by the endeavors of the highest perfection of
Reason, or natural speculations of the Divinity, will ever find access to God
upon a Mercy-seat, until he come to acknowledge the flesh or dead body of
Christ to be the only way consecrated and prepared for him, Heb. 10. 29, 30.

2. That the Light that is in every man knows not this mystery of Christ, nor
is able to make any discovery of it, as is evident from Ephesians. 3. 9. where the
holy Spirit testifies, That it has been hid in God from the beginning of the
World: And to make all men see what is the fellowship of the Mystery which
from the beginning of the world has been hid in God, who created all things by
Jesus Christ, to the intent that now unto Principalities and Powers in heavenly
places, might be known by the Church the manifold wisdom of God.

Mark here, it was hid from the beginning of the World; so that neither all the
Light in Adam in his innocence, nor in the holy Angels, knew it, how much less
could the Candlelight of man's Spirit since the fall, by any force remaining in
it, enter into this great secret? Does not Christ himself tell us plainly, That
these things are hid from the wise? Matthew. 11. 25. I thank thee. O Father, Lord
of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and the
prudent, and have revealed them unto babes. And does not Paul say when he
preached the Gospel, That he spoke the wisdom of God in a Mystery, which none
of the Princes of this World knew, 1 Cor. 2. 7, 8. But we speak the Wisdom of
God in a Mystery, even the hidden Mystetie which God ordained before the world
to our glory, which none of the Princes of this world knew; for had they known
it, they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory? And does not the same
Paul, who was a learned man, brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, and instructed
according to the perfect manner of the Law, Acts 22. 3. And as touching the
righteousness thereof, blameless, Phil. 3. 6. plainly declare, That before his
Conversion (notwithstanding all his Light and Learning, and all his care to
follow that Light to the utmost, for he had lived in all good Conscience before
God until that day, Acts 23. 1.) he was ignorant of these things, and utterly
unable with all his natural and acquired parts, to come to the knowledge of
them: Why else (if it was not so) did he so violently persecute the Saints, as
appears at large in Acts 8. 3. and 9. 1. and 22. 5, 9, 19, 20 -- and 26. 10,
11. And how else could he think with himself, That he ought to do many things
contrary to the Name of Jesus of Nazareth, Acts 26. 9. And kick against the
pricks, and persecute the Lord Jesus, ver. 14, 15. But that the Light within
(which he was faithful to) was unable to make known unto him the true Jesus,
and that it was so, he himself does yet further declare in those words, Who are
thou Lord? Acts 26. 15. and in 1 Timothy 1. 13^ where he confesses he had been a
blasphemer, a persecutor, and injurious, yet had obtained mercy, because he did
it ignorantly in unbelief.

Thirdly, 3. It knows not the law of faith.
As the Light in every man knows not the Redeemer, who according to Gods
Eternal Purpose, is the Author of Eternal Salvation to all them that obey him,
Heb. 5. 9. So it is altogether unable to discover the way and means whereby the
Redeemer, and with him life and happiness is to be received and enjoyed; that
is, it knows nothing of the Law of Faith mentioned by the Apostle, Romans 3. 27.
The tenor whereof is this, That whosoever believes in Jesus Christ, The tenor
of the Law of Faith.
shall not perish, but have everlasting life, according to John 3 15, 16. For
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. The knowledge
of this Law sprung not up with mankind in nature, it was not written in the
heart of natural man as a thing just and equal. Adam's Light only showed him
what was just to be done, and when he had sinned, convinced him, and passed
sentence upon him, and there left him in his misery, not affording any
direction or help for his recovery, which made him fear, and hide himself, Genesis
3. 10.

Then was the great fountain of free Grace opened, and by the occasion of the
transgression and misery of man, this Law of Faith was added, and founded upon
Christ in that Gracious Promise, Genesis 3. 15. The seed of the woman shall break
the head of the Serpent; The law of Faith is not natural but supernatural.
this Law is not natural, but supernatural, not springing up together with man,
as that of works, but added to show the exceeding riches of the Grace of God in
his kindness to poor sinners through Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 2. 7. which is as far
above the reach of a natural man to know, as the Heavens are above the Earth,
yea as the thoughts of God are above the thoughts of man, Though vain man would
be wise, yet he is born like a wild Asses Colt, Job 11. 12. Its above the reach
of his reason, to conceive how Faith in a crucified Christ, should be the way
to save a sinner; and hence it is, that the preaching of a Christ crucified,
for the obedience of Faith, is to the Greeks soolishness, 1 Cor. 1. 23. he is
not able by all his Candlelight, to discover this mystery of the hidden
wisdom of God, according to that divine Testimony, 1 Cor. 2. 9, 14. Eye has
not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things
which God has prepared for them that love him; but the natural man receives
not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither
can he know them, because they are Spiritually discerned; the truth hereof will
yet further appear, by considering that Querie, Acts 2. 37. Men and brethren,
what shall we do? and that of the Jailer, Acts 16. 30. Sirs, what must I do to
be saved? which do clearly argue, that these men now prict in their hearts, and
wounded in their consciences, had no sufficient Light, nor understanding, to
direct themselves to a remedy, and therefore they ask, What shall we do.

And as this Light cannot discover the Law of Faith, 4. I^ cannot convince a
man that his not believing in Christ is a sin.
so it cannot convince any man, that his not believing in Christ is a sin; this
is the proper work of the Spirit, the Comforter, as the Scripture testifies,
John 16. 7, 8, 9. Nevertheless I tell you the truth, it is expedient that I go
away, for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you, but if I
depart I will send him unto you, and when he is come, he will reprove (or
convince) the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment; of sin,
because they believe not in me, etc.

In as much then as it is clearly manifest, What light it is that can discover
these great Mysteries.
that the natural man with all his Light, is unable to reach these great
mysteries, this gives occasion to speak somewhat briefly of that light which
can reveal and make them manifest, which will be found to be a Light, as far
exceeding the Light of the natural man in glory, as the ministration of the
Gospel exceeds the ministration of the Law in glory: 2 Cor. 3. 11. For if that
which is done away be glorious, how much more that which remains is glorious?
as the things discovered, to wit, the glorious Gospel of Christ, the knowledge
of the glory (that is the goodness and mercy) of God in the Face of Jesus
Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 6. are more glorious, so is the Light discovering them, It is
the light of Christ Jesus as Mediator, which irradiates the soul with the
knowledge of Gospel Mysteries
hence it is called the mavelous Light of God, 1. Pet. 2. 9. and it is no
other then the Light of Christ Jesus as Mediator between God and man, 1 Timothy 2.
5. which does irradiate the soul of man with the knowledge of these great
mysteries, agreeable to that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 36. 9. In thy Light we
shall see Light: He is given to be a Light of the Gentiles, Acts 13. 47. He
only being in the Bosom of the Father, can reveal him, according as himself
does witness, Math. 11. 27. Neither knows any man the Father save the Son,
and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him, Joh. 1. 18. No man has seen God
at any time, the only begotten Son which is in the Bosom of the Father, he
has declared Him.

The invisible, and inaccessable God coming down in the man Christ Jesus, which
is the great mystery of godliness, God manifest in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3. 16.
makes all the glory of his goodness and mercy to appear in the Face of Jesus
Christ: as he said to Moses, Exo. 33. 19. I will make all my goodness to pass
before thee; hence he is said to be the brightness of his glory, Heb. 113. now
as Christ is the shining forth of the Fathers glory, so it is he only, that
shines into the hearts of all that believe on him, the Light of the konwledge
of the glory of God; as in the first creation God made all things by the word,
so in the new creation, or new creature all things wrought by the Word made
flesh, The great Agent by which Christ works, is his Spirit.
who is the one Mediator between God and man, 1 Timothy 2. 5. and the great Agent
by which Christ works, is his Holy Spirit, that Spirit which the world never
saw, nor can receive, Joh. 14. 17. By this Spirit sent forth he does reveal the
misterious things of the Gospel, even the hidden wisdom of God concerning
Christ and the new creature, which was not written in the heart of man, nor
could be known by the wisdom of this world, as it is evident in 1 Cor. 2. 9,
10, 11, 12. Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have entered into the
heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him, but
God has revealed them unto us by his Spirit, for the Spirit searches all
things, yea the deep things of God, even so the things of God knows no man
but the Spirit of God; now we have received not the Spirit of the world, but
the Spirit which is of god, that we might know the things that are freely given
to us of God; thus the same Apostle says, that his knowledge in the mystery of
Christ was revealed unto him by the Spirit, Ephesians. 3. 4, 5. Christ does no other
way inlighten the eye of the understanding but by his Spirit: Ephesians. 1. 17. That
the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory, may give unto you the
Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him, the eyes of your
understanding being enlightened, etc.

This is that Spirit that teaches all things, John. 14. 26. that guides into
all truth, Joh. 16. 13.

And because none but new creatures can receive this new Light, None partakers
of this Light, but new Creatures.
according to Joh 3. 3. Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom
of God, therefore this Light is to all that have it, the Light of life, Joh. 8.
12. He that follows me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the Light
of life; the same Spirit that inlightens, does regenerate and renew, Tit. 3. 5.
According to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and
renewing of the Holy Ghost, and so not every man that comes into the world, but
he that is born of the Spirit, Joh. 3. 5. and made a new creature, 2 Cor. 5.
17. (according to that Gospel-promise, Ezekiel. 36. 26 A new heart will I give
you, and a new spirit will I put within you) is enlightened with the mavelous
Light of Christ.

By this Spirit also does he write this new Law of Faith in their hearts, The
law of faith is writ^ten in the he^^ of a new cre^^ture.
called the Law of the Spirit of Life which is in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 2.
according to that of the Apostle, Heb. 8. 10. I will put my Laws in their
minds, and write them in their hearts: where he speaks not of the Law of works,
which is writ in the Natural man's heart, but of the Law of the new Covenant,
which the Apostle is there treating of, and which God would put into their
hearts, who were in Covenant with him, and whose sins and iniquities he will
remember no more. Neither does he only give a new life, a new light, a renewed
spirit, The Spirit himself dwe^^ in the heart a new creatur^
and write his Laws in their hearts by his Spirit; but (that he may cause them
to walk in his ways, Ezekiel. 26. 27. and that they may have help in themselves,
Job 6. 13.) he gives the Spirit himself to dwell in their hearts, as the same
Scripture ( Ezekiel. 26 27) testifies: And I will put my Spirit within you. So
Gal. 4. 6. And because you are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son
into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father: and so they become one spirit with the
Lord, The Spirit is that witness that every b^^liever has i^ himself.
1 Cor. 6. 17. He that is joined to the Lord is one spirit. And this is that
witness that every believer has in himself, 1 John 5. 10. He that believes on
the Son of God, has the witness in himself; a witness that he is the child of
God, Rom 8. 16. The Spirit it self bears witness with our spirits, that we
are the children of God. And while he looks at, and believes on a Christ
without him, as having done all in his own person for him, according to Romans 4.
25. Who was delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our justification.
Romans 8. 3. For what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the
flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin
condemned sin in the flesh. Heb. 9. 26. And now in the end of the world has he
appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself. And Heb. 10. 12. But this
man after he had once offered sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the
right hand of God. He also knows and has a witness in himself, that Christ
dwells in his heart, Ephesians. 3. 17. and lives in him, as Paul witnessed, Gal. 2.
20. Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. And he is the
habitation of God through the Spirit, Ephesians. 2. 27. In whom ye are builded for an
habitation of God through the Spirit. 1 John 3. 24. We know that he abides in
us by the Spirit which he has given us.

From that which has bin said, What the great mistake^ of this people is.
it does plainly appear, that the mistake of this people is very gross, who
call the light in every man Christ, and worship it as the Redeemer, and the
Lord that bought them; whereas indeed (as has been cleared) this light in
every man is but the spirit of a man, and the law written in his heart, from
the terror and condemnation whereof the Lord Jesus came to deliver.

It also appears, (...) worship the ^^^^t in every (...) as the ^^deemer, is
(...) worship an ^^ol.
that to worship this light as the Redeemer, is to worship an imaginary and
fictitious Christ, and indeed an Idol, and in effect to deny the person of the
true Jesus, who is Emmanuel, God and man in union, who in his own person
without us, not in ours, has by one offering, once for ever, wrought eternal
redemption for us, Heb. 9. 12. By his own blood, he entered in once into the
holy place, having obtained eternal Redemption for us; ^^rist is the ^^ject of
faith.
and is the alone object of Faith: yea, hence it will follow, that whosoever
affirms (as this people do) that the light in every man is Christ, is a
deceiver, and an Antichrist, ^ho is a de^^iver and an ^^tichrist.
such as the Apostle speaks of, 2 John 7. For many deceivers are entered into
the World, who confess not that Jesus Christ is come into the flesh. This is a
deceiver and an Antichrist, whom the Saints are forbidden to receive into their
house, or to bid them God speed, Verse 10. Receive him not into your house,
neither bid him God speed.

But of these and other useful Inferences, more fully after the answering of
an Objection or two, wherein all their seeming strength lies, and whereon their
greatest confidence is built.

Against that which I have said, ^n Objection ^om Joh. 1. 9. ^^swered.
there is nothing more frequently urged then that one Scripture, Joh. 1. 9.
That was the true light which lights every man that comes into the world.
This Scripture they account to be an invincible proof of their fundament all
Assertion; which in their words and writings is thus held forth: this light is
Christ, God, the Lord God, and the Lamb, the object of faith; and this true
light which is Christ, lightens not some, but every man coming into the world;
And therefore it must needs be saving. And that this light can be meant of no
other then of Christ, they further allege Joh. 8. 12, 35, 36. where it is
plainly expressed, that Christ is the light of the world.

Because I observe that that subtle Adversary Satan does get the greatest
advantage against many weak and unstable souls, through their misunderstanding
and wresting of these Scriptures, in the mean while being ignorant of his
devices; I shall endeavor, according to my measure, to declare the mind of
Christ in them: that if it be the will of the Lord, such as are taken captive
by him, may escape out of his Snares.

When it is said, that that was the true light which lights every man that
comes into the world; two things must be considered.

(1) Who this true light is. Two things to ^e considered ^oncerning ^^e true
light.


(2) How he lights every man that comes into the world. For the first, the
Scriptures do witness, that this true light is the Word God, The true l^^g is
the Word God the Creator. Not as God (...)
by whom the world was made: for as it is said, Joh. 1. 1. In the beginning was
the Word, and the Word was with God; So that which is spoken of in the 2, 3, 4,
5, 7, 8, 9, 10. verses following, is to be referred to the Word God the Creator
of all things, and not to the Word, as the Word is made flesh, as ver. 14. or
as the Word is God manifest in the flesh, as, 1 Timothy 3. 16. or as the Word is
in union with the humane nature, according to his name Emmanuel, Matthew. 1. 23.
Let the impartial and unprejudiced Reader consider what is said in every verse,
and I doubt not but he will find it according to the report given, as in the 2
verse, it is said, The same was in the beginning, that is, the same Word God,
distinct from the humanity; and so it is in the verse following. As in the 3.
verse, All things were made by him; that is, by the Word God, in the 4. verse.
In him was life, and the life was the light of men: That is, God the Word, the
Creator, who gives life and light to all men, according to that in Acts 17. 28,
29. In him we live, move, and have our being; and we are all his offspring, in
the 5. verse. And the light shines in darkness, and the darkness comprehended
it not: That is, The Word God, as it is explained in the 10. verse, He was in
the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not. Though
the Word the Creator shined as light in the world, and was not far from every
one of us, as the Apostle speaks, Acts 17. 27. and had set up a Candle in them,
whereby the eternal power and Godhead might be known by the things that were
made; yet such was the darkness of men, that they did not comprehend and
acknowledge him.

In the 7. and 8. verses it is said, John was sent to bear witness of that
light, that is, of the Word God, to wit, that God the Word was come to manifest
himself in the flesh; he bare witness, that the light which was in the world,
and by whom the world was made, and whom the world knew not, was now come to
appear in the flesh. It Is true, that John also bare witness of Christ in both
natures; as when the Word was made flesh, verse 14. it is said in the 15. verse,
John bare witness of him: and afterward, when he saw Jesus coming unto him, he
says, Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world, verse
29. Where he speaks of him as the Word made flesh, and Tabernacled amongst us:
But in the verses before mentioned, he only asserts, and proves his Divinity.
In like manner are we to understand the 9 verse, That was the true light, that
is, the Word God, the Creator and former of all things, Isa. 40. 28. was (to
wit, in the beginning, for thither the Verb in the Original in every verse,
does carry us) the true light; not a borrowed, or derived light, but the
fountain and original of all light; according to that Scripture, 1 John 1. 5.
God is light, and in him is no darkness at all. This I say is proper to the
Creator, who is the fountain of Life and Light to all beings according to their
capacities; whereas Christ as Mediator, deriveth Light from the Father, as he
does Life and Subsistence, as he himself does witness, Joh. 6. 57. I live by
the Father, etc. And thus we see who this true light is, Viz. The Word God. And
hence it may be that the word Christ is not once named in any of the first 9.
verses of the first of John, but only the Word.

2. How does he lighten every man that comes into the World? How the true
^ight lights ^very man that ^ometh into ^he World.
The Word God, or God the Word, as Creator of all things, does lighten every
man that comes into the world, by setting up in every man a Spirit, by which
he lives; which is called the Candle of the Lord, Prove. 20. 27. and by writing
a Law in his heart, of which Spirit and Law I have spoken before.

This is a true and faithful account of the Light that Lightens every man.

2. Objection.
But does not Christ say expressly, Joh. 8. 12. I am the light of the World? and
is not the Word, and the true light of whom John bare witness, Christ?

Answer.
That the true Light that lights every man that comes into the World, is the
Word, as such, I have already proved. And further I say, according to Joh. 1.
14. That the Word was made flesh, and tabernacled amongst men, and they beheld
his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father: The word made
Flesh is only called Christ.
and being imbodied in flesh, he is thenceforth, and so considered, called
Christ the Lord, or the Lords Christ, Luke 2. 11, 26. For unto us in born this
day in the City of David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. And it was
revealed unto him by the Holy Ghost, that he should not see death before he had
seen the Lords Christ. And no otherwise does he bear that name, but as he is
the Word made flesh, to be seen, and believed on: it is not the Word alone, nor
the flesh alone, but the Word and flesh in union, that is called Christ, Joh.
1. 41. We have found the Messiah, which is being interpreted, the Christ; And
is a light to lighten the Gentiles, Luke 2. 26, 32. And it was revealed unto
him by the holy Ghost, that he should not see death, before he had seen the
Lords Christ: A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people
Israel. Till then, there was no such thing as a Christ, or a light to the
Gentiles, but only in a promise.

The Word being thus made flesh, The Word made flesh, does only bring life and
mortality to light.
manifested and seen, 1. Joh. 1. 2. brought life and immortality to light
through the Gospel, by his appearing, 2 Timothy 1. 9, 10. Who has saved us, and
called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to
his own purpose and grace which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world
began, but is now made manifest by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ,
who has abolished death, and brought life and immortality to light through the
Gospel. Now that purpose of grace and love, (which was in the Fathers bosom
before the world began, which was promised, Genesis 3. 15. The seed of the woman
shall break the head of the serpent; and from that time believed and expected
by all the faithful) appears by this manifestation of God in the flesh, Tit. 2.
11. For the grace of God that brings salvation to all men has appeared. And
3. 4. But after that the kindness and love of God our Savior toward man
appeared, etc.

And thus is Christ said to come a light into the world, The Word made flesh^
does only lig^^ten savingly those that blieve on hi^
not to lighten every man that comes into the world, but only those that
believe on him, according to that testimony, Joh. 12. 46. I am come a light
into the world, that whosoever believes on me should not abide in darkness.
This also is that light mentioned Joh. 3. 19. And this is the condemnation,
that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather then light.
And Joh. 8. 12. I am the light of the world, etc.

This Word made flesh is he that was promised to be a covenant to the people,
The Word made flesh is given for a Covenant.
and a light to the Gentiles, Isai. 42. 1, 6, 7. Behold my servant whom I
uphold, mine elect in whom my soul delights; I have put my Spirit upon him,
he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles. I the Lord have called thee in
righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for
a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles, to open the blind eyes,
The light g^^ven by the Word made flesh, is far more excelle^^ then the lig^^
set up in ever^^ man, by the Word the Creator,
etc. Who brings into the world a life and light far exceeding that light and
life that was set up in every man that comes into the world by the Word the
Creator: which more excellent life and light brought in by the Son, none
receive but such only as receive the Son, Joh. 1. 12. and are born again, Joh.
3. 3. 1 John 5. 12. He that has the Son, has life; and he that has not the
Son, has not life. He also that has the Son has light, Ephesians. 5. 14. But till
a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God, Joh. 3. 3. nor perceive
the things of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2. 14. But the natural man receives not the
things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him; neither can he
know them, because they are spiritually discerned: but is dead in trespasses
and sins, The misunder^standing of Joh. 1. 9. is from a neglect^ of a distinct
consideration of the Word, and the Word made flesh.
Ephesians. 2. 1, 5. and darkness, as to this new life, and Christ, Ephesians. 5. 8.

The neglect of this distinction of the Word, and the Word made flesh, (which
is so plainly set down in the Scripture, as has been showed) and of the
properties belonging to either of them, is the ground of the great mistake of
many, who not considering what is testified of the Word as Creator, do confound
that light which is set up by him as such, in every man, with that light which
he gives as he is the Word made flesh.

And thence do call that light Christ, and so saving, which is but the spirit
of a man, and the law written in his heart, springing up with his nature in the
Creation; and therefore can neither be Christ, nor saving, as has been already
proved.

That there ought to be care thus to distinguish, ^^e necessity the
fore^entioned ^^stinction ^^ared in ^ree parti^lars.
it will be made further evident by considering these following particulars.

1. That Christ is the only Mediator between God and man, as the Scripture
testifies, 1 Timothy 2. 5. For there is one God, and one mediator between God and
man, the man Christ Jesus.

2. That in Christ there are two whole, perfect and distinct natures, the
Godhead and the Manhood, inseparably joined together in one person; which is an
Article of faith to which the Scriptures give full testimony, as may be seen in
these few instances: Luke 1. 35. And the angel answered and said unto her, The
holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow
thee: therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee, shall be
called the Son of God. Col. 2. 9. For in him dwells all the fullness of the
Godhead bodily. Gal. 4 4. But when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth
his Son made of a woman, made under the law. 1. Tim. 3 16. And without
controversy great is the mystery of godliness, God manifest in the flesh,
justified in the spirit, seen of angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed
on in the world, received up into glory. Romans 1. 3, 4. -- Concerning his Son
Jesus Christ our Lord, who was made of the seed of David according to the
flesh, and declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the spirit of
holiness, by the resurrection from the dead.

3. That Christ is often mentioned where the two natures, inseparably joined
together in his person, are distinctly spoken of; that is, the matter may
respect, and be applicable to the properties of one nature, and not of the
other: as when he says, I and my Father are one, Joh. 10. 30. he speaks of his
divine nature; but when he says in the same chapter, verse. 15. I lay down my
life for the sheep, he has respect to his humane nature. As he is God, he is
equal with the Father; as he is man, he lays down his life for the sheep: and
yet one and the same Christ, who is God and man, speaks in both places. This is
also evident in Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8. In like manner when Christ says, I am the
root and offspring of David, Rev. 22. 16. he speaks distinctly of both
natures: he is the root of David, as he is God; the offspring of David, as he
is man. So when it is said of the Son, Heb. 1. 2. That the world was made by
him; and in the next verse, that by himself he purged our sin: we must
distinguish, and say, The world was made by him as God, and he purged away sin
as Mediator by the sacrifice of himself, Heb. 9. 26. and 10. 12. This man,
after he had offered one sacrifice for sin for ever. Thus, rightly to
distinguish the natures of Christ, is not to divide the Father from the Son,
nor the Son from himself; but to give to either nature that which properly,
under a distinct consideration, belongs to it; and to both in union, that which
belongs to both. Without which, the works of the Creator and Mediator, which
are manifestly distinct, would be confounded. As in the matter under debate,
concerning the Word, and the Word made flesh; the Word is God the Creator, the
Word made flesh is the Mediator. The Creator sets up a light in every man; the
Mediator gives a greater light, but, to such only as believe on him, Joh. 12.
46.

Thus having answered their Objections, though I question not but a judicious
Reader, who has taken a survey of their Principles, and shall seriously
consider what I have hitherto asserted and proved concerning the light in all
men, will easily discern both the unsoundness and absurdity of their Opinions,
and the peril and danger of the consequences necessarily flowing there from:
The opinion of this people is many waye^ injurious to Jesus Christ, and
pernicious to the souls of Men.
Yet in thankfulness to Jesus Christ, and for their sakes (whether Quakers or
others) who either through weakness of judgment, or want of due consideration,
have not taken sufficient notice of the dangerous tendencie of their Tenants,
especially of their Fundamental Opinion hitherto opposed; I shall endeavor in
a few Inferences from the premises, to show how injurious it is to the true
Jesus, who is Immanuel, the Word made flesh, God and man in union; and how
pernicious and destructive such a sandy foundation will prove to precious souls.

And first, 1. It denies the great mystery of Godliness,
it is evident that this Opinion is guilty of denying the great mystery of
godliness, which, as the Apostle affirms, 1 Timothy 3. ^6. is God manifest in the
flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of angels, preached unto the Gentiles,
believed on in the world, received up into glory. In which words the Apostle
tells us, that the true Christ (for of him he speaks) is God manifest in the
flesh; and that this God-man was justified in the spirit, and assumed into
glory: and also says, that this God-man was seen of angels, preached unto the
Gentiles, and believed on in the world. But this people (as the Spirit speaks
expressly some should do in the later times, 1 Timothy 4. 1.) do revolt or depart
from the faith of this great mystery; affirming, that the light that is in
every man is Christ, the Redeemer. And if so, where then is the person of
Christ? where is God manifest in the flesh? This is denied in their saying that
the light without the flesh is the true Christ; as also is the assumption of
this God-man to the throne of glory.

In like manner do they, ^^d the Lord at bought ^^em.
who hold this opinion, deny the Lord that bought them, according to that
prophecy of the later times, 2 Pet. 2. 1. For the Lord that bought them is no
other then God manifest in the flesh, who purchased them with his own blood,
Acts 20. 28. which is contradicted and denied by this opinion, which says that
the light alone is the Redeemer.

Secondly, It sets up an ^^ol.
this Opinion is guilty of setting up a gross and dangerous Idol; which will
appear to any man, who shall impartially consider, and compare this Opinion
with the description of an Idol.

An Idol is any thing (besides the true God) that man's imagination seigns to it
self to be a God, ^^hat an I^^ol is.
and to which he ascribes a Deity, whether it be exhibited to the body or
mind: Exodus 20. 3. Thou shall have no other Gods besides me. 1 John 5. 21.
Keep your selves from idols.

Now this people do set up, and call the light that is in every man, God,
Christ, the Spirit; which yet is not God, nor Christ, nor the Spirit, as has
been proved: Therefore they set up an Idol in stead of Christ. And inasmuch as
it is light, and a light within, and has a greater likeness to God then other
representations of him have which are set up in stead of the true light; by so
much it is a greater and more dangerous Idol.

The more like any thing is to God, the sooner is man induced to call it God
himself: therefore Satan, who seeks the possession of Gods throne, does more
effectually deceive, and draw men to worship him as God, when he appears as an
angel of light, 2 Cor. 1. 14.

Thirdly, 3. It opens a way to the Doctrine of Demons, and the worship of the
Devil.
admit this Idol, this grand lie, for the corner stone, and the whole
superstructure will consist of lies: for, as the Apostle observes, 1 Timothy 4. 1.
when men have revolted from the faith of the great mystery of godliness, they
presently attend to erroneous doctrines, to wit, the doctrines of Demons;
either to doctrines taught by Demons or devils, or to doctrines concerning
devils, (as Mede understands the place.) Those are the very Rocks which this
people (concerning the faith having made shipwreck) do further run their souls
upon.

For, having set up this Idol (the light that is in every man that comes into
the world) as God, and as the Anointing, which is to be attended and obeyed as
their Teacher; they do not only open a way for Satan being transformed as an
angel of light to suggest unto them as many lies and erroneous doctrines as he
pleases, (of which I shall name some afterward) but while they do worship
that light as God, they do deifie and worship Angels.

Fourthly, 4. It leads (...) to slight (...) Scripture (...) rule, and walk
after t^^ own lusts.
this Opinion does necessarily lead all such as own it, and are true unto it,
to walk according to the suggestions and motions of their own minds, without
any respect had to the Scripture as a rule: for, as they affirm that the light
in all men is Christ, and is the same Anointing both in believers and
unbelievers; so they say, it is a perfect rule in every man's conscience,
whereby he ought to be guided. Whence it will unavoidably follow, that
whosoever shall give up himself to obey and be guided by this light as a
perfect rule, will no longer hold himself obliged to walk after a certain
Scriptural rule, but must follow the uncertain motions in his own mind,
whether those motions lead to actions good or evil. And hence it has come to
pass, that some who have followed this guide, have been led to many heady,
rash, unclean, unjust actions, altogether unwarrantable by the rule of the
Scripture of truth. Of such as these the Apostle speaks, 2 Pet. 3. 3. where he
foretells that in the last days there should come such as would scoff at the
second personal coming of Christ (as this people do) walking after their own
lusts; that is, according to the Greek, walking after that which is in their
own minds.

Fifthly: 5. It opens door to grea^^ confusion.
Open this as the first door of entrance, (as they do) and it leads into a
Babel of confusion and errors.

No sooner is a man entered in at this deadly gate, but he is in the City To^u,
where first (if his eyes be anointed with eye salve by the true Jesus) he may
behold this Image of Jealousy (i. e. the light that is in every man that comes
into the world) set up and worshipped in prayers and praises; Their Worship is
Idolatry.
all the honor and attributes due to the true Redeemer alone, being ascribed
to it: which is an idolatry so much worse then that of Jeroboam, or of the
Papists, by how much it is more mysterious, and in show more spiritual, and so
less discernable; whence it comes to pass that multitudes are ensnared by it,
according to that, None but Idolaters admitted into the number of their
Priends. The manner of their Worship very confused, as it was practiced in
their Meetings in Lancaster. The names of their Assemblies, and members thereof.
2 Pet. 2. 2. Many shall follow their pernicious ways.

The falling down to this Image, is that whereby every particular person is
matriculated or registered into their Sotiety of Friends: for now, and not
before, (as they say) he has received the Truth; and, notwithstanding many
defects, is accepted as a friend.

The next thing to be beheld, is a company of worshippers, in great confusion,
praying and singing, or teaching and singing, all or many together with loud
voices; contrary to 1 Cor. 14. 33, 40. For God is not the author of confusion,
but of peace, as in all the Churches of the Saints. Let all things be done
decently and in order.

If he ask how this company is called, the answer will be, A Meeting, not A
Church; and the particular members, Friends, not Brethren and Sisters. For
though the Apostles and primitive Saints constantly called the Assemblies
gathered into the fellowship of the Gospel Churches, and the particular members
thereof Brethren and Sisters; yet this people, having set up another Jesus and
Gospel then that which the Apostles preached, do also characterize themselves
by new names. Though he cannot find the name or office of Pastor, Teacher,
Elder, Deacon, which Christ set in his Church, in this company, nor hear the
Scriptures read, or alleged for proof of any of their doctrines, nor scarce
find a Bible amongst them: yet he may hear not only men, Who are their
^^achers.
but women-teachers, contrary to 1 Cor. 14. 34. Let your women keep silence in
the Churches: for it is not permitted unto them to speak, etc. 1 Timothy 2. 10,
11. Let the woman learn in silence with all subjection. But I suffer not a
woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the man, but to be in silence.
Teaching lies in the name of the Lord, and causing their weak captivated
disciples to err by their lies, as that woman Jezabel did, Rev. 2. 20.
Notwithstanding I have a few things against thee, because thou suffer that
woman Jezabel, which calls her self a prophetess, to teach, and to seduce my
servants to commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed to idols. As for
instance in a few particulars:

These Teachers affirm,

1. That the Scriptures are not the rule of faith, What doctrins are taught by
them.
and conversation to walk by; contrary to 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. All Scripture is
given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness: that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. Hence it is that
Water Baptism, the Supper of the Lord, and Censures, and other appointments of
Christ, are rejected by them.

2. That the light in every man is Scripture within.

3. That the light in every man is the perfect law of liberty, a perfect rule
in every man's conscience, where man is guided by it: And that it leads those
that are obedient to it, to purity, holiness, and uprightness. Hence they say,
what they do in obedience to this light, is done in obedience to the Lord, and
therein they sin not. So that though they speak untruths, falsely accuse,
persecute with the tongue, or otherwise do acts of injustice, etc. yet they
will not be brought to acknowledge a fault, because therein they were obedient
to their guide, and so to the Lord.

4. That the Light within every man is the object of Faith.

5. That it is a common sufficient Light; that it is Salvation to all that obey
it.

6. They teach free will.

7. They teach and set up an inherent legal righteousness, denying the imputed
righteousness of Christ, which was wrought in the person of Christ, without us;
without which none can be saved.

8. That Christ's fulfilling the Law in us, or the Spirit mortifying, and
sanctifying, and so fulfilling the Law in us, is justification.

9. That there is that in the Spiritual man, which being turned into, and
followed, can redeem, and make atonement, and that in him the atonement is
made: which destroys the atonement made by the blood of Christ.

10. They teach, that there is no coming of Christ but that within, and so deny
the Assumption of Christ, God and man, to the throne of glory, and his second
coming in his glorified person; contrary to the Scriptures of truth.

These and many more Arminian, What books these doctrine are to be found in.
Popish, and long since profligated Errors, are laid upon the forementioned
sandy foundation by the hands of their chief builders; as may be seen in the
Books of James Naylor, George Fox, Hubberthorn Deusbury, Farmworth, Burrows,
Howgill, Parnel, Mason, and others.

But having done with their first, Their foundation being rased, their whole
building will fall.
and main principle, I shall not enlarge upon their hay, wood, and stubble;
being assured, that the removing of their foundation will easily bring down
their whole building.

While I am considering and writing these things, I cannot but say, as in the
presence of the Lord, This people are objects of pity.
I bear a hearty love to their persons, and am moved with bowels of compassion
toward their precious and immortal souls; and that my soul yearns after
their recovery, and return to the true Jesus, who is the way, the truth, and
the life; and that it is only their abominable Errors that I loath, and have
levelled this discourse against.

And having thus born my testimony against that which appears in this people to
be against the mystery of Christ crucified, I have no purpose for the future to
trouble my self in making replies to any of Papers or Queries, for that I
observe a design of Satan, moving them to multiply questions, tending rather
to strife then edification; and am warned by the Apostle, to avoid such, 2 Timothy
2. 23. But foolish and unlearned questions avoid, knowing that they do gender
strifes.

Yet in as much as they have since our debate, A further Debate offered with
this people.
set many Papers upno the door, called often upon me to make good my
assertion, and have given me a paper, wherein they challenge all the Sons of
Adam to discourse with them of this their fundamental principle; though I be
nothing, and know well my insufficiency to such an undertaking, above many
others: Yet I say, if satisfaction be not received from that which is here
writ, I further declare my self willing, and ready (as far as it becomes a
prisoner) again to debate this point in difference with Geo. Fox, or any of his
friends, before the high Sheriff, or any other persons in the commission of
peace, who can regulate our meeting, if they shall require him, and me, to come
forth for that end; not doubting but in the light and strength of Christ, (...)
who teach^^ that the ^^ht in every ^^n is Christ, an Anti^^^ist.
to maintain by Scripture-evidence, what I have already asserted and proved;
And further to make it appear, That he, who shall affirm the light in every man
to be Christ, is a deceiver, and an Antichrist.

And here notwithstanding I have thus freely and faithfully declared my
judgment against the deceit of this people, ^^e reason ^^y the good ^^ings in
this ^^ople are ^entioned.
and more especially against that, which is the very Soul and life of all their
principles; I cannot let pass, without mentioning some commendable things in
them, left through my silence I should seem to condemn that which I allow.

Which that I may more orderly come unto, ^ plea for ^^od things ^ay cloak a
^esign against christ.
I shall briefly touch upon the means, or occasion of the great success, which
their way has had in the world; which will administer just ground of
Jealousy, that their pleading for those good things (which ought to be owned
by all) has rather proceeded from the Serpentine subtlety acting principally
in their leaders, to cloak and more insensibly to carry on a pernicious
design against Christ, then from a true zeal of a godly reformation, for the
honor of Christ.

The principle then here opposed, ^Vhence their ^pinion has ^ad its advan^age.
has had its advantage for acceptance and growth, with great applause of
multitudes, from some or all of these means following.

1. From the ignorance, pride, covetousness, idleness, formality, looseness,
corrupt customs, Idolatrous superstitions, and cruelty of Parish Priests, and
the generality of their hearers.

2. From the too great formality, legality, and manifold divisions of separated
Congregations.

3. From the open Testimony this people have borne against the forementioned
evils, together with a greater pretense of spirituality, unity, purity,
holiness, righteousness, gravity, zeal, and perfection in them, then did appear
in any of the former.

Antichrist does never oppose Christ more, then when he appears in a mystery
most like him: Antichrist most opposes Christ when ^he appears most like him.
when he comes in the name of Christ, and pretends to be all for Christ,
reproving much that is evil, and pleading for many commendable things. Thus our
Savior tells us, many false Christ's shall arise, Matthew. 24. 24. In Sheeps
clothing, Matthew. 7. 15. Insomuch that if it were possible, they should deceive
the very Elect.

This has bin the advantage and method of this people; Such has b^ the method
this people.
they have cried out against the priests and teachers, as hirelings, deceivers,
covetous, scandalous, etc. Against their hearers, as an ignorant,
superstitious, formal deceived people; every charge having much of truth in it:
What has rendered persons unable deal with them.
And the persons thus charged being clothed with guilt, were never able to this
day to look this people in the face, who in the mean while crying out, Lo here
is Christ, not in the multitude, not in the public assemblies, not in the
common way of worship, but amongst us a separared people, gathered and called
out of the world into a more spiritual way.

Upon these fair shows, Whence so many have embraced the false doctrine and way.
it is no wonder, that many poor harmless people (either wanting able teachers,
or being unacquainted with a Gospel-Church-way, or both) should readily embrace
every thing for truth which they speak, who had put to silence all their
hireling-teachers, and carnal professors.

This has bin the very case of this nation, there being in many parts few
(except guilty persons) to deal with them, The wrong way that ma^ny have take
i^^ to suppress their errors.
who knew no no better way to get the flies off their gauld backs, then to
crush them all at once, and with them the good and the evil together: which
when many well-meaning people perceived, they magnified these sufferers, and
received their doctrine as the orracles of God, and so easily fell into their
net, to do Homage to their new God. In the mean while these ignorant, loose,
and rash priests and people, who thus dealt with them, lost themselves, injured
the truth, and gave this people ground to glory over them.

Whereas the right course to be taken in this case, The right way to suppress
their errors.
is to distinguish between good and evil; and what is brought, either in
doctrine or manners, that is good, let it be owned, embraced, and cherished;
and what is blamed as evil, (if upon trial it be found evil) let it be put
away: thus shall we be in a better capacity to see, and deal with their most
secret delusions.

In this method I am willing to join issue with the best of this people. Do
they bear a witness against hyreling priests and teachers, against tithes, What
things are commendable, and t^ be owned in them.
against superstitious, carnal, formal worship, against swearing, against
corrupt worldly customs in any part of our conversation? herein I join with
them. Are they, at least in show and pretense, for the power of godliness as
well as form, for worshipping in spirit and truth, for justice, for
righteousness, sobriety, modesty, gravity, and whatsoever is excellent in life
and conversation? all these I allow, and am really for. Yea, what ever they can
make appear to be evil, that would I cast off with as much indignation as they;
and what further good they can show, that I have not learned, that would I
gladly embrace.

And thus (through the riches of grace) having cast out those beams which dim
the eyes of many, ^ow one may ^^me to dis^n their sent deceipts.
I can better discern the motes that lie deep in the bottom of their own eye,
and being upon equal ground with them, can tell them that all these fair
pretenses, and high expressions, are found to be a covering too short to hide
their nakedness and deceit; as will plainly appear to the unprejudiced Reader
in the foregoing discourse. And that while they call others deceivers, they
themselves are more subtle deceivers; while they call others merchants of
Babylon, and charge them for selling Christ's words, the Prophets and Apostles
words formony, though as to many the charge may be true, yet they themselves
are found in the same guilt; none sell more Babylonish ware then they, nor do
any put off their merchandise at greater rates then they, as might be instanced
in several persons, whom I forbear to 'mention; nor shall I further enlarge in
particulars of this kind, but shall commit the whole matter of this discourse
to the serious consideration of all men, and the success of it in their hearts,
to be ordered according to the good pleasure of the All-wise powerful God,
whose blessing only can make it prosperous.

If some may be warned to avoid, and others recovered out of the snare of the
devil, and brought to the acknowledgment of the great mystery of Godliness, 1 Timothy 3. 16. from the Faith whereof they have departed, and God thereby may be
glorified, the end is gained for which it was intended.

KAKOLOGOS APOKALYPTOS. OR, An Appendix to a Relation of a Debate had in the
Castle at Lancaster, Between the QUAKERS and J. W. Wherein the Evil language of
the Quakers is discovered, and compared with the language of the FALSE PROPHETS.
IT is foretold that those false prophets, Characters false Prophet in the last
days.
deceivers and Antichrists that should come in the last days, should be
boasters, proud, blasphemers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of
those that are good, heady, high-minded, 2 Timothy 3. unruly, vain talkers, Tit 1.
10. presumptuous, self-willed, speaking great swelling words of vanity, 2 Pet.
2. 10, 18. raging waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame, Jude 13.
Whether these characters do not eminently appear in some of these people, by
this which follows; and whether (notwithstanding their boasting of
perfection, and a sinless state) they declare not themselves to be the servants
of corruption: I leave to be considered by all that are sober, impartial, and
wise; yea, even by such of themselves as are not wholly void of the fear of God
in their hearts.

For my own part, The spirit of the Quakers and of the Dragon compared.
though I can say that (through the goodness of God) I have had converse with
Christians in several Forms, and in several Nations, above thirty years; yet I
never met with a spirit in any sort of Professors more like those unclean
spirits which are said to come out of the mouth of the Dragon, the Beast, and
the false Prophet, then this which has manifested it self in the Magisterial
expressions hereafter mentioned in this Paper.

Had I been mistaken in my Assertion, and my Arguments brought to prove it; or
had I affirmed any thing in my Paper derogator from the Truth of Christ: Such
as oppose themselves should be answered in meekness.
it would have become them, or at least George Fox, if he was (as Margaret Fell
affirms) called from the Shoo-makers Trade, of the Lord, to his work and
service, as the Apostles were) to have advised them as Paul did, (2 Timothy 2.
25.) to have answered in meekness.

But contrariwise, The Quakers in stead of Answers return Invectives.
in stead of a meek Answer to my Scriptural Arguments, after my Paper had been
many days in their hands, they send forth many infamous Libels, stuffed with
Invectives, most of them being put into the hands of the Jailer and Prisoners
before they came to mine; wherein, besides the unsavory language following,
they do their utmost to render me odious, and obnoxious to the greatest danger,
and that by dark and dubious insinuations; as, That it is known what I have
been, and, Some things else they have which must not yet be manifested, etc.

By this subtle means, the more to amuse the people, and beget in them an
opinion of me as some heinous offender.

Surely methinks they should not be so weak, Calumniation no refutation.
as to imagine that these unchristian calumniations should pass with wiser men
for a sufficient refutation of what I have writ. And if hereby they think to
affright me, they are greatly mistaken: for I fear nothing that they or any
others can do to hurt my unstained reputation amongst men.

I shall therefore pass by many biting, false, scornful, jeering and frothy
expressions in their published Papers, and only mention some few of those
censures, judgings, cursings, which like a flood they have sent out against me;
with their names who have published their Papers, or sent them open. Such as
have sent Sealed Letters, their names are concealed.

Thomas Gurwen in a Paper writes thus: The Quakers maledictions.


John Wigans, what a rage and chafe art thou in! and how theu swellest, and
fretieth! Oh the plagues of God will be thy portion, and be poured out upon thy
head.

Thou was so full of rage, and bitterness, and envy and malice in thy heart.

Thou have raked and scraped a deal of chaff, and rabling stuff which came out
of the bottomless pit.

In another Paper:

A filthy dreamer, who vomits up thy own shame.

Thy Book will be thy utter overthrow: for it is no more to me tho^^ chaff, and
dirt under my feet.

In another Paper:

Thy ill-bred behavior, thy ill-bred saucy tongue, unnurtured and unbred: and
besides thy saucy language.

Thy hypocrisy, and saucy tongue, and unmanner liness, and ill breeding.

Whether this was endited by Thomas Curwen Husbandman, or dictated by George
Fox Shoo-maker, I know not: but when he has showed (as he has not) in what
particulars I have manifested ill-bred behavior, saucy, unnurtured,
unmannerly language, I may possibly learn better, but never in this man's
School. Let the Wise judge what manner are most likely to be learned from this
master of Cacologie.

Margaret Fell in one Letter:

Thou manifests thy gainsaying spirit, Core-like, gainsaying and resisting of
the truth, as Jannes and Jambres did; that is to say, the light with the which
every man is enlightened, is not the light of Christ, nor a saving light. Thou
art without God in the world. Thou have manifested thy self to be out of the
first step that leads to Christianity, and art a minister of darkness. Thy foul
sinful prayers are abominable.

They fleshly performances are but grass and chaff.

All thy rotten bypocritical performances.

Thou have committed sacrilege, and have blasphemed against the holy Spirit of
God; which never will be forgiven thee in this world, nor in that which is to
come. Thou art under it, and it remains upon thee for ever. That foul and
unclean spirit that thou art of. Thou manifests thy dark sottish spirit.

In a second Letter:

Thou begins with a lie, and ends with the devil, and sets John Wigan next to
him, as if thou wast his head-Vicegerent: but certainly thou art a great zealot
for him. All such unclean spirits as thine is. Thy black defiled heart and
conscience. Thou have manifested thy self to be a child of darkness. What have
thou to do to take the Name of God and Christ in thy mouth? Thou enemy of God.
Thou art a thief. Thou are not a believer of Christ. Thou art yet in thy sins.
Thou art a man separated from God. Thou never knew nothing of the worship of
God. Thy envious poisonous heart. Thou art under the chain, and it is over
thee. A fighter against God and his truth, and the reward thou will be sure to
have. And never look that that which is cursed will be blessed. Thou art
accursed, and no other portion can thou have: and this is Scripture, and truth
to thee.

In a third Letter:

Thou can do something in writing a Book of thy own dreams, and thy
imaginations, and brain-studies, and telling of lies which thou hatcheth out of
darkness. Thou art a mere Sot and Ignoramus. Thy evil unclean heart. Thy
malicious dark envious spirit. Thy weakness, inability, and ignorance in the
things of God.

I having told her that if she called the light that that is in every man that
comes into the world Christ, she set up an Idol; and if she worshipped that
light as Christ the Redeemer, she was an idolate^: She answers thus: I never
heard such words, but from an idolater, and a blasphemer against God and
Christ. Thou art an enemy of God, thou art worse then the Jews. Thou art a fit
man to join with the Turk to set up Mahomet. O thou infidel, O thou child of
darkness!

Speaking of Christ, she says, I am a witness for him against all such
Antichrists, and deceivers, and blasphemers as thou art. Thou art a minister of
the night, and of darkness, in the Apostacy. Thou art a night-bird. The curse
and the judgment that is written therein, ( speaking of the Scripture) Christ
Jesus and the Apostle has pronounced it upon thee. Thou art the man. Thou have
lost God and Christ.

Because I asked this Question, viz. What Parish Priest in England had got more
money with his tongue then George Fox since he was Journeyman-Shoomaker in
Manchester? she says, Thou art a wicked, ungodly, impudent liar. Thou liar. A
proud disdainful spirit. A heathenish spirit, which torments thee, and many
more such night-owls as thou art. Thou wicked liar. The devil the God of this
world is thy God, and thou have done what thou can in opposing the Quakers to
get him glory. Thou have a great measure of the spirit of envy, malice, and
cruelty, and blood.

Thus far are her expressions, whom Thomas Curwen affirms to be so virtuous a
woman, that I am not worthy to take her name in my mouth.

Another writes thus:

Thy vain hypocritical prayers, and formal preachings, and Chains offerings.
Thou art darker and darker, and will be to thy dying day, unless thou come to
believe undoubtedly that Christ enlightens every man that comes into the world
with a saving light. You have been, and are hypocrites. Thy blasphemies against
the everlasting truth.

Another writes thus:

Thou opposes the truth, and manifests thy self to be an enemy of Christ the
light* an opposer of the Gospel which is the power of God, of which power thou
art ignorant, and a stranger unto. Thou art gone into rebellion, and not only
ignorant of the true God, and Christ, but also art become an enemy and opposer
of him by deceit and deceivableness. Thou hardens thy heart, and stiffens thy
neck against the Lord, and heaps up wrath against the day of wrath.

Another writes thus:

Thou hardens thy self against the truth more and more. It has been evidently
manifested that thou art an enemy to God and his truth. Thou art in thy will
worship and carnal ordinances, as Baptism, and bread and wine. Thou art vainly
puffed up with thy fleshly mind, and art in the steps of the false Prophets of
old, and the false Apostles in the days of Christ.

In a Paper from William Holden and others, it is written as follows:

Oh friend John Wigans, it seems old Henry Woods and Thomas Curwens Pills which
they gave thee to work out that old leaven that has lien of long within thee,
but this has wrought of the contrary part, and has caused thee to vomit and
spue out upon a piece of paper, and sent forth for the dogs to lick up: and
they being eager, does take so much ^f this they filthy spuing, that it causes
them to vomit as thou does.

A few days after this Appendix was given forth, another Paper was delivered to
me from the said William Holden, which at his request is here inserted.

Oh friend John Wigan, it seems old Henry Wood and Thomas Curwen Pills works
with thee, that thou purges upward and downward, that thou had need of one to
wipe thee; for thou makes a pitiful stink: it seems thou have a full stomach,
and a full body, that through thy vomiting and purging thou besmears every one
that comes nigh thee; one may follow thee by the smell: and thou art more like
a scolding woman then a man: thou art more like a foul Dragon, then to preach
the Gospel: thy language is more like that thou had been bred in Bedlam, then
amongst men: thou art more like a rustical Doorkeeper, to tear off peoples
coats off their backs, then to preach the Word: thou art more like a ranting
Tavernfellow cocking up thy hat, then a civil man. And thy brother Price
glorying in his own strength, throwing the Ball, following pleasures, sporting
in the daytime like a ranting fellow: who art a busie-body in other men's
matters. But this is like Wigans and Prices worship: thou art like unto the
raging sea, foaming out thy own shame, casting up mire and dirt; who art
deceiving a company of silly simple people; who clothes them with thy old
rotten rags, and feeds them with thy husks. One of the filthy dreamers and
inchanters, deceiving the people with thy sorcery, like thy old brother Simon
Magus; yet have a feigned humility in will worship, puffing up thy fleshly
mind. And John, do thou not see thy self to be in an ugly dress, and shape,
and image that thou art in? and will thou not give over preaching and vomiting
to people, yea or long, and deceiving their souls, and poisoning them with thy
Sorcery? for thou stinks all the Country over: and now will thou not go to
Steeple-house? for you are all one in the ground: for thy Nonconformity will
not cover thy hypocrisy and deceit. We see thou have Ishmaels bow, and Cains
club, and Esaus sword, and the clusters of Sodom, and the grapes of Gomorrha,
and Babylons confusion, and the Egyptians tongue; and by thy side carries Judas
bag, and wears the livery of Antichrist, and art shod with deceit: one of the
fools whose heart is filled with laughter, as thou did make thy self manifest
in the Dispute: and who is like a man with a scald head, and like a horse with
a gauld back, going frenging up and down, snuffing up thy nose like the wild
Asses colt; grinning like a Dog, teeth like a Lion, a paw like a Bear, and
mouth like a Dragons beast, poisoning the peoples souls with thy Sorcery, which
makes them to vomit, and spue, and drink up iniquity, and vomit it out, which
the people licks up and vomits it out, that they make such a stink! And thou
have shamed Christianity: thou art more like an Oyster-woman; it is like thou
knows Billings-gate: thou art better selling Oysters then doctrine, or
preaching either. And we hear thou have vomited up more, to add to thy first
vomit: for thou stands in need of purging; for thou have a very unclean vessel,
which is full of the old man: for thou might shame with thy filthy spuing, if
thou were not very impudent. And thou may put this to thy Appendix. No more,
but love to thee poor captivated creature of Satan.

From thy friend, William Houlden.

This Paper was delivered to me the 5 M. 15 d. 1664.


The writings out of which these sayings are extracted, How many sheets they
have filled with raylin^ Language.
with some others of like import now in my keeping, will fill up three or near
four sheets close written, wherein (besides what is here mentioned) is
contained not a word tending to discover the unsoundness of my assertion, or to
enervate my Arguments; but manifold untruths, and light vain and scurrilous
expressions, altogether unbecoming Saints: which (though I can show if
required) being too tedious for the Reader, I have forborne to transcribe,
being also assured, that the Lord will sweep away the refuge of lies: nor had I
presented this to view, but that they have first done it, and that I find it
said, that the folly of such shall be made manifest to all men, 2. Tim. 3. 9.

If instead of answering an assertion proved by plain Scripture, Wherein the
Quakers fol^^ manifest.
it be not folly to call the assertion and proofs chaff, dirt, rabling stuff,
out of the botomless pit, and filthy spewings, etc. And to curse the Author
with the plagues of God, and to tell him he is accursed, an enemy of God, an
infidel, a child of darkness, etc. I say, if this be not folly, let the wise
judge; I am sure the All-wise and righteous God, will in due time, judge
between them and me in this matter; and make it manifest, that these fruits
never came from his good, pure, holy Spirit.

Had it not bin a more easy and commendable work, A right Spir^ would have led
them a better way.
in one sheet plainly to have discovered and refuted my errors (if any such be
in my writings) then to have filled three or four sheets with such stuff as
this? Surely a right Spirit would have led them that way.

But whosoever will engage against the Spirit of Antichrist, When Antichrist
speaks like a Lamb, and when lik^ a Dragon.
especially to raise him out of his chief hold, can expect no better measure,
while he is owned, and submitted to in his deceits: his carriage is like a
Lamb; but cross him, and he is in a rage, and speaks like a Drag^^* Rev. 13.
11. While the false prophet has hope to allure any, and make merchandise of
them, his speech is fair, and his feigned words are smoother then oil. 2 Pet.
2. 3. Prove. 5. 3. Like the adulterous woman, Pro. 7. 21. But if he prevail not,
but be opposed and rejected, then is he loud, clamorous, and stubborn, Prove. 7.
11. and 9. 13. like Joseph's. Mistress, when she could not prevail, cries out,
and by false accusations causes him to be cast into prison, Genesis 39. And yet
further, besides all this, and before my book is answered, there are four of
these people who severally write themselves Blacksmith, Husbandman, Laborer,
The vain shifts of persons maintai^ning Error.
and Tailor, who send forth into the town a new challenge to debate seventeen
or eighteen points with me. But why is not the Shoo-maker joined with them?
What feeble shifts are these? My assertion strikes at their very foundations.
And before they make that good, they would run into other matters. But though
they seem to be weary of their cause, I must hold them to it, till their
Cornerstone, and mine be so thoroughly tried, that it may evidently appear
whether of them is the true Rock Christ Jesus.

And whereas I said in my paper, that I was willing and ready again to debate
the point in controversy with Geo. Fox, or any of his friends before the high
Sheriff, or any in the commission of peace, if they should require us to come
forth for that end; Let not George think to shuffle himself out, and put the
task upon others: for he must know, that in as much as it is affirmed, that he
was called of the Lord from his trade as the Apostles were, my desire is in
this matter chiefly to deal with him, ^uch as say ^^ey are Ap^^^tles, ought to
^^e tried.
and such others, that say they were Apostles, that their doctrine and deeds,
being brought to light, it may be clearly known whether they be true Apostles
indeed, or false, who preach another Jesus and Gospel then Paul did, as I have
great cause to suspect them, and doubt not to prove them to be, if they adhere
to the principles which are laid down by them in their printed books, and
asserted and maintained in our late debate.

And lest it should be thought that these Mechanics are mentioned with
contempt, Preachers sent, though Me^hanicks, are to ^e esteemed.
as if none such were, or could be useful laborers in the Lords vineyard; I
do here seriously profess, that any truth declared by such a one (being sent)
is as precious to me as coming from any other man; And there are at this day
persons well known to me, of several occupations, under a special anointing,
who being sent, are successful laborers in the work of the Gospel, and whom I
highly esteem for their works sake.

But as the Lord approves not, We must not ^id God speed ^o those that ^ring
not doctrine of Christ.
so neither can I own preachers who are not sent, Jer. 23. 32. Romans 10. 15. but
do creep privily into the work, and run unsent. Jude 4. Jer. 14. 14. Nor can I
bid them God speed, who bring not the doctrine of Christ, nor preach the same
Jesus and Gospel that Paul did, but speak perverse things, Acts ^o. 30.
bringing in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, 2 Pet.
2. 1.

For though such as these may say (and others may think) that they are Apostles
when they are not, and for the greater confirmation of their erroneous
Doctrines may boast of gifts, as some have said to me that George Fox had the
gifts of Tongues, and to others it has bin said he could speak above thirty
Languages. When false Apostles are ^ryed, they will be found ^ars.
And by this and such like plausible pretenses, they may insinuate themselves
into many, and gain a multitude of followers, which is one certain character of
Antichrists last coming, that many shall follow his pernicious ways. Matthew.
24. 5. 2. Pet. 2. 2. Yet when they are trye^, they will be found liars, Rev. 2.
2.

In the Interim I have one request to leave with the sober Reader, A request to
the Reader.
Viz. That he will seriously, and impartially resolve in himself these
following Queries.

1. Whereas it can be found in all the Scriptures, Queries to considered.
that any of the true Prophets, or Christ, or his Apostles, ever used such
language as is before mentioned, to any person professing Repentance toward
God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ; or whether it be not clearly the
fruit of an Antichristian spirit, as has bin hinted.

2. Whether there can be any other aim in the aforesaid censures, then to cast
an odium upon, and to cause a disesteem of the person opposing them. And
whether this was not the practice of the false Prophets, and false. Apostles of
old, thereby to gain more credit to their own cause.

3. Whether it be not a manifest abuse of the Scriptures, and a presumptuous
intruding into the office of Christ, positively to affirm that the sins of any
man shall never be forgiven in this world, nor in that which is to come, merely
because he denies that light that is in every man that comes into the world to
be saving; In as much as the Scripture no where says that that light is saving.

4. Whether do not this people censure all the men and women in the world, (as
well as the Author of these papers) to be out of the first step that leads to
Christianity, to be infidels, and to be accursed, if they deny the light that
is in every man that comes into the world to be saving. And whether is not this
as much as to say, that they only, and none besides themselves are Christians;
And whether is not this a great appearance of pride in them, thus highly to
extol themselves above all others.

5. And whether, are not all these censures directly contrary to the
Scriptures, and such as make them liable to greater Judgment. Matt. ^^. 2. Jam.
3. 1, 2.

6. Whether do not these clamours, and evil speakings, for which there is no
Scriptural warrant, manifestly slow from bitterness, anger, ^rath, malice, as
the Apostle intimates, Ephesians. 4. 31.

7. Whether any wise experienced Christian can judge this people to be in a
perfect sinless estate, who appear with these open sinful revilings, cursings,
judgings, in their mouths. Nay-since they boast and glory in this their shame;
Whether is it not evident that they are servants of Corruption?

8. Whether this has not bin their manner all along, to strive to overcome
with these carnal weapons, threatenings, censurings, cursings, revilings, etc.
And since no spiritual weapon is yet employed in the management of their cause,
whether have not all persons just cause to suspect t^^ badness of it, and that
as the weapons are carnal, and devilish, so is their cause supported thereby.

9. Whether it be not abominable wickedness to father all their evil speeches
upon the Holy Ghost, and to say when they curse, rail, revile, speak falsely
and frothily, that it is by his inspiration and command.

10. Whether can any man rationally conclude, that these people bear any true
love to that person whom they judge to be an enemy of God, and ^^cursed, and
whose sins shall never be forgiven in this world, nor in the world to come? Or
rather, when they profess love, and say they desire his eternal welfare, is not
there just ground to believe that they speak lies in Hypocrisy, as it is said
Apostates should do in the later times, 1 Timothy 4. 2. (...) 11. Do they not
plainly discover a persecuting spirit in the forementioned revilings, and may
not any man in reason conclude, that whom they judge an enemy of God, and
accursed, they would use as such if they had power.

12. Lastly, I leave it to be considered, by such as will take the pains to
read the account which I have given of the light within, whether they do not
speak all this evil of me, merely because I have told them the truth, and not
for any other cause, etc.

By that time thou have well considered these Queries, and by the resolution of
them, have gained a better understanding of this people, ^^robable (if
providence intermit not) another sheet may be pre^^ted to thy hand, with a
further discovery of the mystery of Iniquity. In the mean time, I shall finish
this with a few Cautions to all ^^ts of people, but more especially to young
weak inquiring persons.

1. Take heed of that Religion that begins with a lie: for it is certainly a
great judgment of God to be given up to believe a lie, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11. And
(...) the first step to this peoples Religion is an abominable lie, and that
every one is taught and required at his entrance into their religion to believe
(...) lie, I have showed in my former paper.

2. Take heed of that spirit that denies either directly or consequentially
Christ come in the flesh, for that is the spirit of Antichrist, 1 John 4. 3.
And he that bids such a one God speed, is partaker of his evil deeds, 2 John 11.

3. Take heed of those persons (how fair soever their pretenses be) who have no
better weapons to defend their doctrine with, then censures, judgings,
threatenings, curses, for that was not the way of Christ, and his Apostles; And
of those who can curse men, and bless God with the same mouth, for that ought
not to be, Jam. 3. 9, 10.

Ephesians. 5. 6. Let no man deceive you with vain words. FINIS.

