THE Doctrine of Perfection VINDICATED:

By way of Answer to some objecting Reasons, frequently used by them that plead
for Sin in this life: And that Freedom from Sin is to be attained in this life,
or never, plainly showed herein; and how they that deny it, are one with the
false Prophets and Antichristian Seducers, spoken of in the Scriptures.

With some Wholesome EXHORTATION given forth as the Spirit gave utterance;
tending to provoke all that make a profession of God, to press on after the
same.

Showing plainly, how it is agreeable with what is signified in the Scripture,
and the Light within; both of which bears witness for the said Doctrine, and
against all Sin.

Something likewayes expressed concerning BREAD and WINE.

Also, some wholesome DIRECTIONS to stir up young People to seek after their
Creator in the days of their youth.

Written by one who breathes to God for the Redemption of the Seed, that lies
yet in the house of bondage, bound by the Cords of Iniquity,

J. Whitehouse.

LONDON, Printed for R. Wilson, 1663.

TO THE READERS.
FRIENDS,
THe eternal invisible Fountain of Wisdom, Life, Love, and everlasting Mercy,
who is the Creator and Upholder of all things by the Word of his powerful
Spirit, who is God over all, blessed for ever; who when I was young and tender
in years, did beget a sincere desire in my soul, which has caused me, even to
this day, secretly to seek after the knowledge of, and acquaintance with him,
that I might know his Will, and receive Power from him to do the sames the
which desires, he in his endless Love to my poor breathing soul (which has no
true peace nor satisfaction, but in doing his Will, and enjoying his Presence,
which is of more value to me than any outward thing, yea, than Life it self in
this world) has far more abundantly satisfied, than many now can, or than I my
self once could believe, when I was in the darkness, which comprehends not the
Light of his Son, which shines in the hearts of the sons and daughters of men,
letting them see the evil of their ways, which I testify, as one who has
made proof of the same, is sufficient to give them the knowledge of God, and to
lead them into all Truth, if they would but give up to follow the leadings of
it; by the leadings of which, in my seeking estate, have I been drawn from one
sort of People to another, still to associate my self with those who did most
sincerely press on after God in a holy life, being willing to run with the
foremost, that I might obtain with them the prize; which is to say, in this life
(only) a perfect freedom from all sin, even to put off the old man, with all
his deeds, which is sin, and a putting on the new, which is created after God
in perfect and true Holiness, which the Lord God has given me by his Spirit,
to believe and see a possibility of attaining to; in which only stands the
certain assurance of the full Prize, and the eternal Weight and Crown of Glory,
which in the Life to come is to be fully enjoyed; the which this first is but
as an Earnest of, without which the true certainty of the second cannot be
obtained: And since I have received this Faith, power thereby has been given
me far more than before, when I rejected the Light of his Son, by which only I
witness it is received: And now this Faith, which is from above, even the
perfect gift of God, I find to be the chiefest thing, for the effecting and
completing of an holy life in man, through the power of God, (in them which
believe, being received into the heart) of obtaining a perfect life, becomes as
a root therein which is pure, that causes the branches to be holy, and keeps
the creature circumspect and sincere to God, still minding what a holy Calling
and Mark is set before it; and so the Faith being sound and clean, the fruits
thereof are Holiness, which becomes the House of the Lord God: And verily
whosoever comes to sup with him, without this comely pure covering of Holiness,
they shall in no ways enter with the Lamb into the Marriage-Chamber, but be
shut out, (the which I see this day, to the burthening of my soul and grief of
my spirit, is abundantly wanting amongst most People professing God and Christ)
for they having not this purifying Faith, count it Blasphemy and Error, and so
rest and believe in the contrary; (which is to say) they must live, in sin
whilst in this life, being taught so by their blind guides, who could not
themselves cease therefrom; and so Profaneness is gone forth from the Priests,
over all the Land, as in the ancient days; which gives way to much looseness
and sin; the which, if any in the Spirit of meekness and fear of God reprove
them for, then presently they flee to the Scripture, and with the same spirit
that leads them to sin, rake together all the Saints failings, to plead for
sin, term of life, the which those things were never written for; so that in
stead of resisting the Devil, in the pure Faith which stands in the Power of
God, rather gives place to him, and pleads for their so doing; so that the
Devil has not his Kingdom by force only, but by consent, they having granted
him a place in them, while they have a place in this life; which grieves the
Spirit of God their Creator, who alone should have the Rule and Government of
their bodies, souls, and spirits, which are his; in the sense of which I am
moved to write these following lines by way of Answer to some Questions, or
objecting Reasons, which are frequently used by them that plead for sin, and
against the Doctrine of Perfection; that if possible, it may be a help to stir
them up to the Witness of God in them, that their Understandings by it may be
opened who are not wilfully blind, but rather through ignorance stand against
the thing, being beguiled by the subtilty of the Serpent, as Eve in her
innocence was, who told her, though she did eat of the forbidden fruit, she
should not surely dye; and that is his lying voice at this day, whether in
Teachers or others, that tells people though they live in some sin, they shall
be saved from the condemning power thereof. So I shall proceed in order, as
beforementioned, as the Lord shall assist me by his Spirit, with what else may
be given me in thereby, even as the Spirit shall give to express, in what
signification God shall please, for the good of all that desire after him, to
whom this may come; the which I commit to the Light in all Consciences to
answer to the truth hereof, desiring all that know me in the outward, not to
slight it, because of the meanness of the outward vessel that wrote it, but
with care to weigh it over, that God's Witness in you may answer; for God has
made the poor in this world, rich in Faith; and in times past, and doubtless
now also, has raised, as it were, things that are not, to bring to naught
those things which are contrary to him, that he may have the Glory to Himself
alone. But however it may be received or rejected, I shall rest in patience;
being content in that I feel am Acceptance with God in this my Obedience to
him, which is a sufficient Reward unto me; who am known to the World by the
name of

John Whithouse,

The Doctrine of Perfection vindicated, etc.
The Worlds Question;

Whether is Perfection, or freedom from all sin,

Yea; so; and if he leave us where he finds us (which is to say) in sin, what
then is he a Savior from? or, how does he effect that which is said of him?
For Sin and Imperfection is of the Devil; 1 John 3.8.
for the destroying of which, he the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of
all that believe in his Light and Son of the world, was manifested; and if this
work be not effected by him, then may we say he is insufficient, and comes
short of the end for which he was given for a Light to the Gentiles, Isa. 42.6,
7.
and to be Gods Salvation to the ends of the Earth; who is the second Covenant,
which is not sound faulty, as was the first, which made nothing perfect;
Therefore was it taken away, that the second, Heb. 7.19.
which is the better hope, by which we draw nearer to God, might be
established: so then, shall I conclude with the world, that the first made none
of the comers thereto perfect, nor the second neither? God forbid.

For they who do believe and receive him who is the new and second Covenant,
Christ Jesus the true Light, who enlightneth every man that comes into the
world; to them, as the Scripture says, he gives power to become the sons of
God, who are not born of flesh and blood, neither of the will of man, Joh.
1.12, 13.
but of God: and who is so born, sins not, because God's Seed, Christ Jesus
abides in him, 1 John, 3.9. Mal. 1.21.
who is a Savior thar saves his People from their sin, and not in it: they who
know this, know the Scripture to be true, because it is fulfilled in them; and
can truly call Christ, Lord, because they do his Will, and not their own, but
are dead thereto, and are only alive to God, bringing forth fruits of
Righteousness, the end of which is Life and Peace: Romans 8.3, 13.
All which is fulfilled in them, who walk not after the flesh, but through the
Spirit of Life in Christ, which makes free from sin and death, and does
mortify the deeds of the same: These are they, who through the washing of
Regeneration in the work of mortification, come to know and witness a cleansing
from all sin, and to have their Robes made white in the blood of the Lamb, Heb.
9.26.
who was made manifest to put away and make an end of all sin, and to perfect
for ever those that through the Spirit are thus sanctified.

Yea, (says the world) Our Teachers Rich. Baxter for one.
who are learned and wise, tell us, this Doctrine of Perfection is a dangerous
tenent, and the Doctrine of the Devil, and not of Christ nor his Apostles; but
is a blasphemous Principle, contrary to the Scriptures.

Now to this, Moses, who prophesied, saying, Acts 3.22.
A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, like unto me, Him shall
you hear in all things whatsoever he says: And it shall come to pass, That
whosoever will not hear and obey him, shall be cut off from the Land of the
Living. And in like manner, Mal. 3.3.
to Him gave all the Prophets witness, saying, He shall come as a Refiners
fire, and as Fullers soap, and shall thoroughly purge the sons of Levi, that they
might offer an Offering to the Lord in Righteousness. Mat. 3.12.
Also John Baptist bare witness of him, saying, His Fan is in his hand, and he
will thoroughly purge his Floor, (Mark that) not in part, he does not say, but
thoroughly. And now he, the Eternal and Everlasting true Light, the chief and
High Priest over the Household of God, the pure Purger, Perfecter, Cleanser and
Fulfiller of all the Law and the Prophets: Behold, this is his Doctrine,
preached by him in the days of his flesh, Be ye perfect, Matthew. 9.48.
as your heavenly Father is perfect: And now, behold, he is arisen in many sons
and daughters by his quickening Spirit, which has raised them out of Sin and
Death, and through them is he preaching by Life and Doctrine, the same as he
lived in, who is the same, yesterday, to day, and for ever; who is the perfect
Pattern, and finished his course in Perfection, leaving it an Example, for all
that believe in him to follow. So this is none of the Devil's Doctrine, neither
his Command; but the Doctrine and Command of the Son of God, who is not a hard
nor an unjust master, requiring that of his servants which he gives them not
power to do, but it is the slothful servant that makes not use of his talent,
but buries it in the Earth, and then complains for want of power; but they who
receive the gift of God, God gives them power to do whatsoever he commands,
whose Commandments, 1 John 2, 3.1.7.
to them that follow him in faithfulness, were not grievous, but joyful; who
were washed and cleansed, but not by themselves, but by walking in the Light,
as God was in the Light; so came they to witness the Blood of his Son to
cleanse them, not from some sin, but all; and so were made Ministers, not of
the Letter, which kills, but of the Spirit, which gives Life, and quickens
unto Perfection, and labored to bring men thereto, that they might present
every man perfect in Christ, in whom there is no sin; for he was not sent to be
a cloak to cover sin under his righteous garment, but to destroy it, and take
it away, slaying the carnal or fleshly mind which warreth against the soul,
working sin in the members, upon the Cross which is spiritual, or all spirit;
which Cross works inwardly, bringing into subjection every vain thought and
imagination, taking every motion of evil in the conception, and so destroys it
there before it be acted or consented to; which every one that receives him in
his Light, which makes all things manifest, shall come to witness, even a
dying with him to the flesh, from whence comes sin, and then quickening by the
Spirit with Christ unto Righteousness. This is the first Resurrection, to arise
out of Sin into Perfection with Christ, the which except a man be made a
partaker of in this life, the second death will have power over him.

So by all this it appears, that Christ is the Minister of Perfection, who
preached it more clear and exacter than it was in the Law; Matthew. 5.28.
who said, if a man lust to do any thing, he is guilty as if he did it; which
the Law without was too weak to find out; and so became a strengthner of the
Law, which requires Perfection: and also for the effecting of this he gave
gifts to his Apostles and Ministers, some he made Prophets, some Teachers and
Evangelists, others Pastors, and the like, for the finishing of the work which
he had begun, which was, to perfect all the Members of his Body, the Church,
that they might all come to the measure, and stature, and fullness of him who
was perfect, and is the perfecter of all that believe in him, who is the Light
that shines in darkness; and these Apostles brought some, Romans 6.18.
by turning them from darkness to this Light, to witness freedom from sin, and
had their fruits unto holiness, and the end everlasting life: and also, those
who had not attained to this estate, 1 Pet. 1.15.
they did not tell them they never should in this life, but exhorted them to go
on to Perfection, giving them many Commands to that end, warning and teaching
every man in all wisdom, that they might present themselves perfect in Christ,
in whom there is no sin nor sinners: for they that are in him, are new created
in Righteousness and true Holiness, which is without sin, and all things in
them are of God, being all made new by the Son of God who sits upon the Throne
as a Refiners fire, which consumes all the dross and takes away the tin, and
then sin must needs be done away, for that is of the Devil. Now for this end did
Paul strive and labor mightily, Heb. 13.21. Jam. 1.4.
both praying and desiring God to make them perfect in every good work. And
likewise James, in the trial of their Faith, exhorted them to keep in the
patience, and let it have its perfect work, that they might be perfect and
entire, wanting nothing. Peter also in his exhortation, wherein he stirs them
up by way of remembrance, to go on unto the end, and not faint by the way;
neither to live in the fashions of the world, nor lusts of the flesh; but
commands them to be holy in all manner of conversation, as he that has called
them is holy; 1 Pet. 1.16.
(The reason why? says he) because it is written, Be ye holy, for I am holy;
(Mark that) He does not say this Command is taken away, neither too hard to be
fulfilled. To the same effect John, the blessed Disciple, to the little
Children, warned them not to deceive themselves, by saying they had no sin
before they were cleansed therefrom, but that they should confess it to God,
then he would forgive it them; and not only so, 1 John 1.7, 8, 9.
but if they walked in the Light, as he is in the Light, then their fellowship
should be with him, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son should cleanse them
from ALL Sin. 1 John 3.8, 9, 10.
He then exhorts them not to be deceived by any man, telling them, he that does
Righteousness, is righteous, even as Christ is righteous; and that he that has
the living true Faith in him, purifies himself, even as he is pure; saying, he
that commits sin, is of the Devil, for he sinned from the beginning: but he
that is born of God, sins not, neither indeed can he, because God's Seed
remains in him, which is Christ the Light, which saves from sin. And then he
gives a mark to know the Children of God from the children of the Devil,
saying, Whosoever does not Righteousness, is not of God, but of the Devil, as
his words before signify; and also, if a man says, he knows Christ, Mat. 5.
last.
and keeps not his Commandments (one of which is to be perfect) he is a liar,
and the truth is not in him; for he that says he abides in him, ought himself
so to walk, even as he walked: For he that sins, and abides not in his
Doctrine, 2 John 9.
has not God, but denies, and is denied of both the Father and the Son, let
him say and profess what he will. Also, the Spirit speaking to one of the
Churches, found fault, because their works were not perfect before God, Rev.
3.4.
who is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity; bidding them therefore to repent
and be watchful, because there was something wanting.

Wherefore the Spirit cries this day through me, Awake, awake ye sluggards,
arise, arise ye careless ones, who are at ease in sin, and have taken up your
rest in iniquity; for the Son of Righteousness is risen, and the Day of
Holiness is dawned, therefore God requires all men to repentance, and to bring
forth fruits meet thereto; for the night of ignorance, whereat he winked, is
past, and he is arisen in his mighty Power who will no longer be silent, but
will cry like a traveling woman, who will not cease till the Birth is brought
forth, which is to establish Judgment and Righteousness in the Earth, that he
alone over all may be exalted; therefore will he search the whole Earth with
his pure candle of Light, and will make the sinners in Sion afraid, and
fearfulness shall surprise the hypocrites, and none shall abide before him who
is a consuming fire, nor dwell with everlasting burnings; but he that walks
in Righteousness and speaks uprightly, Psa. 15.1, 2, 3.
and despises the gain of oppression, and holds his hands from bribes, his
eyes from seeing of evil, and his ears from hearing of blood; it is he that
shall dwell on high, his place of defense shall be the Name of the Lord, which
is the Refuge of the Righteous, his eyes shall see the King of Sion in his
beauty: and therefore let all people fear God, and give glory to him, for the
hour of his Judgment is come, wherein he will be avenged upon all the
Inhabitants of the Earth, who are made drunk with the Wine of Fornication, in
Babylon the Mystory of Iniquity, which the Lord God in his Almightiness is
arisen to destroy; and therefore if any man follow the Beast, which is that
unclean nature which polluteth man, or receives and keeps his Mark, which is
Sin, the same shall drink of the Wine of the Wrath of God, which is poured
forth without mixture into the Cup of his Indignation, and he shall be
tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy Angels, and of
the Lamb of God; who would have taken away their sin by his Light of Life, but
they would not believe therein, Joh. 3.19.
but loved the darkness rather, because their deeds were evil: but blessed are
they that believe therein, and follow it, for it is they only that die in the
Lord, and rest from their labor, and their works do follow them, says the
Spirit, Revel. 14.13.

But now to the thing beforementioned. It Is plainly manifest, that the
Doctrine of Perfection is of God; commanded by him, and preached by his Son,
whom the Prophets prophesied should come to that end, and witnessed by his
Apostles and Ministers, who have left in the Scriptures of Truth their
Testimony concerning the same, which as a Cloud of Witnesses, does testify for
and to the same, far exceeding more than I have here mentioned.

By all which it appears, that your Ministers are not of Christ,
notwithstanding all their wisdom and learning, but contrary to him and his
Ministers, Isa. 40.3.
and the true Prophets who foretold of Him, and the glory of his Day: Therefore
the conclusion must needs be, They are of the false Prophets spirit, and
consequently of Antichrist; wherefore I shall mention a little, according to
Scripture, how they are one in this very thing, with the false Prophets and
Antichristian Seducers which were in the world in the Apostles days, and which
they prophesied should come in the latter days, after their decease. Now in the
first place, in the days of old, God by the mouth of his Servants, cried
against false Prophets and Priests, who were from the greatest to the least all
given to covetousness, every one dealing falsely, Jer. 23.14, 17. Micah 3.5, 13.
Ezekiel. 10.11, 12, 13 14, 15, 16
in healing the hurt of the danghter of his People slightly, crying peace to
those that put into their mouth, when there was no peace: So they strengthened
the hands of the wicked, that they should not turn from their evil ways, but
promised them life therein; and so seduced the people, and caused them to err,
by their lies, and by their lightness; one building a wall, and another daubed
it with untempered mortar, which would not stand in the overflowing shower of
the Wrath of God.

So in like manner, your Teachers through covetousness and self ends have
spoken smoothly to you, telling you of the Mercy of God, 2 Pet. 2^.
through which your sins should be forgiven you, though you lived in them, and
with the Serpent's voice have said, though you eat of the forbidden fruit which
is sin, yet ye shall not die; so here in your unsound conditions, even like a
rotten wall, they have daubed you with untempered mortar, which will not stand
you in any stead when the Lord by his pure Light in your Consciences, comes to
search you with Judgment, then your daubing will not hide you from the Wrath of
the Lamb; no, no, then all their smooth words, and untempered doctrine, which
they have invented to please you for self ends, telling you of Heaven and what
a happy glorious place it is, will all fly away from you, and them also, who
have led you in blindness, and have caused you to err from the Voice of God,
to follow the voice of the Serpent, who led man into sin, and so blinded his
mind that he might cause him never to find the way to God again, which is a way
of Holiness in which the unclean cannot walk: So I say, if you will not come
out from amongst them, and be separated from the unclean thing, which is sin,
and own and receive the Light of Christ, that it may search all your wounds and
putrefying sores, from the crown of your heads to the soals of your feet, that
so he may wash you thoroughly, and baptize you with fire, and burn up all that is
contrary to his pure Life in you: I say, except this you come to and witness,
with you blind guides you must fall into the ditch.

Now I shall come to speak a little of the Deceivers which Christ and the
Apostles spoke of in their days. First, Christ said, 1 John 3.8.
Beware of false Prophets, which come unto you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly
are ravening wolves: ye shall know them by their fruits. Now we know that sin
is a mark of the Devil, or a fruit of an evil tree; likewise Perfection is a
mark of God, for he is perfect, and it is the fruit of a good tree; so they who
are in sin, and plead it for doctrine, that they can never be out of it whilst
in this life, are the evil trees, because they bring forth such fruit as this,
which a good tree cannot bring forth. Also Paul said, that the Spirit spoke
expressly, that in the latter times some should depart from the Faith, 1 Timothy
4.1.
giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of Devils, speaking lies in
hypocrisy, having their consciences seared with a hot iron. Now mark, Is not
this the doctrine of the Devil, that though men live in sin they shall not be
damned, but shall escape the condemning power thereof? did not the Devil
himself preach this first, Genesis 3.4.
when he said, Ye shall not surely dye, though you eat of the forbidden tree?
and are not they who maintain this for truth, those, whose consciences are
seared and hardened against the Voice of God, even to speak lies in hypocrisy
against his Spirit, which condemns sin in the flesh? And also, he further says
this; 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, etc.
Know that in the last days perilous times shall come; for men shall be lovers
of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, false accusers,
without natural affection, truce breakers, fierce, despisers of those that are
good; heady, traitorous, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of
God; having a form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof. Now of this
sort are they that creep into houses, leading captive silly women, laden with
sin, led away with diverse lusts; ever learning, and never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth.

Now it seems, that these proud, covetous, high-minded men, who were fierce,
despisers of those that are good, had a form of Godliness, like many now, who
deny the power thereof, even as those did; for the power of God, or of
Godliness, makes all those that have it, free from the power of the Devil,
whose power leads man captive at his will, doing his work, which is sin, which
all who have the form, and not the power, are servants to; for he that commits
sin, is the servant of sin, Joh. 8.34
and he that serves it, the Devil is his master: Romans 6.16.
for his servants ye are to whom ye obey; and he that serves him, cannot serve
Christ, nor is a Child of God; for ye cannot serve God and mammon, neither two
masters, says Christ. So it is certain we must be of the one, for we cannot be
of both. And now also, who is it that be ever learning, and never comes to know
the Truth, but those that never knew a freedom from sin, neither do believe
they ever shall in this life? for Christ said, if you continue in my Doctrine,
then shall you know the Truth, Joh. 8.31, 32, 33, 34.
and the Truth shall make you free. But the Jews replied, saying, We were never
in bondage to any man. But said Christ, He that commits sin, is the servant of
sin. So it appears, that they who are overcome with sin, and led away with
diverse lusts, are not come to know Christ the Truth, who sets free from sin;
and they are the creepers into houses, who lead silly people in blindness,
laden with sin, and tells them they can never be eased of the burden thereof in
this life; yet promises them liberty and freedom in the life to come, whilst
they are the servants of corruption in this life: Are not these the filthy
dreamers that defile the flesh, who are sensual and devilish, Jude, 10, 11.
knowing nothing but what they know naturally, in which they corrupt
themselves? (which is to say) in their outward learning, which though it be
Hebrew, Greek and Latin, yet it is all but natural, even as English is, which
a child may learn of its parents; so likewise all other tongues are learned of
men: but the true knowledge of God is only learned in and by the Spirit. Are
not these also those, who with fair words and smooth speeches deceive the
hearts of the simple by their great swelling words of vanity, which they invent
to please such who have itching ears, that cannot away with sound Doctrine, but
love to be daubed up slightly; who cannot endure to hear of coming out of sin
in this life, and yet would have Heaven in that which is to come: I say, such
Teachers as these are of Antichrist, whom Jude says were clouds without water,
Jude 12.
which is, to have a show of Godliness, but have not his Life abiding in them,
but their hearts are exercised with covetous practices, and for self ends
admire some men's persons for their own advantage, who themselves could not
cease from sin: these are the murmurers and complainers, Phil. 3.19.
who walk after their own ungodly lusts, minding earthly things, whose god is
their belly.

This was the fruit of the spirit of Antichrist that the Apostles said should
come, and was come in their days, by which we know that those who bring forth
such fruits are of the same spirit in these our days; the consideration of
which I shall leave to the Witness of God in all people, that they thereby
might come to see whether those that deny the Doctrine of Perfection, and plead
for sin term of life, do not in all, or many of these things, agree with the
Antichrists and false Prophets that are mentioned in Scriptures? and so the
conclusion unavoidably will be this, They are not of God, but of the world,
which lies in wickedness, and therefore the world hears and follows them.

Yea, (says the world) though we do not believe, we can be perfectly freed
from all sin in this life; yet we do not believe that we must or may live in
sin wilfully, neither do our Teachers tell us we shall be saved if we do; but
they tell us we must strive against it what we can, and then we shall be
accepted through Christ, for he has tasted death for us, and so has made a
way for all that can believe he died for their sin, and rose again for their
Justification, to be accepted through his Righteousness, which shall be imputed
for ours; and though we live in some sin which is condemned by the Law, yet
has he by his Death delivered us from the condemning power of sin and the Law,
the force of which he has taken away; for we are not under the Law, but under
Grace.

To this I answer. Romans 3.25.
Sacrifices and Shadows of the first Law and Priesthood, and so took away all
the hand writing of Ordinances, making an Atonement for sins past, that
forgiveness might be preached to and in all that receive him, and walk in his
Light; which was not to be found in, nor by the outward Law, for it being once
transgressed, there remains nothing but condemnation: So mercy and forgiveness
came by Jesus the Savior, (and not by the Law) without whom none could be
saved; because all had and have transgressed, and come short of fulfilling the
Law; therefore all your striving, whilst you reject Christ the Light, which
makes sin manifest, in whom the Law of the Spirit of Life is witnessed, which
sets free the soul through the administering of death unto, and condemning that
in man which warreth against it, by bringing it into captivity unto sin,
through which comes death; I say, though you may strive with all your might,
which indeed is but weakness, you will never get dominion over sin, because you
in denying the Light, miss of the Power which only redeems out of the bondage
thereof; which Power does accompany that which reproves for, and condemns sin
in the flesh; to which, except you become subjects unto, neither freedom from
sin, nor the righteousness of the Law (which is Perfection) you will never come
to witness; and so though you believe he died for your sin, yet unless you come
to know him to arise in you, to destroy it and take it away inwardly, and
thereby to fulfill the Law of Righteousness in you, and so to mortify the deeds
of the flesh, which breaks the Law by his powerful Spirit, that you may follow
it, and your fruits may be unto Righteousness, and you dead to the fruits of
the flesh, which is sin, all your belief will avail you no more than the Jews
unbelief did them, which rather added to their condemnation than otherwise.

Therefore all come down to that of God made manifest in you, and receive it
with a willing mind, and then you will feel it giving you that power, which by
all your own willing and striving out of it, you could never obtain, even to
become the Sons of God, and to know his Seed brought forth in dominion, in you
to abide, and then you will come to know what that state was in which they were
that could not sin, 1 John, 3.9.
because they were born of God, and his Seed remains in them, by which they
were kept, so that the wicked one touches them not; because greater was he
that was in them, than he that was in the world: So unless you feel this
wrought in you by him, all your talk of him and his Righteousness will do you
no good: for as long as you commit sin, the filth will follow it, and the
condemning of that which condemns sin in the flesh will follow you to the end
of your race, by which a fire will be kindled where the worm will never die,
neither goes it out; and the Law against sin you will find to have its full
force then, because you rejected the Light through disobedience, which would
have destroyed for you that which transgressed the Law in you, and as you had
yielded in obedience to it, it would have fulfilled the Law in you, by bringing
forth fruits of holiness which the Law requires; and all your thoughts of
being from under the Law, will prove vain; for it is said to be a Schoolmaster
to bring unto Christ the Light and Lamb of God, who takes away sin; the which,
Gal. 3.24.
except you are brought to, and by him cleansed, you will find the Law to stand
in full force over you, you being out of him who ends that which transgresses
it, Jam. 2.10.
even by slaying it upon the Cross, which is the Power of God, which
over-comes, or rather comes over, and so brings under the power of the Devil,
which keeps man in bondage in sin: so when you come to know this, you will
cease remembering his death at Jerusalem, and will come to see how he has been
crucified in you, and what it is that has crucified him; Romans 6.10.
and not only so, but will know a dying with him to the flesh and the fruits
thereof; and then shall you be quickened with him in the Spirit of Life, in
which you will live unto God, which you will truly know when he comes to arise
from the dead in you, and to lead that captive which has held him in
captivity, and oppressed him as a cart with sheaves, who while you go astray
bears the iniquity of you all, and is crucified in that place which spiritually
is called Sodom and Egypt; (read within and feel what I say) then will you
come to mourn over him whom you have pierced: Rev. 1.7.
And this verily I say unto you, except you know his Crucifixion and
Resurrection nearer you than Jerusalem, even in you, and arising with him out
of the grave of sin and death, and a living to God in the Spirit of Holiness,
which sets free from sin; all your talking of his dying for your sin, and
arising for your justification, while you have lived in sinning against his
Light in your Consciences, will never profit you any thing: Ephesians. 5.14.
Therefore arise thou that sleep in sin, and stand up to Judgment, and
hearken to that which calls out of sin, which is the Spirit of Truth, and it
will give thee life, if through death thou will follow it; for no other way is
there to come to life, but through death to that which leads thee from God; Gal.
3.19.
therefore take up the Cross, and kiss the Rod, and it will whip thee out of
sin, and a new work in thee will begin: Those that know this death, are not
under the Law, but under Grace; for the Law was added because of transgression,
in which if a man live, and it live in him, then is he under the Law: for it
takes hold on a man so long as he lives in sin, which is the transgression
thereof; Tit. 2.11.
but he that is dead to sin, is not under it, but is come to the Grace of God,
which leads him out of sin, and teaches him to live godly and righteously in
this present evil world: so then by Grace sin is done away, and the Law
fulfilled, which requires a holy life, which is brought forth in and through
all that receive the Power of God, which in Christ the Light is offered freely
to all, that he might be all in all both to will and to do that which man of
himself could in no ways do; he having lost his first estate in which he had
power over all things, being fain into the bondage of the Devil, and captivated
by him at his will: therefore God in his endless Love to lost man, Romans 8.3, 4.
sent his Son a Light into the world, who for sin condemns sin in the flesh,
which the Law without was too weak to do, that the Righteousness of it might be
fulfilled in all that obey and follow him: Now such can truly witness he comes
not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it in and for them, which Law requires
Perfection and Holiness, without which a man shall never see God.

But says the World, Yea, perfect in part, so are accepted a^ wholly perfect
through Christ.

Nay, entire, wanting nothing; for the Law requires not a part, but the whole;
and it is not a Perfection inferior to what the Law requires, but even the
same, if not a better, that we are to be brought to by the power of the Lamb of
God, who takes away the imperfection of all that walk in his Light; or else it
cannot be said he fulfills it, but leaves it unfulfilled, and has made a way
by which man shall escape the condemnation of it, though he live in
transgression thereof, which was not the end of his coming in the flesh, that
man should be accepted perfect, because he lived in perfection; but that the
same perfect, innocent, harmless life, might be brought forth by the operation
of his Life, which is the Light of men, in our mortal bodies; herein lies the
acceptance, if he come thus to live in us, to make our sinful bodies
conformable to that Body of his, 2 Cor. 5.17.
which was the perfect pattern; then are we in him, according as it is said, He
that is in Christ, is a non creature; old things are passed away, and all is
become new, and all things are of God, then that which is of the Devil is done
away. So here perfection in part will not stand nor agree with this Doctrine;
for it is manifest, if we are in Christ, Jam. 1.4.
then the intireness is known, where nothing is wanting, because all things are
of God who is perfect; but this work is not by self, neither by man's own
willing ^or running, but of God that shows mercy; Col. 1.27. 1 Cor. 1.30. 2
Cor. 4.7.
which mercy is Christ the Light, in all that receive him the hope of Glory,
who is made unto them wisdom and power, to mortify and justify, to kill and
to make alive, even to work all their works in them and for them, which was the
treasure that the Apostles had in their earthen vessels; that the excellency of
the Power might be of God, and not of them; the which work must be witnessed in
this life, for after the departure hence, Heb. 3.7, 8.
there is no putting off the old man with his deeds: Therefore, while it is
called to day, harden not your hearts, but arise, and awake to Righteousness,
and hearken to that which knocks at the door of your hearts, calling to
repentance; Rev. 3.20.21.27.
for nothing that defiles, or is defiled, must enter with the Lamb into the
Kingdom of Glory; And if your heads lie down in sin, and in it you end your
race, even so will your rest be; in your old garments you will be found, which
the Lord, who is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity, has no pleasure in,
neither will receive you, unless your garments are made white in the blood of
the Lamb, which cleanses all, who walk in his Light, from sin; which was
witnessed by the Apostles, who walked therein in this world, which made them
bold against the day of Judgment; because, as he was, even so were they, which
is agreeable to Christ's own words, who said, He that is perfect, shall be as
his Master; the which if you witness not before you go hence, all your hopes of
it hereafter will be as a dream, wherein a man thinks he is drinking, but when
he awakens, lo he is dry; Even so all your dreams of entering into Holiness with
Christ, or having his Righteousness imputed for yours, whilst you have lived in
unrighteousness, will all pass away as a vision of the night, or as a dream
which comes to nothing.

And for the further proof of this point in hand, the Doctrine of Perfection,
Joh. 1.1
give ear a little to the Light of Christ, the faithful and true Witness, even
the Word that was in the beginning, before sin was brought forth, Romans 10 8.
which in the Scripture is called the Word nigh in the heart, and in the mouth,
which Paul preached; Joh. 15.26.
and the Spirit of Truth, which convinces the world of sin, which is
infallible, and cannot change, nor err, but keeps its unity with God, of whose
nature it is: Behold, I bear a Testimony against all sin, says the Light,
whatever is reproved is made manifest by me, and in righteous Judgment I seal
the Condemnation upon every soul of man that does evil; for I never consented
to any sin since the day that man transgressed against me in the beginning, but
have kept my Unity with my Father in purity; though man fell, yet not me, I
spare no sin great nor small, but by me it is condemned all, neither speak I
peace to any therein, telling them they shall be saved from the Wrath to come,
though they live in some sin; though man's ear which should have heard my
Voice, has been stopped by the Devil, and his eye kept blind by the god of the
world, so that he has not known my Voice nor seen my Shape; and though I have
knocked at the door of his heart, yet he would not open to me, but loved the
voice of the Serpent better, who has taught many to teach this for Truth, That
he must have some part in their hearts as long as they live on the earth, and
yet notwithstanding they shall be saved; but behold they shall find it a lie,
and I will make them to know, it was never spoken by me, in the day when I
shall judge the secrets of all hearts, when none shall be able to stop my
Mouth, nor hinder my Voice; Then will I kindle a Fire that shall never go out,
and quicken a Worm which shall gnaw eternally; then shall they remember how I
showed them the evil of their ways, and set their sins in order before them,
but they would not hearken unto me, neither regard reproof, but stopped their
hears at my Voice, and closed their eyelids at the shining of my Light, John
3.19, 20.
loving the darkness rather, because their deeds are evil; therefore the wages
of sin shall be their portion in the pit of death for ever.

Wherefore, thus says the Light that shines in darkness, Come all ye workers
of iniquity, and stand in your ranks together, and let me reason with you a
little; O ye Murderers and envious ones, ye Thieves and covetous of other men's
goods; ye Swearers, Liars, and false-witness-bearers, Cozeners, Cheaters, and
users of any dissimulation whatsoever, with all you proud lustful ones; and all
you Gamesters, and vain boasters, Singers and rejoycers in that which your own
vain minds have invented; and all foolish jesters and speakers of idle words
whatsoever, even all, from the greatest sinners to the least, Do not I, the
Light in all your Consciences, reprove and condemn you for all these things, as
well the least as the greatest? Did I ever give you leave to live in any of
these things? but contrariwise, have I often wooed and entreated you to come
out of them, telling and showing you plainly, if you lived in any of these
things, you should never inherit the Kingdom of God.

And also, O you Professors, who have had a form of Godliness, but not the holy
power thereof, who in an outward show have made many Prayers, with other
outside shows of Holiness, while your hearts were full of Iniquity and the
inside all Deceit? have not I [the Light] often smitten you for these things,
Mat. 7.20, 21, 22, 23.
showing you that the Lord looked not at the outward appearance, but only
requires the heart? and though you may say, you have prophesied in my Name,
yea, and cast out Devils, with many wonderful works, yet will I profess I never
knew you, unless you receive me, that I may cleanse you from all iniquity:
Wherefore cleanse your hands ye Publicans, and purify your hearts ye
Pharisees; for so long as you are in sin, neither of you are justified by me.
Deny me in any of these things beforementioned if you can, for which if I
condemn you, think you to find mercy with my Father? Nay, Joh. 5.22.
nay, my Father and I are both one, and he has committed all Judgment unto me,
and that you will find one day, to your utter condemnation for ever, except you
turn at my reproof, that I may pour out my self upon you, to cleanse you from
all pollutions of flesh and spirit, and so bring you into a godly life, in
perfectness and true holiness, before you go hence and be no more seen; for as
Death leaves you, so will Judgment find you; Isa. 38.18.
for in the grave there is no cleansing: So whilst you have time, take this for
a warning, for you will find no mercy with God after death, if you reject me,
the Light, whom my Father has in his mercy sent into the dark world, that all
that receive me should be led out of sin and darkness, into the Light of
Everlasting Life. If any ask for a proof of these words, let them turn within,
and search the Book of Conscience, and look truly therein, and there they shall
find it.

We hope we shall find mercy hereafter,

The mercy of God is not as many think it is, Rev. 20 13.
then shall your dead minds be awakened, and the mercy which you have dreamed
of therein, be turned into fear, wrath and anger, wherein the Lord will reveal
himself, to take Vengeance upon all that knew him not, to live in them, and
they to live in him, whose Life raises out of Death and all dead works, Revel.
20.6.
into the Life of Righteousness, which is free from sin, which is the first
Resurrection, of which whosoever partakes not, the second Death will have power
over.

Therefore more plainly to all understandings, this I say, is the mercy of the
compassion at God to all mankind, who have lost their spiritual life, through
falling into sin, by which came death over all, insomuch that man became more
senseless than the Ox, Isa. 1.3
which knew his owner, or the Ass, which knew his Master's crib; I say, his
mercy is to offer him Life freely, in the Light of his Son, which he had fully
lost, and of himself could in no ways gain it again, John 1.3.
therefore God so loved the world, that he sent his Son a Light into it, in
whom was and is Life, whose Life is the Light of men, shining in dark hearts,
to which they in taking heed, and obeying it in its movings, leadings and
workings, will thereby be led out of sin, which it bears Testimony against, to
take up a Cross to the carnal mind and lusts of the flesh, which in them is all
enmity against God, on which Cross the evil seed will be crucified, and the
enmity slain, and so comes of twain, one new man to be made, in whom the Image
and Life of God is restored again by the second Adam, in whom all are made
alive, 1 Cor. 15.22.
who receives him who is the quickening Spirit, from that death which entered
them by the first Adam, who was an earthly man; and so all that receive Christ
the Light, receive the Mercy of God, and come to know the Seed of the Kingdom,
which is like a little leaven, which as it comes to have its way to work and
operate in the heart, it makes all things new, by working out the evil seed,
and killing the old man with his deeds, and so makes a new lump; Joh. 3.3, 5.
this is the work of Restoration in the washing of Regeneration, through which
the new birth is brought forth, of which, except a man be born, he must not
inherit the Kingdom of God: So this is the Mercy of God, Joh. 15.24.
to give every one a measure of the Light of his Son, to work this Work in and
for them, which they of themselves could not work, which must be wrought in
this life or never.

But yet I feel there are some in the world who are ready to say thus: Oh this
perfect life that we could attain it!

Well, my Friends, hearts were ready to faint, and were almost giving up to
conclude that there we must remain, notwithstanding something breathed to come
forth, but being in bondage in the Prisonhouse, the keeper thereof said its
impossible; and while we hearkened unto him, we saw no hope of attaining our
desires, but turning away from him, and standing a little still, we heard a
Voice that spoke unto us comfortably, Joh. 13.
and with it was a Light that shone out of darkness, by the which we saw
mavelous things, wherein our souls were greatly revived; and as we hearkened
diligently, and gave up to the call of the same, it brought us by a way that we
thought not of, out of the depth of the dungeon of death, where we were held in
bondage and slavery, by the King of the bottomless pit, who seemed so strong,
as if he could never be overcome; but he that spoke unto us in the Light,
Matthew. 12.29.
has proved too strong for him, for he has broken the bars of brass, by the
might of his power, and unlocked the doors of steel, and by the Sword of his
Spirit has he cut our bands assunder, even the chains wherewith we were held.

And therefore I, as one that have been in the deep, even in bondage under the
prince of that world which lies in wickedness, do hold forth and testify unto
you, that a stronger than he is come, Matthew. 12.29.
who is able to bind the strong-man, and spoil all his goods; and behold he is
nigh unto you, who breathes from deliverance from sin, for it is he that has
begotten that desire in you, and not only so, but his purpose is to satisfy
it, if you would join with him with whom all things are possible, in that which
shows you your conditions in that state where you are, and makes it loathsome
unto you, that you might consent unto him, and be willing to come forth; who is
calling in the freeness of his Love this day, to all that are weary and heavy
laden with sin, Matthew. 11.28, 29, 30.
and have no delight in it, that they might come to him, who is meek and lowly,
in their hearts, and take his yoke upon them, which I testify is easy to all
the honest-hearted, and his burden is very light; wherefore, O ye sincere
breathers after God, who hunger truly after him and his Righteousness, lift up
your heads, for the Blessing of God is unto you; therefore doubt you not, but
turn to the Light that tells you all that ever you did, and look ye only at
him, and not at your own weakness, then will you find him to be a Savior, who
will open your eyes, and enlighten your hearts, and will bring you to the
Fountain of Life, where you shall draw Water out of the Well of Salvation, Joh.
4.14.
whereof you shall drink and be satisfied, which shall spring in you up to
everlasting Life: Oh therefore come away, for the Day of all days is dawned,
and the black clouds of the dark night which were over the Sun of the morning
are fleeing away, and the stone is rouled from the mouth of the Sepulcher, and
the Lamb is arisen from thence; therefore arise, come away my Beloved, why seek
ye the living amongst the dead? For lo, the fullness of him is not at all to be
found in the observation of any outward things; as Bread and Wine, or the like,
Col. 2.20, 21, 22, 23.
which perish with the using: therefore is leanness of soul upon all who stick
in outward shadows, and a complaint heard in all their habitations, mourning in
all their streets; Wherefore arise, arise, this is not your Rest, for it is
polluted, and the Lord is departed from thence, and is turning away the
backside of his Glory, that you may behold him in the perfection of beauty,
even face to face: therefore his bowels yearn toward you, that he might come
in and sup with you; that he may make his abode with and in you; knowing right
well that your souls satisfaction depends only of the enjoyment of his pure
living presence, which only quickens and raises them out of death to life,
which no external thing can do; Rev. 3.20. Jer. 23.29. Romans 10.8.
therefore is he come home to the door of your hearts; Oh then come down and
feel to the knocks of the hammer of his Word, which is nigh you, even in your
hearts and mouths, that your rocky and stony hearts may be softened and broken
thereby; then shall you feel the Water of Life which will spring from the Light
therein; the which when you have felt and tasted of, you will never go more to
the muddy waters which are fouled by the feet of the beasts of the field, which
satisfies not the appetite of that which hungers after God; for the sake
whereof my soul breathes after you, and to the Lord also in your behalf, and in
the yearning bowels of endless and unutterable Love am I drawn forth thus to
write unto you in this day, wherein the Lord has showed me, how he is seeking
you to himself, who by the right hand of his outstretched Arm will bring you
into the Fold of true Rest, if you resist him not in the way of his own
workings, wherein he is drawing near unto you, even to reveal himself in your
hearts, that he might guide you with the Light of his Eye, and be unto you an
Everlasting Teacher: Therefore, this must I signify unto you, that it is in
his Love to you for good, to suffer your Teachers to be removed into corners
this day, and to premit such in their places wherein your souls have no
delight, that so he may draw you home to his own house, wherein there is bread
enough; that so you may come to wait to receive at his hand, and not at the
hands and lips of men, who have fed you with that which died of it self, and
quickened not unto God, neither will stand you in any stead in this day, which
is come as a trial to show you the emptiness of all outward things, whereof you
have been feeding, in them thinking to have life, and have denied the Light
within, in which the Life is (only) and have been idolizing men, who spoke unto
you in the wisdom of words, and not in the power of God, by setting them up in
your hearts, and running in your minds upon them more than you should have
done; and while you enjoyed their presence, you made slight of the little
appearance of Christ's Light in your Consciences, the which many of them taught
you to do, telling you it was a natural thing, which grieved the Lord;
therefore did he often warn the Teachers and Professors by his Servants and
Prophets, both by words and signs, what a day he would bring upon them for
these things, except they repented and turned from the evil of their ways to
his Light; but they would not hear nor regard: therefore in righteous Judgments
is it now come and coming to be fulfilled; but yet in mercy, that so he might
bring you down to himself, whose Love is yet to many of you freely held forth
in the Light of his Son; whom I exhort you all to bow unto, Psalm. 2.12.
and kiss him, lest he be angry, and in his Wrath withdraw from you, shutting
the door of mercy; because when he called, you would not answer: but O my
spirit yet breathes toward you, saying, Oh that you would cease hunting
without, like Esau, for so you miss of the blessing; but turn in home to the
Light of Christ, and, like Jacob, keep at home, and there you will meet with
the Blessing, which will satisfy your souls; Col. 2.16, 17.
where you will feel the ingrafted Word of Life to be the full sum and
substance of all outward shadows, and far exceeding all Types or
Representations that can ever be made of it; the which when you come indeed to
know and find, your hearts will be overjoyed, insomuch that you will be ready
to call to your neighbors and friends to rejoice with you; even like the woman
who had lost her groat in her own house, Luke 15 8, 9.
and went abroad to seek it, but at last turned home, and in sweeping and
making clean her own house, found it there: This is your state; therefore be
still, and see the Salvation of God, which is nigh unto you, and believe not
those who draw you without, saying, Lo here, or there; for the Kingdom of God
is within you, which your souls breath after: Luke 17 21, 23.
Therefore hew no more broken cisterns that can hold no water to satisfy your
thirsty souls, but to the Fountain of living Waters all come and drink freely,
then shall you never thirst again; then shall you know what it is to drink new
Wine with Christ in the Kingdom of Heaven, and to sup with him; then will you
never go more to seek him in the dead letter, and other dead creatures, but
will come to know him and his Life made manifest in you: this is the sum and
substance of all, even to know the Bread of Life in your own houses, and your
own Fig Tree, that you may sit under it, where none can make you afraid; then
will you know the Mystery of Godliness, which is very great, even God manifest
in the flesh.

But now I feel some weak understandings will be ready to say, You seem here to
deny the Ordinances of the Lord's Supper,

To which I have these words to signify:

Although Christ took the Cup, saying, This is my Blood; This is my Body; this
do in remembrance of me, etc.

I say, this being all the Command you have for it, is not sufficient to prove
it to remain an Ordinance for ever: for he did not say, 1 Cor. 11.26.
you shall always do this, (but, Do this) which signifies only at that time;
to keep them in remembrance of him till he came to them again: And if after he
was come, they did use it, because of the weakness of some, yet that is not
sufficient for you to rely upon, and so to rest only in the shadows, denying
the substance, as ye do, (which is to say) the Power of God which sets free
from sin in this life, which indeed is the sum of all, John 6.33, 35, 48, 50,
51, 53, 54, 55, 56.
even the Life and Blood of the Lamb of God, except which a man partakes of, he
has no life in him; to which I testify a man may attain to, and not use those
things; and then, what need is there of them, the substance being enjoyed?

And now to speak more plainer to the matter, this I say; Even as Paul by the
Spirit of God, cried down that which God himself commanded, Gal. 6.15.
(which is to say) Circumcision, saying, it availed nothing, but only the new
creature, which was not wrought in any measure by that outward act, but by the
Circumcision of the heart, in and by the Spirit, which was the substance of
that outward type; for the attaining of which he did not preach the outward,
Gal. 5.6
to be used for the means to bring to the inward, but saw plainly that the use
of the outward, drawed their minds therein to rest, Romans 2.29. Gal. 5.2
short of the thing it self: therefore he said, If they were circumcised,
Christ (the true Circumcision) should profit them nothing. And had he any proof
for this, but only the Spirit in himself: and therefore by the Spirit, in the
Fear and Authority of God, this I say unto you all (Bread and Wine, Joh. 6.53,
54, 55.
or no Bread and Wine) avails nothing, but only the Body and Blood of the
Lamb, which is spiritual (or all spirit) is the main thing, even the very
substance it self, which only is felt and enjoyed by staying the mind inwardly
in the Light and Spirit of God, and not by eating and drinking in the
remembrance thereof, and never coming to witness the thing remembered, which (if
you say, Yea, we do by Faith) I tell ye, Nay; not by the true Faith, while you
witness not freedom from all sin in this life, 1 John 3.3. and 5.18.
neither believe you shall do; for they who had the living Faith, it purifies
them, even as Christ was pure, who came not to this pure cleansing by such
outward things and means as you plead for; but they said it was by walking in
the Light, 1 John 1.7.
as God was in the Light, that they had their fellowship with him, and the
Blood of his Son, to cleanse them from all sin; Jam. 2.20.
so there your Faith, without these fruits, is but a dead faith: And now let me
appeal to the Witness of God in those, who have done it in the most sincerest
abundance to God; and in so doing it, have felt something, as ye have thought,
of the Love of God; Yet, I say, it has been because your minds were at such
times in consideration of the weight of the matter, circumspectly stayed upon
God in the Spirit, and not because you ate the Bread and Wine: So then cease
making an Idol of it, as thinking you cannot enjoy God without it; or that the
dead creature conveyes any thing of him into you; and come down into the
Spirit, and in it dwell continually, which is that, that only can and does do
it; and so when you come truly in this condition, and in it do abide, Joh.
14.23.
(which is to say) not only to sup with Christ sometimes, but always in the
Spirit to make your abode with him, and he with you, you will then say with me
that all these outward things are nothing, but the Spirit is all in this
matter; which whosoever denies, Col. 2.21, 22.
resists the everlasting Ordinance of God: wherefore, touch not, taste not,
handle not, any thing that perishes with the using, after the doctrine and
commandments of men; nor make to your selves the likeness of any earthly thing
of the invisible Body and Blood of the heavenly Son of God; for if ye do, may I
not say, Oh! miserable is your condition! and little are your hearts affected
with him, who cannot keep in the living remembrance of him, without eating and
drinking in remembrance of his Death. Wherefore, O come down to that which
crosses the carnal mind, to take up the Cross, that it may be crucified
thereon; then shall you know a dying with him, and be made partakers of his
Resurrection, wherein the sting of Death, and the victory of the Grave will be
remembered no more.

And yet, further; May I not say unto you, that the Papists, whom you condemn
as Idolaters, may plead for their using of Images in like manner, as you do for
your Bread and Wine; for they say they worship them not as gods, but look upon
them in their worshipping of God, that so thereby their minds may be fervently
fixed upon him, having conceived in their hearts that they cannot be so fervent
with him without them, as with them.

But, they are deceived; for they may draw nearer to God without them.

Even so say I: greater than these, (as says the Spirit.) Oh then, rest not in
the lesser, lest by so doing you miss of the greater; for the Glory of all
Glories is appearing, and that which you think to be the greatest light unto
you, shall become but mere darkness, in comparison of the marvelous Light that
shall yet appear in the day that is already dawned: Oh therefore, prepare,
prepare to meet the Bridegroom, for the Marriage of the Lamb draws nigh; yet
none but those who have on the pure Wedding Garment shall enter with him into
the Bride-chamber, neither taste of the Supper of the Lamb.

Having had some experience of the Loving Kindness of God, and of his dealings
with me, from my Childhood to this day; it is moved in my soul to give forth a
Testimony of the same, for the good of all who in the days of their youth seek
and desire after him.
IN the days of my Childhood, I was brought up with my Parents after the
manner as other Children were; but not in much strictness or restraint from
evil vanities that Children are prone to (by them) they being after the manner
of other worldly people, given to the fashions and vanities thereof, and such
like things themselves, but had my liberty in many things even as I would; but
yet notwithstanding, God in his endless love to my soul showed me the evil of
my ways, words and actions, and begot a desire in me after himself, and opened
my understanding, and showed me much of the vanity and ignorance of the
Teachers and Professors of the world, insomuch that I was fully satisfied, that
the Teachers of the world were not the Ministers of Christ, and that they did
people little good, which caused me that I never followed them, so as to expect
benefit from them; and I marvelled that those who could read the Scriptures,
and seemed to be wise, would ever follow them: Such things as these were
stirring and working in me, from eight or nine years of age until eleven or
twelve; about which time the People called Baptists, appeared in this my native
place and Country, which is Tipton in Staffordshire; whose Doctrine and outward
Form, which I only looked at, I found to be more in imitation according to the
Scriptures, than the other Teachers, and therefore did I go amongst them, and
owned them more than any; and after some years time my understanding was very
much opened, so that I became wiser than all my acquainted Playfellows in
Religious matters, and could not freely act such things as others did, though I
was many times overcome with them; but the Lord followed me with his Witness,
so that I had no peace in any evil words or actions; insomuch that many times
in the very acting of vain foolish things, something would smite me into
heaviness and grief; though I was never given to that which the world calls
gross sin, but only childish vanities, as playing with lads, foolish jesting
and idle talk, singing of songs, and such like things, as other untoward lads
are given to, which scarce any one would reprove me for; for the best sort of
people about me were guilty of many such things, who seemed to be wise men; yet
notwithstanding, I could have no peace in them, though something would tell me
I was young, and need not matter such things so early, but might let them alone
til I was a man, and then I should have more knowledge in godly matters, and it
would be well enough to grow civil and circumspect then: yet for all this, I
could not get over the Witness of God, but it showed me, that this was the
Serpent's voice, that would draw me from remembering my Creator in the days of
my youth: And so in the exercise of these things my soul was often revived with
true desires after God, who I little thought was so nigh me as he was: and many
times I made Vows in spirit, that if he would pass by my sins past, I would
never do as I had before: But alas, in my own power I could not perform them,
and I was ignorant of the Power and Spirit of God; and though we in these days
had nothing but he Scriptures to help our minds in such things; for the
Teachers concluded, that all Revelations and imediate Teachings by the Spirit
of God, as in the days of old, [were ceased;] the which made me many times
sorrowful, saying, Oh that I had been alive in those days, when the Lord
taught his People by his Spirit! And when my spirit was exercised in such
things, I was many times drawn to go into some secret place to be alone, and
there could I freely make my moan to God, according to the meaning of my mind,
with strong desires and tears, sometimes praying in words as God gave me
utterance, which I knew he would not despise, but was more accepted with him
than all the fine words, or forms of men's inventions; and this I can truly
say, I never in all my days prayed in hypocrisy, to be seen of men, neither
ever did learn any form of prayer to rest in it, for I knew that was deceit;
but from the smcerity of my heart I ever did it; and in these things I many
times felt, even a sweet communion with God; and many times in my waiting upon
God, and pondring of things concerning him, some things would open in me,
signifying that a glorious day was nigh at hand, which I should live to see,
and that I should bear a Testimony for God therein; but when I went to reason
in my self how it should be fulfilled, I being unlearned, neither should be
brought up to learning outwardly but little, my Parents being but mean in the
outward; then I darkened my self by these reasonings, and could not see how it
should be; but when I remembered, that all things were possible with God, then
was I made to see that those reasonings came from flesh and blood, and were to
be denied; but many times the enemy of my soul overcame me, and brought me to
much vanity, which I knew to be evil; yet though I knew it, and had a desire
against it, yet was I carried away into it: then when I retired in my mind to
God, something would tell me that I had sinned against my own knowledge, and
God would not accept me, and so would have cast me into despair, as if I should
never be forgiven: Then this thing would be brought into my remembrance by the
Spirit (...) God, That his Blessing was to those that hungered and thirsted
after Righteousness, and they should be satisfied; which greatly revived my
soul; for I could truly say, notwithstanding all my sins, that I was one of
those hungerers; and for all the doubting desperations that the Devil could
cast into me, yet I felt something in me, that (as it were) could rely upon
God, as being of his nature, and still cried after him; in which I felt some
acceptance with God, and of his mercy to my soul, and I saw it was the evil one
which led me into sin, that would have me to believe I should not be accepted
with God, because of my transgressions which I had not gotten power over; for
to will it was then present with me, but how to perform I had not found: for
though the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ the Light, was nigh unto me,
which now I know makes me free from the Law of sin and death; yet I knew it not
then, but now I know that the Lord was then at work in me, begetting desires in
my heart after him, that so I might be made willing to receive the
manifestation of his Son in me with joy; which when he had prepared my soul, he
then revealed in me, by which my heart was made glad, and even overcome with
the love of God, and his great Mercies toward me. But yet, to go back a
little, while I was ignorant of the glorious Manifestation of God, and went to
the Baptists Meetings, until there was some of the People called Quakers came
into this Country, who preached up the Light within, and the like, by whom some
of the Baptists were convinced; and then the rest of them who were Speakers,
made it their great business to preach down, and against the Light within; and
so I was thereby hindered with evil Reports of them, (which then were many) very
much cast against that People, though I had never heard them at all; but as
concerning those who preached so much against that inward Light (woe and alas
for them!) for they are greatly fallen into the Darkness, and are become even
as sottish as other people, and have lost their Zeal which they had for that,
which they then thought to be Truth, for whose sakes I have many times been
grieved; for I can testify that there was a good desire once in them, which
drawed them in some measure, as I may say, toward Canaan; but alas, the way
proved strait, and the mind being alive which lusted after the fleshpots, they
are again turned into the darkness of Egypt: And notwithstanding all that these
men could say for their own way, or against others; yer I saw plainly, neither
they nor I were as we should be, but I was still unsatisfied, because I had a
Law in my members that warred against the Law of my mind, which led me captive
into sin, which I could not overcome, neither could I believe I ever should,
though I had a desire against it.

And so after all these things, it was ordered that I must go down to Bristol
upon some outward occasion; about which time I was seventeen or eighteen years
old, and it happened that I was to stay there some time, in which I did abide
at a place where there was a Woman, who owned the People called Quakers, and
she showed me some of their Books; and though I could read but badly, yet I
perceived that they were not such a People as I thought they had; and so my
mind was turned out of enmity against them into love, insomuch that I had a
desire to hear them; so I went to their Meetings several times, but could hear
no words; but in beholding of them, I was convinced that they were a People to
whom God had manifested more than any People that ever I had seen, but how, I
knew not; but at last, on a First Day, I was much moved in my spirit, above
other times, to go to their Meeting; and, unknown to me, before I came, there
was a man, whose name in the flesh is John Story, in whom God had raised his
Witness, and opened his Understanding to bear a Testimony for him, who when I
heard speak, the Spirit of Life opened my understanding to receive his words,
which were made serviceable to me at that time, for the informing of my mind in
the true Way of God, which I had been long seeking after, the which I gladly
received, and willingly turned from the Darkness, joining to the Light; which I
found to be as a man that told me all that ever I had done; and not only so,
but condemned all sin in me, showing what was good, and what was evil,
condemning me for joining with the evil. And so the ministration of
Condemnation I came to witness, which was very glorious in its time, wherein
the just Judgments of the Lord took hold of that which drew me into sin, in
which Judgments the true Seed greatly rejoiced, because its Redemption drew
nigh, and the Lord was arisen to plead with its Enemy by Fire and Sword, which
had held it in bondage, which I was daily led to take up a Cross to; by which
the carnal mind, which warreth against the spiritual, was crucified in me
daily, and I daily died to the world and the vanities thereof, and so my mind
came to be redeemed unto God, who with the finger of his Spirit wrote his Law
in my heart, which as I became obedient to, it made me free from the Law of
sin, and gave me victory over it daily; so was that in me quickened which
delighted only to do the Will of God, and to walk in his Way; which I testify
is a pleasant path and very delightsom, surpassing all the delights and
vanities of the world, which satisfies not the soul, but burdens the pure Seed
of God, which I witness is set free through Judgments, and that there is no
way to Life but through Death, for fallen man; no way to true Joy, but through
Trouble; no way to Canaan, but through the Red Sea, and the Wilderness; no way
to enter the Kingdom, but through many Tribulations. So the Lord by the Spirit
of burning, has made that in me, which was as a fruitful field, to become as a
Forest; and that which was as a Forest, to be as a fruitful field: Yea, the
Lord has made the parched, to be as a pool, and the dry-land, springs of
water; and has visited poor Lazarus with mercy and love, but the rich Glutton
has he fed with Judgment; and Esau the wild hunter, the first birth, has he
brought down, to serve Jacob the younger, who has obtained the Blessing; and
hard-hearted Pharaoh has he plagued, but Israel the Seed has he blessed, whom
he has led by the pillar of fire, which was a light unto him, by which he
walked out of the darkness of Egypt, from under the bondage of Pharaoh, whom he
has destroyed in the bottom of the Sea: Therefore does the Seed rejoice and
sing, with high praises to its King, who by the power of his strong hand has
broken the snare and band, and set its feet at liberty, that it might walk in
the way to Canaan, the blessed Land, in this God's glorious day, wherein the
Sun is risen in glory bright, which has expelled the darkness of the cloudy
night, and has melted the frost and snow away, which covered the tender plant
in the gloomy day.

Wherefore now being come unto the day of God,
And having felt his Love by kissing of his Rod,
I will make mention of his Name, and tell of his Salvation;
For he has showed me the same, which saves out of Transgression:
Therefore with joy unto the Lord with th'Spirit I will sing,
Who has broken the snare and cord of Death, which was a sting;
And has quickened by his Power a life in me to live,
Which when it feels his pleasent showers, does Praises to him give.
I, when I feel the pure Fountain in me to open and spring,
Which issues from Sions Mountain, the Life of her sweet King.
Then is my sp'rit overcome even with the issues of that Life,
Which comes from the glorious Sun, who leads out of strife,
Into the perfect pure Love, which never thinks ill,
Where nothing at all does him move to any, but pure good will.
O in this Life, that is free from strife, my soul has its delight;
For O it is my married Wife, to whom my very life,
(In that same holy Marriage, which is both clean and pure,
Which neither Death nor Hell can break, but ever will endure)
Is even wedded, yet not by any Imagination,
But by the Spirit undefiled, which saves out of transgression.
Yet in much fear unto the Lord I cry,
O without thy Presence what am I!
If thou forsake me, I shall surely fall;
For, of my self, I have no strength at all;
O therefore by thy Power, me deliver
And save, to glorify thy Name for ever.
Yet now come hearken unto me, all that desire to know,
And my Beloved long to see, the way to you I Will show.
It is by walking in the Light, which does convince of sin,
Which is committed in the night, by all that walk therein:
Therefore out of the Darkness come, and hearken to the Light,
Even the Glory of the Son, and it will free you quite.
So my dear Beloved, you will then come to see
By whom my soul is moved, who is so dear to me:
O then you will come to see his shape, and hear his glorious Voice,
The which will make the Seed to leap, and your souls to rejoice.
Therefore come now, follow the Light, and do not from it turn;
So shall you have a pure sight, and myst'ries deep shall learn:
Even that great and glorious Work of happy Restoration,
The which is wrought by him that makes the blessed new creation:
Who sitting on the Throne alone, shines like a precious stone,
Who does enlighten every one, that in the world does come.
Therefore let all that fear the Lord, now hearken to his Voice,
And obey it, that better is than any Sacrifice.
Wherefore now come and look within, and there incline your ear;
For it is the Spirit of the Lord which only speaks there.
For though man's heart's deceitful, and imaginations naught;
Yet God's Spirit it is which shows him every idle thought:
Therefore within let every one unto the Light return,
And hearken to its Voice, that is pure, and then you will come to learn
What that is called that does redeem, and save the soul from sin,
And then you will come to know the Law that written is within,
Even by the finger and direction of the living God
In all the hearts of them, who understand and kiss his Rod,
Which smites and chastises them, when ere they go astray,
That it might turn them (that are out) into the good old Way,
Wherein they will find peace that is pure, unto their souls, and then
Shall rest with God, which will endure for evermore, Amen.
And so the Lord God of eternal Holiness having lighted a Candle in my heart,
and given me a measure of his good Spirit, by which he has preached
Righteousness through me, if I had never opened my mouth, nor set pen to paper;
I say, I am not now to put it under a bushel and hide it, but to set it up,
that it may give light unto all; neither must I hide my Talent in the earth,
lest it be taken from me, and given to another who will improve it better; but
my chiefest care must be to stand in all things approved to God in
faithfulness; and when he draws me, or calls me forth, if I leave the old man
to mend his Net himself, as Peter and John did, let none that knows me marvel
at it, for I must go about my Father's business, who has redeemed my mind out
of the love of earthly things and worldly delights, that I should set my whole
delight in him, who has also brought me to see of the travel of my soul, and
to be satisfied concerning the knowledge of his Truth; so that I look not for
another Truth, Way, Leader nor Guide, to lead me up to a higher glory in this
Truth which is yet to be attained, for the revealing of which, am I waiting in
the Light, not expecting any thing any other way, but only a growing from
strength to strength, and a pressing on from glory to glory, even as God in his
Son Christ the Light, shall make known himself unto me; but I expect not
another Savior than Him (the Light) for by Him the Lepers are cleansed, the
blind made to see, and the lame man to leap like an Heart, the dumb to speak;
and to the poor is the Gospel preached by Him, whom he fills with good
things, but the rich and the full he sends empty away: all which, whosoever
receives and follows, the Lamb, the Light, the Way, the Truth and the Life,
shall come to witness, and read with a clear understanding what I have
written; but from those that rebel against the Light, these things are sealed
by the hand of the Wisdom of God.

I. W.

Some wholesome DIRECTIONS to stir up young People to seek after their Creator
in the days of their youth.
ANd now, O all you Young men and Maids, with all that are of a capacity to
understand my words, who are young and tender in years, for my bowels yearn
toward you; therefore come hearken to my voice, and be attentive to the words
of my mouth, and I will instruct you in the Fear of the Lord, which is the
beginning of true Wisdom; Now this is the Counsel of God unto you, which he
has put into my heart to write, that you all hearken to that which shows you
the evil of the world and the vanity of your own ways; which condemns you for
every evil word and action; for that I testify unto you all, is the Spirit of
God which he has given you to profit withal, which, as you receive it, will
open your understandings, and if you join therewith, it will give you dominion
over sin, and cleanse you from iniquity; O therefore come down to it, and put
your necks under the yoke, and let that which crosses the vain mind be your
delight; and still join with that in you which breaths after God, so shall
you come to an acquaintance with him; for to that does he make known himself,
and to them, and none but them who wait therein upon him; wherefore let not
your minds run after vain things, but above all mind the Fear of the Lord, and
seek after your Creator in your youthful days, before the evil seed has
gotten too deep a root in your hearts; for then it will be hard to get it out;
yea, ever the longer you put the day of the Lord off, so much the harder will
it be for you to return, and become conformable to his Will; even as it is hard
to make an old crooked tree straight and fit it for the building, which is not
done without much hewing; so will it be with you, if you go on till old age in
the crooked perverseness of sin; but if you take up the Cross while you are
young, then shall you grow up as the pleasant plants of a Garden, in whom the
Husbandman is well-pleased, who will make it the delight of his soul to water
you with the distilling Dews of his Love, which is better than Wine or Oil, or
any earthly thing: O then, after Him seek ye with your whole hearts, then shall
you find Him, and be satisfied in the fullness of his Love; whose Life will rest
upon you and make you like unto himself, whose Image of Love you are to bear
forth to all men; who causes his Sun to shine upon his Enemies as well as his
Friends: but yet you are to bear a faithful Testimony against all
Unrighteousness; hating the evil of all, but the persons of none; and in all
conditions, watch over your own spirits with diligence; for the greatest enemy
you have to deal with, is in your own house, which will be drawing your minds
into something or other in the Creation below, that so he might cause you to
forget God your Creator; which, if you be crossed in, and cannot have your
wills satisfied, nor accomplish the desire of your minds, murmur not, for God
sees what will be best for your good and his glory; O therefore, let not your
minds run after Gold nor Silver, Houses nor Lands, Wives nor Husbands, neither
the Friendship of the World, nor the Fashions thereof, which will all pass away
and come to nothing; but, above all these, seek ye first the Kingdom of God,
and the Righteousness thereof, and in it be content with what shall be of God
added unto you; who will not suffer those that fear him to want any good thing;
who have chosen the one thing needful above all other things, even the good
part, and have refused the evil, and the many things, whereby comes the
offense; such have made a good choice, for the Lord is their Inheritance and
Portion, and their Lot is fallen in a good ground; Wherefore all, come, turn
in, and cleave to the one good thing, even that which never consented to any
evil; for that is the Seed of the Kingdom, which is likened to a little Leaven
which the woman hid in the Meal, and it leavened the whole Lump, even so is
that Seed, the Righteous Leaven, hid in your hearts, to leaven you into its
nature, which is of the Nature of God: O then, let all your hearts be united
thereunto, and in obedience give up to the workings of it, and then it will
work out all that is contrary to God in you, and make you like unto it self,
which is, meek and lowly, harmless, pure and undefiled; and therefore it
condemns you while you are in the lofty, hurtful, filthy nature, which leads
you into sin; Which if it follow you with Torment and Condemnation, giving you
no peace in your evil vvayes, then this I testify, as one who have had
experience thereof, That it is the Love of God unto you; for then is he seeking
after you, and striving with you by his Spirit, that he might draw you to
Himself, who would not that you should perish in your sin, but turn to him, and
receive the reproof of his Instruction, which is the Way of Life: O therefore,
turn ye, turn ye, and kiss the Rod that smites you, and it will be a staff of
strength unto you, with which you shall walk and not be weary; and with it
shall you smite down your Enemy who would stop you in the way; and when you are
faint, you shall lean thereon and be strengthened; and then that which was your
Condemner, will become your Justifier; and that which spoke trouble, will speak
peace unto you: Wherefore let the time past be sufficient which you have spent
in vanity, and for time to come see that you hearken to that which calls to
Repentance, even the Light of Jesus, which is the more sure Word of Prophecy,
nigh, in your hearts, and in your mouths; which is the Word of Faith which the
Apostle preached; which will purify your hearts from sin, and cleanse your
spirits from iniquity. So while the Lord calls, see that you answer, for his
Spirit will not always strive with men.

And now, my Friends, you who are in any measure turned to this, or hereafter
may turn, and by it come to see many vanities of the World, and foolish customs
of men, (which you must forsake, or you cannot have peace with God) which will
be a cross unto you; this is my Counsel unto you, That you reason not with
flesh and blood, which must not God's Kingdom inherit, but give up freely, and
look not at your own weakness, neither flee the Cross; for if you do, then you
save alive the Enemy of your own peace, which is the carnal mind, which must be
crucified upon the Cross which is spiritual: So stay your minds only in the
Light, and there you will find the Power of God to crucify your carnal minds,
in which the weakness stands, and will give you power over all within and
without; for this I can truly say for your encouragement; Are you weak and
fearful? so was I; but the Lord hah made me in many things strong and bold for
that which is good, glory to his Name for ever, in whom I will make my boast,
for he it is who works all my works in me and for me; so that I am nothing,
but He is all; who, if He should forsake me, I should surely fall: So whatever
he may show you, or do for you, or with you; yet still keep you in the sense of
your own nothingness, lest the boasting mind get up in you to rob Him of his
Glory. So be not highminded, but fear, and make it your greatest care to be
diligent, and hearken to his Voice, that you may be prepared for the glorious
Manifestation which is to be revealed in you by the Son of God, who is arisen
higher in his Beauty than in the days past, wherein the cloud of Ezer, and
thick darkness was over many, by which they were veiled; but the day is at hand
wherein the light of the Moon shall become as the light of the Sun, and the
light of the Sun as the light of seven days, and the eyes of many shall be
opened to see mavelous things: Therefore trim your Lamps, that you may be
ready against the Bridegroom comes, who will come, and will not long tarry,
but hasteneth, and the time draws nigh wherein ye that are waiting for his
appearance shall be promoted higher than Kings or Princes of this World, and
shall triumph with the Lamb upon the holy Mountain of God, where no venomous
beast shall come.

So let none run with the world into the evil thereof; although they that do
so, are even set up; and he that departs from iniquity is for them a prey: but
yet it is not as the Wicked thinks it is; for the Lord beholds all their
doings; he winketh not, as in the night of ignorance, neither will he long
forbear, nor suffer them to proceed much longer; for his purpose is, to destroy
the Devil and all his works, with all the workers of iniquity: And behold, he
is now like a man who has laid his bait and set his snare, and hides himself
in a secret place, who will arise when they think not of him, and his hand
shall not spare, neither his eyelids pity, but will be avenged of all his
Enemies; and then they that feared him, and thought upon his Name, shall be
honorable in the eyes of many people; and many shall be joined unto them, and
to the Lord in that day; and the Kingdoms of this World shall become the
Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever.

Oh the sense of this God's glorious Day, wherein the Lamb, the Scepter over
all must sway, it transports my soul into a heavenly joy, and sets my spirit
above the world full high: Wherefore I say unto you all that love and fear the
Lord, Rejoice and be glad, and in the strength of his powerful Spirit tread
upon all the vanities of the World, and cast its glory behind you, and lift up
your heads in the Faith and Power of God, which will give you Victory over the
World, and the Devil, the god of it; and cast away all the weights and burdens,
with all the encumbrances thereof, wherein sin is apt to beset you, that you
may have liberty with joy to run the Race which is set before you, that so the
glorious Crown of Immortality you may obtain, and with the Lamb upon his Throne
may reign, which is promised to him that overcomes, even as he overcame; who
was in all things tempted as we are, yet without sin: So to that which is able
to deliver you out of temptation, as it did him, I leave you all, (to wit) the
Life that was in him, which is the Light of men, in which the Prince of this
World has no part; which as every one comes to be stayed in, they are hid with
God in Christ the Light, from the temptations of the Serpent, who can enter no
where but in the earthly carnal mind, which is his throne, whereon he sits,
deceiving the Nations; but the day of his downfall is at hand, and therefore
let the Hosts of Heaven rejoice and sing, for over him shall reign our King,
and upon the Throne on high shall sit, and the Devil with all his works shall
be cast into the pit: Wherefore trumph ye Sons of Sion, and be glad ye
Daughters of Jerusalem, for he that makes the New Creation is already come, who
was the first, and will be the last; to whom be honor, glory and dominion now
and for evermore.

Delivered from my hand the third of the first Month, (called March) 1663. J. W.

THE END.

