THE DREADFULNESS OF THE SIN OF Despising Dominion, AND Speaking Evil of
Dignities: Represented in a SERMON Preached before the Right Honorable, the
Lord Mayor, AND Court of Aldermen, At the Guild Hall Chapel, July 30. 1682.

By John Whitfeld, A. M. sometimes of Jesus College in Cambridge, and now
Rector of Bugbrook near Northampton.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Carr, at the Kings Head, at the West end of St.
Paul's Church. MDCLXXXII.

Moore, Mayor.

Cur. Speci^ vent. die Dominico xxx. die Julii 1682. Annoque Regni Regis Caroli
secundi Angl. etc. xxxiiijto.
THis Court does desire Mr. Whitfeld to Print his Sermon, this day Preached at
the Guild Hall Chapel, before the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen of this City.

Wagstaffe

To the Right Honorable Sir JOHN MOORE, Knight. Lord Mayor of the City of London,
and to the Honorable Court of Aldermen, his Brethren.
My Lord,
NExt to despising those Dominions, the Vindication of which I have presumed
humbly to offer at in the Discourse a^ext, a demurr to your Honors Order for
this impression of it, would be a Crime of greatest magnitude; which I could
not contrive how to atone for. I know too well mine own deficiencies, to
render my self and them obnoxious to the public Censure of this critical Age,
but withal know as well, who is Gods Representative in this Kingdom, and the
Kings, in this Great and celebrated City; where like a Wise Master Builder you
have laid such a Foundation, that if your Successors shall make a
Superstructure proportionable, the Top stone will come to be advanced in glory
to the best of Religions, Kings, and Churches in the World; And thereby
Monuments erected of just and Pious fame, to your self and them, more lasting
than those of Brass and Marble; more Glorious than the Re-erection of this
splendid City: Where the Foundations have been lately attempted to be
destroyed, in a sadder sense than ever. Toward the prevention of which great
Fatality, what here I have (with no other prospect than a truly conscientious
one) designed, I have also endeavored to make good by Scripture reason, the
best, and most authentic; which none will, or can deny, but those that have
dared of later days to abjure both.

How propitious a reception this, and its poor Compiler found with your
Lordship, I can never sufficiently own to the World, with that gratitude and
obedience which is due, for those great and Everlasting Obligations you have
deigned to lay upon me; having no better return to make, than the best and most
importunate of my Devotions; That the Great God would graciously continue to
assist you with that just and generous courage as well as conduct, which you
have given very ample proof of, for carrying on the good Work you have begun;
that at last it may be consummate; and your security, reputation, and
satisfaction with it, in that of our Most Gracious Sovereign, and his truly
sober, steadfast, Loyal Subjects; in which Vote your Lordship may assure your
self of the most cordial concurrence of all such, more especially those of our
Function, and most peculiarly that of him, who though the meanest, yet cannot
but be ambitious to be reputed,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Obliged, Devoted, and obedient Servant, John
Whitfeld.
August 10. 1682.
JUDE 8. Latter Part of the Verse. -- Despise Dominion, and speak evil of
Dignities.


IF ever the complexion of any Age and People in the World were drawn in
Colors to the Life, so certainly is that of them whom lately we have had too
much of conversation with, by our Apostle in the great Instances here given,
these two, that are the grand Characteristicks of the Text:

A People that have dared the Divine as well as humane vengeance to the
extremest height; whom whole Theaters of God's severest Judgments cannot awaken
to any serious sense of those sins which here the Apostle sets out so very
tragical a Scene of.

The sin of the Apostate Angels, Jude 6,7.
of Sodom and Gomorrha, and these one would think were great enough; yet there
is one that vies them both, set off with the saddest and highest of all
Emphases; not only in doleful, but very dismal accents, (...); as St.
Chrysostom upon another place, What dreadful words he speaks when here he
says, Despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities! Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 11.29.


These the Apostle clearly ranks with those: This he represents as a very
formidable thing; and shows, how its doom, though it commences, yet does not
determine here, but in a place more hideous, in eternal fire.

This he renders as a sin so hugely full of horror, that nothing can be more.
And so St. Peter, (...), 2 Pet. 2.10.
a sin that they, we, and all the World, should tremble at; where he has
stigmatized with as black Characters, not only the same thing, but done it in
the self same words, with our Apostle here; from whom, says Tirinus, Tirinus in
loc.
he took the Transcript of them, being wrote six years before, as he computes.
The word for Dominion here being the same with that of Government there, which
is (...), a word appropriate to the Imperial Dignity and Dominion then; well if
now in so great veneration.

For despising indeed, St. Peter uses another word, (...), setting their minds,
all their Prudentials, Politics, against that Government, those Dignities, in
the diminution and derision of them.

Saint Jude has (...), which signifies not only a rejection, as Beza and others
give it; but annihilation of this Government, making nothing of it; as if
thither they would (if they could) at last reduce it, into nothing; or, which
is worse, a Democratical Chaos and confusion.

The other words (which with both the Apostles are the same) rise higher still,
to the (...), the glories, splendors, or glorious Dignities, which such so
ingloriously blaspheme.

Dignities, that is, Princes, says Beza upon the place; Beza in loc. (...), i.
e. Principes, quantumvis augusta Majestate praeditos.
and that with this addition, Set off and illustrated with the Augustest
Majesty.

These are those which he makes the Dignities and Dominions here; and which he
calls an Order constituted by God himself: Ordinem ipsum a Deo constitutum.
so he ownes the Divine Right of Monarchy.

According to that of St. Peter and St. Paul, 2 Pet. 2. Romans 13.
the Imperial Powers then in being; as we shall see more clearly and fully in
the Sequel.

These he cannot but grant to be of a Celestial Origin, of Divine not humane
Institution. So far we have him with us.

And happy for him if here he could have held, and been consistent with
himself. For he is presently off; and will have Governments to be, Senators, a
Colleague of Medley Magistrates, Senatores, sive aliorum Magistratuum Collegium.
in French Seignieur; to bring in his beloved Lay Elders, within the Character
of these Dominions.

Estius flies higher, Est. in loc.
and would transfer it to Angels, the heavenly Powers, the better to evade all
earthly; wherein, Enthusiast-like, Papist and Schismatic, the Foxes and
Firebrands, are well linked together.

The vulgar of the Romanists reads that of St. Peter (one would bless himself
how,) Sectas non metuunt introducere, Strange sort of introduction! so
construing (...), merely according to their own opiniatriment.

And thus the Rhemists, that they may turn all upon the Protestants. For so I
find in their Notes upon these words, Despise Dominion, such be Heretics (and
we know who are so in their Calendar) that will not be subject to any
Superior; of which kind, in blaspheming the supreme spiritual Magistrate, are
the Protestants. Fulk. in loc.


There they think they come home to us; and I think Dr. Fulke comes home to
them in this return, Such an Heretic, nay worse than Heretic, is Antichrist
the Pope; which will not be subject to any Superior, no not the Decrees of a
General Council, though himself has owned its authority. As Martin the V. that
of Constance, and Eugenius the IV. that of Basil; yet both of them refused to
conform themselves to their Decrees, when they came to determine that such a
Council should supersede his Holiness.

Such an Heretic is he that advances himself above all that is called God, as
St. Paul averrs; 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
and so does perfectly despise all Dominion, besides his own insufferable
usurpation: And blaspheme Majesty with the vilest of all indignities, when he
arrogates to himself to deprive Kings of that Dominion which they have, and
ever had by inviolable succession; and so imperiously to discharge Subjects of
all loyalty and homage to their Sovereigns. As (says Beza) did Julius the IV.
to a Neighboring King then, meaning, doubtless, King Henry the VIII. and Pius
the V. to our Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth.

In short, such Heretics are all now with us that would take the Monopoly out
of his hand; that do as did the Gnostics, and before them the Simonians (as
the Apostle here has so significantly phras'd it) (...), that is, says Estius,
in their own imagination. In imaginatione sua. Est. in loc.


That are transported with delusive Dreams; so Clemens Alexandrinus, as well as
after him Epiphanius and Oecumenius refer it to their absurd, blasphemous
phantasms,

That have all their senses sealed in profoundest slumber, as Beza does express
it. Sensus omnes altissimo veterno sopitos. Beza in loc.


According to that of the Prophet Isaiah, upon whom the Lord has made a full
effusion of the Spirit; but it is the Spirit of slumber, nay worse than so, of
deep sleep. Which he threatens as the greatest of Judgments that can befall any
person or people in the World. Isai. 29.10.


To rouse such then a little, who are but too numerous in this Lethargick Age
of ours, and that I may the better do it, I shall thus endeavor to
demonstrate, viz.

That the two great things which are the true Original of this so grand despite
and defamation in them that contemn Dominion, and in the Apostles sense as well
as word, blaspheme Dignities, are Ignorance and Atheism; there is the source of
all.

First, Ignorance: So our Apostle has here affured us, These speak evil of the
things they know not; Jude 10.
that are beyond, that are above them; clear out of their Sphere and Orb.

And so St. Peter in the same awakening word, (...), They speak evil of the
things they understand not, 2 Pet. 2.12.
which they do not, cannot ken; that are preterpluperfectly past their
intelligence; And this makes them go on in the way of Cain, that murtherous
one, (for there is worse murder of the tongue and Pen, than any of the hand;)
Dei Episcopos linguae gladio jugulastis, fundentes sanguinem non corporis, sed
honoris. Optatus contra Parmenianum, l. 2. p. 72.
and run on so rashly and precipitantly as if they would outrun their
Coryphaeus Corah, in that contradiction which shall be as (if not more) fatal
to them without repentance, in a deeper absorption than it was to him.

This is that which makes them to espouse so many mean and inferior
apprehensions of those Dominions that are so very high, (...), elevated above
all on Earth; Romans 13.3. 1 Pet. 2.12.
the Dignities that are so sacred, high as Heaven.

The Case is so plain that nothing can be more. The main, and as to most, the
only cause why the feculent part of Mankind amongst us do so much slight and
thwart the Sovereign Powers, is their egregious and, as to some, stupendous
ignorance, if they would but be so ingenuous, nay commonly honest, as to
acknowledge it.

It Is chiefly, if not only, because they do not, or (which is infinitely more
for their disparagement) will not know what indeed and truth they are in
themselves, and ought to be in our repute.

When the Old Roman Antony (as if the fatality of an awkard humor did attend
that Name) squibb'd at the Study of the Civil Law, withal acknowledging his own
no great accuracy in it, the then Oracle of that and all Eloquence said, That
by the one he had made some satisfaction for the other: 'Twas Cicero, as
himself has told us. De Orat. lib. 1.


Well if such would learn at last before it be too late to make some (though
such, Heaven knows, is small reparation) for those otherwise irreparable
injuries they have done, there where their ALL cannot make restitution.

No wonder in the least if a bright and piercing Ray affect a weak and waterish
eye, Urit enim fulgore suo, as the Naturalist says.

Still in reference to (...) here, and in St Peter.
And because these Dignities and Dominions bear such beams of brightness in
themselves, this makes them such motes as they are in the eyes of others, those
Birds of Night, (though scarce Athenian ones) that cannot endure the splendor
of this Day. The Rays of Majesty which is so Divine a thing in it self, cannot
but dazzle such ill-affected eyes as theirs; and that makes it so troublesome
to them, and them to it, as of late they have been.

And therefore what fair Masquerade soever men have now to put upon the foulest
of facts, the secret undermining, and withal too open scandalizing of our
Governors and Government both in Church and State, which have been ever since
the gracious Reformation, so glorious in all the Christian World, (and begin
now to be so, amongst the remoter Infidels and Pagans) doubtless the design of
such infamous Persons is chiefly, if not only this, That amongst the blind
Mobile they may seem to be something, when really they are nothing but in their
own too great, and others as little estimate.

According to that Adage, Inter caecos luscum, A purblind Person, though a
Cipher in himself, may make a considerable Figure with them that are stark
blind; nay, pass for a Prince amongst the People, as well as those of Corah's
Association. Numb. 16.9.


And certainly, if ever knowledge and those whom the eternal Wisdom has
constituted to be the lasting Conservators of it, Mal. 2.7.
( for the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and all the people should
seek the Law at his mouth, the great Gospel-Law of their greatest Duty toward
God and the King, for which he is sent to be the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts
to them;) I say, if ever the knowledge, these notices, were at any time more
requisite than other, now certainly they are most apparently so: when we have
so many amongst our selves, that by a more stupid than subtle sort of
sophistry, attempt to wrangle us not only out of our senses, but (what is
infinitely far more valuable in it self, and should be so to us) our Religion
also: (The best the World ever had, or is like to have) which we derive not
only ever since, but from our Savior himself, the clearest Current. And that
by a superfoetation of Religions, which they would introduce; such Principles
and Practices as are perfectly and eternally abhorrent, not only to the thing
but very Name and Notion of all true Religion, a Name too sacred to be so
profaned, and thing too pure to be so defiled, (as of latter days it has been)
with any thing of Sedition, Privy Conspiracy, much less open Rebellion, as well
as false Doctrine, Heresy and Schism, the most daring contempts of God's holy
Word and Commandment that can be contrived in all the World; from which all
that are not wholly given up to hardness of heart, cannot but pray, Good Lord
deliver us.

'Twould be thought an odd way to reform and illuminate the Structure by
damming up its lights; just like that of our late blessed Reformades, Down with
the Clergy to advance piety, and with the Universities only for the sake of
learning: so with the supreme, and after that sobordinate Magistracy, Level all
to exalt the little Achitophel, with his Associators great policy, but greater
pride, vainglory, hypocrisy, envy, hatred, malice, and all manner of
uncharitableness. The true Church-definition which our Litany will afford us of
those false Anti-Church-Protestant-Dissenters, who have been so busy and
capricious every where of late amongst us; buoyed up by some like him in Rome
called Ennatus; who being very old, but withal very mutinous and aspiring;
Adrian being told that he was dead, fell into a very pleasant humor, and said,
He could not but admire how he could tend to dye.

Well it would be for the World if some such Boutefeaus could find leisure at
the last to pay that Debt to the King of Terrors, which they have not yet done
to the King of greatest (I dare not say too great) mercies.

I read of the States of Mittellene, that designing a revenge at the most
exquisite rate upon some they had an everlasting pique against, Aelian Var.
Hist. lib. 3.
because they would not conform themselves to their Republick-Constitutions,
(or in plain English turn Commonwealths men) they imposed this penalty as the
severest they could possibly invent to inflict upon them, viz. that their
Children should not go to School, or have any kind of education toward any
thing of that which we call humane (though to more than a good many it is
barbarous) learning; the effects of which, they know, would be most fatal.

Therefore also was the Apostate Julian's Persecution accounted more
incomparably cruel than that of Dioclesian; though less bloody, yet more
barbarous: because by shutting up the Christian Schools, they put out the eyes
of their souls. Which some would make us believe is the best way to make men
illuminate at a greater rate than ordinary, to see more and better than all the
World besides.

And what is like to be our fate in this regard, if another Age should veer
about as this has done, the Omniscient only knows.

The Heathenish (I had almost said Hellish) Education of but too many (and some
of them none of the meanest Babes we have amongst us) bodes very little less
than Barbarism, and that in the saddest and direst Abstract.

And our Children may be shrewdly put to it to pray that of the holy Psalmist
in a more sorrowful sense than we, (though some of us have known severity
enough) That our great Master would teach our Senators wisdom. Psalm. 105.22.
There Is like, God knows, to be but too much need on it; -- Deus omen! Heaven in
its compassion toward them, as well as us and ours, avert it!

Socrates hearing that one of his Scholars was very industrious to have a
Statue (which he was never like to arrive to) made as like himself as might be,
told him smartly, That he found him very much concerned that the Stone should
be made like him, but not at all that himself should not become like the Stone:
Which was the most disconsolate resemblance, and such an one as needs no
Application, but of some to themselves.

To be suret his is the Devil's grand design, ever was and will be so, to
muzzle up men in profound ignorance of God and themselves, and as contemptuous
also (next to God) of their Superiors; and then there needs no more to make
them his Devotees for ever.

Like a crafty Thief or Setter he draws them aside into some dark and uncouth
passage, some cunning Corner, Conventicle or Cabal; and there robs them of the
best of Treasures, that of their Allegiance toward God, and man for the Lord's
sake. 1 Pet. 2.13.


He shuts the eyes and stops the ears from giving entertain to any thing of
sound Doctrine; and then opens it to what is corrupt, perverse, rebellious, as
the only saving Gospel Truths.

He and his Factors go out like Beasts of prey in the Night, John 11.10.
though of latter days with us their impudence as well as ignorance (the two
prime accomplishments amongst them) have dared with Absolom's brutality to
stare the Sun it self in the face, 2 Samuel 16.22.
as if they would outvie, and at the last extinguish it; and then bring in with
the greater triumph those damnable Doctrines and practices the Apostle speaks
of. 1 Timothy 4.2,3. 2 Timothy 3.1,2. to ver. 9.


Which, would God they were confined within the compass of the Romish Church;
and that some who would be vogu'd the best of Protestants, and most innocent of
his Majesty's Subjects, were here Dissenters; and then they need not fear a
prosecution.

Such insinuating Serpents (as our Savior very frequently calls the viperous
Brood they come of) Matthew. 23.33.
that spit so much of their venom every where against our Government
established by Law; Genesis 3.1. to 6.
and would (as the Devil in their shape) 2 Cor. 11.3.
promote an Apostasy and Rebellion, next fatal to that first; (as we know by a
costly experiment they too lately did, and had it not been most miraculously
prevented, had tantum non done it again past all retrieve.)

They love to lie in the shade, under any sort of Umbrage, though it be but a
very thin and sleighty one; when such Umbrella's would become a Bantamite
better than a Christian.

And they that are decoyed by them into the greatest of indignities they can
devise to do to these Dominions, the most unnatural as well as disingenuous,
not only of defiance, but despite against their genuine Liege Lord; do
therefore (as the Light himself has told us) love the darkness rather than the
light, because their deeds are so superlatively evil: John 3.19,20.
that so they may be beyond all capacity, not only of an Evangelical Conversion
(which is so great a rarity with them) but so much as a Legal Conviction, which
some, it is to be feared, dread more than damnation.

Xerxes, as Herodotus reports, had so strange and unaccountable an affection
for the Plane-tree, which is significant for nothing at all but shade, that he
was very curious and enormously extravagant in his expenses for beautifying and
adorning of it. Which fond fancy in so great a Person, does hugely well
resemble that fonder one in those, who of later days have been seduced from and
against that, as sacred as it is solemn, thing, called Allegiance: Eccles.
8.2,3,4.
Which the Oath of God is upon them for; and that not only singly, but, it may
be, more than doubly and trebly so. And, believe it, such a Bond it is, as the
wisest of men thought could not be easily broken. Eccl 4.12.
It Is not a tie of Law alone, but one of the greatest Gospel-Obligations that
can be quoted.

And yet how unconcernedly we see men drawn from that by the Spirit of error
and profaneness, and withal (which is the worst of the two evils, this being
Prompter and Promoter unto that) the prophanity, ignorance and error of their
own Spirits. As if they were resolved to anticipate their damnation, could not
be at it soon enough, and so must ride Post upon this and such like Errands, to
meet it in that way which most infallibly will lead to that very fatal end at
last, of those who will not fear the Lord and the King, but meddle with them
that are given to change. Prove. 24.21,22.


No time or pains, cost or care, but they will as adventurously as carelessly
expend upon the forbidden Tree, not of Knowledge and Life, but of ignorance and
death; that has neither Fruit nor Flower, only it is hugely grown, very
spaciously spread; casts, I cannot say, a good shadow so properly as the
inversion; for it is only the shadow of good: like that of the Cypress, said to
be, Gravis Umbra, a Doleful Shade; nay, worse and sadder still than so, it is
Umbra Mortis, a Deadly One.

Yet they as those that Pliny has told us of, Tributum and pro umbra pendent;
Not. Hist. lib 12.
That they will purchase at any sort of rate, with the utmost hazard of their
lives and fortunes, which brings them to, and keeps them in the Valley of the
shadow of Death, for ever after.

And they shall be lustily paid for their pains, that hold them in invincible
ignorance, and as insuperable obstinacy as to all Duty, which they cannot but
own themselves to stand so strictly and unacquittably indebted in, to their
superiors, by all bonds of Nature, Conscience, Law, Gospel, Reason and
Religion, which is the highest, the most refined and sublimated reason.

I mean as here and elsewhere, 1 Timothy 2.1,2,3. Tit. 3.1,2. 1 Pet. 2.13,14. to
ver. 18.
the Apostle does so frequently and as fervently inculcate, viz. their duty
toward these Sovereign Dominions, and Honor to these sublimest of Dignities.
Which shall never, can never be discounted, but will be reckoned at the dearest
rate imaginable, and paid for too, to the very utmost Doit, in that woeful
place, 2 Pet. 2.4. Jud. v. 6.
where there will be no liberty, but what Eternal Chains shall afford, nor
property, but only indignation and wrath, Romans 2.8,9.
Tribulation and Anguish to them that are everlastingly contentious, as are the
Troublers of our Israel, and do not, will not obey either for Wrath or
Conscience sake, but are desperately bent to run the Eternal hazard, as well
as Temporal. Our Savior tells their Brethren the Sadduces (for these act as if
they did disbelieve a Resurrection as did those,) who were as notorious and
recorded Rebels as they were Schismatics; so we find from several Authors, and
Josephus himself, who being a Jew, would not be too severe upon them.

Truth it self tells them plainly, You do err, not knowing the Scriptures: Mat.
22.29.
their ignorance in the Scriptures, in that sober sense which they ought duly
to be rendered in, is that which renders them so obnoxious to this worst of
errors, despising Dominion, and defaming Dignities.

Not knowing the Scriptures, and the Power of God, in that Power and Dignity,
which himself in his all-wise Sovereignty, has conferred upon Kings and
Princes, by instances that are no less than innumerable in the Old Testament,
From the Patriarchs and Prophets; and in the New from our Blessed Lord and his
Apostles.

Not knowing the purport of that Promise made personally by God himself, Genesis
17.1,2,3.
so early in the World to Abraham the Grandfather of the faithful as the
highest honor and happiness that could possibly attend him and his Family,
viz. That Kings should come out of him; out of his Loins or Thigh (as the Holy
Ghost has seen good to phrase it) that is descend lineally from him, by the
unalterable, and indefeatable right of Inheritance, till it reach even to the
King of Kings himself.

This was part of that Sacred Covenant which God Almighty did then so solemnly
stipulate between himself, and him: And that for an Everlasting Covenant, Genesis
17.6,7.
as there he sets that peculiar remark upon it, in perpetuam rei memoriam, not
only as to his Person but Posterity, to stand upon record for them, that great
and numerous Train that should issue from him, as the greatest security as well
as reputation they could have; which primely did consist in this, namely, That
the Scepter should not depart from Judah, (as that Covenant is afterward
re-ratified with Jacob) Genesis 49.10.
nor a Lawgiver (for so is a King, you see clearly in Gods own Estimate and
Ordination) until Shilo, the great Sovereign, come: And unto him shall the
Collection and Submison of the People be, and that for ever, no intercision is
allowed of.

It Is an Eternal Law, from the first to the last, Suprema Lex, that of the
Legislative Power, wholly and solely to have its resiance there where the
Scepter is; like that of the Medes and Persians, never to admit a repeal. Dan.
6.8,15.
And the Salus Populi only too consists in that, if they could once arrive to
so much sense to see it, then seeing might be believing with them.

Not knowing the Scriptures, what vast affluences of Dignity as well as
Dominion, 1 Samuel 15.24,25.
the infinitely Wise and Holy God was pleased graciously to confer in the
Original of Kingly Government in Israel, upon Saul his own immediate Successor
there. And afterward accumulate upon David, Solomon, and their Successors in
that Kingdom. 2 Samuel 5.10,11. 1 Kings 3,4,5,6,7,8,9.10. 2 Chronicles.
1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9.


Not knowing what that so much celebrated Preacher as well as King, so
frequently does reiterate, by Gods own special inspiration, Pro. 16.10.14.15.
19.12. 20.2.8. 22.11. 24.21.22. 29.4. 14.30.31. Against whom there is no rising
up: and whosoever provokes him to anger, sins against his own soul.
as to the Honor, Favor, Frowns, and displeasure of a King in terms so highly
much emphatical, that nothing ever was or can be more: Each of which he renders
so greatly and incomparably considerable, that nothing under Heaven can ever
come in competition with them. Eccles. 8.2,4. I Counsel thee to keep the Kings
Commandment and that in regard of the Oath of God; whosoever keeps it shall feel
no evil.
Where the word of a King is, there is Power, and who may (so much as) say to
him, What do thou? As if his very word were a Law: so as to his commands. And
for his threatenings, the Wrath of the King is as the Roaring of a Lion, carries
terror and execution with it: to make us the more conscientious to fear him in
the one, and obey him in the other, and in neither to dare to disregard him in
the least, as we respect our welfare there, or here. This, and infinitely more
he gives in charge, in such weighty words as do preponderate all that can
possibly pretend against it; and that in places more than can be enumerated. Be
pleased to take one for all, as that which seems to have more peculiar affinity
to the business of the Text.

Where he gives that tremendous Prohibition, Eccl. 10.20.
Curse not the King (the word there signifies the same still with this here,
namely to blaspheme) no not so much as in thy thoughts, or Conscience, the most
closeted and retired corner of them, thy very Bedchamber, where thou may
suppose thy self most secret, and withal secure.

See how he dares men to it at their highest peril; for says he there, a Bird
of the Air, that is, the Winged Angels (says the Holy Father, Hieron. in loc.
which in Zachary are said to take their flight over all the Earth) Zach.
1.10,11.
shall carry the voice, and that which has Wings (which therefore they are so
significantly portrayed with) shall tell the matter.

They are ever ready to be upon the Wing to take their several circuits over
all the World. They hear when Treason and Sedition is but whispered in the
closest, and most cunningly contrived Cabal, and give intelligence of it in the
High Court of Heaven; much more when it comes to be Printed, to be Preached,
Mat. 10.27.
to be vogued in altissimis, in the high places of the streets, and preached
upon the house tops, as our Savior speaks; not only creeps into the Press, but
mounts the Pulpit, as of later days it did, and God grant it may never, never
do so again.

They err, not knowing the Scriptures of the Prophet as well as Preacher; where
God is graciously pleased by him to promise, as the Peoples most peculiar
Happiness and Privilege, Esa. 49.23.
as well as their Princes Honor and Prerogative, That Kings should be their
Nursing Fathers and Queens their Nursing Mothers, to support them in their
tender and indulgent, their kind as well as potent and capacious Arms. It Is He
that has made them, and not themselves, to be Patres Patriae, National
Fathers; and they that make it their business so unnaturally, as well as
undutifully to expose them, do but hereby expose themselves to that ignominious
curse of the shameless Cham, Genesis 9.24.
for displaying their Fathers nakedness, in that irreverent and indecent manner
that their brutal Libels (too barefaced every where amongst us) do.

And they also that mouthed out a Sedition, which is their own Liberty and
Property, at that tumultuous rate as they have lately done, have but hereby
offered themselves and theirs to the dint of Divine Vengeance, Genesis 9.25.
in the Letter of Canaan's Curse, to be made Servant of Servants to him that so
has superciliously styled himself, when they will not be true and loyal
Subjects to their only true and rightful Sovereign.

Not knowing, that is, not owning that of him who was more than a Prophet, Mat.
22.19,20. Mark 12.16,17. Luke 12.24,25.
the great decision and determination he has made for himself and us, in all
succeeding ages of the World. The lasting, everlasting Precept, as well as
exemplar, he has given for rendering to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, as
duly and exactly, as carefully and conscientiously as to God the things that
are Gods; no difference that he who is God blessed for evermore has made
between them.

When the Tribute-money was demanded of him, Mat. 17.24. to v. 28.
though he was a Prince, and they that were his Attendants free, because not
strangers, but Children of the Kingdom, as himself assures us; yet he stands
not upon their Privilege and his own Prerogative, as most justly he might have
done. Though he was the legal Heir of that Kingdom, by a lineal descent from
David, yet he would pay Tribute to the Roman Emperor, and work a signal
miracle designedly for doing of it, rather than Caesar should not have his
demand, and that by arbitrary imposition, as is most apparent.

They know not, Romans 13.7.
or at least will not own that of the great Apostle, Render therefore to all
their dues: Tribute to whom Tribute, Custom to whom Custom, Fear to whom
Fear, Honor to whom Honor is due. And if ever due, to be sure it is so here,
where the Apostle does so importunately insist upon it, as to that homage and
subjection which is the debt of every single Soul, not any one that is, was,
shall, or can ever be exempted.

And the Reason which there he renders for it is most irrefragable, because
they are the Higher or Superior Powers, as he expressly calls them; Romans 13.1.
(...), (a word I cannot easily quit) i. e. such as have the superiority over
all things and persons, as it does most genuinely denote.

The Powers that were then are now, (...), viz. the Regal and Imperial, (as
before was hinted) then, and ever since in being, which he assures us is
immediately ordained of God, (...), to make the Monarchick Power and our
submission to it, a Divine Ordinance.

St. Peter is more express (if any thing can be so) 1 Pet. 2.13.
when by him it is entitled (...), the Creature, Gods own Creation, that of
subjection to this very Power, which there he does so particularly urge to the
King in the first and highest place: so both the Apostles are most punctual,
and past all contradiction in that averment.

And therefore whosoever resists or confronteth that Power; (...), and (...).
Romans 13.2.
that sets himself in array against it, or would set up another in diametrical
opposition to it, (the sole Sovereign singular Power, which there those, and
here this Apostle do so very particularly fix upon) does as particularly rebel
against the Ordinance of God, so the Apostle does persist; and they that are
resolved to do so in their resistance, he is as positively resolved against
them, that they shall receive to themselves Damnation; not only judgment in
this World, (for then it would be (...)) but (...), down right Damnation in
that to come. They that will not believe it now, shall feel it then for ever,
in the most exquisite of sensible experiments.

Therefore is it that he urges that Universal Reverence and Veneration due to
them from us all, so smartly and severely, for no less than Wrath, if we will
not render it for Conscience sake. Ay and farther still than so, Romans 13.4,6.
For, for this Cause pay you Tribute also, as there he does proceed; gives the
reason of the thing, as to these Persons, past all dispute; and that because
they are Gods Ministers to us for good; set over us, so to be.

And certainly the least and cheapest Tribute we can offer, or he require, is
that of Honor to these Dignities, subjection to this Dominion; That costs us
nothing is a very light and easy, Romans 12.1.
a most reasonable, and acceptable piece of service.

Hard case that men cannot give good words, when no more at present is expected
thence, whence we can hardly ever hope for any thing of good action; but must
still be prompted to perpetuate their wonted ways of Disobedience and Despite,
to inflame all; to provoke still daily more and more, (as if they had not done
more than enough already;) sad resolution to be impregnable, and everlasting,
in their impenetrably obdurate humor: Certainly, there are softer, smoother,
and far more decent ways the Scripture does direct them to, if they would
observe them as that which every Christian man ought to know and believe to his
Souls health, as duly as his Creed, and the Commandments.

But they err, they and their Misleaders too, not knowing, or as if they did
not, or else would not know the Scriptures, where it stands written in fair and
legible Characters; so that he that runs may read them thus upon. Sacred,
Record for ever: Act. 21.5. Exodus 22.28.
Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy People, quoted by St. Paul in
Gospel times from that of the Law, Thou shall not revile, or Blaspheme the
Gods; so they are in his account, whatever they are in ours; Psalm. 82.6.
we have an (...) for it; I have said you are Gods, and all of you Children of
the Most High, so that he must needs be the Father and Original of them.

The word there in the Hebrew, is still as consonant as ever to this in the
Greek, where we are forbid to revile those Gods, or curse these Rulers; an
inseparable Curse does every where attend it. Let him that likes it; take it to
himself, and see how well he can digest it when he comes once deliberately to
ruminate upon it.

It Is hard digesting Poison, such especially as has been so epidemical in this
unexemplar'd Age of ours, wherein the vilest of men have made so little of it,
to cast the greatest and soulest of aspersions upon them that bear Divinity
about them: Wherein the meanest of Mechanics turn Censors of their Sovereigns
actions, so Critical.

That as in Pompey the Great 't was thought a crime, because he scratched his
head with one finger, so they are ready through their malicious ignorance, to
make every mole a scar, every Infirmity a gross Enormity: And accordingly to
pass their Censures; nay, sadder still than so, their sentence too; and that
perhaps a very black and bloody one, upon the greatest, and the best of men;
Psalm. 105.15.
their Princes, Prophets, Priests, on Gods anointed, whom he has so strictly
prohibited us to touch, with our impure, unhallowed Hands, Tongues, Pens, under
a weighty Penalty, for he that touches them, touches the Apple of his own
eye: Deuteronomy. 32 10. Psalm. 17.8. Zach. 2.8.
and that is a very dear, and tender part indeed.

Whatever is designed or effected against them, he takes it all as offered
directly at himself; Luke 10.16.
He that despises you, despises me; believe it, they bid as high as possibly
they can; they that despise them and their Government, despise the Regiment of
Heaven, nay, clearly do defiance to God himself; when they attempt to have to
do with them, they shall find at last they have to deal with him; impar
congressus.

For by me Kings reign; Prove. 8.15,16. (...). Hagg. 2.23. Jer. 22.24.
it is God that upholds Kings, not that Golden Scepter as Xenophon says; They
are the Signets of his right hand, as himself calls them, which doubtless the
great Poet had some sense of when he styles Kings (...), bred up in the bosom
of Jove, or rather Jehovah, the same word. Once again, they err, not knowing
the Scripture, which muzzles the mouths of all such Bruits, and ties them up
not only from acting but speaking against Kings; it will allow of no such thing
at all. Job 34.18.
Is it fit to say to a King thou art Wicked, or to Princes you are ungodly?
Suppose they were, suppose they did so, yet the Scripture tells us, it is not
fit that we should say so.

Nay, from so much as thinking evil of them: It Is worth the repetition, Curse
not the King no not in thy thought. He that knows the secrets of all Hearts
will not suffer us to harbor so much as one single thought against them. Not
only the Overt Act, but the very thought is Treason by the Laws of Heaven that
are indisputable, that are altogether indispensible.

Holy David, wise Solomon, and other Kings, whose uncontrollable authority the
most Holy Scriptures give us so ample an account of, did things not to be done,
and withal not spoken of. They are not blazed and blown up and down in the
World: Nothing at all spoke or thought of, tending to their defamation or
disiparagement.

No libelling of Kings then, none that durst to speak evil of Dignities in a
single Syllable, all hushed, still and quiet, serene, according to that Majesty
they had so much then, as we have little regard and reverence now for.

Which should teach us to do as they did, to hold our Peace whilst we have it;
to sit down in silence, sobriety and humility: and if we cannot (or which is
worse, will not) act the Christians part, let us learn at least the
Pythagoreons; go to their School of silence, seal up our mouths for ever; and
let this impression (if we be not as flint to receive, or water to retain none)
be made upon them in such indelible Characters, as never to be obliterate,
stamped with the point of a Diamond, Not to despise Sovereign Dominion, sacred
Dignities. The Scripture is so far from allowing, that it does perfectly abhor
all such deportment amongst men; Jude v. 9,10.
worse than Michael the Archangel would treat the Devil withal in his contest
with him.

Angels that are greater, infinitely far greater in power and might than the
greatest of men, 2 Pet. 2.10,11.
bring not railing accusations as do these; that despise Government.
Presumpruous are they, and self-willed, most prodigiously so: Nay, not afraid
to speak evil of Dignities, which the Apostle makes such a very fearful sin,
past all sort of Parallel whatever.

For thus St. Peter falls in which our Apostle here; is as copious also as St.
Paul, in this great and necessary argument spends whole Chapters, 1 Pet. 2. 2
Pet. 2.
the second of both his Epistles upon it; to press obedience to Governors,
supreme and subordinate, to every Ordinance of man; for God's sake.

To the King; therefore called (...), by an Etymology as true as it is trite:
(...), because he is the foundation upon which his Subjects are fixed for their
Lives, Estates, Laws, Liberties, Religion, the grand supporter of them all.
Prove. 29.4.
And by Wisdom it self the wise King is called, stabilimentum Populi, the
Peoples settlement, most satisfactorily and completely so.

To the King as supreme; so that the Apostle you see does solemnly assert the
Kings Supremacy, (...).
and makes it to be originally of Divine Right: Hard case then if we cannot
afford it to be so, when so it is the Will of God that it should be, as there
himself expressly has declared it; that we should all of us, duly and devoutly
pay that Allegiance which we owe to the King as he is supreme: Esa. 45.1. Romans
13.4.
And seeing all Kings, without distinction or restriction are Gods
Vicegerents, we should without exception yield obedience to them, whom by his
Prophets he has so significantly styled his anointed, and that Cyrus himself,
and by his Apostle, Nero and Tiberius (if not both) the Ministers of God, which
is worthy of our observation.

What then will our Despisers and Defamers say to this, do they, nay, do they
not know these Scriptures? or rather do they not wish them I have seen those
Chapters of St. Paul and St. Peter, which press obedience to our Governors,
torn out of the Quakers Bibles; and an impression of their own, wherein they
are wholly left out. Romans 13.5.
out of their Bibles, as they are with some, and were out of the Churches in
the Usurpation; where I have seen Fear God left, though but dimly so, and
Honor the King quite expunged.

Well, let the vilest of men say what they will, do what they can against them,
these are great and fundamental Principles of Faith, as well as Doctrine and
Practice, standing stable Truths; First of Piety toward God, and next of
Honor, Devoir and Duty toward the King; whom next and immediately under God,
we all stand everlastingly obliged in Conscience to and for God to obey. And
it is not a passive, without active obedience that will serve to bear us out
now, or another day.

Though as to true conscientious (and to give it the Kings own Epithete)
steadfast Loyalty, well grounded, thus fixed upon the Scriptures, a little of
that, God knows, goes a great way, as the World has too long gone with us.

Yet sure I am, the Apostle makes it a main Masterpiece of Christianity, when
he joins, 1 Pet. 2.17
Fear God, and honor the King, so indivisibly together. The greater their
guilt that formerly and lately have attempted to make the separation, of what
God has made so inseparable.

Where there is the one, there will be the other, and without the one there can
be nothing of the other. He that is not a good Subject, cannot be a good
Christian; a Rebel can never commence Saint, though their Holy Father dubbs
them so. This the Scripture does avouch, Isa. 40.6. 1 Pet. 1.25.
and this we do and dare abide by, being as sure as the word of our God, which
endures for ever.

Thus we stand, but thus they fall into error, willingly and wilfully so, not
knowing, that is, not regarding the holy Scriptures, but still suppressing the
Truth in unrighteousness; Romans 1.18.
the Law of God, Gospel of Christ, Laws of the Land; those of more antique and
fresher Date; by one of which it stands enacted to this purpose, that whosoever
shall defame the Kings Government in Church as well as State, the Doctrine and
Discipline by Law established, shall thereby incur the severest of Penalties
that can be inflicted.

Not knowing, or at least not considering the Law of Nature, and that of
Nations; though indeed the Civil Law which is hugely copious as to all other
rights, is more contract in that of Sovereignty; as taking it for granted, that
none should dare to contradict it in the least. That leaves Monarchs free, to
make their Subjects so, more or less, according to their own pleasure; to which
that has resigned all, as the Scripture does.

Not knowing the Laws of common humanity and Civility, which would have taught
them better words and things, than such as these: 2 Pet. 2.12. Jud. v. 10.
But as mere Natural brute Beasts, made to be taken and destroyed, they speak
evil of the things and Persons that they know not.

And what they know naturally in these things, they continue to corrupt
themselves and others, so long till at last without Repentance, (and it is not
an ordinary share will serve their turn) they shall utterly perish in their own
corruptions, wherewith they so deeply have contaminated themselves, and the
unfortunate age they live in.

They know not the Scriptures of former ages; the Writings of the Holy Fathers,
next to the Holy Writ, to be had in perpetual Veneration; nor the Practice of
the Primitive times, how the good Christians then did honor and revere, and
only not adore their Kings and Emperors, next and immediately after God, they
that were in those devouter ages next and immediately after Christ. As they in
their great and learned Apologies, have registered and vouched to all the World;
instances from whom, if I should once begin, I should not know when, or where
to end. How the Christian Church offered up their daily Devotions for Heathen
Emperors; the manner as well as matter of whose Prayers for them, is recorded
in the greatest of solemnity. Manibus expansis, quia innocuis, capite nudo,
quia erubescimus; precantes sumus semper pro omnibus Imperatoribus, orbem
quietum, vitam longam. Tertul. Apol.


Whom in their Prayers, and by their Practices, they ever owned as God does, to
be his anointed; let their Practice and profession be what it would, yet Oleum
suum defendit Deus, says Optatus; Though no defenders but opposers of his
Faith, God would defend his Unction in them, and upon them judicio suo Deus
servavit rem suam; They are peculiarly his; so he has ever styled them; and
therefore to no man singly, nor some, or all men collectively to be any ways
accountable, for any thing, that at any time, in any way or manner they have
done, or can ever do. Quia si Peceatum est hominis, unctio tamen est
Divinitatis; ergo, ne tetigeritis, ne dum Peccatum hominis percatitur, and
Oleum quod Dei est, feriatur. Optat. lib. 2. p. 1273.


This is Christian Doctrine, and practice, I am sure; and you may rest
sufficiently secured of it.

But alas! such know not what Heathens have said and done in this regard: How
to admiration and amazement they have outdone too many of our Modern
Christians; the more and greater is the shame. Seneca de Clem. lib. 1. c. 11.
thus describes a King; ille, ille est Spiritus vitalis quem tot millia trabunt.
And again, lib. 1. c. 4. ille, ille est vinculum per quod Resp. cohaeret: nihil
ipsa per se futura, nisi onus and praeda, si men's illa imperii subtrahatur.
Prudet haec opprobria Nobis -- They could as if they had it from Scripture
say, Timendosque Reges, call Dread Sovereign, as well as we; show more fear of
the Deity, in the honor due to Dignities and Dominions, than we now; could
call their Kings, as the Scripture has done, The breath of their Nostrils.

So dear they were in their Estimate, that it is celebrated of the
Cappadocians, that when offered by the Roman Senate to be freed from Kingly
Government, They bravely and gerously refused; telling them in plain terms,
That they were such a people as could not live without a King; he was their
Life and Soul. Heroic Souls indeed! Heroice repudiarunt, illamque gentem sine
Rege ne quidem vivere posse.


To conclude this Head with that of the Apostle, where he speaks to Jews, and I
of Jewish Christians, Act. 13.40,41. from Hab. 1.5.
Beware lest that come upon you which is spoken of by the Prophet, Behold ye
despisers and wonder, and know that without Repentance you shall assuredly
perish, for the Mouth of the Lord has spoken, and nothing else can reverse it.

And to give a demonstration of it, I will work a work in your days, says the
Lord, such a work as you shall in no wise believe, though a man declare it to
you; seeing could not do with such stupid creatures, nothing but feeling could
serve the turn, in irreversible vengeance. Discite justitiam moniti, nec
temnere Divos. Which leads me to give you an account of the other great Origin
of this so great despite and defamation; for alas, ignorance is not all; it
rises higher still; Atheism comes in and joins it is forces in this defiance;
wherein they are both equally and eternally engaged, against these Dignities,
whose cause the Text espouses. Omne in praecipiti vitium stetit, as the Poet
has it. All Monstrous and Prodigious sins, concentre here in one, and are
arrived at their fullest height, their compleatest (...): and this is the sad
emphasis of all the rest that here are instanced in.

That of the Apostate Angels, who kept not their Primitive station, but turned
Rebels against Heaven, and so are immediately doomed to Hell. Jud. v. 6.7.


Those of Sodom and Gomorrha, that gave them selves over to be immerst in all
manner of strange stupendous Licentiousness; Likewise also those (...), filthy
dreamers, that are so fond in their own irrational imaginations, which are but
Dreams; when by defaming Dignities, they think to dethrone Dominions: His
Majesty's Declaration April 8. 1681. p. 9. The restless malice of ill men, who
are laboring to poison our People; some out of fondness of their old beloved
Commonwealth Principles, and some out of anger at their being disappointed in
the particular designs they had for the accomplishment of their own ambition
and greatness.
These Plato's redivive, that by a fatal revolution, would reinduce a
Commonwealth, which was one of his Idea's; herein he did but dream, as well as
others after him, that here the Apostle takes to task. Though they set all the
little Wits they have left, upon the Tenters to out-reach all that have been
before them in such vile attempts as these; Psalm. 31.20. Old Version.
that cruelly, disdainfully and despightfully act, as well as speak against
their Superiors.

So that the profane Esau, Ishmael, and Rabshekah, were but Bunglers to those
(as they would be thought gentiler Ones) in this most accomplished age of ours.

St. Austin has an observation, that if a Felon or Traitor immediately upon his
fact should lose his eyes, then all as immediately would be ready to look upon
it, and construe it as a Judgment: But, oculum cordis amisit, and ei pepercisse
putatur, his heart is stone-blind, as well as hard; and then, Heaven is thought
to be soft and indulgent to him.

Should it now deal with them that despise Dominion, Number. 16.21,29. to 34th.
as it did with Corah, and his Rebellious crew, Nay but as St. Paul with
Elymas, Act. 13.8. to 12th.
when he set himself designedly in opposition to him, then all would learn at
last, before it be too late, to hear and fear before the Lord and his Anointed,
Deuteronomy. 17.13.
and do no more presumptously as yet they do.

But, oculorum caecitas ad mentem translata est, says Cicero; and few or none
take notice of that more dismal doom so far as he did; as if he had it from
that of the holy Prophet, Esa. 6.9.
In seeing they shall not see, at least not perceive; Nay, their eyes have they
closed as well as ears, lest at any time they should see with their Eyes, hear
with their Ears, and understand with their Heart, and so should come at last to
be converted.

All avenues here we see are stopped, and barricadoed; there is no approaching
such as these; Heaven it self has interposed by way of prevention; Mat.
13.13,14. Mark 4.12. Luke 8.10. Joh. 12.40,41. Act. 28.25,26,27. Romans 11.8.
therefore is this doom so fatally denounced from God by the Prophet,
frequently insisted on by our Savior, and St. Paul, to show, that we, as well
as they should take some more than ordinary notice of it.

It is the Panthers hatred to the Man, that makes him fly so fiercely at his
Picture. Potest inique Princeps, potest tamen odio esse nonnullis, etiamst ipse
non oderit.
And what in these dignified Dominions, that makes them pursued with such an
implacable Odium, but only the image of God that they bear upon them: that of
their Government, being the fair resemblance of his, I mean as to Monarchy in
Heaven, and upon Earth.

Not these, if they would speak out, not these Dominions only that they so much
strike at, in all those unheard of and unparalled affronts they have lately
met withal; which Heaven and Earth may justly stand astonished at, Jer. 2.11,12.
and blush for them that will not, cannot do it for themselves; no, they arrive
higher yet in this their flight; take up the gantlet against Heaven it self.

These, these are the bold, and daring offspring, that past a fiction, too
truly do (...), bid battle against Heaven, in the great sense of that greater
word, a word by it self, when they are told to their teeth, by one of their own
Orators, Act. 5.39.
That they fight against God.

How highly is the Holy one of Heaven pleased to show himself concerned in this
contrast? He takes it wholly, solely to himself; (...) the very word that we
have here in the Text, 1 These. 4.8.
He that despises, despises not man, but God; it reflects all at last
directly upon him.

They do (...), spurn against heaven, and him that has his Throne situate
there, when thus they attaque Thrones, and Dominions here, as they will find in
his own vindication of them. So that well might the blessed Ignatius thus say,
that whoever any ways attempts to extenuate the Sacred Order in Church as well
as State, he is (...), one that directly does defiance unto Christ, flies in
his face; in one word, to answer his, an Atheist Cap-a-pe. Ignatius is much,
most upon this, in all his Epistles that are accounted and proved by the
incomparable Bishop of Chester to be genuine.
Which that none of them might ever be, that holy and truly Apostolical person
beseeches God it might never come within the compass of his hearing, or their
receiving such a black infection into their souls. For prevention of which
disease, that Plaguey one as there he calls it, (...), which the factious and
seditious are habitually so very much disposed to; he gives them a Sovereign
antidote, and does (...), he was their Taster, as he tells them, and they as
they valued the health of their souls, to pledge him in it.

He is very sedulous in such prescripts as are these; cautions them to whom he
writes, Ad Tralliar.
not to offer by any means to contradict, or any ways oppose the Authority that
Heaven had set over them: (...), for it is, says he, a dreadful thing to do it,
reaches very high, as high as God himself; as in that apt instance that there
he gives of Moses, in that ungrateful Peoples murmurings; Exodus 16.7,8.
which himself in his appeal to God says plainly were not against him and
Aaron, but against the Lord.

And withal observes, that (...), none ever past without vengeance, that rose
up in resistance, against their Superiors, whether Moses in the Civil, or
Aaron in the Ecclesiastical State, but came to some formidable end.

Nay farther still, that none such either are, or can be truly conscientious in
themselves, whatsoever their pretensions are to others; (...).
but only such as have all formality and nothing of the Power and Energy of
Godliness in them. For then they would not dare to blaspheme the Gods, and
endeavor to render those Powers so impotent and insignificant, which the hand
of Omnipotency it self, has industriously set up amongst them. In pursuance of
which he shows, how they should ever have them in the greatest and most
valuable estimation; (...), etc.
as having, the express image and representation of the great Deity upon them,
as they govern us, from him that governs all. 1 Samuel 2.30.
And applies that peculiar of Gods own to them, Heb. 10.28,29. (...).
He that honors them, he will honor; but who despises them, shall be rendered
as despicable himself: Such God will not let pass always with impunity; for if
they that despised Moses Law died without mercy; then says He, in the Apostles
words, of how much sorer punishment shall they be thought worthy that despise
Dominion now? They that thus smear and bespatter Gods Anointed, that do any
thing in derision and disesteem to them, whom he has taken so near to himself,
into his particular care and conduct, they fall foul upon God himself, as
Shimei did in his accost to David; 2 Samuel 16.5.7.
who was the first the Scripture gives us notice of, that ever did or durst
attempt such a horrid, and before unheard of villainy as to affront a King;
(though he did it but at a distance neither, not directly to his face;) as to
cast dirt upon the Robes of Royalty, 2 Samuel 16.13.
to bemire and vilify, nay, to profane that Person, Power, which in Gods own
estimate ever was and still is, no less at all than Sacred, that he himself has
stamped Divinity upon.

But now to see how docible some Creatures are, the meanest and vilest Peasant
can outdo him; though in what he did, he gave too clear an evidence, that there
was no fear of God at all, before his eyes. When he was so foolishly as well as
wickedly extravagant. Psalm. 14.1,2.
For the same fool that says in his heart there is no King, says also, there is
no God. And they that will not allow us to honor the King, would not leave us
at last a King to honor: And they that in honoring and obeying the King, will
not admit us to fear God, would (if they could) not leave us a God to fear.

And yet withal, to show how dastardly the most daring and audacious Atheists
are, (and such are those degenerate Hectors of our age, who are valiant in
naught but fighting against their God and King; you find him ( Shimei I mean)
afterward in another posture; he comes submissively to wipe, nay, sneakingly
to lick off that dirt again; is not more hasty before in cursing, 2 Samuel
19.18,19.20.
than he is after that in caressing and complementing the King when the rising
Sun was set, praecocious Absalom, under a sad and sable Cloud; quickly up, and
as quickly down again; no more to be admired, to be adored. And he whose proper
sphere it was, breaks out afresh, after all Eclipses, which the interposition
of their malice had made to darken him, more bright and glorious than ever.

The Race of true and real, not affected Majesty (that is but a Stage or rather
Puppet-play at best) are pure and piercing; dazzle the eyes of him, and all
such invidious ones as his. Who in the most virulent of all their despite,
shall find at last they do but play at small game.

I once heard as great a reputed Atheist as he was Commonwealths man, (and they
are usually Twins) who durst not speak in the disparagement of his Majesty's
Person or Power, ('it was too early then, not long after his Triumphant
Coronation,) fall very foul upon the Regalia, those Ensigns of Majesty,
Insignid Majestatis.
with which he was then so solemnly and most magnificently Inaugurate; making
the Crown and Scepter to be no better than mere childish gewgaws, (which as
near as I can recollect, was his very word;) rendering all such solemnities a
perfect ridicule: Though together with the most Sacred Unction there was a
Crown of pure Gold set upon the Head, and a sumptuous Scepter put into the
hands, of Kings in Scripture; which I think was then urged. 2 Samuel 1.10. 2
King. 11.12. 2 Chronicles. 23.11. Amos 1.5,8.


But you would wonder how very powerfully he did then insinuate himself with
some, and in his own conceit, past all control.

You see what influence such have amongst the people, and how they begin at
first to draw them into mean and despicable thoughts of these Dominions, that
so at last they may hurry them on to the most daring and destructive practices;
When not despising, not defaming no nor blaspheming neither will suffice, but
only deposing, dethroning, annihilating them, (as you heard the Word imports).
Here, here must be the black Catastrophe of all; which fate, how near, how
very, very near it was lately to have been our own, there are none, but must be
feared as well as senseless, that are themselves, and would have others to be
wholly disbelievers, in a Case so clear and undeniable to any sober,
thoughtful, unprejudiced, and unbiast man. If we should insist any farther upon
the inquisition, and all were rightly once examined, we should find, that
concomitant to these two great Causes of the not only disregard but direct
defiance that is now done to these Dignities and Dominions, are those which do
proceed from intolerable Pride, Prejudice, Partiality and Presumption. But
above all, a scurrilous, scandalizing humor, which is every where so
vehemently predominant, in this unbridled and licentious age of ours.

And that both of the Tongue, and Pen; as to which, Machiavel from whom they
have their Maxim, borrowed it (some say) from Midas, viz. fortiter calumnari,
to calumniate stoutly, do it to purpose; and therefore they will be sure, not
to be behind hand with it in the least; Their Superiors shall have it home;
they will lay on, and something will stick, before all (or any thing with some) be
taken off.

Some Mouths, the Prophet and Apostle from him tells us, Romans 3.13,14. from
Psalm. 5.9.
are open Sepulchers; and how many such Graves we have gaping all about us, to
bury men's reputation in, before themselves?

How many that (like the Serpent) carry Poison in their Tongues; nay, their
Tongues have also poisonous Teeth; the Poison of Asps, as there it is called;
and that is said to be the most exquisite.

The Devil the Old Serpent, ever was and will be the slanderer, as his name so
significantly implies: (...), 1 Pet. 5.8.
That original Accuser, whose perpetual work it is to calumniate the best, and
misinform the worst of men; and therefore he insinuates himself into the
society of those that would be Angeli agentes in rebus humanis; the great
Intelligencers in the Higher, as well as Lower World.

His Pique as poynant and inveterate against them that make it their care and
Conscience with holy Job, Job 16,7,8.
to keep their integrity as ever it was against him. De veneno Serpentis
nascuntur Vermes mendaciorum, says St. Austin; and for such worms, bred of the
forbidden fruit, the cure is very difficult, if not impossible.

Calumny so black and withal infectious so poisonous and pestilential a breath
it bears, that it blasts a Fame though never so white and clear.

Such a pernicious quality it has, says Bernard, that tres uno flatu lethaliter
inficit; it kills three at once, the informant, informed, and him that is
falsely and maliciously informed against. Like White Powder it kills without a
Crack, though not without a Report, which now makes so great a noise in this
tumultuous World.

And if ever a people given up of God to believe lies, and live upon them,
certainly these are they. 2 These. 2.11,12. Isa. 28.15. We have made lies our
refuge, and under falsehood have we hid our selves. (...).


An endless task it would be to accost all, or indeed any sort of Cavils, a
most servile, sordid slavery; so the great Plato calls it.

Therefore some think 'twas nobly said of him, Vindico me a conviciis solo
contemptu; that he had the compleatest conquest here only by as complete
contempt.

So said Socrates, and believe it, he was no Fopp. When abused to his face upon
the Stage, he only smiled it off; gave it no greater notice.

One told Diogenes that the Boys laughed at him, at ego-non video, says he; he
did not at all regard it; and so he could laugh as fast at them. And 'twas the
opinion of no mean man, nondum foelix es, si te nondum derideat turba; that to
be ridiculed by the Rout, is a badge of happiness as well as honor: it does
not black, but brighten; as if nothing could advance our credit or comfort at a
higher rate than this: For if they have called the Master of the House
Beelzebub, Mat. 10.25.
no wonder if the best of his servants cannot escape the worst of all their
Censures. Quo nihil immensus melius orbis habet. And again; Quo nihil majus,
meliusve terris fata donavere, bonique dii, nec dabunt quamvis cedant in aurum
secula primum.
This has been the lot of the greatest of Princes, that ever wore a Diadem;
you shall not see a Crown without this Cross in it: Titus Vespasian, Surnamed
Deliciae humani generis, the Darling of men, as David was of God, drew this
Lot: and so Augustus Caesar, of whom 'twas said, as it may be of ours, than
whom the World yet never had more great, more good, or ever shall, or can, till
it shall be no more.

This I know, to some is but as the sounding Brass, and tinkling Cymbal; 1 Cor.
13.1.
to such as would deal with ours, as the Jews did with their and our King
Jesus; Mat. 27.29.
put a Reed instead of a Scepter into his hand; and a Crown of Thorns upon his
Head, and do it in as despightful a derision.

But better it is, more suitable, and decent, and I hope more seasonable, than
the noise of Pulpit-Drums, and Sheba's Seditious Trumpet, 2 Samuel 20.1.
to sound an Alarm to another Holy War, as formerly we know full well they did.

To close all then with that which sounds more peacefully and harmoniously,
namely, the Prayers that our holy Church has taught us. As we are most humbly
and heartily to implore, English Liturgy, in several of its Prayers, both upon
ordinary, and extraordinary occasions.
That God would so rule the Heart of his chosen Servant Charles our King and
Governor, that he knowing whose Minister he is, may above all things seek his
Honor and Glory; so that we, and all his Subjects, duly considering whose
authority he has, may faithfully serve, honor, and humbly, in God, and for
God, obey him, according to his blessed Word, and Ordinance; that as we have
thus promised, we may as carefully and conscientiously, in the sight of God,
perform all Loyal and Dutiful Allegiance to his anointed Servant, our Dread
Sovereign, and his Lawful Heirs that shall succeed him. That our Gracious King
may through Gods abundant mercy continue his Reign over us, in virtue,
Godliness and honor, many, and many years. And that we dutifully serving and
obeying him, with all honor, fidelity, and cheerfulness, as faithful and Loyal
Subjects, may long enjoy him with the continuance of those great and most
invaluable blessings, which by him, God has vouchsafed us: But especially the
profession of the only true Protestant Religion, by Law established amongst us.

That God would strengthen the hands of him, and all that are put in Authority
under him, with Judgment and Justice effectually to suppress all such workers
of iniquity, as would turn Religion into Rebellion, and Faith into Faction,
that they may never be able to prevail against us, or triumph in the ruin of
Gods Holy Church amongst us: But that our Gracious Sovereign, and his Realms
being preserved in Gods true Religion, and by his merciful goodness still
protected in the same, we may all duly serve our God and our King; and evermore
offer up our Prayers and Praises to God for King, and People, in the public
Congregation, and hereto let all that are there assembled, say Amen; So be it,
through Jesus Christ our Lord; the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; the
blessed and only Potentate of all the World; 1 Timothy 1.17. 6.15,16.
Now unto the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the only Wise God, Father;
Son, and Holy Ghost, be ascribed all Honor, Power and Glory, whose is the
Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever, and ever, Amen.

FINIS.

