ARGVMENTS AGAINST BOWING AT THE NAME OF JESUS.

COMPOSED ABOUT five years since, BY A REVEREND MINISTER OF THE CITY OF LONDON
FOR his own defense.

Proving the unlawfullnesse and injustice of imposing that posture in Gods
worship, which is neither enjoined by the Word of God nor by the Canon of the
Church (though pretense be made by some, to be commanded from both) as appears
chiefly in the first and last Arguments.

Revelation 22.18, 19. For I testify untoe very man that hears the words of
the prophecy of this Book, If any man add unto these things, God shall add
unto him the plagues that are written in this Book.

And if any man shall take away from the words of the Book of this Prophecy,
God shall take away his part out of the Book of life, and out of the holy City,
and from the things which are written in this Book.

1 Cor. 14.26. Let all things be done unto Edifying.

Published in the year, 1641.

ARGVMENTS AGAINST BOWING AT THE NAME OF JESUS.
ARGUMENT. I.
ALL worship of GOD that is taught by the commandments of men, and not
prescribed by GOD himself is will worship, and simply unlawful.

But such is this bowing at the Name of Jesus.

Ergo will worship and simply unlawful.

The Major Proposition is from Heaven, and therefore greater then to be denied,
Esa. 29.13. Col. 2.22. and elsewhere.

The Minor likewise I conceive to be evident, Because there is no such worship
to Christ taught by God, or Christ himself, as the bowing of the Body to him
upon the mention, or sounding of the Name Jesus. As for that place Phil. 2.10.
which some look upon as countenancing this worship; I conceive it does not so
much as look toward it. For First it is here said, not that at the Name of
Jesus, but (...), in the name of Jesus every knee shall bow. The Proposition
iv, in, never (to my remembrance) noting the time when, (except it be in
construction with words, signifying time, as Mark 1.9. It came to pass in
those days, and such like.) But very frequently the cause for, or through
which, as Mark. 11.28. (...): in what power, that is, by or through what power
do thou these things; So Rom 7.23. (...), carrying me or leading me Captive
in, that is, by the Law of sin, besides many other like instances: so that the
name of Jesus here meant must not be any name made of letters and sillables,
but of power, majesty and terror: because there must be found in this Name
that, which must be that efficient cause of the sujection here spoken of, that
which must command this bowing the knee from all Creatures whatsoever, which of
all literal names or titles that are given to Christ in the Scriptures, is
least of all intimated in that sweet and gracious Name of Jesus, a Savior:
what is there in that Name to compel or force the Devils to bow the knee unto
him?

Secondly, neither is it here said that, (...), but (...), not that at, or in
the name Jesus: but in the name (of) Jesus every knee shall bow, as all
translators read i^. Now any other name or title given to our Savior in the
Scripture, as Christ, Emanuel, etc. may in better propriety of speech be called
the names of Jesus, then Jesus it self, to urge and say that Jesus is the name
of Jesus, savours not the dialect of the Holy Ghost.

Thirdly, That name of Jesus here spoken of, wherein it is said that every knee
shall bow, is such a name as was not given to Christ, till after his
sufferings; and at the time of his exaltation and sitting down at the right
hand of majesty: for it is expressly said, to have bin given unto him by God
(his Father) by way of reward or recompense, for that great service he did unto
him in that great abasement and humiliation of himself unto death: Wherefore
(says the Text) God has exalted him, and given him a Name, verse 9. namely
for that obedience and humiliation of himself, mentioned verse 6, 7, 8. But
the name Jesus, we know was given unto him long before, at the time of his
Circumcision; therefore this is not the name that every knee shall bow at.

Fourthly, If this worship of bowing at the name Jesus were commanded in this
Scripture, then were it a sin and simply unlawful to omit it at any time
whenever it sounds, which no man ever yet affirmed that I have heard of.

Fifthly, If bowing the body at the name Jesus be enjoined in this Text, by the
same interpretation, the Confessing with the tongue that Jesus Christ is the
Lord, must be enjoined also, and as altogether necessary as the other: for
those things which God has joined together can no man put asunder.

Sixthly, If this worship of Christ (of bowing to him) mentioned in this place
be due unto him in relation to his Name Jesus, or as he is a Savior: how come
the things under the earth (by which all interpreters that I know understand
the Devils, except some Popish, that fish for Purgatory in the words.) How come
the Devils (I said) to be charged with men, touching the exhibiting of this
reverence or adoration to Christ, who (we know) have neither part nor
fellowship with them in that great and gracious business of salvation?

Seventhly, I do not know any Orthodox or ancient interpreter, so to interpret
the place.

Notwithstanding, though this Scripture will not carry it, yet will it not
follow that bowing at the, name of Jesus should be will worship, because bowing
to his person being a prescribed and unquestionable lawful worship, it may be
performed at any time: and therefore at such a time as the name Jesus is named,
as well as at any other time: for election of a man's time when be will worship
God, does ^ot alter the nature of the worship; nor make it ever the more
will worship.

worship of God, or of Christ, in respect of Conveniencie, and freedom from
distraction of business: or in respect of any such circumstance as may really
further or better the worship, has no such influence into it, as to alter or
change the nature of it, because such a choice of time is rather of Gods
choosing then of ours; for the Scriptures without, and the Law of Conscience
within, commands us to make choice of such time when we may serve and worship
God after the best and holiest manner. But to rule the election of time, for
giving any outward act of worship or adoration unto God, by any such
Circumstance which has no relation at all to this worship; (I mean to better
it or further it in him that performs it,) but only that which is founded on
the device of men, I conceive to be an unlawful election, and not to be made.
As for example, for a man to make choice of the time to bow himself to God,
when he stands before an Image, were simply unlawful, because he regulates the
choice of his time by such a Circumstance as does no way further him in that
act of worship, but directly tends both to further the Idolater in his wicked
opinion, who thinks he does well to worship God, in an Image, and also to
scandalize those that are weak.

Therefore to choose a time to worship Christ when such a certain name of his
shall be presented unto us, which makes indeed a representation of him unto us,
as an Image does: but has nothing more in it to further such an act of
adoration, then an Image has, and has in like manner bin abused as Images
have, and is apt to cause the like offense, as bowing to God before an Image
does, is an unlawful election for the time of such worship.

That the name Jesus is of Divine Institution: for the representation of his
person to the mind and spirit of a man, whereas the Image is purely humane: and
besides that there is an intimation of that salvation which comes by him, given
out by the name Jesus, which is no way intimated in an Image: and therefore that
there is no Comparison to he made between bowing at the name Jesus, and before
an Image.

Jesus, and an Image of Christ in respect of the institution, yet in respect of
representation made by either, there is none: for the Image represents to the
mind that very same person (and no other) which the name does: so that if the
worship be lawful in respect of the representation simply, which is made by the
name Jesus, it will be as lawful before the Image, because as (I say) there is a
representation also of the same person.

Secondly, though the name Jesus be of divine institution for the
representation of the person, wherein the Image fayles, yet in respect of any
outward adoration, to be given unto this representation by that name, there is
no more to be found of any divine institution, for the name, then for the
Image, so that to express an outward act of adoration upon the bare sound or
hearing of the name, having no more warrant from God then doing the like before
an Image has; it apparently follows, that they are both worships of the same
nature, and one to have as much in it of the will of Man as the other.

Thirdly, the name Jesus being of divine institution, which the Image is not:
it is a greater sin any ways to misuse it, either by obscuring or perverting
the intentions of God in it, or by multiplying our own upon it, then it is to
abuse an Image, which is but the device of men's heads, and the works of their
hands.

Fourthly, however in respect of institution, the name may seem more capable of
adoration then the Image: yet since the name is not so apropriated to the
person of Christ by divine institution in respect of the letters and sound of
it, but that it is common to other persons with him, and represent others to
the mind as well as Him; whereas the Image is wholly appropriated unto him, and
represents no other to the mind but him alone; in this respect the Image seems
to be the safer and better call to exhibit worship unto Christ, then the bare
sound of the name, because it does not give that certain and distinct
signification or representation of the person to be worshipped, which the Image
does. As Paul speaks of the Trumpet, Cor. 1.14.8. If it give an uncertain
sound, who shall prepare himself to the battle? so this name Jesus, giving
only an uncertain sound or representation, representing as well other persons
to the mind that are not to be worshipped, as well as him to whom the worship is
due, it seems a very unfit signat for worship to be given unto it, yea in this
respect which is most intrinsecall and essential to the point in hand, it
comes short of the Image.

Fifthly, (and Lastly) whereas it is laid in the Objection, that there is in the
name an intimation given of that salvation which comes to the world by him,
which is not in the Image. To this I Answer Three things:

First, That there is in the Crucifix more then an intimation given of that
salvation that comes by him; there is a representation of that death, and those
sufferings by which that salvation was purchased and wrought.

Secondly, If that an intimation of the salvation that comes by Christ be a
proper and sufficient ground to found an act of adoration upon, then is the
name and title of Savior, the fittest summons for men of this Nation, who
(generally) understand not the intimations, or significations of Names in other
Languages, but only in their own.

Lastly, if that an intimation of salvation coming by Christ, were proper to
build an act of outward worship or adoration upon; then this worship is rather
to be given, when any such sentence is read, or spoken, which prospicuously and
fully informs the mind and soul hereof, then at the mention of that Name
Jesus. As for example, upon the hearing of this or the like sentences in
Scripture, The Son of man come to seek and save that which was lost: as that
Romans 5.8. Whilst we were yet sinners Christ died for us. Or that Io. 3. So God
loved the world, etc. in these and many the like sayings, there is a full
intimation or signification of that great salvation, that comes by Christ more
then is the bare mention of the name Jesus. By all which it evidently
appears, that in respect of any lawful or warrantable ground for an outward
act of adoration, there is no more in the sound or name Jesus then in an Image.

The second Argument.
NO Command or invention of men, that superinduceth any other use or device
upon any the sacred names or titles of God, beyond what himself has declared
in his Word, is to be received: But this Command of bowing does this, it makes
the name or title Jesus, to serve for another purpose then God has any where
declared. Ergo such a command is not to be received.

The Major (I conceive) will not be denied: Because for men to meddle with any
of the great and fearful names of God, and to dispose of them as they please,
without express Authority from himself, is presumption of the highest
magnitude.

The Minor likewise has evidence enough to be believed, because there is not
the least intimation in the Scripture that God ever intended that any such use
should ever be made of the name Jesus, as to summon men to bow their bodies at
the name or sound of it.

ARGUMENT. 3.
THat practice which directly tends to revive an ancient Heresy, or
dangerous opinion in the Church (especially having nothing in it to
counterpoyce such a danger) is not to be introduced or assented unto. But this
practice of bowing at the name Jesus, directly tends hereunto, and has
nothing at all to counterpoyse such a danger: therefore it is not to be
introduced or assented unto.

The Major carries its own light with it.

The Minor is thus clearly proved; That which directly tends to induce men
to think or believe that Jesus and Christ are two different persons, and that
Jesus is more excellent then Christ, directly tends to revive an old and
dangerous Heresy ( viz. that of Corint^ and others, who held that Jesus and
Christ were two persons: and the one greater then the other.) But this boweng
at the name of Jesus, (other names being passed over without the like reverence
done at the mention of them) directly tends to induce men to think, etc. Ergo.

The reason of the Minor is, because reverence argues excellency upon
whomsoever its cast or conferred: and where either it is denied or not
exhibited, it implies a person or condition of less excellency.

ARGUMENT. 4.
ALl worship of God that is not grounded upon the Moral Law, is Adulterous
worship, and not to be tendered or exhibited.

But this bowing at the name Jesus is a worship not founded upon the Moral
Law. Ergo.

The Major I conceive unquestionable: Because the worship of God being a Moral
duty, (and that of the chiefest and highest rank,) it can have no other rule
or foundation, but the Moral Law: and the same Author, that has power to
exact a new worship, must have power also to make a new Law (or further it)
because there is no act (especially Religious) justifiable, but by some rule:
where by the rectitude or goodness of it must be tried and demonstrated.

This bowing is no worship, but a pious ceremony, or sign, or outward
expression of worship, or the like:

God, to be truly and properly worship, is to overthrow the whole species or
kind of that, which we call external worship: for what outward act of the body
is rather to be called worship, then bowing down the body; prostration happily,
or falling flat on the ground, may be conceived a further degree of this
worship: But if prostration before God be worship properly so called; then must
bowing down of the body toward the earth unto him, be of the same kind of
worship also: because it is a degree or part of the same act.

Secondly, if bowing the knee to Christ be no worship of him, it must needs be
a mocking of him, as it is said of the Roman Soldiers ( Mat 27.29.) They bowed
their knees before him, and mocked him, etc. he that boweth the knee to the
Lord Christ, and does not intend to honor and worship him in it, doubtless
mocketh him thereby.

Thirdly, there is nothing more apparent from the Scripture, then that bowing
the knee is worship (properly so called) yea the worship of God is often
signified by bowing the knee before him, Isa. 45.23. I have sworn by myself
(says God) that every knee shall hew unto me.

The Minor is thus declared, That worship of God which is built upon an
Ecclesiastical Constitution, is not founded upon the Moral Law But this
worship of bowing is built upon an Ecclesiastical Constitution.

Ergo, etc.

The Major I explicate and demonstrate thus: Two Laws which are not subordinate
(I mean with a logical subordination,) but contradistinguished one against
the other, cannot be together the ground of one and the same duty. But the Law
Moral, and Law Ecclesiastical are Laws of a different kind, not subordinate,
but contrad^stinguished. Ergo, etc.

The reason of the Minor is: Because Ordinations, or Constitutions
Ecclesiastical, respect matters of circumstance, and things indifferent; the
Moral Law only treats of, and obliges to things of absolute necessity.

The subject matter of Ecclesiastical Laws and Constittuions be (in the
general) matters of indifferency and decency, about the worship of God: yet
if such Constitutions take, in any part of the Morality of it this makes it
not will worship, because it is the will of man it should be done, supposing it
to be the will of God first.

Constitution, promiscuously imposing things of mere indifferency, with
things of absolute necessity. But it has not yet bin proved, that this worship
has any other Mother, but either the Constitutions or Customs of men; the
Word of God, or Moral Law cannot yet be compelled to own, or to acknowledge
it; so then it being the Son of a stranger, it is not to be brought into the
Temple of the Lord.

That this rule makes as strongly against kneeling at the Communion, as against
bowing at the name of Jesus, because it has no other foundation, but the like
Ecclesiastical Constitution.

thanksgiving, in the duty of receiving, which being a branch of prayer
(largely taken) there can be no outward gesture more natural and suitable to it,
then kneeling. Besides there is an act of prayer (strictly taken) etc.

But there is no such special duty in hand, or performance, when the name
Jesus is mentioned: upon which this gesture of bowing should be rounded, but
only the duties of hearing and attending the Word of God, whereunto all other
gestures of standing, or sitting, are much more convenient, and have
approbation from the Scriptures. The former of standing, Nehe 8.5. Mat. 13.2.
and elsewhere: the latter of sitting, Ezekiel. 20.1. and 33.31. Mar. 3.34. etc. So
that to injoyne bowing still upon the pronunciation of the name Jesus, in the
midst of the Service, whether it be in the hearing of a Chapter, or Gospel
read, wherein those other gestures of standing, or sitting, are by the same
Authority allowed: besides that, it wants a special foundation to build it
upon; it dissolves (for the time) those other gestures which the Scriptures
allow, substituting another in their stead unknown to them: and further it
condemns that which it allows, by censuring men for sitting, or standing, then
when they have allowed both as lawful.

ARGUMENT. 5.
THhat which (at the best) is a compound worship, to the framing and making up
whereof there is a concurrence, partly of the will of God, partly of the will
and wisdom of men, is an unlawful worship, especially when that which is from
man is the form spirit and life of the worship: and that which is from God is
but the material and less principal part of it. But such is this worship of
bowing, etc. Ergo

The Major I conceive needs no relief from any truth clearer then it self.

The Minor is thus proved. If only the outward act, the bowing of the body be
from God: but the bowing of it at such a time, and upon such an occasion, be
from Man, then it is a compound worship, yea and that which is formal and
principal in it is from Man, and only that which is weak and less regarded
is from God. But the antecedent is true, (namely) that the bowing of the body
only is from God: but the bowing at such a time, and upon such an occasion is
from Man. Therefore the consequence or Counclusion is true also, viz. That that
worship is a mixed and compound worship, and that which is principal and most
esteemed from Man, and only the neglected and less principal part of it from
God: the Consequence is evident in both the parts and members of it.

1. That which has a plurality and diversity of ingredients in it, must needs
be a thing compounded. And secondly, for the latter part of it, that which is
from God (if any thing at all be in it from him ( viz. the bowing of the body
is but the material, and less principal part of it: but that which is from
Man, namely to do it at such a time, and upon such an ocasion, is the formal
and principal part of it, appears thus: Because let the Body be bowed never
so diligently and frequently, upon the mention of all other names of Christ, as
Lord, Savior, etc yet this is not regarded, no more then a dead carcass when
the life is departed from it; nor taken for the worship commanded. Therefore
that which gives the life and essence to it, is not that which makes it an act
of adoration: neither is it the exhibiting of it, to the person for whom it is
claimed (as pretense is made) but it is the exhibition of it, sub tali signo,
upon such a sound. This is that which gives it the special nature, and makes
it to b^ accepted and acknowledged for the worship commanded. Therefore this is
the life and soul, and all in all of this worship.

Now for the Minor Proposition. That this Circumstance or point in it, that it
should and must be given precisely at such a time, is purely from man and not
from God, has sufficiently bin demonstrated already; and the Argument that
evinceth it, beyond all contradiction, is soon repeated* there is not the least
intimation from God at all in the Scripture that any thing more should be done
in this kind too, or upon the name Jesus, then to any other name or title,
whether of God or of Christ. Therefore to found an act of worship upon the
mention or sound of the name Jesus is purely and absolutely from Man, and not
from God.

ARGUMENT. 6.
IT is a thing unlawful to lay a stumbling block in the way of the weak or
blind. Then it is unlawful to require such worship, at the mention or sound of
the name Jesus, or to countenance any such Command. But this is simply
unlawful, Levit. 19.14. Ergo.

The Consequence will be reduced to a lightsome truth by reasoning thus, to
injoyne any worship of God, in such away or upon such terms, whereby the weak
and simple (yea and the wiser also) may e^sily be ensnared, drawn and provoked,
to commit Idolatry, at least to commit absurdity, and give divine worship, to
that which is not such, is an unlawful injunction, and it is sin to
countenance it. But that injunction to bow at the name of Jesus, is such an
injunction, Ergo etc.

The Major I conceive is rich in evidence of clear truth.

The Minor likewise is not of any difficult proof, viz. that the injunction
and practice of bowing, is in the nature of it apt to mislead the simple,
either into Idolatry, or absurdity. That which directly occasions men to
worship those who were but mere men, or to bow upon the mention of their
Names, directly and in the nature of it, leads men either to commit Idolatry,
or (in the best interpretation) a gross absurdity in the service of God. But
this Command and practice of b^wing at the name Jesus, directly tends to one or
both of these. Ergo*

The Minor is clear because the name Jesus is a name common to others, besides
the Lord Jesus, as to Josua, who is called Jesus, Heb. 4 8. And Jesus the Son
of Syrach: and Bar-Iesus a Conjurer, Acts 13.6. Now how easy it is for the
simple to mistake one person for another, that goes in the same name with him,
without any distinction or note of difference in the sound, none can be
ignorant of.

ARGUMENT. 7.
NO outward Ceremony or act of worship that tends to the prejudice, and
interruption of the worship and service of God, which is more inward and
spiritual is to be received and yielded unto. But such is the practice of
bowing at the name of Jesus. Ergo.

The Major Proposition is evident: because duties of inferior nature and
consequence, when greater are in place, and cannot be performed in their due
manner; when these are thrust upon them, are no duties in such a case: but all
their obligatory virtue and power is suspended for that time.

And for the other Proposition, that bowing at the name of Jesus is such a
worship, or outward act, that cannot stand with the due performance of that
which is greater, and more spiritual, it is clearly demonstrable from hence:
Because attentive hearing and minding the Word of God, either read or preached,
is such a duty, that cannot but be interrupted, and suffer distraction and
diversion of the mind, if the other duty of bowing be attended also. The mind
of man finds a marvelous difficulty and insufficiency in it self, to give that
diligent and deep intention to the Word of God, which belongs to it, when it
has its full strength entire, and unbroken with any other collateral
occasions, when it is in the greatest freedom that may be from all other
thoughts. Ergo, If it shall be burdened in the time of hearing with the care and
purpose of bowing, when such a word or sound comes forth, this cannot but much
break and weaken the intenti^n of it.

But there is no necessity of thinking of bowing till the time come, and the
name be in the Ear.

bow when the sound comes, can hardly forbear thinking of it again and again
before hand, and will have much ado to keep the sound out of his imagination,
before it comes at his Ear. Let any man make a narrow experiment in himself,
and ingenuously confess what he finds, I make no doubt but his confession has
been already drawn to his hands in this Argument.

ARGUMENT. 8.
THat worship which intends to exalt one name of God, or of Christ before
others; and to bring all the rest into contempt, is at no hand to be
condescended unto. But such is this bowing worship at the name of Jesus, it
tends to magnify one name of Christ, with the disparagement of all the rest.
Ergo.

The Major I take for granted: Because whatsoever reflects prejudice upon any
of the great and sacred names and titles of God upon any pretense whatsoever,
is not to be endured.

The Minor is thus confirmed, because this name only being judged a fit medium
of conveying a special honor, or service to Christ: and others not thought
worthy of such an office or employment, this must needs turn to a reproach unto
them that they shall all be defective this way in comparison of this one.

That it is not denied unto the rest, men may do the same reverence upon the
mention of any other name.



Secondly, If this knee-service were done upon the mention of every name or
title of Christ besides, sometimes it might so fall out, (viz.) when such names
come, many, or very often together, that it may make the body of the Service
ridiculous, and a good part of it a little better then a mere distraction.
Ergo, The liberty that is left to men in this case, does not ease the business
at all: because if it be taken in the way, by which it is intended that the
other names of Christ shall be brought to an equality of honor with that of
Jesus; the truth is it will be so far from doing this, that it will bring them
altogether, one and other without exception into contempt.

ARGUMENT. 9.
THat worship of Christ which reflects disparagement upon the other two
persons, as though they were inferior to him, and worthy of less honor is at
no hand to be allowed.

But this worship is such a worship, enjoined only to the second person.

It is true, God has given all the honor and dignity unto Christ, whereof he
now stands poffessed, as Mediator, to this end, that all men should honor the
Son, as they honor the Father, Io. 5.23. but that men should honor him above
the Father, or with any such worship wherewith the Father is not honored:
there is no Scripture will bear it, nor the analogy of Faith endure it.

That the same honor may be exhibited to the other persons, when men will,
they are not restrained in this case.



That in bowing to Christ we bow to the whole Trinity in him, and that it is no
more a disparagement to the other Persons to refer a special honor upon
Christ (so they be not excluded in it) then for a man to direct his prayers
unto any one of the Persons alone, which is no disparagement or neglect of the
other, if he do not exclude them? though he addresseth himself actually to
one only in prayer.

bowing is by the Commandment settled only upon the second Person, and not so
much as the least mention made of either of the other, as having any right to
communicate in the same worship with him.

Secondly, a man directing his prayers at one time, to one of the Persons in
particular, may at another time direct it to another, and the third time to a
third; and so the equality of the Persons is fully acknowledged. But in the
command, and tender of this knee-worship, a man is sent with it only to the
Son; neither will it serve or be accepted to tender this honor to the Son, in
the Father, or in the Holy Ghost (as in prayer it is accepted with God) but it
will suffice in this knee-worship, that the Father and Holy Ghost be worsh^pped
in the Son; yea if they be not worshipped, it will serve also: by which it
appears evidently, that there is a wide difference between the one and the
other.

Thirdly, if the Scripture had limited, or restrained the duty or worship of
prayer, to one of the Persons only limited, I mean in such a sense that it
had mentioned only this one Person, as capable of this worship, and had given
no intimation of the like capacity in the other two (though it had not expressly
excepted against them in this behalf) it is evident, that it had established,
or at least strongly intimated an inequality between the Persons, and given a
pre-eminence to the one above the other two. This is the very case of this
Precept for bowing at the Name Jesus, there is a full establishment of a
capacity of this worship in the second Person: but there is not the least
intimation given of the like capacity in either of the other. Ergo, It directly
tends to set up a conceit of an unequality between the persons in the minds of
men, and therefore it is not to be assented unto.

ARGUMENT 10.
NO outward worship or service of God, that can have no other reasonable end,
but only to intrappe and ensnare the faithful servants of God, is not to be
endured: But such is this bowing worship. Ergo.

It serves to testify the inward reverence of the heart, and the frame of the
soul how it stands affected to the Lord Jesus; and what can be a more real
end.

God or no* so that if that be the intent of it, to express the inward
reverence of the soul to Christ: Then is the commanding of it a snare unto
men, to entangle them with the sign of hypocrisy, because it is not in any
man's power to have his heart inw^rly affected when he pleases. But the command
of bowing, injoy^es him to the outward ^orship, whether he find his heart
inwardly affected yea or no Now to compel a man to make profession of some
good which is not in truth in him, what is this but to command dissimulation:
and for the greatest part of those that are most taken with, and most pliable
to this posture, it is more then aparent, that for any inward soul reverence
to Christ, they have little to do with it: So that to command all without
exception to do it, there is no interpretation to salve it, but that it is to
command the greatest part of those to whom it is enjoined to profess that
outwardly, which they are not within, which in plain speaking is gross
dissimulation.

2. If it be the proper end and intent of this Ceremonial worship, to testify
the inward reverence of the soul to Christ, then should it rather be commanded
to be done at such times indefinitely, when a man finds the impression of such
a reverence upon his spirit; and not determinately when ever he hears the
sound of the Name Jesus, Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks:
and so it is fittest for all the body to speak, and not when the heart is
empty.

3. If a definite time be fit to he appointed, when men shall bow their bodies
to Christ, in token of their inward reverence, it should rather be when some of
those great things he has done for us were mentioned, then, when only this
bare name is recited: because there is not so much in the bare Name, which is
scarsely herd to affect the heart toward him, as when that goodness and mercy
which is seen in that great salvation he has purchased for us, is displayed
before our eyes.

4. Lastly, it is a thing altogether unreasonable, when things that are
stronger, and more spiritual are in place, especially when that which is a
more full, and more genuine exercise must give place for a time, to make way
for that which is inferior to it.

But reverence in attention to the Word of God and Christ is doubtless a
greater and fuller exercise, and testimony of greater inward reverence of the
heart, then bowing at the name of Jesus is: The Sould^ers that put him to death
bowed the knee to him in derision: but for outward reverence in hearing the
Scriptures, though it may be taken up by those that have no true love to God,
or his Word, yet God himself gives testimony of it, as a seemly behavior well
becoming his people, Ezekiel. 32. Ergo, For a man to break off and interrupt a
more solemn exercise to Christ, which reverent (...) in a reverent attention to
his Word, whether it be sitting, or standing, only to introduce a
heterogenity, and less pertinent exercise in bowing, I conceive is not that
reasonable service of God, which the Scriptures call for, and require at every
man's hands.

ARGUMENT. 11.
THat worship which neither the Law of God nor the Law of Man, nor the Church
whereof we are members, imposes; ought not to be assented unto, or entertained.
But such is this bowing it is neither commanded in this case by the Law of God,
neither is there any Canon, or Constitution of the Church. Ergo, etc.

The Major is without exception.

As for the Minor, That this worship is not commanded by the Law of God, it
has been sufficiently declared already. For the latter member of it (that it
is not commanded by any canon or Constitution of the Church, may thus appear,
if not by the 18. Canon, then not at all. But that it is not commanded by the
18. Canon, These considerations make it every whit as much, if not more then)
probable.

1. That worship or reverence here advis^d or called for, is only such a
worship or reverence as is due, for that is the first and principal
qualification of it, by which the other two, (us and all) must be interpreted.
Now the rule in Law is, That is due which is required by the Law of God. But
such reverence or worship of Christ, which the Law of God does not require, is
not that worship which the Canon advises unto. But now as concerning the
bowing worship or reverence in this case, it has bin often proved, to have bin
no where required by the Law of God.

That the word due may have reference to some former Law or Constituteon of the
Church, as well as to the Law of God, in respect whereof it may be called due.

God, or by the Law of the Church, then the interpretation of the Canon, is not
to be left too or made by any one man or more: but by a Convocation of the
Clergy, under the broad Seal, as is expressly enjoined by his Majesty's
Declaration, prefixed before the last Impression, in the Book of the (39.)
Articles of Religion. (Ergo) as yet till the Canon be made to speak more plain
by this Authority, there is no Authority sufficiently peremptory to impose any
such worship, by virtue of the Canon.

But Secondly, suppose it be granted that the word due, has, or may have
reference to some former Constitution of the Church; yet till such a Canon be
produced, which hitherto has not been, neither ever will, or can be, where
this reverence of bowing the body or knee, precisely, or determinately is
enjoined; till then there is nothing to be had out of the Canon for bowing.

2. That reverence to Christ the Canon advises unto, is only such a reverence
as has bin accustomed. Now to what custom this word refers there is
nothing determined of it, it ^s not in any probability but that it is either to
the Church of God in general, or to the custom of the Church of God in
England; as for what has bin accustomed in the Church m^lignant, of Popery I
presume, the Canon looks not after it. Now that it has neither bin the Custom
of the Church Catholic; nor the custom of the Church of England to bow still
at the name of Jesus: I know no Authenticke Author that can testify; as for
the practice of some particular, either place, or person, it will not amount to
make that which is properly called a Custom.

3. But if the words of the Canon (Due, lowly, and Customed) be understood, of
any humble deportment, and reverent Composure of the outward man, in the
hearing of the word of Christ; then will the sense be more expedient and
clear, then will be found in any other interpretation; for suah a reverence is,
(first) apparently Due, from the Word of God, and his Law, and the Law of the
Church. And (Secondly) it is, lowly, the body every way framed to the humble
deportment of the soul. (Thirdly) such a reverence has bin still accustomed,
and is still the custom of all the true Servants of God, both in England and
elsewhere: those Three qualifications of (Due, Lowly, and Reverend) will never
be made so really, and so generally into the worship of bowing, as they do to
that reverent and humble attention of hearing the word of God, and this is most
pliable to the meaning of the Canon.

4 Nothing is enjoined in this Canon, that is not prescribed nor mentioned in
the Book of Common Prayer: and it is evident from hence, because in the Act of
Conformity prefixed, before the Book, if there be any other Ceremony in the
service of God, it is prohibited under the penalty: but for the Ceremony of
bowing at the name of Jesus, the Book of Common Prayer no where mentions.
(Ergo) it is not likely to be enjoined, or if that be granted, then the Book of
Common Prayer will fall heavy upon him, that shall observe the Canon: on the
other side, the Canon will condemn him that shall observe the Book of Common
Prayer.

5. His Majesty's special Command and pleasure is in the former Declaration,
that the literal and Grammatical sense shall still be taken, and no other;
But now if the Canon have no other Midwife, but the literal and Grammatical
sense, it will never be delivered of this bowing worship, at the name of Jesus.
If the canon were exactly translated, into all languages, and suit made to the
best Grammarians of all Nations, to give the literal sense of it, it is not to
be conceived, that any one of them would ever find, that bowing the body at the
sound of the name Jesus, would ever to be meant by it.

FINIS.

