A GRATULATORY VERSE Upon Our late Glorious VICTORY OVER THE DUTCH,
By the Author of Iter Boreale.
GOut! I conjure thee by the powerful Names
Of CHARLES and JAMES, and their Victorious Fames,
On this great Day set all thy Prisoners free,
(Triumphs command a Jail-delivery)
Set them all free, leave not a limping Toe
From my Lord Chancellors to mine below;
Unless thou giv'st us leave this day to dance,
You Are not the old Loyal Gout, but come from France,
It Is done, my grief obeyes the Sovereign Charms,
I feel a Bonfire in my joints, which warms
And thaws the frozen jelly; I am grown
Twenty years younger; Victory has done
What puzzled Physic: Give the Dutch a Rout,
Probatum est, 'twill cure an English Gout.
Come then, gut nimble Socks upon my Feet,
They shall be Skippers to our Royal Fleet,
Which now returns in dances on our Seas,
A Conqueror above Hyperbole's.
A Sea which with Bucephalus does scorn
Less than an Alexander should be born
Oh her proud Back; But to a Royal Rein
Yields foaming Mouth, and bends her curled Main:
And conscious that she is too strait a stage
For Charles to act on, swelled with Loyal Rage,
Urges the Belgic and the Gallick shore
To yield more room, Her Master must have more,
Ungrateful Neighbors! 'twas Our kinder Isle,
With her own Blood, made Your Geneva Style
Writ in small Print [Poor States and fore perplext]
Swell to the [ HIGH AND MIGHTY LORDS] in Text;
And can ye be such Snakes to sting that Breast,
Which in Your Winter gave you Warmth and Rest?
Poor Flemish Frogs, if Your Ambition thirst,
To swell to English Greatness, You will burst.
Could You believe Our Royal Head would fail
To Nod those down who fell before our Tail?
Or could Your Amsterdam by her commands,
Make London carry Coals to warm her Hands?
A bold Attempt! Pray practice it no more,
We saved our Coals, yet gave you Fire good store,
It is enough; The righteous Heavens have now
Judged the grand Quarrel betwixt us and you.
The Sentence is -- The Surface must be ours,
But for the bottom of the Sea, it is yours:
Thither your opdam with some thousands, are
Gone down to take possession of your share.
Me thinks I hear great Triton found a Call,
And through the affrighted Ocean summon all
His scaly Regiments, to come and take
Part of that Feast which Charles their King does make;
Where they may glut Revenge, quit the old score,
And feed on those who fed on them before;
Whom when they have digested, who can find
Whether they are fish, or flesh, or what is their Kind?
Van-Cod, Van-Ling, Van-Herring will be cried
About their Streets; All Fish, so Dutchifi'd.
Their States may find their Capers in their Dish,
And meet their Admirals in Buttered Fish,
Thus they will imbody, and increase their Crew,
A cunning way to make each Dutch man Two,
And on themselves, they now must feed or fast;
Their Herring Trade is brought unto its Last.
To the KING.
GReat Sir, Beloved of God and Man, admit
My Loyal zeal to run before my Wit,
This is my Pens miscarriage, not a Birth;
Her haste has made her bring blind Puppies forth.
My aims in this attempt are to provoke,
And kindle flames more Noble, by my smoke;
My wisp of Straw may set great Wood on Fire,
And my weak Breath Your Organs may inspire,
Amongst those Flags you have taken from the Dutch,
Command your Denham to hang up his Crutch.
He is a Man both of his Hands and Feet,
And with great Numbers can Your Navy meet,
His quicker Eye Your Conquest can survey,
His Hand, York's Temples Crown with flourishing Bay,
Waller (great Poet and true Prophet too)
Whose curious Pencil in Rich Colors drew
The Type of this grand Triumph for your view,
(The Fishers (like their Herrings) bleeding new)
With the same Hand shall give the World the sights
Of what it must expect when England Fights,
That Son and Heir of Pindars Muse and Fame,
Your Modest Cowley, with Your Breath will flame,
And make those Belgic Beasts, who live, aspire,
To fall Your Sacrifice in his pure Fire.
He shall proclaim Our JAMES great Neptune's Wonder,
And like a Jove Fighting in Clouds and Thunder.
Printed at London, and Reprinted at Edinburgh, 1665.


