A REPROOF FROM THE LORD: DECLARED By the Movings of his Spirit to certain
Professors, whose habitations is in and about Hull and Beverley, who take
delight in approaching to God, and to know his ways, as a people that did
Righteousness, and yet seeks to limit him, and stumbles at his light, in which
the knowledge of his ways is received: With an admonition to all to beware of
the Leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy, who for a pretense, make long
Prayers, whilst iniquity is regarded in the heart, and disobedience lived in,
lest you receive greater Damnation.

AS ALSO, AN INVITATION to all, who are groaping in the dark, to own the light
in which the Pearl is found, which gives strength against sin, and rest to the
soul; Published for the information of such as desire to know the Truth, and
would enter into the Kingdom, were they not deceived by the sleights of men,
who shut up the way, and will neither enter themselves, nor suffer those that
would to go on, That you may try all things, and hold fast that which is good.

By one that seeks not his own, but the good of your souls, called, John
Whitehead.

Hear ye, and give ear, be not proud; for the Lord has spoken, etc. Jer.
13.14. London, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the sign of the Bull and Mouth
near Aldersgate. 1656.

A Reproof from the Lord.
THis ensuing Letter was I moved to write and send amongst you (who were met to
gether at Hassel upon the 31 day of the fifth month 1656.) in love to your
souls, as a testimony against your deceits, which to your wisdom may otherwise
appear, to which eye I look not to be made manifest, knowing it perceives not
the things of God; Therefore do I exhort all of you to whom it shall come, to
read what follows, without any prejudice in the fear of the Lord, that your
understandings may be opened, in the light, to see and know the mind of the
Spirit which will give to each of you what is your portion.

FRiends,
consider how you are puffed up in your knowledge, and your hearts waxen fat,
and your eyes blinded by the god of the world, and ears become dull of hearing,
that you cannot savor the things of God, nor rejoice in the truth, but
accounts Jesus Christ preached, (the light of the world, who in lightneth every
man that comes into the world) a fancy, and foolishness, or simpleness, to
what you have attained, though few of you knows any thing of the fellowship of
his sufferings, power of his Resurrection, or virtue of his Life made manifest
in you, but have gotten the report and fame thereof to talk of, and in your
prudence and comprehensions are prescribing a way, and seeking to limit the
Holy One in it, witness your agreeing beforehand who shall speak, and rejecting
the truth in others, and taking your turns by an outward Order of habitation in
such a place, witness your own words, who said, it is now Beverley turn; and
also your agreeing beforehand on particular things to be prayed for, as by
your own words plainly appeared, and going to prayer at the call of one
another, though some of you acknowledged you had no freeness in spirit to it:
All which is seen to be contrary to the doctrine of Christ, Body of Christ,
imagines it to be like your selves, rent and divided, (as some of you said) who
contradicts one another, even you who profess to be the Mouth of the rest, some
of you saying, That you want the Spirit, and cannot find it, but are in much
darkness, others of you speaking in behalf of the rest, affirms, That you have
it, and are Gods children, and does his work, which proves some of you at
least, to be Liars: And notwithstanding you are thus in confusion and darkness,
(as might be mentioned in many other particulars) you are not ashamed to speak
in derision and contempt of the Children of light, because we all speak the
same things, and declares one truth, according to the Apostles Doctrine, which
truth is the ground of union, and stands a witness against all deceit, the
declaring of which you have contemned, because it came contrary to your wills
and appointments, and does not feed that which reaches out to the tree of
knowledge, which is disobedient, and like the Athenians, cried out for some new
thing, and you would hear it, but accounted it babbling, and a disturbance, to
declare that which was from the beginning, carping at the manner of words, and
time of their delivery, though they varied not from examples and rules in
Scripture, which says, Cry aloud, Read Isai^ (...) Mat. 10.17 1 Kings 18 1
Cor. 13.3
spare not, and show my people their sins, and that which you have heard in the
ear declare on the housetop, which you accounted a heinous thing, and the
fruits of an unmeek spirit Though (...) till three of (...) had ended, a fourth
b^ indirectly pray, whilst (...) waited for Answer to thing propo^ed, whose
^mulation proved as (...) was praying Mat. 6.7, 8 14. Phil. 4.5. 1 Thessalonians. 5.2
saying, that I would make the Spirit by which I spoke odious, by speaking in
the time of your (long) prayers, though the Scriptures say, If any thing be
revealed to one that sits by, let the first hold his peace; and read Elijah and
Baalls Prophets, and you may see your selves as in a figure, and an example for
speaking in the time of Prayer, and how like in effect your crying is to
theirs, which the Prophets witnessed against, and how far different both you
and your Prayers is from Christ's Doctrine, and the Saints practice, let his
light in your consciences judge, and your Heathen-like much speaking in your
Prayers, witness against you, as also your breaking out into a confused uproar,
many speaking together to stop the declaring of Truth, and not rendering a
moderate reason of your sayings, contrary to the Apostles rule, Let your
moderation be known unto all men, and try all things, and hold fast that which
is good, which ye refused to do, and being lifted up in your knowledge, accounts
it a needless thing to lay amongst you the foundation of Repentance from dead
works, though you be even found therein, as the light of Christ in all your
consciences will witness, which shows you your secret lust, pride, and
high-mindedness, covetousness love, and conformity to this world, as also your
respect of persons, anger, and peevishness, with your false accusing, deriding,
foolish laughter, wantonness, and so forth, which dead works and your saying
that you have not power against them, is a greater testimony of your unbelief,
and disowning of Christ, then all your profession of Faith in him, and talking
of his excellency in words can be for you, which profession and fair saying is
nothing but hypocrisy, whilst you do not the things you say, and the hope you
have in that nature is not sure and steadfast, but must be cut off, and perish,
and you also, except you repent; and this shall you witness to be truth
declared in plainness, when the worker of iniquity from Christ is forced to
depart, and rewarded according to the deeds done in the Body, and those only
who have done the Fathers will enters into the Kingdom. Mat. 7.21, 23. John
12.3^
A warning may this be to all that mentions the name of the Lord Jesus Christ,
not any longer to deceive your selves with a vain hope that purifies not,
neither let any deceive you with vain words, but believe in the light of the
Lord Jesus, and singly wait, that therein you may receive power for obedience
to the Faith, and put away the evil of your doings, and the abominations that
are in your hearts, which shuts out your prayers, that they pass not through,
but you ask and receive not, desire to have, and have not, (because you ask
amiss, to consume it on the lust of your own wills, which is not subjected in
the Cross;) Iam. 4.2, 3
and although there does a joy arise in some of your affections, at the
uttering forth of words that makes mention of the thing you want, which joy for
a time you may feed on; yet anon it withers and sades away, and you are but
where you were before, at a loss in your selves, sticking fast in the mire and
clay, and bondage, to the corruption and evil of your hearts, and not believing
in the light which opens the blind eye, you know not where to find the power
which should slay the enmity, and crucify the flesh with the affections and
lusts, but are struggling and striving by what you can do to enter, often
pleading your actions before the Lord, and filling your mouths with Arguments
to persuade him to accept your endeavors and prayers, which are seen to be
exacted labors, and a forced work performed in the strength of the natural
understanding and wisdom, by which you know not God, nor his mind, but have
a zeal not according to knowledge (from which arises many deceitful
workings, as feigned cryings, and the like) in which you call for fire from
heaven, not knovving of what spirit you are.

But the Lord who searches all hearts, and knows your intents, has shut out
your wisdom from knowing him or his way; and to touch of the Tree of life you
cannot come by all your climbing, Cor. 1.20, 1.
turning and striving; the flaming sword being set to keep its way, you cannot
pass through to feed on it, whilst you live in that nature and wisdom wherein
pride, strife and every evil work lodges; but before you have a right to the
tree of Life must become fools, Genesis 3.24.
and cast down your Crowns at the teet of Christ, who lights every man that
comes into the world, and own his Witness, John. 1.9.
who has kindled a burning under your glory, and testifies of your works that
they be evil; in whose Light stand you still, and you will see condemnation
upon all your own vvilling, and running, and acting in your own strength, as
also upon all your wickedness, and self-righteousness, which are both
abomination to God, and a profession of faith, and talk of Christ and his
Kingdom to come, will not serve to cover you that are found therein, and
will not that the Lamb shall reign over you in spirit, that humbled himself to
the Cross, whose appearance you cannot own, nor the glory thereof, which is not
the glory of this world, nor of the Princes of this world, which shall come to
naught, but stands in righteousness, judgment, purity, and in this world
suffering, and reproaches, whipping, and imprisonment in Dungeons, and holes,
to be numbered amongst Transgressors, buffeted, stoned, spit upon, and accounted
a Devil, a Deceiver, etc. even by such as have gotten the Scriptures (which
testifies of him) to talk of, ^ph. 1.20, 1, 22. Cor. 15.4, 25.
and yet in all these things the Lamb reigns and shall reign till all rule
and authority be put under him, though I say his appearance and glory in this
world can no more be owned by such as look for an outward kingdom, power and
dominion, and in the mean time lives in pride, fashions and lust of the world,
then it could by the Jews, who looked for his appearance in an outward pomp,
and for an outward restoration of their kingdom, and when he appeared did not
know him, nor the voices of their own Prophets, ^cts 13.27
but fulfilled them in crucifying him, who was not born by the will of man, nor
appeared according to their expectation and thoughts of him; and how like your
thoughts and expectations of his appearance are unto theirs let his Light in
your consciences judge, the which you may do well to take heed unto, until he
be manifest, who brings to light that which has layen hid in darkness, and
makes known the Councels of the heart, Then will you cease from all ouward
expectations of his coming; ^u. 17.20, 1. ^an. 2.23, ^ 5. Pet. 2.6, ^, 8.
Lo here, and lo there, and know his Kingdom to be within, and feel the
Scepter of it, which is Righteousness, smiting at the feet of that glorious
Image, which in your Comprehensions is set up, but must be dashed in pieces by
the stone cut out of the Mountain without hands, which is stumbled at, set at
naught and rejected of your builders, as being the light (...) the world, that
lights every one that comes into the world; which light declared, you account
a low mean thing, and a fancy, or some thing the is insufficient to salvation,
without a further light. But this I say unto you, John 1.
and testify in the Lord, that his height you cannot comprehend, who is far
above all powers of darkness, and was from the beginning with God, by whom all
things was made and do consist, whose name is called the Word of God, which is
the life and light of men shining in darkness (though thereby not comprehended)
which was testified in due time, and became flesh and dwelt amongst the Saints,
and they beheld his glory as of the only begotten Son of God, and what they
heard and saw, they Witnessed forth, and we know that their witness is true,
who testified of him that he is the true light that lights every man that
comes into the world, and there is not any besides him that makes manifest the
deeds of darkness, or can lead out therefrom: So all that expect or hold our
another light then that which lights every man, and deny its sufficiency, are
in the fancy, exalted and puffed up in their knowledge and wisdom, with which
they know not the Scriptures, nor the power of the Lord Jesus Christ, John
8.21. 1 Pet. 2.4. Psa. 118.22. 1 John 1.7.
who is the light of the world, sufficient to lead out of darkness, for he that
follows him, shall not abide therein, but have the light of life; and here is
the stone which the builders reject, made the head of the corner, and is a
precious sure foundation to all them that believe and walk in his light, who
are witnesses of the virtue of his blood (which by vain talkers is made a cloak
for sin) washing and cleansing from all sin, and of his fullness, who is able to
save to the uttermost, have we received power to become the sons of God, in
that obedience and righteousness which is perfect, where all that be found are
justified, which righteousness is revealed from faith to faith, in all them
that believe in the light which manifests and condemns sin in the flesh, with
which light, all you that stumble at it, are seen to come short of the
righteousness of God, which makes a man righteous, and are shut out of the
Covenant of grace, and light wherein salvation, and the power against sin is
placed; yet left without excuse in that, light is come into the world, lighting
every man (and you say you see) in which light the grace of God that brings
salvation has appeared unto all men, and there is your condemnation that abide
in darkness, John 3.19, 2^ Titus 2.11.
that light is come, and grace has appeared, in which power against sin is
freely tendered, and yet darkness rather loved, and lived in, because of evil
deeds, and the free grace of God into wantonness, is turned by all of you that
live in the ungodliness, and follow after the worldly lusts (which the Saints
are taught to deny.) And you are the murmurers, complainers, and slothful
servants, Isa. 55.2, 3, Acts 7.51.
which foolishly would charge the fault upon God, as though he did not draw nor
give power against sin, when as he has freely given him for a witness to the
people, in whom all power and fullness dwells, and by his spirit has striven
with you ever since you began to yield the members of you bodies servants to
unrighteousness, for which you have often been checked in secret, and felt the
spirit moving to purity, contrary to your wills; but how often ye have resisted
the holy spirit, and quenched his motions, let the light of your consciences
judge, ye stiffneckned, and uncircumcised in hearts and ears? how will you be
able to stand when the Lord shall visit upon you the evil of your doings, who
have a form of godliness, but denies the power which overcomes sin; how deeply
are you fallen into the Enemies snare, who ownes his power to keep you in sin,
and cannot see nor own the spirit and ^ower of God, that would lead you out
from it, though it be a Reprover of you, my ^ul even laments your captivity?
how is the whole Head become sick, and the who^^ heart faint? how are you
scattered in your imaginations, and driven from mountain to hills, which be dry
and barren? how is your beauty and glory withered, and your wise men gone
backward, and their knowledge become foolishness, and their language
confounded? How do you reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man? how are
you groping in the dark to find him whom your souls longs after? how do your
eyes fail, whilst your expectations are without, looking for glorious days,
and a power to come, but when you know not, but as you imagine and conceive,
from the promises written in Scripture, which imaginations and conceivings
blindes the eye (that should apply the promises to their right object) and
leads the mind outward into groundless hopes, which are mixed with doubt and
uncertainties; and whilst you follow such blind guides as your imaginations
and conceivings, which arise from the earthly wisdom, which knows not the
things of God, you often fall into the ditch, and are defiled by the pollutions
of the world; (...) ^5, 2, 3, 4.
and thus compassing your selves about, with the sparks you have kindled, are
forced to lie down in sorrow.

And now a word to all amongst you who sit weeping by the Rivers of Babylon,
and have honest desires after God and his righteousness, whom my bowels yearnes
over, and sounds toward you, that you may not any longer be tossed with the
sleights of men, nor feed on their airy Notions, which gives you not the least
strength against sin, but draws out your minds without, to look at Christ at a
distance from you, and his appearance in power to come hereafter, though he be
near unto every one of you, (...) ^.3.20. (...). 10.6, 7, 8
reproving in the gate or door of your hearts, whereat the mind goes forth
into vanity, even, as says the righteousness which is of faith. The Word is
near you in your hearts, and in your mouths, the Word of Faith which we
preach, and this is the same Word which was from the beginning, preached by the
Apostles, and witnessed to be living and abiding for ever, ingrafted and able
to save the soul; and this is it which discerns the thoughts and intents of
your hearts, and bears witness against every vain thought, idle word, and
froward ungodly way, which your own wills that are not free, but bound to
vanity, chooses; therefore from your own wisdom, labors and self-works (which
be all wicked) cease; and stand still in the Light of that engrafted Word, (of
which the Scriptures testify) which is able to save your souls; so may your
blind eyes be opened, and you brought into a true sense of your conditions, to
see how you have walked in unpleasant places; and that notwithstanding all your
knowledge and profession, all is not right in the inward, but corruption still
lodges in the heart as a Partition Wall, separating you from God; and to do
good of your selves have no understanding nor ability, but for ever might have
perished in this state, if God in his everlasting love had not given his son a
light into the world to manifest and lead out of this darkness. So in the Light
(which shows you fin and inability in self to come out of it) wait, ^or. 1.4.
and you will feel in your selves the sentence of death and condemnation upon
the first man, which is of the earth, earthly; and by the operation of Gods
power which is manifest in the light, you will feel desires begotten and moving
in your souls after righteousness, which motions is the Fathers drawing in his
love that you may not perish, Ezekiel. 33.11. James 1.10.
but come unto Christ which is the light and life; and this is the will of God
which begets by the word of truth both to will and do, according to his good
pleasure: Therefore beware of continuing in stiff neckedness, least you be
found fighters against God, and resisters of his will, as they are who perish
in their sin; but while it is called to day, Phi. 2.13.
hear him that speaks from heaven, whose voice shakes the heavens and the
earth, who is the good shepherd, and calls unto you that have gone astray; Heb.
12.25 26.
therefore harden not your hearts, but wait in spirit to hear and know his
voice who testifies against all sin and calls after him out of the conformity
and love of this world and whosoever will be his disciples, must sell all, deny
themselves, Mark 12.21.
and take up his cross daily and in obedience follow him: This is that which
you yet want, and makes the difference between you and us, and is the ground of
the enmities standing, and sin prevailing over you; therefore who amongst you
is weary and heavy laden therewith, and would be his disciples, consult not
with flesh and blood, nor give way to that nature which stumbles at the cross,
and seeks to save its own life in the delights and pleasures of the flesh; and
to keep in the union, love and unpure friendship of the world, which is enmity
to God, and whosoever will be its friend, is Gods enemy; Iam. 4.4. Ioh. 2.15
profess what you will that love the world, the love of the Father is not in
you; therefore do not love it, nor the things that be in it, neither fear any
outward losses nor suffering that you shall meet with in your separation from
your former companions, nor the frowns nor oppositions of men, Matt. 10.37, 38.
Luke 9.23. 1 Cor. 1.8.
for if you count any thing too deer to part with, that you may win Christ, you
are not worthy of him; but let self (in which the inability to do good lodges)
be wholly denied by you, and take up the daily cross to your wills and lusts,
that wars against your souls, which cross is the power of God in all that are
saved, which crucifies to the world, and taking it up, and enduring of it, you
will come to witness the flesh crucified with its affections and lusts, and the
Partition Wall broken down, and that which lets taken out of the way by the
Lamb of God, in whom dwells the fullness both of wisdom and power, which
together with him is freely given to all that ask not amiss, but waits in
spirit to know him revealed, and his life through death made manifest, Col.
1.27. 1 Ioh. 4.4.
which opens the mystery that has been hid from ages, Christ in you the hope
of glory, who is greater then he that is in the world, and gives victory and
dominion over it, as it was in the beginning, and this salvation is witnessed
and freely is tendered unto you in the Covenant of Light, Life and Power, in
which waiting to learn of him who is meek and low in heart; his holy arm you
will come to see not shortened that it cannot save, but stretched out to take
you by the hand, and lead you by a way that you have not known, in which you
will come to see the wonders of the Lord, and the works of his hands brought
forth out of bondage to corruption, and possess the life of that which you
profess in words.

Now being warned, take heed of hardening your hearts against the Lord by
continuing in sin, and resting in the outward knowledge of these things from
what you have read in Scriptures, for that is not as you ought to know them,
which if you do, Genesis 6.3.
your visitation will pass over, and the Spirit of the Lord cease striving, by
which he would sanctify and gather you into his fold; and then will the things
belonging to your peace be hid from your eyes, and you shall desire to see one
of the days of the Son of man and shall not see it; and though you be not
gathered yet shall he be glorious, Act. 28.28
and the Gentiles will hear his salvation, and many shall come from the East,
West, North and South, and sit down together in the Kingdom of God, and your
selves shall be shut out who will not hear. So he that has an ear let him hear,
and come forth, for the time is now at hand; and I am clear of your blood at
that day, who in love to your souls have sent you a warning, commending it to
your consciences in the sight of God, where I look to be made manifest when the
book is opened, 2 Cor. 4.2 3, etc.
and till then am willing to bear your reproaches, and be accounted your enemy
for declaring the truth.

The 14 day of the 6 month, 1656.
The End.

