THE MESSAGE FROM THE HOUSE OF COMMONS to the LORDS, By Master Bulstrode
Whitlocke Esquire, and presented to their Lordships by him. Whereunto is added
His Majesty's most gracious Answer to their Message, February 22, 1642.

H. Elsinge Cler. do. Com.

C R



London Printed by E. Griffin, 1642.

AT a Conference of both Houses in the painted Chamber, Reported again as
follows by the Lord Roberts to the house of Lords concerning the importance
of embracing and promoving the design of those Petitioners who desire and hope
that the state may be eased of the charge of the Irish War, by the
undertaking of particular adventurers in the houses of Parliament, London and
the rest of the Kingdom.
Master Whitlocke,

WHo managed the conference, acquainted my Lords, that he was commanded by the
house of Commons to present a Vote of that house to your Lordships, which being
read, he afterward proceeded. That whereas your Lordships were pleased to
return thanks lately to the King with the House of Commons for his Majesty's
favor expressed in the passing of two Bills much importing the safety, quiet
and content of this Kingdom, and the King had thereupon recommended to both
houses the care of Ireland, so as these propositions read to your Lordships
even with relation to that message, were seasonable. Then he offered by way of
pretension, something concerning the title, which was, the vote of the Lords
and Commons. This he knew your Lordships understood to be but matter of form,
for your Lordships consent was that, which must make it to be so. He then
proceeded and offered to your Lordships three motives, each beginning and
concluding the entertainment of this course.

1 The reducing of Ireland. 2 The proffit of the King. 3 The ease of the people
of England.
For the first, Ireland was in that condition, as not only the civil power,
which was wont to be the former quarrel, but now even religion, the rooting up
of the protestant religion, and extirpation of the English is the quarrel.

The rebels are so audacious as to scandalize the King and Queen; and the
question is not now, whether Irish or English, but whether the Protestant or
Popish Religion shall stand in that Kingdom; This Rage of theirs stays not
there; they intend to stayne this land with the blood of Protestants.

The life and soul of Religion is now at stake, and he made no doubt every
good Protestant will lay down his life and fortune for the preservation of it.

Then he came to the second motive, which he amplified, first by way of
disadvantage, and showed, what a loss it would be to the King, to be bereaved
of that large and fruitful Island, which was a third part of the Kings
dominions, yea a third Kingdom. He then showed how much the preservation of it
conduced to the Kings profit, and how improveable this would be, by keeping
that: now was the time to make him a through King there, and to esta^lish the
throne, which had bin disputed and ^ottering in that Realm these 400 years.

He then proceeded to the third motive, and said the people of England, have
lately undergone many and heavy payments; he meant not those illegal
payments, which were a just punishment, to such as would submit to such unjust
charges, but he spoke of the levyes by Parliament, the burden whereof together
with the decay of trade, our neighbors in the Country were very sensible, by
those propositions read to your Lordships, the poorer sort will be eased, the
payments made easy, because voluntary, and thereupon will be many and
cheerful givers, who must ever have the honor of a memory to have
contributed to so good a work; so as where profit is an ingredient with piety
and Loyalty, the plaster will be sooner applied to Ireland.

When therefore our duty to God, and the King, may invite to so good a work,
he doubted not of your Lordships concurrence with the House of Commons for the
good of that, which was the good of the Kingdom.

Having said thus much in general he offered some thing to the propositions in
particular. That whereas the first Proposition demanded two Millions and half
of Acres for the undertakers, which might at first sight look as a great
demand to such as know not the extent of that Kingdom which is computed by
those who well understood the latitude of it, to contain 15. Millions of
Acres, and therefore to take out two Millions and half, when two parts of
three of that Kingdom are in open rebellion, is not so great a demand, as may
at first sight appear; and the proposition conduces much to the raising of
Rent to the King; He said it was well known that the revenew of the Exchequer,
and Court of wards in Ireland, did not exceed the sum of 43000 l. yearly,
besides the Customs which your Lordships found not great, except in Monopolies
and undue charges, what ever the customs are, they will be by these
propositions much advanced, 20 or 30 Thousand pounds a year rent will accrue
to the Crown by the reservations in them expressed, besides 7 Millions and half
of Acres, over and above the two Millions and half desired in the propositions
left to the Kings disposal.

The other propositions which are for the manner of bringing in of the money
are very necessary, nothing being of more consequence then to dispatch this
war.

He observed out of Livy, that the Romans made their wars great and short,
some they finished within 6, some within 10, other within 20 days, as with the
Samnites, Latins, etc. He did not mention this, as though it were feasible for
us to conclude this war in so short a time, but only to prove by the Actions
of that great State, that nothing is more advantageous to a State, then the
speedy dispatch of a war, and he hopes that if this money comes in, the war
of Ireland might be brought to a short issue: he added that he remembered with
grief the former obstructions for Ireland, but he now hops by the King and
your Lordships concurrences, that delays will be turned into dispatches; and
this was necessary because forragine Princes though now otherwise employed,
will be a wakened by a lasting war, to take care of our affairs. He
observes the course of Irelands first plantation, to suite much to this
propounded.

King William the first, gave leave to 12 Knights to go into Wales to get what
they could and to plant themselves there, from those descended Richard le
strong bow, first Earl of Pembrooke, who made the first impression in that
Kingdom.

Of which Geraldus Cambrensis says, that it should be maintained Multis
caedibus, crebris Conflictibus multoque certamine, he hops the course now in
hand will give a period to that Conquest, and this prophecy, and that those
intended plantations may be as prosperous to settle, as the former to gain
that Kingdom.

Wherefore this work being so full of piety, honor, and charity, none shall
need to speak for it, the works speak for it self. And so delivering the
vote of that house to your Lordships he concluded the Conference.

His Majesty's most gracious Answer to the Message of the House of Commons to
the Lords.
HIs Majesty being very glad to receive any proposition that may repair the
calamity of his distressed Kingdom of Ireland, especially when it may be
without burden or Imposition, and for the ease of his good Subjects of this
Kingdom, has graciously considered the overture made by both Horses of
Parliament to that purpose, and returns this answer.

That as he has offered and is still ready to venture his own Royal person
for the recovery of that Kingdom, if his Parliament shall advise him
thereunto, so he will not deny to contribute any other assistance he can to
that service by parting with any profit or advantage of his own there, and
therefore relying upon the wisdom of this Parliament does consent to every
proposition now made to him without taking time to examine whether this course
may not retard the reducing of that Kingdom by exasperating the Rebels and
rendering them desperate of being received into grace, If they shall return to
their obedience; and his Majesty will be ready to give his Royal Assent as to
all such Bills as shall be tendered unto him by his Parliament to the
Confirmation of every particular of this proposition, etc.

H. ELSYNGE, Cler-Parl. D. Com.


