THE SPEECH OF Bulstrode Whitelocke Esquire, TO The Right Honorable the Lords,
At a Conference of both Houses on Thursday the seventeenth of February last,
Concerning the Propositions then made by diverse Gentlemen, Citizens, and
others, for the speedy reducing of the Kingdom of IRELAND.



LONDON. Printed for John Burroughes. 1642.

The Speech of Bulstrode Whitelock Esquire, To the Right Honorable the House
of Peers, now assembled in PARLIAMENT.
My Lords,
I Am commanded by the House of Commons, to present unto your Lordships a Vote
which has passed that House upon some propositions made unto them, for the
speedy, and effectual reducing of the Kingdom of Ireland: I desire the Vote
may be read, and afterward I shall offer a few Reasons to invite your
Lordships consent unto it.

After the Vote read,

My Lords,

You observe three Motives for the House of Commons to pass this Vote.

1. The Reducing of Ireland. 2. The greatness and profit of the King. 3. The
case of the People of England.
The reducing of that Kingdom at this time, concerns not only the Civil Power,
but the existence of our Religion. Their former Rebellions have been only
conflicts with Sovereignty, to withstand the subjection to the Crown of
England; the present revolts goes to the extirpation of our Nation and Religion
amongst them. They have falsely scandalized the Piety and Honor of His
Majesty, and of the Queen; and yet pretend loyalty, and would cover their
wickedness with the cloak of their Religion.

It is too evident, they intend not only to shake of the Government of England
over them, but to blot out the name of the English, and Protestants, and if
their strength can equal their malice, and suffice to transport them hither,
they will stain this Land with the blood of Protestants, as they have already
with most barbarous cruolties taken away the lives of many thousands of our
poor Brethren in Ireland.

^.The question is not now, Whether English or Irish shall govern; but whether
the Protestant, or the Popish Religion shall be established, and which of them
shall be ruined. The very life and soul of our Religion lies now at stake, and
no good Protestant but will readily lay down his own life and fortunes, to
succor and maintain it. These propositions tend to that good end, and there
can be no greater motive to entertain them.

2. The greatness and profit of His Majesty is so much concerned herein, That
as the loss of that large and fertile Island, would cut off a third part of His
Majesty's Dominions; so a through reduction of it would establish the Kings
throne which has been totterring there above 400. years, and would much
advantage the greatness and profit of His Majesty.

3. The ease of the people of England, your Lordships will readily condescend
unto, when you shall be pleased to remember the great and heavy payments they
have lately undergone. I omit those illegal ones before the Parliament, where
the payment was a punishment for submission to unlawful taxes; but those
necessary great levies raised by Authority of this Parliament; and whereby the
happy settlement of the peace and union of England and Scotland has been
wrought, These with the present general decay of trade have brought the people
very low; and we find some in the Country more apprehensive, what sums go
out of their Purses, then what honor or liberty they gain thereby.

Our Stories acquaint us with sad effects of great and often taxes; If these
propositions succeed, those dangers will be prevented; the inferior and poorer
sort eased, and sufficient to do the work, raised voluntarily by such as are
best able and willing to spare it, By many liberal and cheerful
contributions, whom God will bless for it. It will be a pleasing sacrifice to
him, and an immortal honor to those most worthy persons, who shall bring
materials to this building, And this not without strong hopes of advantage to
themselves.

When profit shall be an ingredient with Charity and Loyalty; the plaster will
be the sooner, and better tempered, that may cure the wounds of Ireland. And
when Charity does relieve our poor distressed Brethren; Loyalty to our King and
Country, to preserve the honor and profit of both, And Piety to God, and our
own souls are the Motives. I doubt not of the cheerful concurrence of your
Lordships with the House of Commons, to embrace all good and honorable means,
for the effecting this great work of reducing that Kingdom.

I come now to the propositions. The first is, That two Millions and a half of
Acres may be allotted to such as shall disburse moneys for this service. The
propositions may seem at the first very large and difficult; but when it shall
appear by computation of men of great experience of that Country, and upon
solid grounds, that the content of this Island is above 15 Millions of Acres of
profitable Lands; whereof 5 Millions of Acres are estimated to belong to the
Kings good Subjects there: out of the ten Millions remaining, they ask but two
Millions and a half; and yet three parts of four of that Kingdom, are out in
Rebellion.

This may make the propositions seem neither immoderate nor difficult.

The proportions to be assigned to the adventurers, will be found equal and
reasonable.

The second proposition is in advancing the Kings Revenue by reserved Rents to
him, out of these two Millions, and half Acres. It is well known, the Revenue
of that Kingdom, out of the Exchequer and Court of Wards there, never exceeded
forty three thousand pounds per an. besides the Customs, which never yielded
much, and altogether would scarce defray the charge of that Crown. And some
late pretenses of improving the Revenue there, appear to your Lordships upon
examination, to be very small, and all that was advanced, came by unworthy
Monopolies, and to private hands. By these propositions, the Rent to be
reserved, will amount to between thirty and forty thousand pounds per an.
besides seven Millions and a half, of Acres left to be disposed, and what even
the Customs have been at the highest, will be really trebled unto his Majesty.

The other propositions are for the speedy payment of such sums as shall be
raised, whereby the War may proceed with a full strength and expedition. Livy
observes, that the Romans made their Wars great and short. Those with the
Latins, Samnites, and Tuskanies, concluded in short times; one in six days,
another in ten days, and a third in twenty days space. I mention not this
with hopes to be imitated, but to show how much their actions which bear a
great sway in the world, confirm this truly, That nothing in War can be more
advantageous to a State, that to bring it to a speedy conclusion.

I cannot remember, without much grief of heart, the unhappy delays in the
relief of Ireland; but those obstructions are now in a good measure removed,
and our hopes raised, that by a blessed concurrence of his Royal Majesty, your
Lordships, and the House of Commons, the great work of Ireland, with all
possible speed, will be finished. A narrow and thrifty course in this
business, will prove after the old Proverb, but penny wisdom. To prolong
time, would give advantage to neighboring Princes, whose particular interest
may, perhaps, at this time, engage them; otherwise stand at gaze, and are full
of jealousies of these proceedings, to take the first occasion to oppose us,
and to support our enemies.

I shall trouble your Lordship no further, but with a short observa^ion from
the Story of Ireland. King William the first, who called himself the Conqueror,
gave leave to twelve Knights to enter Wales, and what Lands they could gain
there, to keep and plant themselves in it: from one of these, descended
Richard, the strong Bow, Earl of Chepstoe, who in Henry the seconds time, made
the first Conquest, and with such as desired to plant themselves in Ireland.
Gerraldus Cambrensis tells us, this shall continue Crebris conflictibus multis
caedibus longoque certamine. These propositions, I hope, will give a period to
that prophecy: and as the first Conquest there, was begun by Plantation, so a
happy and perfect establishment thereof, and of the true Religion, may be made
by a like noble Plantation, to which these propositions tend; and by command of
the House of Commons, I present them to your Lordships, for your consent and
approbation.

FINIS.

