THE WHOLE TRIAL OF Mr Christopher Love. BEFORE A pretended High Court of
Justice in Westminster Hall. Containing The Charge of High Treason against him.
Debates between the Court and him before his pleading to the Charge. The
several depositions of the Witnesses. Mr. Loves Defense to the Charge and
Evidence. Mr. Sergeant Hales (a learned Counsel) his Plea against the Charge
and Evidence. And the Sentence. WITH The Relation of his Suffering, and his
Speech and Prayer at his Death upon the Scaffold on Tower Hill.

Published by John Farthing Citizen of London, who took the Trial in the said
Court in Short-writing for Mr. Love, and at his own request.

To which is added, The Tragedy of his Trial and Death in very elegant Verses
By the acute Author of Iter Boreale.

London, Printed in the Year, 1660.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
THou have here a true and impartial account of the Proceedings of the High
Court of Justice (so called) against that faithful Servant and Minister of
Christ M. Christopher Love, a man of so much and such known wor^h while he
lived, and of so good a name and memory now dead, that as any thing I can say
of him would signify little, so I shall be wholly silent in it: What and how
extreme the Proceedings of the Court were against him, will by this that
follows sufficiently appear, especially if thou do but considerately peruse
M. Loves defense, and the Plea of that honorable Gentleman, and his then
faithful Counsel M. Sergeant Hales, against both the Charge and Evidence.
This trial was formerly printed, but not till now made thus public, the times
not bearing it. The Court took a severe course to have prevented the publishing
of it, as being (it seems) conscious to themselves of their own foul and false
play therein; and did therefore every day commit my very Notes to the Tower,
(though they did not prove to be under such strict keeping, but that I had the
liberty of giving them several visits) not that I think every one of the Court
should fall under the same consideration, for there were diverse of them (as I
am certainly informed*) that would not at all have appeared in it, but upon the
earnest solicitation of some nearly related to M. Love, and that only in order
(if it could have been) to the saving of his life. My aim in now publishing
this Trial, is not that it should prove an injury to or an irritation of any,
but partly a little to revive the memory of that now blessed servant of God
(though I know the righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance) and
partly that the world may be somewhat acquainted with the manner of proceedings
of our high Courts of Justice, especially when they have been erected (as it is
too too apparent ours have been) only to feed the malice, and serve the corrupt
and unjust interests, of ambitious and merciless men.

J. F.

The Trial of Master LOVE before the High Court of Justice in Westminster Hall.
June 20. 1651.
THe Court being set and called over, the Lieutenant of the Tower was commanded
to bring forth his Prisoner; and Master Love was brought to the Bar. After the
reading of diverse late acts of Parliament concerning Treason, Master Prideaux,
the Attorney general for the Commonwealth spoke as follows:

Attur. Genesis My Lord, you have heard several Acts of Parliament read, and the
offenses therein mentioned. My Lord, I have here a Charge against Mr. Love, the
Prisoner at the Bar, and I humbly desire that it may be read likewise; and you
may please to take his Reply to it, whether by Confession or otherwise.


The Clerk is commanded to read the Charge. The Clerk. A Charge of high
Treason, and other high Crimes and Offenses, exhibited to the high Court of
Justice by Edmond Prideaux, Attorney General for the Commonwealth of England,
for and on the behalf of the Keepers of the Liberties of England, by Authority
of Parliament, against Christopher Love late of London Clerk, by him preferred
and commenced against the said Christopher Love.

That is to say,

THat he the said Christopher Love, as a false Traitor and enemy of this
Commonwealth and free State of England; and out of a traiterous and wicked
design, to stir up a new and bloody war, and to raise insurrections,
seditions, and rebellions within this Nation, did in several days and times;
that is to say, in the years of our Lord 1648, 1649, 1650, 1651. at London, and
at diverse other places within this Commonwealth of England, and elsewhere,
(together with William Drake late of London Mercer, Henry Jermin late of London
Esquire, Henry Piercy late of London Esquire, John Gibbons late of London
Gentleman, Edward Massey late of London Esquire, Richard Graves late of London
Esquire, Sylas Titus late of London Gentleman, James Bunce late of London
Alderman, and other their accomplices (yet unknown) traitorously and
maliciously combine, confederate, and complot, contrive and endeavor to stir
and raise up forces against the present Government of this Nation, since the
same has been settled in a Commonwealth and free State without a King and
House of Lords, and for the subversion and alteration of the same.

And the better to carry on and accomplish their said traitorous and wicked
design, he the said Christopher Love, together with the said William Drake,
Henry Jermin, Henry Piercy, Richard Graves, Edward Massey, John Gibbons, Sylas
Titus, James Bunce, and others (since the death of Charles Stewart, late King of
England, who for his notorious treasons, and other tyrannies and murders by him
committed in the late unnatural and cruel war, was, by Authority derived from
Parliament, justly condemned to death, and executed) several days and times in
the respective years aforesaid, at London aforesaid, and at sundry other places
of this Commonwealth, and since this Nation was settled in the way of a
Commonwealth or free State, as aforesaid, did traitorously and maliciously
declare, publish, and promote Charles Stewart, the eldest Son of the late King
of England, to be King of England (meaning this Commonwealth) without the
consent of the people in Parliament, first had and signified by Authority and
Ordinances to that purpose.

And further, to carry on and accomplish their said traitorous and wicked
design, he the said Christopher Love, on several days and times in the
respective years aforesaid, at London aforesaid, and in diverse other places
within this Commonwealth of England, and elsewhere, together with the said
William Drake, Henry Jermin, Henry Piercy, Richard Graves, Edward Massey, John
Gibbons, Sylas Titus, James Bunch, and other their accomplices, as aforesaid,
did traitorously and maliciously invite, aid, and assist the Scots, being
forraigners and strangers, to invade this Commonwealth of England, and adhered
to the forces of the enemy raised against the Parliament and Commonwealth
aforesaid, and Keepers of the Liberties of England aforesaid.

And further, to carry on and accomplish the said traitorous and wicked design,
he the said Christopher Love diverse days and times between the twenty ninth
day of March, 1650, and the first day of June, 1651. at London and other
places, as aforesaid, did traitorously and maliciously give, hold, use and
maintain correspondence and intelligence, by Letters, Messages, Instructions,
and other ways prejudicial to this Commonwealth, with the said Charles
Stewart, Son of the late King, and with the late Queen his mother, and with the
said Henry Jermin, Henry Piercy, and diverse other persons being of council and
abiding with Charles Stewart.

And further, to carry on and accomplish the said traitorous and wicked design,
he the said Christopher Love several days and times in the respective years
aforesaid, at London aforesaid, and diverse places within this Commonwealth of
England and elsewhere, as aforesaid, did traitorously and maliciously use,
hold, and maintain correspondence and intelligence with diverse persons of the
Scottish Nation; that is to say, with the Earls of Argile, Lowden, Lothian, and
Belcharris, and with one Bayley Gentleman, and diverse other persons of the
Scottish and other Nations, whom he the said Christopher Love well knew to
adhere to the said Scottish Nation in this war against the Parliament and
Commonwealth of England.

And further, he the said Christopher Love, within the times, and at the places
before mentioned, did traitorously and maliciously abet, assist, countenance
and encourage both the Scottish Nation, and diverse other persons adhering to
them in this war against the Parliament; and did send and convey, or cause to
be sent and conveyed, Moneys, Arms, Ammunition, and other Supplies, to Scotland
and other places, and to the said Titus, Massey, and others in confederacy
against this Nation, without special leave and license from the Parliament of
England or Council of State, or the Captain General of the Parliaments Forces.

And further, to carry on and accomplish the said traitorous and wicked
practice and design, he the said Christopher Love, within the times, and at
the places before mentioned, did traitorously and voluntarily relieve the said
Sylas Titus, Edward Massey, Col. Bamfield, and one Mason late of London
Gentleman, and one Sterks late of London Gentleman, who then were, and yet are
under the power of the Scottish Nation, and in Arms against the Parliament and
Commonwealth of England, with Moneys, Arms, and Ammunition. All which
Treasons, and traitorous and wicked practices and designs of him the said
Christopher Love, were and are to the apparent hazard of the public peace of
this Commonwealth and free State, Parliament and people of England, and to the
manifest breach, contempt, and violation of the Laws of the Land, and contrary
to the form of diverse Statutes and Acts of Parliament in such case made and
provided.

And Master Attorney General (by protestation, saving to himself in the behalf
of the Keepers of the Liberties of England, to exhibit any other Charge
against the said Christopher Love, and to reply to the Answer he shall make to
the premises) does for the said Treasons, on the behalf of the Keepers of the
Liberties of England, impeach the said Christopher Love as a Traitor and
public enemy to this Commonwealth and free State of England; and does pray,
that he may be put to answer all and singular the premises, that such
proceedings, Trial, Examination, Judgment, and Execution may be thereupon had
against him, as shall be agreeable to Justice.


The Clerk. Christopher Love, you stand charged on the behalf of the Keepers of
the Liberties of England, by Authority of Parliament, of high Treason, and
other high Crimes and Offenses against the Parliament and People of England;
this high Court therefore requires you to give a positive and direct Answer,
whether you are guilty or not guilty of the Crimes and Treasons laid to your
charge.


Master Love. My Lord, Before I plead, I humbly crave leave to express my self
in a few words to this Court, and afterward to make humble Proposals of what I
desire in order to this Trial. In the first place, being I am this day called
to a great and weighty work, in the entrance to it I do earnestly beg the
prayers of all them that have an interest in God, that he would carry me
through this whole Trial with such gravity, godliness, and meekness of
wisdom, as becomes a Professor and Preacher of the Gospel; and that he would
keep me in this hour of temptation, rather from sin then from suffering. Sir,
I am this day made a spectacle to God, Angels, and men, singled out from among
my brethren to be the object of some men's indignation and insultation. By my
appearing in this place, I am made a grief to many that are godly, and a
laughing stock to the wicked. -- Here he was interupted by the court.


Lord President of the Court. Mr. Love. how long time do you intend to take up?


Mr. Love. I will be brief; Sir.


L. Pres. We have been calling upon God to direct us and you, and all good
people, that justice may be done; and you would glorify God rather then man,
if you would confess, knowing what was done in that great sin of Achan; there
was great pains taken, and the whole Nation was fain to be examined, and their
houses divided, and at last when it came to Achan, you know what Joshua said to
him, confess and tell the truth, and glorify God; this is that, that if you
respect God before man, you may now clear your self, and set forth his glory
upon earth; and your next work is to plead guilty or not guilty. For we see
that those ways you go, would take up time, and we have taken all into our
thoughts before hand.


Mr. Love. I do not desire to protract time, but I would not lie under a
prejudice.


L. Pres. When you go out of your way, we must help you; and know, if any be
under a prejudice here, their prejudging is rather in mercy, then in prejudice
to you.


Mr. Love. I hope you will not be more severe to a Minister, then you were to
Lieut. Col. John Lilburn. When you were at the court at Guild Hall, at the
trial of Lilburne, you gave him the liberty of two hours to plead before he
pleaded guilty or not guilty.


L. Pres. To a Minister, you say well; but I tell you, we do more to a
christian then to a minister; and we are all christians, and your ministry is
but an Office; and therefore what Mr. Lilburne had, it was the favor of the
court then; but time is spent, and pray do not you follow that now.


M. Love. Whereas your Lordship is pleased to urge the case of Achan to me, if
my case were the same as Achans was, I should do as Achan did, confess and
give glory to God; but Achans was a peculiar and extraordinary case, and
therefore I pray it may not be laid to me. God was the informer and discoverer,
and God did by lot discover Achan to be the man.


L. Pres. Will you plead?


M. Love. I desire liberty to speak a word. I had not diverted my discourse,
but upon your Lordships words.


At. Genesis My Lord, I hope he will be so ingenuous, as not to be long.


L. Pr. Take this in your way, Mr. Love, God is as present here, as he was in
the case of Achan. Go on.


Mr. Love. Sir, by my appearing in this place, I am made a grief to many that
are godly, and a laughing stock to the wicked, and a gazing stock to all; yet,
blessed be God, not a terror to my self. Sir, I am as Jeremiah was, born a man
of strife and contention: not actively, I strive and contend with none: but
passively, many strive and contend with me; yet I trust God will make me, as he
did Jeremiah, an iron pillar and brazen wall against those that do oppose me,
that I shall not be dismayed at there faces, lest I be confounded before them.
Strong suggestions against me are generally received, and great opposition
strongly maintained, and in this condition no man dares stand by me; but God
stands by me and strengthens me. -- Here he was interupted again.


L. Pres. Sir, come to the business in hand.


M. Love. I beseech you, Sir, spare me: you gave Mr. Lilburne more time.


At. Genesis Ly Lord, when he shall come with such speeches, that are nothing to
the business in hand! My Lord, he instances in Lilburns case; you know that
debate, it was in relation to a Narration.


M. Love. Sir, it was the Narration of his doings and sufferings, that he might
not be misrepresented to the Court.


At. Genesis You know you are a Minister; and if it be your purpose to spin out
time, to think to ingratiate your self to the people, it will not do. My Lord,
this is a Court of Justice that proceeds according to the established Laws, and
Laws that have been read to him. Mr. Love is a Minister, and had he applied
himself to God as he might have done, he need not have been brought hither; if
he had not gone that way he did. But my Lord, I desire he may go on to the
Charge, and give his answer to it. My Lord, before we have done, we shall have
many occasions of discourse between him and I.


M. Love. I beseech your Lordship allow me that favor that you allow to every
one you try, that I may not stand under misrepresentations to you, who are my
Judges.


L. Pres. Are not we of as much credit as you? and are not we judged Ministers
as well as you, and more then you? and I tell you, that which you require, we
have already done, and wish you as much happiness as to our brother; and for
you to spend time about that which is nothing to the business, it must not be
suffered.


At. Genesis My Lord, let the constant known laws of the Commonwealth of England
be observed, as well as other laws, of which that is one, that he ought not to
speak any thing, till he has pleaded guilty or not guilty. My Lord, I desire
to take my course. I do not make speeches against him, to misrepresent him to
you, otherwise then he stands charged; and my Lord, I would not have him to
clear himself till he come to the trial, whether he be not accused justly. It
is not my nature, but the duty of my place; and the duty of his place, as a
prisoner, is to plead, and to put himself upon trial; that being done, there
will be occasion enough for him to plead his own innocence. My Lord, to take up
two hours time in talking of that which is not material, should not be.


M. Love. I insist upon that liberty that Mr. Lilburne had.


L. Pres. He did plead first.


M. Love. No my Lord, he did not plead first; and I have much to move before I
plead.


L. Pres. You can say nothing till you plead.


M. Love. My Lord, I desire not much time.


At. Genesis My Lord, let the time now insisted on be what time it will, Mr. Love
will have time to speak for himself, and it is so far from being to the point,
that it is trifling; and this rather makes him seem guilty, then it gives him
any acquittance.


M. Love. Prove me guilty first Sir. Sir, do not prejudge me.


Then command was given to read his Arraignment. The Clerk. Christopher Love,
you stand charged on the behalf of the Keepers of the Liberties of England, by
Authority of Parliament, of high Treason, and other high Crimes and Offenses
against the Parliament and People of England; this high Court therefore
requires you to give a positive and direct answer, whether you are guilty or
not guilty of the Crimes and Treasons laid to your charge.


M. Love. I refuse not to plead, but I beseech you give me leave to speak
before I answer.


Mr. Love having a paper in his hand, the Judge said: L. Pres. How many leaves
is it?


M. Love. But two or three; and if this Court be more strict and severe to me,
then that was to Mr. Lilburne, I cannot help it. What I shall say, shall be
something in general, and I beseech you give me leave to speak to it.


At. Genesis Sir, not before you plead.


M. Love. Yet I have this liberty, that when matter of law arises in the
Indictment, to make a motion, and to move for counsel, and to show the
illegality of it; and though I confess I am extremely ignorant of the Law, yet
I understand, that after I have pleaded, I am not capable of counsel.


L. Pres. You are mistaken, Master Love.


M. Love. I suppose I am not mistaken: For in the third part of Judge Cooks
Institutes, I find it thus: The prisoner, when he pleads not guilty, whereby
he denies the fact, after the plea of not guilty, can have no counsel; but if
he have any matter of Law to plead before, he may urge it.


L. Pres. He pleads he is ignorant of the Law, and yet can make use of it.


M. Love. I am to plead for my life, and I am to use Scripture, Law, and any
other lawful means to save my life. Paul did plead the Roman Law.


L. Pres. Some of us know as much of Paul and Scripture as you do.


M. Love. Sir, I make no comparisons. Then Mr. Love reads out of Judge Cooks
Institutes. The safest way for the party indicted, is to plead upon his
arraignment the special matter for the overthrow of the Indictment: And this
must be done before I plead, and to require counsel for the pleading thereof,
which ought to be granted, and to require a copy of so much of the Indictment,
which is necessary for framing his plea, which ought to be granted; and these
laws ought to be construed favorably, for that the Indictment is commonly
found in the absence of the party.


L. Pres. But your Indictment is in you^ presence. You are out of your way.


M. Love. Sir, you bring me out of my way.


L. Pres. Your Indictment is not yet found, there is nothing done behind your
back, only the reading of this; but that is nothing but a written parchment,
till you plead unto it.


M. Love. I have something to except against the legallity of this Indictment.


L. Pres. Go on then.


M. Love. Sir, the first motion I shall make, is for counsel to advise in
matters of Law relating to this Trial; and as I do gather from hearing the
Indictment, there are several matters of law that do arise, in which I desire
to have counsel assigned me; and the first is, whether the Act by which this
Court is constituted, of the 26 March, 1650. that forbids receiving or sending
Letters or Messages to or from England or Ireland, do enable you to receive a
charge against me concerning Letters to or from Scotland, Scotland not being
mentioned in that Act by which you are constituted; therefore seeing this is
matter of law, I desire I might have counsel to advise with about it.


At. Genesis Mr. Love then does admit that he has received and sent letters to
Scotland.


M. Love. I admit nothing, Sir, you charge me with it, but I do not grant it.


At. Genesis Then you will give us leave to prove it. If he will admit that he
has sent and received letters from Scotland, and so demur that it is not in
your power, I will join with him. But my Lord, there was a particular Act
read, that does relate particularly to Scotland; and that this court has
cognizance of that Act, was read before hand, but Mr. Love did not observe what
was read to him; and it is so far in favor of justice to him, that you read
him the laws and clauses upon which he stands impeached, and that there is a
law against sending to Scotland. But my Lord, these debates are lingering of
time; if a man will demand counsel, he admits the fact, that the fact is true;
but being true, he ought not to be condemned upon it: if so, I will join with
him. But if he plead not guilty, I shall be ready to prove it.


M. Love. I beseech you Sir, I do apprehend there is another matter of law
arises, and that is from the Act of the 26 Maerch, 1650. there is a
prohibition of sending letters or messages to any in arms against the
Parliament; now I am charged with sending and writing letters into Scotland:
now it does not appear to me, that Scotland was in arms against the Parliament
of England, but for their own preservation. Therefore I desire counsel in this,
Whether I that am accused of writing and sending into Scotland, am therefore
accused of writing and sending to those who are in arms against the Parliament
of England; or whether they were in arms for the preservation of Scotland, or
in opposition to the Parliament of England.


At. Genesis If you will admit still, that you have sent or received from
Scotland, then I readily grant it.


M. Love. I will admit of nothing; I have so much of a christian in me, that I
will deny nothing that is proved to be true, and so much of an Englishman, that
I will admit of nothing that is seemingly criminal.


L. Pres. You are a christian, and you are here in the presence of God as Achan
was.


M. Love. If it be proved against me.


L. Pres. Then your denial of it will be a high transgression against God.


M. Love. I could urge the case of Jesus Christ, who when he was accused before
a Judicatory, answered not a word.


L. Pres. You are out.


M. Love. When Christ was accused in a civil business, to be a mover of
sedition (as now I am) they asked him whether he was King of the Jews, and he
answered them not a word. But this is that I doubt, whether there be not
matters of law arising from the charge read against me, and that in respect of
the time of the Act of the 26 March, 1650. which gives power to you to
determine several crimes, and to proceed to the trial of the offender. And
Sir, it is also to me doubtful, whether this be not matter of law, viz.
whether this trial ought not to be by a Jury of twelve of the neighborhood, or
whether in any different way from it; and I doubt it upon this ground, your
Lordship having given me this hint; for I was present at the trial of Mr.
Lilburne, and the formality of the law tied him to plead to this, that he must
be tried by God and his Country. He refused it, and your Lordship urged it upon
him, that he might safely plead it by God, because God was in all Judicatories;
and by his Country, because, said you, by Country is meant the Jury of a man's
equals. And this is a trial according to the law of the Land. Now if you have
declared that in Guild Hall, I beseech your Lordship inform me, whether a
different way from this of a Jury of the neighborhood be according to law in
Westminster Hall.


L. Pres, You shall be informed. That was a trial by the law, as it then stood;
these now are all upon Acts of Parliament and Laws of the Land, that are of as
high a nature as they: those are ancient Laws, and these are Statutes lately
made, and of an extraordinary nature, and were made to meet with such persons
as you, that have done such things as you have done. And now for your
Neighborhood, I hope you have twenty or forty Neighbors that are within the
equity of that Law.


Mr. Love. If they be a Jury, I have power to except against 35. of them.


At. Genesis My Lord, he pretends Mr. Lilburns Trial, but when you come to hear
the evidence, you shall hear what he was doing then; he was preparing himself
then in his business; he thought his time might come; and I am informed, that
since he has been in the Tower, Lilburn has been his counsel.


M. Love. Mr. Prideaux, Sir, you are no God, to know my thoughts.


At. Genesis I did say this from his own expression, he was a diligent observer
there, that he might know what was done there, that so he might prepare himself.


M. Love. Sir, you did declare this after the change and abolition of a King
and House of Lords, that a Trial by a Jury of twelve of the neighborhood was
according to Law; and you urged Master Lilburne with this, that he might plead,
and do no harm unto himself. And not only so, but the House also declared,
That since the change of Government, they would never alter that way of trial;
and upon the ninth of February, 1648. they did declare, That though they
thought fit to abolish the Kingly Office, and the House of Lords, yet they
resolved they would still retain and preserve the fundamental Laws of the
Nation, for and concerning the preservation of the liberties, lives, and
estates of the people. Now Sir, they declaring they would never alter this way
of trial, and you declaring this way of trial by Juries, to be according to
the fundamental Laws of the Land, I beseech you give me the reason why it is
denied to me.


At. Genesis My Lord, it is very unusual for a prisoner to debate with the
court. Here he is to be controuled. Let him know he is a prisoner, upon the
trial of his life, before that court that has been empowered by the
Parliament, they who did never bind their own hands: I must say, my Lord, they
cannot bind their own hands. And it is this trial that they have thought fit
to give him. And for his excepting against thirty five, then you will hardly be
a court left. My Lord, I think if he look upon the court, he will find no
enemies here, knowing them to be of his neighborhood, and most of them of
London; and I think, he known to them, and they to him, the most of them. But
my Lord, these disputes are not allowed to others; and the Gentleman will (I
hope) have so much modesty at last, that he will think he has said a little
too much to the court; and I think, it is not good to provoke too far. And my
Lord, he has said much, and you have given him fair answers, and those that
are clear and undeniable. But if he speak of the jurisdiction of the court,
and that he will not plead, let him speak in plain English, and he shall hear
me in plain English.


M. Love. Although I am not satisfied as to the foundation and original of
this court, yet I refuse not a trial, hoping that tenderness of conscience
will appear in you, and clearness in me, and weakness of proof against me.
Upon this, I do not refuse a trial, but I will plead, if I may have that which
the Law allows me. And according to my weak measure and unskilfulnesse in the
Law, upon the charge read against me, I do apprehend there may be some things
objected against the legality of the Indictment, and many things to take it
off, both for matter of time, and form, and other things, by a lawyer.
Therefore I entreat I may have counsel to be with me, both in my chamber, and
here in the court, and then I will plead.


At. Genesis I am not here to make a bargain: but this I will say to him, he has
had so much tenderness and respect, as few men more. He has had notice of his
trial above a fortnight; and my Lord, he has not been denied counsel.


M. Love. I could do nothing in order to my trial, because I have sent for
counsel, and they would not come near me, because they were not assigned by
this court; and my studies being another way, and being unskilful in the Law,
therefore I could do nothing in preparation to my trial: Therefore I pray do
not destroy me in a hurry: The more fair the trial is, the more just you will
be, and I the more guilty if it be proved against me.


At. Genesis I appeal to Master Love, whether or no it was not denied to
Lilburne; and there is none that hears him, but sees he has prepared himself,
and perused several Acts whereupon he is impeached. But these are discourses
(my Lord) which if he will put too nigh upon the court, that we should dispute:
we cannot force words from him.


M. Love. Mr. Prideaux is pleased to urge Mr. Lilburne, but I have more matter
of Law arising from the charge then he had, and have not that trial by way of
a Jury as he had; and there are many things in the charge said to be done
before the Act of the 29 March, 1650. which gives you cognizance only of
things done from that time; so that many things there are, in which counsel
would advise me; therefore I beseech you deny me not that right and just favor.


L. Pres. You do not breathe the same air nor the same breath, for it comes
from you both yea and nay: for you say you are ignorant, and yet will not be
informed by any thing that can be said, and so your ignorance is wilful. But
in this case I am sure, what Law soever you can plead, yet there be some Acts
and matters you have denied.


M. Love. I have urged matter of law arising out of the charge, from the 29 of
March, 1650. There was no Act then, that I know of, that did prohibit the
sending of Letters or Messages to or from Scotland; and I am indicted for
Letters or Messages sent to, and received from Scotland, before that time.


At. Genesis I would fain give you satisfaction: do not cast away your self. My
Lord, we do use in law to lay it so for the fact, we cannot tell what the proof
will be, whether the proof will be within this three months or ten months;
and it is laid in relation to other offenses.


Mr. Love. I have here the Letters of several Counselors, and they return to
me their denial; if I could have got their counsel, I would: And yet if I had
had it, I could not tell what they should have advised me in, not having a copy
of my charge.


L Pres. If you had desired a copy of your charge, you might have had it. You
must know you are before those that have law and conscience, and that are bound
to be of counsel for you, and that is the court, and it is their duty to see
that whatsoever the law of England allows you to have, that that you should
have; but you must have it in a due and proper time and manner of law
appointed. You are not now for the present where Lilburn was, nor before such a
court; he was before a Commission of Oyer and Terminer, who are to proceed
according to those Laws, and upon that the Commission directs, and that is by
that which the known and fundamental laws of England direct unto: but this is
not in all particulars the like; the Jury there has a large latitude, who
proceed by way of grand Jury and petty Jury, which are both included in this
court: so that in all things the proceedings upon that are not as upon this:
but thus far the proceedings are alike; you have your charge, and you are to
plead to it, for that is the first thing to be done; there is nothing can
answer your charge, but whether you be guilty or not guilty: if you plead not
guilty, then the evidence will be called, and if then any matter of law arises
upon the evidence, it is the usual course to assign you counsel, and to be
counsel for you, and to tell you it is law to have counsel; but for you to
demand counsel, and first to have counsel assigned you, it is against that
form and legality that the law of England appoints; for till you put your self
upon trial, we cannot allow you counsel to the trial; so that you must plead,
and it is our duty to tell you so: and it is the duty of this court, to be as
careful when you have put your self upon trial, that all the benefit of the law
may be afforded you; therefore you need not fear it, for if any of these things
arise you now fear upon the evidence, then will be your time and our time to
stand upon this you now do, touching matter of law; but in the mean time, in
truth that which we are to tell you, and which we are bound in justice and
conscience to let you know, is this, that you are out of your way; and
therefore do not destroy your self: for if you refuse to plead, there is
nothing then but a plain downright judgment.


M. Love. In ordinary courts of Judicatory the Judges do counsel for the
prisoner; but you are here Judges not only in matter of law, but of matter of
fact also, and therefore I cannot advise with you: for should I confess any
thing, then it arises out of my own mouth, and you will condemn me upon it;
seeing therefore both lie in you, both matter of law and matter of fact, I
beseech you afford me counsel, and let me have a copy of my charge, and
Solicitors, that they may be here with me in court, and then I shall willingly
plead.


At. Genesis This cannot be done, nor ever was done, to have counsel assigned
until upon matter of fact something did appear; and for the copy of the
charge, it was never demanded I think before; and it is in vain for us to
speak, if the Gentleman do refuse to plead; I shall then press you for
justice.


M. Love. I do not refuse to plead; but yet I should be guilty of my own blood,
should I not plead for that just and necessary means for the preservation of my
life: through my ignorance I may run my self into hazard and danger; therefore
I beseech you deny me not that just favor.


A lawyer a member of the Court. Mr. Love, you are not prodigal, you say, of
your blood, nor are we I hope, prodigal of your blood; we are to answer for
all, therefore I pray let me beg thus much of you: if you plead not guilty to
the charge, then there is a proceeding to be by Master Attorney, to prove you
guilty of it; and if by any evidence that he shall produce, or in any thing
that shall fall out from your self, in answer to the evidence, there shall
arise matter of law, trust us, I pray you, we do promise you that we will give
you the benefit of the law in it; and when there comes matter of law to be
decided, which we are persuaded is matter of law, then you shall have counsel
assigned you; but there is no counsel to be allowed till the prisoner desire
it, and show matter of law, for which he desires it.


Another lawyer of the Court. The main thing you stand upon, Mr. Love, is this,
that there is no mention made in any Act, that this court can take cognizance
of sending to, or receiving from Scotland, but therein you are mistaken; for
the business of holding correspondency with Scotland, is in express words
appointed to be under the jurisdiction of this court, therefore I think you are
utterly mistaken in that. Then Sir, for counsel, if there comes any thing in
the world that is legal, and is a fit thing counsel should be heard in, I think
I may promise it, we will not make our selves so far guilty of your blood, as
to deny you that justice that belongs to any man; for it is your just right to
have it, and we cannot deny it, when a point of law arises. And you do not
urge matter of law; only you question the jurisdiction of the court, and we
must overrule you in that, for we are not to dispute the power of the court;
for if the Parliament give us jurisdiction, and by a special Act appoints,
that the business of holding correspondency with Scotland should be within the
cognizance of this court, we must obey, and not dispute.


M, Love. I suppose, Sir, a man may demur concerning the jurisdiction of a
court to one point, as if he be accused for treason at the common pleas, he may
demur to the jurisdiction of that court in that: so Sir, I apprehend there are
some things read against me in the charge, of which this court cannot take
cognizance; for that they are said to be done before the Act for the
constituting of this court came forth: so that I may demur to the jurisdiction
of the court in that particular.


L. Pres. For you to anticipate your evidence before we come to it ^ we do not
tie you to the charge, but to the proof, and we must apply our selves to the
proof, and not to the charge.


At. Genesis And for the business of Scotland, which troubles him much, it is
expressed in this very Act, that the same offenses are to be inquired, tried, and
judged by the high Court of Justice, in such manner and form, as other offenses
are to be tried, in express terms.


M. Love. But there is no time mentioned: for there are two Acts, wherein if
the prisoner be not indicted within a year, then the fact shall not be
prosecuted. Therefore I must demur to the charge, as not legal in matter of
form. There are two Acts declaring what offenses shall be treason, wherein it
is said in those two Acts, That if the party be not indicted within a year, he
shall not be indicted at all. Now the Indictment that is against me, looks back
to things that are pretended to have been done by me in 1648. and 1649. And so
according to those two Acts, I am not to be questioned for them, it being above
a year before I was indicted.


L. Pres. How is it possible that this comes to be an exception until you
hear the evidence? if you hear the evidence, and do find that the witness
do speak to this not within the time of the limitation, then is your exception
proper; but no counsel can divine what time they can give evidence for.


M. Love. Sir, I am now to look to the charge of treason read against me, and
not to the evidence; and in the charge I am indicted for those things, for
which I apprehend I ought not to be indicted. For according to those two Acts,
I ought not to have been indicted for things pretended to have been done by me
so long ago: and this I apprehend to be matter of law. And for the witnesses,
let them speek to what time they will, yet this I am sure, they cannot prove
that I was indicted within a year for those things that are charged upon me to
be done in 1648. and 1649. for that were to prove an impossibility: so that it
appears to me, I am indicted for those things for which I ought not to be
indicted.


L. Pres. It may be so; and if so, those things will fall off of themselves;
there may be some things true, and some things not true; and the counsel may
fail in proof of some of them, and you may clear your self; yet this cannot be
before the pleading. When you come to plead, if the matter be not proved
against you, and within the time limited, it will fall off of it self without
any words at all; and all this time is lost to all this Auditory, and no
counsel can give you advice in this.


M. Love. I still say, I do not refuse to plead, but if you would afford me
counsel, I should think my life in a great deal less danger. For I do not
know, whether I may not, by the advice of counsel, confess some part of the
indictment; whether I may not demur in law upon some part, or a great part of
the indictment, which I have done already; As that I am charged for treason for
those things that are not within your cognizance or power, as I apprehend, and
things done before your Acts; and for such things, that if I had done them, I
must have been indicted for them within a year, or else not at all; and these I
deem legal exceptions.


Member of the Court. My Lord, he is very ignorant of the law; for the fact
must be put in question before matter of law can arise; for if the fact be one
way, then the law falls out that way; if the fact be false, then another way.
Now if Mr. Love bring in any of these exceptions for matter of fact upon proof,
wheth^r he sent letters into Scotland, or in such a time, whether that be any
offense, that will all arise after the matter of fact proves true or false: But
before that, under favor, none can speak to any thing against an Indictment,
unless he speak against the jurisdiction of the court. And then for other
matters, they are saved unto him. And you will, I suppose, admit of counsel in
matter of law; but his desire cannot be granted unto him until he plead, and
until the matter of fact be some way determined.


M. Love. I beseech you acquaint me then with the meaning of these words in
Judge Cooks Institutes, The prisoner at the bar may have counsel to overthrow
the Indictment. It must be either to overthrow a part of the Indictment, or to
help the plea, either to plead not guilty in part, or to demur in part. Let me
hear then, I beseech you, what is the meaning of those words, That the prisoner
at the bar may have counsel to overthrow the Indictment. I cannot overthrow the
Indictment when I plead; for then witness comes in against me.


At. Genesis He may overthrow the Indictment by the witness; and I believe he is
convinced, that the court has jurisdiction in as full and express terms as
law and authority can give them. And for the next, I may say, your Lordship and
the court did never allow a counsel to pick holes and find faults. But if he
object that to you that is just and probable, and that which is dubious and
doubtful, and fit to be debated in law, Assign him counsel. You have heard all
his particular exceptions, and given your judgment upon them all. But I hope,
he does not here expect to have lectures of law read him, and to make him
understand them. But as to those particular exceptions that he has made to
you, I think some satisfaction is given, and that every man is satisfied, and
that there is no color of doubt there; for matter of fact, and the times that
he insists upon. For the Act directing what offenses are treason, and not to be
arraigned unless they be prosecuted within a year, I must tell him, the
impeachment is laid from 1648 to 1651. Yet my Lord, I shall make it appear,
that the Indictment does look backward to some offenses, and forward to others;
it is laid first in general. He committed such and such treasons and offenses
in such and such years. And I shall come with the evidence, and apply them to
such times that are within your power, and in which the law makes them
offenses: And this is to be debated then, and not to be once spoken of now. My
Lord, I shall begin from 1648. and run on with him, that he has continued in a
treasonable disposition, and in treasonable plottings, to the time he was laid
up, and since; and will justify all; and therefore it behooves him to insist
upon it. And I will make it appear, that he was one of the first that ever did
appear against this Commonwealth in plotting; and he did continue so until the
time of his restraint, and after that time.


M. Love. Sir, you are no witness; if you be a witness, come and swear.


At. Genesis I will use you with all the duty of my place; and if you give me not
occasion, I shall not do otherwise.


M. Love. I shall give you no occasion.


L. Pres. This will make all that hear him, to think that this is the very
best of his case; as we know it is.


M. Love. Sir, although I do not come here to have the law expounded to me, yet
I do come here to have the benefit of the law; and if the law allows me this
benefit (I being unskilful) that if I can find in the charge matter of law
arising, then to have counsel to advise me, and to overthrow the Indictment;
Why should I be denied this benefit? And I do not yet, according to my
understanding, see that you afford me the benefit of the law, you not granting
me counsel to advise me to overthrow the Indictment.


One of the Court. Mr. Love, if it were possible, I desire you might have
satisfaction, for this that you desire is very just; and when it comes to its
proper time, then you shall have it: But do not by disorderly demanding of it
out of your time, lose the benefit you might have of it when it comes to your
time. That which you stand upon, and call law, is not matter of law; nor can
you call it law, till you hear what the fact is. For can any man judge what is
matter of law, till he know the matter of fact; as it has been told you well,
that the law arises out of the fact; (...) that if you will anticipate the
evidence and the proof of the fact, by urging this matter of law (...) did
hear read in the charge, you will do your self wrong, and you are mistaken in
it: For there is no matter of law appears there, for it is barely, Thus you
have done. And if you say this is Law, you exclude all the Witnesses. Whether
you have done it or no, we cannot tell; and if you have done it, whether
contrary to law or no, we cannot tell, because we must apply the witness to
the Acts of Parliament that authorizeth us to sit here; and if we find that
the doubt grows upon what the witnesses say, and upon what the law says, then
does matter of law arise, and then it is time for you to say, it appears not by
this witness, that it is within the Act. I do the rather speak this, because
we do extremely desire you should receive satisfaction, for I would not have
any here have any thing put upon him, that may not appear just and according to
law; and none can ever say that a man had counsel assigned him before he
pleaded here.


L. Pres. It is now the Sessions at Newgate, and there may be many prisoners,
and if every prisoner should take the liberty to plead matter of law, and say,
I am no Lawyer, let me have counsel assigned me, and I will answer, when should
we have any man answer? when would men be executed for robbing, and stealing,
and killing?


M Love. That court is different from this, you here are Judges both of law and
fact, there the Judges judge of law, and the Jury of matter of fact. But Sir,
satisfy me in this, if there be any thing in law before pleading to overthrow
the indictment (as I perceive by Judge Cook there is, and to which I have
received no satisfactory answer) let me have that legal benefit to overthrow
the charge. I have said what I can: but if I had counsel here, they could say a
hundred times more.


L. Pres. You have heard no body but your self, for whatsoever has been told
you by the court and your friends about you, has not been hearkened unto. We
have spent thus much time, and people are weak, and if you will plead, do.
Read his charge once again; and I tell you, the next is judgment.


The Clerk. Christopher Love, you stand charged on the behalf of the Keepers of
the Liberties of England, by Authority of Parliament, of high Treason, and of
other high crimes and offenses against the Parliament and People of England;
this high Court therefore requires you to give a positive and direct Answer,
whether you are guilty or not guilty of the Crimes and Treasons laid to your
charge.


M. Love. I am not satisfied, but that matter of law does arise from this
charge; and I do earnestly press I may have counsel, and then I will plead.


At. Genesis I do as earnestly press, that you would as positively say, that you
cannot allow him counsel till he has pleaded.


M. Love. I now see Mr. Attorneys words to be true. When he came to me to the
Tower and examined me, the 16 of this month, he said, That seeing I would not
acknowledge (as he called them) my treasons, I was judged peremptory and
obstinate; and I remember he said these words to me, Mr. Love, Though you are
too hard for me in the Pulpit, yet I will be too hard for you at the Bar; and
truly now I find it so; and it is an easy matter for a Lawyer, armed with Law
and Power, to be too hard for a poor naked Scholar, that has neither Law nor
Power.


L. Pres. Does this do any good to you? if it were so that you are too hard for
him (for you are too hard for every man in the pulpit;) yet you sometimes are
so out, and in that you are controulable. If Master Attorney be too hard for
you here, let him be too hard for you; but it is the Court that are to deal
with you here: we will not do it because of his saying, but you must think that
the court will be led by their evidence, and not by Mr. Attorney.


M. Love. You gave this favor to Master Lilburne, and I do not deny to plead:
but I am not prodigal of my blood, therefore I crave counsel.


L. Pres. I do not know what to say more to give you satisfaction, then what I
have said; you say you do not deny to plead, and yet you do not plead; you say
Mr. Attorney is too strong for you; but you know it is not he, but the evidence
may be too strong for you. And do not you think that you have such Judges, as
will let you receive any prejudice. Mr. Love, you are a Minister, I pray show
forth the spirit of a Minister of Jesus Christ; carry your self so, as that you
may not either wrong your self or the court. I would have you behave your self
without recriminating. You speak of Mr. Attorney, as if he could be too hard
for you, as if we were all of his side, be it right or wrong: Know, that we are
men of conscience, and have souls to save as well as you.


Mr. Love. The charge is long, and I never heard of it before, nor knew of it
before.


One of the Court. We give you our faith and credit, that if any matter of law
arises, we will not make our selves guilty of your blood, but we will allow
you counsel; your self has read a book in the court, that shows the court
cannot allow you counsel till you plead.


L. Pres. Did you ever consult with the Lieut. of the Tower? what, will you
cast away your self?


Col. West Lieut. of the Tower. I could, My Lord, advise him no more then what
I knew, and that was the time of your sitting.


M. Love. I hope you will not in a hurry spill my blood.


Lieut. of the Tower. Since Saturday was seven night he was not restrained.


L. Pres. Your Profession goes much in profession; but when it is abused, it is
the highest transgression; you would evade things with mental reservations, and
say and unsay at the Bar, as high as any Jesuit can do.


M. Love. I will not lie for my life; you may say what you please, and do what
you please* I speak before God and this Audience.


L. Pres. Mr. Love, know that we are here in as sacred a posture as you are in
the highest place of your calling, and if we do not know that God is here
present, we are the miserablest creatures in the world; and therefore if your
office and ours do not make us know that we are in the presence of God and
Jesus Christ, it will be but ill for us; and yet you hurry out, that it should
be such a terrible thing in you, more then in us. You have spoken many words as
a shadow in the air, there is nothing material in them, but the strength of
your will against the judgment of the court.


M. Love. If I do plead to the charge, I do allow the matter and form of the
charge to be legal. I desire to have counsel to come to my chamber; I do not
say, to come to this place, but to have liberty for them to come to my chamber.


Mr. Steel Recorder of London. I did not think to have spoken, nor have I
usually spoken in this court, yet I will speak a word out of tenderness to
your self. You have very often insisted upon it, that you should have counsel
assigned before you plead, that is it you plead for: truly the course of law is
this, That if the prisoner charged at the bar, before he plead shall demand
counsel, he must of necessity put in some special plea before the time he can
demand counsel. The court does not enforce you to plead guilty or not guilty to
all the matter of fact, but they say, of necessity you must plead. If you put
in a special plea, and tell them that it is a special plea, and desire counsel
upon it, they will consider it: but till you can declare what that special plea
is, for there is a general plea, and a special plea; the general plea is, not
guilty, the special plea is in some particulars. Now for you to allege
neither the special plea nor the general plea, it is impossible that counsel
can be assigned you. And whereas you say you are concluded if you plead, and
cannot object against the indictment afterward; no Sir, I tell you in the name
of a Christian, and one that knows a little of the law, that all the objections
you have against the indictment, the formality of it, and those things you
speak of, as that of your fact not being committed in such a time that the Act
holds out, that the high court has no relation to try you for Scotland; all
these will be saved to you, if they arise upon matter of fact from the
evidence. True, if you make an objection against the jurisdiction of the court,
that has no relation either to the special plea or general plea, it cannot be.
It is impossible an objection should be received against the essence of the
court, there is none can possibly overruled that for you, but themselves; it is
such a thing, that no counsel can be assigned you, as to that, because it
strikes at the very being of the court. Now therefore I beseech you in the name
of a christian, that you will not do your self that prejudice, for nature
teaches every man to preserve himself by all just ways and means; and I do
believe that in this business you have apprehended it for your preservation,
and that you are loath to do any thing that tends to your destruction; but you
may satisfy your conscience, in that you have done what you can. And when you
have pleaded, and used all the arguments you can, and have heard the judgment
of the court in it, you may satisfy your conscience, that in the words of
honest men (unless it be the jurisdiction of the court, though you have
tacitly spoken there) you shall have that right and privilege which the law
allows you. I confess^, I never spoke here before, and it is a rule amongst us,
that none but the President should speak, and we have done more to you, then to
the greatest person that ever spoke here, because we think some necessity lies
upon us toward you (in regard of your calling, and the worth that has
appeared in you) to direct you what you have to do.


M. Love. Sir, a man may demur touching the jurisdiction of any court, if he
can show any thing in the indictment that the court cannot take cognizance of,
which he is charged with; though he do not demur simply as to their
jurisdiction in general, yet as to that particular he may demur; as a man may
demur in Chancery, when a cause is only triable at the common law.


L. Pres. You must know, that he that speaks against the jurisdiction of the
court, speaks against the jurisdiction of the Parliament of England.


Mr. Steel Recorder of London. Mr. Love, to help your understanding, I did not
say that Mr. Love did expressly speak against the power of the Court, as if they
had no power to try him; but this he seemed to say; That what he has offered
against the jurisdiction of the Court, in any thing he is questioned for, if he
have not counsel for it before, he cannot have it afterward. Now if the
question you offer be a mixed doubt, for your objection is mixed; for you say,
the Court has no power to try the facts, whereof you are indicted; now is it
possible the Court can judge of that, or know there is matter of law arises
out of it, till the fact appear out of the mouths of the witnesses? it may be
the fact will not be proved, then there will be no matter of law arising; if the
fact be proved that it was done at such a time, before the act was made, when
that appears to them, the Court then will strike it off, you shall not need
counsel, then we shall not regard it: if upon the fact any other doubt arises
in relation to Scotland (for it must be from two witnesses, your doubting being
mixed with matter of fact) we shall then be able to judge of it.


Mr. Love. Sir, if any crime be laid to my charge, that ought not to be laid,
and that this Court can take no cognizance of, I should have counsel in it.


L. Pres. We have spoken more to you then became us, perchance, and that from
tenderness to you; and if nothing can give you satisfaction, but over and over
with the same things again, we can but speak our consciences and leave it to
your self.


Mr. Love. I do declare, I do submit to the trial, and am willing to do it;
but it behooves me to use all just means for the preservation of my life; if you
will, give me but a days time to consult with counsel.


L. Pres. That is in your learning sufficient to say, you will do it, and yet
do not do it; because I say, I will submit, therefore I do submit; this is no
obedience at all. I know no such Logic as this; it is submitting that must do
it; you will submit, but you will not act; pray M. Love, be so charitable as to
take us to be Christians.


Mr. Love. What prejudice Sir, can it be to this Court, being I have not spoken
with any Lawyer, to give me but a days time? I will desire no more.


At. Genesis I would feign know, why may not the next prisoner say, you have done
so in Mr. Love's case?


Mr. Love. You have accepted of special pleas, you did it in the case of Sir
John Stowel; and if I through my ignorance in law, cannot urge the strength of
law, and a special plea, as otherwise I might do, I beseech you let me not be
prejudiced by it.


L. Pres. Sir John Stowel insisted upon special matter he had to plead, and
that was, the Articles of Exeter: but he did first plead to the charge, Not
guilty: yet we gave him that benefit; and he had that which did last a great
debate of this Court, and so did Hambleton; and diverse others, we will do no
otherwise with you then with them.


Mr. Love. If you now deny me my special plea, I cannot help it, which is
this, that the writing or sending letters (if it could be proved against me)
into Scotland, does not come within your act, and that it is only for England
and Ireland that are mentioned therein.


L. Pres. If there be a special plea wherein there is no difficulty, then we
give no counsel; but a special plea must have something that is dubious in
the judgment of the Court; but for this, that in the letter of the law every
School boy understands; the Judge will not allow you counsel in a trivial
matter; we have gone over and over with you again, and this is like other
discourses with you; but certainly never was the like seen, that a Court was so
trifled with.


M. Love. This is my humble motion, allow me but counsel to morrow, that they
may appear here.


L. Pres. You may have counsel to morrow as the case shall be.


M. Love. Shall I have the copy of the Charge?


L. Pres. You shall have what is fit, you shall have nothing denied you when it
comes to you to have it, you shall have that respect; I do it not to flatter
you: but refuse to plead at your peril.


Mr. Love. Will you give me but this favor, that I may have but an hour or
two's time to consult with a Lawyer?


L. Pres. I do not know but that this that is done, must be done for all that
comes to the bar.


At Genesis I had thought there would have appeared in him that calls himself a
minister of the Gospel, more meekness and obedience to authority, not
out-facing authority: and it is not well done of him. My Lord I humbly beg, that
having had thus much of your patience, and persuasion by arguments, and all
means used to him, and nothing will prevail; that, my Lord, you will now be
pleased to give your judgment according to the rules that the law appoints
you, upon him that refuses to plead.


M. Love. I do not refuse to plead.


L. Pres. Does a man of your learning say, you do not refuse!


M. Love. A man may demur to his charge, and yet not refuse to plead; and the
court may grant me a days time, if they please; for I come here unarmed and
unprepared.


At. Genesis His demur is to matter of fact.


L. Pres. Will you put that upon law, for law, which is not law? and by your
putting your self upon that, you confess the whole charge.


At. Genesis I desire one favor, my Lord, which is of justice to him; which is,
that you would be pleased to command your clerk to read that act that says, If
any person before you refuse to plead, he may hear the sentence of the law
upon him.


L. Pres. Clerk, read the Act.


The Clerk reads that part of the Act about refusing to plead. At. Genesis My
Lord, we desire his final sentence.


M. Love. My Lord, I desire but the favor of a days time to consult with
Lawyers.


The Lord President consults a while with the Court. L. Pres. I now do deliver
it from all of the court, and all of them are of that mind, and now plead, or
you shall have judgment.


M. Love. But if I plead, I desire I may have counsel to hear the witnesses.


L. Pres. We will not make a president; for it will be said, it was Master
Lilburns case, and Master Loves case.


Mr. Love. Will you promise me, that I shall have counsel to hear the witness.


L. Pres. We will promise you justice. Read the sentence.


The Clerk goes to read the Sentence. M. Love. Not guilty.


At. Genesis My Lord, we do say in the behalf of the Commonwealth, he is guilty
of the crimes and treasons laid to his charge. And, my Lord, you now perceive,
that when you have been long troubled, you see he comes very hardly to it; an
innocent man would not have made so much ado; and knowing his innocence, would
not have had so much capitulation and trifling with a court of Justice. My
Lord, for these crimes, you are pleased to observe they are of several natures,
and of long continuance. And now, my Lord, for the state of the evidence, it is
commended to the charge of another Gentleman, that is master Solicitor General
of the Commonwealth, to open to you the state of the fact, by which he stands
here impeached and accused, the nature of it, and how it should have been
carried on, the series of time, the persons with whom he complied, how plotted
and contrived to undermine this Commonwealth, even to the foundations of it.
My Lord, when that is opened, I will then produce the evidence to make it good
against him.


Mr. Solicitor Genesis My Lord, Mr. Love urges much for himself, but he does not
tell you what. For my part, I never saw his face till now; but his own
carriage, if that do not do him wrong, none will. He says, he is singled out
from all the rest of his brethren. I suppose he means those that are his fellow
conspirators; the reason of that is, because he was the first, he had a hand in
the first action and last action; so that from the beginning to the end he was
the principal man, both by counsel, friends, purse, and encouragement; and that
is the reason he might justly be singled out to be first in the punishment,
because he was first in the fact. He says, God in Achans case wrought the
discovery. My Lord, I think the court will think, that God was the great
Discoverer of this great treason; for through the whole series of it, it was
pressed and carried on with as much caution and secrecy as the wit of man could
contrive, and nothing but the goodness of the God of lights, the Father of
lights, could have brought this to light, who discovers the secrets of all
hearts, and hidden things of darkness; He has discovered this. My Lord, the
nature of the treason, it is not one or ten treasons, but it is a mystery of
treasons, woven together during the space of two years, under the notion of
Religion. Many of them that were the conspiratours, giving out, that they were
a party distinct and separate, and so they did behave themselves like a party
separate from the rest of the Commonwealth. First, this party did assume to
themselves sovereign power, and did exercise it diverse ways; they did take upon
them to send Agents abroad to treat with foreign Princes and States, enemies
to this Commonwealth, and to give commission to that purpose, and to give
instructions to that purpose, they did demean themselves in this point, as if
this party had been a free State. My Lord, the very first of their rise was
that in February, 1684. When the Scots had declared for the King, then they
send immediately to their brethren here, these conspirators, to let them know
that they intended to make addresses to the new King very speedily, and that
there was propositions drawing to that purpose; and did desire a firm
compliance with them, promising them faithfully (and how they kept it we shall
hear) as their brethren of Scotland, that their interest should be provided for
as their own. And the Covenant that was the ground of all. When they had thus
promised, they believed their brethren, and thereupon went about the work, and
established a council at Dowgate, and there they met, and plotted and contrived
how in the first place to make an agreement between the King and the Scots, to
the intent that when they were agreed, they might come with united forces to
invade this Commonwealth. They were plotting and contriving this about
Midsomer, 1649. They were taken notice of abroad to be considerable men; and
the King of Scots, as they called him, thought fit to send an Agent to them, to
treat with them, which was one Mason, my Lord Piercies man; his errand here,
was to reconcile both parties, the Royal and Presbyterian party, and to make
them both subservient to do his work. My Lord, he treated with the Countess of
Carlisle, William Drake, and diverse others, citizens of London, and this was
with the privity of the Ministers. My Lord, he had commission from the King to
assure these conspirators, that if they could procure the Scots to send more
moderate propositions then they had formerly sent (for the treaty was broken
off before; the propositions were then immoderate) that they should be
satisfied. Thereupon they were so confident of themselves, and so bold; (and in
this Master Love had a principal hand) that without any more ado, he frames a
Letter to Scotland, to advise them, and to persuade them by all means to send
more moderate propositions. The Scots return them this answer, That they saw no
cause to send more moderate propositions; but they desiring a good success of
the Treaty, they should send before hand to the King, to prepare and move him
to comply with the propositions when they came. Thereupon they were as ready,
whereas they sent with the one hand to the Scots, so with the other hand to the
King. They framed a Letter to the King, and I will express it in their own
language; this was the substance of their Letter: First they let the Prince
know, that there was a considerable party in England sensible of their
sufferings there (they made themselves so considerable;) and by and by, you
shall see what became of that. First, the Kind did understand them to be so
considerable. Secondly, they were bound in conscience and loyalty, to the
utmost to help him to his just rights, if he were once engaged with them by
taking the Covenant, etc. and prosecuting the ends of it. Thirdly, that there
was no way to do this, but by closing with his subjects of Scotland. Fourthly,
that being done, all the Presbyterians were bound to assist him. And this,
which they did, must be sent away before commissioners come, to prepare the
King to give them good entertainments. With this Letter there was a Letter sent
to the late Queen, to desire her by all means to work the King to a compliance
with the Scots. And there was a Letter sent to my Lord Piercy and Jermin to
that purpose, taking notice that the Queen, my Lord Piercy, and Jermin, were
their very good friends, and ready for this conjunction; whereof they took
special notice, and did approve of it as a thing very acceptable, and which
should be remembered in due time. My Lord, this Letter was sent, and afterward
Mason he brings the Answer from the King, and Queen, and Piercy, all agreeing
to work this, that the Scots if they came with propositions, should be complied
withal. But Piercy and Jermin writ further, and did advise them, to the intent
the King might not fall back again, that they would send a meet person to be
present about the King when the commissioners came, that so he might see fair
play: And thereupon Titus was sent away, to be an agent there for them at this
Treaty; and this Treaty was at Jersey; but this Treaty took not effect as was
desired. Whereupon they resolved upon another treaty at Bredah; but at the
treaty at Bredah the King advised in his Letter (which I shall read) in the
later end of the Letter, that they would send commissioners then to treat with
him. My Lord, the Letter was written by the King back again to the Ministers.
First, the King in the Letter took notice of the Ministers noncompliance with
the present power, and of their loyalty and good affection to him; and that if
God restored him, he would requite them. Secondly, he promised all satisfaction
to the Scots. Thirdly, made large promises of high favors particularly to the
Ministers. Fourthly, wished them to send commissioners, sufficiently instructed,
to treat at Bredah. Now my Lord, in the Diary that came along with this (for
there was a Diary of all Titus his Negotiations) in that Diary it did appear,
that the King was very much satisfied with the correspondents application to
him, and that that should be a main argument to him to satisfy the Scots. So
my Lord, if they had not thus moderated, and persuaded the King that they were
a very considerable party, he would never, in all probability, have closed with
the Scots, but have thought them very inconsiderable. But when he was informed,
that if he closed with the Scots, he should have a considerable party in
England, that made him think the Scots were worth the closing with. My Lord,
Titus in his Negotiation at Jersey did assure the King, that the Ministers were
averse to the present Government, both in pulpit and in print, and that they
were well-affected to serve him and the Nation, and that the Nation was ready
to espouse his quarrel if he did join with the Scots. This he did assure him
in the behalf of the Ministers. And to show how they did own this, they did
like this assurance so well, that they sent him another Letter; and they did
likewise send him a Letter of thanks for his good service he had done, in
possessing the King how considerable they were. My Lord, after this business
of Jersey, when Titus had done his good service there, he was coming home to
make his relation; but hea^ing by the way, that the Council of State had
intercepted some Letters, he durst not come farther then Calice; and from
thence he sends a Letter, to let them know all this; and withal, that he had
something to communicate to these conspirators, that was not fit to be
communicated by Letter, and therefore desired that some meet person might be
sent to Calice. Thereupon, this Letter being read in Mr. Loves study (so
secretly was it carried) there it was agreed, that Major Alford should be the
man that should go to Titus, and should receive all this account from him.
Whereupon Alford he went away to Titus presently, and there he did speak to
him, and Titus did acquaint him with all these proceedings; and withal they
did advise, that a Commission should be sent in the later part of the Letter.
So that now they had no more to do, but since their hopes failed them at
Jersey, to have an eye to the Treaty at Bredah, where they desired to send
Commissioners. My Lord, this letter to be presented at Bredah, was managed at
Mr. Loves house. Col. Massey, Col. Graves, Titus, etc. These were the parties
There were Letters sent to them to act accordingly; and Titus sent letters to
the King and Queen, and Piercy. And again my Lord, for the Commission; it was
as transcendent a boldness, as ever was done by private men; and the
Commission was corrected by Mr. Love; for it was rough drawn by William Drake,
which was the English Agent here. But Mr. Love in his study, and Doctor Drake,
did help to correct it. The substance of the Commission was this: We the
Presbyterian party in England, do authorize you, Francis Lord Willoughby of
Pariham, Edward M^ssey, James Bunce, Richard Graves, and Sylas Titus, to treat
on our behalf, and the rest of our Brethren the Presbyterians of England, with
the King, and to assist our brethren the Scots Commissioners, in their treaty
with the King, and to do according to the Instructions annexed. My Lord, here
be the heads of the Instructions: That the Commissioners should use all
arguments they could, to move the King to give the Scots satisfaction, and to
take the Covenant; and particularly to inform him of the condition of affairs,
and how things stood in England at that time; all which then cried out for an
agreement with the Scots; giving them full power of all things, and what should
be concluded by them the commissioners, should be confirmed by the
confederates. I think, my Lord, here was a very large commission; whatsoever
they thought fit, they were willing to comply with and make good. My Lord, at
Mr. Loves house, at the same time it was moved (according to a letter from my
Lord Piercy to William Drake) that a good sum of money might be sent to the
King, as a great means to dispose the King to an agreement with the Scots; but
they did not think fit to be cozened of their money, but if this conjunction
did follow, then to raise money considerably. And they went on so far, as to
debate how to raise this great sum of money for this pious work, as you shall
hear by and by, under what notion when propounded. Those men agreed, that the
best way was, that the Ministers should have several correspondents; and that
they should propound the lending of 10, 20, 30, 40, or 50 pounds, for a
charitable use; but you must not ask what this charitable use is for. And this
charitable use, what would it have been? if God had not blessed the battle at
Dunbar, we should have seen it. My Lord, a little before the battle at Dunbar,
when they had a letter from Massey, or Bailey, or, somebody, they then began to
understand their brethren better then before; for he did inform them, that
notwithstanding what was pretended, yet for all that, there was no English
employed, nor was the King crowned. This did disturb the minds of the
conspirators very much; insomuch that they did expostulate with a large letter
written by Mr. Love and Dr. Drake, written in a table book in sack, and sent
there; they did expostulate with them, because the Presbyterian party, which
was the overruling party, were grown so confident of carrying all before
them, that they did neither crown the King, nor mind the English. They did
blame them for this, seeing this going upon a single interest, and upon one
party alone, which they did call godly, would not do well. And my Lord, it
proved so indeed, they carried it on upon this, till the battle at Dunbar came,
and then they began to be of another mind. After that battle, there was a
letter from the commissioners of Estates, pressing for Arms and Ammunition; and
letters from Massey and Titus for money to be sent. My Lord, these good natured
men, notwithstanding they had been so handsomely dealt withal when their
brethren were in power, yet for all that, so fierce and eager were they to
carry on this great design, which God knows what it would have come to, they
notwithstanding, upon Mr. Loves proposition (for he was the man who did
propound it) agreed to send 500 pounds presently to Massey. My Lord, this money
was raised, and subscriptions taken by Mr. Love himself at his own table: And
this is proved by one who brought his ten pounds, he brought it to Mr. Love,
and would trust no body else with it; and this was sent away presently by
captain Massey. My Lord, there was a large letter sent also with the money,
wherein was good counsel; for besides the money, he did write to advise his
brethren, that it would be notable service to endeavor after union. The letter
was sent, and that large letter inviting to union had been delivered to the
Assembly, and that would help to quash the dissenting party in Scotland, who
had made the King a prisoner. But now the State and Church were all agreed, and
this was the fruit of Mr. Loves letter. And if they had not been so united,
they could have done no harm; this letter came so seasonably that they
conceived it very considerable. They pressing to union very much, by this means
did quash the dissenting brethren, and by that means they came to be as now
they are. My Lord, about Christmas last, there came a letter from Massey, which
gave an account of crowning their King, and of great preparations to take the
field; and that the correspondents here should beware of unseasonable rising,
and that they were most afraid that these persons would rise too soon, and so
spoil all. My Lord, in answer to this letter, they write back again to Massey,
to advise him on the other side, to take heed that he came not into England but
well provided, and not to depend much upon the assistance here in England; they
were afraid he was too weak, as he was afraid they were too forward. My Lord,
after Cook was apprehended, then the correspondents met no more at public
meetings, and yet they received letters from Drake, Massey, Bunce, and the rest
(whereof Mr. Love was still made acquainted as a principal man) that told them
of the hopeful condition of the Scots Army, that they intended to engage in
England; advising the party here, not to be too forward. This was the second
advice; and see the reason of it; for if Mr. Love sat at the helm, as he did,
all the meetings being at his house, after Drake went away he still stating the
question, drew these letters and corrected them. And if he were such a main
stickler, truly there was very great reason for his advice. My Lord, about the
middle of March last, Col. Bamfields man brings an answer to the message in the
table book written in sack, containing four or five sheets of paper: Upon this
packet there was nothing written but the letter L. to deliver to one of the
conspirators; and seeing nothing but the letter L. written, he carried it to
Mr. Love, and Mr. Love did own it as sent to him; and that was the large
Narrative of the state of affairs in Scotland, after the fight at Dunbar, how
things stood there. My Lord, with this Narrative was sent also a letter from
Mr. Bailey, by order from the general Assembly: they did order Mr. Bailey
(which was the Scotch correspondent there) to write a large letter; and there
was another letter from my Lords of Argile, Lowden, and Lothian, etc. it is
worth your observing what this letter was that came from these men: First,
thanks for the good affections of Mr. Love and the rest of the conspirators.
Secondly, encouragement to persevere, and to credit Bamfields negotiation for
money. Thirdly, promised to repay all, whatever they should lend: But when, and
by whom this payment should be made, the letter will tell you; and that is,
when God shall bless their endeavors in procuring a free Parliament in
England. So the Parliament in England must pay all the Scots debts, that these
conspirators shall lend. Truly I think it will be a very free Parliament
indeed, when it comes so free out of the peoples purses. My Lord, Mr. Love and
others gave Bamfields man that brought this Narrative out of their own purses
ten pounds, and sent a bill of exchange of 30. pounds to Bamfield; by one
witness it will be expressly proved, that ten pounds of this money came out of
Mr. Loves purse. My Lord, William Drakes last letter did inform, that Massey
would break into England as soon as there was grass for his horses; and
therefore he sent to have a good bank of money provided in readiness, and that
they should think of timing a party, and that they should neither rise too soon
nor too late, but just when Massey came in; this Mr. Love told Major Adams. My
Lord, now we come so near to the time, as that one of these conspirators is
apprehended by the Council of State. When he had been in restraint three days,
he sent to Mr. Love, and Mr. Love came to him; but he had been at a kind of a
Fast, for they did keep Fasts once a fortnight at least, and Prayers, for the
good success of this design, That God would bless this wonderful Treason; which
was for the making, by the Scots Army, an utter subversion of this
Commonwealth; and the free, and noble, and magnanimous people of England,
should be made vassals and contributaries to the Scots Nation; This was the
design, and for this design, the Ministers fasted and prayed: But it is plain,
God did abhor such things. And, my Lord, Master Love took upon him, to speak to
the person under restraint, Take heed, says he, what you do, least you wrong
your self or others; and said, It is true, Titus his man has broken up Papers,
but we are all well enough; but give notice to the rest of the Confederates,
That they may not be surprised; but be you not troubled, because we have prayed
for you this day: And they implored the God of Truth, that nothing of all this
should come to light, but that we should be in the dark still in generals. My
Lord, This is the true state of the evidence, as near as I can present it, with
a frail memory: And, my Lord, I have opened nothing but generals, your Lordship
and the Court, will judge of it; and Master Love will have the less to do to
answer: But it appears by this, That there has been such a practice, such a
series of Treason, Treason upon Treason, that one Act of Parliament is not
enough to contain it; but all those Acts of Parliament read, every one of them
make him a Traitor. And, my Lord, I am sorry I have taken up so much of your
time, especially, when you have spent so much time before: If your Lordship
therefore will be pleased to have the patience to hear the Witnesses, we shall
prove more then I have yet opened.


At. Genesis My Lord, This was an early Treason, that began betimes to crush the
Commonwealth in its infancy: And, my Lord, Master Love being singled out for
justice, you will anon observe, there was singular cause for it; and if he had
had his desert, it had been long before now: But States can play sometimes with
Treasons, and not take a time tell they see fit. My Lord, This Treason, as I
have opened it to you, began in the year 1648. The King of Scots so called; but
take notice, That the same Nation and Persons that proclaimed him King of
Scotland, proclaimed him King of England also at the same time, in the same
Nation; and those persons that proclaimed this person King of Scotland, the
same proclaimed him King of England. My Lord, You have heard some of the
Conspirators named, Titus and Drake, active men both of them; These men have
been so ingenuous, That they have fled for their Treasons; notwithstanding this
Gentleman, a Minister of the Gospel, he does not do so; they have confessed their
offenses, and are fled for them; they dare not appear, they have so much guilt
within them, that prompts them to keep away; but this Gentleman has not so
much My Lord, Drake was so active, and it was carried on with so much secrecy,
and so much (as they thought) of Caution, That Master Drake writing, as that
Gentleman next Mr. Love does, in short hand, he burnt his Papers, and burnt all
where any thing was to be seen, so that no originals are to be seen. My Lord,
in this case it has been opened to you, what transactions Mr. Love had with
Scotland; and you have been pleased to observe, it was a tender point, that Mr.
Love did enter discourse with the Scotch Nation, Mr. Love was very much
troubled at it, and he may see just cause to be troubled at it: And will you
give me leave, there has been Blood and Treasure spent, as was told you by Mr.
Solicitor. I am afraid, I might too justly say, by that Gentleman, and those he
did seduce, That they have been too much the cause of this Blood, even that
Gentleman that stands at the Bar, that should be a man of peace, and not of
blood. My Lord, I may justly say, That that Gentleman has been too much the
cause of these late Engagements between these two Nations, and making himself a
party; and it is a sad thing, when parties appear against a State. My Lord, I
am too much afraid, what ever God pleases to work upon him, That it should
touch his Conscience, that he should be instrumental in such a work. But I
verily believe, had there not bin actings from hence, there had not bin so much
forwardness in the Kings party to the Scots. My Lord, I will mind that
Gentleman of what is said of the fifth of November, I am sorry for it, that it
should be said of our Ministers, whose Faith is Faction, Whose Religion is
Rebellion; it is said so of the Romish Ministers, I hope it will not be said so
of the English, That their Faith is Faction, and that they pray for strife, and
fast for strife. My Lord, For these men, Drake and Titus, they are gone, as I
said, and they did confess themselves so much guilty, as that they have fled
for it; and Mr. Love does know (I am sorry to see him in that gesture) that he
was conversant with them all, and does know (I believe) that we can prove it;
and when he hears the men named, he will say so too. Truly, my Lord, I have
nothing to say against the person of the man, but against his vices and faults;
and nothing to his Function, and nothing to those whom he pretends so boldly to
represent, that is, the Presbyterian party. We do all know, there are many
honest, precious and godly men, that have received no discountenance from the
State; nor this Gentleman, that should give him any countenance or
encouragement to oppose the State: But it is somewhat a bold thing, for a
particular man to be the head of a party, and they to engage as representing a
considerable party, to engage to send Commissioners to agree upon Instructions;
this is very bold. But, my Lord, God be thanked, many of those that were
seduced at first, were wise, and did come in before the last; and did not strut
it out, my Lord, with States and Justice, as that man has done before now, and
at present, even out-facing Justice, and boldly, I ^ay, wiping his lips; he
has done no offense. My Lord, they were so bold with Scotland, that there was
a known Agent there maintained and kept, between Scotland and them; and I will
tell him the Gentleman's name, his name was Mr. Sterks; and, my Lord, when he
went away, the Act requiring those of the Scottish Nation to be gone, that
Gentleman did supply him with money himself; and others gave him eight or ten
pounds in his purse to carry him away. My Lord, I believe he knows this, and I
am sorry, That that Gentleman that has gone along with us in much of this War,
that he should at last, so much betray his own discretion, as rather to trust a
reconciled Enemy, then to be true to his own Friends. I say, He trusts a
reconciled Enemy, and a weak Enemy, and that he will think, and will know, that
they might betray him; as justly may be done, when men so cast themselves upon
the Party of the King, and Queen, and Peircy, and Jermine; it is no great
policy nor discretion to have so many of Council: they say, three keeps
council; but this Gentleman has now 20, 30, 40, in Scotland, France, and
Holland, and Agitations between them, and frequent Intercourses. My Lord, I
shall now call the witnesses out to you, which when Mr. Love does see, himself
will say, are honest men, and to be believed.


Mr. Love. My Lord, I beseech you let me speak a word.


At. Genesis My Lord, he has heard his Charge in particular; and those things,
which if he be ingenuous to himself, and his own Conscience, he cannot but know
we shall prove them; and before we prove them, I desire to hear, whether or no
he will confess them.


Mr. Love. I hope this Court will not hearken to the insinuations of
instruments of State, who are well rewarded for their eager prosecution of men
in such a condition as I am in; it is an easy matter, through flourishes of
Law, and strains of wit, to stir up the minds of my Judges against me.


L. Pres. You have heard the Matter opened to you, which you cannot in any
Christian, or godly Conscience, or Understanding, but acknowledge, That such
Secrets as these you were privy to, and came to your hand; you cannot, before
God and man, do better then to confess these, which you know by the urging of
them upon you, are come to our knowledge.


Mr. Love. Will you give me leave to express my self, as to these things which
I am now charged with, I do declare and protest, in the presence of God and
this great Assembly, That I never wrote any Letter* either to the King of
Scots, or to the Queen his Mother, or to the Church or State of Scotland, in
the general, or to any particular person of the Scottish Nation, since the Wars
began between England and Scotland, to this day. I do declare also in the
presence of the same God, I never received any Letters written to me, either
from the King of Scotland, or Queen his Mother, or from the Church or State of
Scotland, in general, or from any particular person of the Scottish Nation,
since the Wars began between the two Nations, to this day. I declare and
protest likewise, in the presence of the same God, I never collected, or gave,
or lent, one penny of money, either to send into Scotland, or into any foreign
part, to the King, or Queen his Mother, or to the Church or State of Scotland,
in general, or to any particular person of the Scottish Nation, since the Wars
began, to this very day. And as to these particulars, I have said it often, I
am as innocent, and as harmless, as the least child; and if you will take the
aggravating of these circumstances against me, and will proceed upon
aggravations of the crimes against me, I hope God will help me with more Peace
of Conscience to undergo the censure, then you shall have to inflict it. And as
for that Gentleman, that made that great relation to you of the Treaty of
Jersey; for my part, I am as great a stranger to all those Transactions, as any
here. I never saw the face of Titus, nor did I ever send to him or receive any
thing from him.


At. Genesis My Lord, We shall call the witnesses.


Captain P^tter is called into the Court. Mr. Love. I except and protest
against this Witness, for he has been already examined in private, and has
made his confession there, and that is equivalent to a conviction; and I hope,
the Court in Justice, will not admit of this man for a witness.


L. Pres. You shall have Justice, as well as ever any Jesuit had.


At. Genesis You see now what Mr. Love drives at, and you will find his
Jesuitical evasions: And, my Lord, let him be asked, Whether ever this man was
before this Court, or any Committee of this Court; and I think in Justice, you
ought to examine Witnesses before hand: But it is clear and evident, That this
man has been a party with him. I do humbly conceive, it is so clear and
evident, that rather I should except against the witness, as an incompetent
witness, then Mr. Love, because he has been a party with him; but I desire he
may be a competent witness, and one in whom there is more ingenuity, then there
is in Mr. Love.


Mr. Love. Sir, before he swears, I beseech you ask him this question, Whether
he has not been threatened with death, if he would not witness against me.


L. Pres. You cannot overruled us with your beseechings, and beseechings, it
will not do it; your over-importunity shall not prevail with us.


M. Love. Let God prevail with you: though he may be legalis testis before
Conviction, yet he cannot be so after Conviction.


The Clerk* The evidence you shall give, between the Keepers of the Liberties
of England, and the prisoner at the Bar, shall be the truth, the whole truth,
and nothing but the truth; So help you God.


He is sworn. L. Pres. Now look upon the God of truth, and speak the truth.


C. Pot. I shall speak the truth.


At. Genesis That Gentleman was pleased to trust others, as I said, even
reconciled Enemies, and fell from his Friends. I do grant, that this Gentleman
has confessed; and if every honest man confess his fault, that is no offense;
for an honest man questioned for a fact, to confess the truth thereof. I have
not heard that that is no good law; and I do say, that before ever this man
came to be examined, we did know it all, and perchance from those that this
Gentleman thought fitter to trust, then us; but we did so know it before, that
every circumstance was opened by us; and we did convince this Gentleman, and
others, though not Mr Love: But Mr. Love says, He must not accuse himself, he
must not answer; but this Gentleman did more ingeniously. I do affirm, That he
was questioned to every particular, before he answered: And we do know, that
the State has long hands and ears. Now, my Lord, if you please, ask M. Potter
what he knows of this business of sending to, and receiving from Scotland.


L. Pres. You are upon your Oath, and in the presence of God, then whom there
is no higher upon the earth, that is in the seat of Justice, and without
relation (as Mr. Love says) to the parties; therefore tell the truth of your
knowledge, in the transaction of this treacherous treason, that has now been
above two years in the passages, between the Presbyterian party.


At. Genesis No, my Lord, we will not own that upon them; there are some that do
style themselves so, The Presbyterian Party, that are conscientious persons,
and pious, and godly men; and I should do them wrong, should I lay it upon
them; but that which I do, is against those that do undertake to style
themselves, The Heads of them.


L. Pres. Begin then with that which concerns Mr. Drakes Agency.


Cap. Pot. I have taken an oath to speak the whole truth in this business; but
that is, the truth I know. I desire I may not be pressed to things that I have
only heard.


At. Genesis You must, and from whom you heard them.


Cap. Pot. I was examined several times, and had a wide latitude there; and
then I was to speak to every truth, as I thought and heard; but now I have
taken an oath to speak the truth between the State and this Gentleman: And I
beseech you, that I may be held close to those things, and I will give you the
fullest and fairest account I can. What I said before, was in order to the
discovery of the thing; much of which, I had by hearsay from others, and in
that I may mistake, in persons, places, and times: What I have done my self,
and what I know this Gentleman has done, that may be put to me fully.


Mr. Love. The witness must so speak, That we have seen and heard, that do we
testify.


At. Genesis Your Doctrine will not pass here.


Mr. Love. It is Scripture, Sir, and it behooves me to speak, for I am upon my
life.


At. Genesis Mr. Potter, speak what you know, and from whom, and I desire there
may be no glosses put there, by those, who I am sure, cannot do it. I ask you
first of the proceedings, and ^ending to Scotland, and back again to England;
and what you know of it, and from whom.


C. Pot. My Lord, the Committee, that examined me, knows I was not priv^ to the
first transaction: I did say indeed something of it by hearsay, and I did
likewise say, That Mr. Drake told it me; but I may err in that particular,
possibly M. Drake did not tell me so; for as I apprehend, I said, I did think
it did put a necessity upon the King to agree with the Scots; and then having
seen some papers, and conferred with that relation others have made, I
collected the truth of them, as far as I did know; but now I am upon my oath,
let me therefore come to the matter; I spoke then many things as I heard, which
I cannot affirm upon my oath.


L. Pres. We must judge of what you have heard.


C. Pot. My Lord, I cannot be certain of that.


At. Genesis That is receded from. But what do you know of Masons coming over here?


C. Pot. I know nothing of Mason, I saw him but once, and at that time there
past nothing between us of public concernment, as I remember.


At. Genesis What was the answer that was returned to that which Mason did bring?


C. Pot. That I can speak nothing to of my own knowledge; I heard he was come
hither, and was here to see the tempers of men, and to see how things were like
to go.


At. Genesis My Lord, ask him from whom he came?


C. Pot. It was said he came from my Lord Piercy, but these things are so
remote from me, that I can say nothing to them of my own knowledge.


At. Genesis My Lord, let him speak what he knows about reconciling the
Presbyterian parties.


C. Pot. I think others can speak more close to that; I can say nothing but by
hearsay; I heard that Mason did endeavor here to find how the affections of
the people stood, and whether there was a necessity that the King should comply
with the Scots, or with the cavaliering party; and that he found a necessity of
complying with the Scots.


L. Pres. What assistance should he have from hence?


C. Pot. I know no more of Mason then this.


At. Genesis My Lord, ask him if there were not some letters returned by Mason,
in answer to what he brought?


C. Pot. Not that I know of.


L. Pres. Did you hear of it?


C. Pot. I think I did hear of it, but I cannot tell by whom: I think by
William Drake.


At. Genesis My Lord, ask him whether he knows of any petition sent to the King
of Scots?


C. Pot. I do not know of any, but have heard so.


L. Pres. By whom did you hear so?


C Pot. By William Drake.


L. Pres. Who did Drake say did carry the petition?


C Pot. I cannot tell.


At. Genesis Do you know of any answer returned from Piercy and Jermin?


C. Pot. I know nothing at all of these things.


L. Pres. Were not you invited to the meeting?


C. Pot. Yes, I was.


At. Genesis What did he tell you?


C. Pot. Nothing at all: we had nothing but common discourse there.


At. Genesis Who was there?


C. Pot. There was William Drake, Major Alford, and I think Mason and Titus
were there.


L Pres. Do you remember any more?


C. Pot. I do not remember, nor can I certainly say they were there.


L. Pres. Were not you pressed or moved to go to Jersey?


C. Pot. Not that I know of.


L. Pres. Did not Titus offer to go?


C. Pot. I cannot well tell; but at that time, or some other, he either was
spoken to to go, or offered to go.


L. Pres. How long ago?


C. Pot. My Lord, I cannot speak this of my own knowledge; but I have heard
say, I think, a month after the time.


L. Pres. Had he any money to bear his charges?


C. Pot. I know of none.


At. Genesis Well, what meetings afterward was there in M. Loves study?


C. Pot. I have been at M. Loves several times.


At. Genesis My Lord, ask him whether he was not present in M. Loves study, when
a letter was there read from Titus, and who was present there, and what were
the debates upon it, and what was the contents of the letter, and whether it
was not for some to come to Calice to him.


C. Pot. The letter I well remember; I cannot say it was in M. Loves study, nor
can I say it was in his house, I do not know M. Love was present; the letter I
have seen it, or heard of i^, it did desire some to come to Calice about the
treaty; and I remember well, that Major Alford told me he did go to him.


L. Pres. What was the contents of the letter?


C. Pot. I cannot well remember that I have seen it; but I have either seen it
or heard of it, I cannot tell which.


L. Pres. You must be true to the State, and speak the truth.


C. Pot. My Lord, I would be true to the State and to the Gentleman at the bar
too. And my Lord, I can say no more to it, I either saw it or heard of it, I
cannot tell which. I am upon my oath, my Lord; the letter did desire some body
to come to Calice to him.


At Genesis Was not this meeting in M. Loves study?


C. Pot. I cannot say it was in his house, I rather think it was not.


L Pres. Was he present?


C. Pot. I cannot say he was present, I think he was not present, I think M
Alford was sent to the tavern.


The papers of Captain Potters examinations were here produced by the Attorney
general, and by the Clerk read to him. At. Genesis My Lord, these were his
Examinations.


C. Pot. I entreat this may be remembered (which I premised at first) I had a
latitude then that I have not now, I am now upon my oath, and desire to be true
to my own conscience, and to the State, and to this Gentleman; I have made (it
is true) such a confession as this is, and I believe the greatest part of it to
be true, according to the latitude I spoke it in; but now I am upon my oath,
and now I am to speak knowingly; the substance of the thing is true, I believe,
that he was sent, and sent upon such things, so much I do verily believe to be
true, upon my oath, but of the places I cannot speak.


At. Genesis Alford did go to Calice and return, and how many days was it
between his going and returning? and where did he give an account of what he
did receive from Titus a^ Calice?


C Pot. It is a hard matter for me to speak to the time, I think about a week;
and for the relati^n he made when he came back, as I take it, I met him at the
Kings Head in W^lbrook upon his landing; whether he made the relation to me
there, or afterward at M Loves, whether I heard of the meet^ng^ or whether I
was at the meeting, I cannot say. I am sure he himself made me the relation;
but whether there, or any other where, I cannot make out.


At. Genesis Upon your oath, did not Major Alford make return of the answer in
Master Loves study?


C. Pot I cannot say it, but I think it was there.


At. Genesis Was Master Love present?


C. Pot. I think he was present, and I think it was in his house; I am sure
Major Alford made me a particular relation between him and I.


At. Genesis Was Sterks the Scotch Agent there or no?


C. Pot. I cannot say he was.


L. Pres. Was it read in Master Loves study?


C. Pot. I cannot say I was there.


His Examination was again read to him. At. Genesis What was the substance of the
Kings letter?


C. Pot. It is so much out of my memory, that I scarce remember there was a
letter, it is so much out of my mind.


More of his Examination was read to him. L. Pres. What do you remember of this
now, is this true?


C. Pot. I remember I have heard as much, and I believe it is true.


L. Pres. Have you not heard the letter read?


C. Pot. I do not know there was a letter sent; nor do I know there was a
letter read. I desire to speak the truth; I had a latitude then, that I have
not now; I had then such an information showed me, and I spoke to it so far as
I thought it was true; these papers you show me as my examination, were not of
my framing.


The Clerk. Look upon them, is not this your hand?


C. Pot. I know it is my hand.


At. Genesis My Lord, I did go to the Tower to him, and was with him, and did
examine him. My Lord, here be those that will prove it, that himself did
confess, and said it was true; and he took time himself to inform himself, and
had (as he said) other men's examinations, and informations by; and he did add
and amend, and gave it under his hand. This is the truth, after several
examinations. And he had papers by him, and did correct them himself, and
brought them under his own hand written by himself, these very things. And my
Lord, ask him whether he did not write these things first with his own hand,
and bring them to the Committee of Examinations.


L. Pres. Whether did you not bring in your own examinations, and what you
could inform, written by your own hands?


C. Pot. My Lord, that is my hand, and what is there I must own as mine. But I
hope you will let me distinguish between what I delivered then, as I heard it
and thought, and what I deliver posi^^vely. I do say it is true now, as I have
heard.


L. Pres. Why did you not say of hearsay then, as well as now?


At. Genesis Upon the oath you have taken, whether do you not know this of your
own knowledge?


C Pot. Upon the oath I have taken (and I desire to speak it in Gods presence)
I do not remember that I saw the letter from the King, or heard the letter
read, or the copy, nor can I say Alford told me so much, though I think he did,
yet I do not know he did.


M* Love. I desire you would take notice, whether this be fair, that Mr.
Attorney should help the witness, by putting things into his mouth?


At. Genesis My Lord, I can help the witness by asking him questions.


C. Pot. My Lord, no man shall so far tamper with me, as to make me say an
untruth.


At. Genesis My Lord, pray ask him, whether he did not write these papers, most
of them, with his own hands.


C. Pot. True, but to open to the committee the ground of this business; but I
did not expect to swear to every one of these particulars:


At. Genesis My Lord, ask him, whether after this return was made there was not a
meeting, and instructions made about the commission to be sent to Bredah?


C. Pot. My Lord, to that, I have heard so much; but I cannot speak it
positively. I saw no commission nor instructions, I heard there was both. I do
not know by whom I have heard it, I think by William Drake.


L. Pres. Were you not at Mr. Loves house when they were drawn up, and Mr. Love
corrected them.?


C. Pot. I never saw the instructions.


M. Love. Nor I neither.


L. Pres. Did you not hear so?


C. Pot. I did.


L. Pres. To whom to be directed?


C. Pot. To Captain Titus.


L. Pres. And to who else.


C. Pot. The commissions and instructions were to be directed to my Lord
Willoughby of Parham, Col. Graves, Major Genesis Massey, Capt. Titus, and Alderman
Bunce.


At. Genesis My Lord, ask him whether he has not heard Mr. Love tell him so.


C. Pot. Never in my life.


L. Pres. Were you not then present at his house?


C. Pot. I know not that I was, nor can I remember.


His Examination was again read. At. Genesis Whether were you not at M. Loves
house? and was there not a letter agreed upon to Massey, and Bailie, and Titus?


C. Pot. I have been several times at M. Loves house.


L. Pres. Whether were you not at M. Loves house with these correspondents?


C. Pot. I have been several times at his house with them; and I have been
oftener there upon other occasions.


L. Pres. Name them.


C. Pot. I mean with M. Love, and M. Jackson, and M. Robinson, and Major
Alford, and M. Drake, and M. Gibbons.


L. Pres. What was then agreed upon about letters when you were at M. Loves
house?


C. Pot. I have a very bad memory, I cannot speak to time, and places, and
persons; such letters I have heard of were written, I profess I can speak no
more knowingly. I never had a hand in any one letter, but such letters I have
heard of.


L. Pres. Upon what account did you meet at M. Loves house?


C. Pot. I met there sometimes upon a friendly account, sometimes upon a
christian account, and sometimes to hear news, and sometimes to tell news.


L. Pres. Where did you meet with these persons, with William Drake, and these
so often mentioned?


C. Pot. My Lord, there was a correspondency in point of news.


L. Pres. Between whom?


C. Pot. Between capt. Titus there, and William Drake here, and he would tell
us many times news there.


L. Pres. Do you know Titus was employed as an Agent hence?


C. Pot. I think he was.


L. Pres. Had he money collected?


C. Pot. I do not know of one penny I lent him, and I never contributed to him.


At. Genesis My Lord, ask him, whether himself did not upon an occasion
contribute ten pounds, and bring it into M. Loves parlour.


C. Pot. I confess that.


At. Genesis For a table book that was written in sack, do you know of any such
thing?


C. Pot. I do. My Lord, I went to William Drake in his retirement, and he was
writing out of his Papers some letters in a table book, which he told me was in
sack, as I take it.


L. Pres. Why did he write them in sack?


C. Pot. I take it, because it should not be discovered.


L. Pres. Do you not know to whom the letters written in sack were sent?


C. Pot. I know not; but he told me to Bayley and Titus.


L. Pres. Where was Bayley and Titus then?


C. Pot. I know not where Titus was, but I think Bayley was in Scotland.


L. Pres. After Drake was gone, where were your meetings usually?


C. Pot. Many times at M. Loves house.


L. Pres. When you did meet there, what did you meet upon, was it not to
receive Messages from Titus, and Massey, and Bunce, and Bailey, and to return
answers?


C. Pot. We had sometimes letters read there, but from whom they came, or to
whom, I believe few can tell, I cannot tell; something of news we have heard,
of affairs; that was the occasion of my coming sometimes.


At. Genesis Did M. Love never tell you the occasions of those meetings, and
press you to lend money to furnish Massey and Titus?


C. Pot. I can say nothing to that.


At. Genesis What say you to the private fasts?


C. Pot. There were private fasts.


At. Genesis What, for a blessing upon the treaty at Bredah?


C. Pot. There were fasts kept, but I never understood they were for any other
end, but for the sins of, and judgments upon the nations; and for the most
part there have been hundreds of men and women there.


At. Genesis Did M. Love often officiate there?


C. Pot. He has preached and prayed.


L. Pres. Did any pray for a blessing upon the treaty?


C. Pot. I cannot say so.


At. Genesis What say you to those letters that came hither after the fight at
Dunbar?


C. Pot. My Lord, after the fight at Dunbar there came letters from Bailey, and
Titus, and Massey.


L. Pres. And where were these published?


C. Pot. My Lord, I can say no more; I have heard of these letters too.


L. Pres. Were not you present at M. Loves house when they were read or made
known there?


C. Pot. Possibly I was; I cannot say I heard the letters read there, I did
hear letters by a private hand occasionally afterward.


At. Genesis By the oath you have taken, were you not present at M. Loves house,
when those foresaid letters from Titus, and Bailey, and Massey, were published
and read?


C. Pot. My Lord, I cannot say I was there, and I dare not say I was not; it is
a year ago; I believe I was there several times when several letters were read,
and it may be when those were read.


L. Pres. Whether was there not five pounds given to a messenger that brought
them?


C. Pot. I have heard there was, but I do not know it.


L. Pres. Did you contribute any thing toward it?


C Pot. I think, I did contribute ten shillings.


L. Pres. Who contributed besides your self.


C. Pot. I know not.


At. Genesis Was there not at Mr. Love's a promise of arms, or letters?


C. Pot. My Lord, I cannot say so.


At. Genesis VVat can you say?


C. Pot. I have heard there was.


At. Genesis By whom have you heard it?


C. Pot. I cannot say by whom, or who told me so, either Mr. Alford, or Adams,
or Far, or some of those men that used to meet there; for it was common, when I
was not there, ^or some or other to meet with me.


At. Genesis Did Mr. Love contribute to the messenger?


C. Pot. I cannot say, he did.


At. Genesis My Lord, I do not ask him one question, but what himself has
confessed.


C. Pot. I do remember such letters I have heard did come, but never saw those
letters; I do likewise remember I heard there was five pounds gathered for the
messenger, and I do believe I contributed ten shillings toward it.


At. Genesis Who else gave besides your self, and who received it?


C. Pot. I profess, I know not.


At. Genesis Whether was there not a Declaration to the Church of Scotland then
published?


C. Pot. The D^claration, I know nothing of it, you remembered me of it at the
Committee, when I was first examined, but I knew nothing of it.


At. Genesis My Lord, Ask him, whether the State and Church did not write for
arms and ammunition at that time after the fight.


C. Pot. My Lord, I have heard so much, but cannot speak positively or
particularly to it; I have heard of such letters, but cannot tell by whom: I
saw them not.


At. Genesis To whom were they directed?


C. Pot. I never heard who wrote them, nor to whom they were directed.


At. Genesis Was there not one letter with L. upon i^?


C. Pot. My Lord, About the letter L. I did receive those letters my self,
there was an L written upon them; My Lord, these letters came from Bamfield out
of Scotland; there was in these letters a large Narrative of the Affairs of
Scotland, from Dunbar sight, to the time of the date of them, which I think was
about Christmas; this is a thing, I know better then ( I am afraid I give
offense by saying, I think, and I heard, and that I cannot speak positively;
but of this I can speak positively.) Bamfield gave an account therein of a
Narrative of two sheets of paper, and I, and another, or two, opened them, and
I carried these letters to Mr. Loves, there was one or two more, with me: Mr.
Jaquell, and I think Dr. Drake, I cannot well tell. There was a Narrative of
the Scots Affairs, and a Letter from namelesse persons, which we supposed to be
from Mr. Baily, and from my Lords of Argile, and Lowden, and Lothian, and
others, whose names I do not remember: these letters wrote for ten thousand
pounds, for buying of A^mes, and hiring of shipping; these letters we disliked,
and we dissented from them, and agreed to give a negative answer; but we
thought fit for our own safety, to raise some money for the messenger, and
Bamfield, to which I contributed ten pounds. I carried all these letters to Mr.
Loves; one or two were opened, I think we opened them, the Narrative and my
Lord of Argiles letter I opened before I understood what they were.


At. Genesis Why did you carry them to Mr. Loves?


C. Pot. There was a great deal of news in them: there was a letter L. and I
did in my examination say, I conceived it was to Mr. Love: but now upon my
oath, I do not remember very well, and I do not think it was to Mr. Love. I do
confess, I carried these letters to Mr. Loves, I, and Mr. Jaquel; these
letters were opened, but whether Mr. Love opened them, or I, or the other, I
cannot tell.


At. Genesis With whom did you leave them?


C. Pot. I brought them away all of them.


At. Genesis Were they not read?


C. Pot. They were all read.


At. Genesis He confesses further, he paid ten pounds: to whom were the letters
directed?


C. Pot. The letters had no direction at all upon them, I believe.


At. Genesis My Lord, Ask him whether there was not a sum of four or five hundred
pounds agreed to be raised.


C. Pot. The advice that was given to that, was, that we should do nothing in
it, and we did nothing in it more then I tell you, I carried those letters to
them, and had discourse of them, and resolved to do nothing in them.


At. Genesis Why did you carry them to Mr. Loves?


C. Pot. I went for advise what I should do in them.


At. Genesis My Lord, Pray ask him concerning the four or five hundred pounds,
and for what, and whether this discourse was at Mr. Love's house, whether there
was not a Proposition for raising of four or five hundred pounds, and for whom
this was to be raised, and where to be raised, and by what means?


C. Pot. I heard there was, I do not know the place where: to this I
contributed ten pounds, I brought it one evening to Mr. Loves house, and there
I left it.


At. Genesis Where was this money agreed to be raised?


C. Pot. I cannot speak to that.


At. Genesis Who took the Subscriptions?


C. Pot. I cannot speak to that neither.


At. Genesis Did Mr. Love contribute?


C. Pot. I cannot say he did.


At. Genesis Was it in his house?


C. Pot. I do not know that I subscribed at all, I do not think there was any
subscriptions; I am sure, I never subscribed my name.


At. Genesis When you came into Mr. Loves palour, and left the ten pounds, did
you not give him a twitch by the hand?


C Pot. I cannot say so: His Examination was again read.


L. Pres. Is this true?


C. Pot. The substance of it is true.


L. Pres. Of your own knowledge?


C. Pot. Of my own knowledge, that I left so much money.


The Clerk reads more of his Examination. C. Pot. This is a Section I never
worded, nor phrased my self, I have heard as much as this comes to, but cannot
speak it knowingly.


At. Genesis Did you not write this your self?


C. Pot. I belive not, I cannot positively say, that Mr. Love either drew up
the letter, or received the letter.


At. Genesis You say he received the letter from your own hands?


C. Pot. But not the letter from Titus, and Baily.


At. Genesis Do you know of a way of correspondency laid at Kendal, or no?


C. Pot. I heard there was such a correspondency.


At. Genesis By whom?


C. Pot. I cannot say by whom.


At. Genesis Do you know that Groves was sent to look for letters there?


C. Pot. Yes.


L. Pres. Did Mr. Love know of it?


C. Pot. I cannot say he did.


At. Genesis What had Groves for his pains for going?


C. Pot. Ten pounds.


At. Genesis From whom?


C. P. I paid it.


At. Genesis Did you receive any of it again?


C. Pot. I did receive some of it, I received two 10 s. by several persons.


At. Genesis From whom?


C. Pot. From Gibbons, and Alford, and Far.


At. Genesis Not from M. Love.


C. P. I do not know I ever had a farthing from him in my life.


At. Genesis My Lord, ask him whether there was not letters returnrd to Bamfield
again, and by whom.


C. Pot. My Lord J did receive a letter that J suppose was to Bamfield.


L. Pres. from whom did you receive it?


C. Pot. It was left in my shop.


L. Pres. By whom?


C. Pot. J cannot say by whom.


L. Pres. Whom do you conceive it came from?


C. Pot. J think from M. Love or Doctor Drake.


At. Genesis Do you conceive so? My Lord, ask him whether Mr. Love or Doctor
Drake was not appointed to draw the letter.


C. Pot. When we were together, there was a negative answer resolved upon, and
this answer to the best of my remembrance was agreed to be drawn up by Mr.
Love, and Doctor Drake: but J received this letter.


At. Genesis And who received the thirty pounds.


C. Pot. J cannot tell.


At. Genesis But you sent the letter.


C. Pot. J did.


At. Genesis Ask him whether he did not send for M. Love, and what discourse past
between them, since he was in prison.


C. Pot. J did send for M. Love, and he did come to me, and J desired his
counsel as a Minister, and J told him upon what score J was questioned, then J
was questioned upon M Cook only, and he gave me encouragement only as a friend
and Minister of the Gospel ought to do.


At. Genesis What was that?


C. Pot. He wished me to make a Christian use of my afflictions; and gave me
some other instructions, we had an hours discourse, and it was all to this
purpose: he wished me to make a Christian use of my restraint, and to labor to
get Christian Wisdom and fortitude.


L. Pres. What did he say more to you?


C. Pot. My Lord, no more past between us, and J gave him an account of what
questions J was examined upon in Cooks business.


L. Pres. Did you give him an account?


C. Pot. J have said so, and he did advise me to prudence, and fortitude, and
courage.


At Genesis Did he not advise you to be courageous, and that unless you discover
one another, you were safe enough?


C. Pot. My Lord, my keeper was with me, and we had no such discourse.


At. Genesis Did he not wish you to be silent?


C. Pot. Either then or since he did tell me there was a letter came from M.
Drake, that told him Titus his man had taken some letters from Titus; but he
could not conceive how it could concern me.


At. Genesis But did he discover nothing, and wish you to be prudent for your
self, and them?


C. Pot. He did not then.


At. Genesis When then?


C. Pot. I saw him not since, and he told me of Bamfields man.


At. Genesis How came it about Mr. Love spoke with you?


C. Pot. I did prevail with my keeper to go with me to dinner, and to take a
glass of wine, and then I provided for Mr. Loves coming to me.


At. Genesis What has Mistress Love said unto you?


C. Pot. I saw her ever and anon.


At. Genesis What has she said to you?


C. Pot. She has wished me with tears to have a care of her husband, and not
to discover any thing, I think she has.


At. Genesis Did not Mr. Love say then, that he had been at a fast, where you
were remembered?


C. Pot. He did so.


At. Genesis My Lord, I confess, I was with this man in the Tower, as I am bound
to do by my place, to examine him; he had made his examination before I came
thither, and I brought it with me. My Lord, I did ask him questions, he did
answer me upon knowledge, he did confess the truth, but told them, Mr.
Attorney General was pleased to help him to particulars, and bring them to his
remembrance.


C. Pot. I profess, if it had been to save my life, I could not affirm them,
but you putting me in mind of it, I did know of it.


At. Genesis At the Committee of Examinations, then he had more particulars told
him, and he did confess he did know them all, and he may give you an account,
whether he did not give an account under his own hand: My Lord, I am not
abused, but the Council of State, and the Parliament are abused, and if this
man should do this wrong to Mr. Love, and inform the Court and Council, and
the man be brought upon his life, because he has affirmed it, and that
several times before several Committees. This man must not escape unpunished,
if for no other fault but this, to accuse a man before Authority, and when he
comes to his oath to deny every word of it. Captain Fisher will witness, that
he did bring all under his own hand, and upon my credit, he did speak as fully
as we did open, and much more fully; and I answered, upon here-say, how do you
know it? and he said he did know it, he did remember it, and he did put it down
positively, and that when Mr. Drake went, away, all the meetings were at Mr.
Loves house, and Mr. Love did still declare the occasion of the meetings, and
the letters were opened by him, and the discourse upon them; and every word he
said upon his own knowledge.


C. Pot. I do confess again, that before Captain Fisher, and Mr. Attorney did
prompt me --


At. Genesis Prompt you, Sir!


C. Pot. Before he did remember me of them, I had forgot them, as if I had
never heard them; but it is one thing to remember a thing as I have heard, and
as J conceive to be true, and another thing to swear to it positively: and the
paper allowed me this latitude, some of it, I have heard, the rest J believe,
and some J know, and upon this account J believe it is all true.


At. Genesis My Lord, It Is possible, J might wish him to express what he did
know himself, and what he did know by relation of others, and so did set it
down, and he did it fully and clearly; and after all this, brought it in again
written with his own hand to the Council of State.


At. Genesis My Lord, if you please, Captain Fisher may go for the Original
under his own hands.


Clerk The Original cannot be ^ound.


Mr. Love. Here is nothing at all that concerns me about the business of
Titus, in Jersie, and about the letter from Titus, and the copy of the letter
from the King; he tells you he does not know it was in my ^ouse, he tells you it
was but a copy, not the Original.


Captain Pot^er withdraws. Major Alford called into the Court, and takes his
oath. At. Genesis My Lord, let him declare what he knows either by himself, or
others, and of his employment at Calice: make the whole Narrative as much as
you can remember.


Major Alford. My Lord, J was one morning wished to go with William Drake to
the Swan at Dowgate, heating there was a Gentleman lately come from the Prince,
where J should hear all the news from beyond the Seas; when J came there, it
was one Captain Titus, one whom J had never seen before, and he gave a relation
of the good disposition of the Prince, and how inclinable he was to take the
covenant, and to cast off the cavaliering party, and those about him, if the^e
were an opportunity to make it known, that there was a considerable party in
England that would stick close to the ends of the covenant. Upon that Sir, my
self, and some others that were there, did think we were bound in duty, and in
relation to the Covenant, to press the ends of the Covenant, for the Prince to
take it, and to prosecute the ends of it. And for that Captain Titus said, if
we would appoint another meeting, he would draw up something by way of
attestation or petition to the Prince to that purpose. My Lord, we did meet at
the Bear in Breadstreet, and there he did draw forth something that he had
framed to that purpose, and he read it; and afterward (not at that time) it
was agreed upon to be sent over to the Prince. The substance of it, was to
press the Prince to apply himself to take the covenant, and to prosecute the
ends of it; and to cast off all his cavaliering party about him, which had
brought so much mischief to his father, and would do the like to him. This
Captain Titus drew up, and this I believe was sent over, for Titus undertook to
send it over. I did ask how the Prince should be made to believe, that this
coming from an inconsiderable party, as we were, should come under the notion
of the Presbyterian party of England, for it went under that notion? He said,
he should undertake that by the means of my Lord Piercy. And the petition that
was agreed upon, he did send over, I believe, for I did not carry it to the
post house, but he did undertake to do it. Afterward he went over himself, and
when he was over, he had information that there was notice of his being here,
and of the business he was upon; and therefore he writ over to William Drake
(as M. Drake told me) that he did desire some of us that knew of the business,
should be sent over to him, to receive that account from him which he had in
the business. So M. Drake did persuade me to go over to Calice; and having
some business of my own, I did go over to Calice. I went from my house on the
friday night, and I was back again on the tuesday following: And he did give me
an account of that transaction. The substance of it was this: It was about his
own troubles he had undergone there by the cavalie^ing party, in managing that
business. He had likewise been imprisoned, and they told him they would try
him as a spy; and that they urged hard against him; and that he was in that
condition till my Lord Liberton, the Scotch commissioner, came over; and by his
means he had access to, and favor with the Prince. And that was the substance
of all. He said the King was averse to the covenant, not of himself, but by
reason of those counsels that were about him. And this was the substance of
that account he gave me of his transaction there at Jersey, in reference to the
business he went upon. And this he gave me in writing, which I brought over to
deliver to M. Drake, for it was directed to him, which I did deliver.
Afterward Master Drake carried them to Master Loves house, where they were
read. And that is all as to that business.

Then afterward there was a commission, they called it a commission, it was
agreed upon among us, to be sent over to my Lord Willoughby of Parham and
Massey, and I think Graves and Titus, that they should agitate and act for us
at Bredah, and to advise with the Scotch commissioners that were there, in the
behalf of the Presbyterian party here in England; and that is all in relation
to that. Afterward M. Drake read to me the copy of a letter in characters,
which he had written himself in his own back-shop, which he told me should be
sent to the Queen, which was to persuade her to persuade the King, as he came
that way, to close with the Scots, for that was the likeliest way to make good
his own interest; but that was at M. Drakes house, only between him and I.
Afterward M. Drake told me he had disbursed money about receiving of letters,
and receiving of news, and did wish me that I would let him have ten pounds,
and said he would speak to some others of his acquaintance to do the like, and
if he could get up a considerable sum, I should have part back again, for he
said the charge was too great for him to undertake; and I do think he had ten
pounds of me for that. After Dunbar fight, there was I and some others at M.
Loves, in his great lower room, where was a letter read that was said to be
from Major General Massey, that gave an account of the business of Dunbar; and
also did write for Arms, I know not how many thousands; and to that purpose,
that they might be provided by the way of Holland. But upon that, all that were
there did say -- I heard no man speak of providing arms or any such thing. He
writ in his letter, that for his own necessities, and Captain Titus that was
there, that a motion might be made for providing some money to send over for
their supply; and it was then said, we were so inconsiderable, and so few, that
the sum spoken of could not be done; and therefore it was moved, that every one
should do by himself and friends what he could. This was the substance of that.


At. Genesis I believe, My Lord, he has dealt ingenuously with you. This in the
general. I pray you ask him, what he knows concerning any letters that should
have been sent at the beginning of the change of this government to Scotland
from any part of England.


Major Alford. For that I know nothing; but heard Mr. Drake say, that he had
correspondency with some in Scotland, and I have heard him use one Mr. Baileys
name; and he had a cipher which they writ by.


At Genesis For the Swan at Dowgate, he gave relation of that; but who was
present then?


Maj. Alford. Truly my Lord, it is so long since that I cannot positively tell;
but I am sure I can remember there was M. Huntington, and William Drake, and
Lieut. Col. Bains: And I cannot tell, my Lord, I think there was one Mr. Hall.


At. Genesis Was Mr. Gibbons there or not?


Maj. Alf. Truly, My Lord, I cannot tell whether he was there at that time or
no.


At. Genesis My Lord, he says Titus at that time did give relation of the Prince
and his party. Can you remember what that relation was? and do you know whether
this was not afterward communicated, and to whom?


Maj. Alf. I have given you the substance of it; but for communicating of it, I
knew it from none but only from those there.


At. Genesis Titus took time to draw it up?


Maj. Alf. He did so; and at the next meeting at Breadstreet, there were the
same men again; and I think at the same time there was Col. Barton.


At. Genesis Was there no mention then (when it was propounded to you to be a
considerable party) was it not said the ministers were to be acquainted with it?


Maj. Alf. It was asked Titus, how the King should be possessed that this came
from the Presbyterian party in England, because it was agreed upon that there
should be no names used to it? he said there needed none, but only the
engagement of the ministers in it.


At. Genesis What ministers?


Maj Alf. Truly he did not speak a word of any man that I know of.


At. Genesis Was it not then propounded, that Titus should be sent to the Scotch
King before Commissioners came to him, to have a correspondency settled between
him and some others here?


Maj. Alf. I cannot say at that time, but afterward. Whether at that time or
any other J cannot tell, but one time Titus said, he had learned from my Lord
Piercy, which had hastened him over, that this business was of that
concernment, that they that did undertake it should be there before the Scotch
Commissioners did come. And thereupon Titus (as William Drake told me, for this
was not at the meeting) was persuaded to undertake to go about this business.


At. Genesis Whether was there not some directions given for a letter to be
written to the Queen, to prepare the Articles with the Scots?


Maj. Alf. I cannot say any thing but what William Drake told me privately
between him and I, as to that purpose, a letter to the Queen.


At. Genesis What was that?


Maj. Alf. I did tell your Lordship.


At. Genesis My Lord, ask him whether he was not at supper with Titus?


Maj. Alf. No my Lord, I was not there when he offered himself to go, as I know
of.


At. Genesis What money had Titus to bear his charges?


Maj. Alf. Thirty pounds.


At. Genesis From whom.


Maj. Alf. From William Drake singly.


L. Pres. Did not Drake gather it up again?


Maj. Alf. My Lord, I cannot tell; I know nothing of any man, but what I did my
self.


At. Genesis We were now speaking of the meeting at Mr. Loves house, and of Titus
letter being read, and he sent. Let him give a particular relation of that
again. I make bold to ask him questions to help his memory.


Maj. Alf. The letter that was read of Titus, was not at Mr. Loves house, as I
know of (but Mr. Drake for all things came to him; and we knew nothing but
only from him; for the correspondency was settled between William Drake and
Captain Titus) nor at any public meeting that I know of, but what Drake told
me.


L. Pres. But you were at Mr. Loves house, you said but now.


Maj. Alf. I was, but not upon this account, it was after I had been over; for
I do not know that ever I was at Mr. Loves house, or ever spoke with him till I
went over: if I have, I have forgot that ever I spoke in my life to Mr. Love
about it, till after I came from Calice; and then I did bring over a relation,
and gave an account of it concerning Titus his transactions.


L. Pres. That account you gave at Mr. Loves house?


Maj. Alf. No, my Lord, I gave it to William Drake, for it was directed to him;
and it was three or four days after that we met at Mr. Loves house, where Mr
Drake read the thing.


L. Pres. At what time was it?


Maj Alford. At the time when the Scotch King was at Jersey.


At. Genesis Whether did you bring from Titus a copy of a letter from the King?


Maj. Alford. That I forgot; but Titus did show me a letter, at leastwise he
said so, that he had it from the King, that he sent to this Presbyterian party.
And, my lord, he did copy out the letter, and the copy he gave me, which I did
bring over.


L. Pres. To whom did you deliver it?


Maj. Alf. I delivered it to William Drake, I gave it Mr. Drake himself, and I
think at his own house; I think it was the same, and that it was read at Mr.
Loves house. The substance of it was this, as he told me, That he took in good
part the petition or application that was made to him; and if ever God did
restore him, and that he was in a condition, then he should think of it.


L. Pres. What did he speak of a noncompliance with the present Government,
and by whom?


Maj. Alf. I do not remember a word of that.


At. Genesis What said he concerning the Scots, and what he would do for the
Ministers, if God restored him?


Maj. Alf. I cannot tell any such passage, nor do I remember the particulars of
it.


L. Pres. The letter was then read you say?


Maj. Alf. I suppose it was the same that I gave to Mr. Drake, but I cannot say
it was the same, because it was not in my custody.


At Genesis Did not you propose to send fifty pounds to Titus?


Maj. Alf. For that, I heard say that there was fifty pounds sent to him, but
whether it were or no, I know nothing of it, nor did contribute to it, nor knew
nothing of it.


Maj. Alf. Did not you make a Narrative your self of what you received by word
of mouth from Titus?


Maj. Alf. It is very like I did speak of it to this purpose I tell you of, I
do not know particularly what I said.


At. Genesis Did you not receive an account from Titus of his transaction at
Jersey?


M. Alf. I did.


At. Genesis Did you not give an account of that you received from him?


M. Alf He gave it me in writing, and I delivered it to Mr. Drake.


At. Genesis But when you met at Mr. Loves house afterward, did you not make
some narrative of what you received from him by word of mouth?


M. Alf. I had it not by word of mouth, but only by the delivery of papers to
me, which he could not bring over with safety.


L. Pres. Were those papers read at that meeting?


M. Alf. I tell you, my Lord, I delivered them to Mr. Drake, and Drake did
read some papers, and J believe they were the same, but J cannot say they were
the same, for they were out of my custody.


At. Genesis Who then were there present?


M. Alf. There was Mr. Love, Dr. Drake, Mr. Case, Major Adams, Mr. Gibbons, and
Capt. Far. Truly, J cannot particularly tell.


At. Genesis This was given him at Mr. Loves house, and Mr. Love present. My Lord,
I pray you ask him whether Titus his message was not well approved of, and the
letter of thanks to be returned, and the hundred pounds in money?


M. Alford. I do not remember any of these things you speak of now.


At. Genesis What do you remember was said concerning him there?


Ma. Alf. I do not know what was said; I do not know what any man could say to
them which were papers from him; I do not remember any particulars, it is so
long ago; I believe now it is two years ago.


At. Genesis Do you not remember that this was one passage in the Kings letter,
that the King wished them to send Commissioners to Bredah?


M. Alf. I do not remember that.


At. Genesis But was there not a commission at Mr. Loves house agreed upon to be
sent?


M. Alf. That there was.


At. Genesis What was to be the effect of that commission?


Ma. Alf. It was to advise those men to join with the Scotch commissioners, to
take advice with them, and to accept the Presbyterian party with the King, in
relation to the first petition that was sent.


At. Genesis Was Master Love there?


M. Alf. Mr. Love was there; but I do not know what Mr. Love or any man did
direct in it.


At Genesis Who did correct those instructions?


M. Alf. I cannnt tell.


At. Genesis Who was agreed to prepare the commission?


M. Alf. I do not know, for I believe it was prepared when it came there; I
heard that which we call a commission read there, but who prepared it, or acted
in it, I do not know.


At. Genesis Did Gibbons bring it?


M. Alf. Who brought it I cannot tell.


At. Genesis Who were the Commissioners?


M. Alf. As I remember, my Lord Willoughby of Parham, and Massey, and Alderman
Bunce, and whether Titus and Graves, I cannot tell.


At Genesis Was this in Mr. Loves study, or in another place?


M. Alf. It was in Mr. Loves study.


At. Genesis Was the rough draft corrected by any body or no?


Mr. Alford. I cannot tell whether it was or no, nor can I remember any more
particulars of it then what I have given you.


At Genesis What do you know concerning any instructions to give power to the
Commissioners what to do?


Mr. Alford. At the same time there was agreed upon some instructions for them
to walk by, which was the substance of the petition which had been formerly
sent, that is, it pressed the King to take the Covenant, and to prosecute the
ends of the Covenant.


At. Genesis Who carried the commission and instructions?


Mr. Alford. One Mason.


At. Genesis Who was that Mason?


Mr. Alford. I did not know him, but I have heard say, he did belong to my Lord
Piercy.


At. Genesis Was there not at that time some letters propounded to be written to
the Queen, and Jermi^e, and to what purpose?


Mr. Alford. I cannot tell that any of these things were propounded there, but
Mr. Drake had told me, and read to me in characters some that he had writ
thither.


At. Genesis And was it sent?


Mr. Alford. I cannot tell, for it was privately between him and I.


At. Genesis When this Commission was thus brought into Mr. Loves study, was
there not a question propounded, what warrant have* we to send Comm^ssioners,
and by what authority, and what was the resolution upon it?


Mr. Alford. We^l it may be, but I do not remember it.


At Genesis Do you remember who went with Mason, when he carried away this?


Mr Alford. None went with him, but I, and Mr. Gibbons did carry the papers two
or three days after that we had from Mr Drake, which was this commission we
speak of, to Gravesend, to Mason; for he was at Gravesend before, and there
delivered it to him.


At Gen What was the effect of these instructions?


Mr. Alford. The substance of them was according to the first commission, to
press them to use all their endeavor to advise, and take advise wi^h the
Scotch Commissioners how to press the King to take the covenant, and to ^oyne
with the honest party, the Church party in Scotland; that was the substance of
it.


At. Genesis Did he not write to you to send money to the King?


Mr. Alford. I heard Mr. Drake once say, there was a letter from my Lord Piercy
to that purporse, but Captain Titus himself wro^ against it.


At. Genesis What course or way was propounded to raise money?


Mr. Alford. I know of nothing propounded that way* It was not agreed for me at
that meeting to go down, but Mr. Drake suddenly went down, and Mr. Drake alone
spoke to me.


At Genesis But ^e told you it was the first advise of some others?


Mr. Alford. Truly, I do not remember that he did tell me so: there was a
commission and instructions read at Mr. Loves, but whether agreed upon there or
no, I know not.


At. Genesis What know you since Dunbar ^ight?


Mr. Alford. For that, we met at Mr. Loves house, in his lower roo^, and there
was a letter that was said came from Massey, wherein he gave an account of that
business, how many men were lost, and that he did write for Arms to be sent,
and in his letter did propose a way, as I remember, to be done by the way of
Holland, I cannot tell the particular number of Arms he writ for; but for
Arms; and also did speak something in it concerning his own, and Titus's
necessity, they being there strangers.


At. Genesis There was a Proposition made of raising some money for supply of
their necessities?


Mr Alford. It was not to purchase money, or arms, for any such thing, but
only a Proposition made for supplying those Gentlemen's personal necessities.


At. Genesis And how was that to be done?


Mr. Alford. It was to be done among our selves, to raise some money; there was
five hundred pounds spoken of, but it was impossible for us to do that, for us
that were inconsiderable men, being men of mean estates, and fortunes, and so
it was brought down to a less sum.


At. Genesis What was that sum?


M. Alford. Either two or three hundred pounds, I cannot tell which.


At. Genesis How was that to be raised?


Mr. Alford. It was to be raised among our selves.


At. Genesis And did you subscribe then presently?


Mr. Alford. No, I did not.


At. Genesis Who did?


Mr. Alford. I cannot tell that any did; for I then said, that I did not know
that either my self, or any there, was engaged by promise to do any thing for
any, only for Captain Titus; for he alone was there upon our Interest, and
therefore I said, for that I would contribute ten pounds.


At. Genesis How much did Mr. Love contribute?


Mr. Alford. I do not know of any particular sum.


At. Genesis Did Mr. Love press you to contribute, or move any to do it?


Mr. Alford. Truly Mr. Love did move to contribution of money, for the purpose
we speak of, for the supply of Titus.


At. Genesis When was Titus there?


Mr. Alford. I cannot tell.


L. Pres. Did Mr. Love move it?


Mr. Alford. Yes, my Lord.


Mr. Love. Was I the first that did move it?


Mr. Alford. Truly, I cannot tell that.


At. Genesis Was it at that time that the letters were read?


Mr. Alford. It was at that time.


L. Pres. And was Mr. Love there then?


Mr. Alford. Yes, it was at that time.


At. Genesis Do you remember of any Declaration of the Kirk and State read at
that time?


Mr. Alford. No indeed, I do not.


L. Pres. You did say, that the Letter did mention for arms?


Mr. Alford. But we did all every one of us dis-avow that, but only the supply
of their particular occasions.


At. Genesis Was there no motion then made for a letter to be written to the
Church of Scotland, to press them to union and moderation.


Mr. Alford. Not that I know of.


At. Genesis Was there not a motion of sending fifty pounds to Colonel Graves?
and what succeeded upon it?


Mr. Alford. I do not know of any particular, but only of the sum to be raised
in respect of Titus.


At. Genesis How should your 300 l. be disposed of?


Mr. Alford. That I cannot tell.


At Gen For whom was it to be raised?


Mr. Alford. I told the Court that it was proposed for Massey, and for Ti^us.


At. Genesis Did you pay your money?


Mr. Alford. No, I did not pay it, for I went out of town presently: I did
promise ten pounds, and ten pounds J paid, but J cannot te^l to whom I paid it,
I believe it was paid by my man.


At. Genesis Did he bring it to you upon account as paid?


M. Alford. J believe he did.


At. Genesis What do you know more?


Mr. Alford. Truly, Nothing more.


At. Genesis What do you know of any correspondency settled at Kendal?


Mr. Alford. N^thing at all.


At. Genesis This was since Dunbar fight. Do you know of any letters that came
from the Kirk, or Lowden, or Argile, or any of those?


Mr. Alford. No, J know nothing of that.


Mr. Love. You confess you went to Callice, and brought the copy of a letter
from Titus: Did J send you to Titus?


Mr. Alford. No, J do not say you did.


Mr. Love. It is alleged by this Gentleman, that it was sent out of my house,
Did J write any letter by you when you went into Holland? And upon your coming
home, you say the copy of a letter was read at my house, will you swear I was
in the room at the time when the letter was read? I was in my hou^e, but did
not I go often out and in? Sir, I do speak this, because some at the Committee
said, I went in and out often. Do you swear that I heard the le^ter read in my
house?


M. Alford. M. Love it was read in your study, but that you were there when the
letter was read, I cannot tell.


M. Love. He says he cannot tell that I heard the letter read.


M. Alford. I cannot tell whether you might go out.


M. Love. How long ago was this letter.


M. Alford. I think it was at that time the King was at Jersy, I cannot
remember the month, I think about two years ago.


M. Love. Was the letter sent to me, or was it received by me?


M. Alford. I did not say it was, I gave the paper I brought over from Titus to
William Drake; and some two or three days after, when we did meet at your
house, M. Drake read those papers, for he told me they were the same, but I
cannot tell they were the same.


Mr. Love. I desire he may be asked whether I did give my consent to the
sending the pretended Commission he speaks of.


M. Alford. Truly, there was not any man's particular assent asked, that I know
of.


L. Pres. Was it not agreed in the general that it should be sent over?


M. Love. I pray ask him this question, did not I dissent from sending the
Commission?


M. Alford. I do not remember it.


M. Love. For the business of money, he says, there was two or three hundred
pounds raised, do you affirm I raised a penny?


M. Alford. I did not say it was raised, but I say it was there propounded to
be raised.


L. Pres. This he did say, There was a proposal for the doing of it, and you
did persuade the doing of it; and he left ten pounds with his man afterward.


M. Love. Ask him whether there was not a letter at that time read, that Massey
was withdrawn at that time in discontent from the Court?


M. Alford. I do not remember that particular.


M. Love. Ask him whether the money was sent to buy arms, or raise forces, or
only to supply his wants, he not having a livelihood.


M. Alford. It was not for arms, but it was for Massey and Titus, to supply
their necessities.


M. Love. But he proves not that I lent any.


M. Alford. I do not say you did.


At. Genesis Observe Sir, there was a letter for arms at M. Loves house, read
there, and M. Love did propound three hundred pounds to be raised, and pressed
the doing of it accordingly. M. Alford did likewise lend ten pounds; you may
believe there has been tampering with this witness too. My Lord, ask M Alford
whether there was not a letter brought to him by his Sister.


M. Alford. My Lord, after I had liberty for my wife to come to me, she did
give me a paper, which I knew was my Sisters hand; if I saw the thing I could
tell, but it did miscarry.


Captain Fisher. My Lord the messenger is here in the court that did take the
letter, of which this is the true Copy word for word.


Major Alford withdrawes, and Major Huntington is called into the Court, and is
sworn. L. Pres. What do you know about M. Loves house, about the Commission,
and Captain Titus?


M. Huntington. My Lord I can say, that about March, 1648. I met with Major
Alford, and he told me that Titus was in town, and asked me if I knew him, and
I told him, I; and asked him where he was, he said he was newly come from
beyond Sea, from the Fry, there being Alderman Bunce; I asked him where he was,
he said little to me; but he said he was to meet him the next day at the Swan
at dowgate, that there was to be some Citizens in order to those Gentlemen
beyond the Seas, to speak with him there. I did meet, and the Citizens there
were Col. Barton, Col. Vaughan, Captain Massey, L. Col. Bains, and I think
Hollis his man, I am not certain of it; but Captain Far was there: the
business at that time, was only commendations from their friends there; and to
tell them that he was commended to their acquaintance. And afterward, he grew
into very high praises of the Prince, and that he had the knowledge of it from
a Scotch Lord, I know not his name. After this he told them the Prince was
running very unhandsome courses, and they had very great hopes, that his own
inclinations did not lead him to it, but it was the Malignant party about him,
that had a prevalency over him there, as over his Father here; but he did
rather incline to join with the Jrish Rebbels, and did believe he would incline
that way, unless he could get something from hence, to divert him from i^;
whereupon he did hope they would all set themselves that way, and that he would
get letters from persons of honor (whom I know not) that should persuade him
into a good belief of the Scots, and to take the Covenant; after this there was
a meeting again, I think fourteen days after, at the white Heart in Breadstreet,
and there I met too; in the time that I was there, I did understand there had
been a meeting or two before in order to the business, and Captain Titus did
declare he had now again letters from persons of honor, to send to my Lord
Piercy, and did hope they would set something a foot amongst themselves of the
like consequence: for Massey, Bunce, and Graves could see no way under the
heavens but for the King to take the Covenant, and join with the Scots, and to
engage the Covenanting party here. And to that purpose, he draws forth a paper
that did purport that they were bound in honor, and justice, and conscience,
and I think Loyalty, to maintain him in his just rights, if he would go and
join with the Covenanting party in Scotland; and that he had no other way under
God, but that; which if he did, they took themselves bound in Conscience to
help him to his just rights. Upon this L. Col. Bains makes objection to it, and
said, it was a Malignant business; and did fear there was no good design in
the thing, and thereupon they did break up. I cannot tell whether it was sent
or no, for they were afraid he would betray the business.

After that I was told by Major Alford, that Bains told them, he was very sorry
he should meddle in that business, and that they would never prosper, that had
any thing to do with him, for that the sins of him and his Father were so
great; whereupon they were very wary and afraid he would discover the
business. And he, I think, knew no further. After this, I did understand this
letter was sent to the Prince, and I was told so by M. Alford, that it was sent
in the name of the secluded members, and Ministers, and Citizens, and souldery,
and Noblemen; I remember it fetched a great compass: whereupon when the Prince
saw this letter, and had it from my Lord Piercy, he stormed at it, and said,
Who are these Noblemen, and the rest? What can they do for me? can they raise
me ten thousand men? Whereupon there was nothing done, but Titus retired himself
to his mothers house, and there lived about three quarters of a year, and came
to town after, and did solicit his own business. A little after this, I heard
(upon the business of the Scots) that there was another letter sent that did
begin the thing again, and now the Prince had considered of the thing, and sent
over the letter, and I heard, that it was to the Ministers of London. I did not
see the letter, but Alford and Drake told me it was so. After this Titus was
sent away, and that with a sum of money, as I heard; who lent the money, J cannot
tell, and what sum J know not: but presently after this, J coming to town out
of the West, in March 1649. in the beginning of March, the day of my coming to
London, after J had been here one or two days at most, J met with Hollis his
man in Fleet Street, I do not know his name, he met me, and I asked him what
news? he told me, he wondered that I was a stranger: and I asked him, what news?
says he, if you come to M. Love's house, you shall hear news; what is your
business there, said I? he said, it was to pray together, and to hear the
news: I went about nine of the clock, and prayer was over, and the news a
great part was over: but after I did come there, that I did hear, was this;
William Drake pulled a paper out of his pocket, that I understood he had put
into his pocket, or withdrawn, because of a stranger, and afterward he took it
out again. The substance of the paper was to this pu^pose, as I remember, it
was in characters, and pulled out of his pocket, and by him read: In the name
of the Commissioners commissionating the Lord Willoughby of Parham, Major
General Massey, Colonel Graves, Captain Titus, and Alderman Bunce, in order to
the Treaty, in the behalf of the well affected party in England, and these to
join with the Scotch Commissioners, according to such instructions that should
be therewith enclosed. And some body asked him, what power have we to give such
a commission? it was answered again by Wiliam Drake, that we have the Kings
command for it, and we have likewise the authority of some prudent Parliament
man, whom we look upon (says he) beyond the power of them that now sit:
whereupon M. Love replies, Come, come, let it go* and after that I knew nothing.


At. Genesis Repeat that again?


Huntington. When the question was asked, what power have we to send or give
commission, says Drake, we have the command of the King to do it; besides, we
have the authority of secluded Members; whereupon Mr. Love replied, Come, come,
let it go.


Mr. Love. Pray, ask him this one question, Were there no speeches between
William Drakes words, and those words he pretends were mine?


Huntington. J remember none.


Huntington withdraws. L. Colonel Bains, is called into the Court, and is
sworn. L. Pres. Speak what you know of this business?


Bains. My Lord, Concerning any thing that came from Scotland, I never knew any
thing, nor did I ever hear any thing; for Dowgate, J was at two meetings at
Dowgate; At the first meeting, there was a person that J did not know, which at
the second meeting, J was told was Captain Titus, and he at that meeting (where
there was nine, or ten, or more, or thereabouts,) he did propose some thing to
be done in order to the restoring or preserving the Presbyterian Jnterest by
way of application to the King, as he called him, and did advise it to be by
way of petition, and that he conceived to be the only way to preserve the
Presbyterian Jnterest in England; and that way would be the way to assure him,
he had a considerable party in England; and he did use many arguments, as a
duty lying upon us by our Covenant, to apply our selves to him, and he offered
to draw up a draught of a petition against the next meeting to that purpose:
and he said, it was necessary some thing should be done by some Parliament men,
and some Ministers, and some Citizens, that were leading men, men that thereby
he might be assured that he had a party, and that considerable. At the next
meeting, which was suddenly after, he did produce a paper, which, as J
remember, was in short hand; a petition, which was to the purpose J have
hinted. There were several debates, whether it should be signed, or not
signed, and my self, and two more before disliked it; and before he read the
paper, he began to commend the good nature of the King, what good affections he
had, and likewise did say, there was a necessity something should be done to
the Queen, and Jermine, and Piercy; who he said, were our friends, that they
should stir him up to comply with the Scotch Commissioners; and upon this there
was my self, and two more there present, (I hope it sat upon them, as upon my
self) disliked the business, and from that time for my own part, I never
heard any thing; the heads of the Petition I cannot suddenly remember. This
paper carries the sum and substance of the business.


The Clerk shows him a paper which he had formerly given in. Bains This paper,
if it be not interlined since, it was of my own dictating, and writ with my own
hands, he looks upon the paper. I see no alteration made at all.


L. Pres. And this you deliver upon oath?


Bains Yes, upon my oath, to the best of my remembrance. And as to the
Prisoner, I can say nothing.


Bains withdraws. Major Adams is called into the Court, and sworn. L. Pres.
Declare your knowledge in this business?


M. Adams. Touching Alderman Bunce and Mason, I know something by relation
touching the correspondency with them.


L. Pres. Tell the manner of it.


M. Adams. I conceive it was carried on by Mr. Drake, that is now absent; and
in Scotland, by one Baily.


At. Genesis What do you know of Mason, and of letters sent by him?


Mr. Adams. Mason I do know, and I do know he did receive letters.


L. Pres. From whom?


M. Adams. He said, from my Lord Piercy.


At. Genesis To whom were those letters communicated here?


M. Adams. They were communicated to M. Drake, and by M. Drake, to my self,
and M. Alford, and C. Potter, and C. Far.


At. Genesis Was M. Love privy to it?


M. Adams I cannot say that, my Lord.


At. Genesis Were there not letters sent to Scotland to them, and back again
hither about sending moderate propositions to the King?


M. Adams. There was such letters.


L. Pres. Who writ them?


Mr. Adams That I cannot tell.


L. Pres. Had Mr. Love a hand in them?


M Adams. I cannot say he had. I cannot prove a negative, I cannot say he had
not.


At. Genesis What know you of the petition sent to the King?


M. Adams I know nothing of it, only I was told of it.


L. Pres. Who told you of it?


M. Adams I cannot my Lord fix it upon any particular man, but I believe I was
told of it by Alford, or Far, or Bains; for I was not there at that time.


L. Pres. What do you know about the meeting at the Swan at Dowgate?


Mr. Adams. My Lord I was not there.


At. Genesis Then my Lord, he may tell you what he does know?


Mr. Adams. My Lord, upon our meeting in some place or other, I cannot tell
where, I cannot tell the time, nor the place, but either at the Swan in
Fish-street, or at the Swan at Dowgate, or in Cateaten street; in one of these
three places, I cannot punctually remember.


At. Genesis Who was at that meeting?


Mr. Adams. Mr. William Drake, Captain Titus, Major Alford, Captain Far,
Captain Potter, and my self; and I do not know how many more, or whether any
more, or no.


L. Pres. What past there?


Mr. Adams. It was there agreed, that Captain Titus should go over to Jersy.


At. Genesis What was he employed about?


Mr. Adams. The end of his going, was to endeavor to work an agreement between
the King and Scots, according to the Covenant. That was the end that was
propounded. And in order to his going, we did agree to furnish him with money
for the present, and made some kind of promise to maintain him while he was
out.


At. Genesis What money was he furnished with?


Mr. Adams. I cannot be punctual in that, but about a hundred pounds.


At. Genesis Who should pay it?


Mr. Adams. I paid twenty pounds of it, but I cannot tell who paid the rest.


At. Genesis To whom did you pay it?


Adams. To Mr. Drake.


At. Genesis My Lord, Ask him whether when this was sent to Jersy, was there not
a return made?


L. Pres. Well, go on, There was your twenty pounds gone?


Mr. Adams. This is the substance of what I can say of his going.


At. Genesis Was this twenty pounds that you laid out of your own, or did you
collect it of some of the rest, or did you gather any of it again?


Mr. Adams. I cannot say that I did.


L. Pres. Did you not?


Mr. Adams. My Lord, I tell you the truth, I do not know whether I did, or no;
for I remember it was determined that we should gather it at that meeting?


At. Genesis Did not Mr. Love know of the collection?


Mr. Adams. I cannot say he did, it may be, he might, but I dare not say upon
my oath, that he knew of it.


At. Genesis Ask him what return Titus made, what answer, and what account he
gave?


Mr. Adams. M. Alford went to Calice to meet Titus, and Titus did send word
that the Council of State heard of his being there, and thereupon desired that
some body might be sent over to him; for he had something to communicate which
he could not well do by writing, and thereupon Mr. Alford was sent.


At. Genesis My Lord, Ask him where the letter was read?


Mr. Adams. The letter that Titus sent, was read by Mr. William Drake.


At. Genesis Where?


Mr. Adams. At his house, as I think, for I cannot certainly remember, I did
not say, upon my Examination that it was read any where.


At. Genesis Whether were not you moved to go?


Mr. Adams. There was some motion to that end.


L. Pres. Who moved it, and where?


Mr. Adams. Who moved it, I cannot tell; it was moved, I think, in Mr. Loves
Chamber.


At. Genesis Was Mr. Love there?


Mr. Adams. He was there.


At. Genesis Did Mr. Love move it*


Mr. Adams. I cannot say he did.


L. Pres. He will not say it?


Mr. Adams. I cannot say it upon my oath.


At. Genesis My Lord, so much he says, that it was moved in Mr. Loves chamber,
then he may give you an account of Mr. Alfords return, and where the account
was given?


Mr. Adams. The return of Mr. Alfords account was given at Mr. Loves house.


L. Pres. What was it?


Mr. Adams. The return he made in general was by a Narrative, and a copy of a
letter from the King: there was with the Narrative that which was said to be
the copy of a letter from the King.


L. Pres. What was the substance of that letter?


Mr. Adams. The contents of the letter, as I remember, was first, he expressed a
great deal of affection to the Ministry of England in general, and promised
great favor when he was in a condition to do it, and desired them to continue
steadfast in the way they were in.


At. Genesis Was this letter published at Mr. Loves study?


Mr. Adams. It was read.


L. Pres. Was Mr. Love there?


Mr. Adams. Truly, to be positive, that Mr. Love was there, I dare not say; but
Mr. Love was there at that meeting, either at the, beginning or ending, but
whether the letter was read at Mr. Loves house I dare not swear; the Narrative
from Titus, was a very long one, and very well drawn, I cannot give an account
of it now: the whole of it was after this manner; To give an account to us of
all the transactions that had happened since his going out of England, he did
give an account of his usage by the Cavalier Party, that was against the Kings
agreement with the Scots, because there was some did incline to his agreement
with them, and there was another party was much against it, and he gave a very
large account of that* after that he went on describing his disposition and
condition.


At. Genesis This was the substance of the rest. Was there not some propositions
for giving of thanks to Titus, for his so well managing his affairs there?


Mr. Adams. There was a motion made by some body.


L. Pres. Who made the motion?


Mr. Adams. I cannot tell.


At. Genesis Was not an hundred pounds more to be sent agreed upon there?


Mr. Adams. I think so.


At. Genesis There was more money contributed, who agreed to lend any?


Adams? Sir, To that question, I cannot say, who propounded it; but that there
was money sent.


L. Pres. Who contributed?


Mr. Adams. I did my share.


L. Pres. How much was that?


Mr. Adams. As I remember, ten pounds.


At. Genesis To whom did you pay it, and where did you pay it?


Then they showed him his Examination. L. Pres. Come, look upon it, and be well
advised.


Adams looks upon his Examination. Mr. Adams. I paid it to Mr. Drake at his
fathers shop in Cheap Side.


At. Genesis Next about the Commission and instructions to be sent, what do you
know of that? when this letter was read from the King, and published in Mr.
Loves study, whether was there not a Commission agreed upon, to give
instructions to treat with the King at Bredah?


Mr. Adams. There was a motion made at Mr. Loves house, that there should be a
commission and instructions drawn and sent; the motion was made at Mr. Loves
house, they (...) there spoken of.


L. Pres. By whom, who did the Dialogue run between? Did Mr. Love do it?


Mr. Adams. Truly, for my part, I did not then take such special notice, that
I dare at this time upon my oath, deliver any thing positively against any
particular man, but generally all spoke something, as I remember.


At. Genesis Was there any debate to mend the instructions?


Adams. Truly, Sir, not as I remember.


At. Genesis Did not Mr. Gibbons bring the rough draft of the Commission?


Mr. Adams. Truly, I think he did, as I remember he did, I have spoken of the
Commission and instructions that were debated then and there, and that many of
these persons here mentioned, were there; but that some of them mentioned,
might not be there then, is very likely.


At. Genesis Was Mr. Love there?


Mr. Adams. That he was there some part of this time, I am very confident.


L. Pres. Was it in his study?


Mr. Adams. It was.


At. Genesis Was there a Commission agreed upon to be sent?


Mr. Adams. For the word agreed, I cannot tell what to say to it; Agreed, holds
forth as if a vote passed.


L. Pres. Was there not a general consent?


Mr. Adams. Being upon my oath, I desire to be cautious, for I must be tender
in speaking the truth in this case, and I do not know what to make of the word
agreed.


L. Pres. Was it approved of?


Mr. Adams. To my understanding the thing was thus, that at such meetings as
these, we were not absolutely formal, as if we had been established by a Court
of Justice, to act thus, and that there should be prefaces, and such things, or
such methods observed, as that any man undertook to make a preface, either at
the beginning, or conclusion, but it was spoken to by many persons, and by
every person spoken to, and in this sense it was agreed.


At. Genesis Were there not instructions agreed upon, and all this in M. Loves
study?


Mr. Adams. It was so.


L. Pres. Were they not read there?


Mr. Adams. I think they were.


L. Pres. Who read them?


Mr. Adams. I cannot tell who read them, but they were read, and I think Mr.
Drake read them*


At. Genesis What was the contents of the Commission?


Mr. Adams. The contents or the substance of the Commission was to this effect.

This he reads out of his Examination. We the Presbyterians of England, do
authorize you the Lord Willughby of Parham, Edward Mas-Massey, Richard Graves,
Cilas Titus, and James Bunce, to assist our Brethren, the Scotch Commissioners
in their Treaty with the King, according to the instructions annexed, I dare
not swear it in these words, but to this purpose it was; The substance of the
instructions were to use all the arguments they could to move the King to give
the Scotch satisfaction, and to take the Covenant; such arguments were
mentioned, as the then condition of affairs best afforded, particularly how
things stood in England at that time: which did all of them cry out for an
agreement, and gave them full power as to all things, and what should be
concluded by them, should be confirmed by these here; but I cannot say so, but
what words were, were to this purpose, saving this conclusion, that what was
concluded, should be confirmed here, I do not remember that.


At. Genesis Was there not some debate by what warrant they should act in this
Commission and instructions?


Adams. There were some such words at the meeting.


L. Pres. What did Mr. Love say?


Adams. I cannot remember what Mr. Love did say, or whether he said any thing
or nothing at that time, but that there were such words said, I have said it,
but by whom, I cannot fix it upon any particular person.


At. Genesis Was it not debated by what warrant they should derive power to
themselves to send this Commission?


Adams. There was such language, but by whom, I cannot say, I think by William
Drake* It was because the King had writ this letter, wherein he desired there
should be such instructions; there was something spoken of the secluded
members, but by whom, I do not know; there was a Proposition whether the
authority should be taken from the secluded Members, or from some other.


At. Genesis Did not Mr. Love then say, Come, let it go on.


Ad. I dare not say so.


At. Genesis Was it not propounded at the meeting to write to the Queen, and to
Jermine, and Piercy, for them to mediate with the King to agree with the Scots.


Adams's Examination was here again read. Adams. My Lord, So much of this, as
I think to be true, I shall own.


At. Genesis Was there not a letter writ from Piercy, that a considerable sum
of money was fit to be sent to the King, and what answer was given; was it not
to be done till the King and Scots should agree, and then to raise the money?


Adams. That there was such a letter writ, I must needs acknowledge.


At. Genesis Where (...) it read? at Mr. Love's house?


Adams. No certainly, I only saw it in Mason's own (...), and I remember he
showed it me.


At. Genesis Next ask him whether there was not a letter written about August
last to some here, that Massey had back friends in Scotland, complaining he
could not be promoted there?


Adams. I did understand there was such a letter, but by what way, I do not
know.


At. Genesis Was not the letter communicated at M. Loves house, and were not you
present when this letter was read at Mr. Loves house, wherein Massey complained
he had back friends in Scotland?


Ad. No certainly, that letter* was not to my remembrance read there, I heard
of such a letter, but saw it not.


At. Genesis My Lord, ask him whether he was not appointed to draw up some
letters.


Ad. There were some I should have had a hand in drawing.


At. Genesis Who were appointed with you.


Ad. As I remember, Captain Potter, Captain Massey, and M^. Gibbons.


At. Genesis But was there no meeting upon it, was M. Love named?


Adams. Mr. Love was not named.


At. Genesis Was there not one Sterks a Scotch Agent here, that kept intelligence
from Scotland?


Adams. I know, there was such a one, we took to be an Agent here.


L. Pres. Did he meet at your meetings?


Ad. Yes, he did meet sometimes.


At. Genesis Was he at Mr. Loves house at any time?


Ad. That he was.


At. Genesis When the Act came forth for banishing the Scots, was there not a
collection for his charges, and were not you at M. Loves house when it was
agreed to?


Adams. I was not.


At. Genesis Did you contribute money?


Adams. I did contribute 10 or 12s. I cannot tell which.


At. Genesis What discourse upon Dunbar fight was there from this person that is
already spoken of?


Adams. This is the thing, if you please to help my memory; for there were so
many particulars in this correspondency, that I cannot tell whereabouts it is I
am to speak to, I am very uncertain where abouts it is a Im to speak to.


L. Pres. Speak the certainty as it was in your breast.


Ad. My Lord, if it be doubtful to me, how can I be certain, and charge it
upon my memory?


L. Pres. Speak the truth?


Adams. I will speak the truth.


L. Pres. Do so then?


Here again Adams looks upon his Examinations. Adams. There is some of it I did
set down, that I dare not own upon my oath, I then did deliver it so when I set
it down.


At. Genesis Did Mr. Love know that this Scotch man was the Scotch Agent? did you
not take notice that Mr. Love took notice of him?


Adams. I do think he did, as far as I understand, he did.


At. Genesis Did not Mr. Love generally tell you the cause of the meetings?


Adams. No Sir.


At. Genesis Did you not hear Mr. Love say, that this Sterks was the Scotch Agent?


Adam. I never heard Mr. Love say so, but I knew this, that by our usual
meetings Mr. Love did understand him as I did, to be the Scotch Agent.


At Genesis How often did you meet at Mr. Loves house?


Adams. I cannot tell, it may be seven, or eight, or ten times; an uncertain
time.


At. Genesis He was at Mr. Loves study?


Adams. Whether so many times, I know not.


At. Genesis My Lord, ask him whether it was not at Mr. Loves study when money was
propounded to be raised for Massey, and Titus.


L. Pres. Was that in Mr. Loves study?


Ad. I cannot tell* whether it was in his study, or in the lower room, I am apt
to believe it was in the lower room.


At. Genesis Was Mr. Love there?


Adams. Certainly, he was there.


L. Pres. What was the contents of the letter?


Adams. The contents of the letter I cannot remember.


At. Genesis Whether did it not declare the poverty of his condition? And was it
not after Dunbar fight?


Adams. Yes, it was.


At. Genesis Was this letter from Massey, read at Master Loves house, was this
for money?


Ad. It was.


L. Pres. Was it agreed for money to be raised?


Adams. If you take the word agreed, as I formerly propounded, it was so.


At. Genesis How was the money to be raised, and in what manner?


Adams. It was by those that were privy to the contribution.


At. Genesis Was not Mr. Love there, and did not he write down the sums that were
to be contributed?


Adams. This I must needs say, that Master Love had papers in his hand, and he
did write something, but I did not see what he did write, and every man did
write that was there.


At. Genesis Did not you conceive so, that Mr. Love summed up every man's sum? did
he put the letters of their names before them, when he writ the sums?


Adams. I cannot say that.


At. Genesis Was not there a letter penned by Master Love, and Doctor Drake?


Ad. To that question, I must say there was a letter, but I cannot deliver it
upon my oath that it was penned by Master Love, or Doctor Drake, but it was
taken to be so, and I thought it was so.


At. Genesis To whom was that letter directed?


Adams. I cannot tell to whom.


At. Genesis To whom was it declared to be directed? to whom was it declared to
be written?


Adams. To the General Assembly and Kirk of Scotland.


L. Pres. Was this at Mr. Loves house too?


Adams. It was so.


At. Genesis Was Mr. Love present, and did approve of it?


Adams. Mr. Love was present at some time of this meeting: the reason why I
thought it to be of Master Loves, or Doctor Drakes drawing, was nothing but
merely the language of it, it being in order to promote the ends of the
Covenant, and all the whole language was couched to that purpose, and taking
notice of the want of respect to Massey, and the English, and of their being
beaten.


At. Genesis My Lord, This is very high; for he tells you this letter was approved
of, and directed to be sent, and this was after Dunbar fight, after we were
engaged in blood.


Here Adams read out of his Examination, as follows: Adams. There was also a
large letter in the nature of a Declaration penned by Master Love, and Doctor
Drake, and approved of by most of the Presbyterian party, Ministers, and other,
and directed to the General Assembly, and Kirk of Scotland, subscribed by
none, which contained the substance of what was declared by Titus, and Massey,
but durst not promise any great sums of money till they appeared more
considerable, and grew nearer action; the business required higher spirits
then was for the present, and the business required a considerable sum: but
to leave no means un-attempted when the business was seasable. So far he reads.


At. Genesis Major Adams is now upon his oath to tell you.


Adams. My Lord, As well as I remember, it did put forth much after this sort,
but I cannot swear it in these words, but that is the substance of it.


At. Genesis Was not this agreed and declared at Mr. Loves house, that such a
letter should be written to the Honorable Committee, and to the Kirk.


Ad. I answer, that after the same manner as all other things are agreed at
such meetings as this is, but I have no ground, and do not know why I should
say Master Love and Doctor Drake penned it.


At. Genesis Ask him for the substance of the letter, whether it were not as he
has told you, and whether he did not say, they could not promise a
considerable sum of money.


Adams. Certainly, either in that letter, or some other, there was some such
expressions.


L. Pres. Well, it was about that time, and in that letter, or in some other
letter, and at M. Loves house.


At. Genesis My Lord, Ask him if there was not an Agent come from Scotland, and a
way laid at Kendall for a correspondency between these Gentlemen here, and some
of Scotland, and whether one Groves was not sent thither?


Adams. That was something obscure; that there was such a thing, I do verily
believe, because it went amongst us for a truth, but how to make it out for a
truth upon my oath, I cannot tell.


L. Pres. Did Mr. Love know of it?


Adams. I do not know.


At Genesis Ask him what he knows concerning Colonel Bamfield's man coming hither?


Adams. Concerning that I know nothing, but I confess I had some Item, that at
that time there was something found; and this is all I can say to that, I
cannot guess the time.


At. Genesis Was it after the fight at Dunbar?


Adams. Yes, that it was.


At. Genesis Were the meetings at Mr. Loves house?


Adams. I cannot say all, but all that I know of, were.


At. Genesis Ask whether upon the large letter, Massey did not write that things
were well settled in Scotland?


Adams. Many of these things were understood so, and taken for granted amongst
us, but I can say no otherwise, I thought it to be so; but I know not.


At. Genesis Were you not present, or at Mr. Loves house, when these letters were
read, that they were in a hopeful condition?


Adams. I cannot say so.


L. Pres. What can you say?


Adams. As before. That it went for a truth amongst us, and that is as much as
I can say to it.


At. Genesis Was there not a large letter inviting your friends to union?


Adams. I understand the other letter to be this you propound to me now.


At. Genesis Now we speak of a letter from Alderman Bunce, and others?


Adams. I cannot speak particularly to that; for I did not see them, but they
were told me by one or other of those that were of the correspondency, and this
is all I can say.


L. Pres. What is the truth? Do you conceive it is so?


At. Genesis My Lord, we shall not trouble him with that, my Lord. Ask him one
question more, What did Mr. Love tell you, that if the Presbyterians got the
upper hand again?


Adams^ Those words, I think, did but amount to this, that if the Presbyterians
were in arms again, by the blessing of God, the Cavaliering party might be
prevented from getting the day.


L. Pres. Who do you mean by the Correspondents?


Adams. By correspondents I mean Alford, Potter, Far, etc.


L. Pres. Was not Mr. Love one of them?


Adams. I took him to be so, my Lord.


Mr. Love. My Lord, I pray ask him, whether any of these pretended or supposed
letters, were ever received by me, any one of them, or that I writ one of them,
or mended one of them.


Adams. I cannot say that ever I saw him do any such thing, nor did I ever see
him write any.


L. Pres. But you saw the letters there?


Adams. That I have said.


Mr. Love. Ask him whether I gave my consent to the sending away of this he
calls a commission, and instructions, about the time of the Treaty at Bredah.


Adams. No, I will not swear that, and upon my oath I cannot.


L. Pres. Will you not, I will press you to nothing, you said even now, you
did not know he did send them away, but you did say, he was privy to them, and
to the debates of them: did he declare any dissent?


Adams. I cannot say that.


M. Love. Will you ask him this question? Whether he read the letters that he
pretends were sent into England, or Scotland, or whether he heard them read?


L. Pres. That he swears?


Adams. I did not swear that these were the contents of them exactly. I was
there when these letters were read.


Mr. Love. He only heard them read.


L. Pres. If there were half a score that had correspondency, and received
letters, and come together, and one of the most confiding men read them, will
any man say, that he will not believe these were right read, such a hearsay as
this, is such a hearsay as you may take notice of.


M. Love. But let him prove how it was a correspondency on my part.


Adams. I did not say that Mr. Love was one of the Correspondents, I deny that
I said so, I said I conceived him to be so, but that is not, that he was so.


L. Pres. They did debate together, and met together, and received
instructions, and therefore he may very aptly conceive he was a Correspondent?


Mr. Love. Does he swear that J assented?


Adams. J did not swear so?


Mr. Love. He says, money was sent to Titus, pray ask him whether by Agents J
employed?


Adams. I cannot say so.


Mr. Love. Here is no proof at all, that ever I received Letter, or Writ or
sent any Letter: Pray ask him if I knew before they came to my house, that they
would bring such letters with them. Do you swear that I was present in the room
at the time that the letters after the defeat at Dunbar were sent, wherein
there was, as you say, a promise of assistance?


Adams. You were there some part of the while.


Mr. Love. Ask him whether he was not threatened with death, in case he would
not, and promised favor in case he would bring in evidence against me.


Adams. I cannot say I was threatened with death to that end.


Mr. Love. I shall bring a witness that shall prove from his own mouth, that
he has confessed, if he did not bring in evidence against me, he should be
hanged.


Adams. It is true, Percival did come to me, and I did say to him, that upon my
examination, I did say, if I were not ingenuous, I was threatened to be hanged.


At. Genesis When a man is a Traitor and does confess, he deserves mercy.


Mr. Love. Ask him whether he has not received money to give in this
information against me.


Adams. I have not.


Mr. Love. Did not some messenger come to you, some months since, from some
members of the Council of State, and told you, you were poor, and should be
ruined if you did not confess it? he had three messengers sent unto him from
the Council of State, or some of them, that told him, if he would not confess
he should be ruined.


At. Genesis Did you receive money, or were there promises made to you to
testify against Mr. Love?


Adams. Upon my oath I did not.


Mr. Love. Has he never come to Mr. Scots chamber? did he not come a month
before I was committed, being brought there by Major Cobbet; and whether he
has not received money from Major Cobbet. I desire that Major Cobbet may be
called upon his oath, to know whether he has not given him money to bring in
information against me; for he has taken notice of all Fasts, and of all
things done, and has brought all to Mr. Scot: I know, by information, that
this Adams is a hired witness. Sir, this man is a Tobiah and a Sa^ballat; some
men have hired this man against me. I desire Major Cobbet may be called.


L. Pres. He did, and might do it; but did he it to testify against Mr. Love?
I hope a State that watches the Nation, may watch for the safety of a Nation.


Mr. Cobbet a Major of the Army is called into the Court and is sworn. Mr.
Love. Pray ask him whether he has not at any time within this three months,
given any money to Major Adams, to acquaint Mr. Scot or the Council of State
with this design, as it is called.


Maj. Cobb. My Lord, I must, and do deny that which this Gentleman does aver,
and truly I wonder at his boldness in the presence of this Honorable Court; I
do know Major Adams, and have known him a long while, and commiserating him as
being a prisoner, I lent him ten pounds, but for no consideration that he
should betray Mr. Love, or any man: I paid the money to his wife.


Mr. Love. He paid it, be says, how then did he lend it? and he paid it to his
wife, that was to cover the bribery; but did not you discover to this man, if
he would reveal it to Mr. Scot, what recompense he should have of him? Did not
you walking in the fields with him, desire him to reveal what he knew, and
promised him if he did, he should be a man preferred.


Maj. Cobbet. I have been acquainted with Major Adams this four or five years,
and met with him in the behalf of the Presbyters; understanding there was
something was driven on dangerous to the Commonwealth: and I thought I was
bound in duty to requite them, if it were possible, for their pains of
discovery; and I labored with him that he would deal so honestly with himself,
and the Commonwealth, as to let the Commonwealth know, what he did know of
this design: accordingly he gave me some notice; and I said to him, Major
Adams, If I find you ingenuous, if there be any thing that I can do for you, I
shall be ready to serve you by night and by day.


Mr. Love. It appears then that the ten pounds was not ^ent to Major Adams, but
was paid him for his discovery; so that it is clear he is a hired witness; and
have you not brought him to Mr. Scots chamber with promises of preferment?


No answer to that question. The Leiutenant of the Tower is commanded to
withdraw his Prisoner, and the Court adjourns till to morrow. The second days
proceedings, July the 21. 1651.
The Court being sat, Col. West Lieutenant of the Tower was commanded to bring
forth his Prisoner, and Mr. Love was brought to the Bar.

MAster Jaquel was called into the Court, and the Clerk tenderd him his oath,
And M. Jaquel spoke to the Court to this purpose,

That there were many oaths abroad, and he could not tell what to say to them,
and he desired to be excused. The L. Pres. told him that he could not be
excused. M. Jaquel said, he was a Prisoner accused of the same offenses that M.
Love was accused of, and that he conceived he was not a competent witness
against him: the Court again pressed him to take his oath. Mr. Jaquel said, that
he durst not in conscience swear against Mr. Love, and therefore desired it
might not be pressed upon him. The Court still presisted in it, that he must take
his oath, and witness what he knew; he answered, he would speak the truth of
what he knew, as well as if he was under an oath: The Court told him, that that
could not be, for if he did not swear, what he should say, could not be
received as any thing in matter of evidence. M. Jaquel still persisted in his
refusal; when the Court saw he could not be otherwise prevailed with, they
fined him five hundred pounds for refusing to swear; and Mr. Jaquel after he
was withdrawn out of the Court, was called in again, and pressed to take his
oath, and was told that the Court had fined him five hundred pounds for
refusing to swear, and again asked him whether he would swear. M. Jaquel then,
when the oath was read to him, did not swear in that manner as the other
witnesses did, but only put his hand to his buttons, and when Mr. Love asked
him whether he was under an oath, he answered that he was as good as under an
oath: but the Court not being satisfied with that answer, pressed him further,
and then he did say, he was sworn, and was under an oath.

L. Pres. Declare now what you know of this business.


Mr. Jaquel. My Lord, for the paper I was examined about, as for knowing Titus,
I never saw him in my life but one quarter of an hour in a private house, and I
knew nothing of his business any where. For the other, Alford coming over with
letters, I was at Mr. Loves house, and when I was there, there was several men
there.


At. Genesis In what part of Mr. Loves house.


Jaquel. I conceive in his chamber, for I went up to several that were there,
whose names I can positively say, for two or three of them, though I cannot
remember the other absolutely, though I conceive most I have named in my
examination were there; C. Potter was there, and Doctor Drake, and M. Alford,
and M. Love was there sometimes, though diverse times he went out, some coming to
speak with him.


At. Genesis Was there not a copy of a letter said to be sent from the King, read
there?


Mr. Jaquel. I remember no such thing.


At. Genesis Was there not a narrative.


Jaquel. Yes, from Titus, wherein he declared the Kings inclinations to make
peace with the Scots; but that his wicked counsel about him did hinder it.


At. Genesis Was not this of what Titus had related from Jersey, the narrative of
what had past between him and the King there?


Jaquel. I think it was.


At. Genesis Was not M. Alford sent to receive an account from him to Calice?


Jaquel. William Drake did tell me so afterward.


At. Genesis Did M. Alford deliver no account there?


Jaquel. I think it was M. Alford read the narrative.


At. Genesis Did he make no relation by word of mouth?


Jaquel. Truly, I cannot remember.


At. Genesis You cannot remember it was read?


Jaquel. Yes, I am sure it was read, and at Mr. Loves house.


At. Genesis And he was present sometimes.


Jaquel. Yes, sometimes.


At Genesis What money was there agreed upon to be provided for Titus?


Jaquel. I know of none. It was moved by Captain Potter that there might be
forty pounds, but I know of none, nor was it agreed by M* Love, M. Drake or my
self, that we should lay down any at all.


At. Genesis Did you not meet with William Drake, and desire to go along with him
to see Titus?


Iaquel. I did so, but I think Drake desired it. I met him in Newgate market,
and, says he, I am going to see Titus, go along with me; I said, I never saw
him, nor did I know him: says he, You shall not stay at all: whereupon we went
and found him in a Cheese-mongers house in Newgate market.


At. Genesis What discourse had you?


Jaquel. He said, he was newly come out of Holland, and he had been with the
King, and he was a man of excellent parts for his years, and that he was
inclinable to what was good, but that he had such desperate evil Counsel
about him; and that he did much pity him, and that his Clergy especially was
wicked; and he propounded nothing to us, nor did I ever see his face
afterward, and this is about two years and a half ago; and for any other
meetings at the Swan Tavern, or for any Agents, I never met him, or saw him.


At. Genesis Do you not remember at any meeting, that there was money propounded
for Captain Titus, or for Alfords being sent over to Calice? Speak what you
know of that, and by whom it was told you?


Iaquel. Major Alford himself told me he was to meet his son, and he went over
upon that score; but after he was gone, William Drake told me he was gone to
see or meet Captain Titus, I am not certain of the words; and when he did
come again, which was the next time I heard of him, then William Drake comes
to me, and desired me to go along with him, for I think he went up and down
to every man.


At. Genesis You think then that William Drake was the prime man.


Iaquel. Yes, he was the Actor and the Agent that moved all.


At. Genesis When Alford returned, he desired you to go with him.


Iaquel. To Mr. Loves house.


At. Genesis What was done at Mr Loves house?


Iaquel. There were some papers read, which Alford, as I take it, read, or
William Drake, I am not certain which; but read it was, of a relation, that
Titus came out of Iersy, and had seen the King there, and the Scots
Commissioners, and that the King had a great inclination to agree with the
Scots Commissioners, and that he was a man of excellent inclinations and parts,
and had a great desire to agree, but his Counsel, and wicked crew about him
would not let him; and he said, as I remember, that the King was a kind of a
Prisoner with them there, and said, his Counsel did hinder him, or else, if he
were from them, he would agree with the Scots Commissioners.


At. Genesis You say, this paper was read; this Narrative was read, and in M^.
Loves house; was not Mr. Love present?


Iaquel. I am not able to say he was, when I came in, I remember he was not in
the room, and he was there two or three times while I was there, but he was
several times called out.


At. Genesis Do not you know there was an agreement of a letter written back to
Titus?


Iaquel. I can remember no such thing, but I think William Drake told me so, as
I remember, but that was two years ago, I do verily believe by what I
conceived, was of his writing.


L. Pres. I could wish that men's consciences could not be scrupled to believe
so much of a Minister, more then of a Magistrate; I hold it pernicious doctrine
for any man to think he is bound more to obey the Minister, then the
Magistrate: I ask you then before the Magistrate here, who was present at that
meeting?


Iaquel. William Drake. I am sure, and Major Alford was there, and Captain
Potter, and several others, as I remember, Master Ienkyns.


At. Genesis This was in Mr. Loves house, was it not in his study?


Iaquel. I cannot tell that, I say, as I conceive, that Master Ienkyns, and
Master Case were there, but positively I cannot say it, and Mr. Iackson, and
Mr. Nalton, I think.


At. Genesis What say you of Mr. Watson?


Iaquel. I think he was there.


At. Genesis What say you of Mr. Herring?


Jaquel. I think he was.


At. Genesis What say you of Mr. Cauton.


Iaquel. In truth, I cannot tell.


At. Genesis What say you of Mr. Robinson?


Iaquel. I think he was.


At. Genesis What say you of Mr. Drake?


Iaquel. Yes.


At. Genesis Was Colonel Vaughan there?


Iaquel. Yes, I conceive he was there.


At. Genesis Was Master Iackson there?


Iaquel. Yes.


At. Genesis Was Capt. Far, and Capt. Potter there?


Iaquel. I believe so.


At. Genesis Was Mr. Gibbons there?


Iaquel. I cannot tell.


At. Genesis What say you of Mr. Sterks?


Iaquel. No Sir, I do not know it.


At. Did you not know him to be the Scotch Agent? Was he not taken among you
to be an Agent from Scotland?


Iaquel. Yes, he was a Scotch man.


At. Genesis And for contribution of money, what money did you pay, and to whom?


Jaquel. Two five pounds to Mr. Drake.


At. Genesis For what use?


Jaquel. For charitable uses.


At. Genesis Then he asked it of you so, or for that purpose; but afterward, What
did you learn it was employed about?


Jaquel. Sir, he did not tell me how he did employ this money; but afterward,
I heard him say, that he had sent Titus money.


At. Genesis What did you contribute to Sterks his going into Scotland?


Jaquel. Ten shillings.


At. Genesis And who else did contribute, that was there? and how much was the sum
that was collected?


Jaquel. I cannot tell.


At. Genesis How much do you guess, or have heard?


Jaquel. Four or five pounds, I think.


At. Genesis Ask him who gave the Scotchmen money.


Jaquel. Truly, I did give several Scotchmen money, both to poor Ministers and
others, that were banished by the Act, because I knew they were very poor, and
knew not how to get away; and I did it out of charity toward them.


L. Pres. Because the State had an ill opinion of them, therefore* you had a
good opinion of them.


Jaquel. There was one Minister that had twelve children that was banished.


At. Genesis Were you at any meetings at Mr* Loves after Dunbar fight?


Jaquel. No not I.


At. Genesis At what Fast were you at, and who officiated at those Fasts?


Jaquel. I was at Major Adams, and Colonel Bartons.


At. Genesis Who did exercise at those Fasts? was Mr. Love, Mr. Jenkyns, Mr. Case,
any of them?


Jaquel. I believe they were, I conceive so, I profess I cannot remember, I
believe Mr. Jenkyns was there.


At. Genesis Was not Mr. Love one of them?


Jaquel. Yes, he was.


At. Genesis What was the occasion of those Fasts?


Jaquel. I know no particular occasion, but for the good of the two Nations.


At. Genesis How do you know they were for the good of the two Nations? was it not
for an agreement between the King, and the Scots?


Jaquel. I confess, it was for the good of both Nations, as both Nations are
the Church of God; and do both profess themselves Protestants, and of one
Religion; and I conceived, it was my duty to pray for the good of them both.


At. Genesis But was there not some expressions for a blessing upon the Treaty at
Breda?


Jaquel. I cannot remember such expressions; for in such duties, I desire to
have my heart lifted up unto God: And, my Lord, it is a great while ago.


L. Pres. Will you say your heart is lifted up unto God, when your
understanding is in your heels?


Jaquel. My Lord, I do not remember one passage in prayer a week after.


At. Genesis That is in ordinary meetings, but this was for both Nations; but by
what did you know, that this was for the good of both Nations, and why was it
pretended to be for the good of both? and, my Lord, why they should not meet
before, but just at that time, and at a private Fast?


Jaquel. I think that since the Nations of England and Scotland were at odds,
I have been at twenty Fasts.


At. Genesis My Lord, ask him, whether he were not late with Potter, and did not
meet with him about Letters from Bamfield, and whither they went to read them?


Jaquel. This was about February or March last, he told me he received Letters,
and desired me to go along with him to Mr. Loves, and after Dr. Drake came in,
and then these Letters were read; and I profess, I know not from whence they
came, nor the man; and so did Mr. Love declare, That he never saw, nor knew,
nor heard of Bamfield before.


At. Genesis Did he not make mention of Parties in Scotland, that one party was
for the King, another for the King and Kirk, a third neither for King, nor Kirk?


Jaquel. Yes.


At. Genesis But who were those he named, that were men for the King?


Jaquel. I think, Hamilton and his party.


At. Genesis And who for the King and Kirk?


Jaquel. Argile and Leshley.


At. Genesis And who neither for King nor Kirk?


Jaquel. Straughan and Car.


At. Genesis What, did he tell you of the young Kings escaping?


Jaquel. Something there was in that, but he was fetched back again.


At. Genesis What said he of Argile?


Jaquel. Nothing at all, as I remember.


At. Genesis Was there not an expression, That they were now agreed to receive in
the whole Nation, unless it were those that were notoriously* scandalous and
excommunicated?


Jaquel. I believe there was.


At. Genesis Did it not mention five thousand pounds for providing of shipping?


Jaquel. Yes; in the Narrative or Letter; whether there related at that time, I
know not.


At. Genesis And what mention was there made, who were fit to command in England,
if that party should come from thence into England?


Jaquel. I conceive there was three Noblemen.


At. Genesis Name them.


Jaquel. My Lord of Suffolk, my Lord of Warwick, and my Lord of Manchester, or
either of them.


At. Genesis That was prepounded by Bamfield, but I hope those Lords were more
noble, then to do any such thing: Was there not another Letter that came with
that of Bamfields, sent by my Lord of Argile, and it was only, That there
should be an apbrobation of him: And was this Letter likewise read at the same
time, and at the same place?


Jaquel. Yes, my Lord.


At. Genesis What was then propounded for money to be raised for Bamfield?


Jaquel. Truly, Captain Potter did make mention for Forty pounds to be raised,
Ten pounds for Colonel Bamfields man, and thirty pounds for Bamfield himself;
but that business at the reading was wholly declined, and absolutely refused by
all, to act any thing in that relation, in which it was sent over; whereupon,
Captain Potter did move, that if nothing were done in that, whether it were not
convenient to send the Messenger something to bear his charges; says he, If you
will pay the messenger Ten pounds, and send Bamfield Thirty pounds, I will give
the messenger the Ten pounds; but there was no Agreement, not Conclusion, I
know of, no Bill of Exchange that was sent, but Captain Potter said, he would
lay down Ten pounds.


At. Genesis But no body spoke against Captain Potters laying down of Ten pounds;
and it was propounded to you to lend Ten pounds, and you said you would
consider of it; but did Potter lend it?


Jaquel. I cannot tell that, my Lord, he said he would do it.


At. Genesis My Lord, let now Master Jaquel tell you what was the cause, why they
did refuse to do any thing in the Letter about Five thousand pounds; what was
the cause upon the debate between you at Mr. Loves house? why you did refuse to
do any thing about the Five thousand pounds?


Jaquel. The debate was soon over; for we absolutely refused it, we would not
meddle in it, not liking the business; it was a trouble, I am confident, to
them that heard it read.


At. Genesis You do not remember, that ever any body did acquaint the Magistrate
with the design in working from Scotland?


Jaquel. No, not I.


At. Genesis Did not some say, That Bamfield was a malignant?


Jaquel. I cannot tell, but I never heard of him before.


At. Genesis Were you not told he was a Cavalier, and of the Kings side, and that
that was the true reason, why they would not trust him?


Jaquel. I do not remember any such thing.


At. Genesis Did Mr. Love agree for Ten pounds for Bamfields man, and Thirty
pounds for Bamfield?


Jaquel. No, I cannot say so.


At. Genesis Did not Major Alford tell you upon his return from Calice, that he
was sent thither to take an account thence?


Jaquel. He did not, but William Drake did tell me, that he was gone to Calice
to speak with Captain Titus.


At. Genesis And to take an account of the transaction at Jersey?


Jaquel. Truly Sir, I cannot say that, but William Drake told me, he was gone
thither to speak with Titus; and this is above two years ago, that William
Drake told me so.


At. Genesis To what end?


Jaquel. To tell and hear news.


At. Genesis What did he do more?


Jaquel. I profess in the presence of God, I cannot tell Sir, I beseech you;
for in the Paper I told you before, there were some circumstances, and
something that I cannot say; but it was to this purpose, To speak with Titus,
to hear the news from Jersey; but I cannot say certainly that word.


At. Genesis We do not press you to the word, but to the effect of it; my Lord, I
think Mr. Jaquel has given an account already, that this relation was at Mr.
Loves house. Mr. Jaquel, let me bring one thing to your remembrance, if it be
true, At your meeting at Mr. Loves house, upon this business of Bamfields
Narrative, you say, Thirty pounds was moved to be sent to Bamfield, and Ten
pounds to his man.


Jaquel. Yes* by Captain Potter.


At. Genesis And when it was then said, it was thought fit by Mr. Love, Mr. Drake,
and Captain Potter, that it should be so done, whether did you not all agree
that it should be so done?


Jaquel. No, there was no agreement, but it was thought convenient, or to that
purpose.


At. Genesis It was thought convenient by all the company present?


Iaquel. Truly Sir, there was not much regard taken in that business, nor was
there much done; for we did not stay long, but there were such words.


At. Genesis But by all present?


Jaquel. Yes, there were such words.


At. Genesis Whether were not some friends at dinner at Dowgate, and was not
Mason there?


Iaquel. My Lord, There was a Gentleman there, I cannot say, who he was, nor
did I see him before or since.


At. Genesis Who did they tell you it was? did they not tell you, Mason?


Jaquel. I profess, I cannot remember that, nor can I tell, but I conceive it
was so.


At. Genesis In your Examination, you say it was Mason.


Iaquel. I said, I conceived so.


At. Genesis Why did you believe so?


Iaquel. I cannot tell, but as I remember, William Drake told me, It was so.


At. Genesis Whether when Bamfields letter came, and the letters from my Lord of
Argile, Lowden, and others came, Was there not a letter from Baily?


Iaquel. I do not remember, my Lord.


At. Genesis Nor from the General Assembly?


Iaquel. I do not remember any such thing.


At. Genesis Bethink your self, you are upon your oath, whether he that brought
letters from Bamfield, did not bring letters from Baily, and from the General
Assembly.


Jaquel. I cannnot remember there was any such thing spoken of there.


At. Genesis Was there no expression of letters of thanks for the good affection
of the Presbyterian party here, and encouragement to persevere?


Jaquel. I do not remember any such thing.


At. Genesis Was there no promises, that when they by their endeavors should get
a free Parliament in England, that they would re-imburse all that was laid out


Jaq. I do remember no such thing.


Mr. Love. I would ask him some questions; and the first is, whether he has
spoken this as a mere relation, or whether he owns all this he has spoken, as
under an oath.


At. Genesis We are past that my Lord, he did say, he was under an oath.


Mr. Love. If he say so, I am concluded.


Mr. Jaquel made no answer to this. L. Pres. You have asked two questions in a
few words: for the first, whether he speak it under an oath; you know, that
time was spent to declare it before he began: If you ask of his own knowledge,
you mistook it; for he says something he has by relation, and some that he
knows: this he has taken notice of, what should we further examine over the
same thing; for he says some of his own knowledge, some by relation from
particular parties, and some from parties he calls not now to mind: and it was
declared by the Court, that he was a witness, and the Court accepted him.


Mr. Love. I desire your Lordship to ask him this question, whether the
supposed Narrative that he speaks of, that Alford said he brought over, and
read at my house, was read at my house; or only by Alford, and so brought over
as news?


Jaquel. In truth, my Lord I cannot tell that.


Mr. Love. He speaks of Sterks a Scotch man, I desire your Lordship to know
wether he knows, or can affirm by the oath you say he has taken, that he was
a Scotch Agent.


No answer to that question. Mr. Love. Sir, Ask him this question, he mentions
a fast at Major Adams, or Col. Bartons, and that for the good of both nations;
because he thought they were the Church of God; whether there was any
intimation in that meeting, that it was under this notion, for the good of both
Nations; whether that meeting was for the Scotch Nation to invade the English
Nation.


No answer to to that question. Mr. Love. He said, (if I have taken him
rightly, and if not, I desire your Notaries to inform me better) that Mr. Love
did not agree to such a sum as forty pounds, and afterward he said, that
all there said, it was convenient. Now I would ask how these two can agree
together.


L. Pres. You are right; for the thing of agreement he disclaimed totally.


Mr. Love. Then I did not agree to it.


L. Pres. No, nor any else.


M. Love. But afterward he says, that they did conceive it was convenient;
Now, I pray ask him, how he knew that I thought it was convenient?


Jaquel. I cannot say any thing that Mr. Love did say it was convenient; but it
was not dissented from, nor spoken against by any, as I remember.


Mr. Jaquel withdraws. Colonel Barton is called into the Court, and is sworn.
At. Genesis My Lord, let Colonel Barton tell you what he knows of the meeting at
the Swan at Dow-gate.


Col. Barton. My Lord, I was there a little while after the death of the late
King; I was going into Cannon-street, and met with William Drake, he desired me
to go with him to the Swan at Dow-gate, I told him I had a little business in
Cannon-street, and I would be there by and by: I staid about half an hour
about my business, and went then to the Swan at Dow-gate, and there was, to my
best remembrance (for positively I cannot say) William Drake, and one a
stranger, Major Huntington, and Lieutenant Colonel Bains, and there was one
Captain Titus, as was said, and Major Alford, and I do not remember who else
were there. My Lord, at that time truly I was under a defect in my hearing, and
since that I have lost an ear, through a huge heat, and cold taken. But, my
Lord, I not coming but to the middle of their discourse they had, and not
perfectly hearing, could not well judge of their discourse, but afterward I
asked William Drake, what the intent of the meeting was? he told me, that
their intentions were to make some addresses or applications (some such word it
was) unto the Prince, and to take him off from his malignant or evil Counsel
about him, and to put him upon such as would be honester and better
Counselors; and this is the substance of what I then understood from Will.
Drake. My Lord, J think, two or three days afterward, I know not which, there
was a meeting again at the White Heart in Basing-lane, and at the corner of
Bread-street; there were, I think, most of them that I have named at the first
meeting; I am sure William Drake was there, and Captain Titus, and Lieutenant
Colonel Bains, and Major Huntington, I cannot tell whether Mr. Alford was there
or no, but these I am sure were there; I did not come to the beginning of that
meeting neither, the Paper had been read before I came in, to my best
remembrance; but I asked William Drake what was the meaning of that meeting? he
told me, it was to the same effect that they spoke of before; and they had
thoughts to send some body over to the Prince, to persuade him from that
condition; a while after J met with Lieutenant Colonel Bains, and truly, J did
ask him more fully of the circumstances of that meeting: he told me something
that they intended to make use of my Lord Piercy and Jermin, and those about
the Prince, which he disliked. Truly, my Lord, it troubled me extremely to
think that they should make use of such ill instruments to persuade the King,
and J said, J thought it was not well: And the next time J said to William
Drake, you have not done well, for it is not a christian way we take to make
use of such men as these to persuade with the King; for do you think that my
Lord Piercy and Jermin, and those men will ever persuade the King to leave
themselves, and their own Counsels? so he put me off, and from that time he was
a little more shy of me. Afterward he did secretly and cunningly get from me
Ten pounds, and came under a pretense to supply a friend in necessity, and J
said to him, you have money of your own; says he, J have not so much as J must
needs supply him with, and he could not do it of himself for fear it should be
missed. My Lord, J asked him what friend it was; nay, says he, you can not
know that, nor you cannot have it till he is in a condition. To tell you truly,
he had been a good customer to me both for himself and friends, and J was loath
to deny him it, supposing J should have it again. J afterward did not, to my
best knowledge, meddle or make at any meeting, J was never at any of those
meetings after the business at Basing lane, because J disliked them; but
afterward J did suppose that this Ten pounds was for Captain Titus; for J did
put it to him, and said, J am afraid you did furnish Titus with that Ten
pounds: What then, said he? Then J shall require it again of you: so he put me
off, and run out of the Land. My Lord, for any other meetings, transactions or
knowledge of any other thing from the time of the meeting in Basing-lane, J
know none. For the Prisoner at the bar, truly J do not remember, and J am
confident J was never at his house in my life, nor changed one word with him.


At. Genesis Did you meet with Titus in Fleet Street.


Bart. J did, my Lord, and J asked him whether the King that was dead (for J
knew he was much about the King, because J had heard it) and J asked him (J
say) whether the King was a man of those parts he was reported to be. Titus
told me, not only of his parts, but virtues: Truly J suspected then, that Titus
was not the man he seemed to be, and J feared he was a Cavileer in his heart;
and truly that did occasion me, with the dislike of others, to leave their
company.


At. Genesis There were sometimes private fasts at your house, wha^ was the
occasion of them, and who spoke to you for them?


Col. Barton. My Lord, I do not remember the party that sapke to me, I am not
certain whether it were Master Vickars, but cannot positively say it, or
whether it were by Sir Matthew Brand, or by whom they desired to meet, they met
in a room at my house to humble themselves before the Lord; and I cannot say
any thing of the Fast, because I had customers, and I did think I was bound to
serve my calling; and I was not there above half an hour, and it was up and
down, off and on, there were diverse Ministers, who did exercise at that time.


At. Genesis Who did exercise at that time?


Col. Barton. I was not there much of the time, but I think Mr. Jenkins, and to
my best remembrance, Mr. Love was there; there was Mr. Tate the Parliament^
man, to my best remembrance; I think Mr. Jaquel was there, and there was Sir
Matthew Brand.


At. Genesis What other Ministers were there?


Col. Barton. I think Mr. Case, and to my best remembrance Mr. Robinson; but I
am not certain.


At. Genesis What was the occasion of your Fasts, and at your house?


Col. Barton. I knew no occasion, because I was not there, but have heard, a
servant of my house, who was there, gives this relation. Mr. Jenkins began in
this manner, O Lord, thou know we are not meet to put up complaints against
any, but to humble our selves before thee, and to pray, that the sins of the
Land may be pardoned; but I do not remember there was any word, but for the
pardoning the sins of the Nation.


At. Genesis Was there no sins named in particular?


Col. Barton. My Lord, I do not remember.


At. Genesis My Lord, ask him whether any body has been with him, to call for
any money for any parties beyond Sea; for Massey or any others.


Col. Barton. I shall give you a true Narrative of that, I understood, my Lord,
that after the prisoners that were taken at Dunbar were come down the River,
there were diverse Citizens, both men and women, that came to see them, and made
a relation of their misery to be such, as I have not heard; and there was one
among the rest, that said there was a piece of meat reached down among the
prisoners, and two or three catching at it, it fell down among the dung, and
they took it up, and eat it; there were diverse did move for a contribution to
them, and it was a pretty while before I did contribute any thing; there was
Captain Far with me, and desired me to give him some money, and he did not
propose the use; but to my best remembrance, it was either for charitable uses,
or for some in misery. Now I was loath to ask him for what charitable use,
because I did not desire to be known to give such a sum of money to the Scotch
prisoners. I had a little money which I had devoted to charitable uses in my
own purpose: When the Pa^liament granted my Petition for reimbursing the money
I lent, I did promise Fifty pounds to charitable uses; and this, I confess, I
did intend for the Scotch prisoners, but was loath to ask him, because I would
not be thought charitable to your Enemies; but did it not under that relation.


At. Genesis Mr. Jaquel, you know William Drake and Mr. Love very well, do you
not know that Mr. Drake and Mr. Love, were very familiarly acquainted?


Jaquel. I must needs say, Mr. Drake would be acquainted with all the Ministers
in London; and I cannot say, he was more acquainted with Mr. Love, then with
any other Minister.


Captain Far is called into the Court, and is sworn. At. Genesis My Lord, let him
acquaint you with what passed at the White Heart in Breadstreet.


Cap. Far, I desire the benefit of my Papers.


At. Genesis At whose request did you come to the white Heart in Breadstreet, and
when was it?


Far. By William Drake.


At. Genesis Was that the first time you were acquainted with any thing of this
nature, for carrying on and prosecuting of an order, to the furtherance of an
Agreement between the Scots, and the King? What do you know of that, at what
time was the meeting.


Cap. Far. It was about two years since.


At. Genesis What was the discourse at that meeting?


Cap. Far. It was the drawing up of some heads of a Letter, which might be sent
to Scotland.


At. Genesis What was the effect of it?


Cap. Far. It was to this effect, to the best of my memory; for it is so long
since.


Here Captain Far was at a stand, whether through infirmity of speech (for he
seemed to be slow of speech) or otherwise, I cannot say; and he or the Attorney
General for him, made great use of the Papers of his Examination. At. Genesis To
desire them, the better to bring them to an agreement, that there might be
moderate Propositions.


Cap. Far. It was to moderate their desires in the agreement, between the King
and the Scots.


At. Genesis What to do?


Cap. Far. That they might abate of their demands.


At. Genesis Of their former demands, that they might be the more like to agree;
was it not so?


Cap. Far. Yes, my Lord.


At. Genesis Was it not propounded likewise, that some should be sent to the
King, to persuade him to give satisfaction to the Scots?


Far. It was propounded by Titus, but not approved of.


At. Genesis But did you not agree to send to the Scots that you did agree to,
and were there not heads which Titus, or Drake, did undertake to write, and
afterward were drawn up?


Far. I saw no letters.


At. Genesis But did not Drake tell you he had sent them to Master Baily in
Scotland? Captain Far being at a stand, the Atturny General asks him again.
Did not William Drake tell you, a letter was sent accordingly into Scotland?


Far. Yes he did tell me, he had sent letters.


At. Genesis My Lord, let him give you Lordship an account before the Treaty at
Jersey, where Drake met with him, and what he propounded to him, whether to
send to Jersey, and what persons, and upon what message?


Far. Mr. Drake did say, that Captain Titus did say, It was requisite for one
to be at the Treaty at Jersey, and I had it from Drake, that Titus did
undertake to go himself thither.


At. Genesis What was his employment to be there, and what money was to be raised
for him? -- Did he tell you he wanted money?


Far. After Mr. Drake desired, I would help him to ten pounds, and Titus was in
want of money to relieve his necessities; and upon this request I did leave ten
pounds in Mr. Drakes Warehouse.

Was Drake present?


Far. I think he was, I was promised it again, but never received it.


At. Genesis My Lord, Let him inform after this negotiation of Titus was ended at
Iersy, whether there was not a letter written by Titus, and whether this was
not read in the presence of Mr. Love, and some others, and whether at Mr. Loves
or no?


L. Pres. Upon the ending of the Treaty at Iersey, and Bredah, were you not
present at Mr. Loves house, when it was signified from Titus, that it was not
convenient for him to come into England, because he thought he was discovered
to the Council of State, and desired some body to be sent to Calice to take an
account there of his negotiation?


Far. Yes, my Lord, I was there.


At. Genesis Where, at Mr. Loves house?


Far. Yes.


At. Genesis In what part of his house, whether in his chamber, or study?


Far. In his study, as I remember.


At. Genesis Was the letter read there, and who read it?


Far. William Drake read it.


At. Ge^. What was the substance of the letter, as you remember?


Far. It was forsending one over to Calice.


At. Genesis Was Mr. Love present when this letter was read?


Far. Yes sure, he was present.


At. Genesis Was it agreed that one should be sent to Calice, to take an account
of it.


Far. It was desired, and I was propounded to go.


At. Genesis Who named you to go?


Far. Mr. Drake.


At. Genesis What was the occasion that Major Alford did go?


Far. It was his Sons being there, that was gone from him.


At. Genesis But then it was agreed that Alford should go? When Alford did return
from Calice again, and there was an account given of his employment, Where was
this account given? and where were those papers read that did give the account?


Far. It was given at Mr. Loves; but I cannot say, he was present at that, for
he was absent sometimes; I cannot be positive to say he was present: I do
conceive he was present, but cannot positively say it.


At. Genesis What was the substance of the account given by Alford, or Drake, or
who read it?


Far. It was a Narrative that he had been at Calice, and what entertainment he
had.


At. Genesis Was there a copy of a letter brought thither written from the King
to the Presbyterian party?


Far. I cannot say, he brought it.


At. Genesis What was the substance of the letter?


Far. To send Commissioners to the Treaty at Bredah.


At. Genesis What else was in the letter? Did not the King of Scots declare in
the letter, that he would give satisfaction to the Scots, and in order
thereunto he desired Commissioners?


Far. It is so long since, that I cannot remember it.


At. Genesis I ask you, whether it were not to this effect, to declare that he was
willing to give satisfaction to the Scots, and to that end desired the
Presbyterian party to send commissioners to Bredah?


Mr. Love. This is gross darkness, for you to dictate words to him, and then
to say, Was it not thus, or to this effect? and so to put into the mouths of
the witnesses what you would have them say.


At. Genesis When you go in darkness, it is gross treason.


Mr. Love. Eight witnesses have not proved, that I either w^it letter, or
received letter, or lent money.


At. Genesis What was the effect of the letter?


Far. It is so long since, that I cannot speak particularly, but it was to send
commissioners.


At. Genesis The copy of the letter that came from the King by Major Alford?


Far. I do not say so, Sir.


L. Pres. Such a letter as they conceived to be brought from him, as they read.


At. Genesis What was that?


Far. That he had been with Titus, and did bring the Narrative from him, or to
that effect.


At. Genesis Was it not to be communicated?


Far. Yes, it was so.


L. Pres. What was the Narrative read from Titus? who were present at this
meeting?


Far. There were several there, but I cannot positively remember any.


At. Genesis Was Mr. Love there?


Far. I cannot say he was.


L. Pres. Was Doctor Drake there?


Far. I cannot say positively, that he has been at any meetings.


L. Pres. When you were of this meeting, and Major Alford returned this at Mr.
Loves house, was Doctor Drake there?


Far. I cannot say it.


L. Pres. Was Mr. Jenkyns there?


Far. I cannot say it.


L. Pres. How many were there?


Far. About ten, or twelve.


At. Genesis Ask him, whether this meeting, when this letter came from the King,
advising to send Commissioners to treat with the King at Bredah? Whether was
there not a Commission named, and persons named to treat?


Far. William Drake read papers, but it was not agreed upon by the Company,
because private persons could not give commissions.


L. Pres. Was it not debated at that meeting for a Commission to be sent
accordingly?


Far. Will. Drake read papers there, that was in the nature of a Commission, but
it was not agreed upon by the Company, because private persons could not do
such a thing.


L. Pres. Was it not in order to the Treaty?


Far. It was to advise with them about the Treaty.


At. Genesis Was it not read in the presence of the Company?


Far. The Commissions and instructions were read in the presence of the
Company, but they were not agreed upon.


At. Genesis Was it not in the name of the Presbyterian party in England?


Far. As I do remember, the Commission was in the name of the Presbyterian
party, for I did but only hear it read.


Mr. Love. Let him speak viva voce.


Far. To the best of my remembrance, it was for the Presbyterian party, but
positively, I cannot say so; My Lord, it is two years since, and as near as I
can remember, it was so.


L. Pres. The Commission you say, was not agreed to, but the letter and
instructions were?


Far. William Drake did undertake to draw them up.


L. Pres. Were they drawn up, and sent? I am not able to say they were.


L. Pres. Who were to be the Commissioners?


Far. My Lord Willoughby of Parham, Alderman Bunce, Major General Massey,
Colonel Graves, Captain Titus.


At. Genesis What were they to do?


Far. To advise, but not to treat in the behalf of the Presbyterian party.


L. Pres. Not in the behalf of the Prebyterian party?


Far. No.


At. Genesis Was there not an agreement of letters to be sent to the Queen, and
no proposals that way?


Far. No, my Lord.


L. Pres. What was the substance of that letter read?


Far. It was, as I remember, to have the Queen persuade the King to give
satisfaction to the Scots in their just demands.


At. Genesis Was it not moved then to be debated what power they had to send a
Commission, and by what authority they should do it, and by whom was it spoken?


Far. It was demanded, what authority had private men to send Commissioners?


At. Genesis Did not you go afterward with some over into Southwark?


Far* Yes.


At. Genesis Where did you go?


Far. I went with Major Alford, and with Alderman Bunce his son, and I went
to Gravesend.


At. Genesis What other company was there?


Far. No body else, nor had I gone, but at the request of Master Alford.


At. Genesis Did you know that Mason went?


Far. There was no such man went along with us.


At. Genesis Did no body tell you that Mason went with the instructions agreed
upon?


Far. There was a Gentleman we met with at Gravesend, that I conceive to be
that Mason.


At. Genesis Did he carry the instructions?


Far. I cannot tell.


L. Pres. Did no body tell you so?


Far. Not as I remember, I did not see any delivered to him.


L. Pres. Do you believe he carried them out of these circumstances you heard?


Far. Yes, I believe he did, I am upon my oath, and to say positively, I cannot.


At Genesis Were there not letters left at your house, and for whom, and what did
you with them?


Far. There was at my brothers house letters left, but they were returned.


At. Genesis But for whom were those Letters?


Far. They were directed to William Drake by Titus.


At. Genesis Were you at Colonel Bartons house at the Fast?


Far. I was.


At. Genesis Who officiated there, was Mr. Love one of them?


Far. I cannot say positively, I believe Mr. Love did.


L. Pres. Do you believe, Mr. Love was one of them?


Far. I conceive he was one of them, and Mr. Robinson.


At. Genesis Did he not pray for a blessing upon the Treaty, between the King and
the Scots?


Far. That was done, but I cannot say it was by Mr. Love; but these words were
said there.


At. Genesis Were you at a meeting at Mr. Loves, after the fight at Dunbar, a
remarkable time to this Nation?


Far. I was there, but came in late.


At. Genesis Were you there, when a Letter was read from Massey?


Far. I did not hear it read.


L. Pres. What do you know of it?


Far. There was such a Letter came, to assist the King with Money and Arms; but
it was not agreed upon.


L. Pres. Do you swear such a Letter came?


Far. I cannot swear positively.


L. Pres. Did the Gentleman tell you so?


Far. He did tell me so.


L. Pres. The letter did write likewise for Arms and Ammunition, did it not?


Far. Yes, and for money.


L. Pres. Did not Mr. Love tell you, they could not do it.


Far. I did understand it was Mr. Love.


At. Genesis Did not Mr. Love tell you, they agreed to raise a sum of money for
Massey, and Titus, and Graves, and some of them?


Far. Yes, he did.


At. Genesis What was the sum of money, and for whom was it agreed upon; did Mr.
Love tell you so?


Far. I say Mr. Love did tell me, it was agreed upon for the sending of some
money, whether 250 or 300 l. I cannot say positively; and it was to relieve
Massey and Titus in their necessities.


At. Genesis Did not Mr. Love move you to contribute to this? and what did you
contribute?


Far. Mr. Love asked me, and I did promise five pounds, and brought five
pounds, and laid it down upon his Table.


At. Genesis Who was in the Room then?


Far. There were several.


L. Pres. Do you know none of them?


At. Genesis Mr. Love says, he has neither writ, received, nor sent; but he does
not say, he did not mend letters.


Far. I brought five pounds in a Paper, and laid it upon his Table.


L. Pres. And was he in the Room?


Far. Yes, my Lord, but I cannot say, any else was.


At. Genesis I could tell you who there were more; Mr. Case was there too: my
Lord, ask him if it were not agreed between them, that it should be so brought.


Far. As I did understand it was so; it was so for my particular, but I cannot
say it of others.


At. Genesis Did not Mr. Love speak to you to that purpose, to bring it in that
way?


Far. I cannot say he bid me lay it down.


L. Pres. What was the manner of Mr. Loves requiring of you, or notifying of it
to you, and the manner of your pursuit of that?


Here Captain Far was at a stand, and made no answer. At. Genesis I will make it
very short, Whether this were not done, that there might be no discovery of it?


Far. It was done to that effect, that there should be no discovery of it, I
did it under that ^otion.


L. Pres. And do you not think Mr. Love conceived it under that notion?


Far. I cannot say he did.


At. Genesis Were you not spoken to by Cap. Massey, to speak to Colonel Barton to
lend money?


Far. I did speak to him.


L. Pres. What was that?


Far. Ten pounds, as I conceived, for I received it from him in a Paper.


At. Genesis To whom did you deliver it?


Far. To Cap. Massey, Masseys Brother, my Lord.


L. Pres. You received it from Col. Barton; Cap. Massey bid you speak to Col.
Barton for a sum of money, and he gave it to you, and you gave it to Cap.
Massey.


At. Genesis Was the money, as you conceived, returned to Massey and Titus?


Far. I cannot say it was.


L. Pres. Do you believe it was desired to be raised to that purpose; and do
you think it was done according to that purpose?


Far. I do not know.


At. Genesis Whether do you conceive, that this money you thus brought to Cap.
Massey, was not for Massey and Titus?


Far. I do conceive it was.


At. Genesis And was not Mr. Love commonly at your meetings; and whether, after
Drake went away, the meetings were not at his house?


Far. I met with Mr. Love often at h^s own house.


At. Genesis This money was taken up under the notion of a charitable use.


Far. I do conceive it was given them under that notion.


Mr. Love. Sir, He gave you a large account of the negotiation with Titus, Pray
ask him if I were privy to it.


Far. I cannot say so.


L. Pres. Do you believe it?


Mr. Love. You say the copy of the Kings letter (you suppose) that was brought
over by Alford, was read at my house; whether did I hear the letter read in my
house?


Far. I cannot say you did.


L. Pres. Was not Mr. Love, when the letter was communicated, sometimes in the
room, going, and coming?


Far. I cannot say when it was read, but I say he was there during some part of
the communication, but I cannot say he was there at the reading of the letter.


At. Genesis These are good questions, my Lord.


Mr. Love The Court will judge of that.


L. Pres But do you not conceive that he understood the contents of it?


Far. I do conceive so:


Mr. Love* But he does not say, it was so. He said there was a Narrative read
from Titus, I desire your Lordship to ask him whether I was present whiles the
Narrative was read yea, or no.


Far. I cannot say any thing to that, I cannot swear he was there.


Mr. Love. Ask him whether I did not go often out of the room.


Far. I did observe that when Mr. Love has been there, he has been often
called away, and has been absent, and therefore I cannot say such a thing was
done when Mr. Love was there.


At. Genesis He has before proved it upon oath, that he was there sometimes.


Mr. Love. But look before, and he said, he could not say I was present when it
was read.


Mr. Love. This Narrative, whether was it a copy written by Alford, as news
brought over, or the copy written by Titus himself?


Far. Alford said it was a Narrative from Titus.


Mr. Love. Pray ask him whether I did send Alford over yea or no, or agreed to
the sending of him over.


Far. I think he did not, but he was sent by William Drake.


Mr. Love. My Lord, whether was he not privy to it? he told you Titus his
letter was writ before Alford went.


Far. But it was not agreed upon.


At. Genesis Titus his letter that he writ, that some might come to him, to
receive an account of him, was read at Master Loves house.


Mr. Love. I move this question, because Alford, who was the man sent,
confessed that William Drake sent him. He pretended there was a Commission read
in my house, I desire to know when or at what time, whether before the 29. of
March, 1650.


Far. I am not able to speak to the time, it is about two years since, or
something under.


Mr. Love. I desire Sir, to ask him this question, whether the rude draught
written by William Drake, or the original copy was sent away.


Far. There was only a rude draught that Drake read, and then afterward Drake
was to draw it up.


Mr. Love. Ask him whether I gave my consent to the sending away of this
Commission?


Far. I cannot say Mr. Love was there when it was sent away.


At. Genesis Did Mr. Love make any protestation against it?


Far. It was agreed by all, that that the Commission could not be sent.


Mr. Love. Ask him, whether I did not declare in the Company, when there was
such speech of commissionating, that it was an high act of presumption for
private persons to commissionate any, and a notorious falsehood, to say it was
an act of the Presbyterians, and whether did not I declare my self against
sending the Commission?


Far. I did say, it was agreed upon by all, that we could not send the
Commission.


Mr. Love. I can prove, if I may have the witnesses indemnified, that I
declared against any Commission.


L. Pres. Mr. Love has declared then he knew of the Commission.


Mr. Love. I acknowledge the dis-avowing of any Commission, J gave my reasons
for it.


At. Genesis My Lord, J hope you will remember what the Prisoner says.


Mr. Love. J do not own any thing about concurring with any Commission, but
only dis-avowing of it. After Dunbar fight, he says, he came late, and he
cannot tell whether the letter was read at my house, only he says, J told him
so; and whether was that the letter, or a copy of it.


Far. J cannot say that.


Mr. Love. The most that J have done, is but to receive news, and J hope J
shall not die for that: Was this letter of Massey written to me?


Far. J have said already, J cannot say so.


Mr. Love. I would be glad to be freed in Court.


L. Pres. You are a very free man indeed.


Mr. Love. He speaks of a sum of two hundred and fifty pounds, or three hundred
pounds, sent to Massey, and Titus, pray ask him, whether I did agree that it
should be sent?


L. Pres. Did he dis-agree?


Far. I said, it was agreed to, but by whom, I cannot say.


At. Genesis Did Mr. Love at that time dis-agree?


Far. I cannot say, he did.


Mr. Love. Did I move Captain Far, or say, Captain Far, will you contribute
five pounds to Massey, or Titus, or any money?


Far. You asked me the question, what I would do?


Mr. Love. But for Massey, and Titus?


Far. I did conceive, it was for Massey, and Titus.


Mr. Love. He says, he laid it in my house, and he so far justifies me, that
he cannot say I received it, and God is my witness, I never did see it in my
life: If another man agrees to receive money in my house, I hope the Court will
not judge me for it.


L. Pres. It is an easy matter for you to take it, and convert it to another
use.


Far. I do conceive that Captain Massey had the money.


Mr. Love. Now you clear me; another man brings the money, and I do not order
him to bring it, and another receives it, and not I.


Captain Far withdrawes. At. Genesis Now my Lord, we shall conclude in a very
short word, with a Minister to a Minister.


Master Jackson the Minister is called into the Court. Mr. Jakson. Sir, I dare
not swear.


L. Pres. Dare you testify the truth, when God calls you to it? for God will
appear in no other vision then in the power of Magistracy.


Mr. Jackson. I dare not speak against this man's life.


L. Pres. Dare you speak the truth before a Magistrate?


Mr. Jackson. That that I say is this, that I look upon this man, as a man very
precious in God's sight; and my Lord, I fear I should have an hell in my
conscience unto my dying day, if I should speak any thing that should be
circumstantially prejudicial to his life; and in regard of these terrors of
the Lord upon me, I dare not speak.


At. Genesis I think all the Jesuits in all the Colleges have not more
desperate evasions or shifts from the purpose then these men have. My Lord, you
now see what a desperate combination here is, that men being before authority,
and in the face of Magistracy, in such a Court as this is, so eminent in the
presence of it, and so authorized as this is, that men should dare to dally as
they do, and that Ministers should say, they dare not speak the truth, not when
treason is hatched and contrived, they dare not speak the truth; that this man
should be more precious, though a traitor, then the Commonwealth which should
be preserved. I hope we shall root these opinions out, or some of the parties
that hold them: that I will say.


L. Pres. Master Jackson, you are one of the parties in these meetings, you
have been at their meetings, and we require nothing of you but to speak the
truth. Saint Austine will tell you, that to conceal a truth, or tell a lie, you
had better let the world fall about your ears: you are required nothing but to
speak the truth, and will you say this truth will be a torment to your soul?
are you a Professor of Jesus Christ, a Minister of God? the great errand you
are sent hither about, is, to speak the truth from him; therefore lay your hand
upon your heart, and do as becomes you as a Christian, and as a rational man,
and as one that will tell truth, for by the Truth the world stands: we are all
no better then savage men, if we have not judgment to tell truth one to
another.


At. Genesis My Lord, Suppose Mr. Love should kill one of these men, (that do
hear the debate) in the presence of Mr. Jackson, and he should be called to
give evidence, and refuse it; he may take away any man's life; personal
respects should be set aside, when we come to judgment. You see, my Lord, the
person of this man, how it is preferred by this man. That which is the truth,
you are required to speak, and nothing else.


L. Pres. Have you any oath or promise among your combiners, to be secret in
this business?


Mr. Jackson. Never in my life, my Lord.


L. Pres. Will you take your oath?


Mr. Jackson. I dare not, my Lord.


L. Pres. What is your reason?


Mr. Jackson. I have told you my Lord, and I will tell you it again, I am a man
of a troubled spirit, and I dare not do any thing that should cause a hell in
my conscience to my dying day.


L. Pres. Do you look to die?


Mr. Jackson. Yes, my Lord.


L. Pres. And do you expect to live again?


Mr. Jackson. I trust in Jesus Christ I shall live again.


At. Genesis My Lord, I desire your Clerk may be commanded to give him his oath,
and ^e required to take it.


The Clerk tenders him the oath. L. Pres. Will you take this oath, or not?


Mr. Jackson. No* my Lord.


L. Pres. Then I think you are the men that were spoken of before, Jesuits and
Priests: they say, you are none, but you are their brethren.


At. Genesis My Lord, these go beyond Jesuits, the Jesuits will swear with a
reservation, and these will not swear at all; this man must be proceeded
accordingly with, for if this be allowed, I conceive there will be no justice
in England. And in respect of the quality of his person, function, and gravity,
by so much is it a more pernicious example, and it aggravates the thing every
way.


L. Pres. Let it be known here, that it may be dispersed abroad, and I think
there are some of most Counties of England. And this air is gone forth, this
very plot is secretly spread with some chief Ministers throughout all England.


At. Genesis This right they have done to many of them, that I believe it will
make a more severe inquisition into these persons, then otherwise there would
be: it is not blood that is looked after, but confession and contrition. I am
glad that those that are not Clergy men do come in; and the Clergy will not
confess at all.


The Court consults a while. L. Pres. Master Jackson, For your refusing to
swear, the Court fineth you five hundred pounds, and imprisonment during the
pleasure of the Court.


The Keeper of the Fleet is called upon, and commanded to take him into
custody. Mr. Love. My Lord, I have some motions humbly to make to this Court.
The first is, to entreat your Lordship, and the rest of the members of this
Court, that if I have let fall any expressions through inconsiderateness, or
for want of skill in the Law, that have been an offense either to your
Lordship, or to any, I beseech you, if I have spoken any derogating
expressions, or made any unseasonable motions, that you would impute it to my
ignorance.


L. Pres. None of them shall hurt you.


Mr. Love. Then I entreat this favor, that I may have counsel assigned me, and
Soliciters here in Court, and in my chamber at the Tower, and a copy of my
charge, and convenient time, as the nature of the business requires, my charge
being long, and I have not read a word of it, nor the depositions: that I may
have, I say, counsel assigned me, and convenient time to bring in my answer;
and I am confident, through the good hand of God upon me, I shall clear my
self of all the treasons charged upon me, and of all their aggravations,
through strains of wit, and quillets of law, by instruments of State; I am
confident, I shall clear my innocence, that I shall not stand a traitor
before you.


L. Pres. They being instruments of State, are instruments of God, appointed by
the State. For your time, you have all this afternoon. Are you not ready?


Mr. Love. I was yesterday nine hours locked up in that close room, and in
this place, and I could not read one word last night, not out of trouble of
mind, but through weariness, being kept so many hours in the Court.


At. Genesis My Lord, he has had a fortnights notice of his trial to prepare
for it; My Lord, we have been two days, and by the course of proceedings, if
the Gentleman had had his trial by a Jury, both must have been dispatched in
one day. We are appointed to go on to hear his defense now, or else on Monday.


Mr. Love. I desire a convenient time to bring in my witnesses, to make it
appear how the witnesses against me contradict themselves; I have not yet read
the depositions of one man, and I cannot read the depositions by Monday, and to
morrow is a day that some time of it should be spent in other employments.


L. Pres. To do justice, you must run out of the Church, and though you were at
your prayers, you must forsake praying and Sabbaths, to do justice; Sir, this
is of a higher nature then all your preaching, and praying.


The Court consults a while together. L. Pres. The Court all agree to give you
till Wednesday eight a clock in the morning.


Mr. Love. I desire that I may have counsel here, and in my chamber.


L. Pres. You have showed nothing these two days, that raises any doubt in
matter of Law.


Mr. Love. There are some things in my charge, that I doubt this Court cannot
take cognizance of, something in those acts, and something in respect of the
time. It is matter of law, whether the act speak of sending, or receiving
letters, or messages. And here are eight witnesses come in, and never a man
proves that I received letter, or sent letter, or lent any money. And this I
conceive is matter of law, whether the acts reach, being present only where
other men lay down money.


L. Pres. You have had counsel?


Mr. Love. My Lord, I have had none.


At. Genesis For counsel, you are to send him none, my Lord; he has his liberty,
he has recourse for all the people in England to come to him.


Mr. Love. Counsel have refused to come to me, I have there letters about me.
Here he reads the letters of some Counselors which they sent to him to the
Tower, declaring they could not come to him unless they were assigned by the
Court.


At. Genesis All that we can say to you, is, that Counsel may come to you, if
they will.


Master Love is commanded away, and the Court adjourns till Wednesday. The
third days proceedings. July 25. 1651. The Court is set, and Mr. Love is
commanded to the Bar.
At. Genesis Mr. Love. This is the day the Court has given you, (according to
your desire) to make your defense, and they are ready to hear it.


L. Pres. And I hope those directions that have been given, have been observed,
that any persons of what quality soever, either Lawyers, or others that came
to you, have had in a fair way access unto you. And that you have been
debarred nothing that the Court gave order for; if there have been any
impediments, we will do our best to have them taken away.


At. Genesis My Lord, I have nothing more at present against him; you have heard
that whereof he stands accused, and the evidence produced to prove it: and my
Lord, I hope they be sufficient to convince the Gentleman, that there is proof
against him for these facts, and treasonable designs, whereof he stands
accused. This day is appointed for is defense, if he think fit to make it; but
if God has otherwise wrought upon his heart, and that he himself is convinced,
that the charge against him is proved to be true; to me it will be the best way
of his preservation; But what way soever he thinks fit to take, I shall be
ready to go along with him in it; and so my Lord, I expect what he shall say.


Mr. Love. My Lord, I shall not trouble your Lordship, and the Court, to bring
in at present any witnesses, to testify any thing that might invalidate that
testimony that some have brought in against me; I love not to protract time,
but I should betray my own innocence, should I by my silence lie under all
that charge and obloquie which is cast upon me: and therefore, I deem it my
duty wherein I can, and as far as I am able, to express my self before your
Lordship, and the Court; And therefore I humbly crave leave of your Lordship,
and this Court, that I may make my defense for my life before you.

Although I am denied counsel to plead for me in this Court, which is so just
and necessary a means for the preservation of my life, yet my comfort is that
of the Psalmist, Psalm. 7.10.12.5.
My defense is of God, which saves the upright in heart, and pleads the
cause of his servant against him that puffs at him.

My Lord, You have granted me that favor, which the Romans did to Paul, that
he might answer for himself, concerning the crimes laid against him.

In making my defense, I shall humbly crave leave to proceed in this method, To
speak something first concerning the charge. 2dly, concerning the witnesses and
their testimony. 3dly, some thing concerning my self; and then Lastly, some
things humbly to propose to your Lordship, and the Court. Concerning my charge.
Mr. Attorney General has exhibited a charge against me consisting of two
parts. Of high treason, and of other high crimes and offenses. As touching the
first, comparing the acts which the State has made, with the actions which my
self have done, I know not any personal act of mine, (proved against me) that
renders me guilty, as to treason, by any public act of your Lordships; And
therefore I pleaded the general issue, Not guilty, as to that.

As to the second, my Counsel, having a general license to come to me, and
since having been with me; they have acquainted me that presence with, or
silence at what my accusers have done, this renrenders me culpable by your
acts. And therefore as to that, I shall humbly commit my self to your justice
and mercy.

Concerning Sir, the Charge laid against me, I can safely and truly say, I am
charged with many things, which I ought not; being pretended to be done before
the Act was published, which constitutes this Court; I am charged likewise
therein with many things that I knew not, and with other things that I did not;
and therefore dare not in conscience lie under the obloquie of the whole
charge. I do therefore in general declare and protest against what is
mentioned in the charge, touching the raising of insurrections, seditions, and
rebellions; I may say in that regard as Jeremy did, I desire not that woeful
day, God he knows.

To the other particulars, to wit, the confederation with Jermine, Piercy, and
others in foreign parts, to raise forces, I answer, I dislike the very mention
of their names, or any concurrence with them in any practice of such a nature;
who are persons, whose principles are so contrarient to religion and liberty.

As touching the other particulars; to wit, a correspondence with the Son of
the late King, the Queen, Jermine, and Piercy, and others mentioned in the
charge; I do declare before you, that I never received letter from, nor sent
letter to any of them, nor had I any correspondence with them.

There are other things in the charge, to which all the depositions of the
witnesses do not in the least come up: And should I by my silence, render my
self obnoxious to the whole, you might judge me to be guilty of that which
indeed I am not guilty of.

I observe in reading the charge, that there are many things in it, which the
witnesses do not in the least speak unto. For first, None of them swear, that
ever I writ letter to the King, or to the Queen, his mother, or to Jermine,
Piercy, or any other person named in the charge, or to any person of the
Scottish Nation, since the troubles began.

Again, None of the witnesses swear, that ever I either desired, or persuaded,
or directed any person to write any letter to any persons, whose names are
mentioned in the charge; or to any person in, or of the Scottish Nation; Nor do
any of them swear, that ever any letter was written in my house: but that only
letters supposed to be come from, or sent to the Scots, were read there, which
I do not deny. Again, None of them swear, that ever I did so much as read a
letter in my house, or other where, that was pretended to come from the Scots,
or pretended to be sent into Scotland. Further, None swear that ever I gave my
express and particular assent to the sending away of any letter. And none
swear, that ever I collected one penny of money, either for the King, or the
Scots, or any person in Scotland. That which is affirmed by one testimony, to
wit, by Alford, that I moved for money, I shall answer when I come to it.
Again, None of the witnesses prove, that ever I invited any person, or
foreign forces, to invade the Nations of England, and Ireland, which yet is
laid expressly to my charge, in the charge read against me: None likewise prove,
that ever J plotted, contrived, or endeavored to raise forces, tumults, or
insurrections within this Nation, against the present Government. None swear,
that J was a correspondent; Jndeed Adams in his testimony had these words,
(which both the Notarie and my self took,) that he took me to be a
correspondent: but when J had your Lordships, and the Courts leave to put this
question to him; Whether upon oath he would affirm J was one? His answer was,
that he could not positively say J was so, but he said, he did conceive J was a
correspondent, but did not say J was so. So that Sir, as to these particlars,
there are none of the eight witnesses, (neither the seven, that have been
sworn, nor yet Master Jaquel, whom J do not take to be under an oath,) that
do charge any of these particulars upon me.

J have a word also to speak concerning the witnesses, who are my accusers, and
J might say, there is an incompetency in them, as to their number. There are
many particulars sworn against me, to which but one witness has sworn to one
fact; and this J shall humbly offer to your Lordships and the Courts
consideration. J might allege also an incompetencie, as to their quality, they
are not only persons accused of treason, and so are not to be believed, but
they have made an open confession of that which is treason by your Act, and so
are not legales testes. They have done that by an open confession, which as J
am informed, is equivalent to a conviction; they have confessed, sending of
letters, receiving of letters, and lending of money. But they have proved none
of these things against me. Now they having both given it under their hands,
and also publicly declared that they have done these things, I cannot judge
them competent witnesses against me; but this I must leave to the Courts
consideration.

Sir, Concerning the incompetency of their number, To that wherein two
witnesses do concur, I am concluded. And wherein they have testified any
thing true, I would not deny it for all the world, and wherein they agree in
their testimony in a truth, therein I will be candid, and ingenuous to
acknowledge it.

My Lord, Though the Charge be long, and my time but short, and the depositions
many sheets of paper, (and truly I could hardly read them over, till late last
night) yet through the good hand of God upon me, I shall labor to make as
plain and clear a defense as God shall enable me.

Sir, In reading over the charge, I observe, that those things which seem most
criminal against me, are sworn to, but by single testimony, and I will mention
with your Lordships leave a few particulars.

First, Touching the letters, said to be from Titus, the effect of it being as
was said, to desire some to come over to Calice, that he might give them
information touching affairs at Jersey, none but Far swears that, this letter
was read in my house. The other witnesses, some say, it was read in one place,
and some in another; Alford, I remember, he says, he heard it from William
Drake, and Adams says, it was read in William Drakes house, but none but Far
swears it was read in my house. There is likewise none but Far swears, that
Major Alford was desired in my house to go to Calice to Titus, neither Jaquel,
nor Potter, nor Alford, nor Adams, nor any of the rest lay this to my charge;
it is only Far, that lays this to my charge, and he does it most untruly,
which I will make out unto you by an undeniable demonstration.

He says, that at a meeting at my house, the company did desire Major Alford to
go to Calice. Now if your Lordship observes Alfords testimony, he tells you upon
oath, that he was never in my house, till after he came from Calice, nor ever
spoke with me in my life, till after he came from Calice, therefore could not
be desired in my house to go to Calice. So that Sir, I will not lay it upon the
badnesse of Far's conscience, but upon the badnesse of his memory. I do not
think he is such an Atheist, to swear falsely deliberately, but being asked so
many questions as he was, for he was asked fourscore and eighteen questions by
Mr. Attorney, and some of the Court, he might easily say, he knew not what.

And I saw the man was confounded, and it was hinted to him what to say, by the
help of the papers, and examinations taken from him in private, and showed to
him in public; so that Sir, I saw the man under a temptation. I was loath to
mention this then, though I knew his testimony herein to be be false, because I
would not anticipate my last answer.

A 3d particular charged upon me by one witness only is a copy of a letter,
(not the Original, none swears that) that Alford received from Titus, and he
told him, it was a copy of a letter from the King. Now Far he swears that the
substance of the letter was to desire Commissioners to be sent over to Bredah,
at the Treaty there; now Alford, who pretended to receive this letter from
Titus, being asked the question, he swears that there was no such thing in the
letter, that he knew of. Now truly, if any did know the contents of that copy
of a letter, it must be Alford, who brought it over; I beseech your Lordship
therefore to consider it, and though the charge against me be very high, and my
condition very low, and the opposition against me very great, yet I hope I am
in the hands of merciful and just men, and that wherein you see but single
testimonies, that therein you would be very tender in proceeding to a sentence
against me upon those testimonies.

Again, in the next place, I observe a single testimony only in another
business, and that is Major Alford; none but he of all the witnesses, did
swear that it was agreed upon among us, that is, at my house, That a
commission, and instructions should be sent over to the Lord Willoughby of
Parham, Massey, Titus, and Alderman Bunce; none, I say, but Alford swore this;
Adams indeed, swore that there was a motion that this should be, and Huntington
swore this, that Mr. Love should say, Come, come, let it go, (to which I shall
answer when I come to it.) But Far said expressly, three times in Court, being
upon oath also, That all the Company were against sending away the Commission:
And Alford he only swears, that the Commission was agreed upon.

I hope your Lordship, and the Court, will judge which of these to believe, and
for Alfords affirming that it was agreed upon among us, I am sure, if he had
any conscience, he could not say that I agreed to it. I will not deny (now
witnesses have proved it) but that I was present. But I did express my self
against the Commission and instructions, as being an act of high presumption,
for private persons to send commissions and instructions; and as being an act
of notorious falsehood, that it should run in the name of the Presbyterian
party; when none did know any thing of it, that I know of, but only those
that were then in the room; and I beseech your Lordship, and the Court, to
consider that this is not only a single testimony, but that it is said to be
done in the year 1649. a great while ago, my Lord: And so the business of
Titus, if it had been true, was done some time before that; so that Sir, it
being done before the Act of the 26th of March, 1650. which constitutes this
Court, herein I hope it will not be deemed criminal, if I had agreed to, and
approved of the Commission, which I never did. Another particular, to which I
observe, there is but a single testimony, which is Alford also; he swore, that
at a meeting at my house, I moved for contribution of money to Titus: None
swore this, but only he, Adams swore, I took pen and ink in my hand, but he
knows not what I writ: others swore that I was sometimes present at the
meeting, but none but Alford swore that I moved at a meeting for contribution
of money. Now Sir, as to that it is but a single testimony; and if it were
true, I do not deem it comes under the Act, because the Act (of which I was
ignorant, till the day I heard it here in Court) of the second of August, 1650,
That Act does adjudge this to be treason, to wit, The sending, or causing to be
sent money, horses, or arms, into Scotland. Now Sir, if it had been true,
which this witness deposes, That I at a meeting did move* for money, yet he
proves not against me, that ever I received or sent away a penny; and if I had
moved it, that had neither been a sending away of money into Scotland, nor a
causing of money to be sent away; and so brings me not as to treason under your
act.

Another thing, unto which only a particular witness swore; to wit, Far, is,
that I moved him particularly to contribute money; he charge not this at a
meeting, as Alford does; for he says, he came in late, but says that it was a
personal motion to him alone; and he does not say, that I moved him for money,
for Massey and Titus, but that I only asked him this question, Captain Far,
what will you do? And if your Lordship consider it, and that your Notaries have
taken right, you shall find that to be his answer, which I shall answer when I
come to it; and thereupon he confesses, he brought five pounds to my house, but
he does not tell you that I received it, and God is my witness, I never saw
it, nor received it, nor did I give any directions about it; but as Far was
going out of the Court, he named Captain Massey, the person which he thought
received the money; for which he was rebuked by some that were by him, that so
the greater odium might lie upon me; as if because the money being brought to
my house, I must needs therefore receive it; his name, as I am informed, that
rebuked him for declaring, who received it, is Captain Bishop; so that they
would insinuate into your breasts, who are my judges (who I hope will be
conscientious) That it was I that received the money, when the witness meant
honestly, that another received it; but if I had received it, or moved for it,
yet he is but a single testimony to that particular. Again, in reading the
depositions, I take notice that there is only a single testimony to those
words; (upon the reading; reading I cannot say, for I never read it; upon the
hearing some papers read, supposed to be a commission) that Huntington swore,
that I should say, Come, come, let it go. Those were his words; but the other
who were there present, two or three of them being asked whether they heard me
speak such words, they all of them denied that they heard any such words. Now
truly, this Huntington is a man whose face I never saw before that day, nor
since, till I saw him here in the Court; and if I had known that a business of
any dangerous nature had been come to my house, which I did not; (for I knew no
more of it, then any here present, before Drake took the papers out of his
pocket, which Huntington confesses were written in characters, and read by
Drake,) I should have been accounted a very indiscreet man, to speak any such
words in the presence of a man whose face I never saw before. And for those
words, that I should say, Come, come, let it go. I hope your Lordship, and the
Court, will be satisfied, that I never spoke any such words; as to the
commission and instructions, for then I should have contradicted my self in one
breath. For at the same time, I had spoke against it.

Again, I observe in the depositions, None but Adams affirms that there was a
Letter, which says he; was declared to be directed to the General Assembly of
Scotland. He does not swear it was directed to the General Assembly, but that
it was declared to be so, and so swears by hear say: None but he (I say)
affirms upon oath, that at my house there was a Letter read which was declared
to be directed to the General Assembly. And he says further, He thought this
Letter was pend by Master Love, or D. Drake. But I beseech your Lordship and
the Court to consider by what reason he did conceive this, and I hope your
Lordship will distinguish between a positive assertion, and a conjectural
supposition. For being asked why he conceived so? I conceive so, says he,
because of the language of it; as if he that never saw any Letter of mine, to
know that poor and low style I write in, should conceive that either I, or that
other Gentlemen named, should pen that Letter, merely because of the language
of it; it being (he said) in order to promote the ends of the Covenant. I hope
the Court will judge of the insufficiency of this evidence; and were it never
so clear, yet as to that particular, it is but one testimony.

Again, None but Adams swear concerning a large Letter, that for my part I
never knew of, till the day he affirmed it here in Court. A large letter, he
says, in the Nature of a declaration, pend as he thought, by Master Love, or
Doctor Drake, wherein it should be said, that they could not send money, till
the Scots did appear more considerable, and grew nearer to Action. Yet he
confesses he had no ground to say, Master Love pend it. And indeed, he had not.
But Sir, as for this letter, though I durst not for a world deny any thing
which I know to be true; Yet God is my record* to any knowledge, I never so much
as heard any mention of it. And as for these words he speaks of to be in the
Letter, I know nothing at all of them. Nor did I ever hear them, as I know of,
till I heard him affirm them here in Court.

But if it had been so, yet he is but a single testimony, and I beseech your
Lordship to consider that he says it was to this effect, or this was the
substance of it. Now I hope, so many Grave Judges and Lawyers that sit upon my
life, and so many conscientious men, will be tender of a man's blood, when a man
shall come in with evidence, and shall show neither my hand, nor the letter,
nor the Original, neither copy, nor transcript, nor any thing but the vain
rovings of a man's memory in things spoken or done so long ago: And that a man
shall come in against a man's life, and shall only say, that this was the sum
or substance of it, or it was to this effect: And I being a Divine, I shall not
speak as to matter of Law, that this is insufficient testimony, but as a
Scholar, and one that studies the Scriptures, I shall observe one memorable
instance that pleads my justification in this particular* and they are the
words of Christ; Christ said, Destroy ye this Temple, and in three days I will
raise it up: Now the Scripture in Mark, says, John 2* 19. Mar. 24.57.58.
There arose certain and bare false witness against Christ^ saying, we heard
him say, I will destroy this temple, etc.

I beseech your Lordship to consider, that in this testimony of the false
witnesses against Christ, there is only the variation of a word, and the
addition of a letter; there is the addition of a letter, I, and the alteration
of the word ye for will, (there is all) for Christ did not say I will destroy,
but, destroy ye, and yet the Scripture takes notice of it, that this addition
of a letter, and alteration of a word, brought his accusers under a false
testimony; though they spoke according to their intention, for they did verily
believe he spoke of the Temple, for they said, Forty years was it in building.
So that I beseech you be tender in matters of blood; I know you who are
skillful in the law do know that the proof of treason must be as clear as the
Sun, Probationes opportent esse luce clariores. Now when a man shall come
against a man's life, and cannot show any letter that ever he wrote, or that
ever he did receive; but shall only swear it was to this effect or to this
purpose, or I believe this was the substance of it, I hope you are so wise and
conscientious, that you will pass no judgment upon this conjecturall evidence.

Another particular, to which only one witness testifies; and that is Adams,
he swears that I should say, that if the Presbyterians were in Arms, by the
blessing of God, malignants might be prevented from getting the Day. Truly, I
do not know what crime is in these words, but as they may be wrested. But Sir,
I do remember that this Adams has often come to my house; he said, seven or
eight times; he might have said, seven and twenty times: for he has come some
times once or twice a week to my house, to tempt me (as I now perceive) and
has offered me money: and would ask me whether I knew any thing for a public
use that might require money. And though I never suspected him, yet so free am
I from maintaining correspondencie, or from having intelligence, or
contributing of money to maintain a war, That I never received one penny of him
in my life, though I have been moved to it by him: But I remember, of late
especially, about a quarter of a year before I was in prison, he would come
once or twice a week to my house, and he pretended that he was wrought upon by
me, and that I had turned him from his malignant principles; for he was very
violent for Hamilton's invasion of England, which I was, and to this day am
against; and I did labor to possess him what a mischievous design that was:
And so he pretended to be turned to my principles, and upon this got some room
in my affections; but these words were not above a fortnight before I was
committed to prison: and I remember, the occasion of them was this; I was
bewailing the great alienation and difference that there was between the
Presbyterian and Independent party (though I do not love names of distinction)
and indeed, thus I said, That if the godly party, that are now disunited and
disjoined, both of the dissenting and the Presbyterian way, were in arms, there
were no hopes that ever the Malignants should get the day. And God is my
record, I spoke nothing to him but to this purpose. And thus through the good
hand of God upon me, I have spoken to what I observe in reading the
Depositions, wherein I find but single testimonies against me.

I shall now crave leave (which is the main of my work) to run over the
Depositions as briefly as I can; for I shall not trouble you with large
Speeches: but being the Depositions were large, and the Witnesses many, your
Lordship and the Court (I hope) will bear with me with the more patience, if I
speak more largely in it. It is (...) duty to speak for my self, and it is for
my life.

The first Witness that (...) in Court against me, was Henry Potter. As to his
testimony, there are many particulars which (...) was asked about me, to which
he spoke but conjecturally; As he thought, and as he believed, and as he
conceived. And when papers by M At. Gen, of his Examination were tendered to
him, he answered, that then he had a latitude to speak more then he durst
affirm upon Oath. And upon this I shall humbly crave leave that I may make this
motion to you, That you would not, in passing judgment upon me, hearken to any
private examinations, which are extrajudicial to be brought in Court against
me; for most of the Witnesses had their private Examinations showed them in
Court, and were read to them, and they did not speak in their relations of what
they knew, but what they conceived; and when they could not tell what to say,
then their Examinations were produced to direct them; and I hope your Lordship
and the Court will take notice of this. And herein I cannot but acknowledge the
justice of this Court in this particular, That you would not receive private
examinations till they came face to face, that I might answer to the crimes
laid against me.

But as to his Testimony, I shall not run over things that touch me not, I must
not flatter my self to pass over things that concern me. For I know it will be
looked upon with more prying eyes then mine are. There are only two things in
his testimony that concerns me. He speaks not of any meetings at my house that
he knows of; he speaks not of any money that ever J lent him or gave him,
though there was a narrow and exact examination of him in those particulars.
But two things concern me in his Deposition: The one is, that he received a
letter with a great L upon it, from one Colonel Bamfield, which was a Narrative
of the Affairs of Scotland, which letter, with two more enclosed from my Lord
of Argile, Lowden and Louthain, He said, he brought them to Mr. Loves; and
herein J might take notice, that he forgot himself a little, for he might have
said, that he brought them first to Mr. Jaquels; for Jaquel did affirm in
Court, that Potter brought the letters to him, and spoke to him to come to me.
The substance of the letters from the Earl of Argile and the rest, he says,
were to move for ten thousand pound; and (as J remember, Jaquel says, for five
thousand pound: But Potter himself acquits me in this matter; for he does not
swear the letter was to me, nor could he swear it justly; nay, he swears, he
did not think it was to me. And as for this Bamfield, he is a man whose face J
never saw to this day. And he swears, (and indeed, he had been injurious if he
had not told you thus) that when he came into Mr. Loves house, he said, Mr.
Love, I have news to show you. This passage of C. Potters, [Mr. Love, I have
news to show you] was through some mistake left out of his Depositions.
And unless things be aggravated against me by the insinuations of men, and by
rigid inferences and collections, this will be the worst charged upon me, That
there were several meetings at my house, and several letters read there;
which J do not deny: But Sir, he confesses, that he said, [ Mr. Love, I have
news to show you;] and that he opened some of the letters, and that some were
not opened when he brought them: But neither he nor Jaquel swears, That J
opened them. And he tells you, that he carried the letters away with him. And
he swears further, that both my self, and all that were there present did
manifest an utter dislike and detestation of those letters. But herein J know
what will be laid to my charge. It will be said, why did not Mr Love reveal
them? Truly to this J do ingenuously say, That J did conceive, by reading of
the Act that constitutes this Court, That these only were bound to reveal,
that did receive them; and not that J was bound to reveal that which another
man received. But herein J am better informed by my council, and they tell me,
That presence with, or silence at what others do, makes it a criminal fact in
me, if the matter of the Letter be criminal and treasonable by your Acts; and
therefore in this, that J did not discover them, J shall humbly beg your favor.

The next thing in Potters Testimony that touches me, is, He swears that he
heard of a Proposition for raising of 400 l. for Titus and Massey: But he
varies from the others; Alford said, 2 or 300 l. and Far said, 250 or 300 l.
and Potter says, 400 l. But he says he was not present when the proposition
was made, and therefore he cannot speak as to that. But yet says he, J brought
ten pounds to Mr Love's house, and there left it (five or six persons more
being in the room.) Mr. At. Genesis was pleased to ask him whether he did not
give me a twitch by the hand or cloak when he brought it? Potter, I remember,
denies that he did so, and I do not remember that ever he did it, nor do I
remember that ever he laid penny of money down in my house. And I tell it you
in the presence of God, I never saw it, nor received it to this very day. But
Sir, if he had given me a twitch, which is intended as an aggravation against
me, I hope a Judicatory will not proceed upon so silent a thing as that is.
Though Solomon says, There is a teaching with the fingers, yet that is so
silent a thing, that a court of Judicatory cannot take notice of it, unless it
be manifest and apparent by some act. Pro. 6.13
And therefore seeing he does not affirm that I saw the money laid down, or
that I received the money, or directed or ordered him to come to my house with
any money, I hope you will not lay that to my charge. And thus I have done as
to that particular.

There is only one thing more in order to the letters he was examined about.
He was asked what answer was returned to those letters that he received from
Bamfield, and the Earl of Argile, and the rest, that he showed Mr. Love. To
that he gave this account, That a letter was left at his shop, which he thought
(he said) came from Mr. Love or Doctor Drake. Now Sir, for my part, I declare
in the presence of God, That I never in all my life, either wrote or sent, or
left Letter at his shop: And although, I am not to plead an other man's cause,
yet I believe, that godly Minister he mentions, will clear himself also; but I
must only speak to my own defense. For my part, I never in my life, sent
Letter to his shop, written to those persons: And he only swears, That he
thought the Letter left in his shop, came from me or Doctor Drake: But how
could he know from whom it came, or what was the matter of it? And if it had
come from either of us, which he did not affirm, yet he does not say he opened
the Letter, and so could not tell the Contents of it, that it was an Answer to
the supposed Letters he showed me. I have only one thing to observe in his
whole Testimony, and that is, That he confesses until he had a sight of other
men's Examinations in private; to wit, Of Alfords and Adams, the things did not
come to his remembrance, or words to that effect, he has in his depositions;
and that there were some things, to which he could not speak exactly, till he
first saw some Informations; and that Master Attorney General did show him some
Informations, and that did bring things to his remembrance; and that before
Captain Fisher, and Mr. Attorney did prompt him and remember him, he had
forgot* So that Sir, J beseech you consider, whether this be a clear and good
Testimony in Law, That when a man has forgot a thing done so long ago, he
shall through the Examinations of others, have his memory rubbed up, and then
shall come here in a public Court, to testify this against a man's life.

The next Witness is Major Alford, He gives you a large Relation about sending
Titus to Jersey, and of a 100 l. given him for his journey, and of Letters to
the Queen, and Jermine, and Percy. My Lord, J am as ignorant of all these
things, as the child unborn, and did never know that Titus was gone or sent to
Jersey, by any person, till a long time after J heard he was there, and till J
heard of his name in the Diurnals, That he was an Agent for some Presbyterians;
till then, God is my Record, J knew nothing of that; and J need not speak to
this, but because this was part of my Charge, and brought in to the Court* many
may imagine, as if J were guilty upon the whole matter; but that which concerns
me, is this. He affirms that the Commission and Instructions were agreed upon,
at my House, to send to some persons; To wit, My Lord Willoughby of Parham,
Massey, Titus, and Alderman Bunce, to Treat at Bredah; and this to be in the
behalf of the Presbyterian Party.

Now Sir, I shall humbly crave leave to offer, wherein this Testimony is not
only disagreeing with the Testimony of others of the Witnesses, but even to
his own Testimony also: For here he says, it was agreed upon at Master Loves
house, and in three leaves after, he says, It is true, there was a Commission
and Instructions read at Mr. Loves house; but whether they were agreed upon
there or no, says he, I know not: I do not say, he has a bad conscience, but
sure I am, he has a bad memory. He disagrees with the witnesses also; for Far
did expressly affirm upon Oath, That all the company was against sending them
away; and therefore, for Alford to say it was agreed upon among us, in that I
am sure he does not speak truly. Another thing which Alford lays to my charge,
is about a Letter, which after Dunbar fight should come from Massey, wherein he
should write for Money, and for Arms, by the way of Holland; and he swears,
this Letter was read in my house, and says, That upon the reading of it, I did
move for the contribution of Money to be raised for the supply of Titus. Now
before I answer to that, though I am not in a condition to retort, yet I shall
humbly crave leave without offense to Mr. Attorney General, to entreat the
Court to take notice of this one thing: Master Attorney General, when the
witness had spoke these words, did pray your Lordship and the Court to observe,
That Massey wrote for Arms, and Mr. Love moved for Money; as if he would
insinuate to the Court, that he writing for Arms, and I moving for Money, that
my moving for Money was to buy Arms: Now Alford upon oath did declare, That
every man there was against Arms, and he only said, That the motion for Money,
was to supply the Personal necessities of Massey and Titus, who were in want:
So that I entreat you to consider it, that that Insinuation of Mr. Attorney
General, might not be aggravated against me, and that a bad inference might
not be drawn from it, as if he writing for Arms, and I moving for Money, That
that Money should be to buy Arms; which is contrary to Major Alfords Oath.
Again, another insinuation of M Attorney General is this, He prayed your
Lordship and the Court, to consider, That I moved for three hundred pounds. Now
this is contrary to Alfords oath; for Alford has these words, Mr. Love did
move for the contribution of money, but there was no sum spoken of. Now when
he shall affirm, that there was only a motion for money, but no sum spoken of;
Shall this be laid to my charge, as if I moved for 300 l.? Therefore I entreat
you, that those Insinuations and Aggravations of Mr. Attorney General may not
be laid upon me; and that ye would take no notice of any private Examinations,
nor yet of any Aggravations of those who are instruments of State; but upon the
plain deposition of the Witnesses, and according to their testimony and your
consciences, I must stand or fall. Alford said further, That after he came from
Titus, he gave an account of a Narrative, and of a Copy of a Letter from the
King of Scots; what he might bring, I know not; and if he did, I never desired
him, either to go to Calice, or to come to my house: For I never spoke with him
(as I remember) till after he came from Calice, nor till the time, he says, the
Letter and Narrative was read in my house: Now Sir, he only says it was a Copy
of a Letter (not the original). That Titus (says he) did show me a Copy of a
Letter, at leastwise, which he said was from the King to the Presbyterian
Party. So that this which is the Foundation of the rest of the testimony, is
only this, That the Copy of the Letter was read at my house, and that it was a
Copy of the Kings Letter: This he affirms only, upon hearsay, for he says,
Titus told him so; But who can swear, either that Titus had the original
Letter, or that this was a true copy; nay, might it not be a fictitious thing,
either of Titus or of this man, as may well be suspected: So that they that
receive Letters, if that be Treason, and those that write Letters, and send
money, if they be Traitors; yet they have proved none of these against me, and
yet I only am Araigned, and they in hope of Favor.

Again, I desire the Court to take notice, though Captain Far says there was
this Clause in the copy of the Letter from the King, To send Commissioners to
Bredah; (and yet he overthrew his oath afterward: For says he, It is so long
ago, that I cannot remember it; but I shall speak to that when I come to it:)
Yet Alford that brought this Letter, affirms, That he did not know it was to
desire Commissioners to be sent; and if it had been so, I should never have
done it, and never did it: At that time I was in my Study, J do not deny it,
but when Drake read the Commission, J did declare my dislike of it, and
detestation against it; and so did (as Fa^ affirmed) either most or all the
company: And if any such thing were sent, God is my Record, J did neither know
of the writing of it, (other then in Characters) nor of the contriving of it,
nor yet of the sending it away, till J heard Alford confess in the Court, that
he carried this Commission to Gravesend to one Mason, a man whose name J never
heard of, before J was in trouble: and if J had written and consented to it,
yet it was in the year, One thousand six hundred forty and nine, as Major
Huntington swore; and therefore was before the time that your Act could take
hold of me, if J had concurred to it, which J never did. Again he insisteth
upon it, that I moved for a contribution. Now herein, I beseech your Lordship,
that I may offer these two things.

First, This is but the single Testimony of one man, and by the Law of God, and
of the Land, a man must not die, but under the testimony of two or three
witnesses, in the Old Testament, Deuteronomy. 9. and 15. One witness shall not rise up
against a man for any iniquity, or for any sin in any sin that he sins: At
the mouth of two witnesses, or at the mouth of three witnesses, shall the
matter be established. And least this might be thought to be a Judicial Law,
pertaining only to the Jewish State; it is therefore quoted four times in the
New Testament; by Christ, in Matthew. 18. by Paul, in 2 Cor. 13. and in two other
places; as noting it to be a Law of Moral equity, That no man's life should be
taken away, but by express and clear Testimony of two sufficient witnesses. Now
in this that may seem most to pinch upon me, that I should move for Money,
there is but one witness; and it is, as I am informed, contrary to the Laws of
the Land, and the Statute of the first of Edward the sixth, which provideth,
That no man shall be Indicted, Araigned, and Convicted for Treason, but by two
lawful and sufficient witnesses; and therefore I beseech your Lordship, and the
Court, That you would be tender in those things, wherein you find but one
witness speaking.

The other thing which I shall say to this point, about moving for Money, is,
That I humbly conceive the Act does forbid relieving persons in Arms: but now
no person can be relieved by a bare motion; it is not the motion, but the
having the Money moved for, before the person in Arms can be said to be
relieved; and if it were true, yet it is not proved, That those persons were
then in Arms: The other Act of the second of August, I conceive, gives me
relief if I had moved for Money; For it judges those only to be guilty of
Treason, That shall either send or cause to be sent, Money, Horse, Arms, and
Ammunition into Scotland. Now Sir, if I had in a meeting moved for Money, yet
he tells you not for how much I moved for, for ought he knows it might be but
for six pence, for he cannot swear to it; and I hope, when the sum is not
spoken off, you will be very tender. Yet this comes not under your Act, either
to be a sending of Money into Scotland, or a causing of it to be sent, which is
not in the least fastened upon me: When I asked him (though he swore I moved for
Money) whether I contributed any Money my self, to that he answered, He could
not say I did; nor could any of the eight witnesses that came in against me.
And thus I have done as to his Testimony.

The third Witness is Major Huntington, and he affirms, That in the year One
thousand six hundred forty and nine, one asked him to go to my house, and told
him there was some there at Prayer, and that he might there hear some news; and
that he spoke upon hearsay: but then he spoke upon oath, And when I came
there, Prayer was done. Now for a man to be so positive in the first entrance
of his Testimony, as to say Prayer was done, when he could not know that there
was any Prayer there at all, (for when he came, it seems there was no Prayer,
and how then could he know there was any Prayer there at that time?) This at
the very first entrance of his evidence, I suppose might be a just ground to
suspect his whole Testimony; but as for the man, I knew him not, I never saw
him, as I said, before that time, nor since, till I saw him here in Court. This
man affirms, That William Drake read in Characters, that which he called a
Commission, and said, That he had command from the King, to send this
Commission away, which God is my Record, I never heard, nor ever knew of it;
and Alford that brought over the Letter, in which Far swore those words were,
he himself denies it. But that which concerns me in Huntingtons Testimony, is
this, He affirms, that when the Commission was read by Drake, I should say,
Come, come, let it go. Now Sir, I asked him this Question, Let it go, what does
that refer to? says Huntington, Let the Papers go. Now truly, I am not so bad a
Grammarian, as to speak of Papers, let it go, and not to say, let them go. And
if I had spoke of Papers, as he says I did, I must either be guilty of
nonsense, or else he of falsehood, I believe he of both. But as for those
words, Come, come, let it go; he does not affirm, that I said, Come, let it go
away, but let it go, and that may be a word of dislike: And if I did say so,
yet it was not of the Commission, God is my Record, for he came not till nine
of the clock at night, as himself says; and before he came, I had declared my
self against sending away the Commission and Instructions, as being an act of
two high a nature for private men, and of notorious falsehood, to say it was in
the name of the Presbyterian Party, when it was not: And the other men that
were here in Court upon oath, and that were then present, as Adams and Alford,
did confess upon Examination, That they heard no such words from me.

The next testimony is Master Adams, and he relates a story of a correspondency
between William Drake, and one Mason, and being asked, Was Master Love privy to
this correspondency? he did so far clear me, that he could not say it, nor was
I privy to it. Being asked again, Was Master Love privy to these letters of
sending moderate propositions to the King? that he likewise cleares me in, he
cannot say it. And I can say, that I am so far from moderation in their sense,
that moderation* ^n their sense I deem downright Malignity, which I was, and
still am utterly against. He was asked likewise, did Master Love know of
collecting a hundred pound for Titus? To that he answered, that he durst not
upon oath say that M. Love was privy to this collection, and he does not say
that it was agreed in my house, to send away the commission, but says, it was
moved in my house: for says he, I cannot say it was agreed upon, for there was
no vote past. These were his words, and he contradicts Alford and Far in three
places of his testimony. He overthrows Alfords deposition. He affirms, that the
copy of the letter from the King, was to show what great affection he bare to
the ministry of England, and promised great favor when he was in a condition
to do it, and desired them to stand steadfast in the way they were in: and he
says, he dare not swear that this letter was read in my house, but he thinks
it was. Now as to this letter likewise, J desire the same favor from you, That
when the letter does not appear, neither the Original, nor the individual
copy, that you would be tender of passing any judgment upon me, upon the vain
rovings of a man's memory; and of a man's memory too, that is engaged to
prosecute my life, to save his own, as most of the witnesses that came in
against me are. He says, there was a motion made in my house, That a
commission and instructions should be drawn up to send to my Lord Willoughby of
Parham, and the rest in Holland, but says he, by whom I cannot say; and says
he, there was no debate, as I remember, to mend the instructions; though the
Atturny General did lay it upon me, as if I had corrected and amended them,
when J did neither read them, no nor so much as touch them in my life. The
substance of the commission he tells you was to Authorize the Lord Willoughby
of Parham, Massey, Graves and others, to assist their Brethren of the Scottish
Nation in their Treaty: Now to this there is a manifest contradiction in
another man's testimony. For C. Far swears, that the commission he speaks of
was not to treat, but only as private persons to advise that the King might
agree with the Scots, upon the interest of Religion and the Terms of the
Covenant, That he might not be drawn away by the high flown Cavaliers, and
Malignants, so that Far overthrows this testimony of Adams: Adams says it was
to treat, and Far says, it was not to treat but to advise: but be it the
one, or be it the other, J detest both, J had no hand in, and gave no assent
unto it, but manifested my dissent to the whole. He being likewise asked (for J
am still upon Adams his testimony) whether at a meeting it was not propounded
at my house to write to the Queen, and to Jermin, and Percy, to mediate with
the King to agree with the Scots. To this he ansvvered no, and truly he might
very well answer so, for J am sure J did never in all my life hear of a motion
so much as of a letter to be writ to any of these three persons, to the Queen,
Percy or Jermin; and should have loathed and abhorred the very thought of it;
and should think that cause the worse, wherein these persons were engaged;
being asked whether there was not a letter from Percy, that writ for money to be
sent to the King, and whether the answer given was, that they should stay till
the King and Scots were agreed, and then to send money: Adams in this did me
this right, He confessed, he saw such a letter writ, but (says he) I only saw it
in the hands of one Mason, a man who for my part, I never knew, nor heard of
till I was in trouble: and being asked whether this letter from Piercy, was
read in Master Loves house, he said, certainly no. Being again asked whether
about August there was not a letter written from Massey, wherein he said he had
back friends in Scotland, and complained that he was not promoted there, and
whether that letter was communicated at Master Loves house; In this also he did
me right, for he answered, No certainly, that Letter was not, to the best of my
remembrance, read there; I heard of such a letter, but saw it not. Then being
asked whether one Sterks was not a Scotch Agent, and whether he did not use to
come to my house? to which he gives this answer: We took him to be a Scotch
Agent, and he met sometimes at Master Loves house: Now Sir, as to that, he
supposes that he was an Agent, but does not swear that he was so, much less
that I knew him to be so. Nay, I can swear upon the best information I have had
both from his own mouth, and the mouths of others, that he was no Agent, for he
lived in England fourteen years, and had not been in Scotland in fourteen years.

And I heard himself say so, when he went away upon the Act; and I asked him,
Are you employed by the Church or State of Scotland? and he told me no, he was
not: it is in your breasts whether you will believe me or no: and likewise M.
Blare when he was here in London, did affirm to me, that he was a poor honest
man, and that he was no way employed as an instrument of State. I know nothing
of the man's Agency, be he Agent or not, I never sent letter or message by him,
nor received any from him in all my life; but I see it is laid heavy upon me in
my charge, that I contributed money to him: but no man in his depositions did
prove that I ever gave him a penny. Adams being asked, whether Master Love did
not write down the sums of money that was to be contributed to Massey; In this
he does me right also, for he says, Master Love had paper in his hand, but I
did not see what he wrote, and therefore to that I need not answer; being
further asked, Did not Master Love put the first letter of their names before
the sums which others wrote, he answered, he could not say so. Being asked
further, Was there not a letter pend by Master Love and Doctor Drake, this
answer he gives, There was a letter, but (says he) I cannot deliver it upon my
oath that it was pennd by them, but I thought it was so. He could not tell to
whom this letter was directed, but said, it was declared to be directed to the
General Assembly of Scotland: Now as I observed in the beginning, this is only
the single testimony of one man, and indeed it was the first Question (as I
remember) that was asked me, that was of moment, when I was examined by the
Committee, Whether I did not penn this letter? I did declare to them in the
presence of God, that I neither pend that nor any other to any person of the
Scottish nation since the wars began, and this I declare in the presence of the
same God, still to be a truth. Being asked further, Was Master Love present at
sometime of this meeting? he answered, I was, and the reason why he thought
that we might pen it, was because of the language of it. M. Atturn. Gen upon
this ( I remember) uses this expression, My Lord, this is very high, after we
were engaged in blood, that a letter should be sent. But to this I say, there
is only a single testimony, that such a letter was writ, and whether it was
sent or no, he does not prove, nor does he prove that I writ it; and I declare
to you, that I never writ it: as touching this letter, which M. At. Genesis is
pleased to insist upon so much, Adams, being asked whether it was agreed upon
that this letter should be sent? he gave this answer, It was after the same
manner that other things were agreed upon: but there was no vote past, and
therefore he cannot prove my particular and express assent to the sending of
the letter, or any other letter whatsoever; and here to take off the Jealousy
of a correspondency; which in the close, through the Grace of God I shall clear
to you; but to take it off now a little before I come to it: if there had been
a correspondency maintained, would it have been imaginable, that from the time
of the fight at Dunbar, which I think is ten months since, to this time, That
there should be no letter that any man can say, nor that I did certainly know
of, that either was written or conveyed, or debated upon to be written, from
that time to this very day, to any of the Scottish nation; and yet all this
tends to aggravate matters against me, and all the burden is laid upon my weak
shoulders. Other men that have heavy loades, have laid them upon my back to
lighten them from off themselves. Touching this letter, he says, this was the
substance of it, or it was to this effect, or purpose; and again I insist upon
it to beseech your Lordship and the Court, to take heed what you do. It
concerns you more th^n me, it concerns my life only; But it concerns your
honors, and lives, and souls and all, That upon an uncertain evidence you do
not spill a man's blood. The man never read the letter, only he heard it read;
and then he brings in to that and other letters, This is the sum of it, or it
was to this effect. And though this man has done me injury in some
particulars, yet in others he has done me right. For being asked, Did Master
Love write letters, or receive any, or mend those instructions, he only swears,
he saw the letters, but cannot say I did read them; Being asked whether I did
give my consent to the sending away of that letter after Dunbar fight, which is
so much insisted upon, and so greatly aggravated, he did thus far right me; He
said, I will not swear he did give his consent; being asked whether I was a
correspondent, he said, he took me to be a correspondent, and upon these words
I had leave to ask him this Question: Whether he knew J was a correspondent? To
this he said, that Letters were heard by me, but said he, J cannot swear that
he was a correspondent, J did conceive Master Love to be a correspondent, but J
did not say so, and J dare not swear that he was a correspondent. So that
herein likewise there is nothing but his humbly conceivings and his
suppositions, according to which J hope you will not pass any censure upon me;
and thus J have done with Adams testimony.

The fifth testimony is that of Jaquel, which I do here again in Court except
against, as no Legal witness, for he did declare he could not in conscience
take an oath against me. He did well nigh half an hour declare he could not
swear, but that he would make a Narrative or relation of what was true I did
entreat your Lordships leave to put it to him whether he was under an oath or
no, and he said twice at least, J am as good as under an oath: if any person
good or bad come under an oath, J must stand or fall by his testimony, and
according to Gods Ordinance, an Oath is to decide all controversies: But the
man declared, He was not under an Oath; and went out of the Court, and was
fined five hundred pound; and when afterward he was called into the Court
again, he did only put his hand upon his Buttons on his Breast: So that this
was not any taking of an Oath; but fearing his Fine* he did it, though with
much seeming regret of Conscience; and I am informed this day, that he denies,
that he was under an Oath: And if so, Then I have nothing to say to his
Testimony, and so shall not speak to it, but only as to a bare Relation, and
naked Information. There is nothing that does concern me in his Testimony, but
only a concurrence with Potter; Potter and he coming to my house, with some
Letters (as he says) One from Bamfield, another from Argyle, Louden, and
Louthian, and Belcarris; and another from one Master Batly, if I remember
right. Now Sir, as to these Letters, I do not deny, but that they brought them
to my house; nay, I do acknowledge those two men did bring those Letters to my
house, at leastwise, which they said were such; but whether they were the
Originals, or Copies, I know not; for I never read nor kept the Letters, but
they carried away the Letters with them; and Captain Potter said, Master Love,
I have news to show you, at that very time when Mr. Jaquel and he came to show
them at my house. This Witness, I cannot call him so, but this Informer says,
That being asked what was done upon the hearing of those Letters, he said,
Potter read the Letters; but that there was no Agreement upon it, but an utter
dislike in all that heard them, about the Contents of them: And he has these
words further, It was, says he, a trouble, I am confident, to them that heard
and read the matter of those Letters; but being asked, Did Master Love agree to
the giving of Forty pound to Bamfield, and his man? To that Question he answers
thus; he said, There was no Agreement, but it was thought convenient by all.
Upon this, I craved leave of your Lordship to ask him this Question, How he
knew my thoughts, that I thought it convenient; to which, he gave this answer,
I cannot say any thing, that Master Love did say, it was convenient. So that
therein, though he might presume upon a man's thoughts to know them, yet he must
only judge my thoughts by my words, as the tongue and heart agrees; for he is
not a god: but he does not say, That I said it was convenient; nor did either
of them prove that ever I gave a penny, either to Bamfield or his man.

The last Witness that came in against me, is Captain Far; and indeed, I do not
know what to make of his Testimony, I will not call it a prompting, that will
be thought too bad a word; but certainly it was such a Testimony, that I never
heard produced in any Court in my life. For Master Attorney General, and some
others here, did ask him Ninety eight Questions; so that the man spoke nothing
deliberately, but spoke by reading out of his private Examinations, which is
extrajudicial to be brought in Court where the witnesses are to speak Viva
voce. There was, I say, so many Questions (besides those I had leave to ask
him) propounded to him, during the time he was upon his Oath; And the man was
of a dull spirit, and slow of speech, and I did perceive him to be so possessed
with fear, that he knew not what he said; for he has manifest contradictions
in his Testimony, which I believe all the Court will see, and therein concur
with me, when they come to hear them. The first word I heard him say in Court,
was this, To desire the benefit of his Papers; it seems he did suspect the
badness of his memory, that he must have his Papers to help him (and Papers
written by another) before he would be deposed in Court against me for my life.

Being asked, whether upon the ending of the Treaty at Jersey, there was not a
Letter came from Titus, to desire some body to come unto Callis? and whether
that Letter was read at any house? and whether at my house Alford was desired
to go? He affirms, he was (which none else did) and which is a most notorious
falsehood. I have no rancor in my heart against him, the Lord knows I have
prayed for all those that persecute me; and my heart cleaves to them in love
and pity: I do not tax the badness of his conscience, I think he dares not be
so vile, but I do tax his memory in things done so long ago: And afterward he
says, He could not remember ought (though he did pretend to remember) because
they were done so long ago: yet before he did affirm them Now to demonstrate
this that he says in this Clause to be false, That Alford was desired in my
house to go, Alford himself says he was never at my house, till he came from
Callis, which is certainly true; and therefore Alford could not at my house be
desired to go to Callis; when there was an account given of Alfords return from
Callis, then I know he was there, though I never spoke with him before that
time, as I remember; nor was he ever within my doors till after his return: But
says Far, I cannot say Master Love was present, while Alfords return was there
read, for sometimes he was absent.

Then further being asked what was the substance of that copy of the Letter
from the King that Alford brought from Titus? he answered, that the sum of it
was this, That the King of Scots did declare he would give satisfaction to the
Scots; and in order thereunto he desired Commissioners to be sent over to
Breda; These are the words of his testimony. Now Sir, this is but the single
testimony of one man, and it is contrary to the testimony of that very man that
brought over this letter: and if any man knew the substance of the copy of the
letter pretended to be from the King, it must be Alford that brought it over.
Certainly, none could know it better then he, and therefore for this man to be
so strangely besides himself, and to forget himself, so as to say, This is the
sum of the letter, when he that brought it says the contrary, and did not
know that this was the sum of it: this may seem strange, and J hope you will
judge of the weakness of this testimony. Being asked whether he did not conceive
this to be the copy of the Kings letter? he did me right in that, for he said,
he could not tell whether it was the copy; but that Alford told him, he brought
over a copy of the Kings letter. And Mr. At. Genesis was pleased to aggravate this
of Cap. Far against me: Says he, the King sent over for Commissioners to
treat, and accordingly at Mr. Loves house it was agreed upon that Commissioners
should be sent, and there were persons named. To this J say, that, God is my
record, I never in all my life heard (as J remember) of any letter from the
King to that end, that Commissioners should be sent over. And Far does me right
herein; for in answer to that question, Was your Commissioners agreed upon? he
three times answers negatively. J do not perceive that he remembers himself so
well in all his testimony, as in that particular. Being as'kd whether the
Commission was agreed upon, he said it was not agreed upon by the company; and
herein he did me more right then any man, for he gave my reason; for (says he)
the reason given was, because private persons could not give a commission. And
though he has done me more wrong then any man, yet herein he has done me more
right then any man. Being further asked, Was it not debated to send a
Commission over? Drake, he said, read a paper in the nature of a Commission;
but it was not agreed upon by the company, because private persons could do no
such thing. And a third time he says, The Commission and Instructions were
read in a company at Mr. Loves house; (that he affirms, and that J do not deny)
but not agreed upon. And further he said, he did conceive, to the best of his
remembrance, it was in the name of the Presbyterian party of England; but (says
he) I cannot positively say it was so, for I did but only hear it read. Then
your Lordship askd him this question, Did you say, that the Commission was not
agreed upon, but that the Instructions were? To this Cap. Far said, that Will.
Drake undertook to draw up the Commission and Jnstructions; but yet, says he, I
cannot say, that they were either drawn up or sent. Again, he says further (and
herein he does me more right then Adams or Alford does) Adams, he says it was
not agreed upon; yet he says thus, There was a Commission read for to treat,
and so says Alford; But this man says directly, that this supposed commission
was not to treat in the behalf of the Presbiterian party. And it had been a
folly for private men to assume such a vain title to themselves: so that he
says directly, upon your Lordships question to him, that it was not to treat,
but to advise the Scotch commissioners, and the Ministers especially, to agree
with the King upon the interest of Religion and terms of the covenant: but
being asked, Was it not in the behalf of the Presbyterian party. He answered
no, Being further asked: Was there not an agreement at M. Loves house for a
letter to be sent to the Queen? Herein also this man does me right: he said no
my Lord; and yet he contradicts himself likewise, for being asked in the next
question, what was the substance of that letter to the Queen? he answered the
substance of the letter to the Queen was, that she should persuade the King to
give satisfaction to the Scots in their just demands: now either he must hear
of this letter somwhere else, or else frame a fixion to himself, that this was
the matter of the letter, when there was no such letter in rerum natura; The
next thing he charges me with is, that I should say it was agreed that money
should be raised for Massy and Titus* and he names the sum, he thinks 250 or
300l. And that I thereupon should particularly move him with this question, C.
Far, What will you do? Now I beseech your Lordship and the Court to consider,
that he does not swear that I said, we were agreed; but it was agreed; and that
might be the act of other men, and not mine: and in an other place, he said
they agreed; but he does not say, That J said, We agreed; to include my self;
but to that, that J should move him and say, C.F. What will you do? Truly this
is but a general question, and he himself did me thus far right; When I had
leave from the Court to propound this Question to him, Captain Far, Did I move
you, or say to you, What money will you give for Massey or Titus? He answered,
he did conceive it was for that use; So that he proves not against me, that I
moved for money for Massey or Titus; but only that I should say, Captain Far,
What will you do? and if you observe the words of the testimony, they are
these exactly. He tells you that he brought five pounds; for there is all that
ever I am charged with: I am not charged with lending a penny, but only that
fifteen pounds was brought to my house; ten pounds by Potter, and five pounds
by this man: And he affirms that he left this five pounds at my house; and
herein I perceive a contradiction in the man, and therefore it is hard to
determine when he speaks true, or when he speaks false: These are his very
words; Mr. Love (says he) asked me what I would do? And I did lay down five
pounds upon Mr. Loves Table when several persons were in the room. And being
asked, Did Mr Love receive this money? he said he could not tell; but was loath
to tell, who he thought received it; but in his last word save one that he
spoke in Court (which made much for my advantage) he said, he thought I did not
receive it; and God is my record, I did not: but he said, another man did, and
named Captain Massey. But the contradiction I observe is this; He tells you, he
laid down five pounds when several persons were in the room: and in the next
question but one, being asked, Was Mr. Love in the room? Yes, My Lord, says
he; but I cannot say any body else was there. So that therein the man evidently
contradicts himself: and it appears he was under a very great fear, and even
confounded by the many questions propounded to him. I asked him further, Did I
bid you lay it down? Says he, I cannot say that you bid me lay down the money.
Being asked, Was this way of laying down of money to prevent discovery? He
said, he did it under that notion: But being asked by me, Did I bid you lay it
down under that notion? He answered, he would not say I did. So that I neither
directly nor indirectly did bid him bring money to my house, or lay it down
when it was brought there; but other persons were in the room, and he conceives
what person took it away: therefore I beseech you make a candid and fair
interpretation of what* I have said or done.

Being asked about the copy of the Kings letter, that Alford says he brought
over from Titus, whether I was in the room whilst it was read? he said, I
cannot say that he was there when* it was read: but he was there during some
part of the communication; but says he, I cannot say he was there at the
reading of the Letter, Nor can I say he was present whilst the Narrative was
read. He observed I was often called away, and was absent; and says he, I
cannot say there was any such thing done by Mr. Love. And I asked him this
question, Did I send, or agree to send Major Alford to Calice? He answers, he
thinks I did not; and herein he falsifieth his former Testimony; for he said
Major Alford was desired in my house to go to Calice: And yet Alford swore he
never was in my house till after he came from thence. But herein he does me
right too (though with contradiction to himself.) He said, it was agreed at my
house that Alford should go; and yet now he says he thinks I did not agree to
the sending of Alford.

Being asked further, Whether did I give consent to the sending away the
Commission? he answered, I cannot say Mr. Love was there when it was sent away.
And truly I may say, who brought it away, or who drew it up, and what was done
in it, I cannot tell; there might be a thousand Treasons in it for ought I
know; for I did neither own the reading of it, nor the sending of it; but did
utterly protest against both. Being again asked, whether J agreed to the
sending of it away? he answered, It was agreed upon by all, That we could not
send the Commission away. When J asked him, Did J say to you, Captain Far, Will
you contribute five pounds for Massey and Titus? he gave this answer; (says he)
You asked me what I would do? so that I conceived it was for Massey and Titus:
And ^e affirms, he laid this five pounds down in my house; but did not say that
J received it; and in the presence of God J speak it, J never saw it nor,
received it in all my life.

And thus with much acknowledgment, and blessing God, and thanking your
Lordship and the Court, you have given me leave to take a brief survey through
the Depositions of the Witnesses, though they have been very large, and the
Charge against me very high.

Now having spoken to the Depositions (before I shall crave leave to speak
something concerning my self, and make humble Proposals to this Court) I shall
add but one word, and it is this: I was loath, before I saw Witnesses face to
face, to confess any thing: I deemed it against nature for any to confess
against himself, unless he could be sure his confession should not prejudice
him; and I might have been guilty of my own blood, if I had confessed: for
then, did the matter confessed amount to Treason by your Law, my life would be
at your mercy, and you might hang me upon mine own confession: and upon that
ground I went resolved to the Committee, and through the grace of God I
resolved not there confess a word nor tittle, till I heard what proof was
brought in against me. And now I do ingenuously acknowledge. That there were
several Meetings at my house, That these persons met there, and that this
Commission was read there: but I did utterly dislike it, and dissent from it.
And that I was present at the reading of Letters, either at the beginning, or
end, or some part of them, I do acknowledge: And this I say, that I was ignorant
of the danger that now I see I am in. The Act of the second of August 1650,
does make it Treason to hold any correspondencie, or to send Letters, though
but in a way of commerce, into Scotland; let the matter of them be what it will
be: Now herein my Council acquaints me with my danger, that I being sometimes
present when Letters were read in my house, am guilty of a concealment: and as
to that I do humbly lay my self at your feet and mercy. But as to Treason, I
do not know any personal act of mine proved against me, that brings me under
any Act of yours. And thus having briefly spoken concerning the Charge in
general, and concerning my accusers* and having briefly surveyed their
Testimony, I shall humbly crave leave to speak something concerning my self,
and I shall be very brief in it.

Concerning my self, it is needful I should speak a word: I would not stand
under misrepresentations, to seem to be what I am not. I am presented unto
some, as if I were a Malignant, an Apostate from my first principles, a mover
of sedition; and what not but what I am? Wherefore I am constrained to speak a
word in my own vindication; and I shall make the Apostles apology, I am become
a fool in glorying: but ye have compelled me. I count it never lawful for a
man's own mouth to praise him, till another man's mouth accuses him; and then he
may without vanity be his own vindicator. What I shall say of my self, the Lord
knows it is not voluntarily, out of an affected ostentation, but by compulsion,
for a necessary and clear manifestation of my Principles and Practices now
suspected. As touching Malignity, I hate both Name and Thing: and, as Cardinal
Farnesus said of himself profanely, That if he knew any part of him infected
with Lutheranism, he would cut it off, and cast it into the fire: That I can
say truly, That if I knew any part of me infected with Malignity, I would cut
it off with the pruning hook of mortification, and by an ingenuous retractation
before you all this day. God is my witness, I never drove a Malignant Design,
I never carried on a Malignant interest, I detest both; I still retain my old
Covenanting principles, from which through the grace of God I will never depart
for any terror or persuasion whatsoever. When I look upon all the Vows, and
Covenants, and Declarations, and Protestations of both Houses of Parliament, I
do find a sutablenesse between my judgment and them, and am not conscious to
my self of any thing that I have done in opposition or contradiction
thereunto: And therefore J may say as Jeremy did when he was accused in the
like case, of making defection to a contrary party, Jerem. 37.13, 14. Irijah
said to Jeremiah, Thou fallest away to the Caldeans: Then said Jeremiah, It is
false, I fall not away to the Caldeans. So, if it be charged upon me, that J
am fallen from my first Principles, or that J am fallen to Malignity; J say to
any that shall so accuse me, It is false, J fall not away to Malignitie, J do
retain as great a keenness, and shall whilst J live, and as strong an
opposition against a Malignant interest, whether in Scotland, or in England, or
in any part of the world, against the Nation where J live, and have to this
day, as ever J did in former times. J am no Jncendiary or evil Jnstrument, to
divide the Nations one from another. God knows, the grief of my heart has been
for the divisions, and the desire of my soul has been for the union of both
the Nations: and if J had as many lives as J have hairs on my head, or as much
blood in my veins as there is water in the sea, J could count it all well spent
to quench the burning that our sins have kindled between the two Nations. J
have all along engaged my estate and life in the Parliaments Quarrel against
the Forces raised by the King: My appearing in their cause was not from any aim
at profit, but out of a persuasion of conscience, and sense of duty. J may
speak it as Paul does it of himself, I was in labors more then they all. J
speak it without vanity, J was, according to my obscure station and mean
condition, in doing and giving in the Parliaments Quarrel, more then many.
Many gave out of their abundance, but J out of my want: and as Christ spoke to
the widow who gave two mites, that she gave more then they all; for she gave
all that she had, even all her living: So did J; though J gave my mite, yet J
gave my all: And J did not only deem it my duty to preach for the lawfulness
of a Defensive war, but, unless my Books and wearing apparel, J contributed
all that J had in the world; and that was no small sum, considering the
meannesse of my condition. And J have at this day a great sum due to me from
the State, which is still kept from me, and now my life endeavored to be taken
from me. And yet for all this, J repent not of what J have done; though J
could from my soul wish, That the ends of that just War had been better
accomplished: then should we have been happy and united among our selves, and
honored among the Nations round about us, J am so far (J say) from repenting
of what J have done, both by doing and contributing, and suffering in the
Parliaments Quarrel. That were it to do again upon the same unquestionable
Authority for the same declared ends, and against the same Malignant persons, I
should manifest as much readiness of mind to engage according to my measure,
as ever I did.

And thus I have declared my self touching my Principles, in these
particulars; I shall now crave leave to express my self a little touching my
sufferings; and then to make but a few humble Proposals, and so cast my life
into Gods hands and yours. Touching my sufferings; I may say, that my whole
life has been a time of affliction, either of body or mind, God sees my heart
to be a tuffe and knotty piece, that it needs so many blows to break it; I may
say with the Psalmist, I have been afflicted from my youth up, and from my
youth up I have met with opposition. From the Prelates, being persecuted by
them, merely for conscience sake; it is near twenty years since I was cited to
the Bishops Courts; I have been often troubled for hearing of Sermons, and
discharging other exercises of Religion, which were an offense in those days:
When I was a Scholar in Oxon and Master of Arts (I do not speak it out of vain
ostentation, but merely to represent unto you, that what I was, I am, and what
J am,* J was) J was the first Scholar that J know of, or ever heard of in Oxon,
who did publicly refuse in the Congregation House to subscribe unto those
impositions, or Cannons imposed by the Archbishop touching the Prelates and
Common Prayer. And for which, though they would not deny me my degree, yet I
was expelled the Congregation House, never to fit as a Member among them. When
J came first to London, which is about twelve years since, J was opposed by the
B. of London; and though J was called as a Lecturer to Ann Aldersgate, yet it
was near three years before J could fasten upon any Lecture. After this, about
the year 1640, or 1641, J was imprisoned in New Castle, merely for expressing
my self against the errors of the Service Book, and was removed from prison
there, by a Habeas Corpus, to this place; And in this Court of Kings Bench, J
was acquitted. After this, about the beginning of the Wars between the late
King and the Parliament. J was the first Minister that J know of in England,
who was accused for preaching of Treason and Rebellion, merely for maintaining
in a Sermon in Kent at Tenterden, the lawfulness of a defensive war, at the
first breaking out and irruption of our Troubles; but was then publicly
acquitted in a Court there, and recovered costs and damages of my Accuser.
After this J had a little breathing time, whilst the two Houses of Parliament
were in power; only J was once complained against by the Kings Commissioners at
Vxbridge for preaching a Sermon there; J did not know that J should preach
there till the Psalm was sung, and did only preach a Sermon which J had
preached the day before at Windsor Castle; J was, J say, complained of by the
Kings Commissioners to the House, for that Sermon; but within three weeks J was
acquitted and discharged, by order of the House of Commons. That Sermon is much
spoken of because it is so little seen, it is so obscure a piece, and many
imagine, as if the keenesse of my affection was blunted from what it was in
that Sermon: But J declare unto you, that J come up to this day to every tittle
of that Sermon: J hear it is lately printed, and if it be printed according to
the first copy, J will own every line of it, as that to which my heart and
judgment concurs to this very day. After all this, since the late change of
Government, J have been three times in trouble; J was once committed to custody
by, and twice cited before the Committee of Plundered Ministers, but there was
no sufficient proof against me, and so J was discharged.

But now last of all, this great and last trial and trouble is come upon me: J
have been kept several weeks in close Prison, and now J am arraigned for my
life; herein is my great comfort, even that which was the Apostles, God that
has delivered me, he does deliver me, in whom I trust that he will yet deliver
me. 2 Cor. 1.10. Job 5.19.
And that that shall be made good to me; He shall deliver thee in six troubles,
yea in seven there shall no evil touch thee. As Cato, he was accused thirty
two times by the unkind State whom he faithfully served, and yet after thirty
two times accusation, his innocence and uprightness brought him off. Why
should not I be confident in my God, who have had a life time of experience of
his care and love toward me. It is not the danger of my life troubles me; I am
a sickly man, and I know a disease will ear long kill me, whatever you do with
me; but this grieves me more; That I should suffer from their hands for whom I
have done and suffered so much in my obscure station, and according to my weak
measure; had it been an Enemy had dealt thus by me, and made such an eager
prosecution of me, and such high aggravations of that which in the simplicity
of my heart I have done, it had not been so much, and as I told the Committee
when I was examined by them (who charged me with Jesuisme and non-ingenuity,
because I would not confess against my self and others) that though I
honored them as private Gentlemen, and should acquaint them with what my self
had done, when it should not be a snare to me; but when they shall apprehend me
by a warrant for Treason, and examine me in order to a trial for my life, In
no Judicature in the world, will I confess a word, till I first hear what will
come in against me. Now as I told them then, I never wrote letter, nor received
letter; nor sent, or lent money to any person of the Scottish Nation. Now that I
should meet with this hard measure; to have the most ridgid and severe
interpretation put upon all my actions, to be looked upon with so jealous (I
might say with a worser) eye, that have in my measure ventured my all, in the
same quarrel that you were engaged in, and lifted up my hands in the same
Covenant, that have took sweet counsel together, and walked in fellowship one
with another; That from these I should have such hard measure, This, this
troubles me greatly; had I been so dealt withal at the Juncto at Oxon, I
should not have been so troubled at it; but to be dealt so with at Westminster,
this is that at which I stand amazed: yet blessed be God, I am not afraid; My
Conscience does not tell me of any personal Act of mine proved against me that
brings me under any of your laws as to Treason. And thus having expressed my
self, concerning my charge, and the witnesses, and my self. I shall now in the
close of all say (what ever tortured collections, or inferences, are drawn from
my practices, and however Lawyers may aggravate those things that in part have
been proved against me; yet I do declare in the presence of God, that what ever
I have done, in the simplicity and integrity of my heart, I have done it; and
did deem it to be consonant and agreeable, both to my conscience, and to the
Protestations, and Covenant I have taken: and I have done nothing out of
animosity or from a spirit of revenge; and thus J have done concerning my self.
J have only a few humble proposalls to make to your Lordship, and the Court,
and then J shall leave all to Gods determination and yours. To you that are my
Judges, J humbly crave this of you, and J do it upon your Lordships words, the
first day of my appearance here. When you were pleased to deny me Counsel, you
said you would be Counsel for me; and J beseech you be so, for you are Judges
both of matter of law, and matter of fact. J may make use of that passage,
Proverbs 31.8. Solomon says there, that rulers must open their mouths for the
dumb, in the cause of all such as are appointed for destruction. Truly, My
Lord, J am as a dumb man before you; dumb in matters of Law, J cannot plead one
word for my self: J beseech you be as Solomon's Rulers were, and open your
mouths for him that is appointed to destruction; you who are my Judges, be my
Advocates, my life lies in your hands. And then J beseech you let me make this
humble motion to you, That you would not count any thing that J have done to be
out of animosity, or stoutnesse of Spirit; Truly, nothing but Conscience could
carry me through all my sufferings; I could not leave such dear relations that
God has given me, and such a loving people, and comfortable livelihood, as any
Minister has within the walls of London: Nothing but conviction of conscience,
can carry me another way: And till Conscience be fully satisfied, J cannot stir
one step.

The next thing J beg is to beseech your Lordship and the Court, to put a
candid and fair interpretation upon all that J have done, or that by witness
you have heard; that it was no Malignant design, though I do not own the
management of any design: J never writ letter, nor sent letter to any of the
Scottish nation; yet thus far J own the thing, that it was agreeable to my
judgment and Conscience: For J thought the interest of God, and Religion, and
the good of the Nation would be more advanced, if the King went into Scotland
upon Covenant terms, then if he should fall into the hands af the Jrish
rebels; or offer this Nation to the Turk, or Spanyard, or any other to come in
and make a prey of it. J did Judge it would be a foundation laid of great
troubles and blood, if he were not received by that nation. And though I did
not, and do not in the least own either the Commission or Instructions, or the
way of management of that business, yet I confess the agreement between the
King and Scots I desired, and deemed it my duty upon this ground, one clause of
the Covenant being, to seek the union and good of both Nations; and those who
endeavor the contrary are declared by the Covenant to be Incendaries,
Malignants, and Evil Instruments, who not only divide the Kingdoms one from
another, but divide the King from his people. Now they declaring him to be
their King, according to my apprehension I thought it agreeable to my Covenant,
to pray and desire, as a private man, and no more, for an agreement between the
King and them, upon those terms consistent with the safety of Religion, and the
terms of the Covenant.

And thus I have opened my heart to you. The favorable interpretation I humbly
beg of you is this, That things might not be taken in the worst sense: Non est
reus, nisi men's sit rea: He is not guilty, unless the mind be guilty, I heard
your Lord-ship say so at Guild Hall, as I remember.

The Lord knows in the uprightness of my heart, I have done, what I have done.
It is a Maxim in the Law (I have read it in Divinity books) Ampliandi sunt
favores, et in paenis benignior interpretatio facienda; Favors are to be
amplifyed and enlarged by Magistrates; but in punishments, the most benign and
favorable interpretations must be made. Now of my Actions the harshest
interpretations are made; I have a Charge laid against me, which I deem (and as
my Council tells me) to be rather a flourish in Law, then reality of matter..

I stood amazed when I heard the charge against me, I thought it had rather
been against some other man then against me. As if I should send to the Queen,
Piercy and Jermin: herein I did rather venture my life upon a Trial, then to
lie under all that Obloquie, which that charge did lay upon me. Therefore I
again beseech you put a fair and candid interpretation upon what is proved
against me.

I remember a phrase, Summum jus est summa injuria, to be over just, is to be
injurious. Be not over righteous, may refer to Courts of Judicatory. Herein I
acknowledge, that my not revealing what my accusers have done, this lays me
under the fault of a concealment, for which I lay my self at your feet.

The next humble request I have to make, is this, To entreat your Lordship and
the Court, that you would not hearken to any politic suggestions, that may be
laid before you: I know under what disadvantage I lie, that am the first
Minister in England tried for Treason, in a business of this nature, and what
a prejudice this is to me, to make an example upon.

The first Suggestion that I humble entreat you would not hearken to, is; That
it will not be for the honor and interest of the State, if I be not condemned;
Truly it is for the honor of the State for you to do Justice, If you have
found, that I ever writ letter, or sent, or received letter, or lent money; if
in these regards you have found me within your Acts, spare me not: But if I
have been only present at the reading of letters, and have been silent at what
others have done; therein I lay my self at your mercy, to show me favor. It
was a suggestion to Pilate, If thou sparest that man, thou art no friend to
Caesar; and so if you do not condemn me, you are no friends to those who
commissionate you; but be friends to your selves and families, and take heed
that you bring not guiltless blood upon you.

And here (and so I shall have done) in the close of all, I do acknowledge,
that in many particulars, as touching not revealing (I say not as to personal
actings, nor do any prove it against me) I do fall within your acts, as to the
censure of a concealment; and herein I humbly beg your mercy. And however J may
be judged to be a man of a turbulent and unquiet spirit,; yet those that know
me in my relations, will not say so of me; and my people, over whom God has
called me (J think) will say, J am a man who desires to live quietly in the
Land: But however my spirit and principles are questioned, yet J resolve by the
grace of God to lead for the future a quiet and peaceable life, in all
godliness and honesty.

J have but one word more to close all J have to say for my self (for J have
made no plea in Law; in those matters J am as a dumb man, and cannot open my
mouth) and it is this, The Charge and Depositions lie before you, and J will but
lay this before you also, that if so be my fact should deserve death, which J
believe it does not, and J hope you cannot find me under your own Acts as to
Treason; yet if you do censure me rather upon a political interest, then from
the merit of the fact, the Scripture accounts not that Justice, but Murder.
Jehu put to death Ahabs sons, and that by the command of God; but he did it
upon a political interest, to establish himself in his new gotten Government:
and when God reckons for this, he says, I will avenge the blood of Jezreel
upon the house of Jehu. To do any thing upon a political interest, though the
fact may deserve death, the Scripture counts this Murder, not Justice.

And I beseech you, let me suggest one thing to you, though J am a worm and no
man, and deserve not to be regarded amongst the children of men; yet what I
have done and suffered, let it be a little thought on by you: And let me urge
that of Abiathar the Priest, he did an act that was not justifiable, and says
Solomon, Thou art worthy of death; but I will not at this time put thee to
death, because thou barest the Ark of the Lord God before David my father, and
because thou have been afflicted in all wherein my father was afflicted. I
leave it to your own consciences to make application.

Many things else might be suggested against me, and all to exasperate and
exulcerate your minds against me, to make you with less regret of conscience
to pass a doleful Sentence upon me; which J hope you cannot, and for the fear
of the Lord you dare not: but if you should, (and so J have done) J will say to
you, as Jeremiah did to the Rulers of Israel, As for me, behold I am in your
hands, do with me as seems good and meet unto you; but know ye for certain,
that if ye put me to death, ye shall surely bring innocent blood upon your
selves: But J will say as the Apostle did, I hope better things of you, though
I thus speak. And thus J commit my self, and my all, unto God and to your
judgments and consciences.


M. Attourney-Generall's present Reply to M. Loves Defense. M. Attourn. Genesis MY
Lord, you have heard him say much, and it had been much better for him if he
had said less. My Lord, when men go out of the way of their own calling, they
very often err; and truly I may attribute much of M. Loves confidence to his
ignorance, My Lord, to his ignorance of the Law; and when men meddle beyond
their own bounds, they do transgress. M. Love has made you a continued
Speech; My Lord, I do find the old Proverb commonly true, In multitude of
words there wants not evil: And should I say nothing against M. Love, my
Lord, he has said enough against himself, in that that he has now repeated
even to his own condemnation in that which he acknowledges, my Lord, (I cannot
say ingenuously, though himself has said so) to be rather a misprision of
Treason and a concealment. My Lord, acts of concealment are not so long
continued, they have not so long continuance: And my Lord, you very well know
(for the satisfaction of the Gentleman at present, and some else that hear me)
that he that hears a Treason, (for I do go now a little in his own way) he
that hears a Treason, must not look back before he go to the Magistrate and
reveal it, and if he be at the Plough, he must leave his Plough; if this
Gentleman were in his Pulpit he must leave his preaching, he that knows a
Treason, must go presently and reveal it; there must be no repetition of
Treason, My Lord, M. Love: my Lord, will be mistaken in that. But truly, my
Lord, I was very sorry, considering the condition M. Love now stands in, to
hear those expressions from him that he has made to you in relation to the
past and present Authority; my Lord, I am not willing to repeat them, M. Love
must hear of it another time; truly, my Lord, here is little of ingenuity (all
men will believe) in this Gentleman, that has now laid it for a principle to
himself, and all that shall hear him (and I think it not to be so Christian, so
ingenious) not to confess any thing any time; but that is ingenuity that what
is proved, that he will confess, and that is a high piece of ingenuity, that
those things that are proved he will ingenuously acknowledge; I, my Lord, I do
not take that to be ingenuity neither in my Law, nor I believe in his Divinity
will it be. My Lord, there has been a great deal of care and pains taken by M.
Love to take in pieces the evidence, I shall not undertake now to join them
together, but in convenient time I shall, I doubt not, for the satisfaction of
the Court, and their judgments, who I must say, have been threatened by the
Gentleman; and my Lord, I hope for the conviction of himself. My Lord, he
knows there are shrewd pieces against him that he has acknowledged; but he
would take them off one by one, but when they are put together, they will not
be single evidence, nor single testimony, nor single facts, but a continued
reiteration and repetition of Treason, a continued and Series of time. My Lord
you are pleased to observe that himself does appear from 1648. to 1651. so that
in 1648. 1649. 1650. and 1651. in all these years my Lord, there has been this
constant repetition and transacting of Treason.

My Lord, I learn from him, and it is very true, -- It is not good dallying with
holy things, nor is it with States and Commonwealths, it is very bad dallying
with them, those that flutter there will burn their wings at last; and it is
not Quirks of wit, nor strains of sense or nonsense, will, my Lord, clear
these things, it w^ll not do it, my Lord. My Lord, he has desired you will not
hearken to private examinations, my Lord, I have said so too, and there has
more been offered to you; but that which has been public and viva voce, all
have been so. But surely, my Lord, I could wish this Gentleman, and all others
of his profession, would meddle in their own Sphere, and not to walk out of
that to come and teach Court^ what they should do, to teach the Magistrate what
is his duty. My Lord, I do hardly think it belongs to them ever in the Pulpit
to do those things: But to tell us we must not examine beforehand, and ask
questions in private; My Lord, we cannot then be prepared for Felons and
Treasons: And my Lord, J say, this confidence is much from his ignorance; for
these things are very familiar, and must be continued to be done; so that these
things are not well broached by him, and I do think he will say at last he
understands not himself; and those (I hope) that hear, my Lord, will say, I do
not use it; for, my Lord, I must say, it must be otherwise in all well-governed
Commonwealths. My Lord, he has not denied, but acknowledged Meetings at his
house more than once, twice or thrice: And truly, I did expect from this
Gentleman that he would not have continued those fearful imprecations of
calling God to witness, that he did never write Letter, nor send Letter, nor
lend money. I had thought he would not have gone upon these equivocations; Did
he never move other men to write? Did he never move others to lend money? It is
not to say, this, and this I have not done; but I had thought he would have
cleared himself totally of any guilt that way, either in relation to receiving,
or hearing Letters read, or lending, or receiving money, or moving for money.
My Lord, to put it upon a particular Case, this will not blind the eyes of
Justice, but you will be able to see it: He is pleased to say, my Lord, he will
not lay it to the badness of the Witnesses consciences, but to the badness of
their memories; my Lord, I hope in conclusion their memories will appear to be
right, and some bodies conscience else to be bad. And, my Lord, for to hear
this said by this Gentleman that is a Minister of the Gospel, that it is a
crime for these men to acknowledge their offenses, this is strange; I had
thought the first step to repentance had been confession, and that it had been
no offense for any man living that has committed a fault, or that thought he
had committed a fault, to acknowledge it. In my Law and Divinity I thought it
so, and I have not learned otherwise; and shall this Gentleman take exceptions,
because these Gentlemen who have thought they have done amiss, have
acknowledged their errors, and have craved mercy? My Lord, I must say thus, if
any deserve mercy, it is those that do acknowledge their offenses, and crave
mercy, and are sorry for them; and not those that are obstinate, and bid
defiance to justice, prove what you can, I will confess nothing, that is not so
conscientious nor Christian a way: And for the Witnesses, I do wonder that Mr.
Love, of any man, should find fault with them; I cannot say they have taken
sweet counsel together, but I shrewdly suspect they have taken very bad
counsel together; these Gentlemen are of his own choice, and of his own
companions, and those that were conversant with him; and if you please to
observe, at every word Will Drake, methinks that is a word of familiarity; but
my Lord, for these, they were his companions, and whether I might say more, his
household friends or guests, but sure they were in his house very often, and
were private with him, and in his Chamber and Study, and to cover all these
actions, and these treasonable practices, and Letters, and Designs, here they
must come to hear news, and this must cover it all; they come for nothing but
news, and our contributions must be for charitable uses, but you must not ask
why or wherefore we lend money, but it is for charitable uses; neither God nor
man will be blinded in these things, and if these fig leaves be sown together,
it will neither cover nakedness nor treason. My Lord, M. Love has said, (and
in that given judgment against himself) that either to treat or advise with
the King of Scots in Scotland, he detests them both: My Lord, if he be guilty
of both, then I hope, he does detest and renounce himself, and then I think, he
has laid your judgment somewhat; his own having past first, yours will easily
follow. My Lord, he confesses, that for this act of the 2. of August, 1650. he
was ignorant of it, and of the danger of it. My Lord, he very well knows that
ignorance is no excuse, the Act is a public Act, and has been long printed,
now ten months since, himself says: And yet methinks I cannot reconcile
that, (that he that goes to make others differ) that he knew not of this Act,
and yet Sterks the Scotch Agent was banished upon this Act, and there was a
contribution for him for his going away; the same Act that does the one does
the other. My Lord, he has been pleased to cite a saying of Cardinal
Farnesus, That if he knew any part of him infected with Lutheranism, he would
cut it off, and throw it into the fire; and so can he speak truly of himself,
he would do if he knew any thing of Malignancy by himself. My Lord, the
question between him, and us is, what is Malignancy, I doubt we differ in that,
I doubt his sense of Malignancy; I am sure by some words I shrewdly ghess at,
that I count that malignitie, and I hope all this Court, and all that hear me
count that malignity, that I doubt his judgment leads him not to it, so I
doubt we differ upon that.

My Lord, he has said he was never an Incendiary, or evil instrument: I wish
there were not cause for you to think otherwise: But surely the Gentleman has
made large imprecations, and has spoken much for himself; but (I believe) he
knows there is so much justice here, that he expects not to be believed in
what he says. If it were enough to accuse, who should be innocent? And if it
were enough to deny, who should be guilty? he does not expect to be believed
for his word certainly; for now he knows he stands in another capacity, and as
things are alleged and proved on both sides, so he is to be believed and no
otherwise. My Lord, he has been pleased to reflect upon my self in many
particulars, yea and the Court knows in what a capacity I stand here, as a
servant to the State to do my duty faithfully, and J must do it, and yet I
must say, it does not become me to prompt Witnesses; that word, my Lord, was
not well spoken. He is pleased to say in the commendation of himself, that he
has a place in London where he has a very good Congregation, and a very good
competency of maintenance, and J heartily wish he had thought so really, and
had kept himself singly to that; J do not think he will say that in the duty of
his place, as a Minister of the Word, to preach, to instruct, to exhort,
rebuke, reprove his people, or any under his charge, that ever the State did
interpose or meddle with him, neither the Parliament nor the Commonwealth;
then for Gods love, my Lord, why should this man interpose or meddle with the
State? Had you not enough to do in your own calling? Had you not charge enough
lying upon you, but must you be going abroad, and put your sickle into another
man's harvest? I will say, the State did never trouble the Gentleman in his
duty, he did go on with as much peace and quietness as himself could desire, we
interrupted not him, let him reflect upon himself, whether others have dealt so
kindly with him; when had he that liberty that now he has had? You may be
pleased to observe, himself says twelve years ago he could not in three years
in London get an admission to be a Lecturer, and when he spoke in the
Congregation-house at Oxford, he was expulsed there; he has had no such
measure here: does kindness provoke him to these things? those that sin against
kindness are the highest Transgressors. What provocation has this Gentleman
had in his Ministry, that he could not follow that, and have let the
Parliament and State alone? Does he not receive breath here to live, and his
livelihood to sustain himself and his relations? Why should you interpose to
disquiet your self and the Commonwealth when they did not provoke you? And let
all judge whether this should not convince you; and let me say thus much, that
you have dealt foolishly, and have gone beyond your bounds, and have not kept
within your limits in what you have done in these things that you have
acknowledged.

My Lord, I speak this, that those may hear now that may not hear the other;
for that which M. Love has said, we must have some time to recollect, and to
speak in the vindication of the proceedings of the State against this
Gentleman, which though I think it needs not much, in respect of the Court that
has heard him say so much and confess so much as he has done, yet for the
lenity of the State, that has moved them to take care of their own
preservation: And I would not do it but that he has stood upon all terms of
defiance with justice and majesty, and you have heard from a fellow Minister
what he did the last day, and the principles he urges this day, which let me
repeat again, there will be no living in society, if these things be let alone.
My Lord, it is much insinuated by him, that his blood will be upon you and the
Court, J would he had thought upon blood before these things had been so
transacted by himself, I am afraid (between God and his own conscience be it,
and those that have had correspondency with him) that much of this blood that
has been spilt in Scotland, has been much by their means; you hear him say,
that what was desired by them (and in order to what it was) was, that the King
of Scots might join with the Scottish Nation, and not go to Ireland, that was
his conscience: I do not know, his conscience led him to meddle with those
things, to meddle with State Affairs. But my Lord, if it be so, and this has
been brought on by them, that one has encouraged the King to join with the
Scots, and the other has encouraged the Scots to join with the King by hopes
of parties here, which he himself acknowledges now, was undertook in the name
of a Presbyterian party, though I think and do believe it, for very many honest
Presbyterians, that they would spit in his face if he should say it of them;
but I say these doings has occasioned the shedding of much blood, and a great
deal of variance between the two Nations, and the Lord knows when it will end.
But my Lord, as he concluded for himself, you will be pleased, my Lord, to give
me leave (though not in that way of conjuration as he has done) to say for the
State, I shall not prevent your judgments; but it is better that one man, than
a State should perish. And if this man be guilty of the Treasons proved against
him, I believe himself will judge, he had better perish and suffer death, than
the State should perish. All these actings of his have been underminings of the
State clean through, carried on very closely and covertly in disguises, and not
discovered; but he that dances in a net will be caught trapping at last. My
Lord, before you give your judgment, you will consider that justice to the
Commonwealth --

So my Lord, I have added what my bad memory (J hope not bad conscience) has
repeated to me, as might give some answer to what he has said: but since he
has been pleased to take such pains to run through all and every one of the
evidence so exactly, and has had three days given him for it: my Lord, I
shall ask but one for my self, and for those that are the Council of the
Commonwealth. My Lord, this is all I shall say at present to you, and shall
say no more till next meeting.


Judge Keeble The Lord President speaks after the Attourney-Generall: the very
beginning of his Speech was not heard, he beginning very softly. L. Pres. But
again in this point, for the Presbyterian Government, if it be rectified,
doubtless it tends to the peace of this Nation, and all places, but not with a
Scotch limitation, I deny that; nor limited by a Scotch Covenant.

The next thing is this, because you often fall upon distinctions of the Law,
and that you are ignorant of the Law; the more to blame you, that profess the
learning of the Law of God; for there is no Law in England, but is as really
and truly the Law of God as any Scripture Phrase that is by consequence from
the very Texts of Scripture; for there are very many consequences reasoned out
of the Texts of Scripture; so is the Law of England the very consequence of the
very Decalogue it self, and whatsoever is not consonant to Scripture in the Law
of England, is not the Law of England, the very books and learning of the Law;
whatsoever is not consonant to the Law of God in Scripture, or to right reason
which is maintained by Scripture; whatsoever is in England, be it Acts of
Parliament, Customs, or any Judicial Acts of the Court, it is not the Law of
England, but the error of the party which did pronounce it, and you or any man
else at Bar may so plead it; and therefore to profess you are knowing in the
Laws of God, and yet to be ignorant of the Laws of England, when yet the Laws
of England be so purely the Laws of God, as no Law in the world more
practical at this day, for you to be ignorant of them, it is not to your
commendation, nor to any of your profession.

Then Sir, for your going on in these ways. The Court with patience has heard
you (I think) two hours, or thereabouts, and you have done nothing but
anticipated the Court; What? do you think they have not understandings, and
judgments, and consciences? They would have done it, they would have examined
these Witnesses precisely, and would have compared them; but you have taken up
all this time by way of anticipation; and in a Rhethoricall way to do it! let
me tell you, that Orators among the Heathen have been the greatest
Incendiaries, and those Orators in Christendom that do not set their
judgments upon right ends, they are the most unworthy men in Christendom; for
there is no heresies, murders, traitorous and treasonable practices and
attemptings, and all the highest wickednesses that ever were committed in
Christendom whatsoever, or in this Nation in particular, but they have had
some of that profession that have called themselves Ministers of Jesus Christ,
as the Jesuits of Jesus, and the Priests of those; and all these things and
high actings have still had some tincture of your Coat in them: Therefore it is
not your Office can excuse you; your Office is sacred, as other Christian
Offices are, and you are no more Divines by your Office; but you are to
remember, and you must know, that Christian justice that you teach in the
Pulpit, to act it in the Court is of a higher nature than preaching is: and
therefore in this, that you should advance your profession beyond the
Judicatories of this Land, know, that Judgment and Justice is the highest
Religion in the world both in Christendom and out of it: And this Sir, we
would have you know, that Lawyers Doctrine tends to this, and I hope hereafter
you will be more obedient and better versed to know these grounds of the Laws
of England, by which now you are called here. I shall say no more, but take
advice with the Court about you.


The Court adjourns, and M. Love is commanded away. The fourth Days proceeding
June 27. 1651.
Mr. Hall The first Council for the Commonwealth. Mr. Hall. MY Lord, The
Prisoner at the Bar, Mr. Love, stands impeached before your Lordship of High
Treason, which impeachment has been read before your Lordship and the Court.
My Lord, by that he stands charged with High Treason, with several offenses of
High treason; That he in the years 1648, 1649, 1650, and 1651, with William
Drake, Henery Jermin, Henry Piercy, John Gibbons, Edward Massey, Sylas Titus,
and others his Accomplices, did Traitorously, Wickedly, and Maliciously
Confederate, Plot, and Endeavor to stir up a New and Bloody War in this
Nation, and to subvert the Government now established, without a King and House
of Lords.

My Lord, That in the same years, since the death of the late King, he did with
other his accomplices, endeavor to promote Charles Stewart to be King of
England, contrary to an Act of Parliament, before that time made, in this
Nation.

My Lord, That in the same years, he and his accomplices did Traitorously and
Maliciously aid and assist the Nation of Scotland, to the end that they might
invade this Commonwealth; and has adhered to the forces raised by the enemies
of this Commonwealth.

My Lord, That in the same time, between the month of March, and the first of
June, this present month, he has Troiterously and Maliciously held and
maintained correspondency, and intelligence by Letters, Messages, Instructions
and otherwise, with the enemies of this Commonwealth; and to the prejudice of
this Nation; And in particular with Charles Stewart, and the late Queen his
Mother, and with Jermin, and Piercy, and other persons of Council abiding with
Charles Steward.

My Lord, That he has likewise held correspondency and Intelligence with the
Scottish Nation, prejudicial to this Commonwealth, and to the end they might
invade and bring a Bloody War upon this Nation.

My Lord, These Treasons and Traitorous and Wicked Practices of the Prisoner at
the Bar, were and are to the apparent hazard of the public Peace of this
Commonwealth, and Free State, and the Parliament and People of England; and in
contempt and violation of the Laws of the Land, and contrary to several Acts
of Parliament, in such Cases made and provided.

My Lord, There has been several Witnesses, and Proofs of these particular
Charges against the Prisoner. And, my Lord, I do conceive that there has been
such proof made, that in your Lordships judgment, he will appear to be guilty
of all these particular actings; But, my Lord, I will not enter upon the proof,
only make a Summary Relation of the beginning and continuance of this Plot and
design.

My Lord, This Plot did begin very suddenly after it pleased God to take away
the chief enemy of this Nation. The King died in January 1648, and this Plot
began in February, the very next month following: And in the same month, my
Lord, the Scots Nation did proclaim Charles Stewart King of Scotland; and they
did not stop there, but proclaimed him likewise King of England; and then, my
Lord, this Plot began here; for in the month of February, the next month after
the King dyed, the meeting was at the Swan at Dow-gate, where were several of
the Correspondents at that time; as Drake, Huntington, Titus, and others, and
the end of that meeting was to contrive a way that they might agree the King
and the Scottish Nation; that was the end of their meeting at that time.

My Lord, Within a few days after that, they met again all these several
persons, at the White-Hart in Bread-street, and to the same purpose; and at
length it was resolved to make their addresses to the Queen, and to Piercy, and
Jermin (first it was the King himself) for a compliance between the King and
the Scots; letters were sent accordingly, and several meetings, and several
returns of messages were had of them: My Lord, at length it was resolved, that
they should send Messengers to the King at Jersey, and agreed upon one Titus;
and they raised money and gave it to Titus to undertake the journey. My Lord,
Titus accordingly went in the month of May, One thousand six hundred forty
nine, and returned in August following. After he had done his negotiation
there, he returned to Calice; but being afraid that this wicked plot was
discovered, by reason of letters that were intercepted, he durst not come into
England; but sent letters to desire some correspondents might be sent to
Calice. My Lord, all this time I do not find that the proof discovers the
prisoner at the Bar to be any actor, or present at any meeting hitherto: But
when these letters came from Titus, then the letters were brought to Mr. Loves
house; which is the first time I find him by proof to be present. The letters
were read in his house, and in his Study, as some of the witnesses say, that
there were present: and it was then agreed, my Lord, that Alford should go to
Calice to Titus. My Lord, accordingly he went, and there Titus did communicate
unto him the Affairs that passed at Jersey: Within four or five days after,
Alford returns again, and where should the meeting be but at Mr. Loves house
again? where Mr. Love and diverse of the accomplices were in his house, a letter
from the King was read; the Dyary, the Narrative from Titus likewise was read
there; and there was the consultation wat should be done, and what further
course they should take to join the King and the Scots together. My Lord,
afterward they did agree that there should be some sent to treat with the King
at Breda; The Instructions were drawn in Mr. Loves house, (I think one witness
says so) and Mr. Love present; money was raised, and Mr. Love himself did
speak to one of the witnesses to raise money, which was Far: Far accordingly
did bring in five pounds, and laid it down upon Mr. Loves Table, Mr. Love being
present then in the room.

My Lord, I shall not trouble you with the relation of more particulars; But my
Lord, I conceive, that Mr. Love, does upon these proofs stand guilty of
endeavoring to promote the King to be King of England: For, my Lord, what
should be the end of uniting the King and the Scots together, after that the
Scots had proclaimed Charles Stewart King of England, but that they might come
in a warlike manner to invade this Nation, and to set up his Authority as King
among us*

My Lord, I conceive (I shall submit to your Lordships judgment) that he is
guilty of Intelligence from a professed Enemy. The intelligence is (my Lord)
that diverse letters were sent, and these letters were read in his presence, as
himself does confess he was at the reading of diverse letters, and yet did not
consent to them; and thereupon makes it as it were but misprision of Treason.
My Lord, I conceive that this is apparently Treason: For if letters were sent
to one person, and did occasionally come into another man's hand, and he
conceal them, being not sent to him, There peradventure it is but misprision
of Treason. But when there are sent to these particular persons letters from
the King and Scots, and diverse persons in hostility against the Commonwealth of
England, and received by the Confederates in Master Loves house, and there were
read and debated, though they did not agree to some particulars, yet they are
Actors: They are -- in the very intelligence it self; and did likewise return
several letters.

My Lord, this Intelligence was with the Scottish Nation, which truly, my Lord,
I do conceive hardly an English man, that had the blood of an English man
running in his veins, would join in confederacy with that Nation, of all the
Nations of the world, against this Commonwealth: a Nation that has been known
(and I am sure, the prisoner at the Bar is well read in the Histories and
Stories of this Nation) to have been a constant Enemy to this Nation in all
ages through the memory of all Histories; and, my lord, of late, not three
years since, came and invaded this Nation with a Puissant Army, which it
pleased God to deliver us from: and this the Prisoner could not be ignorant of,
that we had lately a fight with them at Dunbar, that hostility could not be
unknown unto the prisoner at the Bar neither: and yet for all that, to
confederate with a Nation, that were such constant enemies to us. My lord, I
could not conceive it had been in the heart of an English man, much less in a
Minister and Preacher of the Gospel among us.

My lord, There are some particular charges upon him more then upon any of the
rest; After Drake fled away, being doubtful that his secret Traitorous Plot
would be discovered, Mr. Love supplied his room: all the meetings, and
confederacies, and letters, and Agitations in this business were constantly at
Mr. Loves house, himself being present. And, my Lord, money as I said before,
by Mr. Love himself desired to be raised, for the furthering of this design,
and several sums of money were raised. I shall trouble your Lord-ship with no
further relation, but leave it to the proof that was made before your Lordship
and the Court.


Sir Thomas Witherington, the second Council for the Commonwealth. Sir Th.
Wither. My Lord, Mr. Loves Defense which he made for himself, as he did it for
his life, so he took a great deal of pains in it, and was very accurate in the
Defense he made, especially in the Witnesses. My Lord, I shall not take upon me
(for it is not my charge at this time) to reply unto, the whole Defense that
Mr. Love made.

My Lord, That I shall say, shall be in two particulars, for Mr. Love divided
that which he said into four parts; the first concerning the Charge; the second
concerning the Witnesses and Testimony; and 3. concerning himself; and 4.
concerning some proposalls to the Court.

My Lord, I shall only meddle with that which is concerning the Witnesses; and
2. to some part of that he said concerning himself; I shall only reply as to
these two, and the rest I shall leave to Mr. Atturny General, that better
knows what is for the advantage of the Commonwealth.

My Lord, I shall begin concerning the Witnesses to clear them (for now we are
in our reply for the Commonwealth.) Mr. Love, who did profess a very great
deal of ignorance in the Laws of the land yet he did insinuate something that
implied some knowledge of them, in that, my Lord, he took some exceptions to
the Witnesses; my Lord, I take it that these exceptions were:

1. That the witnesses were not Probi testes and legales,

And 2. That they were Participes criminis, and that indeed is included in the
other.

My Lord, First I shall speak to this, that the witnesses produced against him,
are Legales Testes: they are competent witnesses, and sufficient witnesses,
without exception against them. I shall first speak to that they are Testis
legales, for Mr. Love did object, that they themselves confessed themselves to
be guilty of the same crimes, and so their confession is upon the matter, a
conviction, and so they are convicted of the crimes in which they are witnesses
against him; and so are not competent witnesses.

My Lord, I shall clear this; under favor, I take it they are very clear and
good witnesses, notwithstanding the Exceptions. And, my Lord, this I take to be
a very plain case, the case which is in our Common Law; the case is -- which
proves it fully. For if a man be accused of High Treason, indicted of High
Treason, and will confess the Indictment, and become an Approver, yet he may
be a witness against all those parties guilty of the same Treasons with
himself, he is particeps criminis with them, and they with him; and yet this
man thus becoming an Approver, will at Common Law be a witness, and a legal
and good witness against them.

My Lord, I shall a little open that, because it clears the case. My Lord, an
Approver can only approve it is true; that is when a man is indicted of High
Treason and other his Accomplices with him; and he upon the Indictment says it
is true, and then desires he may have some thing assigned to him, and then he
accuses such and such persons of the same crimes; in this case this man after
he has confessed the Indictment, and takes his corporal oath to reveall all
Treasons he knows in the Indictment, (for he can accuse no further) after this
done he shall be a witness, he is a witness against those with whom he is
Particeps criminis. Nay, my Lord, it is of merit and Justice that he shall have
this reward, he shall be pardoned his life* Now that I prove to you, because
that shows the reason; that even the man, after Indictment and Confession, yet
being an Approver, shall be an Accuser of his brethren, those that were
Participes criminis with him, and a good witness; and the reason of that goes
to this case in hand. For although these men had a hand in the same plot and
design with him, and have confessed, and did confess it upon evidence, that they
were there present, and did many things; yet I take it they are clear,
competent, and good witness; and that is no Objection against them, that they
are Participes criminis. My Lord, if the law were otherwise, it were impossible
to prove many offenses; for many offenses cannot be proved, but by some men
that had a hand in them. Jn an ordinary case an action of Trespass and false
imprisonment, if three men are guilty of it, it is an usual thing in Courts of
Justice to admit one of them a witness; true, they are not parties in the
action, and so may be witnesses; for these things may be so secretly done
otherwise, that their Treasons could never be revealed to recover against the
prisoner.

There is a case, I think in all our knowledge, it is the case of the Earl of
Castle-haven, he was accused of a very grievous Fact, the witnesses which came
against him, were one or two Footmen, that were Participes criminis in the very
same fact, and these men by the Opinion of the Judges were competent witnesses.
My Lord, he was arraigned, indicted, and convicted, and suffered death: nay, it
is very true, that one of these persons was afterward hanged for the same
offense: so that I think, under favor, as to that, I take it, that they are
clear and good witnesses, notwithstanding that objection.

The next objection is, that they were not probi testes: Truly for that, my
Lord, I must appeal to your judgment in it, whether these men be not probi
testes, and houestes too; for in case of an approver, as I mentioned before,
that man that accuses his brethren upon the same Treason, it is said, that of
merit and justice, the King ought to grant him his pardon: For they that
discover the Traitors against the Commonwealth, these certainly are probi
testes, and good Commonwealths men: and so I take it, that this is no
objection against them in that, but as before they were legales testes, so they
are probi testes. My Lord, I mention these things, to show that the witnesses
for the Commonwealth are good and competent in this case.

The next objection touching these witnesses, is, that though they be admitted
for good witness; yet there is not to any one fact two witnesses: There is not
any one of the most criminal parts of the Charge proved by two witnesses: And
so as before they were incompetent in regard of the quality and participancy of
their crimes, so now he would make them incompetent for want of number.

My Lord, I shall first agree to the ground of this objection; for truly, my
Lord, I take it, that it is by the common and ancient law of England, that in
cases of Treason there must be two witnesses; and it is by a law more ancient
then that, that is, by the law of God. But my Lord, it is true, the law of this
Land is explained by several Statutes; the Statute of the first year of Edward
the Sixth, and the fifth year, and the second year of Philip and Mary; My Lord,
I take it, upon all these Statutes, the one Statute says, To accuse another,
there must be two witnesses; I take it, the accuser and witness are all one;
that is, the same that in one Statute is called a Witness, in another is
called an Accuser. But there must be two, that is the objection* But then give
me leave to consider this Case, and to consider how those two witnesses shall
be. My Lord, I say under favor, that in a Case that consists of a complicated
fact; that is, the reiteration of many actions, my Lord, I conceive none of
these laws are to be intended, that for every of the particular facts there
should be two witnesses: that cannot be the intention of any of these laws,
that in every particular fact, that is to say, whether Mr. Love was present at
the reading of the letters, if you have one witness to that, another for the
writing of them, another to the sending of them; though these three witnesses
speak to several parts of the business, yet they are a concurrent testimony,
for all agree to the fact. I well remember, my Lord, a Case in the
Star Chamber, against B. of Leicestershire, I think there was an information
against him for Bribery and extorting of Fees: The matter came in the
conclusion, that one man proved a bribe, and another man proved a bribe; one
proved a bribe of forty pounds, and another a bribe of forty pounds: but there
were several witnesses to several bribes. The question now was, whether he
took bribes or no? And these tending to the same general Charge, it was the
opinion of all the Judges, that he did extort and take bribes. The one witness
spoke to one bribe, and another to another; and in that Case, as two witnesses,
made good a charge against an offender, yet in that case it was taken, that
where witnesses, though they speak not in every particular, yet all tending to
the same general Charge of Bribery, these were taken for plural witnesses,
and that was a good conviction. That was the opinion of the Judges then. I
mention this Case only for an instance to express my self in this: For Mr.
Love cannot expect, that to every particular thing laid to his charge two
witnesses should be produced. But my Lord, when one witness proves, this thing
he has done, this letter has he written; and another that another thing he
has done, which all tend to the Treason; now these are more witnesses, and two
or three witnesses of the same thing, though not to the same individual thing
it is --. So that upon the matter they are concurrent witnesses in this
complicated fact, though not concurrent in this or that circumstance; for that
is impossible almost in any action to be done.

But then Mr. Love did further enlarge this objection; which was out of a
saying he had, That in case of Treason, Probationes opportent esse luce
clariores: The proof must be as clear as the Sun. Truly, my Lord, it is very
hard, that works of darkness should need so much light for discovery, and that
so clear a proof should be necessary when the things are done in darkness and
secrecy. My Lord, I think, under favor, though in this particular we have our
witness, as I do take it, to speak very plainly and clearly; for it is their
own faults if they do not, for they were present at the meetings, at the
Consultations and Debates. But yet I do observe, That in this case things were
carried on in a very secret manner; for I do observe first, at these meetings
all of them were done under a disguise, every thing acted in this business. I
observe it upon evidence, first, That the very meetings themselves, They go
under the Title of Prayer and Fasting; for so Huntington told you, he was spoke
to go to prayer at Mr. Love's house. The Contributions made for raising of
money, for sending of Messages and dispatches, was under the disguise of
charitable uses; so that here was darkness all along. And then for the
Letters, there was no names subscribed to them, all were done without names,
only the letter L. was upon one. And the place truly, I must say, that was
obscure too; for what man would have thought, that the place of meeting should
have been Mr. Love's house, a man that has been so much for, and showed so
great an affection to the Parliament, as he said himself in substance? a man
would sooner have thought to have found this Treason in any Cellar in London,
then in Mr. Love's house. For the Instructions, for the directions and
Dispatches, some were sent in Table-books, written in Sack in a Table Book.
But, my Lord, I am afraid in the conclusion, the Letters will be written in
blood. But, my Lord, this I do observe, that through these difficulties, though
we past through our Evidence, yet your Lordship heard how plain the proof was
in most particulars.

My Lord, I shall say no more as to these Witnesses, because the other part of
answering the Witnesses belongs to the Attorney General; for Master Love went
over all the particular Witnesses.

My Lord; I shall only say one thing, and that is this, concerning Mr. Love
himself; and it is only concerning this point. My Lord, Mr. Love himself did
say, He would be ingenuous so far as he took himself to be guilty. But, my
Lord, I know your Lordship and the Court observes, that that ingenuity did
follow the proof that was for the Commonwealth. My Lord, he confesses he was
present at them, he was silent after all these Meetings and Debates, I mean the
meetings after they began at his own house; for I speak not of them that were
at Dow-gate, for there is no proof that he was there. My Lord, this he
confesses, and this he says is misprision of Treason. Truly, my Lord, I must
be bold to differ from him in that particular; I take it that that he confesses
is High Treason. I shall speak a little to Misprision of Treason, and so
conclude.

My Lord, Misprision of Treason is when a man has notice of a thing that is
Treason, and he conceals it; now, my Lord, under favor, the concealment must
not be long, it must not sleep long with him. My Lord, I remember an Axiom an
Author has in our Law, and that is Bracton; he has a discourse of misprision
of Treason, he has it in Latin -- says he, He that knows a Treason, he must
not stay in one place a day and a night, but he must go on, he must go toward
the Magistrate. Nay (says he) though he have most urgent business yet he must
set it aside and go on, and must not stay in any place till he has revealed
it. Nay he says further, He ought not to look back till he has given
information to the Magistrate; The man that does not after this manner
forthwith reveal it, this only is misprision of Treason. But considering this
case of Mr. Loves, now confessing the fact, he takes it to be misprision of
Treason, but I take it to be Treason it self. My Lord, I shall observe what
Mr. Love did; he was at these meetings; these meetings were continued for
diverse days, and months. My Lord, was there any discovery made by Mr. Love?
was there any revelation of his to any Magistrate? Did he tell it to any man?
Nay, Did he confess it upon his Examination, when examined? Nay, Did he not
deny it when he came to the Bar before your Lord-ship? Can this be said to be
misprision of Treason, that a man should hold so long in Treason and not reveal
it? My Lord, As every Treason includes a misprision of Treason in it; so I
conclude, that misprision of Treason may grow up to treason it self. Now when
a man shall so long sleep upon it, and be violent in it, and not reveal it, I
take this misprision of Treason grows up into Treason it self.

My Lord, I shall say no more of that, but I shall conclude, because the other
part lies upon Mr. Attorney General, who is better able to do it; only one
thing I shall take notice of to your Lordship, and I am troubled at it; and
that is, That as he says, that he that has been so much for the Parliament,
with whom he has gone along, and took sweet counsel together, and has been
Active for, and Passive with through all the passages of the late Wars, that
he should suffer from them, this he says, stuck very much upon him. But, my
Lord, for him that has been so much for the Parliament, so familiar with their
proceedings, that has been so active for them, and has suffered so much for
them; my lord, for him to kick the heel against the Parliament, for him after
all this, now even in the Infancy of this Commonwealth, that this child should
be destroyed, and by one with whom we have took sweet counsel together. And by
one I may say this, that though he had no hand in making this Commonwealth,
yet I dare say he had in the preparations to it; for himself all along has
gone with the Parliament; so that my Lord, I take this to be an objection
against him. But, my Lord, I shall say no more in it, but refer the other part
to M. Atturney-Generall.


M. Atturney-Generall the third Council for the Commonwealth. At. Genesis My
Lord, I am sorry M. Love has given the occasion of this meeting, and of my
speaking at present, I could much rather have wished to have been silent; but
now I am drawn hither, I am forced to it. M. Love, my Lord, in the beginning of
his Trial did desire God so to assist him, that he might go through it with
gravity, meekness and wisdom, as became a Minister of the Gospel: I wish that
God had heard his prayers, that he had so gone through it; what he has done,
the Court has observed.

My Lord, in that part I have to do, I do heartily desire I might do it with
faithfulness to you, and the duty of the place I ought to discharge, and to the
Court.

My Lord, the work that this day lies upon me is, to reply somewhat to what was
said by M. Love in his own Defense, and to make a faithful repetition to the
Court, and to do the Witnesses and the Prisoner right; to repeat that, and
that only that has been said: And in that, that J may do no wrong to mislead
the Court, and offer nothing to the prejudice of the Witnesses, nor to the
prisoner. And truly, my Lord, I shall not (in his own words) have any tortured
Collections, nor any inferences, nor strains of wit; he has showed his Oratory
in his defense. My Lord, I shall show the simplicity of Law in the Reply.

My Lord, the Charge has been repeated to you, and for that insisted upon by
M. Love for the Witnesses and testimony you have had answer; I shall not
trouble you, there has been pains taken in it, my Lord, I think all men were
satisfied that it was clear enough; yet to make it more clear. M. Love, my
Lord, insisted upon one thing more, and that is upon point of Time, and the
point of the Jurisdiction of the Court, which (by your favor) I shall first
begin with.

He stands charged he says, for crimes done in 1648. 1649. 1650. and 1651. and
those crimes he says, were before this Court was, or had a being, and so had
not power to take cognizance of them.

That my Lord, J shall endeavor to clear to you, and I think in much
cleerness, cleerer than the light, as he will have his evidence. He stands
charged (I say) positively, my Lord, with no crime before a Law was emitted,
that did give an inhibition and was published and known. He stands charged with
no crime before the Law was published, that did declare what the crime was, and
gave notice to beware.

My Lord, that that was first, was the Law that was made the thirtieth of
January, 1648. that does declare, (and upon that Law I shall fetch the
foundation and rise of this Treason) that whoever shall proclaim, declare,
publish, or any way promote Chapter Stewart, or any other person to be King, or
chief Magistrate of England, or Ireland, without consent in Parliament, shall
be adjudged a Traitor, and shall suffer pains of death as a Traitor: Here was
this Law published, and notice given what every man should trust to, and I may
say my Lord, Obedience expected: Against this Law has M. Love transgressed,
and under favor, in a very high measure; so that, my Lord, I charge him upon
this Law, and since this Law was made, and to this Law there is no limitation
of time for men to be questioned for it: and for this Law, it is in express
terms given in Commission to this Court to take cognizance of it; so that I
think, this is a little clear to him.

My Lord, the next is a Law published in July, 1649* that is entitled, An Act
declaring what offenses shall be Treason; that I think he is not ignorant of,
though he pretended to be ignorant of another. My Lord, that Law likewise,
though it was before this Court was erected, yet this Court has by express
words of the Commission power to take cognizance of it; and this Court in these
things is not like other Judicatories, that when offenses are committed, the
State takes care to appoint Courts and Judges to judge those offenses; let it
be no offense to M. Love if this Court were erected especially to try him, but
the Law was not made especially to punish him; for the Law was made before, and
the offense committed before, and so I think, in all England the offenses are
committed before the Judges go their Circuits and have their Commissions.

My Lord, the next is the Law that constitutes this Court, and says in what
particulars this Court has power to take notice of offenses, besides those
mentioned before, and the last concerning the Scots; that was but lately which
Mr. Love says he was ignorant of; but he was not ignorant to do somewhat
against it. My Lord, these are for the laws that Mr. Love is impeach't upon.

The next thing that I have to do is, (and in that I humbly beg your favor,
That as I am now to do Justice (if I may so say) to the Court, and to be
faithful to my Trust and the Duty imposed upon me) to repeat the evidence
right unto you; and in that, as the Gentleman the Prisoner at the Bar, has
had that favor from you to have a Notary by him to take all that was said of
all parties; so, my lord, by your favor, we have had some here to help our
memories; with whom I have conferred, and by the help of their Notes and our
memories, my lord, we think we have faithfully transcribed that which was
said by the Witnesses. And, my lord, I humbly crave favor, as not now being a
private examination, to be read, but a public testimony in the presence of Mr.
Love himself, and the Court; I hope it is not private now, but I may use notes
to do him right, and may read those things that they testified upon their oath
here.

In the first place, my lord, I shall according to my best judgment do him no
wrong: For the first, I shall acknowledge it was but a hearsay, and that from
Drake, of letters sent from Scotland to the Presbyterian party in England, to
let them know what had been done of proclaming the King there, and that care
should be taken for their Interest. This I do acknowledge was but a
hearsay; but that which followed not long after that time, my lord, was
positive, and there (my lord) I shall begin the rise of this; and thus as has
been observed by my fellows that are Counsel here, though there was not
acting, nor presence, nor knowing, yet (my lord) under a second, it will
appear he was consenting and approving, and so guilty of the first fact: My
lord, there was a meeting at Dowgate, I suppose you remember it full well, it
has been several times repeated to you by several persons, and Titus the
party now beyond the Seas, and Drake, and other Traitors fled, were prime
sticklers for this, and moved others to come in and to be there present, and
hear what was the design. As J did crave your Lordships favor, so I shall,
that I may not (as he says) trust to fickle nor roveing memory, that I may
be faithful to read to you that I have taken, and what was said by them; I
suppose Mr. Love has by him one that can control me if I do not right.

I begin with this meeting at Dowgate, and continued at the White-Hart in
Breadstreet, Alford gave you this evidence, That one morning he was wished by
Drake to go to the Swan at Dowgate; when he came there, there was one Titus
who gave relation of the good disposition of the Prince, and how inclineable
he was to take the Covenant, and to cast off the Cavaliering party, and those
about him, if there were opportunity found, how to make him know there was a
considerable party in England that would stick close to the ends of the
Covenant; and upon that we that were there did think we were bound in duty,
in relation to the Covenant, to press the Prince to take it, and to prosecute
the ends of it. And for that Titus said, if we would appoint another meeting,
he would draw up something in way of Application of the Presbyterian party to
that purpose.

We afterward met at the Bear in Breadstreet, and there he drew fourth
something he had framed to that purpose, and read it, and it was agreed upon
to be sent over to the Prince, the substance of it was to press the Prince to
apply himself to take the Covenant, and to prosecute the ends of it, and to
cast off all the Cavaliers and that party about him, which had brought so much
mischief to his Father, and would do likewise to him: And this (I believe)
was sent over, for Titus undertook to send it over. We asked him how the
Prince could be made to believe that this coming from so inconsiderable a
party as we were, should come under the notion of the Presbyterian party of
England; he said he would undertake it by means of my Lord Piercie. And my
lord, I think you do remember there was one Mason servant of Piercy, that was
sent over hither, so testified by some, to reconcile the Royal and
Presbyterian party. This Mason (my lord) was Piercies Servant, so testified
here by diverse, My lord, here is now the foundation, Drake is he that moves
Alford; and Titus I may suppose the mover of Drake, and both of them fled at
Traitors.

My Lord, If they were Traitors, and this is Treason; then whoever had a hand
in carrying on this Design, himself is a Traitor, and his Action is Treason.
My Lord, this is the Testimony of Alford.

My Lord, There is another witness, and that is, lieut. Colonel Bains, who I
think was present only at this meeting, and had enough of it, and did leave it;
and yet was present at this, and gave in evidence of what was there proposed. I
think he was present at no other meeting, he was satisfied this was too much;
his Testimony, as I take it, was this, for I shall read it, that I may do no
wrong to no party: Bains said, It was also proposed by Titus, that something
should be done in order, to restoring the Presbyterian Interest, by Application
to the Prince, and to assure him that he had a considerable party in England,
which looked upon it as a duty, and lying upon all of them by the Covenant. And
that it was necessary some what should be done by some Parliament men,
Ministers and Citizens, that were leading active men, that he might have an
assurance, that somewhat would be done for him: and somewhat to the Queen,
Jermin and Piercy, whom, he said, were their friends. This, my Lord, was that
which Titus said at this meeting; and testified by Bains.

My Lord, There is another, Colonel Barton, who was produced as an Evidence.
My Lord, I think that he spoke not much more then to this, and gave off here.
My Lord, his Testimony was this; for I do conceive, under favor, we have taken
the very precise words spoken by them: And, my Lord, so as spoken and taken, so
written, and so, my Lord, read to you: Barton, my Lord, said, That Drake would
have him to be a Messenger, and to that purpose there were several meetings at
the Swan and White-Hart. This was what Barton testified.

My Lord, Then there was Major Huntington, which was at this meeting, and one
more at Mr. Loves house, which he full well remembers. My Lord, Huntington
says this, That about March 1648. (in January was the Law published) Alford
told him, that Titus was in town, and that he was newly come from beyond the
Seas from their friends, Massy, Bunce, Graves and others, and that Titus was to
meet the next day at Dow-gate, where he fell into high praises of the Prince,
and told them that though he was taking unhandsome courses, yet they had great
hopes his inclinations were otherwise. Titus said further, he feared his
inclining to the Irish, unless something should be gotten from his friends
here to divert him; that you remember was Mr. Loves charity too, as you will
hear anon. Titus purposed to get letters from persons of honor, to persuade
him to a good opinion of the Scots, to take the Covenant, and to join with them.

Afterward they met at the White Heart in Bread-street, where Titus declared
that he should gain these letters, and hoped to set something a foot to the
same effect; and there said, they were confident they could see no way under
Heaven for him else, but by taking the Covenant, and engaging the Scots against
England; to which purpose he drew forth a Paper, purporting that they were
bound in honesty, conscience and loyalty, to maintain and help him to his just
Rights, if he would go along and join with the Covenanting party in England and
Scotland.

My Lord, This is that now that has past in proof by evidence concerning this
first meeting at the Swan at Dowgate, which I do humbly conceive was the rise
and foundation of what follows afterward. And this, my Lord, if true, I
suppose no man will say, but that was Treason that was transacted there. I do
not say, my Lord, that Mr. Love was present at it, nor as yet, can I say,
knowing of it, but what follows after, my lord, will bring him in danger.

My Lord, Here, you have heard, was this meeting, and what was propounded to be
done here, and how active Titus was, and that he was to go (you have heard by
the Testimony) to Piercy; and it is not doubted by any but he did go thither;
it is not doubted by any but he was sent and did go thither. To that purpose I
shall now read you two witnesses more, which I have caused to be transcribed
too, in the words as spoken by them, as I do conceive, that is Adams and Far;
That there was money agreed upon, to send Titus to Piercy; that there was money
collected, and that they themselves did contribute. Adams he expresses it
thus: That upon a meeting, the place and time I remember not; where I think
were present Drake, Titus, Alford, and my self, and I cannot tell how many
more; It was agreed that Titus should go to Piercy, the end of his going was to
promote an agreement between the King and the Scots, according to the Covenant
(and, my Lord, you shall hear in due time what that Covenant is, that M. Love
has said in his late Defense,) In order to his going, we did agree to furnish
him with money for the present, and made some kind of promise to keep him
while he was out; about an hundred pound was furnished; for my part, I paid
twenty pounds of it. This is Adams.

The next is Far: He says, He did understand by Drake, that Titus, who was
here requested as one, to be present at the Treaty at Jersey, which Titus did
undertake to go thither; he undertook to go himself: that after he was gone,
Drake desired Far to let him have ten pound, saying, Titus was in want, and
upon this I lent him ten pounds; the Letter was read at M. Loves house when he
came from Calice. So my Lord, here is now under favor, his proof before you of
this meeting at Dowgate, at the Swan there, finished in Bredstreet, carried
over unto Jersey, Titus the Messenger furnished with money by a party from
hence in this Arrant, as we told you. My Lord, all this while I do not hear of
M. Love: if he were, My Lord, he was like the Mole under ground: but however,
my Lord, Mr. Love has carried himself (as some have said) like a Rat among
joynt-stools, a man can see him, but cannot hit him; But, my Lord, I doubt he
will appear to be too busy in what follows, and that he had a hand in it at
first.

My Lord, the next to go on with is this, in time; that when Titus finished his
work at Jersey, he was then to give an account to his Masters that employed
him, and upon his return he was to do it faithfully, as he thought. But being
informed, that the State had vigilant eyes, and they discovered him what he had
been doing there, and he having notice from some of his steadfast friends here
of it, he thought it was not safe for him to come in person, so that his guilty
conscience kept him off: But then he did desire that he might give an account
by the hand of some others, by their memories, and for that purpose wrote a
letter, to whom I cannot tell, I think to Drake; The letter was written, and
under favor, my Lord, this letter from Titus was read in M. Loves house, to
have one sent to him; and there it was propounded for some to be sent, Adams
was propounded, for him to go; Far propounded for him to go; but not them, but
Alford was agreed to go, and did accept of it: but not that he was there, my
Lord. My Lord, for this I shall crave the same favor from you, to read Adams
and Far, as to that particular. This is Major Adams, It was moved in M. Loves
house, M. Love being there present, that I should go to Calice to meet Titus;
but Alford going thither, did at his return give an account of the state of
things at M. Loves house. My Lord, that I read him for, is for that part, that
it was moved in M. Loves chamber, M. Love being then present: that I should go
to Calice to meet Titus; it was moved that Adams should go; my Lord, this I
read to show M Love was privy to this before the Messenger was sent. My Lord,
the next is Capt. Ralph Far. I was in M. Loves house in his Study, wherein (in
M. Loves Study) a letter was read from Titus, desiring one might be sent to him
to Calice; and thereupon it was moved that I should go, but afterward it was
agreed that Alford should go, who went accordingly. That is now as to that
particular, that before any man was sent unto Calice, it was made known in M.
Loves house, and some propounded for to go, and at last another did go; this,
my Lord, I offer to you, as that which will not be controverted by M. Love, for
I have read you two Witnesses to it. The next, my Lord is, in which (I think)
we do not differ, but that when Alford had been at Calice, and had taken the
account that Titus gave him, the copy of the letter which he said was from the
King to the Presbyterian party here, the Narrative of all the Transactions and
Proceedings at Jersey; that upon his return, I think we do not differ, nor is
it denied; I am sure M. Love acknowledged it in his last Defense, because
proved by four, therefore confessed; my Lord, that this Narrative, the copy of
this letter was read in his house, and for that I have the testimony of Adams,
Alford, Jaquel, and Far, which if it be your pleasure, I shall humbly read
unto you.

The first is Major John Alford, Having received at Calice a Narrative in
writing of Titus his transactions in Jersey, I brought the same to Drake, to
whom it was directed: Now it appears to whom the direction was; and he brought
it to M. Loves house, where it was read; afterward there was a Commission so
called; but my Lord, if you please, that is for this in the first place, That
this Narrative brought from Titus by Alford, was read at M. Loves house.

The next is Adams, But Alford going to Calice, did at his return give an
account of the state of things at M. Loves house, which account was the
Narrative from Titus, and the copy of the letter said to be the Kings letter.
The Contents whereof I remember was as follows, The King expressed a great
deal of affection to the Ministry in general in England, and promised them
great favors when he was in a condition, and desired them to continue steadfast
in the way they were in; which letter was read and published in M. Loves Study,
and M. Love was there sometimes of the reading, at the same time a motion was
made of giving thanks to Titus for his well managing affairs there, and at the
same time the Commission and Instructions were. So that here is another
testimony, that this was done at Mr. Loves house; the Narrative, says this
Gentleman, and the copy of the Kings letter.

My Lord, the next I shall read unto you is Mr. John Jaquel. After Alfords
coming home, I was at Mr. Loves house, where was Potter, Drake and Alford; and
Mr. Love was there some times, though di^ers times some body came to speak with
him, and called him, and he went to speak with them: A Narrative from Titus was
there read by Alford or Drake, wherein was declared the Kings inclination to
make peace with the Scots, but his wicked Council hindered him. I think it was a
Narrative of what had passed between the King and Titus at Jersey. This is that
that Jaquel says.

The next, my lord, i^ Far; Alford being returned, he gave account of his
employment at Mr. Loves house; A copy of a letter was there read, from the
King to the Presbyterian party in England; the substance was to send
Commissioners to the Treaty at Breda. The Narrative brought from Titus was
communicated at Mr. Loves house: where were present ten or twelve persons. So,
my lord, you have heard these four witnesses, what they have said concerning
this: Now you shall give me leave to make application of this to the former; I
shall crave you favor to go through this. There follows more at Mr. Loves
house; this is not ended yet. My lord, after this, there was somewhat
propounded to be done upon this Narrative and a letter from the King; somewhat
was propounded at this meeting: My lord, then there was (as I know the Court
remembers) speech of a Commission that was somewhat controverted. There was
speech of a Commission, and a Commission read, Mr. Love ingenuously
acknowledges, and it was proved, and he declared his dissenting from it, and
that he was against it, because as private persons they had no power to do any
such thing. But, my lord, that there was a Commission read there, brought by
Drake (I do not say that this proves that Mr. Love corrected it:) That there
were Instructions and letters read for to be sent over, I think, is not denied:
but, my lord, for that, if you please, I shall read you the witness. The first
is Alford: Afterward there was a Commission, so called, agreed among us, sent
over to the lord Willoughby of Parham, Massey, Graves and Titus, at B^eda, to
advise with the Scots Commissioners there, in behalf of the Presbyterian party
in England. This Commission was read in Mr. Loves Study: and at the same time
Instructions for the Commissioners to walk by were agreed on to be sent: which
Commission and Instructions were the substance of the Petition formerly sent,
to press the King to take the Covenant, and to prosecute the ends of it. This
Petition was (I conceive) what was formerly agreed upon at Dow-gate: which
Commission and Instructions one Mason the lord Piercy's man carried over. This
is Alfords testimony as to this. And being asked by Mr. Love, Did not I
dissent from sending the Commission and Instructions? he says this, It was
agreed in the general, that the Commission and Instructions should be sent,
Mr. Love being then present. All present are Principles, my lord.

My lord, in the next place is Major Huntington's testimony; and the first is
this, That at Mr. Loves house, in the beginning of March 1649, I found Drake
and others, and there was read a paper in the nature of a Commission,
Commissionating my lord Willoughby of Parham, Graves, Titus, Massey and Bunce,
to treat in the behalf of the well-affected party of England, and to join with
the Scots Commissioners, according to such Instructions as should be therein
enclosed. And this question being asked, What power have we to give or send
such a Commission? Drake answered, We have the Kings Command for it, and the
authority of some secluded Parliament men; for J look upon them beyond the
Power that is now sitting. Whereupon Mr. Love replied, Come, come, let it go.
You have heard Huntingtons testimony, and Mr. Loves paraphrase upon those words.

The next is Adams. At the same time a Commission and instructions were spoken
of at Mr. Loves house, to be drawn up and sent. As J remember, Mr. Gibbons
brought the rough draught. J am very confident that Master Love was there some
part of this time; and it was in his Study, where this was generally consented
unto. The Jnstructions were there agreed also, and read by Drake, as J
remember. Sterks the Scottish Agent met with us sometimes at Master Loves house.
This is what was testified by Adams: There is another to this, and that is
Captain Far: William Drake read there a paper, of the nature of Commission,
which was not agreed to by the Company, because private persons had no
authority to give Commission. The Commission was in the name of the
Presbyterian party. A letter and instructions was then agreed upon, The
Commissioners were to be the Lord Willoughby of Parham, Bunce, Massey and
Titus; who was to move in the behalf of the Presbyterians: Papers then were
read, to have been sent to the Queen, to persuade the King to give satisfaction
to the Scots. But they were not assented to.

My lord, I have done with this that concerns this meeting; and now I shall
apply that which I intended and spoke of before. The Design you heard, that (my
lord) was at the Swan at Dowgate, was treasonable enough in conscience, high
enough; a party employed to agitate! And though we do not find Mr. Love to
have been knowing or privy to it at first; yet, my lord, if there be a Treason
hatched and designed, a party sent in it; and any subsequent act of any other
party, that shall come into this, and approve of it, and join in it in what way
soever, This man, my lord, is guilty of the first transaction of Treason. So
that though Master Love did so walk under ground, that we cannot bring him in
to be knowing at first, yet I bring him approving at last: And, my lord, though
here be his first appearing, it is enough and too timely; And my lord, Titus
departing, and an account given of all; and for ought appears, not to be proved
by me, nor by any for the Commonwealth, whether Master Love did approve or
not; or how far he went in it. But he was present, and at the debates and
discoursings about it, and actings in it. My lord, this is far from misprision
of Treason; for misprision of Treason is a bare silent act, that carries
nothing of discourse nor debate with it: it is a simple act of omission. But
when Treasons are hatched, and are designed, and others shall come and treat,
and debate, and discourse upon carrying them on; my lord, by the subsequent act
he has approved of all that passed before, and made himself party to it.
Here is an account given by Titus of what had passed there; this is brought
into Master Loves house; there are debates concerning a Commission: whether
they took the KING for the Authority, or the King wrote of it, it does not
much move me. A copy of a letter from the King was read there, let them take
it among themselves as they please. Here was a Commission debated, and Master
Love acknowledges he debated against it. My lord, under favor, if he had
declared an utter dislike, and (as he himself says) a detestation and
abomination against it! But he goes on, though not in that particular, yet in
another; and he is guilty of all. In Treason there are no Accessaries, all
present are Principles.

The crime of Treason is beyond the crying blood of murder, one is but
private, the other is public; so as, my lord, though Mr. Love acknowledges,
that he so far owned the Narrative from Titus and the proceedings there, the
reading of it, but did dissent from the commission, and did speak against it,
and at present I shall take it so too; yet for the instructions sent, and for
the commission named, you have had four witnesses named to you; my lord,
dissent will not serve his turn, and yet to that there is not a pretense of a
dissent from the instructions, and what was sent, and that is a consent and
concurrence, and that is an approbation of all precedent actions, and makes
himself a party in it, and that is by one witness; and, my lord, you have
heard by Master Sergeant Witherigton, that to every circumstance there needs
not two witnesses, but to the design there must be two; and Adams himself
says it was propounded to have given Titus money, as you shall hear by and by;
and Far tells you, that there was going on so far in it, that a paper was read
for letters to be sent to the Queen to move her to persuade the King, but that
was not assented to; but it was moved among them.

My Lord, The next thing I shall take, as near as I can, was when this was
done, and this transaction past over, and the instructions sent, that were
agreed upon for Commissioners at Bredah, then begins the troubles in Ireland.
You have heard of a Paper Book sent, written in sack, and returned a year
after; that comes next: There was sent over from Colonel Bamfield (Mr. Love
says, he knew not the face of the man) but he liked his employment it seems,
that would be privy to such proceedings from a man he knew not. There came a
servant over, I take it from Bamfield, and that was about Christmas last, that
is the time expressed after Dunbar fight. My Lord, This was brought, the letter
was delivered to Potter, and their Superscription was singly with the letter L.
which I may say, may be better applied to Master Love, then to any other, all
circumstances considered; yet I shall not conclude from it, but though he
says, he had no letters directed to him, I shall say as truly, that they were
directed to him, as much as to any man else, and a little more; for Master Love
was very unfortunate, that these letters should be brought to him, read in his
house, the transactions there, and Mr. Love to have no hand in it; this is
hardly to be believed.

My lord, in the next place are these letters that came from Bamfield: if it
please you, for that I shall read Potter. I received letters out of Scotland
from Bamfield, with the letter L upon it, wherein was a large Narrative of the
affairs of Scotland, from Dunbar fight, to the time of the date of them, which
(I think) was about Christmas. I carried those letters to Master Loves, where
was one or two more with us, Jaquel, and I think Doctor Drake, we three I am
sure of it. There were letters from a namelesse person, whom we supposed to be
Master Baily; and a letter from my Lords of Argile, Louthain, and Lowden. These
letters wrote for ten thousand pounds for buying of Arms and hiring of
shipping; and for five thousand men to be landed in England. These letters were
disliked and dissented from; and it was agreed to give a negative Answer: And
we thought fit (for our own safety) to raise some money for the Messenger and
Bamfield: the sum^n agreed on was forty pounds; to which I contributed ten
pounds. I carried the letter to Mr Loves, to take advice upon it. Mr. Love and
I, and Jaquel read those letters that were opened, and those that were not
opened, we did open and read, and discourse on them; and upon advice resolved
to do nothing in it: Neither did they reveal it. And then being demanded,
whether at Mr. Loves house there was not a discourse for raising 4 or 500 l. he
answered, There was. Being demanded whether letters were not returned to
Bamfield, with the money sent him; He answered, A letter was left at my shop,
and I apprehended it came from Master Love, or Mr. Drake. (and Jaquel being
demanded whether Mr. Drake and Mr. Love were not appointed to draw up the
letter? he answered, Yes, they were.) and that is Potters testimony.

The next mention is, that Jaquel was present there, he is sure of it; Master
Love himself, and Jaquel. This is Jaquels testimony; At a Meeting at Mr. Loves
house, Master Love being present, It was thought fit that forty pounds should
be raised for Bamfield. A letter was read from Bamfield at Master Loves house,
Mr. Love being present; Mr. Love declared, he never saw or knew Bamfield. The
letter was for five thousand pounds to hire shipping. And another letter from
my lords of Argile, Louthain and others, at the same time and place was read,
to induce the Confederates to give credit to Bamfield. Potter moved that ten
pounds might be given to the Messenger that brought the letter, and thirty
pounds to Bamfield: which was considered of, and nothing said against it. There
was no agreement; but it was thought convenient by all then present. Upon this
Mr. Love asked Mr Jaquel a question, and he said, I cannot say that Mr. Love
said, It was convenient: but it was not dissented from, or spoken against by
any.

My lord, I suppose this is a faithful relation of what the witnesses said. My
lord, you have heard of this, and the time when it was; That Bamfields servant
was sent, and letters brought from Scotland, giving an account of proceedings
there: letters from Argile, Louthain, Lowden, and Belcar^is, to give credit to
what Bamfield should relate: money provided, though not the sum nor the means
those letters did hint to them; perchance their purses could not reach that;
but so far as they could go, they would; they would reward him that brought
it, and him that sent it; and thereupon 40. l. was provided, ten pounds for the
messenger, and thirty pounds for Bamfield. In this repetition I think I have
not wronged Mr Love.

The next is the letter that came from Massey and Titus, who were then in
Scotland; and in what condition I think every man knows; in what condition
they are there: though by the way, I should be sorry to repeat that which Mr.
Love did say the first day, That it did not appear to him, that the Scots were
in arms against the Parliament of England, but in arms for their own
preservation; and therefore did desire Council; here was one of his reasons
why he desired council to be informed, To advise him whether they were in arms
for their own preservation, or in opposition to the Parliament of England: This
was that Mr. Love was pleased to say the first day. My Lord, this of Massey and
Titus gives them an account likewise of the affairs in Scotland after Dunbar
fight too. If you pleas^, my lord, I will read you three witnesses to that, and
that neither does Mr. Love deny, but that these letters were read at his house.

This is Major John Alfords. After Dunbar fight, we met at Mr. Loves house in
his lower room, where a letter from Massey was read, which gave an account of
the fight there; wherein he also wrote for Arms, mentioning his own and Titus
necessities. Thereupon a proposition was made for raising of moneys for the
supplying of their necessities; and five hundred pounds being propounded, it
was brought down to two or three hundred pounds, to be raised among our selves:
Mr. Love did then move for contribution of money to that purpose; and I
thereupon promised ten pounds, which my man paid. This, my lord, is the
testimony which Alford gives, as to this concerning Massey.

The next is Adams. When the money was propounded to be raised for Massey and
Titus, certainly Mr. Love was then present; and this after the Fight at Dunbar:
And the money was agreed to be raised by those that were privy to the
correspondency; Mr. Love had then a paper in his hand, and did write some
thing, I saw not what he did write, and so every man that was there did write
what he would lend, I conceive Mr Love summed up every man's sum. Masseys letter
was for Arms, and the money propounded was for Titus and Massey; For Titus,
because he was sent by us: and Mr. Love was there. This, my Lord, is Adams his
Testimony; and though he did not know what Mr. Love writ, yet he kn^w what Mr.
Love moved.

My Lord, Here is another, and that is Captain Far, which I shall make bold to
read to the Court likewise, concerning the same action. After Dunbar fight I
came somewhat late to a Meeting at Mr. Loves house, where Mr. Love told me a
letter was come from Massy, to assist the King with Money and Arms, but it was
not agreed that any Money or Arms could be sent. And I understood from Mr.
Love they could not do it. Mr. Love then likewise told me, they agreed to raise
a sum of money for Titus, Massy, and Graves, and to be sent to relieve them in
their necessity; which sum, whether it was 250 l. or 300 l. I cannot positively
say; but Mr. Love moved me to contribute; I told him I would give him five
pound, which I brought wrapped up in a paper, and laid it down on Mr. Love 's
Table, Mr. Love and several others being in the room; it was so done that
there might be no discovery. And Mr. Love asking him some Questions upon this,
whether it it was done so by Mr. Love or no, he did not know that, but it was
done so by himself, that there might be no Discovery. My Lord, Mr. Love did
not disagree; Far being cross examined by Mr. Love, did not say that Mr. Love
did disagree to the sending the money to Massy and Titus. So I have done with
that particular likewise, the receiving letters from Massy, and of the account
from Scotland, and the fight there.

That which Adams says, Mr. Love having replied unto it, concerning a letter
writ to the General Assembly and Kirk of Scotland; and in that, my Lord, he is
pretty positive. Adams Testimony is; There was a letter written to the General
Assembly and Kirk of Scotland at Mr. Loves house; Mr. Love was sometimes
present at this meeting: which letter was taken to be penned by M. Love and Mr.
Drake, and I thought it to be so because of the language of it; and that after
Drake escaped all the meetings I know of, were at his house; and so my Lord,
say some others. Being examined, he says, I saw letters which were read in Mr.
Loves house, Mr. Love was present and privy to the debating of them, and did
not declare any dissent.

My Lord, I have now done with these particulars, you have seen Mr. Love at the
end, though you found him not at the beginning; it is not good to come at the
ending of the Quarrel. But, my Lord, under favor, by the laws and rules of
Justice, if any ill thing be contrived and plotted, and afterward any other
person shall come into the contrivance of it, and carry it on; My Lod, I think
I shall not need to say much in it, but he is culpaple and guilty of the whole,
from the first to the last: And that Mr. Love should be but a mere Spectatour,
a mere concealing person, it is very hard to be believed by any that are
rational men; for after that once Titus has done his errand at Jersey, and
gives his account here; my Lord, that his transactions, and the subsequent
employment, all that we know of, are all transacted, and carried on in Mr.
Loves house, in Mr. Loves Study, in Mr. Loves presence: It was not one or two,
or three times, which had been enough, and very well had it been for Mr. Love,
if he had done as Bayns did, or as Barton did; they when they heard (though
that were too much for them, My Lord, to conceal, as they have done, yet did
confess it when required) they left off when they heard of it, they would go
no further in it, they knew the danger of it. Mr. Love, my lord, as you will
hear anon, by what himself has proposed, what judgment and conscience led him
to carry on this; it was a conscience of his own Covenanting interest and
principles, for the Scots, and Religion that led him on to carry on this Design.

My lord, I have done with this, that is the evidence against him; for
Application to it, you have heard the several laws read before the charge
opened, that man is guilty of High treason, and is a Traitor by the laws of
the land now, that does any way promote, declare, or publish Charles Ste^art to
be King of England. My lord, you have heard the evidence, what Titus has
plotted, what Drake has carried on, what Mr. Love has approved of, and how
far he has consented and joined in the design. My lord, I shall say it again,
if Titus and Drake be traitors, as their own guilty consciences have made
themselves judge themselves so; he that flies confesses the fact; My lord,
they are fled. My lord, if they be traitors, Mr. Love must be the same with
them; for Mr. Love was carrying on, and has agreed, and concurred, and
approved of carrying on the Design that Titus and Drake have acted; Consenters
and Agents are to have the same punishments; in Treason there a^^ no
accessaries. My Lord, the next point is this; the next Act is that of the 17.
of Janury, 1649, Having given you the evidence, you will give me leave now
shortly to repeat the Law. The first is, for promoting Charles Stewart, etc.
That if any person shall maliciously and advisedly plot, contrive and endeavor
to stir up or raise forces against this present Parliament, and for the
subversion of the same, and shall declare it by any open deed, etc.

My Lord, Mr. Love is pleased to express himself that none can accuse him, nor
none have sworn against him, that he has raised any Seditions, any
Insurrection, any Rebellions; my Lord, I cannot say it fully, whether he be
guilty of that, or no; but this I will say (the judgment I shall leave to the
Court upon the evidence heard) if Mr. Love be guilty of any thing moving or
tending toward the raising of Forces, Seditions, or Rebellions, though the
thing be not done, yet, my Lord, it is Treason, those practices; those purposes
are Treason by the law, though they never come to act; we shall not look, I
hope, to see a Rebellion raised before we shall say it is Treason, and
endeavor against it; but for that, how far he is guilty upon the evidence of
being instrumental of the war in Scotland, and to have endeavored to have a
party got in England; my Lord, I shall leave it to your judgment upon the
evidence you have heard.

My Lord, There is likewise another in the same law, If any person procure,
invite, agree, aid or assist any Forraigner or Stranger, to invade England or
Ireland, or adhere to any Forces raised by the Enemies of the Parliament, or
Commonwealth, or Keepers of the Liberties of England; this is High Treason;
for this you have heard the evidence what Mr. Love has done toward this,
still upon the same foot of account it is Treason, though but proposed and
intended, though not acted; then there is another clause upon the law, that Mr.
Love has insisted upon, of constituting this Court. But for those former I
have said, and you shall give me leave to repeat it again, that these laws
offended against, though in time before this Court was constituted, yet this
Court has, in express words, commission and Authority given them by the
Parliament, to take cognizance of all Facts and offenses, done after that Law,
though done before your Commission; and that, my Lord, is not to be doubted, to
be a very good and legal Authority: And yet for this the law that constitutes
this Court, of the 26 of March 1650. That no person after the 29 of March 1650,
shall give or hold any Intelligence by letters, messages, or otherwise, with
Charles Stewart, James Stewart, or the late Queen their mother, or the Council
abiding with any of them, prejudicial to the Commonwealth, or with any that
shall be in Arms against the Parliament of England, or shall bring or send
into England, Ireland, or any Dominions of this Commonwealth, letters,
messages, or instructions, tending to raise insurrections or a new war within
this Nation, and shall not forthwith reveal the same to the Speaker of the
Parliament, or to the Council of State, or two Members thereof, or to two
Justices of Peace, shall be guilty of, etc. that is a clause in the law that
constitutes this Court. And no person shall voluntarily relieve any person in
Arms, or that shall be in Arms against the Parliament, with any Money,
Victuals or Ammunition, on pain of death of other corporal punishment. And
whosoever shall voluntarily take up Arms against the Parliament, and shall
encourage others to do so, shall die without mercy.

These, my Lord, are clauses contained in the Act that constitutes this Court;
and I read the law before the charge; and now, my Lord, I have repeated the
evidence faithfully, now let it be considered howifar the evidence goes with
them: There are there Acts of Parliament, I suppose Mr. Love knew not of the
next, for he says, he knew not of that of the 2 of August, but it was published
solemnly at the Exchange, and at Westminster Hall; but ignorance cannot excuse
him, that no man will pretend. This, my Lord, is in relation to Scotland, it
was made in August: The Battle at Dunbar, I cannot well tell whether it was in
September or October; in September this correspondency from Bamfield, Argyle,
Lowden and Lowthen, Belcarris, Massey and the rest, were all since Dunbar
fight; that is clear, they were since that time; the words of the Law are
these, Whoever, after the 5. of August, shall use, hold, or maintain any
correspondency or intelligence with any of the Scots nation residing in
Scotland, without license from the Parliament, or with any other person or
persons of the Scottish or any other Nation, whom they know to adhere to the
Scottish Nation against the Parliament; or shall abet, assist, countenance or
encourage the Scottish nation, or any other person adhering to them in their
war against the Parliament and Commonwealth of England, or shall send, or cause
to be sent and conveyed any money, horse, arms, Ammunition, or any other
furniture of Plate, Goods, Merchandise, or any supply whatsoever to the Scots,
or to any port or place thereof, or in their power, or in confederacy against
this nation, these facts are High Treason by this Law. And the high Court of
Justice are to take cognizance of the Contents by express provision of that Law.

My Lord, I shall not need to repeat the evidence again, but upon these (my
Lord) I must leave him to your justice and judgment to do what in your
consciences you think is just upon these Laws, and what M. Love has done in
transgression against them.

My Lord, M. Love was pleased at the beginning of this Trial, to make some
deep protestations, I think he did move all honest men that heard him, and
truly I did think and did hope, that they were not made with any relation to
equivocation, or mental reservation; but to a positive denial of any facts of
Treason, or looking that way; that it had been made in that sense, that he had
been clearly not guily of any thing: But (my lord) having looked upon them, and
caused them to be transcribed to me, I do find that they are somewhat
cautious, and perchance they may be true, my lord, in the sense spoken by M.
Love, but whether true in the sense they should have been spoken by a Christian
in a public Assembly, that I shall not judge. His first protestation was, in
the presence of God and this Assembly, that I never wrote any letter to the
King, or to the Church, nor to the Queen, or Church and State of Scotland in
general, or to any particular person of the Scotch Nation, since the war began
to this very day.

My Lord, this may be true, but whether any letter has been sent from the
King, or from the Scottish Nation, or others, or by Massy or the rest, that
shall be believed as the evidence is.


M. Love. It is in my second protestation.


At. G. Again (says he) I do likewise declare in the presence of the same God,
I never received letter written to me from the King, or from the Queen his
Mother, or from the Church or State of Scotland in general, or any particular
person of the Scottish Nation since the war began. I protest and declare
likewise in the presence of the same God, I never collected, gave or lent penny
of money either to send into Scotland, or any foreign parts, either to the King
of Scots, or to the Queen his mother, to the Church or State of Scotland in
general, or to any particular person of the Scottish Nation since the wars
began; but that M. Love did not move others to contribute we have not a word of
that. Truly, I did think it when he spoke it. But it seems these
asseverations were studied to evade, and that he would speak true, but not the
whole truth. I have given them but a touch, these may be true, my lord, but
under favor there is something else that is as true, and goes almost as near
as this.

My lord, M. Love the last day had your patience and justice to make a large
Defense, and he was very large in it; and though he did beat us down, that are
the Counsel for the Public, that we should not use Oratory, nor flourishes,
nor Querks of Law, nor Niceties, in which I shall be guided by him, and shall
not do it; yet he is pleased fully to make use of all insinuations to the
Court to trip up every Witness upon niceties, upon not expression, upon
nonsense, and such (my lord) which I shall not follow him in: for I shall deal
as truth ought to deal in pure nakedness and simplicity, and not to use any
Oratory, but to set the matter of fact before you, and leave it unto the Court,
who are the Judges between the Commonwealth and himself for life and death.
But, my lord, you shall give me leave to touch upon some few things in the late
Defense of his, It was divided into four parts.

The first, the Charge; the second, the Witnesses and Testimony both in one.
The Witnesses for the persons, the Testimony for the fact: The third,
concerning himself; the fourth, some proposalls to the Court, which truly (my
lord) might better have been termed rather threatenings, than proposalls.

My lord, for the Charge, you have heard it has been gone through, and the
evidence concerning it; concerning the Witnesses (my lord) I have read unto you
(for I do take it upon my conscience) what I knew, and nothing but what was
true, I have not varied that I know of a syllable, and I think I ought not to
do it, the duty of my place requires it not from me.

My lord, concerning himself, he is pleased to say something, and much of his
merit, but (my lord, it is a grief to this Court, to my self, and all that are
well-wishers to the public, that any man that has been a friend to the
Parliament, that has gone along with them, acted for them, suffered for them,
done as he has done, that this man should be called to public Justice; I
hope (my lord) all that hear me bear witness, that I think (my lord) we
are all sensible of it.

But, my Lord, look upon who has been the cause of it, let that he looked
into, and every man will be satisfied in his own judgment and consceince,
whether Mr. Love were provoked or no; or whether he has not provoked the State
to bring him to be thus exemplary in Justice. M. Love says, (my lord, I shall
desire to make use of the paper) I confess it is not so much the danger of my
life, I am a sickly man, and I know a disease will ere long kill me, whatsoever
you do with me; but this grieves me more, that I should suffer from your
hands, for whom I have done and suffered so much in my obscure station, and
according to my weak measure. Had I been so dealt with at Oxford at the Juncto
there! but to be so dealt withal in Westminster Hall, this troubles me. And my
Lord, it does trouble me to deal so with him. My Lord, whether may we or
himself better take up this complaint? Had the State been thus used by a
Cavalier, by a posest open enemy, it had not been so much trouble to us, you
would have come to justice upon a little more desire than now: But that M.
Love, a Minister, a Minister of the Gospel, a man that has preached for us,
prayed for us, acted with us, gone along with us, that he should go to
undermine us, that he should be joined, or in confederacy with others to
undermine the State, where he did live peaceably and quietly, where none
interrupted him; he had a free liberty, as much as a King in this
Commonwealth: Truly that M. Love should do this, it is (I think) an
aggravation, and not an aggravation upon the Court or State; that they should
prosecute where a man is prosecuting them; what he has done, my Lord, you
have heard; what his offenses have been, and who gave the cause, that a
Minister should do this, one that had a calling otherwhere, and better to
employ himself, than to meddle with States, and Secular Affairs; and these
things to be done in M. Love's house, and in his Study, where he should have
been studying better things. My lord, next he says, I could not leave such
relations as I have, nor such a loving people and competent living as any
Minister has within London, only Conscience carried me another way, and till
Conscience be satisfied, I cannot stir one jot. My lord, this his
Conscience, I do not know what it has to do in Government, or what Mr. Loves
Conscience had to do in these affairs: He had a calling of his own to use; and
should I go out of my calling and meddle with other men, I humbly conceive, I
were a busy body. M. Love had a calling enough for any one man to employ
himself in, and me thinks, when he says he had such a relation to a loving
people, a competency of livelihood, that he should not apply himself to return
to them, but to wander abroad; and when we once wander, it is hard coming in
again, till perchance we are fetched in again with the whip. But (my lord) Mr.
Love had other relations of wife and children, which he might have looked upon
also, and taken care of them.

In the last place, he is pleased to say, (and that I believe has carried on
this design) The Covenant Interest; you have heard what Titus did, what Drake
did, and what the rest did, that all this it was upon the Covenant, and the
Covenant is urged, I am sure, to things the Parliament has forbid. M. Love is
pleased to declare himself still to retain his old principles, from which (by
the grace of God) he will not be taken off by any terror. My lord, you will
hear by and by what the Covenant he supposes leads him to, and (my lord) I
shall take it asunder, and bring it next, if you please, that is, the Covenant
Interest* Says M. Love, Though I own not the way of managing any papers, I
neither writ them, nor sent them, yet thus far I own the thing, I confess it
was agreeable to my judgment and conscience, and I thought the interest of
godliness would be more promoted if the King went into Scotland upon
Covenant-terms, it would be more for the good of the Nation.


M. Love. No Sir, those are not my words, I said, than to fall in with the
Irish Rebels, or to offer this Kingdom to the Spaniard. I thought a greater
foundation of trouble would be laid, if this reception were not laid by that
Nation: and the Covenant has a clause in it, that we are to seek the good and
union of both Nations; and they are judged to be incendiaries and Malignants
that not only divide the King from his people, but the Kingdoms one from
another.

Now they declaring him to be their King, according to my apprehension, I
thought it agreeable to my Covenant to pray and desire as a private man, and no
more, that there might be an agreement upon those terms consisting with
Religion, and the terms of the Covenant.


At. Genesis But had you gone on as a private man, M. Love, we had not stirred you
now: My lord, this is plain of it self, what interest this Covenant Interest
is, till the King and the people in the two Nations, etc. Truly, my lord, M.
Love is pleased to express himself somewhat obliquely against the present
Government. He says, My Lord, When I look upon all the Vows, Covenants,
Declarations, Protestations of both Houses of Parliaments, I find a
sutablenesse between my judgment and them, and am not conscious to my self of
any thing I have done in opposition or contradiction thereunto; I repent not of
whatsoever I have done, though I could wish the ends of that just War had been
better accomplished: then should we have been happy, and united among our
selves, and honored among the Nations round about us. I am so far from
repenting of what I have done, both by doing, and contributing, and suffering
in the Parliaments Quarrel, that were it to be done again upon the same
unquestionable Authority, for the same declared ends, and against the same
Malignant persons, I should manifest as much readiness of mind to engage
according to my measure.

After this, where he had mentioned his troubles at Oxford, when a Scholar
there, and at London, when he came to a Lecture here; at Newcastle, when he
spoke for the Parliament there; and in Kent, when he spoke against the King
there; when these were over, after this he had a little breathing, whilst the
two Houses of Parliament were in power: This Gentleman was troubled in the time
of the King, in the time of the Bishops, in the time of these Wars, for being
for the Parliament: But I appeal to his own conscience and judgment, whether
ever he was troubled or disturbed by this Parliament, or by this Government of
the Commonwealth, whether he had not as free and as full liberty to preach the
Gospel, to instruct others, and to save souls, as his heart could wish; and I
desire to know whether ever the Parliament did enterpose with him, till he did
interpose with us. He went out of his way, my Lord, he was quiet and safe in as
much security as any of us; and, my Lord, even those that were the Watchmen for
the safety of this Commonwealth; did watch and take as much care, even for his
preservation, as for any one of ours, and thus he has required them. My Lord,
I will repeat it; I appeal to his own conscience, and to any of his friends
here, whether ever, till his judgment and conscience did interpos^ in State
affairs, to dispose of Kingdoms and Commonwealths, whether ever (...) were in
the least interupted.

My Lord, He says himself, when he came to be a Lecturer in London, the
Bishop would not admit of him in three years, yet (my Lord) he is admitted here
three years, and none has interupted him* and your self say, you have a
competent livelihood, and a people very loving to you, and you might have so
continued if you would.

My Lord, His proposalls to the Court, I do say, were hardly fair proposals,
for they had a little of threatening in them; For (says he) if you censure
rather upon a Political interest, then of the me^rit of the Fact, the
Scripture counts it not justice, but murder: Truly (my Lord) I think justice
is a political interest, the preservation of the General; but surely I do not
think the person will come in judgment before you, but the merit of his Fact;
and as yet I may say, I suppose the Treasons he has committed, if those find
him guilty, if the Court finds him guilty of those facts laid to his charge,
and if you are satisfied in your judgments, that they are proved* my Lord, it
is Justice, not murder; and it is Justice, that which political interest
requires of you, that Justice be done upon the Prisoner. And he is pleased to
say in his last Defense, That he denied the commission to be s^nt, and
entituling the Presbyterian Party to it: and he has acknowledged it had been
very high presumption if they should have done it, and a notorious false-hood:
and in that I join with him; and whether he has not done so (my lord) that I
shall leave to you. That the Presbyterian name was made use of, you have had
many concurrent evidences, and Mr. Love was present when these things were
mentioned; and if it be a fault which himself has acknowledged, it is right
done to the Presbyterian party, who, I am sure will not own him in it.

My Lord, But a word more; this last day he was pleased to mention his Sermon,
which made me a little to enquire after it, it was preached at Uxbridge (my
Lord, I had the honor to be at the Treaty) which has been so much spoken of,
and truly I wonder this Gentleman did not remember what he said then; if you
please (my Lord) I shall put you in mind of some passages: I have the Sermon
here.

Mr. Attorney General reads out of the book which he said was Mr. Love's
Sermon. I have ever thought that too much mercy toward Malignants, has made
more Delinquents then ever Justice has done. Mercy should not weigh down
Justice (my Lord, these are good Instructions) in God they are both equal, why
should it not be so in man? Pity to the bad, has proved cruelty to the good;
the sparing of offenders has made many worse, few or none better (and my Lord,
we know it.) To them that have showed no mercy, let judgment be showed without
mercy; much guilt contracted, much innocent blood spilt, which either must be
avenged on us, or by us; My Lord, that is one of his clauses, and here is
another: 2. The Lord heals a land, by cutting off those distempered members
that endanger the health of a land (here is good Doctrine my lord) It was the
Lord troubled Achan and cut him off, because he troubled Israel: Oh that in
this our State, Physicians would resemble God, to cut off those from the land
who have distempered it; I suppose he meant, or shall do; that (my lord) was
his opinion then: And those who lie under the guilt of much innocent blood, are
not meet persons to be at peace with, till all the guilt of blood be expiated,
either by the Sword of the law, or the law of the Sword; and a Peace can never
be safe nor just till then. What M Love has endeavored since (my lord) I
shall say nothing; and I have but one word more, and it is this, my lord, he
says it is not likely to have a peace with such men as these, the malignant
party, while they continue thus. We can as soon make fire and water agree, yea,
I had almost said, Heaven and Hell, as their spirits and ours; for either they
must grow better, or we worse, before we can agree. My lord, I think there is
little hope of their growing better, and my lord, we have not grown worse.

My lord, I shall trouble you no further, I shall use nothing of aggravation,
but as justice is blinded, to let the evidence appear to you in pure nakedness.

My lord, you have heard the evidence (as I humbly conceive) in the same
language, in the same habity in the same words as spoken by the Witnesses: And
(my lord) having heard those, and the Laws, and the Charge against him, upon
the whole I shall humbly leave him to stand, or fall by your justice and
judgment.


M. Love. My Lord, I humbly crave leave to speak but one word, M. At. Genesis has
replied to my Defense as to the matter of fact; concerning his Reply I shall
not insist upon it, yet I shall humbly crave leave to insist upon two
particulars. --


At. Genesis If I have given any new evidence, Mr. Love ought to be heard; but (my
Lord) I have declined it; and for those passages in his Sermon, I do not urge
one word of evidence against him, and for the rest they are his own words which
he has said the last day, and I have brought nothing new before you, and if
the Sermon preached at Vxbridge should be an occasion, I shall cast it aside.


Mr. Love. I humbly conceive there are new suggestions expressed in Court by
those worthy Gentlemen, whose names I know not, nor their employments neither;
but as to those I shall humbly crave leave in a word or two; and then as to the
whole matter of the depositions I shall humbly offer some matter of law arising
upon the whole matter given in. --


At. Genesis I shall crave leave too (my Lord) and leave it to you, for any
suggestions, they are but suggestions, as Mr. Love says himself, and that is
nothing for the evidence: Mr. Love (my Lord) had the last day, and I should
have this day; had he said he had any thing to say, or if he had had any thing
more, he might have said it, I did wait if he would have said any thing: But
(my lord) when the whole was closed, and no new evidence: I did not answer all
the suggestions of M. Love the last day, his evidence and depositions will
conclude the Court, that it is not suggestions and insinuations, the Court are
above those; when the evidence is closed for the Commonwealth, let it be
concluded there: if they offer any now evidence, Mr. Love may have liberty to
answer.


M. Love. Though I dare not tax M. At. Genesis for discharging his duty in his
place, yet for the preservation of my own life. I must not be wanting to my
self, if your Lordship and the Court will give leave, and that is humbly to
beseech your Lordship to take notice, that M. At. Genesis in the relation of the
matter of fact in the depositions is pleased to raise the correspondency (as he
is pleased to call it) as high as Jersey, and so makes me to be Particeps
criminis; that I should be judged by you upon the whole matter; now Alford upon
oath did declare, that Drake and Titus held correspondency, and that the
Ministers knew, nothing of it.


At. Genesis I do not say you did.


M. Love. Therefore I beseech you I may not be judged upon that matter; and
then I beseech your lordship to observe that M. At. Genesis is pleased to say, he
would no insist upon inferences nor strains of wit, but truly I have discerned
both.


L. Pres. You totally err from the way you ought to walk in, and take upon you
to judge others. The Court will consider whether he has offered any thing or
not, we have Notaries, and so have you; you spent the last day only in making
Comments and Collections, yet that you might have some liberty of discourse, we
sat here patiently two hours, and did hear that which we ought not, nor you
ought to have spoken; and now you are entering the same way of inferences and
collections, as though we did not sit here to take notice of what was done, but
we must receive the last word from you and your Comment; if you had had new
matter the last time, you might have been heard, we expected you would have
brought new witnesses, but they were in the same crime with your self, and you
would rather betray your self, then them: and God and the Truth than them; but
we will be as careful of any Comments as you your self can be: and think
that we have so much piety and charity, that we sit here with as good
affections of Justice and Piety, as are in your own breast; this book was not
given as evidence against you, and all that is in your comments, we shall
understand it.


Mr. Love. My Lord, I have only one motion, I have some matters in law to offer
to your lordship to consider by way of exception to the Charge, and also to the
depositions of the witnesses; I have a paper that I humbly desire might be read
in Court as matter in law arising from the Charge, and from the depositions of
the witnesses.


At. Genesis Why did you not this before?


Mr. Love. I am ignorant of the customs of the Court.


L. Pres. I believe you have wronged your own breast in many things you have
said, and you have said you have been ignorant, in many things that you have
known very well, it is not good to dally, you will be ignorant at one time, and
at another time more knowing then others.


Mr. Love. I beseech your Lordship, it is a new suggestion of the At. Genesis
that concealment of Treason for a tract of time, is Treason.


L. Pres. There is no new words of suggestion; if Mr. Atturny has not spoken
it, not read it according to the truth, we will examine it.


Mr. Love. He has done it with disadvantage to me.


L. Pres. If he have, he shall not do it with disadvantage to us, for we will
be as indifferent as your own breast; therefore be not you a commentator of
that, we understand so well as God inlightens, for whether he has done it
with advantage or disadvantage, that is our part to consider.


Mr. Love. I desire to have council upon this matter of law arising from the
evidence; that concealment of Treason by your Acts, suppose it be for
continuance or tract of time, yet by the law it is not Treasons: and my concell
informs me, that the Act of the 26 of March, that constitutes this Court, gave
you power to inquire into Treason, but could not take cognizance of misprision
of Treason, till there was a subsequent Act: therefore I desire this favor,
that seeing it is so much suggested in Court, and seeing the witnesses none can
prove a personal Act of mine, to bring me under your law, as to Treason, I
desire my council to clear this, that concealment of Treason, though for never
so long atract of time, is not Treason by the law of the land.


At. Genesis I will out Mr. Love of that scruple, he is not charged for misprision
of Treason, though I could have done it; but that I insist upon is flat
Treason. It is true, S. Thomas Witherington was pleased to express it in the
way of Argument* that concealment of Treason long, comes to be Treason; but
here are acts, and I insist upon the evidence, and the Court will judge, for
they have heard the evidence.


Mr. Love, I beseech your Lordship that the paper might be read, the exceptions
that I have against the Indictment, and the matters of law arising from the
evidence.


At. Genesis My Lord, Truly I profess, I hope I am not in my nature cruel, that I
should do injury to Mr. Love: but (my lord) I cannot favor him to do injury to
the law of the nation. My lord, he has one by him that has taken every word
of the charge.


M. Love. I did plead upon your lordships promise, that I should have a fair
and indifferent hearing, and if matter of law did arise from matter of Fact,
which could not, you said, be known til the witnesses were deposed, I had your
lordships promise, and I think the Courts, that I should have counsel to plead
to matter of law.


At. Genesis My lord, I think here is no legislative power in this Court to change
laws* My lord, I appeal to all here, whether the evidence we gave were not
closed upon Saturday, and all the depositions; whether Mr. Love did not take
care and pains to make his own De^ence, as to matter of fact, and spent so
many hours on Wednesday last. My lord, he had all before that, if he had matter
of law, it was more proper to move then; but when he has gone so far, and we
have closed all, do but consider the consequence, that when this is done and
all the evidences heard, then to come with matter of law!


L. Pres. Mr. Love, that you have said hitherto is nothing but of the same
nature of that you said the last day, and the Court will take it into
consideration and judge of it; but if you have any thing in your paper, that is
so included upon the evidence, for I tell you the evidence was ended the last
day, and your reply; and if you had any thing, you should have offered it the
last day; here has been nothing new offered concerning you, but as it is
usual for the Council for the State to state the matter of Fact to the Court,
for they have the last word; but you had fully ended before, and shall we go
out of the way for you, more then for a whole Generation which the law runs
unto? I do not know how to do it; you had this paper in your pocket, you might
have pulled (...) out, and you ^^ve had time in a nearer degree to it; yet the
Court is willing, if you (...) Counsel, shortly read what you read upon for
matter of Law, they will hear it, if such exceptions as are not of your own,
but by the advice of Council.


Mr. Love gives in his Exceptions. Exceptions taken by Chistopher Love Clerk,
To the Charge of high Treason, and other high crimes and offenses, exhibited to
the high Court of Justice against him, by Edmund Prideaux Esquire Attorney General
for the Commonwealth of England. These Exceptions are not here printed, for
that they come in more properly afterward, being again in substance given into
the Court, and signed by Mr. Loves Council, and the substance of them then
debated in court by Mr. Hale, a Council for M. Love. At. Genesis My Lord, you
have now some fruits of the Notary: By the law of England, he that is impeached
of high Treason, is not to have the copy of the Indictment; it is said, the
Court are Judges for the prisoner, and Council for him: To you all things be
substantially charged. That there is a substantial Charge, the evidence makes
out. But this precedent being admitted, and the former of Lilburn's cited, I
shall have little encouragement to go on with any Charge of Indictments.


L. Pres. Though it be more then the law permits, yet the Court will take
consideration of it.


At. Genesis He did read his papers: I think it is more then ever was heard of in
any Court in the world: but to take his papers in by your Clark; I hope this is
no Replication to the Charge, I hope he answers not that way; then we shall
dispute that way again: If he give papers, I may, and as Ambassadors, treat by
papers.


L. Pres. Mr. Love, we have gone out of our way for you, and whatever has been
suggested by the Council this day is nothing, unless they had offered new
matter; and they have offered none: and therefore it is against any law that
was ever yet practiced in England. You were concluded before; though happily the
neglecting of it might have been a prejudice to you; yet you have offered a
paper which the Court will take as a paper to consider of.


The Court adjourns into the painted Chamber: And upon their return, the Lord
Pres. speaks. L. Pres. M. Love, our long absence upon this account may seem to
you and others, that we have had something of great difficulty among us, which
we have considered of. That which has been upon your papers last offered, in
which you have set down the parts of the Charge, and the Statutes, and your
Exceptions; These we have considered of. But to these, though you do affirm it
here to us, that it is by advice of your Council; yet it is not under your
Councels hand, nor your own; which in order it should be; we have considered of
them, and our examining of them has taken up a great deal of this time we have
been absent. We find that there may happily be some mistakes in your Notes;
Therefore it is resolved, though there seem not much difficulty to us, yet you
shall have Council; thus doing, that they shall set it down under their hands,
what matter of law they will argue to, and bring it under their hands upon
Tuesday next at eight a clock, to this place, or to the Painted Chamber.


Mr. Love. Shall the Council have only bare liberty, or will the Court assign
them me?


L. Pres. If you desire it, and name them, they shall be assigned you.


M. Love. I desire Mr. Maynard, Mr. Hale, Mr. Waller, and Mr. Archer.


The Clerk was called upon to read the Order. Clerk. Friday, the 27 of June
1651. Ordered by the High Court of Justice, That if the Prisoners Council shall
under their hands assign any matters of law fit to be argued and presented to
this Court, on Tuesday next at eight a clock in the morning, this Court will
take the same into further consideration.


Mr. Love. I would know whether they are assigned to plead here in Court, or to
bring a paper under their hands.


L. Pres. If they will under their hands set down what they will stand to for
law, it shall be considered, and they shall plead.


M. Love. I humbly thank your Lordships favor, and the favor of the Court.


Mr. Love is commanded away. The Court adjourns. The fifth Days proceedings,
July the 1. 1651,
These Exceptions following signed by Mr. Love's Council, were delivered this
morning by Mr. Love's Solicitour into the Court, sitting in the Painted Chamber.

Exceptions to the Charge of High Treason, and other High Crimes, and Offenses,
exhibited to the High Court of Justice, by Edmund Prideaux Esquire Attorney
General for the Commonwealth of England, against Christopher Love Clerk: And
Matters of Law humbly presented to the said High-Court, according to the
Direction of an Order hereunto annexed. For this Order, see the foregoing page.
First THe Charge is, That Christopher Love as a false Traitor, and Enemy to
the Commonwealth of England, and out of a Traitorous and wicked Design, to
stir up a new and Bloody War, and to raise Insurrections, Sedition and
Rebellion within this Nation, in several days and times, that is to say, in
the years of our Lord God 1648, 1649, 1650, 1651, at London and in diverse other
places within this Commonwealth of England, and elsewhere, together with
William Drake, and diverse other persons, did traitorously combine, confederate,
and complet together, to stir and raise Forces against the present Government
of this Nation, since the same has been settled in a Commonwealth and
Free State, without a King and House of Lords, and for the subversion and
alteration of the same.

The Act of the 17 of July 1649. is, That if any person shall maliciously or
advisedly plot, contrive or endeovour to raise forces against the present
Government, or for the subversion or alteration of the same; and shall declare
the same by open deed, that every such offense shall be Treason.

Exception 1. The words Maliciously or Advisedly are left out of the Charge.

2. That the words of the Act are omitted, which are, Plot, Contrive or
Endeavor,

3. It is not Treason within the Act to plot, contrive, or endeavor, to stir
up or raise Forces against the present Government, or for the subversion or
alteration of the same, unless the same be declared by some open deed. But the
Charge is, That Christopher Love did combine, confederate, and complet, to stir
and raise up Forces against the present Government, etc. and it is not charged
that he said Christopher Love did declare the same by any open deed.

Secondly, Whereas the said Christopher Love is by the said Articles charged,
that for the Subversion, and alteration of the same, and to carry on the said
traitorous Design, that he did Traitorously and Maliciously declare, publish,
and promote the eldest Son of the late King to be King of England (meaning this
Commonwealth) without the consent of the people in Parliament, first had, and
signified by Authority or Ordinance to that purpose.

The Act of the 30. of January 1648. is, that no person do presume to proclaim,
publish, or any way promote Charles Stewart, son of the late King Charles,
commonly called, the Prince of Wales, or any other person, to be King, or chief
Magistrate of England, by color of Inheritance, Succession, Election, or any
other claim whatsoever.

Exception. It is not expressly charged that the same was done after the said
Act made, neither does the Charge pursue the words or intent of the Act.

Thirdly: The Charge is, that to accomplish the said traiterous and wicked
design, the said Christopher Love, on several days and times in the years
aforesaid, at London etc. together with William Drake and other persons, did
traitorously and maliciously invite, aid and assist the Scots, being Strangers,
to invade this Commonwealth of England, and has adhered to the Forces of the
Enemies raised against the Parliament

The Act of the 17 of July 1649. is, that if any person shall procure, invite,
aid or assist any Forraigners or Strangers to invade England or Ireland; or
shall adhere to any forces raised by the enemies of the Parliament or
Commonwealth, or Keepers of the Liberties of England; every such offense shall
be taken to be Treason.

Except. 1. That it is not alleged in his Charge who in particular were the
Strangers that were invited to invade England.

2. That it is not alleged, that at the times of the invitement, aid and
assistance laid in the Charge, the Scots were strangers.

3 That it is not alleged particularly in the Charge, to the Forces of what
enemies raised against the Parliament, Christopher Love did adhere.

4 It charge the Prisoner for a treasonable assistance in some years that
were before the said Act of the 17 of July 1649 was made.

5 To advance the said traitorous and wicked design, is uncertain to what
design it shall have reference, several charges of treason being before
expressed.

Fourthly. The Charge is, That Christopher Love, diverse days and times between
the 29th of March 1650. and the first day of June 1651. at London etc. did
traitorously and maliciously give, hold, use and maintain correspondency and
intelligence by letters, messages, instructions or otherwise, prejudicial to
this Commonwealth, with Charles Stewart son of the late King, with the late
Queen his mother, and with Henry Jermin, Henry Piercy, and diverse other persons
being of Council and abiding with Charles Stewart.

By the Act of 26 March 1650. the matters charged herein are only prohibited,
but are not made Treason.

Except. 1. That this charge is mislaid, being charged to be done traitorously.

2 The charge is uncertain, being alleged in the disjunctive (or otherwise)
and shows not in what other manner.

Fifthly. The Charge is, That Christopher Love, within the times, and at the
places aforesaid, did traitorously and maliciously use, hold and maintain
correspondency and intelligence with diverse persons of the Scottish Nation; that
is to say, with the Earl of Argile, and others of the Scottish Nation, and with
diverse other persons of other Nations, whom Christopher Love well knew to
adhere to the said Scottish Nation in the War against the Parliament.

The Act of the 2d of August 1650. is, that all and every person that shall
use, hold or maintain any correspondency or intelligence with any person or
persons of the Scottish Nation, residing in Scotland, without the license of the
Parliament, the Council of State, or the Lord General: or with any person or
persons of the Scottish or any other Nation whom they shall know to adhere to
the Scottish Nation in this War against the Parliament.

Except. 1. That it is not laid, that the persons of the Scottish Nation
mentioned in the charge, were residing in Scotland, nor expressly alleged that
they did adhere.

2* That it is not averred that such correspondency was holden without the
license of Parliament, Council of State, or the Lord General, nor in what war
the correspondence or intelligence was held.

3 It is not laid with what particular persons of any other nation adhering to
the Scottish Nation, correspondency or intelligence was holden; nor of what
Nations.

4 This correspondency and intelligence is not laid to be after the 5 of August
1650. mentioned in the said Act of the 2d of August 1650. but refers to a time
preceding that Act.

Sixthly. The Charge is, That Christopher Love, within the times and at the
places before mentioned, did traitorously and maliciously abbet, assist,
countenance and encourage both the Scottish Nation, and diverse other persons
adhering to them in this War, against the Parliament. And did send and convey,
or cause to be sent and conveyed, Moneys, Arms, Ammunition, and other Supplies
to Scotland and other places, and to the said Titus, etc. in confederacy
against this Nation, without license of the Parliament of England, or Council
of State, or General of the Army.

The Act of the 2d of August 1650. is, that no person shall abbet, assist,
countenance or encourage the Scottish Nation, or any other person or persons
adhering to them in their war against the Parliament and Commonwealth of
England; or shall go, or send, or cause to be sent etc. any money, Horse, Arms,
Ammunition, or other Supplies into Scotland etc. or to any person under their
power, or in confederacy with them against this Nation, without the license of
the Parliament of England, Council of State appointed by their authority, and
of the Captain General of the Parliaments Forces a^ aforesaid.

Except. 1. That there are no particular persons named, who were abetted,
assisted, countenanced, or encouraged, neither of the Scottish Nation, nor of
any other persons adhering to them.

2. In the Charge, the sending of money, etc. is laid to be done without the
license of the Parliament of England, or of the Council of State, or General
of the Army.

The words of the Act are, without the license of the Parliament of England, or
Council of State appointed by their Authority, or of the Captain General of
the Parliaments Forces.

3. The time to which this refers, is between the 29 of March 1650. and the 1.
of June 1651. and so it takes in the time between the 29 of March 1650, and the
2d of August 1650. which is before the making of the Act.

Seventhly. The charge is, That the said Christopher Love, at the times and
places before mentioned, did Traitorously, and Voluntarily relieve the said
Sylas Titus, and one Sterks a Scotchman, which then were and yet are under the
power of the Scottish Nation, and in Arms against the Parliament of England,
with Moneys, Arms, and Ammunition.

By the Act of the 26. of March 1650. the matters charged herein, are only
prohibited, but not made Treason.

Except. 1. That this Charge is mislaid, being charged to be done Traitorously.

2. It is laid to be at the times before mentioned, whereas there are several
times before mentioned; so as it is uncertain to which of those times this
Charge relates.

3. And of these times sundry of them are laid to be in several years before
the making of the upon Act which this Charge is grounded.

Allegations by Christopher Love touching the matters and proof upon the Charge.
Though I do not conceive any sufficient proof is made of the Charges against
me, yet I shall be ready to make it appear upon proof.

That one of the principal witnesses has deposed against me upon promise of
reward, and upon menace of punishment.

That one has received extraordinary rewards for his deposing.

That diverse of the witnesses against me have been by their own confession
detected of contributing of supplies and assistance, sending and receiving
letters, contrary to the late Acts.

That no two lawful witnesses produced prove any one Treasonable fact.

That no witness does depose further then concealment, or misprision of
Treason at the most.

Christopher Love.

As this case is stated, we conceive these questions may arise.

1. Whether in this case these be lawful and sufficient witnesses, as by law
is required.

2. Whether here be two lawful witnesses.

3. Whether any concealment of Treason be Treason within the late Acts.

We have not seen any Authentical copies of the Charge or Evidence; but upon
the copies we have seen, we humbly conceive fit to tender these matters and
Exceptions to the consideration of this High Court. And we shall be ready to
speak to them, or any of them, or to any other matters arising upon the case,
as we shall receive further directions.

Matthew Hales. John Archer. Thomas Waller.




After the Court had received the precedent Exceptions, and were sat in
Westminster Hall, Mr. Love was commanded to the Bar.

When Mr. Love* appeared at the Bar, he desired the Court that his council
might be heard to these Exceptions. And when Mr. Archer and Mr. Waller, who
were of his council, appeared in Court, the Court demamded of them, whether
they were of Mr. Loves council? they answered, they did understand they were
assigned to be of his council by the Court; then the Attorney General
demanded of them, whether or no they had subscribed the Engagement; they
answered, they had not done it; and spoke further to this purpose, that they
were by the Court assigned to be of Mr. Loves council, and were sent for into
the Court, and in obedience thereunto they had appeared, and were ready to
speak, if they might be heard. It was demanded of them by the Court, whether or
no they would subscribe the Engagement? they answered, That they desired time
to consider of it: and so withdrew.

After they had withdrawn, Mr. Love moved the Court that Mr. Hales, another of
his council, might be sent for.

-- Upon the coming in of Mr. Hales, the Lord President said. L.P. You come at
council for M. Love, the Gentlemen that were here, are brought into an
incapacity of doing him service that way; we asked them whether they have
engaged: we doubt not you, but tell you the reason why we did it.


Mr. Hales. My Lord, I have done it.


L. Pres. Therefore you are assigned.


Mr. Hales. I had very late notice of this business, it was Saturday night
late before I had notice of it, and the next day was not a day to think of
those things. Yesterday was Monday, and the most part of that day I spent in
looking over those things that had been (I think) presented to your Lordship
and the Court; we did not know what command your lordship would put upon us,
whether you would admit us to speak, and to what you would admit us to speak,
and when you would admit us to speak. ^t is impossible (my lord) I must deal
plainly, I profess it is impossible for me, in a business of this great
consequence, to undertake to speak any thing for the present, till such time as
I know your lordships directions, and this was that we acquainted this
Gentleman with as soon as ever I saw him, and the first time that ever I saw
him, which was but this day.


At. Genesis I think that Mr. Hales has put somewhat under his hand.


Mr. Hales. We have done so.


At. Genesis Nay you must stand single, the other two are set aside, it must be
you only, I suppose Mr. Hales knows what he is to speak to.


Mr. Hales. Truly we know what we are to speak to, but to speak upon such a
business on such a sudden, when we did not know what directions the Court
would give, that I could not undertake, and I think Master Attorney will not
press it upon us, it were a hard case if he should.


At. Genesis Mr. Hales knows as well as any man what is to be done in these
cases, none better then himself, the Court uses not to assign council to pick
flawes, but those that are just exceptions, and the Court i^ doubtful too, how
they will allow council to debate them, and stand to the judgment of the
Court. I suppose he comes to speak to that that the party has alleged.


Mr. Hales. It is true, we do so: but Mr. Atturny General knows likewise, that
when matters of law are assigned, that there is some reasonable time, we expect
not long, but some reasonable time it assigned also for the parties to prepare
themselves, for truly otherwise I should not do that duty I ow to the Court and
my Client, if I should speak ex improviso, in such a manner as I have done; for
the first time I saw any thing of it, was on Saturday night, between eight and
nine of the clock.


L Pres. Though that was the first sight of this paper, as it is now set down,
it was not the first notice you had to be of his council, but himself has
declared it here long ago, that the former paper was by your advice.


Mr. Hales. No (my lord) if he did so, I will plead not guilty.


L. Pres. I will not say your name, but when he gave us in his paper, before
this, the last day, you said it was the advice of your council.


Mr. Love. Not Mr. Hales.


L. Pres. Then happily we shall ease you a great deal: that that is under your
hand, is very short, and we shall ease you of some of that too; and you know
that upon all assignments in the Upper Bench and common Law, when they first
open it, they show some causes upon which they will argue it, and when you have
had time already, now show something that may be worthy of it, and we will
consider of it.


At Genesis Before he speak (my lord) I desire that he will give it under his
hand positively, not queries but positive, that this in his judgment he thinks
fit to be matter of Law, and to be argued.


M. Hales. My Lord, we think that these things are such.


L. Pres. Then you must upon the first sight open it so far, that it may be
your judgment.


At. Genesis But not suffer it to be debated unless you think it doubtful.


M. Hales. We are here assigned council for him, and if your Lordship will
please to give us that time that may be convenient for us to do our duty for
him, if not, we shall do but your Lordship wrong, and our Client wrong if we
should speak.


L. Pres. You may have some convenient time, but you must open it now, that we
may judge what time is proportionable; if you will not open it, that this is
the point you will argue upon, we can say nothing.


M. Hales. Then the reading of that which we have exhibited to the Court, will
be as much as possibly I shall be able to do at this time, for we have had no
copy of the Charge.


L Pres. Nor must have.


M. Hales. And we have taken a copy at random, according as it has been
offered to us by those that have taken notes, and we have presented upon those
Notes, and we have applied our selves to M. Attorney for a copy of the Charge,
and he conceived that it was not fit for him to do it without direction of the
Court; but for a copy of the Charge when Exceptions are taken, it is usual to
have it granted; and for us to speak and spend your lordships time upon matters
that are contained in a Charge, whereof for my own part I never heard, and
which is usual upon Excceptions offered to be granted, it would be very --


L. Pres. It is an excellent thing to speak to men of understanding; did you
ever know an Indictment in this nature, a copy of it delivered upon the
prisoners prayer?


M. Hales. Yea, I have known it very often.


L. Pres. He shall, as his memory serves him, speak to the substance, but to
have a copy of the Charge, I take it, you have not known.


M. Hales. Thus far I have known it, I have been commanded to be of counsel
with persons that have been impeached of Treason by the Parliament, I know that
the Archbishop of Canterbury, when he was impeached of Treason, had a copy of
his Charge, that I know he had; I know this is the usual course, that if a
person takes Exceptions to a matter contained in an Indictment, though it is
true, he shall not have the copy of the whole Indictment, yet he shall have a
copy of so much whereupon his Exception grows; that has been done, and will
not be denied; but for the other matter, I know that in the Archbishop of
Canterburies case there was a copy of the whole Charge granted, and the like
was done in the case of the Lord Strafford.


At. Genesis I shall give that answer a little more then I did, Parliamentary
proceedings are no rule for other Courts to walk by; besides (my lord) you sit
here upon a known published Law, and the offense charged is against those Laws:
I believe M. Hales well remembers, that both my lord of Straff^rds case, and
the Archbishop of Canterburies case were both of them for many several facts
several times a long time committed, which several facts being judged by
Parliament, were judged to be Treason not against any settled positive Law: And
for Straffords case, you know how the judgment, at last was given by Act of
Parliament, King, Lords and Commons. And for the Archbishop of Canterburies
case, you know what the several complaints against him were, many of them not
Treason, but so many of them together, that in Parliament they thought fit to
judge him guilty of Treason; but those privileges are not to be paralleld, he
knows very well it was not against such, and such, and such a law, to make
those offenses Treason. Having given thus much favor, I may say, to the
Prisoner, that he may by memory exhibit his Exceptions, he has done it, if you
judge that those Exceptions are worth the debating, be worthy of it, you may
(as M. Hales says) give directions for so much to be given him, otherwise (for
my part) I did never give it unto any; but those that have been in my place
before, did never give it but by immediate Warrant from the King, or the
Parliament now, but for so much as the Court thinks fit, for so much as
concerns the Exceptions.


Sir Tho. Witherington. For that that M. Hales objects to the Indictment, it
stands with a great deal of justice; for if a prisoner lays hold of part of an
Indictment, and say there is a mistake in it, there is reason it should be so,
because the Court must judge it whether it be so or not, therefore there is
necessity of it that there should be a copy of so much; but I think he never
knew that all the Indictment was, but that part, and that is of necessity for
the Court, that they may see whether the Exceptions accord with the Indictment
or no; if there be any Exception to an Indictment, if that Exception remains
not as a doubt or question, there shall be no copy of so much of the Indictment
given: if he shall raise a doubt that there is any doubt in law, or any
question and variance between the Acts and the Charge, if he shall raise any
such doubt, then I think according to the old law he may have that part of the
Charge; but we desire he may raise some doubt to the Court.


M. Hales. My Lord, we have raised the doubts, and we are ready to deliver in
those that we conceive to be Exceptions to the Charge, if we be overruled in
them, we have no more to say; but if your lordship upon the view of these
things we have offered, think them worthy to be spoken to before your Lordship,
then surely that is agreeable with that very rule which the Council of the
State is pleased to state; that is, that in case we allege that which the
Court shall think fit for us to debate before them, that then we may have that
whereby it may appear whether we debate upon that which is, or is not.


At. Genesis M Hales says he has given them in, but I have seen none of them, my
lord.


L. Pres. Whether their memory be perfect or imperfect, that we shall help you
withal, and then I will tell you what you were best do, for time goes away: we
will before you take it, take the several Statutes and the Charge, and your
Exceptions, and compare them altogether before you, and you shall except to
every one as you go.


At. Genesis I desire the exceptions may stand as they are.


L. Pres. I, but he shall see whether there be any material variance between
the Notary and the Charge.


At. Genesis That Notary was upon favor too, Mr. Love will acknowledge it.


Mr. Love. I do with all thankfulness acknowledge it, my lord.


At. Genesis I desire it may be no president for aftertimes.


The Clerk. If you please, read your Exceptions.


M. Hales. My lord, we begin with the first, and these are the Exceptions: We
take it that Charge is grounded upon the Act of the 17th. of July, 1649. and we
take some Exceptions to that first part of the Charge, that is, concerning what
offenses shall be adjudged Treason.


L. Pres. Read your Exceptions, and then you shall hear the Charge.


M. Hales. Our Exceptions are these; first, that whereas the words of the Act
are, That if any person shall maliciously, and advisedly plot, contrive, or
endeavor to stir up, or raise Forces against the present Government, or for
the subversion or alteration of it, that the words maliciously or advisedly,
are left out of the Charge, which we conceive are material words.


At. Genesis Read.


M. Barnard the Clerk. That he the said Christopher Love, as a false Traitor
and Enemy to this Commonwealth, and Free State of England, and out of a
traitorous and wicked design to stir up a new and bloody war, and to raise
insurrections, seditions, and rebellions within this Nation, did several days
and times, in the several years of our Lord, 1648. 1649. 1650. 1651. at London
and in diverse other places within this Commonwealth of England, and elsewhere,
together with William Drake late of London Mercer, Henry Jermin late of London
Esquire, Henry Piercy late of London Esquire, Richard Graves late of London
Esquire, Edward Massy late of London Esquire; John Gibbon late of London Gentleman,
etc. and other their accomplices yet unknown, did traitorously and maliciously
combine and confederate themselves together, and plot, contrive, and endeavor.


At. Genesis What say you M. Hales?


M. Hales. Now we find what the inconvenience is of coming to put in our
Exceptions, when we have not a clear copy of the Charge, and that was the cause
why we did subjoyn this, that in case any mistake arise by mistake of the
copies, that we may amend: it it is true, we find maliciously is in.


At. Genesis Traitorously will be enough.


M. Hales. I think not, that is ove^; for if it be maliciously alleged, that
is over. Then the next thing we except to, is, he traitorously combined,
confederated, and complotted together; it is true, there is plot in it, but
there wants the words contrive and endeavor, but that is not the principal
matter we stand upon.


The Clerk. They are in.


M. Hales. Then that is answered too. The next Exception that we take to the
Charge is, that the Act upon which this part of the Charge is grounded, says,
that he must manifest it by an overt Act, by an open deed; now we say, there is
(as we conceive) nothing charged upon him in pursuance of this Act, that is,
there is no overt, or open deed laid in the Charge, for the words of the Act
are so, that if any man shall maliciously plot, contrive, and endeovour to stir
up, or raise forces against the present Government, and shall declare the same
by open deed, that then every such offense shall be Treason.


At. Genesis If M. Hales has read the copy of the Charge as it was taken, I think
he finds diverse of them in the Charge of open acts.


M. Hales. The business is not whether there be open deeds, but whether they
are applied to this Act, or be Substantive Charges of themselves.


At. Genesis I would ask him, whether that open act must be in the Indictment, or
in the Evidence?


M. Hales. In the Indictment; it must be expressly laid in the Indictment, or
else it is no good indictment.


At. Genesis But for that, that we may not dispute upon those things, my lord,
there are the several Charges against the several Acts; there are several
open acts that are laid in the Indictment, and (I think) if he look upon it, he
will find that they are laid to every one of them, and relate and refer to
every one of them.


S. Tho. Wither There is writing of letters, contributing of money, and
receiving of messages.


Mr. Hales. That will appear by the subsequent parts of the Charge.


L. Pres. The subsequent parts of the Charge will make that appear, for if he
did lend money, etc. if they be really there, we shall hear it by and by.


M. Hales. I take it, that the law is very plain, that the Act must be
mentioned in the Indictment.


At. Genesis But we will not debate that when we are express in the thing, we are
not so tied to form, as to pin them to every word of it.


The Clerk. And further to carry on and accomplish the said wicked practice and
design; he the said Christopher Love, diverse days and times between the 29th
of March 1650. and the first of June in the year of our Lord 1651. at London
and other places as aforesaid, did traitorously and maliciously give, hold, use
and maintain correspondency and intelligence by letters, messages,
instructions, and otherwise.


L. Pres. These are open acts.


Mr. Hales. Then favor us in this, we take it that between this, and the first
Charge, there comes a particular charge, that relates to Charles Stewart, that
is intervenient between the first charge, and this that is now read, or else we
are misinformed by the Prisoner; and if there be so, then we think our
Exceptions will take place.


S. Tho. Wither. It is all contained in one Indictment, and then that that
explains the overt act follows afterward, as a distinct thing in the
Indictment, and so it was in my Lord Cobhams case in that Indictment, and in my
Lord of Essex his case.


L. Pres. He may make overtures.


M. Hales. We confess it; but we supose it very certain, that both as this Act
is penned, and as the Act of -- is penned, which are much at one, as to the
manner of penning them, there is of necessity an overt act to be laid to make
good that general Charge; that, we conceive, will be plain; and that is
admitted and agreed by the Lord Cook in his collections of the Pleas of the
Crown, fol. 12.13. where he says, the Indictment of the Earl of Somerset, in
the time of Edward the 6th, and all other of the like form, were against Law,
because he said, that he did not follow the words of the act, and that he did
it per apertum factum, and shows not what that open deed was; that was not a
good indictment, for the fact must be set forth in the indictment; that must be
done. Then the question is, whether this be so done here or no? we conceive by
this Charge it is not so done here, upon this ground; we say, there follows
after this a particular charge concerning his promotion of Charles Stewart; and
then subsequent to that, there follows this that the Court has now read; we
say, that in this case here is not a charge of an overt act, neither by the one
nor by the other; there is not a charge by the former, because that is a
distinct treason made distinctly treasonable by another act; and therefore that
which is made a distinct charge of treason by another act, shall not be an
overt act within the former: That is one thing we say. And another thing we say
is this, that in this case, the second, that is that which the Court has been
pleased to direct to be read to us concerning his holding correspondence, that
shall not be an overt act relating to the first charge; for it is an uncertain
relation: for there be two designs mentioned before, the one is a design
contained in the first charge, the other a design contained in the second
charge, for the promoting of Charles Stewart; and we say, the third shall not
be coupled up to the former, because it is a distinct Charge of Treason in it
self, and because it is uncertain to which it relates; for it refers not more
to the first Charge then to the second concerning the promoting of Charles
Stewart, that is called the Prince of Wales.


L. Pres. For this, I take it for the present, that the Charge is founded upon
four Statutes, if he lay the offense against the first, second, third, and
fourth, and he shall come and conclude it without relation to any particular of
these Treasons, he did thus and thus by letters and correspondencies, that will
relate to them every one, though it come but in the conclusion; and though the
Statutes be various, yet the indictment is but one, and he may put in this of
the overtures in one place sufficiently, to be a sufficient overture to every
one; and therefore though to one of them there should be no overture in it at
all, but valet ut valere potest, it will hang upon so much, as it will bear an
overt act, and then you will not deny but that those words are overtures.


M. Hales. It is true, they are so, but yet still we conceive this third, which
we call the third Charge, that is concerning holding correspondence, the third
or fourth, I cannot tell which it is, but it is one of them; we say, that that
is not an overt Act applied to the first Charge: when we come to the substance
of that Charge as it stands by it self, then our Exceptions will rise upon it,
as it stands singly by it self; but we conceive that shall not be a
supplementall Charge to make good that first Charge, that is concerning
endeavoring to subvert the State as it stands established, it shall not be
used as an overt Act to make good the first Charge; when we come to that
particular Charge, that is concerning the maintaining of correspondence,
whether it be a good Substantive Charge of it self, then we shall offer our
Exceptions to that; but in the mean while we are but upon debate of the first,
whether the first contains such a Charge, as by the Act of the 17th. of July,
1649. is required.


At. Genesis My Lord, we are heard before you concerning it, Mr. Hales will find
that after all these laws are repeated, and after all his offenses against
those laws are repeated, it is concluded that all are against the several Acts
of Parliament, in such cases made and provided; if Mr. Hales will single them,
^he impeachment does not, but relates to all of them; and, I think, that in
this way of impeachment we are not tied to those very nice and strict formal
rules upon Indictments, but if substance does appear, it does appear to you, my
Lord, that in substance the Acts are pursued, and that upon the whole
impeachments there are, even this that is required, the expression of an open
deed, an ove^t Act, those are laid, and it will be acknowledged by Mr. Hales,
that they are in themselves sufficient, being thus expressed and concluded, that
those several practices and designs, and Treasons, are against the form of the
several Statutes, in that case made and provided, not in relation to the 17.
of July, nor the 2d of August, but to all of them; and I believe that all of
these facts, all of this Treason, all of this Design, whether with the Scotch
nation, or members of the Scotch nation, or those adhering to the Scots nation,
had all but one foundation, the subversion of this present Government, that was
the foundation and Treason of the whole, that was it that was intended; for to
bring one in, and not to cast out the other, would have done no good; but upon
the whole, that was the Treason; and upon all these circumstances and open
deeds, and designs, the sum, though it be a Treason to hold correspondence,
though it be a Treason to promote Charles Stewart, though it be a Treason to do
other things, yet the Treason is in this, the Scots Nation to come in with
intent to subvert the Government, Charles Stewart to be made King to subvert
the Government: so that the grand work, at heart, at root, was the subversion
of the present Government; and as for that, I wish heartily for Mr. Love's
sake, there were not so many open deeds expressed by him.


S. Tho. Wither. Mr. Hales speaks of the Charge, the words are these; And
further to carry on and accomplish the said traitorous and wicked Practice and
Design, he, the said Christopher Love (now this I take to be the overt Act)
diverse days and times between the 29. of March 1650, and the first of June
1651 at London and diverse other places; as aforesaid, did Traitorously and
Maliciously, use, and hold correspondence and intelligence by letters (those
are open acts) Messages, Instructions and otherwise, to the prejudice of the
Commonwealth; and these are laid within the time, and not a distinct Charge, as
Mr. Hales would infer: but they do directly set forth an overt act done by Mr.
Love.


Mr. Hales. Is it your Lordships pleasure I should reply any thing, because I
come utterly unprovided for it, I must profess.


At. Genesis We may give him this, and one or two more.


L. Pres. Go on Master Hales, if you have that that is material for another
reply, do; but take this, Master Hales, I take it very strong both in Grammar
and Logic too, as well as in Law, that when all the whole charge is radically
and fundamentaly but one Treason, though there be many branches of it, the
Charge has knit them altogether, and made but one act of so many complicated
Treasons as here are, and when he comes to the latter end, if some of them were
De facto, not by an overt deed published, yet if he come and prove that it was
so done by the proofs, that there was correspondence, and these things De facto
done, and that charge De facto done, you cannot break it there, to say that
this fact did not reach to all; for if there be any one, it is sufficient; but
here it is to all, even to that one that you speak of.


At. Genesis My Lord I shall read a word to Mr. Hales, Al which Treasons and
Traitorous and Wicked practices and designs of him, the said Christopher Love,
were, and are to the apparent hazard of the public peace of this Commonwealth
and Free State, Parliament and people of England (Mr. Hales finds not these
in any Indictment) and to the manifest breach, contempt, and violation of the
laws of this land, and contrary to the form of diverse Statutes and Acts of
Parliament in such case made and provided, in general, my Lord.


M. Hale. We conceive, under favor, and we think that it cannot be denied,
that such a conclusion will not serve the turn.


At. Genesis No, not in an Indictment.


Mr. Hale. If there be a substantial part of the Charge omitted, that ought to
be alleged in fact, it is not the conclusion, that contrary to the form of the
Statutes in this case made and provided, will help it. My Lord, (I come
unprovided) the case of my Lord Dyer, that known case upon an Indictment for
Recusancy, or for a wilful or knowing harboring of a Jesuit, or Priest:
Says my Lord Dyer, It is not enough to say, he did harbor him contrary to the
form of the Statute,* but he must say, he did it knowingly: he must allege
and pursue the substantial words of the Act of Parliament. And so again, an
Indictment for absenting from Church; it is not enough to say, he did it
contrary to the form of the Statute: but that he did it obstinately. Therefore
that general conclusion, that this was to the hazard of the Commonwealth (it
is true, it is an ill thing for any man to do such a thing that is to the
hazard of the Commonwealth) but those words serve not the Statute neither: and
then to say at the conclusion, Contrary to the form of diverse Statutes, that
will not help it, under favor, in case of an Indictment. Then Mr. Attorney
makes a difference between the case of an Indictment, and this Charge. I
conceive that in this case there is no difference; the matter is the same, the
one concerns the life of a person, and so does the other; the offense is the
same, the one is a charge of high Treason, and so is the other. It is true,
those formalities that concern the manner of the Trial, those (it is true) are
laid by, because here is no Jury to come before your Lordship; but your
Lordship tries upon the hearing of the testimony, and according to things
alleged and proved: But for other matters that especially are substantially
required by the Act of Parliament, we conceive that those shall be supplied no
more by an intendment in case of a Charge before your Lordship, then in case of
an Indictment for Treason: To this I shall say no more, but leave a word or two
to your Lordships judgment. For the other thing (we are still but upon the
first Charge, the first Article) it has first of all been insisted upon, that
an overt act is not necessary to be alleged, because supplied by the words of
the conclusion, Contrary to the form of the Statute: To that I have answered, I
conceive, it is not, nor can it be supplied, because it is a substantial thing
in the very words and bowels of the Act, and cannot be supplied by a general
conclusion. Then it has been said by Sir Thomas Withrington the States
Sergeant, that in this case those subsequent matters and charges shall be an
overt act within the Statute; that is that which he has read to you; It is in
the fourth Article (as I take it) That Christopher Love, diverse times between
the 29 of March 1650. and the first of June 1651. did traitorously and
malicously hold and use correspondence and intelligence by letters and
messages. But that cannot be; I may say it, that is not a sufficient
manifestation of an overt Act, because there do precede it these particular
Charges of Treason within particular Acts of Parliament; why then, if so be (to
maintain his design, for the carrying on of his design aforesaid) this should
be said to relate to the first design, why not to the second design, of
promoting Charles Stewart to be King? And why not to the third design? So that
where there are three several designs before, all made Treason by the Acts of
Parliament, that cannot be an overt act to make good the first part of the
Charge, with submission to your Lordships judgment. And then another thing we
say, That this Charge which Sir Thomas would carry up to the first Charge, and
make it as an enforcing and overt act within the first Charge, that cannot be,
for this other reason; because it is charged as a traitorous distinct act in
him. Now we have this learning delivered by Sir Edward Cook in his Comment upon
this, in the 25 year of Edward the third: That is, where there are several
acts made Treason; the one is an act for leavying of war: Now there the case
was Treason against the person of the King, Queen, Prince, etc. that one part
shall not be an overt act in case of Indictment, shall not be construed as an
overt act for the making good of another part; because where all are made
equally traitorous, and all are charged as equally traitorous, we think, with
submission, those parts shall not be made an overt act to another Treason. So
when here is a Treason made by the Act of the 17 of July, and another by a
subsequent Act, that which is charged as a Treason in the subsequent Act, shall
not be said to be an overt act for the making good of the former: if the former
be not a Treason able to maintain and support it self, this subsequent act
shall not serve as a bolster to uphold it, and to supply that which is laid as
a distinct treason of it self. Now these are the three things we insist upon:
First, That an overt act is necessary to be laid. Secondly, That it is not
supplied by the general conclusion, nor can it be. Next of all, that this act
that is here laid to be done, traitorously to hold correspondence and
intelligence, it refers no more to the first design, then to the second or to
the third design, which are charged as three distinct Treasons; and this is
charged as a distinct and positive Treason of it self, and therefore shall not
be carried over as a supplement to another.


At. Genesis We granting that an overt act is necessary to be expressed; grant it
should be so, but no more but in evidence: and then granting in the next place,
that the general conclusion will not be sufficient to maintain it, when it is
requisite an open deed should be expressed. Then for the third, I cannot be of
his judgment in this way of impeachments; but as we see one person may commit
four or five treasons, and one act may be an offense against four or five Acts
of Parliament; and this is the truth: for where the several acts are repeated,
that (my Lord) are those laws against which this treason, and this treasonable
practice and design is laid to be; then follows the several enumerations of
those practices, designs, and open acts of his now applied by us. But Mr.
Hales would take them and apply them to one singly; But I observe to your
Lordship, that those open acts of his are offenses by an open act against the
several Acts of Parliament; but it serves his turn for his Client to apply
them so: but I hope you will not apply them so; but when they come between the
offenses, and the overt acts follow it, and the conclusion upon the whole, that
all those traitorous and wicked practices and designs are against the several
Acts of Parliament: And if there be an open act so expressed in the
impeachment, that in law is an open act, suppose it should be required to be
expressed; if there be an open act, then I hope you will be satisfied when it
has been well proved; if it be expressed in the Indictment an open act, that I
hope will satisfy your judgments and consciences; especially when open acts
shall appear to you to be an offense against the Acts of Parliament. I shall
leave this to your judgment, and trouble you no further; and you will find in
its place whether it be requisite or not.


L. Pres. That that Mr. Hales said, if it were a thing of absolute necessity in
an Indictment, then the conclusion will not help; if the thing were of absolute
necessity there charged, and not charged contra formam Statutis, will not do
it: but if I understand it right, it is fully laid in this Charge, that he did
by open and overt acts do the thing; it is laid so; the words of open act are
not, but the value; that is, that he did by writing, by words, by messages, by
money; and these are really overt acts, though he did not call these overt
acts; these are laid fully in the Charge: and then, if they be laid fully in
the Charge, and we satisfied in the full proof of that Charge, that we have
heard overt acts to maintain it, then I think this cannot come within any of
those cases, that when an essential thing is left out of an Indictment, there
the conclusion will not help: this I conceive so far. Then the next, What
method or order this can be, by setting down the Statutes, and then withal
these overt acts of letters, of messages, of money, will reach to every one of
the qualities, that these Treasons are manifested by this act; but if it were a
treason of such a nature, that none of these could reach to the manifestation
of it, then you say well; but when these words reach to the manifestation of
every charge laid in the Charge, then it is effectual and real, and the
conclusion is sufficient.


At. Genesis Before he goes to the next, I shall crave your direction in it; for
I profess, my Lord, to you, that I in drawing the Impeachments, take not my
self to be so strictly tied to the forms of Indictments in letters and
syllables; and the forms I have taken and do take, are those that have passed
heretofore, and I follow them; and till I receive your direction to the
contrary, I take not my self bound but to express the substance of that which
is laid to his charge, by which he may know his Offense, and give an answer:
But to forms, and quiddities, and niceties, I conceive I was not bound to that.


Mr. Hales. I press not forms, nor quiddities, nor niceties in this business.
The next is, concerning the charge of promoting the Prince of Wales.


At. Genesis No, there is no such thing in it, your copy is amiss again; read it.


Mr. Hales. Our Exception is this, (we have been but upon the first all this
while, I take it so) the next is, That he did traitorously publish the son of
the late King of England, to be King of England (meaning this Commonwealth)
without the consent of the people in Parliament first had or signified by
ordinance to that purpose. I think we shall not trouble your Lordship much
with that; for if that be as our copy is; it is true, it is not well laid; but
if it be never so well laid, I conceive, as I am informed, there is nothing of
that endeavored to be proved.


At. Genesis That we leave to the Court, Mr. Hales.


Mr. Hales. Then the next is, that to accomplish the said traitorous and wicked
design, Christopher Love did at several days in the years aforesaid,
traitorously and wickedly advise the Scots. Our exception to that is this,
There is a treasonable assistance charged in some of the years that were before
the making of the Act that did prohibit it.


At. Genesis And afterward too, M. Hales.


Mr. Hales. It lays it in some of the years before the making of the Act, and
that is sufficient to invalidate this Charge.


The Clerk. And further to carry on and accomplish the said traitorous and
wicked practice and design, he the said Christopher Love, several days and
times in the respective years aforesaid, at London and diverse other places
within this Commonwealth of England, and elsewhere as aforesaid, together with
the said William Drake, Henry Jermin, and others their accomplices aforesaid, did
traitorously and maliciously invite, aid, and assist the Scots, being
foreigners and strangers, to invade this Commonwealth of England, and has
adhered to the forces raised by the enemies of the Parliament and Commonwealth
aforesaid, and Keepers of the Liberties of England as aforesaid.


At. Genesis You will find this in a Statute before this.


Mr. Hales. Not before the 17 of July 1649. and then your Charge is repugnant,
you charge us for an offense which is precedent to the statute.


At. Genesis For that, you go and take them and pick them; but we lay them all
together: the^e were Treasons he committed in 1648. and that which I pitch upon
still is this (that Mr. Hales thought was waved) that this man did not promote
the interest of Charles Stewart late King, or that he had not endeavored a
subversion of this Government; I lay that against this Act made in 1648. then
by consequence to maintain that, he did it to promote his interest, and to
subvert the Government; and there was a law in 1648 that did inhibit that;
there is a law inhibits the calling in of strangers; and it follows by that,
that he who calls in strangers may promote the interest of Charles Stewart too;
and that foundation is to this purpose, that he did promote him to have been
King of England: and you know what he expressed to you, what tenderness of
conscience he had to take care that he might not go elsewhere.


Mr. Hales. If it be so, then we must desire, That part of the charge may be
read.


At. Genesis I have not charged them, nor until I receive command, shall I vary
from what I have received formerly, that I shall charge this to be against
this, and that against that; but I have laid down the Acts of Parliament that
have made things Treason, and the offenses severally, and upon the whole
conclude that these are treasons against several Acts of Parliament severally;
if one or all together serve turn, I hold it well enough. If you put me to
every one of them particularly, I must have more time, and better Clerks to
draw the Inditements.


Mr. Hales. Still the same objection meets (with submission to the Court and
Mr. Attorney, the same objection meets) with them; we say then, he will make
this a kind of an additionall Charge to the first, or to the second, or to
both; but we know not to which.


At. Genesis Yes.


Mr. Hales. But we say that that is not sufficient, upon these reasons, because
it is a charge of treason in it self, and therefore shall not be made an
additionall and supplementall charge to make out another. And then we say, that
this is uncertainly charged, whether you will make it supplementall to the
first charge of Treason, that is, the endeavoring of the subversion of the
Commonwealth; or to the second charge of Treason, which is a distinct charge of
treason, of the promotion of the interest of Charles Stewart.


At. Genesis I cannot divide them.


L. Pres. Are not these as perfect as before? does not the subversion of this
Commonwealth promote the interest of Charles Stewart? and does not the promotion
of Charles Stewart subvert the interest of this Commonwealth? If he has laid
it, that he did both of these by assuming it, by a double or multiplied act,
and all these multiplied acts are but one subversion; if I subvert it by one,
or by 20 acts, both of them are the same in nature; for the subversion of the
one, is the bringing in of the other; and the bringing in of the one is the
subversion of the other; and so they are relatives fully one to the other, and
there cannot be more expressed in the Charge then this: And notwithstanding all
these acts, though that act has made the Treason, cannot it be by another act?
you may prosecute by virtue of this subsequent act, any thing that was
understood to be general treason by the law of the Land.


Mr. Hales. My Lord, this is that we insist upon. It is true, we do conceive,
though the promotion of the interest of Cha. Stewart is not consistent with the
preservation of the interest of the Commonwealth; yet every destruction of the
interest of the Commonwealth is not therefore a promotion of the interest of
Charles Stewart; for then there could be no Treason against the Commonwealth,
but it must be a promotion of the others interest. Now there may be a Treason
against the Commonwealth without the promotion of the others interest. I urge
it to this purpose, to make it appear, that they are several Charges bottomed
upon several Acts, and therefore the reference here made to promote the
design aforesaid, is uncertain to which it shall relate; it may fall out the
party may be guilty upon the first Article; it may fall out, he is not guilty
upon the second Article, and then it is uncertain to which article it relates,
that he is guilty of, or not guilty of: and here may be the consequence of it,
then you will make a Treason, which to this third clause is a Substantive, and
contained in it self, to be an overt act to another charge of Treason, and that
you cannot do: you cannot make a Treason which is so charged, to be an overt
act, or exposition, or a declaration of that which is contained in the former,
like that case I instanced in before, of the 25 of Edward the 3d, That no man
shall go about to destroy the person of the King, nor to raise war against his
people: so that we use it not in any other reference, but only to explain and
bring the reason of that ancient Law to this Law: In that case a man cannot
charge the overt act of going about to destroy his person, which is a distinct
Treason of it self, to be an overt act to the Charge of Levying war, which is
another distinct Treason: And if he alledg, such a one did go about to destroy
the Prince, or the Consort of the King, or the King, and to make the levying of
war to be an overt act to it, this he cannot do; because though it is true, it
might be an overt act to it, yet notwithstanding, it being made a distinct
treason, it cannot be an overt act to another treason: and so here, this very
assisting and inviting of forces is made a distinct treason; and so if you take
it substantively, it is insufficiently laid; and if relatively, you may not do
so, because it is a treason of it self, and shall not be brought in relation to
another treason laid before it.


At. Genesis For that, I hope Mr. Hales will leave me to that liberty I have,
that is, that if one act be an offense against several Acts, I may aggravate
it so, as to make him know it is so; and I take it for an aggravation of his
offense, when he has offended against so many several Laws, which he has
done; and that I may have liberty to say so, though perhaps that subversion of
this Government is not in every respect a promoting of the interest of Charles
Stewart; but the subversion of this Government, as it is here laid in this
indictment, is a promotion of the interest of Charles Stewart: and so it is
here. And I have done now with that.


L. Pres. Then (Mr. Hales) I will add a word, because that you did put the case
of a man destroying the person of a King, and Levying of war; if it be laid,
those very acts, if they be laid as a continued, or a medium, or an enterprise,
that he had taken up a war to destroy the person of the King; those words in
one sense, if it had been laid solitarily by it self, and destroying the King
in another; but if he showed that by levying of war he endeavored it, then the
denomination is from the end in that place; and though they be two treasons
substantively, yet when they are laid as one continued act, they are but one:
and so it is in this case; all these, though there are several statutes, and
several treasons, these multiplied acts make up but one complete in the
conclusion: if there want one of these, if there be sufficient in the other, it
is treason enough, and too much too (I would it were not so) if they be laid in
subordination, as all these are, every one of them further to promote this, and
to promote that; so they are laid in promotion of it to every one; and then
they are contiguous, and depend one upon another, and are substantive, and so
substantial, as that they may be relatives one to another, and so are these.


At. Genesis The next, Mr. Hales.


M. Hales. The next is the 4 Charge; and that is, concerning holding
correspondence by letters and messages, with Charles Stewart and the late Queen
his mother; we say, that this part of the Charge is ill laid also; it is laid
in nature of a felony by the Act, and laid to be done traitorously in the
Charge; and that is a substantial (not a mere formality, but a substantial)
mistake; for if so be a woman be indicted of petty treason because it is
proditoria, yet in truth it amounts but to felony; now in case where she is an
accessory to a felony, the indictment is naught: if a man be accused that he
did traitorously such an action, which in it self amounts but to a felony, that
charge is naught; and so it is here, it is mislaid: for by the act of the 26 of
March 1650, the matters therein charged are not made treason, at most but
capital; but we think it only prohibited, and then we say it is an uncertain
charge: and so it is, under favor; for though the act says, No man shall hold
correspondence by letters, messages, or otherwise; yet when we come to inform
upon it, or to indite upon it, it is not enough to say, He held correspondence
by letters, messages, or otherwise; but if you will ground your deed upon that
Act, you must show what that otherwise is, and that is the exception to that
part of the Charge.


The Clerk. And further to carry on the said traitorous and wicked practice and
design, he the said Christopher Love diverse days and times, between the the
29 of March, 1650. and the first of June 1651, at London and other places, as
aforesaid, did Traitorously and Maliciously give, hold, use, and maintain
correspondence and intelligence by letters, messages, instructions and
otherwise.


Mr. Hales. Or otherwise was our notes, then that is out of doors, but our
Exception is, that it is alleged to be done Traitorously.


L. Pres. And the Statute says it shall be Treason.


M. Hales. No it says not so, the Act lays it only in nature of a Felony, and
in the Charge it is laid to be done Traitorously, and so the Charge is mislaid.


At. Genesis I confess it is express so in the 26. of March 1650. and it is not
said what the offense is, but I conceive in the first place, that by the law of
England, be that holds correspondence with a Traitor, will go very near it, my
Lord; and the^ I humbly conceive, that still he going upon the first Act, it is
laid to be with Charles Stewart, and the Queen and Council with him (I think)
it is a promoting of his interest; he to hold a correspondence with him, whom
the Parliament has said, you shall in no case promote his interest.


Mr. Hales. I must be bold still a little, to crave Mr. Atturneys favor, to
reply upon him in this kind of way, for I have not had time.


At. Genesis You have had more time then I, for I heard not of it till now.


Mr. Hales. We say, the Charge is not good because it is made Felony only by
the Act, and laid in the Charge to be done traitorously; and then we say, that
Charge is uncertain to what design it relates; if it relates to the business
concerning the promoting of Charles Stewart's interest, if it be so, we
conceive it is not proved; for the proof I mention not, but that is not
insisted upon, that Master Love did promote the interest of Charles Stewart,
contrary to the Act of Parliament, that ( I think) is not insisted upon,


At. Genesis O yes.


Mr. Hales. I conceive, no.


At. Genesis I conceive very much otherwise, Mr. Hales.


Mr. Hales. I desire that Charge once more may be read concerning the promoting
the interest of Charles Stewart.


The Clerk. And the better to carry on and accomplish the said Traitorous and
Wicked Practice and Design, he the said Christopher Love, with the said William
Drake, etc. (since the death of Charles Stewart, late King of England, who for
his notorious Treasons, and other Tyrannies and Murders by him committed, in
the late unnatural and cruel wars, was by Authority derived from the
Parliament, justly condemned to death, and executed) several days and times,
in the respective years aforesaid, at London aforesaid, and sundry other places
within this Commonwealth and since this Nation was settled in the way of a
Commonwealth or a Free State, as aforesaid, did Traitorously declare, publish,
and promote Charles Stewart, eldest son to the late King, to be King of England.


Mr. Hales. We are informed, that there is nothing of any particular act of
his, concerning that; but we have nothing to do with the Fact, but we conceive
that no subsequent thing by way of construction or interpretation, shall make a
publishing and promoting in such a manner as this is, it must be such a thing
as expressly publishes and promotes him to be the chief Magistrate of England,
according to the words of the Act, and not by way of dilation; we say, this is
not a thing to be applied to serve the turn, upon this reason; we say, that
the holding of correspondence and intelligence with Charles Stewart, eldest son
to the late King, it cannot be coupled on to the promotion of the interest of
Charles Stewart to be King of England, seeing that is but by way of
interpretation to bring it within the first part of the Act.


At. Genesis For that I shall crave your direction.


L. Pres. It is not interpretative, but positive.


At. Genesis But I shall shall crave your pleasure, whether I shall in my
impeachments afterward put in all my evidence; what is charged, and evidence
proves, that you will judge upon I hope.


Mr. Hales. then the next part of the Charge, and that is the fifth, that he
did hold correspondence with diverse persons of the Scots nation; our Exception
to that is plain, we conceive, that part of it is not well laid neither, it is
not laid in pursuance of the Act of Parliament, as our notes are, this is that
we say, that it is not expressly alleged, that they were persons residing in
Scotland, as our notes are.


At. Genesis Like enough so, Sir.


The Clerk. And further to carry on and accomplish the said Traitorous and
Wicked Design, he the said Christopher Love, several days and times in the
respective years aforesaid, at London aforesaid, and diverse other places within
this Commonwealth of England and elsewhere, as aforesaid, did Traitorously and
Maliciously hold and maintain, correspondence and intelligence with diverse
persons of the Scots Nation, viz. with the Earl of Argile, Lowden, Louthian,
Bailey, Belcarris, and diverse other persons if the Scots, and other Nations,
whom he well knew to adhere to the Scots Nation in this war against the
Parliament and Commonwealth of England.


Mr. Hales. This we conceive, is not a good charge, for the words of the Act of
the 2d of August 1650, upon which this is grounded, are, that no man shall hold
correspondence with the Scots Nation residing in Scotland.


At. Genesis You were best read further, Mr. Hales.


Then Mr. Hales read part of that Act, beginning at these words, [Be it
Enacted, Ordained, and declared by this present Parliament] and ending with
these words, [Without the allowance, license, etc. Mr. Hales. It is true, there
is no residing; for that yet comes not home, we conceive, to part of the
Charge; there are two parts of the Charge, the one, That he did maintain
correspondence with diverse of the Scottish Nation, and with diverse other
persons of diverse other Nations, whom he well knew to adhere to the Scots
Nation in this war against the Parliament. As to the first, that is out of
doors; then here is no full charge of holding any correspondence with any of
the Scots Nation; for that part of the Charge rests upon this, that it must be
with holding of correspondence with any such persons as are residing in
Scotland, and with any other person residing there. Then as to the other part
--


L. Pres. It is a continued speech, not with the Scots nor any other.


Mr. Hales. Then here is another thing in it, that it is not averred that such
correspondence and intelligence was held without the license of Parliament.


At. Genesis You are mistaken in that, your notes are not true.


The Clerk. And he the said Christopher Love, within the times, and at the
places before mentioned, did Traitorously assist, encourage, without the
special license of the Council of State, or Parliament, or Captain General
of the Parliaments Forces.


M. Hales. We say then, these are two distinct Charges, and grounded upon two
distinct parts of an Act, but there is this more in it, which we conceive is
not to be answered, with submission, under favor, it is said he did it within
the times aforesaid, the times that are aforesaid, are between the 29 of March
1650, and June 1651; now this Act whereby this is made traitorous or
Treasonable, takes not place till the 5. of Aug. 1650, so that it might be done
within the times aforesaid, that is, between the 29 of March 1650, and June
1651, and yet not contrary to the Act of the 2d of August, which was 1650


S. Tho. Wither. We lay it within all the times aforesaid, and, I suppose, the
matter of the evidence has told you the times, which now we are not to dispute.


Mr. Hales. Whatsoever is done between the 29 of March 1650, and the 2d of
August 1650, is not done contrary to the Act of the 2d of August 1650, upon
which Act this Charge is grounded; there is a time between them, and between
the time of exhibiting of these Articles: whatsoever is said to be done between
the 29 of March 1650, and the exhibiting the Articles is not said to be done
after the 2d of Aug. 1650; for if it be done between the 29 of March and the 2d
of Aug. it is done within the time aforesaid, that is, between the 29 of March
1650 and June 1651, and yet not done contrary to the Act of the 2d of August,
because done before the Act came forth.


At. Genesis Though Mr. Hales will not consent to it, we will strike out the 29.
of March, and then he will not deny but that is good enough, with that stricken
out, before the first of June 1651. whether it be not good enough, and no time
laid before it?


Mr. Hales. No indeed, it is not good enough.


At. Genesis Why not? it is after the offense committed.


Mr. Hales. Because it may as well be before the Act as after the Act.


At. Genesis If we lay it after the offense committed, I suppose it is well
enough, and the wisest will think so; lay it to be the first of June 1651;
suppose it were in September before, it is good enough.


Mr. Hales. If you lay it upon the first of June, it is a year, before it is
not good enough.


At Genesis That that Mr. Hales insists upon, he may say it is before the first
of June 1651 so long since, but in a just and reasonable intendment, when we
insist upon that law that makes it Treason to hold it after such a time, and we
say that before the first of June 1651. he did commit Treason in holding
correspondence, and sending provisions of war before that Law, though it were
before the second of August, 1650. that were not against that Law.


M. Hales. Still we say, that contrary to the form of the Statute, or contrary
to the form of the Law, which is but the conclusion, shall not supply that
which is material to be alleged: now when here is an Act laid to be done,
certainly it is material, to allege that it is done in such a time as may
appear to be after the time of the prohibition of it to be done; the
prohibition runs to the second of August, 1650. that no man after the fifth of
that August shall do such an act; then it must be laid to be an act done after
the fifth of that August; but it is not laid so here, but laid so as may be
intended to be done before the fifth of August; for here is a time laid
between the 29. of March, 1650. and the time of the exhibiting the Articles
which is in June, 1651. and that he did this within the time aforesaid; now he
that says he did it the 30. of March, says he did it within the time
aforesaid, and yet says not that is within the Act.


Sir Tho. Withrington. We have given an answer to that, we have laid it within,
and without the time, that it is within the time, the witness does prove it,
and M Hales speaks not to what we have proved, and cannot speak to it.


Mr. Hales The proof shall never supply the insufficiency of the Charge; for we
may as entirely offer you an Exception to this matter, after you have heard the
proof, as before you have heard it; for it stands now as upon the Charge
singly, so that it shall not be supplied out of matter that appears in the
proof, but it must be considered whether the Charge can supply it self or not;
for that that is alledgable against the Charge before the proof made, is
alledgable as well afterward; if it were not good before the proof, the proof
shall not be supplementall to it; for upon that reason, if an Indictment did
want time, or certainty, then after the party were heard upon his Defense, it
might be said when this Exception was taken to the Indictment, all this might
appear upon the Evidence, but that will not supply the defect of the Indictment.


At. Genesis I am sure we have laid it late enough, the first of June, 1651.
before that time, and Mr. Hales his Exception is still upon that way of
proceedings upon Indictments; he must have that positive and strict certainty
in it in each particular, I must give it that answer still, that if you do in
these cases put me to it, to express every particular circumstance of every
particular fact, and every particular time, and that it must conduce in the
conclusion of it, I must make you Impeachments that will not be fit for you to
read nor hear; but under favor, if that it contains in it in this way of
Charge that convenient certainty, that convenience that may put the prisoner to
the knowledge of it, and to prove it; for this relates not singly, for if I
should go that way M. Hales has labored to draw me, that is to take every one
of these severally, and that I must make a distinct Charge upon one, and upon
the other, and a distinct Evidence upon one, and upon the others I conceive
these run quite through all the laws every one of them; had I confined this now
between the 5. of August 1650. and June 1651. then what had become of all the
laws before that time? therefore to make them relative to all, I have expressed
such a time as may relate to all; for had I confined it singly upon this or
that act, whereas I humbly conceive, that these acts and these offenses of M.
Love are relative to more than one Act of Parliament, and go to several acts;
and therefore I cannot confine my self to one act, and say, it was done at such
a time, and there limit it and let it die; but my endeavor has been, and upon
this particular we debated it, when we did draw it, we put it so, that the
several acts may have the several effects, and M. Loves Treasons look upon
every one of them, and they upon every one of his Treasons, and as his offenses
run through, and against all the acts, so must our laying it upon him run, and
the evidence also; and though we took care to lay it back far enough, that was
to the first of June, 1651. and so laid it high enough to the other that it
might reach the rest, and in this way we are not tied so to express it in every
particular, as other Indictments run.


M Hall At. of the Duchy. He would charge it upon the times between the 29.
of March, and the 1. of June, that be not the times that we have expressed in
this, for it is that within the times aforesaid we have positively laid, that
it was in the year 1651. for we have laid before that in the year 1648, 1649,
1650, 1651. then in the times aforesaid, we have positively laid, that this
fact was done in the year 1651. which of necessity must be since that Act
concerning the Scots was made, and that I conceive is an express positive time
mentioned in the Charge, and gives a full answer to that objection; for it is
not within such a time, but in the year 1651.


M. Hales. That Charge is within the times aforesaid, which is last mentioned,
between March 1650. and 1651.


Mr. Hall. That we shall submit to the Court, whether in the same times
aforesaid, shall not relate to all the times beforementioned, as well as the
particular times he has picked out; for we mention that in the year 1651.
these things were done.


At. Genesis For that I have given you that that is the general answer, if I be
put to it, whereas Mr. Love had transgressed against those several Acts of
Parliament, we have put it so, that we conceive his offenses run through them
all, and so we have laid them, and (I hope) we are not upon those Nicities,
that we must express the direct days and times, as Indictments run, but here
is enough to make him know his offenses.


L. Pres. I conceive it is much better as it is too, and more obvious to every
understanding, and their interpretation, then as you would have it, a great
deal; for the necessities of the day it is not material, that you will agree,
nor the week if they lay a time so many months before, or after, if the proof
come and fall within the compass of the Charge, as the proof is laid, so is the
fact, the proof determines whether it were within the times without the Law, or
within the times aforesaid; for it is not within that time, and every of them,
but within the times generally laid, all those acts were done, and those must
be laid in particular, which was at one time, and one at another, which were
two years a brewing, and are by the proofs laid in general, that is best to
say, one fact was done at one time, and another at another time, and at such a
time, and not at such a time, it can be no man's judgment to be so laid in an
Indictment or Charge, but they must be laid thus in general, and the Evidence
must make it particular, that it was within the times that are laid, as when
there are no times, as from March to June and August, and after if they be both
laid, if the fact be within such a time that is within the law, all the other
is out of doors.


M. Hales. My Lord, thus if it please your Lordship, I think with submission to
your Lordships judgment, that in such a case it is not in the proof to make
good a Charge; if the Charge do not contain a sufficient certainty, it is not
in the proof to make it good. My Lord, I insist now upon the necessity of a
day to be precisely laid; I know (though it is true, it has been otherwise
held in some cases) yet, in a case of this nature, the day is now material,
for now we are upon an Act of Parliament: As now, if so be the Statute of the
29th. of Elizabenh enacts that every man that shall knowingly entertain a
Jesuit, that that man shall be a Traitor, shall stand guilty of Treason; if so
be a man would say in an Indictment that such a man between the 28th. of
November, in the 28th. year of the Queen, and the 28. of December in the 29.
year of the Queen, did entertain such a Jesuit, this Indictment would be
naught, not upon the uncertainty of the day, but because it takes in a time
which is not prohibited by the Statute, the Indictment may be true that he did
receive a Jesuit within that time, and yet that he did not receive him contrary
to the form of (...) ^^atute, and to say in the conclusion contrary to the form
of the Statute will not help it, for that is ou^ objection, that it is not done
contrary to the form of the Statute, because it takes in such a time, as that
it might be done before the Statute came forth; we say, that when there is a
time laid between the 29. of March 1650, and June, 1651. and that within that
time he did do thus, and thus, that there is the fault, it does overreach the
time of the prohibition of the Statute, for any thing appears to the Court, the
Court may find the Indictment or Information true, that he did it within this
time, that is, between the 29. of March 1650. and June, 1651. and yet for all
that, the party not in fault to be impeached, because he might not do it
contrary to the Act, for he might do it between the 29. of March, 1650. and
June, 1651. and yet do it before the Act came forth, which was in August, 1650.


M. Hall. My Lord, I conceive M. Hales has not answered that I alleged; but
now if there were no other times mentioned in all the Charge, but only between
the 29 of March and June, 1651. then it were somewhat; but when the times are
expressed before, though that it was in the year 1651. and then we say in the
times beforesaid, I conceive that in the times aforesaid shall relate expressly
to that time in the year, 1651. and then it must be within the Act.


M. Hales. That cannot be, that will make the Charge worse.


L. Pres. That I conceive you are upon is this, the very Letter of the Charge;
for you say at this time that is laid, he could not be a Traitor, and you join
it with a time in which he might be a Traitor; This (you say) they lay in the
Indictment, that he did in such a time of March, and afterward, and at that
time there was no law to prohibit it, and so that could not be a crime against
him, and this, you say, no proof will help it, I take it, M. Hales, this is the
substance; but if this be thus laid, and the proof does come in, this is very
essential in my judgment, when upon the matter, if this be as you see it
appears upon the face of the thing, that the proof must go to that time within
the Law, and therefore that will not vitiate at all such an Indictment, if it
were so as you say; but I take it, that this being complicated with more Laws,
as I said before, though he were not guilty upon this, yet in the conclusion he
is found guilty of that which is as to other offenses.


At. Genesis I shall say but this, we all know that a time is expressed but for
formality, and that time that is expressed is not materall, so it be laid far
back enough; but if I lay it in June, and prove it in June twelve months, it is
time enough for this, as your Lordship was saying: that which I do say, is,
that I cannot confine not this very act that is supposed to be, and yet not
laid to be against that Act of the second of August 1650. from this clause in
express terms, not singly: But that which I humbly insist upon is this, that
never a one of these offenses singly transgress one single Law, but is an
offense against several Laws. I conceive, I had done my self and the
Commonwealth wrong, had I limited it to any one; for his complying with the
Scots, and joining with them, and contributing with them, and receiving
intelligence, it is more then against that single Act; it is promotion of his
interest, and subversion of the Government, and against every one of the laws:
And therefore, I conceive, I had not done right to the place I am entrusted
with, if I should have laid it singly; but he is indicted, that as a false
traitor he has done these things; that is the preamble: and then we
ininstanced the particulars, and give a time, which time he will acknowledge is
not positively necessary to be true, that that time must be the day the fact
was committed, but if it be before, it is enough: But he infers, because this
seems to be an offense within the Statute of the second of August 1650. and is
laid between the 29 of March 1650, and the first of June 1651. and so whether
this can relate to that Act; and by evidence you know it is afterward; but
this being an offense against several Laws, I cannot charge it to be against
one Law: but the art is now, as Mr. Love began, to take it asunder, and singly,
and then it is nothing; and Mr. Hales takes it singly. It is not against this,
nor against this; but it is against every one of them, and not against this
singly, but against the rest of them.


S. Tho. Wither. My Lord, it cannot be contrary to the form of the Statute,
unless it be done after the time, so that the conclusion shows it was laid
within the time, but for that case, as Mr. Hales instanced in, he puts a case
of one Act of Parliament, we are now upon offenses against several Acts of
Parliament, in that case of retaining a Jesuit, he is a Traitor by the Act of
the 29 of Elizabeth, so that if he lays it between the 28 of the Queen, and
the 29. if the Jury find that he did retain him knowingly on the 10. of May
29. then it will not be denied, but that it is an offense against the Statute.


Mr. Hales. But still we say the Indictment is naught in that case, because it
takes in a time which was before the Act came forth, so that the party might do
it within the time expressed in the indictment, and yet not do it contrary to the
Act, and this is our case.


At. Genesis My Lord, you have heard us for that.


Mr. Hales. The last thing is concerning contribution to Silas Titus, and
Sterks a Scotchman; and to that we have the same Exception, that that is not
made Treason by any Act of Parliament, and therefore it is mislaid to be done
Traitorously, for the Statute of the 26 of March 1650, only prohibits it, and
so makes it penalt, but not Treason. But then we say again, it is laid very
uncertainly too; that is, at the times before mentioned; if Mr. Attorney of the
Duchy his constructions should stand, that is, that the times before
mentioned refer to the time past, then he may refer to a time before the Act.
But we conceive the thing it self is not Treason by the Act, but only
prohibited; and we conceive, under favor still, that by way of reduction to
any of the former Charges, this shall not be made as an instance or an overt
act by way of reduction to any of the former Charges, because it is charged
particularly to be traitorously done, because there are several charges of
Treason before, and that which Mr. Atturny was pleased to observe upon another
occasion, that in this case the charge is against several Acts of Parliament,
it is true, but though it be against several Acts of Parliament, yet it must
bind and pinch upon one; for we say, one Treason is not to be made an instance
to another, and so to be made accessory, and depending, and accidental to
another, and then we say in this case, that this being not a Treason in it
self, and being as uncertain to which of the former Treasons it is applied, it
cannot be well laid, nor well applied, that is, to the last, that he did
voluntarily relieve Silas Titus, it is not made Treason.


Attur. Genesis It is against the Act of the 2. of August, 1650. in express words:
read the Impeachment.


The Clerk. And further to carry on and accomplish the said traiterous and
wicked practice and design, he the said Christopher Love within the times, and
at the places last aforesaid, did traitorously and voluntarily relieve the said
Silas Titus, Edward Massy, Col. Bamfield, one Mason late of London Gentleman,
and one Sterks late of London Gentleman, who then were, and yet are under the
power of the Scotch Nation in Arms against the Parliament and Commonwealth of
England, with moneys and ammunition. Which Treasons and traiterous and wicked
practices and designs of him the said Christopher Love, were and are to the
apparent hazard of the public peace of the Common wealth, and Free State,
Parliament and People of England, and to the manifold breach, contempt, and
violation of the Laws of this Land, and contrary to the form of diverse
Statutes and Acts of Parliament in such case made and provided.


M. Hales. Then we say, it is uncertainly alleged, and uncertainly laid: but
we take it, it is not within the words of the Act, we desire that Act may be
read.


The Clerk. That shall from and after the 5. of August, 1650. use, hold, and
maintain any correspondence, etc.


M. Hales. Then this is not within this Act, because that this is concerning
sending to persons that are in Scotland, I observe not that it is charged that
they were in Scotland.


At. Genesis Or shall abbet, assist, countenance or encourage the Scotch Nation,
or any other person or persons adhering to them in their war against the
Commonwealth: What think you of relieving, is not that abbetting and
encouraging?


M. Hales. It should be laid so then, I desire that part of the Charge may be
read again.


The Clerk. And further to carry on, etc.


M. Hales. My Lord, we think this is not fully charged according to the Act.


At. Genesis I will read you another of the 26. of March 1650.


M. Hales. That makes it not Treason.


At. Genesis It comes very near it, but I insist upon it, it is under the other,
relieving them with money, buying of Arms.


Mr. Hales. Still the same Exception lies upon it, within the times aforesaid,
which certainly cannot be acknowledged.


At. Genesis We acknowledge the same Exception; and the same answer lies to it,
that of the 26. of March 1650. it is, he shall suffer death, and upon this it
is Treason upon both together, we cannot divide them, but must express them so.


Mr. Hales. Under favor, the one makes it Felony, and the other a Treason.


At. Genesis But it is a deadly one.


L. Pres. If a Statute Law makes a thing Felony that was not Felony, or recites
a thing that is Felony, and says it shall be punished with death, being a
petty Larceny, therein you say well; but if the Statute recites that that is
Treason in it self actually, and says, that they that do these things shall
suffer death, according to the nature of that offense that is formerly recited,
and limits it so in the recital, if the recital be Treason in the beginning,
and then say, that that Trartor shall suffer death without mercy.


M. Hales. We have showed our reasons in the Case, my lord, it is as much as we
can say upon this sudden concerning this Charge; there are some other things
that are mentioned here by Mr. Love, as how far forth there be sufficient
Witnesses, admitting the Charge were good; how far forth the Witnesses are
sufficient in themselves; and then whether here be two concurring Witnesses to
any one act, and whether any thing be more proved then Misprision of treason,
and concealment of treason; these are things Mr. Love takes upon him in fact to
say: And now for those, when the case is made, we shall be ready to speak to
these things; for truly it is sudden and new to me, for these matters came not
to my knowledge till this morning after eight a clock; that is, concerning the
last paper he offers to your Lordship, and that is, Exception to Witnesses,
proof, and matter of the proof, whether the bare concealment (for thus it is
stated unto us, the concealment) of any thing that is treason whether that be
treason or no in the party that conceals it; these are things that if we were
prepared for, we should speak to. First, we conceive by the Statute of primo
and quinto Elizabethae, there is a necessity in this proceeding before your
Lordship to have two lawful and sufficient Witnesses. Next of all, we think,
that if these witnesses be such as he has stated them to be; which whether
they be or no, we know not, for we are utterly unacquainted with the evidence,
yet we should think they are no sufficient witnesses; and then admitting they
were sufficient witnesses, yet if so be one witness speaks to one fact,
another to another, we conceive these are not sufficient witnesses within the
Statute, not sufficient to convict him. And then, if that which they have
witnessed be nothing that amounts to Treason, happily committed by others, that
makes him not guilty within the Acts. If we had time to understand, and digest,
and consider, what were the matters that are alleged, we should be able to say
somewhat to it. My Lord, that which we have said, we have said of a sudden, and
so it appears because we had not that clear understanding of the Charge as
otherwise we might have had, and so have saved much of your time.


At. Genesis For that that has been said suddenly by Mr. Hales, I shall suddenly
give it this answer, he has had more time then I, he has said from Mr. Love
and not from himself: he says when the case is made; I think it will appear
then that these Exceptions have been made to the Court, that the witnesses have
not been competent neither in quality nor number, they have been spoken to; for
the witnesses, the Exception to the quality because they were of the same gang,
they had a hand in the some Treason, that was the Exception, I think that will
not be allowed to be a legal Exception, they are persons that (as Mr. Love
pretended) had a hand with him in this Fact, and therefore they should not be
competent witnesses; that I shall appeal to Mr. Hales's judgment, before
conviction and upon a proceeding, whether they may not discover (and after
conviction) if they be Approvers. For the next, for two witnesses; when the
case is made, you will find one, two, three, four, five, six, and to most of
them two, three and four, for so I may make bold to say, for so I read them to
you the last day. And then for the last Exception, that was for the concealment
of Treason, it is far from it, for I know not what a concealment Mr. Love may
intend, I am sure Mr. Hales will not think that a concealment to run on one,
two, or three years, and run on, and send letters; that when he acts along with
them, and has the meetings at his house continually; moves them to receive
money, and contribute; I think he was the highest Actor amongst them, for the
meetings were continually at his house, the advices were there resolved upon
debates, there he gave his advice one way, and they another way; I think he
will not think this is but misprision of Treason; and we never did charge it,
nor intend it so, but went a little higher.


Mr. Hales. If that be declared to be insisted upon, that the non-revealing of
Treason, though it be a month or two, or a year or two, can be no Treason, then
we have done with that question; for then it will rest singly upon the Fact
before your Lordship, whether there be any thing more proved, then such a
concealment, then it is true, we are discharged of that question. But then
concerning the proof, if Master Attorney will please to admit, that the proofs
are such as Master Love has stated in this paper. --


At. Genesis That I shall not do before hand, but to debate upon the proof, I
shall crave your Lordships directions; I have gone over them already, and it
has been trouble enough to me, if it be your Lordships pleasure I must go over
the proof again, I shall submit to you, but not to him.


L. Pres. Mr. Hales, there is no witnesses that have been heard, but they have
been of the said confederacy, that was one Exception Mr. Love made; it was
debated at the producing, and overruled, and I believe your judgment will go
well with us, that it was no Exception. Another was, that they have been
promised rewards, that was likewise moved, and overruled, the Court was of
opinion that they may do it; that if there be a Treason, and there be many
correspondents in it, and one out of remorse, as some of these did say, that
when they had been there they did not like their ways, but went from them, and
came to them no more; if this man, or any other man afterward shall come and
reveal this, it is in the power of the State either to reward him with moneys,
and to promise him life too, if he shall faithfully do it; and this we say,
is a stronger case then the case of an Approver, which afterward when they
became Approvers, they must confess the Fact, and say they are guilty of the
Fact plainly, and openly, and yet then they are good witnesses to discover
this, as it was plotted in hell, for this was no other, though they had a
vizard upon them, which was no otherwise; I say, if any one will discover such;
nay happily it was offered to Master Love himself, if he would have done it: I
believe there was some overtures made to him; but this is law too, by the law
of this land, which is the law of God; for we have no law practiced in this
land, but is the law of God, and so did the Lawyers maintain it before the King
in Henry the eighths time, the Popes, Legates, and chief Archbishops, and
Bishops of England, and did then prove it to them, that there was no law
practiced in England but the law of God, which our Ministers are loath to
touch, and busy themselves to study, but study the Ceremonial Laws of the
Jews, which are Mortua Mortifera, which are not to be practiced by any other
Nation, till they be established by a law; and that which is the law of God in
this land, that has so much preserved it, these they are wilfully ignorant of,
and say, it is civil; but I say, his Christian law: and therefore never
distinguish in a Christian Nation, that the laws are Moral and
Ecclesiastical, with that fained distinction; but all the Laws of this Nation
are Christian, and stand with Evangelicall Truth, as well as With natural
reason, and they are founded upon it; and therefore, Master Hales, we are here
now to go on by these laws, which are the laws of God, and we must walk in
them, as we would walk to Heaven. And for that you speak of now, Mr. Attorney
has answered all the Exceptions every one, and I think for that matter of
Fact, every one of them particularly. Mr. Love did take his Exceptions too, and
they were overruled. Now to come, whether these are lawful witnesses over
again, when it is in matter of Fact, and overruled by the judgment of the
Court, Master Hales will not think that is regular. And then, whether there be
two to one point or nor, that is another of your Exceptions; that I take it
(Master Hales) is not matter of law, but for the Judges to consider of it; that
which should be matter of law, is this, whether that single proofs, some to
one, and some to another, joined all together do issue out all this Treason; we
want not presidents for that, for this is a heterogeneall Treason, every
particular that these Statutes make a Treason, they are all of them
complicated, he has gone through them all in his act, and we must pass
through them all in our judgments: though every one is particular Treason, had
it been singularly laid by it self; yet now being laid as one concatinated
Treason, they all of them make but one. For the next, for that of misprision,
he is not charged here with misprision at all, but direct Treasons; and if it
be but misprision, we shall not for misprision judge him a Traitor upon this
Charge; but then, what is in his judgment misprision? if this be nothing but a
concealment, I think that the Court upon the Evidence will judge that it is
more then a bare concealment, and whether Mr. Hales will think if I be a
promoter, and concealer from one to another, and have so many continued
meetings, whether two or three years together acting with them, and concealing
them, for it is not a bare concealment, but a complicated Act; for if it were
but a bare notion of it, we should have much ado to prove it, but (I think) the
Court is satisfied, it is more then notion.


S. Tho. Wither. I shall speak a word to that Mr. Hales moved last, whether you
will be pleased to hear any more of Councels, in these three particulars; for,
under favor, these three particulars concerning the witnesses, concerning
their quality and number, and the Treason it self, these are matters of
another kind of nature then all the rest he insisted upon, for the rest are
mere matters of Law, upon the formality, and insufficiency of the Charge; these
questions of the witnesses, are questions that are mixed, for they depend upon
the matters in Fact, and cannot be otherwise stated; now Mr. Love, though he
had no Council appeared before, yet he had in his Defense all these Objections
too; as of the incompetency of them, because they were participes criminis, and
for that I think (under favor of your Lordships judgment) he had a full and a
clear answer to it, in case of an Approver, he is Particeps criminis, and
accuses men that are Participes criminis, yet that man even ex merito
justitia, he shall be pardoned, says our Law, and therefore that Objection
that is made against the witnesses, that they are promised rewards and pardon,
that is no Objection, for in that case the Approver shall have his pardon, ex
merito justitiae. Then for the other point, that is, whether by two witnesses
in such a plot or no, to prove a Treasonable act, that is, consisting merely
upon the matter of fact, that I shall not take upon me to repeat, you have
heard it; but this I said then, and this I humbly offer now, that if there be
two witnesses, though they concur not in the same individual act, yet if they
concur in two acts, concurring to the same Treason, they prove the same
Treason; if one prove the sending of letters, and another the sending of money,
I take it these are two witnesses, though they speak of two distinct acts; but
in our proof we have gone on to two witnesses, three or four in most points.
But then for the misprision of Treason, we did apprehend that, that which M.
Love himself has confessed, is Treason it self; but Mr. Love is pleased to
make his own collection upon his own confession, for I confess my presence
and silence after these meetings and consultations; but this I take to be
misprision of Treason: To this I replied, we took it to be Treason it self,
for our books say, a man must not sleep, nor look, back, but go presently to a
Magistrate to reveal it; but when a man will not only sleep upon it, but keep
it back, and act in it, this is more then misprision. But our charge is for a
Treason it self, and truly Treason comprehends a misprision of Treason in it,
but this point I think neither will come in question now; for we say and
charge, that it is a treason it self, not Misprision; and that collection Mr.
Love makes, it is his own, but the judgment is yours, whether it be a Treason
or not.


Mr. Hales. If it be your Lordships pleasure we shall speak, we are ready to
say what we can in the shortness of time; but if it be not your Lordships
pleasure, we shall not say it.


At. Genesis If your Lordship please to declare what he should speak to.


Mr. Hales. These points, I shall only mention them, I cannot argue them now.
This is that I conceive; first of all, according as the case is stated, that
is, Whether a person menaced, that he shall lose his life if he discover not a
particular person, and that he shall have his life if he do discover him;
whether such a person be a competent witness or no?


At. Genesis Hear a word, I appeal then to you, whether any such person were
produced before you?


Mr. Hales. First we only go upon what supposition Mr. Love makes.


Mr. Love. I humbly crave leave to that effect, to prove that particular.


At. Genesis No, not now, Sir.


Mr. Hales. We conceive such a person is not a competent witness: then that
is out of the case, it should seem, Sir. Truly, then the case that is put
concerning an Approver, comes not to the question, under favor; for though it
is true, an approver at Common law, might be an accuser; yet we are not now
upon a proceeding at the Common law, when we talk of witnesses now; but we are
upon a proceeding how far forth warranted for the witnesses, by the stat. of
the first and fifth of Ed. 6: so that what is said concerning an Approver,
comes not to this question; he that may be a competent witness at Common law,
he is not a competent witness upon those statutes, for the words of the
statute are expressly, that he shall be a lawful and a sufficient witness:
and if so be that such a case were now, it is not to sample this case that is
before you, with the case of an Approver, which is a bare accusation at Common
law, and where the Jury likewise are to have other evidence; for either the
defendant may wage his battle, or put himself upon his Country; and then it is
at the pleasure of the Jury whether they will believe the Approver or no: but
by the Act of the first and fifth of Edward the Sixth, it is expressly said,
There shall be two sufficient witnesses in case of Treason; so that that has
made an alteration of what was in the Common law before; one witness was
enough before, now two witnesses are requisite: and we conceive, the words
lawful and sufficient conclude such persons: if there be not any such, we are
not to say we know, or know not: but if so be any person is drawn to make such
a testimony for the preservation of his life, and shall make such an
expression, we think, that though it is true, he is a person that is
attainted, yet he is a person that is thus drawn, and we think he is not such a
witness as is intended, especially in such a case as this is, where the trial
of the fact is before your Lordship, which is both Jury and Judge, to try the
fact, and determine the law; and therefore perhaps here will be a more rigorous
expectation who should be, and who should not be a sufficient Witness, then in
case it were a bare trial by Jury; there may be those exceptions alleged
against a witness when the trial is as now it is, that may not be when a
trial is by a Jury; and threfore i^ so be that a party be thus drawn to
testify for the preservation of his life, we think that this is not such a
lawful and sufficient Witness as is required in such a case. Next of all, it
is said in the paper, that they have detected themselves, being parties of as
deep a guilt as the person that is accused: I will not dispute that at this
time; for it is not the case, whether a person that is a plotter and
confederate with one that commits Treason, may be a Witness; but when a person
is detected by lawful Authority, before the Charge exhibited, whether such a
person who is so detected, whose life is in the hands of the State, be one of
these competent witnesses, we must leave it to your judgment in that, but we
think he is not a competent witness; for there is not a bare accusation of a
person, but (as the case is stated to us) by a person that should be examined
and confess himself guilty of those things whereof Mr. Love is impeached, and
that before the Charge is exhibited. My Lord, the next matter is concerning the
plurality of witnesses, the number of them, we think, under favor, with
submission, that in this case, suppose the Charge had been singly upon one act
of Treason, we conceive, that in that case there is a necessity of two persons
to prove that Charge: If the Charge be upon several Acts of Treason, be the
Charge so; yet if you will bring them within any one of the acts, you must have
two Witnesses to bring them within that act: For suppose a man were indicted of
Treason heretofore for Levying of war, and another Treason for adhering to the
Enemies, and another Treason for counterfeiting of the Coin, or those kind of
things; these are several Treasons, though they are all put into one
Information, and happily may be put, in case of necessity, into one Indictment,
as here are several acts put into one Charge. But now a proof of Treason
within one of the Acts by one Witness, and a proof of a Treason within another
of the Acts by another witness, will not be esteemed and accounted a proof by
two witnesses; for it must be a proof, not that he is within the Charge, but
within that part of the Charge upon which he is to be arraigned; and here is
not a proving each distinct part of the Charge by two witnesses, as the Statute
requires. And then to come nearer, suppose the Charge were but upon one Act, as
that he held correspondence with the Scots, and did invite them etc. I conceive
that in this case, under favor, that that particular Act with which you will
charge him to be a Traitor within any one law, must be proved by two Witnesses.
The Star Chamber course I know what it was, that in case there were one
general charge, and then it did descend to several particulars, one witness
would serve for one, and another to another, and a third to a third, and these
should make up two witnesses to convict the party; but we are not now in a
proceeding of Star Chamber, that is laid by, it was not altogether so regular
in all things: and then, we are not in a thing barely criminal, but in a case
of life; and not in the case of life ordinarily, but in a case wherein a party
is accused of Treason, wherein the Statute does provide that there shall be two
Witnesses (as I conceive) to swear to the same thing, by which you would bring
him within it; otherwise they stand as single Witnesses every one apart. I have
heard of a case (I have not had so much time as to look into it) concerning Mr.
Rolph, indicted at Winchester; I will not so much as repeat over the Case upon
my credit to the Court; but I take it, it was thus: He was indicted for
somewhat about the person of the King; one Witness deposed about the
presenting of a Pistol, or that he said he would; another about poisoning, or
that he said he would: these two things did conclude in one and the same act;
and though they concluded in one and the same as evidences, complicated
evidences to make good one Charge, and either of them had been sufficient, if
proved by two; yet as I am informed (this is the inconvenience, upon the sudden
we cannot offer it upon the confidence of our own knowledge, which a little time
would make us wholly decline the mentioning of it, or affirm it upon our
credit; but this I am informed) was not held a case proved by two witnesses;
and if that be so, then I conceive these steps; the first will be agreed, that
the proof of several Charges by several Witnesses, against several Acts,
will not make a proof by two Witnesses; it must be a proof by two Witnesses
against one act: therefore the proof of any thing against the Act of the 17 of
July 1649, and another proof of a thing done against the Act of the thirtieth
of January 1648; and another for a thing done against the Act of the 2d. of
Aug. 1650; here the offenses are several, the Treasons several, and the
Witnesses to either stand singly by themselves: How the case of the Fact is
upon the proof, I cannot tell; that is, whether this falls out to be the case.
But again, if the Charge were single, as now upon the Act of the 30 of January
1648, for proclaiming of the King, or promoting the Prince of Wales his
interest to be King of England; we think, with submission, (which we shall
leave to your judgment) that in that case there is a necessity of two Witnesses
to speak to one thing; and not one to supply one part, and another to supply
another: That shall be as much as I shall say concerning that; and I could wish
that we had had so much time as to look into it, to inquire what the truth of
that case was which was tried at Winchester, as I take it. Now for the other
matter, that is, Whether Misprision of Treason, concealment of Treason be
Treason? if that be not insisted upon.


At. Genesis No, no.


Mr. Hales. Under favor, the law is, That concealment of Treason is not
Treason; but if that be not insisted upon, then the question of the fact is,
whether there be any more then a proof of a concealment, or of a Misprision of
treason; which if so be it be not, I can say no more.


At. Genesis Truly (my Lord) I did intend to speak to that of M. Loves case, and
as of his making, but not now of his making, but as he has made it formerly;
surely, it is a great deal of patience and favor you have afforded him, that
for matter of fact and law you have heard it all over again: As for that first,
of the Competency of the Testimony, I shall remember his own division; First,
of the Charge: Secondly, of the Witnesses and the Testimony: The third,
concerning Himself: And the fourth, his humble Proposals to the Court. One part
of his Defense was concerning the Witnesses and Testimony, that he made a long
defense to; and if it be not good evidence, that parties that are of the same
robberies may not accuse their fellow thieves, I think some must be unhanged
that have been hanged: but that I shall not speak to, for I think not that Mr.
Hales his judgment leads him to it; but if they were threatened, and should be
made afraid of their lives, that were somewhat; but that is not the case here.
The next is for two Witnesses: I might say, that by the Common Law of England,
one witness was enough before the Law of quinto Edwardi sexti was made; for
else it was not needful to be made; and Mr. Hales knows again, that as to
Trial, those Laws are repealed; but not to trouble you with these things, or
to say wherein they must concur, I did crave the favor of you to read the
Witnesses as they deposed, and I did tell you when it was by hearsay, and when
upon knowledge, and when by two, three, and four, to several acts of M. Loves
own actings, two, three, four witnesses, I think they are number enough to
accuse, and detect a person of as high quality. And for the last, for
misprision of Treason, M. Love has said that which never came into my
thoughts, that such actings done by M. Love could be judged misprision, he that
acted with them, consulted, and debated, and plotted, gave his judgment one
way, moved to raise money, received intelligence, all brought to his house, and
transacted there; I would appeal to M. Hales his judgment, whether this could
be misprision of Treason, when a party acts in it, has the meetings at his own
house, and has there debates of Commissions, and Instructions, and Letters, I
think this goes as far beyond misprision, as Treason is beyond misprision; but
seeing these are new cases before you, you have spent enough of your time, I
shall not spend more to argue the cases that are not.


M. Love. I humbly crave leave that seeing my council some of them are
rejected by the Court, as not fit to plead before you, and seeing another of
them, M. Maynard, the necessity of his affairs is such, he could not be here
this day to plead here, and seeing this worthy Gentleman came here unprepared,
whose face I never saw till this morning, therefore I humbly pray there may be
more time and council assigned me with your favor and leave, that they may
fully debate the Argument before you, those matters of the Law which are under
his hand, and the hands of the two worthy Gentlemen rejected by you to plead
here, that others may be added to M^ Hales to plead the matters of Law before
you, and that I may have a copy of the Charge.


At. Genesis I hope we have had delays enough, it is with the Court, now we
have done.


M. Love. And Sir, there are witnesses here present that will prove that which
M. Atturney-Generall thought none could prove, to wit not only general
threats, if they would not confess in the general, but promises of favor,
and threatening of death if they would not testify against me in particular,
and I have manifold Exceptions touching the incompetency not only of number,
but quality; one Witness said, he could not in conscience, and did not swear
till he was threatened, nay, fined by you, and drawn out of the Court; another
Witness had money laid to him by Cobbet, which was given his wife, which did
seem to conceal the bribery the more; but he confessed himself that the money
was laid down in his house, and given him to make use of, and to be the price
of my blood (Sir) to testify against me: I have Witnesses to produce, Major
Adams said, he should be hanged, if he did not testify against me; for he had
given information, and been in hire for many months together; Major Cobbet,
and three other Messengers have come to him, and offered him preferment for
four months together, if he would reveal what he calls a design against the
Commonwealth, and he has not revealed this till he had these promises of
preferment; and did not declare against me till he was threatened by death if he
did not do it; therefore I beseech you hear what Witnesses I can bring in to
invalidate the testimonies of these men.


At. Genesis My Lord, it seems I must be for all; now M. Love begins with the
Court, that you threatened them, and punished them; I appeal to all here,
whether a Witness brought into a Court in matter of property, and refuse to
take his Oath, whether that Court be not bound in justice to punish him, and
yet if he shall see his error, and submit himself to do that which to justice
belongs, then (I think) it is justice and mercy in you to remit him of both;
and that is the case of this Gentleman; in conscience, he could not swear
against him, a conscience well wrought upon; he could not in conscience swear
against him: for him it was done in the Court, and by the Court, and (I think)
undeniably justified.


M. Love. He is not under an oath to this day, he has declared it himself.


At. Genesis This is to satisfy other men, but it is not so regular, and orderly
to be done; but my Lord, and the Court are pleased to give you a fair hearing,
and proceedings, that no Exceptions may be taken to it: there was another that
was as good as his word, that he could not find in his conscience to swear
against Mr. Love, and that was a Minister, that conscience deserved to be
rectified more than five hundred pound comes to, and perpetual imprisonment:
that man that cannot find in his conscience to judge him that was a godly
person (as he thought) and against him he must not give witness, not for
Treason, not to save a Commonwealth; and he has had your sentence, and most
justly; I think all that was, was too little, my Lord. Then for the rest, this
is a discourse to satisfy people, the Spectators here; for surely these are
extravagancies, and total irregularities; he has had his time to except, and
heard to except, and said all that he has said now; and so there is nothing
more to be done, but now for us to rest in your judgments what you will do
further.


M. Love. I beseech you, I acquainted your Lordship and the Court, that some of
the Witnesses were not well, others I could not get them here present, but did
make offer to bring Witnesses to prove against Major Adams, that he has
confessed himself he was threatened with death if he did not inform against me,
and he said these words, he could not tell whether he should in conscience
think rather better to be hanged then to come in against me; and he could swear
only generals, and could not swear that ever I did write or receive Letters:
and M. Jaquel himself, since he was sent away from the Court, has said he was
not under an Oath.


At. Genesis What course shall we hold? if you will not be regular, let the Court
be regular: had you not time for to do it then? Did he not demand Indemnity
for them? and rather than he would produce others to hurt themselves, he would
rather die himself first.


M. Love. But these are not under a crime, I beseech you, the Court would be
tender in matters of blood.


At. Genesis Be tender of justice.


L. Pres. I would you had been so too.


M. Love. This man declares himself he is not under an Oath to this day, he did
but put his hand upon his bttons.


L. Pres. Those were your very words, and very uncivil and indiscreet; you
have not spoke at any time yet, but you have hurt your self more than any body
else has, and yet your language is so liberal, that no man shall escape the
lash of your tongue.


Mr. Love. I fear no man, my Lord.


At. Genesis That is a bold word.


L. Pres. You have as ill Comments as any man that wears a cap; your guiltiness
appears in this you say; we have heard all this that you require before; those
very words that you say of this man now particularly, go to them first, that he
was saying, he was not under an Oath. It was said so again, and again, and
again at that time we brought him, and before he was examined, holding up his
hand, we asked him it, and he said he did, and put it to him again, and again,
Are you under an Oath? till at the last he did conclude and testify he was
under an Oath; I testify this before all the company here, this is noised
abroad, again by many people, the care we had of that very man you speak of,
you asked him three or four times then, and at the last upon the conclusion, he
confessed himself he was under an Oath, he did not do as you do, you will
say things are truth, but you will not speak those Truths before God in a
testimonial way, though some of your Witnesses that proved, said it was true
in the presence of God, what they gave under their hands; these men that do
thus, are no better than Jesuits in reality, though not in name. You made a
Confession of misprision of Treason you said, but you have confessed Treason. I
will tell you who did the like in the very words almost that you did, and that
was Father Garnet, when he came to see the evidence produced so full against
him by those that were participes criminis, as you are, himself confessed when
he came to the last, Had I thought (says he) that the State had had such
clear proof against me, I would have ingenuously confessed it, and not
trifled with them as I have done: So you said, you did not think it would have
been proved so far as misprision; but when it was proved sufficiently in your
apprehension, and convicted, and your counsel had informed you it could not be
less than misprision, then you would ingenuously confess, so did Garnet. The
other witness that was threatened, it was testified by a worthy Captain; I
speak it again, was not it debated as much as the wit of man could? did you not
object that then that you do now? and did not the Court then satisfy you, or
at least satisfy themselves that it was not so? For I tell you in that very
thing wherein you say he was threatened, it was told you, that the Captain that
was here then, deposed what he had done, and how he had done it, and at what
time it was delivered; for you were discovered long before that, and your
Examinations taken long before that; upon this now when your Treason was
discovered and declared by several Witnesses, and that such a one was in
confederacy, and I think the State might safely promise him life, and reward
too; for there is more in the plot yet, then is yet found out, and that some
are like to hear of within this fortnight, that were here, which is a dangerous
thing; but this you did declare, and the Court was satisfied, that all that was
promised as a reward, was for discovering of a plot against the State: and that
was lawful by the Laws of God and man. And now you bring Witness; you were
at first demanded whether you would bring them or no; and you asked indemnity
for them, and the next time you denied you would bring none; and now you are
asked what you have to offer to the Court, and after all this time, what come
you to do now? to prove that that was acted here in the Court; you say, we
threatened them; true, that we did threaten some, and I think we went thus far,
that if he would not, we would set five hundred pounds fine upon his head; but
he would none of that, but came in again, and delivered his knowledge. But you
had another of your own Robe too that came in, and he would not testify, and
why? His conscience was tender; his science was perfect enough to speak against
you; for he was confederate with you, and has confessed enough of it; but his
conscience was tender: No man can tell here whose conscience is crazy, and
tender; conscience is a thing betwixt God and man only; and they that lay
nothing upon their Consciences to prove their integrity, they had as good say
nothing before a Judge; for though we have a Law of Conscience in England, yet
that Law is judged by rules; and therefore he, whoever he be that pretends
Conscience, there are so many consciences, as there are men, and no men have
power to judge of it but God; but Sir, for that cause that he would not for his
tender conscience, we did set a fine of 500 ^. upon him, and sentenced him to
the Fleet til he paid it: we call not this terrifying, neither does the law;
nor any reward favor nor affection, for the discovery of a Traitor, is no
illegal act, this we told you before; but you must have it again, and again,
and again; so that you may delay, no time shall be omitted by you.


Mr. Love. I have but a few words more; your Lordship was pleased to say, that
you could justify promising rewards to those that would discover, and
threatening punishments to those that would not; but you said, if I could prove
promising of rewards or threatenings to them that would not testify against me,
they should be heard; now I produce not witnesses in general, that they were
promised favor or threatened if they would or would not; but I offer to produce
witnesses that can witness against some of the particular witnesses, that said
they should be hanged, if they did not witness against me; and this, as your
Lordship promised, I humbly crave.


At. Genesis Truly he will not want suggestions, he has had his time to prove it,
and one favor I shall beg of the Court, that this your patience to Mr. Love,
your just favor toward him, may be no president hereafter; but for this, when
we closed the Evidence Saturday was sevennight for the Commonwealth, he had
till Wednesday following to make his Defense; for his witness he offered them,
you offered to receive them, he said he would have none, now he comes to offer;
we produce you no new witness, nor offered nothing since Saturday was
sevennight, if we come to witnesses again, we shall come to an aspersing one
another, we shall make it a pretty endless work; we have done our parts, and
followed the rules of Justice, and Mr. Love has had his full liberty to
justify, to say what he could, and prove what he could for himself; if he
neglect his own time, to his own peril be it; the Court I hope will not be
guilty of it to alter the ways of Justice.


Mr. Love. I could not compel witness^s, there was no Sub poenas, but they
must come when they offer themselves.


L. Pres. You were asked, and you would produce none.


Mr. Love. They were not in a capacity to come, my Lord.


At. Genesis There is nothing resting more to be done, but now all being done (if
you please my lord all being done) for the issue of the Fact, all his
exceptions to the impeachments, which are matters of Law; we are now humbly
craving your judgment upon this impeachment between the Keepers of the Liberty
of England, and Master Love the Prisoner at the Bar. I now humbly demand your
judgment.


Mr. Love. I humbly pray, that since I never saw the face of this worthy
Gentleman, till this morning, and so could have no particular advice from him,
that there might be longer time allowed to this Gentleman, and an addition of
three Gentlemen more, and a copy of the Charge.


At. Genesis You have had more then ordinary Prisoners have had before, I will
assure you, Mr. Love.


L. Pres. M. Hales you have heard a little opened of our passages and
proceedings which you did not before, but every man else has lift up his
voice; you have gone over a great deal of the fact: now for matter of Law, for
that of misprision, that will rest (I think) in the judgment of the Court;
there is no misprision laid, but Treason, and I think the Court will find
^reason upon the proofs that are before them, they will not need to have any
Argument of misprision, if the Court think there is sufficient Treason laid,
then that Argument, we need not desire no more time for that, and if it be
misprision, that the Court shall judge it so, then upon the matter there is no
Charge against him for us to proceed upon, so that by that Charge, I cannot see
what you can ground your Argument upon.


Mr. Hales. The Charge is not only for Treason, but for Treason and other High
crimes, and mis^demeanors.


At Genesis But not misprision.


Mr. Hales. Though the word be not in, we think it will reach it.


L. Pres. It will not indeed.


At. Genesis We insist upon it for the^ Commonwealth, for the Charge is as it is
laid.


L. Pres. For the two next, so I told M. Love before, and he spent two hours at
the least in capitulating the evidence of the State, not any thing of his own,
for he gave no Witnesses; but he did go over the whole evidence of the State
from point to point, and made, I think, himself (as he said) the Exceptions
that were made against them; these he went over, though we might have shut him
up at the first: for him to sum up that which was the duty of the Court, when
he had no evidence, to sum up the Evidence of the State, which we might not
have let him: but this he did; and it is our part to examine the Evidences, and
the nature of them, and what the nature of the thing is, and how many Witnesses
are to every point: whether there be two Witnesses to a point or no, cannot
fall under dispute of law, it is matter of fact.


Mr. Hales. It is true, we are here only to do that duty that your Lordship
injoyns us to (my Lord.) It is true, for us to dispute whether this evidence
proves such a thing or no, happily it may not belong to us to do that: But thus
far, if your Lordship think fit, this may happily be allowable (with submission
to the Court) that is, whether, if the proofs be admitted, this man positively
proves thus, the o^ther man proves positively thus; whether that these two
proofs do make a proof of one fact, happily (if your Lordship shall so think fit)
there may be somewhat of Law in that; that is, whether it make a double
Testimony within the Statute of Primo and Quinto: For (with submission to your
Lordship) the Statute of Primo and Quinto is not repealed as to point of
Testimony; it is repealed as to the place from whence the trial is to come;
but not in point of Witnesses, therein it may come in questionless (if your
Lordship shall think fit:) But truly, I have not seen one word of the evidence
from the beginning to the end; and if so be that any matter should rise, that
the Court should think fit, as well as proper for me to offer in the defense of
this Gentleman, I must profess I cannot, unless I had seen the things; for I
have not seen one word.


L. Pres. For seeing the Evidence further then memory, you nor no man else
ought to know, though we have given leave to write; and therefore though we
have given leave to take notice of them, yet that is more then ever any Court
did, or we need to have done, but only to trust to their own memories: but in
that you speak of now, for you to have day to argue, when you are not able to
say, nor we neither, that there is any such thing. Did you ever hear such a
thing, to pray day to argue that you do not know positively it is so?


At. Genesis We have spent a great deal of time, and all that can be said will be
but to run a round: What is to be done, is your own consultation among your
selves.


L. Pres. Withdraw your prisoner.


Mr. Love. I beseech you, allow me time for Council.


The Court adjourns. Another of Master Loves to his Wife.
More dear to me than ever,
IT adds to my rejoicing, that I have so good and gracious a wise to part with
for the Lord Jesus: In thy grief, I have been grieved; but in thy joy, I have
been comforted. Surely, nature could never help thee to bear so heavy a stroke,
with so much silence and submission to the hand of God! O dearest, every line
thou writest, gladdeth my heart. I dare not think that there is such a creature
as Ma^y Love in the world; for Kit, and Mall, I can think of them without
trouble, leaving them to so good a God, and so good a Mother. Be comforted
concerning thy Husband, who may more honor God in his death than in his life;
the will of the Lord be done, he is fully satisfied with the hand of God.
Though there be but little between him and death, he knows, there is but little
between him and heaven; and that ravisheth his heart. The Lord bless and
require thee for thy wise and good counsel; thou have prevented me, the very
things I thought to have written to thee, thou have written to me: I have had
more comfort from thy gracious letter, than from all the counsel I have had
from any else in the world; well, be assured, we shall meet in heaven. I rest,
till I rest in heaven.

From the Tower, the Lords Day. Thy dying, but comforted Friend, CHRISTOPHER
LOVE.


Another of Master Loves to his Wife.
My dearest delight on Earth,
I Was fast asleep when thy Note came. I bless God, I break not an hours sleep
for all my sufferings; I know they work for me a more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory. I slept this night from ten at night, till seven in the
morning, and never waked. My Dear, I am so comforted in the gracious supports
God gives thee, that my burdens are the lighter on my shoulders because they
are not so heavy on thine; or if they be heavy, yet that God helps thee to hear
them. The Lord keep it in the purpose of our hearts for ever, to submit to the
good pleasure of God. I bless God I do find my heart in as quiet and composed a
temper as ever I did in all my life. I am till I dye,

From the Tower, August 18. 1651. Thy tender hearted Husband, CHRISTOPHER LOVE.


Master Loves last Letter to his Wife, on the day he suffered.
My most gracious Beloved,
I Am now going from a Prison to a Palace; I have finished my work, I am now to
receive my wages; I am going to heaven, where are two of my children, and
leaving thee on the earth where are three of my babes; those two above need not
my care, but the three below need thine. It comforts me to think two of my
children are in the bosom of Abraham, and three of them will be in the arms
and care of so tender and godly a Mother: I know thou art a woman of a
sorrowful spirit, yet be comforted: though thy sorrow be great for thy
Husbands going out of the world; yet thy pains shall be the less in bringing
thy child into the world; thou shall be a joyful Mother, though thou be a
sad Widow. God has many mercies in store for thee; the prayers of a dying
Husband for thee will not be lost. To my shame I speak it, I never prayed so
much for thee at liberty, as I have done in prison. I cannot write more, but I
have a few practical counsels to leave with thee, viz.

1. Keep under a found, orthodox, and soul-searching Ministry; Oh there are
many deceivers gone out into the world, but Christ's sheep know his voice, and a
stranger will they not follow. Attend on that Ministry that teaches the way of
God in truth, and follow Solomon's advice, Prove. 19.27. Cease to bear
instruction that causes to err from the ways of knowledge.

2. Bring up thy children in the knowledge and admonition of the Lord: the
mother ought to be a teacher in the fathers absence, Prove. 19.27. The words
which his mother taught him: and Timothy was instructed by his Grandmother
Lois, and his mother Eunice, 2 Timothy 1.5.

3. Pray in thy family daily, that thy dwelling may be in the number of the
families that do call on God.

4. Labor for a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great
price, 1 Pet. 3.4.

5. Pore not on the comforts thou want, but on the mercies thou have.

6. Look rather at Gods end in afflicting, than at the measure and degree of
thy afflictions.

7. Labor to clear up thy evidences for heaven, when God takes from thee the
comforts of earth, that as thy sufferings do abound, so thy consolations in
Christ may abound much more, 2 Cor. 1.4.

8. Though it is good to maintain a holy jealousy of the deceitfulness of thy
heart, yet it is evil for thee to cherish fears and doubts, about the truth of
thy graces; If ever I had confidence touching the grace of another, I have
confidence of grace in thee; I can say of thee as Peter did of Silvanus, I am
persuaded that this is the grace of God wherein thou stand, 1 Pet. 5.12. Oh
my dear soul, wherefore do thou doubt, whose heart has been upright, whose
walkings have been holy, etc. I could venture my soul in thy souls stead, such
a confidence have I of thee.

9. When thou find thy heart secure, presumptuous and proud, then pore upon
corruption, more than upon grace; but when thou find thy heart doubting and
unbelieving, then look on thy graces, not on thy infirmities.

10. Study the covenant of grace and merits of Christ, and then be troubled if
thou can. Thou art interested in such a covenant that accepts purposes for
performances, desires for deeds, sincerity for perfection, the righteousness of
another, viz. that of Jesus Christ, as if it were thine own. Oh my Love! rest,
rest then in the love of God, in the bosom of Christ.

11. Swallow up thy will in the will of God; it is a bitter cup we are to
drink, but it is the cup our Father has put into our hands, When Paul was to
go to suffer at Jerusalem, the Christians could say, The will of the Lord be
done; Oh, say thou, when I go to Tower Hill, The will of the Lord be done.

12. Rejoice in my joy; to mourn for me inordinately, argues that either thou
enviest, or suspectest my happiness. The joy of the Lord is my strength, oh let
it be thine also. Dear wife, farewell; I will call thee wife no more, I shall
see thy face no more: yet I am not much troubled, for now I am going to meet
the Bridegroom the Lord Jesus Christ, to whom I shall be eternally married.

From the tower of London, 22th August, 1651. The day of my glorification. Thy
Dying, yet most Affectionate Friend till death, CHRISTOPHER LOVE.


FINIS.

