A MANIFESTATION OF TRVTH

1 Concerning the Scriptures, and concerning the Word, Light, and Spirit
within. 2. Concerning trial of Spirits. 3. Concerning Perfection. 4. Concerning
Salvation by Christ. 5. Concerning Swearing. 6. Concerning the Worship of God,
and why we separate from those that worship in Temples made with hands. 7.
Concerning Ministers and Maintenance. 8. Concerning women's speaking in the
Church. 9. Concerning Superiors and Inferiors, and the honor that is due
from the one to the other, wherein something is said concerning Title,
Courtesies, and Salutation by the highway.
WRIT IN ANSWER To a BOOK which a Nameless Author has written against the
People called QUAKERS WHEREIN

Is contained diverse Untruths and hard Speeches, tending to beget jealousies
and evil thoughts of them, (who are known to be Harmless and Innocent) in the
Authors Tennants and Neighbors, to whom he has sent this Book, which is here
detected, and the Innocence of Gods servants cleared: Also the Truth of those
things which they believe and practice in these particulars aforesaid is
declared.

By John Whitehead, who has no pleasure in stirring up strife and contention
about things of his nature; And therefore has labored rather to manifest the
Truth, to the unbiassed Reader, than particularly to traduce his Adversary,
desiring that he and those to whom he directed his Book, may have a sight of
this, if peradventure it may be in instrumental to remove from them all
prejudice, that they may receive the naked Truth, as it is in Jesus.

Friendly Reader,
I Have lately received in manuscript a small Book, which in the fear of the
Lord I have read over, and seriously pondered, which I was the more induced to,
because I had some ground to suspect, (if not to conclude) that it was writ by
Lord Say, who has been famous for the profession that he has made of
Christianity: And therefore I should admire, Isa. 29.14.
but that I know the pleasure of the Lord is to confound the wisdom of the
wise, and bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent, from whom he hides
that which he reveals to babes, that no flesh might glory in his sight: I say,
but that I know and do consider these things, I should admire, that he (who
has read the Scriptures, Mat. 11.25.
and so long professed Christ, who said that men would say all manner of evil
of his blessed and peculiar people) should be so far degenerated, both from
Christian Charity and true Nobility, Chapter 5.10
as to harbor so many evil thoughts and groundless jealousies of an Innocent
harmless people; and my soul mourns, that he is so far given up to believe
lies, and report such palpable untruths against us; amongst which I shall only
instance these few, as none of the least, viz That George Fox desired a
Gentlewoman to wear a Bracelet for his sake, and thereby enchanted her to
follow him, from which George Fox has approved himself innocent as a child,
and so shall I ever look upon him, till the spreaders of that slander bring
forth their Author: That James Nailor made himself, or said of himself that he
was Christ, is another lie; though it be true, that some foolish women (which
both he and we reproved) said so of him; And it has often been proved and
printed to the shame of the first raisers of that slander, that he never said
of himself, that he was as holy* just and good as God: Therefore till the
contrary be made manifest by some known Author, we must conclude that another
lie: A fourth is,

That Jesuits and Priests are known to mingle themselves amongst us, and be
our Teachers and Instructers; which thing I know to be false; and the grievous
sufferings of diverse of my dear friends for testifying against their bloody
persecuting principles, and Idolatrous worship, may sufficiently evince that we
mingle not with them, nor they with us; And my hearts desire is, that English
men might beware, lest while they look for Jesuits and Popish Priests amongst
us, they be not led by them themselves into such snares as they cannot easily
break; and till the parties be named which see one of our friends go with a
rope about his middle to hang a Minister, I shall conclude that another lie;
because I know it is contrary to our very nature and principle, who are born
from above, which is to save men's lives and not to destroy; as also all
whoredom and uncleanness is an abomination to us; therefore do we both warn and
testify against the practisers of it, which is sufficient to demonstrate, that
he who solicites to filthiness, and she who said she was commanded of the
Father to go to bed to a man (being none of her husband) if any such there
were) are not of us, therefore do I conclude those reports slanderous. Diverse
other hard speeches and groundless suggestions I find, which I shall not
particularize, being satisfied they are not grounded upon any just cause given
by us either in doctrine or practice; also hoping that the Author may be
sensible say this time (wherein truth is risen above slanders) that he has
overshot himself in writing such grievous things against us, whom I am
persuaded he does not sully know; and therefore I cannot wonder if he do
persecute, which yet I will not positively affirm, though I do certainly know
that his principle leads to it, which says, that a Blasphemer may justly be
put to death in Gospel times; though Christ Jesus, who is far more excellent
then Moses, gave no such command, but rather held forth the contrary in the
whole course of his doctrine and practice: Read Mat. 13.
But if he with whom I now deal have had his hand against any, which for
conscience sake could not respect his person, so as to imprison their persons
or spoil their goods for things done in obedience to the Light of Christ in
their consciences, though contrary to his judgment, that will be found in Gods
day persecuting their persons, under the pretense of persecting the Devil and
their sin, which narrow cover the most bloody persecutors ever had; but
howsoever, Jer. 20.10.
this I say and do desire that he may know it if he be yet alive, that he is at
least guilty of their sin, who said, Come let us smite him with the tongue,
report ye, and we will report it; But surely, the Lord sees how we are set as a
mark for every one to shoot at, Isa. 25.8.
and I am persuaded that when he has fully tried us, he will roll away the
reproach from us for ever; And their eyes that wait to see us slumble and fall
into foul enormities (as diverse professors (but not professors of the fame
Life) have done) shall certainly fail; for hitherto has the Lord helped us and
blessed us, and made us to stand in the sufficiency of his grace in the sight
of our enemies, and I know that his presence is yet with us, and we are of him,
and not of that Spirit that they were of at Munster, who followed John of
Leydon and thought to build up Sion with blood and beat down its enemies with
carnal weapons, for though they might pretend to be led by the Spirit within
them, we know that that which led them into uproars, war and bloodshed, was not
the Spirit of Christ which leads us, for it teaches us to love our enemies and
to save men's lives and not to destroy.

And for the corrupt principles and practices of those called Ranters, we have
given testimony against them, which all that have heard and duly weighed in
that Spirit that tries all things, can witness that we are as far from them as
light from darkness; but whereunto shall I liken the men of this generation?
for when the Spirit of Christ does so work in the hearts of any that they
cannot run with the world into rioting and excess, then presently they will
call it Beelzebub, Mat. 10.25.
or the Devil transformed into an Angel of Light, as the Pharisees did unto
Christ in the days of his flesh; and if they called the Master of the house
Beelzebub, no wonder if it be more done to them of his household. But as for
self-mortification, voluntary humility, and will worship, whereof we are
accused, we know it avails not; but those which do by the Spirit mortify the
deeds of the flesh, shall find comfort in so doing, and an humble heart, Isa.
57.15.
with a broken and contrite Spirit which does fear God and tremble at his Word,
however that be reproached as one of the Devils tricks; yet such a one God
delights to teach and dwell in; Chapter 66.2.
and we with whom his Tabernacle is, do not worship in our wills, but in Spirit
and Truth; neither do we say that it is a perfect demonstration of humility to
cast away band-strings, lace and ribbonds, though we believe it a duty
incumbent upon us to abstain from wearing things superfluous and unserviceable;
and also from all excess in meats and drinks, though we know the Kingdom of God
stands not therein, yet we desire to be found temperate and in modest apparel,
1 Timothy 2.9
according to the good example of the ancient Christians.

And further I do observe how the Author of that writing with which I now deal,
has often misrepresented our doctrines and practice, as further may appear by
a serious view of his, and what follows, thereby I perceive he does not rightly
understand us, and I am persuaded did never regularly try our Spirits, either
by a sober hearing of our doctrines declared by our own mouths and pens, or by
his own view of our practices, but has heard and believed what evil and
prejudiced men have maliciously printed and said against us on purpose to
slander and render us odious. Therefore in answer to what is said against us, I
shall labor rather (for the stopping of slanders and to prevent
misconstructions) to inform the Reader of the Truth of those doctrines which we
do believe and practice, then particularly to traduce the Author with whom I
have to deal, though in many things more I might show wherein he has wronged
us and given unsound constructions both of Scripture and our doctrines and
practices.

Concerning the Scriptures, and concerning the Word, Spirit, and Light within.
Concerning the Scripture, I say we do not slight them nor cast them off as a
dead Letter, Paper and Ink, but own them which Moses and the Prophets,
Evangelists and Apostles did write or speak forth as they were moved by the
Spirit of God, (so far as they are free from false transcription and corrupt
translation) to be the very words and true sayings of God, and therefore not to
be slighted, but read, believed, and practiced by every true Christian; but
they that are unlearned of Christ, 2 Pet. 3.10.
whose hearts are not stablished by the grace of God do pervert or wrest the
Scriptures out of their right place to their own destruction, not rightly
distinguishing betwixt the Law and Gospel times, nor betwixt that which was
abolished for the unprofitableness thereof, and that which God has established
for ever; and therefore we do direct all to that Word of God which was in the
beginning before the Scriptures were written, Read Joh. the first.
of which the Scriptures testify that it is Life, and is the Light of men that
shines in darkness, even in men's dark hearts, showing the grosness and
corruption of their hearts; I say, this Word which was and is God the Savior
of all them that believe, who searches all hearts and incomprehensibly dwells
in his Kingdom that is in man, and does reprove man for his unbelief and evil
deeds) we do direct all to wait to know this ingrafted Word and hearken to it,
Luke 17.20, 21.
that they may not be unlearned but all taught of the Lord that Spirit, which
holy men of God knevv and did believe in, Jam. 1.21.
and was moved or led by, before the Scriptures were written; that so by
this Interpreter one of a thousand people may have the Scriptures opened, and
feel the power of God, and have faith in the power and live in the life that
the Primitive Christians lived in; Act. 26.17, 18.
and thus to direct people to the Word, Spirit, or Light of God within, is
none of the Devils work (as he says) but the work of Christ's ancient
Ministers; neither does it make void the Scriptures, 1 John 1 2, 3.
but establishes them in their right place as a true Declaration: and the Lord
Jesus Christ who is that quickening Spirit (which does enlighten every man
that comes into the world) in his right place as the foundation which unto
all generations stands sure; Joh. 1.9. 1 Cor. 3.9. 2 Timothy 2.19.
neither can our directing people to this foundation (Christ the Light which
enlightens their consciences) have such bad effects as to lay them open to all
base lusts, error and delusion, for all those things are condemned with the
Light, and they that believe and do such things go from, and against the Light
in their own consciences.

Concerning the trial of Spirits.
I say the Apostle gave forth no such command, as that we should try the Spirit
of God by the Scriptures, for it is most absurd to try the superior by the
inferior; and no man can rightly understand the Scripture nor discern Spirits
whether they be of God or no, but by the Light of the Spirit of God within, 1
Cor. 2.14.
Therefore are they worthily reproved who presume by strength of reason,
sharpness of wit and humane learning, both to judge of the Scripture and of the
Spirit of God and its movings in men, Jer. 31.33
as the Scribes, Pharisees and chief Priests did, who in their pride and
self-wit sat as Judges of the Law in the letter, Isa. 8.20. Heb. 10.16
and thereby condemned Christ the Prince of Life, and also his blessed Martyr
Stephen, as blasphemers that were not worthy to live; and this was the fruit of
trying the Spirit by the Scripture when man's wisdom sat as Judge of both,
Note, That we own the Scriptures to be a rule, but not the only rule whereby
to cry Spirits.
which is rather to be judged by them both; and let such as know no other rule
whereby to try Spirits but the Scriptures, confess they are ignorant of the Law
written in the heart, and of the testimony of Jesus, which is the Spirit or
Word of Prophecy that is near in the heart even the more sure Word, surer then
the words of the Prophets or Apostles, which may be wrested; for it is a Light
in a dark place ( viz. the heart) to give man a true understanding of their
words; and his Law that is written there, is perfect and unalterable; and by
this rule holy men of God tried Spirits before the Scriptures were written, and
so all the Spirits that are gone out into the world may be tried, and those
that are contrary to it are also contrary to the Scriptures rightly understood,
and therefore under the judgment of both; 2 Pet. 1.19
but the Spirit of God judges all things, but ought to be judged of no man;
therefore sad will be their account that call it the Devil, and its motions,
his impulses; for all sins and blasphemies against the son of man may be
forgiven, Mat. 12.31, 32
but the blasphemy against the holy Spirit shall not be forgiven, neither in
this world, nor in that to come.

Concerning Perfection.
We say first, that we have sinned and God has let us see it, and we have
confessed it, 1 John 1.7.
and he has forgiven it through the blood of Christ which does wash and
cleanse us from it, and by his power we are kept from sinning; yet do we not
boast of perfection in our selves, because by the grace of God we are what we
are: howbeit we know that it is the Commandment of Christ that we should be
perfect even as our Heavenly Father is perfect; Mat. 5 48
and therefore we are persuaded it is not impossible for us to be so whilst
here in this life, for he is not such an hard Master to command
impossibilities: Heb. 10.10; 14.
and moreover, by one offering he has for ever perfected them that are
sanctified; and we are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus
once for all, therefore perfected for ever: and this was, and is the very end
for which he sends forth his Ministers, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13
even to gather the Saints into the unity of the Faith, to a perfect man in the
mersure, fullness and stature of Christ, 1 John 3 5, to 11.
who even for this purpose was manifest, to take away sin and destroy the works
of the Devil; but if any will yet say, that cannot be whilst here in this life
for, some sin will remain in men whilst on this side the grave, let them answer
me these questions. 1. Whether they believe that any shall enter in, to inherit
Gods Kingdom? and if yea, then whether they believe that they shall enter into
it with some sin in them? and if nay, then in what time and place shall they be
cleansed, and their sin perfectly done away, seeing they deny it to be possible
whilst in this life? but we affirm it, being persuaded that there is no
purgatory wherein to be cleansed after death, and knowing that Christ Jesus is
able to save to the uttermost, Heb. 11.25
they that come to God by him; so that those that are born of God and abide in
Christ, sin not, neither can because they are born of God, and his seed remains
in them; contrary to which text no interpretation of it, or argument can stand
good; but herein are the children of God and the children of the Devil made
manifest; he that does righteousness is of God, but he that sins is of the
Devil, who sins from the beginning: and this doctrine does not tend to
Ranting, as they that understand it not, say; but to encourage people to wait
to be cleansed and kept by the mighty power of God from all unrighteousness,
which is all sin, and press on to perfection in the Life of Christ.

Concerning Salvation by Christ.
We say and believe, that without the sufferings and death of Christ at
Jerusalem, no man can be saved, justified or sanctified, and therefore do they
maliciously or (at least) ignorantly slander us, who say we expect not to be
saved by Christ's sufferings at Jerusalem, but by Christ's sufferings in us; for
such words did never proceed from us, though we say, that it is not an
historical knowledge and belief of what Christ said and suffered at Jerusalem
sixteen hundred years ago* that can or does save any man without feeling of his
Spirit, Phil. 3.10.
Power and Life made manifest within, to make them conformable to him in his
death, and raise them together with him to live in the virtue of his life, by
which life we as well as the ancient Christians are saved, Romans 5.10
and we are justified, sanctified in the Name and by the Spirit of our God
which mightily works in us, and all his works are perfect: and therefore I do
distinguish betwixt the righteousness which is of faith, 1 Cor. 6.11
which the Spirit works, and the righteousness which is of the Law performed
by man's own strength; for though the one be as filthy rags, yet so is not the
other; therefore is he the enemy of all righteousness that mingles them both
together, and treads them under foot as dung and dross; therefore let all that
love their souls, love Christ the righteousness of God and follow after him,
that they may be made righteous, and have that boldness in the day of judgment
which the ancient Christians had, because (said they) as he is, so are we in
this world. 1 John 4.17


Concerning Swearing. To swear at all in Gospel times, is no part of Gods
worship; therefore it is no delusion but the truth that makes us refuse to
swear in any case.
For though swearing was used in the time of deaths reign from Adam to Moses,
and that by some of Gods people; and not only so, but commanded in some
particular cases by Moses and the Prophets in the time of the Law; yet a
greater Prophet being raised, to whom they all gave witness and command that in
all things he should be heard, with this severe penalty, that every foul that
would not hear him should be cut off from his people; Acts 3.22, 23, 24.
And seeing Christ Jesus that Prophet which they said God would raise, has
found that Covenant faulty in which oaths were used, Mat. 5 34.
and by his own mouth expressly has commanded us not to swear at all; though in
old time it was lawful and an honor to God to swear in some cases, yet now it
is not lawful, or an honor to God to swear in any case, because Christ Jesus
the great Lawgiver, in the New Testament has by plain and express precept
wholly forbidden it, against which precept no argument, conclusion or
interpretation, whether of Council, Synod or private man, is good; though
grounded upon the Law of Moses, the words of the Prophets, or practice of Gods
Servants* Saints or Angels, for their words and practices are to be reduced to
an harmony with his, and not his to theirs, he being given to be head over all
things to his Church, which is his body, the fullness of him that fills all in
all; and therefore cannot the example of Saints or Angels, and much less the
practice of men in strife, justify us in the breach of his command, had we no
other ground for our denial to swear; but to swear at all is against the Law of
the Spirit of Truth that dweleth in us, and derogates from the glory of his
verity who has made our yea, yea, and our nay, nay, in all things; but the
Apostle James who writ to the twelve Tribes scattered abroad, as if he had
foreseen that, because of former precepts and customs they would have stood to
justify some swearing contrary to Christ's command, was very positive, and
expressly did forbid it; above or before all things, says he, my brethren swear
not, Jam. 5* 12.
neither by heaven, nor by earth (Mark) nor any other oath, but let your yea be
yea, and your nay, nay, lest ye fall into condemnation; Therefore we cannot
swear by heaven nor the things therein, nor by earth nor the things therein,
nor by any other oath, though by such Christians as be in the Apostasy from the
Spirit and Life of Christ, it be accounted lawful; for if we did swear at all,
we should justly fall with them into the same condemnation.

Concerning the worship of God, and why we separate from them that worship in
Temples made with hands.
First, Because we do thus believe and declare, that God is a Spirit and dwells
not in Temples made with hands, Acts 7.48. Chap. 17.24, 25.
neither is rightly worshipped there, and therefore we cannot join with them in
worship, that be erred from the Spirit and from the Truth, Mat. 15.8, 9.
and do in their wills worship in vain, having their fear toward God taught by
men's precepts, and their worship consists not of Gods Ordinances, but in diverse
observations, inventions and traditions, which are not the Commandments of the
Lord from heaven, Read Is. 2.
but rather a loathing to his soul and a grief to his spirit, because in matter
and manner they are contrary to the Primitive Christians worship; For first,
they did not sprinkle Infants, and call that baptism into the Church, that we
can find in the Scripture, nor in History, for near the first three hundred
years; neither was it a part of their worship to sing David's Psalms in rhyme and
meeter, as in these days men do, which are far enough from the condition that
David was in when he gave forth the Psalms; and besides, the Ministers that
were allowed among the Primitive Christians did not read Prayers for money, nor
study Sermons to last an hour and preach them for money; neither did the
Primitive Christians love to have it so, as the titular Christians now do; who
by their divisions, envying and persecuting about worship do make it manifest,
that they are neither in the same Spirit nor worship in the same manner as the
Primitive Christians did, and therefore we separate from them which we have
sufficient ground to do, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. 2 Timothy 3.5.
though they had the very form of godliness, which yet they have not, seeing
they are out of the power which should crucify them to the world, and the
world to them; and are conformed like to the world, and for the generality of
them do live in sensual lusts, if not in open Profaneness; but although we
cannot for conscience sake join with them in their worship, because we do in
heart believe it is not right; yet do we not (as he says) Joh 21. to the 24.
cast off all worship and Ordinances of God; for we are sought out by the
Father to worship him in Spirit and in Truth, where we have found aceeptance
with God at what time soever, and wheresoever we have been gathered together to
wait upon him, whether by day or in the evening, as the true Christians were
when Paul continued his speech till midnight; and sometimes we meet in a
believers house, upper-chamber, field or barn, Acts 20.7, 8.
as the ancient Christians did, who were gathered out of the world, and
separated from the Jews worldly Sanctuary, and Heathens Temples, and yet were
not of those that did creep into houses, and separate themselves, sensual, not
having the Spirit, no more then we are, though by such as accused them and
persecuted them, we have all manner of evil said against us falsely, and are
persecuted as they were, because for conscience sake we cannot forsake the
assembling of our selves together as the manner of some is, but must meet
together in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, Heb. 10.25 Mat. 18.20
that we may enjoy his presence, and comfort and edify one another in love.

Concerning Ministers and maintenance.
We do say, how shall they preach and declare unto us the mind of God, except
they be chosen and sent of God? Romans 10.14* 15.
and therefore we do deny to hear such as run, and are not sent of God, but for
lucre and honors sake take upon them to Preach and speak of those things which
by wisdom, humane learning, 1 Pet. 5.2, 3 Job 38.2.
and natural parts they can never understand, but do darken counsel by words
without knowledge; for the generality of them say, that revelation is ceased
and that they have no vision in these days; therefore we wonder not that they
and their people are so ignorant of God, Mat. 11 27
for none knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son reveals him;
neither do we wonder why so many perish for want of true knowledge (though we
greatly pity to see it so) for we know that when the Teachers have no vision
(as by their own confession they have not) the people perish; Prove. 29.18.
therefore we dare not trust our souls with them, though people that have
itching ears do choose them for their Pastors; or such Bishops as exercise
Lordship and Dominion over peoples consciences, impose them upon us; for the
Lord Jesus Christ is the Bishop of our souls, 1 Pet. 2.19. Jer. 3.15.
and he has given us Pastors according to his own heart, that feed us with
knowledge and understanding, and leads us to living springs, and a fold of
rest, Mar. 10 8, 9, 10.
and them we do dearly own and esteem for their works sake that be Christ
true Ministers whom he has sent, and does furnish, and enable by the gift of
his Spirit, for the work of the Ministry, who freely without money or price
have received the word of reconciliation and do freely preach it, coveting no
man's silver or his gold, nor his corn, not his hay, nor his wool, nor his Lamb,
but do cast their whole care upon the Lord that has sent them; and do plow in
hope* plant in hope, and thresh in hope, that the ground may be broken up that
has brought forth briars and thorns, and the true seed grow to a blade, an ear
and corn in the ear, and then be separated from the chaff; and such as these
shall never be frustrate of their hope, nor want necessary things pertaining to
this life, though they know not to day what they shall have to morrow; chap.
6.25, 26, 27. 1 Cor. 4.11
I know that they that preach the Gospel shall never want a livelihood: But he
that has sent them will take care to provide them a morsel in due season; and
such as these (though some of them have no more certain dwelling place then the
ancient Ministers of Christ had) are made manifest in our consciences, and so
far approved and owned as the Ministers of Christ. Hos. 6.9. Heb. 7.16.
But for the company of Priests that are made by man's will, and have the Law of
a carnal commandment for to uphold their Ministry and maintenance, and claim
tithes of men's increase, a thing not mentioned by the ancient Christians; and
when for pure conscience sake (and not for any corrupt ends, as our manifold
sufferings may evince) we cannot uphold that Jewish custom, and Antichristian
practice which has been introduced in the dark night of Popery, then do they
sue us to Law, cast in prison and make spoil of our goods, ordinarily the
trebble value of what they demanded, but sometimes amounting to the trebble
trebble value of what they said was due; which has brought such a blot on
them, as, shall never be wiped off, and manifests them to be such as Peter said
had hearts exercised with covetous practices, and such grievous wolves as Paul
said should come, not sparing the flock; therefore we do turn from them to the
chief Shepherd, 2 Pet. 2.14 Act. 20.29
who has redeemed us from being a prey to them.

Concerning women's speaking.
That Daughters did Prophecy in the Congregations of Gods ancient people, is
evident; Number. 11.2 Judge. 4.4, 5, 6. Joel 2.28, 29.
for to Israel God spoke by, or in Merriam in the days of Moses; and again, he
spoke in Deborah to Israel, and judged them by the words of her mouth, who sat
under the Palm tree for many years in the days of Barack; and Joel said, that
when God did pour forth his Spirit, Daughters should Prophecy, as well as
Sons; Acts 21.9.
and one man had four Daughters that were Prophetesses in the Apostles days,
and diverse women were helpers of the Apostles in the work of the Ministry,
as is both evident in the Acts of the Apostles, and in the Epistles, Read Romans
16. 1 Cor. 11.5 chapter 14.22.
where Paul also gave rules how they should Prophecy, saying, That every
woman praying or Prophesying with her head uncovered, dishonors her head:
and where should the woman Prophecy if not in the Church, seeing the same
Apostle commends that gift above many for edification of the Church; and
says, that Prophecy serves not for them that believe not but for them that
believe: so that it is evident, that although he did not permit a woman to
speak in the Church, nor usurp Authority over the man, yet he did permit the
Spirit of God to speak in women, as we do; for we dare not forbid it, lest
in so doing we should quench the Spirit which they have the Promise of, as
well as men.

Concerning Superiors and Inferiors, and the honor that is due from the one to
the other: Also concerning Titles, Courtesy and Salutation by the way.
In the beginning God did create all Nations of one blood to dwell upon the
face of the whole Earth, Acts 17.26
that they might glorify his Name and live innocently in love one to another,
but since the seed of the Serpent was received in man's heart, that naturally
inclines him to pride, violence, and all other foul inormities: we are
persuaded that by Gods Ordinance some have a superiority given them for the
punishment of evil doers, and a praise to them that do well: As first, the
Husband over the Wife. 2. The Parents over the children, the King over his
Subjects, and the Rulers over the people, in their several Countries and
liberties: also Masters over their servants, and Mistresses over their
handmaids, and to these Superiors we are persuaded by the Lord that there is an
honor due from inferiors: and in his Light we do see and know that it
consists not in vain Ceremonies wherein there is no service to God or man, such
as uncovering the head, and bowing the knee: And therefore the examples of
Jacob and Abraham, though good men, who bowed to Esau, and Abraham to the
Hevites a Heathen Nation, will not vvarrant us to bovv down and worship
creatures against our consciences, no more then their going in to their
handmaids will vvarrant us to do the like: neither does due honor consist in
vain complements, which for the most part are frivilous, fained and
hypocritical, as, your servant Sir, I go Sir, etc. but in diligent and speedy
obedience to all just commands of Superiors, and in patient suffering under
those that are unjust, does due honor consist, for those children do most
honor their Parents, and those Subjects their Prince, which are of good
behavior, temperate, sober, wise, and humble, and do readily obey all their
just commands, and patiently suffer chastisement for refusing to obey that
which is unjust; and this honor which is due from all Inferiors to Superiors,
we do not at all teach any to withhold, and therefore we can with confidence
appeal to the consciences of our very enemies and accusers, that we do design
to level nothing but sin, wherein we are justified by the Lord, who will bring
down the loftiness of man, Isa. 2.11.
and bow the haughtiness of his spirit, and exalt himself alone, as in the
beginning, for he is worthy, because he alone is the Lord; and therefore we
cannot call any man the Lord besides him, 1 Cor 8 5*6.
though we know in the world there is Lords many, and one of them we can call a
Lord, but not the Lord, nor my Lord, because God is the Lord, and there is none
our Lord besides him; and in like manner, we can call some Ladies as the
ancient Christians did, yet not any elect Lady, but such whose election we
know, and why should we call any my Lady, as he urges, unless by marriage union
we have interest in them? And for such as do any way demonstrate to us that
they are of a Noble and honorable spirit, we shall not stick to call them
Noble or honorable, as Paul did Festus and others; but we see they are most
degenerate from true Nobility and Christian says (and so least deserve it)
which do so eagerly seek honor one of another, Joh 5.44.
for to such Christ said, how can ye believe? rendering that as the reason of
their unbebelief. And further, a King we can call by that title, and a Father
by that title, and those that are our Masters according to the flesh by that
title, and every one in their place by such titles as are neither false,
flattering, nor blasphemous; but such titles as are so, we cannot give to any,
Job 32* 21, 22.
for in so doing God would soon take us away. And for curteousness to all, both
to Superiors and to Equals, where is the man or woman among all our neighbors
that have been conversant with us, that can justly accuse us, and show wherein
we have not been courteous and amiable to them? unless they count it discurtesie
to be reproved for evil, or not to have their persons worshipped, and adored as
God, with uncovering the head, and bowing the knee, which is usual when we
approach to him in prayer; and if withholding that from men be esteemed
discurtesie, let them show where God commanded it, or the ancient Christians
gave it, Hester 3.5* 6.
seeing Mordica denied to give it (when required by a King) to Hamnan a person
of great place, though thereby he did not only endanger his own life, but the
life of all the Jews throughout the Provinces of Babylon. And further, if any
do judge us not courteous for speaking to them in that language which God and
nature has appointed for distinction betwixt singular and plural numbers, viz.
Thou to a single person, whether Superior or Inferior, and You to many; then
let them come forth and show the contrary to be a courtesy commanded, or
commended by God or any of his Saints. And for not using diverse other vain
customs and manners of the Nation in which we live, I know we are accused of
discurtesie and unmannerliness, as for not using the drunkards custom and
manner, in drinking one to another, and pledging those that drink to us, and
for not using the ignorant peoples custom and manner, in saying god even and
god-morrow when we meet them, and other things wherein people will not be held
guiltless for taking Gods Name in vain, and using such words as corrupt good
manners, Ex. 20.7.
and therefore we cannot be conformable to them, though for it we suffer
reproach; and sure if the Author of that writing with whom I now deal, had met
some of Christ's ancient Disciples, he would have said they had gone by men like
a Hog or a Cow (as he says we do) when they were obedient to Christ's command,
who said, salute no man by the highway; and the Prophet said, if any salute
thee, Luke 10.4. 2 King. 4.29.
answer them not again. But in all other things wherein we may do any service
to God or our neighbors, where is the man that can say we refuse, or are
discurteous, or unneighbourly? and from whom have we withholden, either rents,
debts, or other customs (as he accuses us) which in righteous reason and
conscience is due? but sure our blameless conversation in these things may by
this time have stoped the evil surmizings and gainsayings of our adversaries,
and therefore I shall commit our cause to the Lord, who I am persuaded will yet
more and more plead it, and clear the innocence of those that love him, by the
rising of his light which is a faithful witness in all consciences to which we
desire more and more to be made manifest; And therefore we desire that all
sober people may take heed of receiving false informations against us, whereby
both they and we may be wronged, but rather first hear what we declare and hold
for, and then judge of it and us, according to the Light of the Spirit which
God gives them, and according to the Scriptures of Truth; and if by true trial
they find us hold forth or practice that which is contrary to either, let them
avoid it, 2 Cor. 4.2.
for on no man's conscience would we impose any thing which he cannot freely
receive, no more then we would be imposed upon, for it is our principle to do
unto all men even as we would be done unto.

Writ the 24th. day of the second Month, 1662.
THE END.

