Mathematical MAGIC OR, THE WONDERS That may be performed by Mechanical
Geometry.

In two Books. CONCERNING Mechanical POWERS. Mechanical MOTIONS.
BEING ONE OF The most easy, pleasant, useful, (and yet most neglected) part
of MATHEMATICS. Not before treated of in this language.

By I. W. M. A.

(...).

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for Sa: Gellibrand at the brazen Serpent in Paul's
Churchyard. 1648.

TO HIS HIGHNESS The Prince Elector Palatine.
May it please your Highness,
I Should not thus have presented my diversions, where I owe my study and
business, but that where all is due, a man may not justly withhold any part.

This following Discourse was composed some years since at my spare hours in
the University. The subject of it is mixed Mathematics which I did the rather
at such times make choice of, as being for the pleasure of it, more proper for
recreation, and for the facility more suitable to my abilities and leisure.

I should not Sir, have been ambitious of any so Great (I could not of any
Better*) Patronage, had not my relation both engaged and emboldned me to this
Dedication.

They that know your Highness how great an encourager you are, and how able a
Judge in all kind of ingenuous arts and literature, must needs acknowledge your
pressures and low condition, to be none of the least mischiefs (amongst those
many other) under which the Commonwealth of learning does now suffer.

It would in many respects much conduce to the general advancement of religion
and learning, if the reformed Churches in whose cause and defense your family
has so deeply suffered, were but effectually mindful of their engagements to
it. And particularly, if these present unhappy differences of this Nation did
not occasion too much forgetfulness of their former zeal and professions for
the vindicating of your family, and the restoring of your Highness; the
hastening and accomplishment of which, together with the increase of all
heavenly blessings upon your Highness, shall be the hearty daily prayer of

Your Highness most humble and most devoted servant and Chaplain, JOHN WILKINS.

TO THE READER.
IT is related of Heraclitus that when his Scholars had found him in a
tradesmans shop, whether they were ashamed to enter. He told them, Quod neque
tali loco dii desunt immortales, that the gods were as well conversant in such
places as in others; Intimating that a divine power and wisdom might be
discerned even in those common arts, which are so much despised; And though the
manual exercise and practice of them be esteemed ignoble, yet the study of
their general causes and principles, cannot be prejudicial to any other
(though the most sacred) profession.

It has been my usual custom in the course of my other studies, to propose
diverse Mathematical or Philosophical inquiries, for the recreation of my
leisure hours, and as I could gather satisfaction to compose them into some
form and method.

Some of these have been formerly published, and I have now ventured forth this
discourse; wherein besides the great delight and pleasure (which every
rational Reader must needs find in such notions as carry with them their own
evidence and demonstration) there is also much real benefit to be learned;
particularly for such Gentlemen as employ their estates in those chargeable
adventures of Drayning, Mines, Cole-pits, etc. who may from hence learn the
chief grounds and nature of Engines, and thereby more easily avoid the
delusions of any cheating Impostor: And also for such common artificers, as are
well skilled in the practice of these arts, who may be much advantaged by the
right understanding of their grounds and Theory.

Ramus has observed, that the reason why Germany has been so eminent for
Mechanical inventions, Scho. Mathem. l. 2.
is because there have been public Lectures of this kind instituted amongst
them, and those not only in the learned languages, but also in the vulgar
tongue, for the capacity of every unlettered ingenious Artificer.

This whole Discourse I call Mathematical Magic, because the art of such
Mechanical inventions as are here chiefly insisted upon, Agrippa, De Vanit.
Scient. ca. 42.
has been formerly so styled; and in allusion to vulgar opinion, which does
commonly attribute all such strange operations unto the power of Magic; For
which reason the Ancients did name this art (...), or Mirandorum Effectrix.

The first book is called Archimedes, because he was the chiefest in
discovering of Mechanical powers.

The second is styled by the name of Daedalus, who is related to be one of the
first and most famous amongst the Ancients for his skill in making Automata, or
self-moving Engines: both these being two of the first Authors that did reduce
Mathematical principles unto Mechanical experiments.

Other discourses of this kind, are for the most part large and voluminous, of
great price and hardly gotten; and besides, there are not any of them (that I
know of) in our vulgar tongue, for which these Mechanical arts of all other
are most proper. These inconveniences are here in some measure remedied,
together with the addition (if I mistake not) of diverse things very
considerable, and not insisted upon by others.

THE CONTENTS And Method of this following Discourse.
The first Book.
Chap. 1. THe excellency of these Arts. Why they were concealed by the
Ancients. The Authors that have treated of them. Chapter 2. Concerning the name of
this Art. That it may properly be styled liberal. The subject and nature of
it. Chapter 3. Of the first Mechanical faculty, the Balance. Chapter 4. Concerning
the second Mechanic faculty, the Leaver. Chapter 5. How the natural motion of
living creatures is conformable to these artificial rules. Chapter 6. Concerning
the Wheel. Chapter 7. Concerning the Pulley. Chapter 8. Of the Wedge. Chapter 9. Of the
Screw. Chapter 10. An inquiry into the magnificent works of the Ancients, which
much exceeding our later times may seem to infer a decay in these Mechanical
arts. Chapter 11. That the Ancients had diverse motives and means for such vast
magnificent works, which we have not. Chapter 12. Concerning the force of the
Mechanic faculties; particularly, the Balance and Leaver. How they may be
contrived to move the whole world, or any other conceivable weight. Chapter 13. Of
the Wheel, by multiplication of which, it is easy to move any imaginable
weight. Chapter 14. Concerning the infinite strength of Wheels, Pulleys, and
Screws, that it is possible by the multiplication of these, to pull up any Oak
by the roots with a hair, lift it up with a straw, or blow it up with ones
breath, or to perform the greatest labor with the least power. Chapter 15.
Concerning the proportion of slownesse and swiftness in Mechanical motions.
Chapter 16. That it is possible to contrive such an artificial motion as shall be
of a slownesse proportionable to the swiftness of the heavens. Chapter 17. Of
swiftness, how it may be increased to any kind of proportion. Concerning the
great force of Archimedes his Engines. Of the Ballista. Chapter 18. Concerning the
Catapultae, or Engines for Arrows. Chapter 19. A comparison betwixt these ancient
Engines, and the Gunpowder instruments now in use. Ch 20. That it is possible
to contrive such an artificial motion, as may be equally swift with the
supposed motion of the heavens.
The second Book.
Chapter 1. THe diverse kinds of Automata, or Self-movers. Of Mils. Of the
contrivance of several motions by rarefied air. A brief digression concerning
Wind-guns. Chapter 2. Of a sailing Chariot, that may without horses be driven on
the land by the wind as ships are on the sea. Chapter 3. Concerning the fixed
Automata, Clocks, Spheres representing the heavenly motions. The several
excellencies that are most commendable in such kind of contrivances. Chapter 4. Of
the moveable and gradient Automata, representing the motions of living
creatures, various sounds, of birds, or beasts, and some of them articulate.
Chapter 5. Concerning the possibility of framing an Ark for submarine Navigations.
The Difficulties and Conveniences of such a contrivance. Chapter 6. Of the volant
Automata; Archytas his Dove, and Regiomontanus his Eagle. The possibility and
great usefulness of such inventions. Chapter 7. Concerning the Art of flying. The
several ways whereby this has been, or may be attempted. Chapter 8. A resolution
of the two chief difficulties that seem to oppose the possibility of a flying
Chariot. Chapter 9. Of a perpetual motion. The seeming facility and real
difficulty of any such contrivance. The several ways whereby it has been
attempted, particularly by Chemistry. Chapter 10. Of subterraneous Lamps, diverse
historical relations concerning their duration for many hundred years
together. Chapter 11. Several opinions concerning the nature and reason of these
perpetual Lamps. Chap. 12. The most probable conjecture how these Lamps were
framed. Chapter 13. Concerning several attempts of contriving a perpetual motion
by magneticall virtues. Chap. 14. The seeming probability of effecting a
continual motion by solid weights in a hollow wheel or sphere. Chapter 15. Of
composing a perpetual motion by fluid weights. Concerning Archimedes his
water-screw. The great probability of accomplishing this inquiry by the help of
that, with the fallibleness of it upon experiment.
ARCHIMEDES, OR, MECHANICAL Powers. The first Book.
CHAP. I. The excellency of these Arts. Why they were concealed by the
Ancients. The Authors that have treated of them.
ALL those various studies about which the sons of men do busy their
endeavors, may be generally comprised under these three kinds: Divine.
Natural. Artificial.


To the first of these, is reducible, not only the speculation of Theological
truths, but also the practice of those virtues, which may advantage our minds,
in the enquiry after their proper happiness. And these arts alone may truly be
styled liberal, Quae liberum faciunt hominem, Sen. Ep. 88.
quibus curae virtus est, (says the divine Stoic) which set a man at liberty
from his lusts and passions.

To the second may be referred all that knowledge, which concerns the frame of
this great Universe, or the usual course of providence in the government of
these created things.

To the last do belong all those inventions, whereby nature is any way
quickened or advanced in her defects: These artificial experiments being (as it
were) but so many Essays, whereby men do naturally attempt to restore
themselves from the first general curse inflicted upon their labors.

This following Discourse, does properly appertain to this latter kind.

Now Art may be said, either to imitate nature, as in limming and pictures; or
to help nature, as in medicine; or to overcome, and advance nature, as in these
Mechanical disciplines, which in this respect are by so much to be preferred
before the other, by how much their end and power is more excellent. Nor are
they therefore to be esteemed less noble, because more practical, since our
best and most divine knowledge is intended for action, and those may justly be
counted barren studies, which do not conduce to practice as their proper end.

But so apt are we to contemn every thing which is common, that the ancient
Philosophers esteemed it a great part of wisdom to conceal their learning
from vulgar apprehension or use, thereby the better to maintain it, in its due
honor and respect. And therefore did they generally vail all their Arts and
Sciences, under such mystical expressions, as might excite the peoples wonder
and reverence, fearing lest a more easy and familiar discovery, might expose
them to contempt. Sic ipsa mysteria fabularum cuniculis operiuntur, summatibus
tantum viris, Macrobius Somn. Scip. l. 1. c. 2.
sapientia interpret, very arcani consciis; Contenti sint reliqui, ad
venerationem, figuris defendentibus a vilitate secretum, says a Platonic.

Hence was it, that the ancient Mathematicians did place all their learning in
abstracted speculations, refusing to debase the principles of that noble
profession unto Mechanical experiments. Insomuch, that those very Authors
amongst them, who were most eminent for their inventions of this kind, and were
willing by their own practice, to manifest unto the world, those artificial
wonders, that might be wrought by these arts, as Daedalus, Archytas,
Archimedes, etc. were notwithstanding so much infected with this blind
superstition, as not to leave any thing in writing, concerning the grounds and
manner of these operations.

Quintilian speaking to this purpose of Archimedes, says thus. Quint. l. 1. c.
10.
Quamvis tantum tamque singularem Geometriae usum, Archimedes, singularibus
exemplis, and admirandis operibus ostenderit, propter quae non humanae sed
divinae scientiae laudem sit adeptus, haesit tamen in illa Platonis
persuasione, nec ullam Mechanicam literam prodere voluit.

By which means, posterity has unhappily lost, not only the benefit of those
particular discoveries, but also the proficiency of those arts in general. For
when once the learned men did forbid the reducing of them to particular use,
and vulgar experiment* others did thereupon refuse these studies themselves, as
being but empty and useless speculations. Whence it came to pass that the
science of Geometry was, Pet. Ram. Schol. Mathem. l. 1.
so universally neglected, receiving little or no addition for many hundred
years together.

Amongst these Ancients, the divine Plato is observed to be one of the greatest
sticklers for this fond opinion, severely dehorting all his followers from
prostituting Mathematical principles, unto common apprehension or practice.
Like the envious Emperor Tiberius, Plin. Not. l. 36. c. 26.
who is reported to have killed an Artificer for making glass malleable,
fearing lest thereby the price of metals might be debased. So he, in his
superstition to Philosophy, would rather choose to deprive the world of all
those useful and excellent inventions, which might be thence contrived, then
to expose that profession unto the contempt of the ignorant vulgar.

But his Scholar Aristotle, (as in many other particulars, so likewise in this)
did justly oppose him, Arist. Quaest. Mechan.
and became himself one of the first Authors, that has writ any methodicall
Discourse concerning these arts, choosing rather a certain and general benefit,
before the hazard that might accrue from the vain and groundless dis-respects
of some ignorant persons. Being so far from esteeming Geometry dishonored by
the application of it to Mechanical practices, that he rather thought it to be
thereby adorned, as with curious variety, and to be exalted unto its natural
end. And whereas the Mathematicians of those former ages, did possess all
their learning, as covetous men do their wealth, only in thought and notion;
the judicious Aristotle, like a wise Steward, did lay it out to particular use
and improvement, rightly preferring the reality and substance of public
benefit, before the shadows of some retired speculation, or vulgar opinion.

Since him there have been diverse other Authors, who have been eminent for
their writings of this nature. Such were Hero Alexandrinus, Hero Mechanicus,
Pappus Alexandrinus, Proclus Mathematicus, Vitruvius, Guidus Vbaldus, Henricus
Monantholius, Galileus, Guevara, Mersennus, Bettinus, etc. Besides many others,
that have treated largely of several engines, as Augustine Ramelli, Vittorio
Zoncha, Iacobus Bessonius, Vegetius, Lipsius.

Most of which Authors I have perused, and shall willingly acknowledge my self
a debtor to them for many things in this following Discourse.

CAP. II. Concerning the name of this Art. That it may properly be styled
liberal. The subject and nature of it.
THe word Mechanic is thought to be derived (...), Lypsius. Polyorcet. l. 1.
Dialog 3.
multum ascendere, pertingere: intimating the efficacy and force of such
inventions. That Is a senseless absurd Etymology imposed by some, Quia
intellectus in eis moecbatur, as if these arts did prostitute and adulterate
the understanding.
Or else (...), (says Eustathius) quia hiscere non sinit, because these arts
are so full of pleasant variety, that they admit not either of sloth or
weariness.

According to ordinary signification, the word is used in opposition to the
liberal arts: whereas in propriety of speech those employments alone may be
styled illiberall, which require only some bodily exercise, as manufactures,
trades, etc. And on the contrary that discipline, which discovers the general
causes, effects, and properties of things, may truly be esteemed as a species
of Philosophy.

But here it should be noted, that this art is usually distinguished into a
twofold kind: 1. Rational. Pappus Prooem. in Collect. Mathem. l. 8.
2. Cheirurgicall.


The Rational is that which treats of those principles, and fundamental
notions, which may concern these Mechanical practices.

The Cheirurgicall or Manual, does refer to the making of these instruments,
and the exercising of such particular experiments. As in the works of
Architecture, Fortifications, and the like.

The first of these, is the subject of this discourse, and may properly be
styled liberal, as justly deserving the prosecution of an ingenuous mind. For
if we consider it according to its birth and original, we shall find it to
spring from honorable parentage, being produced by Geometry on the one side,
and natural Philosophy on the other. If according to its use and benefit, we
may then discern that to this should be referred all those arts and
professions, so necessary for humane society, whereby nature is not only
directed in her usual course, but sometimes also commanded against her own
law. The particulars that concern Architecture, Navigation, Husbandry, Military
affairs, etc. are most of them reducible to this art, both for their invention
and use.

Those other disciplines of Logic, Rhetoric, etc. do not more protect and
adorn the mind, then these Mechanical powers do the body.

And therefore are they well worthy to be entertained with greater industry and
respect, then they commonly meet with in these times; wherein there be very
many that pretend to be masters in all the liberal arts, who scarce understand
any thing in these particulars.

The subject of this art is concerning the heaviness of several bodies, or
the proportion that is required betwixt any weight in relation to the power
which may be able to move it. And so it refers likewise to violent and
artificial motion, as Philosophy does to that which is natural.

The proper end for which this art is intended, is to teach how by
understanding the true difference betwixt the weight and the power, a man may
add such a fitting supplement to the strength of the power, that it shall be
able to move any conceivable weight, though it should never so much exceed that
force, which the power is naturally endowed with.

The art it self may be thus described, to be a Mathematical discipline, which
by the help of Geometrical principles does teach to contrive several weights
and powers, unto any kind, either of motion or rest, according as the Artificer
shall determine.

If it be doubted how this may be esteemed a species of Mathematics, Dav.
Rivaltus praef. in lib. Archim. de centro gravitatis.
when as it treats of weights, and not of quantity; For satisfaction to this,
there are two particulars considerable.

1. Mathematics in its latitude is usually divided into pure and mixed. And
though the pure do handle only abstract quantity in the general, as Geometry,
Arithmetic: yet that which is mixed does consider the quantity of some
particular determinate subject. So Astronomy handles the quantity of heavenly
motions, Music of sounds, and Mechanics of weights and powers.

2. Heaviness or weight is not here considered, as being such a natural
quality, whereby condensed bodies do of themselves tend downwards; but rather
as being an affection, whereby they may be measured. And in this sense
Aristotle himself referres it amongst the other species of quantity, Metaph.
l. 10. c. 2.
as having the same proper essence, which is to be compounded of integrall
parts. So a pound does consist of ounces, drams, scruples. Whence it is
evident, that there is not any such repugnancy in the subject of this art, as
may hinder it from being a true species of Mathematics.

CAP. III. Of the first Mechanical faculty, the Balance.
THe Mechanical faculties, by which the experiments of this nature must be
contrived, are usually reckoned to be these six: 1. Libra. 1. The Balance. 2.
Vectis. 2. The Leaver. 3. Axis in Peritrochio. 3. The Wheel. 4. Trochlea. 4.
The Pulley. 5. Cuneus. 5. The Wedge. 6. Cochlea. 6. The Screw.


Unto some of which, the force of all Mechanical inventions must necessarily
be reduced. I shall speak of them severally and in this order.

First, concerning the Balance; this, and the Leaver are usually confounded
together, as being but one faculty, because the general grounds and
proportions of eithers force is so exactly the same. But for better
distinction, and more clear discovery of their natures, I shall treat of them
severally.

The first invention of the balance is commonly attributed to Astrea, who is
therefore deified for the goddess of justice; and that instrument it self
advanced amongst the celestial signs.

The particulars concerning it are so commonly known, and of such easy
experiment, that they will not need any large explication. The chief end and
purpose of it, is for the distinction of several ponderosities; For the
understanding of which, we must note, that if the length of the sides in the
Balance, and the weights at the ends of them be both mutually equal, then the
Beam will be in a horizontall situation. But on the contrary, if either the
weights alone be equal, and not their distances, or the distances alone, and
not the weights, then the Beam will accordingly decline.

As in this following diagram.



Suppose an equal weight at C, unto that at B, (which points are both equally
distant from the center A,) it is evident that then the beam BF, will hang
horizontally. But if the weight supposed at C, be unequal to that at B, or if
there be an equal weight at DE, or any of the other unequal distances; the
Beam must then necessarily decline.

With this kind of Balance, it is usual by the help only of one weight,
Cardan. Subtle. l. 1.
to measure sundry different gravities, whether more or less, then that by
which they are measured. As by the example here described, a man may with one
pound alone, weigh any other body within ten pounds, because the heaviness of
any weight does increase proportionably to its distance from the Center. Thus
one pound at D, will equiponderate unto two pounds at B, because the distance
AD, is double unto AB. And for the same reason, one pound at E, will
equiponderate to three pound at B, and one pound at F, unto ten at B, because
there is still the same disproportion betwixt their several distances.

This kind of Balance is usually styled Romana, statera. It seems to be of
ancient use, Mechan. ca. 21.
and is mentioned by Aristotle under the name of (...).

Hence it is easy to apprehend, how that false balance may be composed so
often condemned by the wise man, as being an abomination to the Lord. Prove.
11.1 ca. 16.11. Item, cap. 20.10.23.
If the sides of the Beam be not equally divided, as suppose one have 10 parts,
and the other 11, then any two weights that differ according to this
proportion, Pappus. Collect. Mathem. l. 8.
(the heavier being placed on the shorter side, and the lighter on the longer)
will equiponderate. And yet both the scoles being empty, shall hang in
aequilibrio, as if they were exactly just and true, as in this description.



Suppose AC, to have 11 such parts, whereof AB, has but 10, and yet both of
them to be in themselves of equal weight; it is certain, that whether the
scoles be empty, or whether in the scole D, we put 11 pound, and at E, 10
pound, yet both of them shall equiponderate, because there is just such a
disproportion in the length of the sides AC, being unto AB, as 11 to 10.

The frequency of such cousenages in these days, may be evident from common
experience: and that they were used also in former ages, may appear from
Aristotle's testimony concerning the Merchants in his time. Quaestion. Mechan.
c. 2.

Budaeus. Hence the proverb Zygostatica fides.


For the remedying of such abuses the Ancients did appoint diverse officers,
styled (...), who were to overlook the common measures.

So great care was there amongst the Jews for the preservation of commutative
justice from all abuse and falsification in this kind, that the public
standards and originals, by which all other measures were to be tried and
allowed, were with much religion preserved in the sanctuary, the care of them
being committed to the Priests and Levites, whose office it was to look unto
all manner of measures and size. 1 Chronicles. 23.29.
Hence is that frequent expression, According to the shekel of the Sanctuary,
Exodus 30.13.
and that Law, All thy estimations shall be according to the shekel of the
Sanctuary, Lev. 27.25
which does not refer to any weight or coin, distinct from, and more then the
vulgar, (as some fondly conceive) but does only oblige men in their dealing
and traffic to make use of such just measures, as were agreeable unto the
public standards that were kept in the Sanctuary.

The manner how such deceitful balances may be discovered, is by changing the
weights into each other scole, and then the inequality will be manifest.

From the former grounds rightly apprehended, it is easy to conceive how a man
may find out the just proportion of a weight, which in any point given, shall
equiponderate to several weights given, hanging in several places of the Beam.

Some of these balances are made so exact, (those especially which the
refiners use) as to be sensibly turned with the eightieth part of a grain:
which (though it may seem very strange) is nothing to what De ponderibus and
nummis l. 1.
Capellus relates of one at Sedan, Master Greaves Roman foot.
that would turn with the four hundredth part of a grain.

There are several contrivances to make use of these in measuring the weight
of blows, the force of powder, the strength of strings, or other oblong
substances, condensed air, the distinct proportion of several metals mixed
together, the different gravity of diverse bodies in the water, from what they
have in the open air, with diverse the like ingenuous inquiries.

CAP. IV. Concerning the second Mechanic faculty, the Leaver.
THe second Mechanical faculty, is the Leaver; the first invention of it is
usually ascribed to Neptune, and represented by his Trident, which in the Greek
are both called by one name, (...). Aristotle Quaest. Mechan. cap. 4.
Archimedes, de Aequiponderant. l. 1. prop. 7. Vitruvius Architect. l. 10. c. 8.
and are not very unlike in form, being both of them somewhat broader at one
end, then in the other parts.

There is one main principle concerning it, which is (as it were) the very sum
and epitome of this whole art. The meaning of it is thus expressed by
Aristotle, (...). That is, as the weight is to an equivalent power, so is the
distance betwixt the weight and the center, unto the distance betwixt the
center and the power, and so reciprocally. Or thus, the power that does
equiponderate with any weight, must have the same proportion unto it, as there
is betwixt their several distances from the center or fulciment: as in this
following figure.



Where suppose the Leaver to be represented by the length AB, the center or
This Aristotle calls (...). Vitruvius, Pressio. Vbaldus Fulcimentum. Dan.
Barbarus, Scabellum.
prop at the point C, the weight to be sustained D, the power that does uphold
it E.

Now the meaning of the foresaid principle does import thus much; that the
power at E, must bear the same proportion to the weight D, as the distance CA,
does to the other CB; which, because it is octuple in the present example,
therefore it will follow that one pound at B, or E, will equiponderate to eight
pounds at A, or D, as is expressed in the figure. The ground of which maxim is
this, because the point C, is supposed to be the center of gravity, on either
side of which, the parts are of equal weight.

And this kind of proportion is not only to be observed when the power does
press downwards, (as in the former example) but also in the other species of
violent motion, as lifting, drawing, and the like. Thus if the prop or
fulciment were supposed to be at the extremity of the Leaver, As in this
Diagram at A, then the weight B, would require such a difference in the
strengths or powers that did sustain it, as there is betwixt the several
distances AC, and BC. For as the distance AB, is unto AC, The right
understanding of this does much conduce to the explication of the Pulley.
so is the power at C, to the weight at B; that is, the power at A, must be
double to that at C, because the distance BC, is twice as much as BA. From
whence it is easy to conceive, how any burden carried betwixt two persons, may
be proportioned according to their different strengths. If the weight were
imagined to hang at the number 2, then the power at C, would sustain but two of
those parts, whereof that at A, did uphold 16. If it be supposed at the figure
(3) then the strength at C, to that at A, would be but as three to fifteen. But
if it were situated at the figure (9) then each of the extremities would
participate of it alike, because that being the middle, both the distances are
equal. If at the number (12) then the strength at C, is required to be double
unto that at A. And in the like manner are we to conceive of the other
intermediate divisions.

Thus also must it be, if we suppose the power to be placed betwixt the
fulciment and the weight, as in this example.



Where, as AC, is to AB, so is the power at B, to the weight at C.

Hence likewise may we conceive the reason why it is much harder to carry any
long substance, either on the shoulders, or in the hand, if it be held by
either of the extremes, then if it be sustained by the middle of it. The
strength that must equiponderate at the nearer end, sometimes increasing the
weight almost double to what it is in it self.



Imagine the point A, to be the place where any long substance (as suppose a
Pike) is sustained; it is evident from the former principle, that the strength
at B, (which makes it lie level) must be equal to all the length AC, which is
almost the whole Pike.

And as it is in the depressing, or elevating, so likewise is it in the drawing
of any weight, as a Coach, Plow, or the like.



Let the line DB, represent the Pole or Carriage on which the burden is
sustained, and the line AC, the cross bar; at each of its extremities, there
is a several spring-tree GH, and IK, to which either horses or oxen may be
fastened. Now because A, and C, are equally distant from the middle B, therefore
in this case the strength must be equal on both sides; but if we suppose one
of these spring-trees to be fastened unto the points E, or F, then the strength
required to draw on that side, will be so much more, as the distance EB, or FB,
is less then that of AB; that is, either as three to four, as EB, to BA, or as
one to two, as FB, to BA. So that the beast fastened at A, will not draw so much
by a quarter, as the other at E, and but half as much as one at F.

Whence it is easy to conceive how a husbandman ( cum inaequales veniunt ad
aratra juvenci) may proportion the labor of drawing according to the several
strength of his oxen.

Unto this Mechanical faculty should be reduced sundry other instruments in
common use. Arist. Mechan. c. 5, 6, 7. Vide Guevar. Comment.
Thus the oars, stearn, masts, etc. according to their force, whereby they
give motion to the ship, are to be conceived under this head.

Thus likewise for that engine, Mechan. c. 29. Pet. Crininitus, de honesta
Disciplina l. 19. c. 2. calls it corruptly Tellenon.
whereby Brewers and Dyers do commonly draw water, which Aristotle calls (...),
and others Tollenon. This being the same kind of instrument, by which
Archimedes drew up the ships of Marcellus.

CAP. V. How the natural motion of living creatures is conformable to these
artificial rules.
THe former principle being already explained, concerning artificial and dead
motions, it will not be altogether impertinent, if in the next place, we apply
it unto those that are natural in living bodies, and examine whether these
also are not governed by the same kind of proportions.

In all perfect living creatures, there is a twofold kind of motive
instruments: 1. Primary, the muscles. 2. Secondary, the members.


The muscles are naturally fitted to be instruments of motion, by the manner of
their frame and composure; consisting of flesh as their chief material, and
besides of Nervs, Ligatures, Veins, Arteries, and Membranes.

The Nervs serve for the conveyance of the motive faculty from the brain. The
Ligatures for the strengthening of them, that they may not flag and languish in
their motions. The Veins for their nourishment. The Arteries for the supplying
of them with spirit, and natural vigor. The Membranes for the comprehension or
enclosure of all these together, and for the distinction of one muscle from
another. There are besides diverse fibrae or hairy substances, which nature has
bestowed for the farther corroborating of their motions; these being dispersed
through every muscle, do so join together in the end of them, as to make entire
nervous bodies, which are called Tendones, almost like the grisles. Now this
(says Galen) may fitly be compared to the broader part of the Leaver, De
Placit. Hippoc. and Platon. l. 1. ca. 10.
that is put under the weight, which, as it ought to be so much the stronger,
by how much it is put to a greater force; so likewise by this, does nature
enable the muscles and nervs for those motions, which otherwise would be too
difficult for them.

Whence it may evidently appear, that according to the opinion of that eminent
Physician, these natural motions are regulated by the like grounds with the
artificial.

2. Thus also is it in those secondary instruments of motion, the members:
amongst which, the hand is (...), De usu partiu^ l. 1. c. 2.
the instrument of instruments, (as Galen styles it;) and as the soul of man
does bear in it the image of the divine wisdom and providence, so this part of
the body seems in some sort to represent the omnipotency of God, whilst it is
able to perform such various and wonderful effects by the help of this art.
But now for its own proper natural strength, in the lifting any great weight;
this is always proportioned according to its extension from the body, being of
least force when it is fully stretched out, or at arms end, (as we say) because
then the shoulder joint is as the center of its motion, from which, the hand in
that posture, being very remote, the weight of any thing it holds must be
accordingly augmented. Whereas the arm being drawn in, the elbow joint does
then become its center, which will diminish the weight proportionably, as that
part is nearer unto it then the other.

To this purpose also, there is another subtle problem proposed by Aristotle,
Mechan. c. 31.
concerning the postures of sitting and rising up. The quaere is this, Why a
man cannot rise up from his seat, unless he first, either bend his body
forward, or thrust his feet backward.

In the posture of sitting, our legs are supposed to make a right angle with
our thighs, and they with our backs, as in this figure.



Where let AB, represent the back, BC, the thighs, CD, the legs. Now it is
evident, that a man cannot rise from this posture, unless either the back AB,
do first incline unto F, to make an acute angle with the thighs BC; or else
that the legs CD, do incline toward E, which may also make an acute angle with
the thighs BC; or lastly, unless both of them do decline to the points GH,
where they may be included in the same perpendicular.

For the resolution of which, the Philosopher proposes these two particulars.

1. A right angle (says he) is a kind of equality, and that being naturally
the cause of rest, must needs be an impediment to the motion of rising.

2. Because when either of the parts are brought into an acute angle, the head
being removed over the feet, or they under the head; in such a posture the
whole man is much nearer disposed to the form of standing, wherein all these
parts are in one straight perpendicular line; then he is by the other of right
angles, in which the back and legs are two parallels; or that of turning these
straight angles into obtuse, which would not make an erect posture but
declining.

But neither of these particulars (as I conceive) do fully satisfy the
present quaere, neither do the Commentators, Monantholius, or Guevara, better
resolve it. Rather suppose BC, to be as a Vectis or Leaver, toward the middle
of which is the place of the fulciment, AB, as the weight, CD, the power that
is to raise it.

Now the body being situate in this rectangular form, the weight AB, must
needs be augmented proportionably to its distance from the fulciment, which is
about half the thighs; whereas if we suppose either the weight to be inclined
unto F, or the power to E, or both of them to GH, then there is nothing to be
lifted up but the bare weight it self, which in this situation is not at all
increased with any addition by distance.

For in these conclusions concerning the Leaver, we must always imagine that
point which is touched by a perpendicular from the center of gravity, to be one
of the terms. So that the diverse elevation or depression of the instrument,
will infer a great alteration in the weight it self, as may more elearly be
discerned by this following Diagram.



Where A, is supposed to be the place of the prop or fulciment, BC, a Leaver
which stands horizontally, the power and the weight belonging unto it, being
equal both in themselves, and also in their distances from the prop.

But now suppose this instrument to be altered according to the situation DE,
then the weight D, will be diminished, by so much, as the perpendicular from
its center of gravity HI, does fall nearer to the prop or fulciment at A. And
the power at E, will be so much augmented, as the perpendicular from its center
(KE) does fall farther from the point at A. And so on the contrary in that
other situation of the Leaver FG; whence it is easy to conceive the true
reason, why the inclining of the body, or the putting back of the leg, should
so much conduce to the facility of rising.

From these grounds likewise may we understand, Sir Fran: Bacons Not. Hist.
Exp. 731.
why the knees should be most weary in ascending, and the thighs in descending,
which is, because the weight of the body does bear most upon the knee-joynts,
in raising it self up, and most upon the muscles of the thighs when it stays it
self in coming down.

There are diverse other natural problemes to this purpose, which I forbear to
recite. We do not so much as go, or sit, or rise, without the use of this
Mechanical Geometry.

CAP. VI. Concerning the Wheel.
THe third Mechanical faculty is commonly styled axis in peritrochio. Called
likewise (...). Arist. Mechan. c. 14.
It consists of an axis or cylinder, having a rundle about it, wherein there
are fastened diverse spokes, by which the whole may be turned round; according
to this figure.



Where BC, does represent the Cylinder which is supposed to move upon a smaller
Axis at E, (this being all one in comparison to the several proportions, as if
it were a mere Mathematical line) LG, is the rundle or wheel, HFIK, several
spokes or handles that are fastened in it; D, the place where the cord is
fastened for the drawing or lifting up of any weight.

The force of this instrument does consist in that dis-proportion of distance,
which there is betwixt the Semidiameter of the Cylinder AB, and the
Semidiameter of the rundle with the spokes FA. For let us conceive the line FB,
to be as a Leaver, wherein A, is the center or fulciment, B, the place of the
weight, and F, of the power. Now it is evident from the former principles, that
by how much the distance FA, is greater then AB, by so much less need the
power be at F, in respect of the weight at B. Suppose AB, to be as the tenth
part of AF, then that power or strength, which is but as a hundred pound at F,
will be equal to a thousand pound at B.

For the clearer explication of this faculty, it will not be amiss to consider
the form of it, as it will appear being more fully exposed to the view. As in
this other Diagram.



Suppose AB, for the Semidiameter of the Axis or Cylinder, and AC, for the
Semidiameter of the rundle, with the spokes; then the power at C, which will be
able to support the weight D, must bear the same proportion unto it, as AB,
does to AC: so that by how much shorter the distance AB, is in comparison to
the distance AC, by so much less need the power be at C, which may be able to
support the weight D, hanging at B.

And so likewise is it for the other spokes or handles EFGH, at either of
which, if we conceive any power, which shall move according to the same
circumference wherein these handles are placed, then the strength of this power
will be all one, as if it were at C. But now supposing a dead weight hanging at
any of them, (as at E,) then the disproportion will vary. The power being so
much less then that at C, by how much the line AC, is longer then AI. The
weight K, being of the same force at E, as if it were hung at I, in which point
the perpendicular of its gravity does cut the Diameter.

The chief advantage which this instrument does bestow, above that of the
Leaver, does consist in this particular. In a Leaver, the motion can be
continued only for so short a space, as may be answerable to that little
distance betwixt the fulciment and the weight: which is always by so much
lesser, as the disproportion betwixt the weight and the power is greater, and
the motion it self more easy: But now in this invention, that inconvenience is
remedied; for by a frequent rotation of the axis, the weight may be moved for
any height or length, as occasion shall require.

Unto this faculty may we refer the force of all those engines which consist
of wheels with teeth in them.

Hence also may we discern the reason why sundry instruments in common use,
are framed after the like form with these following figures.



All which are but several kinds of this third Mechanical faculty. In which
the points ABC, do represent the places of the power, the fulciment, and the
weight. The power being in the same proportion unto the weight, as BC is unto
BA.

CAP. VII. Concerning the Pulley.
THat which is reckoned for the fourth faculty, is the Pulley: which is of such
ordinary use, that it needs not any particular description. The chief parts of
it are diverse little rundles, that are moveable about their proper axes. Arist.
Mechan. c. 19.
These are usually divided according to their several situations, into the
upper and lower. If an engine have two of these rundles above, and two below,
it is usually called (...), if three, (...), if many, (...).

The lower Pulleys only do give force to the motion. If we suppose a weight
to hang upon any of the upper rundles, it will then require a power, that in it
self shall be fully equal for the sustaining of it.



The Diameter AC, being as the beam of a balance, of which B is the prop or
center. Now the parts A, and C, being equally distant from this center,
therefore the power at E, must be equal to the weight at D, it being all one
as if the power and the weight were fastened by two several strings at the ends
of the balance FG.

Now all the upper Pulleys being of the same nature, it must necessarily
follow, that none of them do in themselves conduce to the easing of the power,
or lightning the weight, but only for the greater convenience of the motion,
the cords by this means running more easily moved then otherwise they would.

But now suppose the weight to be sustained above the Pulley, as it is in all
those of the lower sort: and then the power which supports it, need be but half
as much as the weight it self.



Let AC, represent the Diameter of a lower Pulley, on whose center at B, the
weight is fastened, one end of the cord being tied to a hook at D. Now it is
evident, that half the weight is sustained at D, so that there is but the
other half left to be sustained by the power at E. It being all one as if the
weight were tied unto the middle of the balance FG, whose ends were upheld by
two several strings, FH, and GI.

And this same subduple proportion will still remain, though we suppose an
upper Pulley joined to the lower, as in these two other figures.



Where the power at A, is equal to the weight at B: Now the weight at B, being
but half the ponderosity C, therefore the power at A, notwithstanding the
addition of the upper rundle, must be equivalent to half the weight; and as the
upper Pulley alone, does not abate anything of the weight, so neither being
joined with the lower, and the same subduple difference betwixt the power and
the weight, which is caused by the lower Pulley alone, does still remain
unaltered, though there be an upper Pulley added unto it.

Now as one of these under Pulleys does abate half of that heaviness which
the weight has in it self, and cause the power to be in a subduple proportion
unto it, so two of them do abate half of that which remains, and cause a
subquadruple proportion betwixt the weight and the power; three of them a
subsextuple, four a suboctuple: and so for five, six, or as many as shall be
required, they will all of them diminish the weight according to this
proportion.

Suppose the weight in it self to be 1200 pound, the applying unto it one of
these lower Pulleys, will make it but as 600, two of them as 300, three of them
as 150, etc.

But now, if we conceive the first part of the string to be fastened unto the
lower Pulley, as in this other figure at F; then the power at A, will be in a
subtriple proportion to the weight E, because the heaviness would be then
equally divided unto the three points of the lower Diameter B, C, D, each of
them supporting a like share of the burden. If unto this lower Pulley there
were added another, then the power would be unto the weight in a subquintuple
proportion. If a third, a subseptuple, and so of the rest. For we must note,
that the cords in this instrument are as so many powers, and the rundles as so
many leavers, or balances.

Hence it is easy to conceive, how the strength of the power may be
proportioned according to any such degree, as shall be required; and how any
weight given, may be moved by any power given.

It Is not material to the force of this instrument, whether the rundles of it
be big or little, if they be made equal to one another in their several
orders; But it is most convenient, that the upper should each of them increase
as they are higher, and the other as they are lower, because by this means the
cords will be kept from tangling.

These Pulleys may be multiplied according to sundry different situations, not
only when they are subordinate, as in the former examples, but also when they
are placed collaterally.

From the former grounds it is easy to contrive a ladder, by which a man may
pull himself up unto any height. For the performance of this, there is required
only an upper and a lower rundle: To the uppermost of these at A, there should
be fastened a sharp graple or cramp of iron, which may be apt to take hold of
any place where it lights. This part being first cast up and fastened, and the
staff DE, at the nether end, being put betwixt the legs, so that a man may sit
upon the other BC, and take hold of the cord at F. it is evident that the
weight of the person at E, will be but equal to half so much strength at F; so
that a man may easily pull himself up to the place required, by leaning but
little more then half of his own weight on the string F. Or if the Pulleys be
multiplied, this experiment may then be wrought with less labor.

CAP. VIII. Of the Wedge.
THe fifth Mechanical faculty is the Wedge, which is a known instrument,
commonly used in the cleaving of wood. The efficacy and great strength of it
may be resolved unto these two particulars: 1. The form of it. 2. The manner
whereby the power is impressed upon it, which is by the force of blows.


1. The form of it represents (as it were) two Leavers.



Each side AD, and AE, being one, the points BC, being in stead of several
props or fulciments; the weight to be moved at A, and the power that should
move it, being applied to the top DE, by the force of some stroke or blow:
Mechan. c. 18.
as Aristotle has explained the several parts of this faculty. But now,
because this instrument may be so used that the point of it shall not touch the
body to be moved, as in these other figures;

Therefore Vbaldus has more exactly applied the several parts of it according
to this form, that the point A, should be as the common fulciment, in which
both the sides do meet, and (as it were) uphold one another; the points B, and
C, representing that part of the Leavers where the weight is placed.

It is a general rule, that the more acute the angles of these wedges are, by
so much more easy will their motion be; the force being more easily impressed,
and the space wherein the body is moved, being so much the less.

The second particular whereby this faculty has its force, is the manner
whereby the power is impressed upon it, which is by a stroke or blow; the
efficacy of which does much exceed any other strength. For though we suppose a
wedge being laid on a piece of timber, to be pressed down with never so great a
weight; nay, though we should apply unto it the power of those other
Mechanical engines, the Pulley, Screw, etc. yet the effect would be scarce
considerable in comparison to that of a blow. The true reason of which, is one
of the greatest subtilties in nature, nor is it fully rendered by any of those
who have undertaken the resolution of it. Mechan. c. 10. Subtle. l. 17 Exercit.
331.
Aristotle, Cardan, and Scaliger, do generally ascribe it unto the swiftness
of that motion; But there seems to be something more in the matter then so; for
otherwise it would follow that the quick stroke of a light hammer, should be of
greater efficacy, then any softer and more gentle striking of a great sledge.
Or according to this, how should it come to pass, that the force of an arrow
or bullet discharged near at hand (when the impression of that violence,
whereby they are carried, is most fresh, and so in probability the motion at
its swiftest) is yet notwithstanding much less then it would be at a greater
distance. There is therefore further considerable, the quality of that
instrument by which this motion is given, and also the convenience of distance
through which it passes.

Unto this faculty is usually reduced the force of files, saws, hatchets, etc.
which are as it were but so many wedges fastened unto a Vectis or Leaver.

CAP. IX. Of the Screw.
THat which is usually recited for the sixth and last Mechanic faculty, is the
Screw, which is described to be a kind of wedge that is multiplied, or
continued by a helicall revolution about a Cylinder, Pappus Collect. Mathemat.
l. 8.
receiving its motion not from any stroke, but from a Vectis at one end of it.
It is usually distinguished into two several kinds: the male, which is meant
in the former description, and the female, which is of a concave superficies.



The former is noted in the figure with the letter A, the other with F.

Aristotle himself does not so much as mention this instrument, which yet
notwithstanding is of greater force and subtilty, then any of the rest. It is
chiefly applied to the squeezing or pressing of things downwards, as in the
Presses for printing, for wine, oil, and extracting the juice from other
fruits. In the performance of which, the strength of one man may be of greater
force, then the weight of a heavy mountain* It is likewise used for the
elevating or lifting up of weights.

The advantage of this faculty above the rest, does mainly consist in this: the
other instruments do require so much strength for the supporting of the weight
to be moved, as may be equal unto it, besides that other superadded power
whereby it is out-weighed and moved; so that in the operations by these, a man
does always spend himself in a continued labor.

Thus (for example) a weight that is lifted up by a Wheel or Pulley, will of it
self descend, if there be not an equal power to sustain it. But now in the
composure of a Screw, this inconvenience is perfectly remedied; for so much
force as is communicated unto this faculty, from the power that is applied unto
it, is still retained by the very frame and nature of the instrument it self;
since the motion of it cannot possibly return, but from the very same place
where it first began. Whence it comes to pass, that any weight lifted up, with
the assistance of this engine, may likewise be sustained by it, without the
help of any external power, and cannot again descend unto its former place,
unless the handle of the Screw (where the motion first began) be turned back:
so that all the strength of the power, may be employed in the motion of the
weight, and none spent in the sustaining of it.

The chief inconvenience of this instrument is, that in a short space it will
be screwed unto its full length, and then it cannot be of any further use for
the continuance of the motion, unless it be returned back, and undone again as
at the first. But this is usually remedied by another invention, commonly
styled a perpetual screw, which has the motion of a wheel, and the force of a
screw, being both infinite.



For the composure of which, instead of the female, or concave screw, there
must be a little wheel, with some notches in it, equivalent to teeth, It is
used in some Watches.
by which the other may take hold of it, and turn it round, as in these other
figures.

This latter engine does so far exceed all other contrivances to this purpose,
that it may justly seem a wonder why it is not of as common use in these times
and places, as any of the rest.

CAP. X. An enquiry into the magnificent works of the Ancients, which much
exceeding our latter times, may seem to infer a decay in these Mechanical
Arts.
THus have I briefly treated concerning the general principles of Mechanics,
together with the distinct proportions betwixt the weight and the power in each
several faculty of it; Whence it is easy to conceive the truth and ground of
those famous ancient monuments, which seem almost incredible to these following
ages. And because many of them recorded by Antiquity, were of such vast labor
and magnificence, and so mightily disproportionable to humane strength, it
shall not therefore be impertinent unto the purpose I aim at, for to specify
some of the most remarkable amongst them, and to inquire into the means and
occasion upon which they were first attempted.

Amongst the Egyptians, we read of diverse Pyramids, of so vast a magnitude, as
time it self in the space of so many hundred years has not yet devoured. Li.
2. c. 175
Herodotus mentions one of them, erected by Cleopes an Egyptian King, wherein
there was not any one stone less then 30 foot long, all of them being fetched
from Arabia. And not much after, the same Author relates, how Amasis another
Egyptian, made himself a house of one entire stone, which was 21 cubits long,
14 broad, and 8 cubits high. The same Amasis is reported to have made the
statue of a Sphinx, Plin. l. 36. ca. 12.
or Egyptian cat, all of one single stone, whose length was 143 foot, its
height 62 foot, the compass of this statues head containing 102 foot. In one
of the Egyptian temples consecrated to Jupiter, there is related to be an
Obelisk, Plin. l. 37. cap. 5.
consisting of 4 Smaragds or Emeralds; the whole is 40 cubits high, 4 cubits
broad at the bottom, and two at the top. Diodor. Sicul. Biblioth l. 1. Sect. 2.
Sesostris the King of Egypt in a Temple at Memphis, dedicated to Vulcan, is
reported to have erected two statues; one for himself, the other for his wife,
both consisting of two several stones, each of which were 30 cubits high.

Amongst the Jews we read in sacred Writ of Solomon's Temple, which for its
state and magnificence, might have been justly reckoned amongst the other
wonders of the world, wherein besides the great riches of the materials, there
were works too of as great labor. 1 Kings 7.15. cap. 5. v. 17
Pillars of brass 18 cubits high, and 12 cubits round, great and costly stones
for the foundation of it. Josephus tells us that some of them were 40 cubits, De
bello Judah. l. 6. c. 6.
others 45 cubits long. And in the same chapter he mentions the three famous
Towers built by Herod, wherein every stone being of white marble, was 20 cubits
long, 10 broad, and 5 high. And which was the greatest wonder, the old wall it
self was situated on a steep rising ground, and yet the hills upon it, on the
tops of which these Towers were placed, were about 30 cubits high, that it is
scarce imaginable by what strength so many stones of such great magnitude
should be conveyed to so high a place.

Amongst the Grecians we read of the Ephesian Temple dedicated to Diana, Plin.
l. 36. c. 14. Panciroll. Deperd. Tit. 32.
wherein there were 127 columns made of so many several stones, each of them
60 foot high, being all taken out of the quarries in Asia. It Is storied also of
the brazen Colossus, or great statue in the Island of Rhodes, that it was 70
cubits high. The thumbs of it being so big that no man could grasp one of them
about with both his arms; Plin. l. 34. c. 3.
when it stood upright, a ship might have passed betwixt the legs of it, with
all its sails fully displayed; being thrown down by an earthquake, the brass
of it did load 900 Camels. But above all ancient designs to this purpose, that
would have been most wonderful, which a Grecian Architect did propound unto
Alexander, Vitruv. Archit. l. 2.
to cut the mountain Athos into the form of a statue, which in his right hand
should hold a Town capable of ten thousand men, and in his left a Vessel to
receive all the water that flowed from the several springs in the mountain.
But whether Alexander in his ambition did fear that such an Idol should have
more honor then he himself, or whether in his good husbandry, he thought that
such a Microcosme (if I may so style it) would have cost him almost as much as
the conquering of this great world, or what ever else was the reason, he
refused to attempt it.

Amongst the Romans we read of a brazen Colossus, Suet. Ner.
made at the command and charges of Nero, which was 120 foot high; Martial
calls it Sydereus, or starry.

Hic ubi Sydereus propius videt astra Colossus. And it is storied of M. Curio,
Pancirol. Deperd. Tit. 18.
that he erected two Theaters sufficiently capacious of people, contrived
moveable upon certain hinges; Sometimes there were several plays and shows in
each of the^, neither being any disturbance to the other; and sometimes they
were both turned about, with the people in them, and the ends meeting together,
did make a perfect Amphitheater: so that the spectators which were in either of
them, might jointly behold the same spectacles.

There were besides at Rome sundry Obelisks, Ide^ Tit. 31.
made of so many entire stones, some of them 40, some 80, and others 90 cubits
high. The chief of them were brought out of Egypt, where they were dug out of
diverse quarries, and being wrought into form, were afterward (not without
incredible labor, and infinite charges) conveyed unto Rome. In the year 1586,
there was erected an old Obelisk, which had been formerly dedicated unto the
memory of Julius Caesar. It was one solid stone, being an Ophite or kind of
spotted Marble. The height of it was 107 foot, the breadth of it at the bottom
was 12 foot, at the top 8. Its whole weight is reckoned to be 956148 pounds,
besides the heaviness of all those instruments that were used about it, which
(as it is thought) could not amount to less then 1042824 pounds. It was
transplaced at the charges of Pope Sixtus the fifth, from the left side of the
Vatican, unto a more eminent place about a hundred foot off, where now it
stands. The moving of this Obelisk is celebrated by the writings of above 56
several Authors, (says Monantholius) all of them mentioning it, Comment. in
Mechan. Arist. c. 19.
not without much wonder and praise. Now if it seem so strange and glorious an
attempt to move this Obelisk for so little a space, what then may we think of
the carriage of it out of Egypt, and diverse other far greater works performed
by Antiquity? This may seem to infer, that these Mechanical arts are now lost,
and decayed amongst the many other ruins of time: which yet notwithstanding
cannot be granted, without much ingratitude to those learned men, whose labors
in this kind we enjoy, and may justly boast of. And therefore for our better
understanding of these particulars, it will not be amiss to enquire both why,
and how, such works should be performed in those former and ruder ages, which
are not, and (as it should seem) cannot be effected in these later and more
learned times. In the examination of which, we shall find that it is not the
want of art that disables us for them, since these Mechanical discoveries are
altogether as perfect, and (I think) much more exact now, then they were
heretofore; but it is, because we have not either the same motives, to attempt
such works, or the same means to effect them as the Ancients had.

CAP. XI. That the Ancients had diverse motives and means for such vast
magnificent works, which we have not.
THe motives by which they were excited to such magnificent attempts, we may
conceive to be chiefly three: Religion. Policy. Ambition.


1. Religion. Hence was it that most of these stately buildings were intended
for some sacred use, being either Temples or As Pyramids, Obelisks.
Tombs, all of them dedicated to some of their Deities. It was an inbred
principle in those ancient Heathen, that they could not choose but merit very
much by being liberal in their outward services. And therefore we read of
Croesus, that being overcome in a battle, Herodot. l. 1.
and taken by Cyrus, he did revile the gods of ingratitude, because they had no
better care of him, who had so frequently adored them with costly oblations.
And as they did conceive themselves bound to part with their lives in defense
of their religion: so likewise to employ their utmost power and estate, about
any such design, which might promote or advance it. Whereas now, the generality
of men, especially the wisest sort amongst them, are in this respect of another
opinion, counting such great and immense labors, to be at the best but
glorious vanities. The Temple of Solomon indeed was to be a type, and therefore
it was necessary that it should be so extraordinarily magnificent, otherwise
perhaps a much cheaper structure might have been as commendable and serviceable.

2. Policy, that by this means they might find out employment for the people,
who of themselves being not much civilized, might by idleness quickly grow to
such a rudeness and barbarism, as not to be bounded within any laws of
government. Plin. l. 6. c. 12.
Again, by this means the riches of the kingdom did not lie idly in their
kings treasuries, but was always in motion, which could not but be a great
advantage, and improvement to the Commonwealth. And perhaps some of them
feared lest if they should leave too much money unto their successors, it might
be an occasion to ensnare them in such idle and vain courses, as would ruin
their kingdoms. Whereas in these later ages, none of all these politic
incitements can be of any force, because now there is employment enough for
all, and money little enough for every one.

3. Ambition to be known unto posterity; and hence likewise arose that
incredible labor and care they bestowed, to leave such monuments behind them,
as might Psalm. 49.11.
continue for ever, and make them famous unto all after ages. This was the
reason of Absalons pillar, spoken of in Scripture, to keep his name in
remembrance. 2 Samuel 18.18.
And doubtless this too was the end which many other of the Ancients have
aimed at, in those (as they thought) everlasting buildings.

But now these later ages are much more active and stirring: so that every
ambitious man may find so much business for the present, that he shall scarce
have any leisure to trouble himself about the future. And therefore in all
these respects, there is a great disproportion betwixt the incitements of those
former and these later times unto such magnificent attempts.

Again, as they differ much in their motives unto them, so likewise in the
means of effecting them.

There was formerly more leisure and opportunity, both for the great men to
undertake such works, and for the people to perfect them. Those past ages were
more quiet and peaceable, the Princes rather wanting employment, then being
over-prest with it, and therefore were willing to make choice of such great
designs, about which to busy themselves: whereas now the world is grown more
politic, and therefore more troublesome, every great man having other private
and necessary business about which to employ both his time and means. And so
likewise for the common people, who then living more wildly without being
confined to particular trades and professions, might be more easily collected
about such famous employments; whereas now, if a Prince have any occasion for
an Army, it is very hard for him to raise so great a multitude, as were usually
employed about these magnificent buildings. We read of 360000 men that were
busied for twenty years in making one of the Egyptian Pyramids. Lib. 2.
And Herodotus tells us of 1000000 men who were as long in building another of
them. About the carriage of one stone for Amasis the distance of twenty days
journey, there was for three years together employed 2000 chosen men,
Governors, besides many other under-labourers. 'Twas the opinion of Antiq. l.
2. c. 5.
Josephus and Nazienzen, that these Pyramids were built by Joseph for granaries
against the years of famine. Others think that the brick made by the children
of Israel, was employed about the framing of them, because we read that the
Tower of Babel did consist of brick or artificial stone, Genesis 11.3. And if
these were the laborers that were busied about them, it is no wonder though
they were of so vast a magnitude; for we read that the children of Israel at
their coming out of Egypt, were numbered to be six hundred thousand, and three
thousand, and five hundred and fifty men, Numb. 1.46. so many handfuls of earth
would almost make a mountain, and therefore we may easily believe that so
great a multitude in so long a space as their bondage lasted, for above four
hundred years, might well enough accomplish such vast designs.

In the building of Solomon's Temple, there were threescore and ten thousand
that bare burdens, and fourscore thousand hewers in the mountains, 1 Kings 5.15.

The Ephesian Temple was built by all Asia joining together, the 127 pillars
were made by so many kings, according to their several successions, the whole
work being not finished under the space of two hundred and fifteen years.
Whereas the transplacing of that Obelisk at Rome by Sixtus the fifth, (spoken of
before) was done in some few days by five or six hundred men; and as the work
was much less then many other recorded by Antiquity: so the means by which it
was wrought, was yet far less in this respect then what is related of them.

2. The abundance of wealth, which was then engrossed in the possession of some
few particular persons, being now diffused amongst a far greater number. There
is now a greater equality amongst mankind, and the flourishing of arts and
sciences, has so stirred up the sparks of men's natural nobility, and made
them of such active and industrious spirits, as to free themselves in a great
measure from that slavery, which those former and wilder Nations were subjected
unto.

In building one of the Pyramids, there was expended for the maintenance of the
laborers, with Radish and Onyons, no less then eighteen hundred talents,
which is reckoned to amount unto 1880000 crowns, or thereabouts. And
considering the cheapnesse of these things in those times and places, so much
money might go farther then a sum ten times greater could do in the
maintenance of so many now.

In Solomon's Temple we know how the extraordinary riches of that King, the
general flourishing of the whole State, and the liberality of the people did
jointly concur to the building of the Temple. De bell. Iud. l. 6. ca. 6.
Pecuniarum copia and populi largitas, majora dictu conabatur, (says
Josephus.) The Rhodian Colossus is reported to have cost three hundred talents
the making. And so were all those other famous monuments of proportionable
expense.

Pancirollus speaking of those Theaters that were erected at the charges of
some private Roman Citizens, says thus: Deperd. Tit. 18.
Nostro hoc saeculo vel Rex satis haberet quod ageret aedificio ejusmodi
erigendo; and a little after upon the like occasion, Res mehercule miraculosa,
quae nostris temporibus vix a potentissimo aliquo rege possit exhiberi.

3. Add unto the two former considerations that exact care and indefatigable
industry which they bestowed in the raising of those structures: These being
the chief and only designs on which many of them did employ all their best
thoughts and utmost endeavors. Cleopes an Egyptian King is reported to have
been so desirous to finish one of the Pyramids, that having spent all about it
he was worth, or could possibly procure, he was forced at last to prostitute
his own daughter for necessary maintenance. And we read of Ramises another King
of Egypt, Plin. l. 36. c. 9.
how that he was so careful to erect an Obelisk, about which he had employed
20000 men, that when he feared lest through the negligence of the artificers,
or weakness of the engine, the stone might fall and break, he tied his own son
to the top of it, that so the care of his safety might make the workmen more
circumspect in their business. And what strange matters may be effected by the
mere diligence and labor of great multitudes, we may easily discern from the
wild Indians, who having not the art or advantage of Engines, did yet by their
unwearied industry remove stones of an incredible greatness. Acosta relates
that he himself measured one at Tiaguanaco, Histor. Ind. l. 6. c. 14.
which was thirty eight foot long, eighteen broad, and six thick, and he
affirms that in their stateliest aedifices, there were many other of much
vaster magnitude.

From all which considerations it may appear, that the strangeness of those
ancient monuments above any that are now effected, does not necessarily infer
any defect of art in these later ages. And I conceive, it were as easy to
demonstrate the Mechanical Arts in these times to be so far beyond the
knowledge of former ages, that had we but the same means as the Ancients had,
we might effect far greater matters then any they attempted, and that too in a
shorter space, and with less labor.

CAP. XII. Concerning the force of the Mechanic faculties, particularly the
Balance and Leaver. How they may be contrived to move the whole world, or any
other conceivable weight.
ALL these magnificent works of the Ancients before specified, are scarce
considerable in respect of art, if we compare them with the famous speeches and
acts of Archimedes: Of whom it is reported that he was frequently wont to say,
how that he could move, Datum pondus cum data potentia, The greatest
conceivable weight with the least conceivable power: and that if he did but
know where to stand and fasten his instrument, he could move the world, all
this great globe of sea and land; which promises, though they were altogether
above the vulgar apprehension or belief, yet because his acts were somewhat
answerable thereunto, therefore the King of Syracuse did enact a law whereby
every man was bound to believe, what ever Archimedes would affirm.

It Is easy to demonstrate the Geometrical truth of those strange assertions,
by examining them according to each of the forenamed Mechanic faculties, every
one of which is of infinite power.

To begin with the two first of them, the Balance and the Leaver, (which I
here join together, because the proportions of both are wholly alike) it is
certain, though there should be the greatest imaginable weight, and the least
imaginable power, (suppose the whole world, and the strength of one man or
infant) yet if we conceive the same dis-proportion betwixt their several
distances in the former faculties from the fulciment or center of gravity, they
would both equiponderate. And if the distance of the power from the center, in
comparison to the distance of the weight, were but any thing more then the
heaviness of the weight is in respect of the power, it may then be evident
from the former principles, that the power would be of greater force then the
weight, and consequently able to move it. Thus if we suppose this great globe
at A, to co^tain 2400000000000000000000000 pounds, allowing a hundred pound for
each cubicall foot in it, Static. l. 3. prop 10.
(as Stevinius has calculated) yet a man or child at D, whose strength
perhaps is but equivalent to one hundred, or ten pounds weight, may be able
to outweigh and move it, if there be but a little greater disproportion betwixt
the two distances CD, and CB, then there is betwixt the heaviness of the
weight, and the strength of the power, that is, if the distance CD, unto the
other distance CB, be any thing more the^ 2400000000000000000000000 unto 100 or
10, every ordinary instrument does include all these parts really, though not
sensibly distinguished.

Under this latter faculty I did before mention that engine by which Archemedes
drew up the Roman ships, Lipsius Poliorcet. l. 1. Dialog. 6.
at the siege of Syracuse. This is usually styled Tollenon, being of the same
form with that which is commonly used by Brewers, and Dyers, for the drawing of
water. It consists of two posts, the one fastened perpendicularly in the ground,
the other being jointed on cross to the top of it. At the end he fastened a
strong hook or grapple of iron, which being let over the wall to the river, he
would thereby take hold of the ships, as they passed under; and afterward by
applying some weight, or perhaps the force of Screwes to the other end, he
would thereby lift them into the open air, where having swinged them up and
down till he had shaked out the men and goods that were in them, he would then
dash the Vessels against the rocks, or drown them in their sudden fall:
insomuch that Marcellus the Roman General was wont to say, Plutach. in his
life.
(...), That Archimedes made use of his ships in stead of Buckets, to draw
water with.

This faculty will be of the same force, not only when it is continued in one,
but also when it is multiplied in diverse instruments, as may be conceived in
this other form, which I do not mention, as if it could be serviceable for any
motion (since the space by which the weight would be moved, will be so little
as not to fall under sense) but only for the better explication of this
Mechanic principle, and for the right understanding of that force arising from
multiplication in the other faculties, which do all depend upon this. The
Wheel, and Pulley, and Screw, being but as so many Leavers of a circular form
and motion, whose strength may therefore be continued to a greater space.



Imagine the weight A, to be a hundred thousand pounds, and the distance of
that point, wherein every Leaver touches either the weight or one another from
the point where they touch the prop, to be but one such part, whereof the
remainder contains ten, then according to the former grounds 10000 at B, will
equiponderate to A, which is 100000, so that the second Leaver has but 10000
pounds to move. Now because this observes the same proportions with the other
in the distances of its several points, therefore 1000 pounds at C, will be of
equal weight to the former. And the weight at C, being but as a thousand
pound, that which is but as a hundred at D, will be answerable unto it; and so
still in the same proportion, that which is but 10 at E, will be equal to 100
at D; and that which is but one pound at F, will also be equal to ten at E.
Whence it is manifest, that 1 pound at F, is equal to 100000 at A; and the
weight must always be diminished in the same proportion as ten to one, because
in the multiplication of these Leavers, the distance of the point, where the
instrument touches the weight, from that where it touches the prop, is but as
one such part, whereof the remainder contains ten. But now if we imagine it to
be as the thousandth part, then must the weight be diminished according to this
proportion; and then in the same multiplication of leavers, 1 l. will be equal
to 1000000000000000 pounds: so that though we suppose the weight to be never so
heavy, yet let the disproportion of distances be greater, or the Leavers more,
and any little power may move it.

CAP. XIII. Of the Wheel, by multiplication of which it is easy to move any
imaginable weight.
THe Wheel or axis in peritrochio, was before demonstrated to be of equivalent
force with the former faculties. If we conceive the same difference betwixt the
Semidiameter of the wheels or spokes AC, See the figure cap. 6* pa. 3^.
and the Semidiameter of the axis AB, as there is betwixt the weight of the
world, and the strength of a man, it may then be evident, that this strength of
one man, by the help of such an instrument, will equiponderate to the weight of
the whole world. And if the Semidiameter of the wheel AC, be but any thing more
in respect of the Semidiameter of the axis AB, then the weight of the world
supposed at D, is in comparison to the strength of a man at C; it may then be
manifest from the same grounds that this strength will be of so much greater
force then the weight, and consequently able to move it.

The force of this faculty may be more conveniently understood and used by the
multiplication of several wheels, An engine of many wheels is is commonly
called Glossocomus.
together with nuts belonging unto each of them; as it may be easily
experimented in the ordinary Jacks that are used for the roasting of meat,
which commonly consist but of three wheels, How to pull a man above ground with
a single hair*
and yet if we suppose a man tied in the place of the weight, it were easy by
a single hair fastened unto the fly or balance of the Jack, to draw him up from
the ground, as will be evident from this following figure.



Where suppose the length of the fly or balance in comparison to the breadth
of its axis, to be as 10 to one, and so for the three other wheels in respect
of the nuts that belong unto the^; (though this difference be oftentimes less,
as we may well allow it to be) withal suppose the weight (or a man tied in the
place of it) to be a hundred pounds: I say according to this supposition, it is
evident that the power at the balance, which shall be equal to the weight,
need be but as 1 to 10000. For the first axis is conceived to be but as the
tenth part of its wheel, and therefore though the weight in it self be as
10000, yet unto a power that has this advantage, it is but as 1000, and
therefore this thousand unto the like power at the second wheel, will be but as
100, and this 100 at the third but as 10; and lastly, this ten at the balance
but as one. But the weight was before supposed to be 100, which to the first
wheel will be but 10, to the second as one, to the third as a decimall, or one
tenth, to the sails as one hundredth part: so that if the hair be but strong
enough to lift 1/10000 that is, one ten thousandth part of a man, or (which is
all one) one hundredth part of a pound, it may as well serve by the help of this
instrument for the drawing of him up. And though there be not altogether so
great a disproportion betwixt the several parts of a Jack, (as in many perhaps
there is not;) and though a man may be heavier then is here supposed, yet it is
withal considerable that the strength of a hair is able to bear much more then
the hundredth part of a pound.

Upon this ground Mersennus tells us out of Solomon de Cavet, Comment. in Genesis
c. 1. v. 10. art. 6 De viribus motricibus Theor. 16.
that if there were an engine of 12 wheels, each of them with teeth, as also
the axes or nuts that belong unto them, if the Diameter of these wheels were
unto each axis, as a hundred to one: and if we suppose these wheels to be so
placed, that the teeth of the one might take hold of the axis that belongs unto
the next, and that the axis of the handle may turn the first wheel, and the
weight be tied unto the axis of the last, with such an engine as this, says
he, a child (if he could stand any where without this earth) might with much
ease move it toward him.

For according to the former supposition, that this globe of sea and land, did
contain as many hundred pounds; as it does cubicall feet, viz.
2400000000000000000000000, it may be evident that any strength, whose force is
but equivalent to 3 pounds, will by such an engine be able to move it.

Of this kind was that engine so highly extolled by Stevinus, which he calls
Pancration, or Omnipotent, De Staticae praxi.
preferring it before the inventions of Archimedes. It consisted of wheels and
nuts, as that before specified is supposed. Hither also should be referred the
force of racks, which serve for bending of the strongest bows, Ramelli Fig. 160.
as also that little pocket engine wherewith a man may break or wrench open any
door, together with diverse the like instruments in common use.

CAP. XIV. Concerning the infinite strength of Wheels, Pulleys, and Screws.
That it is possible by the multiplication of these, to pull up any Oak by the
roots with a hair, lift it up with a straw, or blow it up with ones breath, or
to perform the greatest labor with the least power.
FRom what has been before delivered concerning the nature of the Pulley, it
is easy to understand, how this faculty also may be proportioned betwixt any
weight, and any power, as being likewise of infinite strength.

It Is reported of Archimedes, that with an engine of Pulleys, to which he
applied only his left hand, he lifted up 7000 says Zetzes Chiliad. 2. Hist.
35.
5000 bushels of corn at once, and drew a ship with all its lading upon dry
land. This engine Zetzes calls Trispatum, or Trispastum, which signifies only a
threefold Pulley; But herein he does evidently mistake, for it is not possible
that this alone should serve for the motion of so great a weight, because such
an engine can but make a subsextuple, or at most a subseptuple proportion
betwixt the weight and power, which is much too little, to reconcile the
strength of a man unto so much heaviness. Therefore Vbaldus does more properly
style it Polyspaston, Praef. ad Mechan.
or an instrument of many Pulleys: How many, were easy to find out, if we did
exactly know the weight of those ancient measures; supposing them to be the
same with our bushel in England, which contains 64 pintes or pounds, the whole
would amount to 320000 pounds, half of which would be lightened by the help of
one Pulley, three quarters by two Pulleys, and so onward, according to this
subduple, subquadruple, and subsextuple proportion: So that if we conceive the
strength of the left hand to be equivalent unto 20 or 40 pounds, it is easy to
find out how many Pulleys are required to enable it for the motion of so great
a weight.

Upon this ground Mersennus tells us, Comment. in Genesis c. 1. v. 10. art. 6.
that any little child with an engine of an hundred double Pulleys, might
easily move this great globe of earth, though it were much heavier then it is.
And in reference to this kind of engine (says Monantholius) are we to
understand that assertion of Archimedes (as he more immediately intended it)
concerning the possibility of moving the world. Praef. ad Mechan. Aristotle.


The wedge was before demonstrated to be as a double Vectis or Leaver, and
therefore it would be needless to explain particularly how this likewise may
be contrived of infinite force.

The Screw is capable of multiplication, as well as any of the other faculties,
and may perhaps be more serviceable for such great weights, then any of the
rest. Archimedes his engine of greatest strength, called Charistion, Stevin. de
Static. prax. See Besson.
is by some thought to consist of these. Axes habebat cum infinitis cochleis.
And that other engine of his called Helix (mentioned by Deipnosophist. li. 5.
Oper. exter. Archimed.
Athenaeus) wherewith he lifted Hiero's great ship into the sea, without any
other help, is most likely to be framed of perpetual screws, says Rivaltus.)

Whence it may evidently appear, that each of these Mechanic faculties are of
infinite power, and may be contrived proportionable unto any conceivable
weight. And that no natural strength is any way comparable unto these
artificial inventions.

It Is reported of Sampson, that he he could carry the gates of a city upon his
shoulders, Judge. 15.
and that the strongest bonds were unto him but as flax burnt with fire, and
yet his hair being shaved off, all his strength departed from him. We A. Gell.
Noct. At. l. 15. c. 16.
read of Milo, that he could carry an Ox upon his back, and yet when he tried
to tear an Oak asunder that was somewhat riven before, having drawn it to its
utmost, it suddenly joined together again, catching his hands in the cleft, and
so strongly manackled him, that he became a prey to the wild beasts.

But now by these Mechanical contrivances, it were easy to have made one of
Sampsons hairs that was shaved off, to have been of more strength, then all of
them when they were on. By the help of these arts it is possible (as I shall
demonstrate) for any man to lift up the greatest Oak by the roots with a straw,
to pull it up with a hair, or to blow it up with his breath.

Suppose the roots of an Oak to extend a thousand foot square, (which is almost
a quarter of a mile) and forty foot deep, each cubicall foot being a hundred
pound weight; which though it be much beyond the exte^sion of any tree, or the
weight of earth, the compass of the roots in the ground (according to common
opinion) not extending further then the branches of it in the air, and the
depth of it not above ten foot, beyond which the greatest rain does not
penetrate (says Not. Qu. l. 3. c. 7.
Seneca.) Ego vinearum diligens fossor affirmo nullam pluviam esse tam magnam,
quae terram ultra december pedes in altitudinem madefaciat. And because the root
must receive its nourishment from the help of showers, therefore it is probable
that it does not go below them. So that (I say) though the proportions
supposed do much exceed the real truth, yet it is considerable that some
great overplus must be allowed for that labor which there will be in the
forcible divulsion or separation of the parts of the earth which are continued.

According to this supposition, the work of forcing up the Oak by the roots,
will be equivalent to the lifting up of 4000000000 pound weight, which by the
advantage of such an engine, as is here described, may be easily performed with
the least conceivable power.



The whole force of this engine does consist in two double Pulleys, twelve
wheels, and a sail. One of these Pulleys at the bottom will diminish half of
the weight, so that it shall be but as 2000000000, and the other Pulley will
abate three quarters of it: so that it shall be but as 1000000000. And because
the beginning of the string being fastened unto the lower Pulley, makes the
power to be in a subquintuple proportion unto the weight, See cha. 7.
therefore a power that shall be as 1000000000, that is, a subquadruple, will
be so much stronger then the weight, and consequently able to move it. Now
suppose the breadth of all the axes and nuts, to be unto the Diameters of the
wheel as ten to one; and it will then be evident, that to a power at the first
wheel, the weight is but as 100000000. To the second as 10000000. To the third
as 1000000. To the fourth as 100000. To the fifth as 10000. To the sixth as
1000. To the seventh as 100. To the eighth as 10. To the ninth as 1. To the
tenth as 1/10, one decimall. To the eleventh as 1/100. To the twelfth as
1/1000. And to the sails yet less. So that if the strength of the straw, or
hair, or breath, be but equal to the weight of one thousandth part of a pound,
it may be of sufficient force to pull up the Oak.

If in this engine we suppose the disproportion betwixt the wheels and nuts,
to be as a hundred to one, then it is very evident that the same strength of
breath, or a hair, or a straw, would be able to move the whole world, as will
be easily found by calculation. Let this great globe of sea and land be
imagined (as before) to weigh so many hundred pounds as it contains cubicall
feet; namely, 2400000000000000000000000 pounds. This will be to the first
Pulley, 1200000000000000000000000. To the second less the^
600000000000000000000000. But for more easy and convenient reckoning, let it
be supposed to be somewhat more, viz. 100000000000000000000000 This to the
first wheel will be but as 10000000000000000000000. To the second as
100000000000000000000. To the third as 1000000000000000000. To the fourth as
10000000000000000. To the fifth 100000000000000. To the sixth 1000000000000. To
the seventh 10000000000. To the eighth 100000000. To the ninth 1000000. To the
tenth 10000. To the eleventh 100. To the twelfth 1. To the sails as 1/100.


So that a power which is much less then the hundredth part of a pound will
be able to move the world.

It were needless to set down any particular explication, how such Mechanical
strength may be applied unto all the kinds of local motion; since this, in it
self is so facill and obvious, that every ordinary artificer does sufficiently
understand it.

The species of local violent motion are by Aristotle reckoned to be these
four: Pulsio. Phys. l. 7. c. 3.
Tractio. Vectio. Vertigo.
Thrusting, Drawing, Carrying, Turning. Unto some of which all these
artificial operations must necessarily be reduced, the strength of any power
being equally applyable unto all of them; So that there is no work impossible
to these contrivances, but there may be as much acted by this art, as can be
fancied by imagination.

CAP. XV. Concerning the proportion of slownesse and swiftness in Mechanical
motions.
HAving already discoursed concerning the strength of these Mechanical
faculties: it remains for the more perfect discovery of their natures, that we
treat somewhat concerning those two differences of artificial motion:
Slownesse, and Swiftness.
Without the right understanding of which, a man shall be exposed to many
absurd mistakes, in attempting of those things, which are either in themselves
impossible, or else not to be performed with such means as are applied unto
them. I may safely affirm, that many, if not most mistakes in these Mechanical
designs, do arise from a mis-apprehension of that difference, which there will
be betwixt the slownesse or swiftness of the weight and power, in comparison
to the proportion of their several strengths.

Hence it is, that so many engines invented for mines and waterworks do so
often fail in the performance of that for which they were intended, because the
artificers many times do forget to allow so much time for the working of their
engine, as may be proportionable to the difference betwixt the weight and power
that belong unto them: whereas he that rightly understands the grounds of this
art, may as easily find out the difference of space and time, required to the
motion of the weight and power, as he may their different strengths; and not
only tell how any power may move any weight, but also in what a space of time
it may move it any space or distance.

If it were possible to contrive such an invention, whereby any conceivable
weight may be moved by any conceivable power, both with the same quickness and
speed (as it is in those things which are immediately stirred by the hand,
without the help of any other instrument) the works of nature would be then too
much subjected to the power of art: and men might be thereby encouraged (with
the builders of Babell, or the rebel Giants) to such bold designs as would
not become a created being. And therefore the wisdom of providence has so
confined these humane arts, that what any invention has in the strength of its
motion, is abated in the slowness of it: and what it has in the extraordinary
quickness of its motion, must be allowed for in the great strength that is
required unto it.

For it is to be observed as a general rule, that the space of time or place,
in which the weight is moved, in comparison to that, in which the power does
move, is in the same proportion as they themselves are unto one another.

So that if there be any great difference betwixt the strength of the weight
and the power, the same kind of differences will there be in the spaces of
their motion.

To illustrate this by an example: Let the line GAB, represent a balance or
leaver, the weight being supposed at the point G, the fulciment at A, and the
power sustaining the weight at B. Suppose the point G, unto which the weight is
fastened, to be elevated unto F, and the opposite point B, to be depressed unto
C; it is evident that the arch FG, or (which is all one) DE, does show the space
of the weight, and the arch BC, the motion of the power. Now both these arches
have the same proportion unto one another, as there is betwixt the weight and
the power, or (which is all one) as there is betwixt their several distances
from the fulciment. Suppose AG, unto AB, to be as one unto four, it may then be
evident that FG, or DE, will be in the same proportion unto BC. For as any two
Semidiameters are unto one another, so are the several circumferences
described by them, as also any proportional parts of the same circumferences.

And as the weight and power do thus differ in the spaces of their motions, so
likewise in the slownesse of it; the one moving the whole distance BC, in the
same time, wherein the other passes only GF. So that the motion of the power
from B to C, is four times swifter then that of the weight from G to F. And
thus will it be, if we suppose the disproportions to be far greater, whether or
no we conceive it, either by a continuation of the same instrument and faculty,
as in the former example, or by a multiplication of diverse, as in Pulleys,
Wheels, etc. By how much the power is in it self less then the weight, by so
much will the motion of the weight be slower, then that of the power.

To this purpose I shall briefly touch at one of the Diagrams expressed before
in the twelfth Chapter, concerning the multiplication of Leavers.



In which, as each instrument does diminish the weight according to a decuple
proportion, so also do they diminish the space and slownesse of its motion.
For if we should conceive the first Leaver B, to be depressed unto its lowest,
suppose ten foot, yet the weight A, would not be raised above one foot; but now
the second Leaver at its utmost could move but a tenth part of the first, and
the third Leaver but a tenth part of the second, and so of the rest. So that
the last Leaver F, being depressed, will pass a space 100000 greater, and by a
motion, 100000 swifter then the weight at A.

Thus are we to conceive of all the other faculties, wherein there is
constantly the same disproportio^ betwixt the weight and power, in respect of
the spaces and slownesse of their motions, as there is betwixt their several
gravities. If the power be unto the weight, but as one unto a hundred, then the
space through which the weight moves, will be a hundred times less, and
consequently the motion of the weight a hundred times slower then that of the
power.

So that it is but a vain and impossible fancy for any one to think that he can
move a great weight with a little power in a little space; but in all these
Mechanical attempts, that advantage which is gotten in the strength of the
motion, must be still allowed for in the slownesse of it.

Though these contrivances do so extremely increase the power, yet they do
proportionably protract the time. That which by such helps one man may do in a
hundred days, may be done by the immediate strength of a hundred men in one day.

CAP. XVI. That it is possible to contrive such an artificial motion, as shall
be of a slownesse proportionable to the swiftness of the heavens.
IT were a pretty subtilty to inquire after, whether or no it be not possible
to contrive such an artificial motion, that should be in such a proportion
slow, as the heavens are supposed to be swift.

For the exact resolution of which, it would be requisite that we should first
pitch upon some medium, or indifferent motion, by the distance from which, we
may judge of the proportions on either side, whether slownesse or swiftness.
Now because there is not any such natural medium, which may be absolutely
styled an indifferent motion, but that the swiftness and slownesse of every
thing, is still proportioned either to the quantity of bodies, in which they
are, or some other particular end for which they are designed; therefore we
must take liberty to suppose such a motion, and this we may conceive to be
about 1000 paces, or a mile in an hour.

The starry heaven, or 8th sphere is thought to move 42398437 miles in the same
space: So that if it may be demonstrated that it is possible to contrive such a
motion, which going on in a constant direct course, shall pass but the
42398437 part of a mile in an hour, it will then be evident, that an
artificial motion may be slow, in the same proportion as the heavens are
swift.

Now it was before manifested that according to the difference betwixt the
weight and power, so will the difference be betwixt the slownesse or swiftness
of their motions; whence it will follow, that in such an engine, wherein the
weight shall be 42398437 pounds, and the power that does equiponderate it, but
the 42398437 part of a pound (which is easy to contrive) in this engine the
power being supposed to move with such a swiftness, as may be answerable to a
mile an hour, the weight will pass but the 42398437 part of a mile in the
same space, and so consequently will be proportionably slow unto the swiftness
of the heavens.

It is related by our Countryman I. Dee, that he and Cardan being both
together in their travels, Preface to Euclid.
they did see an instrument which was at first sold for 20 talents of gold,
wherein there was one wheel, which constantly moving round amongst the rest,
did not finish one revolution under the space of seven thousand years.

But if we farther consider such an instrument of wheels as was mentioned
before in the 14 chapter, with which the whole world might be easily moved, we
shall then find that the motion of the weight by that, must be much more slow,
then the heavens are swift. For though we suppose (says Stevinus) the handle
of such an engine with 12 wheels to be turned about 4000 times in an hour, De
stat. pract.
(which is as often as a man's pulse does beat) yet in ten years space the
weight by this would not be moved above 10512/2400 0000000000000000 parts of
one foot, which is nothing near so much as a hairs breadth. And it could not
pass an inch in 1000000 years, says Mersennus. Phaenom. Mechan prop. 11.


The truth of which we may more easily conceive, if we consider the frame and
manner of this 12 wheeld engine. Suppose that in each axis or nut, there were
ten teeth, and on each wheel a thousand: then the sails of this engine must be
turned a hundred times, before the first wheel, (reckoning downward) could be
moved round once, and ten thousand times before the second wheel can finish one
revolution, and so through the 12 wheels, according to this multiplied
proportion.

So that besides the wonder which there is in the force of these Mechanical
motions, the extreme slownesse of them is no less admirable. If a man consider
that a body should remain in such a constant direct motion, that there could
not be one minute of time, wherein it did not rid some space, and pass on
further, and yet that this body in many years together, should not move so far
as a hairs breadth.

Which notwithstanding may evidently appear from the former instance. For since
it is a natural principle, that there can be no penetration of bodies, and
since it is supposed, that each of the parts in this engine do touch one
another in their superficies, therefore it must necessarily follow, that the
weight does begin and continue to move with the power: and (however it is
insensible) yet it is certain there must be such a motion so extremely slow, as
is here specified. So full is this art of rate and incredible subtilties.

I know it is the assertion of Cardan, Motus valde tardi, De varietate rerum l.
9. c. 47.
necessario quietes habent intermedias. Extreme slow motions have necessarily
some intermediate stops and rests: But this is only said, not proved, and he
speaks it from sensible experiments, which in this case are fallible. Our
senses being very incompetent judges of the several proportions, whether
greatness or littleness, slownesse or swiftness, which there may be amongst
things in nature. For ought we know, there may be some Organicall bodies, as
much less then ours, as the earth is bigger. We see what strange discoveries
of extreme minute bodies, (as lice, wheal-worms, mites, and the like) are made
by the Microscope, wherein their several parts (which are altogether invisible
to the bare eye) will distinctly appear: and perhaps there may be other insects
that live upon them as they do upon us. It Is certain that our senses are
extremely disproportioned for comprehending the whole compass and latitude of
things. And because there may be such difference in the motion as well as in
the magnitude of bodies; therefore, though such extreme slownesse may seem
altogether impossible to sense and common apprehension, yet this can be no
sufficient argument against the reality of it.

CAP. XVII. Of swiftness: how it may be increased to any kind of proportion.
Concerning the great force of Archimedes his Engines. Of the Ballista.
BY that which has been already explained concerning the slowness of motion,
we may the better understand the nature of swiftness, both of them (as is the
nature of opposites) being produced by contrary causes. As the greatness of
the weight in respect of the power, and the great distance of the power from
the fulciment, in comparison to that of the weight, does cause a slow motion:
So the greatness of the power above the weight, and the greater distance of
the weight from the center, in comparison to that of the power does cause a
swift motion. And as it is possible to contrive a motion unto any kind of
slownesse, by finding out an answerable disproportion betwixt the weight and
power: so likewise unto any kind of swiftness. For so much as the weight does
exceed the power, by so much will the motion of the weight be slower, and so
much as the power does exceed the weight, by so much will the motion of the
weight be swifter.



In the Diagram set down before, if we suppose F, to be the place of the power,
and C of the weight, the point A, being the fulciment or center, then in the
same space of time, wherein the power does move from F, to G, the weight will
pass from C, to B. These distances having the same disproportion unto one
another, as there is betwixt AF, and AC, which is supposed to be quadruple. So
that in this example, the weight will move four times swifter then the power.
And according as the power does exceed the weight in any greater
disproportion, so will the swiftness of the weight be augmented.

Hence may we conceive the reason of that great force which there is in
Slings, which have so much a greater swiftness, then a stone thrown from the
hand, by how much the end of the Sling is farther off from the shoulder-joynt,
which is the center of motion. The sacred history concerning David's victory
over Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.49.
may sufficiently evidence the force of these. Lipsius Polio. l. 4. Dialog. 2.
Vegetius relates that it was usual this way to strike a man dead, and beat
the soul out of his body, without so much as breaking his armor or fetching
blood. Membris integris laethale tamen vulnus important, and sine invidia*
sanguinis, hostis lapidis ictu intereat.

In the use of these, many of the Ancients have been of very exquisite and
admirable skill. We read of seven hundred Benjamites left handed, Judges 20.16.
that could sling a stone at a hairs breadth, and not miss. And there is the
like storied of a whole Nation amongst the Indians, who from their excellency
in this art were styled Baleares. (...). Diodor. Sicul. Biblioth l. 5. L.
Florus Hist. l. 3. cap. 8. Io: Boemus Aubanus de moribus gentium l. 3. c. 26.
They were so strict in teaching this art unto their young ones; Vt cibum puer
a matre non accipit, nisi quem ipsa monstrante percussit, That the mother
would not give any meat to her child, till (being set at some distance) he
could hit it with slinging.

For the farther illustration of this subject, concerning the swiftness of
motion, I shall briefly specify some particulars concerning the engines of
war used by the Ancients. Amongst these, the most famous and admirable were
those invented by Archimedes, by which he did perform such strange exploits, as
(were they not related by so many and such judicious Authors) would scarce
seem credible even to these more learned ages. The acts of that famous
Engineer, are largely set down by Histor. l. 4
Polybius, Histor. Obilius 2. histor. 55.
Tzetzes, Li. 2. c. 3.
Proclus, Marcellus.
Plutarch, Histor. l. 24.
Livy, and diverse others. From the first of whom alone, we may have
sufficient evidence for the truth of those relations. For besides that he is an
Author noted to be very grave and serious in his discourse; and does solemnly
promise in one place that he will relate nothing, Histor. l. 4. juxta initium.
but what either he himself was an eyewitness of, or else what he had
received from those that were so; I say, besides all this, it is considerable,
that he himself was born not above thirty years after the siege of Syracuse.
And afterward having occasion to tarry some weeks in that City, when he
traveled with Scipio, he might there perhaps see those engines himself, or at
least take his information from such as were eye-vvitnesses of their force: So
that there can be no colorable pretense for any one to distrust the
particulars related of them.

In brief, the sum of their reports is this: When the Roman forces under the
conduct of Marcellus, had laid siege unto that famous City, (of which, both by
their former successes, and their present strength, they could not choose but
promise themselves a speedy victory;) yet the arts of this one Mathematician,
notwithstanding all their policies and resolutions, did still beat them back to
their great disadvantage. Whether they were near the wall or farther from it,
they were still exposed to the force of his engines, (...). From the multitude
of those stones and arrows, which he shot against them, was he styled (...),
Cael: Rhod: Ant: lect: l. 2. c. 16. Pluteus Testudo.
or Briareus. Those defensive engines that were made by the Romans in the form
of Pent-houses for to cover the assailants from the weapons of the besieged,
these would he presently batter in pieces with great stones and blocks. Those
high towers erected in some of the ships, out of which the Romans might more
conveniently fight with the defendants on the wall, these also were so broken
by his engines, that no Cannon or other instrument of Gunpowder, Sir Walt:
Raleigh histor. l. 5. c. 3. 16.
(says a learned man) had they been then in use, could have done greater
mischief. In brief, he did so molest them with his frequent and prodigious
batteries, that the common soldiers were utterly discouraged from any hopes of
success.

What was the particular frame and manner of these engines cannot certainly be
determined, but to contrive such as may perform the like strange effects, were
not very difficult to any one who is thoroughly versed in the grounds of this
art. Though perhaps those of Archimedes in respect of diverse circumstances,
were much more exact and proper for the purposes to which they were
intended, then the invention of others could be; He himself being so
extraordinarily subtle and ingenious above the common sort of men.

It Is probable that the general kind of these engines, were the same with
those that were used afterward amongst the Romans and other Nations. These
were commonly divided into two sorts: styled Ballistae. Catapultae.
Both which names are sometimes used promiscuously; Vid. Naudaeum de Stud.
Militar. l. 2.
but according to their propriety (...), called also (...). Fundibalus.
Petraria.
Ballista does signify an engine for the shooting of stones, and Catapulta for
darts or arrows.

The former of these was fitted either to carry diverse lesser stones, or else
one greatest one. Some of these engines made for great stones, have been
proportioned to so vast and immense a weight, as may seem almost incredible:
which occasioned that in Lucan, Lib. 3.
At saxum quoties ingenti verberis ictu
Excutitur, qualis rupes qua^ vertice montis
Abscidit impulsu ventoru^ adjuta vetustas,
Frangit cunctarue^s; nec tantu^ corpora pressa
Exanimat, totos cu^ sanguine dissipat artus.


With these, they could easily batter down the walls and Towers of any Fort: So
Ovid. Quam grave ballistae moenia pulsat onus. And Statius -- Quo turbine
bellica quondam
Librati saliunt portarum in claustra molares.


The stones that were cast from these, were of any form, Lipsius Poliorcet. l.
3. Dial. 3.
Enormes and sepulchrales, Milstones or Tombe-stones. Sometimes for the farther
annoyance and terror of any besieged place, they would by these throw into it
dead bodies, either of men or horses, and sometimes only parts of them as men's
heads.

Athenaeus mentions one of these Ballistae that was proportioned unto a stone
of three talents weight, Deipnosoph. l. 5.
each talent being 120 pounds (says Vitruvius) so that the whole will amount
to 360 pounds. Archit. l. 10. c. ult. (...). Plut. Marcell.
But it is storied of Archimedes, that he cast a stone into one of Marcellus
his ships, which was found to weight ten talents. There is some difference
amongst* Dav. Rivaltus Common. in Archim. Oper. Ext.
Authors, concerning what kind of talent this should be understood, but it is
certain that in Plutarchs time, (from who^ we have this relation) one tale^t
did amount to 120 pounds (says Suidas: Naudaeus de studio. Milit. l. 2.
) according to which account, the stone it self was of no less then twelve
hundred pound weight. A weapon (one would think) big enough for those rebel
Giants that fought against the gods. Now the greatest Cannon in use, does not
carry above 64 pound weight, which is far short of the strength in these
Mathematical contrivances. Amongst the Turks indeed, there have been sometimes
used such powder instruments, as may equal the force of those invented by
Archimedes. Gab. Naudaeus tells us of one bullet shot from them at the siege of
Constantinople, De Stud. Mil. l. 2.
which was of above 1200 pound weight; This he affirms from the relation of an
Archbishop, who was then present and did see it; the piece could not be drawn
by less then a hundred and fifty yoke of oxen, which might almost have served
to draw away the Town it self. But though there has been perhaps some one or
two Cannons of such a prodigious magnitude, yet it is certain that the biggest
in common use, does come far short of that strength, which was ordinarily in
these Mechanical engines.

There are diverse figures of these Ballistae, set out by Vegetius, Lipsius, See
Rob: Valteurius dear Milit. l. 10. c. 4.
and others; but being without any explication, it is not very facil to
discover in what their forces did consist.

I have here expressed one of them most easy to be apprehended, from the
understanding of which, you may the better guess at the nature of the rest.



That great box or cavity at Ai, is supposed to be full of some heavy weight,
and is forced up by the turning of the axis and spokes BC. The stone or bullet
to be discharged being in a kind of sling at D, which when the greater weight
A, descends, will be violently whirled upwards, till that end of the sling at
E, coming to the top will fly off, and discharge the stone as the skillful
Artist should direct it.

CAP. XVIII. Concerning the Catapultae, or Engines for Arrows.
THe other kind of engine was called Catapulta, (...), In Greek (...).
Athenaeus. Deipnos. l. 5.
which signifies a spear or dart, because it was used for the shooting of such
weapons: some of these were proportioned unto spears of twelve cubits long;
they did carry with so great a force, Lib. 23.
ut interdum nimio ardore scintillant, Lipsius Poliorcet. l. 3. Dial. 2.
(says Ammianus) that the weapons discharged from them were sometimes (if you
can believe it) set on fire by the swiftness of their motion.

Diod. Sicul. Biblioth. l. 14. Sardus de Invent. Rerum. l. 2.
The first invention of these is commonly ascribed to Dionysius the younger, who
is said to have made them amongst his other preparations against Carthage. But
we have good reason to think them of more ancient use, because we read in
Scripture that Vzziah made in Jerusalem engines invented by cunning men to
shoot arrows and great stones withal, 2 Chronicles. 26.15.
though it is likely these inventions were much bettered by the experience of
after ages.

The usual form of these Catapultae, was much after the manner of great Bows
placed on Carriages, and wound up by the strength of several persons. And from
that great force which we find in lesser Bows, we may easily guess at the
greater power of these other engines. Sir Fran: Bacon Not. Hist. Exp. 704.
It Is related of the Turkish Bow, that it can strike an arrow through a piece
of steel or brass two inches thick, and being headed only with wood, it
pierces Timber of eight inches. Which though it may seem incredible, yet it is
attested by the experience of diverse unquestionable witnesses: Barclay in his
Icon animorum, a man of sufficient credit, affirms that he was an eyewitness,
how one of these Bows with a little arrow did pierce through a piece of steel
three fingers thick. And yet these Bows being somewhat like the long Bows in
use amongst us, were bent only by a man's immediate strength, without the help
of any bender or rack that are used to others.

Some Turkish Bows are of that strength, as to pierce a plank of six inches in
thickness, (I speak what I have seen) says M. Io: Greaves in his
Pyramodographia. How much greater force then may we conceive to be impressed by
the Catapultae?

These were sometimes framed for the discharging of two or three arrows
together, so that each of them might be directed unto a several aim. But it
were as easy to contrive the^ after the like manner for the carriage of twenty
arrows, or more, as in this figure.



Both these kinds of engines when they were used at the siege of any City, were
commonly carried in a great wooden Turret (first invented by Who was therefore
styled Poliorcetes. This kind of Turret was first used at the siege of Cyprus,
and is thus described by Diodorus Sicul. Biblioth. l. 20.
Demetrius.) It was driven upon four wheels at the bottom, each of its sides
being forty five cubits, its height ninety. The whole was divided in nine
several partitions, every one of which did contain diverse engines for battery:
from its use in the battering and taking of Cities it is styled by the name of
Helepolis.

He that would be informed in the nature of Bows, let him consult Mersennus De
Ballistica and Acontismologia, where there are diverse subtle inquiries and
demonstrations, concerning the strength required to the bending of them to any
distance. The force they have in the discharge according to several bents, the
strength required to be in the string of them, the several proportions of
swiftness and distance in an arrow shot vertically, or horizontally, or
transversally.

Those strange effects of the Turkish Bow (mentioned before) so much exceeding
the force of others, which yet require far greater strength for the bending of
them, may probably be ascribed either to the natural cause of attraction by
similitude of substance (as the Lord Bacon conjectures.) For in these
experiments the head of the arrow should be of the same substance (whether
steel or wood) with that which it pierces: Or else to that just proportion
betwixt the weight of the arrow, and the strength of the bow, which must needs
much conduce to the force of it, and may perhaps be more exactly discovered in
these, then it is commonly in others.

CAP. XIX. A comparison betwixt these ancient engines, and the Gunpowder
instruments now in use.
IT shall not be altogether impertinent to inquire somewhat concerning the
advantages and disadvantages betwixt those Military offensive engines, used
amongst the Ancients, and those of these later ages.

In which inquiry there are two particulars to be chiefly examined:

1. The force of these several contrivances, or the utmost that may be done by
them.

2. Their price, or the greatness of the charges required unto them.

1. As for the force of these ancient inventions, it may sufficiently appear
from those many credible relations mentioned before; De bello Iudaico. l. 3. c.
9.
to which may be added that in Josephus, which he sets down from his own
eyesight, being himself a chief Captain at the siege of Iotapata, where these
events happened. He tells us that besides the multitude of persons, who were
slain by these Roman Engines, being not able to avoid their force, by reason
they were placed so far off, and out of sight; Besides this, they did also
carry such great stones, with so great a violence, that they did therewith
batter down their walls and Towers. A great bellied woman walking about the City
in the day time, had her child struck out of her womb, and carried half a
furlong from her. A soldier standing by his Captain Josephus, on the wall, had
his head struck off by another stone sent from these Roman Engines, and his
brains carried three furlongs off.

To this purpose Cardan relates out of Ammianus Marcellinus. De variet. l. 12.
c. 58.
Tanto impetu fertur lapis ut uno viso lapide quamvis intacti barbari fuerint
ab eo, destiterunt a pugna and abierunt. Many forain people being so amazed at
the strange force of these Engines, that they durst not contest with those who
were masters of such inventions. It Is frequently asserted, that bullets have
been melted in the air, by that extremity of violent motion impressed from these
slings. Fundaque contorto transverberat era plumbo,
Et mediis liquidae glandes in nubibus errant.


So Lucan, speaking of the same Engines. Inde faces and saxa volant, spatioque
solutae
Aeris and calidae liquefactae pondere glandes.
Which relations, though they may seem somewhat poetical and improbable, yet
Aristotle himself ( De coelo lib. 2. c. 7.) does suppose them as
unquestionable. From whence it may be inferred, that the force of these Engines
does rather exceed then come short of our Gunpowder inventions.

Add to this that opinion of a learned man (which I cited before) that
Archimedes in the siege of Syracuse, Sir Walt. Raleigh. Hist. l. 5. c. 3. 16.
See Lipsius de militia Romana. l. 5.
did more mischief with his Engines, then could have been wrought by any
Cannons, had they been then in use.

In this perhaps there may be some disadvantage, because these Mathematical
Engines cannot be so easily and speedily wound up, and so certainly levelled as
the other may.

2. As for the price or charges of both these, it may be considered under three
particulars: 1. Their making. 2. Their carriage or conveyance. 3. Their charge
and discharging.


In all which respects, the Cannons now in use, are of much greater cost then
these other inventions.

1. The making or price of these Gunpowder instruments is extremely expensive,
as may be easily judged by the weight of their materials. A whole Cannon
weighing commonly 8000 l. a half Cannon 5000, a Culverin 4500, a Demiculverin
3000; which whether it be in iron or brass, must needs be very costly, only
for the matter of them; besides the farther charges required for the form and
making of them, which in the whole must needs amount to several hundred
pounds. Whereas these Mathematical inventions consisting chiefly of Timber,
and cords, may be much more cheaply made; The several degrees of them which
shall answer in proportion to the strength of those other, being at the least
ten times cheaper; that is, ten Engines that shall be of equal force either to
a Cannon or Demicannon, Culverin or Demiculverin, may be framed at the same
price that one of these will amount to: So that in this respect there is a
great inequality.

2. As for their carriage or conveyance; a whole Cannon does require at the
least 90 men, or 16 horses, for the draught of it; a half Cannon 56 men, or 9
horses; a Culverin 50 men, or 8 horses; a Demiculverin 36 men, or 7 horses;
Supposing the way to be hard and plain, in which notwithstanding the motion will
be very slow. But if the passage prove rising and steep, or rotten and dirty,
then they will require a much greater strength and charge for the conveyance of
them. Whereas these other inventions are in themselves more light (if there be
occasion for the draught of them) being easily taken asunder into several
parts. And besides, their materials are to be found every where, so that they
need not be carried up and down at all, but may be easily made in the place
where they are to be used.

3. The materials required to the charging of these Gunpowder instruments, are
very costly. A whole Cannon requiring for every charge 40 pound of powder, and
a bullet of 64 pounds; a half Cannon 18 pound of powder, and a bullet of 24
pounds; a Culverin 16 pounds of powder, and a bullet of 19 pounds; a
Demiculverin 9 pounds of powder, and a bullet of 12 pounds: whereas those other
Engines may be charged only with stones, or (which may serve for terror) with
dead bodies, or any such materials as every place will afford without any cost.

So then, put all these together: If it be so that those ancient inventions did
not come short of these other in regard of force, and if they do so much
excel them in diverse other respects; It should seem then, that they are much
more commodious then these later inventions, and should be preferred before
them. But this inquiry cannot be fully determined without particular experience
of both.

CAP. XX. That it is possible to contrive such an artificial motion, as may be
equally swift with the supposed motion of the heavens.
FOr the conclusion of this Discourse, I shall briefly examine (as before
concerning slownesse) whether it be possible to contrive such an artificial
motion, as may be equal unto the supposed swiftness of the heavens. This
question has been formerly proposed and answered by Cardan, De Variet. Rerum
l. 9. c. 47.
where he applies it unto the swiftness of the moons orb; but that orb being
the lowest of all, and consequently of a dull and sluggish motion, in
comparison to the rest; therefore it will perhaps be more convenient to
understand the question concerning the eight sphere or starry heaven.

For the true resolution of this, it should be first observed, that a material
substance is altogether incapable of so great a celerity, as is usually
ascribed to the celestial orbs. (as I have proved elsewhere) And therefore the
quaere is not to be understood of any real and experimental, The earth a
planet, prop. 9.
but only notionall, and Geometrical contrivance.

Now that the swiftness of motion may be thus increased, according to any
conceivable proportion, will be manifest from what has been formerly
delivered, concerning the grounds and nature of slownesse and swiftness. For
according as we shall suppose the power to exceed the weight: so may the motion
of the weight be swifter then that of the power.

But to answer more particularly: Let us imagine every wheel in this following
figure to have a hundred teeth in it, and every nut ten: It may then be
evident, that one revolution of the first wheel, will turn the nut, and
consequently the second wheel on the same axis ten times, the third wheel a
hundred times, the fourth 1000 times, the fifth 10000 the sixth a hundred
thousand times, the seventh 1000000 times, the eight 10000000 times the ninth
100000000 times, the sails 1000000000 times: So that if we suppose the
compass of these sails to be 5 foot, or one pace: and that the first wheel is
turned about after the rate of one thousand times in an hour: It will the^ be
evident, that the sails shall be turned 1000000000000. times, and consequently
shall pass 100000000 miles in the same space. Whereas a star in the Equator
(according to common Hypothesis) does move but 42398437 miles in an hour, and
therefore it is evident that it is possible Geometrically to contrive such an
artificial motion, as shall be of greater swiftness, then the supposed
revolutions of the heavens.

DAEDALVS, OR, MECHANICAL Motions.
CHAP. I. The diverse kinds of Automata, or Self-movers. Of Mils, and the
contrivance of several motions by rarefied air. A brief digressio^ concerning
wind-guns.
AMongst the variety of artificial motions, those are of most use and
pleasure, in which, by the application of some continued strength, there is
bestowed a regular and lasting motion.

These we call the (...), or self-movers: which name in its utmost latitude, is
sometimes ascribed unto those motions, that are contrived from the strength of
living creatures, as Chariots, Carts, etc. But in its strictness and
propriety, it is only appliable unto such inventions, wherein the motion is
caused either by something that belongs unto its own frame, or else by some
external inanimate agent.

Whence these (...) are easily distinguishable into two sorts:

1. Those that are moved by something which is extrinsecall unto their own
frame, as Mils by water or wind.

2. Those that receive their motion from something that does belong to the
frame it self, as clocks, watches, by weights, springs, or the like.

Of both which sorts, there have been many excellent inventions: In the
recital of them, I shall insist chiefly on such as are most eminent for their
rarity and subtilty.

Amongst the (...) that receive their motion from some external agent, those
of more common use are Mils.

And first, the Water-mils, which are thought to be before the other, though
neither the first Author, nor so much as the time wherein they were invented is
fully known. And therefore Polydor Virgil refers them amongst other fatherless
inventions. De invent. Rerum, l. 3. c. 18. Not. Hist. l. 18. c. 10.
Pliny indeed does mention them, as being commonly used in his time: and yet
others affirm, that Bellisarius in the reign of Justinian, did first invent
them; De Repert. Tit. 22.
Whence Pancirollus concludes that it is likely their use was for some space
intermitted, and being afterward renewed again, they were then thought to be
first discovered.

However it is certain, that this invention has much abridged and advantaged
the labors of men, who were before condemned unto this slavery, as now unto
the Galleys. Ad Pistrinum.
And as the force of waters has been useful for this, so likewise may it be
contrived to diverse other purposes. Herein does the skill of an artificer
chiefly consist, in the application of these common motions unto various and
beneficial ends, making them serviceable not only for the grinding of corn,
but for the preparing of iron or other oar, the making of paper, the elevating
of water or the like.

To this purpose also are the Mils that are driven by wind, which are so much
more convenient then the other, by how much their situations may be more easy
and common. The motions of these may likewise be accommodated to as various
uses as the other, there being scarce any labor, to the performance of which,
an ingenious artificer cannot apply them. To the sawing of Timber, the plowing
of land, or any other the like service, which cannot be dispatched the ordinary
way, without much toil and tediousness. And it is a wonderful thing to
consider, how much men's labors might be eased and contracted in sundry
particulars, if such as were well skilled in the prinples and practices of
these Mechanical experiments, would but thoroughly apply their studies unto
the enlargement of such inventions.

There are some other motions by wind or air, which (though they are not so
common as the other, yet) may prove of excellent curiosity, and singular use.
Such was that musical instrument invented by Cornelius Dreble, Marcell.
Vrankhein. Epist. ad Ioh. Ernestum.
which being set in the sunshine, would of it self render a soft and pleasant
harmony, but being removed into the shade, Like that statue of Memnon in
Egypt, which makes a strange noise when ever the sun begins to shine upon it.
Tacit. Anal. 2. Strabo affirms that he had both seen and heard it.
would presently become silent. The reason of it was this: the warmth of the
sun, working upon some moisture within it, and rarifying the inward air unto so
great an extension, that it must needs seek for vent or issue, did thereby give
several motions unto the instrument.

Somewhat of this nature are the Aeolipiles, which are concave vessels,
consisting of some such material as may endure the fire, having a small hole,
at which they are filled with water, and out of which (when the Vessels are
heated) the air does issue forth with a strong and lasting violence. These are
frequently used for the exciting and contracting of heat in the melting of
glasses or metals. They may also be contrived to be serviceable for sundry
other pleasant uses, as for the moving of sails in a chimney corner, the motion
of which sails may be applied to the turning of a spit, or the like.

But there is a better invention to this purpose mentioned in Cardan, De
Varies* Reru^ l. 12. c. 58.
whereby a spit may be turned (without the help of weights) by the motion of
the air that ascends the Chimney; and it may be useful for the roasting of
many or great joints: for as the fire must be increased according to the
quantity of meat, so the force of the instrument will be augmented
proportionably to the fire. In which contrivance there are these conveniences
above the Jacks of ordinary use.

1. It makes little or no noise in the motion.

2. It needs no winding up, but will constantly move of it self, while there is
any fire to rarifie the air.

3. It is much cheaper then the other instruments that are commonly used to
this purpose. There being required unto it only a pair of sails, which must
be placed in that part of the chimnie where it begins to be straightned, and
one wheel to the axis of which the spit line must be fastened, according to this
following Diagram.



The motion of these sails may likewise be serviceable for sundry other
purposes, besides the turning of a spit; for the chiming of bells or other
musical devices; and there cannot be any more pleasant contrivance for
continual and cheap music. It may be useful also for the reeling of yarn,
the rocking of a cradle, with diverse the like domestic occasions. For (as was
said before) any constant motion being given, it is easy for an ingenious
artificer to apply it unto various services.

These sails will always move both day and night, if there is but any fire
under them, and sometimes though there be none. For if the air without be much
colder then that within the room, then must this which is more warm and
rarefied, naturally ascend through the chimney, to give place unto the more
condensed and heavy, which does usually blow in at every chink or cranny, as
experience shows.

Unto this kind of motion may be reduced all those representations of living
creatures, whether birds, or beasts, invented by Ctesibius, which were for the
most part performed by the motion of air, being forced up either by
rarefaction, with fire, or else by compression, through the fall of some
heavier body, as water, which by possessing the place of the air, did thereby
drive it to seek for some other vent.

I cannot here omit (though it be not altogether so pertinent) to mention that
late ingenious invention of the winde-gun, which is charged by the forcible
compression of air, being injected through a Syringe; the strife and distention
of the imprisoned air serving by the help of little falls or shuts within, to
stop and keep close the vents by which it was admitted. The force of it in the
discharge is almost equal to our powder-guns. I have found upon frequent
trials (says Mersennus) that a leaden bullet shot from one of these gunnes
against a stone wall, Phenomenon pneumatica, prop. 32.
the space of 24 paces from it, will be beaten into a thin plate. It would be
a considerable addition to this experiment which the same Author mentions a
little after, whereby he will make the same charge of air to serve for the
discharge of several arrows or bullets after one another, by giving the air
only so much room, as may immediately serve to impresse a violence in sending
away the arrow or bullet, and then screwing it down again to its former
confinement, to fit it for another shooting. But against this there may be many
considerable doubts, which I cannot stand to discuss.

CAP. II. Of a sailing Chariot, that may without horses be driven on the land
by the wind as ships are on the sea.
THe force of wind in the motion of sails may be applied also to the driving of
a Chariot, by which a man may sail on the land as well as by a ship on the
water. The labor of horses or other beasts, which are usually applied to this
purpose, being artificially supplied by the strength of winds.

That such Chariots are commonly used in the Champion plains of China, is
frequently affirmed by diverse credible Authors. De incremento Vrbium l. 1. c.
10.
Boterus mentions that they have been tried also in Spain, though with what
success he does not specify. But above al other experime^ts to this purpose,
that sailing Chariot at Sceveling in Holland, is more eminently remarkable. It
was made by the direction of Stephinus, and is celebrated by many Authors.
Fabularum docas, Fab. 9.
Walchius affirms it to be of so great a swiftness for its motion, and yet of
so great a capacity for its burden, Vt in medio freto secundis ventis commissas
naves, velocitate multis parasangis post se relinquat, and pancaru^ horarum
spatio, viginti aut triginta milliaria Germanica continuo cursu emetiatur,
concreditosque sibi plus minus vectores sex aut dece^, inpetitu^ locu^
tra^sferat, facillime illius ad clavu^ qui sedet nutu, quaqua versum minimo
labor velis commissum, mirabile hoc continenti currus navigiu^ dirigentis.
That it did far exceed the speed of any ship, though we should suppose it to be
carried in the open sea with never so prosperous wind: and that in some few
hours space it would convey 6 or 10 persons, 20 or 30 German miles, and all
this with very little labor of him that sits at the Stearn, who may easily
guide the course of it as he pleases.

That eminent inquisitive man Peireskius, having traveled to Sceveling for the
sight and experience of this chariot, would frequently after with much wonder
mention the extreme swiftnes of its motion. Commemorare solebat stupore^ quo
correptus fuerat cum vento translatus citatissimo non persentiscere tamen, Pet.
Gassendus. Vita Peireskii, l. 2.
nempe ta^ citus erat qua^ ventus. Though the wind were in it self very swift
and strong, yet to passengers in this Chariot, it would not be at all
discernable, because they did go with an equal swiftness to the wind it
self. Men that ran before it seeming to go backwards, things which seem at a
great distance being presently overtaken and left behind. In two hours space
it would pass from Sceveling to Putten, which are distant from one another
above 14 Horaria milliaria, (says the same Author) that is more then two and
forty miles.

Grotius is very copious and elegant in the celebrating of this invention, and
the Author of it in diverse Epigrams. Ventivolam Tiphys deduxit in aequora
navim,
Jupiter in stellas, aethereamque domum. Grotii Poemata, Ep. 19.

In terrestre solum virtus Stevinia, nam nec
Tiphy tuum fuerat, nec Iovis istud opus.
And in another place Imposuit plaustro vectantem carbasa, malum
An potius navi, subdidit ille rotas? Ep. 5.

-- Scandit aquas navis currus ruit aere prono,
Et merito dicas hic volat, illa natat.
These relations did at the first seem unto me, (and perhaps they will so to
others) somewhat strange and incredible. But upon farther enquiry I have heard
them frequently attested from the particular eyesight and experience of such
eminent persons, whose names I dare not cite in a business of this nature,
which in those parts is so very common, and little observed.

I have not met with any Author who does treat particularly concerning the
manner of framing this Chariot, though Grotius mentions an elegant description
of it in copper by one Geynius: Epig. 20. and 21.
and Hondius in one of his large maps of Asia, does give another conjecturall
description of the like Chariots used in China.

The form of it is related to be very simple and plain, after this manner.



The body of it being somewhat like a boat, moving upon 4 wheels of an equal
bigness, with two sails like those in a ship; there being some co^trivance to
turn and steer it by moving a rudder which is placed beyond the two hindmost
wheels: and for the stopping of it, this must be done either by letting down
the sail or turning it from the wind.

Of this kind they have frequently in Holland other little Vessels for one or
two persons to go upon the ice, having sledges instead of wheels, being driven
with a sail; the bodies of them like little boats, that if the ice should
break, they might yet safely carry a man upon the water, where the sail would
be still useful for the motion of it.

I have often thought that it would be worth the experiment to enquire, whether
or no such a sailing chariot might not be more conveniently framed with movable
sails, whose force may be impressed from their motion, equivalent to those in a
windmill. Their foremost wheels (as in other Chariots) for the greater
facility, being somewhat lower then the other, answerable to this figure.



In which the sails are so contrived, that the wind from any Coast will have a
force upon them to turn them about, and the motion of these sails must needs
turn the wheels, and consequently carry on the Chariot it self to any place
(though fully against the wind) whither it shall be directed.

The chief doubt will be, whether in such a contrivance every little
ruggedness or unevennes of the ground, will not cause such a jolting of the
Chariot as to hinder the motion of its sails. But this perhaps (if it should
prove so) is capable of several remedies.

I have often wondered, why none of our Gentry who live near great Plains, and
smooth Champions, have attempted any thing to this purpose. The experiments of
this kind being very pleasant, and not costly: what could be more delightful
or better husbandry, then to make use of the wind (which costs nothing, and
eats nothing) in stead of horses* This being very easy to be effected by
those, the convenience of whose habitations does accommodate them for such
experiments.

CAP. III. Concerning the fixed Automata, Clocks, Spheres, representing the
heavenly motions: The several excellencies that are most commendable in such
kind of contrivances.
THe second kind of (...) were described to be such Engines, as did receive a
regular and lasting motion from something belonging to their own frame, whether
weights, or springs, etc.

They are usually distinguished into (...) (...), fixed and stationary. (...),
moveable and transient.


1. The fixed are such as move only according to their several parts, and not
according to their whole frame; In which, though each wheel has a distinct
rotation, yet the whole does still remain unmoved. The chiefest kind of these
are the clocks and watches in ordinary use, the framing of which is so commonly
known by every Mechanic, that I shall not trouble the Reader with any
explication of it. He that desires fuller satisfaction, may see them
particularly described by De Variet Rer. l. 9. c 47.
Cardan, Tract. 2. part 7 l. 1. cap. 4. Repert. Tit. 10. Architect. l. 10. c.
14.
D. Flood, and others.

The first invention of these (says Pancirollus) was taken from that
experiment in the multiplication of wheels mentioned in Vitruvius, where he
speaks of an instrument whereby a man may know how many miles or paces he does
go in any space of time, whether or no he do pass by water in a boat or
ship, or by land in a chariot or coach: they have been contrived also into
little pocket instruments, by which after a man has walked a whole day
together, he may easily know how many steps he has taken. I forbear to enter
upon a larger explication of these kind of Engines, because they are
impertinent unto the chief business that I have proposed for this discourse.
The Reader may see them more particularly described in the above cited place of
Vitruvius, in Subtle. l. 18.
Cardan, Theatrum instrumentorum. Wecker de secretu. l. 15. c. 32.
Bessonius, and others; I have here only mentioned them, as being the first
occasion of the chiefest (...) that are now in use.

Of the same kind with our clocks and watches (though perhaps more elaborate
and subtle) was that sphere invented by Archimedes, Mentioned by Cicero.
Tuscul. Quaest. l. 1. item De Not. Deoru^ l. 2.
which did represent the heavenly motions: the diurnall and annual courses of
the sun, the changes and aspects of the Moon, etc. This is frequently
celebrated in the writings of the Ancients, particularly in that known Epigram
of Claudian: Jupiter in parvo cum cerneret aethera vitro,
Risit, and ad superos talia dicta dedit;
Huccine mortalis progressa potentia curae?
Iam meus in fragili luditur orb labor.
Iura poli, rerumque fidem legesque Deorum,
Ecce Syracusius transtulit art senex.
Inclusus variis famulatur The secret force from which the motion was impressed.
spiritus astris,
Et vivum certis motibus urget opus.
Percurrit proprium mentitus Signifer annum;
Et simulata novo Cynthia mense redit.
Iamque suum volvens audax industria mundu^
Gaudet, and humana sidera mente regit.
Quid falso insontem tonitru Salmonea miror?
Aemula naturae parva reperta manus.
Excellently Translated by T. Randolph.
Jove saw the heavens framed in a little glass,
And laughing, to the gods these words did pass;
Comes then the power of mortal cares so far?
In brittle orbs my labors acted are.
The statutes of the Poles, the faith of things,
The laws of Gods, this Syracusian brings
Hither by art: Spirits enclosed attend
Their several spheres, and with set motions bend
The living work: each year the feigned Sun,
Each month returns the counterfeited Moon.
And viewing now her world, bold industry
Grows proud, to know the heavens his subjects be.
Believe, Salmoneus has false thunders thrown,
For a poor hand is natures rival grown.


But that this Engine should be made of glass, is scarce credible, Instit. l.
2. c. 5.
Lactantius mentioning the relation of it, affirms it to consist of brass,
which is more likely. It may be the outside or case was glass, and the frame
it self of brass. Coelius Rhodoginus, Antiq. lect. l 2. c. 16.
speaking of the wondrous art in the contrivance of this sphere, breaks out
into this quaere. Guide. Vbaldus praef. ad Mechan.
Nonne igitur miraculorum omnium, maximum miraculum est homo? He might have
said Mathematicus: and another to this purpose, Sic manus ejus naturam*
Collect. Mathem. Prooem. ad l. 8.
ut natura ipsa manum imitata putetur. Pappus tells us, that Archimedes writ a
Book de Sphaeropoeia, concerning the manner of framing such Engines, and after
him Posidonius composed another discourse on the same subject, though now
either the ignorance or the envy of time has deprived us of both those works.
And yet the art it self is not quite perished, for we read of diverse the like
contriva^ces in these latter times. De vanit. Sciet. c. 22. Schol. Mathem. l.
1. So Cardan too, l. 17. Monanth. in Mecha. Arist. Com. c. 1. Dr Hackwell,
Apol. l. ^. c. 10. sect. 1.
Agrippa affirms that he himself had seen such a sphere, and Ramus tells us how
he beheld two of them in Paris, the one brought thither amongst other spoils
from Sicily, and the other out of Germany. And it is commonly reported, that
there is yet such a sphere at Strasburg in Germany. De vita Archimedis.
Rivaltus relates how Marinus Burgesius a Norman made two of them in France for
the King. And perhaps these latter (says he) were more exact then the former,
because the heavenly revolutions are now much better understood then before.
And besides it is questionable, whether the use of steel springs was known in
those ancient times; the application of which unto these kind of spheres, must
needs be much more convenient then weights.

It Is related also of the Consul Boethius, that amongst other Mathematical
contrivances, Cassiodor. Chron. Pet. Bertius praef. ad Consolat. Philos.
(for which he was famous) he made a sphere to represent the Suns motion, which
was so much admired, and talked of in those times, that Gundibaldus King of
Burgundy, did purposely send over Ambassadors to Theodoricus the Emperor, with
entreaties that he would be a means to procure one of these spheres from
Boethius; the Emperor thinking hereby to make his kingdom more famous and
terrible unto forain Nations, does write an Epistle to Boethius, persuading him
to send this instrument. Quoties non sunt credituri quod viderint? Quoties hanc
veritatem lusoria somnia putabunt? Et quando fuerint a stupore conversi, non
audedebunt se aequales nobis dicere, apud quos sciunt sapientes talia
cogitasse. So much were all these kind of inventions admired in those ruder and
darker times: whereas the instruments that are now in use amongst us (though
not so much extolled) yet do altogether equal (if not exceed) the other, both
in usefulness and subtilty. The chiefest of these former Engines receiving
their motion from weights, and not from springs, (which as I said before) are
of later and more excellent invention. Polyd. Virgil. de Invent. rerum l 2 c.
5. Cardan Subtle. l. 17.


The particular circumstances for which the Automata of this kind, are most
eminent, may be reduced to these four.

1. The lastingnesse of their motion, without needing of any new supply; for
which purpose there have been some watches contrived to continue without
winding up for a week together, or longer.

2. The easiness and simplicity of their composition; Art it self being but
the facilitating and contracting of ordinary operations, therefore the more
easy and compendious such inventions are, the more artificial should they be
esteemed. And the addition of any such unnecessary parts, as may be supplied
some other way, is a sure sign of unskilfulnesse and ignorance. Those
antiquated engines that did consist of such a needless multitude of wheels,
and springs, and screws, (like the old hypothesis of the heavens) may be
compared to the notions of a confused knowledge, which are always full of
perplexity and complications, and seldom in order; whereas the inventions of
art are more regular, simple, and perspicuous, like the apprehensions of a
distinct and thoroughly informed judgment. In this respect the manner of
framing the ordinary Automata, has been much bettered in these later times
above the former, and shall hereafter perhaps be yet more advantaged. These
kind of experiments (like all other humane arts) receiving additions from every
days experiment.

To this purpose there is an invention consisting only of one hollow orb or
wheel, whereby the hours may be as truly distinguished, as by any ordinary
clock or watch. This wheel should be divided into several cavities, through
each of which successively either sand or water must be contrived to pass; the
heaviness of these bodies (being always in the ascending side of the wheel)
must be counterpoised by a plummet that may be fastened about the pulley on the
axis: this plummet will leisurely descend, according as the sand by running out
of one cavity into the next, does make the several parts of the wheel lighter
or heavier, and so consequently there will be produced an equal and lasting
motion, which may be easily applied to the distinction of hours.

3. The multitude and variety of those services for which they may be useful.
Unto this kind may we refer those watches, by which a man may tell not only the
hour of the day, but the minute of the hour, the day of the month, the age
and aspects of the Moon, etc. Of this nature likewise was that larum mentioned
by Walchius, Fab. 9.
which though it were but two or three inches big, yet would both wake a man,
and of it self light a candle for him at any set hour of the night. And those
weights or springs which are of so great force as to turn a mill, Ramel. fig.
130.
(as some have been contrived) may be easily applied to more various and
difficult labors.

4. The littleness of their frame. Nunquam ars magis quam in minimis nota est
(says Aquinas. Jacks no bigger then a Walnut to turn any joint of meat.
) The smalnesse of the Engine does much commend the skill of the artificer; to
this purpose there have been watches contrived in the form and quantity of a
Jewel for the ear, where the striking of the minutes may constantly whisper
unto us, how our lives do slide away by a swift succession. De subtle. l. 2.
item l. 17.
Cardan tells us of a Smith who made a watch in the Jewel of a ring, to be worn
on the finger, which did show the hours, (non solum sagitta, sed ictu) not
only by the hand, but by the finger too (as I may say) by pricking it every
hour.

CAP. IV. Of the moveable and Gradient Automata, representing the motions of
living creatures, various sounds, of birds, or beasts, and some of them
articulate.
THus much of those Automata, which were said to be fixed and stationary.

The other kind to be inquired after, are those that are moveable and
transient, which are described to be such engines as move not only according to
their several parts, but also according to their whole frames. These are again
distinguishable into two sorts: 1. Gradient. 2. Volant.


1. The Gradient or ambulatory, are such as require some basis or bottom to
uphold them in their motions. Plato in Menone. Arist. Polit. l. 1. c. 3.
Such were those strange inventions (commonly attributed to Daedalus) of
self-moving statues, which (unless they were violently detained) would of
themselves run away. De Anima l. 1. c. 3.
Aristotle affirms that Daedalus did this by putting quicksilver into them.
But this would have been too gross a way for so excellent an artificer, it is
more likely that he did it with wheels and weights. Of this kind likewise were
Vulcans Tripodes, celebrated by Homer, Iliad. 18.
that were made to move up and down the house, and fight with one another.
There have been also chariots driven by the force of a spring contrived within
them.

De Variet. rerum l. 12. c. 58.


He might as well have contrived them into Journey-men statues, each of which
with a hammer in his hand should have worked at the forge.

But amongst these fighting images, that in Cardan may deserve a mention, which
holding in its hand a golden apple, beautified with many costly Jewels; if any
man offered to take it, the statue presently shot him to death. The touching of
this apple serving to discharge several short bows, or other the like
instruments that were secretly couched within the body of the image. By such a
treachery was King Chennetus murdered (as Boethius relates.

It is so common an experiment in these times to represent the persons and
actions of any story by such self-moving images, that I shall not need to
explain the manner how the wheels and springs are contrived within them.

Fab. 9. There have been other inventions to move on the water.

Navigium sponte mobile, ac sui remigii autorem, faciam nullo negotio, says
Scaliger, Exerc. 326.


Amongst these gradient Automata, that iron spider mentioned in Walchius, is
more especially remarkable, which being but of an ordinary bigness, besides
the outward similitude, (which was very exact) had the same kind of motions with
a living spider, and did creep up and down as if it had been alive. It must
needs argue a wonderful art, and accuratenesse, to contrive all the
instruments requisite for such a motion in so small a frame.

There have been also other motions contrived from Magneticall qualities, which
will show the more wonderful, because there is no apparent reason of their
motion, there being not the least contiguity or dependence upon any other body
that may occasion it; but it is all one as if they should move up and down in
the open air. Get a glass sphere, fill it with such liquors as may be clear of
the same color, immixable, such as are oil of tartar, and spirit of wine: In
which, it is easy so to poise a little globe or other statue, that it shall
swim in the center. Under this glass sphere, there should be a loadstone
concealed, by the motion of which, this statue (having a needle touched within
it) will move up and down, and may be contrived to show the hour or sign. See
several inventions of this kind in Kircher de art Magnetica, l. 2.

There have been some artificial images, which besides their several postures
in walking up and down, have been made also to give several sounds, whether
of birds, as Larks, Cuckoes, etc. or beasts, as Hares, Foxes. The voices of
which creatures shall be rendered as clearly and distinctly, by these
artificial images, as they are by those natural living bodies, which they
represent.

There have been some inventions also which have been able for the utterance of
articulate sounds, as the speaking of certain words. Such are some of the
Egyptian idols related to be. Coel. Rhod. lect Ant. l. 2. c. 17. Maiolus
Colloq.
Such was the brazen head made by Friar Bacon, and that statue in the framing
of which Albertus Magnus bestowed thirty years, broken by Aquinas, who came to
see it, purposely that he might boast, how in one minute he had ruined the
labor of so many years.

Now the ground and reason how these sounds were contrived, may be worth our
inquiry.

First then, for those of birds or beasts, they were made from such pipes or
calls, as may express the several tones of those creatures which are
represented: these calls are so commonly known and used, that they need not any
further explication.

But now about articulate sounds there is much greater difficulty. Fab. 9.
Walchius thinks it possible entirely to preserve the voice, or any words
spoken, in a hollow trunk, or pipe, and that this pipe being rightly opened,
the words will come out of it in the same order wherein they were spoken.
Somewhat like that cold Country, where the peoples discourse does freeze in
the air all winter, and may be heard the next Summer, or at a great thaw. But
this conjecture will need no refutation.

The more substantial way for such a discovery, is by marking how nature her
self does employ the several instruments of speech, the tongue, lips, throat,
teeth, etc. To this purpose the Hebrews have assigned each letter unto its
proper instrument. And besides, we should observe what inarticulate sounds do
resemble any of the particular letters. Thus we may note the trembling of water
to be like the letter L, Bacon Not. hist exper. 139.200.
the quenching of hot things to the letters Z, the sound of strings, unto the
letter Ng, the jirking of a switch the letter Q, etc. By an exact observation
of these particulars, it is (perhaps* possible to make a statue speak some
words.

CAP. V. Concerning the possibility of framing an Ark for submarine
Navigations. The difficulties and conveniences of such a contrivance.
IT will not be altogether impertinent unto the discourse of these gradient
Automata, to mention what Mersennus does so largely and pleasantly descant
upon, Tract de Magnetis proprietaetibus.
concerning the making of a ship, wherein men may safely swim under water.

That such a contrivance is feasible and may be effected, is beyond all
question, because it has been already experimented here in England by
Cornelius Dreble, but how to improve it unto public use and advantage, so as
to be serviceable for remote voyages, the carrying of any considerable number
of men, with provisions and commodities, would be of such excellent use as may
deserve some further inquiry.

Concerning which there are two things chiefly considerable: The many
difficulties with their remedies. The great conveniences.


1. The difficulties are generally reducible to these three heads:

1. The letting out, or receiving in any thing, as there shall be occasion
without the admission of water. If it have not such a convenience, these kind
of voyages must needs be very dangerous and uncomfortable, both by reason of
many noisome offensive things, which should be thrust out, and many other
needful things which should be received in. Now herein will consist the
difficulty, how to contrive the opening of this vessel so, that any thing may
be put in or out, and yet the water not rush into it with much violence, as it
does usually in the leak of a ship.

In which case this may be a proper remedy; let there be certain leather bags
made of several bignesses, which for the matter of them should be both
tractable for the use and managing of them, and strong to keep out the water,
for the figure of them being long and open at both ends. Answerable to these,
let there be diverse windows, or open places in the frame of the ship, round the
sides of which one end of these bags may be fixed, the other end coming within
the ship being to open and shut as a purse. Now if we suppose this bag thus
fastened, to be tied close about toward the window, then any thing that is to
be sent out, may be safely put into that end within the ship, which being again
close shut, and the other end loosened, the thing may be safely sent out
without the admission of any water.

So again, when any thing is to be taken in, it must be first received into
that part of the bag toward the window, which being (after the thing is within
it) close tied about, the other end may then be safely opened. It is easy to
conceive, how by this means any thing or person may be sent out, or received
in, as there shall be occasion, how the water, which will perhaps by degrees
leak into several parts, may be emptyed out again, with diverse the like
advantages. Though if there should be any leak at the bottom of this Vessel,
yet very little water would get in, because no air could get out.

2. The second difficulty in such an Ark will be the motion or fixing of it
according to occasion; The directing of it to several places, as the voyage
shall be designed, without which, it would be very useless, if it were to
remain only in one place, or were to remove only blindfold, without any certain
direction; And the contrivance of this may seem very difficult, because these
submarine Navigators will want the usual advantages of winds and tides for
motion, and the sight of the heavens for direction.

But these difficulties may be thus remedied; As for the progressive motion of
it, this may be effected by the help of several Oars, which in the outward
ends of them, shall be like the fins of a fish to contract and dilate. The
passage where they are admitted into the ship being tied about with such
leather bags (as were mentioned before) to keep out the water. It will not be
convenient perhaps that the motion in these voyages should be very swift,
because of those observations and discoveries to be made at the bottom of the
sea, which in a little space may abundantly recompense the slownesse of its
progress.

If this Ark be so ballast as to be of equal weight with the like magnitude of
water, it will then be easily movable in any part of it.

As for the ascent of it, this may be easily contrived, if there be some great
weight at the bottom of the ship (being part of its ballast) which by some
cord within may be loosened from it; As this weight is let lower, so will the
ship ascend from it (if need be) to the very surface of the water; and again,
as it is pulled close to the ship, so will it descend.

For direction of this Ark, the Mariners needle may be useful in respect of
the latitude of places, and the course of this ship being more regular then
others, by reason it is not subject to Tempests or unequal winds, may more
certainly guide them in judging of the longitude of places.

3. But the greatest difficulty of all will be this, how the air may be
supplied for respiration: How constant fires may be kept in it for light and
the dressing of food, how those vicissitudes of rarefaction and condensation
may be maintained.

It is observed, that a barrel or cap, whose cavity will contain eight
cubicall feet of air, will not serve a Urinator or Diver for respiration, above
one quarter of an hour; the breath which is often sucked in and out, being so
corrupted by the mixture of vapors, that nature rejects it as unserviceable.
Now in an hour a man will need at least 360 respirations, betwixt every one of
which there shall be 10 second minutes, and consequently a great change and
supply of air will be necessary for many persons, and any long space.

And so likewise for the keeping of fire; a close Vessel containing 10
cubicall feet of air, will not suffer a wax candle of an ounce to burn in it
above an hour before it be suffocated, though this proportion (says
Mersennus) does not equally increase for several lights, because four flames
of an equal magnitude will be kept alive the space of 16 second minutes,
though one of these flames alone in the same Vessel will not last above 25, or
at most 30 seconds, which may be easily tried in large glass bottles, having
wax candles lighted in them, and with their mouths inverted in water.

For the resolution of this difficulty, though I will not say that a man may by
custom (which in other things does produce such strange incredible effects) be
enabled to live in the open water as the fishes do, the inspiration and
expiration of water serving instead of air, this being usual with many fishes
that have lungs; yet it is certain that long use and custom may strengthen men
against many such inconveniences of this kind, which to unexperienced persons
may prove very hazzardous: and so it will not perhaps be unto these so
necessary, to have the air for breathing so pure and defecated as is required
for others.

But further there are in this case these three things considerable.

1. That the Vessel it self should be of a large capacity, that as the air in
it is corrupted in one part, so it may be purified and renewed in the other: or
if the mere refrigeration of the air would fit it for breathing, this might be
somewhat helped with bellows, which would cool it by motion.

2. It is not altogether improbable, that the lamps or fires in the middle of
it, like the reflected beams in the first Region, rarefying the air, and the
circumambient coldness toward the sides of the Vessel, like the second
Region, cooling and condensing of it, would make such a vicissitude and change
of air, as might fit it for all its proper uses.

3. Or if neither of these conjectures will help, Harmon. l. 4. prop. 6. Monit.
5.
yet Mersennus tells us in another place, that there is in France one Barrieus a
Diver, who has lately found out another art, whereby a man might easily
continue under water for six hours together, and whereas ten cubicall feet of
air will not serve another Diver to breath in for half an hour, he by the help
of a cavity, not above one or two foot at most, will have breath enough for six
hours, and a lanthorn scarce above the usual size to keep a candle burning as
long as a man please, which (if it be true, and were commonly known) might be a
sufficient help against this greatest difficulty.

As for the many advantages and conveniences of such a contrivance, it is not
easy to recite them.

1. It Is private; a man may thus go to any coast of the world invisibly,
without being discovered or prevented in his journey.

2. It Is safe; from the uncertainty of Tides, and the violence of Tempests,
which do never move the sea above five or six paces deep. From Pirates and
Robbers which do so infest other voyages; From ice and great frosts, which do
so much endanger the passages toward the Poles.

3. It may be of very great advantage against a Navy of enemies, who by this
means may be undermined in the water and blown up.

4. It may be of special use for the relief of any place that is besieged by
water, to convay unto them invisible supplies: and so likewise for the
surprisall of any place that is accessible by water.

5. It may be of unspeakle benefit for submarine experiments and discoveries: as

The several proportions of swiftness betwixt the ascent of a bladder, cork,
or any other light substance in comparison to the descent of stones or lead.
The deep caverns and subterraneous passages where the seawater in the course
of its circulation, does vent it self into other places, and the like. The
nature and kinds of fishes, the several arts of catching them, by alluring
them with lights, by placing diverse nets about the sides of this Vessel,
shooting the greater sort of them with guns, which may be put out of the ship
by the help of such bags as were mentioned before, with diverse the like
artifices and treacheries, which may be more successively practiced by such who
live so familiarly together. These fish may serve not only for food, but for
fuel likewise, in respect of that oil which may be extracted from them; the
way of dressing meat by lamps, being in many respects the most convenient for
such a voyage.

The many fresh springs that may probably be met with in the bottom of the
sea, will serve for the supply of drink and other occasions.

But above all, the discovery of submarine treasures is more especially
considerable, not only in regard of what has been drowned by racks, but the
several precious things that grow there, as Pearl, Coral, Mines, with
innumerable other things of great value, which may be much more easily found
out, and fetched up by the help of this, then by any other usually way of the
Urinators.

To which purpose, this great Vessel may have some lesser cabines tied about
it, at various distances, wherein several persons as Scouts, may be lodged for
the taking of observations, according as the Admiral shall direct them. Some
of them being frequently sent up to the surface of the water, as there shall be
occasion.

All kind of arts and manufactures may be exercised in this Vessel. The
observations made by it, may be both written, and (if need were) printed here
likewise. Several Colonies may thus inhabit, having their children born and
bred up without the knowledge of land, who could not choose but be amazed with
strange conceits upon the discovery of this upper world.

I am not able to judge what other advantages there may be suggested, or
whether experiment would fully answer to these notionall conjectures. But
however, because the invention did unto me seem ingenious and new, being not
impertinent to the present enquiry, therefore I thought it might be worth the
mentioning.

CAP. VI. Of the volant Automata, Archytas his Dove, and Regiomontanus his
Eagle. The possibility and great usefulness of such inventions.
THe volant or flying Automata are such Mechanical contrivances, as have a
self-motion, whereby they are carried aloft in the open air, like the flight of
Birds. Such was that wooden Dove made by Archytas, Diog. Laer. l. 8. Pet.
Crinitus de honest. discip. l. 17. c. 12.
a Citizen of Tarentum, and one of Plato's acquaintance. And that wooden Eagle
framed by Regiomontanus at Noremberg, which by way of triumph, did fly out of
the City to meet Charles the fifth. Ramus Schol. Mathem. l. 2.
This later Author is also reported to have made an iron fly, Quae ex artificis
manu egressa, Dubartas 6 days 1 W. I. Dee Preface to Euclid.
convivas circumvolitavit, tandemque veluti defessa in Domini manus reversa
est, which when he invited any of his friends, would fly to each of them round
the table, and at length (as being weary) return unto its Master.

Cardan seems to doubt the possibility of any such contrivance; De Variet.
rerum lib. 12. c. 58.
his reason is, because the instruments of it must be firm and strong, and
consequently they will be too heavy to be carried by their own force; but yet
(says he) if it be a little helped in the first rising, and if there be any
wind to assist it in the flight, then there is nothing to hinder, but that such
motions may be possible. So that he does in effect grant as much as may be
sufficient for the truth and credit of those ancient relations; and to distrust
them without a stronger argument, must needs argue a blind and perverse
incredulity. As for his objection concerning the heaviness of the materials in
such an invention, it may be answered that it is easy to contrive such springs
and other instruments, whose strength shall much exceed their heaviness. Nor
can he show any cause why these Mechanical motions may not be as strong,
(though not so lasting) as the natural strength of living creatures.

Scaliger conceives the framing of such volant Automata, Subtle. Exercit. 326.
to be very easy. Volantis columbae machinulam, cujus autorem Archytam
tradunt, vel facillime profiteri audeo. Those ancient motions were thought to
be contrived by the force of some included air: So Gellius, Noct. Attic. l. 10.
cap. 12. where he thinks it so strange an invention that he styles Res
abhorrens a fide. Athan. Kircher de Magnete l. 2. par. 4. Proem: does promise a
large discourse concerning these kind of inventions in another Treatise which
he styles Oedipus Aegyptiacus.
Ita erat scilicet libramentis suspensum, and aura spiritus inclusa atque
occulta consitum, etc. As if there had been some lamp, or other fire within it,
which might produce such a forcible rarefaction, as should give a motion to the
whole frame.

But this may be better performed by the strength of some such spring as is
commonly used in watches; this spring may be applied unto one wheel, which
shall give an equal motion to both the wings; these wings having unto each of
them another smaller spring by which they may be contracted and lifted up: So
that being forcibly depressed by the strength of the great and stronger spring,
and lifted up again by the other two. According to this supposition, it is
easy to conceive how the motion of flight may be performed and continued.

The wings may be made either of several substances joined, like the feathers
in ordinary fowl, as Daedalus is feigned to contrive them, according to that in
the Poet, Ovid Metam. l. 8.
-- Ignotas animum dimittit in arts,
Naturamque novat, nam ponit in ordine pennas
A minimo coeptas longam breviore sequente,
Vt clivo crevisse putes, etc.
Or else of one continuate substance, like those of Bats. In framing of both
which, the best guidance is to follow (as near as may be) the direction of
nature; this being but an imitation of a natural work. Now in both these, the
strength of each part is proportioned to the force of its employment. But
nothing in this kind can be perfectly determined without a particular trial.

Though the composing of such motions may be a sufficient reward to any ones
industry in the searching after them, as being in themselves of excellent
curiosity; yet there are some other inventions depend upon them of more
general benefit and greater importance. For if there be any such artificial
contrivances that can fly in the air, (as is evident from the former
relations, together with the grounds here specified, and I doubt not, may be
easily effected by a diligent and ingenious artificer) then it will clearly
follow, that it is possible also for a man to fly himself: It being easy from
the same grounds to frame an instrument, wherein any one may sit, and give such
a motion unto it, as shall convey him aloft through the air. Then which there
is not any imaginable invention that could prove of greater benefit to the
world, or glory to the Author. And therefore it may justly deserve their
enquiry, who have both leisure and means for such experiments.

But in these practical studies, unless a man be able to go to the trial of
things, he will perform but little. In such matters, Horace.
-Studium sine divite vena, (as the Poet says) a general speculation, without
particular experiment, may conjecture at many things, but can certainly effect
nothing. And therefore I shall only propose unto the world, the Theory and
general grounds that may conduce to the easy and more perfect discovery of
the subject in question, for the encouragement of those that have both minds
and means for such experiments. This same Scholars fate, Res angusta domi, and
-- curta supellex
is that which hinders the promoting of learning in sundry particulars, and
robs the world of many excellent inventions. We read of Aristotle, that he was
allowed by his pupil Alexander 800 talents a year, for the payment of Fishers,
Fowlers, and Hunters, who were to bring him in several creatures, that so by
his particular experience of their parts and dispositions, he might be more
fitly prepared to write of their natures. The reason why the world has not
many Aristotle's is, because it has so few Alexanders.

Amongst other impediments of any strange invention or attempts, it is none of
the meanest discouragements, that they are so generally derided by common
opinion, being esteemed only as the dreams of a melancholy and distempered
fancy. Contra Hierocl. confut. l. 1.
Eusebius speaking with what necessity every thing is confined by the laws of
nature, and the decrees of providence, so that nothing can go out of that way,
unto which naturally it is designed; as a fish cannot reside on the land, nor a
man in the water, or aloft in the air, infers, that therefore none will venture
upon any such vain attempt, as passing in the air, (...), unless his brain be
a little crazed with the humor of melancholy; whereupon he advises that we
should not in any particular endeavor to transgress the bounds of nature,
(...) (...), and since we are naturally destitute of wings, not to imitate the
flight of Birds. That saying of the Poet, Virgil. Aeneid. l. 6.
Demens qui nimbos and non imitabile fulmen, etc. has been an old censure
applied unto such as ventured upon any strange or incredible attempt.

Hence may we conceive the reason, why there is so little intimation in the
writings of antiquity, concerning the possibility of any such invention. The
Ancients durst not so much as mention the art of flying, but in a fable.

Daedalus, ut fama est, fugiens Minoia regna,
Praepetibus pennis ausus se credere coelo,
Insuetum per iter gelidas enavit ad arctos, and.
It was the custom of those former ages, in their overmuch gratitude, to
advance the first Authors of any useful discovery, amongst the number of
their gods. And Daedalus being so famous amongst them for sundry Mechanical
inventions (especially the sails of ships) though they did not for these place
him in the heavens, yet they have promoted him as near as they could, feigning
him to fly aloft in the air, when as he did but fly in a swift ship, as
Diodorus relates the Historical truth, So Eusebius too.
on which that fiction is grounded.

CAP. VII. Concerning the Art of flying. The several ways whereby this has
been or may be attempted.
I Have formerly in two other World in the Moon, ca 14. Mercury, or the secret
and swift Messenger, c. 4.
Discourses mentioned the possibility of this art of flying, and intimated a
further inquiry into it, which is a kind of engagement to some fuller
disquisitions and conjectures to that purpose.

There are four several ways whereby this flying in the air, has been or may
be attempted. Two of them by the strength of other things, and two of them by
our own strength.

1. By spirits or Angels. 2. By the help of fowls. 3. By wings fastened
immediately to the body. 4. By a flying chariot.
1. For the first, we read of diverse that have passed swiftly in the air,
Zanch. de oper. pars 1. l. 4.
by the help of spirits and Angels, whether good Angels, as 2 Kings 2.11.
Elias was carried unto heaven in a fiery chariot: as Acts 8.39. Dan. Apoc 39.
Philip was conveyed to Azotus, and Habbacuck from Jewry to Babylon, and back
again immediately: Or by evil Angels, as our Savior was carried by the Devil
to the top of a high mountain, Luke 4.
and to the pinnacle of the Temple. Thus witches are commonly related to pass
unto their usual meetings in some remote place; Erastus de Lamus.
and as they do sell winds unto Mariners, so likewise are they sometimes
hired to carry men speedily through the open air. Hist. Iud. l. 5. c. 26.
Acosta affirms that such kind of passages are usual amongst diverse Sorcerers
with the Indians at this day.

So Kepler in his Astronomicall dream, does fancy a witch to be conveyed unto
the Moon by her Familiar.

Simon Magus was so eminent for miraculous sorceries, that all the people in
Samaria from the least to the greatest, Acts 8.10.
did esteem him as the great power of God. And so famous was he at Rome,
Hegesip. l. 3 c. 2.
that the Emperor erected a statue to him with this inscription, Simoni Deo
Sancto. It Is storied of this Magician, Pol. Virgil. de Inven. Rerum. l. 8. c.
3. Pet. Crinitus de Honest a Discipline. l 8. c. 1. mistrusts this relation as
fabulous. Non enim Lucas hoc omisisset.
that having challenged Saint Peter to do miracles with him, he attempted to
fly from the Capitol to the Aventine hill. But when he was in the midst of the
way, Saint Peter's prayers did overcome his sorceries, and violently bring him
to the ground, in which fall having broke his thigh, within a while after he
died.

But none of all these relations may conduce to the discovery of this
experiment, as it is here enquired after, upon natural and artificial grounds.

2. There are others who have conjectured a possibility of being conveyed
through the air by the help of fowls; to which purpose that fiction of the
Ganza's, is the most pleasant and probable. They are supposed to be great fowl
of a strong lasting flight, and easily tamable. Diverse of which may be so
brought up as to join together in carrying the weight of a man, so as each of
them shall partake his proportionable share of the burden; and the person that
is carried may by certain reins direct and steer them in their courses. However
this may seem a strange proposal, yet it is not certainly more improbable,
then many other arts, wherein the industry of ingenious men has instructed
these brute creatures. And I am very confident, that one whose genius does
enable him for such kind of experiments upon leisure, and the advantage of such
helps as are requisite for various and frequent trials, might effect some
strange thing by this kind of enquiry.

It Is reported as a custom amongst the Leucatians, that they were wont upon a
superstition to precipitate a man from some high cliffe into the sea, tying
about him with strings at some distance, many great fowls, and fixing unto his
body diverse feathers spread, to break the fall; which (says the learned Bacon,
Not. hist. experim. 886.
if it were diligently and exactly contrived) would be able to hold up, and
carry any proportionable weight; and therefore he advises others to think
further upon this experiment, as giving some light to the invention of the art
of flying.

3. It Is the more obvious and common opinion that this may be effected by wings
fastened immediately to the body, this coming nearest to the imitation of
nature, which should be observed in such attempts as these. This is that way
which Fredericus Hermannus in his little discourse de Art volandi, does only
mention and insist upon. So the ancient British Bladuds.
And if we may trust credible story, it has been frequently attempted not
without some success. It Is related of a certain English Munk called Elmerus,
Ernestus Burgravus in Panoplia Physico-Vulcania. Sturmius in Lat: linguae
resolut.
about the Confessors time, that he did by such wings fly from a Tower above a
furlong; and so another from Saint Marks steeple in Venice; another at
Norinberge; and Busbequius speaks of a Turk in Constantinople, who attempted
something this way. Melancholy, Par. 2. Sect. 1. Mem. 3.
M. Burton mentioning this quotation, does believe that some newfangled wit
('it is his cynicall phrase) will some time or other find out this art. Though
the truth is, most of these Artists did unfotunately miscarry by falling down
and breaking their arms or legs, yet that may be imputed to their want of
experience, and too much fear, which must needs possess men in such dangerous
and strange attempts. Those things that seem very difficult and fearful at the
first, may grow very facil after frequent trial and exercise. And therefore he
that would effect any thing in this kind, must be brought up to the constant
practice of it from his youth. Trying first only to use his wings in running
on the ground, as an Estrich or tame Geese will do, touching the earth with
his toes; and so by degrees learn to rise higher, till he shall attain unto
skill and confidence. I have heard it from credible testimony, that one of our
own Nation has proceeded so far in this experiment, that he was able by the
help of wings in such a running pace to step constantly ten yards at a time.

It is not more incredible that frequent practice and custom should enable a
man for this, then for many other things which we see confirmed by experience.
What strange agility and activenesse do our common tumblers and dancers on the
rope attain to by continual exercise? Maffaeus Hist. Ind. l. 1.
It Is related of certain Indians, that they are able when a horse is running in
his full career, to stand upright on his back, to turn themselves round, to
leap down, gathering up any thing from the ground, and immediately to leap up
again, to shoot exactly at any mark, the horse not intermitting his course. And
so upon two horses together, the man setting one of his feet upon each of them.
These things may seem impossible to others, and it would be very dangerous for
any one to attempt them, who has not first gradually attained to these arts,
by long practice and trial; and why may not such practice enable him as well
for this other experiment, as for these things?

There are others who have invented ways to walk upon the water, as regularly
and firmly as upon the land. There are some so accustomed to this element, that
it has been almost as natural to them, as to the fish; men that could remain
for above an hour together under water. Pontanus mentions one who could swim
above a hundred miles together, from one shore to another, with great speed,
and at all times of the year. Treatise of custom.
And it is storied of a certain young man, a Sicilian by birth, and a Diver by
profession, who had so continually used himself to the water, that he could not
enjoy his health out of it. If at any time he staid with his friends on the
land, he should be so tormented with a pain in his stomach, that he was forced
for his health to return back again to sea; wherein he kept his usual
residence, and when he saw any ships, his custom was to swim to them for
relief, which kind of life he continued till he was an old man, and dyed.

I mention these things to show the great power of practice and custom, which
might more probably succeed in this experiment of flying (if it were but
regularly attempted) then in such strange effects as these.

It is a usual practice in these times, for our Funambulones, or Dancers on
the Rope, to attempt somewhat like to flying, when they will with their heads
forwards slide down a long cord extended; being fastened at one end on the top
of some high Tower, and the other at some distance on the ground, with wings
fixed to their shoulders, by the shaking of which they will break the force of
their descent. It would seem that some attempts of this kind were usual
amongst the Romans. To which that expression in De guber. Dei. l. 6.
Salvian may refer, where amongst other public shows of the Theater, he
mentions the Petaminarii: which word (says Io: Brassicanus) is scarce to be
found in any other Author, Annot. in Salvi.
being not mentioned either in Julius Pollux, or Politian. It Is probably
derived from the Greek word (...), which signifies to fly, and may refer to
such kind of Rope-dancers.

But now because the arms extended, are but weak and easily wearied, therefore
the motions by them are like to be but short and slow, answerable it may be to
the flight of such domestic fowl as are most conversant on the ground, which
of themselves we see are quickly weary, and therefore much more would the arm
of a man, as being not naturally designed to such a motion.

It were therefore worth the inquiry to consider whether this might not be more
probably effected by the labor of the feet, which are naturally more strong
and indefatigable: In which contrivance the wings should come down from the
shoulders on each side as in the other, but the motion of them should be from
the legs, being thrust out and drawn in again one after another, so as each leg
should move both wings, by which means a man should (as it were) walk or climb
up into the air: and then the hands and arms might be at leisure to help and
direct the motion, or for any other service proportionable to their strength.
Which conjecture is not without good probability, and some special advantages
above the other.

4. But the fourth and last way seems unto me altogether as probable, and much
more useful then any of the rest. And that is by a flying chariot, which may
be so contrived as to carry a man within it; and though the strength of a
spring might perhaps be serviceable for the motion of this engine, yet it were
better to have it assisted by the labor of some intelligent mover as the
heavenly orbs are supposed to be turned. And therefore if it were made big
enough to carry sundry persons together, then each of them in their several
turns might successively labor in the causing of this motion; which thereby
would be much more constant and lasting, then it could otherwise be, if it did
wholly depend on the strength of the same person. This contrivance being as
much to be preferred before any of the other, as swimming in a ship before
swimming in the water.

CAP. VIII. A resolution of the two chief difficulties that seem to oppose the
possibility of a flying Chariot.
THe chief difficulties against the possibility of any such contrivance may be
fully removed in the resolution of these two Quaeres.

1. Whether an engine of such capacity and weight, may be supported by so thin
and light a body as the air?

2. Whether the strength of the persons within it, may be sufficient for the
motion of it?

1. Concerning the first; when Callias was required by the men of Rhodes,
Vitruvius Archit. l. 10 c. 22.
to take up that great Helepolis, brought against them by Demetrius, (as he had
done before unto some less which he himself had made.) He answered that it
could not be done. Nonnulla enim sunt que in exemplaribus videntur similia, So
Ramus Schol. Mathem. l. 1.
cum autem crescere coeperunt, dilabuntur. Because those things that appear
probable in lesser models, when they are increased to a greater proportion, do
thereby exceed the power of art. For example, though a man may make an
instrument to bore a hole, an inch wide, or half an inch, and so less; yet to
bore a hole of a foot wide, or two foot, is not so much as to be thought of.
Thus, though the air may be able to uphold some lesser bodies, as those of
birds, yet when the quantity of them is increased to any great extension, it
may justly be doubted, whether they will not exceed the proportion that is
naturally required unto such kind of bodies.

To this I answer, that the engine can never be too big or too heavy, if the
space which it possesses in the air, and the motive faculty in the instrument
be answerable to its weight. That saying of Callias was but a groundless shift
and evasion, whereby he did endeavor to palliate his own ignorance and
disability. The utmost truth which seems to be employed in it, is this: That
there may be some bodies of so great a bigness, and gravity, that it is very
difficult to apply so much force unto any particular instrument, as shall be
able to move them.

Against the example it may be affirmed and easily proved, that it is equally
possible to bore a hole of any bigness, as well great as little, if we suppose
the instrument, and the strength and the application of this strength to be
proportionable; But because of the difficulty of these concurrent circumstances
in those greater and more unusual operations, therefore do they falsely seem
to be absolutely impossible.

So that the chief inference from this argument and example, does imply only
thus much, that it is very difficult to contrive any such motive power, as
shall be answerable to the greatness and weight of such an instrument as is
here discoursed of, which does not at all impair the truth to be maintained;
For if the possibility of such a motion be yielded, we need not make any
scruple of granting the difficulty of it; It is this must add a glory to the
invention; and yet this will not perhaps seem so very difficult to any one who
has but diligently observed the flight of some other birds, particularly of a
Kite, how he will swim up and down in the air, sometimes at a great height, and
presently again lower, guiding himself by his train, with his wings extended
without any sensible motion of them; and all this, when there is only some
gentle breath of air stirring, without the help of any strong forcible wind.
Now I say, if that fowl (which is none of the lightest) can so very easily move
it self up and down in the air, without so much as stirring the wings of it:
certainly then, it is not improbable, but that when all the due proportions in
such an engine are found out, and when men by long practice have arrived to any
skill and experience, they will be able in this (as well as in many other
things) to come very near unto the imitation of nature.

As it is in those bodies which are carried on the water, though they be never
so big or so ponderous, Sen. Not. Qu l. 3. c. 25.
(suppose equal to a City or a whole Island) yet they will always swim on the
top, if they be but any thing lighter, then so much water as is equal to them
in bigness: So likewise is it in the bodies that are carried in the air. It is
not their greatness (though never so immense) that can hinder their being
supported in that light element, if we suppose them to be extended unto a
proportionable space of air. And as from the former experiments, Archimedes
has composed a subtle science in his Book, De insidentibus humido, concerning
the weight of any heavy body, in reference to the water wherein it is: So from
the particular trial of these other experiments, that are here inquired after,
it is possible to raise a new science, concerning the extension of bodies, in
comparison to the air, and motive faculties by which they are to be carried.

We see a great difference betwixt the several quantities of such bodies, as
are commonly upheld by the air; not only little gnats, and flies, but also the
Eagle and other fowl of vaster magnitude. Cardan and Scaliger do unanimously
affirm, Subtle. l. 10. Exercit. 231.
that there is a bird amongst the Indians of so great a bigness, that his beak
is often used to make a sheath or scabbard for a sword. Histor. Nov. Orb. l 4.
c. 37.
And Acosta tells us of a fowl in Peru called Condores, which will of themselves
kill and eat up a whole Calf at a time. Nor is there any reason why any other
body may not be supported and carried by the air, though it should as much
exceed the quantity of these fowl, as they do the quantity of a fly.

Marcus Polus mentions a fowl in Madagascar, which he calls a Ruck, the feathers
of whose wings are 12 paces, or threescore foot long, which can with as much
ease, soop up an Elephant, as our Kites do a Mouse. If this relation were any
thing credible, it might serve as an abundant proof for the present quaere. But
I conceive this to be already so evident, that it needs not any fable for its
further confirmation.

2. The other doubt was, whether the strength of the other persons within it,
will be sufficient for the moving of this engine? I answer, the main difficulty
and labor of it will be in the raising of it from the ground; near unto which,
the earths attractive vigor, is of greatest efficacy. But for the better
effecting of this, it may be helped by the strength of winds, and by taking its
first rise from some mountain or other high place. When once it is aloft in the
air, the motion of it will be easy, as it is in the flight of all kind of
birds, which being at any great distance from the earth, are able to continue
their motion for a long time and way, with little labor or weariness.

It Is certain from common relation and experience that many birds do cross the
seas for diverse hundred miles together: Plin* l. 10. c. 23.
sundry of them amongst us, which are of a short wing and flight, as
Blackbirds, Nightingales, etc. do fly from us into Germany, and other remoter
Countries. And Mariners do commonly affirm that they have found some foul
above six hundred miles from any land. Now if we should suppose these birds to
labor so much in those long journies, as they do when they fly in our sight
and near the earth, it were impossible for any of them to pass so far
without resting. And therefore it is probable, that they do mount unto so a
high a place in the air, where the natural heaviness of their bodies does
prove but little or no impediment to their flight; Though perhaps either
hunger, or the sight of ships, or the like accident, may sometimes occasion
their descending lower, as we may guess of those birds, which Mariners have
thus beheld, and diverse others that have been drowned and cast up by the sea.

Whence it may appear, that the motion of this chariot (though it may be
difficult at the first) yet will still be easier as it ascends higher, till at
length it shall become utterly devoid of gravity, when the least strength will
be able to bestow upon it a swift motion: as I have proved more at large in
another discourse. World in the Moon, c. 14.


But then, (may some object) If it be supposed that a man in the aethereall air
does lose his own heaviness, how shall he contribute any force toward the
motion of this instrument?

I answer, The strength of any living creature in these external motions, is
something really distinct from, and superadded unto its natural gravity: as
common experience may show, not only in the impression of blows or violent
motions, as a river hawk will strike a fowl with a far greater force, then the
mere descent or heaviness of his body could possibly perform. But also in
those actions which are done without such help, as the pinching of the finger,
the biting of the teeth, etc. all which are of much greater strength then can
proceed from the mere heavines of those parts.

As for the other particular doubts, concerning the extreme thinness, and
coldness of this aethereall air, by reason of which, it may seem to be
altogether impassible, I have already resolved them in the above cited
discourse.

The uses of such a Chariot may be various: besides the discoveries which might
be thereby made in the lunary world; It would be serviceable also for the
conveyance of a man to any remote place of this earth: as suppose to the Indies
or Antipodes. For when once it was elevated for some few miles, so as to be
above that orb of magnetic virtue, which is carried about by the earths
diurnall revolution, it might then be very easily and speedily directed to any
particular place of this great globe.

If the place which we intended were under the same parallel, why then the
earths revolution once in 24 hours, would bring it to be under us, so that it
would be but descending in a straight line, and we might presently be there.
If it were under any other parallel, it would then only require that we should
direct it in the same Meridian, til we did come to that parallel; and then (as
before) a man might easily descend unto it.

It would be one great advantage in this kind of traveling, that one should be
perfectly freed from all inconveniences of ways or weather, not having any
extremity of heat, or cold, or Tempests to molest him. This aethereall air
being perpetually in an equal temper and calmnesse. Pars superior mundi
ordinatior est nec in nubem cogitur, Sen. de Ira l 3. c. 6. Pacem summa tenent.
Lucan.
nec in tempestatem impellitur, nec versatur in turbinem, omni tumultu caret,
inferiora fulminant. The upper parts of the world are always quiet and serene,
no winds and blustering there, they are these lower clowdy regions that are so
full of tempests and combustion.

As for the manner how the force of a spring, or (in stead of that) the
strength of any living person, may be applied to the motion of these wings of
the Chariot, it may easily be apprehended from what was formerly delivered.

There are diverse other particulars to be more fully enquired after, for the
perfecting of such a flying Chariot; As well too long as too short, too broad
as too narrow, may be an impediment to the motion, by making it more difficult,
slow and flagging.
as concerning the proportion of the wings both for their length and breadth,
in comparison to the weight which is to be carried by them, as also concerning
those special contrivances, whereby the strength of these wings may be
severally applied either to ascent, descent, progressive, or a turning motion;
All which, and diverse the like enquiries can only be resolved by particular
experiments. We know the invention of sailing in ships does continually receive
some new addition from the experience of every age, and has been a long while
growing up to that perfection, unto which it is now arrived. And so must it be
expected for this likewise, which may at first perhaps seem perplexed with
many difficulties and inconveniences, and yet upon the experience of frequent
trials, many things may be suggested to make it more facil and commodious.

He that would regularly attempt any thing to this purpose, should observe this
progress in his experiments, he should first make enquiry what kind of wings
would be most useful to this end; those of a Bat being most easily imitable,
and perhaps nature did by them purposely intend some intimation to direct us in
such experiments; that creature being not properly a bird, because not amongst
the Ovipara^, to imply that other kind of creatures are capable of flying as
well as birds, and if any should attempt it, that would be the best pattern for
imitation.

After this he might try what may be effected by the force of springs in lesser
models, answerable unto Archytas his Dove, and Regiomontanus his Eagle: In
which he must be careful to observe the various proportions betwixt the
strength of the spring, the heaviness of the body, the breadth of the wings,
the swiftness of the motion, etc.

From these he may by degrees ascend to some larger essays.

CAP. IX. Of a perpetual motion. The seeming facility and real difficulty of
any such contrivance. The several ways whereby it has been attempted,
particularly by Chemistry.
IT is the chief inconvenience of all the Automata before mentioned, that they
need a frequent repair of new strength, the causes whence their motion does
proceed, being subject to fail and come to a period; and therefore it would be
worth our enquiry, to examine, whether or no there may be made any such
artificial contrivance, which might have the principle of moving from it self:
so that the present motion should constantly be the cause of that which
succeeds.

This is that great secret in art, which like the Philosophers stone in nature,
has been the business and study of many more refined wits, for diverse ages
together* and it may well be questioned, whether either of them as yet, has
ever been found out, though if this have, yet like the other, it is not
plainly treated of by any Author.

Not but that there are sundry discourses concerning this subject, but they are
rather conjectures then experiments. And though many inventions in this kind,
may at first view bear a great show of probability, yet they will fail being
brought to trial, and will not answer in practice what they promised in
speculation. Any one who has been versed in these experiments must needs
acknowledge that he has been often deceived in his strongest confidence; when
the imagination has contrived the whole frame of such an instrument, and
conceives that the event must infallibly answer its hopes; yet then, does it
strangely deceive in the proof, and discovers to us some defect, which we did
not before take notice of.

Hence is it, that you shall scarce talk with any one who has never so little
smattering in these arts, but he will instantly promise such a motion, as being
but an easy achievement, till further trial and experience has taught him
the difficulty of it. There being no enquiry that does more entice with the
probability, and deceive with the subtilty. What one speaks wittily concerning
the Philosophers stone, may be justly applied to this, that it is Casta
meretrix, a chaste whore. Quia multos invitat, neminem admittit, because it
allures many, but admits none.

I shall briefly recite the several ways whereby this has been attempted, or
seems most likely to be effected, thereby to contract and facilitate the
enquiries of those who are addicted to these kind of experiments; for when they
know the defects of other inventions, they may the more easily avoid the same,
or the like in their own.

The ways whereby this has been attempted, may be generally reduced to these
three kinds: 1. By Chymicall extractions. 2. By Magneticall virtues. 3. By the
natural affection of gravity.


1. The discovery of this has been attempted by Chemistry. Paracelsus and his
followers have bragged, that by their separations and extractions, they can
make a little world which shall have the same perpetual motions with this
Microcosme, with the representation of all Meteors, Thunder, snow, rain, the
courses of the sea in its ebbs and flows, and the like; But these miraculous
promises would require as great a faith to believe them, as a power to perform
them: And though they often talk of such great matters, At nusquam totos inter
qui talia curant,
Apparet ullus, qui re miracula tanta
Comprobet --
yet we can never see them confirmed by any real experiment; and then besides,
every particular Author in that art, has such a distinct language of his own,
(all of them being so full of allegories and affected obscurities) that it is
very hard for any one (unless he be thoroughly versed amongst them) to find
out what they mean, much more to try it.

Etten. Mathem. Recreat. prob. 118.
One of these ways (as I find it set down) is this. Mix five ounces of, with
an equal weight of ^, grind them together with ten ounces of sublimate,
dissolve them in a Cellar upon some marble for the space of four days, till
they become like oil olive; distill this with fire of chafe, or driving fire,
and it will sublime into a dry substance: and so by repeating of these
dissolvings and distillings, there will be at length produced diverse small
atoms, which being put into a glass well luted, and kept dry, will have a
perpetual motion.

I cannot say any thing from experience against this; but me thinks it does not
seem very probable, because things that are forced up to such a vigorousnesse
and activity, as these ingredients seem to be by their frequent sublimatings
and distillings, are not likely to be of any duration; the more any thing is
stretched beyond its usualll nature, the less does it last, violence and
perpetuity being no companions. And then besides, suppose it true, yet such a
motion could not well be applied to any use, which must needs take much from
the delight of it.

Amongst the Chymicall experiments to this purpose, may be reckoned up that
famous motion invented by Cornelius Dreble, and made for King James; wherein
was represented the constant revolutions of the Sun and Moon, Celebrated in an
Epigram by Hugo Grotius. l. 1. Epi. Epist. ad Ernestu^ de Lamp: Vitae.
and that without the help either of spring or weights. Marcellus Vranckhein,
speaking of the means whereby it was performed, he calls it, Scintillula animae
magneticae mundi, seu Astralis and insensibilis spiritus; being that grand
secret, for the discovery of which, those Dictators of Philosophy, Democritus,
Pythagoras, Plato, did travel unto the Gymnosophists, and Indian Priests. The
Author himself in his discourse upon it, Epist. ad Iacobum Regem.
does not at all reveal the way, how it was performed. But there is one Thomas
Tymme, who was a familiar acquaintance of his, and did often pry into his
works, (as he professes himself) who affirms it to be done thus;
Philosophical dialogue. Confer. 2. cap. 3.
By extracting a fiery spirit out of the Mineral matter, joining the same with
his proper air, which included in the Axle tree (of the first moving wheel)
being hollow, carries the other wheels, making a continual rotation, except
issue or vent be given in this hollow axle tree, whereby the imprisoned spirit
may get forth.

What strange things may be done by such extractions, I know nor, and therefore
dare not condemn this relation as impossible; but me thinks it sounds rather
like a chymicall dream, then a Philosophical truth. It seems this imprisoned
spirit is now set at liberty, or else is grown weary, for the instrument (as I
have heard) has stood still for many years. It is here considerable that any
force is weakest near the center of a wheel; and therefore though such a spirit
might of it self have an agitation, yet it is not easily conceivable how it
should have strength enough to carry the wheels about with it. And then the
absurdity of the Authors citing this, would make one mistrust his mistake; he
urges it as a strong argument against Copernicus, as if because Dreble did thus
contrive in an Engine, the revolution of the heavens, and the immoveablenesse
of the earth, therefore it must needs follow that it is the heavens which are
moved, and not the earth. If his relation were no truer then his consequence,
it had not been worth the citing.

CAP. X. Of subterraneous lamps, diverse historical relations concerning their
duration for many hundred years together.
UNto this kind of Chymicall experiments, we may most probably reduce those
perpetual lamps, which for many hundred years together have continued burning
without any new supply in the sepulchers of the Ancients, and might (for ought
we know) have remained so for ever. All fire, and especially flame, being of
an active and stirring nature, it cannot therefore subsist without motion;
whence it may seem, that this great enquiry has been this way accomplished:
and therefore it will be worth our examination to search further into the
particulars that concern this experiment. Though it be not so proper to the
chief purpose of this discourse, which concerns Mechanical Geometry, yet the
subtilty and curiosity of it, may abundantly requite the impertinency.

There are sundry Authors, who treat of this subject on the by, and in some
particular passages, but none that I know of (except Fortunius Licetus) that
has writ purposely any set and large discourse concerning it: Lib. de
reconditis antiquorum lucernis.
out of whom I shall borrow many of those relations and opinions, which may
most naturally conduce to the present enquiry.

For our fuller understanding of this, there are these particulars to be
explained: 1. (...), or quod sit. 2. (...) cur sit. quomodo sit.



1. First then, for the (...), or that there have been such lamps, it may be
evident from sundry plain and undeniable testimonies: Saint Austin mentions
one of them in a Temple dedicated to Venus, De civitat. Dei l. 21. c. 6.
which was always exposed to the open weather, and could never be consumed or
extinguished. To him assents the judious Zanchy. De operibus Dei, pars 1. l. 4.
c. 12. De deperd. Tit. 35.
Pancyrollus mentions a Lamp found in his time, in the sepulcher of Tullia,
Cicero's daughter, which had continued there for about 1550 years, but was
presently extinguished upon the admission of new air. And it is commonly related
of Cedrenus, that in Justinians time there was another burning lamp found in an
old wall at Or Anti. och. Licetus de Lucernis, l. 1. c. 7.
Edessa, which had remained so for above 500 years, there being a crucifixe
placed by it, whence it should seem, that they were in use also amongst some
Christians.

But more especially remarkable, is that relation celebrated by so many
Authors, concerning Olybius his lamp, which had continued burning for 1500
years. The story is thus: As a rustic was digging the ground by Padua, he
found an Urne or earthen pot, in which there was another urne, and in this
lesser, a lamp clearly burning; on each side of it, there were two other
Vessels, each of them full of a pure liquor, the one of gold, the other of
silver. Ego Chymiae artis, (si modo vera potest esse ars Chymia) jurare ausim
elementa and materiam omnium, (says Maturantius, who had the possession of
these things after they were taken up.) On the bigger of these urns there was
this inscription: Plutoni sacrum munus ne attingite fures,
Ignotu^ est vobis hoc quod in orb latet,
Namque elementa gravi clausit digesta labor
Vase sub hoc modico, Maximus Olybius.
Adsit faecundo custos sibi cotia cornu,
Ne tanti pretium depereat laticis.


The lesser urn was thus inscribed: Abite hinc pessimi fures,
Vos quid vultis, vestris cum oculis emissitiis?
Abite hinc, vestro cum Mercurio
Petasato Caduceatoque,
Donum hoc Maximum, Maximus Olybius
Plutoni sacrum facit.


Whence we may probably conjecture that it was some Chymicall secret, by which
this was contrived.

Mag. Natural. l. 12. cap. ult.
Baptista Porta tells us of another lamp burning in an old marble sepulcher,
belonging to some of the ancient Romans, enclosed in a glass vial, found in
his time, about the year 1550, in the Isle Nesis, which had been buried there
before our Saviors coming.

In the Tomb of Pallas, the Arcadian who was slain by Turnus in the Trojan
war, Chron. Martin. Fort. Licet. de lucern. l. 1. c. 11.
there was found another burning lamp, in the year of our Lord 1401. Whence it
should seem, that it had continued there for above two thousand and six hundred
years: and being taken out, it did remain burning, notwithstanding either wind
or water, with which some did strive to quench it; nor could it be extinguished
till they had spilt the liquor that was in it.

Not: ad August: de civit. Dei, l. 21. c. 6.
Ludovicus Vives tells us of another lamp that did continue burning for 1050
years, which was found a little before his time.

Such a lamp is likewise related to be seen in the sepulcher of Francis
Rosicrosse, as is more largely expressed in the confession of that fraternity.

There is another relation of a certain man, who upon occasion digging somewhat
deep in the ground, did meet with something like a door, having a wall on each
hand of it; from which having cleared the earth, he forced open this door, upon
this there was discovered a fair Vault, and toward the further side of it,
the statue of a man in Armor, sitting by a table, leaning upon his left arm,
and holding a scepter in his right hand, with a lamp burning before him; the
floor of this Vault being so contrived, that upon the first step into it, the
statue would erect it self from its leaning posture; upon the second step it
did lift up the scepter to strike, and before a man could approach near enough
to take hold of the lamp, the statue did strike and break it to pieces: such
care was there taken that it might not be stolen away, or discovered.

Our learned Cambden in his description Page 572.
of Yorkshire, speaking of the tomb of Constantius Chlorus, broken up in these
later years, mentions such a lamp to be found within it.

There are sundry other relations to this purpose. De jure manium, l. 2. c. 32.
Quod ad lucernas attinet, illae in omnibus fere monumentis inveniuntur, (says
Gutherius.) In most of the ancient Monuments there is some kind of lamp,
(though of the ordinary sort;) But those persons who were of greatest note and
wisdom, did procure such as might last without supply, Deperdit. Tit. 62.
for so many ages together. Pancirollus tells us that it was usual for the
Nobles amongst the Romans, to take special care in their last wills, that they
might have a lamp in their Monuments. And to this purpose they did usually give
liberty unto some of their slaves on this condition, that they should be
watchful in maintaining and preserving it. From all which relations, the first
particular of this enquiry, concerning the being or existence of such lamps,
may sufficiently appear.

CAP. XI. Several opinions concerning the nature and reason of these
perpetual Lamps.
THere are two opinions to be answered, which do utterly overthrow the chief
consequence from these relations.

1. Some think that these lights so often discovered in the ancient tombs, were
not fire or flame, but only some of those bright bodies which do usually shine
in dark places.

2. Others grant them to be fire, but yet think them to be then first enkindled
by the admission of new air, when these sepulchers were opened.

1. There are diverse bodies (says Aristotle) which shine in the dark, De
anima. l 2. c. 7.
as rotten wood, the scales of some fishes, stones, the glowworm, the eyes of
diverse creatures. Subtle l. 9.
Cardan tells us of a bird in new Spain, called Cocoyum, whose whole body is
very bright, but his eyes almost equal to the light of a candle, by which
alone in a dark night, one may both write and read; By these the Indians
(says he) use to eat their feasting Suppers.

It is commonly related and believed, that a Carbuncle does shine in the dark
like a burning coal, from whence it has its Carlo Pyropus. Historia Animal. l.
8
name. To which purpose there is a story in Aelian, of a Stork, that by a
certain woman was cured of a broken thigh, in gratitude to whom, this fowl
afterward flying by her, did let fall into her lap a bright Carbuncle, which
(says he) would in the night time shine as clear as a lamp. But this and the
like old relations are now generally disbeleeved and rejected by learned men:
Doctissimorum omnium consensu, hujusmodi gemmae non inveniuntur, (says Boethius
de Boot) a man very much skilled in, De Lapid. and Gemmis. l. 2. c. 8.
and inquisitive after such matters; nor is there any one of name that does
from his own eyesight or experience, affirm the real existence of any gem so
qualified.

Some have thought that the light in ancient tombs has been occasioned from
some such bodies as these. Vide Licet. de lucern. l. 2.
For if there had been any possibility to preserve fire so long a space, it is
likely then that the Israelites would have known the way, who were to keep it
perpetually for their sacrifices.

But to this opinion it might be replied, that none of these Noctiluca, or
night-shining bodies have been observed in any of the ancient sepulchers, and
therefore this is a mere imaginary conjecture; And then besides, some of these
lamps have been taken out burning, and continued so for a considerable space
afterward. As for the supposed convenience of them, for the perpetuating of
the holy fire amongst the Jews, it may as well be feared lest these should have
occasioned their idolatry; unto which that nation was so strongly addicted,
upon every slight occasion; nor may it seem strange, if the providence of God
should rather permit this fire sometimes to go out, that so by their earnest
prayers, being again renewed from heaven, (as it Levit. 9.24. 2 Chronicles. 7.1. 1
King. 18.38. De jure Mani. l. 2. c. 32.
sometimes was) the peoples faith might be the better stirred up and
strengthened, by such frequent miracles.

2. It is the opinion of Gutherius, that these lamps have not continued burning
for so long a space, as they are supposed in the former relations, but that
they were then first enflamed by the admission of new air, or such other
occasion, when the sepulchers were opened: as we see in those fat earthy
vapors of diverse sorts, which are oftentimes enkindled into a flame. And it is
said, that there are some Chymicall ways, whereby iron may be so heated, that
being closely luted in a glass, it shall constantly retain the fire for any
space of time, though it were for a thousand years or more; at the end of
which, if the glass be opened, and the fresh air admitted, the iron shall be
as red hot as if it were newly taken out of the fire.

But for answer to this opinion, it is considerable that some urns have had
inscriptions on them, expressing that the lamps within them were burning, when
they were first buried. To which may be added the experience of those which
have continued so, for a good space afterward; whereas the inflammation of fat
and viscous vapors does presently vanish. The lamp which was found in the Isle
Nesis, did burn clearly while it was enclosed in the glass, but that being
broken, was presently extinguished. As for that Chymicall relation, it may
rather serve to prove, that fire may continue so many ages, without consuming
any fuel.

So that notwithstanding the opposite opinions, yet it is more probable that
there have been such lamps, as have remained burning, without any new supply,
for many hundred years together; which was the first particular to be explained.

2. Concerning the reason, Cur sint.
why the Ancients were so careful in this particular, there are diverse
opinions. Some think it to be an expression of their belief, concerning the
souls immortality, after its departure out of the body, a lamp amongst the
Egyptians being the Hieroglyphick of life. And therefore they that could not
procure such lamps, were yet careful to have the image and representation of
them ingraved on their Tombs.

Others conceive them to be by way of gratitude to those infernal deities, who
took the charge and custody of their dead bodies, remaining always with them
in their Tombs, and were therefore called Dii manes.

Others are of opinion, that these lamps were only intended to make their
sepulchers more pleasant and lightsome, that they might not seem to be
imprisoned in a dismal and uncomfortable place. True indeed, the dead body
cannot be sensible of this light, no more could it of its want of burial; yet
the same instinct which did excite it to the desire of one, did also occasion
the other.

De Lucernis, l. 3. c. 8.
Licetus concludes this ancient custom to have a double end. 1. Politic, for
the distinction of such as were nobly born, in whose monuments only they were
used. 2. Natural, to preserve the body and soul from darkness; For it was a
common opinion amongst them, that the souls also were much conversant about
those places where the bodies were buried.

CAP. XII. The most probable conjecture how these lamps were framed.
THe greatest difficulty of this enquiry does consist in this last particular,
concerning the manner how, Quomodo sint.
or by what possible means any such perpetual flame may be contrived.

For the discovery of which, there are two things to be more especially
considered.

1. The snuff or wiek, which must administer unto the flame.

2. The oil, which must nourish it.

For the first, it is generally granted that there are diverse substances which
will retain fire without consuming: such is that mineral which they call the
Salamanders wool, says our learned Not. hist. exper. 774.
Bacon. Ipse expertus sum villos Salamandrae non consumi, says Lib. exper.
Ioachimus Fortius. And De Secretis, l. 3. c. 2.
Wecker from his own knowledge affirms the same of plume-allum, that being
formed into the likeness of a wiek, will administer to the flame, and yet not
consume it self. Of this nature likewise was that which the Ancients did call
linum vivum, Or Linum Carpasium. Plutarch, de Oracul. de sectu.
or asbestinum: of this they were wont to make garments, that were not
destroyed, but purified by fire; and whereas the spots or foulness of other
clothes are washed out, in these they were usually burnt away. The bodies of
the ancient Kings were wrapped in such garments when they were put in the
funeral pile, Plin. Hist. l. 19. c. 1.
that their ashes might be therein preserved, without the mixture of any
other. The materials of them were not from any herb or vegetable, as other
textils, but from a stone called Amiantus, which being bruised by a hammer, and
its earthy nature shaken out, retains certain hairy substances, which may be
spun and woven as hemp or flax. Pliny says, that for the preciousnesse of it,
it did almost equal the price of pearls. Pancirollus tells us, Deperd. Tit. 4.
that it was very rare and esteemed precious in ancient times, but now is
scarce found or known in any places, and therefore he reckons it amongst the
things that are lost. But L. Vives affirms, that he has often seen wieks made
of it at Paris, In August. de civit. Dei, l. 21. c. 6.
and the same matter woven into a napkin at Lovaine, which was cleansed by
being burnt in the fire.

It Is probable from these various relations, that there was several sorts of
it, some of a more precious, other of a baser kind, that was found in Cyprus,
the deserts of India, and a certain Province of Asia: this being common in some
parts of Italy, but is so short and brittle, that it cannot be spun into a
thread. And therefore is useful only for the wieks of perpetual lamps, says
Boethius de Boot. D lapid. et gemmis, l. 2. c. 204.
Some of this, or very like it, I have upon inquiry lately procured and
experimented. But whether it be the stone Asbestus, or only plume-allum, I
cannot certainly affirm. For it seems they are both so very like, as to be
commonly sold for one another (says the same Author.) However it does truly
agree in this common quality ascribed unto both, of being incombustible, and
not consumable by fire: But yet there is this inconvenience, that it does
contract so much fuliginous matter from the earthy parts of the oil, (though it
was tried with some of the purest oil, which is ordinary to be bought) that in
a very few days it did choke and extinguish the flame. There may possibly be
some chymicall way so to purify and ^efecate this oil, that it shall not spend
into a sooty matter.

However if the liquour be of a close and glutinous consistency, it may burn
without any snuff, as we see in Camphire, and some other bituminous
substances. And it is probable that most of the ancient lamps were of this
kind, because the exactest relations (to my remembrance) do not mention any
that have been found with such wieks.

But herein will consist the greatest difficulty, to find out what invention
there might be for their duration. Concerning which there are sundry opinions.

Saint Austin speaking of that lamp in one of the Heathen Temples, De civ. Dei
l. 21. c. 6.
thinks that it might either be done by Magic, the Devil thinking thereby to
promote the worship and esteem of that idol to which it was dedicated, or else
that the art of man might make it of some such material, as the stone
Asbestus, Zanch. de Operibus Dei, par. 1. l. 4. c. 12.
which being once enkindled, will burn without being consumed. As others (says
he) have contrived as great a wonder in appearance, from the natural virtue of
another stone, making an iron image seem to hang in the air, by reason of two
load-stones, the one being placed in the seeling, the other in the floor.

Others are of opinion that this may be effected in a hollow vessel, exactly
luted or stopped up in all the vents of it. And then, if a lamp be supposed to
burn in it, but for the least moment of time, it must continue so always, or
else there would be a Vacuu^, which nature is not capable of; If you ask, how
it shall be nourished, it is answered, that the oil of it being turned into
smoke and vapors, will again be converted into its former nature; For
otherwise, if it should remain rarefied in so thin a substance, then there
would not be room enough for that fume which must succeed it; and so on the
other side, there might be some danger of the penetration of bodies, which
nature does as much abhor. To prevent both which, as it is in the chymicall
circulations, where the same body is oftentimes turned from liquour into
vapor, and from vapor into liquour again; so in this experiment, the same oil
shall be turned into fume, and that fume shall again convert into oil. Always
provided, that this oil which nourishes the lamp, be supposed of so close and
tenacious a substance, that may slowly evaporate, and so there will be the more
leisure for nature to perfect these circulations. According to which
contrivance, the lamp within this vessel can never fail, being always supplied
with sufficient nourishment. That which was found in the Isle Nesis, enclosed
in a glass vial, mentioned by Baptista Porta, is thought to be made after
some such manner as this.

Others conceive it possible to extract such an oil out of some minerals, which
shall for a long space serve to nourish the flame of a lamp with very little or
no expense of its own substance. Wolphang. Lazius, l. 3 c. 18. Camb. Brit. p.
572.
To which purpose (say they) if gold be dissolved into an unctuous humor, or
if the radical moisture of that metal were separated, it might be contrived
to burn (perhaps for ever, or at least) for many ages together, without being
consumed. For if gold it self (as experience shows) be so untameable by the
fire, that after many meltings, and violent heats, it does scarce diminish,
it is probable then, that being dissolved into an oily substance, it might for
many hundred years together continue burning.

There is a little chemical discourse, to prove that Vrim and Thummim is to be
made by art; the Author of this Treatise affirms that place, Genesis 6.16. where
God tells Noah, a window shall thou make in the Ark, to be very unfitly rendered
in our translation a window, because the original word (...) signifies properly
splendour or light; and then besides, the air being at that time so extremely
darkened with the clouds of that excessive rain, a window could be but of very
little use in regard of light, unless there were some other help for it; From
whence he conjectures that both this splendour, and so likewise the Urim and
Thummim were artificial, chymicall preparations of light, answerable to these
subterraneous lamps; or in his own phrase, it was the universal spirit fixed
in a transparent body.

It is the opinion of Licetus (who has more exactly searched into the
subtilties of this inquiry) that fire does not need any humor for the
nourishment of it, De Lucernis, c. 20, 21
but only to detain it from flying upwards. For being it self one of the chief
elements (says he out of Theophrastus) it were absurd to think that it could
not subsist without something to feed it. As for that substance which is
consumed by it, this cannot be said to foment or preserve the same fire, but
only to generate new. For the better understanding of this, we must observe,
that there may be a threefold proportion betwixt fire, and the humor or matter
of it. Either the humor does exceed the strength of the fire, or the fire does
exceed the humor; and according to both these, the flame does presently
vanish. Or else lastly, they may be both equal in their virtues, (as it is
betwixt the radical moisture and natural heat in living creatures) and then
neither of them can overcome or destroy the other.

Those ancient lamps of such long duration were of this later kind. But now,
because the qualities of heat or cold, dryness or moisture in the ambient air,
may alter this equality o^ proportion betwixt them, and make one stronger then
the other; therefore to prevent this, the Ancients did hide these lamps in some
caverns of the earth, or close monuments: And hence is it, that at the opening
of these, the admission of new air unto the lamp does usually cause so great an
inequality betwixt the flame and the oil, that it is presently extinguished.

But still the greatest difficulty remains, how to make any such exact
proportion betwixt an unctuous humor, and such an active quality, as the heat
of fire, or this equality being made, it is yet a further difficulty, how it
may be preserved. To which purpose, Licetus thinks it possible to extract an
inflamable oil from the stone Asbestus, Amiantus, or the metal gold, which
being of the same pure and homogeneous nature with those bodies, shall be so
proportioned unto the heat of fire, that it cannot be consumed by it, but being
once inflamed should continue for many ages, without any sensible diminution.

If it be in the power of Chemistry to perform such strange effects, as are
commonly experimented in that which they call aurum fulminans, one scruple of
which shall give a louder blow, and be of greater force in descent, then half a
pound of ordinary gunpowder in ascent; why may it not be as feasible by the
same art to extract such an oil as is here enquired after: Since it must needs
be more difficult to make a fire which of its own inclination shall tend
downwards, then to contrive such an unctuous liquour, wherein fire shall be
maintained for many years without any new supply.

Thus have I briefly set down the relations and opinions of diverse learned men
concerning these perpetual lamps; of which, though there have been so many
sundry kinds, and several ways to make them, (some being able to resist any
violence of weathers, others being easily extinguished by any little alteration
of the air, some being enclosed round about within glass, others being open;)
yet now they are all of them utterly perished amongst the other ruins of time;
and those who are most versed in the search after them have only recovered
such dark conjectures, from which a man cannot clearly deduce any evident
principle that may encourage him to a particular trial.

CAP. XIII. Concerning several attempts of contriving a perpetual motion by
magneticall virtues.
THe second way whereby the making of a perpetual motion has been atttempted,
is by magneticall virtues; which are not without some strong probabilities of
proving effectual to this purpose: especially when we consider that the
heavenly revolutions, (being as the first pattern imitated and aimed at in
these attempts) are all of them performed by the help of these qualities. This
great orb of earth, and all the other planets being but as so many magneticall
globes endowed with such various and continual motions, as may be most
agreeable to the purposes for which they were intended. And therefore most of
the Authors, who treat concerning this invention, do agree, that the likeliest
way to effect it, is by these kind of qualities.

It was the opinion of Pet: Peregrinus, and there is an example pretended for
it in Betttinus (Apiar. 9. Progym. 5. pro. 11.) that a magneticall globe or
terella, Gilbert de Magnet. Cabaeus Philos. Magnet. l. 4. c. 20.
being rightly placed upon its poles, would of it self have a constant
rotation, like the diurnall motion of the earth; But this is commonly exploded,
as being against all experience.

At han as. Kircher, de Art Magnet. l. 1. par. 2. prop. 13. Item l. 2. p. 4.
Others think it possible, so to contrive several pieces of steel, and a
loadstone, that by their continual attraction and expulsion of one another,
they may cause a perpetual revolution of a wheel; Of this opinion were Tract.
de motu continuo.
Taisner, De Rota perpetui motus. par. 2. c. 3.
Pet. Peregrinus, and De Variet. reru^ l. 9. c. ^8. De magnet. l. 2. c. 35
Cardan, out of Antonius de Fantis. But D. Gilbert, who was more especially
versed in magneticall experiments; concludes it to be a vain and groundless
fancy.

But amongst all these kind of inventions, that is most likely, wherein a
loadstone is so disposed, that it shall draw unto it on a reclined plane, a
bullet of steel; which steel, as it ascends near to the loadstone, may be
contrived to fall down through some hole in the plane, and so to return unto
the place from whence at first it began to move; and being there, the loadstone
will again attract it upwards, till coming to this hole it will fall down
again: and so the motion shall be perpetual, as may be more easily conceivable
by this figure.



Suppose the loadstone to be represented at AB, which though it have not
strength enough to attract the bullet C, directly from the ground, yet may do
it by the help of the plane OF; Now when the bullet is come to the top of this
plane, its own gravity (which is supposed to exceed the strength of the
loadstone) will make it fall into that hole at E: and the force it receives in
this fall, will carry it with such a violence unto the other end of this arch,
that it will open the passage which is there made for it, and by its return
will again shut it, so that the bullet, (as at the first) is in the same place,
whence it was attracted, and consequently must move perpetually.

But however this invention may seem to be of such strong probability, yet
there are sundry particulars which may prove it insufficient; For,

1. This bullet of steel must first be touched and have its several poles, or
else there can be little or no attraction of it. Suppose C in the steel to be
answerable unto A in the stone, and to B; In the attraction CD, must always be
directed answerable to AB, and so the motion will be more difficult, by reason
there can be no rotation or turning round of the bullet, but it must slide up
with the line CD, answerable to the axis AB.

2. In its fall from E to G, which is motus elementaris, and proceeds from its
gravity, there must needs be a rotation of it, and so it is ods, but it happens
wrong in the rise, the poles in the bullet, being not in the same direction to
those in the magnet; and if in this refluxe it should so fall out, that D
should be directed toward B, there should be rather a flight then an
attraction, since those two ends do repel and not draw one another.

3. If the loadstone AB, have so much strength that it can attract the bullet
in F, when it is not turned round, but does only slide upon the plane, whereas
its own gravity would roll it downwards: then it is evident, the sphere of its
activity and strength would be so increased when it approaches much nearer,
that it would not need the assistance of the plane, but would draw it
immediately to it self, without that help, and so the bullet would not fall down
through the hole, but ascend to the stone, and consequently cease its motion.
For if the loadstone be of force enough to draw the bullet on the plane, at the
distance FB, then must the strength of it be sufficient to attract it
immediately unto it self, when it is so much nearer as EB. And if the gravity
of the bullet be supposed so much to exceed the strength of the Magnet, that it
cannot draw it directly when it is so near, then will it not be able to attract
the bullet up the plane when it is so much further off.

So that none of all these Magneticall experiments, which have been as yet
discovered, are sufficient for the effecting of a perpetual motion, though
these kind of qualities seem most conducible unto it, and perhaps hereafter it
may be contrived from them.

CAP. XIV. The seeming probability of effecting a continual motion by solid
weights in a hollow wheel or sphere.
THe third way whereby the making of a perpetual motion has been attempted,
is by the natural affection of gravity; when the heaviness of several bodies
is so contrived, that the same motion which they give in their descent, may be
able to carry them up again.

But against the possibility of any such invention, it is thus objected by
Cardan; All sublunary bodies have a direct motion either of ascent or descent,
which, Subtle. l. 17 De Var Rerum l. 9. c. 48.
because it does refer to some term, therefore cannot be perpetual, but must
needs cease, when it is arrived at the place unto which it naturally tends.

I answer, though this may prove that there is no natural motion of any
particular heavy body, which is perpetual, yet it does not hinder but that it
is possible from them to contrive such an artificial revolution as shall
constantly be the cause of it self.

Those bodies which may be serviceable to this purpose, are distinguishable
into two kinds.

1. Solid and consistent, as weights of metal, or the like.

2. Fluid or sliding, as water, sand, etc.

Both these ways have been attempted by many, though with very little or no
success. Other men's conjectures in this kind you may see set down by diverse
Authors. D. Flud. Tract. 2. pars 7. l. 2. c. 4. et 7.
It would be too tedious to repeat them over, or set forth their draughts. I
shall only mention two new ones, which (if I am not over partial) seem
altogether as probable, as any of these kinds that have been yet invented; and
til experience had discovered their defect and insufficiency, I did certainly
conclude them to be infallible.

The first of these contrivances was by solid weights being placed in some
hollow wheel or sphere, unto which they should give a perpetual revolution.
For (as the Philosopher has largely proved) only a circular motion can
properly be perpetual. Arist. Phys. l. 8. c. 12.


But for the better conceiving of this invention, it is requisite, that we
rightly understand some principles in Trochilicks, or the art of
wheel-instruments; As chiefly, the relation betwixt the parts of a wheel, and
those of a balance: the several proportions in the Semidiameter of a wheel,
Arist. Mechan. c. 2. De ratione librae ad circulum.
being answerable to the sides in a balance, where the weight is multiplied
according to its distance from the center.



Thus suppose the center to be at A, and the Diameter of the wheel DC, to be
divided into equal parts (as is here expressed) it is evident according to the
former ground, that one pound at C, will equiponderate to five pound at B,
because there is such a proportion betwixt their several distances from the
Center. And it is not material whether or no these several weights be placed
horizontally, for though B do hang lower then C, yet this does not at all
concern the heaviness, or though the plummet C, were placed much higher then
it is at E, or lower at F, yet would it still retain the same weight which it
had at C, because these plummets (as is the nature of all heavy bodies) do
tend downwards by a straight line: So that their several gravities are to be
measured by that part of the horizontall Semidiameter, which is directly either
below or above the^. Thus when the plummet C, shall be moved either to G or H,
it will lose ^ of its former heaviness, and be equally ponderous as if it were
placed in the balance at the number 3, and if we suppose it to be situated at
I or K, then the weight of it will lie wholly upon the Center, and not at all
conduce to the motion of the wheel on either side. So that the straight lines
which pass through the divisions of the diameter, may serve to measure the
heaviness of any weight in its several situations.

These things thoroughly considered, it seems very possible and easy for a man
to contrive the plummets of a wheel, that they may be always heavier in their
fall, then in their ascent; and so consequently that they should give a
perpetual motion to the wheel it self: Since it is impossible for that to
remain unmoved, as long as one side in it is heavier then the other.

For the performance of this, the weights must be so ordered, 1. That in their
descent they may fall from the Center, and in their ascent may rise nearer to
it. 2. That the fall of each plummet may begin the motion of that which should
succeed it. As in this following Diagram.



Where there are 16 plummets, 8 in the inward circle, and as many in the
outward, (the inequality being to arise from their situation, it is therefore
most convenient that the number of them be even.) The eight inward plummets are
supposed to be in themselves so much heavier then the other, that in the wheel
they may be of equal weight with those above them, and then the fall of these
will be of sufficient force to bring down the other. For example, if the
outward be each of them 4 ounces, then the inward must be 5, because the
outward is distant from the center 5 of those parts, whereof the inward is but
4. Each pair of these weights should be joined together by a little string or
chain, which must be fastened about the middle betwixt the bullet and the center
of that plummet, which is to fall first, and at the top of the other.

When these bullets in their descent are at their farthest distance from the
center of the wheel, then shall they be stopped, and rest on the pins placed to
that purpose; and so in their rising, there must be other pins to keep them in
a convenient posture and distance from the center, lest approaching too near
unto it, they thereby become unsit to fall, when they shall come to the top of
the descending side.

This may be otherwise contrived with some different circumstances, but they
will all redound to the same effect. By such an engine it seems very probable,
that a man may produce a perpetual motion. The distance of the plummets from
the center increasing their weight on one side, and their being tied to one
another, causing a constant succession in their falling.

But now, upon experience I have found this to be fallacious, and the reason
may sufficiently appear by a calculation of the heavines of each plummet,
according to its several situation; which may easily be done by those
perpendiculars that cut the diameter, (as was before explained, and is here
expressed in five of the plummets on the descending side.) From such a
calculation it will be evident, that both the sides of this wheel will
equiponderate, and so consequently that the supposed inequality, whence the
motion should proceed, is but imaginary and groundless. On the descending
side, the heaviness of each plummet may be measured according to these
numbers, (supposing the diameter of the wheel to be divided into twenty parts,
and each of those subdivided into four.)

The outward plummets.
7 0 10 0 7 0 The sum 24.
The inward plummets.
1 0 7 2 7 2 3 0 The sum 19.


On the ascending side the weights are to be reckoned according to these
degrees.

The outward.
1 3 7 2 9 0 5 3 0 0 The sum 24.
The inward.
4 1 7 0 5 2 2 1 The sum 19.


The sum of which last numbers is equal with the former, and therefore both
the sides of such a wheel, in this situation will equiponderate.

If it be objected, that the plummet A should be contrived to pull down the
other at B, and then the descending side will be heavier then the other.

For answer to this, it is considerable,

1. That these bullets toward the top of the wheel, cannot descend till they
come to a certain kind of inclination.

2. That any lower bullet hanging upon the other above it, to pull it down,
must be conceived, as if the weight of it were in that point where its string
touches the upper, at which point this bullet will be of less heaviness in
respect of the wheel, then if it did rest in its own place: So that both the
sides of it in any kind of situation may equiponderate.

CAP. XV. Of composing a perpetuaell motion by fluid weights. Concerning
Archimedes his water-screw. The great probability of accomplishing this inquiry
by the help of that, with the fallibleness of it upon experiment.
THat which I shall mention as the last way, for the trial of this experiment,
is by contriving it in some water instrument; which may seem altogether as
probable and easy as any of the rest, because that element by reason of its
fluid and subtle nature (whereby of its own accord it searches out the lower
and more narrow passages) may be most pliable to the mind of the artificer. Now
the usual means for the ascent of water is either by Suckers or Forces, or
something equivalent thereunto; Neither of which may be conveniently applied
unto such a work as this, because there is required unto each of them so much
or more strength, as may be answerable to the full weight of the water that is
to be drawn up; and then besides, they move for the most part by fits and
snatches, so that it is not easily conceivable, how they should conduce unto
such a motion, which by reason of its perpetuity must be regular and equal.

But amongst all other ways to this purpose, that invention of Archimedes is
incomparably the best, which is usually called Cochlea, or the waterscrew,
being framed by the helicall revolution of a cavity about a Cylinder. We have
not any discourse from the Author himself concerning it, nor is it certain
whether he ever writ any thing to this purpose. But if he did, yet as the
injury of time has deprived us of many other his excellent works, so likewise
of this, amongst the rest.

Athenaeus speaking of that great ship built by Hiero, Dipnosoph. l. 5.
in the framing of which, there were 300 Carpenters employed for a year
together, besides many other hirelings for carriages, and such servile works,
mentions this instrument as being in stead of a pump for that vast ship, by the
help of which, one man might easily and speedily drain out the water, though it
were very deep.

Biblioth. l. 1.
Diodorus Siculus speaking of this engine, tells us, that Archimedes invented it
when he was in Egypt, and that it was used in that Country for the draining
of those pits and lower grounds, whence the waters of Nilus could not return.
(...), (says the same Author.) It being an engine so ingenious and
artificial, as cannot be sufficiently expressed or commended. Cardan Subt l.
1. De sapient. l. 5.
And so (it should seem) the Smith in Millain conceived it to be, who having
without any teaching or information found it out, and therefore thinking
himself to be the first inventer, fell mad with the mere joy of it.

The nature and manner of making this, is more largely handled by Vitruvius.
Architect. l. 10. c. 11.


The figure of it is after this manner.



Where you see there is a Cylinder AA, and a spirall cavity or pipe twining
about it, according to equal revolutions BB. The axis and centers of its
motions are at the points CD, upon which being turned, it will so happen that
the same part of the pipe which was now lowermost, will presently become
higher, so that the water does ascend by descending; ascending in comparison to
the whole instrument, and descending in respect of its several parts. This
being one of the strangest wonders amongst those many, wherein these
Mathematical arts do abound, that a heavy body should rise by falling down,
and the farther it passes by its own natural motion of descent, by so much
higher still shall it ascend; which though it seem so evidently to contradict all
reason and Philosophy; yet in this instrument it may be manifested both by
demonstration and sense.

This pipe or cavity for the matter of it, cannot easily be made of metal, by
reason of its often turnings; but for trial, there might be such a cavity,
cut in a column of wood, and afterward covered over with tin plate.

For the form and manner of making this screw, Vitruvius does prescribe these
two rules:

1. That there must be an equality observed betwixt the breadth of the pipe,
and the distance of its several circumvolutions.

2. That there must be such a proportion betwixt the length of the instrument,
and its elevation, as is answerable to the Pythagoricall Trigon. David Rival.
Com. in Archim. opera extern.
If the Hypotenusall, or Screw be 5, the perpendicular or elevation must be 3,
and the basis 4.

However (with his leave) neither of these proportions are generally necessary,
but should be varied according to other circumstances. As for the breadth of
the pipe in respect of its revolutions, it is left at liberty, and may be
contrived according to the quantity of water which it should contain. The chief
thing to be considered is the obliquity or closeness of these circumvolutions.
For the nearer they are unto one another, the higher may the instrument be
erected; there being no other guide for its true elevation but this.

And because the right understanding of this particular is one of the
principal matters that concerns the use of this engine, therefore I shall
endeavor with brevity and perspicuity to explain it. The first thing to be
inquired after is what kind of inclination these Helicall revolutions of the
cylinder have unto the Horizon, which may be thus found out.



Let AB represent a Cylinder with two perfect revolutions in it, unto which
cylinder the perpendicular line CD is equal: the basis DE being supposed to
be double unto the compass or circumference of the cylinder. Now it is
certain that the angle CED, is the same with that by which the revolutions on
the cylinder are framed, and that the line EC, in comparison to the basis ED,
does show the inclination of these revolutions unto the Horizon. The grounds
and demonstration of this are more fully set down by Guidus Vbaldus, in his
Mechanics, and that other Treatise De Cochlea, which he writ purposely for the
explication of this instrument, where the subtilties of it are largely and
excellently handled.

Now if this Screw which was before perpendicular, be supposed to decline unto
the Horizon by the angle FBG, as in this second figure; then the inclination of
the revolutions in it, will be increased by the angle EDH, though these
revolutions will still remain in a kind of ascent, so that water cannot be
turned through them.

But now, if the Screw be placed so far declining, that the angle of its
inclination FBG, be less then the angle ECD, in the triangle, as in this other
Diagram under the former; then the revolutions of it will descend to the
Horizon, as does the line EC, and in such a posture, if the Screw be turned
round, water will ascend through its cavity. Whence it is easy to conceive the
certain declination wherein any Screw must be placed for its own conveyance
of water upwards. Any point betwixt H and D, being in descent, but yet the more
the Screw declines downwards toward D, by so much the more water will be
carried up by it.

If you would know the just quantity of water which every revolution does
contain and carry, according to any inclination of the cylinder, this may be
easily found by ascribing on it an Ellipsis, See a further explication of this
in Vbaldus de Cochlea, l. 2 Prop. 25.
parallel to the Horizon; which Ellipsis will show how much of the revolution
is empty, and how much full.

The true inclination of the Screw being found, together with the certain
quantity of water which every helix does contain; it is further considerable,
that the water by this instrument does ascend naturally of it self without any
violence or labor, and that the heaviness of it does lie chiefly upon the
centers or axis of the cylinder, both its sides being of equal weight (says
Vbaldus; Ibid. l. 3. prop. 4.
) So that (it should seem) though we suppose each revolution to have an equal
quantity of water, yet the Screw will remain with any part upwards (according
as it shall be set) without turning it self either way. And therefore the least
strength being added to either of its sides, should make it descend, according
to that common maxim of Archimedes; De Aequipond. Suppos. 3.
any addition will make that which equiponderates with another, to tend
downwards.

But now, because the weight of this instrument, and the water in it does lean
wholly upon the axis, hence is it (says Vbaldus) that the grating and rubbing
of these axes against the sockets wherein they are placed, will cause some
ineptitude and resistency to that rotation of the cylinder, which would
otherwise ensue upon the addition of the least weight to any one side; But
(says the same Author) any power that is greater then this resistency which
does arise from the axis, will serve for the turning of it round.

These things considered together, it will hence appear, how a perpetual motion
may seem easily contrivable. For if there were but such a water-wheel made on
this instrument, upon which the stream that is carried up, may fall in its
descent, it would turn the Screw round, and by that means convey as much water
up, as is required to move it, so that the motion must needs be continual,
since the same weight which in its fall does turn the wheel, is by the turning
of the wheel carried up again.

Or if the water falling upon one wheel would not be forcible enough for this
effect, why then there might be two or three, or more, according as the length
and elevation of the instrument will admit; By which means the weight of it may
be so multiplied in the fall, that it shall be equivalent to twice or thrice
that quantity of water which ascends. As may be more plainly discerned by this
following Diagram.



Where the figure LM, at the bottom does represent a wooden cylinder with
helicall cavities cut in it, which at AB, is supposed to be covered ever with
tin plates, and three water-wheels upon it HIK. The lower cistern which
contains the water being CD. Now this cylinder being turned round, all the
water which from the cistern ascends through it, will fall into the vessel at
E, and from that vessel being conveyed upon the water-wheel H, shall
consequently give a circular motion to the whole Screw: There is another like
contrivance to this purpose in Pet: Bettin. Apiar. 4. Progym. 1. Prop. 10. but
with much less advantage then it is here proposed.
Or if this alone should be too weak for the turning of it, then the same
water which falls from the wheel H, being received into the other vessel F, may
from thence again descend on the wheel I; by which means the force of it will
be doubled. And if this be yet insufficient, then may the water which falls on
the second wheel I, be received into the other vessel G, and from thence again
descend on the third wheel at K: and so for as many other wheels, as the
instrument is capable of. So that besides the greater distance of these three
streams from the center or axis, by which they are made so much heavier, and
besides, that the fall of this outward water is forcible and violent, whereas
the ascent of that within is natural; Besides all this, there is thrice as
much water to turn the Screw, as is carried up by it.

But on the other side, if all the water falling upon one wheel, would be able
to turn it round, then half of it would serve with two wheels; and the rest may
be so disposed of in the fall, as to serve unto some other useful delightful
ends.

When I first thought of this invention, I could scarce forbear with Archimedes
to cry out (...); It seeming so infallible a way for the effecting of a
perpetual motion, that nothing could be so much as probably objected against
it: But upon trial and experience I find it altogether insufficient for any
such purpose, and that for these two reasons:

1. The water that ascends will not make any considerable stream in the fall.

2. This stream (though multiplied) will not be of force enough to turn about
the Screw.

1. The water ascends gently and by intermissions, but it falls continuately and
with force; each of the three vessels being supposed full at the first, that so
the weight of the water in them might add the greater strength and swiftness
to the streams that descend from them; Now this swiftness of motion will
cause so great a difference betwixt them, that one of these little streams may
spend more water in the fall, then a stream six times bigger in the ascent,
though we should suppose both of them to be continuate; How much more then,
when as the ascending water is vented by fits and intermissions, every
circumvolution voiding only so much as is contained in one Helix? And in this
particular, one that is not versed in these kind of experiments, may be easily
deceived. O


But secondly, though there were so great a disproportion, yet notwithstanding
the force of these outward streams, might well enough serve for the turning of
the Screw, if it were so that both its sides would equiponderate the water
being in them (as Vbaldus has affirmed.) But now upon farther examination, we
shall find this assertion of his, to be utterly against both reason and
experience. And herein does consist the chief mistake of this contrivance. For
the ascending side of the Screw is made by the water contained in it so much
heavier then the descending side, that these outward streams thus applied, will
not be of force enough to make them equiponderate, much less to move the
whole. As may be more easily discerned by this figure.



Where AB, represents a Screw covered over, CDE, one Helix or revolution of it,
CD, the ascending side, ED the descending side, the point D the middle. The
Horizontall line CF, showing how much of the Helix is filled with water, viz.
of the ascending side, from C the beginning of the Helix to D the middle of it;
and on the descending side, from D the middle, to the point G, where the
Horizontall does cut the Helix. Now it is evident that this later part DG, is
nothing near so much, and consequently not so heavy as the other DC. And thus
is it in all the other revolutions, which as they are either more or larger, so
will the difficulty of this motion be increased. Whence it will appear, that
the outmard streams which descend, must be of so much force as to countervail
all that weight whereby the ascending side in every one of these revolutions
does exceed the other; And though this may be effected by making the
water-wheels larger, yet then the motion will be so slow, that the Screw will
not be able to supply the outward streams.

There is another contrivance to this purpose mentioned by Kircher de Magnete,
l. 2. p. 4. depending upon the heat of the sun, and the force of winds, but it
is liable to such abundance of exceptions, that it is scarce worth the
mentioning, and does by no means deserve the confidence of any ingenuous artist.

Thus have I briefly explained the probabilities and defects of those subtle
contrivances, whereby the making of a perpetual motion has been attempted. I
would be loath to discourage the enquiry of any ingenuous artificer, by denying
the possibility of effecting it with any of these Mechanical helps; Treated of
before, l. 1. c.
But yet (I conceive) if those principles which concern the slownesse of the
power in comparison to the greatness of the weight, were rightly understood,
and thoroughly considered, they would make this experiment to seem (if not
altogether impossible, yet) much more difficult then otherwise perhaps it will
appear. However, the inquiring after it, cannot but deserve our endeavors, as
being one of the most noble amongst al these Mechanical subtilties. And (as it
is in the fable of him who dugge the Vineyard, for a hid treasure, though he
did not find the money, yet he thereby made the ground more fruitful, so)
though we do not attain to the effecting of this particular, yet our
searching after it may discover so many other excellent subtilties, as shall
abundantly recompense the labor of our enquiry.

And then besides, it may be another encouragement to consider the pleasure of
such speculations, which do ravish and sublime the thoughts with more clear
angelical contentments. Archimedes was generally so taken up in the delight of
these Mathematical studies of this familiar Siren, (...). Plutarch. Marcell.
Joan. Tzetzes, Chil. 2. Hist. 35. Valor. Maxim. l. 8. c 7.
(as Plutarch styles them) that he forgot both his meat and drink, and other
necessities of nature; nay, that he neglected the saving of his life, when that
rude soldier in the pride and have of victory, would not give him leisure to
finish his demonstration. What a ravishment was that, when having found out the
way to measure Hiero's Crown, he leaped out of the Bath, and (as if he were
suddenly possessed) ran naked up and down crying (...)! It is storied of Thales
that in his joy and gratitude for one of these Mathematical inventions, he
went presently to the Temple, and there offered up a solemn sacrifice. And
Pythagoras upon the like occasion is related to have sacrificed a hundred oxen.
The justice of providence having so contrived it, that the pleasure which there
is in the success of such inventions, should be proportioned to the great
difficulty and labor of their inquiry.

FINIS.

