THE DOCTRINE OF Contentment Briefly Explained, and practically Applied, in a
TREATISE on 1 Timothy 6. 8.

By HENRY WILKINSON D. D. Sometimes Principal of Magdalen Hall in OXFORD.

Heb. 13. 5. Let your conversation be without covetousness; and be content with
such things as ye have: for he has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake
thee. Aug. Confess. l. 3. Omnis mihi copia, quae Deus meus non est, egestas
est. Seneca de Vita beata. Beatus est praesentibus qualiacunque sunt contentus,
amicu^sque rebus suis. LONDON, Printed for George Sawbridge, at the Bible on
Ludgate Hill, Anno Dom. 1671.

HONORATISSIMO DOMINO Guliel. D. Gray BARONI de VVARK, (...), Patrono suo long
Optimo Gratitudinis and Observantiae ergo D. D. D. Q. L. M. Q.

HENRICUS WILKINSON.

TO THE READER.
HAving read in Histories, that the gates of Mindus were larger then the City,
I purpose to avoid such an indecorum: for I will not make a large porch to a
small building, nor premise a long Preface to a short Treatise. Only in brief
I shall premise two Particulars.

1. That I am not ignorant that many have gone before me, and in elaborate
volumes have treated on this subject of Contentment: I shall not be discouraged
to follow after those Authors (though I am sensible that I come short of them;
yet) I will cast my mite into the Treasury, hoping that a willing mind, and a
real desire of doing good may obtain acceptance with God and men. Throughout
the whole Discourse I have professedly insisted on a plain and perspicuous
method. And although the Doctrine of Contentment is the To (...) of this Tract,
and of other Authors, both they and I concurring in the substantials thereof,
yet as to the manner of handling of this Doctrine, I insist only on my own
method, neither do I plow with any other man's heiser; but what I treat on, has
cost me much pains in my retired meditations (though I am willing to learn of
any.) What I here treat on I know experimentally to be true, and my desire and
endeavor is to comfort others with these particular comforts, wherewith I my
self have been comforted.

2. Concerning the Doctrine of Contentment which is here treated on, it is a
rare, excellent and profitable Lesson, which can be never enough taught, and
never enough learned. The book of Nature cannot teach it exactly, we must
therefore have recourse unto the Book of Scripture, where only it is exactly
taught. Philosophers are in the dark, and their lamps twinkle; we must go to
school to Christ, and to his Apostles, who teach us this great Lesson.
Contentment of spirit is not an herb which grows in our gardens: it is a plant
of our heavenly Father's plantation, and it is only watered by the influences
of the Spirit of God. To make God our portion, as David did, and Psalm. 119. 57.
Lam. 3. 24.
as the Church professes, The Lord is my portion. To learn (as St Paul did) in
every estate to be content: Phil. 4. 11.
To cast our care upon God who cares for us (as St Peter exhorts,) 1 Pet. 5. 7.
This is the right and only way to render our lives comfortable, and to make
us live a heaven upon earth. I will not (that I may keep my promise) detain
thee Candid Reader, with a long preliminary discourse. I heartily wish thy
profitting by what thou read: and if thou profit by reading of this
Discourse, (which my hearts desire is that thou may) give God the glory and
praise of all, and help him in thy prayers, who commends thee to Gods gracious
providence, and is desirous of the employment, to be,

Thy servant for Christ's sake, Henry Wilkinson.
From my Study in Goffield in Essex. June 6. 1671.
THE CONTENTS OF THIS TREATISE.
CHAP. I. COntaining an exposition of the context, the dividing and expounding
the words of the Text and the deduction of a Doctrine, with the method of
prosecution thereof.
SECT. 1. Containing an exposition of the context p. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 SECT. 2.
Wherein the words of the Text are expounded p. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 Doct. That it is
our obliged Duty, which concerns us all to labor after a contented mind, and
to acquiesce and rest satisfied with the present condition and station, wherein
God is pleased to set us in the present world.
CHAP. II. Wherein Contentedness consists in five distinguishing characters
SECT. 1. Containing three characters of Contentedness, viz. 1. A contented
person makes it his business to bring his mind suitable to his means. p. 13, 14.
2. A contented person is thankful for all that he has. p. 14, 15, 16. 3. A
contented person endeavors against coveting those things that are not his own.
p. 16, 17. An objection propounded and answered. p. 17, 18, 19, etc. SECT. 2.
Containing a fourth and fifth character of Contentment, viz. 1. To go on
cheerfully in the works of ones calling. p. 25, 26, 27. 2. To make God our
portion p. 28, 29, 30, 31.
CHAP. III. Wherein the Doctrine is illustrated by several examples, and proved
by Scripture.
SECT. 1. Wherein the Doctrine is illustrated by the examples of Abraham. p.
32. and of Jacob. p. 32, 33. and of Agur. p. 34, 35. and of St Paul. p. 36, 37,
38, 39 SECT. 2. Wherein the Doctrine is proved by Scripture. p. 39. 44.
CHAP. IV. Consisting of four Arguments to demonstrate the truth of the
Doctrine.
SECT. 1. Containing two Arguments: The first drawn from Gods All Sufficiency.
p. 43, 44, etc. The second Argument is drawn from the wisdom of God. p. 47, 48,
etc. A question propounded how are all things the Interest of Saints? and
answered four ways p. 50, 51 SECT. 2. Consisting of a third Argument took from
the benefits of Contentment, and and they are upon a temporal account, p. 54.
and upon a spiritual account. p. 55, 56. Whereunto is added a fourth Argument
drawn from the mischiefs that proceed from coffeehouse p. 57, 58, 59, 60, 61
CHAP. V. Containing an use of Reproof and Examination.
SECT. 1. Containing an use of Reproof. 1. Of envious persons. p. 63. 2. Proud
persons. p. 65, 66. 3. Discontented persons. p. 67, 68. 4. Murmurers. p. 71
SECT. 2. Containing an use of Examination. 1. Of whom we must learn this lesson
of Contentment? For Answer. 1. Negatively. 1. Nature cannot teach this lesson.
p. 74. 2. Moral education cannot teach us this lesson. p. 75. 2. Positively.
The Holy Scriptures teach this lesson, and we must be taught of God. p. 75. A
question is further propounded. What is the object of Contentment? Answ. In all
conditions whatsoever we must be content. p. 78. both in prosperity not to be
greedy after more. p. 79. and in adversity not to be discontented, because we
have no more p. 79. 80, 81, 82 SECT. 4. Containing four Characters of
Contentment. 1. A contented person is charitable, open-handed, and
open-hearted. p. 84. Two impediments must be removed, viz. High-mindedness and
worldly confidence. p. 86 Q. How far charity is to be extended? Answer. p. 89.
2. A contented person is sober and moderate in his desire, after the things of
the world. p. 90. 3. A contented man quietly submits to the hand of God. p. 91.
4. A contented man takes regular courses both to get and keep an estate. p. 94,
95.
CHAP. VI. Containing an use of Exhortation in six moving Considerations.
1. Consider what we brought with us into the world, and what we shall carry
out of it. p. 97. 2. Consider that our great comforts are not in outward
things. p. 98, 99, 100, 101. 3. Consider that the mystery of divine Contentment
is an excellent and sublime mystery. p. 101. This mystery consists in four
Particulars. p. 103, 104, 105. SECT. 2. Containing a fourth Motive. 1. Because
the art of Contentment is a gainful art. p. 108. both for the present p. 108,
109. and for the future. p. 110. A fifth motive to Contentment is took from the
greatness of those mercies which we enjoy, and the meanness of those things
which we want p. 112, 113 SECT. 3. Containing a sixth motive to Contentment,
taken from the companions of Contentment. 1. Faith is a companion of
Contentment. p. 115, 116, 117, 118. 2. Patience is a companion of Contentment.
p. 119, 120. 3. Heavenly-mindedness. p. 120, 121.
CHAP. VII. Containing a fourth Use which is for direction; wherein five
impediments are to be removed, and ten Duties are to be put in practice.
SECT. 1. Removing five grand Impediments of Contentment. The first whereof is
unbelief. p. 123, 124. 2. Unthankfulness. p. 126. 127. 3. An immoderate care of
the world. page 129, 130, 131. 4. Instability of spirit. page 132, 133. 5.
Voluptuousness p. 135, 136, 137 SECT. 2. Containing five Duties to be practiced
in order to Contentment p. 138 Duty 1. Self reflection. page 138, 139. 2. Let
us compare our selves with others. page 141, 142. 3. Labor for self-denial. p.
143, 144. 4. Study the vanity of the creatures. page 145, 146, 147. 5. Study
the fullness that is in Jesus Christ p. 148, 149 SECT. 5. Containing five Duties
more. The sixth in order is to study the divine promises. p. 150, 151, 152. 7.
Observe the divine providence. page 153, 154. 8. Be much in prayer. p. 155.
Three parts of prayer are mentioned consisting of Confession, Petition and
Thanksgiving. p. 156, 157, 158. 9. Exercise sobriety and temperance. page 158,
159. 10. We should all drive a trade for heaven p. 160, 161
CHAP. VIII. Containing an use of Consolation.
SECT. 1. Showing causes of Contentment. 1. From God. p. 163. 1. Because God is
a Father. p. 164, 165. 2. God is a Shepherd. p. 167, 168, 169. 3. God is a
Master. p. 170, 171, 172. 4. God is an Husband 174 SECT. 2. Showing causes of
Contentment from our selves, as wrought in us by God; two causes are mentioned,
viz. Peace of conscience, and a right government of the affections p. 175, 176,
etc. By way of Recapitulation, the substance of the Treatise is represented in
five Propositions, which concludes the whole.
Errata sic corrigenda.
Page 36. lin. 19. leg. (...) and in marg. (...). and in marg. p. 50. l. 2 Cor.
1. 20. p. 72. lin. 12. l. brayd. p. 80. marg. l. Act. 14. 22. p. 113. lin. 16.
l. expostulate. p. 132. marg. l. objicit periculis. p. 134. lin. 18. l.
resolution. p. 141. marg. l. feriunt. p. 143. lin antepenult. l. between them.

1 TIMOTHY 6. 8. And having food and raiment, let us be therewith content. CHAP.
I.
Containing an Exposition of the Context, the dividing and expounding of the
words of the Text, and the deduction of a Doctrine, with the method of
prosecution thereof.

SECT. 1.
Containing an Exposition of the Context.

THe Apostle St Paul writing to Timothy, and being endowed with a Spirit of
infallibility, commands as a Father the Son, or rather as one (...) with all
authority, (...). Perinde ergo est ac si dixisset, quotidie inculcandum esse
hoc doctrinae genus, nec docendos modo esse homines, sed exhortationibus quoque
assiduis stimulandos, ac urgendos. Calvin. in loc.
v. 2. And as for such who teach otherwise, the Apostle stamps a brand of
infamy upon them, v. 3, 4. If any man teach otherwise and consent not to
wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine,
which is according to godliness, He is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about
questions, etc. There are two words which have a remark put upon them: One is
(...), which is (as one observes) (...) non modo inflatum sed dementatum
significat, Vict. Strig.
not only to be swelled and puffed up, but to be made mad. Another word is
(...) sick or diseased, which (though it is commonly rendered doting about
questions, yet) in the Original we find (...) sick and diseased about
questions. It was originally the saying of Melanchton, (which since a learned
Knight adopted and St Henry Wotton Provost of Eaton College.
bequeathed to his tombstone) Disputandi pruritus est Religionis scabies.

And what is the fruit of needless questions, and strife of words, which the
Apostle calls (...)? we read what comes of them, v. 4. Envy, strife, railing,
evil surmises, these are the bitter fruits which grow on such trees. And
further, v. 5. here follows more of such naughty fruit, even perverse
disputings: The word is (...): Beza tells us of an ancient Copy that reads
(...) (i. e.) assidui attritus, mutuo enim se atterunt sophistae, and sua
scabie alios inficiunt. But he owns the received version of the word, Perversae
exercitationes, Sun^ verae (...) ad acuendum ingenium, conformandum judicium,
veritatis denique investigationem comparatae. Beza.
and (...), which Quintilian calls Scholarum exercitationes. Beza highly
commends them; so that scholastical disputations are not here condemned: they
are very useful, and serviceable in a learned Commonwealth. But what the
Apostle reproves (as the word Significat Paulus istis inanibus quaestionibus
homines quasi in quodam ludo impudentiae and improbitatis exerceri: Beza.
(...) implies) are vain questions and needless contentions, and vain
janglings. The meaning of the Apostle (as I conceive) is this, That all such
disputes as tend to rubbing, galling, and vexing one another, in wrangling
about trifles, and quarrelling about needless matters are here prohibited. The
(...) mentem habentium alien a^ a pietate, quod vere est (...) Grot. in loc.
(...)
Apostle by way of character discovers who these wrangling Disputants are, v.
5. 1. They are men of corrupt minds. 2. They are destitute of the Truth; and
they discover their erroneous corrupt judgment by this their rotten
supposition, Supposing that gain is godliness. From these the Apostle charge
us to withdraw our selves.

Now the Apostle having reproved these false teachers and skeptical
Philosophers, sets all our judgments right by acquainting us what is the true
gain, v. 6. But godliness (...)
with contentment is great gain. But what is this Contentment mentioned? I
answer the word signifies a self-sufficiency. Godliness is a sufficient
portion, and he that is contented with godliness is rich enough. God alone can
persuade the hearts of his children to be contented. God gives to all his
children so much, as in his wisdom he sees to be sufficient for them. He in an
especial manner gives his Children his grace to fear him, and contented spirits
to submit to him, and believing hearts to depend on him, and a sanctified use
of all outward things they enjoy; hence they are exceeding gainers. It Is
Calvin's observation, That Vera felicitas in pietate sita est. Haec vero
sufficientia veluti quoddam auctarium est, Calv.
true happiness consists in godliness; for this sufficiency is as it were an
augmentation. What Is the reason or strong argument which the Apostle urges to
press this grand duty of Contentment? The Apostle tells us in v. 7, For we
brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we can carry nothing out.
The richest now alive neither brought gold, nor silver, nor mannours, nor
fields into this world: neither can they carry them away with them, when they
depart out of this world. We came naked into the World, and we shall return
naked out of it, (as Job acknowledges) Naked came I Job 1. 21.
out of my mothers womb and naked shall I return thither. We came all naked out
of the womb of our mother that bare us, and we shall all return naked into the
womb of our Mother Earth, whence we were took, and whereunto we shall be
resolved. What Is then the grand duty which concerns us all? The Text declares
fully; (...), etc. And having food and raiment, let us be therewith content.
But if men will try conclusions of their own devised fancies, and will drown
themselves in immoderate worldly cares, and intanglements; if they will make
haste to be rich, and care not how they come by riche^s, per fasque nefasque --
Quocunque modo rem, let them read v. 9. But they that will be rich fall into
temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown
men in destruction, and perdition. Such as with an over-carking care and
greediness pursue the Mammon of this world, and make it their confidence, they
shall be sure to smart for their anxious solicitude after the world, when they
meet with losses, disappointments, and variety of vexations. The Apostle gives
covetousness its right name Bio vocabat (...); dolor and cura videntur animum
quodammodo perfodere; avaritiae nimirum messis. Vid. Bez. in locum. Sen^entia
fui^ Timoni^ duo esse malorum elementa, (...). Id.
and doom, v. 10. For the love of money is the root of all evil, which while
some coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves
through with many sorrows.

SECT. 2.
Wherein the words of the Text are expounded, and the Doctrine observed.

I Shall now resume the words of the Text, Sect. 2.
and my endeavor shall be to keep close unto them: Wherein are contained, 1. A
great Duty, or an excellent lesson of necessity Text divided.
to be learned by us all, and that is Contentment. 2. Here is set down the
extent and latitude of this great Duty, wherein it must be exercised, and that
is specified in two particulars of vast comprehension: viz. In food and raiment.

Before I observe the doctrine obvious in the words, I shall premise a
Paraphrase of three significant weighty words in the Text. One the Apostle
calls (...), a second (...), a third (...). And after I have given the
Exposition of these words, what I shall further enlarge upon will be more
perspicuous in the ensuing discourse.

1. (...), which signifies (...). Cyprianus enarrans precationem Dominicam,
vertit and exhibitionem, hoc est quod vocant praebendam, propius accedens ad
sensum Pauli quam qui vertit and alimenta. Erasm. In eo locutionem juris
secutus est Cyprianus, nam exhiber^ est aler^. Grot.
necessary food, which may conduce to our nourishing. It Is not said (...), (i.
e.) delicate dainty food, but (...), such nourishing food as serves for
necessity and not for superfluity. Here Is Tanta edere decet quanta ad
nutrimentum sufficient, and non quanta ea sunt, quae delicias adducunt. Oecumen.
employed necessary, not superfluous food; not such luxurious high diet as may
pamper the appetite, and minister fuel to noisome lusts; but the food here
mentioned consists with such a diet as is sober, temperate, and conducing to
the nourishment and preservation, and not to the overthrow and destruction of
the body.

A second word is (...) raiment, from (...) Aristides posuit pro tecto, Philo
autem ut hic Paulus pro vest and tecto. Es^ enim (...) sive (...) hoc omne quo
tegimur. Grot.
(...), and that from (...) to cover. It is not said (...) ornaments, but (...)
raiments, coverings. Here Is no mention made of gorgeous and costly attire, or
embroidered rich garments, only such raiment as may cover our nakedness, and
defend us from the cold. An Instance we have in our first Parents, Genesis 3. 21.
Unto Adam also and his wife did the Lord God Tanta ac talia induere decet,
quantis nuditas ipsa protegatur, and non quaecunque delicias gignunt, and
mollitiem iis, quae ea ferunt. Oecumen. in loc.
make coats of skin and clothed them. Let us hence be instructed to reflect
upon our original; No shame for nakedness, till sin was committed; Sin brought
shame: Innocence was a better clothing then cloth of Tissue, or any other
costly garment invented by after generations. Though Persons of Quality may
wear finer garments (so they be decent and modest) then inferior persons, (for
I know of no Scripture warrant to level the Nobleman with the Peasant) yet
it is every ones duty according to his condition to be contented with such
apparel as is necessary to cover nakedness, and keep off cold. He that is of a
lower degree must not envy him that is of a higher degree. The Country man's
Leather or Russet may keep him as warm as the Noblemans Velvet or Scarlet.
Calvin on the place (as he frequently does) gives a choice observation upon the
words. In that (says he) the Apostle makes mention of food and Quum alimenta
and tegmina nominat, delicias and abundantem copiam excludit. Natura enim parvo
contenta est: superfluum autem, quicquid exuperat naturalem usum. Non quod
liberalior usus per se damnari debeat, sed appetitus semper vitiosus est. Calv.
Paulus ea solum nominavit quae omnibus in universum hominibus necessaria sunt;
idque simpliciter, and non ad certos fines duntaxat, and sub quibus caetera
fere possunt comprehendi, Estius.
raiment, he excludes delights, and an abundant plenty: For nature is content
with a little; and that is superfluous, which goes beyond a natural use; not
that a more liberal use is to be condemned, but a vicious appetite is always to
be condemned. By food and raiment all things necessary are comprehended; and
other things which are necessary, are reduced unto these two things, food and
raiment.

A third word is (...), which 3. (...).
word though it be of the future tense, yet (as the Hebrew phrase is usual) it
evidently denotes the force of an Imperative signification, as those commands
do, Thou shall not kill; Thou shall not commit adultery, etc. Estius propounds
the question whether this be a counsel or a command, and he determines, That
it is a command Praeceptum est, idemque ad omnes pertinens, atque adeo ex ipsa
naturae lege profectum. Nam superflua quaerere contra naturam est, and si
petere superflua a Deo non licet, ergo nec quaerere. Estius.
appertaining to all as proceeding from the law of nature; for to seek
superfluities is against nature; and if it be not lawful to beg of God
superfluities, therefore not to seek them. Beza renders Beza in loc.
the word (...), Haec tibi satis erunt, These things will be sufficient for us.
Junius renders the words Propter hoc Junius in loc.
nobis sufficit alimentum and operimentum. If we have to nourish and cover us,
we have sufficiency, and have cause enough to be content. And (as Chrysostom
observes on (...). Chrysostom.
the place) We ought to eat such things as are sufficient for nourishment for
the quantity and quality, and we ought to be clothed with such garments as will
cover nakedness, and nothing ought to be superfluous. It Is the observation of
Reverend Perkins Mr Perkins in loc.
on the words, That it is not said cates nor delicate food, but food that may
feed; It Is not said ornaments or habiliments, but covering garments, so much as
may defend us from the cold. Hence a Lexicographer and Critic in several
languages derives Garment quasi Minshaw's Diction.
Guardment, implying that our clothes should be for a safeguard from the cold,
and not for vanity and superfluity. Hence has place that of the Poet: -- Toga
quae defendere frigus Horat. ^ Sermon.
Quamvis crassa queat.

Aquinas expounds the Bona sunt propter necessitatem, quibus indiget homo
propter interiora consumentia, and haec sunt alimenta, vel contra exteriora
corrumpentia, and sic indiget homo tegumentis vestium and domorum. Aquinas in
locum.
Text concerning those good things which are for necessity, such as we stand in
need of. So then let us consider what a great mercy it is to have sufficient
food and raiment for us and ours: let us therefore account what we have
sufficient, and give God thanks for what we have, esteeming what God gives us
to be enough and sufficient for us.

The words thus divided and expounded contain this obvious Doctrine to be
reduced unto our daily practice, viz.

That it is our obliged duty, which concerns us all, to labor after a Contented
mind, and to acquiesce, and rest satisfied with the present condition and
station wherein God is pleased to set us in the present World.

In the prosecution of this practical Assertion Method propounded.
(which is the Groundwork of the ensuing Treatise) I shall confine my self to
a plain and perspicuous Method. 1. To discover wherein Contentedness consists.
2. To illustrate the point by choice examples. 3. To quote Scripture Precepts
injoyning, and commanding obedience to the duty. 4. I shall endeavor to
confirm the Doctrine by demonstrative Arguments. 5. I shall conclude with a
practical Application and particular reflection upon our selves, hoping and
desiring (through Christ that strengthens me) to prevail with the Reader, to
learn this Excellent lesson of Contentedness, and reduce it into daily practice
throughout his whole life and conversation.

CHAP. II.
Showing wherein Contentedness consists in five distinguishing Characters.

SECT. 1.
Containing three Characters of Contentedness.

IN pursuance of my Method propounded, my work lies before me in the first
place to discover wherein contentedness consists: 1 Wherein Contentedness
consists, instances are given in 5 several Characters.
and this I shall represent in these five distinguishing Characters. 1. A
contented person makes it his business to bring his mind suitable to his means.
2. He is a person thankful for any thing, and every thing that he has. 3. He
strives and endeavors against coveting those things, which are not his own. 4.
He enjoys himself cheerfully and goes on contentedly and quietly in the
management of the works of his calling. 5. Above all he labors to make God his
portion: for he alone can persuade the heart of any one to rest content and be
satisfied. I shall resume the enlargement of these particulars, and prosecute
them in their order.

1. A Contented person makes it his business Character 1. A contented person
makes it his business to bring his mind to his means. Latus in praesens animus
quod ultra est, oderit curare. Hor. Lib. 2. Carm. 16.
to bring his mind suitable to his means: Although his outward condition in the
world may be very low, yet an inward frame of heart raises the condition
higher: for whosoever though in a mean condition endeavors to get a composed
and sedate frame of spirit, he is rich enough, because he has brought his mind
up to his means; and hereupon his spirit is quieted and settled. It Is the
discontented spirit of a man, that causes him to esteem a great estate but
mean, because his desire is insatiate and unlimited: whereas a contented person
is endowed with such an excellent temper, that he esteems a mean estate great,
because his mind is quieted, his affections are regulated, and his heart
acquiesceth in the divine dispensations; so that riches, honors, pleasures,
all are the portion of a contented man: because a contented man enjoys a sacred
communion with God, and he finds all in the Fountain which was wanting in the
Cisterns, and in the deficiency of all Creatures, he finds all made up in the
Allsufficiency of God. Though such a man may want, according to the worlds
verdict, many outward accommodations, yet in his own judgment he possesses
them, or else what is better, and more worth then them all: for his heart rests
contented, and is abundantly satisfied with the good pleasure of God. This man
makes God his portion and therefore has all, as a Father says, He has all
things, who has him that possesses Habet omnia, qui habet possidentem omnia.
Aug.
all things. Of this choice temper of spirit was David, Psalm 16. 5, 6. The
Lord is the portion of mine inheritance and of my cup. Thou maintainest my lot,
Docet hic locus eos demum rite in vera pietate edoctos esse quibus unus Deus
sufficit: Nam David partem sortis suae and haereditatem vocando, and calicem,
se eo uno ita contentum affirmat ut nihil appetat extra ipsum, nec pravis
desideriis titilletur. Calv. in loc.
the lines are fallen to me in a pleasant place, yea I have a goodly heritage.
Upon this place it is observed, That those are rightly instructed in true
godliness who are satisfied with God alone, and are so contented with him, as
to desire nothing without him. This is the first Character of a contented
person whose mind and means concur in a mutual harmony and correspondence.

A second Character of a contented person Character 2. A contented person is
thankful for what he has.
is to be thankful for all that he has: Though he sees that many others have
a larger share of outward things then he has, yet he is so far from murmuring
against God, and envying of men, that he is thankful for that little which he
enjoys, and for it he returns unto God the Tribute of a thankful heart. A
contented person is such an one, in whom godliness and contentment meet, (for
none but godly men can truly be contented men.) He (I say) considers that
whatever he possesses is the liberal allowance of God, and that all his days
he lives upon Gods alms, and is maintained by him, and if he enjoy a more large
and plentiful estate, he receives all from the sole Bounty and Largess of God,
and if he possess a meaner estate yet he has more then he deserves; for (as a
Reverend and godly Divine Mr John Dod who wrote on the Commandments and Lords
prayer, etc.
used to say) If we have less then Hell it is more then we deserve. Upon such
deliberate thoughts we come to learn this excellent lesson of Contentment;
wherefore this is a signal testimony of Contentment, when we are so far from
being discontented for what we want, as our mouths are filled with the praises
of the Lord, and our hearts are enlarged with thankfulness for the present
mercies which we enjoy: for he that is the most thankful person is the most
contented person. Job was thankful as well for adversity as for prosperity.
Job. 1. 21. The Lord (says he) has given and the Lord has taken away,
blessed be the name of the Lord. He well knew that the same wise God who gave
him an estate could in wisdom take it away, and restore it double (as it came
to pass) in his own appointed time. Of the same resolved spirit was David, who
had a fixed and contented spirit as well in adversity as in prosperity: as will
evidently be evinced by comparing Psalm 57. with Psalm 108. when he made this
latter Psalm he was in prosperity and exuberant in praises. v. 1, 2, 3. O God
my heart is fixed. I will sing and give praise even with my glory. Awake
psaltery and harp, I my self will awake early. I will praise thee O Lord among
the people, and I will sing praises to thee among the nations. But when David
penned Psalm. 57. he was in a great affliction (as the Title specifieth) when he
fled from Saul in the cave; and he complains v. 4. My soul is among lions: yet
at that time of his distress, he discovered an excellent frame of spirit, such
an one as was fixed and resolved, both contented and quieted. v. 7. My heart is
fixed, O God, my heart is fixed, I will sing and give praise.

A third Character of a Contented person Character 3. A contented person
strives against coveting those things, which are not his own.
is this, That he strives and endeavors against coveting those things that are
not his own. The tenth Commandment forbids coveting, Exodus 20. 17. This express
letter of the Law St Paul carried in his serious thoughts, and therefore he
sets it as a Frontlet before his eyes, Romans 13. 9. Thou shall not covet. Now
according to the strict letter of the Law, the conscience of the Apostle clears
him from all false accusations, Acts 20. 33. I have coveted no man's silver, or
gold, or apparel. Abraham was of a contented spirit, God did bless him with a
great substance, he was exceeding rich; yet (though usually they who have a
great deal would willingly have more) he desired not in the least any
augmentation unto his estate by the King of Sodom. Abraham might very fairly
with justice and equity have detained and reserved for his own use the goods of
the King of Sodom, and he might have made a legal challenge of them by a double
right and title. For first the goods (...). Arist. 1 Palit.
were Abraham's jure belli, because he had won the field, and got those goods by
conquest. 2. Those goods were Abraham's jure donationis, by the King of Sodom's
free donation, Genesis 14. 21. And the King of Sodom said unto Abraham, Give me
the persons, and take the goods to thy self. However Abraham would rather
cedere de suo jure, then be made richer by the King of Sodom.



how, and in what sense it is lawful to desire another man's estate.

1. Negatively, In such 1. Negatively. In what cases we may not desire another
man's estate.
cases as these to be mentioned, it is not lawful to desire another man's
estate. As for instance;

1. It is not lawful to desire and covet an 1. A man may not desire another
man's estate against the right owners consent.
estate against the owners will and consent. For though the buyer would
willingly give a valuable price, yet he must not importune, force and
necessitate the owner to part with his Inheritance against his will, much less
use any indirect ways to circumvent, and go beyond the owner, to defraud him of
his estate by any forged cavillations. When a man is resolved to get another
man's estate, and will take no denial, and notwithstanding the owners dissent
and reluctance, yet he will pursue his indefatigable endeavors to compass it,
this man without all question is a male-contented spirited person.

To produce an Instance notoriously known; Ahab's heart was set upon Naboth's
vineyard, he tendered very fair proposals, either to give the price in money to
the full value, or else by way of exchange to give another and a better
vineyard. The vineyard of Naboth was near to the palace of Samaria,
conveniently situated for Ahab's accommodation; it lay near his Demesnes:
Naboth gave a flat and rational denial, 1 Kings 21. 3. And Naboth said unto
Ahab, The Lord forbid it me that I should give the inheritance of my fathers
unto thee. Upon this answer Ahab took pet, refused his meat, laid him down upon
his bed heavy and displeased, v. 4. Thus this discontented man was sullen, and
vexed himself, because he could not possess that which was not his own: his
desire was inordinate and his spirit restless, so that he could not enjoy
himself in any thing else, because his greedy desire was not satisfied in that
particular concerning Naboth's vineyard. Now let us take notice of the dreadful
effects and consequences of this discontented spirit. Upon this cursed root
grew such fruit as was more bitter then gall and wormwood. For first, to
compass Naboth's vineyard, Ahab gave himself up to the wicked counsels of his
wife Jezabel, one who is stigmatized for the vilest of women, for whoredoms and
witchcrafts. 2 King^ 9. 22.
2. Hence follows false-witness-bearing and false accusations against the
ninth commandment. Jezabel wrote in the Kings name, and sealed the letter with
the Kings signet. Religion was pretended, though nothing but murder was
intended. Naboth 1 Kings 21. 13.
was accused of blasphemy, and two sons of Belial were suborned to give
testimony to a false accusation. Then thirdly follows murder, a palpable
breach of the sixth Commandment, Naboth was stoned to death. And fourthly,
after the murder committed upon the person of Naboth, Ahab came and took
possession of his vineyard; This was evident theft, a breach of the eighth
Commandment. Thus we see the gradations of sin; covetousness and discontent
brought forth forgery and false accusations; forgery and false accusations
brought forth murder, and murder brought forth theft and robbery. The source
and orignal of all was a covetous spirit, a greedy desire in Ahab to get that
which was not his own; and this desire is unlawful. For any great man to impale
the poor man's acre in his Park, and to enclose the poor man's Cottage in a great
man's Palace against the poor man's consent, is absolutely unlawful both by the
Law of God and man.

2. As it is not lawful to desire another 2. It is not lawful to desire
another man's estate, nor to improve our own by any unjust and indirect means.
man's estate, and to endeavor to get it any indirect, unjust, or false way; So
neither is it lawful to improve a man's own estate by fraud and falsehood,
cousenage and oppression. It Is commonly said that every man may make the best
of his own, but that saying must be limited to just and honest means. But
multitudes there are who make themselves rich by rapine, oppression and
violence: and many there are who offend in an high measure, by cavilling in
needless matters, who by forged cavillations, Iesuitical collusions and
equivocations, and by variety of tricks and wit, seek to dispossess the right
owners out of their own inheritance. And others there are as bad as they, who
to make more room for themselves, and to maintain their own Grandeur, defraud
many poor by Monopolies, Enclosures and depopulations. Many there are who
rejoice to build their own foundation upon the ruins of other men, and to rear
up a stately Fabric upon that place, where many houses have been pulled down,
and many families have been destroyed. What do these design, and what other
effects do follow, but a Babel of confusion, and a ready way to ruin
themselves and their posterity? Many so build houses (such I mean as get
estates by rapine and violence) as if their very stately houses should be
places of their sepulchers. Those Scriptures are well known, (Oh! that they
were as well laid to heart) One is Jer. 17. 11. As the Partridge sits on
eggs and hatcheth them not, so he that gets riches, and not by right, shall
leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end shall be a fool. Another is
Habak. 2. 9, 10, 11. Woe unto him that coveteth an evil coveting to his house,
that he may set his nest on high, that he may be delivered from the power of
evil. Thou have consulted shame to thy house by cutting off many people, and
have sinned against thy soul. For the stone shall cry out of the wall, and the
beam of the timber shall answer. Many Histories are upon Rex cervu^ insequitur,
Regem vindicta, Tyrellus Non been praevisum transfixit acumine ferri, v. Pride.
Hist. V. Cambden on Hantshire.
Record for terror and caution. One only I shall mention of Will. Rufus
recorded by many writers of our English Chronicles, which a great Scholar a
late B. of Worcester takes special notice of, and in two verses describes the
sad consequences thereof. The story in brief is this. William the Conqueror
demolished four Abbeys and thirty six Parish Churches in Hantshire, and turned
out the Inhabitants for thirty miles compass, to make a Forest for wild beasts,
(which Forest to this day is called New Forest.) His son William Rufus was
hunting in that Forest, and was slain there by the glancing of an Arrow.

But in the second place as I have showed 2 Positively, in what case we may
desire that which is another. 1. In merchandise, a man may exchange one thing
for another.
negatively in two particulars wherein a man may not desire another man's
estate; so I will show in two other particulars, how a man may desire another
man's estate, and may improve what he has of his own.

1. In merchandise, in buying and selling, a man for his money, may with
moderation and equity, desire and seek after that which is another man's. He may
in the shambles buy meat, and in the shops buy cloth, giving a valuable
consideration for them, always provided that in equity and good conscience the
price ought to be worth the commodity, and the commodity ought to be worth the
price. Caveat emptor (though it is a common saying, yet) will not excuse any
seller, who knowingly goes beyond his Brother. Merchandising and buying and
selling, trading and trafficking, commuting one thing for another by mutual
consent of the buyer and seller are not only lawful but commendable. Abraham
communed with Ephron the Hittite about the cave of Machpelah for a burying
place. Ephron would have given it him, but Abraham would not take it upon gift;
wherefore Ephron told him the value of the land to be worth four hundred
shekels of silver, Genesis 23. 15. Abraham paid that sum, v. 16. He did not dodge
or cheapen the Market, much less force any abatement, but comes up to Ephron's
price. In this case a man may desire what is not his own at present, but what is
yet remaining in another man's possession, both parties being agreed, one to
buy, and the other to sell.

2. It Is both lawful and necessary for any 2. A man may improve in good ways
his own estate.
man to make a good improvement of what he possesses of his own. And though
probably at present some profits arising and accruing out of his estate are not
yet visible to him, yet he ought by good husbandry and a frugal management of
his estate to make it better, and what yet he has not, to make his own (as far
as equity permits) by industry and diligence. Thus Solomon says, The Prove. 10.
4. Prove. 12. 27. Prove. 13. 4. Prove. 12. 24.
hand of the diligent makes rich. The substance of a diligent man is precious.
The soul of the diligent shall be made fat. The hand of the diligent shall bear
rule. The thoughts of the diligent tend to plenteousness, Prove. 21. 5. Such as
are diligent are preferred to high honor and dignity, Prove. 22. 29. See thou
a man diligent in his business? He shall stand before Kings, he shall not stand
before mean men. Wherefore diligence and industry, a provident and frugal care
in the discharge of the duties of our calling are not only seasonable, but
necessarily requisite. Every person ought to be industrious in his calling.
None ought to eat the bread of idleness. Drones and Loiterers are not to be
permitted to be in a hive. It is the Labourer and not the Loiterer that is
worthy of his hire. And in an especial manner it is a Christian duty incumbent
on Masters of Families to provide for their household, as the Apostle says, But
if any man provide not for his own, and ^ Tim. 5. 8.
especially for those of his own house, he has denied the faith, and is worse
then an infidel. So then contentedness does not in the least debarr and put by
honest labors, and an industrious care in a man's calling. But contentedness
moderates, directs and limits our care and industry, that whatever labor we
undertake, be not inordinate and immoderate, and may not exceed the bounds of a
just and due proportion. But the enlargement of this Particular will more
properly fall into the next Section.

SECT. 2. Sect. 2.

Containing a fourth and fifth Character of Contentedness.

I Proceed to a fourth Character of a Contented Character 4. A contented man
goes on cheerfully in the works of his calling.
mind, and that is to engage a man to go on cheerfully in the discharge of the
works of his calling.

There Is a twofold calling (which every man either has or ought to have) One
is a General Calling as a Christian: The other is a Particular Calling as
relating to the secular affairs of this present world, as Merchandising, etc.

1. For a General Calling. How can a 1. A contented man goes on cheerfully in
the works of his general calling.
man go on cheerfully in the performance of religious duties, unless his heart
be quieted, composed and settled? Vexatious discontented thoughts, worldly
intanglements and a hurry of earthly encumbrances will follow men into their
closets, and distract them, even when they are upon their knees a praying. When
discontented and tumultuous thoughts lie near the heart they will follow men
into a public Congregation; so that though their bodies be in the Church, yet
their hearts run after their covetousness. Further, discontent will follow a
Preacher unto his pulpit, and there distract and divert his thoughts and most
serious meditations: but when men's thoughts are sedate and fixed, Oh! how much
profit do they reap by the word preached and the word read? how fervently do
they pray! and how much are their affections raised in meditation! and how
powerfully and affectionately does a Preacher deliver the word of God, when the
inward frame of his spirit is well ordered and composed. We read that the blind
man in the Gospel threw away his coat when he heard that Christ was coming by
that way; so must we (especially when we are about religious duties) cast out
of our thoughts the lumber of the world, and throw away earthly intanglements;
that so we may go on cheerfully in the performance of every duty. But variety
of discontented perplexing thoughts and carking vexatious cares, are like
plummets of lead to depress and bow down the spirit: whereas a quiet and
contented spirit drives on with such expedition in every duty as did the
chariots of Amminadab. Cant. 6. 2.


2. As a Contented spirited man goes 2 A contented man goes on cheerfully in
the works of his particular calling.
on cheerfully (as a good Christian ought to do) in the works of his general
Calling, as in praying, hearing, reading, meditating, so in the works of his
particular calling he goes on with alacrity of spirit. For instance, one is a
Minister, another is a Physician, a third a Lawyer, a fourth a Merchant, and
variety of persons (as their mind leads them) take upon them variety of
callings; whosoever then he be that has learned this divine art of
Contentment, he manageth the works of his particular calling with much alacrity
of spirit; he labors to improve his present calling to his best advantage, and
he seeks not great things for himself: he looks upon his present portion
(though meaner then many others have) as Gods liberal allowance. Though he
enjoys but one talent (whilst others have many yet,) he looks upon himself as
obliged to make a diligent improvement of that one talent, having in his eye
that promise, Matthew. 25. 21. His Lord said unto him who with five talents had
gained five more -- Well done thou good and faithful servant, thou have been
faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things, enter thou
into the joy of thy Lord. Thus then it evidently appears, that to be diligent
and industrious in the present station and calling wherein God has set us, and
to be cheerful in our employment plainly evidenceth a contented mind.

Fifthly, (and the last Character but Character 5. A contented person makes God
his portion.
chiefest of all I have named) is this, viz. That man is contented who makes
God his portion. God only can persuade the heart, and prevail with it, to rest
satisfied and abundantly contented with himself. Wherefore the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 6. 6. (...). Quies animae est nihil appetere. Lud. de Dieu. Pietas cum
animo sort s^a contento. Beza. Est sufficientia qua quis sua sort est
contentus, etc. C. a Lapide.
Godliness with contentment is great gain. The word signifies self-sufficiency:
this God only can give; and godliness alone as derived from God can bring
contentment; and he is a rich man indeed, who is content with Godliness. It is
an excellent observation of Calvin, That God is always present Semper adest
suis Dominus, and quantum illorum necessitati sufficit ex sua plenitudine suum
cuique demensum erogat. Calv. in loc.
with his people, and he gives to every one of them that portion that may
suffice for their necessity. Whoever therefore makes God his portion and
treasure, his honor and refuge, his shield and buckler; he has the greatest
cause to be content, for he has all in God. Esau said to Jacob, I have enough,
Genesis 33. 9. But Jacob said, I have all, for of all, seeing God gave him his
grace: For grace is more worth then a whole world: besides Jacob had interest
in the Ex benignitate Dei omnia mihi abunde suppetunt. Paulus Fagius.
Covenant of grace, and having God his portion he had all, David professed that
the Lord was the portion of his inheritance. Psalm. Benign largitus est mihi
Deus, quamplurima and omnia mihi suppetunt, and nulla re indigeo. Vatablus.
16. 5. The Lord is the portion of my inheritance, and of my cup: thou
maintainest my lot. So Psalm 119. 57. he again professes; Thou art my portion,
O Lord: so likewise the Church professes, Lam. 3. 24. The Lord is my portion
says my soul, therefore will I hope in him. If then we desire rest and
quietness, all our hopes, love, joy and desire Amor est pondus animi, quocunque
feror: and amore fertur animus in Deum tanquam in centrum aeternae quietis.
Aug. de Civit. Dei, lib. 1. cap. 13.
must center upon God. The dove could find no rest for the sole of her foot
till Noah took her into the ark. There can be no rest nor acquiescence for any
Christian, but in God. Its frequently observed by learned men that all the
letters in Jehovah are quiescent, to imply unto us that there is no rest to be
had but in God alone. Do thou Oh Christian! desire treasures? they are to be
had in Christ. 1 Pet. 2. 7.
Col. 2. 3. In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Do
thou desire honors, they are to be had in Christ; for he is said to be (...)
in the abstract, and he puts a great honor upon all his Saints, as we may see
1 Pet. 2. 9. But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy
nation, Rev. 1. 5.
a peculiar people. Gods children are Kings and Priests unto God. Christ (says
Col. 3. 11.
the Apostle) is all and in all. Augustine has a memorable saying, viz. Christ
alone Ipse unus Christus erit tibi omnia, quia in ipso uno bono, bona sunt
omnia. Aug.
will be to thee all, for in that one good are contained all. And in that rare
book of his Confessions, amongst many choice sayings he propounds from his own
experience this excellent one; viz. All my plenty, if Omnis mihi copia, quae
Deus meus non est, e^^stas est. Aug. Confess. lib. 3.
God be not there is poverty. Here then is evidenced, wherein consists the
experimental knowledge of Contentment. That man questionless has not only the
Theory, but the Practice of Contentment, who accounts God his riches, honors,
pleasures, profits, refuge and all. While the Epicure continues swallowing, and
the covetous is scraping, and the ambitious continues climbing, and the
voluptuous man with all eagerness pursues his vain delights and pleasures, a
true believer makes his address and application unto God. He finds and tastes
riches, pleasures, delights, and all comforts whatsoever concentred in his God.
His God is all and above all, and the light of his countenance he prefers
before all the treasures in the universe. This is that grand request that David
prefers to the throne of grace, Psalm 4. 6, There are many that say, who will
show us any good? Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us. The
multitude in general ask after that which is good: for good in general is the
object of the will (as the Philosopher observes.) (...). Arist. Rhet.
But there are variety of mistakes, and many mistake that for good which is
not. Wherefore the Psalmist determines wherein saving good, real and solid
consists, viz. In the light of Gods gracious countenance. Moses the man of God
prays, O satisfy us early with thy mercy, Psalm. 90. 14.
that we may rejoice and be glad all our days. Such an one who has these
desires in sincerity and truth is the truly contented man.

CHAP. III.
Wherein the Doctrine is illustrated by Chap. 3. Containing an illustration of
the doctrine by Examples.
several examples, and proved by Scripture.

SECT. 1.
Wherein the Doctrine is illustrated by Examples.

2. IN the second place I shall illustrate 2 Head. Wherein the doctrine is
illustrated by Examples.
the truth of the doctrine by Examples. I shall make mention of four Scripture
Examples as choice patterns for our imitation.

The first Example of Contentment I 1. Example of Abraham.
shall instance in, is Abraham. I before mentioned his Contentedness in
refusing the goods of the King of Sodom. What I shall now take special notice
of, shall be concerning his Contentedness in managing and ending the
controversy between his herdsmen and Lots herdsmen. First, Abraham persuades
to peace and amicable agreement, Genesis 13. 8. And Abraham said unto Lot, Let
there be no strife I pray thee, between thee and me, and between thy herd-men
and my herdmen, for we are brethren. Secondly, Abraham (though the uncle and
superior) offers to Lot, though his nephew and inferior, the choice of what
place he would go to, v. 9. Is not the whole land before thee, separate thy
self I pray thee from me, if thou will take the left hand, then I will go to
the right, or if thou depart to the right hand, then I will go to the left. And
Lot accordingly took his choice, v. 11. Then Lot chose him all the plain of
Jordan. Thus Abraham discovered signal and exemplary humility in yielding to
his nephew Lot the choice of a place, and as signal and excellent contentedness
of spirit in taking Lots leavings.

A second Example I shall instance in, is 2 Example of Jacob.
of Jacob, Abraham's grandchild, who trod exactly in his grandfathers steps.
Jacob was constrained to fly for his life, and to be an exile from his fathers
family, that so he might escape the murder designed by his incensed brother
Esau. He came the first night of his travels to Bethel, and what lodging Genesis
28. 11.
he had there, is upon record. He had no other canopy then the Expansum of the
heavens, and no other pillow. but hard stones; yet there where he lay subdio,
exposed to wind and weather, God graciously appeared Genesis 28. 13, 14, 15.
in a dream unto him, and renewed his covenant made with Abraham and Isaac; and
likewise promised great blessings to him and his seed: and in the mean time God
promised his special presence to Jacob both in going and returning. After such
mercies promised, Jacob made a solemn vow, Genesis 28. 20, 21. And Jacob vowed a
vow saying, If the Lord will be with me, and will keep me in the way that I go,
and will give me bread to eat and raiment to put on, so that I come again to my
fathers house in peace, then shall the Lord be my God. It is worth our
observation that Jacob capitulates not for high diet, nor costly raiment (for
beggars must not be choosers) but he only desires what is necessary for food
and raiment. Pererius upon the place gives his verdict, (whereunto many wise
men will give their assent) That Media vitae humanae conditio, and facultatum
mediocritas optanda maxim est hominibus, etc. Quippe quod arcet flagitia,
vitamque reddit frugalem and quietam and jucundam. Pererius in Genesis 28. 20.
a middle estate is to be most desired, and he gives a strong reason, Because a
middle condition drives away vices and renders the life frugal, and quiet and
pleasant. The said learned Author quotes an obscure saying of an ancient Poet,
and refers himself to Plato's interpretation thereof. The saying at first
hearing seems a riddle or paradox, viz. The half is more worth then the (...).
Hesiod.
whole. Totum accipere (as Plato observes) noxium est: Dimidium autem moderatum
est, and conducibile. Cui parum non est satis, ei nihil est satis. Cui quod
satis est non est satis, ci nihil est satis.

3. Example of Agur.
A third Example I shall give instance in, is in Agur. Which name of Agur
amongst some of the Rabbis is accounted an appellative name of Rabbi Levi
putat etiam Salomonem sese nominasse Agur filiu^ Jake. Mercer.
King Solomon. I put no stress upon that conjecture; however without all
question this Agur was a man of great wisdom, humility and integrity, and
contentedness: and it is worthy of an especial remark, what was that which in
such an earnest prayer he begs of God, Give me neither Prove. 30. 8, 9.
poverty, nor riches, feed me with food convenient for me. Lest I be full and
deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord? or lest I be poor and steal, and take the
name of God in vain. He neither desired poverty, nor riches, but an indifferent
estate. Jesurun abuse his plenty, of whom it is said, But Jesurun waxed fat and
kicked. Thou Deuteronomy. 32^ 15.
art waxen fat, thou art grown thick, thou art covered with fatness. Then he
forsook God which made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his salvation.
Riches ^^e snares, and many times it so falls out, that (...), fullness and
forgetfulness go together. 2. Agur desired not 2. Paupertas inimica bonis est
moria bus omnis.
poverty, because it is accompanied with many inconveniences, and an occasion
of many sins. He desired not poverty, lest he should be put upon the temptation
of stealing, and so break the eighth Commandment, or lest through his poverty
and necessitous condition, he should be put upon the temptation of taking the
name of God in vain, and so incurr the breach of the third Commandment.
Wherefore upon deliberate thoughts he desires convenient food, sufficient for
necessity, and not for superfluity: as if he should say (to urge the
significant expressions of two learned Authors,) one whereof says, Nourish me
with the bread Ale me pane demensi mei, qui mi^i satis sit ut inde alar, qui n.
ihi convenit. Mercer.
of my allowance, which may be sufficient for me, that I may thence be
nourished with that which is convenient. Hence we pray that God would give us
our daily bread, (i. e.) Quidam vertunt panem sufficientiae nostrae, inter quos
Scultetus; sed Syra melius a Tremellio vertuntur, panem necessitatis nostrae,
and a Bodero, indigentiae nostrae. videtur (...) accepisse, quasi (...). Lud de
Dieu. Thalazar in Prove. 30. 8.
for the day, or the bread of our sufficiency, and necessity and indigency,
etc. Another learned Author reads the words of Agur, Da mihi praedam panem
statuti mei, and he quotes a Rabbin, who draws a similitude from wild beasts,
quae in diem victitant, and non plura quaerunt aut diripiunt.

A fourth and last Example (which I shall 4. Example of St Paul.
mention out of Scripture) is St Paul, Phil. 4. 11, 12. I have learned in
whatever state I am therewith to be content. I know both how to be abased, and
I know how to abound; Every where and in all things I am instructed both how to
be full, and to be hungry; both how to abound, and to suffer need: this is an
excellent profession, and in it are observable these particulars.

Hoc est, novi quod adest boni consulere. Erasm.
to be (...), who is endowed with a contented frame of spirit. 2. Consider who
was this experienced scholar, 2. A(...) and res dicitur quae sufficit, and homo
qui eo quod habet contentus est. Grot.
it was the Apostle Paul. Here are two words whereby are set forth his thorough
learning of his lesson, one is (...), I have learned: (i. e.) by study,
exercise and daily practice. Paul this learning? I answer 1. Negatively, the
Apostle learned A. 1. Negatively.
not this lesson from Plato's Academy, nor from Zeno's Stoa, nor from
Aristotle's Lyceum. All the moral precepts and documents of heathens came too
short of teaching so high a lesson, as the divine art of Contentment. Though
Seneca went far for a heathen in laying down precepts, yet in his own practice
he condemned his precepts: and though he wrote much for the contempt of the
world, yet he clave very close to the world, witness his usury and avarice
notoriously branded in those very times wherein he lived. 2. Positively I 2.
Positively.
answer, that this divine lesson of Contentment the Apostle learned in the
school of Jesus Christ. For Christ alone can teach us this lesson, and cause us
to learn it. Another word is mentioned v. 12. I am instructed. 2. (...), I am
instructed.
The metaphor is taken from holy things. (...) signifies initio, imbuo, thence
(...) is derived; so that hence it evidently appears, that the lesson of
Contentment is a great mystery. This the Apostle learned, and in this mystery
he was instructed. 3. Consider the extent and latitude of this great Art which he
had learned and of this high mystery wherein he was instructed: it is said
(...), 3 (...), in whatsoever state I am.
it is not said (...), in what state I have been: that is past, and not to be
recalled; neither is it said (...), in what estate I shall be, for that is not
in our power to determine, what shall be for the future; but it is said (...),
in what estate I am for the present: according to that condition, as God the
Sovereign Lord of all is pleased to order, dispose and set out for me at the
present, I have learned in that condition to be content. He then that is of a
contented spirit, does not torment and vex himself with the frequent
remembrance and repetition of that prosperous estate which he has formerly
enjoyed and now is deprived of: neither does he anxiously forecast and project
what he may be, or would be, by giving way to tumultuous perplexing thoughts:
but he upon serious and deliberate thoughts renders himself wholly to Gods
disposal, and he is willing to live upon Gods finding; wherefore he labors to
quiet and satisfy himself with the present portion that God has lent unto
him, for which he returns unto God the tribute of a thankful heart. There is
great reason why all true believers should be contented with Sancti sciunt it a
placere Deo, suff^cientiam ergo non m^tiuntur rerum copia^ etc. Calv. in loc.
their present estate or condition: for (says Calvin) The Saints know that
they so please God, therefore they measure sufficiency not by the plenty of
things, but by the will of God, which they esteem of by the thing it self,
because they are persuaded that all their affairs are governed by the
providence and will of God.

It would be no difficult task to add testimonies from humane Authors, but I
shall be very sparing in this kind. Solinus Polybistor tells a story of one
Aglaus, who Cortina Aglaus in angustissimo Arcadiae angulo pauperis soli
dominus, nunquam egressus paterni cespitis terminos invenitur. Jul. Sol.
Polyhist.
all his time went not one step out of his own ground. Quintilian accounted his
cottage his kingdom, and accounted it riches enough Hoc mihi parvulum and
humilis tugurii rusticum culmen aquitas animi regna fecerat satisque divitiarum
erat nihil amplius velle. Quint. Declam.
to desire no more. The Poet accounts the poor man's cottage his kingdom. By all
these examples there is showed much of a contented spirit. But I shall not stay
in the farther enumeration of examples borrowed from heathens, having named
Scripture examples, which are instar omnium, and it is needless labor to light
a candle to the Sun which went before. Pauperis and tugurii congestum cespite
culmen,
Post aliquot mea regna videns mirabor aristas. Virgil. Eclog. 1,



SECT. 2.
Wherein the Doctrine is proved by Scripture.

IN the third place my work lies before me; Head of Scripture precepts
commanding the duty of Contentment.
to give in Scripture precepts, commanding this excellent duty of Contentment.
I shall insist on three or four select Scriptures only. One is Eccles. 9. 7.
Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry heart, for
God now accepts thy works. I shall endeavor to give the sense of these
words. Go thy ways: It is used adverbially, as much as Age igitur, eia, agedum;
and this is a word of encouragement. Eat thy bread and drink thy wine, implying
that we must eat and drink of our own, we must not by fraud or robbery get our
meat and drink: for though stolen waters and bread of deceit may be sweet at
first, yet they end in gall and bitterness; any substance got unjustly will
moulder away and perish. with joy and with a merry heart. God would have us
enjoy the fruit of our labors with cheerfulness, and it is well pleasing to
God that we should enjoy comfortably and cheerfully the outward things of this
present life. for God now accepts thy work. (i. e.) It is well pleasing to
God for a man in the fear of God to labor diligently in the works of his
calling, and to rejoice in the blessing of God upon his labors. It is Gods
acceptance of our work that expells anxiety and immoderate carefulness, and
causes joy and alacrity in the spirit. Compare this Scripture with Eccles. 3.
12, 13. I know there is no good in them, but for a man to rejoice and to do
good in his life time, and also that every man should eat and drink, and enjoy
the good of all his labors, it is the gift of God. Solomon gave his
experimental verdict of all earthly things; and gives this sentence, that there
is no good in them, except a man with Contentment rejoice in Gods blessings and
do good in his life time. For he reaps the fruits of his charity, and does most
good, who makes his own eyes his Overseers, and his own hands his Executours.
He that has a large and a liberal heart to honor God with his substance, and
Prove. 3. 9. Eccles. 11. 1.
to cast his bread upon the waters, and in the confluence of his riches to be
doing of good, this is the man that enjoys the good of his labor. He sees a
good improvement of his charity, and he finds the benefit of it: for he enjoys
the benefit of many prayers, and his own eyes see the rich increase of his
charity. Contentment is a duty in an especial manner enjoined to soldiers.
Luke 3. 14. And the soldiers demanded of John the Baptist saying, And what
shall we do? And he said unto them, Do violence to no man, neither accuse any
falsely, and be content with your wages. Violence, false accusations and
robbery, are as well to be avoided by soldiers as other men. For war is not to
be sought for it self, nor is the life of a soldier a constant abiding trade,
but therefore men go to war, that peace may be procured and right Ideo
suscipienda sunt bella ut pax quaesita esse videatur. Cic. Offic.
be done. Further, this duty of Contentment is commanded indefinitely unto all,
Hebr. 13. 5. Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content with
such things as ye have; for he has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake
thee. There are five negatives, which make in (...).
Greek the strongest negation. That place is taken out of Joshua 1. 6. God made
his promise good to a tittle unto Joshua: let us make the same promise our own,
and apply it to our particular concernments and conditions. Let us abandon
covetousness and a greedy pursuit after the world, and labor to learn this
excellent art of Contentment, and then we may encourage our selves in this good
word of promise, That the Lord will never leave us nor forsake us.

CHAP. IV. Chap. 4. Wherein are handled four Arguments to persuade to
Contentment.

Consisting of four Arguments to demonstrate the truth of the Doctrine, and
persuade us to Contentment.

SECT. 1.
Consisting of two demonstrative Arguments.

IN the fourth place let us assign some Head 4.
Arguments for the demonstration of the Doctrine, That it is our obliged duty
to labor after a Contented mind, and acquies^e quietly in that present station
and condition, wherein God is pleased to set us in this present world. For the
demonstration of the truth of the Doctrine I shall insist on a fourfold
Argument, drawn from Gods All Sufficiency and Wisdom, from the benefits which
accrue from Contentment of mind, and the mischiefs which proceed from
discontent.

The first Argument is drawn from Gods Arg. 1. drawn from Gods Allsufficiency.
All Sufficiency. He is Omnipotent; and the Absolute Sovereign Commander of
heaven and earth: all creatures are at the command and dispose of God: all the
cattle upon a thousand mountains are at Gods command. Psalm. 50. 10, 11. Every
beast of the forest is mine, and the cattle upon a thousand hills. I know all
the fowls of the mountains, and the wild beasts of the field are mine. And as
all cattle are at Gods command and disposal, so are all granaries at Gods
command, and when he speaks the word they shall yield food and sustenance to
his people. All treasures are at Gods disposal to enrich a people: and all
magazines are at Gods disposal to defend a people. God is not only potent and
able to do some things, but omnipotent, and able to do all things, Genesis 17. 1.
God appeared to Abraham Pronuncia^ Deus se ad protegendum Abram satis habere
virtutis, quia ^unquam aliter consist^^ fides nostra, quam dum certo persuasi
unicum Dei praesidium nobis sufficere, quicquid saluti nostrae in mundo
adversum est secure despicimus. Calv.
and said, I am the All-sufficient God, walk before me and be thou perfect.
Luther Esto, diabolus sit maguipotens, nunquam orit omnipotens. Luth.
said of the devil, Although he be able to do great things, yet he cannot do
all things. But herein consists the Christians strong ground of consolation,
Rev. 19. 6. The Lord God omnipotent reigns. Though we live in an island
encompassed round about with seas, yet that the Lord reigns is unto us strong
ground of security and protection. For so says the Psalmist, The Lord
reigns, Psalm 97. 1.
let the earth rejoice: let the multitude of isles be glad thereof. God
encouraged Abraham to the leading of an holy life from the consideration of the
Omnipotency and All Sufficiency which was promised, Genesis 17. 1. I am the
Almighty God, Elshaddai, Allsufficient. This one promise is of higher valuation
then all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them. And Abraham had
experimental knowledge of Gods all sufficiency, when he left his native
country at Gods command, and went into the land of Canaan: as soon as he came
into Canaan there was a famine in the land, Genesis 12. 10. yet God graciously
sustained him, and kept him and his great family alive in a time of famine.
Afterward he went into Egypt, and there the beauty of Sarah became a snare,
whereupon Abraham took an indirect course which was no less then equivocation,
v. 12. but thinking thereby to escape one danger he fell into a greater danger,
and exposed his wife to a greater hazard, v. 15. But the power and mercy of God
eminently appeared in a seasonable rescuing of Abraham from all dangers, v. 16.
v. 20. This without all question was a great instance of the All Sufficiency of
God: but a greater instance was put forth in the case of Isaac: for Isaac the
son of the parents old age, the son of the promise, the beloved son, the only
son was appointed for slaughter by Gods command, Genesis 22. 2. Take now thy son,
thine only son Isaac, whom thou love, and get thee into the land of Moriah,
and offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of the mountains which I will
tell thee of. This was a difficult command contrary to flesh and blood, a great
trial of Abraham's obedience. We read not that Abraham acquainted Sarah with
the command, neither did he himself make the least demurr, or enter into the
least dispute against it, but he yielded present and cheerful obedience
thereunto, for so we read, Genesis 22. v. 10. And Abraham stretched forth his hand
and took the knife to slay his son: now what was that which quieted and
supported the heart of Abraham, but the consideration of Gods All Sufficiency.
The same God who gave him Isaac was able to preserve him: see how strenuously
the faith of Abraham acted. Heb. 11. 17, 18, 19. By faith Abraham when he was
tempted offered up Isaac, and he that had received the promise (...) recepit,
neque mactavit, neque recepit ex morte, sed cum id facturus fuerit, perinde est
ac si mact asset, ac rursum in vitam revocatum recepisset, hoc est quod dicit
(...). quod ipsa res non facta sit, sed facta esse videatur. Clarius, (...) (i.
e.) (...), per imaginem quandam resuscitationis ex mortuis, jam enim mortuus
erat in sua and patris opinione. Grot.
offered up his only begotten son, of whom it was said, that in Isaac shall
thy seed be called, accounting that God was able to raise him up even from the
dead, from whence also he received him in a figure. And hereunto may be added
the question of Moses, (which was in him a sin of unbelief) Numb. 11. 22. Shall
the flocks and the herds be slain for them to suffice them? or shall the fish
of the sea be gathered together for them to suffice them? But observe what
answer God gives to Moses, v. 23. And the Lord said unto Moses, Is the Lords
hand waxen short? Thou shall see now, whether my word shall come to pass unto
thee, or no. Amaziah propounds a question of distrust and perplexity, but the
Prophet gives him a full and satisfactory answer, 2 Chronicles. 25. 9. And Amaziah
said to the man of God, but what shall we do for the hundred talents, which I
have given to the army of Israel? And the man of God answered, The Lord is able
to give thee much more then this. If then we would frequently and in good
earnest make it our business to meditate on the power and All Sufficiency of
God, and believe that God is always and thoroughly able to help, relive and
succor us in all our straits; we should upon such deliberate considerations,
resolve to sit down quietly under various dispensations, and cheerfully submit
and resign our wills, to the disposing and ordering will of a wise and
Omnipotent Lord God: but when people yield to the temptations of a distrustful
murmuring spirit, and thereupon presume to call the power and providence of God
into question, and repine at Gods dealings, then they utterly undo themselves,
and instead of easing themselves of present burdens, they add to themselves far
greater and weightier burdens too heavy for them to bear. If then we would be
good proficients in the art of divine Contentment, we must believe this
fundamental truth, That God is All-sufficient.

A second Argument is drawn from the Arg. 2. drawn from the wisdom of God.
Wisdom of God. The wisdom of God continually puts forth it self in the
ordering and governing of all the affairs of the universe. And questionless the
dividend and portion which God allows, is the best portion which any man can
have, and what any enjoy is James 1. 5. (...).
from God, who gives liberally to all men and upbraideth not. What wicked men
possess is by common donation and ordinary providence; Exlargitate Dei, they
partake in a great measure of Gods liberality. They have their portion in this
life, and the riches, Psalm. 17. 14.
honors and pleasures of this terrestrial world is all the heaven they shall
have: and if we enter upon deliverate considerations, by what means wicked men
come by their riches, and how they purchase earthly riches with the loss of
their heavenly-bornbeing souls, we have no cause to envy the prosperity of
ungoldly men. How many are there, who by oppression, cousenage, extortion and
forgeries, compass to themselves great estates? they add house to house, and
call them by their own names, and raise their buildings upon the ruins of
others, even of widows, orphans, and others unable to defend themselves; so
that might many times prevails above right. But these men verify an old
proverb, in being penny wise and pound foolish: for by overbusying themselves to
heap up transient and perishing riches, they lose a durable substance (i. e.)
eternal riches, and being over solicitous for riches in this world, they lose
the riches of heaven in a better world to all eternity. David was a while at a
stand, and stumbled at the prosperity of the wicked, Behold (says he) these
are the ungodly Psalm. 73. 12, 13.
who prosper in the world, they increase in riches, verily I have cleansed my
heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocence. But David corrects himself and
goes into the Sanctuary, and there his judgment is set right, Until I went
into the Sanctuary of Psalm. 73. 17, 18.
God, then understood I their end. Surely thou did set them in slippery
places, thou castest them down into destruction. The Prophet Jeremiah was much
perplexed about the selfsame thing. He pleads and expostulates the case with
God after this manner, Righteous Jer. 12. 1, 2.
art thou, O Lord, when I plead with thee, yet let me talk with thee of thy
righteous judgments, wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper? wherefore
are all they happy that deal very treacherously? Thou have planted them, yea
they have taken root, they grow, yea they bring forth fruit, Thou art near in
their mouth, yet far from their reins. But none have cause to envy them, if
they observe how the Prophet prays against them, Pull them out like sheep for
the Jer 12. v. 3.
slaughter, and prepare them for the day of slaughter.

But though wicked men have a liberal share in worldly riches, (and they have
such a right as no man may rob and defraud them;) yet godly men enjoy the
things of this life by special providence, and by covenant interest, and they
have all the creatures sanctified to them; for they enjoy Christ in the
creatures: for so says the Apostle, He that spared not his own Son, but
delivered Romans 8. 32.
him up for us all, how shall he not with him freely give us all things? Gods
children have an ample Charter of immunities, (as the Apostle mentions) 1 Cor.
3. 22, 23. Whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death,
or things present, or things to come, all are yours, and ye are Christ's, and
Christ is Gods.



in capite, in their head Christ, and this of all others is the best tenure.
the promises are yea and Amen, (i. e.) 2 Cor. 1. 20
they are sure and certain, not off and on, not fast and loose, but firm, and
sure and steadfast; these are precious promises. 2 Pet. 14. (...).
Saints have all by donation, and what can be surer and better title then free
gift? what can be so sure as the free gift of the omnipotent Lord God? Christ
hereupon comforts his children, and encourages them against all distrustful
cares and fears, Luke 12. 32. Fear not little flock, for it is your (...)
Fathers good pleasure to give you the kingdom. Here is nothing of merit, but
all of mercy: nothing to be ascribed to man's free will, but all must be
ascribed to Gods free grace. I shall add only one more apposite Scripture to
prove all things to be by Gods free donation, and that is an excellent and
choice promise, Psalm. 84. 11. For the Lord God is a sun, and a shield, the Lord
will give grace and glory; no good thing will he withhold from them that walk
uprightly. 4. The saints have possession of all, and so all is theirs, Joh. 3.
36. He that believes on the Son has everlasting life. All Gods children have
the earnest of their inheritance, and some first fruits and fore-tasts of
heaven. They have heaven inchoative begun in an holy life and conversation in
this world, and they shall have it perfective in glory and happiness in another
world. Not a bit of bread which a true believer eats, but he begs Gods blessing
upon it; and as he prays, that God would give him his daily bread and sanctify
the use of it to him, so especially he prays that God would give him Christ the
Bread of Life. Let us then Joh. 6. 35.
seriously consider, that whatsoever God gives to one or other, he gives in
wisdom. To one he gives more, to another he gives less, and yet for most wise
ends and purposes. God knows what is better for every one of us, then we can
know for our selves. Does not experience testify how many being overcome by
the temptations of prosperity are utterly undone, for that their plenty and
riches have become snares to them? For they grow wanton and luxurious in the
abundance of outward things, and so in their fullness they forget God, and are
like those swine that eat the mast, but never look up to the tree, from whence
they receive them. And many there are, who when they were in a meaner condition
could never believe, neither did it ever enter into their hearts to think that
they should carry things so proudly and insolently as they do, being advanced
to a higher condition. None sufficiently know their own hearts, and how
prosperity will puff them up. Dic mihi si fuer is tu leo, qualis eris. Captain
Hazael abhorred the thoughts of doing that, which he boldly ventured upon, when
he was King Hazael. It usually 2 Kings 8. v. 12, 13.
so falls out, that some are far better in a meaner condition, then they are
after they are promoted to a higher condition: so that those riches and
honors, which (if well improved) might have been for their welfare, through
abuse and misemployment prove unto them occasions of falling. Now God in wisdom
orders all things, and allotteth unto us such a dimensum and portion, which he
knows fittest for us. A wise physician diets his patient, and prescribes unto
him, lest he should take that which might be hurtful unto him. So does the wise
God of heaven and earth give us convenient food, such as is most suitable to
our condition. If we then seriously meditate on the wise disposing providence
of our gracious God, we shall bear all dispensations with a quiet and contented
frame of spirit, and in all things submit and resign our wills unto the will
of God, accounting his will good, acceptable and perfect. Romans 12. 2.
The grand duty incumbent upon us is this, to make a good improvement of one or
more talents wherewith God instructs us, and to order our affairs with
discretion, and to endeavor to be thankful for what we have; so (through the
grace of God) we shall be good practitioners and proficients in this excellent
art of divine Contentment.

SECT. 2.
Consisting of a third and fourth Argument.

I Proceed to a third Argument, to engage Arg. 3. drawn from the benefits
coming from Contentedness.
to Contentedness of spirit, and this is drawn from those singular benefits
accruing from Contentment. Argumentum ab utili is usually a prevailing piece of
Rhetoric, and by this the Orator persuades his auditors to approve of what
he commends unto them.

There is a twofold benefit or emolument arising from a Contented mind, viz.
upon a temporal and spiritual account.

1. Upon a temporal account. All the 1. Upon a temporal account, Contentedness
of mind brings great benefits.
outward accommodations of this world whether they be riches, or honors, or
relations, etc. are much sweetened to us, and enjoyed comfortably and cheerfully
by virtue of a Contented and quiet frame of spirit. No man sleeps so sweetly as
a contented man, Eccles. 5. 12. The sleep of a laboring man is sweet whether
he eat little or much, but the abundance of the rich will not suffer him to
sleep. A Contented man eats his meat savourily, and relisheth sweetness in
hard meat and course fare: his heart is merry, and a good conscience is a cause
of true mirth. Hence says the wise man, He that is of a Prove. 15. 15.
merry heart has a continual feast. Solomon made a magnificent feast for seven
days, and Ahasuerus made a feast for one hundred and fourscore days: but he
that feasts with a good conscience keeps a feast every day. A Contented man
goes on cheerfully in the works of his calling, with such a calm and sedate
spirit, as he is neither puffed up with prosperity, nor cast down by adversity:
insomuch that such a man though of a mean estate enjoys all that he has, be it
less or more, more comfortably then a mal^ contented person, who has in his
possession thousands of gold and silver. It is not the high and honorable
condition, nor the rich and wealthy condition, that can render a man's life
pleasant and comfortable; but it is Gods blessing that makes rich, and adds no
sorrow to it. I have read how a learned Heathen describes a happy man thus, He
is not happy who has all that he desires, Beatus est, non qui habet quae
cupit, sed qui non cupit quae non habet Sen. Et minus haec optat, qui non
habet. Juven. Satyr. 14.
but he is happy who desires not what he has not. Take then a survey of
contented persons, who have learned this rare art of Contentment, and you shall
see that they live comfortably, and enjoy that little that they have with more
satisfaction and complacency then multitudes who have more pounds, then the
other has pence. Wherefore to eat and drink and sleep with a merry heart, and
to follow the works of our calling with cheerfulness of spirit, the ready way
is to put in practice that excellent lesson of the Apostle, I have learned
(says Phil 4. 11^
he) in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content. For he is the wise man,
and thrives best in whatsoever he sets his heart and hands unto, who has
learned this choice lesson of Contentment. And thus upon a temporal account
great is the benefit which contentment produces.

2. Upon a spiritual 2 Upon a spiritual account Contentment brings great
benefit.
account much benefit arises from a contented spirit. For instance, in
hearing, a meek and quiet frame of heart much conduces to our profiting by the
word of God. For so says the Apostle, Wherefore lay apart all filthiness and
James 1. 21.
superfluity of naughtiness, and receive with meekness the engraffed word,
which is able to save your souls. When a man comes to hear a Sermon with a
quiet and calm spirit, O what wonderful effects has the Word upon such a
person; hereby his attention and intention are quickened: the affections are set
in right order, and the memory is retentive. I may give another instance in
prayer, When discontented perplexing thoughts are driven away, (as Abraham Genesis
15. 11.
drove away the fowls, which some apply to vain distracting thoughts) then are
Christians prepared to pour out their hearts to God in prayer. So likewise for
meditation, that I may call an up-hillduty, whereby a Christian ascends from
earth to heaven in divine contemplations. There is no greater obstacle to
divine meditation then a perplexed spirit entangled with variety of worldly
encumbrances. Wherefore such persons as delight in meditation retire themselves
as Isaac did, (as we read of him) And Isaac went out to meditate in the field
at Genesis 24. ^3.
even-tide. Serenity and settledness of mind do very much conduce to the
profitable exercise of meditation: but when the hurry of the world, and the
carking and vexatious cares about it surprise our hearts, and take possession
of them, then we become altogether as unfit and indisposed for meditation, as a
bird is for flying, either when an heavy stone is tied to her leg, or else when
she is entangled by lime-twigs: if then we would learn to climb up the hill,
and be in the mount with Moses, and enjoy communion with God in the exercise of
this divine art of meditation, we must in the mean time labor for a serious,
composed and contented spirit, and abandon vexatious, discontented and carking
cares. And thus upon a temporal and a spiritual account both, we shall be
exceeding great gainers by being well instructed in this mystery of
Contentment, and by being diligent practitioners in this excellent art.

The fourth and last Argument shall be Arg. 4. drawn from the mischiefs of
discontent.
drawn from the mischiefs that proceed from discontent.

There is a threefold mischief occasioned by a discontented spirit, viz. to the
body, to the estate, and to the soul.

1. Discontent is mischievous unto the 1. Discontent is mischievous to the body.
body, for when a man is tortured with variety of discontented and vexing
thoughts, his body is macerated with continual grief, and pines away till it
become a very Skeleton. Though such a male-contented man lie soft in a bed of
Down, yet he feels no refreshment there: because he takes no more contentment
upon such a bed then a bed full of thorns. At his table, where is sumptuous
fare, choice and delicate food; yet all those sweet dainties are sawced and
sowred with a fretting discomposed spirit, so that his bread tastes no better
then gravel, and his cup tastes as bad as poison. Wherefore any man will enjoy
as much ease and delight, even when he is tortured upon a rack, and his bones
are dislocated upon a wheel, as he shall enjoy who is tormented with a
repining, impatient and malecontented spirit. Sleep (which is called Psalm. 127.
2.
beloved sleep, and a great refreshment to nature; yet it) refreshes not such
a man. Bread and water which are the stay and staff of a man's life, these
nourish not, nor are digested; good and profitable company delight not,
melodious music cannot please the ears, gaudy pageants cannot please the eye,
when the heart is encumbered and tossed up and down, and the head troubled and
disquieted with variety of carking imaginations, nothing can give content.
Jonadab asked Amnon, Why art thou being the Kings 2 Samuel 13. 4.
son lean from day to day? So great, rich and honorable persons in this world
may have this question propounded to them, Why are you being Nobles and rich
Personages, so much macerated with grief and vexatious troubles? Is not this
the reason, because your hearts are unsettled and unsatisfied, and the pomp and
vanities of the world sit too heavy, and too close and near unto your hearts?
This is the main cause often times, why the body does insensibly pine away with
fretting; because the mind is so distracted with tumultuous perturbations, and
perplexed with variety of earthly intanglements.

2. The mischief of discontent evidenceth 2 The mischief of discontent is to
the estate.
it self to the estate of a discontented person. For by projecting, contriving
and distracting himself about multitudes of business, he knows not how to fix
upon any thing to any good purpose, or intent. So true is that observation of
that great Historian, That diversity of things breaks off Rerum diversitas
aciem intentiouis abrumpit. Florus.
the edge of intention. What got that notorious fool mentioned in the Gospel by
plotting and contriving ways for the advancement of his estate, and taking of
his fill in his imaginary delights and jollities. Luke 12. 16.
He was on a sudden disappointed of his expectations, Luke 12. 19. we read what
he promised to himself, And I will say to my soul, Soul, thou have goods laid
up for many years, take thine ease, eat, drink and be merry. But observe what
became of him, v. 20. But God said unto him, Thou fool, this night thy soul
shall be required of thee, then whose shall those things be, which thou have
provided? And a particular application is made, v. 21. So is he that lays up
treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God. 3. Discontentedness is
mischievous to the soul.


A third and last mischief (which I shall name) is this, That discontentedness
of spirit is mischievous to the soul; and such a mischief as redounds to the
soul is the worst mischief of all. For it is an experimented observation that
of all persons there is none who more prejudice their own souls, then
male-contented persons: when they are in a Congregation, where the Word is
preached, the entanglements of the world do seize so much upon them, so that
they heed no more what the Preacher says then the seats whereon they sit.
These auditors are of the same temper as those were, of whom the Prophet
speaks, Ezekiel. 33. 31. And they come unto thee as thy people comes, and they
sit before thee as my people, and they hear thy words, but they will not do
them: for with their mouth they show much love, but their heart goes after
their covetousness. When they are admitted into conference with serious
Christians, by whose society they might be gainers, then the cares of the world
creep into their thoughts, and so disturb them, insomuch that all good
discourse is lost upon them, and becomes like water spilt upon the ground, that
cannot be gathered up again. Farther, in their private prayers the world steps
in, and distracts them in the performance of that duty. And when they should in
a solemn manner at the Lords Supper keep their thoughts to the great business
in hand, then the world interposeth, and diverts them from serious meditations.
Experienced Christians are sensible of these failings, and bewail them in their
serious addresses to the throne of grace. Who is able to declare sufficiently,
how many are those mischievous consequences which grow upon this root of
discontent, which is a root of bitterness that brings forth nothing but gall
and wormwood? It is evident by what has been forementioned, that the body,
estate and soul of a man are all exceedingly the worse by reason of a
discontented spirit.

CHAP. V. Chap. 5. Containing an use of Reproof and Examination.

Containing an Use of Reproof and Examination.

SECT. 1.
Containing an Use of Reproof.

HAving handled the Doctrinal part, I now proceed to particular application.
Let us then reflect upon our selves in these five ensuing Uses, viz. For
Reproof, Examination, exhortation, direction and Consolation.

The first use is for Reproof of all malecontented Use 1. For reproof of all
malccontented spirits.
spirits, who are mere strangers to this necessary duty of Contentment.
Although they have food and raiment, and peradventure of the best and choicest
in both kinds; yet they have not copied out this excellent lesson of divine
Contentment. Hence the confluence of riches and honors, pleasures and profits
of the world are a heavy burden and vexation to them, because they enjoy them
not with a quiet and a cheerful mind. Now, that I may not stay in generals, I
will propound particular instances, and so discover who are discontented and
never satisfied, and so come within the verge of this Use of Reprehension.

1. All envious persons are in an especial 1 Envious persons are discontented
persons.
manner to be numbered amongst discontented persons. For because others are
greater and richer, and in higher esteem then themselves, therefore they
torment, vex and fret themselves: this sin the Psalmist forbids, Psalm. 37. 1.
Fret not thy self because of evil doers, neither be thou envious against the
workers of iniquity. Their doom he prophesies, v. 2. For they shall soon be
cut down like the grass, and wither as the green herb. And the remedy to cure
envy, is prescribed, v. 3. Trust in the Lord and do good, so shall thou dwell
in the land, and verily thou shall be fed. The way to cure envy, is to put our
trust in God, and to go to him as to our strong hold, wherein we may repose our
confidence. Apposite to this purpose is the charge of Solomon, Prove. 23. 17.
Let not thine heart envy sinners, but be thou in the fear of the Lord all the
day long. The fear of God fixed in the heart is a special means to root out
this weed of envy. But where the fear of God is wanting, envy does increase and
multiply. Whoever therefore willingly allows himself in this grand sin of envy,
he can never enjoy himself, nor any thing he possesses comfortably: for though
he has a liberal portion of earthly things, yet he is still hankering after
more, projecting and contriving variety of ways, according to the dictates of
his own fancy, how to add house to house, land to land, and one bag of gold or
silver to another; and when he takes notice that some others are richer then
himself, he envies and grudgeth them, and his heart rises against them; so
that any man's prosperity is the eyesore of an envious man. If then we would
learn this lesson of divine Contentment, we should pluck up root and branch
this bitter and cursed weed of envy; for wherever envy grows, contentment
cannot grow near it. Envy is so bad and mischievous a neighbor, as it hates
and expells contentment out of its coasts. And contentment of spirit is so good
a neighbor of it self, as it neither desires nor seeks after acquaintance and
neighborhood with envy. There is not a greater antipathy in nature between a
wolf and a lamb, then there is in morality between an envious and a contented
person. Envy and Contentment are inconsistent, and cannot keep a mutual
intimacy and correspondence together: still there will be clashing and
heart-burning between them. Though Saul was a King, yet he could not enjoy
himself contentedly, because he envyed David for the commendation which the
women gave him in their singing and dancing; and the envy of Saul brake forth
into such rage and fury, as to seek David's destruction. Readiness envy and malice
were so exceeding great, that he envyed David his very life, and thought that
his posterity should never thrive, as long as David lived, 1 Samuel 20. 31. For
as long as the son of Jesse lives upon the ground, thou shall not be
established, nor thy kingdom. All the grandieur and preferments which Haman
enjoyed were nothing, so long as Mordecai was alive. Though Mordecai then was
an inconsiderable person, and lightly esteemed of in Ahasuerus his Court, yet
Haman envied him his life. For in the confluence of his great preferments, he
enters this protestation against his own contentment, Yet all this avails me
nothing, Esth. 5. 13.
so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the Kings gate. Wherever envy
is, there discontent lodges under the same roof.

2. Proud, ambitious, haughty spirited 2 Proud ambitio^s persons are
discon^ented persons.
persons are to be reproved for their great discontent: for they are always
puffed up with ambitious aspiring thoughts of climbing higher. They are not
satisfied with their present condition, but still pursue greater things for
themselves. This was a check to Baruch, Jer. 45. 5. And seek thou great
things for thy self, seek them not. This was the sin of ambition whereof those
Apostles were guilty, Luke 22. 24. And there was also a strife amongst them,
which of them should be counted the greatest. A strange thing Vix credibile tam
luctuoso tempore vaca^sse animos ambi^ioso certamini. Grot.
(as a learned Commentatour observes) that in such a time of mourning, they
should be at leisure for an ambitious contention. And if through infirmity good
men be overtaken with this sin of ambition, questionless ungodly great men
drive a trade and habituate themselves in pride and ambition. Suppose a great
proud man abound in titles of honor, even so many as to clog his memory; yet
notwithstanding his proud spirit is insatiate. Cesaer and Pompey were of such
high spirits; insomuch as one could in no wise brook, that the other should be
his equal, nor he brook, that the other should be his superior. The Prophet
Jeremy could prophecy nothing to the content of his proud ^earers: for so we
read, Jer. 43. 2. Then spoke Azariah the son of Hoshaiah, and Johanan the son
of Kareah, and all the proud men, saying unto Jeremiah, Thou speak falsely:
The Lord our God has not sent thee to say, Go not into Egypt to sojourn there.
A proud person is in no kind a contented man: for dignities and preferments,
her thinks the greatest he can get too little, and many preferments heaped on
him, he reckons but as a very few. And as for favor and estimation in the
world, a proud person thinks he can never be enough valued and applauded: his
own glory he prefers before Gods glory, and chooses rather the praise of men
then the glory of God. And as for spiritual matters, which most nearly concern
the soul, none more discontented then a proud person; for he is so well
conceited of himself, that he is too proud to learn; he despises instruction,
and thinks himself wiser then the best of Teachers. If a proud opinionated man
hear a plain powerful sermon, he is not contented with the simplicity of the
Gospel, his palate is vitiated, and he cannot relish wholesome food; he cannot
content himself with the form of sound words; but he affects curiosities of
humane inventions, fragments of Poets, gleanings of Comedians, and such like
trash he prefers before plain edifying preaching: so then look upon a proud
person upon any account whatever, you shall find him a discontented man.

3. A third sort of discontented Persons 3 Covetous persons are discontented
persons.
(which come under this reproof) are covetous greedy worldlings, mammonists,
who are eathed and swallowed up with the immoderate love of the world. These,
though they have much of the world already, yet they are of such a ravenous
disposition, as they are greedy after more. Their hunger and thirst is after
corn and wine, and they have a large grasp to hold together abundance of the
worlds goods. A covetous man degenerates into a horseleech, and uses the
self-same language Give, give. And upon a review, a covetous man is far worse
then the horseleeches daughter; for when she has glutted her self with
abundance of bloud-sucking, she lets go her hold and falls off; but a covetous
man is so far from falling off, as he falls faster on, and therefore he falls
upon new projects and devices to satisfy (though he will never be satisfied)
his devouring and ravenous appetite. Hell and the grave are never satisfied; no
more can the hell and grave of an inordinate greedy desire after the world ever
receive any satisfaction.

There are two significant words used by the Apostle to set forth covetousness:
one is (...), and the other is (...). Ex vi nominis significat studiu^ semper
plus ^abendi. Gersh.
The first word is (...), which word signifies having more; so that a covetous
man is still desiring of more. And this desire is immoderate, even with the
loss of others (as Beza observes.) Significat immodicam acquirendi cupiditatem,
etia^ cum aliorum de^r^mento. Beza in Luc. 12. 15.
This man is rapax, greedy; to be compared to a greedy devouring wolf, or to a
vulture and cormorant, swallowing up all he can get. If he may compass riches,
he cares not how he comes by them, whether per fas vel nefas, quocunque modo
rem, all is one to him; so he may swim, he cares not who sinks; so he may
stand, he cares not who falls; so he may be a gainer, he cares not who is the
loser. Wherefore he sticks not, nor scruples at oppression, rapi^^e and
violence, bribery, calumnies and unjust suits, sacrilege, perjury, (for any
thing he can swallow down, which may bring most grist to his own mill.) And
this man (though he escape the punishment of man oftentimes, yet) God brands
him for an Idolater, Ephesians. 5. 3. Amongst other choice qualifications of a
Bishop, one is -- not greedy of filthy lucre, (...). Covetousness is a great
sin in any man, but more notorious in a Minister of the Gospel. God abhorrs a
Psalm. 10. 3.
covetous man, and bars him out of heaven. The covetous are ranked amongst the
vilest of sinners, Know ye not, that the unrighteous 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.
shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither fornicatou^rs,
nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with
mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor
extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God.

Another word whereby covetousness is expressed is (...) -- the love of money.
(...).
And the Apostle tells us, that it is 1 Timothy 6. 10.
the root of all evil, which while some coveted after, they have erred from the
faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows. There is an emphatical
word, (...), Ad hoc ut posthac evadendi emergendique facultatem non habeant.
Oecumen in locum.
which signifies ducking or plunging. Covetous muckworms are as it were duck'd
and plunged over head and ears with the love of money, and therefore (unless a
hand of mercy deliver them) they cannot escape without inevitable destruction.
And such a man whose heart is thus swallowed up with the love of the world, is
as much tenax, to hold fast what he has already got, as rapax, ravenous and
greedy after more. Who are there to be found of such sordid and penurious
spirits, as covetous persons? They sit upon their riches, as Rachel sat upon
the stuff, not willing to rise up from it. Gold and silver are the darlings
which they hug in their bosoms. Job sets a mark on them (as their speech
bewrays them) who say to the Job 31. 24.
wedge of gold thou art our confidence. Wherefore a greedy penurious man
grudgeth himself his necessary food and raiment. As by oppressing, griping and
racking, he is a thief to the poor in robbing and spoiling of them, by a sin of
commission; or otherwise by not relieving, not feeding, nor clothing them,
which is a sin of omission; so he is a thief to himself, being not willing to
allow Cupit hic gazis implere famem, n^c tamen omnis. plagu gemiferi sufficit
istri, nec tota sitim L^dia vincit, etc. Sen. Trag. Herc. Oet.
himself what is necessary and fitting for his estate and calling. And of all
others, no man is so great a malcontent, as a covetous muck-worm: for the
more he has, the more he craves; as the more fuel is added to the fire, it
breaks forth into a greater flame: so more riches, as gold and silver, lands
and revenues, when they are given unto a covetous man, they are like oil cast
into the fire to make a greater blaze; he is still disturbed in his spirit, and
perplexed with multitude of tumultuous thoughts, because he has not all that
he desires: so then it evidently appears, that covetousness and contentedness
are opposite, and can admit no terms of reconciliation; for one goes out as
soon as the other comes in.

4. A fourth and last sort (which I shall 4. Murmurers are discontented persons.
mention) of discontented persons, who fall under this reproof, are Murmurers,
who are frequent in muttering, whining, and in using of querulous and reviling
language, even to the traducing of divine providence, and repining at divine
dispensations: because they have not what they would have; they are so far from
being thankful for that which they have, (and the least that they have is
infinitely more then they deserve) as they exceedingly offend through
murmuring, grudging and complaining for what they want. The Israelites highly
provoked God in this kind, and deeply smarted for their provocation. Insomuch
as their example is a sea-mark or monitory example, to beware of their sin,
lest we partake of their punishments, 1 Cor. 10. 10. Neither murmr ye, as
some of them also murmured, and were destroyed of the destroyer. The Israelites
^^brajd^^ of peevish and froward children, who (as we use to say) are never
contented, neither full nor fasting. They were afflicted with hard bondage in
Egypt, and were forced to serve with rigor; so that all they did eat and
drink was sauced with hard servitude. But as soon as ever they had obtained
their liberty, and were delivered from their Egyptian bondage, and in the
wilderness met with wants of bread and water, they fell a murmuring, and were
so insensible of, and unthankful for their liberty restored, as that they
preferred the garlic and onions of Egypt, before their deliverance. Wherefore
in a mutinous and rebellious manner, they combined against Moses and Aaron,
Numb. 14. 4. And they said one to another, let us make a Captain, and let us
return into Egypt. None are more discontented then murmurers: Their thoughts
are disturbed, their devotions distracted, the works of their calling are
neglected, their sleep passes from them, they relish no pleasant taste in
their eating and drinking, because their minds are disquieted and unsatisfied.
Hence it comes to pass, that the tongue of a murmurer is set on fire of hell,
because he gives himself up to a habit of reviling and railing at others,
because they are in a more prosperous condition then himself. This murmuring
language grows on that cursed root of unbelief, and diffidence of Gods promises
and providence. Hence, from this sin of murmuring arise so many fluctuating
and tumultuous thoughts, and so many roving imaginations, which obstruct the
tranquillity of the mind, and disorder the affections by putting them into a
confusion, or else setting the whole man in combustion.

SECT. 2. Use 2. For Examination.

Showing who is the Author of Contentment, and what are the Objects of
Contentment.

I Proceed to a second use, which shall be for Examination. Whether we have
learned this divine and excellent art of Contentment?

this question, we must make enquiry into three things, and give answers
accordingly. 1. We are to enquire of whom we must learn this great and choice
lesson of Contentment? 2. What is the object of Contentment? 3. What
distinguishing characters may be set down, whereby we may know whether we have
learned this excellent lesson of Contentment, yea or no?

Of whom we must learn contentment.
must learn this lesson? The ground of enquiry is, because every one cannot
teach this lesson of Contentment, and it is not commonly to be found. It is not
an herb that grows in every garden, but it is a plant of our heavenly Fathers
plantation.

Given negatively and positively.
where contentment is not to be found; then secondly, positively, where it is
to be found. 1. Negatively, I shall produce an instance or two, where
contentment cannot be had as,

1. Nature cannot teach us this lesson. 1. Nature cannot teach contentment.
Nature is corrupt, vitiated and depraved; for we are by nature inclined to all
manner of inordinate affections, and the vergency of the heart is carried in a
swift career after every lust, as a boat in a full tide, which with the sail
hoised up is carried down the stream, with all manner of violence. Nature
excites us to a greedy and eager pursuit after the world, and provokes the
appetite to all inordinate and boundless desires: insomuch as a man may as
easily fill a sieve brim full with water, as fill up the disorderly desires of
a natural man.

Secondly moral Education cannot teach 2 Moral education cannot teach
contentment.
a man this excellent lesson of Contentment. Seneca though he wrote rare
precepts and counsels for contempt of the world and for a contented mind, yet
it is storied of him, that he was a great Usurer, and a greedy covetous man.
All the grounds of contentment which Philosophers give are of too low an
elevation: For (says a learned Doctor.) Their Topics were taken from the Dr
Saundersons Sermon. 2. ad Aulam. p. 116. fol.
dignity of man, from the baseness of outward things and m^tability of fortune,
and from the shortness and uncertainty of life, and such like other
considerations as come within their own sphere, useful indeed in their kind,
but unable to build such a pile or roof as they would build thereupon.

But as I have showed negatively where contentment cannot be learned, I will
now show positively where it is to be learned, and of whom, viz. we must repair
unto the Sanctuary and search the holy Scriptures, and The holy Scriptures
teach contentment.
beseech God to teach us to make a right application of them. We must be taught
of God, and anointed by the Spirit of God, before we can learn the excellent
lesson of divine Contentment. St Paul though he was an Hebrew of the Hebrews,
(i. e.) an Hebrew both by the father and mothers side; though he was bred up at
the feet of Gamaliel, a learned Doctor and expositour of the law, and though
he was one of the Pharisees, the strictest Sect amongst the Jews (for the
proverb was amongst them, That if only two men were to be saved, one of them
would be a Pharisee) yet notwithstanding all these advantages St Paul had, he
could learn this lesson of Contentment no where else but in the school of Jesus
Christ. Now it is the saving knowledge of Christ seated in the heart, and the
image of Christ (which is righteousness and holiness) formed in the life and
conversation, whereby a man is cast into a new mould, which frames the heart
into such a serene and quiet temper, as notwithstanding storms and tempests are
boisterous without yet there is a mavelous calm within. So then questionless
contentment is the gift of God: of him we must beg, he is the sole donour of
it. Contentment is a lesson only taught in the school of Christ: other
teachers (whatsoever they may pretend) can never persuade the heart to a quiet
and settled repose and acquiescence, but still there will arise perturbations
of the mind, which will set the whole man out of order. But Christ, who is the
only Lord and Master, who has sovereign and absolute command over the hearts
and consciences of all men, he can persuade the heart and prevail with it
effectually to be contented, acquiesce and rest in him, as lines in their
proper center. Philosophers spent much time in prescribing precepts (which they
call their Documenta) for the better ordering of the lives and conversations of
mankind: but all their precepts reach no farther then the outward man: they
meddled not at all with the inward man: whereas contentment and coffeehouse
arise from the mind, and from things within, rather then from things without;
wherefore the wound is most usually inward, and therefore more tormenting. The
mind apprehends things after a different way, and as there is a different
conception, content and discontent act accordingly. Now when the mind of a
godly man is first placed on God, and wholly depends on him, and accounts God
his riches, treasure and honor; and accounts Christ all in all, then there
abides contentment and tranquillity in abundance in that soul.

In the second place (in handling this use) 2. The objects of Contentment.
we are to propound an enquiry, What is the object of Contentment? I answer
with the Apostle, Phil. 1. 11. I have learned in whatsoever state I am,
therewith to be content. The Apostle specifies without any limitation, (...),
as if he should thus enlarge himself; Be my estate what it is, indifferently
high or low, rich or poor, prosperous or adverse, yet I am sensible that all
comes from the ordering and disposing wisdom of God; therefore I not only must
of necessity bid my present condition welcome, but I am willing with
cheerfulness to bid it welcome: not onley of necessity I yield and submit to
Gods providence, but I submit with a ready and cheerful spirit; because I know
and acknowledge all Gods dispensations to be wise and holy, and it is my
obliged duty to rest satisfied, and bow my self in submission to them. We must
know that it is a point of wisdom to learn contentment, as well in an higher as
in a lower condition, in a great, as well as in a mean estate; in prosperity
and confluence of riches, to bear them without pride, luxury and insolence, is
as difficult, as to bear a mean estate without murmuring, fretting and
repining: wherefore it concerns us both in prosperity and adversity to learn
this excellent lesson of Contentation.

1. We must be content in prosperity. 1. We must be content in prosperity.
Object. Answ.


But it will be objected, who will not be content with a prosperous estate?

For answer there are many, who notwithstanding they have abundance of riches
and honors in this world, yet they enjoy not themselves, but are very
strangers to this lesson of Contentment: for the great share they have of
outward things, they vex and torment themselves more by casting about, and
projecting how to add to their estates and improve their revenues, and advance
themselves and their posterity to high promotions: so that frequently it comes
to pass, that a day-labourer who has not a penny, but what he earns and enjoys,
only enough to keep him alive from hand to mouth, he (I say) lives more
contentedly, sleeps more sweetly, eats (though course diet) more heartily, then
many great personages whose revenues are of several thousands per annum:
wherefore it is the duty of all such who are in a prosperous condition in the
world, to be thankful for the mercies they enjoy, and to honor God with their
substance in doing good, and in distributing to ^he necessities of such as are
in want, and in the height of their riches to labor for a quiet, fixed and
composed frame of spirit.

2. Let us be contented in adversity. 2 We must be content in adversity.
Now is the time of trial, amidst varieties of losses, crosses, poverty and
disappointments, to bear up the spirit with patience and learn the lesson of
contentment. An even sedate frame of spirit amidst variety of dispensations,
will much conduce to the learning of this choice art of Contentment: for he
that can moderate and bound himself in days of prosperity, and not surfeit of
the sweetness thereof, he will be the better enabled to bear the bitterness of
adversity. A heart fixed, trusting in God, has made a good proficiency in this
even frame and settled temper of spirit: this man fears no bad news, for his
heart is above them. The Psalmist gives him this character, Psalm. 112. 7. He
shall not be afraid of evil tidings, his heart is fixed trusting in the Lord.
It is an observable saying of the Orator, Praeclara est aequabilit as Ci^.
Offic.
in omni vita, and idem semper vultus eademque frons. Many trials we must
expect and prepare for: because afflictions are the common lot of Gods people,
and we must through many tribulations enter into Act. 14. 22.
the kingdom of God. Wherefore the duty incumbent on us is this, That no man
should 1 Thessalonians. 3. 3.
be moved by these afflictions* for your selves know that we are appointed
thereunto. How many and manifold are the afflictions that befall men's estates:
many have sustained great losses by fire, being burnt out of house and home:
many are impoverished by the rot of cattle; others are undone by decay of
trade, others have been undone by perfidious careless servants, and many have
been great sufferers in times of war, being spoiled of their goods by rapine
and violence, and others have been much losers by highway robbers, so that
many of considerable estates before, are reduced to poverty, and may take up
the complaint of Naomi, Call me not Naomi, call me Marah; Ruth 1. 20, 21,
for the Almighty has dealt very bitterly with me, I went out full, and the
Lord has brought me home empty again, why then call ye me Naomi, seeing the
Lord has testified against me, and the Almighty has afflicted me? Times of
affliction are times of trial, and read unto us necessary and serviceable
lectures of contentment. Many sore afflictions befall our bodies: and some are
troubled with variety of diseases. Every one meets with one disease or other,
as an alarm to warm him of the frailty and short continuance of his life upon
earth. When the stone, strangury, cholick, gout, toothache, fevers, and such
other like distempers rage in their extremity, then patience, meekness and
contentedness afford great help and assistance to bear those burdens with more
facility; for hereby the disease is more mitigated and less painful. But on the
contrary, raging, fretting and vexing under pains and anguish adds more fuel to
the flame, and in stead of lessening aggravates the grief more and more. But of
all griefs and sorrows none are so sad and painful as inward wounds, such as
are wounds of conscience. The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmities,
Prove. 18. 4.
but a wounded spirit who can bear? Such a time especially (when the arrows of
the Almighty stick fast in a man, and an awakened conscience cries loud against
the sinner) not excluding other times, requires the exercise of faith and
patience, and setting of the spirit of prayer on working, and resigning of our
wills to the will of God in every thing. The duty incumbent on us is fully
expressed, Isai. 50. 10. Who is among you that fears the Lord, that walks
in darkness and has no light, let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay
upon his God. Although for the present, God may respite an answer of peace to
his own children, yet his deferring is no denial. He will speak peace in his
own appointed time: after he has prepared and seasoned his people for the
reception of so great a mercy, he will send it them, Psalm. 85. 8. I will hear
what God the Lord will speak; for he will speak peace unto his people, and to
his saints; but let them not turn again to folly. Though God may hide his face
from his own people for a time, and his hiding may cause much grief and trouble
to them, yet in his good time, he will lift up the light of his countenance
upon them. Our duty then is, to watch and pray, and act faith on promises, and
quietly and submissively yield up our wills to the will of God. Although at
present there be no dawning of comfort, yet a clear sunshine will break forth.
Let us then make particular application of these Scripture cordials, ^sal. 97.
11. Light is sown for the righteous, and joy for the upright in heart. There is
some considerable interval of time between seed time and harvest, wherefore as
the husbandman must wait patiently for the appointed time of harvest, so must a
true believer wait Gods appointed time. Light and gladness are sown, true
believers shall reap the benefit thereof in Gods own convenient time. Another
Scripture cordial is Psalm. 112. 4. Unto the upright there arises light in
darkness. O Christian, labor for uprightness, (i. e.) sincerity, and assure
thy self, that the light of Gods countenance will dispell thy darkness, and his
consolations will cheer up and revive thy spirit abundantly.

SECT. 3.
Containing four signs and Characters of contentment.

I Proceed to a third enquiry, what signs 3. Enquiry, what be the signs of
contentment.
and characters may be given, whether we have learned this excellent art of
Contentment, yea or no? For satisfaction to this enquiry, I shall set down
certain (...), or distinguishing signs, which discover a great difference
between contented and discontented persons, as I shall represent unto you in
these ensuing particulars.

1. A contented person is a charitable 1. A contented person is a charitable
person.
person, open-handed, large-hearted and liberal. As God has given him a
competent share of this worlds goods, so he communicates and distributes them
to the supply of such as are in a necessitous condition. He looks upon himself
as a steward in trust, and therefore engaged to dispense to others that are in
need, in feeding the hungry, clothing the naked, visiting the imprisoned and
relieving the distressed. God has made as well the poor as rich: and the rich
ought to open their hands and hearts for the relieving of the poor. The
commands are very many to this purpose; only I shall instance in two or three,
one command is, Eccles. 11. 1, 2. Cast thy bread upon the waters, and thou
shall find it after many days. In our old English translation it is read, Cast
thy bread upon wet faces; implying, that the poor man's misery causes him to
weep. Now charity bestowed upon the poor is not lost; it is like seed sown, Which
will bring forth a plentiful harvest. But some may complain of the times, and
may fear that they themselves may want. But this thought must not hinder
charity. For v. 2. it is said, Give a portion to seven and also to eight, for
thou know not what evil shall be upon the earth. There is a certain definite
number used for an uncertain and indefinite, implying the great extent of
charity, that many ought to be made partakers of it. And though evils are
foreseen, and feared, yet whilst we have this worlds goods, we should take the
present opportunity of doing good with them. Another command is, 1 Timothy 6. 17,
18. Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not high-minded, nor
trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who gives us richly all
things to enjoy; that they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to
distribute, willing to communicate. In this Scripture are many choice things
observable, 1. There is a word of command, (...): Mandatum ab alio acceptum
aliquibus d^nunciare. Zanch.
it is a judicial term taken from charges at Assizes given by Judges: they give
their charge as they receive it from the rule of the law, and so the Apostles
gave their charges and word of command, as they received it from Jesus Christ.
2. To whom is this command given? I answer, it is to them that are rich in this
world, such as have the affluence of worldly goods, as gold and silver, corn,
lands and revenues: Such as have abundance of the good things of this life are
not to hoord them up, but to distribute and do good. 3. Observe two obstacles
or impediments, which must be avoided.

The first is high-mindedness, (...) 1. Highmindedness hinders good works.
this is a grand impediment; it is all one with pride of heart, and it
obstructs the practice of charity: for proud persons grasp all they can, and
think all they have too little to satisfy their pride: and hence it comes to
pass, that many will bestow many pounds in gorgeous apparel, and care not what
they expend upon ridiculous and exotic garbs and fashions, and in the mean
time they grumble at a few pence asked of them toward the relief of such, as
are in extreme poverty.

A second impediment is worldly confidence, 2. Worldly confidence hinders good
works.
it is expressed, not trust in uncertain riches: for confidence in riches,
trusting and relying upon them hinder all acts of charity. The words are
emphatical, (...) Neque spem pouere in divitiis incertis: Hypallage Hebraica
pro (...), and hoc pro (...). Dugards Lexicon.
Who of any understanding would trust in uncertainties? But here is positively
set down in whom trust ought to be reposed, it is said in the living God.
Riches they perish, the owners die, but God lives for ever, and to trust in God
here is a strong ground of encouragement in the subsequent words, who gives us
richly all things to enjoy. Therefore we must alienate our hope and trust from
all earthly things, which fade, decay and wither, and place our whole hope and
confidence in the living God. Now the particular acts of charity are expressed
in four particulars. 1. To do good, (...), and this implies liberality and
beneficence. Not only a bare doing of good, but in a bountiful manner. Quo
quisque opibus abundat, eo amplior illi been ficentiae materiae suppetit, and
quo semper ad erogandum pigriores sumus quam deceat, eo pluribus ver bis eam
virtutem commendat. Calv.
2. To be rich in good works: not only a doing good, but doing good in a
plentiful manner is commanded. A niggardly giving for a rich man is here
forbidden. 3. That they be ready to distribute, here is set forth a ready
propension of the mind. 4. That they be willing to communicate. This is
exegetical of the former; distributing and communicating are acts of charity.
And such as exercise these duties shall reap the comfortable fruit thereof. 1.
Tim. 6. 19. Laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the
time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life. From this Scripture
Papists plead for merit, Remuneratio non ex meriti ratione pendet, sed ex
liberali Dei acceptione. Calv.
and Estius causelessly blames Calvin, (as usually Papists do) for saying (and
that orthodoxly) That reward depends not on merit, but on Gods free acceptance.
To this Scripture I will add one other, which may give light to this, viz.
Hebr. 13. 16. But to do good and to communicate forget not, for with such
sacrifices God is well pleased. So that here is neither merit in the work, nor
in the worker, but it is Gods acceptance we must only plead. For by what has
been mentioned appears, that acts of charity and contentedness of spirit join
together in a mutual harmony. Let none therefore imagine, that by a prudent and
liberal distribution of his goods to the necessity of others, that he shall be
any whit a loser: for God himself will be his paymaster, Prove. 19. 17. He that
has pity on the poor lends unto the Lord, and that which he has given, will
he pay him again. An open-handed man that is considerately charitable (for
indiscreet charity is culpable) is a blessed man, Psalm. 41. 1, 2. Blessed is he
that considers the poor, the Lord will deliver him in time of trouble. When
contentment and godliness go hand in hand, then charity puts forth it self. For
in testimony of thankfulness, a good man abounding in riches will abound in
acts of charity, and disperse to the poor with a cheerful and willing mind,
Psalm. 112. 9. He has dispersed, he has given to the poor, his righteousness
endures for ever. The fear of want and rolling disturbing thoughts cause many
to be so niggardly and close-fisted: But a man of a contented mind is
industrious in his calling, thankful for what he has, and therefore fears no
want; but he exercises with all cheerfulness acts of charity, and improveth
the present season, making his own eyes his overseers, and his own hands his
executours: for by doing good in his life time, he may to his comfort behold
the good success of his charity, and likewise enjoy the benefit of the fervent
and powerful prayers of many, who have fared the better by him, and whose loins
do bless him. Now a ready way to evidence the truth of our religion is to
exercise works of mercy and compassion toward such as are in want. Let not
rich persons be afraid, that they shall miscarry in their liberality, for we
read, Prove. 11. 25. The liberal soul shall be made fat, and he that waters
shall be watered also himself. Isai. 32. 8. But the liberal devises liberal
things, and by liberal things shall he stand.



Luke 6. 31, 36. He is kind unto the unthankful and the evil. Be ye therefore
merciful as your Father also is merciful. Sometimes we should give to one who
is in distress, though a vile man, qua homini, and si non homini tamen
humanitati. The Apostle commands the enlargement of charity, yet he
appropriates it to some more then others in an especial manner, Gal. 6. 10. As
we have therefore opportunity, let us do good unto all men, especially unto
them, who are of the household of faith. And the practice of charitable acts is
a character of pure religion, James 1. 27. Pure religion and undefiled before
God and the Father, is this, to visit the fatherless and widows in their
affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world.

A second sign of a contented man is 2. A contented man is moderate in his
desires after the world.
this, when he is sober and moderate in his desires after the things of the
world. Although all the lands and revenues, and whatever he possesses are his
own proper goods, and he is diligent to improve them, yet he orders all his
affairs with moderation: as that man is blameworthy, who is greedy and eager
in the pursuit after another man's estate; so is he to be blamed, who is over
eager and solicitous for recovering of his own right. For instance, If a tenant
have his barns fired by lightning, and his corn burnt up, or multitude of his
cattle die of the rot (notwithstanding the rigor of the law requires exact
performance of covenants, yet) the landlord is obliged in conscience to show
mercy and compassion. There are cases of necessity and charity, by reason of
emergent casualties, wherein a man may and ought cedere de suo jure. For a man
in every thing to require the (...), to be strickt and punctual, as not to
abate a penny, in case of poverty, losses and sickness, and such like cases,
this is to be righteous overmuch, which Solomon prohibits, Eccles. 7. 16. Be
not righteous overmuch, neither make thy self over-wise, why should thou
destroy thy self? Our common Proverb gives some light to this Scripture, viz.
Right in extremity is the greatest Summum jus, summa injuria.
injury. Our duty is to moderate our zeal with prudence, and temper all acts of
justice with moderation. Tacitus Retinuit quod est difficillimum ex sapientia
modum. Quisquis plus justo non sapit, ille sapit. Tacitus in vita Agric.
in the life of Agricola says, that he retained (that which is most difficult)
a moderation in wisdom; He is wise that is not over-wise. Such then, who are
too strict and greedy in exacting every penny to the utmost (though it be their
own) without any consideration of emergent losses by the hand of God, do
plainly discover themselves to be without bowels of compassion, and persons of
covetous and discontented spirits.

3. Another sign of 3. He is a contented man who amidst great losses,
patiently and quietly submits unto the hand of God.
contentment is this, when a man who formerly enjoyed a plentiful estate, but
by losses either at sea or at home, or variety of casualties is reduced to a
mean condition; yet this man looks at and acknowledges the hand of God, and
without fretting or murmuring, and without reviling of second causes, he
patiently and submissively undergoes his sufferings and losses. When a man can
part with that which God has given him, and quietly resign that to God which
he has received from God, this shows much of a contented and patient spirit.
Though many have their houses burnt and their goods consumed in the flames, yet
there is great mercy in that they escaped with their lives, and the acting of
thankfulness for so great a deliverance as this, should silence all murmuring
for the loss of the other. We should in deliberate thoughts all consider, that
all that we have and hold is in trust from God, our great Lord and Creditour.
The title, propriety and interest of all we are or have are in God alone; we
only are stewards, or usu fructuarii. That God has lent any of us an estate
so long, is a great testimony of his bounty, and a great obligation to engage
us to thankfulness; wherefore we must not think hardly of God, nor murmr at
God, for calling for his own again. For God is the absolute Sovereign Lord and
Owner of all; we are only tenants at his will and pleasure. God is our Master,
we are his stewards and engaged to give an account, for all that which is
committed to our trust. Job is a pattern of patience, chap. 1. 21. The Lord
gave (says he) and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord.
And when his wife gave him a cross answer, and wicked counsel, he returns a
wise answer, Job 2. 10. Thou speak as one of the foolish women speaks;
what shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil?
He is a very bad debtor, who grumbles and falls out with his creditour when he
calls for his own. It oftentimes so falls out that the lender who in kindness
has lent a considerable sum of money, when he calls for it again, he loses a
friend of the borrower: but this is a high piece of ingratitude, to be utterly
abhorred. But he is a sober and settled spirited man, and has learned the
lesson of contentment, who is willing to resign that up to God which he has
received from God. If he loses an estate by fire, robbery, decay of trading,
shipwreck, etc. he looks at the highest hand and cheerfully submits. He said
well who used this expression, Non contristor quia recepisti, ago gratias quod
dedisti. Whenever then losses, poverty or affliction befall us, when we are
deprived of that which formerly we enjoyed, we must exercise two graces, viz.
patience in submitting to Gods will, both for the present and future; and
thankfulness for that estate which we have enjoyed so long; and patience and
thankfulness are grand evidences of contentation.

A fourth sign (and the last I shall name) 4. A contented man takes just and
regular courses.
of Contentment is this, that a contented man takes just and regular courses,
both in getting an estate, and keeping it when it is got. In both he acts
regularly, not according to any law of his own lusts, but according to the
unerring rule of the Word of God. Solomon prescribes several irrefragable
principles, which may be called Proposi^iones aeternae veritatis. One is Prove.
16. 8. Better is a little with righteousness, then great revenues without
right. A second principle is, Prove. 10. 2. Treasures of wickedness profit
nothing, but righteousness delivers from death. A third principle is, Prove.
15. 16. Better is little with the fear of the Lord, then great treasures and
trouble therewith. A fourth principle is, Prove. 20. 17. Bread of deceit is
sweet to a man, but afterward his mouth shall be filled with gravel. A fifth
principle is, Prove. 20. 21. An inheritance may be gotten hastily at the
beginning, but the end thereof shall not be blessed. A sixth (to name no more)
principle is, Prove. 9. 17, 18. Stolen waters are sweet, and bread eaten in
secret is pleasant, but he knows not that the dead are there, and that her
guests are in the depths of hell. These are select aphorisms and experienced
principles delivered by Solomon: who then of any understanding dare adventure
to advance an estate by bribery, forgery, extortion, sacrilege, etc? The gold
called Aurum Tholosanum, made every one the poorer that had it. And a coal with
a piece of flesh, which an eagle took from the altar, set her nest on fire. It
is commonly observed that eagles feathers will not mix with any other feathers.
Men of serious and conscientious spirits, will not suffer any goods unjustly
gotten to mingle with their estates. Solomon tells us, Eccles. 10. 1.
Dead flies cause the ointment of the apothecary to send forth a stinking
savor. One wild gourd shred in with other herbs, spoiled a whole mess of
pottage: so any estate gotten by unjust ways, mingled with the rest, will bring
a curse upon the whole. It argues questionless a male-contented spirit, when
men make haste to be rich, and run on in the eager pursuit of unjust practices
and crafty devices, to overreach and go beyond their brethren, so that they
may gain by others losses, and lay their foundation and build upon others
ruins. But such vile practices prove the ruin of the practitioners. Whereas a
contented singlehearted man keeps on his calling with all faithfulness, and
accounts no ways gainful and beneficial, but such only which are just and
honest. A heathen, one of the eloquentest of them all could say, That Quod non
est honestum illud non est mile censendum. Cic. Offic.
which is not honest is not to be accounted profitable. Whatever imaginary gain
the world boasts of is not to be valued, only true gain is purchased by honest
and true ways.

CHAP. VI. Chap. 6.

Containing an use of Exhortation, which is pressed home by six moving
considerations, to persuade to Contentment.

SECT. 1.
Containing three Motives to Contentment.

I Proceed to a third use, which is for exhortation Use 3. For exhortation.
to persuade to the daily exercise and practice of this great duty of
Contentment. The art of contentment (as I mentioned before) is a mystery, and
therefore in it there is some more then ordinary excellency to be understood.
The duty incumbent on us is to be well instructed in this mystery. It is a
divine art, we must labor to be good proficients, and experienced scholars in
it. Therefore to excite and persuade to the learning and practicing of this
choice art (well worth our learning) of contentment, I shall lay down these six
moving and weighty considerations.

1. Consider what we brought with us 1 Consid. We brought nothing with us into
this world, and shall carry nothing out.
into the world, and what we shall carry out of it. The Apostle informs us of a
mere nullity, both of the one condition and the other, 1 Timothy 6. 7. For we
brought nothing into the world, and it is certain, we can carry nothing out.
Job amidst his great afflictions confesses, Job 1. 21. Naked came I out of my
mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither. None of us all brought into the
world mannours, lordships, or bags of gold and silver; neither shall we carry
out of the world any such things with us. That great Personage, who Pellaeo
Juveni non unus sufficit orbis.
could not be contented with the whole world, but whin'd because there was not
another world to conquer, yet when he was dead, he was confined to a grave six
or seven foot long. A little compass of earth will hold that man when dead,
whom in his life time, many miles riding would not content. If then we consider
seriously how naked we all came into the present world, without furniture or
provision, either of food or raiment, and when we go out of the world, we shall
be divested and P^ucis minimisque natura contenta est, cuj^s satietatem si
superfluis urgere velis, aut injucundum quod infuderis fiet, a^t noxium. Bocth.
de Consol. phil. lib. 2.
stripped of all our possessions, this weighty consideration seriously set home
upon our hearts, should read us an useful lecture of contentment. A small
little pittance will suffice nature, and keep us alive in this present world,
and carry us through it. And where grace is wrought effectually upon the heart,
less will suffice; for grace will moderate the affections, and bridle the
appetite, and so order the whole man into a quiet and sweet frame, insomuch as
whatever we have (be it less or more) we shall with comfort and serenity of
mind enjoy the same.

2. Consider that our great comforts, 2. Consid. That our great comforts, joys,
hopes and treasures, consist not in the fruition of outward things.
joys, hopes and treasures, are not in the fruition of outward things; but our
best reversion and our greatest satisfaction is to be had in heaven, and in the
great things of eternity. Why then should we take up our thoughts and
immoderately perplex and entangle our spirits with an over-eager solicitude for
the things of the present world? Upon an exact survey, there will be found an
impotency and insufficiency in all things under the Sun, to quiet and satisfy
the immortal soul of man. For the heart of man is triangular, and the world is
circular, and it is impossible for a circle to fill a triangle. If we look for
rest in this present world, we look for it where it is not to be had; For here
is not our rest. If we look Micah 2. 10.
for an abiding city here, we mistake the place: It is not to be had in this
world, only in the world to come: so says the Apostle, For here we have no
continuing city, but Hebr. 13. 14.
we seek one to come. If we expect any satisfaction from earthly treasures, we
shall be disappointed in our expectations; for they are all subject to variety
of casualties. Let us then take counsel from Christ, Matthew. 6. 19, 20. Lay not
up for your selves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust does corrupt, and
where thieves break through and steal: But lay up for your selves treasures in
heaven, where moth nor rust does corrupt, and where thieves do not break
through and steal. Let us account Christ our chiefest treasure, and let us be
willing to part with all treasures for Christ. Christ is infinitely more
valuable then all the treasures in the universe. He is the pearl of price; We
must imitate the wise merchant, who when he had Matthew. 13. 46.
found one pearl of great price, he went and sold all that he had and bought
it. If then we have got possession of Christ, we are rich enough. In him are
hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. The knowledge Col 2. 3. O
Thesauris omnibus opulentior notitia Christi^
of Christ is richer then all treasures whatsoever, (as an ancient Father
observes.) A traveller in his journey meets with variety of hardships and
sufferings; he meets with many a shower of rain, course fare, hard lodging, and
many times falls into vile company, from whom he receives affronts and abuses;
but he in the mean time comforts himself with hopes of better usage at home,
(for home though homely will make amends for all.) What is this world but an
Inn and thorow-fare to eternity? Heaven is the home of a true believer, that is
his journeys end; and there (as Job speaks) The wicked cease from troubling,
and there Job 3. 17.
the weary be at rest. Would you not think that traveller to be a madman, when
at his Inn (where he is to lie but for one night only) he calls for all the
pots and pans, candlesticks, bedsteads, and all the lumber of the house to be
brought into his chamber: just so is he whose continuance is to be very short
in the world, and but for a moment of time, and yet he does so turmoil,
encumber and involve himself with so much pelf and luggage of the world, and
grasps such large handfuls of earthly treasures, as if he had no other thoughts
but of fixing his station, and settling himself here below, as if he dreamed of
an eternity upon earth. But a child of God looks upon himself as a stranger and
a pilgrim; and he accounts these outward things as transient, fading and
perishing things. He has his eye fixed on heaven, that is his country, and he
can cheerfully bear with hardships in his way, whilst he is traveling to his
country. So did those believers desire a better country, that is an heavenly.
Hebr. 11. 16.
So did Moses eye the recompense of the reward. The words are emphatical.
Something A (...), Hebr. 11. 26.
Moses looked from, he looked off them, as one that altogether forsook them,
and would have no more to do with them; and what were those things you may
read, Heb. 11. 25. They were the pleasures of sin; and Moses made the better
choice, Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. The Apostle looked from them, and
regarded not a whit any sinful pleasures, but there is something (which
abundantly satisfied him) that he looked unto, and that is the recompense of
the reward. The serious contemplation of heaven and the great things of
eternity, will quiet our spirits, and make them be contented with lesser
matters here below, considering that there is reserved a brave reversion in
heaven for us.

3. Consider that this mystery of divine 3. Consid. That the mystery of divine
contentment is an excellent mystery.
Contentment is an excellent and sublime mystery. It is well worth the learning
of the profoundest scholar, and this art is so excellent and honorable, as
whosoever he be that learns it, gains high honor, credit and reputation by it.
It is no disparagement in the least (but a means to obtain high renown and
honor) even for the most learned Rabbis and men of greatest knowledge, to go
with St Paul to school, to learn this great lesson of divine Contentment. This
great Doctor of the Gentiles, a profound and every way accomplished scholar,
the chiefest of the Apostles for acquired parts and endowments, made it his
grand study and business, to learn to be contented in every estate and
condition. Let us go and do likewise, and learn of the Apostle that which he
first learned of Christ, and that is the excellent art of Contentment. I have
often in this Treatise given to contentment this epithet of excellent, and I
call it so the rather, because it resembles God. The word is (...)
self-sufficient, Phil. 4. 11. There it is in the concrete; but it is in the
abstract, 1 Timothy 6. 6. (...) selfsufficiency. A (...).
Contentment, or self-sufficiency (as the word signifies) can be appropriated
unto none but God; For he only is (...) (i. e.) primarily and absolutely
self-sufficient: But St Paul and others may be said to be so secondarily and
derivatively. Whoever he be, that desires and endeavors to be thus content and
self-sufficient, he must beg it of God, and whosoever has obtained this jewel,
he must ascribe to God the praise and glory of so rich a treasure, and precious
commodity.

So then the excellency of Contentment consists in four particulars.

1. It resembles God. There is a similitude 1 Contentment and self sufficiency
resembles God.
or assimilation unto God, so far as the measure of a creature will contain. By
selfsufficiency (here rendered contentment) there is a similitude unto God
himself. God alone is self-sufficient, and the more beauty and excellency is
put upon any creature, by so much the more it resembles the Creator.

2. God is the sole Donour of contentment. 2. God is the sole Donour of
Contentment.
God is the original, exact and perfect pattern. And the more holy we are, by
how much the more we conform to our original. This gift of contentment is one
of the good and perfect gifts which come James 1. 17.
down from God. This is that which the Preacher so highly commends, That every
Eccles. 3. 13.
man should eat and drink, and enjoy the good of all his labor, it is the gift
of God. God gives us our beloved sleep. God alone can Psalm. 127. 2.
quiet and settle our spirits; so that we can never rest satisfied, nor enjoy
any acquiescence, but in God alone. Hereupon St Austin in that rare book of his
Confessions gives this experimental verdict, That wherever the soul of
Quaquaver sum se verterit anima hominis, ad dolores figitur alibi, praeterquam
in te. Aug. Confess. lib. 4. cap. 10.
man turns it self, it is fastened to sorrows any where besides God. And in
another place, the same Author adds further, viz. In all things which In
omnibus quae percurro, non invenio tutum locum animae meae, nisi in te, quo
colligantur sparsa mea, nec nisi a te, quicquam recedat ex me. Aug. Confess.
lib. 10. cap. 40.
I run through, I find no place of safety for my soul but in thee, in whom all
that is scattered in me is gathered together, neither can any thing come. from
me without thee. God then is the only center of our rest. He can quiet and
compose our spirits, and this is his work alone. Thus then the excellency of
Contentment is discovered, because it resembles God, and it is the gift of God.

3. Add hereunto a third 3. It is difficult to attain unto this art of
contentment.
thing to set forth the excellency of Contentment, and this is drawn from the
difficulty to attain it. We usually say that such things which are excellent,
are hardly come by. (...)
Precious jewels and pearls of great value, are not easily compassed; there is
required great pains and industry to get precious commodities; for pearls, many
dive into the Indian ocean; many climb up dangerous rocks, for getting of
precious stones: how many travel many a weary step to purchase gold and silver,
and how great pains do they take in digging and sweating in the mines.

Non nisi sublato reperitur gemmula saxo. Every one understands not what worth
is in a jewel, neither will every one be at any pains to seek for it: but after
pains and diligence are used, and the pearl is possessed, it will make amends
for all the labor. This contentment is a rare and precious jewel, difficult to
get; but more worth then all the labor that is bestowed in getting of it.
There must be working, sweating, fasting and praying: faith and patience must
be exercised; but when once we are owners of this rich treasure, the difficulty
and labor in getting will sweeten the fruition, and inhance the estimation
thereof. For the more pains we have conferred to get this excellent jewel of
contentment, the greater comfort we shall perceive in the fruition thereof.

A fourth and last excellency of Contentment 4. There is satisfaction and
complacency in contentedness.
I shall mention is this; That herein consists the excellency of a contented
spirit, that it receives satisfaction, and apprehends it self satisfied, and
thereupon takes delight and complacency. In this respect a man of a contented
mind is richer then many great and noble Personages; for they are not contented
with a great deal, the other is contented with a little. It is not within the
sphere of any thing under the Sun, whether riches, honors, pleasures,
friendships, etc. to afford any real and solid satisfaction to an immortal
soul. Still there is one thing or other defective, still there is observed one
or other bitter pill, that sowrs all our enjoyments in this present world. The
eye is not satisfied with seeing gaudy pageants; neither is the ear satisfied
with hearing the most melodious music; neither is the heart satisfied with
plotting, projecting and contriving high things in this world. But when God is
pleased to vouchsafe contentment and settlement of heart, then there is
abundance of satisfaction Antisthenes an heathen Philosopher desired a great
boon of the heathen Gods, which was, that they would give him the spirit of
Socrates. Now Socrates was a man of such an even and constant frame of spirit,
that he was one and the self-same man, and no way discontented, or discomposed
in his spirit amidst vicissitudes of affairs. It is Seneca's commendation of a
good man; to be Vir bonus est semper idem, and in omni act ^^ par sibi. Sen.
one and the same in all conditions. Thus much we may learn from heathens
themselves, that there is a great and excellent virtue in a contented mind. But
(as I formerly mentioned) I say this down for a proposition of eternal truth:
That the art of divine Contentment cannot be learned sufficiently in the
schools of Philosophers; but only in the school of Christ. For he alone can
teach us this choice lesson, and make us willing to learn it. Wherefore that we
may obtain true and real satisfaction, let us go to God for it, and make our
applications to the throne of grace. Let us pray with Moses the man of God,
Psalm 90. 14. O satisfy us early with thy mercy, that we may rejoice and be
glad all our days. And let us as Philip did ask that grand question, of
absolute necessity to be known, John 14. 8. Philip says unto him, Lord, show
us the Father, and it suffices us. No satisfaction, no contentment can be
found, but in God alone. If we look for contentment in worldly things, we seek
for the living amongst the dead. If we expect satisfaction in creatures, we
shall meet with disappointments, and by experience find an insufficiency and
deficiency in creatures, and an inability to answer the desires of our hearts.

SECT. 2.
Containing a fourth and fifth Motive to Contentment.

I Proceed to a fourth moving consideration, 4. Consid. The art of Contentment
is an exceeding enriching and gainful art.
which is, that the art of Contentment is an exceeding enriching and gainful
art: it is a thriving and advantageous employment; he that drives this trade,
takes a ready way to thrive, and be a great gainer. However a man has an
indifferent estate, and low in comparison of many others, yet if he can enjoy
what he has contentedly, and keeps up a quiet settled mind, he is a great
gainer, not only for the present, but for the future.

1. For the present, a contented man is 1. A contented man is a gainer for the
present.
a gainer: for he is so well pleased with his present condition, that he enjoys
great serenity and calmness in his spirit. Though boisterous and swelling waves
roar and toss him up and down, and exceedingly afflict the outward man; yet as
to his inward man, he enjoys a mavelous tranquillity and quietness. Though
storms and tempests, and Felix ille quem nec fortui^a attollunt, nec adversa
deprimunt. Sen.
one affliction follows upon the neck of another, as one wave of the sea
follows another; yet a man of a composed spirit comfortably passes through
all; for neither prosperity puffs him up, neither does adversity cast him down.
And in the observation of the eloquent Orator, It is the property of a strong
Fortis animi and constantis est, non perturbari in rebus asperis, nec
tumultuantem de gradu dejici. Cic. Offic.
and constant mind, not to be disturbed in rough passages; nor tumultuously to
be cast down from his degree and condition. A man of this choice frame of
spirit is a great gainer, even in variety of dispensations; for what he has,
he enjoys with comfort. Whereas many, who have vast revenues, Honesta res est
laeta paupertas, illa vero non est paupertas si laeta est. Cui enim cum
paupertate been convenit, dives est. Sen.
yet enjoy them not to contentment and satisfaction; some discontent or other
arises and imbitters all; though they may be accounted rich in the worlds
esteem, yet for want of a contented mind, they are very poor and beggarly: but
a good man, who makes God his portion, and accounts him his treasure, is
exceeding rich and always in a thriving way, notwithstanding losses and crosses
intervene: for he has great cause of contentment, both from above him, and
from within him.

1. From above him, he has great cause 1. A good man has cause of contentment
from above him.
of contentment, because he has interest in precious promises, in the covenant
of grace, in Gods special providence, and in the redemption and intercession
of Christ. Upon these grounds, he raises to himself abundance of contentment.
And though he meet with disappointments and failing in creatures, yet his God
never fails, nor disappoints him. And though the cisterns be drawn dry, yet the
fountain is always full: upon such considerations a good man receives great
satisfaction, and labors to use the language of praise and thankfulness, and
avoid all querulous and murmuring language.

2. A good man has cause of contentedness 2. A good man has cause of
contentedness from within him.
from within him, Prove. 14. 14. A good man shall be satisfied from himself. (i.
e.) There are inward consolations arising from the testimony of Gods reconciled
countenance, which will afford abundant satisfaction. The testimony of a good
conscience is a soul-satisfying comforter. So then, though there be without
storms and tempests, yet if there be a calm within, and notwithstanding outward
troubles and vexations, yet if there be inward comforts, as peace of
conscience, the light of Gods countenance, the apprehension of his love in
Christ, all these will swallow up and devour all outward troubles and sorrows,
as Aaron's rod swallowed up and devoured the rods of the Magicians of Egypt.
And as a contented man is a gainer for the present, so 2. A contented man gains
as to his future condition.


In the second place a contented man is a gainer as to his future condition:
For he takes a direct and ready way to thrive, and to improve his estate to the
best advantage; whosoever is of such a composed and settled spirit, he can set
upon any business, cheerfully, and prepare for variety of dispensations.
However things go, he is a resolved man and thankful for all. It was an
heroical speech of Luther, Let the world Felix sit mundus, evertatur mundus,
benedicam Domino qui fecit mundum. Luth.
be in prosperity, or let it be destroyed, yet will bless God who made the
world. As the Ancients held the plow and prayed, so a man of this sweet and
contented frame of spirit, manageth the duties of his calling with prayer, and
faith in God: and to pray and be diligent in our calling, is the readiest way
to thrive; so we may expect a blessing from heaven, Prove. 10. 4. The hana of
the diligent makes rich. Thus Jabez prayed for Gods blessing, and God answered
his prayer, 1 Chronicles. 4. 10. And Jabez called on the God of Israel, saying, O
that thou would bless me indeed, and enlarge my coast, and that thine hand
may be with me, and that thou would keep me from evil, that it may not
grieve me: And God granted him that which he requested. It is not an ordinary
(...). 1 Timothy 6. 6.
gain, but a great gain that accrues unto godly persons and contented persons.
This then is the way to improve our estates to the best advantage, when we join
godliness and contentment together. It is an argument drawn, a been conjunctis
ad male divisa, we must join them together and make no separation. 5. Consid.
The greatness of the mercies which we enjoy, and the meanness of those things
which we want.


A fifth consideration to move us to contentment, shall be drawn; from the
greatness of those mercies which we enjoy, and the meanness and emptiness of
those things which we want. We who have interest in Christ have a right to all
the promises, and covenant of grace. In Christ we have a strong title unto
them. We are of the church of the firstborn, and of the Hebr. 12. 23. Gal. 6.
10. 2 Cor. 6. 28. Romans 8. 17.
household of faith, sons and daughters of God, heirs, and joint heirs with
Jesus Christ. Now the serious consideration of our interest in these great
things of eternity, may cause us to set a lower rate on these things of this
present world. What is all the gold and silver, all the Eastern and Western
treasures in comparison of heavenly things? They are no better then trash and
vanity in comparison of those things which in heaven are reserved for all true
believers. Let us compare the riches of Christ, his purchases of justification
and sanctification, and glorification, with the honors, profits and pleasures
of this present world, and we shall find that these transient and perishing
things are not worthy to be compared with those durable things. We read that
Abraham gave the sons of his concubines gifts, and sent them away, but he gave
the inheritance unto Isaac the son of the promise: so God gives outward gifts;
as riches and honors to the men of the world, but the inheritance of heaven he
reserveth for his children. There is a notable story of two men, one called
Anthony, and the other called Didymus; This Didymus was a man eminent for parts
and graces, but he was blind: Anthony asked him if he was not troubled for want
of his eyesight; yes (says he) I am, but shall I be troubled for the want of
that which even dogs have, and shall I not rejoice and be thankful for that I
enjoy, which Angels have? The application is obvious. A Christian man thus
expostulates with himself: Shall I be discontented and vex my self for want of
that which dogs have? They have bread and meat, and kennels to lodge in; and
often times the very dogs of some great Personages are fed with choicer food, and
lie in better rooms then some good Christians are accommodated withal: shall I
not then be contented with that which makes Angels themselves glorious? For
this cause, the Apostle is exuberant in praises, Ephesians. 1. 3. Blessed be the God
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual
blessings in heavenly places in Christ. What then though a child of God has
not promotions in earthly places, yet if he have assurance of Gods love in
Christ, and an interest in heavenly places, this consideration should be an
especial engagement to contentment. A poor beggar lying in a Church Porch, read
a lecture of contentment to a rich man: The rich man being much discontented
and tormented, went on purpose to discourse with a beggar lying in straw in a
Church Porch: the rich man wishes him a good morrow; he wondered what-he meant;
then (said he) I wish you a good day; Why, says the beggar, do you wish me
either good morrow or good day? for I never knew bad morrow, nor bad day in all
my life, nor did I ever meet with one bad night. What is the reason said the
rich man? The poor man answered, when I was in a rich estate, I prayed always
that petition in the Lords Prayer, Thy will be done, and now being in a poor
condition, I pray the same prayer, Thy will be done; so nothing comes amiss to
me, because I labor to submit my will in all things to the will of God. If
then we could imitate this man in all conditions, to endeavor to bring our
wills in obedience and subjection to the will of God, we should then be good
practitioners in this excellent art of Contentment.

SECT. 3.
Containing a sixth motive to Contentment.

THe sixth Consideration (to mention 6. Consid. The companions and associats of
Contentment.
no more) shall be drawn from the good companions and associats of this choice
grace of contentment. Diogenes, when he was to let his house, urged this great
argument, to get a good tenant, because (said he) my house has good neighbors
round about it. I am sure amongst many there are three special associats and
bosom companions of contentment, whose neighborhood and acquaintance are much
to be desired and prized, and they are faith, patience and heavenly-mindedness.

1. Faith is a companion of contentment. 1. Faith is a companion of contentment.
Faith and dependence on God is a special means to work the heart over to such
an excellent temper. For faith acting on the promises, with a steadfast
recumbence on the Word of God, does abundantly stay and quiet the hearts of
Christians, and support and carry them with cheerfulness through the greatest
storms of afflictions. A man fallen into the water catches hold of any twig, any
cord, or any hand to help him out: so though a Christian be in a sinking
condition, yet if he can adhere to the divine promises, and act faith upon
them, he will be held up above water. It is unbelief which causes so many
tumultuous and vexatious thoughts in our hearts. Could we believe God, and
trust in him on his word, that he is faithful in all his promises,
all-sufficient, omnipotent, willing and able to relieve and help us, and that
he is of tender bowels, full of compassion, a Father of mercies and a God of
all consolations; such serious meditations as these would stifle all
discontented thoughts in the conception, nip them in the bud, and crush them in
their first motions. The more faith the more contentedness, and the more
unbelief the more discontentedness. Faith acts upon a ground of experience,
Romans 8. 28. And we know that all things work together for good to them that
love God, to them who are the called according to his purpose. Faith keeps a
believer alive in dying times; it keeps the heart from fainting, Psalm. 27. 14.
Wait on the Lord: Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine heart, wait
I say on the Lord. Whence arise discontented murmuring speeches, but from
unbelief? For unbelief is that root of bitterness which brings forth nothing,
but gall and wormwood. When men are straightened for outward things, they are
exceedingly perplexed and troubled in their spirits; but when faith
interposeth, it affords meat, drink and clothes; for a believer trusts God with
all, and he accounts God his life and livelihood, and all. How then does a
believer live? the Prophet tells us, Hab. 2. 4. The just shall live by his
faith. For the excellency and usefulness of this sentence is so evident, as
that it is quoted in several places of Scripture, and pressed home unto point
of practice. When troubles Romans 1. 17. Gal. 2. 20. and 3. 11. Hebr. 10. 38.
and vexations arise from thwarting passages of providence, faith steps in and
returns away with Trophies of victory, 1 John 5. 4. This is the victory that
overcomes the world, even our faith. When multitudes are perplexed and
endangered, by reason of the methods, wiles and variety of Satan's temptations,
then faith is to be made use of as a strong shield, to ward off the blows, 1.
Pet. 5. 9. Whom resist, steadfast in the faith. In one word let it be spoken,
that in all troubles, disasters and sufferings, faith quiets the mind. Faith is
like that meal, which being cast into the pot, the wild gourds did no harm, but
notwithstanding 2 Kings 4. 42.
they were shred in the pot, yet as soon as the meal was put in, the pottage
became wholesome. Faith sweetens the sowrest pills of afflictions, and becalms
the spirit amidst the sharpest sufferings. Yet we must with caution express our
selves. Faith that is genuine and of the right stamp, must be a purifying
faith, and a working Acts 15. 9. Gal. 5. 6.
faith: and however Luther be misunderstood, when he says, Cavete a bonis
operibus; he means that we must beware of trusting in good works, so as to
plead merit, and to expect salvation by them; he elsewhere gives this character
of faith, Fides maxima and heroica operatur. Faith then is not to be understood
as an instrument in working or meriting, but as an instrument in receiving and
applying of grace and mercy through Christ. Faith is our act, and it is our
duty to believe; but it is Gods gifts; we of our selves are no more able to
believe, then to perform the Commandments. The self-same power that raised up
Christ from the dead, can only raise us up to believe, Col. 2. 12. Buried with
him in baptism, wherein you are also risen with him through the faith of the
operation of God, who has raised him from the dead. That we may not rest as
Papists do, opere operato, the Apostle mentions the Author and Giver of faith.
And so likewise the Apostle Cum Baptismi efficacia salutaris a fide pendeat,
aquum est ut ipsa fides a solo Deo expectetur, ne nobis in nobis detur aliqua
ansa gloriandi. Dav. in Col. 2. 12.
tells us, Ephesians. 2. 8. For by grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of
your selves, it is the gift of God. Faith is a necessary companion of
contentment, they both come from God, and where they are, they do (as the
expression is) mutuas locare operas, they join in a mutual serviceableness one
to another, and as the proverb is, Vara vibiam sequitur; so faith and
contentment join together in a mutual assistance, and furtherance of each
other. Thus faith is one companion of contentment.

2. A second companion of contentment is 2. Patience is a companion of
contentment.
patience; the ready way to learn contentment, is to prepossess our selves with
patience. Who are the discontented persons, but such as are impatient, fretting
and disquieting themselves under their burdens? But such as are patient,
submissive spirited persons, have attained unto a good proficiency in this
choice art of contentedness. This grace of patience is of singular use, for
thereby we possess our selves, and enjoy all that we have quietly and
contentedly. It is our Saviors command, Luke 21. 19. In your patience possess
ye your souls. And there is an absolute necessity of exercising this grace of
patience, Hebr. 10. 36. For ye have need of patience, that after ye have done
the will of God, ye might receive the promise. As a soldiers courage is known
in a day of battle; so is a Christians patience tried in time of affliction.
Tribulation works patience, and patience experience, and experience hope.
Wherefore Cyprian that eminent Martyr, in that excellent book of patience gives
this counsel, In thy grief bear, and in thy humility In dolor sustine, and in
humilitate tua patientiam habe, quoniam in igne probatur aurum and argentum;
sic Job examinatus est and probatus, and ad summum fastigium lau ^is patientiae
virtute provectus. Cypr. lib. de patientia.
have patience, because gold and silver is tried in the fire, as Job was tried
and approved, and by the virtue of patience, promoted to the highest top of
praise. Wherefore then, the right remedy is, when afflictions many and great
are incumbent on us, to banish all discontents and murmurings, and quietly and
patiently to submit to the correcting hand of God. Thus patience is another
companion of contentment.

3. A third companion of 3. Heavenly mindedness is a companion of contentedness.
contentedness is heavenly mindedness. A godly man's conversation or citizenship
(for so the word imports) is in heaven. His negotiations (...), etc. Nos autem
ut coelorum cives nos gerimus. Beza.
and merchandizings, even all the trade which he drives is for heaven: heaven
is his country, that is his Fathers house. When Anaxagoras was asked, Have
thou any regard of thy country? Yes (says he) and pointed his hand up toward
heaven. He that accounts heaven his throne and inheritance, will look upon
earth no better then his footstool. He lives above earth, whose heart is in
heaven. Whence then proceeds so many murmuring and querulous speeches? How
comes it to pass, that upon any cross thwarting providence, we fret and repine,
and are so exceedingly perplexed with melancholy and discontent? The reason is,
because we set our hearts too much upon the world, and mind earthly things. If
sin sat heavy (as Reverend Mr Dod used to say) then the world would sit light,
but because the world sits heavy, sin sits light. If our conversation was in
heaven, and we took a prospect of it in serious contemplations; and if we
ascended up into the mount with Moses, and retired our selves into the fields
with Isaac, to have more freedom for meditation; and did we with Enoch walk
with God, and with David's blessed man meditate in the Law of God, day and
night, if this was our condition, we should take so much delight and
satisfaction in heavenly things, as we should not vex and torment our selves
for the want of worldly things. Wherefore then let us with all holy greediness
labor after heavenly mindedness, and this is an excellent means to learn the
lesson of divine Contentment. If we account heaven our treasure, joy and hope,
our hearts will be fixed thereon, our tongues will be speaking thereof; even
our whole joy, desires and delights will be taken up, and employed about the
serious thoughts of heavenly things. Wherefore though in this present world (as
it is the lot of travelers in their Inn) we may meet with many disappointments
and dissatisfactions; yet the serious meditations of heaven (which is our home)
will abundantly make amends for all. If we should fancy a perpetuity in an Inn,
and dream of an abiding happiness there, we should exceedingly forget our
selves. We may apply Psalm. 49. 11, 12. Their inward thought is, that their
houses shall continue for ever, and their dwelling places to all generations;
they call their lands after their own names. Nevertheless man being in honor
abides not; he is like the beasts that perish. We should not look upon our
selves as perpetual proprietours and possessours of a fee-simple without any
alteration; but we should look upon our selves as strangers and pilgrims (as
the Apostle writes) 1 Pet. 2. 11. Dearly beloved, I beseech you, as strangers
and pilgrims abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul. Whoever
then is willing to learn this grand lesson of Contentment, let him make choice
of those three choice companions, viz. faith, patience and heavenly mindedness,
and questionless, through the assisting grace of God, he shall arrive unto an
high attainment and perfection, in this so much to be desired art of divine
Contentment.

CHAP. VII. Chap. 7. Containing an use for direction.

Containing a fourth Use, which is for direction, wherein five Impediments are
to be removed, and ten Duties are to be put in practice.

SECT. 1.
Removing five grand Impediments of Contentment.

I Proceed to a fourth Use, which is for Use 4. For direction.
direction, and for the more profitable handling of this Use, I shall discover
five grand Impediments, which as so many stumbling blocks are to be removed out
of the way, and then I shall prescribe ten choice duties, which are to be
reduced unto point of practice.

1. For the impediments which obstruct and set a bar against contentment, I
shall amongst a multitude that might be named, confine my self unto five only,
viz. Unbelief, Unthankfulness, Immoderate cares of the world, Instability of
spirit and Voluptuousness. These five are as so many remora's and obstacles in
the way to hinder and stop contentment.

The first Impediment of contentment is 1. Impediment of contentment is
unbelief.
unbelief: for it is the mother of discontent, that cursed root, whereon grows
those cursed fruits of impatience, murmurings and repinings, and such like,
which are far more bitter then gall and wormwood. If we could trust God and
believe him to be Allsufficient and Omnipotent, and therefore able to help us,
and could we believe God to be a God of truth, and therefore as good as his
word, and could we believe him to be a God of wisdom, knowing how to contrive
and order all things for our good, then we should soon banish out of our hearts
all discontented and repining thoughts: but such is the great mischief of
unbelief, that it foments and cherishes all vexatious perplexing thoughts.
Hence it comes to pass, that an unbeleever discovers his discontent in respect
of two objects, viz. The Word of God, and works of God. As to both unbelief
discovers it self.

1. An unbeleever questions and distrusts 1. An unbeleever distrusts the Word
of God.
the truth of the Word of God: for so God complains, Psalm. 106. 24, 25. Yea,
they despised the pleasant land, they believed not his word; But murmured in
their tents, and hearkened not unto the voice of the Lord. God promised them a
land flowing with milk and honey, and they sent searchers to view the land.
They brought goodly fruit, even a cluster of grapes so great, as it Numb. 13.
23.
was carried between two: yet notwithstanding all Gods promises, and their own
visible experiences, they believed not his word. Many gracious promises God
makes, and he is faithful in his promises: He glories that he is a God keeping
covenant; (for his covenant is a covenant of salt, not capable of the least
putrefaction; yet) unbeleevers call all Gods promises into question: such were
foretold of, 2 Pet. 3. 4. whom the Apostle brands for scoffers, walking after
their own lusts, and saying, Where is the promise of his coming? The
unbeleeving Prince mentioned, 2 Kings 7. 19, 20. is a standing monument and
warningpiece, who when the Lord promised plenty in Samaria, he distrusted Gods
promise, and he was made a dreadful spectacle of unbelief; for the people trod
him in the crowd to death. Let us forbear disputings, reasonings,
expostulatings with God, and believe God upon his word; so did David, a pattern
for our imitation, Psalm. 56. 3, 4. What time I am afraid, I will trust in thee:
In God I will praise his word: In God I have put my trust, I will not fear what
flesh can do unto me.

2. An unbeleever questions and distrusts 2. An unbeleever questions and
distrusts the works of God.
the works of God. Notwithstanding variety of protections, provisions, security
and comfort, and other experiences of the works of divine providence, an
unbeleever still distrusts God, and will not believe. O what wonderful works
did God for the children of Israel, in delivering them from Egyptian bondage,
and in making the sea dry land for them to pass over, and when they were safely
passed over, God caused the sea to return to its strength, and in it Pharaoh
and all his host were drowned: and after this great deliverance of the children
of Israel from the Red sea, God opened his storehouses to make provision for
them: Manna and Quails were rained down to feed them; and to quench their
thirst the flinty rock became a springing well; yet notwithstanding all these
visible providence, they believed not the works of God, Psalm. 78. 32. For all
this they sinned still, and believed not for his wondrous works. These were
unbeleevers of the first magnitude, who neither believed the Word of God, nor
the works of God, and therefore they must needs be their own enemies to all
manner of contentment; for there can be no solid ground of contentment but in
God, and from his gift. If then we distrust him, and will neither believe his
word, nor his works, there can be no possibility of ^. Impediment of
Contentment is unthankfulness.
contentment.

2. A second Impediment of Contentment is unthankfulness. None are so
discontented, none such murmurers, as unthankful persons; such as are not
sensible of those great mercies which they already enjoy, but are still a
whining and murmuring for what they have not, these in a high manner bewray
their unthankfulness. Have not many of us more then Christ had when he was upon
earth? He who was Owner and Commander of the whole world, was contented to be a
servant, and live in a poor mean condition, 2 Cor. 8. 9. For ye know the grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became
poor, that ye through his poverty might be rich. And when a man came to Christ,
and professed his readiness to follow Christ whithersoever he went, Christ who
knew his heart gave a suitable answer; and Jesus says unto him, The foxes have
holes, and Matt. 8. 20.
the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of man has not where to lay his
head. The man had a house in his design and expectation, but he was
disappointed of his expectations. When in our serious thoughts we consider what
Christ wanted as earthly things, and what we have, this consideration may
excite us to thankfulness. But it is commonly observed, that such as are
unthankful for, and unsensible of the present mercies which they enjoy, of all
others they are still murmuring and complaining because they have no more.
Wherefore to learn this lesson of contentment, we must unlearn the lesson of
ingratitude. Amongst Heathens as well as Christians, the sin of ingratitude is
marked with a brand of infamy: Si ingratum dixeris, omnia dixeris, is a saying
no more common then true, implying that a man that has said that which savours
of ingratitude, has said all the worst that he can. A learned Orator takes
notice, Omnes cousentiunt gentes terram creare nihil pejus homine ingrato.
Baudii Orat. p. 114.
That it is the consent of all nations, that the earth brings forth nothing
worse then an ungrateful man.

Seneca reckons ingratitude amongst the greatest Inter plurima maximdque vitia
nullum est frequentius quam ingrati animi. Sen. (...). Xenoph. Cyropaed. l. 1.
vices; and Xenophon observes, that impudence follows ingratitude. It is left
upon record as a badge of infamy upon the chief butler, Genesis 40. 23. Yet did
not the chief butler remember Joseph, but forgot him. Unthankful men are
mentioned in the same catalogue with those abominable sinners, which shall come
in the last and perilous times, 2 Timothy 3. 2. etc. For men shall be lovers of
their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemous, disobedient to
parents, unthankful, unholy, etc. Wherefore we must utterly detest and abhor
this abominable sin of ingratitude; not only in respect of others (because it
is a sordid and ignominious sin) but also in respect of our selves, because it
disquieteth and vexes the spirit, insomuch as we enjoy nothing contentedly,
that we possess.

A third Impediment of Contentedness 3 Impediment of contentment, immoderate
care of the world.
is an immoderate care of the world: when the heart is encumbred and entangled
with variety of perplexing and carking cares, there can be no contentment of
mind: for as immoderate love of the world comes in at one door, contentment of
mind runs out at the other door: we must then distinguish between a moderate
and immoderate care, between a provident frugal care, and a carking vexatious
care. A moderate and provident ^are is lawful and necessary: none ought to eat
the bread of idleness. And he that provides not for his family is worse then 1 Timothy 5. 8.
an infidel, and has denied the faith. But the question will be asked, How can
a man be said to deny the faith? I will give an answer from Calvin on the
place, There can be no piety toward God, Nulla enim in Deum est pietas ubi
quis it a humanitatis sensum exuere potest. Calv. in loc.
where any can so put off all sense of humanity. But the care forbidden is,
that only which is immoderate carking and tormenting; this Christ in one
Chapter three times forbids, Matthew. 6. 25, 31, 34. Take no thought: The word is
(...). The etymology is (...), it is a dividing, Solicitudo est aegritudo came
cogitatione. Cic. Tusc. 4.
distracting, rending and torturing the mind: (...) is solicitudo diffidentiae,
a distrustful solicitude accompanied with a vexatious carking care. The charge
of the Apostle is, Phil. 4. 6. Be careful for nothing: (...), Anxie and cum
summa animi solicitudiue atque aerumua^ cogitare. Zanch.
We are then to distinguish between a primary and secondary care: primarily our
care must be to glorify God, and save our souls. Secondarily, we must take
care after worldly things: but in religion that figure called (...) must be
carefully avoided: for many make that their first care, which should be their
last. The order which Christ prescribes ought to be the certain and infallible
rule, But seek ye Matthew. 6. 33.
first the kingdom of God and his ^^ghteousness, and all these things shall be
added unto you: but how many are there who entangle and inveigle themselves
with multiplicity of worldly encumbrances, like a mill-horse, always walking if
not running the round, and hurrying themselves about with multitude of anxious
and vexatious cares. And what get they by their anxious solicitous cares, but a
farther addition of care and dissatisfaction: for the more they thus turmoil
and disturb their spirits, the more discontented and unsatisfied they are.
Hence it comes to pass, that they can neither eat nor drink, nor sleep quietly,
because they tire and wear out themselves with multitudes of melancholical
disquieting thoughts. Hereupon they make assays and trials of many ways, and
undertake variety of projects to advance their estate in the world, and it
proves with them like those smiths, who have too many irons in the fire, and so
neglect some of them. It is frequently observed, that all those who intermeddle
in too many ways, miscarry frequently in the managing of them, and after
miscarriages and disappointments, O! how is a covetous mammonist perplexed and
discontented: the love of the world has swallowed up his affections, and
therefore he accounts the wedge of gold his confidence. Micha, when the
children of Dan robbed him, pursues them, and cries out in the bitterness of
his spirit, Ye have taken away Judge. 1. and 24.
my gods, and the Priest, and ye are gone away, and what have I more? So
covetous worldlings cry out with so much bitterness, when any worldly losses
befall them; as if God and heaven were to be undervalued in comparison of them:
wherefore it is a special duty incumbent on us, to banish away from us the
immoderate love of the world; For the friendship of the world is enmity against
John 4. 4.
God, and it is our enemy likewise; for we can never enjoy any thing to our
content and satisfaction, if our hearts with too much eagerness hanker after
the world.

A fourth Impediment is instability of 4. Impediment, instability of spirit.
spirit. An inconstant fluctuating mind, unsettled and tossed up and down, can
never enjoy any real and solid contentment; for it is a composed stable spirit
which is Gods gift, which makes a Christian contented with that present
portion, and causes him to rest quietly in that present station and condition,
wherein God has set him: When as on the contrary, an unstable spirit, a
wandering fickle head will not let a man be quiet in any place and condition.
Solomon tells us, Prove. 27. 8. As a bird that wandreth from her nest, so is a
man that wandreth from his place. Grotius gives (as I Facile capitur avis a
^ido avolans; sic and qui domo relict a, long peregrinatur multis se objicit
perculis. Grot. in Prove. 27. 8.
conceive) an apposite exposition on the place, A bird, says he, flying from
her nest is easily taken; so is he that journeyeth a long way from his house,
exposed to many dangers. So when men relinquish their calling, and ramble
abroad, leaving their families to sink, or swim, taking no care of them, they
bring swift destruction on themselves and their posterity. It is a common
saying, that a tumbling stone never gathers moss: no more do unsettled fickle
persons ^hrive whithersoever they go, and such are they, who are so deeply
overcome with melancholy, as that they neither enjoy themselves comfortably at
home, nor abroad: for when they are at home, their hearts are abroad, and when
they are abroad their hearts are at home. They fix no where; for by being every
where in their wandering and extravagant thoughts, they are fixed no where to
any good purpose. These unstable and fickle-headed persons are full of
discontents, and not more discontented with troubles from abroad, then from
those emergences which fall out at home: they are not more vexed at others,
then they are at themselves. A man of an inconstant spirit is like a wave of
the sea, tossed up and down, or like a weathercock that turns with every wind;
he is so inconstant, that he knows not his own mind, he knows not what he would
have, he is not his own man; but he is inconstant and unfaithful to himself. St
James gives a character of such a man, A double-minded man is unstable James 1.
8. (...).
in all his ways. Now to find out a double and unstable man, where to have him
no man knows. You may hear him murmuring, whining and grumbling, but you cannot
trust nor believe him on his word. Many heathens were renowned for their
constancy and settled resolution. It was said of Fabricius, that one might
sooner turn the Sun out of the firmament, then turn him from the course of
Justice. Regulus was a man constant to his engagement, though he foresaw the
ensuing danger which did befall him. And Aristides could not be seduced from
the course of Justice. Cicero against Catiline Defendi Rempublicam adolescens,
non deseram senex. Contempsi Catalinae gladios, non pertimescobam tuos. Cic.
Orat. 2. Philipp.

Non si fractus in me ruat mundus pavens, non si cavernis toenarus nutet
fremens, non, si caterva pestium obsideat latus, mutabo mentem quam mihi
Christus dedit. Cause. Sol. p. 232.


professes himself to be one and the same man, in his elder and younger years
(that is,) a true friend to the Commonwealth. Causinus has an high passage
setting forth the constancy of his resolution, which amounts to this sense,
Come what will come, even the worst that can be imagined, yet he will not alter
his mind. This constancy and rese^^tion of mind is a ready way to procure
contentment; but by way of caution, we must always suppose, that constancy and
settledness must be fixed upon right grounds and principles; let us be certain,
that the principles are right, and then let us resolvedly put them into
practice. It is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing: so for
constancy and resolution, we must exercise them in good things. And courage and
constancy well placed are of singular benefit and furtherance to contentment:
whereas levity, fickleness and inconstancy of spirit, raises mutinies,
tumults, and variety of perturbations in our thoughts: wherefore to be well
skilled in this art of Contentment, we must abandon an unstable and inconstant
spirit.

5. A fifth Impediment of Contentedness 5. Impediment of contentment is
Voluptuousness.
is Voluptuousness. Voluptuousness is a grand remora and obstacle to all manner
of contentedness; for voluptuous men are still a plotting, projecting and
contriving to add more fuel to the fire of their unsatiable appetite; therefore
they leave no stone unmoved, nor no device unattempted for the satisfaction of
their lusts. Hence it comes to pass, that many persons of great estates care
not how much they spend in gaming and drinking, etc. and to supply their
exorbitances, they oppress and grind the poor, rack their tenants, and project^
and devise irregular ways for the satisfaction of their lusts. Hence it comes
to pass, that a prodigal man drowned in his voluptuous courses, and intoxicated
with vain carnal delights, cares not what he is at, and what moneys he spends
upon a lust, and he frets and torments himself, if his mind be not satisfied.
But Solomon gives all voluptuous persons their doom, Prove. 21. 17. He that
loves pleasure shall be a poor man. He that loves wine and oil shall not be
rich. And the same wise man ironically begins, but concludes with a dreadful
judgment, Eccles. 11. 9. Rejoice O young man in thy youth, and let thy heart
cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in
the sight of thine eyes, but know thou, that for all these things, God will
bring thee into judgment. Who could ever tell of any person, who wasted his
time, strength and estate in sinful lusts and pleasures, that found any real,
solid and lasting contentment, when they looked back upon those days and
companions, with whom they lived riotously? Can they take any satisfaction in
the remembrance of them? Amnon committed. 2 Samuel 13. 15.
an abominable sin of incest with Tamar, yet afterward, the hatred wherewith he
hated her, was greater then the love wherewith he loved her. And all the
Jovial, mad carowsings of drunkards commonly terminate in discontent and
contention: so says Solomon, Who has woe? Prove. 23. 29, 30. Cui accidunt multa
incommoda corporis and animi, and fortunarum, Merc.
who has sorrow? Who has contentions? Who has bablings? Who has wounds
without cause? Who has redness of eyes? They that tarry long at the wine, they
that go to seek mixed wine. Belshazzar in the midst of his jollity, was
surprised with a terrible hand-writting, which wrote down his swift
destruction; as we read, Dan. 5. 5. In the same hour (i. e. when they were
drinking and praising the gods of gold and silver) came forth fingers of a man's
hand, and wrote over against the candlestick, upon the plaster of the wall of
the Kings palace, and the king saw the part of the hand that wrote; then the
Kings countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so that the
joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against another. There
is a laughter called Risus Sardonius, which ends always in great Immo ego
Sardois videar tibi amarior herbis. Virg.
sorrow: the Poet alludes to it. And what else is the laughter and mad
merriment of all ungodly men, but that which terminates in sorrow and mourning?
For says Solemon, Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful, and Prove. 14. 13.
the end of that mirth is heaviness. And Solomon gives his experimental verdict
against laughter. I have said of laughter it is madness, Eccles. 2. 2.
and of mirth what does it? It is known by experience, that a man who has
misspent a whole day in jovial company and mad merriment, can take no rest, nor
quietly enjoy himself at night. However at present, some please themselves with
the society of ungodly men, yet, when they come to themselves, and are composed
and deliberate in their thoughts, then it is the grief and vexation of their
hearts, that ever they cast in their lot amongst such vile wretches: wherefore
we may upon sure grounds conclude that voluptuousness is a grand impediment of
Contentedness.

SECT. 2.
Containing five Duties to be practiced in order to Contentment.

HAving removed these five Impediments mentioned in the former Section, I shall
prescribe ten Duties (whereof five shall be handled in this Section, and five
in the Section following after) which if they be reduced into point of practice
(through the grace of God) they will be special helps and furtherers to the
getting and keeping of this excellent grace of contentment.

The first Duty is to reflect upon our 1. Duty is self-reflection.
selves, and get a more familiar and intimate acquaintance at home: for it much
conduces to our advantage to be better known to our selves. Amongst many
choice sentences of that eminently pious Father St Bernard, two I shall apply
to my purpose: one is this, There are many Multae sunt scientiae hominum, sed
^ulla melior est illa^, qua^ eogn^scit homo seipsum. B^rn. de interiori domo,
p. 1073.

Beatus homo qui se potest cognoscere, probare and improbare. Nam qui sibi
displicet, Deo placet; and qui sibi vilis est, Deo charus est. Bern. de
interiori domo, p. 1072.


knowledges of men, but none is better then that whereby a man knows himself.
Another is, He is a blessed man who can know himself, allow and disallow; for
he that displeases himself, pleases God; and he that is vile in his own eyes,
is dear in the eyes of God. If then we would learn the divine art of
Contentment, we must study our own hearts, how filthy they are, and how vile
and abominable we are by reason of the pollution of sin; when we our selves are
thoroughly known unto our selves, we shall be better contented with our present
condition, and then we shall attain unto a good degree of this knowledge of our
selves, when in the simplicity and singleness of our hearts, we can make such a
confession as Jacob did, Genesis 32. 10. I am not worthy of the least of all the
mercies, and of all the truth which thou have showed unto thy servant. It is
our great business and worth our best pains, to take a frequent survey of our
hearts and lives, to walk in the cloister of a man's Ampulavi in claustro cordis
mei. Bern.
own heart (as St Bernard expresses it) and to search into every angle and
winding, is time well spent. Upon a serious review, we shall find many
miscarriages, and acknowledge that we have trod many steps awry, and are guilty
of many deviations and transgressions from the rule of the word.
Notwithstanding variety of mercies heaped upon us, we have with Jeshurun waxed
fat Deuteronomy. 31. 15.
and kicked. God has given us all things richly to enjoy, we are maintained by
Gods liberality; but we abuse so great bounty: our clothes which are given for
a covering, we abuse to pride and vanity; the meat and drink which are given
for our nourishment, we abuse to luxury and intemperance: the riches of the
world which God has given us for our comfortable subsistence, and for the
supply of such as are in distress, we have abused to superfluity and
prodigality; or else we have fixed our hearts so steadfastly upon the pelf and
trash of the world, as if we acknowledged no other God but Mammon. Now then
when in deliberate and serious meditations, we consider the wonderful bounty
and patience of God so freely extended unto us, we shall with all thankfulness
acknowledge the mercies of God in leaving to us any thing of this world to
enjoy; for by reason of our great unthankfulness, and misimprovement of our
talents, and abuse of mercies vouchsafed to us, we have made a forfeiture of
all that we enjoy, and it is a miracle of mercy that God takes not the
forfeiture, and strips and degrades us of all, and casts us down into the
nethermost hell. Wherefore upon a serious consideration of our manifold
provocations and rebellions against God, notwithstanding the patience,
forbearings and long-sufferings of God exercised toward us, we have strong
obligations to contentment. The mercies continued to us, are and ought to be
esteemed of by us, as so many cords of love to draw us to this necessary duty
of Contentment. Let us therefore every one resolve with himself, Mecum
habitabo, I will dwell with my self (i. e.) let us be more at home, and study
our hearts more, and then we shall learn to be content.

A second Duty is to compare our selves 2. Duty, to compare our selves with
others. 1. With our superiors.
with others, and that with such, who are above us in greatness, wealth,
honors and promotions of the world. Notwithstanding their grandeur and riches,
considering their vexations, discontents and troubles, we have no cause to envy
them; for though many men have great possessions, yet they can take no content
in them, nor enjoy them with any delight and comfort. Great persons are greater
and larger marks oftentimes for their enemies to shoot against them. Stobaeus
relates a story of Policrates, Ferunt summos sydera montes.
who gave to Anacreon five talents, but he was so perplexed and disquieted with
the thoughts of that money, that he could not sleep, nor any other way
comfortably enjoy himself: wherefore Anacreon restores the moneys to
Policrates, saying, that they Non tanti esse quanti ipsorum nomine cura
laboraret. Stob. cap. 39.
were not so much worth, as to recompense those distracting cares which he took
for them. When we take strict notice how many there are, who compassed vast
estates by oppression and extortion, by defrauding and circumventing others,
making their ways by force and falsehood, might and policies prevailing above
right and honesty, we shall find no cause of discontent, or envy, because we
are not in their condition: when we likewise consider the turmoils, vexations
and troubles which many undergo, to keep that have got already; we ought so far
to abandon discontent and envy, as to abound in thanksgiving to God, through
whose mercy we enjoy what we have in tranquillity and peace.

2. If we compare our selves with inferiors, 2. Let us compare our selves with
inferiors.
such as are to estate and degree far below us in the world, we have great
cause to be content. How many mechanics are there, who have not moneys to
provide one day before another, and have not a bit of bread before they have
wrought for it; yet they eat and drink, and sleep more cheerfully then those
great Persons, who are possessed of Lordships and Mannours, and thousands of
gold and silver. If we would be better proficients in this art of contentment,
we should not disdain to go to poor men's houses, and take notice of their
manner of living, and after what way they maintain their families. If we enter
into conference with some of the poorer sort of people, we shall be informed of
remarkable passages of Gods good hand and providence for them and their
children in times of famine and great scarcity. It is frequently observed, that
many poor men's children, who fare hardly, look more fat and well-liking then
some who have great revenues. Let us therefore compare our selves with poor and
inferior persons, and see how contentedly they live with a little, and are
thankful for far less then we are present possessours of. Such a weighty
consideration as this set home upon our hearts may effectually (through the
grace of God) banish from us all murmuring and whining language, and enlarge
both our hearts and mouths to be thankful for the mercies which we enjoy, and
move our hearts to open our bowels of compassion toward all such as are in
poverty and necessitous conditions.

A third duty is to labor for that excellent 3. Duty to labor for self denial.
grace of self-denial. Contentment and self-denial are so near and dear to each
other, that they live and die together; insomuch as these are convertible
propositions, A selfdenying person is a contented person, and a contented
person is a self-denying person. Self-denial and taking up the cross are
mentioned together* as if there were some connection between. It frequently so
falls out, that self-denial and bearing Christ's cross meet in one and the
self-same person. Both these duties of self-denial and bearing of the cross are
mentioned in three Evangelists, viz. Matthew. 16. 24. Mark 8. 34. Luke 19. 23.
whatever savours of self must be denied and altogether abandoned so far forth,
as it stands in competition with, or opposition to Jesus Christ. A great
scholar must deny his learning: a man of wisdom must deny his learning, and a
strong man must deny his strength; a rich man must deny his riches, and a
Nobleman must deny honors. All that is self must be denied, as self-opinions,
self-reasonings and self-interests; even all must be denied for Christ. And
when a man amidst the affluence of worldly things can deny himself, it is an
evident demonstration that he is a man of a contented spirit; for contentment
and selfdenial do keep a sweet and amicable correspondence with each other.
Self-denial exciteth and encourages us to contentment, and contentment
prevails with us to be willing to deny our selves. This self-denial is of such
great use and necessity, as Salvian says, Abdicare a teipso, ne abdiceris a
Christo; Salv. lib. 5. p. 167.
repudia te, ut recipiar is a Christo. That excellent Martyr Mr Bradford used
to say, whosoever has not learned the lesson of the Cross, has not learned
his A, B, C. in the school of Christ. This lesson of self-denial if it be
learned well, it will teach us to bear our daily cross, both with patience and
cheerfulness. Self-denial helps very much to humble a proud heart, and to
mollify a hard heart. When one strikes with an hammer upon an anvile it makes
a great noise, because hard and hard meeting together makes opposition: and in
building, unless there be cement and soder, there can Durum super durum non
vult condere murum.
be no wall reared up: but if one strikes a hammer upon a pillow, it makes no
noise, because the pillow is soft and yields to the blow. Let God strike what
stroke he pleases, a self-denying spirit yields submissively and patiently to
the blow. And of this root of self-denial, there grows the spirit of
Contentment.

A fourth Duty is to study the vanity of Duty 4. Study the vanity of the
creatures.
the creature. All things under the Sun are vanity and emptiness, and fading
and perishing things; both deficient and insufficient, and altogether unable to
afford any real contentment and satisfaction to an immortal and
heavenly-born-being soul. Why then should we set our hearts upon worldly
things? When we grasp them most greedily, we grasp nothing but smoke, or make
an attempt to hold the wind in our fists. Historians write, that the apples of
Sodom are of such a beautiful aspect, as to invite the beholders to take them,
but as soon as ever they touch them, they fall into cinders and ashes.
Tertullian gives his verdict of earthly things, saying, that they Omnia
imaginaria in seculo, and uihil very Tertull. de corona militis, cap. 13.
are imaginary in the world, and contain no solidity in them. Solomon had
greater experience of earthly things then many thousands have had, yet in that
rare Book (which may be called his Retractations) he gives this censure, Vanity
of vanities, says the Preacher, vanity of vanities, all is vanity. Considering
therefore the emptiness Eccles. 1. 2.
and dissatisfaction, the vanity and deficiency of all created things, why
should we then so much perplex and torture our selves for the want of them; but
rather labor to be contented with what we have, then overtire and wast our
spirits with immoderate grief and vexation, for what we want and would have;
which if we had, notwithstanding we should remain discontented. Cyprian has a
remarkable saying to this purpose, That whatsoever Quodcunque nunc nascitur
mundi ipsius senectute degenerat, ut nemo mi^ari debeat singula in mundo
coepisse desicere, c^m totus ipse jam mundus in defectione fit. Cypr. contrae
Demetr.
is born in this old age of the world degenerates, so that no man needs wonder,
that particular things in the world have begun to fail, seeing that the world
is now in defection. Wherefore upon a serious consideration, that the creature
is subject to vanity, and causes much vexation of spirit, and is altogether
unable to satisfy an immortal soul; and seeing that we experiment a great deal
of treachery and deceitfulness in creatures, we should hence raise ground of
contentment in those things, which we enjoy at present, fearing that we may
meet with frustrations and disappointments in our expectations after greater
matters. The things in this world are usually compared to bubbles, vapors,
flowers, dreams, etc. and till we can lay any fast hold on those things, we
cannot fix upon earthly vanities. A mushrom is suddenly gone. Jonah's gourd in
one night sprang up and withered. As soon as Jonah was glad of the shade of the
gourd, God prepared a worm to smite it. There are inward worms, as the terrors
of afflicted consciences, and outward worms of crosses and losses, which may
soon dash all our comforts, and spoil all our mirth. The horrors of a
tormenting and galling conscience, the loss of a dear and near relation,
deprivation of an estate by fire, robbery, etc. may soon embitter our remaining
enjoyments. If then we make reckoning of any certain fruition of any thing
under the Sun, we are utterly mistaken, and account that something which is a
mere vanity. We are soon at the bottom of all creatures, and we may quickly
apprehend the utmost which they can afford, and upon an exact computation, we
shall find them to be but mere ciphers and insignificant things; so that if we
study the vanity of all earthly things, we shall the sooner learn this choice
lesson of Contentment.

5. A fifth Duty is to study the fullness that Duty 5. Study the fullness that is
in Jesus Christ.
is in Jesus Christ: if we get the knowledge of Jesus Christ, and understand
that fullness that is in him, we shall set an higher price on Christ, and value
the world at a lesser rate; we shall account Christ our portion, and if we can
make sure our interest in him, we shall be well contented, though we enjoy the
less of the world. The Apostle tells us, For it pleased the Father, Col. 1. 19.
that in him should all fullness dwell. We usually distinguish, that there is
Plenitudo fontis, and plenitudo vasis. In Christ there is a fullness of a
fountain; for God Joh. 3. 34.
gives not the Spirit by measure unto him. Now this fullness in Christ is
communicated unto his children, and they shall receive thereof according to
their measure, as much as their vessels can hold. Let us take special notice of
John 1. 16. And of his fullness have all we received, and grace for grace. Beza
upon this Scripture quotes a learned Author, and understands grace for grace,
Gratiam gratia cumulatam, but upon after thoughts he determines according to
the judgment of St Augustine, who says, Instead of the grace of the law which
passes away, we have received the grace of the Gospel which abides, and
instead of shadows and representations of the old Testament, grace and truth is
revealed by Jesus Christ. Wherefore if we believe (as we should) that there is
a fullness in Jesus Christ, why should we vex and disquiet our selves, because
we want the things of the world, which are vain, empty, and no ways able to
satisfy an immortal soul? Christ enjoyed is infinitely to be preferred before
all the world: for in him there is fullness of wisdom to council us, fullness of
mercy to pardon us, fullness of righteousness to justify us, fullness of
holiness to sanctify us, and fullness of glory to make us happy to all
eternity. If then in good earnest we busy our selves with the meditation of
the fullness of Christ, we shall get our hearts alienated from things below, and
fixed on things above. The apprehension of Christ's fullness will quickly
discover the vanity and emptiness of all creatures. If then a man enjoy very
little of the world, and in the mean time enjoys a sacred acquaintance and
communion with Jesus Christ, he has abundantly enough, and therefore he is
contented and satisfied, because he has made God his portion, and accounts
Christ his treasure, riches, even all in all; and such a person is a contented
person.

SECT. 3.
Containing five more duties to be practiced in order to contentment.

THe sixth Duty is to study the divine Duty 6. Study the divine promises.
promises. There is enough in Gods promises to quiet and satisfy the soul of
any man. The promises may be compared to those breasts of consolation
mentioned, Isai. 66. 11. That ye may suck, and be satisfied with the breasts of
her consolations, that ye may milk out and be delighted with the abundance of
her glory. There is much nourishment to be got in the divine promises; and the
promises may be compared to the wells of salvation, Isai. 12. 3. Therefore with
joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation. O what sweet refreshing
promises are there to revive and comfort us in variety of conditions. The
promises afford a salve for every sore, therefore if we would learn this grand
lesson of Contentment, let us be well acquainted with the divine promises. As
for instance, if the want of earthly things strike too close upon us, and
afflict our spirits, amongst many promises, let us make particular application
of those three especially; one is Psalm. 84. 11. For the Lord is a sun and
shield, the Lord will give grace and glory: no good thing will he withhold from
them that walk uprightly. A second promise is, Matthew. 6. 33. But seek ye first
the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added
unto you. A third promise is, Romans 8. 32. He that spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him freely give us all
things? Suppose farther, a man be afflicted with sore and lingering diseases,
let him study the promises. Two I shall mention, one is, Exodus 15. 26. I will
put none of these diseases upon thee, which I have brought upon the Egyptians,
for I am the Lord that heals thee. Another promise is, Psalm. 103. 3. Who
forgiveth all thine iniquities, who heals all thy diseases. If a man be
afraid of potent enemies, let him apply the promises. Amongst many, I shall
give one only instance, which may serve instead of many, and that is, Isai.
41. 10, 11. Fear thou not, for I am with thee, be not dismayed, for I am thy
God: I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee, yea, I will uphold thee
with the right hand of my righteousness: Behold, all they that were incensed
against thee shall be ashamed and confounded, they shall be as nothing, and
they that strive with thee, shall perish. In a word, there is abundant matter
of consolation in the promises, to quiet and stay the heart of a Christian in
all sorts of conditions, whether they concern this life, or that which is to
come. For, says the Apostle, Godliness is profitable unto all things, having 1 Timothy 4. 8.
promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come. We must
therefore be well studied in the promises, and live upon them, and if we have
so much wisdom as to make a suitable and particular application of them, we
shall extricate our selves (through the strength of God) out of many emergent
streights and difficulties, and learn this necessary lesson of contentment: for
the more we know and believe the promises, and taste sweetness in them, the
more contentment we shall have, and through the grace of God we shall banish
murmuring and repining thoughts.

A seventh Duty is to take a serious review, Duty 7. Observe the divine
providence.
and make a diligent observation of divine providence. Gods providence
evidently prove the truth of his promises, and if we (according to our duty)
treasure up our experiences concerning providence, how in variety of straights
and troubles, we have received supplies and succors from heaven, and how God
has made provision for us, and kept us alive in times of dearth and scarcity;
such considerations set home upon our hearts will read us an useful lecture of
Contentment, and help us to be good proficients in this kind of learning. Are
our eyes in our heads? (as Solomon says the wise man's are) Eccles. 2. 14.
Do we take notice of providence as we ought to do? Then we should observe how
Gods providence does extend it self to all his creatures both small as well as
great; God takes care for vegetives: He clothes the grass, and puts a greater
glory upon one lily, then upon all Solomon's royal Matt. 6. 28.
estate. God takes care for bruits. God feeds the ravens: the lions seek their
meat of God. Though lions be creatures of Luke 12. 24. Ps. 147. 9. Ps. 104. 21.
great strength, and greedy after their prey, yet they receive their food
through Gods bountiful provision. Now seeing God takes so great care for
brutish creatures, it is evident, that he takes abundantly much more for
mankind. God does good for Matthew. 5. 45. Luke 6. 36.
all; even the vilest of men are protected, sustained, provided for, and kept
alive by Gods common providence: but as for such as have interest in the
covenant of grace, they enjoy the benefit of Gods special providence, for
protection, direction, supplies and assistance; so that the good things of the
world (which the men of the world enjoy by common bounty and ordinary
providence) true believers receive them sanctified, and Christ with them; he
conveying them unto them through the covenant of grace. Wherefore, O Christian,
take a strict survey of Providence, how when thou wast bewildred and entangled
with variety of troubles, and God has delivered thee, how when thou livedst in
a place, where were dreadful burnings, and God has snatched thee as a brand
out of the burning; and how in a time of pestilence, when thousands fell
besides thee, and ten thousands at thy right hand, God has given thee thy life
for a prey; and in an hard time, when trading decayed, supplies were deficient,
and not visibly to be had, then, in that pinching time, God provided for thee,
and supplied thy wants: make then a catalogue of the merciful providence of
God vouchsafed toward thee, keep them written especially in the table book of
thy own heart, and then upon grounded experience, thou will infer these
conclusions, 1. God has delivered, supplied and helped. 2. God is one, and the
same merciful God, as able, and as willing to help as ever. 3. Hence is to be
inferred, that I will cast my self upon the providence, and be guided by the
wisdom, and wait quietly for the salvation of God. 4. That Christian, who is a
diligent observer of providence, will conclude experimentally with David, Psalm.
73. 28. But it is good for me to draw nigh unto God.

An eighth Duty is to be much in prayer, Duty 8. Be much in prayer.
and frequent address unto the throne of grace. Samuel a child of prayer was a
child much beloved, and a mercy received in answer to prayer is a very welcome
and seasonable mercy. The way then to procure this excellent grace of
Contentment, is to beg it of God, and to be earnest solicitours for it unto the
throne of grace. And although I do not conceive, that at all times one and the
self same method of prayer is necessary, yet it is of great use to pour out
such a prayer as may consist of these three parts, Confession, Petition, and
Thanksgiving.

1. For Confession, Let us confess our 1. Let us confess our sins.
sins in particular, with their several aggravations; against the Law, and
against the Gospel: partly by omitting what the law commands, and committing
what the law forbids. Let us reflect upon our multiplied provocations, how
frequently we have sinned against knowledge and conscience, and against many
Sacramental Covenants of better obedience. And what deserve we at the hands of
God? and what can we expect for our deserts less then hell and damnation? We
deserve not the least crumb of bread which we eat; neither deserve we to
breathe in the common air. The serious consideration of our ill deservings and
unworthiness should prevail with us to calmness and quietness of spirit: for
notwithstanding we suffer very great and heavy afflictions, yet we suffer far
less then we deserve. That we are on this side the grave, and on this side
hell, and that we have any thing left to keep us alive in the world
(considering our many and manifold provocations) it is Gods great patience to
bear with us, and his great and wonderful mercy to let us enjoy even the least
of what 2. Let us join Petition with Confession.
we have.

2. Let us join Petition with Confession in our prayers, and let one petition
amongst others be, that God would give us a contented and quiet spirit. This
contented spirit comes alone from God, and he alone can persuade the heart of
man to be contented and satisfied: God can both supply our wants, and when we
are surrounded with variety of wants, give us a cheerful frame of spirit amidst
them all. The Apostle was assured, My God shall supply all your need according
to his riches in glory (...). Phil 4. 19.
in Christ Jesus. In the best of those things which are under the Sun, there is
something lacking; we must therefore go to God for supply. What is wanting in
any creature God is only able to fill up. All we are and have, comes from God:
but that mercy which is given in answer to prayer, is to be more valued; for
when we can say particularly and experimentally, This mercy I sought of God in
prayer, and he has vouchsafed unto me a gracious answer, wherefore I will for
ever trust God, and stay upon his gracious promises, then do we make a right
and suitable improvement of mercies. A contented mind is the gift of God: it is
worth asking for, and worth having and keeping. O Christian! pray earnestly for
this grace of Contentment, and when thou have got it, part not with it; but
keep it with all care and delight.

3. Let us with Confession and Petition 3. Thanksgiving.
join Thanksgiving to our prayer: For there is not the least mercy that we
enjoy, but we have cause to be thankful for it. As for our food and raiment,
and our daily preservation; for our lives, and livelyhoods, even for all that
we have, we ought to be thankful. There is not a bit of bread which we eat, nor
a sup of bear which we drink, nor any clothes which we wear, but for them all
we ought to acknowledge Gods bounty to us with all thankfulness. Gods
providence watches over us, and all our provisions, supplies and comforts flow
from his gracious hand of providence. Now a thankful man both in his lips and
heart is exuberant in extolling the name of God, and celebrating his praises
and speaking good of his name, and telling of his loving kindnesses all the day
long; and such grateful language suppresseth all murmurings and repinings, and
settles the soul in a holy security and peace.

A ninth Duty is to exercise sobriety and Duty 9. Exercise sobriety and
temperance.
temperance, in the use of all those things which we enjoy; as in eating,
drinking and sleeping, and in the managing of all the duties of our calling, we
must be sober and temperate. Sobriety and watchfulness are joined together by
the Apostle St Peter, Be sober, be vigilant, because your adversary 1 Pet. 5. 8.
the devil as a roaring lion walks about, seeking whom he may devour. And in
that golden chain which the Apostle mentions, 2 Pet. 1. 6. Temperance is one of
those golden links; so that a ready way to learn contentment is, to be
temperate and moderate in the use of any worldly things. Neither must we deny
our selves in unlawful things only (for that we must do at all times) but
sometimes we ought to deny our selves in things lawful; by not taking our
utmost liberty in exacting with rigor our own rights and dues. The charge of
the Apostle is, Let your moderation be Phil. 4. 5. (...), i. e. animus in
convictu moderatus, and miuime rigidus, etiam sui juris exactor. Beza in loc.
known unto all men, The Lord is at hand. If then we labor after sobriety,
temperance and moderation, and have made some considerable progress in those
studies, we shall be well contented with Gods allowance in the present station,
wherein God has been pleased to place us in this present world. Whence comes
discontents and vexations, and tumultuous perturbations of spirit, but from
intemperance and want of moderation? Could men with sobriety and moderation
order all their affairs (though they had lesser estates, yet) they would live
far more contentedly, then greater persons, who possess many thousand pounds
per annum.

The tenth and last Duty (which I shall Duty 10. As one man we should all drive
a trade for heaven.
name) is that we should all as one man drive a trade for heaven; that so our
love, joy, hope, hearts desire and whole man, and whole conversation may be
there. Let us make it our grand business to mind the great things of eternity.
The Apostle speaks in his own name, and in the name of all true believers,
Phil. 3. 20. Our conversation is in heaven. And he gives an express command,
Col. 3. 2. Set your affections on things above, and not on things on the earth.
And it is the command of our Savior, Matthew. 6. 33: Seek first the kingdom of
God, and his righteousness. Wherefore considering, that we have an interest in
the best inheritance, which is the kingdom of heaven, why then should we vex
and disquiet our selves for the loss of earthly things? What matter if we want
the shallow waters of a cistern, as long as we enjoy waters abundantly flowing
from the fountain? Christ has made many promises to his children, and every
promise is a debt; heaven will make performance, and give a full discharge of
all Christ's debts and engagements. Heaven will infinitely compensate and
satisfy the loss of all earthly things: for (says the Apostle) I reckon that
the sufferings of this present Romans 8. 18. (...) significat aliquid apud se
subductis rationibus quosi collectum firmiter statuere, ac proinde non dubiae
opinicnis, sed firma persuasionis significationem habet. Gerrh.
time are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in
us. Upon exact computation the Apostle found it so; or as Doctor of the Chair
he thus determined the question. How then comes it to pass, that we fret and
murmr by reason of afflictions which are incumbent on us? It is because our
hearts are not above, but below: we set too high a price on the dross and dung
of the world* and value not the chiefest price (as we ought to do) viz. the
riches of Christ. Wherefore we must copy out St Paul's lesson and learn it
thoroughly, Phil. 3. 8. Yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss for the
excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ my Lord. When we can thus set a low
price on the world, we shall learn to set a higher price on Jesus Christ. And
when our hearts are fixed on heaven where our treasure is, we shall look upon
all things under the Sun, as below our cognizance, and too low for our
affections. Hence then it will abundantly appear, that heavenly-mindedness, and
a holy conversation will in an especial manner produce contentment and
settlement in the mind of Christians; and although the things of the world run
cross to us, and all their motions are excentrick, yet the riches of Christ,
and the consideration of the high calling in him, the crown of glory, and the
inheritance immortal and undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in heaven
for us, will abundantly content, comfort, and satisfy our spirits: And thus if
we can put those ten Duties forementioned into practice, we shall (through
Christ that strengthens us) learn the divine art of contentment, and
understand that excellent mystery, which St Paul learned and commended to our
imitation.

CHAP. VIII.
Containing an use of Consolation.

SECT. 1.
Showing Causes of Contentment from God, and from our selves, as God gives it
to us.

I Am now to conclude this Treatise with Use 5. For consolation.
a fifth and last Use (which I shall mention) and that is for abundant
consolation unto all such, who have learned this divine art of Contentment.
They reap exceeding great comfort from it, and are fitted for all services,
whether they concern corporal or spiritual affairs. In all conditions, even as
well in adversity, as in prosperity, they who have learned contentment, know
how to order all their affairs with discretion, and know how to manage them to
the best advantage.

True believers have great cause of contentment from God, and from themselves,
as God bestows it upon them, and from the examples of others.

1. True believers have great cause of Contentment (and above all other causes)
from God supremely, and this will appear in these ensuing particulars.

1. God is their Father: And this name 1. God is our Father.
sounds the nearest relation.

More particularly consider,

1. He is a merciful, tenderhearted, compassionate 1. A merciful Father.
Father and full of bowels. Thus his bowels are expressed, Isa. 16. 11.
Wherefore my bowels shall sound like an harp for Moab, and mine inward parts
for Kirharesh. His bowels yearn toward all his children, and are rolled
together: He is the Father of all mercies, and the God of all consolations. God
is compared to a tenderhearted Father, Psalm. 103. 13. Like as a Father pitieth
his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him.

2. As God is a merciful Father, full of 2. God is a wise Father.
bowels and tenderhearted, so he is a wise Father, of infinite wisdom and
knowledge. The thoughts of our hearts, and our secretest intentions are known
to God: the darkest corners of our hearts are transparent and visible to God:
what we have most need of, and what is most fit for us, God knows; and he in
wisdom provides for us, and supplies all our wants in his own time, as he sees
best for us. If he give not what we would have, he gives us what is better: for
if we had our wills satisfied, we should be undone; but Gods will is best, and
must stand. Now seeing God knows what is better for us, then we know for our
selves, let us renounce our own wisdom, and yield ready obedience to the wise
disposing will of God.

3. God is a Father of infinite ability 3. God is a Father of infinite ability.
(for he is omnipotent) to help and succor us, he alone is able to extricate
us out of all straights, and the most pressing exigencies. Though our troubles
are in our thoughts insuperable, yet God can conquer them all; and though they
are multiplied, yet God can deliver us out of them all. That God is infinitely
able to help us, is a strong argument to persuade us to be contented in all
conditions. Ofttimes God suffers his people to be brought into great
exigencies, and into such sad perplexing troubles, that they know not what to
do; then, even then, in that needful time of trouble, God appears for their
deliverance; so that the glory may redound only to the name of God, and his
right hand alone may have the preeminence, and it may appear to the world, that
none less then God himself, could work out such a great salvation for them.
When the people of God are reduced unto the greatest dangers, and are in their
own account most shiftless and helpless, then God puts forth his power for
their help and succor. David experimentally spoke, Psalm. 46. 1. God is our
refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble. And in Psalm. 136. 23. upon
a strong ground of experience he acknowledges Gods wonderful deliverance,
saying, Who remembered us in our low estate, for his mercy endures for ever.
Add hereunto Gods gracious promise, which was really accomplished, Isa. 33. 9,
10. The earth mourns, and languisheth, Lebanon is ashamed and hewn down;
Sharon is like a wilderness, Bashan and Carmel shake off their fruits; now will
I rise, says the Lord, now will I be exalted, now will I lift up my self.

4. God is a Father willing to help his 4. God is a Father willing to help.
children; he will deny them nothing that may conduce to his glory, and their
good. Sometimes indeed for God to deny a petition, is a great mercy, and a
denial is a token of love. A loving Father will not suffer his child to take
poison, neither will he put a sword into his hands, when he has not years of
discretion, lest he hurt himself therewith; no more will God grant all that his
own children desire, lest the grant of their desires may be hurtful unto them.
The Apostle gives a reason why many desires are not granted, James 4. 3. Ye ask
and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that you may consume it upon your lusts.
The great condition required of us in our prayers is mentioned, 1 John 5. 14.
And this is the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing
according to his will, he hears us. If ever we expect good success of our
prayers, let us ask for matter, manner and end, only that which is agreeable
to the will of God.

And as God is a Father, merciful, wise, able, and willing to help, so consider,

Secondly, God is our Shepherd, and from 2. God is our Shepherd.
this relation there arises great cause of contentment and consolation, Psalm.
23. 1. There is a special relation, The Lord is my Shepherd, and a special
illation, I shall not want.

In a shepherd there are observable many and necessary properties.

1. A shepherd knows his sheep, he 1. A shepherd knows his sheep.
knows and distinguishes them, not only from goats, wolves and such like
creatures; but he knows and puts difference by certain marks between his own
sheep and other men's sheep; so Christ perfectly knows all his own sheep, Joh.
10. 14. I am the good shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of mine. There
is a mutual knowledge of and acquaintance with Christ and his sheep; He knows
them, and they know him.

2. Another property of a shepherd is to 2. A shepherd calls his sheep.
call his sheep. A shepherd by a whistle calls his sheep; so Christ calls his
sheep, by the voice of the ministry of his word, and by the motions of his
Spirit, and by the whispers of conscience; and Christ's sheep hearken to his
call, Joh. 10. 27. My sheep hear my voice.

3. A shepherd feeds his sheep. A good 3. A shepherd feeds his sheep.
shepherd carries his sheep into good pastures, and in frost and snow he feeds
them: so God is the good Shepherd, who makes provision for his people. There is
a grand promise, Ezekiel. 34. 13, 14. And I will bring them out from the people,
and gather them from the countries, and will bring them to their own land, and
feed them upon the mountains of Israel by the rivers, and in all the inhabited
places of the country. And I will feed them in a good pasture, and upon the
high mountains of Israel shall their fold be; there shall they lie in a good
fold, and in a fat pasture shall they feed upon the mountain of Israel.

4. A shepherd watches over his flock. 4. A shepherd watches over his flock.
Sheep have many enemies, as wolves, dogs, foxes, etc. Jacob watched day and
night over Labans sheep: so God watches over his children. He is the keeper of
Israel, and a most watchful keeper. Psalm. 121. 4. Behold, he that keeps
Israel, shall neither slumber nor sleep. A shepherd watches against enemies:
he has his fold to keep his sheep in the night, and both day and night, a
Shepherd is vigilant; he has his staff to defend them, still his eye is
watchful over them, lest they should go astray, and their enemies meet with
them and devour them; how watchful was David in rescuing his sheep out of the
mouth of the Lion, and the paw of the Bear. Above all others, God is watchful,
he is the most vigilant Shepherd to defend and protect his sheep. God
promises, Zech. 2. 5. I will be unto her a wall of fire round about, and will
be the glory in the midst of her. And Jer. 31. 10. Hear the word of the Lord O
ye nations, and declare it in the isles afar off, and say, he that scattered
Israel will gather and keep him, as a shepherd does his flock.

5. A shepherd rules, guides and directs 5. A shepherd rules and guides his
sheep.
his sheep whither to go. The self-same word (...) signifies both to rule and
to feed; of all creatures, sheep are most apt to go astray; The shepherds
vigilant eye is over them; he takes notice which way they go; he calls them
with his whistle, sends his dogs for them, and he leads them the way, showing
them where they should feed: so the great Shepherd of our souls calls us home
to him, by his word, and sometimes by afflictions he calls upon us to come unto
him. Afflictions are like a shepherds dog, which brings home straying sheep
unto the shepherd. And this great Shepherd of our souls leads us into that way,
where he would have us go, Psalm. 23. 2. He makes me to lie down in green
pastures: He leads me beside the still-waters. If then we seriously consider
the efficacy of this relation, that God is our Shepherd, we should be engaged
to a contented frame of spirit.

3. Consider God is our Master, and we 3 God is our Master.
are his family; now a master provides for his family, and instructs his
family, and governs his family.

1. A master provides for his family; those 1. A master provides for his family.
of his household, are so many deposita committed to his charge, and it is the
obliged duty of the master, to make provision for them of his household, 1 Timothy
5. 8. But if any provide not for his own, and specially those of his own house,
he has denied the faith, and is worse then an infidel. Now then if masters on
earth take care of, and make provision for their families; how much more care
does the great Master of all the world take, in making supplies and provisions
for them all? All the cattle on a thousand mountains are at his command: as
absolute Sovereign Lord of all, he sends supplies, and makes provision for all.

2. A master instructs and teaches his 2. A master instructs and teaches
his family.
family. It is a grand and necessary duty incumbent upon all masters of
families to instruct all under their roof in the knowledge and service of God:
for performing this duty, God highly commended Abraham, Genesis 18. 19. For I know
him, that he will command his children, and his household after him, and they
shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment; that the Lord may
bring upon Abraham, that which he has spoken of him. It was the resolution of
Joshua (c. 24. v. 15.) but as for me, and my house, we will serve the Lord. And
David stands upon record for a pattern of imitation, Psalm. 101. 2. I will walk
(says he) within my house with a perfect heart. And what purging work he
resolved to set upon in his family, is evident, v. 3, 4, 5. This Psalm Bishop
Ridley frequently expounded to his family, and pressed upon them their duties
accordingly. Let us then thus infer, if earthly masters (as duty binds them)
instruct their families; much more does God instruct his great family. Other
instructers and masters of families may err, and teach their families wrong,
(because men are fallible and subject to error) but God is the great Master
and Instructor of his family, and cannot err; for he is altogether infallible.
Gods teaching is an unerring and infallible way of teaching. He not only
teaches his scholars, but can make his scholars learn and profit by his
teaching. God promises his Spirit, Ezekiel. 36. 27. And I will put my Spirit
within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my
commandments and do them. Gods children have eye salve from Christ, and an
unction from the holy One. Rev. 3. 18. 1 John 2. 20.

3. A master rules and governs his family. 3. A master rules and governs his
family.
A master of a family is bound to command all under his roof, to live in the
fear of God. In an especial manner, a master should regard the observation of
the sabbath, by himself and his whole household, Exodus 20. 10. Thou shall not do
any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter; thy manservant, nor thy
maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates. A
master of a family, must not suffer refractory and incorrigible persons to live
with him; such as will not serve God, he must not continue in his service. He
that is a master of a family has a great price put into his hands, to do a
great deal of good; he must discountenance, and punish sins and wickedness, and
he must encourage the practice of religion, and encourage the power of
godliness. Now does a master on earth rule carefully and faithfully in his
family, how much more does the great Master of the whole world rule and govern
all his household? Other rulers and masters have dominion only over the bodies
of men; but the great Master of heaven and earth is the Lord and Ruler over all
the consciences of men. This Sovereign Lord and Master prescribes laws, and not
only commands obedience, but makes his subjects willing to yield obedience.
But as for such as are rebellious, and will neither bend, nor bow to his
scepter, he breaks them to pieces, Psalm. 2. 9. Thou shall break them with a rod
of iron, thou shall dash them in pieces, like a potters vessel. There is no
opposing of Christ's government; for who ever rebelled against him and
prospered? If then we profess our selves Christ's servants, let us yield
cheerful obedience to him, as our Sovereign Lord and Master. And having
interest in such a Master, we have greatest reason to be contented servants.

A fourth consideration why we should 4. Consider God is our Husband.
have cause of contentment from God is this, because God is our Husband, so he
calls himself, Jer. 31. 32. And when a people revolted from God, he would no
longer be their Husband, Hos. 2. 2. It is took for granted (for so it ought to
be) that husbands should abound in love, and be tenderhearted, and provide for
their wives, and concern themselves in their wives concernments. O! how
superabundantly does this love evidence it self in God! for he loves his
people, and takes care of them, and provides for them. There is an union
between Christ and his Church, and this is a great mystery, Ephesians. 5. 32. And the
love of husbands to their wives, should be like the love of Christ to his
Church, which is a tender, sincere, undivided and constant love; and farther,
this love is a mutual and reciprocal love, Cant. 2. 16. Love must be returned
for love, though our love to Christ is but like a drop to the ocean, or a sand
to the balance, when we compare it with Christ's love to us. Hence then will be
raised a ground of satisfaction, and singular contentment unto the Church of
God, for Christ is the Bridegroom, the Church is his Spouse. God accounts
himself an Husband to his people, therefore he engages himself to take care of
them, Jer. 3. 14, 15. Turn O back sliding children (says the Lord) for I am
married unto you: and I will take you, one of a city, and two of a family, and
I will bring you to Zion, and I will give you pastors according to mine heart,
which shall feed you with knowledge and understanding. Thus you have seen what
causes there are of contentment from God.

SECT. 2.
Showing causes of Contentment from our selves, and from the example of others.

IN the next place, and to conclude this Sect. 2. Showing causes of contentment
from our selves.
Treatise; I shall represent unto you several causes of contentment from our
selves.

Though these causes are wrought within us, yet they are wrought without us and
above us, by the omnipotent power of God. They are our acts, but Gods gifts,
and he crowns his own gifts in us. Not to mention many causes that might be
named, I shall only insist on two causes, as special grounds of contentment,
viz. peace of conscience, and a right government of the affections.

1. Peace of conscience is a strong ground 1. Peace of conscience is a cause of
contentment.
of contentment and consolation. It is a remarkable saying of Aquinas, melior
est pura conscientia, quam plenum marsupium. A man from himself (as Gods gift)
can receive Quasi dicat fore, ut quisquam a se actorum fructum percipiat,
constare cuique suarum actionum mercedem 3 saepe etiam in hac vita, sed
certissime in altera. Merc. in loc.
satisfaction, according to that of Solomon, Prove. 14. 14. A good man shall be
satisfied from himself. Now none by his own power and wisdom can satisfy and
quiet his own spirit; but when the conscience is pacified, and God is
reconciled to a soul, there is an inward soul-satisfying consolation: compare
this with Isa. 3. 10. Say ye to the righteous, that it shall be well with him,
for they shall eat the fruit of their doings. In all our troubles and
afflictions, and amidst slanders and calumnies heaped upon us, what can comfort
us, but the answer of a good conscience? This is cause of rejoicing, that our 1
Cor. 1. 12.
conscience testifies for us. Amidst storms and tempests, Euroclydons, and
tossings and tumblings, a God reconciled will bear up our spirits against all;
Tranquillus Deus tranquillat omnia. But because many pretend to conscience, who
are mere strangers to conscience, and quiet themselves with a false peace, and
content themselves with a carnal security, I will make mention of those
distinguishing characters, which St Bernard mentions, Bona est conscientia,
Bern. de inter. domo, cap. 27.
si habeat in cord puritatem, in ore veritatem, in action rectitudinem. What
is that which sweetens the most bitter pill of afflictions, but the testimony
of a good conscience? And what is that which imbitters all the pleasures in the
world, but an evil conscience? One grain of an evil conscience intermixed
amongst the grandeur and affluence of riches of the great ones of the world,
will prove like that wild gourd which spoiled the whole mess of pottage. Luther
has a rare saying to this purpose, Una guttula malae conscientiae totum mare
mundani gaudii absorbet. If then you would enjoy true and solid mirth, and an
abiding contentment, labor to keep this Fort-royal impregnable, I Hic murus
aheneus esto, Nil conscire sibi, nulld pallescere culpa.
mean, the bulwark of a good conscience. This was the Apostles grand exercise,
to keep a conscience void of offense toward God and toward men, Acts 24. 16.
Faith and a good conscience are to be united, 1 Timothy 1. 19. Holding faith and a
good conscience. If we unite them and hold them fast together, we consult our
own peace and tranquillity, but if we divide them, we lay our selves naked to
the assaults of Satan, the temptations of the world, and the prevalency of our
own corruptions.

2. Another cause of contentment from 2. The right government of the affections
is a cause of contentment.
our selves, is the right government of the affections: when affections are
rightly regulated and bounded, they administer great contentment and
consolation. The affections are frequently to be compared to the swelling and
boisterous waves of the seas, which keeps neither bounds, nor banks, but cause
an inundation. The affections are usually inordinate, extravagant, impetuous
and disorderly, and they set the whole man in a tumult: The perturbations and
disorders of the affections sets all in a hurlyburly of confusion. But when
(through the grace of God) the affections are set upon the right object, and
disposed in a right order, then there arises a wonderful calm and serenity
upon the spirit. When the love, joy, hope and desire are weaned from the world,
and fixed upon heavenly things, then the heart is quieted and abundantly
satisfied. But the disorder and divisions of the affections causes great
discontent; for when the heart hankers partly after earth, and partly after
heaven, there can be no solid contentment and acquiescence amidst such
divisions and distractions: But when all those affections, love, joy, hope and
desire make God the Centrum quietativum, then all is right, for then the heart
is comforted, and the conscience pacified, and the whole man set in a right
frame and temper.

A third cause of contentment is from the 3. There is cause and encouragement
for contentment from the examples of others.
examples of others: This is causae exemplaris. The examples of others may in
an especial manner (when God sets them home) prevail with us to contentment.

Now we are to have a double aspect upon examples, partly such as are above us,
and partly such as are below us.

1. As for such as are above us, we may 1. Let us look upon examples above us.
upon enquiry find many great and noble Personages contented with a small
pittance of this world: For instance: of Moses it is recorded, Heb. 11. 24. By
faith, Moses when he was come to years, or (as the Original is) when he became
a great man, refused (...). Magna fides quae principatus spernit, and
contemptis se aggregat. Grot. Joseph. l. 2. c. 5.
to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter. Moses was so eminent in Pharaoh's
Court, as to be accounted the adopted son of Pharaoh's daughter. Josephus an
Historian of good note, relates this story, that Thermusis Pharaoh's daughter
was the only child of Pharaoh, and he had no son to inherit the kingdom, and
that this his daughter had no child; wherefore after she had found Moses at the
rivers side, she kept him hid for so long a time, as it might be supposed to be
her own child, to the intent and purpose that he might inherit her fathers
crown. This history may be questionable, but the Text evidently sets forth
Moses his self-denial, and contentedness of spirit, Heb. 11. 26. Esteeming the
reproach of Christ greater riches then the treasures of Egypt. I may add
farther the contentedness and selfdenial of those worthies, of whom the world
was not worthy; They wandered about in sheepskins and goat skins, being
destitute, afflicted, tormented, of whom the world was not Heb. 11. 37, 38.
worthy: They wandered in deserts and in mountains, and in dens and caves of the
earth. Thus these holy men were contented with their mean and contemptible
condition in the world, so they might obtain interest in a better life. I
question not, but they might have worn better apparel, then goat skins and
sheepskins, and have lived in better houses then in dens and caves, if they had
complied with those times wherein they lived. Galeacius Caracciolus left his
Marquesdom of Vico, and all his relations, and contented himself to live in a
retired private way at Geneva: for he would not relinquish his Religion for the
honors of the world, but he resolved to hold fast the profession of his faith
without wavering. And he thunders out a dreadful anathema against such who make
the wrong choice, in these words, Cursed be See the life of Galeacius
Caracciolus.
the man, who prefers all the gold and silver in the world, before one days
communion with Jesus Christ. To this example, I will add that of Hormisdas,
recorded by Theodoret. Theod. lib. 5. 131.
This Hermisdas was a Nobleman of Persia, and because he would not deny
Christ, he was degraded from his dignity, stripped of his clothes, and compelled
to wear rags and keep camels. He was well contented with this mean condition,
and when afterward the King of Persia sent for him, and clothed him with
silken clothes, and persuaded him to deny Christ, he presently tore his silken
clothes in pieces, saying, If for these you think to have me deny my faith,
take them again. Whereupon he was with scorn cast out. Had this great man been
willing to deny Christ, he might have kept his temporal dignities and riches;
but he preferred Christ before all honors, and he was rather contented to be a
slave to the King of Persia, and keep his camels, then deny Christ for the
greatest preferments.

2. And as we must reflect upon examples 2. Let us look upon examples below us.
above us, for our imitation; so we must reflect upon examples below us, and
learn from them, this excellent lesson of Contentment. From the poorest we may
learn this lesson. Such as have no more then what they work for, and can only
reserve something to keep them alive on the sabbath day, for which they have
wrought in hard labor all the six days in the week; these, I say, eat, drink
and sleep, with a great deal of contentment. They are contented with course
bread, small drink, and sometimes water, and with a hard bed of straw, and yet
they eat and drink heartily and sleep quietly, and they and their children look
fat and well-liking. They have not those cares, fears and vexations upon their
spirits, as those have, who have thousands of gold and silver. With such as
these, we should compare our selves, and if so little a portion content them,
why should not much more content us?

For a close of this Treatise, let us be exhorted (and O! that the Exhortation
might take good effect) to account God our portion, riches, treasure, and all
in all, and having him, who alone can quiet, content and satisfy our souls, we
shall be abundantly quieted, contented and satisfied. I shall conclude all with
Psalm. 4. 6, 7, 8. There be many that say, Who will show us any good? Lord, lift
thou up the light of thy countenance upon us. Thou have put gladness in my
heart, more then in the time that their corn and their wine increased. I will
lay me down in peace, and sleep: for thou Lord only make me dwell in safety.

FINIS.

