A WARNING To the Inhabitants of LEEDS, And all others in Cities, Towns and
Villages, Who have wilfully been Persecuting THE PEOPLE of the LORD, Whom he
has called by his Eternal Spirit to magnify himself in, and to testify for
Truth and Righteousness, and against all ungodly Works, and Workers thereof.

By Isabel Wails.

Printed in the Year 1685.

A WARNING To the Inhabitants of LEEDS And all others that are or may be
concerned, in all Cities, Towns and Villages, wheresoever this may come.
O You Inhabitants of Leeds!
to whom I have been a near Neighbor, and a near Dwelle^, these several years,
This day I am moved in the everlasting Spirit of Truth, to warn you, both High
and Low, Rich and Poor, to Return unto the Lord God, who by his Holy Spirit
calls in the secret parts of your hearts for Truth and Righteousness, and true
Holiness, and wills not the Death of any Soul that he in his pure Wisdom has
Created. But dear People! this is my Testimony for the Lord, he would have all
to come unto him, that they may receive Life and Peace from him, who is God
forever, and he changes not, neither is he limited this day, nor his Spirit is
not limited, which he in the riches of his Love has manifested and revealed
unto us; so in the sure Revelation of his eternal Love, am I constrained to
tell you, who have made War against the appearance of the Lord in his People,
The Lord is making haste to recompense every one of you according to your
doings; for he is risen to be a swift Witness against the Ungodly: And I
plainly tell you all, who these lines may come before, to be read, or heard, If
you sow to the Flesh, of the Flesh you shall reap Corruption, but if ye sow to
the Spirit, ye shall of the Spirit reap Life Everlasting. Therefore in the fear
of the Lord God, and Bowels of tender Pity, am I made to warn you all, to lay
aside or cease from your Acts of Cruelty, which the power of Satan has
invented in your Hearts, which Power is limited. So I entreat you to return
unto the Lord, and put on the Spirit of Meekness, and seek the Lord God, that
through seeking him you may find Mercy and Compassion, as all his People (who
have sought him) have done, from Age to Age, and Generation to Generation, the
Lord God has had pity unto the Cries of his own; and its for no other cause or
occasion, that we Suffer, but for bearing forth the Testimony of his Love that
he has revealed in us, who were in the Bondage of Corruption, and Iniquity, as
you are, who are persecuting the Upright, and have oppressed the Innocent
without any just cause: Therefore I am bound to declare unto you, That God is
highly displeased at your doings; for his Anger is kindled, and the Viols of
his Wrath are ready to be poured forth upon you, who have wilfully transgressed
against him: And except ye Repent, and let true Judgment come over the head of
the Transgressor, you cannot escape, but you must drink of the Cup of his
Indignation, which is held forth for them that will not take his counsel, nor
hearken unto him when he calls.

Oh! how does my Soul breathe that you would return unto the Lord, before that
you have sinned out your Day, lest that the Lord's Bowels of Compassion be shut
up against you; and if so, Mark] you may call and he will not hear, you may
shout and cry, but he will not hearken, nor answer; therefore as God has
manifested himself unto us through his Son Christ Jesus, though we were in
Darkness as well as others, but through waiting upon him in his own Spirit, we
are come to know the Deeds of Wickedness to be mortified in us, and through his
Spirit that gives Life, are we come to have our hearts softened and mollified
thereby. So in this living Spirit we cannot but declare unto others, and desire
that all may come to the true acknowledgment of the Lord, and not only to know
him, but also to obey him; then it will be certain (as here you abide) that
Cruelty will be put to an end in every one of your hearts, who come to receive
this Counsel, and Mercy and Pity, and true Compassion will be raised toward
all men; for of a Truth I declare, and bear my Testimony for my God at this
very moment of time, that there is yet a tender pity runs from the Bowels of
the Lord unto some of you, and his Mind is, that none might perish nor be
destroyed, but that you might wait upon him, that through him you might receive
Life and Peace forever.

So I entreat you that you may not reject the counsel of the Lord, which does
arise in the meanest of his People, and slight not the day of your Visitation,
Jest it pass over your heads; for this day God is the same that ever he was, to
bear up their heads that fear him, and also to renew their Faith, who are
freely given up to answer him in his Requirings; also he is ready to take
Vengeance of the Transgressors, and of them that stand to fight against any of
his Children, whom he has chosen to bear forth his Testimony in his Truth upon
Earth.

So, dear People, (I would have you to) remember Moses, how often he was made
by the Spirit and Power of God to spoke unto Pharaoh, but Pharaoh opposed the
Power of God through the hardness of his Heart, and rejected the Counsel of the
Lord, that the Lord had revealed unto Moses, and he would not let the Children
of Israel go, but he invented a way (through the work of Satan) how he might
destroy the Innocent; but the Lord hearkened unto their Cries, and their Groans
came before him, and he had regard unto his chosen flock, and by Faith were
they delivered, when Pharaoh and all his Host were destroyed, and did perish
from off the Earth.

So in the tender Bowels of Love, has the Lord God opened my Mouth amongst you
(my Townsmen, Neighbors and Acquaintance) to warn you once more to return
unto the Lord, who is the living God, and no longer harden your hearts; for
this day God has passed by the Wise and Prudent of this World, who have not
had an Eye unto him, and he has revealed himself unto a People who are
accounted as the Offscouring of the Earth, and in the eyes of (Wise) men we are
not counted worthy to live; but God that has heard our Cries, in the deepest
of our Afflictions has had regard unto us, and still does remain with us, and
we are certain he will do, as we stand faithful unto him; for he has renewed
our Faith, as he did Abraham's of Old. So in this Faith and Confidence is my
Soul made to testify against all Gainsayers, and them that strike against the
appearance of the Lord of Hosts, in any of his People whom he has chosen; and
he has also drawn us to believe in him, blessed be his Name forever; for he
has preserved us through many Troubles, Tribulations, and great Sufferings,
both within and without, when men have heaped Sorrow upon Sorrow, through the
wrath of their Hearts, if by any means they could have destroyed us; but yet
the Lord by his outstretched Arm has preserved us, that in the midst of my
outward Troubles and Tribulations I can Bless, Praise and Magnify the Name of
the Lord, that he has delivered my Soul out of the Bondage of Iniquity, and
out of the Snares of Death, and counted me (with my Brethren and Sisters)
worthy to suffer for the Testimony of his Name, its more precious to my Soul
then the increase of Corn, Wine or Oil, or any visible thing that is upon the
Earth.

So in the openings of Gods Spirit of Love, was I constrained to warn you to
consider what you have done, and how ye will answer the Lord, when he comes to
take an account of you, for the deeds that you have done in the Body, that he
did Frame and Make for himself, for a Temple to dwell in, and by your wicked
Inventions you have defiled it, and in it have lodged the Power of Satan. So in
the Spirit of Meekness do I entreat you, that you may come to wait to feel the
Power of God (which is an unlimited Power) to overpower all the Powers of
Satan, which is limited and ever was, and he can go no further then the Lord
suffers him, so that all our Trials and Tribulations that we have gone through,
or may go through, are but light unto us, in comparison of Gods Love that he
has revealed unto us, and made us sharers of, yea, many Thousands of Sons and
Daughters. So in this free Grace that God has made my Soul a Witness of, I
desire to stand a Witness for him forever, over Sin, Death, and all the Powers
of Satan, and my Travail is that you may come to experience the work of the
Lord in you.

Dear People! its my Cry, that your understandings may be opened, that ye may
hearken unto the Voice of the Lord, which Cries in the secret parts of the
heart for Holiness. Then will Sin be put to an end in you, and you will take no
delight in it, nor you will have no Pleasure to have Iniquity to lodge within
your hearts; For I can truly declare unto you, that the Lord has no pleasure
in them that are working Wickedness, and drinking up Iniquity as the Ox
drinks up Water. Oh, my Soul! my Soul cries unto the Lord that ye might
return unto him, before the Day of Calamity and Sorrow come upon you; For if
you will not hearken nor regard, its certain it will overtake you, and then
will you say (if ye repent not) that you had warning given, time after Time,
and would not take it: Therefore whether you will hear, or forbear, I have
answered the Lords Requirings, and in my obedience I have Peace, which I prefer
above all outward Enjoyments. And I am bold to declare unto you this day (the
Lord knows I lie not) that I could neither eat, nor take my natural rest, but
was oppressed, and my Tears were not a few; for my Soul mourned within me,
until I was given up in obedience to the Lord God, to signify unto you, what
he had revealed unto my Soul: Therefore whether you will hear or forbear, (as I
have said unto you) the Lord has eased my Spirit in some measure, and in his
Will I lie down, whatsoever he is pleased to suffer man to inflict upon me, I
desire to be found in his service for evermore.

From one who is a well-wisher of all men, and desires the prosperity of all
Souls, who am a Prisoner at York-Castle,for the Testimony of Jesus, this 17.
day of the 10. Month, in the Year, 1684. Isabel Wails.

POSTSCRIPT.
O Ye People of Leeds!
who have persecuted the Lords Servants, and imprisoned the Innocent without a
cause; For your sakes am I ma^e to mourn in secret, and my Spirit is troubled
within me, when I consider the Calamity that is coming upon you, and which will
certainly overtake you, except you speedily Repent: A Day of Distress and great
Lamentation! A Day of Darkness and Gloominess! A Day of Misery and of the
Shadow of Death, is coming upon you, in which although you call, the Lord will
not hear, yea, though ye cry aloud he will not regard it, because when he
called unto you ye would not hear, and when he waited to be gracious, warning
you again and again to Repent, yet ye regarded it not, but set at naught his
Counsel, and made a scorn of them by whom he warned you, and despised all his
Reproofs.

Oh! consider of this, ye Inhabitants of Leeds, whilst yet you have a day or
time, you who have had a hand in persecuting the Innocent, (who have done no
harm to any of you) and that have had no regard either to Old or Young, Rich
nor Poor, Fatherless nor Widows, but have sent (or haled) of all sorts to
Prison, without respect to Age or Sex, (even some great with Child) Oh! have ye
not despised and afflicted the Aged and Gray-Hairs, whom the Lord has
honored, and the Poor which he regarded? And as for the Sick, have ye not
turned your backs on them, whose Groans have been heard in your Ears? O! do you
not think that the Lord sees and takes notice of these things, and that all
your Hard-heartedness, Cruelty and Oppression, are written down in his Book?
Yes certainly, the Lord of Hosts both s^es and takes notice of them, and in due
time will assuredly visit for the same, and be avenged on his Adversaries,
recompencing a Reward upon them according to their deeds; for it is he that
has called us, and given us to bear Witness of him, and his Name and Truth
upon the Earth, and are made willing to wait on him, and to be subject to him,
in obedience to his requirings; yea, though it be to the hazard of Liberty,
Life and Estate; for he has not spared to shed his precious Blood for us, that
he might Redeem us from all Iniquity, that we might be a peculiar People to
him: Therefore he is precious to us, yea, as a Pearl of great Price; and this
day we cannot but remember him, honor him, and fear his Name, and we durst not
deny him nor his Truth before men, who has plucked us as Brands out of the
Fire, and has raised us up who were dead in Trespasses and in Sins (as well as
others) and has caused us this day to Testify of him, who is God forever and
changes not, who will have pity on them that fear him, and trust in his Name,
when all the Wicked and Ungodly shall perish from his pr^sence, and from off
the Face of the Earth.

The Day hastens, yea, the day hastens, that Gods fierce Wrath and Indignation
will be poured out upon the Stiff-necked and Rebellious Generation, and upon
all such as will not hearken unto (but reject) his Counsel, which by his Spirit
he has and is giving unto the Sons and Daughters of Men: Therefore Repent,
Repent, lest Salvation be hid from your Eyes.

From a Sufferer for the Truth and Righteousness sake, known to many of you by
the Name of Isabel Wails.

THE END.

