Ecclesiastes, OR, A discourse concerning the Gift OF PREACHING As it falls
under the Rules of Art.

SHOWING The most proper Rules and Directions, for Method, Invention, Books,
Expression, whereby a Minister may be furnished with such abilities as may make
him a Workman that needs not to be ashamed. Very seasonable for these Times,
wherein the Harvest is great, and the skilful Laborers but few.

The third Edition.

By JOHN WILKINS. D. D.

2 Cor. 2. 16. Who is sufficient for these things? London, Printed by T. R. and
E. M. for SAMUEL GELLIBRAND, at the BALL in Paul's Churchyard. 1651.

To the READER.
I Have been encouraged to some enlargement of this Treatise, in that part of
it, which concerns the account of Books and Authors. There is here some
Addition to the several kinds of them. And because it would be of excellent
use, if the many choice Treatises upon particular subjects in divinity, were so
distinctly reduced, that a man might have recourse to them upon any emergent
occasion; therefore I have here attempted something to this purpose, namely, to
refer them unto the several heads in the Analysis of Divinity, toward the
latter end of this Book.

The Latin or Greck Tracts of the ancient Fathers and other eminent Writers,
are already thus reduced under several heads in Bolduanus, Draudius, Molanus,
etc. by whose direction it is easy to find the chief A^^^^rs or Discourses in
those Languages upon any particular subject.

The like is here endeavored for our English Treatises, which for their
clearness and fullness in matters of practical Divinity, are generally
esteemed to be of special use and eminency.

It cannot be expected but that the first attempt in this kind, must needs be
very defective. But it is easy for any one to alter, or add, as his own
better experience shall direct.

I have now by an Asterisk noted some of those Commentators who are esteemed
most judicious and useful.

I did farther intend by some mark to have distinguished them, according to
their several times and Professions, whether Fathers, Rabbis, Papists,
Lutherans, Calvinists. The nature of their Works and Comments, whether more
brief, by way of Annotation, Analysis or more large, by way of Questions,
Common places, or Doctrines, whereby younger Students might be directed in the
choice of their several kinds. But I am forced as yet to lay this aside, as
being a business which will require more pains and leisure, then my other
necessary employments can permit.

ECCLESIASTES, Or the Gift of Preaching.
IT is the end of all Sciences and Arts to direct men by certain Rules unto the
most compendious way in their knowledge and practice; those things of which in
our selves we have only some imperfect confused notions being herein fully and
clearly represented to our view, from the discoveries that other men have made
after much study and long experience. And there is nothing of greater
consequence for the advancement of Learning, then to find out those particular
advantages which there are for the shortest way of knowing and teaching things
in every profession.

Now amongst all other callings, this of Preaching, being in many respects one
of the most weighty and solemn, should therefore have its Rules and Canons,
whereby we may be directed the easiest, readiest way for the practice of it.

Besides all those Academical preparation s by the study of Languages,
Sciences, Divinity, with which men should be qualified, and predisposed for
this Calling, I say besides all these, there is a particular art of preaching,
to which if Ministers did more seriously apply themselves, it would extremely
facilitate that service, making it more easy to us, and more profitable to
others.

There are two abilities requisite in every one that will teach and instruct
another: (...). (...)


A right understanding of sound doctrine; and an ability to propound, confirm,
and apply it unto the edification of others. And the first may be without Luke
21. 15 (...).
the other. As a man may be a good Lawyer, and yet not a good Pleader; so he
may be a good Divine, and yet not a good Preacher.

One chief reason why diverse men, otherwise of eminent parts, are herein so
slow and unskilful, is, because they have not been versed in this study, and
are therefore unacquainted with those proper Rules and directions, by which
they should be guided in the attaining and exercise of this Gift.

It has been the usual course at the University to venture upon this calling
in an abrupt overhasty manner. When Scholars have passed over their
Philosophical studies, and made some little entrance upon Divinity, they
presently think themselves fit for the Pulpit without any farther enquiry, as
if the Gift of Preaching and sacred Oratory were not a distinct Art of it self.
This would be counted a very preposterous course in other matters, if a man
should presume of being an Orator because he was a Logician, or to practice
Physic because he had learnt Philosophy: And certainly the pre-eminence of
this profession above others, must needs extremely aggravate such neglect, and
make it so much the more mischievous by how much the calling is more solemn.

Now there are several Treatises of many learned men, both Protestants and
others, who have written particularly and largely upon this very subject,
concerning the Art of Preaching, wherein they have laid down such various helps
and rules, as they from their own practice and long experience have found most
useful. Among whom, these are some of the most eminent, and common.

* Bowls De Pastore. Hen. Alsted. Theologia Prophetica, Frid. Baldvini
Institutio ministrorum. Rich. Bernard. The faithful Shepherd. Joh. Clark.
Oratoriae sacrae (...). Lamb. Danaei Methodus S. Scripturae in concion^bus
tractandae. Hen. Die De ratione studii Theologici. Des. Erasmi Ecclesiastes.
Nichol. Hemingius De Pastore. Barth. Keche^^anus De Rhetorica Ecclefiastica.
Geor. Laetus De ratione concionandi ad Method. Anglican. Will. Perkins
Concerning the Art of Prophecy. Casp. Strasonis Technologia Theologica. De
methodo concionandi Anonym. Jo. Segobiensis De praedicatione evangelica. Abra.
Sculteti Axiomata concionandi.
Will. Zepperus De art habendi conciones. audiend^

Besides these, there are above forty other Authors, who have writ particularly
upon this subject, recited by Draudius in his Bibliotheca classica under the
head of Concionatorum instructio, page 132. To So Jo. Molanus in Bibliotheca
materiarum, under the head of Concionandi munus.
which may be added the directions to this purpose so briefly and fully
comprehended in the Directory, besides those many other discourses wherein
these things have been largely handled on the by, though not chiefly intended.
In all which, many learned men have laid down various rules, which to them
according to their several Genius's and observations seemed most useful.

And we must not doubt but that in this as well as in all other professions,
every days experience may yield some farther advantage, by discovering yet more
facile compendious directions to furnish a man for this calling. And that is
the inquiry which is aimed at and attempted in this following discourse.

This service of preaching may be considered under a double notion, as a Duty.
Gift.


It is here insisted upon only in the second sense, and may be thus described.

It Is such an expertnesse and facility in the right handling and dividing the
Word of Truth, as may approve us to be Workmen that need not to be ashamed.

It does require both Spiritual abilities. Artificial

1. Such spiritual abilities as must be infused from above, whereby our
judgment and affections shall be made experimentally acquainted with all those
sacred Truths, that we are to deliver unto others. James 1. 5. Psalm. 25. 9.
John 7. 17
The only way for the attaining of these, is by Prayer, an humble heart, and a
holy life.

2. Such artificial abilities as are to be acquired by our own industry. And
these are either more general, as skill in all those Arts and Languages, which
are required as predispositions. Or more particular and immediate, for the act
of Preaching, or making Sermons, to which the chief helps are these three;
Method. Matter. Expression.


Each of these do contribute mutual assistance unto one another. A good method
will direct to proper matter, and fitting matter will enable for good
expression.

By Method I understand an Art of contriving our discourses in such a regular
frame wherein every part may have its due place and dependence: which will be a
great advantage both to Our selves. Our hearers.


1. To our selves, and that both for Invention and Memory A man may more easily
find out things, when in stead of seeking for them at random he can have
direct recourse unto all those places and heads from whence they may be most
naturally collected. And more easily retain them, when they are linked together
and not scattered; Method being as a chain, in which if a man should let slip
any one part, he may easily recover it again, by that relation and dependence
which it has with the whole.

2. And so for benefit of the hearers likewise, who may understand and retain a
Sermon with greater ^ase and profit, when they are beforehand acquainted with
the general heads of matter that are discoursed of. It Is but a bad rule in
Alstea, where he advises to conceal, and alter the method for variety Theol.
pro phet. par. 1 cap. 10.
sake. Crypsis dispositionis tollit fastidium auditoris. This may be true of
itching curious hearers, but not of such as regard their own profit and
edification.

An immethodical discourse (though the materials of it may be precious) is but
as a ^eap, full of confusion and deformity; the other, as a Fabric or
building, much more excellent both for beauty and use.

There might be diverse kinds of Methods prescribed, according as men's own
fancies and the variety of subjects and occasions shall require. But that which
our gravest Divines by long experience have found most useful, is this of
Doctrine and Use.

This in the nature of it, is very easy, and therefore most natural, being
generally applyable unto any subject. In the true latitude of it, it is as full
and comprehensive as any other, taking in all such notions as are any way
useful or proper. In the branches and gradations of it, it is very Logical,
putting homogeneous things together, handling generals first, and particulars
after.

The principal scope of a divine Orator should be to Teach clearly. Convince
strongly. Persuade powerfully.


Suitable to these, the chief parts of a Sermon are these three; Explication.
Confirmation. Application.


Each of these may be farther subdivided and branched out according to this
following Analysis.

1. Explication is either of the Text by Unfolding difficulties in the sense,
for which we are to con^ider The phrase it self according to the Original
Translations.
The cirumstances of the place. Persons Who, to whom.
Occasion. Time. Place. Scope or end. Context.
The Analogy of Faith. Other parallel or like Scriptures.
Distinguishing ambiguous Words. Phrases.
Dividing of the Text, which must not be Needless. Obscure.

Doctrines deduced from it, by Clearing their inference. Showing the latitude
of every Truth. According to their several Branches. Duty. Degrees.



2. Confirmation by Positive proofs from Scripture, in Notionall truths by
direct Affirmation. Negation.
evident consequence.
Practical truths by precepts. examples.

Reason, to convince in Doctrinall points from the nine Topics. Cause, Effect.
Subject. Adjunct. Dissentan. Comparats. Name. Distribution. Definitions.
Practical truths from the two general heads of Necessity. Equity.

Solution of such doubts and Quaeries as are most obvious, and material.




3. Application, which is either Doctrinall for our information More general
in some truth to be acknowledged. Didacticall instruction. Elencticall
confutation.
More particular of our own estates to be examined by Marks, which are commonly
either Effects. Properties.

Practical Reproof, which has two parts, Disswasive from The aggravation of
the sin. Threats denounced. Judgments executed.
Directive, wherein concerning Impediments that hinder. Means to promote, more
Remote. Immediate.


Consolation by Promises. Experience. Removing of scruples.
Exhortation, to be amplified by Motives to excite the affections from Profit.
Danger
Means to direct the actions, General. Special.





Besides those more essential parts recited in this Scheme, which belong to the
very nature and substance of a Sermon; there are other less principal parts
also (not to be neglected) which concern the external form of it: Such as
these; Preface. Transitions. Conclusion.


The first thing to be entered upon in this Fabric or Method, is the Porch or
Preface, which is not always necessary in every common structure; but only when
some extraordinary occasion does require it, or by reason of some special
reference, which the Text may have to that particular time and auditory. And
then it should be clear and p^rtinent, short as being a thing on the by, and
such as may quicken attention unto the following discourse.

The most general and effectual matter for a Preface, is (that which was so
commonly used by the Prophets of old) to persuade the hearers that it is The
Word of God which is spoken to them, which concerns their everlasting
happiness, and is able to save their souls; That the Ministers Jam. 1. 21. 2 C
or. 5. 20. Luke 10. 16 1 These. 4. 8
do but stand in Christ's stead; That our receiving or despising of them shall
be reckoned as done unto Christ himself: Which being believed and considered,
will be a strong engagement upon the hearers, unto those three qualifications
which are the chief ends of prefacing, namely to make them Favorable.
Teachable. Attentive.


The next thing to be done is the opening of the Text, according to its proper
sense and meaning; To which purpose we may give some brief Analytical
explication of the Chapter, or at least so much of it as may serve to clear the
Text, and show the dependence of it on the coherent words.

All Scriptures are either manifest or Cryptical and obscure. Matters that are
absolutely necessary to salvation, are expressed in the first of these. Other
truths whether Historical, Doctrinal, or Practical, may be sometimes involved
in doubtful difficult expressions.

In the unfolding of which, we must observe; that if the natural and most
obvious signification of the words, do manifestly disagree with other
perspicuous Scriptures, then we are to seek for some other meaning, which must
always be consonant with the words and other circumstances of the place.

In the finding out of this, we are not so much to consult with our own
fancies; for no prophecy in z Pet. 1. 20. N^h. 8 8.
Scripture is of any private interpretation, but with the Holy Ghost himself,
who best understands his own meaning.

All difficult expressions should first be examined according to their original
and most authentic translations, which will give much light to the true
meaning of them. Though it will be needless to mention any various readings,
translations, or interpretations of Scripture to a vulgar auditory, because it
is apt to stagger them, and to raise doubts; rather then to confirm and settle
them; But we should pitch upon that, which upon serious consultation, we
conceive in our own judgments to be most congruous and pertinent.

The circumstances of the place will help much to illustrate any difficulty of
it. The Rabbis have a saying, Nulla est objectio in Lege, quae non habet
solutionem in latere, that is, there is not any doubt in the Law, but may be
resolved by the context.

We must be careful that all our interpretations be agreeable with the Analogy
of faith, and other parallel Scriptures. The consulting of these, will be a
good means to preserve us from perverting the Word of God by any dangerous
heretical imposition.

Beware of that vain affectation of finding something new and strange in every
text, though never Dr Reynolds Self denial.
so plain. It will not so much show our parts (which such men aim at) as our
pride, and wantonness of wit.

These new projectors in Divinity are the fittest matter out of which to shape,
first a Sceptick, after that a Heretic, and then an Atheist.

There are diverse Texts that have a double sense, Historical and Literal.
Typical and Allegorical.


So those places concerning the Brazen Serpent, Numb. 21. 9. John 3. 14. Jonah
in the Whales belly, Jonah 1. 17. Matthew. 12. 40. Abraham two wives and sons,
Sarah and Isaac, Hagar and Ishmael, Genesis 21. Galat. 4. 22. The Law concerning
the muzeling the Ox that treads out the corn, Deuteronomy. 25. 4. 1 Cor. 9. 9. In
all which there is some typical allusion primarily intended.

Allegorical interpretations may lawfully be used also, when there is no such
natural reference, but merely a fitness by way of similitude to illustrate any
doctrine. Saint Paul gives example for this, 2 Cor. 3. 13, 15. Ephesians. 4. 32.

But here we must observe these three qualifications; there must be, Raritas.
Concinnit as. Utilitas.


1. We must use them sparingly and soberly.

2. They must be short and pertinent, not forced and farre-fetcht.

3. They must be useful, not for aerie and unprofitable notions, being more
proper for illustration then for proof.

It will be a great help for the understanding of the books of Scripture, to
know their several times, references, and order.

The five books of Moses are as the first bases, by which the whole frame of
Scripture may be more easily apprehended.

The other Historical books that follow will explain themselves: The Psalms do
most of them, in their occasions and historical grounds, refer to the books
of Samuel.

The Prophets are ordinarily divided into three ranks, 1 Those that prophesied
before the captivity, who refer to the history in the books of Kings and
Chronicles, especially the second book. 2 Those that prophesied in the
captivity, concerning whose times, there is but very little mention in the
Historical parts of Canonical Scripture. 3 Those that prophesied after the
captivity, unto whom the History of Ezra and Nehemiah has some reference.

And so in the New Testament, the Epistles do many of them refer unto the
story of the Acts of the Apostles.

As for the ranking and succession of the books in Scripture, they were not
writ in the same order as they are placed. But they are set down rather
according to their bulk and largeness, then their true order.

1. Those that were before the captivity are to be reckoned according to this
succession, In the year before Christ.


Obadiah in the reign of Ahab. 1 Kings 18. 3. Jonah 920.
Jeroboam. 2 Kings 14. 25. Amos 840.
in the days of Uzziah Isaiah Iotham Hosea Ahaz Micah 780.
Hezekiah Nahum Joel 700.
about the time of Manasseb Habakkuk 680.
Josiah Zephaniah Iehoiakim Jeremiah 610.


2. In the captivity there prophesied 580.
Ezekiel Daniel

3. From the return out of captivity, till our Saviors coming is reckoned 559
years. About the 18 year of this began Haggai and Ze^hariah, and not long after
Malachi.

And so in the New Testament though the larger Epistles are placed first, yet
they were not written so. It Is probable that they were composed according to
this order, Since Christ.
1 Thessalonians. 50.
Romans. 1 Corinthians. 55.
1 Timothy 2 Corinthians. 56.
Titus. 57.
2 Thessalonians. Philip. Coloss. Galat. Ephesians. Hebr. 61.
Philemon. 64.
2 Timothy

So for the Canonical Epistles, that of James is Lud. de Tena Isag. See
Ludca^elli Historia Apostol.
thought to be written first, then those of Peter, then Jude, and lastly John.

Thus likewise for other particular books, that of the Psalms, some conceive
that the 108. should be first, where David does stir up and prepare himself
to this work, of making Psalms: O God, my heart is ready, I will sing and give
praise. And the 72. Psalm the last, because it concludes with this passage, The
prayers of David are ended. The ordering of them is not jure divino, though it
be of very great antiquity, for Saint Paul does expressly quote the second
Psalm, Act. 13. 13.

The right apprehension of these general notions concerning the proper times
and order of several Books, may be one good help to the true interpretation of
Scripture.

Next to the unfolding of any abstruse and difficult sense, we are to consider
likewise, the very words and phrases, amongst which, if there be any ambiguous,
they must be distinguished and applied according to their proper signification
in the text; Tropes and figures being explained in their natural meaning.

As for the division of the text, it will be needless, unless either the
explication of Terms, or the deduction of Doctrines from the several parts, do
require it. That common practice of dissecting the words into minute parts and
enlarging upon them severally, is a great occasion of impertinency and roving
from the chief sense.

The text having been thus unfolded, the next thing to be done is the inferring
of Observations from it, which should always follow from the words by a strong
Logical consequence. The wresting of Scripture unto improper truths, may easily
occasion the applying of them unto gross falsehoods.

These Observations may be of several kinds, either Mediate and more remote,
Immediate and principal.


Of the first kind are such as are raised from the occasion, coherence, manner,
circumstances, order, denomination of the text; As whether it be a precept,
exhortation, threat, promise, petition, deprecation, similitude, etc. All which
may afford several hints of instruction, and are not to be passed over without
notice. Though these points should be only touched at briefly on the by; and
those only insisted upon largely, which we conceive to be most agreeable unto
the principal immediate scope of the Holy Ghost in that Scripture.

And these observations must be laid down in the most easy perspicuous phrase
that may be, not obscured by any rhetorical or affected expressions; for if the
hearers mistake in that, all that follows will be to little purpose.

The Doctrine being mentioned (if there be any necessity) we may briefly clear
the inference of it, by showing its necessary dependence on the text.

Then (if the matter be capable of it) we may farther enlarge it in its several
branches and degrees, by showing the full latitude and extent of every truth or
duty.

The Text and the Doctrine being thus opened, we should in the next place
descend to the confirmation of it. Remembering always to connect these several
parts by some plain and brief transition, that so the method may be the more
perspicuous.

Now here are two sorts of proofs (...). (...).

The Quod sit, and Cur sit, that it is so, and why it is so. The first is
properly from Testimony, either Divine. Humane.
Divine Testimony is either from some Scripture Precept. Example.

1. For Precepts, it will be needless to heap up many proofs; But it is enough
to suggest two or three of the most pertinent places, with some brief
explication of them.

2. For Examples, it is a rule, exempla mag is movent imparia. There may be
much advantage in the inequality of examples: Lillies, Sparrowes, Pismires,
Heathens.

Testimonies of Fathers, Decrees of Councels, Rev. 2. 10
consent of Churches, Confession of adversaries, may all be of good use if they
are suitable to the matter and auditory. Testimonies of Heathen men may be
proper to show a truth agreeable unto natural light.

Though Scripture can best inform us, what is true and false; yet humane
Records can tell us what is new, and what is ancient.

But here we must be careful that we do not let Hagar the handmaid out-brave
her Mistress Sarah: that we do not prefer bleer-eyed Leah before beautiful
Rachel. To stuff a Sermon with citations of Authors, and the witty sayings of
others, is to make a feast of vinegar and pepper, which may be very delightful
being used moderately as sauces, but must needs be very improper and offensive
to be fed upon as diet.

The Reasons of the Doctrine should be such as may convince the judgment
concerning the reasonableness of any truth or duty, which are herein
distinguishable from the Motives, belonging to the Application, because these
refer properly to the convincing of the judgment, those to the exciting of the
affections.

In practical matters, the general heads from whence the reasons are
deducible, are these two, Necessity, Equity: which are capable of very many
subordinate branches.

In other notionall doctrinall points, the 9 Topics, to which we are directed
in Logic and Rhetoric, may be good helps for the invention of proper
arguments.

When we have confirmed the Proposition by positive proofs, the next thing to
be done is the removing of such doubts and queries, either from carnal reason,
or ambiguous Scriptures, as are most naturally emergent, and proper.

Not that any evident position or consequence from Scripture does need all this
proof in it self, but the better to instruct us in the agreement and harmony of
sacred Writ, and the more powerfully to convince the judgment, which in some
cases will be apt to find out shifts and evasions, whereby to delude it self
and escape conviction, whereas we shall embrace any doctrine, with a stronger
assent, and rest upon it with the whole bent of the affections, when it comes
in upon us with a full stream of evidence. But here we are to remember that the
too long insisting on a confessed truth, is apt to nauseat and flat the
attention.

Having thus passed over the doctrinall part in the explication and
confirmation of the words, we are in the next place to descend unto the
application of them, which is the life and soul of a Sermon, whereby these
sacred truths are brought home to a man's particular conscience and occasions,
and the affections engaged unto any truth or duty.

The Application is frequently mentioned by several Authors, according to a
double acception; sometimes it is taken more strictly, as it is distinguished
from the Uses, and refers only to those particular passages of them, which do
more especially concern the present time and auditory. Sometimes it is taken
more largely, as it comprebends all the Uses that are inferred from the
doctrine. And so I understand it in this place.

In the enlarging of this we are to observe this caution, That the several
heads or Uses we are to insist upon, must not here be handled, in a general
notionall way, as in the doctrinall parts, but in such a home and applicatory
manner, as may have some peculiar reference unto the hearers.

The chief Rules or Canons that concern this part are these two.

1. Every Scripture does affirm, command, threaten, not only that which is
expressed in it, but likewise all that which is rightly deducible from it,
though by mediate consequences.

2. An example has the force of a rule. All of them being written for our
learning. But then 1 Cor. 20. 11.
we must be careful to examine and discern whether the example be
extraordinary or ordinary, according to which the application must be properly
made.

The Apostle tells us that the whole Scripture is given by inspiration from God,
and is profitable (...), for Doctrine, (...), for redargution, (...), for
correction, (...), for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may
be perfect, being perfectly instructed in every good work, 2 Timothy 3. 16.

In that place all the Uses to which Scripture may be applied, are briefly set
down.

Application is either Doctrinall. Practical.

Doctrinal application, is for our information in some truth to be known or
believed, which must follow from the doctrine before delivered and confirmed,
by a natural Logical consequence, as that doctrine does from the text.

And this is of two kinds, Didactical. Elenctical.

1. Didacticall, in some positive truth, (...), which is commonly styled, a Use
of Information, and should consist of such pertinent doctrinall truths, as will
most properly follow from the Observation: In the deducing of these it would be
an endless business to take in all those inferences that are remote or
collateral: But we should pitch upon some few that are more principal and
immediate. Where those Logical directions may be useful, concerning the
collecting, 1. Of a general from a special, as Romans 4. 3, 4. 2. The less
from the greater, as ^ohn 10. 25. Romans 8. 32. 3. The greater from the less. 1
Cor. 9. 9, 10. 4. The effect from the case. Heb. 2. 8. 5. The cause from the
effect. ^ohn 6. 45. etc.

2. Elencticall, (...), in some controverted point, which is usually called a
Use of confutation, for the refuting of such erroneous positions as do subvert
the truth.

Where it will be needless to raise up any old obsolete errors, as now lie
dead and do not trouble the Church: but we should take notice only of such as
being pertinent to the subject in hand, do most infect the present times and
places wherein we live.

And here we ought to be specially careful that we manage these polemicall
discourses, 1. With solid pressing arguments, making our answers as clear as
the objections; for if these be plain, and those perplexed, in stead of
confuting we shall rather confirm the error.

2. With much meekness and lenity in differences, not fundamental, 2 Timothy 2.
25. Soft words and hard arguments being the most effectual way to convince.

Another part of this applicatory information may be for the discovery of our
own particular estate and conditions, in regard of our assent unto any truth or
practice of any duty, where we are to try our selves by marks or signs, and
these for the most part are in the nature of Effects, Properties,
which are the surest demonstrations of the nature of any thing.

Practical application is either, (...) (...). (...).

1. For correction of manners, commonly styled a Use of Reproof, terror,
dehortation, to dissuade and fright men from any sinful course. In the urging
of this, there is much prudence to be expressed in distinguishing betwixt sins of
infirmity, and sins of wilfulness and frowardness; and accordingly
proportioning the severity of our reproofs.

This is generally to be observed, that in all reprehensions, we must express
rather our love then our anger, and strive rather to convince then to
exasperate. Though, if the matter do require any special indignation, it must
be the zeal of a displeased friend, rather then the bitterness of a provoked
enemy. It Is too much levity to check men in an Ironicall geering way, and it is
too much rashness to reprove men in a furious revengefull manner.

This Use should be more especially directed against those particular sins of
the times and places wherein we live. And because in it self, it may be very
displeasing unto the guilty hearers, which will much prejudice the power and
operation of it; we should therefore sweeten it by some gentle insinuations,
wherein it might appear that it proceeds from our affection and care of their
welfare. That there is a necessity of insisting upon it, both from our duties,
and their danger.

The proper heads for amplification of this Use are twofold, Disswasive.
Directive.


1. Disswasive may have these three heads.

First, the agrravation of the sin. Secondly, the threats denounced against
it. Thirdly, the judgments executed upon it.
All which are further capable of many subordinate amplifications, by comparing
one sin, with others that are like or less. By mentioning the evil effects,
consequences, adjuncts, facility, or difficulty, indignity, or any other
argument that may breed in us shame and detestation of the sin, compassion of
our own selves, repentance for our offenses past, and greater vigilance for the
future.

2. The Directive part, should mention the impediments that hinder, and such
means or helps whereby we may be enabled to avoid and overcome any sin. It Is
not enough for the Physician to inveigh against the malignity or danger of a
disease, but his chief care must be, to direct unto the remedy and cure of it.
And for this the prescriptions must be various, according to the several kinds
of offenses. But this directive part is reducible also under the Use of
Exhortation, only here is the difference, that in this place it does properly
belong to Disswasion, in the other to Persuasion.

2. (...), or Instruction in righteousness unto every good Work, may include
Consolation Exhortation.


1. A Use of Consolation is, when we apply the comforts that arise from any
doctrine unto the particular state and consciences of our hearers. This is one
main end of the Scriptures, which were written for our learning, that we
through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have Rom 15. 4
hope. And it should be the special care of a Minister, to attend (...), unto
Consolation, (as that word may signify) like a wise Physician Isa. 40. 1. 1 Timothy 4. 13.
to apply Lenitives and Cordials, where the condition of the Patient does
require it, as well as Corrosives and Purges.

This Use may be amplified by these three heads. 1. By the promises that are
made in Scripture. 2. By the experience of others. 3. By removing of such
doubts and scruples, as an afflicted soul might suggest.


In all afflictions whether outward or inward, we should endeavor to cheer up
the faith of the dejected hearer, by proposing suitable comforts, by raising his
thoughts from sense to faith, from present things to future. Pressing upon him
the Eccles. 3. 11. Romans 8. 28.
consideration of Gods wise providence, by which all things are disposed for
the best. His sure promises in Christ, by whom we may certainly enjoy
plentiful redemption and eternal glory. And though for the present the way of
piety may seem to be full of trouble and opposition, yet it is most safe in the
issue, and the day of redemption does draw nigh, when those that are good shall
be delivered from all their sufferings, and every man shall receive according
to his work.

2. Exhortation, is for the exciting and quickening of our affections unto any
grace or duty. It Is so principal a part of Preaching, that Acts 13. 15. all
that was to be spoken is called Exhortation. The chief end of an Orator is to
persuade, (say the Philosophers) Finis Oratoris est persuasio. And therefore
that Preacher, who in his discourses does only flourish in general notions,
and does not drive at some particular argument, endeavoring to press upon his
auditory, the belief or practice of some truth or duty, is like an unwise
Fisher, who spreads his net to the empty air, were he cannot expect any
success of his labors.

This Use has two common heads of amplification, Motives, to persuade. Means,
to direct.


1. Motives should be such, as do most properly and powerfully work upon the
affections, and therefore are derivable from those two general places, of 1.
Benefit in doing it. Honestum. Utile. Iucundum. Laudabile. Possibile. Facile.
2. Hurt or Danger in neglecting it. Malum. Inutile. Amarum. which are capable
of very many subordinate branches, and these may sometimes be the more
effectually pressed, by adding to them some affectionate conjurements and
obsecrations, like those of the blessed Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 1. I beseech you
brethren by the mercies of God. 2 Timothy 4. 1. I charge 1 Cor 1. 10 Phil. 2 1, 2
thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the
dead, etc.

2. Means or directions, should consist of such particulars, as may best
conduce to the attaining of any grace, or the performance of any duty. And
these may be either,

1. General; as, Prayer, seeking it from God who is the foundation of all
good. Setting apart some solemn time for our more particular enquiry after it.
Improving our abilities and opportunities to this purpose, etc.

2. More Special, according as the nature of several subjects shall require,
and Scripture or experience direct.

These are the chief Uses to which Scripture may be applied. They are
frequently mentioned under more and different names, but they are all reducible
to these heads: it is not necessary they should be all insisted upon in every
Sermon, but only such of them as may be most suitable to the Text, and
seasonable to the time and auditory.

The Conclusion should consist of some such matter as may engage the hearers to
a serious remembrance and consideration of the truths delivered, that they may
revolve upon them, and be careful to renew that impression, which has thereby
been made upon their souls by conference and meditation. To which purpose, as
the milder affections, (...), do best suit with the introduction, which must
insinuate into the love and attention of the hearers; so (...), more eager and
vehement affections will best become the conclusion, as supposing then that we
have won the cause we did contend for, convinced and persuaded the auditory
beyond all opposition.

And therefore here it will be proper to recapitulate some of the most
effectual arguments, which may leave the hearers moved and stirred up in their
affections.

Thus much briefly concerning the most easy method and true logic of a
Sermon, which was the first thing proposed to be discussed, and being rightly
understood, may be a very great help to facilitate this service of Preaching.

The next general head to be insisted upon is, concerning the invention of
matter, where there are two things considerable;

1. The seasonablenesse of it to the time and auditory.

2. The pertinency of it to the text, or subject we are to treat of.

The first of these must be left to the prudence of the Minister in
distinguishing of times and emergencies, in applying himself to the several
conditions and necessities of his hearers; whether they are to be taught and
instructed in some necessary truth, or to be excited unto some necessary duty;
To which purpose he must consider, whether the generality of his hearers be
either ignorant or knowing, whether enemies to Religion, or professors of it,
whether merely formal, or truly pious, whether more cheerful and zealous, or
more cold and sluggish: According to which variety, his Doctrine and
expressions must be variously suited. To use the same matter and manner in all
auditories, is as if a Shoo-maker should make all his ware of an equal size
for children and men, great and little, there being as much difference betwixt
the inward gifts and necessities, as betwixt the outward statures. As in other
invitations we carve that to the guests which is most suitable to their
several palats and appetites: So in these spiritual feasts, we should be
careful to fit our preparations unto the capacity and edification of the
hearers. This is the meaning of the Holy Ghost, (...), rightly to divide the
word of truth, when like a faithful Steward he does proportion his
dispensations according to the exigencies of the Family, when like a wise
Physician he does fit his prescriptions according to the several necessities
of his Patients. This is to have the tongue Luk 12. 42
of the Learned, which knows how to speak a word in due season.

2. The matter must be pertinent and natural unto the subject we are to insist
upon; for want of Isay. 50. 4.
skill in the invention of this, many men (especially young beginners) are very
apt to complain of much dryness and slownesse in their composures, and to take
any hint of flying out into impertinent amplifications, not being able to
enlarge themselves, and keep close to their Text.

Now there is a threefold remedy against this: Prayer. Reading. Meditation.


By the first we must be prepared and directed, both in our judgments and
affections. By the second we may inform and furnish our selves with materials.
By the third we may digest them into the most proper way for the edification of
others. Lectio inquirit, oration postulat, meditatio invenit, contemplatio
degustat, (says a Father,) Prayer August. de Scalis parad. cap^z.
does desire, Reading does enquire, Study and Meditation do discover and digest.

1. Prayer. That God would direct and enable us for the particular service that
lies upon us. It was a usual saying of Luther, Been orasse est been studuisse;
He always found himself in best temper for study, when he had first composed
his thoughts, and raised up his affections by prayer: And certainly the
weightinesse of the service may justly deserve this preparation. For if Queen
Esther, if Nehemiah, being to speak unto an earthly King for the temporal
safety of their people, did first prepare themselves this way, much more then
should Ministers, who are to be Ambassadors from the great God concerning that
weighty business of men's eternal salvations.

2. Reading. It was the Apostles advice to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4. 13. Give
attendance to reading, And he says, that it is the study of the Scriptures,
that must make the man of God perfect, thoroughly furnished, 2 Timothy 3. 17. If
this were necessary in those Primitive times, when men were extraordinarily
inspired with special gifts: much more now, when we cannot exspect any
immediate infusion, but must apply our selves unto the natural proper means of
attaining any ability.

3. Meditation and study, 1 Timothy 4. 15. Meditate on these things, give thy self
wholly to them; (...), Be in them, which phrase implies much intention and
industry in our studies. Demosthenes would have such a one branded for a
pernicious man to the Commonwealth, who durst propose any thing publicly
which he had not beforehand seriously pondered. What impudence is it then in
the great business of salvation, when a man appears before the Church, Angels,
God himself, to discourse in a loose irreverent manner, so as to nauseat and
flat the devotion, and attention of the hearers, to prostitute the esteem and
authority of that sacred ordinance. Nic. Hemming De pasiore.


Let such rash persons consider, Qualis sit res ovile Christi, quam pulchra and
Deo grata fit ovium Christi societ as, in cujus medio Dominus ille est, cui sol
and luna famulantur, cui adsunt ministri ejus millia millium and decies centena
millia; Quantae molis est regnum Christi erigere, and Satanae palatia demoliri,
etc.

But now because amongst those helps of invention which fall under the rules of
Art, this of Reading is one of the principal, therefore it will deserve a more
large and particular consideration.

There are two things which in our reading and study may be of great advantage.
1. Good Books. 2. A right Method and series of matter to be first and most
exactly inquired into.

There is no external help more effectual to direct a man unto pertinent
useful matter, upon all subjects and occasions, then a weli contrived Library,
whe^ein upon any emergent doubt or difficulty, he may have recourse unto the
advice of other grave and learned men, who (it may be) have bestowed a great
part of their time and study, in the resolution of that particular business
which he has occasion to inquire into.

There are many men whose natural parts would extremely improve and grow very
eminent, if they had but the knowledge and help of such Authors, as are most
suitable to their genius and employment, whereas on the other side their
abilities are much damped and kept low, whilst they are confined only to a
scant ill chosen Library.

There is as much Art and benefit in the right choice of some Books with which
we should be most familiar, as there is in the election of other friends or
acquaintance with whom we may most profitably converse.

And this knowledge of Books; as it is in it self a very specious part of
learning, making oftentimes more pompous show then the knowledge of things, so
is it likewise of very great use and advantage. For the attaining of this, the
most proper effectual way is by our own study and experience in the works of
several Authors; But because that is a business of vast industry and much
time, scarce consistent with the frequent returns of public service required
of a constant Preacher, unless he be beforehand qualified for this, by his
education and leisure at the University; therefore there is another help to
expedite our enquiry in this kind, namely, the perusal of such Books as do
give a particular account of all Authors, the times when they lived, the Works
they have published, with the several subjects they have insisted upon; Their
Editions, Translations, corruptions, their esteem and authority; of which kind
there are several Writers, both Protestants and Papists. Such are these
Discourses:

Pauli Bolduani Bibliotheca Theologica. Georg. Draudii Bibliotheca Classica,
Eufebius de scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis. Gesneri Biblioth. cum Simleri
supplemento. Hieronymus de Scriptoribus Ecclesiast. Fabiani Iustiniani Index
Universalis. Johan. Molani Biblioth. Materiarum. Photii Biblioth. Possevini
Apparatus sacri. Sexti Senensis Biblioth Trithemius de Scriptoribus
Ecclesiasticis. Dav. Tossani Synopsis de patribus. Gilberti Voetii Biblioth.
Theolog.
Amongst whom there are some that go by an Alphabeticall order of the Authors
names, as Photius, Sextus Senensis, Possevine, etc. Others observe an
Alphabeticall order in setting down the several matters and subjects they
insist upon, as Bolduanus, Draudius, Gesner, Iustinianus, etc. So that if a man
would know either what subject any particular Authors have treated upon, or
what Authors have treated particularly upon any subject, he may in them see
references to this purpose.

These are esteemed the most advantageous helps for the understanding of Books
in general: but more particularly the Authors which are most proper and
useful for the study of a Divine, are reducible to these three heads.

Those which concern the study either of Scripture. The Body of Divinity.
Antiquity.

The understanding of Scripture being one of the chief businesses of a Minister
to which all his other studies are subordinate;

It Is to be supposed therefore in the first place that he is provided with the
Old and New Testaments, both in their originals and most authentic
Translations.

The chief Translations of the Bible may be distinguished into those which are
either in Translations of the Bible.
the Learned Language. Vulgar

The Translations of the Old Testament into the Learned languages, are chiefly
of five heads.

1. Into Chalde, commonly called the Targum or Chalde paraphrase, which in the
Historical Books do, for the most part render the true sense of the Original;
but in the Hagiographa is exceeding full of mistakes, and do seldom come near
the right meaning.

2. Into Greek, the chief of which is the Septuagint by the 72 Interpreters,
(as the Tradition goes) which has been always esteemed ofgreat authority and
repute.

The other great Translations by Aquila, Symmachus and Theodosio, are now lost,
excepting only some few fragments of them which yet remain.

3. Into Arabic, This Translation has been formerly published only for some
parts of the Bible as the Pentateucb, Psalms, and is by some learned men
rejected as being ignorantly done, not from the Original, but out of some
other Translation and by some corrupt copy. It has since been published for
the whole Bible in the King of France his late edition.

4. Into Syriake. This has been esteemed for genuine and faithful.

5. Into Latin, of which version there are several kinds, but the chief of
them are these five.

1. The Vulgar commonly ascribed to St. Hierom, though there be great reason to
doubt ofit.

2. Pagnines Translation, which is of good antiquity and esteem, published Anno
Dom. 1523. Altered by Arias Montanus in the Interlineary Bible.

3. The Tigurine Translation, begun by Leo Judah, and finished by other reformed
Divines, Munsters.
Anno Dom. 1543. published by Robert Stephens, 1557. with Notes annexed which
he ascribes to Vatablus.

4. The Translation of Sebastian Castalio, which is for the most part very
elaborate and subtle, but not without too much affectation of Elegance,
published first Anno Dom. 1551.

5. The Latin Version which is in most common use amongst us, being performed
by those learned men, Fran. Iunius, and Eman. Tremelius, with very great
diligence and judgment.

The Translation of the New Testament into the learned languages, are either
into Syriack. Latin.


1. The Syriack is of good antiquity and esteem, but was heretofore defective
in some Books, namely the 2d. and 3d. Epistle of John, the 2d. of Peter, Jude
and the Apocalypse, which have been lately supplied by Mr. Pocock.

2. The Latin Translations, are chiefly of three kinds, namely. 1. The Vulgar.
2. Erasmus. 3. Beza, which are all commonly known, and in their several kinds
of good repute.

Now for the translations of the Bible into our own vulgar tongue, there are
some of these so ancient as Henry the 8th his time, by Mr. Tindall and
Matthewes; but these Translations were not so much from the Original Hebrew
and Greek, as from some other Latin Version, and therefore are not esteemed of
any great authority.

The English Translations that have been of most common use and greatest
repute, are these three.

1. The Geneva Translation, so styled because it was finished in that place by
some English exiles in Queen Mary's time, being first published, Anno Dom. 1560.

2. The Bishops Bible in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign, by
Archbishop Parker and others, which because it was not so exact and carefully
done, too often following the Greek rather then the Hebrew, and so liable to
diverse mistakes, (as may appear in the reading Psalms of the Leiturgie,)
therefore King James caused another most exact Translation to be made of it in
his time, which is by way of distinction called

3. The Kings Bible, being that which is now in common use amongst us.

The Various editions of the Bible in the learned Editions of the Bible.
languages, have been so multiplied, that it is not easy (if possible) to
recite them. Amongst those that are esteemed either of greatest Antiquity,
Elegance, or Correctednesse, I still mention some of the chief.

1. The Hebrew with other Translations annexed Hebrew with Translations.
is of several kinds and editions.

The Complutensian in Spain containing the Hebrew, Greek, Latin, together
with the Targum upon the Pentateuch, in six Tomes fol. Anno Dom. 1515.

Munsters edition with his Latin Version, and some Notes out of the Rabines,
Printed at Basil. Anno Dom. 1534.

The King of Spaines Bible, Printed at Antwerp, 1571. in 8. Tomes fol.
Containing the Hebrew Text, the Septuagint, the Chalde Paraphrase and Vulgar,
with a Latin Translation of the 70 and Targum. And for the New Testament, the
Original Greek, the Vulgar and Syriack Versions,, together with a Latin
Translation of the Syriack by Guido Boderianus. Besides an Interlineary Bible
and a large Apparatus. All very elegantly and correctedly Printed.

Vatablus his edition in 3 vol. fol. 1586. containing the Hebrew, the
Septuagint and Latin.

The King of France his Bible, lately printed at Paris, containing all that is
in the King of Spains edition, excepting only the Interlineary Bible and the
Apparatus, and having further added The Samaritan Pentateuch and a Translation
of it, a Syriack Translation of the Old Testament, and an Arabic Translation
of the whole Bible, with Latin Translations to each of them. A very pompous
magnificent work, had the Corrector bestowed as much diligence and skill, as
the Publishers did cost.

2. The edition of the Hebrew Text without Hebrew alone.
Translations, are likewise of diverse kinds.

By Plantine with much truth and exactness both in fol. 4o -- 8o -- with and
without points at several times.

By Robert Stephens at Paris in 4o in a very fair large Character, and after
very elegantly and most correctedly in 16o.

By Hutter in a fair elegant Character, which distinguishes the radical and
servile, the deficient and quiescent letters. Hamburgh. 1587.

By Buxtorfe, with large Rabinicall Notes and Comments. Anno Dom. 1618.

3. The Septuagint distinct from the Original Text, is printed at Rome, and
after, both at Frankford Septuagint.
and Paris with a Latin Translation, and the fragments of the old Greek
Interpreters, Aquila Symmacus and Theodosio, which fragments may likewise be
had distinct in Drusius his fragmenta Veterum, augmented with several other
explications and Annotations of his own.

4. The New Testament for the chief edition of it has been mentioned before,
besides which New Testa.
there are very many others that are commonly known.

Next to these there are some other Discourses that in their several kinds may
be very useful. Amongst these some are 1. Preparatory. 2. Principal and more
direct.


1. Those may be styled Preparatory, which lay down rules and directions for
the profitable reading, and right interpretation of Scripture; such as these.

Ferdin. de Escalante, Clypeus Concionatorum. Wolfang. Franzius de Interp. S.
Script. Salom. Glassii Philologia sacra. And. Hyperius de S. Script. Lectione.
Flacii Illyrici Clavis Scripturae, pars secunda. Jo. Eusebius. Nierembergius de
origin Scripturae. And. Rivet. Isagoge. Nicol. Serrarii Prolegom. Biblica.
Ludov. de Tena Isagoge. Michaelis Waltheri officina Biblica.
2. The Books that do more principally and directly tend to make a man a good
Textuary, may be reckoned up under these three heads: 1. Concordances. 2.
Commentaries. 3. Reconcilers.


1. Concordances are of very great use, both for the unfolding of difficult
Texts, by referring to parallel Scriptures, and to enlarge upon any Theme with
the most proper quotations, as also for the directing of us unto such Texts of
which we have only some confused imperfect remembrance.

These are of two kinds, for Words. Things.

Concordances for words are those which reckon up the several places wherein
such a word is mentioned.

These are either for the Original Old Testam. Hebrew. Buxtorfius. Chaldee, in
some places of Dan. and Isa. Martin. Trostius:
N. Testam. in Greek. Hen. Stephanus. Lucii Lexicon. N. T.

Translations Old Testament into Greek by the Septuagint. Conrad. Kircherus. N.
Testam. into Syriack. Mart. Trostius. Both into Latin. Hen, Stephanus.
English. Cotton. Newman.




A Concordance of things does sum up all the pertinent Scriptures unto any
particular head or common place, which drive at the same sense, though it may
be of different words. Some of these are in Latin, as, Allotti Thesaurus.
Berchorii index moralis. Pet. Eulardi Concordantiae morales. Marlorati
Thesaurus. Enchridion.
Dan. Tossani Index. Georgii Viti Doctrinale Bibliorum.


There are some others of this kind in our English Tongue: Mr. Bernards
Thesaurus Biblicus. The Fort-Royall of the Scriptures. Clarks Holy Oil.
Wilsons Dictionary.


Unto these may be added those Treatises that handle the several acceptions of
words and phrases in Scripture: as Flacii Illyrici Clavis Scripturae. Mr.
Leigh's Critica Sacra. Petri Ravanelli Bibliotheca sacra.


Commentators are either upon some particular Matter. Books.

Those I style Commentators upon matter who do insist upon the explaning of
some peculiar subject, dispersedly contained in the several parts of
Scripture. Such are those that handle,

Scripture Philosophy, as,
Valesius de sacra Philosophia. Levinus Lemnius de Plantis sacris. Franc. Rueus
de Gemmis sacris. Wolf. Franzius Hist. Animalium Sacr. Joan. Bustamantinus de
Animalibus S. Scripturae.
Scripture Chronology, as,
Hen. Alstedii Chronologia sacra. Hugh Broughtons Consent. Laur. Codomanni
Annals S. Scripturae. Mr. Lightfoot, his Harmony. Sr. Walter Raleighs History.
Jac. Saliani Annals, a Creatione ad Christum. Jos. Scaliger de Emendatione
Temporum.
Scripture Geography, or Topography, as,
Jo. Adamannus de situ terrae sanctae. * Christ. Adricomii Theatrum terrae
sanctae. David Chytraei, Itinerarium totius S. Scrip. Chronic. Mr. Fuller, Holy
Land. The Travels of the Patriarchs.
Scripture Measures and Weights, as,
Boizardus. Dav. Chytraeus. Rob. Cenalis. Pet. Ciaconius. Epiphanius. Hulsius.
Johan. Mariana. Occho.
The Proverbiall expressions either used or alluded to in Scripture, or
Adagialia Sacra. as,
Martin Delrius. Johan. Drusius. Andreas Schottus. Joach. Zehner.
The Allegories in Scripture,
Isidor. Hispalensis de Alleg. Hieron. Laureti Silva Alleg. totius Scripturae*
Ottomarus Luscinius. Roberti Holcot Alleg. utriusque Testamenti.
The Schemes and Tropes used in Scripture.
Beda. Cassiodorus. Flacius Illyricus, in part secunda. Barthol. Westhemeri
Tropi insigniores ex utroque Testamento.
There might be diverse other the like subjects instanced in, but these are some
of the chief: Now in all difficulties that refer to any of these heads, a man
may expect more full satisfaction from those Authors that purposely insist upon
them, then from others who do more promiscuously comment at large.

Commentators upon the Books of Scripture are very numerous, and of various
kinds: I shall mention only some of those whose names are most common and most
eminent.

Upon the whole Bible.
* ENglish Annotat. Hugo Cardinalis. * Deodate Annot. * Hugo Grotius. Io. de la
Hay. Nicol. Lyranus. Mariana. Steph. Menochius. See many other Commentators
mentioned in Possevin, Draudius, Schottus. Besodnerus, The Oxford Catalogue.
* Pareus. Conrad. Pellicanus. Pisc^tor. Eman. Sa. Jacob. Tir^nus.
On the Pentateuch.
Hen. Alstedius. Benedict. Aretius. * Henry Ainsworth. Iac. Bonfrerius. Io.
Brentius. Tho. de Vio Cajetanus. * Johan. Calvinus. Seraph. Cappo a Porrecta.
Catena Veterum. David Chytraeus. Joh. Drusius. * Paulus Fagius. Ferus.
Gregorius Magnus. Arth. Jackson. Cornel. a Lapide. Oleaster. Fab. Paulutius,
Piscatoris Questiones. * August. Steuchus Eugubinus. * Theodoret. * Tostatus.
On Genesis.
Tho. Aquinas. Augustinus. Jo. Chrysostom. Cyrillus Alexan. Mart. Delrio.
Benedict. Fernandez. Ioh. Gerhardus. Io. de la Hay. D. Hieronymus. Mart.
Lutherus. Aug. Marlorat. * Pet. Martyr. Wolf. Musculus. Ioh. Mercerus. Marinus
Mersenius. Origenes. David Pareus. Ben. Pererius. * And. Rivet. Victorin.
Strigelius. * An. Willet. Lod. Ystella. Hulder. Zuinglius.
Upon Exodus.
Jo. de la Hay. Iansenius in 15. prior cap. Arth. Lake in cap. 19. * Lorinus.
Christoph. Pelargus. Balthazar Paez. in 15. p. cap. Benedict. Pererius. in 15.
p. cap. * And Rivet. * An. Willet. Hulder. Zuinglius.
On Leviticus.
Cyrillus Alexand. * Jo. Lorinus. Origenes. Christoph. Pelargus. Pet. Serranus.
* An. Willet.
On Numbers.
Guil. Attersoll. Francis. Iunius. * Johan. Lorinus. Origenes. Christ.
Pelargus.
On Deuteronomy.
* Io. Lorinus. Mart. Luther. Christoph. Pelargus. August. de Quiros. * Jo.
Wolfius.
On Josuah.
Augustinus. Bonfrerius. Brentius. Cajetanus. * Calvinus. Carthusianus.
Chytraeus. Drusius. Jo. Ferus. Arth. Jackson. Lavaterus. Corn. a Lapide. Jo.
Mayer. * And. Masius. Cosm. Magalian^s. Arias Montanus. Origenes. * Nicol.
Serrarius. Rupertus. * Theodoret. * Tostatus. Hugo de S. Victore. * Io.
Wolfius.
On Judges.
Augustinus. Iac. Bonfrerius. Io. Brentius. Mart. Bucer. Tho. de Vio.
Caietanus. Chytraeus. Io. Drusius. Io. ^erus. Corn. a Lapide. Ludo. Lavater.
Jo. Mayer. * Pet. Martyr. A^ias Montanus. Cosma. Magalianus. Pellicanus. Rich.
Rogers. Nic. Serrarius. * Theodoret. * Tostatus. Hugo de S. Victore.
On Ruth.
Gab. Acosta. Ven. Beda. Iac. Bonfrerius. Io. Brentius. Tho. a Vio Caietanus.
Chytraeus. Ioh Dr^sius. Lud. Lavater. Corn. a Lapide. Jo. Mayer. Pellicanus. *
Gasp. Sanctius. Nic. Serrarius. Topshell. * Tostatus. * Theodoret. Hugo de S.
Victore.
On Samuel.
Io. Brentius. Tho. de Vio Caietanus. * Io. Calvinus. Dion. Carthusianus. Ioh.
Drusius. Hieronym^s. Corn. a Lapide. * Pet. Martyr. Mendoza. Jo. Mayer.
Origenes. Pellicanus. Nic. Serrarius. * Gasp. Sanctius. Victor. Strigelius. *
Theodoret. * Tostatus. Hugo de S. Victore. * An. Willet.
On the Kings.
Io. Brentius. Cajetanus. Carthusianus. Io. Drusius. Corn. a Lapide. * Pet.
Martyr. Jo. Mayer. Origenes. Pellicanus. Nic. Serrarius. * Gasp. Sanctius.
Victor. Strigelius. * Theodoret. * Tostatus. Hugo de S. Victore.
On the Chronicles.
Caietanus. Carthusianus. Hieronymus. Corn. a Lapide. Lud. Lavater. Jo. Mayer.
Nic. Serrarius. * Gasp. Sanctius. * Theodoret. * Tostatus.
On Ezra.
Ven. Beda. Io. Brentius. Cajetanus. Lavaterus. Corn. a Lapide. Jo. Mayer. *
Gasp. Sanctius. Hugo de S. Victore.
On Nehemiah.
Beda. Brentius. Cajetanus. Ferus. a Lapide. Lavaterus. Jo. Mayer. Mr
Pilkinton. Nic. Serrarius.
On Esther.
Brentius. Caietanus. Drusius. Io. Fevardentius. Lavaterus. Corn. a Lapide. Jo.
Mayer. Pet. Merlinus. Raba^^s Maurus. Nic. Serrarius. * Gasp. Sanctius.
On Job.
Ambrosius. Tho. Aquinas. Augustinus. Beda Ioh. Bolducus. Io. Brentius. * Ioh.
Calvinus. * Jos. Caryl. Catena 24. Graec. Doct. Io. Cocceus. Balth. Corderius.
Ioh. Drusius. Io. Ferus. Gregorius Mag. Lud. Lavaterus. * Io. Mercerus. Pet.
Merlinus. Origenes. * Io. de Pineda. * Aug. Steuchus Eugubinus. * Gasp.
Sanctius.
On the P^almes.
Ant. Angelius. Hen. Ainsworth. Alex. de Ales. Amesius. Tho. Aquinas.
Augustinus. Beda. Bellarminus. Fred. Baldvinus. Bonaventura. Bucerus.
Cajetanus. * Calvinus. Carthusianus. Catena Graec. Doct. Euthymius. Eusebius
Caesariensis. * Io. Foord. Gilb. Genebrardus. Gregorius M. Gregorius Nissenus.
Hieronymus. Corn. Iansenius. Pet. Lombardus. * Io. Lorinus. * Mollerus. *
Marloratus. Ar. Montanus. * Wolf. Musculus. * Muis. Rob. Rollocus. Abra.
Scultetus. Theodoretus. Viccars.
On the Proverbs.
To. Baynus. Ven. Beda. Cajetanus. * Tho. Cartwright. Jo. Dod. Hieronymus. Rob.
Holcot. Iansenius. Jermin. A Lapide. Lud. Lavater. Luther. Melacton. * Io.
Mercerus. * Salazar.
On Ecclesiastes.
Beda. Bonaventura. Io. Brentius. Hugh Broughton. * Tho. Cartwright. Cajetanus.
Io. Ferus. Tho. Granger. Hieronymus. Iansenius. Lavaterus. Lorinus. Lutherus. *
Mercerus. Melancton. * Will. Pemble. Io. de Pineda. Fra. Sanchez. Serrarius.
Tolle^arius. Hugo de S. Victore.
On the Canticles.
Hen. Ainsworth. Hen. Alsted. Anselmus. Tho. Aquinas. Pet. Arboreus. Beda.
Bernardus. Tho. Brightman. Carthusianus. Catena Grae. Patrum, Jo. Cotton.
Foliot. Mart. Delrius. * Mich. Ghisler. Gregorius M. Gregorius Nissen.
Hieronymus. Lutherus. Io. Mercerus. Origenes. De Ponte. * Gasp. Sanctius.
Paulus Sherlogus. * Theodoretus.
On Isaiah.
Tho. Aquinas. Did. Alvarez. Beda. Io. Brentius. Hen. Bullingerus, Cajetanus. *
Calvinus. Cyrillus Alex. Eusebius. Caesari. * Fran. Forerius. Hieronymus. Cor. a
Lapide. Lutherus. * Marloratus. Hen. Mollerus. * Wolf. Musculus. Mich. de
Palatio. Hect. Pintus. August. de Quiros. * Gasp. Sanctius. Abra. Scultetus.
On Jeremiah.
Tho. Aquinas. Io. Brentius. * Io. Calvinus. A Castro. * Pet. a Figueiro. *
Mich. Ghislerius. Hieronymus. A Lapide. Maldonatus. Origenes, * Sanctius. *
Theodoretus.
On the Lamentations of Jeremiah.
Gab. Acosta. Tho. Aquinas. Bonaventura. Broughton. * Io. Calvinus. Mart,
Delrius. Ferus. * Pet. a Figueiro. Hieronymus. Cor. a Lapide. Io. Maldonatus. *
Pet. Martyr. Melancton. Origenes. Hector Pintus. * Gasp. Sanctius. * Theodoret.
* Dan. Tossanus. John Udall. Hugo de S. Victore. Hulder. Zuinglius.
On Ezekiel.
* Calvinus. Carthasianus. Georgius Mag. Hieronymus. Iunius. A Lapide.
Lavaterus. Maldonatus. Origenes. Hector Pintus. * Amand, Polanus. Pellicanus. *
Gasp. Sanctius. Pet. Serranus. * Theodoretus. * Villalpandus. Steph, Zegedinus.
On Daniel.
Hen. Alsted. Tho. Aquinas. Broughton. Bullingerus. * Calvinus. Carthusianus.
Hieronymus. Fran. Iunius. Cor. a Lapide. Lutherus. Maldonatus. Melancton. *
Parker. Ben. Pererius. Hect. Pintus. Amand. Polanus. Rollocus. * Sanctius. *
Theodoretus. Io. Wingandus. * An. Willet.
On the 12 minor Prophets.
Beda. * Calvinus. Carthusianus. Cyrillus Alex. Drusius. Steph. Fabritius. Pet.
a Figueiro, Hieronymus. Hemmingius. Cor. a Lapide. Arias Montanus. Fran.
Rivera. * Gasp. Sanctius. * Io. Tarnovius. * Theodoretus.
On Hosea.
Io. Brentius. Hiero. Guadalupensis. Lutherus. * Io. Mercerus. Hen. Mollerus.
Da. Pareus. Am. Polanus. * And. Rivet. Imman. Tremelius. Theophylactus. *
Hieron. Zanchius.
On Joel.
Johan. Faber. Lutherus. * Mercerus. Pareus. Hugo de S. Victore.
On Amos.
Io. Brentius. Lutherus. * Io. Mercerus. Pareus. Mat. Quadratus. Ruffinus.
On Obadiah.
Mar. Lutherus. * Mercerus. Edw. Marbury. * Io. Rainoldus. Hugo de S. Victore.
On Jonah.
* BP. Abbot. Gab. Acosta. Pet. Baro. Io. Brentius. Jo. Fevardentius, Fran.
Iunius. * BP. King. Lutherus. * Jo. Mercerus. Jo. Treminius. Theophylactus.
On Micah.
Io. Brentius. * Da. Chytraeus. Lutherus.
On Nahum.
* Da. Chytraeus. * Ludo. Crocius. Lutherus. Hector Pintus. Theophylactus. Io.
Winkelmannus.
On Habakkuk.
* Chytraeus. Lutherus. Theophylactus. Winkelmannus.
On Zephaniah.
* Martin. Bucerus. Lutherus. Io. Winkelmannus.
On Haggai.
Frid. Baldvinus. Jo. Ecchius. Phil. Melancton. David Pareus. Winkelmannus.
On Zechariah.
Frid. Baldvinus. * Da. Chytraeus. Lutherus. Phil, Melancton. * Will. Pemble.
Jo. de Reyroles. Balth. Willius.
On Malachi.
Gab. Acosta. Frid. Baldvinus. Da. Chytraeus. Io. Martinus. Melancton. Hen.
Mollerus. Amand. Polanus. Aug. de Quiros. Will. Sclater. * Rich. Stock.
Winkelmannus. Balth, Willius.
Upon the New Testament.
Ben. Aretius. * Theod. Beza. * Tho. Cartwright. Carthusianus. Drusius Annot. *
Erasmus. Fulk. Gregorius M. * Heinsius. Fla. Illyricus. Cor. a Lapide.
Marloratus. Zach. Muthesius. Alph. Salmeron. Dan. Tossanus.
Upon the 4 Gospels.
Tho. Aquinas, Ben. Aretius. Augustinus. Sebast. Barradius. Io. Brentius. *
Luc. Brugensis. Mart. Bucerus. Cajetanus. * Calvinus. * Cartwright. *
Chemnitius. Catena Au^ea. Ad. Contzen. Lud. de Deiu. Io. Gerson. Nic. Go ranus.
Hie^onymus. * Cor. Iansenius. Maldonatus. Jo. Mayer. Arias Montanus. Aloysins
Novarinus. Guido de Perpiniano. Rupertus. Alphon. Salmeron. Scultetus.
Theophylactus. Dan. Tossanus. Jo. Trap. Hugo de S. Victo^e.
On Matthew.
Anselmus. Aquinas. Alphon. Avendanus. Augustinus. * Ferus. Rod. Gualtherus.
Cl^ud. Guilliaudus. Hieronymus. Hilarious. Phil. Melancton. Melo. * Musculus.
Aloys. Novarinus. Origenes. Pareus. A Ponte. Rob. Stephanus. Sibelius. Dan
Tossanus. * Tostatus. Ward.
On Mark.
Albertus M. Beda. Lamb. Daneus. Io. Ge^son. Angel del Pas. Rob. Stephanus. Io.
Winkelmannus. Vitale Zuccolo.
On Luke.
Ambrose Beda. Bonaventura. Catena Graec. Pat. Isid. Cla^us. Hier.
Guadalupensis. Gas. Melo. Origenes. Rob. Stephanus. * Did. Stella. * Fran.
Tollet. Vit. Zuccolo.
On John.
Aquinas. Bonaventure. Catena Gr. Patrum. Chrysostomus. Cyrillus Alex.
Hemingius. * Io. Ferus. Lutherus. Melancton. * Musculus. Origenes. Hieron.
Osorius: Michael de Palatio. Ben. Pererius. Chr. Pelargus. Ribera. * Rob.
Rollocus. * Fran. Tollet. Paul. Tarnovius.
On the Acts.
Dan. Arcularius. Beda. Brentius. Bullingerus. Cajetanus. * Calvinus. Catena
Vet. Pat. Chrysostomus. Ioach. Camerarius. Lud. de Dieu. * Io. Ferus. Gregorius
M. Rod. Gualtherus. * Nic. Gorranus. Co^. a Lapide. * Lorinus. Malcolm. Jo.
Mayer. Alos. Novarinus. Oecumenius. Alph. Salmeron. Tho. Stapleton.
Theophylactus. Dan. Tossanus. Joh. Trap.
Upon the Epistles.
Ambrosius. Anselmus. Aquinas. Beda. Bullingerus. Cajetanus. * Calvinus.
Chrysostomus. * Dav. Dickson. * Guil. Estius. Nic. Gorranus. Rod. Gualtherus.
Ben. Iustinianus. And. Hyperius. * Cor. a Lapide. Pet. Lumbardus. Jo. Mayer. *
Musculus. Oecumenius. Beat. Remigius. * Theodoretus. Theophylactus. Dan.
Tossanus. Joh. Trap. Hugo de S. Victore. Conrad. Vorstius.
On the Epistle to the Romans.
Augustinus. Frid. Baldvinus. Io. Brentius. Mart. Bucerus. Adam. Contzen. Lud
de Dieu. * Io. Ferus. Marcil. Ficinus. Ioh. Gerhardus. Gomarus. * Pet. Martyr.
Phil. Melancton. * Wolf. Musculus. Origenes * Da. Pareus. Elnath. Parr. Ben.
Pererius. Rob. Rollocus. Ab. Scultetus. Dominic. Soto. Stapleton. * Fran.
Tollet. And. Willet. Wilson.
On the Epistles to the Corinthians.
Frid. Baldvinus. * Pet. Mart. in Prim. Phil. Melancton. * Wolf. Musculus. Tho.
Morton in Prim. * Dav. Pareus. Gul. Sclater. Tho. Stapleton. Geor. Wenrichius.
To the Galatians.
Augustinus. Frid. Baldvinus. Io. Brentius. Lutherus. * Musculus. * Da. Pareus.
* Will. Perkins. Rob. Rollocus. Adam Sasbout. Io. Wigandus. Io. Winkelman.
To the Ephesians.
* Paul Bain. Frid. Baldvinus. Mart. Bucerus. * Lud. Crocius. Lubinus. *
M^sculus. Aug. de Quiros. Rob. Rollocus. Adam Sasbout. Ab. Scultetus. * Hieron.
Zanchius. Geor. Wenrichius.
To the Philippians.
Hen. Airay. Frid. Baldvinus. Io. Brentius. * Gomarus. Lubinus. * Musculus. Ad.
Sasbout. Scholanus. Io. Au. Velasquez. * Hieron. Zanchius.
To the Colossians.
Frid. Baldvinus. * Nic. Bifeild. Tho. Cartwright. * Io. Davenant. Ed. Elton.
Melancton. * Musculus. de Quiros. Rollocus. Sasbout. * Hieron. Zanchius.
To the Thessalonians.
* Io. Gomarus. Io. Jewel in Prim. * Musculus. Rollocus. * Will. Sclater. Pet.
Steuartius. * Zanchius. Zuinglius.
To Timothy.
Alex. Ales. Frid. Baldvinus. Lamb. Danaeus. * Claud. Espencaeus. Ant. Fayus.
Io. Gerhardus. Cosma Magalianus. Melancton. * Musculus. Ad. Sasbout. * Ab.
Scultetus. Lud. Soro. Major.
To Titus.
Alex. Ales^^s. * Lud. Crocius. * Claud. Espenc^us. Cos. Magalianus. Ad.
Sasbou^. * Ab. Scultetus. Lud. Soto-Majo^. * Tho. Tailor.
To Philemon.
* Attersol. Brentius. Danaeus. * Dan. Dyke. Fra^. Fevardenti^^^ * Gomarus.
Phil. Pareus. Ab. Scultetus.
On the Hebrews.
* Da. Dickson. Io. Gerardus. * Gomarus. * An. Hyperius. Polyc. Lyserus. David
Pareus. Mic. de Palatio^ Fran. Ribera. Sasbout. Scultetus. * Ludov. de Tena^
On the 7 Canonical Epistles.
Hen. Alsted. * Tho. Aquinas. Beda. Bullingerus. Cajetanus. * Calvinus. *
Estius. Faber. Stap. Nic. Goran. Rod. Gualther. Nic. Hemmingius. Corn. a
Lapide. Salmeron. Dan. Tossanus. Mat. Turnemannus.
On the Epistle of James.
* Brochman. Didac. Daza. Fran. Fevardentius. * Ia. Laurentius. Lorinus. * Jo.
Mayer. Dav. Pareus. Balt. Paez. Aug. de Quiros.
On the Epistles of Peter.
* Amesius. Tho. Adams. in Ep. 2. * Nic. Bifeild. Clemens. Alex. Io. Gerardus.
* Gomarus. * Iac. Laurentius. Lutherus. Dav. Pareus. Scholanus. Io. Winkelman.
Turnemannus.
On the first Epistle of John.
Augustinus. Clemens Alex. * Lamb. Danaeus. * Io. Ferus. * Io. Lorinus.
Turnemannus. * Zanchius.
On the second Epistle.
Clem. Alexand. * Danaeus. Io. Iac. Grynaeus. * Io. Lorinus. Ed. Pocock.
On the third Epistle.
* Lamb. Danaeus. * Io. Lorinus. Ed. Pocock.
On the Epistle of Jude.
Iac. Bolduc. Clemens Alex. * Danaeus. Fevardentius. Hyperius. Fran. Iuniu^. *
Lorinus. Lutherus. Sam. Oats. * Will. Perkins. Aug. de Quiros. Phil. Pareus.
Sasbout. * Sibelius.
On the Revelation.
Alabaster. Albe^tus. M. Alcazar. Alsted. Anselmus. Augustinus. Beda. *
Brightman. Ioach. Camerarius. Dav. Chytreus. Will. Cowper. Dent. Lud. de Dieu.
Forbes. Ioh. Gerhardus. Gorranus. Io de la Hay. A Lapide. Laurentius. Casp.
Melo. * Mede. Napier. Perkins in 3. pr. cap. Ribera. Tossanus. Viegas.
Amongst all these Commentators, it would be too great presumption, for any
private man to compare them, or say which is best; Since there is scarce any
one so well acquainted with all of them, as to be able to pass such a censure.
And besides, amongst those that are commonly known, there are but few that
agree in the same judgment, one preferring this, and another that. And
therefore it will be safest to give only some general character of them.

Some of the Interpreters are more especially eminent for their authority, and
antiquity, as the Comments of the Fathers; Ambrose, Augustine, Bernard,
Chrysosto^e, Cyril Alex. Eusebius, Gregary the great, Gregory Nissen, Hierom,
Hilary, Origin, Theodoret, Theophylact.

Amongst the later writers, some are eminent for their Orthodox sound
judgments, proper and useful matter. So the Protestant Commentators in
general: as Alsted, Baldvin, Brentius, Bucer, Bullinger, Calvin, Chemnitius,
Danaeus, Drusius, Gerard, Hyperius, Iunius, Lavater, Luther, P. Martyr,
Melancton, Mercer, Moller, Musculus, P^reus, Piscator, Rivet, Rolloc, Scultet
Tarnov. Zanchy, etc.

More especially our English Divines, whose abilities and genius's (when they
apply themselves this way) do for the most part raise them up above the common
pitch of other Writers. As may appear in the works of Ainsworth, Ames, Baine,
Byfeild, Brightman, Cartwright, Davenant, Mayer, Perkins, Sclater, Willet, etc.

Amongst the Popish Interpreters, some are more eminent for their subtilty and
rational learning in the explaining of Scripture; such were generally those
Schoolmen who have undertaken to comment upon it, as Albert^s M. Alexand. de
Ales, Aquinas, Bonaventure, Cajetan, Carthusian, Daza, Estius, Mich-d^ Palatio,
Dominic. Soto, etc.

Others amongst them are eminent for solid pious matter, in practical things
and points not controverted, as Ferus, Iansenius, Brugensis.

Others of them are useful for their various collections, and observations out
of former Writers, as many late Jesuits and others, as Gorran, a Lapide,
Lorinus, Maldonat, Masius, Mendoz^, Pererius, Pineda, Ribera, Saimeron, Sanct.
Serrarins, Tolet, etc.

Besides these Commentators upon the several ^ooks, there are others that have
commented upon particular parcels and texts of Scripture. Of which kind the
Homilies of the ancient Fathers are the first and most eminent, as those of
Augustine, Bernard, Chrysostom, Chrysologus, Gregory, etc.

As for the common Postillers they are for the most part rejected by our
gravest most judicious Divines, as being generally useless and empty. But
there are some amongst them of better esteem, as Protestants. Papists. Dr.
Boys. Besseus. Dietericus. Coppe^stenius. Iac. Laurentius. Fonseca. Stumphius.
Gal. Inchino. Zepperus. Labata. Mussus.

To which may be added those discourses of this kind upon occasional subjects.
As,

Georg. Grossii Thesaurus concionum omnigenarum, nempe Catecheticarum,
Praeparatoriarum, Eucharisticarum, Nuptialium, Funebrium, Anniversariarum,
Paenalium, Auspicatoriarum, Valedictoriarum, etc.

Pontani Conciones funebres ex variis autoribus collectae.

Io. Noviomagi penu concionum tum nuptialium, tum funebrium.

Io. Geminiani Conciones funebres.

A collection of English Funeral Sermons, styled, (...).

It Is the common opinion that amongst all such kind of works, our English
Sermons and Treatises L. Verulams Advance of Learning.
are most elaborate and useful. It was the judgment of a very learned man, That
if the choice and best observations, which have been made dispersedly in our
English Sermons (leaving out the largeness of exhortations and applications
thereupon) had been set down in a continuance, it would be the best work in
Divinity that has been written since the Apostles times.

And certainly there is either some special em^nency in their writings, or else
there is some pecular genius in men of the same Country, which makes their
notions seem unto one another more proper and acceptable.

Amongst our English Divines, these are for Sermons and practical divinity some
of the most eminent: BP Andrews. Mr Attersoll. Mr Ball. Mr Bifeild. BP Bilson.
Mr Bolton. Mr Buroughs. Mr Caryll. BP Cooper. Mr Cotton. Mr Dod. BP, and Mr
Downham. Mr Dan: Dyke. Jerem: Dr Featly. Mr Gataker. MT Tho Goodwin. Dr Gouge.
Mr Greenham. BP Hall. Mr Harris. Mr Hieron. Mr Hooker. Dr Iackson. BP Lake. Mr
Mayer. BP Morton. Mr Pemble. Mr Perkins. Dr Preston. Dr Reinolds. Mr Rogers. Dr
Saunderson. Dr Sibbs. Mr Smith. Dr Tailor. BP Usher. Mr Whateley.


Thus much concerning the two first kinds of Books that tend to make a man a
good Textuary, namely Concordances and Commentators. The third sort that was
nominated is Reconcilers.

Those are called Reconcilers, which do purposely insist upon the unfolding and
reconciling of such Scriptures, as seem opposite to one another: of which kind
are,

Althameri Conciliatio locorum pugnanti^m. Alba in difficilioraloca.
Augustinus. Gerardi Bergomensis. Conciliatio. V. T. cum. N. Cameron. Cumerani
conciliatio loc. pug. Estius in difficiliora loca. lunii Parallela. Menasseh
Ben. Israel Conciliatio. Maimonides Doctor Perplexorum. Pelargi Quaestiones.
Scharpii Symphonia Prophetarum. Spanhemii dubia Evangelica. Mich. Waltheri
Harmonia totius Scripture.
In which Authors a man may justly expect to find the great difficulties of
Scripture more exactly discussed and unfolded then in other Commentators.

To these may be added ^uch Critical discourses as do make more particular
enquiry after those difficult Texts that are dispersed in several parts of
Scripture. Such are Arnoldi Bootii Annotationes Sacrae. Angeli Caninii
disquisitiones. Fulleri Miscellanea. Mr. Gregory's Observations upon some
passages of Scripture. Mr. Medes Diatribe.


These are the several kinds of Treatises that do more immediately tend to the
explaining of Scripture, and to make a man a good textuary.

2. There are some other very useful discourses, which treat of the body of
Divinity, and these are,

Either Pos^^ive, as, 1. Catechismes. Latin. English.
2. Common places Epitomes. More Large.
3. Casuists.
Polemicall. Schoolmen, upon the Sentences. Sums.
Particular Controversies about Discipline Episcopacy. Presbytery. Independency.
Doctrine with the Papists. Lutherans. Socinians. Arminians. Anabaptists.
Antinomians.





1. Catechismes are of very great variety and 1. Catechism.
of excellent use, even for the best Divines, to set before them the Analogy of
faith, by which all doctrines must be tried, and the most fundamental
principles of Religion, wherein they ought chiefly to instruct their hearers.
These are so generally known, that I shall need to mention but few of them: in
Latin there is, Amesius, and Ursinus. In English there is Mr Bals Catechism,
Mr. Bains Cathechisme, Mr. Cartwritghts Catechism, Mr. Crooks Guide, BP Ushers
Catechism, etc.

2. The usual Common places of Divinity are 2. Common places.
Systematically handled by these Authors,

Amesius. Alsted. Calvinus. Keckerman. Piscator. Tilenus. Trelcatius.
Wendelinus. Wollebius, etc.
They are more largely insisted upon in these following discourses.

Altingii Loc. Com. Aretii Problemata. Brochmannus. Chemnitii Loci communes.
Danaei Isagoge. Gerardi Loci Com. P. Martyris Loci Com. Musculi Loci Com.
Polani Syntagma. Wallaei Loci Com.
Besides these, there are other kind of Common places, wherein the matter is
Alphabetically disposed of under several heads, from which a man may be
supplied with the most common observations and notes upon any simple Theme. And
though these are by many men rejected as occasions of idleness, yet they may
be sometimes very useful, both for learned men to recall such notions of which
they retain only some confused remembrance: and for others also, who have not
leisure or reading suitable to their employment: of this kind amongst the
Protestants, there is Gruteri Polyanthea. Magiri Polymnemon. Zuinger Beyerlink


Amongst the Popish writers.

Labatae Apparatus. Langii Polyanthea Novissima. Busaei Viridarium. Peraldi
summa virtutum and vitiorum.
Besides these Treatises of positive divinity there are some other Writers that
are styled Mystical Divines, who pretend to some higher illuminations, and to
give rules for a more intimate and comfortable communion with God. And these of
late have been by some much cried up and followed. But they do in the opinion
of many sober and judicious men, deliver only a kind of Cabalisticall or
Chymicall, Rosicrucian Theology, darkning wisdom with words, heaping together
a farrago of obscure affected expressions and wild allegories, containing
little of substance in them but what is more plainly and intelligibly delivered
by others. Some of the chief amongst them are these,

De Avila. Blosius. Barbinson. Behem. Climachus. Hen. Harphius. Thom. a Jesus.
Barth. Riccius. Jo. Rusbrochius. Fran. Sales. Ioh. Thaule^us. Wigelius.
3. The study of Casuists may be very useful for a Preacher in respect of
practical divinity. Amongst them, these are some of the most eminent.

Hen. Alstedius. Guil Amesius. Ir. Azorius. Frid. Baldvinus Mart. Bona^ina.
Lud. Candidus. BP Hall. Diana P^normitana Vincent. Filliucius. Barth.
Keckerman. Will. Perkins. Raynerus de Pisis. Tho. Sanchez. Greg. Sayru^.
Silvester. Fran. Toll^^.
Unto these may be subjoyned those Authors which have treated particularly of
the Lords Prayer. Creed. Decalogue. Sacraments.
which are generally much of the same nature and use with the Casuists.

On the Lords Prayer.
BP Andrews. Aquinas. Babington. Bains. Calvinus. Cyprianus. Lam. Danaeus.
Dent. Dod. Gregor. Nyssen. Greenwood. Dr Gouge. Dr. Hen. King. Jo. Mayer.
Martinus. Will. Perkins. Alpb. Salmeron. Hier. Savanorolla. Hug. de S. Victore.
Lud. Vives.
On the Creed.
Tho. Adams. Hen. Alsted. Aquinas. Augustin^s. Babington. N. Bifeild. Calvinus.
Cyprianus. Danaeus. Dr. Jackson. Lutherus. Mayer. Martinus. Perkins. Del. Paz.
Zanchius.
On the Decalogue.
Hen. Alsted. BP. Andrews. Aquinas. Babington. Calvinus. Jo. Dod. Elton. Ioh.
Gerson. Lutberus. Jo. Mayer. Pet. Martyr. Martinus. Melancton. Musculus. Will.
Perkins. And. Rivet. Jo. Vossius. Hieron. Zanchius.
On the Sacraments.
Pet. de Alliaco. Ambrosius. Will. Attersol. Gerardus. Martinus. Guil.
Parisiensis. Greg. Sayrus. Guil. Snecanus. Paulus Tarnovius. Wilhel. Zipperus.
Besides the Authors of Common places, and the Schoolmen that comment on the
fourth book of the Sentences, who do largely treat upon this subject.

Amongst the Writers of Controversies, the Schoolmen are in the first place
considerable, who dispute over the whole body of Divinity in many nice and
subtle Questions. And though this kind of learning do not deserve so much of
our time and study, as they themselves bestowed upon it. A great part of it
being but as cobwebs, fine for the spinning, but useless. And he were an
unwise man who having bread and wine hanging on either side of him (the
wholesome nutriment of the Old and New Testament) would notwithstanding be
continually gnawing upon a flintstone: yet because they were men of acute
fancies and great searchers into the more abstruse and intricate parts of
Divinity, therefore they are not to be wholly neglected, but in many things may
be very useful.

Amongst these, the two chief are Lumbard. Aquinas.

Peter Lumbard is the first, who is therefore called the Master of the
Sentences, his Books being as the Text which are wholly Commented upon by Gul.
Altissiodorensis. Alex. de Ales. Tho. Aquinas. Gab. Biell. Dio Carthusianus.
Durand. Estius. Ockam. Bonaventura. Jo. Capreolus. Scotus.


The first book of the Sentences does treat of God, his Nature, Names,
Properties, etc. This is commented upon particularly by Pet. de Alliaco. Greg.
Areminensis


The second book of the Sentences does treat of the Creatures, Angels, Men,
Original sin, Free Will, etc. Upon which these are some of the most eminent
Commentators.

Marsilius Inguen. AEgidius Romanus. Archangelus Rubeus.
The third book does speak of Christ his Incarnation, Passion, Merits, of
Faith, Hope, Charity, and other graces; upon this there is Pet. de Alliaco. Io.
de Rada.


The fourth book does insist upon the Sacraments, Resurrection, Judgment, and
state after this life. Upon this there is Adrianus. Ricardus de Media villa.
Dom. ^ Soto.


As these books of Sentences, so the Sums of Aquinas are likewise made choice
of by the Schoolmen as another text upon which to enlarge themselves. These are
Commented upon by Rod. de Arriaga. Dominicu^ Bannez. Fran. Cumel. Tho. a vio
Cajetanus. Fran. de Lugo in primam partem. Did. Ruiz. Fran. Suarez. Greg. de
Valentia. Gab. Vasquez.


Particular Controversies about Discipline, are of three sorts; those that
concern 1. Episcopacy. 2. Presbytery. 3. Independency.


Concerning Episcopacy there are these Authors: Pro. Con. BP. Bancroft. Paul
Bayn. BP. Bilson. Cather wood his Altar Damascenum. Dr. Burges. BP. Downham.
Tho. Cartwright. Mason. Mr. Parker. BP. Whitgift. BP. Hall. SMECTYMNUUS. Dr.
Heylin. Walo-Messalinus, by Salmasius. Dr. Tailor.

Concerning Presbytery.

Pro. Con. Apollonius. The forecited Discourses that are for Episcopacy. Gersom
Buceri Amica Collatio cum Georg. Downham. Issachars Burden. The divine right of
Church Government, by the London Ministers. A Declaration concerning Church
government and Presbyteries. Mr. Bailies Vindication. Dr. Bramhill Warning
against the Scots discipline. Answer to Dr. Bramhill. Mr. Pagets defense of
Church Government Mr. Rutherford. Answer to the Reasons of the dissenting
Brethren. The Reasons of the dissenting Brethren. Salmasius de Apparatu ad
Primatum Papae. Saravia de gradibus ministrorum. Gellius Snecanus. Grallae ab
Anonymo. Mr. Gillis^y Assertion of government in Scotland. Matthew. Sutliv. de
Presbyterio.

The debate concerning Independency is but of late years, and has scarce been
treated of in any of the learned Languages. There are these Authors For it.
Against it. Amongst the Brownists, Ainsworth, Cann. Robbinson, in several parts
of their Writings. M. Ball, Trial of the grounds tending to separation.
Apollonius. Apologeticall Narration. Spanhemius. Vindiciae Clavium. Mr. Cottons
Keys of the Church. M. Edwards Reasons: Antapology. M. Baylies Disswasive. The
way of the Churches in N. England. Dt. Stewards Considerations. Duply. Mr. Ioh.
Goodwins answer to the Antapology. M. Hudson, concerning the essence and unity
of the Catholic Church. M. Mathers and M. Tomsons Answer to M. Hearl. M.
Hearl. The independency on Scriptures of the independency of Churches. M.
Wells, his Answer to M. Rathband. The 32 Questions. M. Rathbands relation of
Church courses in N. Eng.

Particular Controversies about Doctrine are very numerous and of several
kinds: The six before mentioned are in these times most common and general.

1. The Papists.
For them. Against them. Amesius. Becanus. Chamierus. Chemnitius. Bellarminus.
Morney. Pareus. Stapleton. Perkins. Rivetus. Grego. de Valentia. Tilenus.
Whitaker, etc.

There are besides some mixed disputes of this kind in our English tongue,
wherein the Arguments pro and con are put together; as,

Abbot and Bishop. Chillingworth and Knot. Jewel and Harding. Reynolds and
Heart. White and Fisher, etc.
2. The Lutherans.
Pro. Con. Eckhardi Fasciculus. Bezae Colloquium Montisbelgartense. Io.
Himmelii. Calvi. Baptis. Mateol. Calv. Lud. Crocii Examen Matthew. Hoe. Matthew.
Hoe Calvinistarum descriptio. Lamb. Danaei Resp. ad Nic. Selneccerum.

Pro. Con. AEgid. Hunii. Calvini confut. Call. Iudaizans. Hildebrandi Orthodoxa
Declaratio. Conrad. Schlusselburgi Theologia Calvinistaru^ Dav. Paraei
Orthodoxus Calvinus.

3. The Socinians.
Pro. Con. Socinus. Christ. Becmanni Exercitationes Theologicae cont. Socinu^
Crellius. Hieron. Moscharow. Bisterfeldius. Smaltius. Jo. Botsacci
Anti-Crellius. Volchelius. Abr. Calovius de Haeres. Socin. Picesius. D.
Cheynels History of Socin. Goslavius. Dr. Cheynell of the Trinity. Ostorodius.
Grotius de Satisfact. Christi. Jonas Slictingius. Iunius de divinitate Filii.
Catech. Racoviensis. Sib. Lubertus con. Socinum. Martini Synopsis Photinianis.
Jacob. ad Portum. Stegmanni Photinianismus. Paul. Tarnovius de Trin. Thalei
Anatome Samosatenis.

4. The Arminians.
Pro. Con. Arminii opera. Amesius con. Grevenchovium. Apologia Remonstran.
Bertii Collatio Hagiensis. Amesii Coronis. Castellio. Acta Synod. Dordracen.
Consessio Remonstrantium. M. Bayly's Antidote ag. Arminianisme.

Pro. Con. Corvinus contra. Bogarmannum. Tilenum. Molineum. BP. Davenant
Animadversions on M. Hoard. Dr. Featly Pelagius redivivus. M. Hoards Gods love
to mankind. BP. Hutton. Latius de Pelagianis. Scripta Synodalia Remonstrantium.
Molinaei Anatome Arminianismi. Vorstius contra Piscatorem. Twissi Vindiciae.
Videlius de Arcanis Arminianismi. Thomson. Abbot.

5. The Anabaptists.
Pro. Con. There is scarce any Book of note in defense of all the opinions that
are held by this Sect. Cloppenberg. Gangraena, Lucae Osiandri Enchiridion. Io
Wigandus. Ios. Symlerus. For that particular against Paedobaptisme, it has
been of late much debated by M. Tombs his *M. Bailey. M. Blake. M. Cook. M.
Cotton. M. Marshall Sermon. Answer. Exercitation. Examen. M. Geree. Apology. M.
Hussy. M. Laurence. Dr. Featly. Vanity of childish Baptism. M. Baxter.

6. The Antinomians.
Pro. Con. I know not of any Author who does Scholastically maintain any of
these points. They who are commonly cited for it, are M. Geree against Doct.
Crisp. History of Antinomians. Lutheri disputationes tres contra Antinom.
William Hind, concerning the office and use of the moral Law. Dr. Crisp.
Sermon. Mr. Eaton Honycomb. Dead faith. Dr. Tailor, The use of the Law. Johan.
Islebius Agricola. * M. Sedgwick. To. Town. The Assertion of grace. M. Gataker.
M. Ant. Burgess. M. Tho. Bedford.

The third kind of Authors proper for a Divine, are such as concern the study
of Antiquity. Under which head the Authors upon these several subjects may be
reduced, namely concerning 1. Jewish Learning. 2. The Heathen Moralists. 3. The
writings of the Fathers. 4. Ecclesiastical History. 5. Councels. 6.
Confessions. 7. Heresiologies. 8. Lives. 9. Martyrologies.


1. For Jewish Learning.
Buxtorfii Tiberias? Lexico-Rabinicum. Synagoga Judaica.
Cuneus de Repub. Hebraeorum. Le-Empereur clavis Talmudica. Pet. Galatinus. Dr.
Goodwins Jewish Antiquities. Maimonides de legibus Hebraeorum. Ariae Montani
Antiquitates Iudaicae. Pagnini Thesaurus, cum Mercero, etc. Schekhardi Examen
Comment. Rabinicorum. De Iure Regum apud Hebraeos.
Seldeni De jure Gentium libri. Uxor Hebraica.
Mr. Lightfoot the Temple service. Temple.

2. The Heathen Moralists.
The two chief Authors in this kind are Plato and Aristotle, men of clear
reason and profound judgments, whose works are sufficiently known. But besides
these, there is.

Antoninus. Epictetus. Hierocles. Maximus Tyrius. Plotinus. Salustius. Gr. L.
Seneca. Simplicius. Stobaeus. Plutarchus.
Seneca in traducendis vitiis salsus est and elegans, ac vehemens etiam. De
moribus nemo foelicius scripsit ErasmiEcclesiastes. lib. 2.
quam Plutarchus, c^jus libelli digni sunt qui ad verbum ediscantur, e quibus
Basilius and Chrysostomus multa videntur hausisse.

Unto these may be added those Authors that treat concerning Natural Divinity,
The Religion of the Heathen, or the Light of Nature, And the use of reason in
sacred matters, and the like, such as Coelius secundus. Collius de Animabus
Paganorum. Lipsii manuductio ad Stoicam Philosophiam. Marinus de cognitione
hominis quoad lumine naturali attincre potest. Musaeus de usu principiorum
philosophiae and rationis. Raimundi de Sabundis Theologia naturalis. Nic.
Videlii Rationale Theologicum. Io. Vossius de Theologia Gentili.


3. The Writings of the Fathers.
The ancient Fathers are usually reckoned up, according to the Age and
Centuries wherein they lived.

The 1. Century.
Clemens. Ignatius. Dionysius Areopagita. Polycarpus.
The 2d. Century.
Justin Martyr. Athenagoras. Irenaeus.
The 3d Century.
Tertullianus. Theophilus Antiochenus. Clemens Alexandrinus. Origenes.
Gregorius Thaumaturgus. Cyprianus. Arnobius. Lactantius.
The 4th. Cent.
Eusebius Caesariensis. Athanasius. Hilarious. Cyrillus. Hierosol. Basilius.
Gregorius Nazian. Epiphanius. Ambrosius. Gregorius Nyssenus. Theodoretus.
Hieronymus. Chrysostomus.
The 5th. Cent.
Augustinus, Cyrillus Alexan, Chrysologus. Salvian. Prosper. Fulgentius.
The 6, and 7th. Cent.
Gregorius Magnus.
The 8th. Cent.
Beda. Damascenus.
The 9th. Cent.
Nicephorus.
The 10th, 11th, 12th. Centuries.
Theophylactus. Anselmus, Bernardus. Pet. Lumbar* dus, etc.
Diverse other of the lesser Fathers, See in Bibliotheca Graec. Patrum.

Many of the most eminent amongst these are Eccles. lib. 2.
thus charactered and censured by Erasmus.

Basilius, dilucidus, pius, sanus, suaviter gravis, and graviter suavis, nihil
habens affectatae loquacitatis.

Athanasius in docendo mirus.

Chrysostomi scripta popularia sunt, and adimperitae multitudinis aures
animosque accommodata.

In Gregorio Nazianzeno, multum est acuminis, vehementiae satis.

Tertullianus durus est, tametsisalsus in confutandis h^reticis, nasutus in
traducendis vitiis.

Cyprianus, apertus, vehemens, serius, nec infeliciter fluens.

Ambrosius habet, argutias, and sententias affectatas, saepe etiam subobscuras.

Hieronymus, adomnem dicendi facultatem appositus, ardens in concitandis
affectibus.

Augustinus in genere extemporalifoelix est and argutus, sed dulcior est quam
gravior.

Gregorius Pontif. Romans simplex and pius.

Prud^ntius, licet carmine scripsit, multum spirat Ch^istianae facundiae.

Bernardus, festivus, jucundus, nec segnis in movendis affectibus.

In the reading of the Fathers there is much caution to be used, for the
distinguishing of their spurious imposed works, from such as are true and
genuine. To which purpose, there are particular directions set down at large in
these Tracts.

Bellarminus de Scriptor. Ecclesiasticis. Coci censura quorundam scriptorum.
Doctor James his censure. M. Perkins his demonstration of the Problem. Riveti
Critici sacri specimen.
Many of the Fathers are Logically contracted by Scultetus, in the Medulla
Patrum, as also M. Rous in his Mella Patrum, which may be very useful both for
those who intend with profit to read any of them over; and for others also, who
have not means or leisure to peruse them at large.

4. Ecclesiastical History.
This subject is variously treated of, either briefly in Epitomes, or more at
large; either more generally for a long succession of times, or more
particularly for some few ages.

Epitomes.
Jo. Micrelii Syntagma Histor. Ecclesiast. Dav. Parei Epitome. Sympsons History
of the Church. Spondani Epitome Baronii. Conrad. Hornei. Compend. Histor.
Ecclesiast.
More large.
Baronius. Centuriatores. Dorotheus. Evagrius. Eusebius. Josephus. Nicephorus*
Ruffinus. Socrates. Sozomen. Sulpitius Severus. Theod^retus.
Unto which may be added Bishop Mountague's Apparatus, and Io. Forbesii
Instructiones Historico-Theologicae.

Hospiniani Historia Iesuitica. Mornaei Historia Papatus. Luao. Lucii historia
Jesuitica. BP Usher de Britannicarum Ecclesiarum primordiis. Samson Lennard's
history of the Waldenses and Albigenses. BP Parkers Antiquitates Britannicae.
By Iosseline. Goldasti, Histor.
The continuation of the sacred story from Nehemiah to Christ by Dr Mayer at
the end of his English Comments lately published.

5. Councels.
Counsels are either General in Large. Particular Little.

Concilia generalia. Binii. Gr. Lat. 10. vol. Romae 4. vol. Crab. 3. vol.
Caranzae Epitom. Longii a Coriolano Epitom. Council. Concilia Gallicana.
Sermond. Britannica. Spelman. Hispanica. Garcia. Balsamon in concilia. Zonaras
in concilia. Synodus Ephesina.


Iustelli codex Canonum. Ecclesiae Universae.

The Council of Trent History. Review.

Unto which may be subjoyned as being very useful and something of this
nature, the Canon Law, Corpus juris canonici.

6. Confessions.
Corpus Confessionum. Confessio Augustana.
Besides many other Confessions of particular Churches, which according to the
various light and several occasions of those times wherein they were framed,
do comprehend the chief heads of Religion.

7. Heresiogies.
Augustinus. Damascen. Epiphanius. Petrei Haeresiologia. Alph. a Castro. Guido
Carmelita. Irenaeus. Schlusselburgii Catal. Leontius de Sectis. Io. Pontani
Catal. Haeret. Vincentius Lyrinensis. Philastrius.
8. Lives.
Rob. Barns, and Io. Baleus de vitis Pontificum. Joan. Bismarcus. Theod. Bezae
Icones virorum illustrium. The Glory of their times, or the lives of the
Fathers. M. Clarke, The Lives of the Fathers. Govanus de vitis Patrum Occident.
Halliox. de vit. and script. patrum 1 and 2di* saeculi. Hieronymus de
illustribus Ecclesiae doctoribus. Lippomannus de vitis Sanctorum. Melchior
Adam. de vit. Theol. Germ. Georgius Major. Platina de vitis Pontificum.
Rosweydus de vitis Patrum Orientis.
9. Martyrologies.
Baronii Martyrologium. Eulardi Martyrol. Martyrologium Romanum. -- Gallicanum.
Monumenta Martyrum. Book of Martyrs.
These are the several kinds of books which are most proper and useful for a
Preacher; and these are some of the most eminent Authors in each kind. It would
be expedient for a Minister to be provided at least with one of each sort, unto
which he might have recourse upon all doubts and enquiries of that nature. And
this may be one special advantage for the invention of matter.

The second help proposed for this purpose, was a right method and series of
matter to be first and most exactly inquired into. When a man studies over the
chief heads of the whole body of Divinity, according to some natural method
and dependence; by which means the several parts will give mutual light to one
another, and the better enable a man to see into the principles and bottom of
things. And when he has thus deliberately passed over the whole, he may
afterward with the more facility enlarge himself upon any particular text or
subject as occasion shall require.

Our chief collections in the study of these heads may be contrived under the
form of Sermons. Every Sermon containing either one or more of them, according
to the nature of several subjects.

There is a twofold series or order, that may be observed in the matter of our
Sermons; Exegeticall. Methodicall.


Exegeticall, is when a man goes on in a continued course of unfolding some
particular book or chapter, which (though it be of very great use, yet) is not
so proper for a young Divine to begin withal.

Methodical, is when we propose a certain Scheme or design of matter to be
orderly insisted upon under several heads.

This again is twofold, Catechisticall. Scholasticall.

Catechisticall does refer to those plain and most obvious principles of
Religion, laid down in the Catechism, contained under those four general
heads.

The Creed. Commandments. Lords Prayer. Sacraments.

The distinct unfolding of which may be of great advantage, and has heretofore
been esteemed a very good Method both for Ministers and people.

Scholasticall method, or that which is by way of Common place, is more
particular and comprehensive then the former, taking in all those chief heads,
that are insisted upon, either in the Schoolmen or the Common-place-writers.

These Schemes of matter are various according to several men's fancies and
apprehensions. But amongst all, that is to be esteemed the best, which is most
natural for the order, and most comprehensive for the extent of it.

There are diverse learned men, who in Analyzing the whole body of Divinity,
have contrived the Scheme of it under 52 heads, according to the number of
weeks in a year, so that in that space one who is a constant Preacher, might go
through all of them. To which purpose, see Mr. Crooks Guide; BP Ushers
Catechisticall Doctrine, See Amesi us his Chrstianae Catechesi^^ Sciagraphia.
where the whole substance of Divinity is disposed under so many several heads
of matter, and several pertinent Scriptures for texts to each of them.

But amongst the rest there is a very full elaborate frame proposed by Doctor
Staughton, which takes in, (what is much neglected amongst other Protestant
Writers) the most profitable points handled amongst the Schoolmen, who were
great searchers into Divinity, and their writings in many things very useful.
This frame of his is largely set down in his third Sermon upon 2 Timothy 1. 13.

Where he represents the whole body of Divinity under the notion of an AEdifice
or building, wherein there are two things considerable.

The Frontispice or Porch. Fabric or pile.

In the Frontispice he proposes four general heads, which are premised as the
praecognita to this series.

In the Fabric there are two stories, and in each story two rooms.

In the first story is contained the chief principles to be known or believed,
Either more Generally, in each of these 12. heads. Particularly, In the second
story, things for practice, Duties, in each 12 particular heads. Helps,

In all 52. But in some of these the method seems obscure and involved,
especially toward the latter part of it.

Besides this, there are diverse other draughts and Systems of Divinity in
several other Authors, Amesius, Trelcatius, Tilenus, Wollebius, etc. To which
may be added Bishop Downhams Abstract, a bookof singular use for direction in
this kind; out of these it is easy for any one to compose such an Analysis as
shall be most suitable to his own apprehension, and that is certainly most
proper for every one, which he himself shall frame. For instance and
illustration, consider this model which is collected from the Authors above
named.

In Divinity two things are considerable, The Praecognita or generals to be
premised concerning Happiness, Psalm. 4. 6. Micab. 4. 5. Religion, Eccles. 12.
13. Act 24. 14. Church, M^tth. 16. 18. Scripture, 2 Timothy 3. 16.
The Parts containing things to be Known and believed concerning God, Vide A.
Man, Vide C.
Done and practiced, commanded in the Law, vid. I. Gospel, vid. V.




Happiness.
Upon this subject, See at large the Moralists. Aquinas 1a 2dae. The
Commentators upon Ecclesiastes.

M. Reynolds his three Treatises.

Doctor Staugh ton Happiness of man: Righteous man's plea to happiness.

Rob. Bolton, Discourse of true happiness.

Jo. Downha^ concerning the vanity of all worldly things. Spiritual warfare

Religion in general.
The controversies against Turks, Jews, the Apologies of the Fathers for the
Christian Religion against the Heathen.

Phil. Mornaeus Deveritate Christianae Hug Grotius. Religionis.

Ed. Brerewoods Enquiries.

Mr. Pagets Christianography.

S^. Edwin Sands Relation of the state of Religion.

Church.
The Common places. Controversies about Discipline.

Dr. Field, Of the Church.

Dr. Jackson.

BP. Morton.

Jo. Randall.

Dr Preston, The Churches. Dignity. Duty.

Scripture.
Jo. Goodwin. The divine authority of the Scriptures assertd.

The Common places: Controversies betwixt us and the Papists. Those preparatory
discourses for the study of Scripture mentioned before.

Fra. Roberts Key of the Bible.

Jo. Weems, Exercitation proving the necessity, majesty, integrity, perspicuity
of the Scriptures.

His Christian Synagogue concerning the diverse reading, right pointing,
translation, collation of Scripture.

Ed. Leigh, Of the authority, editions, versions, end, properties,
interpretation of Scripture.

Sa. Hieron. Dignity of the Scripture.

Nic. Byfeild, Directions for private reading of the Scripture.

BP. Jewel. Treatise of the holy Scripture.

Jo. White. The way to^ the tree of life, in sundry directions for our
profitable reading of the Scriptures.

A. Things to be known and believed concerning God, in Himself Essence set
forth in his Name, Exodus 3. 14. Attribiutes. First Incommunicable Simpleness,
1 John 1. 5. Infinite nesse. Immensity, 1 Kings 8. 27. AEternity. 1 Timothy 1. 17.

Communicable Love, Mercy, Exodus 34. 6.
Wisdom, Power, etc. ^ob 36. 9.


Arising from the first. Perfection. Glory. Blessedness.


Persons Father, Son, Holy Ghost, Matthew. 28. 19. 1 John 5. 7.


His actions and works Immanent, His general coun^ell and decree concerning
all things, Ephesians. 1. 11. Partic. of reas. creat. Praedest. Election, Romans 9.
23. Reprobation 2 Timothy 2. 20.

Transient, vid. B.



God.
The Common places Schoolmen, Lumbard li. 1. Aquinas p. 1.

Dr. Preston. Treatise of the divine Essence and Attributes.

Ed. Leigh. Treatise of Divinity.

Sam. Hieron. Back parts of Jehovah.

Dr. Jackson. Treatise of the divine Essence and Attributes.

Tho. Morton. Treatise of the Nature of God.

The Name of God.
Jerem. Borough's, Lord of Hosts.

Jos. Mede. Sanctification of Gods Name.

Attributes.
Dr. Preston, as before.

Item, concerning Gods all sufficiency.

Rich. Stock. Treatise of Gods Attributes.

The Trinity.
The Socinian Controversies. Lumbard li. 1. Aquin. p. 1.

Dr. Cheynell.

Hugh Broughton.

Ben. Austin.

Hills Collection out of Zanchy de tribus Elohim.

Gods decrees in general.
Lumbard li. 1. Common places.

Ed. Leigh. Treatise of Divinity.

Predestination.
Common places. Arminian controversies.

Gomarus de praedestinatione.

M. Cotton and D. Twisse.

M. Pe^kins. Treatise of the manner and order of Predestination.

Jo. Ailward.

Jo. Veron. Apology for Predestination.

B. The Transient works of God do refer either to. Nature Creation general
things AEthereall, Genesis 1.1. Elementary, Genesis 1.1.
particular Angels, Coloss. 1. 16. Men, Genesis 2. 7.

Providence Common, in the order of Nature, Psalm. 135. 6. Special in the
guidance of humane affairs. Small and Great, Mat. 10. 29. Casual and Neces.
Pro. 16. 33. Evil and Good, Amos. ^. 6.


Grace contriving our redemption by Christ, who in thatwork may be considered
according to his Offices Regal, Psalm. 110. 1. Isa. 9 6. Priestly, H^b. 5. 1.
and 9. 24 Prophetical, Isa. 61 1.
States Humiliation. Nativity, Luke 2. 11. Incarnation, 2 Timothy 3. 16 Passion, 1
Pet. 3. 18.
Exaltation. Resurrection Act. 2. 24 Ascension, Ephesians. 4. 8. Session, 1 Pet. 3.
22.





Creation.
Common places. Lumbard. lib. 2. Aquinas p. 1. Commentators on Genesis.

Geo. Walker. Treatise of the external works of God.

Tho. Jackson.

Providence.
Tho. Jackson.

Gul. Pemble, de providen.

Geo. Walker, of God actual Providence.

Dr Hackwels Apology.

Dr Gouge. The extent of Gods Providence.

Jo. Veron Treatise of Divine Providence.

Jo. Wilkins The beauty of Providence.

Redemption.
The Arminian and Socinian controversies.

Stalham, against universal redemption.

Mr Jo. Owen, The death of Christ.

Spanhemii Exercitationes de Gratia Universali.

Christ's Offices.
M. Reynolds, on the 110. Psalm.

Dr Fowns Trisagion.

Christ's states of Humiliation. Exaltation.

Lumbard lib. 3. Aquinas p. 3.

BP Usher. of Christ's Incarnation. M. Casaub.

D. Jackson. The humiliation of the Son of God.

Th. Goodwin, Of Christ's Death, Resurrection, Ascension, etc.

BP Andrews, BP Lake, Doct. Don, etc.

Nativity and Passion Sermons.

BP Bilson. of Christ's sufferings Hen. Jacob.

c. Things to be known and believed concerning Man may refer to his several
Parts. Body, its natural Perfections, 1 Cor. 11 7. Infirmities, as Affliction,
Psalm 103 14. Mortality.
Soul, its Nature Spiritual. Ecclef. 12. 7. Immortal, Faculties,
Understanding, And here of Free will. Will, Acts, Habits Affections, Virtues,
and Memory. Vices in general. Conscience,

States. In this life, Innocence Covenant of works, Gal. 3. 20. Sacraments, the
Tree of Life, Genesis 2. 9. 17. Knowl.
Fall, vid. D. Restoration, vid. F.
After this life, vid. H.



Of man in general.
Lumbard li. 2.

Jo. Weems, The portraiture of the image of God in man, in his

Creation. Restoration. Glerification.
Ant. Nixon, The dignity of man.

Afflictions.
BP Hall, Balm of Gilead.

Mr Hughs, Dry rod blossoming.

Jo: Downham, Spiritual warfare.

Paul Bain, comfort and instruction in afflictions.

Mortality.
Mr Perkins, Treatise of dying well.

Manchester, al Mondo. A Contemplation of death and immortality.

Rob: Harris Samuels funeral Barzillai.

Sam: Hieron. Useful meditations on mortality, on Phil: 1, 2, 3.

Will: Cowper, Defiance to death.

Diverse Funeral Sermons collected into one Volume styled (...).

M. Byfeild, Cure of the fear of death.

Sam: Crook, Death subdued.

Immortality of the soul.
Aquinas p. 1. The Philosophical discourses de Anima.

P: Morney, Translated.

Sir Kenelm Digby.

Jo: Jackson, Defense of the souls immortality.

Passions.
Aquinas, 1a 2dae.

M. Reynolds, Treatise of the passions.

Will: Fenner, Treatise of the affections.

Tho. Wright, The passions of mind.

Conscience.
The Casuists.

M. Perkins, A discourse of Conscience.

Sam. Ward, Balm from Gilead.

Jerem. Dyke, Will: Fenner, D. Hammond.

M. Harris Judas his misery on Matthew. 27. 3. S. Paul's Exercise, Confidence
Acts 21. 16. Get, keep, and use a good conscience, on Heb. 13. 18.


Richard Bernard, Christian see to thy conscience.

* M. Sheffeild. a good conscience the strongest hold.

Free Will.
The Casuists, Arminian controversies.

Common places. Lumbard lib. 2.

M. Perkins. Treatise of Gods free grace, and man's free will.

Jo. Bradford, Dialogue of Predestination and Free Will.

Jo. Veron. Treatise of Free Will.

D. In the Fall of man, there is considerable the Sin, Original, Romans 5. 18,
19. and 7. 7. Psalm. 51. 5. Actual Weakness, Romans 7. 19. Malice, Psalm. 19. 13.
Heb. 6. 4.

Punishment Death, Temporal, Romans 5. 12. Spiritual, Eternal.


Of Sin.
P. Lumbard lib. 2.

M. Reynolds, Sinfulness of sin.

Tho: Goodwin, Aggravation of sin.

M. Byfeild, rules and directions about our sins.

Of Original sin.
The Common places: Casuists: Arminian controversies: Lumbard lib. 2. Aquinas
1a 2dae.

Dr Sibs, The dead man, or the state of every man by nature, on Ephesians. 2. 1

W. Teelinck, Paul's complaint against his natural corruption.

Sins of Weakness. Wilfulness.

Sam. Hoard, of presumptuous sins.

Jerem. Dyke, of quenching the Spirit.

Dr Hammond.

Dr Preston, The Saints infirmities.

The sin against the holy Ghost.
Lumbard li. 2. Casuists.

Will: Bradshaw.

Dr Done, on Matthew. 12. 31.

Sebast: Benefield.

Jo: Denison.

Henry Hoddesdon.

Jo: Meredith, The sin of blasp^eming against the holy Ghost.

The punishment of sin.
The Common places. Casuists.

Dr Gouge, 3. Arrows.

See after, de quatuor Novissimis.

Tho: Beard, Theater of Gods judgments.

E. In our restoration there is considerable The Covenant of Grace, Gen 3. 15.
Gal. 3. 2. 1. Vocation into foederal Communion, the administrations whereof
have been various under The old Testament, Which enjoins some things peculiar
to the jews, as A Church, the Ceremonial; A Nation, the Judicial Law.
Wherein the Doctrine of the Gospel is Offered more obscurely, Heb. 1. 1. and
10. 1. Sealed Ordinarily in the Sacrifices, Heb. 9. 9. Sacraments Circumcision,
Genesis 17. 10. Passover, Exodus 12^.

Extraordinarily invarious Types, 1 Pet. (...). 20. 1 Cor. 10. 1.


The New Test. Teaching more plainly, Heb. 1. 2. Romans 16. 25, 26. Sealing in
the Sacraments of Baptism, John 3. 5. The Supper, 1 Cor. 11.


Justification, Vide F. Sanctification, Vide G.


The Covenant of Grace.
Dr. Preston.

Jo. Cotton.

Jo. Ball. Treatise of the Covenant of Grace.

Peter Bulkley. The Gospel Covenant.

BP. Downham, of the Covenant of Grace.

Rob. Harris. Treatise of the Covenant.

Cameron de triplici foedere.

The Ceremonial Law. Judicial

Aquinas 1a. 2ae.

Jo. Weems Exposition of the Ceremon. Judicial.

Sacrifices and Types.
M. Guild. Moses and Aaron unvailed.

D. Tailor, of Types.

Sacraments in general.
Common places: Lumbard lib. 4. Aquinas p. 3. The particular Treatises upon
this subject mentioned before, page 73.

The New Testament.
D. Reynolds. on the 110. Psalm. concerning the excellency and power of the
Gospel.

D. Sibs. The excellency of the Gospel above the Law, on 2 Cor. 3. 17, 18.

Baptism.
Lumbard lib. 4. The controversies about Paedobaptisme, mentioned before, page
81.

Mr Rogers.

D. Burgess. Of Baptismall regeneration.

Jo. Down. Treatise of the faith of Infants.

Sam. Hieron. Baptizing of the Eunuch, on Acts 8. 36, 37.

The Lords Supper.
Jer. Dyke. The worthy Communicant.

M. Rogers.

M. Dod.

D. Preston.

Sam. Bolton.

Will. Pemble. Introduction to the Sacrament.

Will. Bradshaw. A preparation to, and receiving of Christ's body and blood.

Tho. Morton. Treatise of the Lords Supper.

D. Gouge. of the Lords Supper.

D. Reynolds Meditation of the Lords Supper.

Will. Cowper, preparative.

Will. Fenner. Punishment of unworthy Communicants. Duty of Commun.

M. Cudworth. A discourse concerning the true notion of the Lords Supper.

Jo. Down. Against Transubstantiation.

Phil. Goodwin.

F. Justification is wrought Instrumentally by Faith, Romans 10. 10. Efficiently
by Christ, his obedience. Active, Matthew. 3. 15. Passive, 1 Pet. 2. 24.



G. Sanctification is considerable according to its Parts. Mortification
Denying our selves. Mat. 8. 34. Taking up our cross. Vivification Renovation
of the John 33. Tit. 3. 5. Faculties. Habits.

Progress and Increase in grace. 2 Pet. 1. 5. and 3. 18.
Privileges. Liberty, from The Law Ceremonial, Gal. 5. 13. Moral, Romans 10. 4.
Sin, 1 John 5. 18.
Joy, 1 Pet. 1. 8. Peace, Romans 5. 1.



Of Justification.
Common places. Controversies betnixt us and the Papists.

BP. Downham, Io.

Will. Pemble.

M. Forbes.

Jo. Goodwin.

Rich. Baxter. Aphorisins of Justification.

Sanctification.
D. Prestons Saints qualifications.

Jo. Downham, Spirit^all warfare.

The Tracts that set down general directions for a Christians walking with
God, as

M. Scudder, the Christians daily walk.

Rob. Bolton, Directions for walking.

M. Brinsley. True watch.

Paul Bain, directions,

Practice of piety, etc.

Mortification.
D. Preston. Sins overthrow. Treatise of humiliation. Golden Scepter.

M. Cotton. Sins deadly wound: on Acts 2. 37.

M. Woolfall: of Mortification.

Rob. Bolton. Helps to humiliation.

Self-denial.
D. Reynolds: on Matthew. 16. 24.

M. Hooker.

Jer. Bur. roughs. Self-denial. Moses his choice

D. Preston. Treatise of Self-denial.

Taking up the Cross.

D. Hammond.

Those that write on the Beatitudes, ver. 11.

Vivification.
M. Wheatleys New birth.

B^. Cowpers Anatomy of a Christian.

Sam. Hieron, old and new man: on John 3. 6.

Tho. Morton. Treatise concerning Regeneration.

Dr Tailors New Creature. Kings bath of Regeneration.

Progress in grace.
Tho. Goodwin. Growth in grace.

D. Tailor. The Saints progress.

Ob. Sedgwicks. Christ's counsel to his languishing Church.

Christian liberty.
Geor. Downham. Treatise of Christian liberty.

D. Saunderson: on 1 Pet. 2. 16.

Sam. Bolton. True bounds of Christian freedom.

William Pemble Slavery of sin. Benefit of Gods service.

Joy.
M. Gataker: on Ps. 97. 11.

Will. Cowper. Heaven opened.

D. Done: on Psalm. 32. 10, 11.

Peace of Mind.
See Assurance: Desertions.

Rob. Harris. Blessedness of a sound spirit: on Pro. 18. 14.

H. Man's state after this life. Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. 52. John 19. 25, 26.
Judgment Particular, Heb. 9. 27. General, Acts 17. 31. States Salvation, Joh.
5 29. Damnation, Dan. 12. 2.
Place. Heaven, Psalm. 16. 11. Hell, Rev. 20. 15.





I. Duties required in the Law, are either More General as being conducibleto
every duty, in respect of the Manner, with Sincerity, Romans 6. 17. Readiness, 1
Chro. 28. 9. Zeal, 1 Kings 19. 10. Constancy, Rev. 2. 10.
Means; Prayer, 2 Cor. 3. 5. The word, Romans 10. 17. Good company, Psalm. 119.
115.

More Special commanded in the 1 Table, our duty to God. Internal worship. 1
Com. Vide K. External in the 2d Vide L. 3d Vide M. 4th Vide N.

2 Table referring unto Acts or intents concerning Special ranks of men, 5.
Vide O. All persons Life, Com. 6. Vide P. Chastity, Com. 7. Vide Q. Goods, Com.
8. Vide R. Name, Com. 9. Vide S.

The very motion without consent, Com. 10. Vide T.




The 4 last things.
The Common places. Lumbard lib. 4. Aquinas in supplemento partis 3ae.

Rob. Bolton.

Baxter. The Saints rest.

Resurrection.
BP Lake. Sermons for Easter. B. Andrews. Dr Done.

Judgment.
Greenwood: The general judgment.

Sam. Smith: Great Assise.

Will. Fenner: The judgment of the world passed by Saints.

Will. Attersoll: Gods trumpet sounding the Alarm.

Joseph Mede: The prophecy of S. Peter, conc^r^ing the day of Christ's second
coming.

Sincerity
Dr Preston. Of man's uprightness.

M. Gataker: on Psalm. 97. 11.

M. Hooker: on 2 Timothy 3. 5.

Dr Sanderson: on 1 Kings 21. ^9. Genesis 20. 6.

Hitherto may be referred the Tracts of Hypocrisy: as, Sam. Torshels Hypocrite.

Sam. Hieron. Discovery of hypocrifie, Mat. 3. 10.

BP Hall. The Hypocrite, on 2 Timothy 5. 3.

Readiness and Watchfulness.
M. Gataker: on Mar. 13. 37.

Joh. Downham: Against Sec^^ity.

Dr Sibs: Gods inquisition, on Jer. 8. 6, 7.

Sam. Hieron: The remedy of Security.

Will. Fenner: Christ's alarm to drowzy Saints.

Jo. Rogers: Discourse of Christian watchfulness.

Zeal.
Dr Burgess: Fire of the Sanctnary.

Mr Bowls: on Joh. 2. 17.

Dr Sibs: Violence victorious, on Mat. 11. 12.

Mr Greenham: on Rev. 3. 19.

Constancy or Perseverance.
Aquinas 2a 2ae. Common places.

Dr Benefeild Gomarus de perseve rantia.

Mr Gataker: on Rev. 2. 10.

Ob. Sedgewick: on Rev. 3. 2, 3.

Prayer.
Dr Preston: Saints daily exercise.

Rob. Harris: Peter's in largemnt.

Tho. Goodwin. Return of Praye^s.

Tho. Ball about set forms. Jo. Cotton Gifford about read prayer, Greenwood

Jos. Mede.

Hearing and Reading the Word.
Mr Mason.

Jer. Dyke of the right eating and digesting the word

BP Andrews, on James 1. 22.

Joh. Downham, Treatise of the force and efficacy of reading.

Good Company.
Joseph Beutham: The society of the Saints.

Sam. Torshell.

K. The first Commandment does Prohibit, Atheism, Heb. 11. 6. Poluthe^sme,
Deuteronomy. 6. 4. Heresy, Tit. 3. 10, 11. A postacy, Heb. 10. 26. Errors, James 1.
16.
Enjoin Knowledge, John 17. 3. Remembrance, Eccles. 12 1: Love, Deuteronomy. 6. 5.
Trust, P^ov. 3. 5. Hope, Psalm. 146. 5. Fear, Isa. 51. 12, 13. Gratitude, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18. Humility, Mic. 6. 8. Patience, Lam. 3. 39. Obedience, 1 John 5. 3.



Of the Moral Law in general.
The Common places: Casuists. Aquinas 1a 2ae.

Controversies against the Antinomians, mentioned, page 82. Commentators on the
Decalogue, page 73.

Dr Reynolds. The use of the Law.

Jo. Weems: Of the Moral Law.

Atheism or Polutheisme.
See the Treatises before, concerning Gods Essence and Attributes. p. 97.

Smiths Arrow.

Mart. Fotherby: Atheomastix.

Jo. Weems: Treatise of the Atheist.

Heresy.
Aquinas 1a 2ae. The Tracts of Heresy mentioned, p. 97. Many particular
Sermons upon this subject, as M. Ob. Sedgewick, M. Cranford, Mr. Vines, Mr.
Clark, etc.

Apostasy.
Aquinas 2. 2dae.

Will. Pemble.

Tho. Goodwin: The danger of relapsing.

Dr Featly: on Ezekiel. 18. 24.

Mt Mede: The Apostasy of the latter times.

Error.
Sam. Bolton: Tract concerning Error.

Jer. Buroughs Irenicum.

BP Davenant: Exhortation to communion.

Knowledge and Remembrance of God.
Mr Perkins. A declaration of the true manner of knowing Christ crucified.

Will. Pemble. Mischief of ignorance.

Dr Featley: on 1 Cor. 2. 2.

Pet. Molinaeus, de cognitione Dei.

Love to God. Gratitude

Lumbard lib. 3. Aquinas 2. 2dae.

Dr Preston. Of Love,

Will: Pemble. The Christians love.

Mr Pink. Trial of a Christians love.

Dr Sanderson, 1 Timothy 4. 4

Dr Done: on 1 Cor: 16. 22.

Trust and Hope in God.
Lumbard lib. 3. Aquinas 2. 2dae.

Mr Harris. David's comfort at Ziglag.

Fear of God.
Lumbard lib. 7.

Mr Greenham. Of Gods fear.

D. Done. on 1 Pet. 1. 17.

Will. Case. The nature and necessity of godly fear.

Humility.
Aquinas 2. 2dae. Sibelius de humilitate Davidis in Psalm. 131. Commen. on the
Beatitudes.

M. Cawdrey. Humility the Saints livery.

D. Featley: on Matthew. 5. 3.

BP Hall. The fall of pride; on Pov. 29. 23.

Patience.
Aquinas 2. 2ae. See Afflictions. Drexelius.

Will: Cowper. Praise of patience.

M. Young.

L The second Commandment does Prohibit Idolatry, Psalm. 97. 7. Will Worship*
Col: 2. 23. Superstition, Acts 17. 22. Traditions, Coloss: 2. 8. Witchcraft,
Exodus 22. 18. Schism, 1 Cor: 11. 18. Confusion, 1 Cor: 11. 21.
Enjoin right worship in respect of the Manner Deuteronomy: 12. 32. Means John 4. 24.
Sorts. Ordinary Prayer, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. Preaching, Mal. 2. 7. Sacraments.
Discipline, Mat: 18. 17.
Extraord. Fasting, Lev. 23. 29. Feasting, Esther 9. 22.





Idolatry.
Jo: Weems, Treatise of the Idolater.

M. Perkins. Warning against the Idolatry of the last times.

Superstition and Will Worship.
Aquinas 2. 2dae.

D. Hammond Treatise of Superstition* Will Worship.

Witchcraft.
M. Perkins, Discourse concerning the damned Art of witchcraft.

Jo. Weems, Treatise of the Magician.

King James, his Daemonology.

Jo. Cotta. Trial of witchcraft.

Scots discovery of witches.

Schism.
Aquinas 2. 2dae.

Greg: Martin: Treatise of Schism.

Tract concerning Schism. Anonym.

M. Brinsley.

Of Prayer: See before. page 111.

Preaching.
M. Perkins: The Calling of Ministers, declaring their dignity and duty.

D. Stoughton. Preachers. dignity. duty.

Sam: Hiero^. Bargain of salt* Spiritual fishing. Preachers plea. Dignity of
preaching

Ol. Bowls, de Pastore Evangelico.

Of the Sacraments and Discipline.
See diverse discou^ses mentioned before.

Of Religious Fasts.
Various Se mons upon this occasion, especially those before the Houses of Pa:
liament.

The Tracts of Mortification.

M. Hildersham.

M. Mason, of the Christian fast, Epicures

M. The 3d Commandment does Prohibit more particularly the abuse of Oaths,
Jer. 4. 2. Vows, Number. 30. 2. Lots, Prove. 16. 33.
Enjoin the sanctifying of Gods Names, D^ut. 28. 58. Attributes, 1 Pet. 3. 15.
Word, Psalm. 15. 16, 17. Works, Psalm. 58, 10, 11. Religion, Ephesians. 4. 1.



N. The 4th Commandment concerning the set time of worship, its Institution,
Genesis 2. 3. Observance, Isa. 58. 13 Change, Rev. 1. 10.


O. The 5th Command. concerning the duties of se^erall relations Magistrates, 1 Timothy 3. 2. Subjects, Romans 13. 1. Ministers, 1 Pet. 5. 2. People, Heb: 13. 17.
Parents, Ephesians. 6. 4. Children, Ephesians: 6 1. Masters, Coloss. 4. 1. Servants, 1
Pet: 2. 18. Husband, Ephesians. 5. 25. Wife, Ephesians: 5. 24, 33. Noble and rich, 1 Timothy 6. 17. Poor, 1 Samuel: 25. 8. Aged, Tit. 2. 2, 4. Young, Levit, 19. 32.

Of Oaths and Perjury.
Lumbard lib. 3. Aquinas 2. 2dae.

BP Andrews: on Jer. 4. 2.

Jo. Downham: Treatise against Swearing.

D. Saunderson, de Iuramento.

Of Vows.
The Common places: Casuists: Aquinas 2. 2dae.

Of Lots.
M. Gataker: of lusory Lots.

Treatise. Answ. and reply to M. Bamford.
Joh. Down: Defense of the lawfulness of lots in gaming.

Of the Sabbath.
Brerewood, and Byfeild.

D. Twisse: The morality of the fourth Commandment.

M. Leigh: Primrose.

Jo. Sprint: M. Ironside.

M. Cawdrey, and M. Palmer. Sabbatum redivivum.

BP White, etc.

Political duties.
BP Bilson, of subjection.

BP Halls Politics.

Sam. Hieron: on Luke 20. 25.

Upon this subject see many particular debates of these times: as,

D. Fearn: The fuller answer.

Scripture and reason.

The Treatise of Monarchy, etc.

Oeconomicall duties.
M. Perkins: Of the right manner of ordering a family according to Scripture.

M. Dod: Of household government.

Tho: Paget: Demonst^ation of family duties.

BP Halls Oeconomicks.

D. Gouge: Domestical duties.

M Whateley Bride bush. Care cloth.

M. Gataker: on Prove. 18. 22 19 14. Col: 3. 18.

Sam: Hieron: on Mat 9 15, Ruth 4. 11. 12,

P. The 6. Commandment concerning our own and our ne^ghbours person, and life,
does Probibit Roots, Unjust Anger, Matthew. 5. 25. Hatred, 1 John 3. 15.
Fruits, Inward desire of revenge, Romans 12 19 Outward in Words, reviling, Mat.
5 22. Deeds to the Body, Lev. 24 19. Genesis 9 6. Soul by scandal, Matthew. 18. 6.



Command Friendship, Prove. 27. 9. Mercy, Gal: 6. 10. Placablenesse, Ephesians. 4.
26. Meekness, Ephesians. 4. 32. Overcoming evil with good, Romans 12. 21.



Q. The 7 Commandment, concerning chastity, does Prohibit all unchastity in
the Kinds, Inward, in desire, Mat. 5. 28. Outward, Uncleanness, 1 Cor. 6. 9.
Fornication, 1 Cor. 6. 9. Adultery, Heb: 13. 4. Diorce, Mat. 19. 9. Incest, 1
Cor: 5. 1. Polygamy, 1 Cor: 7. 2. Rape, Deuteronomy. 22. 25. Sodomy, Romans 1 26, 27
Bestiality, Lev. 18. 27.

Means, Idleness, 2 Samuel 11. 2. Intemperance, 1 Pet: 4. 3. Neglect of
marriage, 1 Cor: 7. 2. 9.
Signs, Immodesty, 1 Timothy 2. 9. Bad company, 2 Cor: 5 9. places, Job 31. 6.


Enjoin a care of our own chastity in the kind. means. neighbors signs.


Concerning Anger and Hatred^
The Commentators on several parts of the Proverbs. Plutarchus. Seneca de ira.

M. Greenham, of Anger.

Jo: Downham, Treatise against Anger.

Of Murder.
M. Sym. Life's preservative.

Dr Done, (...).

Scandal.
Common places, Casuists, Aquinas 2. 2dae.

Jer: Dyke, Mischief of Scandals.

M. Tombs, Treatise of scandalizing.

D. Hammond, Of Scandal.

Friendship.
The Moralists. Commentators on the Proverbs.

Cicero de Amicitia. Danaeus

Mercy and Peaceablenes
Comments on the Beatitudes.

D. Done, on Romans 12. 20

Of Whoredom.
The Casuists at large.

Jo: Downham, Treatise of Whoredom.

D. Preston, on Colos. 3. 5

Of Divorce and Polygamy
Lumbard lib. 4. Aquinas in Supplem. p. 3.

The Casuists.

Wigandus de divortiis.

Beza de Polyg. and divor.

Edm. Bunny, Of Divorce for adultery and marrying again.

M Milton Treatise. Vindication. Tetrachordon.

Dove.

Intemperance.
Aquinas 2. 2dae.

Junius, The drunkards character.

M. Harris, The drunkards c^p, on I say 5. 11.

Jo: Down: against drunkenness.

Vowing ag: Marriage.

Lumbard lib 4.

Peter Martyr, de caelibatu contra Richardum Smith. Angl.

Jo: Down.

R. The 8th Commandmet concerning our own, and our neighbors goods, does
Prohibit Theft, Levit. 19. 13. Oppression, Prove. 14 31. Deceit, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6.
Sacrilege, Prove. 20. 25. Usury, De^t. 23. 20. Bribery, Prove. 29. 4.
Prodigality, Luke 15. 13.
Enjoin Just dealing, ^evit. 25. 14. Diligence in our callings, Ephesians. 4. 28.
Frugality, John 6. 12. Liberality, Prove. 11. 25. Alms, Luke 12. 33.
Hospitality, 1 Pet. 4 9. Restitution, Exo. 22. 5. Lev. 6. 4. 5.



Of Sacrilege and Tithes.
Aquinas 2. 2dae.

BP Andrews.

Sir James Semple.

BP Carleton.

M. Seldom.

Rob. Tillesly.

Steph. Nettles.

Sir Henry Spelman.

P. H. Treleinie.

Usury.
Aquinas 2. 2dae. Salmasius.

Rog: Fenton, Treatise of Usury.

Tho: Wilson, Discourse of Usury.

To: Bolton, Discourse with M. S.

Dr Holmes.

Bribery.
Jo: Downham, Treatise against Bribery.

Justice and Equity.
Aquinas 2. 2dae.

M. Perkins, Treatise of Christian Equity.

Dt Saundersons Sermons ad Magistratum.

Dr Done, on Romans 13. 7

Diligence in Callings.
M. Whateley, Redemption of time.

M. Perkins, Treatise of Callings.

Dr Saunderson, on 1 Cor. 7. 24.

Liberality and Alms.
Aquinas 2. 2dae.

Jo: Downham, Plea for the poor.

Will: Whateley, The poor man's Advocate.

BP Andrews: on 1 Timothy 6. 17. BP Hall:

Rob: Harris, The old Religion.

Hospitality.
Caleb: Dalechamp, treatise of Christian Hospitality.

Restitution.
The Casuists.

Aquinas 2. 2dae.

S. The 9th Commamdment concerning Fame, etc. speeches, does Prohibit all
Slaundering, Prove. 15. 3. Credulity, Psalm. 15. 3. Hearing Talebearers, Prove.
25. ^3. Censuring, Matthew. 7. 1. Sinister suspicions, 1 Cor. 13. 5. Flattery.
Prove. 27. 14. Silence in defending, 2 Timothy 4. 16.
Enjoin a care of The name of Our selves, Phil. 4. 8. Neighbors, Mat. 1. 19.
Our speeches that they be Deliberate, James 1. 19. Profitable, Gods glory,
Ephesians. 5. 4. Good of others, Col. 4. 6.





T. The 10th Com mandment concerning motions without consent, does Prohibit
Covetousness, Heb. 13 5. Self-love, 2 Timothy 3. 2. 1 Cor. 10. 24. Evil
thoughts, Prove. 24. 9. Envy, Prove. 23. 4.
Enjoin A pure heart, 1 Timothy 1. 5. Watchfulness over our thoughts, Prove. 4.
23. Contentedness, Phil. 4. 11.



Of Lying.
Common places: Casuists: Lumbard lib. 3. Aquinas 2. 2dae.

Jo: Downham: Treatise against Lying.

Of Slandering Talebearers, Credulity, Flattery.
See the Comments on many places of the Proverbs.

Censures and Suspicions
BP Hall: on John 7. 24.

Dr Saunderson: on Romans 14. 3.

Care of our names and credit.
M. Greenham: on Prove. 22. 1.

M. Gataker: on Eccles. 7. 1.

Care of our words.
The Comments on many places of the Proverbs.

M. Bolton, his directions for a comfortable walking with God.

M. Perkins: Treatise concerning the government of the Tongue.

Covetousness.
D. Preston: Remedy against covetousness.

D. Stoughton: Baruchs sore gently opened.

Rob: Harris: Remedy against covetousness.

Jer: Dyke: A counterpoyson against covetousnes

Self-love.
M. Rogers History of Naaman.

M. Dyke, of the heart.

BP Hall, the great Impostor: on Jer. 17. 9.

Jo: Downham: Spiritual warfare.

Thoughts.
Tho: Cowper: Government of Thoughts.

Tho: Goodwin: Vanity of Thoughts.

M. Perkins: Treatise of man's imaginations.

M. Cotton. The Christians charge: ^n Prove. 24. 3

Will. Fenner. The use and benefit of divine meditations. The Arraignement of
vain and evil Thoughts.
Contentation.
D. Tailor.

BP Hall.

Hen. Mason.

M. Burroughes.

V. The Gospel, (asiti distinguished from the Law, which was the condition of
the first Cov^nant) does require Faith, which is, Historical, James 2. 19.
Salvificall. (...); And here of Desertions, Ps. 51. 12. J^b 6. 4. (...), 2 Pet.
1. 10.

R^pentance The parts Search into sin, Lam. 3. 40. Godly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7.
10. Confession, Prove. 28. 13. Reformation, Isay 1. 16, 17.
Thetime, Late repentance, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11.



Of Faith.
Lumbard lib. 3. Aquinas 2. 2dae.

Joh. Wilson, some helps to Faith.

Tho. Ball.

D. Preston.

M. Pemble.

Dr Jackson.

Jo. Down.

Jo. Cotton The life of Faith. Sam. Ward

Ezekiel: Culverwell. Treatise of Faith.

Tho: Goodwin: Encouragements to Faith.

M. Perkins on the 11th chap. to the Hebrew. Grain of mustard seed.

Tho: Shepherd. The sound Believer.

Desertions.
Jos. Symonds The case of a deserted soul. cure DrSibs Souls Conflict. Bruised
Reed.

M. Greenham, comforts for afflicted consciences.

To. Bolton. Instructions for afflicted consciences.

Rob. Yarrow. Sovereign comforts.

Jo. Haiward. Strong helper.

Tho. Goodwin. Child of Light.

Will. Whateley: Oil of gladness.

Of Doubting
BP Babington. Combat between flesh and spirit. M. Perkins:

D. Saunderson: on Rom^ 14. 23.

Assurance.
Nath. Cole. The godly man's assurance.

M. ^reenham. Marks of a righteous man. Sure signs of election.

Will. Perkins. Treatise declaring whether a man be in the state of grace or
not.

Another Treatise resolving this case of conscience, How a man may know whether
he be the child of God.

Sam: Hieron Trial of adoption, 1 John 3. 10. Spiritual sonneship 1 John 3.
1. The spiritual man's task. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19. M. Byfeild: Signs of a godly and
wicked man. Assurance of Gods love, and man's salvation.

Tim: Rogers. The righteous man's evidence for heaven.

M. Roberts, Believers Evidences.

Will. Whateley. Gods husbandry.

Drexelius. The Christian Zodiac.

Repentance.
Dr Tailor. Dan: Dyke.

Mr Stock. Ar. Dent.

M. Perkins Exhortation to repentance. Of the nature and practice of
repentance.

Dr Preston Judas his repentance. Paul's conversion.

The Tracts of conversion, as Jo: Cotton, the way of life, or the whole work of
conversion.

Tho: Shepherd. The sincere convert.

M. Hooker, the Souls Preparation. Humiliation. Vocation. Exaltation. Union.
Implantation.

Those that comment on the 51. Psalm, as BP Lake.

Will: Cowper. Sam: Hieron. Mr. Hildersham, etc.

D. Hammond. Of late Repentance.

William Fenner. Danger of deferring repentance.

Though this Analysis does not deserve to be much commended, as being in some
respects defective, and besides the rules of Art, yet it may serve for instance
and direction to others, in the finding out a better. The several particulars
may be used as Commonplace heads, unto which to refer the collections of our
reading.

Now (I say) when a Minister has thus distinctly passed over the substance of
Divinity under such heads as these: it will be very easy for him afterward to
enlarge himself upon any particular subject or text with natural pertinent
matter.

There are some other helps of invention to which the Art of Rhetoric does
direct, according to the subject we are to handle, whether Demonstrative Praise
Dispraise.
Deliberative Persuade. Dissuade,
Judicial Accuse. Defend.




For each of which there are several Topics, but it is supposed that every
Minister is acquainted with those things in his preparatory studies, and
therefore I forbear any further mention of them.

Thus much of the two first helps unto the gift of Preaching, Method. Matter.


The third and last to be insisted upon is concerning Expression; In which
there are two things considerable, Phrase. Eloquution.


The phrase should be plain, full, wholesome, affectionate.

1. It must be plain and natural, not being darkened with the affectation of
Scholastic all harshnesse, or Rhetorical fluorishes. Obscurity in the
discourse is an argument of ignorance in the mind. The greatest learning is to
b^ seen in the greatest plainness. The more clearly we understand any thing
our selves, the more easily can we expound it to others. When the notion it
self is good, the best way to set it off, is in the most obvious plain
expression. S. Paul does often glory in this, that his preaching was not in
wisdom of words, or excellency of speech; not with 1 Cor. 1. 17. cap. 2. 1,
4. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 4
enticing word: of man's wisdom, not as pleasing men, but God, who tries the
heart. A Minister should speak as the oracles of God, 1 Pet. 4. 11. And it will
not become the Majesty of a Divine Embassage, Non quaerit aeger mediqum
eloquentem, sed sanantem. sen. Ep. 76.
to be garnished out with flaunting affected eloquence. How unsuitable is it to
the expectation of a hungry soul, who comes unto this ordinance with a desire
of spiritual comfort and instruction, and there to hear only a starched speech
full of puerile worded Rhetoric? How properly may such a deceived hearer take
up that of Seneca? Quid mihi lusoria ista proponis? Non Epist. 49.
est jocandi locus, ad miseros vocatus es, op^m te laturum naufragis, captis,
aegris, intentae securi subjectum pr^stantibus caput, quo diverteris? quid
agis? It Is a sign of low thoughts and designs, when a man's chief study is
about the polishing of his phrase and words. Cujuscunque orationem vides Epist.
21.
politam and sollicitam, scito animum in pusillis occupatum. Such a one speaks
only from his mouth, and not from his heart.

2. It must be full, without empty and needless Tautologies, which are to be
avoided in every solid business, much more in sacred. Our expressions should
be so close, that they may not be obscure, and so plain, that they may not seem
vain and tedious. To deliver things in a crude confused manner, without
digesting of them by previous meditation, will nauseate the hearers, and is as
improper for the edification of the mind, as raw meat is for the nourishment
of the body.

3. It must be sound and wholesome, not tainted with any erroneous corrupt
doctrine, or the affectation 1 Timothy 6. 3. 2 Timothy 13. Tit, 2. 7.
of novelty. False opinions do many times insinuate themselves by the use of
suspicious phrases. And it is a dangerous fault, when men cannot content
themselves with the wholesome fo^me of sound words, but do altogether affect
new light 1 Timothy 6, 20.
and new language, which may in time destroy practical Godliness and the
power of Religion.

(...).
4. It must be affectionate and cordial, as proceeding from the heart, and an
experimental acquaintance with those truths which we deliver. Quod procedit e
cord redit in cor: It Is a hard matter to affect others, with what we are not
first affected our selves. Praecipuum ad persuadendum est amare quod suades,
Amanti pectus ipsum suggerit o^ationis ardorem. It Is said of John the Baptist,
that he was a burning and a shining light. Ardere prius est, Lucere posterius;
Ardor mentis est, ^ux doctrinae. This is to speak in the evidence and
demonst^ation of the spirit and of power. There is a common relation to this
purpose, of diverse learned men, who having a great while, with much argument
and strength of reason, contended with another about persuading him to be
baptized, he being learned also, could still evade all their arguments. At
length a grave pious man amongst them, of no note for learning, stands up and
bespeaks him with some downright affectionate expressions, which wrought so
effectually upon the other, that he presently submitted; yielding this reason,
Donec audiebam rations humanas, humanis rationibus repugnabam; caeterum simul
atque audivi Spi^itum loquentem, cessi Spiritui. And it is storied of Iunius,
before his conversion, that meeting once with a Countryman as he was in a
journey, and falling into discourse with him about diverse points of Religion,
he observed the plain fellow to talk so experimentally, with so much
heartinesse and affection, as made him first begin to think, that sure there
was something more in those truths, then his notionall humane learning had yet
discovered: which occasioned his more serious inquiry into them, and afterward
his conversion. Such great power is there in these cordial expressions.

As for the manner of composing Sermons, it will not be convenient for one that
is a constant Preacher, to pen all his discourses, or to tie himself unto
phrases: When we have the matter and notion well digested, the expressions of
it will easily follow. Whereas to be confined unto particular words, besides
the great oppression of the memory, will likewise much prejudice the operations
of the understanding and affections. The judgment will b^ much weakened, and the
affections dulled, when the memory is overmuch burdened and vexed. A man cannot
ordinarily be so much affected himself, (and consequently he cannot so easily
affect others) with things that he speaks by rote; as when he takes some
liberty to prosecute a matter according to his more immediate apprehensions of
it, by which many particulars may be suggested, that were not before thought
of, when he does expatiate upon any subject, according to the workings of his
own affections, and the various alterations that may appear in the auditory.
And then besides, this liberty will breed a (...), such a fitting confidence,
as should be in that orator, who is to have a power over the affections of
others, which such a one is scarce capable of, who shall so servilely tie
himself to particular words and expressions, from which he dares not vary for
fear of being out.

But a man cannot expect a good habit of preaching thus, without much study and
experience. Young beginners should use themselves to a more exact and elaborate
way, when a good style and expression is first learned by penning, it will
afterward be more easily retained in discoursing.

In the elocution there are two extremities to be avoided: too much Boldness.
Fear.


1. Against too much rashness and boldness, consider the special presence of
God, and Angels, the solemn dignity of those sacred mysteries with which we
are entrusted, the weighty business of saving souls. And who can be sufficient
for these 2 Cor. 2. 16.
things? It was a usual saying of Luther, Et si jam senex, and in concionando
exercitus sum, tamen timeo quoties suggestum conscendo. And he found by
experience, that when he was most distrustful of his own preparations, then
were his labors accompanied with some special blessing and efficacy. And on
the other side, when he was most confident, then he failed most.

2. Against too much fear, Consider, it does not become the business we are
about, we should speak the word with boldness, God has promised his
assistance, that his strength shall Acts 4. 29.
appear in our weakness, It does not become the dignity or excellency of our
calling, we are the Angels, the Ambassadors of God, (...), his 1 Cor. 3. 9.
fellow-workers, And besides, this timerousnesse in the speaker will much
hinder the efficacy and power of the word on the hearers. In brief, the most
propermanner of eloquution is with modesty and gravity, which will best suit
with our calling and business.

To conclude. The observation of these helps and directions, together with
frequent diligent practice, will as far (as Art can effect) quickly produce a
good habit, and by consequence a facility.

FINIS.
The Table.
A
AFflictions. page 101 Atheism. 112 Anger. 119 Alms and Hospitality. 121
Assurance. 125
C
Concordances. page 39 Coment: on the Bible. 43 Catechismes. 69 Casuists. 72
Creed. 73 Controversies about discipline; viz. Episcopacy, Presbytery,
Independency. 76 Controversies about doctrine, with -- Papists, Lutherans,
Socinians, Arminians, Anabapt. Antinomians. 79 Councels. 88 Confessions. 89
Church. 95 Creation. 99 Christ's offices, Humiliation and Exaltation. ibid
Conscienc^. 101 Covenant of Grace. 105 Ceremonial and Judicial Law. ibid
Christian Liberty. 108 Care of our words. 123 Covetousness. ibid Contentation.
124
D
Decalogue page 73 Diligence in Callings 121 Defertions. 125
E
Editions of the Bible. page 34 Eccles. History. 87
F
Four last things. page 110 Faith. 124
G
God. page 97 Good company. 111
H
Heathen Moralists. page 83 Heresiologies. 89 Happiness. 94 Hearing and
reading the word. 111 Heresy, Apostasy, Error. 113 Humility and Patience.
114
I
Jewish learning. page 83 Immortality of the Soul. 101 Justification. 107 Joy
and peace of mind. 108 Idolatry. Superstition. 115 Intemperance. 119 Justice
and Equity. page 121
K
Knowledge of God. page 113
L
Lives. page 89 Love, Hope, Fear. 113 Lying and Slandering. 123
M
Mystical Divinity page 71 Martirologies. 90 Man in general. 100 Mortality.
101 Mortification. 108 Moral Law. 112 Murder. 119
O
Oaths, Vows, Lots. page 117
P
Proverbial expressions. page 42 Postillers. 65 Practical Divinity. 67
Predestination. 97 Providence. 99 Passions. 101 Progress in grace. 108
Perseverance. 111 Prayer. 72. and 111 Preaching. 115 Political and
Oeconomicall duties. 117
R
Reconcilers page 67 Religion. 95 Redemption. 99 Religious Fasts. 115
Restitution. 121 Repentance. 126
S
Scripture. page 95 Sripture-Philosophy -- Chron^logy-Geography-Weighs and
measures, -Schemes and Tropes. Allegories. 4^ Systems of Divinity. 70
Sacraments. 73. and 105 Schoolmen. 74 Sin. 10^ Sanctification. 107 Self-Love.
123 Self-denial. 10^ Sincerity. 10 Sabbath. 117 Sca^dall and Friendship. 119
Sacrilege. 120
T
Thoughts. page 123
V
Vivification page 108 Usury. Bribery 121 Writings of the Fathers. 84
Watchfulness. 110 Witchcraft. 115 Whoredom. Divorce. 119
Z
Zeal. 111
FINIS.
These Books are Printed for SA. GELLIBRAND, And are to be sold at his Shop at
the Ball in Paul's Churchyard.
Dr. Twiss Synod of Dorts and Ales. Mr. Paul Bain on the Ephesians. M. Bowls
de Pastore Evangelico. M. Robert Bailie's Disswasive against Brownists. Against
Anabaptists Historical Vindication of the Church of Scotland. Antidote against
Arminianisme.
M. Cotton of the Way of Life M. Sym. Treatise of Life and Self-murder. M.
Downh^n Plea for the Poor. Dr. Stoughton Body of Divinity. Dr. Cheynell, The
Rise and Growth of Socinianisine. The divine Trinunity of the Godhead.
M. Goodwin The vanity of Thoughts. M. Morton The state of the Church.
Threefold state of Man.
Piscator's Aphorisms in English. Of Justification.
Chillingworthi Novissima. Dr. Saunderson's 14. Sermons. M. Sheffield of
Conscience. M. Sedgwick Christ's Counsel to Sardis. Sr. Jo. Temple History of
the Irish Rebellion. Dr. Tailor on the Revelation. Dr. Wilkins, Ecclesiastes or
a Discourse of Preaching. Mathematical Magic. The Beauty of Providence.
M. Wallis his Animadversions on the Lord Brooks his book of Truth. M.
Bradwel's Helps for sudden Accidents. M. Sedgwick against Antinomianisme. The
Mystery of Iniquity yet working in England, Scotland, and Ireland. Plain
English. The Life and Death of Ms. Brettergh. The Art of Surveying. The Jewel
of Arithmetic. An Account given to the Parliament by the Ministers sent to
Oxon.
SERMONS Preached by
M. Oliver Bowls 1. M. Ed. Bowls 1. M. Bond 1. M. Baily 2. M. Catelyn 2. Dr.
Cheynell 3. M. Hall 1. Dr. Horton 1. M. Marshall 3. M. Maynard 2. M. Nalton 1.
M. Palmer 1. M. Pickering 1. M. Ob. Sedgwick 5. M. Jo. Sedgwick 2. Dr. Tuckney
1. Dr. Temple 1. Dr. Hen. Wilkinson 3.

