A Discourse concerning the Beauty of PROVIDENCE In all the rugged passages of
it.

Very seasonable to quiet and support the heart in these times of public
confusion.

By JOHN WILKINS. B. D.

PSALM. 25. 10. All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth, to such as keep
his Co^^^^^^ and his Testimonies. LONDON: Printed for Sa: Ge^^ibrand at the
Brazen Serpent in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1649.

THE PREFACE to the READER.
AMongst all other Doctrines, this of Providence (though it do properly belong
to Natural Theology, yet) is of as Universal concernment, both for knowledge
and practice, as any other point, in Christian Divinity.

The very Heathen have acknowledged, not only a Universal providence of God,
which puts the general kinds of things into a regular way of working, But his
particular providence likewise, which takes care of Individual persons and
actions. Why else do all religions oblige men to pray unto him, and to expect
his special assistance, in every kind of want or necessity?

But now, though this common principle be so universally acknowledged in the
Notion of it, yet men are generally very negligent in the practical
application of it, to particular times and conditions; And so loose that
comfort and satisfaction that may be reaped from it.

It is the chief aim and business of this Discourse, to convince and quicken
men unto this duty, as being by so much the more seasonable for these times,
by how much the present troubles and confusions do now call upon us for it.

It cannot but occasion some suggestions of Diffidence and Infidelity, to
consider those many strange revolutions and changes in the world, which in
outward appearance, seem so full of disorder and wild contingencies. And
therefore it must needs be of special consequence for a man to have his heart
established in the knowledge and belief of this truth here insisted upon.

In all ages of the Psalm. 73. Ier. 12.
world men have been much startled in their judgments, by that unequal
dispensation which seems to be in these outward things. That one event should
Eccles. 9. 2
be to the righteous and the wicked. Nay, That Cap. 7. 15.
a just man should perish in his righteousness, and the wicked should C. 8. 14.
prosper in his wickedness. That on the side of the Oppressor there C. 4 v. 1
should be might, and the Oppressed should have none to comfort them. This has
sometimes so amazed and perplexed the thoughts of considering men, that whilst
they looked barely upon events, they could not tell how to extricate themselves
from these difficulties; which occasioned that speech of Solomon, Surely
oppression makes a wise man mad: that C. 7. v. 7.
is, puts him to his wits end, transports him with wild imaginations, whilst
he knows not readily what to answer in defense of such proceedings.

But now, he that shall seriously consider, how every thing is managed by an
allseeing Providence, which is exactly careful, and infinitely wise, such a
man will be easily satisfied, that in all these obscure administrations, (which
seem unto us so full of casual, negligent, promiscuous events) there is an
admirable, (though unsearchable) contrivance.

As for the particular design which Providence may aim at in some
dispensations, this does not always fall under our reach. It is the glory of
God Prove. 25. 2
to conceal a matter. And many of his works are so ordered, that though a man
labor to seek them out, yet he shall not find them. Yea further, Though a
wise man Eccles 8. 17.
think to know them, yet shall he not be able to find them. And therefore, where
we cannot understand his ways, it is there our duty, with an humble reverence
to believe and admire the wisdom of them.

How would this, (if rightly considered and applied) silence all those unseemly
murmurings and complaints of men in these times. Remember, there is nothing
befalls us but what the counsel of God had before determined to be Act. 4. 28.
done. And he can order things for the best, as well when they cross our
desires, as when they comply with them.

And therefore when Eccles. 5. 8.
you see the violent perverting of judgment and justice in a Province, marvel
not at the matter. That is, Be not transported with wonder or impatience, or
unbelief, as if the Providence of God were regardlesse or negligent. For he
that is higher then the highest regards. Though they that have the highest
power amongst men, may be so far from remedying, that they rather encourage
such disorders, yet God has a strict, watchful eye upon them. And though men
may be apt to secure themselves in such proceedings, by the greatness of their
own strength, as if there were nothing above them, yet there are higher then
they. And there is a C. 3. 17.
time, when God will judge both the righteous and the wicked.

Let us be careful of our own duty, to serve Providence in the usual means,
and leave the disposal of events to him. It should be every man's chief
business, to clear up the evidences of his particular title and relation, unto
this great Governor of the world, and this will be the surest means to set us
above the fear or hurt of all outward changes.

We see with what Artifice and compliance men will insinuate themselves, into
the affection of those who (according to several revolutions) are advaneed
into the places of power. Of how much greater advantage would it be, to get an
interest in his favor, who does and shall always rule over the sons of men,
having all times at his disposal, out of whose hands no strength or policy,
shall ever be able to wrest the sway and dominion of things.

It cannot but afford strong consolation unto every true believer to consider,
that he who has the chief influence, in all these great changes and variety of
events in the world, is both his God, and his Father.

How did this quiet the heart of old Eli, I Sam. 3. 18. It is the Lord, let him
do what seenieth him good. And David upon the same consideration professes, I
was dumb, and opened not my mouth, Psalm. 39. 9.
because thou did it. And our blessed Savior himself makes use of this
argument. The Ioh. 18. 11
cup that my Father has given me, shall I not drink it? Though the potion be
bitter, and displeasing, yet so long as it comes from a loving and careful
Father, we have no reason to fear any hurt by it.

And on the other side, much of men's unquietness and dejection, is occasioned,
either by the want of this evidence, or by the neglect of applying it. When
they terminate their thoughts upon secondary instruments, Fearing Isa. 51. 12,
13.
men that shall dye, and the sons of men that shall be made as grafse:
Forgetting the Lord their maker, who stretched forth the heavens, and laid the
foundations of the earth. This is that which makes men to fear continually,
because of the fury of the Oppressor.

How would it compose all these fears and distempers, if men would but labor
after this assurance of their interest in God with the same zeal and intention
of mind wherewith they prosecute their particular engagements, and animosities
against one another. He that has God for his strength and refuge, is always
sure to be on the strongest side, and need not fear the most tempestuous
mutations. Though the earth be removed, Psalm. 46. 1, 2, 3.
and the mountains should be carried into the midst of the Sea: Though the
waters thereof roar, and be troubled, and the mountains shake with the swelling
thereof.

Thus much I thought fit to premise in the general, concerning the necessity,
and seasonablenesse of this Subject.

As for the particular occasion of publishing this Discourse, I have nothing to
say but this: That being solicited for a Copy of it, by diverse persons (and
some of eminent quality) before whom it was occasionally Preached, I knew not
any more convenient way to satisfy their desires, then by such a public
communication of it.

I could speak something from my own experience concerning the efficacy of
this Doctrine against those damps and dejections of mind, unto which, such
times as these, will expose a man. It is my hearty prayer, that it may be
useful to others also in this respect.

Farewe'l.
THE BEAUTY of PROVIDENCE.
Eccles. 3. 11. He has made every thing beautiful in his time: also he has
set the world in their heart, yet no man can find out the work that God makes
from the beginning to the end.


THis Book contains Solomon's experience in his search for contentment; which
being not to be found amongst any of the creatures, he advises, never to
trouble our selves in an eager prosecution after them, but to enjoy our
possessions with a cheerful liberal mind, without perplexing our selves in
such cares and labors, as may defraud us of those honest comforts to be had by
them. For there is nothing better for a man then that he should eat and drink,
and make his soul enjoy good in his labor. ca. 2. v. 24. That Is one of the
conclusions which Solomon in^ers from his former discourse, and which he
further am lifies, and confirms in the following parts of his Sermon. It being
his chief scope in this book, to direct men how to behave themselves with
cheerfulness and contentment, under all those great revolutions, and that
variety of events, which may befall them in the world.

This Chapter contains a discourse concerning Gods government and disposal of
times; and is therefore not unfitly styled, the Calendar or Ephemerides of
seasons: whence the Wiseman with diverse arguments urges upon us what he had
before commended, a cheerful and contented mind.

The text is one of these arguments: God has made every thing beautiful in
his time; that is, There is a wise order and contrivance in all the works of
Providence; Every particular event is most seasonable in that time which God
appoints; And therefore we have no reason to repine at our condition, as if
matters did not go well with us, for it is impossible they should have been
better then they are, though they do cross our private hopes and desires; yet
God best understands the fittest order and season for all things, making them
beautiful in his time.

Also he has set the world in their heart: By world here is not meant this
material world, but seculum, the succession and course of things, as the
original word (...) does properly import. This God has set in, or (...)
ex. pounded unto men's hearts, that is, he has endowed us with an ability to
discern in some measure that seasonablenes which he observes in the government
of the world.

Yet there is no man can find out the work that God makes from the beginning to
the end: that is, it is above humane ability to comprehend the reason of all
divine proceedings, we cannot find them fully out from the beginning to the
end.

Others conceive that the words may be more This very suitable to the original.
properly rendered thus: As long as the world shall last, God does reveal unto
men's hearts, the work which he makes, from the beginning to the end, excepting
only some things unto which man cannot attain. As if he should have said, In
all ages of the world, here are still some passages of providence, wherein men
may be able to discern a beauty and comeliness though there are some other
particulars, which we cannot understand. The sense of both Interpretations,
being for the substance, much alike.

That Is the connection and meaning of the whole verse. The text according to its
natural fullness does compr^ze in it these three particulars.

1. Every thing has its time.

2. Every thing in its time is beautiful.

3. That is the proper season for all things which God appoints.

1. Every thing has its time. To all things there is an appointed season. ver.
1. Not only for such natural events, as bear in them a kind of necessity, as
a time to be born, and a time to dye: ver. 2. But also for those voluntary
actions, that seem to be most alterable and contingent, A time to weep, and a
time to laugh; ver. 4. The wisdom of Providence in the government of this
lower world, has disposed to every thing its particular season. This is that
which we call, the fullness of time, the ripeness of season. Prove. 27. 1. the
wiseman says there, that the day brings forth events, Paritura est dies,
alluding to a teeming (...)
mother, to whom there is a set date for her delivery. So does Time travail
with the decrees of Providence, and for each several action, there is a
pregnancy, a fulness of time.

2. Every thing in its time is beautiful, even such matters as in their own
natures are not without some deformity. A time to kill, ver. 3. A time to
mourn, ver. 4. A time of hate, and a time of war, ver. 8. The scorching of
Summer, and the extreme cold of Winter, though both in themselves alike
distaftfull, yet are comely in their seasons, and those times would not be so
beautiful without them. Nor is it the natural goodness of any thing that can
make it comely, out of its proper season. That which Beauty is in bodies, and
Harmony in sounds, that is opportunity in Time; Now as white and red, which are
the usual materials of beauty, as those particular notes of which Music does
consist, may be so disposed of, as to cause deformity and discord. So actions
which in themselves are good, may be depraved by their unseasonablenes.

3. That is the proper season for all things which God appoints. Or thus. Every
particular event, is most beautiful in that time which the Providence of God
has allotted to it. It Is above the contrivance of humane policy to bring
matters about in their fittest order. And therefore twere but folly to conclude
that things do not fall out well, unless they answer our desires; for God best
understands the fittest season for every purpose. And whatsoever, or whenever
he works, you may be sure, it is both beautiful, and in its time; Even those
events, which do most thwart our private ends, (could all circumstances be duly
considered) we should find them to be performed, in their most comely order,
and best opportunity.

As for the two first particulars, though they are employed in the text, yet are
they more expressly handled in the former verses. And therefore I shall pass
them over, without any further enlargement, insisting only upon this latter,
as being more directly agreeable to the main scope of the words.

And it is a subject, that in many respects will deserve your more especial
attention; It Is not commonly treated of. And besides, it may very much conduce
to our contentment, to settle our hearts, against all those conditions that may
be fall us in the world. It Is of very general use and concernment, suitable to
all times and occasions. For times of suffering, to make us patient and
submissive; For times of mercy, to make us cheerful, and thankful. In brief,
it extends to all persons, relations, businesses, seasons; nothing is more
generally useful then this, to have our hearts fully persuaded of that wise
order and contrivance which there is, in the disposal of every particular
event in the world. And it is more especially seasonable for times of trouble and
confusion, when men are apt to mistrust the government of Providence, as if he
did neglect the care of this lower world, and leave all things to their own
jarring principles. Then (I say) it is more especially seasonable, to vindicate
the care and wisdom of Providence, to show that every thing which God does is
best, and consequently, that these many distractions and confusions under which
we suffer are far better, then any other (though the most flourishing)
condition could be. And that is the subject I am now to insist upon. The point
is this.

Every particular event is Propos.
most beautiful in that time, which the providence of God has allotted to it.

A truth, by so much the more seasonable for these times, by how much it is now
the more difficult to believe it.

The Observation lies plainly both in the scope of the place, and the most
obvious sense of the words.

The Scripture is copious in other proofs to Confirmation by Testimony Divine.
this purpose. Deuteronomy. 32. 4. His work is perfect, and his ways are judgment, a
God of truth and without iniquity, just and right. Not only his first work of
creation is exactly good and perfect; but his ways of Providence also are
disposed with judgment and righteousness.

So again, Isa. 28. 29. The Lord of hosts is wonderful So Ier. 32. 19.
in counsel, and excellent in working. That is, every event of Providence, is
managed and pre-ordained by an admirable wisdom, and therefore must needs be of
excellent contrivance.

And again. Dan. 2. 20, 21. Wisdom and might are his, he changes the times
and the seasons: he removes Kings, and he sets up Kings. Those two
attributes of strength and wisdom Job 36. 5.
are for the most part put together in Scripture; God never shows any argument
of his strength, but his wisdom is engaged in it also. Those great alterations
and subversions, which happen in the world, do not more demonstrate the
greatness of his power in the doing of them, then the greatness of his
wisdom, in disposing of them for the best.

And again. Psalm. 104. 24. O Lord how manifold are thy works, in wisdom have
thou made them all, the earth is full of thy riches. Which is as well true of
the works of Providence, as of the works of creation.

But this truth is more directly intimated by that vision of Ezekiel, in the
first Chapter of his Prophecy, wherein he does express how all events in the
world are wisely disposed of, by the care and government of Providence. The
scope of that vision was to confirm the faith of the Prophet in the certainty
of those things which he was to foretell; because God himself by whom he was
inspired, had such a special influence, in the orderly managing of all inferior
events.

Though matters might seem to run upon wheels (as we say) to follow their own
courses, without any special guidance, to go at random, yet these wheels have
eyes in them, v. 18. that is, there is the eye of Providence which directs them
in their revolutions. Chron. 6 9. Prove. 15. 3
And then besides, these wheels are likewise governed by the four living
creatures, that Ver. 10.
is, by the Angels of God, who are fitted for all their services, with four
remarkableendowments

1. With wisdom and prudence, typified in that vision, by the face of a man.

2. Courage and resolution, the face of a Lion.

3. Sedulitie, and diligence, the face of an ox.

4. Swiftness and dispatch, the face of an Eagle.

In all which the Prophet does at large explain unto us, with what deliberate
care and forecast, the Providence of God does dispose of all these inferior
events.

This truth may yet be further evidenced, from Humane testimony.
the very light of Nature, and the testimony of the Heathen. Hence was it that
the Ancients did set forth their Gods with Harps in their hands, to show the
harmony they observed in the government of the world. And Bacons Sap. Vet.
Mid^^ was condemned to wear Asses ears, because he preferred Pans Pipe before
Apollo's Lute; Humane policy, before Divine Providence.

Nay the devil himself does acknowledge the wisdom and seasonablenesse of
Divine proceedings, and therefore would fain have sheltred himself under this
pretense, Matthew. 8. 29. Art thou come to torment us before our time? Implying
that it would not become the God of order to do any thing untimely. And
doubtless that must needs be an evident and a great truth, which is confessed by
the mouth of so great a liar.

For the further confirmation of this, let us a little consider, some of those
rugged passages of Providence, which seem to be performed with the greatest
negligence and deformity.

Look upon the History of Joseph, he was (you Examples.
know) one of the promised Seed, concerning whom, God had foretold, a
superiority and dominion, over the rest of his family. Now, that after this, he
should be exposed to the treachery of his malicious brethren; That besides his
nearness to slaughter from their hands, he should be sold into a far Country,
whence there was no hopes ever to hear of him again; That there he should be so
endangered by the rage of a lustful woman, and suffer so tedious and unjust an
imprisonment, all this might seem to be an oversight and neglect of
Providence, as if it had forgotten that promotion which Joseph was designed to.
And yet do but reflect upon the latter part of the story, and you shall find,
how all these misfortunes did mightily conduce, not only to his advancement,
but alto to the safety and preservation of that whole family, which was then
the visible Church. So that if each of his brethren had given him as much money
as they sold him for, it had not been so great a kindness as he received from
their intended cruelty.

It is an elegant gloss of St. Gregory upon this story, Divino judicio quod
declinare conati sunt, renitendo servierunt: Ideo vendit us est a fratribus
Joseph, ne adoraretur, sed ideo est adoratus quia venditus. It was so ordered
by Providence, that what they sought to decline, they did promote, even by
their striving against it; Joseph was therefore sold by his brethren, that he
might not be worshipped, and yet he was therefore worshipped because he was
sold. Sic divinum consilium dum devitatur, impletur; sic humana sapientia dum
reluctatur, comprehenditur. Even so the divine counsel is accomplished in
being opposed; so humane policy is defeated by the means of promoting it.

Thus also is it in the David.
history of David, he was (you know) designed to a Kingdom, but how many
straights was he put to before he attained it? being forced into the
wilderness like a wandering outlaw, and followed there by a company of
discontented persons, who were as ready perhaps, upon every trivial occasion
to revolt from him, as before from Saul. But above all the rest, his last
distress was one of the most desperate, when he was spoiled at Ziglag, not
only of his goods, but his wives and children too, when his own Soldiers in
their mutiny and discontent were ready to stone him; there being then but
little hopes to save his life, much less to get a Kingdom: And yet this
distress also, was in the event of it contrived to his advantage. For having
afterward pursued the Amalekites, he not only recovered his own, but got also
such abundance of other spoils from them, as served him for rich presents,
whereby he might renew and confirm the friendship of his well-wishers in
Israel, that after the death of Saul (which presently followed) he might by
their free votes be chose to succeed him. 1 Samuel 30. and Chap. 31.

You may observe likewise somewhat to this purpose in the story of Jonah, when
he was sent Jonah.
to Nineveh about so weighty a matter as the safety of that great populous
City, and that too, when their destruction was within ken, but forty days
off, that he should now make delays and fly to Tarshish, that upon such a
straight, he should run himself into hazards, might seem to argue some
carelessness, and neglect in the government of Providence. And yet this error
of his was so wisely managed in the event, that it proved a great advantage to
the main end of his business. For it is a probable opinion that these mariners,
who cast Jonah into the Sea, were a special occasion that his preaching was so
successful afterward. The Ninivites being by them informed, that this was
that Prophet, for whom they had lately suffered so violent a tempest, how the
wind ceased, and all was calmed again, when they had once cast him into the
Sea; from whence it was not possible he should be delivered but by a miracle.
And therefore they concluded, that this must needs be some man extraordinarily
inspired from above, and that his preaching was not idle threats, but such as
might justly fright them into that rigorous Fast which afterward we read of,
both for man and beast. It being the wisdom of Providence so to contrive it,
that this offense of Jonah should mightilyadvantage that end, which it did seem
most directly to oppose.

So likewise for that Paul and Barnabas.
distention betwixt Paul and Barnabas, Act 15. it might seem the unseasonable
breach, that could possibly be imagined, when the Church of the Christians was
now in its beginnings and infancy, that then the two chief members of it should
fall at variance amongst themselves, was such an untimely dissension that an
enemy could not wish them worse. Nothing could more thwart the promulgation of
the Gospel of Peace, then the contentions of those that preach it. If that
State which is already established into a Kingdom, divided against it self,
cannot Matthew. 12. 25.
stand, much less could those small beginnings think to increase into a Church
by divisions.

And yet this likewise was so disposed of in the event, that it did mightily
conduce to the propagation of the Gospel through the whole world; for by this
means, those two parted asunder, the one into Cyprus, the other into Syria and
Cylicia, and like two mighty streams Ver. 39, 40, 41.
spread themselves several ways, that so they might the better water the
barren and thirsty corners of the world.

Thus have you seen the Beauty of Providence in some rugged passages of it. It Is
so in everyother parti^cular, though seeming unto us never so deformed. But man
cannot find out the work of God from the beginning to the end.

For the further evidencing of this truth, Confirmation by Reason.
there are two grounds upon which it is bottomed, that being rightly understood
and considered, will make the point very clear.

1. God is exactly careful of every thing.

2. He is infinitely wise for the disposal of all to the best.

1. God does overlook 1 Reason.
all things by an especial Providence. Ephesians. 1. 11. He works all things
after the counsel of his own will. There is no event in the world but it is
ordered both according to Gods will, and by his counsel. Psalm. 135. 6.
Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he, both in heaven, and in earth, and in
the Sea, and in all deep places. Not only in the heaven, where his glory is
more especially conspicuous, but in the earth too, where matters seem to be
full of confusion; And in the Sea, and in all deep places, where we cannot so
much as take notice of them. There is nothing so great but is under his power;
nothing so little but is within his care. Those actions and events that seem
unto us most free, casual, inconsiderable, are all of them ordered by his
providence.

1. That which is most free, the hearts and affections of men do follow the
guidance of his decrees; men may do after their own counsels and inclinations,
but they are still suitable to his Providence; there is nothing more in our
command, then our thoughts and words, and yet both the preparation of the
heart, and the answer of the tongue is from the Lord. Prove. 16. 1.

2. That which seems most casual, The disposing the Lot is from him. Prove. 16.
33. He who is accidentally slain by another is said to be delivered into his
hands by God. Exodus 21. 13. That casual arrow shot at random was directed by
Providence to fulfill the prediction of Ahaos death. 1 Kin. 22. 34 There is no
liberty for causes to operate in a loose and straggling way, but in matters of
greatest uncertainty there is a pre-ordained course of effects.

3. The least most inconsiderable things, are not neglected by Providence. It
was a Like that of the Poet:
profane speech of the Aramites, Non vacat exiguis rebus adesse Jovi.
That God was the God of the mountains, not of the valleys. 1 King. 20. 23.
whereas he regards the lowest the least thing as well as the greatest. The
young Lions, Psalm. 104. 21. The Ravens, Psalm. 147. 9. are provided for by him.
He feeds the fowls of the air, adorns the lilly, and clothes the grass of the
field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the oven. Sparrows (you
know) are but cheap birds, Are not two of them sold for a farthing? Matthew. 10.
29. And yet not one of these does fall to the ground without your Father. He
must give the Fowler leave to kill them; nay when they are upon the wing in
their frequent and often repeated motions, yet then it is he that must appoint
them the time and place when and where they shall settle; and in this sense
also, not one of them does fall to the ground without your Father. The hairs of
our head, are yet less observable, contemptible even to a Proverb, Pili non
facio, Ne pilo quidem melius. And yet these with God, are inter numerata,
amongst those things whereof he takes an exact account.

That place, 1 Cor. 9. 9. Does God take care for oxen? does not simply exempt
such things from thelaw of his Providence; but it is Argumentum a minori, and
does imply his more especial care of that higher rank of creatures to whom
these are subordinate. The plain meaning of it is, That if God has by a
particular law provided that the Ox should not be muzled, which treads out the
corn, He will be much more careful of the laborers in his Harvest.

It Is recorded to the glory of some Ancient Generals, that they were able to
call every common Soldier by his own name, and careful to provide, not only
pay for their Captains, but litter also for the meanest beast that did serve
the Camp. Now you know there is not any creature but is a soldier to the Lord
of hosts, he does sometimes muster up an Army of lice and flies, and therefore
it is but reason that his Providence should take care for such things also. Why
should it not be as great an argument of his power to preserve and order these
lesser creatures, as it was at first to make them? The creation of a glorious
Angel, did not cost him more, then that of a despicable fly. Was it not he,
that out of the same primitive nothing, put that difference, which there is
amongst several natures? And if the Painter in the same piece draw a silken
and a woollen garment, why should he value the one above the other, since it
was the same art that did both make and distinguish them?

2. As his Providence 2 Reas.
does extend to al things; so likewise does his wisdom. As he is exactly
careful, so is he infinitely wise; and therefore as able for the contrivance
of every the least particular thing, as he would be, if he had nothing but that
to look after. If the Providence of God had but one project on foot, we could
easily conceive how he might be able to drive that through all the windings and
circumstances of it, with care and wisdom. Nay we would trust any wise man
with the managing of a single business, when he had nothing else to distract his
endeavors: But for all those multitude of affairs amongst men and Angels, nay
for the very circumstances and manner of all those several actions and
motions, which are performed in every moment of time through the whole world;
we cannot conceive but that in such a tumult of business, the eye of
Providence may be sometimes over-seen. But this arises from our mistake of the
Divine nature, we measure God by our own finite abilities, whereas we should
consider, that that which is infinite cannot be confined by time, or number, or
place; but is as well able at all times, to look to all things, in all places,
as if there were only one business to be cared for: You may see some imperfect
resemblance of this amongst the Creatures. Do but consider the Sun how that at
the same time, without labor or confusion, is employed in diverse services for
all the creatures under heaven. The distinctions of seasons, the growth of
several plants, its various influence upon Minerals, the cherishing of living
creatures, with sundry other such variety of employments, which we are not
able so much as to take notice of. Or else, do but mark the nature of the Soul,
which at the same time perhaps does contemplate heaven, direct the body in its
sundry motions, distribute the food in a wise proportion to the several
parts, not neglecting so much as the least hair about it, but supplying that
with suitable nourishment. And all this it does without weariness or
distraction. And if a creature can do thus, much more then the Creator, who
gives to every thing its proper ability, and does actuate all things, by a
more immediate assistance then the Soul it self. So that though we suppose
infinite occasions, (which notwithstanding creatures are not capable of) yet
the Providence and wisdom of God is infinite also; and there is the same
proportion of infinite to infinite, as of one to one.

Now put both these Reasons together, if the Providence of God be thus exactly
careful of every the least particular: If he be thus infinitely wise for the
disposal of all to the best, no wonder then, though every event in the world
be both beautiful, and in its time.

For the further clearing of this truth, there Vindication from doubts and
objections
are two doubts or quaeries to be resolved, that seem to oppose it.

1. What Is the reason why this Beauty of Providence does not appear to us, but
that many things seem so full of disorder and confusion in the world?

2. How may this consist with the permission of finfull actions, which can
neither be beautiful nor seasonable?

I begin with the first, to show the reason why in so many things we cannot
discern this beauty of Providence. The verse of the text tells us, That man
cannot find out the work of God from the beginning to the end: that is, it is
above humane capacity to comprehend the reason of all divine proceedings, we
cannot find them fully out, from the beginning to the end. And so Job 9. 10.
He does great things past finding out: Lo, he goes by me, and I see him not;
He passes on also but I perceive him not. And again, Chap. 23. 8, 9. Behold, I
go forward, but he is not there; and backward, but I cannot perceive him: on
the left hand where he does work, but I cannot behold him; he hides himself on
the right hand, that I cannot see him. The meaning is, that where ever Job
turned his eyes, there were still some passages of Providence which he could
not apprehend the meaning of. God has reserved this as a peculiar prerogative
to himself. It is not for us to know the times and the seasons, which the
Father has put in his own power. Act. 1. 7.

There may be a twofold reason of this.

1. The obscurity of the things themselves. There are treasures of wisdom,
Col. 2. 3. Not only for their preciousnesse, but for their privatenesse too.
Hidden wisdom, 2 Cor. 1. 7. Secrets of wisdom, And these are double to that
which is (as Zophar speaks) Job 11. 6. that is, Those concealed providence,
which we do not discern the reason of, are of much greater proportion then those
that appear. We read in that forecited place, Ezekiel. 1. 16. of a wheel within a
wheel, signifying those involutions and intricacies which there are in the
ways of Providence. And the Psalmist tells us that His way is in the Sea, and
his paths in the great waters; and his footsteps are not known. Psalm. 77. 19.

As it is in the works of Nature, where there are many common things of
excellent beauty, which for their littleness do not fall under our sense; they
that have experimented the use of Microscopes; can tell, how in the parts of
the most minute creatures, there may be discerned such gildings and
embroderies, and such curious variety as another would scarce believe. Why it is
so in the works of Providence, there are very many passages of frequent daily
occurrence, whose excellent contrivance does not fall under our sense or
observation.

2. Our own ignorance and short sightednesse, and that in a twofold respect.

1. We cannot see that end and drift which Providence aims at in many
particulars; and therefore, no wonder though they seem unto us rude and
uncomely. We measure things by this false balance of opinion, which weighs
only their outsides, and does not look upon their ends and relations. Now the
beauty of things does consist much in their tendency and reference to their
proper ends. If an ignoraut man that knows not the reason of a Winde-mill or
Water-mill, should look upon them only as places of habitation, he cannot
think them well situated, where they are so much exposed to the violence of
winds and waves: whereas he that understands how the wisdom of the Artificer
has contrived those motions unto useful ends, must needs confess a beauty
and comeliness in the work. It Is so likewise in the events of Providence, which
none can rightly apprehend, but he that understands the special drift and
purposes which they are designed to.

2. We cannot see the whole frame of things, how sundry particular events in a
mutual relation do concur to make up the beauty of the whole. He that can
discern only two or three wheels in a Clock, how they move one against
another, would presently think, that there were contrariety and confusion in
the work. Whereas he that beholds the whole frame, and discerns how all those
diverse motions do jointly conduce to the same end, cannot choose but
acknowledge a wise order in the contrivance of it. So likewise is it in the
frame of times, where he alone is fit to judge of particulars, who understands
how they refer to the general. But now we are but of yesterday and know
nothing, because our days upon earth are as a shadow (says Bildad) Job 8. 9.
We look upon things according to a short succession, and so are not able to
discern that beauty which there is in their references to other matters a
far of. But now to God a Psalm. 90. 4. 2 Pet. 3. 8.
thousand years are but as one day. He beholds all things whether past or to
come in the same instant. There is no succession in eternity, but all things
within the reach of time are present unto that. Though in the revolution of a
wheel, there be a mutual succession betwixt the parts contained in it; yet an
eye that is placed without can at the same time discern the whole motion. Thus
also is it in the revolution of time, where though there be a mutual
succession, betwixt those things that are contained under time, yet God who is
without and above it, does at the same view behold all together. So that it is
no wonder, though many things seem beautiful to him, which to us who are so
short-sighted may appear harsh and deformed.

2. The 2d. Quaerie was this. If there be such an overruling Providence, which
does dispose of all to the best; how comes it to pass that there are so many
sinful actions in the world?

To this I answer two things.

1. When men thwart Gods will of Precept, they serve his will of Providence.
Those particular intersts of gain, honor, pleasure, revenge, which sway men's
desires and actions, are wisely contrived to the promoting of Gods decrees and
glory. When Augustus made the general tax upon the world, His end was to
enrich himself, and fill his coffers But God used it as a means to fulfill the
prophecy of Christ's birth at Bethlehem. Rehoboam, and Jehu, and Cyrus, had all
their several aims, in those works, wherein they were subservient to
Providence And they did still accomplish his counsel in prosecuting their own
designs.

2. That which in respect of man's execution is wicked and disorderly, in
respect of Gods appointment is beautiful and comely. There could not be any
more horrid act, then the Betraying and crucifying of our blessed Savior; and
yet even in this, as it was decreed by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God: Act. 2. 23. there was the greatest miracle of divine
wisdom that ever was extended to the creature. Such depths of policy, which
all the subtlety of men or Angels, was not able to contrive, no nor to
suspect, (...), as the Apostle calls it, Ephesians. 3. 10. Interchangeable wisdom,
of curious variety, as the word signifies. Now if God could thus manage the
worst action of man to the best advantage of man, well then may we conclude,
that every event of providence is beautiful in its time.

I have now done with the Explication and Confirmation Application.
of the text. In the Application, it may be useful for these lessons.

1. For Information, and that in a twofold respect. 1 Use. For Information.


1. It may teach us our duty to take notice of, and observe the works of
Providence.

2. It may direct us what to judge of the affairs of these times, under which
we are fallen.

1. If all the events of Providence, be so wisely contrived, it is certainly then
our duty to consider and to take notice of them. Psalm. 111. 2. The works of the
Lord are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure therein. And again,
v. 4. He has so done his mavelous works that they ought to be had in
remembrance. Now a man cannot be said to seek out or to remember that which he
does not carefully observe. It Is the chief scope of that Psalm to excite men
unto this duty. And David makes it a note of piety for men to delight
themselves in the contemplation of Gods works, to remember him in his ways, as
the Prophet Isaiah speaks. This, Asaph Isa 64. 5.
found by experience to be a special Antidote against all diffidence and
carnal fears. In the 77. Psalm when he was surprised V. 7, 8, 9.
with those sad thoughts, Will the Lord cast us off for ever, and will he be no
more entreated? Hatb God forgotten to be gracious? etc. he presently applies
himself to this remedy, v. 11, 12. I will remember the works of the Lord,
surely I will remember thy wonders of old: I will meditate also of thy works,
and talk of thy doings.

If a man were but well read in the story and various passages of his life, he
might be able to make an experimental divinity of his own. He that is
observant of Gods former dealings and dispensations toward him, may be thence
furnished with a rich treasury of experience against all future conditions.

There are very many duties that depend upon a right understanding of the
times. A man knows not how to order his services of prayer and praises, without
some observation and skill in these. It was a great commendation which was
given to the men of Issachar, that they had understanding in the times to know
what Israel ought to do. 1 Chronicles. 12. 32. And the ignorance of these, the wise
man complains of, as being a very great evil: Eccles. 9. 12. For man knows
not his time, but as fishes are taken in an evil net, and as birds are caught
in the snare, so are the sons of men snared in an evil time when it falls
suddenly upon them.

Now this observance of Gods works and dispensations, is a duty always
seasonable, but more especially in such times as these. It Is commonly observed,
that though smooth and peaceable times are best for the liver, the man that
lives in them; yet times that are full of change and vicissitude are best for
the writer, the Historian that writes of them; so though quiet seasons may best
suit with our desires and outward condition, yet these disturbed confused
times, may be best improved by observation, and do most set forth the wisdom of
Providence.

The common providence of God in the various seasons and order of nature, may
afford excellent matter for contemplation, much more that special providence
of his in the guidance of humane affairs, which have been always managed with
various wisdom.

But especially in his dispensations toward these later ages, wherein there
have been many new, unusual emergencies, such as our forefathers have not
known.

How many strange observable passages, may a considering man pick out, amongst
the affairs of these few last years? How strangely has the whole course of
things both in Church and State, been turned about, beyond all men's
imaginations! How has God in every respect, and on all sides, pusled the
wisdom of the wise, and enfeebled the strength of the mighty, abating the
glory of all humane power, lifting himself up above others, in those things
wherein they dealt most proudly, effecting great matters, by despised means;
what strange ebbs and flows of hope have we known? When men have been most
full of confidence, then some unexpected accident has intervened, and
disappointed all. So that the wisest men have been often put to stand at a
gaze, not knowing what to judge of the issue of things; And (though we have not
had leisure to observe it, yet) there has been something equivalent to this, in
other Nations* The whole Christian world being generally full of strange
commotions. Now we may certainly conclude, that all these unusual turns and
changes of things are not for nothing. There is some great design to be
accomplished by them. It Is our duty with diligence to observe the passages, and
with patience to attend the issue.

2. This may direct us what to judge of the present times under which we are
fallen. If it be so that every particular event is so exactly regular and
beautiful; hence then we may infer, how all that confusion and disorder, which
seems to be in the affairs of these times, is not so much in the things
themselves, as in our mistake of them. The Roughest Seasons, (though they may
be unsuitable to our desires) yet have in them a proper comeliness, as well as
times of the greatest serenity.

True indeed, the Scripture does sometimes Ephesians. 5. 16.
mention evil days; but this is not so to be understood as if time in it self
could be evil, either Naturally, for so God pronounced it good; or Morally,
because it is not subjected to any moral rule: but only accidentally in respect
of our mistake and abuse of it: when either we judge of it according to our own
wishes, or mispend it according to our own lusts. It Is only unwise, 2 Timothy 3. 1,
5.
unholy men, that make unhappy times.

As in the works of Creation nothing is properly deformed, but every thing has
a peculiar beauty, according to tha rank and station wherein it is placed; Though
in vulgar speech we use to call a toad and a serpent ugly, yet that is only in
reference to common esteem; Whereas in respect of the universe they are as
regular and comely parts as any of the rest; their outward shapes being suitable
to their inward forms, and those purposes for which they were intended. So is
it likewise in the ways of Providence, those designs that in respect of our
apprehensions are carried on by a crypticall involved method, are yet in
themselves of as excellent contrivance, as any of those, that seem to be of
more facile and perspicuous order.

If a man in these times shall with his reason consult only the outward face
of things, they must needs seem full of irregularities and disorder; when the
spirits of men in the prosecution of the same ends, and the pretense of public
welfare shall be imbittered against one another, even to public ruin, when
there is a violent perverting of judgment and Eccles. 5. 8
justice in a Nation; and on the side of the oppressor there is might, but the
oppressed have none to comfort them. Cap. 4. 1.


When there is a total subversion of those degrees, in which the order and
harmony of things does consist, Servants being Eccles. 10. 7.
on horses, and Princes walking as servants on the earth. When the mountains
are removed, Job 95, 6.
and the pillars of the earth tremble. When Religion and Laws (which are the
foundations of a people) are out of course. Psalm. 11. 3.


And yet even in all this, there may be a design of Providence for our good.
This is certain, all Gods promises to his Church are infallibly true, and all
his dispensations (though never so cross in outward appearance) have a
tendency toward the fulfilling of those promises. And why should not a man
rest himself in this belief?

In our natural enquiries after the efficient cause of things, when our reason
is at a stand, we are fain sometimes to sit down, and satisfy our selves, in
the notion of occult qualities; And therefore much more should we be content to
be ignorant in the final cause of things, which lie more deep and obscure then
the other.

Let no man then presume to censure the several vicissitudes and changes of
things, as if they were unseasonable and ill contrived. Remember we are but
short-sighted, and cannot discern the various, references, and dependancies,
amongst the great affairs in the world, and therefore may be easily mistaken in
our opinion of them. We do in this world (for the most part) see only the dark
side of Providence. At the last and great day of manifestation, when the whole
plot of divine love shall be laid open, then we shall be able to discern the
beauty of Providence in all the rugged passages of it, how tribulation,
distress, persecution, famine, Romans 8. 28. 35.
nakedness, peril, and the sword, do all work for the best to those that love
God.

Judge nothing therefore before its time: 1 Cor. 4. 5. Consider, We cannot see
the works of God from the beginning to the end. And you know there is a vast
difference, betwixt the beginning and the end of a building. It may be our lots
perhaps in these times, to see only the beginning of the fabric, when the old
frame is demolished, the rubbish lies scattered about, the new materials being
so gathered into heaps Posterity perhaps may see the end of it, when all these
confused preparations shall be made up into a beautiful structure.

2. This may serve for 2 Use. For Reproof.
reproof of two sorts of persons.

1. Those that do not observe or regard the works of the Lord.

2. Those that murmur and repine at them.

1. This may reprove those that do not observe or regard the works of the Lord.
It Is a great argument of Infidelity and irreligion, when men let many remarkable
providence pass by them without notice or observation. Or when they look upon
them only in a slight and superficial manner, like those whom the Prophet
Isaiah complains of, Seeing many things, but observing not. Isa. 42. 20.


This sin of inadvertencie of Gods various Providence, has been oftentimes
severely threatened and punished in Scripture. Isa. 5. 12. Because they regard
not the work of the Lord, nor consider the operation of his hands, therefore is
my people gone into captivity. And again, Jer. 12. 11. The whole Land is made
desolate, because no man lays it to heart.

The heaviest judgments that can befall a Nation, are Captivity and
Desalation. And yet they are both denounced against this stupiditie and
carelessness of spirit. And you may guess at the heinousness of the sin, by
the greatness of the punishment.

It Is a sin, that is after a more especial manner appropriated to wicked men.
Psalm. 10. 4, 5. The wicked through the pride of his countenance will not seek
after God; God is not in all his thoughts. Thy judgments are far above out
of his sight. Things that he never enquires after or regards, as if he were not
at all concerned in them. Que supra ^os nihil ad nos. He ^ooks no further then
second causes, unto which he ascribes the success or miscarriage of events;
and does not take notice of that divine Providence by whose influence they are
guided. You see, this is made the note of wicked men. And therefore, as we
would avoid that censure, so will it concern us to avoid the sign.

2. This may serve for the reproof of those, that murmr and repine at the
works of Providence, that take upon them the magisteriall judgment of events;
as if they could tell, how to frame things much better, and to contrive the
issue of things to greater advantage. How ordinary is it, for men to discourse
thus, concerning the great changes of these times? As if the unsearchable ways
of God, were to be judged before the tribunal of humane reason; Who art thou O
man that disputest with God? (says the Apostle) how despicable in comparison
to his infinite majesty and wisdom. If there be a commonwealth amongst Ants
and Bees (as some Naturalists say there is) 'twould make a man smile to think,
that they should take upon them the censure of State matters amongst us men;
and yet here the disproportion is finite, whereas betwixt God and man it is
infinite. As the heavens are higher then the earth, so are Isa 55. 8, 9
my thoughts higher then your thoughts; and my ways then your ways.

He that will take upon him to mend the contrivance of things, let him remember
(says one of the Stoics) that the first thing he is to do, is to mend God, to
teach him Epictetus
wisdom and care. And if he shall think himself unfit for that, let him not
presume upon this. For consider, is not the Providence of God exactly careful
of every thing? Is not he infinitely wise to dispose of all to the best? Are
not all things subservient to his will? Why certainly then, (however matters
may appear to us) yet nothing could have been better then it is. Every thing
shall prove for the best in respect of his glory, and (if we belong to him) in
respect of our good too.

It Is an observable check which Solomon gives to such presumptuous persons as
are apt to repine at, and censure the course of things. Eccles. 7. 10. Say not
thou, what is the cause why the former days were better then these? far thou
do not enquire wisely concerning this. It should seem, that those
flourishing days of Solomon, so very eminent for all kind of plenty and peace
(Silver being in Jerusalem 1 King. 10. 7.
as stones; and Cedars, as the Sycamores in the vale for abundance) were not
yet without some morose repining spirits, who were still maligning the present
condition of things; And therefore no wonder, if we find the like humor
amongst men in other times.

This the wiseman does here reprove, both by a prohibition and a reason.

1. A prohibition. Say not thou, What is the cause why the former days were
better then these? that is, be not transported with that common humor, of
censuring and condemning the present state of times, and commending the times
past; As if the course of events were not managed by the same wise Providence
now, which governed the world before. He does not forbid men to enquire after
the cause of public sufferings; For this is frequently elsewhere enjoined in
Scripture, that upon the occasion of any special judgment, we should search
and try our hearts, consider our ways, and our doings, laboring to find out
the cause of Gods displeasure, that we may accordingly meet him in his ways.
But the meaning is, that we should not take upon us the peremptory censure of
times and dispensations, presuming to condemn those things, which we cannot
understand.

2. The Reason. For thou do not enquire wisely concerning this thing. That's a
figurative expression styled a Meiosis, when a phrase signifies much more then
the naked words do import. The meaning is, it is extreme folly for men to take
upon them the censure of times and providence, as if they were competent
judges of such matters.

There are two places of Scripture, that will make up a Sillogisme to prove
this conclusion.

He that judges of a matter before he has inquired into, and understands it,
It is folly and shame unto him: Prove. 18. 13. But now, It does not belong unto
us to know the times and the seasons which the Father has kept in his own
power. Act. 1. 7. And therefore it must needs be folly to take upon us the
magisteriall censure of such things.

Every day has its proper evil, as well the former Matt. 6. 34
as these; and every day has its proper advantage, as well these as the
former. The very dregs of time, if we endeavor to make a right use of them,
may be redeemed Ephesians. 5. 16.
into opportunity.

There are two reasons of men's offending in this kind.

1. When they look only upon some particulars, without the consideration of
their proper ends, or general frame; Now it is true indeed that some particular
events, singly looked upon, may seem very prejudicial; but the whole
contexture of affairs in their cooperation shall prove for the best. All things
shall work together, (...) for good to those that love God. To. 8. 28.

But now it is above our capacity to comprehend the whole frame of things; And
that is not disorder in respect of the whole, which to us may appear so, being
compared with some particulars. You know, that in the natural body, the
variety and dissimilitude of parts, is required to the beauty of the whole; the
roundnesse of the head, the length of the arm, the flatnesse of the hand,
blackness in one part, and whiteness in another; all these being singly
compared amongst themselves, though they may seem to argue some opposition and
difformitie, yet look upon them as they stand in relation to the whole frame,
and it will appear how in their several ways, they do each of them conduce to
its comeliness and order. If this lower world had in it no changes and
varieties, but were in all respects alike, it would not then be so properly
(...) a beautiful world, as (...), a lump or mass.

2. Another occasion of men's offending in this kind, is, when they will judge
of events, according as they suit with their own wishes. And in this case, it is
impossible that every humor should be satisfied; because particular desires,
(besides their opposition to one another) will likewise be inconsistent with
the general design. It would seem better perhaps to every private man, if he
himself were a Magistrate, or a King, and every common Soldier a Commander, or
a General. But how could this consist with the exigencies of a commonwealth,
or an Army, where there must be degrees, and disproportion of places according
to the necessity of several employments. It Is so in the government of this
great Universe: That difference which there is, betwixt particular things, and
times and persons, does much conduce to the beauty and convenience of the whole.

It Is our safest way then to conclude that all matters are for the best,
beautiful in their times, though to us they may seem full of disorder and
contrariety. Thus the Apostle, in that remarkable place Romans 11. 33. speaking
concerning the rejection of the Jews, when God would cast off and destroy his
peculiar people, and that for his own glory and advantage, He concludes, His
judgments are unsearchable, and his ways past finding out. But of him, and to
him, are all things. As if he should have said, God will do this strange work,
and though for my part, I know not the reason of it. His judgments are
unsearchable, etc. yet sure I am, that of him, and to him are all things; that
is, as the making of all things, was of his power, so the resolution of all
things shall be to his glory.

Though his judgments are as the great deep, for their obscurity and
unmeasurablenesse, not to be fathomed by our shallow apprehensions; yet his
righteousness is as the strong mountains, for their eminency and stablenes.
Psalm. 36. 6. Though clouds and darkness may be round about him, yet
righteousness and judgment are the habitation of his throne. Psalm. 97. 2.

3. This may serve for 3 Use. For Exhortation.
Exhortation, to persuade us unto these four duties.

1. Not to be too hasty in our desire or prosecution of any thing.

2. Not to trouble our selves with any sollicitous care about the success of
things.

3. To be equally prepared for all future events.

4. To behave ourselves with cheerfulness and contentment in all conditions.

1. Hence we learn not to be too hasty in our desire or prosecution of any
thing. God best knows the fittest season for every event; we shall have it when
its time is come, and before that, 'twould not be beautiful: Like snow in
Harvest Prove. 25. 13.
(as the Wiseman speaks) which though it might possibly be some refreshment to
our particular, yet would be a deformity in the course of Nature.

There are some men, whom the Prophet styles Translat. Fearful.
of a hasty heart, (...) Isa. 35. 4. who are too heady and impatient in their
hopes. And it is a weakness that arises from our infidelity and distrust of
Providence. For he that believes, makes not haste. Cap. 28. 16. It Is Gods
usual course to defer what he promises, thereby to exercise our faith, to put
an edge on our desires, and a value upon the blessing. In natural affairs, we
are fain to expect the proper season, and maturitie of things; the husbandman
will wait for his harvest, he does not expect to sow and reap both in a day.
It should be so likewise in other matters; And since that is always the
fittest time for every thing which God appoints, it will become us then
patiently to wait his leisure, and not with overhasty desires to run before
him.

Abraham was fain to tarry a long time for a Son, David for a Kingdom; and
the whole world for Christ. He that rightly understands the worth of any
blessing, and his own want, cannot think much to wait for it. The poor man, at
the pool of Bethesda, being sensible of his own lamenesse, was content to
tarry there 38. years in hopes of remedy. Suppose a promise were deserred to
the utmost, yet do but compare the shortness of our lives, with the duration
of our souls and then no delay can seem tedious. Neque Boethius. Consol. lib 4.
enim est aliquid in tam brevibus vitae metis ita serum quod longum expectaere
immortalis putet animus. A man conscious to himself of his own immortality,
cannot think any time long, which is confined within the narrow bounds of life.

Is there then any mercy which thou expectest? do not over rashly hasten it,
with any indirect project, as if thou were able to help the providence of God,
with wiles and devises of thine own. Though it be long in coming, yet it will
come at last, it cannot be more slow then sure. When Isaac was laid upon the
Altar, and bound for a sacrifice, and his Fathers hand lift up for the fatal
blow, yet then there came a rescue from heaven, which would not have been so
beautiful, if by any unlawful act it had been hastened before that time,
either by Abraham's sparing his Son, or Isaacs resisting his Father.

Joseph did undergo a tedious imprisonment in the Land of Egypt; it is likely,
being the key-keeper, he might have taken his own time, and have escaped when he
would But then he had lost his preferment; whereas by tarrying Gods leisure, he
was delivered with advantage. Though David had been a long while anointed to a
Kingdom, yet because he did not use any hasty means for the enjoying of it,
therefore did Providence clear the passage for him, and prospered it to him
afterward. He might have killed Saul in the Cave, and Abner too, when he 1 Samuel 24. 11. 26. 7.
found them sleeping; but then he had been overhastie: 'twere better they
should fall by their Enemies. The Lord shall smite them when their day shall
come to dye. 1 Samuel 26. 10. And before that, 'twould be but rashness to attempt
it. And so likewise when he stopped himself in his haste after Nabals life, you
know within awhile after, God took him away by his own immediate hand, and gave
both his wife and estate to David.

An over forwardness in the hastening of our hopes, is the ready way to
imbitter them unto us. You know how much trouble and contention there grew,
from that hasty act of Sarah, when in her distrust of the promise, and fear of
being childlesse, she must needs give Hagar to Abraham. So likewise for Jacobs
too much haste in getting the blessing by a wrong means; you know it cost him
afterward, many dangers, and a tedious exile. Whereas if he had tarried
longer, God would have brought it about for him by a more easy and beautiful
way.

Gods time is the best, and he never fails his own season, I the Lord will
hasten it in its time. Isa. 60 22. For us to measure the fitness of seasons by
our own weak apprehensions, is not this to set the Son by our Dial? We are too
short-sighted, apt to Ante-date the promises. The Lord will arise and have
mercy Psalm 27. 13
upon Sion, wben the time to favor her; ye a when the set time is come. Psalm.
102. 13.

2. Hence we learn not to trouble our selves with any sollicitous care about
the success of things. To serve Providence is the usual means, that is our
work; But the issue and event of things that is Gods work, we, have nothing to
do in it. That which is not under our power, should not be under our care. If
there be nothing at our disposal, but that all events do depend upon an higher
Ver. 9.
Providence, 'twere but a vain thing then to busy our selves, with hopes and
fears about them. Much of the disquietnes amongst men in the world arises from
hence, that they busy themselves about Gods work, and neglect their own.

Is there then an evil thou fear, why it is not in the power of any
creatureto hurt thee. Though men should use plots, and threats against thee,
yet they can do nothing. They sat together, and counseled against David,
devising to take away his life, Psalm. 31. 13. But what was his comfort, why,
says he, ver. 15. My times are in thy hands O Lord. He knew that no ill
success toward him, was in the power of others.

Or is there an evil thou feel? why it comes from the hand of God. Be not
then impatient at the instrument. It Is but a childish, currish thing to beat the
rod, or bite the stone that hurt thee. David could quietly undergo the railing
of Shimei, when once he had discerned in it the Providence of God.

Or is there a good thou hopest for? why it is not within the reach of thy
abilities. And therefore 'twere but in vain to think thou could command it by
thine own endeavors. We should count it a mad thing for one that is naturally
low, to busy himself in the study and labor of growing tall, because this is
not alterable by any thing in our power; Since no man can add one cubit to his
stature. Why it is so in other things likewise, God does as well set bounds to
our estates, as to our statures; and of our selves, we can as little add one
penny to that, as one cubit to this. And therefore, never let any one think
that he can raise himself as he pleases, and be the master of his own fortunes.
Though he were furnished with the greatest helps and probabilities of
advancement. Yet the battle is not always to Eccles. 9. 11.
the strong, nor the race to the swift; neither bread to the wise, nor yet
riches to men of understanding, nor yet favor to men of skill; but time and
ehance happens to them all. That is, there is a secret Providence, which does
so unavoidably dispose of these lower events, that the likeliest means we can
use, cannot promise us any certain success.

They that with a compass wisdom will belay events, that with forecasts, and
provisions will bind Providence, for the most part, are not only disappointed
in what they hoped for, but do meet with a curse instead of it. See that place,
Isa. 50. 11. Behold, all ye that kindle a fire, that compass your selves about
with sparks, walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that you have
kindled; This shall you have of my hands, you shall lie down in sorrow.

3. Hence we learn to be equally prepared for all future events, not wishing
for one more then another. What ever comes to pass shall be beautiful, and
therefore should be welcome. All things that befall us shall lead us on to the
same journeys end, Happiness. And therefore we should not in our expectation of
future matters engage our selves in the desire of any particular success. But
with a travailers indifferency (as Epictetus Disert. li. 2. ca. 7.
speaks in Arian.) who when he comesto doubtful turnings, does not desire one
way should be true more then another. So should we entertain every thing that
we meet with in our passage through this life. Especially since we are sure,
that there is none of them, but if we belong to God, shall further us in that
which is our main business, our journey to happiness. And therefore to be
very sollicitous about any particular success, what is it but to limit and
confine the power of God? nay, to prefer our own policy before the wisdom of
Providence, as if we alone were able to discern what would be the best issue of
things. Mark how the same Heathen bespeaks such a person. Thou foolish man
(says he) do thou not desire that which will be most convenient for thee?
And can there be any thing better then what God appoints. (...). Wherefore by
such immoderate and eager desires, thou do (as much as in thee lies) to
corrupt thy Judge, and seduce thy counselor.

The Stoics have many excellent passages to this purpose. Nunquam sapientem De
Benef. lib. 4. 34.
poenitentia subit, (says Seneca) quia nihil melius illo tempore fieri potuit
quam quod factum est. A wise man is never troubled at any cross event, He
knows nothing could have been better then it is. Omnia illi succedunt, nihil
praeter opinionem accidit. All things are successful to him, he is
disappointed in nothing, because indifferent to every thing. Whilst others are
tossed up and down betwixt hopes and fears, his mind is established.

Now if mere reason could advance Heathen men to such resolutions, much more
then should a Christians faith in the providence of God, with those many
promises wherein he has an interest, raise his mind to this heroic temper,
and make him bend himself with a submissive compliance unto every condition.

Ob. But what then, Ob.
may not a man (nay should he not) be very earnest in his desires and prayers,
for some particusar deliverance or blessing?

I answer. Yes. But in Sol.
all temporal matters, it must be still with a tacit submission to the will of
God, who knows better what is fit for us, then we our selves. See the example
of David to this purpose. 2 Samuel 15. 25. He was there put to a very great
exigence, his Son Absolon, had suddenly raised a great Army against him, in so
much as he was fain to fly for his life. There were some of the Priests adhered
to him, and followed him with the Ark. But he, upon serious thoughts desires
them to return again. For (says he) if I shall find favor in the eyes of the
Lord, he will bring me again, and show me both it and his hahitation; But if he
thus say unto me, I have no delight in thee, Behold here I am, let him do to
me, as seems good unto him. Here Is no deep anxietie or aestuation of spirit.
No bitter exclaiming against his unnatural son, and disloyal Subjects, but a
quiet succumbency, an indifferent composure of mind, which resolves to be
content in every condition. He puts the case both ways, and is provided for
either. If it prove after this manner, why then so. If otherwise, then thus. So
true is that common Emblem, that every wise man is a cube or dye, not to be
flung from his bottom. Let him be cast any way, he still lights upon his right
basis, whatever his condition may be, Si fractus illabotur orbis, yet his mind
is still calm and peaceable.

Ob. But would you Ob.
have a man turn Stoic? should he not be troubled at the afflictions that
befall him?

Sol. I answer. Yes: He must be sensible of his Sol.
sufferings, and consequently cannot but grieve under them; especially so far
as his own sin and neglect has occasioned them. But then it should be his care
to quiet his heart from immoderate trouble, by the confideration of that wise
Providence, who does dispose of all for the best.

4. Lastly, hence we learn, to behave our selves with cheerfulness and
contentment under all those conditions which the Providence of God shall think
fittest for us. It Is the Wisemans own inference from the text, in the verses
immediately after it. There is nothing better then for a man to rejoice, V. 12,
13.
and do good in his life; that he should eat and drink, and enjoy the good of
his labor. For if every thing AEquum est ut homini placet, quicquid placet Deo.
be best which God appoints, we have no reason then to be troubled at any
event. What though it do cross our desires, yet 'twould not have been so well,
if it had been otherwise. Things cannot be better with us then they are. David
thought it a hard case, that his child by Bathsheba must dye. But did he loose
any thing by it? was it not better for him to have such a legitimate Heir as
Solomon was? We are but ill contrivers of our own welfare, and therefore should
without murmuring submit our selves and affairs to the government of
Providence. What though that do straiten us in our desires? you are content to
let the Physician bar you of many things, because he has cast your water, felt
your pulse. Consider then, does it not as much concern us to provide for the
salvation of our souls, as the health of our bodies? or does not God understand
this, as well as the Physician that? What reason have we then to repine at his
proceedings? He was a wise Son in Plutarch, who being told by a friend that his
Father would dis-inherit him; Answered, Non faciet nisi faciendum: He will do
nothing but what he should. Thus should a Christian will lingly resign up
himself in every condition to the disposal of Providence.

Do but apply this consideration according to the several occasions of your
lives. When your hearts are at any time amazed or dejected with the thought of
the public confusions; Remember, that God sits in heaven, observing and
ordering all these inferior motions for the best.

And so too in the case of particular sufferings, it is likely that there is not
any amongst you, but has some kind of private trouble and grievance to which
he is more especially exposed. Either weakness of body, or too narrow a fortune,
losses in your estates, disappointment in yourhopes, unhappie relations, or the
like. And these things as we are men, cannot choose but grate upon our spirits,
with some kind of harshnesse and discontent. But now, as Believers, we have a
remedy against them. For consider, there is nothing befalls us by chance. All
things are ordered by the deliberate counsel and foreknowledge of God. He is
as exactly careful of every one of us, as if he had nothing else to look
after. Do not think that any trouble befalls you (because he does not regard,
for his care and providence does extend to all things; nor because he cannot
help, for he is Almighty; nor because he will not, for he is equally infinite
in all his Attributes; But because his wisdom finds that condition to be
fittest for thee; there is some thing amiss which should be mended. When the
superfluous humor is corrected, the physical potion shall be taken away. And
it is not reasonable to expect physic and health both together. When the wound
is healed, the smarting plaster shall be removed. And thou may confidently
say with David, Psalm. 119. 75. I know O Lord that thy judgments are right, and
that thou in faithfulness have afflicted me.

How happy might we be, if we could settle our hearts upon these considerations?

FINIS.

