BABYLONS RUIN, JERUSALEMS RISING.

Set forth In a Sermon Preached before the Honorable House of COMMONS, on the
25 October. being the day appointed for the Monthly Fast, solemnly to be observed.

By Henry Wilkinson, B. D. late Divinity Reader in Magdalen Hall Oxford.

Published by Order of that House.

PSALM. 137. 8. O daughter of Babylon, who art to be destroyed: happy shall he
be that rewards thee, as thou have served us. ver. 9. Happy shall he be that
takes and dasheth thy little ones against the stones.

REV. 18. 2. Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen.

PSALM. 102. 13. Thou shall arise, and have mercy upon Zion: for the time to
favor her, yea, the set time is come. v. 14. For thy servants take pleasure in
her stones: and favor the dust thereof. ver. 16. When the Lord shall build up
Zion, he shall appear in his glory.

ISA. 65. 18. But be you glad and rejoice for ever in that which I create: for
behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing and her people a joy.

LONDON, Printed for CHR. MEREDITH, and SA. GELLIBRAND, and are to be sold at
their Shops in Paul's Churchyard. 1643.

TO The Honorable House OF COMMONS, Now assembled in PARLIAMENT.
MAy it please you to cast your eye upon that, which once had your ear, and to
own that birth which received life at first from you: It desires no other
Passe-port or protection, but your name, (however vilified) nor does it care to
be distinguished or known by any other livery or cognizance, then that which
this Honorable House bestows upon those, on whom it looks as faithful and
devoted servants.

It is your fate now (as it never was to any Parliament) to have violences
offered you, contumelies and indignities cast upon you; your reputation
wounded, and your name, (which had wont to be honored and accounted sacred)
profaned and crucified; yet you may comfort your selves in this, that those
things are done by such whose favor is a blot, and good word an imputation:
Your persons and proceedings had been rendered suspected if they did been audire
amongst vile men, of whom it is said, Is. 32. 6. that they will speak villainy:
If they should undertake your vindiciae by their tongues or swords, or be your
advocates in any kind, we should suspect your persons, and be afraid to own
your cause.

Notwithstanding all this, it would argue too much weakness of spirit, to
resent such injuries too deeply, which can make no such impression as to wound
or hurt: Reproaches are Devils Tacit.
that are cast out by contempt; spreta exolescunt; si irascare, agnita
videntur. It was the honor of Theodosius, The ninth Code.
Honorius and Arcadius, that they did make an act upon record to pardon and
pity such as for want of modesty and excess of impudence should invade their
reputation by insolent slanders, or bitter calumnies. Alexander the Great is
famous for this, that he could contemn slanders; And so is Caesar for passing
by the detractions of Calvus the Orator, and Catullus the Poet: And so is
Augustus for pardoning Timagenes the Historian who had defamed him publicly;
as also for conquering the affronts of Pollio, with a fruere mi Pollio, fruere.
Tiberius himself had wont to dissemble injuries in this kind, and Titus to
scorn them. But our Lord Jesus Christ is a pattern beyond all, who ^ut by, and
indeed conquered all the horrible insolences that the wit of malice could
inflict, with a Father forgive them, for they know not what they do, Luke 23.
34. However you must have a care to vindicate the honor of Christ and
Religion, for though you suffer for Christ, yet you must take care that Christ
does not suffer by you; and though Religion be wounded through your sides, yet
you must have a care that Religion does not bleed to death through your wounds.

It cannot be expected, but that the eye of envy should be upon you, and the
hand of violence up against you, since you are engaged in such a work, as full
of envy as it is of difficulty and danger: for since your business lies
professedly against the Apocalypticall beast, and all his accomplices; you must
expect that the militia of Hell and the trained bands of Satan, (i. e.) those
that have received the mark of the beast, shall be put into a posture of war,
furnished with all their trains of Artillery, and the whole Magazine of Satan,
to put in execution their black Commission, which breathes forth nothing but
blood, and slaughter, and ruin of our persons and our Religion. I hope this
discourse will furnish and accommodate you with Antidotes and Preservatives,
with weapons and ammunition, with cordials and comforts, by which you may be
encouraged to go on, and enabled to hold out and Conquer.

I know you are looked at as a contemptible company, but let those remember
(that account you so) that the cake of barley bread which tumbled into the
host of Midian, and came into a tent, smote it that it fell, and overturned
the tent that it lay down, Judge. 7. 13. It is the condition of Gods people to
appear, and in a sort to be like Christ, of whom it was said, There is no
beauty that we should desire him: He is despised and rejected of men, a man of
sorrows, and acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him;
he was despised, and we esteemed him not, Is. 53. 2. 3. And yet as base as he
was in the eyes of men, he had the most glorious titles that ever were given,
Is. 9. 6. 7. So far should this be from disheartning Gods Servants, that it
should be accounted their honor to be like their Master; however it be that
men have vilified you, yet certainly God has honored you more then ever any
Parliament in England was honored; for he has done that by you, which our
Progenitors did but intertaine in a bosome-retired thought, and in hopes at so
vast a distance from accomplishment, that they seemed rather pleasing fancies,
then fair probabilities: There has been a concurrence of many strange and
admirable Acts of Providence, and God has assembled many and several events,
which have issued out of the multitude of affairs clustering together; so that
we may truly say, it was the design of Heaven to give you and us a contracted
experience of very many mercies, and to instruct us by way of abridgement, and
as it were to show us in a few Months the image of many years.

The birth with which you travel, as it was the expectation of Antiquity and
Ages past, so it will be the happiness of Posterity, and Ages future; think
not that it is in the power or compass of devils or men, to make that birth
prove abortive, which himself has undertaken to bring forth, and to baptize it
with the name of Israel, it being a child of Promise, Is. 66. 9. Shall I bring
to the birth, and not cause to bring forth, says the Lord? shall I cause to
bring forth, and shut the womb, says thy God? That which makes me possess my
soul with an assurance of success, and a gracious issue in your great
transactions, is this, because I see a Jacob and an Esau in the womb of the
great design, and I am sure the elder shall serve the younger: I find a
competition betwixt the seed of the woman and the seed of the Serpent, and I am
sure the seed of the woman shall break the head of the Serpent; whereas the
Serpent shall but bruise the heel of the Church, Genesis 3. 15. the wound in the
head shall be incurable, that in the heel shall not be mortal. I perceive
there is a great contention betwixt malice, and envy, and pride, and tyranny,
luxury, and rebellion, with the rest of that black guard of Hell on the one
side; and faith, and prayers, on the other: Now I am sure that this is the
victory which overcommeth the world, even faith, 1 Ioh. 5. 4. And I am sure
that prayer can engage the whole Militia of Heaven, and the Lord of Hosts on
its side: I perceive that Babylon and its supporters, and Sion and its Builders
are put in the Balances as it were: And I find a Mean (i. e.) God has numbered
thy Kingdom and finished it, and a Tekel thou art weighed in the balances,
and art found wanting, Dan. 5. 24. 25. written over the one Scale: And I see
the Apostles (...) over the other, we are more then Conquerours: Wherefore if
Amalek, or Midian, or Canaanites, or Philistims, or Babylonians can Conquer the
Israel of God; who was therefore Christened Israel, because as a Prince he did
prevail with God, and he should prevail with men, Genesis 32. 28. If now the
Lords Counsel may be frustrated, or his strength mastered, or if there be any
that can speak the word and it comes to pass, and the Lord commands it
not, Lam. 3. 37. then actum est, periistis, You are all dead men, and the cause
is gone; but if that be true which the Lord speaks, Ezekiel. 12. 25. you need not
fear: He says, I am the Lord: I will speak, and the word that I shall speak,
shall come to pass: I will say the word, and will perform it, says the Lord
God: Now God has spoken the word, a terrible word, and a word of confusion
against Babylon: and he has spoken the word, and that a gracious word, for
the restoration of Zion, and building up the walls of Jerusalem, and therefore
let your Faith hang out its conquering and triumphing Flag, and let Emmanuel be
the Motto; and then you may bid an open defiance to all your enemies, and with
a kind of exultation, say with the Apostle, Romans 8. 31. Si Deus nobiscum, etc.
If God be for us, who can be against us? Now that the Lord may be with you,
and for you, it is the constant, instant prayer of

Your obliged, and most devoted Servant HENRY WILKINSON.

Die Mercurii 25. Oct. 1643.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Mr. Poole
and Mr. Rous do from this House give thanks unto Master Wilkinson, and Master
Salwey, for the great pains they took in the Sermons, they preached this day
at the entreaty of this House, at S. Margarets in the City of Westminster, It
being the day of public Humiliation, and to desire them to Print their
Sermons. And it is Ordered that none do presume to Print their Sermons but
such as shall be authorized under their hands writing.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I appoint Chr. Meredith and Sa. Gellibrand to Print this Sermon.

HENRY WILKINSON.

A SERMON Preached before The Honorable House OF COMMONS, At the Public Fast,
October 25. 1643.
ZECH. 1. 18. 19. 20. 21. Then I lift up mine eyes, and saw, and behold four
horns.

And I said unto the Angel that talked with me; What be these? Babylons ruin,
Ierusalems raising.
And he answered me, These are the horns which have scattered Judah, Israel,
and Jerusalem.

And the Lord showed me four carpenters.

Then said I, What come these to do? And he spoke, saying; These are the
horns which have scattered Judah, so that no man did lift up his head: but
these are come to fray them, to cast out the horns of the Gentiles, which lift
up their horn over the land of Judah to scatter it.


IN these words is represented a double vision, and the interpretation of both;
here is a vision of ruin, and a vision of rescue; a vision of destruction, and
a vision of deliverance; although both of the visions be unlocked and opened,
yet some things require some clearing.

First, let us see what is meant by horns; and secondly, who they are that are
pointed at in this place; and thirdly, why four horns. In hominibus cornu
significat potentiam, virtutem, gloriam, fortitudinem. Glassius de metaphor.
lib. 5. Tract. 1. c. 11.


By horns we understand the enemies of Gods people, it being a metaphor taken
from those beasts that wear horns, which are the instruments in which they
show their strength and fierceness, both in defending and offending also.
Cornu, with respect to men, does signify power, and virtue, and glory, and
fortitude, 1 Samuel 2. 1. Job 16. 15. Psalm. 25. 11. Psalm. 89. 18. 25.

In special, Cornu signifies a Kingdom, whose majesty consists in power and
fortitude, 1 Samuel 2. 10. So that the strength and In specie significat regnum,
cujus majestas in potentia, fortitudine, and ^obere consistit. Glass. ibid.
greatness and fierceness of a Nation is hereby set forth, 1 Kings 22. 11.
and Dan. 7. 7. 8. and 21. and Dan. 8. 3. 4. Rev. 12. 3. and 13. 1. and 17. 3.
7. 12. 16. So cornupetere, to push, is all one with praeliari and potentiam
pugnando exerere.



The other two things to be considered both for the persons and number, they
will fall in together: Some understand by the four horns, the four
Monarchies of the world. But as Luther, Melanchthon, and Calvin say, it cannot
be in regard this vision respects a thing actually done; but some of the
Mornarchies had not their being in the world for many years after; and
therefore they conjecture better, who by four horns understand the enemies of
God from the four quarters of the world; On the North the Assyrians and
Babylonians, as our Babylonian enemies lie most northward; on the East the
Ammonites and Moabites; on the South Egypt and the Edomites; on the West the
Philistines.

It is the lot of Gods people to be environed with fierce and powerful
enemies, on all sides, from all quarters of the world. It is the lot of the
godly to be beleaguered with horned Beasts.

Now let us see what these Carpenters are; here is four to The Original word
signifies, Omnis generis Artifices, Luth.
four; Luther observes out of the original, that by Carpenters we must
understand Artificers of all sorts, whose skill and industry God made use of in
the building of the Temple: The truth is, Luther understands by fabri Angelos,
quibus haec imperia demandata sunt; by Carpenters, he means the Angels to
whose care the custody of those Empires was entrusted; But it seems more
congruous to take Carpenters here in this place for such as God did raise up to
be the Executioners of his vengeance upon the horns that had so afflicted and
scattered his people, and hindered the building of the Temple; he calls them
Carpenters, to intimate that their work is twofold; First, for plucking down;
Secondly, for rearing up. Cyrus who was the chief Carpenter which God employed
to saw off the Babylonian horns, was to pluck down that vast Fabric of the
Assyrian Monarchy, and so by that make way for building of Jerusalem.

It is considerable to take notice of the alteration of the expression used in
the two visions; It is said, I saw the four horns, but the Lord showed me the
four Carpenters.

That which way soever we turn our eyes we may quickly see horns, enemies
of the Church of God; but deliverers must be showed us of the Lord.

Before I come to the observations concerning the Carpenters, I shall take
notice of the time when the horns appeared and the Carpenters were raised.

If we look back we shall find ver. 16. 17. the most comfortable and precious
promises that we read of, and presently these horns show themselves, so that
as soon as Zechary had received comfort from the promises made, he immediately
saw an obstruction cast in, he saw all his hopes dashed, if we look with the
eye of reason.

That difficulties always attend deliverances; if the Church be in travel to
be delivered of a comfort, the birth of a promise and the issue of prayers,
you shall immediately find some horns, some fierce and potent enemies ready
to stifle the birth as it comes forth, or to strangle it in the womb.

It is further observed concerning the time when these Carpenters were showed;
the enemies they appear most when the Church has any promise drawing toward
an accomplishment, but the deliverers are showed when the Church seems to be
drawing toward her end, when she is gasping for life; for the time when these
Carpenters were showed, was when the Church was at the lowest ebb; Zecharias
eo tempore vixit, quo sum necessarium fuit consolari pop. venturo regno
Christi, etc. ne^ enim antea vel posthac unquam pop. fuit ita dissipatus,
disjectus, a^ tanto terrore percuisus quamdiu pop. Dei dictus est, quam illo
Babyloniae capivitatis tempore, Luther.
Luther observes how that the Church was in the saddest and most miserable
condition that ever she was brought to.

God then raises up deliverers to his people, when there be least hopes and
most enemies appear: When the enemies be most in sight, (I saw the horns)
then most unexpectedly God shows deliverers, (He showed me the Carpenters.)

In the last place it is said these Carpenters came to fray the horns, etc.
That is, utterly to destroy them, or to remove them out of the way, so as that
they should not hinder the building of the Temple.

Those that God employes as Carpenters in his service, they shall carry on the
work both for plucking down and rearing up, maugre all opposition whatsoever to
the contrary.

You have seen what is meant by the vision in the letter of it, (viz.) the
enemies of the Church of God anciently, The same things which anciently were
acted, are now brought upon the Stage by Satan, whom Epiphanius calls (...),
draconem sese in orbem volventem: he brings about the old malice, rage,
subtlety, and tyranny against the Church of God: So that I may make use of the
words of Ludovicus Laurentius taken by him out of Thucidides, semper eadem geri
in mundo, mutatis tantum personis.
which were a Type of the enemies of the Church of God now: for as Babylon of
old, and that Monarchy was the chief enemy under whose yoke the Israelites did
then groan for seventy years; so is mystical Babylon, which is Rome the
antitype, under which the Church of God has and does most suffer. I shall
therefore with Calvin and others, speak of the enemies of the Church of God,
and of deliverers also, with respect Calvin after he had spoken of the
business in the Type says thus, Videmus hoc vaticinium non modo atati
Zachariae suisse util^, sed omnibus seculis, and ad totum Ecclesiae corpus
respicere.
unto the Antitype in both; the horns in the former vision being but a type of
our Antichristian enemies now; and the Carpenters being a type of our Reformers
under the Gospel, and those that are to build the spiritual Licet enim haec i^
ludaeorum ex captivitate reductorum and urbem and templum ad ficantium
consolationum d^ta sint, complementum tomen habent praecipuum in N. T. in
Ecclesia quae urbs Dei est, Tarnovius in locum.
Jerusalem, even the Church, and to pluck down mystical Babylon, that is,
Rome; for though this was showed for the comfort of the Jews, yet (says
Tarnovius) the accomplishment is and shall be under the Gospel.

For this present I shall fix upon the two last propositions, and handle them
distinctly and severally.

The first of the two which is the fifth, is this, That God then raises up
deliverers, etc.

This is the method which God uses to take; Our account and his in respect of
times and seasons differ like as the Gregorian and the Julian, the one
out-runnes the other; we in our account commonly antedate deliverances and
mercies; but God he seems to us to postdate them, and his appointed time
seems to be past the time appointed, his set day of deliverance, seems to be
a day too late commonly, a year sometimes; Jer. 8. 20. The harvest is past, the
Summer is ended, and we are not saved: Gods time of help is when the time of
help is past. Deuteronomy. 32. 35. It is said concerning the enemies of Gods people,
That their foot shall slide in due time, and God will render vengeance, and v.
36. he will repent himself for his servants: now it is observeable when the
due time spoken of is, in the 36. v. it is said, when he sees that his
servants power is gone, then is the Lords due time to take vengeance of their
Adversaries and to deliver them.

So Jer. 31. 16. 17 the Lord gives comforts, and the ground is this, There is
hope in thine end, says the Lord; when there was an end of hope in a manner,
it is said there is hope in their end: When the knife is at the throat, then,
(...), God then interposeth he puts in then unexpectedly and to admiration, Is.
33. 7. 8. 9. you shall read of a strange preface to a deliverance spoken of v.
10. when hopes are cut off; Then will I arise, says the Lord, now will I lift
up my self, now will I be exalted: God raised up Moses and Aaron to deliver
his people, even when Moses himself thought the business of such difficulty
and impossibility, that he was very unwilling to adventure, Exodus 4. 13. Nay,
Moses thought that God had even forgot himself, Exodus 5. ult. Whereas the time
promised was not come, though it were near; the deliverance seemed to be
farther off, by how much the nearer it approached; Exodus 10. 28. Pharaoh
quarrels with Moses and bids him get him gone, but Exodus 12. 40. 41. God
observed his time even to a day: Gods appointed time is ever seasonable, though
sometime it seems late: Instances are many, Exodus 14. at the red Sea, God
appeared in the Mount: Look throughout the Book of Judges, and Samuel, and
Kings, the Scripture is plentiful in this argument.

But here a question may be seasonably made, Why does God put off the
deliverance of his servants even to the last moment, when things seem to be
past recovery?

Ier. 30. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 17. It is said concerning Gods people, Thy bruise
is incurable, thy wound is grievous, v. 12. and 15. thy sorrow is incurable,
and yet v. 17. it is said, I will restore health unto thee, and I will heal
thee of thy wounds, etc. when the matter is past cure, then it is fittest for
him to cure, who can heal incurable wounds.

Abraham, that you can hope above hope, whether you can believe deliverance
when you cannot see deliverance in probability, Romans 4. 18. 19. 20. there is
your pattern, he will put you to it whether you will take out that copy, he will
try whether the faith of his servants be so quicksighted as to see deliverance
through destruction, and a horn of salvation, Luke 1. 69. exalted above all the
horns of confusion.

Light and a Flame at once, Is. 10. 17. when he appears as he did Exodus 14.
20. in the Cloud, which was bright and black, a cloud of comfort and a cloud of
confusion at once; his two great attributes by which he is known amongst the
children of men, I mean his justice and mercy, when they do show themselves
together, then they do mutually illustrate each the other, and render God much
more glorious to the world. Whence it is that you shall find in Scripture,
that the greatest mercies fall in with the greatest vengeance; Deuteronomy. 32. 43.
there is vengeance and mercy together, and Is. 61. 2. the acceptable year of
the Lord, and the day of vengeance both proclaimed at once. So also Is. 59. 17.
18 there is the helmet of salvation, and the brestplate of righteousness, and
the garments of vengeance at once upon God. So also Nah. 1. 6. 7. you have God
very fearful and terrible, and a strong hold etc. likewise Luke 21. 25. 26.
you shall seldom read of such times, fuller of confusion, and v. 28. the day
of redemption is close by this day of destruction. It is therefore Gods course
to raise up the greatest comforts to his people, when their enemies are most
proud and intolerable, that so he might appear the more glorious in his works
of mercy and fury, of consolation and confusion.

Moses had not been so notable, if Pharaoh had not been so hardened; neither
had Ioshuah appeared so brave a Soldier, if he had not found so great
opposition from Giants and Anakims, from stout and strong enemies; David's
valor was the more taken notice of, because Goliahs pride and valor was so
daring and terrible; the antidote never shows it self so Sovereign as when
the poison shows it self most malignant. Austin had not been so renowned to
posterity, but for the obstinacy and subtlety Vid. con Nic. Tom. 1. conc.
Gener. and conc. Ephesians. Tom. 2. conc. Gener. ex Ed. Bin. and Tom. 1. con. Ep.
Leo^is 81. ^5 and ed. 1^ S^rii.
and learning of Pelagius; nor Athanasius but for Arrius; not Cyrill but for
Nestorius; nor Gregory Nazianzen but for Macedonius; nor Leo but for Eutyches;
nor Hierom but for Russinus; Constantinus had never been called Magnus, if the
Persecutors had not proved cruel: he never had been so famous for building the
Church of God, if they had not been famous in the butchery of it; Jewel had
not showed so orient but for Harding who was his foil; nor had the Synod of
Dort been so much spoken of but for Arminius: none of all these had proved so
good Carpenters, if they had not met with such horns so full of fierceness,
rage, power, and tyranny; Nor had the eyes of Protestant Christendom been so
much fixed on this Parliament, if the horns of Papal Christendom had not
pushed with such violence against this Parliament.

Where is the promise of his coming? where are the Deliverers so much
expected, so long looked after, they are much to be blamed that will measure
Gods times by their glass, and if he does not strike with their clock and go
by their dyall, then there is no hopes, the time appointed is past, and they
will wait no longer. It is a great boldness that men take to themselves, they
would deal with Gods Providence as they do by their Watches, set it backwards
or forwards according as they have a mind to have things fall out sooner or
stay longer: It is a very great fault in Christians, they out-runne Providence,
and they are impatient to stay for deliverance, never considering the vast
difference betwixt Gods Chronology and ours: By this means it falls out that
they have spent their stock of hopes long before the time and season, in which
we should most hope.

he which believes will not make have, but as it is, 2 Chronicles. 20. 12 he will
have his eyes on the Lord; remembering that Hab 2. 3. 4. The vision (I may say
of the Carpenters) is for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak and
not lie; though it tarry, yet wait for it, because it will surely come, it will
not tarry, etc.

Hagars condition, all her stock of hopes may be spent, and she may give her
children for lost, as Hagar did; she may sit and weep for want of relief, and
yet there is a well of mercy close by her, though she does not see it, as there
was close by Hagar, Genesis 21. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. Here is a comfort, that for
every danger there is a deliverer laid in for, and bespoke beforehand that he
should be in a readiness; the provident God has forecast for every horn a
Carpenter, and the Carpenter which God sets on work proves too hard for the
horn; there is a builder for every breaker down, and a repayrer for every
destroyer. It must needs be a very great comfort, whilst we consider how that
the Church never did receive any great blow by a push from any horn, but God
provided a present remedy. God that foresaw the enemies of the people of God,
provided a Ioshuah, raised up the valiant Judges, and Kings, and Prophets, and
Apostles, etc. for his people; God provided a David for a Goliath, a Mordecai
and Hester for Haman, a Cyrus for Babylon; You shall find for your comfort in
Ecclesiastical story, that if any heresy did arise as a horn against the
truth, God provided a Carpenter with his Mallet to knock down that horn, whence
our famous Divines are called Haereticorum mallei. For the Hist. Conc. Nic.
prae. Con. Nic. ex ed. Bin. Tom. 1. Conc. Tom. 1. Conc. Genesis and provi^. Ephesians.
Conc. par. (...). Act. 1. ex ed. Binii ex lib. Nestor. collect.
Arrian Heresy that struck at the Divinity of Christ, you had the first great
Council of Nice: Then for the Heresy of Nestorius (...), etc. (...), then
follows the sentence of condemnation from the whole Synod. (c) Tom 2. Genesis and
provin. Conc. ed. (...). Bi^. Ephesians. Conc. par. 2. act. 1. (d) Tom. 1. Con. Ep
Leonis 81. and 95. de blasphemiis Nestorii and Eutych. ex Sur ed. Tom. 3. Conc
Chalced. 2. par. Act. 4. ex ed. ^in. Vid. (...) Conc. Constant. (...). 1. Conc.
Bin.
that made two persons in Christ, the Ephesine Council was called, and the
heresy condemned: As for the heresy of Macedonius that denied the Divinity of
the Holy Ghost, the Council of Constantinople to suppress that. And then for
the heresy of Eutyches, which affirmed but one nature in Christ, the Council
of Chalcedon was called for the extirpation of that. I might be large in this
kind, but I forbear.

I now come to the second Proposition which was the sixth: That when God raises
up Carpenters, they shall carry on the work, The 2. Propos.
both for plucking down, and building up, maugre all opposition whatsoever to
the contrary.

The Babylonian horns which hindered the deliverance of Gods people, and the
building of the Temple, were knocked off and broken down by Cyrus and others
that God raised up, and the building of Jerusalem went on, Ezra 1. 1, 2, 3.
etc. Then afterward the enemies prevailed so far, that they hindered the
building, Ezra 5, 6. and 24. then cap. 6. 1, 2. etc. you have a Decree for the
building: Then Haggai's and Zacharies prophesies stirred them up to build, Ezr.
5. 1. Zech. 4. 7. the Mountain that stood before Zorobabel is made plain.

The reason of this is plain, Zech 4. 6. because when God sets men on work
where there be least hopes of doing any good, yet the work shall go on, Not by
might nor by power, but by my Spirit, says God. It is not thus to be
understood, as if he would make use of no instruments, for he did then make use
of Carpenters for the building of Jerusalem, but by my Spirit, i. e. I will so
rule, and order, and dispose of things by my Spirit, those means that I shall
use, that it shall appear I did it, and that my name was written upon every
part of the business.

It appears to be Gods Spirit and hand in bringing things to pass; first,
when a matter falls out unexpectedly, and strangely, and suddenly, as we see
that deliverance of David, 1 Samuel 23. 26, 27. Or secondly, when God works by
contraries, Psalm. 112. 4. as when light springs out of darkness, or when that
which was intended for ruin, becomes an Antidote, when the wicked are taken in
their own crafts, Psalm. 7. 15, 16. Thirdly, when God works by weak and
contemptible means, 1 Cor. 27. 28. Fourthly, when many casualties and
accidents falling in together, are wisely ordered to advance a business, as
appears in Mordecai's case, Esth. 6. 1, 2, 3, 6, 7.

So that when God calls men to any special service, it shall be done for he
engages himself in a special manner for the doing of it: Whence it is, that
God for the encouragement of his servants in great businesses, tells them, ^o I
am with you, as if he should say, my wisdom and power shall be with you, both
for the ordering and effecting of the design. When God called Moses to that
great work of leading his people out of Egypt, he speaks that encouraging
language, Exodus 3. 10, 11, 12. I will be with thee, and chap. 4. 10, 11, 12. he
confirms him in like manner, though Moses did shrink, and distrust, and was
very hardly brought on to the work. Whatever the work be, yet it matters not,
so God be in it, he fits men for the work, and carries them through it, though
it may seem difficult and impossible, Ier. 1. 17, 18. 19. If God makes use,
though of a worm, that worm shall thresh Mountains in pieces, Isa. 41. 14, 15,
16. The poor Church trampled on like a worm (which as it is least able to help
it self, so it is most exposed to injury) yet it shall crush in pieces those
that tread it under foot; the wheels moved as the living creatures moved, and
the living creatures moved as the Spirit moved, Ezekiel 1. 19, 20, 21. when he
sets the wheels of the creature going, there is nothing can stay them; there
is no standing against those whom God sends on his errand, Deuteronomy. 30. 32. Ier.
51. 20, 21. It is spoke of Luther how Coelesti^ ille Germanus Lutherus
Antichristum antea terribilem omnibus, so a oris buc^ina conterruit, and parva
sodalium, infirm. tatis contra potentiam, simplicitatis contra frauds,
humilitatis contra fastum, contra crudelitatem patientia, arma coniungentium
stipatus manu, in restitutione evange^ fecit progressum, ^ans. in Orat. pro
German.
invincibly and irresistibly he went on in the opposing of the whole body of
Antichrist, the whole Kingdom of Satan and the beast could not stand before
him.

Whence it follows by way of inference and corollary full of sweetness and
comfort, that those whom God employes in his service, they shall conquer all
opposition; Mountains shall be plained, Zech. 4. 7. Anakims shall lie prostrate
like Dagon before the Arc, 1 Samuel 5. 3. Jericho walls shall fall down, Josh 6.
20. If God gives commission to Armies of Flies and Locusts, they will make a
puissant people stoop, Exodus 8. 21, 25. and 10. 16, 17. though the opposition
be great, and the means to encounter it small, that is all one; one to a
thousand, and two to ten thousand is mighty odds in number and strength, and
yet they shall conquer, Deuteronomy. 32. 30.

It follows, secondly, for encouragement, that no plots or designs, no
conspiracies and combinations against those that God sets on work shall
prosper, Isa. 8. 9, 10. Job 12. 16, 17. Isa. 29. 14.

Honorable and Beloved, this Truth has been sealed to you by many
experiments, and by a concurrence of providence, many, and strange, and
visible; so visible indeed to any (but he that will not see) that you and we
must needs confess and say, there was Digitus Dei, and another time brachium
Altissimi, and here again Iehovah-Iireh; and again, If the Lord himself had
not been on our side, Psalm. 124. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. etc. This deliverance you
may ascribe Deo liberatori, to God our Redeemer, and this Victory Deo adjutori,
to God my helper; and this blow and wound given to the adversary, Deo vindici,
to God to whom vengeance belongs; you and we must needs say here, This is the
Lords own doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes; How often has it been made
good to you, that surely there is no enchantment against Jacob, neither is
there any divination against Israel? Number. 23. 23. Here you may write a Selah,
here an Higgaion Selah, there being matter of astonishment and admiration in
Gods mercies to you; How often has God showed himself then, when indeed there
was dignus vindice nodus, it being past humane help? How often have you been
brought to those straits, that you have been all puzzled, and non-pluss'd? you
have been at a stand, and when you stood still, you then saw the salvation of
the Lord, your standing still was Gods chief time of working, Exodus 14. 13.

The truth is, the House in which you sit has been the Mount of the Lord, a
Mount of mercies, and a Mount of deliverances; so that you of all men may truly
say, God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in time of trouble,
Psalm. 46. 1. and the Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge,
v. 7. Selah. The vessel has bin so near sinking, that with the Apostles you
have cyred out, Lord save us, we perish; and he has saved you, and you have
not perished.

by way of discouragement.
more horns seem to spring up in the place of the old, and when one mountain
is removed, it does but give place and make room for a greater, as if the
removing of one difficulty, were but the creation of a greater.

by way of retortion for encouragement the more.
zeal and courage for true Zeal increases by opposition and like the Palm,
rises up with a kind of indignation against that weight that is laid upon it.
You may well think, that when the Carpenters fall upon the horns with their
hammers, axes, and sawes, the beasts that wear them will be outrageous; this
should encourage you the more, it is a sign you draw nigh the root: It is a
hopeful sign that many a devil is near upon casting out of the Land; It is to
be hoped that many a drunken, profane, formal, superstitious, idolatrous,
ceremonial devil, many a foul spirit is ready to be dispossessed in regard
they have rent and torn our Kingdom so miserably, like that Devil, Mar. 9.
25. 26. when he was to be cast out, rent the possessed ^ore, insomuch as he
was a dead man for the present; we hope that whole legeons are ready to be cast
out: you must conceive that those that rake in waspes nests, and in the holes
of Aspes and Cockatrices, may meet with stings and poison.

Besides, by how much the more diligent you be in your work, by so much the
more diligent will Satan be to resist you. Rev. 12. 4. The Dragon stood before
the woman which was ready to be delivered, to devour the child so soon as it
was born; now that you are in travel ready to be delivered of a male child, of
some good design, the Dragon stands before you, not to be a Midwife to
deliver, but an Executioner to strangle the child in the birth, or to devour
it so soon as it is borne: Since you have to do with a brood of Serpents, you
must expect, that the Serpent will send out of his mouth a flood, as he did
after the woman, Rev. 12. 15. waters of Persecutions from all parts; When
Ioshuah the High Priest appeared before the Lord, Satan stood at his right hand
to hinder him, Zech. 3. 1. but God rebuked him, ver. 2.

Furthermore, whatsoever may be objected almost by way of discouragement
Particular objections answered by way of parallel drawn from the Type, and the
antitype, from the builders of Jerusalem of old, and the builders of Gods house
under the last times of the Gospel.
to you, you may find to have fallen upon those that built the Temple of
Jerusalem, who were your Type, and you shall find that notwithstanding all
discouragements the building went on; which certainly must needs animate and
quicken you, when you find the parallel to be suitable.

It is said, that the business is very sad and mournful? Ans. It is true,
there is cause of mourning, but there is cause of rejoicing too. Ezra. 3. 12.
at the laying of the foundation of the Temple there was weeping, (I confess
upon another style) and there was rejoicing to, because the foundation was
laid, that there was some pregnant hopes of a building toward, which they
might hope would come to an accomplishment in due time

Secondly, we are scandalized and reproched, and the work vilified and scorned.
Answ. Ezr. 4. 12. there you have an invective; and Neh. 2. 19. when Sanballat,
and Tobiah, and Geshem heard of it, they laughed us to scorn, and despised us,
and said, What is this thing that ye do? will ye rebel against the K. but
take notice of the pious answer, ver. 20. Again, Neh. 4. 1. 2. 3. You shall
find reproaches full of venom and indignation against the building and the
builders; but yet for all this the building went on.

Thirdly, we are not only reproached, but the Adversary is in Arms against us.
Answ. This was the case of the builders of Jerusalem, for when the enemies saw
they could not laugh and scorn them from the work, they then levied forces to
beat them from the work, Neh. 4. 8. but yet the work went on, and by that
means it went on, see v. 9. But if it be so, how can it be expected that we
should both defend and build? Answ. How did the builders of Jerusalem? they
fought and built at once, Neh. 4. 16. 17. 18. and they did prosper and go on.
Nay, such was their constant opposition, that they were compelled to watch so
constantly and diligently, That they did not put off their clothes, saving for
washing, ver. 23.

Fourthly, the business is now grown to that pass, that it is so heavy and
so chargeable, that there is a great cry and clamor of the people by reason of
taxations, and by reason of continual watching and laboring at the works, men
are constrained to leave their Trades, and Trade decaying, men now spend upon
the stock; nay, many a man's stock is already spent, so that they are compelled
to borrow upon use, whereupon there be many murmurings and repinings amongst
us. Answ. This was just the case of them that built Jerusalem, Neh. 5. 1. 2. 3.
(...). the very selfsame words that were then spoken are now taken up, and
there is much like the same reasons and grounds: But observe the wisdom and
zeal of Nehemiah in this case, how he behaved himself in the verses
following, from the 6th to the 12th and consider the issue most happy, in the
verses after.

Fifthly, but the people of the land are disaffected both to us, and the work.
Answ. Ez. 4. 4. 5. The people of the land weakened the hands of the people of
Judah, and troubled them in building, and hired Counselors against them, etc.

Sixthly, our Adveriaries lay their designs deep, they work under ground.
Answ. So it was with them anciently, Neh. 4. 11. their Adversaries said, They
shall not know, neither see, till we come in the midst among them, and slay
them, and cause the work to cease.

Seventhly, many great ones draw back, the Nobles many of them will not put
their hand to the work. Answ. So it was anciently, Neh. 3. 5. The Nobles put
not their neck to the work of the Lord.

Eighthly, we are dealt withal by way of treaty and friendly accommodation,
places of meeting are proposed, and the truth is, their trains of love, are
trains of powder to blow us up. Answ. So it was with Nehemiah, 6. 2. he was
sent to by Sanballat and Geshem, saying, Come let us meet together in some one
of the Villages in the plain of Ono; but they thought to do me a mischief:
Whether the case at a Town not far off be not much like this, and whether
mischief were not intended, let the event speak; but observe what answer
Nehemiah made, v. 3. Nay, they sent to him four times, but he gave them the
same answer, He had a great work in hand, so that I cannot come down, etc. I
will not undertake to prescribe what answer you should give.

Ninthly, we have open Declarations against us, and the world is told that we
rebel, and that we think upon strong matters, such things as never entered into
our hearts. Answ. Just so it was with Nehemiah, c. 6. v. 5. 6. they send an
open letter to them to that purpose it might be known to the world, and that
they might affright them with that terrible word of Rebellion. Nay, it is said
that they employed Prophets to Preach their Rebellious intentions, that they
might be communicated more easily and effectually to the people; this was said
then, v. 7. and let the same answer that Nehemiah made, be now made also, ver.
8.

Tenthly, we had those that are set on purpose to draw and entice us into
unwarrantable courses, that so there might be a just matter of acculation
against us; some have been tempted on purpose for that end, that so we might
lie open to their imputations. Answ. This was Nehemiahs case, c. 6. v. 10. he
was allured by Shemaiah to go with him into the house of God, pretending it
was not safe for Nehemiah to be in the City; now this would have engaged
Nehemiah in a dishonorable act, to fly into the Temple, this might have
favored of fear, and then others might have been disheartened, and therefore
he entertaines the offer with indignation, and said, Should such a man as I
flee? v. 11. Secondly, it would have engaged Nehemiah in an unlawful act; for
Iunius and Tremelius observe, that it was not lawful for him to go into the
Temple, and to that purpose they urge that Law, Numb. 3. 38. and Nehemiah seems
to intimate the unlawfulness of the thing, v. 12. he says, and lo, I
perceived that God had not sent him, but that he was hired to make him afraid,
and sin, v. 13.

Eleventhly, but we have those that do entertain commerce and intercourse with
our Adversaries. Answ. So it was anciently, Neh. 6. 17. It is said, in those
days the Nobles of Judah sent many letters unto Tobiah, and the letters of
Tobiah came unto them: It seems the Nobles were rotten in those days, some of
them; nay more, many of them, in Judah some were sworn to Tobiah, because he
was the Sonne-in-Law of Shecaniah, it should seem he was well allied, ver. 18.
and in the 19. ver. you may see the end of the letters, why they were sent, and
why they told the proceedings of Nehemiah to his Adversaries.

Twelfthly, the people of the Land are unprepared, and are apt to draw back and
hinder the work. Answ. so it was in the time of building the Temple, as
appears, Hag. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.

Thirteenthly, Our enemies are not only potent, but crafty. Answ. So were the
enemies of those that built Jerusalem, but that is no matter, for Is. 47. 10,
11. it is one of the judgments against Babylon, For all her divinations and
subtlety, that they shall not know how and whence their evil shall come upon
them. These be discouragements I confess, for Neh. 6. 9. it is said they made
us afraid; but for all this the building went on, and prospered.

Fourteenthly, it may be added further, That there be mighty Commotions, and
stirs, and tumults here and in other parts of Christendom. Answ. That must be
expected; The over-turning and casting down of Babylon, which is a great part
of the Carpenters work, must be with great Commotions; When the days of old
Babylons ruin did approach, there was a noise of a multitude, a tumultuous
noise of the Kingdoms and Nations gathered together, Is. 13. (...). 4. Do but
look over Jer. 50. and 51. chap. to this purpose: And so it shall be in the
plucking down of mystical Babylon, Rev. 16. 17. 18. Kingdoms shall be turned
upside down; Do you think that when God raises up the hearts of men to wound
the beast that has seven heads and ten horns, Apoc. 17. 7. the horns that
are upon the head of the beast, which are ten Kings v. 12. will not lay about
them, when they see the very head of the beast which bears the horns struck
at, that it may be quite struck off never to rise more?

Besides for further answer to this, you must expect great noises and tumults
upon another ground, Rev. 11. ult. The Temple of the Lord was opened, and the
Arc of his testament; That is, those mysteries that were shut up and were not
discerned formerly, but by learned men and great Scholars, these only were
admitted into the Temple, to look into the Arc; but now the Temple is opened,
and the Arc discovered, any Christians (though weak) yet might go and see and
know the mysteries of Religion, anciently hidden from the eyes of the Vulgar;
What followed upon this? Lightnings, and noises, and thunders, and earthquaks,
and a great hail; that is, great tumults, and commotions, and troubles; for
the world envying the happiness of Gods people in this great discovery, did
fret, and bite the tongue, and murmr, and trouble the people of God.

Fifteenthly, we have of the most religious people that are discontented.
Answ. There are not many of them: godly men may be 1 ignorant, and so misled;
and they may be 2 froward and pettish, and so may fret; or they may 3 have
interests and relations that look another way. Now when godly men look upon you
through these glasses, they may be allowed to judge amiss; However it was the
case of Paul, he had not only wicked and ungodly men that did oppose him, as
you read, Act. 17. 5, 6, etc. and Act. 21. but Act. 13. 50. The devout women,
and the chief men of the City raised persecution against Paul and Barnabas.

Sixteenthly, it is said, we go on slowly. Answ. The Temple was many years
in building: Blessed be God you do go on, great bodies move by leisure;
Reformation work is heavy work; and there be many obstructions: There is much
rubbish, as there was Neh. 4. 10. so that they were not able to build the wall;
But blessed be God, many of the utensils, and movables, and much of the
trumpery are cast out already; a vast old frame must be plucked down; many horns
must be knocked off; many rough stones and knotty pieces you shall meet withal,
to be squared and polisht: And there be more builders of Babel then there are
builders of Jerusalem, more that would pluck down, then rear up the walls of
Zion.

Lastly, it may be said that you shall never live to see or enjoy your labors
in this great work; it being a business so vast. Answ. If you do contribute
any thing to so blessed a work, your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord:
David thought himself much honored, that he might prepare materials for the
Temple. It is a happiness to you to begin that, which is the hope of the
present age, and shall be the rejoicing and the glory of posterity: And yet it
may be that that promise may be made good to you, Is. 65. 22. 23. what is
said of houses there, perhaps may be made good in this building, and that to
you, That you shall build and inhabit, you shall plant and eat the fruits of
the planting; and mine Elect shall long enjoy the work of their hand.

Thus have you had the discouragements removed, I come to Encouragements to the
work laid down.
the encouragements to the work. 1. The Word is gone forth for ruin against
Babylon, Rev. 14. 8. and 18. 2. Babylon is fallen, is fallen: the word is
doubled, so that her ruin is certain, it is irresistible, and irreparable; a
great part of your work is done to your hands; so that though all the World cry
up Babylon, it shall not be able to rear one stone of it again; So that for
plucking down, which is a great part of your work, it is already done: She is
fallen in Gods sentence, and she is falling, her execution draws nigh. 2. The
word of promise is gone forth, Aedificabo Ecclesiam, Mat. 16. 18. Now let all
the world cry it down, they shall not prevail, the word of Gods command is a
word of power, it is invincible, there is no standing against that word: Is.
44. 20. 2^. 28. there is a commanding promise full of majesty and might, and
upon this promise follows the work, and the workmen fall to the business,
Isa. 45. 1. 2. 3. I might give many promises to this purpose, but they all
empty themselves into that which is named; now although the Decrees of Princes
should stand in the way to oppose the Decree of God, they shall do no good,
Micah 7. 11.

3 Many prayers are sent up to heaven for these very purposes; the cloud that
was no bigger then a man's hand, 1 King. 18. 44. was a token of a great deal of
rain, but that could of incense, Levit. 16. 13. compared with Psalm. 141. 2.
that is ascended to heaven, has covered not the Mercy seat only, but the
Heavens, and certainly this cloud will fall down in showers of mercy.

4 The eyes of all true Christians are upon you, and their hopes and interests
seem to be embarked in you: certainly a Vessel laden with so precious
engagements and interests of the present and future ages, cannot miscarry.
Caesarem vehis, was thought encouragement enough to the boat-man, who wafted
over the great Commander of the world in a tempest; you carry the interests of
Christ, and therefore although the Sea be rough and dangerous, you need not
fear.

5 The late Covenant is none of the least encouragements, that triple
combination of three Kingdoms will shake the Triple Crown; for it was the
course that Antichrist took to establish his Throne, by confederacies and
oaths, Rev. 13. 16, 17. the mark there may be taken for that indelible
character which those that were in orders did receive, (as the Papists affirm)
when they did bind themselves by oath to defend and promote the Papal See; or
it may be taken for that solemn Oath which So Ot^o primus anno 942. swore to
John 12 Pope. Se^sanctam ecclesiam Romans and Johan. rector (...) ej^s
exaltaturum, s^cundum posses^u^. Distinct. 63. (...). Tibi domino. And lib.
Pontifical. the Emperors Oath is set down: prom^tut, spondet, polli^^tur, at
que jurat coram Deo, and ^ea^o Petro, se de caetero protectorum, procuratorem
and difeaserem ^ore summi (...), and sancte Ecclesiae Romans etc. Clement, Lib.
2. Tit. De jurejurand^.
Emperors took, in which they did swear allegiance to the Pope; others also
did usually swear to maintain the Church of Rome; and there was an oath framed
not long since with an etc. in it, in which we must have sworn up Prelacie,
and something else: Now as the Papal Hierarchy has been sworn up, so it must
be sworn down; the sealed servants of God, Rev. 7. 2. i. e. those that have
bound themselves by oath and Covenant to him, (for oaths are seals) shall
confound the marked servants of the Beast.

6 There be many intimations and prognostics of the overthrow of Babylon, and
of the reedifying of Jerusalem; of the rising of the one, and of the ruin of
the other; amongst many, I will point out some few.

1 The Churches of God are brought to a very low ebb, and a most past hopes,
they have traveled with sorrow, and brought forth Benonies, tears, the issues
of sorrow; now the time of the Churches groaning and sighing, is the time in
which the Embryo of deliverance and mercy is begun in the womb, and the acutest
throws and pangs of the Church have been immediate forerunners of some child
of promise, of some Isaac to the Church; In the mount it shall be seen: So it
was with Israel, Exodus 2. 23, 24, 25. and Psalm. 102. from the 2. to the 13. is
set forth the low condition of the Church, and verse. 13. is Gods time set
forth, to arise for the help of his people.

2 The pride, cruelty and impudence of the Churches enemies, show that they are
ripe for ruin; the iniquity of the Amorites is almost full; the filling up of
the measure of their iniquity is not only a forerunner, but a cause and
provocation to their ruin, and the emptying of the vialls of Gods wrath; when
they are on the highest pinnacles of glory, and ambition, and insolency, then
they are nearest their downfall, Isa. 14. 13, 14, 15, 16. and Apoc. 18. 7, 8.

3 The general shakings and earthquakes of Kingdoms. For when Christ does
do any notable things for his Church, against his adversaries, he shakes the
foundations and pillars of States and Kingdoms: The truth is, when the Lord
does any notable things in the world, you shall find that there has been
great tumults and commotions in States, Jer. 5. ult. Joel 3. 16. At the ruin
and fall of the Caesarean Empire after the death of Julian, there was mighty
earthquakes, and also great commotions and shakings of Nations Ammian. Marcel.
l. 26. c. 31. H^ron. vita Hi^ionis. Ammian. ibid. in c. ^0. Socrat l. 4. c. 27.
Paul. Diac. Hist. Miscell. lib. 12. c. 14. Med. Apost of the latter times, into
Christi 367. which was about the time of the ruin of Rome heathen. gravis
extit^t terrae m^tus, and velut per universum orbem Romans bellicum canontibus
buccinis, excitatae gentes saevissimae, limits si^i proximos persultabant;
Gallians, Rhaetiasqu^ simul Alemann^ popu^abantur: Sarmatae l'ann^n^am and
Quadi^ ^icti, Saxones, and Scoti, and A^^acorti Britannos aerumnis ve^avere
continuis; A^oriani Ma^r caeque a^iae gentes Africam solito acrius incursabant:
Thraci^s diripiebant praedatorii (...) Gothorum: Persarum Rex Armeniis manus
ini^ctabat C^luver. hist. Epit. (...). Oros. lib. 7. cap. 3^.
: Certainly, God has some great work in hand, otherwise he would not thus
shake the Heavens and Earth, as he now does.

4 The great number of choice and excellent spirits, ^itted on purpose for some
extraordinary employments: you shall find still when God had any notable
design, he raised up some eminent instrument which he would honor so far as
to make use of to bring the business to pass. The truth is, those that have
appeared in the world in any more notable degree of eminence, and have been
singled out for noble and heroic services, it has pleased God to imprint some
special characters upon their spirit, that so thereby he might as it were
authorize them for employments. So Moses, Ioshuah, Samuel, Deborah, Gedeon,
Sampson, David, Solomon, Cyrus, Zorobabel, Nehemiah, I might instance in
Prophets and Apostles which came to those great places and designs, to which
they were called, with certain impressions of a Divinity upon them; this makes
me think there is some notable design which God is now bringing (...) in regard
he has prepared so many instruments to set on work; I do believe the world
never had the spirits of men more elevated and raised up to the highest pitch,
aiming at nothing under a through Reformation; Zion and Jerusalem is in their
eye and in their heart continually: Men seem to be aspiring and even ambitious
to contribute something to that work which shall be the glory of the world.

5 The general talk throughout the household among the domestics, is, that
Christ their King is coming to take possession of his Throne, they do not
only whisper this, and tell it in the ear, but they speak it publicly; now
you know that before that Kings do go to a place, their purpose is first known
among their domestic servants, it is talked of within doors first, and then
it is published abroad, and you shall have harbingers to prepare their way:
This has been the news quite through the household, and harbingers have been
sent abroad, it is a sign that he is not far off, it will not be long before he
will come.

6 The Gods of Babylon are in disgrace, and scorned and trampled on, an evident
sign of approaching ruin; if once the Gods of a Nation be taken, and
captivated, the Nation must not, cannot stand long. Now the Idols of Rome are
in great discredit, and those are the gods of Rome; for the Idols of a place
are called in Scripture the gods of a place, Ier. 16. 13. The Idols, the
Pictures, Images, Crucifixes, superstitious practices, Relics, and
Ceremonies, Rites, and Customs, with the Laws of their Gods, are scorned, and
disdained, and loathed. Is. 46. 1. 2. It is said, Bell boweth down, Nebo
stoopeth, etc. the famous Idol gods fall down; Gods judgments were executed
upon them; Babylon does not stand long after, for chapter 47. 1. God says, Come
down, and sit in the dust, etc do thou think to stand when thy gods be down?
So Ier. 50. 2. speaking of Babylons destruction it is said, Bell is confounded,
Merodach is broken in pieces, her Idols are confounded, her Images are broken
in pieces: And Ier. 51. 44. God says, I will punish Bell in Babylon; then it
follows, the wall in Babylon shall fall: and chapter 48. 7. speaking of Moabs
captivity, he says, Chemosh shall go forth into captivity with his Priests.
Chemosh was the Idol of the Moabites. Thy gods, O Rome, are captivated,
banished, scorned; Rome look to thy self, thou can not stand long; the gods
are (...) out of their strong holds spoken of Dan. 11. 39. (i. e.) out of the
Temples which are the Ecclesisticall holds, dedicated to the true God and the
Mahuzzims Deo and Sanctis, as Master Mede very well expounds it, in his
Apostasy of the latter Times. Now we see that the very names of Saints set up
with God and assigned to days and places are almost cast off, and the Images
of Saints, which are strong Crosses have been esteemed Fortresses and
Ammunition, whence that usual expression among the Ancients, munire signo
crucis. And Constantius Ma^ssa inve^giling against (...) for demolishing
Images, (...) them (...) at^ muni^ones ve^gios^ cultus.
holds too, are broken down: Wherefore as L. Florus said concerning the taking
of Carthage, after Carthage none need be ashamed to be conquered L. 2. c. 7
Post Cart(...) etc.
; So I say, after the Conquest and captivity of the gods of Rome, Rome need not
blush to follow; The very Heathens when they besieged a City (...) sets down
the Charm used against (...), l. (...) c 8.
, in the first place they charmed the gods of the place, and then they doubted
not of the City: The gods of Babylon are charmed, and therefore it cannot be
imagined that Babylon should hold out long.

7 The Prophetical Calander in which the time of the ruin of Babylon, and the
building of Sion is foretold, seems to intimate that the time is near
approaching both for the one and the other. For there is the same measure of
time, the same synchronismes of the 1 woman, (i. e.) the Church of God living
in the wilderness, which is for a time, times, and half a time: And 2 of the
seaven-headed beast, (i. e.) Rome, which should reign 42. months: And 3 of the
witnesses prophesying in sackcloth 1260. days, Rev. 11. 3. and 12. 6. and Rev.
13. 5. Then 4 there is the same measure of time, of the treading under foot of
the Court and the holy City by the Gentiles, Rev. 11. 2. As for time, times,
Mr. ^rightman in Apoc.
and half a time, it is expounded, c. 12. v. 6. compared with 14. to be three
years and a half: And three years and a half contain Mr Mede in (...).
42. Months, and likewise in three years and a half there be 12^0 days. Now
it is frequent in Prophesies to set down a day for a year; so then by that
account the witnesses sufferings under the Beast, and the Churches persecution
by the Whore, and the tyranny of Antichrist, reckoning a day for a year, must
be 1260. years, which is just so many years as Christ Preached days (as is
conjectured:) Now some take the beginning of this account from Hildebrand, for
then Antichrist was very high, Anno 6^6. according to the number of the beast,
Rev. 13. 18. I will not undertake Mr. Mason in a Prof. to his Histo.
to determine when we should begin and when to end the account, but it is
clear that there is the same beginning and the same ending. However take your
level where you will, there cannot be many years remaining of 1260. not many
weeks of the three years and a half, not many days of the 42. Months. I may
add to this, that the Vialls that are poured forth already upon Babylon, and
the evident Declinations of the Papal state, are as so many steps to ruin;
the deadly wounds given to the Whore-ridden Beast are so many prologues to the
Tragedy of Rome: It would be too long to go over all the particulars severally.

8 I might add the Predictions of Astrologers, and those that study the
Almanac of Heaven written in visible Characters Nuntius Prophet. It were
worthy to be considered who they are that he charges with Rebellion and
Treason, and Murders, and Thefts, etc. whom also he calls by that opprobrious
name of Ca^uli Calinarii. page 28.
: there is one that is so far from favoring your proceedings, that he has
most unworthily reproached you, in a book set forth by him in which he has
collected some choice observations, (give him his due) out of the most learned
Astronomers, which seem to give great light to all that I drive at: Alsted.
Spec. Mundi insert. Chronol. and in Encyclop. absolata, Septima hac revolutione
Pla^ctae redeunt ad sua initia, unde finis regnorum Mundi a pe^itis rei
Astronomicae codigitur. Encyclop page 46. fol. edit. 1630. and in Chron. (b)
Sabbatismi quandam o^cultam rationem obtinet (speaking of this seventh
revolution) and prae caeteris peculiare, and magni momenti quid denuntiat.
Tych. Brahe.
Alsted, and he out of Tycho Brahe, says that from the year 1603. to 1642.
the world will receive great mutations, because in those 40. years comes to a
period, the seventh revolution of the Planets; besides the numbers in Daniel
and the Apocalypse confirm the same: (a) Tycho Brahe says, that this seventh
revolution has somewhat peculiar and singular above all the former, he speaks
as if it pointed at a Sabbatime, and that by this means a preparation or
protasis were made to the Apocalypticall thousand years. Alsted speaks
peremptorily concerning the conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Aries, in
February last, 1642. portendit (says he) novi alicujus imperii revolutionem:
It is remarkable what Kepler said concerning the influence and effects of that
portentuous star in Serpente which appeared in October. 1604. and vanished in
Febr. 1606. Kepl. de Stella Serpent. p. 6. Haec particula resp^^^t for^an
conc^. ^ordrectanum 148. session^u, celebratum, 618. and Magnum (...). Ang^c.
qu^m (...). conventu^ praesenti hoc anno 1642.
he says that Ecclesiastical Discipline shall be restored by a public
Council, the Church shall be reformed, licentiousness of youth shall be
clean taken away, and the madness of the people shall be restrained, and an
Aristocracy Collegiorum, which may be capable of more constructions, shall
prevail. The Author of Nunt. Prophet. says, that he may aim either at the
Synod of Dort 1618. or (laugh not Nuntius) The Assembly of Divines now called.
Keplers Prediction is very strange, and is yet to be fulfilled, and although
some scorn that it should be meant of this Assembly, yet even they (if
vengeance suffer them to live) may see the business in a good forwardness
toward an accomplishment. I could tell you of much more in this kind out of
Astronomers and Divines, who speak strangely of the Climactericall year of the
Beast, and the horns upon the head of the Beast, as also of those glorious
times approaching; but this would ask larger compass then the time will bear,
or a Sermon will contain. Wherefore now I suppose I may encourage you as the
Apostle did the believing Jews, Heb. 10. 23. 25. Let us (says he to them)
hold fast the Profession of our Faith without wavering: and so much the more,
as you see the day approaching. What day? That day in which your faith shall be
confirmed in the Doctrine which I have Preached, which is the abolition of the
Priesthood, (of which he had spoken before) and the legal Ceremonies; for
nothing could add a greater confirmation to their faith, which were believing
Jews, then to see the desolation of the Temple of which Christ had prophesied,
and of the whole Religion of the Jews as touching Ceremonies, foretold by the
Prophets: So also may be understood, v. 35. and 37. of the same chap. Cast not
away your confidence, etc. For yet a little while, he that shall come, will
come, and shall not tarry: What he is this? but even he that Daniel had
prophesied of, 9. 26. The people of the Prince that shall come, shall destroy
the City and the Sanctuary. That is, T. Vespasian, the R. Emperor, that was to
come: I confess others interpret the day spoken of, of the day of judgment
but without any color of truth: Now as the Apostle did encourage the believing
Jews from the time approaching in which they should see the end of Daniels 70.
weeks, and the legal Sanctuary abolished, and so by that they might know the
Messiah was come; So I may encourage you from this, that the time is very nigh
in which you shall see the utter abolition of the stability and glory of the
Romish Religion and State, the time is nigh (as may be conjectured) the
expiring, set forth in the 42 Months, and 1260. days, and the three years and
a half, and in the mystical language of a time, times, and half a time:
Since it is so, the same words may be spoken to you, as David spoke to his Son
Solomon, when he was to build the material Temple, which was but a Type of
this about which you are employed, 1 Chronicles. 22. 11. 12. 13.

I come now to a Use of direction, in which (with all humility and submission)
I shall endeavor to lay down some Rules.

1. Remember that those are Carpenters that are employed in this great work;
Therefore you must do as they that are to build, you must always go by rule,
and by line, and plummet; you must be most exact in the business, and have a
care to go by rule your selves, to keep close to Law, and cause others to walk
by rule and measure, and steare by compass; those that forsake rule, they may
perhaps be said to build, but as those spoken of Micah 3. 9. 10. they build up
Sion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity.

2. Prepare choice materials for the house of God, you must do what lies in
you for it; here must be no hay nor stubble, no humane inventions in this
frame, they must be all cast out, and kept out.

3. Seek out wise master builders, choice instruments, which must be more
immediately employed in the service, and rearing up the Tabernacle of Jacob,
lest in stead of a uniforme building you have a Babel: Those that build with
untempered mortar, they do but patch and dawb, but they do not build; you
must have a special care to set up lamps, and you must see that they be
furnished with store of oil; choose Aholiabs and Bezu^ls, men thoroughly
furnished to every good work.

4 Take heed of doing the Lords work negligently and by halfs; It is a terrible
word that was spoken, Jer. 48. 10. Remember what was said, Ezr. 7. 23.
Whatsoever is commanded by the God of heaven, let it be diligently done, for
the house of the God of heaven; for why should there be wrath against the Realm
of the King and his Sons? Consider that Saul did the work almost, but for that
he was altogether rejected of God, 1 Samuel 15. 9. 26. therefore go you thorough
with your work; the King of Israel being bid to smite upon the ground by the
Prophet Elisha, he smote but thrice, but the man of God was angry with him and
told him, he should have smitten five or six times, and then he should have
smitten Syria till he had consumed it, but now he should smite it but thrice, 2
King. 18. 19. What ever horns stand in the way, smite them, till you have
knocked them off. The King of Israel paid dear for sparing, when he was to
have destroyed, 1 King. 20. 42. his life went for that life of him whom he
spared, and the King of Isreal's people for his people. The Law concerning Oxen
that push with the horns, and goare, is set down, Exodus 21. 28. 29. It is not
said his horns shall be sawne off, but he must be stoned, and if the owner
had warning of the beast, and would not take a course with the beast that he
should hurt none, he was to be put to death; you have to do with horned
beasts, and they have pushed and killed, and you have had warning; I say no
more, These very beasts are much more outrageous, like a Stagge that is
wounded, or a Bull that has received a knock at the Shambles, will make him
that shot or struck them the object of their fury if they can; certainly the
very worst use is made of suspensions and delays, according to that Eccles. 8.
11. Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore
the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil: Remember
likewise that there is a stigma and a brand of infamy set upon those Kings,
that did not go thorough with the business of Reformation, 2 King. 14. 4. and
15. 4.

5. Take heed of building upon an old frame, that must be all plucked down to
the ground; take heed of playstering when you should be pulling down; now it
is apparent that the old house built up by the faction of Antichrist is
leprous, the plague of leprosy has appeared in every part thereof; it has
been scraped and the stones plucked out, and plaistered up again, and yet the
leprosy breaks forth, therefore according to the Law of leprosy. Lev. 14. 44,
45. it must be pulled down, and you must not make use of the materials of it,
but according to the Law they were to be cast out into an unclean place; what
ever we have had from Rome to patch up a Church withal, you must take care
that it be cast out of the Church, let them be cast back to Rome, which is
Sodom, a beastly unclean sink, from whence we had them; there was a curse upon
Jericho, Josh. 6. 26. it was razed down never to be built, so must Babylon be
plucked down, and every part of it, therefore take heed there be no building
upon any part of that frame that is cursed.

6. Have a special care that none of the horns that are knocked off spring up
again; what ever locks of the Sampsons of state you have shorn off, take heed
they do not grow again; remember the house that he plucked down upon the heads
of his enemies, and remember that envenomed spirits, by how much their power is
abated, by so much the more their malice does increase.

7. There should be a special care had concerning those that are admitted to
the work: Ezr. 4. 1. 2. you have some offer to build with Gods people, but they
would not admit them, v. 3. First, take heed that none of a different Religion
be employed in this work, neither false Teachers, and those that are heterodox
in their tenets; for if they be true to their own principles, they must
advance and promote their own faction and way; Ludovic. Laurent. page 53.
Ecclesia vetro nova (...). cura Abrah. Sculteti. Pet. Gregor. l. 23. c. 3. de
rep. Anton. Theorem. 30. Bod. l. 4. c. 1. Scipio Amirath. Ioh. Althus polit.
cap. 31. etc.
There be that have taken good pains to show diverse reasons of this caution;
Secondly, it is no ways fit that those that are engaged in the work should
speak half the language of Canaan, and half the language of Ashdod; they
ought not to be linsie-woolsey men, neutrals or uterque's, these will daub,
they will not build; Thirdly, no Novelists, these will much disturb
proceedings, for novelties at the first are taking, these will raise a dust,
which will not easily be allayed: Fourthly, no Formalists and Ceremonious men
to be admitted, these will be bringing some straw and stubble in stead of
precious stones; all these kind of men will distract and trouble the workers
they will never advance or promote it, they are fitter for the building of a
Babel, then the Sion of God.

8. Labor to get faith and to increase it, study holiness and be enflamed
with love, and zeal to the cause of God; he that wants ^aith, wants an engine
that can move the Globe of Heaven and Earth, and that engages the arm of God
to advance the building; faith is very necessary, for the walls of Babylon, as
well as the walls of Jericho, will fall down before it: holiness must be their
study, your work is to build the Lords house, within your line and compass:
now they that are to be employed in this business are called Gods sanctified
ones, Is. 13. 3. therefore let holiness to the Lord be written upon your
hearts, upon your foreheads, and upon your actions: zeal is necessary; Christ
said, that the zeal of Gods house had even eaten him up, Ioh. 2. 17. and Psalm.
69. 9. David who was a type of Christ, he speaks the same language either of
himself or Chri^; if any thing swallows you up, let it be the care of this
business: then for love and strong affections to the business, it is most
requisite you should have them; Love puts oil to the wheels, and zeal drives
them with more speed and swiftness: It is not a few sparks of either will
serve the turn, now you should be all in flames; for by you life, and heat, and
activity, are to be communicated to many a dull and lumpish and leaden spirit:
It is said of David, 1 Chronicles. 29. 3. that he set his affection to the building
of Gods house; and Neh. 4. 6. it is said the people had a mind to the work:
Zeal is winged with watchfulness and diligence, and the work calls for all
these; you have an excellent pattern in Nehemiah, chapter 2. 12, 13, 14, 15, and 4.
9, 14, 15, etc.

As for you (honorable and beloved) there be the greatest engagements
Engagements to quicken to your duty.
upon you to excite you to your duty that ever were upon mortal men; for if
honorable Services and Employments be engagements, you are called to them, and
they call for duty: If fasting days, and days of humiliation be engagements,
you have had them: If great advantages, and precious opportunities of being and
doing good be engagements, you have them presented every day, they come
petitioning to you and desire to be entertained, they come a wooing to you, and
beg your favorable acceptance: If deliverances, and thanksgiving days be
obligations on you, you have enjoyed them: If strange and admirable providence
be strong bonds, you have had them: If prayers and tears of Saints, if the
hopes and expectations of the people of God concerning you be mighty
engagements, then surely you have them all: If Gods honor and his Churches
interests, whose builders you are, and his cause, whose Vindices and Assertours
you are, be engagements, these you have deposited to you: If the Interests of
Towns and Countries, and a Kingdom of Christendom in a great measure, carry
any weight in them, you have them cast upon you: If difficulties, and
oppositions, and malice of Devils and men, be engagements (as certainly they
are) to stir you up to zeal, etc. then I am sure you have them declared
against you; here be incentives (I suppose enough) to quicken you.

When I consider the work with all the concomitants and consequences Some
pressing considerations to the Honorable House.
issuing from it, the weighty and ponderous circumstances attending it; me
thinks a Parliament of glorious Angels should be fitter to be employed in such
a business as this, then of weak and sinful men. I cannot but break forth
into admiration, and make use of those words of David, Psalm. 8. 4. 5. What is
man that thou art mindful of him, or the son of man that thou vistest him!
for thou have made him a little lower then Angels, and crowned him with glory
and honor: I may say, What are you that God should single you out for this
great work, which the holy Angels, if they were to make their option and
choice, would as soon pitch upon, that they might lay forth their
excellencies, and engage their perfections in, as soon as any that ever was
transacted among the children of men! May not therefore every one of you speak
as David did to Saul when he offered him his Daughter, 1 Samuel 18. 18. Who am I?
or what is my life, or my Fathers Family in Israel? I may likewise use the
words of Peter in another case, 2 Pet. 3. 11. What manner of persons ought ye
to be in all holy conversation and godliness? Honorable and beloved, you are
chosen men all, but are you all choice men? you are men picked and called out
of thousands that you might be Carpenters, (it is the Lords own word) have you
prayed and wept, that you may be fitted for the building of the Lords house?
you are chosen out of all the Tribes of Israel, and it is supposed that you
represent the virtues, godliness, the humility, the zeal, the prudence, etc.
of whole Towns, and Countries, and of a Kingdom. For it is supposed that those
Towns and Countries from whence you are sent, would make choice of such, who
being most eminent in these things and other excellencies, are most fit to
advance the good of Church and State, and to represent Laconically, and by way
of abridgement, the piety and holiness, etc. of a Kingdom; the thousands of
Israel speak and vote in you, consider well whether you speak as if thousands
of men's interests did depend upon your words. Let me use the Apostles words,
speaking concerning godly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7. what carfulness should this work
in you; yea, what clearing of your selves, yea, what indignation, yea, what
fear, yea, what vehement desire, yea, what zeal, yea, what revenge? Let it
be your constant endeavor, in all things to approve your selves clear in
this matter.

Consider well, are you the men that have taken pains with your selves to
humble your selves before the Lord, that so he might show you the form of his
house, for it is said concerning the house of Israel, Ezekiel. 43. 11. If they be
ashamed of all that they have done, then show them the form of the house, and
the fashion thereof, etc. If you have not done this, then certainly you are
much indebted, and in great arrerages, you are much behind hand, me thinks this
should cast you flat upon your faces this day: It must needs humble you
exceedingly, if it may be truly said by Almighty God concerning any of you, My
work goes on slowly, because you are sluggish, because you want zeal, and
love, and courage to my cause: My building is at a stand, because you are at a
stand, you make no progress in holiness, therefore you make no better
progress in the great affairs committed to you; Reformation goes on slowly,
because you your selves that should be Reformers, want reformation. It will be
a heavy charge if it may be truly said, the hopes and expectations of a
Kingdom are suspended, because you are not humbled, because some of you have
by-ends, carnal and collateral respects, private engagements and particular
interests, which byasse you a wrong way: That the Kingdom groans and weeps,
because you will not weep for your sins; if any of these things may be truly
said of any of you, it will prove a very weighty and a terrible charge. It is
said of Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, that he made Israel to sin, and because
David sinned, 70000. men must die; public persons and a representative Body
may cause a Kingdom to sin, and a Kingdom to be plagued; take heed it be
not said, that England sins because of you, or that England suffers because
you sin.

You are the first fruits of a Kingdom, chosen on purpose for special
service; the whole lump was sanctified and blessed, for the first fruits sake,
Romans 11. 16. Rev. 14. 4. If any of you should be swearers, or covetous, or
unclean, or profane, you may bring a great curse, far greater then ordinary;
If our blessings be cursed, as it is, Mal. 2. 2. how great is that curse! A
Nation is represented by you, (and truly a very miserable Nation, because a
very sinful one) I could wish your sorrow were such this day that it might
appear you represent a Kingdoms sorrows, and a Kingdoms tears; I could wish
that it were so great, as that God would accept it for a Kingdom, for so God
does sometime; you being the first fruits, who knows but you may be accepted,
and the whole lump for you? I would to God it were proportionable some way to
the Nations sins which you represent; so that as it may be said, never any
sin like Englands sin, so it may also be said, never any sorrow was like
your sorrow: The greatest mourners in Sion, are the best builders of Sion:
every sin you subdue this day, you knock down a horn that pusheth against the
building of Gods house; every lust that you slay this day, you dash out the
brains of a Babylonian that hinders the building.

God forbid that that complaining reproof of God against the Elders of Israel,
Ezekiel. 14. 3. 4. should be true of any of you; God would not be enquired of by
them, because they had Idols in their heart, and put a stumbling block of their
iniquity before their face, and this made God a stranger to them, v. 5. The
very first work in any Reformation was the casting down of Idols and removing
stumbling blocks; let it not be said of any of you, that you carry any Idols in
your hearts, which are the greatest stumbling blocks, or that you should
harbor any Babylonians in your bosoms, which secretly undermine and pull down
that which you seem to build; let this day be a day of throwing down the
strong holds of sin, and I assure my self it will be a day of rearing up and
building.

The ruin of the Kingdom of Satan, Antichrist, and Sin, is the raising up
of the Kingdom and Church of Jesus Christ.

I shall, lastly, suggest some consolation to you; to this purpose A word of
comfort for conclusion.
let me use the words that Moses spoke to Joshuah and the children of Israel,
when they were to enter Canaan, Deuteronomy. 31. 6. Be strong^, and of a good courage,
fear not, nor be afraid of them: for the Lord thy God, he it is that does go
with thee, he will not fail thee nor forsake thee: I do not doubt but that
Prophecy concerning the Jew, may in a good measure have its accomplishment
upon you also, Zech. 8. 23. Thus says the Lord of hoasts, In those days it
shall come to pass that ten men shall take hold out of all languages of the
Nations, even shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, We
will go with you, for we have heard that God is with you: God will (I doubt
not) make it appear so visibly that he is with you, that although for the
present you and we have such a day as is spoken of Zech. 14. 6. in which the
light is neither clear, nor dark, yet if you commit your way unto the Lord,
and if you trust in him, he will bring it to pass: and make that blessed
promise good unto you which follows in the next verse, Psalm. 37. 5. 6. he will
bring forth your righteousness as the light, and your judgment as the
noonday: And although you are for the present both in sweat and blood, yet you
must remember that promise to Gods people, Is. 9. 3. their joy should be
according to the joy in harvest, that is a joy cum sudore; harvest work is
sweating work, sweat goes before and attends that joy; and they shall rejoice
as men that divide the spoil; that is, their rejoicing should be like the
rejoicing of those who by blows and blood had gained the conquest: so that
your labor is cum sanguine to, but your rejoicing shall be like theirs that
divide the spoil, a victorious triumphant rejoicing; so that although God does
promise great things, yet they shall not be accomplished (...), he sets out
great mercies to sale for sweat and blood: for those that he does employ in
any great design, he puts them upon the exercise of their faith and patience,
as well as their parts and prudence: I do not doubt but that are long it shall
be true of you and all that join with you, as it was of the Jews Ephesians. 8. 16.
17. The Jews had light and gladness joy and honor: And in every Province and
in every City, the (...) had joy and gladness^ a Feast and a good day: and many
of the people of the Land bec^me Jews for the fear of the Jews fell upon
them.

FINIS.

