ORGULA OR THE FATAL ERROR* A TRAGEDY Composed by L. W.

WHEREUNTO* Is Annexed a Preface, discovering the true Nature of Poesy, with
the (...) and Intention of such public (...)*

Morum hominum Figur^
Op^ima aest eorum I^stituendi Ratio.
LONDON, Printed by T. M. for Stephen and Thomas Lewi^* and are to be sold at
their shop, at the sign o^ the Book-binder^ in (...), 1658.

The Scene Seg^si^. An Antique name of a City and Province, on the East Gaul,
or France.

Personae Personatae.
S^nevero* Lord ^o^ctor. Ludaster; son to the deceast General Castrophilu^.
Ambigamor friend to Ludaster, brother to Orgula. Filathes, son to Sinevero.
Faithful Cap^ain^ adhearing to Ludaster Gratianus* Libra^us, Serverus.
Fidelius, Page to Ludaster in appearance, but Fidelia sister to Fidelius
deceased, who was formerly Ludasters page. Mundolo, a slave waiting on Orgula.
Nefarius, a servant waiting on Sinevero. Two Thieves. Voracho, A band of
Soldiers. Sputatro, A band of Villains.
2 Judges, 2 Advocates, With other Court Officers. A Register. A Sergeant at
Alms, with his assistants. A Citizen. Eumena, Princess under age. Orgula,
Sister to Ambigamor, married to Sinevero. Zizania daughter to Sinevero. two
waiting Women attending on Orgula. Vergona, Amasia,
Women waiters on the Princess,
Personae nominatae.
Patravis, the deceast Prince* Castrophilus, the deceast General. Fidelius,
the deceast page to Ludaster.
To the most accomplished Lady, the Lady FRANCES WILDEGOSS.
MADAM,
HAving long since renounced all sorts of civil homage* which either Custom
has blindly tenderd, or Arrogance insolently assumed, as the affected ^ights
of Greatness, being but an ostentive Coloss, nor accessible nor communicable.

I now can figure to my thoughts no nobler Object of Respect than a clear, high
and regular Intellect, whose Endowments may challenge a more Plausible and
Legitimate Acquisition in such public addresses of Honor, as may sometime
reach to a more remote Posterity; in pursuit of which consequence, Madam,
judging the Dignity of your Mind the most perfect Model of so equal a Design,
I have presumed (from the obscurity of many ^ars) to tender this piece to your
view. The nature whereof, though vilified with vulgar Obloquie (the
unrestrained Fury of whose Ignorance, has not of late, left the most high and
Sacred Mysteries unimpeachable) can gain no further access on your
Inclinations, than what a clear and sollid Argument impartially may produce,
which to unfold, it will be requisite to distinguish the Nature, and the Use of
this our subject now in Agitation.

In Order to which, the Nature thereof is (without all opposition) Poesy. What
that is, cannot in my Apprehension be more Elegantly and perspicuously
delineated than the agreeable Philospher has formed it in his convertible
definition. Poesy is a speaking Picture: A Picture is a dumb Poesy. From
which Sense we may extract, that Poesy only is an Art of lively representation
of bodies Natural, Simply, without referrence to other, or Compositively with
circumstance to their mutual communities, either Natural or Civil. Real in
respect of their precedent, present, or future condition: or Imaginary in
relation to their possibility. In the extent of which Exposition some
particulars may p^obably at first Appearance seem Dubious, some Erroneous.

Dubious, As how it may fall within compass of humane capacity: to figure to
another sense what falls not under the dimension of our own; our purpose is
not here to search into the causes of so high an illumination, it is sufficient
proof to our Position, to affirm such an inspection evident in its Nature, as
may be instanced from the sacred Raptures of the Judahack-Prophets and the
Gentique-Sybills, whomthough we seem improperly to include with the tractators
of our Subject, inspired by a nobler Object; yet in referrence to the Analogy
of form in their Discourses, preceding Ages have indifferently implied the
intimation of their Nature under one and the same Denomination. P^ophets.
Vates, To which usage we have extended this our Exposition.

Erroneous, In that the Fancy herein does assume too vast a Liberty, to
figure forms are visibly to natural and to civil Rules inconsonant. As in
referrence to the First, Satyrs, Centaures, transmutation of Forms and the
like. In answer whereto although it be not difficult to prove, that even herein
the Art does only Nature imitate, who oftentimes from the Inaptitude of matter
does err from her intention in the Form; and in her Ministry does frequently
produce a Prodegie. Yet these inventions may by mean cap^ities be
distinguished, to be bu^ Metaphors to a Moral sense.

In relation to the Second, inserting things Profane, Obscene, Fabulous and
Proposterous.

Profane, As the figuration of their Gods invested with our humane
Imperfections.

In reply whereto we may allege, that in reference to the Civil frame,
intended are hereby, the Potentates of the earth, an allusion may be produced
from Sacred proofs to form it warrantable. In relation to the natural texture,
are secretly herein involved Moral, Phisical, or metaphisical Mysteries,
perhaps yet undiscovered, which from the vulgar Eye should be concealed, as the
Adulterers of Philosophy.

Obscene, To clear which charge we might infer, that if the indecen'st form
hereof were figured, it rather would imply an imperfection in our civil
Commerce than any Imputation to the Art, whose End is only to expose each
Circumstance and accident inherent to the subject, in their most proper and
essential Colors, Beauties, or Deformities. Yet will we not so far insist on
the strict Rules of the Art, as not to impute such indiscretion to the Artists
Error. Who may if skilful, nay who ought (according to the true rules of his
pattern, Nature) so gracefully to over shadow the less decent parts, as might
not raise a^strain on the most modest Cheek to view them publicly.

Fabulous, This subject bears so little weight in an objection, that it might
rather infer the ignorance of the Impeacher, than the Impostury of the Artist.
All sorts of Arts having some secret Gloss and reservation of their mysteries,
to support their Honor and Advantage: This only and alone, pretending unto
none declare things for such as it delivers them, Fained or Essential,
Imaginary or Historical; though in some textures of the latter kind may
possibly be interwoven certain enlargements and digressions (as graces but
peculiar to the Art) not properly consistant with the dignity, weight, use of
such a Subject, requires simple Truth in every circumstance. Yet even herein a
clear Intelligence will suddenly distinguish shadows by the position of the
Natural light; like perfect ears in Mu^ick still tain the Grounds, Orders,
Times of every note, though the Musicians hand, to grace his Harmony, cast
various flourishes on the suspended Measures to lend more weight unto the usage
of invention in this rejected Art, we shall not need to instance the excellence
of the nature thereof to Instructtion, to which the choicest of essential
similitudes cannot exactly reach, wantig such forms of circumstances as might
enlighten the intention of the Deliverer, restrained and obscured in a real
Narration. It may suffice to silence opposition, to allege we find our most
authentic precepts couched in such forms of texture, as Allegories or
Parables; a winning method to attract the grossest tempers, and infix in All
most durable impressions.

From the freedom of this latter objected subject, issues the objection of the
last (Preposturous) in that it is supposed the unprescribed Fancy, ha^ing
assumed a liberty to rove, will suddenly contract extravagant mixtures in her
compositions, to form a Prodigy in the civil frame, as formerly in the
natural.

To this conjecture we may make reply: That no Absurdity can be imagined so
irregular, which may not meet a parralel in the occurrences of civil Actions.
Be it, that we should suppose the most evident. Truth condemned for the
grossest Error: That Wisdom should be confuted by Ignorance: Integrity
ejected by Hypocrisy, Valor overcome by Lachety, Industry supplanted by
Sloth, the Innocent suffer by the Criminal, Justice smothered by Iniquity, Love
rewarded with Hate; which without further proof to verify, I only, Madam, will
appeal to you^ own observation. If any shall aledge such accidents to be but
the effects of our corruption which guids us still to satisfy our sense,
rather than an infeasable impropriety in a civil usage, which the
licentiousness of the Art does often figure; not to decline the smallest shadow
of an objected scruple; we shall in some example divest the action of this
pretended object, leaving the occurrence immaterial or void in any cosnequence
what ever. Can humane sense reflect upon a more Preposterous transaction than
That the Monarch of the world should in the height of all his Glory, and in the
Eye of all the world ma^nificently solemnize Nuptials with another Man; the
most object of his Domestics. Yet such a real precedent we may authenickly
collect from the Records of Nero's Infamy.

Having thus briefly (as the capacity of our Preface will give leave) discussed
of the Nature of our Subject. Order requires that we should next insist upon
the use Thereof: Whereon depends the real worth of every Piece, in Nature or in
Art, which to pursue methodically, we should in course unfold the several kinds
thereof, in their particulars; as Odes, Elegies, Epigrams, and the like: But
since the nature of our present subject may include them all, as several
species under their proper gender, we only will adhere to agitate thereon,
raising our introduction from the first view of the whole Frame, without
distinction of the Parts thereof.

If intercourse in civil commerce may conduce to form the Judgment, compose
the mind, or rectify the manners (as none who has received impression thereof,
can deny) no form of institution humane reason can reflect upon, more suddenly
and more perfectly can attain thereto, than can the well composed illustrations
of a Theater. Where in few hours we may take full view of such variety in
circumstance, as many Ages cannot represent; and from the consequence of events
collect such rules, may guide our undertakings with success to their peculiar
Objects. Whilst being uninteressed Spectators only, are to us distinguished the
secret source of each Transactors purposes, whose actions leave so sensible an
impression of their Character in our thoughts, that seldom in our own
particular community we encounter such an inclination, but that the
prepossession of their figure straight illuminates our senses to disclose their
Tract; whereby our Fortunes, Lives, Liberties and Fames, are timely oftentimes
secured from secret Trains.

To yield a true allay to the distempers of the Soul, no Art can form a fairer
method, than thus to represent the wild distractions of her irregular
motives, transported with licentious fury, to execute the giddy will, with
violation to each strict prescription, Outrage to it self, with the disasters
frequently ensue so stubborn a revolt from that interrior light, should lend
her dignity: if the deformity of the figure may reduce the mind to a more
happy and decent Regulation of her faculties. To which pattern was among the
Spartans introduced a custom to inebriate their Slaves, they might expose their
loose Demeanors to their childrens view, that such a loathsome spectacle might
imprint a lasting Detestation of so brutish a distemper.

Nor yet to regulate our manners can the most powerful precepts form the
Mind, so willingly susceptible of her intended Object: If intimation of the
glory and success of virtue may inflame the Soul to noble enterprises; or the
Infamy and punishment of Vice, deter from shameful practices, which are the
principal Objects, a well compiled Piece still viseth at: or, seldom in the
most imperfect are omitted. First, in regard the mind is here no way
subordinate unto a more supreme sufficience than her own. Secondly, in that
such forms of Institution do pretend unto no servile impositions, the most
material impediments, why the authentick'st guides so seldom meet success in
the Intention of their elaborate prescriptions. Subjects of this nature
propounding no other object, but delight, unto the Auditory, the sensual mind
is easily enticed to view such spectacles, where left unto the freedom of her
proper Inclination, she insensibly assumes a voluntary propension to those
forms are represented in the fairest Characters, with an aversion to the
impeachable.

These are the essential uses of our subject; nor yet are the Collateral
less material: as, The Community of a Prince unto his people (at whose
peculiar charge were formerly erected such magnificent receipts for public
Spectacles, either to ingratiate himself with his subjects in a mutual
participation of delight, as an endearing entertainment from himself, or else
to represent the object, by circumstance and issue of some eminent expedition,
enterprise or treaty within his proper jurisdiction, or with foreign States
transacted by himself or substitutes, unto the illiterate and orebusied
multitude: who usually want vacancy or capacity to peruse, conceive, or retain
the sense thereof under the tedious, abstruse forms of public manifests:
which figured in such Interludes were even obvious, to their very children. A
happy piece of policy to inform with delight the meanest member of the civil
frame in what he is concerned. The means to our security becoming once to us a
mystery, may justly by us be suspected for disguised Furbery.

To this advantage herein does succeed the benefit which arises from the
Peoples intercourse with one another, not only in the introduction and pursuit
of Commerce or Affairs: but in the initiation and support of mutual Amities,
sprung frequently from civil and unsought abodes, and cherished with graceful
entertainments in Society, which here not limited to particulars, may possibly
be dispensed through the civil structure to the Composure of a general Union,
the strength and glory of a Commonwealth. From whence also ensues the requisite
relaxation of Mind and Body, (o'reburdened with the travel of private or
public Negotiations) in a plausible divertisment, whereby become refresht,
both may with fuller vigor and Alacrity, reassume the pursuit of their civil
Functions.

Nor is the Action of a Theater less useful in the Education of our Youth (a
frequent exercise in Foreign Seminaries, Societies and Schools, to inanimate
their spirits, render them plyant and susceptible to every form, might either
frame them more agreeable in their society, or more successful in their
private Commerce; as also, to lend a more assured graceful unconstrained
Demeanor to their persons and in such Habits, to indue them with undaunted
Confidence, Facility, and readiness to communicate in discourse the Image of
their Thoughts to an attentive multitude, an acquisition of no little moment,
in public Consultations, Conferences and pleas: In managing whereof, who has
not gained this Dexterity, shall find the weightiest Reasons in his Argument
silenced, smotherd, o'resway'd by the less pertinent clamor of an insisting
Impudence.

These are the general Objects, which we but cursorarily have only pointed
at, omitting them to ^mplifie or illustrate with the Honor or Example of
Antiquity, in due conformity to the quality of our Introduction, and the more
clear inspection into the nature of our present Subject, which possibly might
appear to rigid Tempers of far less validity, o're-shaddowed with such
formalities, as if they were but artificial Ornaments, no proper or essential
lusters.

The particular Objects have a vaster influence, which (not to err from our
pre^ciption) we will contract to one united couplet to crown the closure of our
Texture, affirming that Poesy investeth virtues, Glory with Eternity on Earth:
and imspiring life in Harmony, lends Zeal wings to scale the vault of Heaven.
If this Essay may in your Honor, Madam, but pretend to the first branch
hereof; my next Endeavor shall in your Piety attempt to reach the latter.

Madam, Your humbly Devoted Servant L. W.

Act I.
SCENE 1.
Sine^ero. SO! the world is calm, now busy Action
Her Theater has left, wrapped in the veil
Of night, whose silent Issue has, e're this,
The stupid Soul beguiled with empty Hope,
While I do mine confirm, enlightened with
The watchful flames of Love and Sov'ranty:
Whose active tempers struggling to engross
My yielding fancy soly to each other,
Seems troubled in his mind. Frustrate, in their division, the design
My suspend Resolution should put on
To form and finish both their purposes.
Pauses. Y' unruly Fires! who frame and guide the world!
Why thus disagree your transferred beams in
Frail humanity? If for the order,
Of your Ministry; plead your pre-eminence!
Yet least declining age in favor should*
Of thy concurrent over-partial prove,
Exalt thy lights, thou still prevailing Love!
Raise here the Exemplar of the ensuing work,
To show the Incredulous how from crippled Time
Thou will extract the last Per^ection:
And thou, the splendid glory of my Age!
To who^e hi^h neigb'ring Summet I am come
By secret paths; maintain thou still thine own!
T^y ga^dy train attracts the wanton Eye
Of woman more, than all the flourishing Grace
Of Youth Fix here m' intentive thoughts your strength,
And on the fabric of Ambition
F^ame love a Temple; where if his Object may
No prove Loves pledge; she may prove Honors Prey.
First here is a swelling cloud must be removed,
Casts his eye on a Letter he held in his hand. Whose progress th^eatens to
eclips your Lights.
C^strophilus Death is crowned in victory,
Whose Glories, still surviving, in his Son,
The People rule more powerfully than Law:
And by Ambigamor his friend pretends
To wed fair Orgula. So fools conclude
E're they consult those powers do them preside.
I am their Fate; it is fixed in my Decree,
In Love and Rule there must no Rival be.
Nefarius! -- How dull a thing is passive Man,
Whom every giddy vapor unc^eates,
Fittest my use. It Is Policies defect,
TO employ such spirits may their ways detect.
Ho! Nefarius?

Nefarius ent. N. My lord.

S. Holds Castrophilus Funeral Triumph this day

N. Such is the voice of Fame my Lord:

S. See that performed, as you fin^e ordered there.

N. I shall, with diligence equ^l to your trust.

Delivers im a P^per. exeunt Act I. Scene 2.
The Princess Eumena with Zisania and other waiters above at a window.
Castrophilus Funeral Triumph attended by Ludaster, Ambigamor, Gratlanus,
Libranus, Serverus, Fidelius and others. Eu. Is that Ludaster follows next the
Hearse?

Zis. Madam it is: The Ornament of our Age:

Eu. The excellence of his Form and Grace compared
Unto his Fame, could hardly be mistook
By whom never seen; Both are so singular.

Zis. Has not your Highness seen him formerly?

Eu. Not within bounds of perfect Memory.

Zis. So Time in me had slight Impressions rac'd,
To her self. Had not even then, Love placed his Figure here.

Lu. What silent Ecstasy has seized this place:
Can Joy nor Grief express a sense of Life?

Amb. Sure the security we bring has rac't
The Memory of Past, and fear of Future Ill^,
And, now, as useless has entombed them both
Without a monument, in Neglect and
Ingratitude.

Gra. Where are those glittering Pageants, who were wont
With fauning Ceremony to come and gaze
On her with wonder they durst never seem
To court, but with a distance of reproach?
Is the A^orde of victory become
Less agreeable, exposing thus ^he path
That to her leads in this sad Testimony.

An At^end. Your faith in me, my Lords, may plead excuse
For them you seem to blame, when I shall show
It Is not their inclination does restrain
The Peoples Hearts to publish their Re^pects,
But a severe injunction from the Lord
Protector.

Lu. My jealousy craves pardon,
Obedience is the ground of civil Rule,
Which, thus prevailing 'bove Affection,
Forms them both worthy and susceptible
Of their ensuing greatness.

Sergeant at Arms ent. meets the Hearse. Ser. In our Dread Sovereigns name,
authorized
By virtue of our Lord Protector's Order,
Castrophilus of the Segusian Force
Late General, I do Arrest for Treason.

Lu. With a more powerful guide possess me Heaven!
Than what but merely does distinguish man
From Beast! I may restrain the wildness of
My Passion, which swells to a Distemper,
High as their Fury: Reason is too weak.
Or if not for our Safety, for your Truth,
Least vainly we conclude ye have forsook
Unguarded Inno^ence.

Draws his Sword. Gra. Shall we have toiled his Honor to preserve
When yet alive, not vindicate his Fame
Now Dead?

Lu. This nor becomes your Duty, nor your Love;
Guilt puts on force: Virtue waves violence.
Our wrongs to the Prescription of the Laws
Must here give place.

Prin at a window. Gra. It is the curse of Arms to raise a power
In Form, must suppress theirs in Right:
Puts up his Sword. Sr. my rudeness will be I hope excused
By my Integrity. Which would advise
To provide timely for security.
Indigni^ies are offere^ to the Dead
Obliquely but reflect upon the Living.

Fu What mystery masks this disorder?

An Attend. The Princes Sr.

To Lud: Lu. With a respect low as my obedience,
To the Pr. Madam, your vassal does present your Grace,
From this sad ^elique of Fidel^ty,
A Balsome to preserve your Beauty fresh
Against the assaults of Age* smoothing your thoughts
With soft tranquillity; which else perhaps
The anxious burden of your Sta^e would with
Their churlish Summons soon precipitate;
A work so laden with fertility,
The feeble stock sunk under the support,
Whose Monuments Epitaph him dignifies
Your Peace and Glories grateful sacrifice.

Eu. How powerfully work the charms of Love.

To herself. Ludaster. Acceptance and Acknowledgement,
Too meanly speak my Gratitude in thanks.
Maturity of time shall it invest
With fairer Ornaments. IN the interim know
I must divide my Interests with yours,
And in the exchange participate of both;
You of my Glory to moderate your Grief;
I of your Grief to moderate my Glory.
Whose price with a new Trial I Would redeem,
Though the Event were to be doubtful made
By his declining from the Action.
But why, Ludaster, this interruption
Of your O ^equies?

Lu. Madam, the ways of mischief are
Too crooked and obscure for erect thoughts
To penetrate; and leaves who should inform
Lost in a silent Labyrinth of wonder.
Yet thus much does the Infancy discover;
M^ll^ce endeavors to stir up a cloud
Might smother virtues memory.
Seizing the sacred Ashes of the Dead
For a pretended crime of Treason.

Eu. This subject might an anger have provoked,
Had not thy Fathers long approved Faith
Shook off the levity of this ground, with scorn
In every man's belief that has but heard
The empty Accents o^ h^s name.

Lu. Yet ^ears the ch^r^e an appearance of Guilt,
Till by your Laws it is cleared, for whose free course
I must appeal your Grace, the Sanctuary
Of Innocence.

Eu. Though my youths Immaturity as yet,
Suspend me from the advantage of my Birth:
I must procure, what Justice cannot deny,
To punish the suggestors of this infamy,
For which attend our Order

Lu. Your Highness Birth and Goodness doubly do
Entitle you to our Obedience.
Ex.
Act I. Scene 3.
Se^evero. It Is wisdom's property to frame redress
To each repugnance of our doubtful Fate,
We may evade her Laws necessity,
And wrest her Power to our purposes,
By the plurality of means we form
To guide us to our ends: To which effect
I must attempt to fortify my Branch,
His tender youth may cherish and sustain
Our fortunes flourishing fertility.
Filathes ent. Filathes! How! So full of thought, alone?
Filat, encounterd in a discontented p^sture. What noble subject entertains thy
Soul
Can justify so firm a solitude?
It Is not the idle dreams of Schools, take on
The specious title of Philosophy,
Can do it: Nor yet those Gyves Morality
Has forged to force the functions of the Soul
To Rule: As she were to dimension
Subject. Ease has those useless trifles wrought
TO excuse the sloth of Natures vacant works,
She in the world superfluously has cast:
Thy Birth and Fate call thee to greater things.
I am surprised. -- Sr. if the Restriction
To himse^ Of my thoughts has figured to your sense
An unbecoming sadness; 'twas only
The care to be in Action responsive
To Their Summons. I might be worthy held
Those happy Beings, I extract from You,
And your fair Industry. Which Intention
With success to make good; I must request
The matter from your hand in some employ,
On which I may a lasting glory raise,
My name may be no blemish to your story.
Si. The servour of thy youth I like, but not
Approve; ^e wise, and vainly not pursue
The inessential appearance of things:
Taste of the fruit, and glut thee with the food
Of Greatness: Leave the Ayery Pomp to those
Who fondly toil their servitude to frame.
Let my experience trace thee out a way
Securely leads to thy Felicity.
All those endowments grace thy youth, are won^
To make Loves pursuit happy in success:
Prove their attaints on this fair Object we
Entitle to our Sovereignty. Loves rules
Regard not Policies distinctions.
Be Bol^, Attempt and Thrive.

Fi. How indiscreet a sense my secret flame
Would, unrestrained, to this purpose vent.

To himself. Nefarius enters. Si. Nefarius!
Turns t^ exit Fila. Nefa. Turns to Fila. Filathes attend me on the Terrace.
And how Nefarius? did the Soldiers Plumes
Couch their exalted heads? who swelled with rage?
And who, with a more suffering dislike shrunk
His intelligent sh^ulders? whose shaking head
His wa^y Reservation, next, employed?
Who w^^h erected or reverted eye,
Dispenc't the cautions of his Jealousy?
These Notions are of consequence, Nefarius.

Ne. Your Honor shall know every circumstance
In fitter time. The Princes, now at hand,
Expects your conference on this subject:

Si. How comes it to her ear so suddenly.

Ne. To the proceeding she a witness was.

Si. My Order then was not observed with care,
Which charged you to divert her by some slight.

Ne. Such motives, often pressed, were often repulst.
Ex. Ne.
Si. Return, I come, who would unblamed strike,
Must what he seems to do, not seem to like.
Ex. Si.
Act I. Scene 4.
Libranus Serverus. Lib. Sad! Serverus? Dejection ill becomes
The Demeanor of a Soldier.

Ser. Not so Libranus,
When framed o'th useles sense of others wrongs:
True valors object solely seated is
On others Interests, to which unblemisht she
Yields up her self, though not unto our own.

Lib. But thus oppressed, is to betray our cause
To an ill Omen; we immov'd have stood
The Chance of war; and far more firmly should
Expect fair virtues Trial.

Ser. The Chance of War
Less fatal is to Arms, than slights of Peace,
Where'n, our open plainness does expose
Our careless lives to every Artifice
Of close Supercherie. But see they come,
Lets wait the Issue.

In great solemnity the Judge with the Court of Justice, Officers goes before
the Hearse, whom Nefarius busily entertains, as also two Advocates, the one as
Plaintiff being Attorney General for the State, the other as Desendant for
Castrophilus. Next the Hearse, Ludaster, Ambigamor, Gratianus, Fidelius and
others. Lib Hah! so busy in obsequiousness!
Open Corruption unsuspected slides
Into the hearts of Men, under the form
Of Ceremony: So Custom gelds the Law.

Ser. Thou err'st Libranus, in that thou think not
The Introduction more material.

The Judges set. Judge Exhibit the Charge.

Reg. Castrophilus of the Segusian Force
The Court Register reads. Late General, refused his Commission
To yield up to our Protectors Order,
By which inhibited to fight, provokt
The Enemy to unsought Encounter,
To the hazard of the State.

At. Genesis Crimes, in their nature clear
Require no further Sense to give them weight;
On such to enlarge with Circumstance or Art
Were not to enlighten, but to aggravate:
In which suggestion, Justice, weakly fenc't,
Might be too soon surprised with appearance.
Which to avoid; my Honorable Lords,
I shall with Artless brevity relate
The inormity of the Offense, exposed
To your Judgments.
First, to your considerations I present
The Indignity to our Sovereigns Substitute,
In contempt of his Order, whose only will
Bore weight enough to lend it consequence.
Had not the obscured Glory of that State,
To whom our better Fate has joined ours,
(Even in her fullest pride) by her example
(Effectual as her transferred Laws) prescib'd
A certain Course to our security
From her sufferings, in continuation
Of her Offices. Which dangerous step
To Ambition, her first Innovator,
Caesar, in his own personal practice sound,
And remedied, at his return to stome,
Perfixing terms unto the Pratorie
And Consulate. This only for the ground
Of the Injunction which followed
With disobedience, the overthrow
Of government: intrudes a president
(The supplement, to all defective Laws)
From our preceding Pattern;
Who sentenced to be whipped his Ingenier,
For that he rather chose to fail this Rule
Of Rule; then that Rule of his Art, which held
A known repugnance to his Masters will:
To which ensues, yet a more weighty crime,
The hazard of our Liberties and Lives
Rashly thrust on one moments doubtful trial,
In opposition to Authority.
Changes in States, 'specially succeeded
By minority, are held no seasons fit
To tempt the i^ certitude of Arms: wherein
Faults irrepairable are seldom twice
Committed: whose issues, though succesful, when
Inhibited that Romans censure merit;
Which to his son triumphs applause denies,
And crowned the victor but for Sacrifice.

Ad. De. My honored Lords,
In Decimo Sex^o Patravis.

Lud. Forbear vain babbler,
Lu. pu^s the Ad. by with his hand from the Bar. Sullie not a Cause with thy
impertinence
Needs no defense from mercinary form;
Her purity to blemish were a Crime,
Great as the Charge suggest's, -- How suddenly
Pause. Incensed wrongs become licentious:
Against the Order of the Court, I fear,
I do transgress; thus rudely to assume
A Liberty; but by your grace allowed,

Iu. Proceed.

Bows to the Judge Lu. TO omit the ground pretended to revoke,
The progress of our Arms, though in it self
Disputsble: since he but once removed
Successor to the President alleged,
More suble far than he, it practiced
With success, as the immediate means
TO establish his security. But this,
With common Preservation balanced,
Will easily, with your assent, admit
A contradiction in the consequence.
And though the works necessity appear,
Not to each vulgar eye, Experience
And Observance, has confirmed the Master
Of the Mystrie therein, for whose account
He only is responsible to heaven
The Function of General, solely being
To Sovereignty inherent; whose presence
Heretofore author^s'd all proceeding,
Till a corrupter Age, though ease and lux,
Induc't a substitute, who still retains
The essential marks of his Original;
Exacts the Rites of National Laws abroad;
Supports the course of civil laws at home;
And with his moving Commonwealth transports
A Law peculi^r to his Ministry:
Which he reforms, or abrogates at Will;
Dispenses Honor, from his proper source;
Divides the spoil as freely as his own.
Nor can the nature of his Action
Agree wish order, limit; or restaint;
Which Subject are, to method time and place,
From whose varying occurrents he by eye
Takes new advice, to guide his purpo^es.
Whence expeditions of this quality,
Prove seldom happy but in silence sealed.
Nor can the objected Presidents be of force
Inferring only, how far this power, now
In question, extends it self over others,
Not how far others power over it.
Which may in fairer evidence appear,
To justfie our Cause (if presidents
Be received) when you shall recollect,
How Fabius first the Cimmian Mountains past.
Divide the Roman from the Thoscan Coast,
Without the Senates consent or advice,
From whom their Tribunes and their Deputies
Being sent with strict Defense to stop his course,
He not desisted from his enterprise,
Which happily he finished, without
A farther Contestation.

Judge stands up. Iu. Whereas the littr'al senee of Laws do not
Exactly touch the Nature of the offense;
We may from Presidents receive advice;
But yet no Rule, in that the circumstance
Of their depending Causes are to us
Not published. In which Case, our recourse
Must to the light of Nature be; Reason,
Laws Principal; who from her self should err,
Should she great Crimes neglect, and yet the small
Suppress; for in her silence so she should,
Were not great crimes forbidden in the less.
Which, cautious, she forbore to specify,
Seeing man's froward frailty still did take
New violence from restraint: Jeloust' awake
His faculty, in her invention.
Such is the subject now in difference,
Our Laws in the letter not precisely mark,
But from the Relative and Comparative sense
We may disclose the full necessity
Of her Intention in the consequence.
Which cannot be the Branches to preserve,
And leave the Root affords them nourishment:
Which here the Person, and his Act transgrest,
Do truly represent: For of what use
Are Magistrates, their Head being disobeyed,
Or in their mouths the ^aws, if who them framed
May in their own Injunctions he gainsayd
With impunity. Yet farther the offense
In the dependence does extend it self;
Exposing the security of the State,
Without necessity, to a doubtful chance;
Which in well-governed Commonwealths are shunned
To The last extremity: And then not past,
Without a general Consultation,
Whose advise slighted or contraried,
In such important actions, does deserve
(What e're the issue be) the punishment
Of high Treason, Whereof I do prounounce
Castrophilus guilty. Yet least the rigor
O'th Law should seem in vengeance to delight,
Who strikes but by example to correct;
His body fre'd from our community,
We undisturbed leave to Funeral Rites;
But what of him remains with us must suffer:
His Honors are in degradation lost,
His goods to the public Treasure forfeited.
His Son and Allies judged to Banishment,
Not as Accomplices to the present Crime,
But as to further Crimes prevention.
Dissolve the Court.

The soldiers seem to weep. Exit Judge. and their Attend. Lud. How soon
affection does communicate
To others sufferings. Thus feeble sorrow,
Does un-man the sold. Why thus dejected?
Do you vainly think, that valor only
Is the practice of the field? The Subject
Of your displeasures is impassible;
Or if in being still, he would again.
His innocent life, with cheerfulness, yield up,
In favor of the course of Justice,
Without a secret murmur.

Gra. His virtue of too frequent usage was
Amongst us all, to doubt the excellence,
Whose glorious Memory our Ages malice
May vail awhile, but can extinguish never.
This nor the scandal to our Industry,
As subsequent to His; moves an excess
In our just sufferings, though either may,
Without Reproach, a just resentment challenge.
But the expansion of his worth cut off,
From us and Action, in ^our weightier wrongs.

Lud Their relati^n to you, but make them such
Seems to yield to passion To me. The effects of love more strongly move
Than of Enmity.

Lib. Or swords are the best speakers of our loves
And wrongs: whose use, each man that has a sense
Of virtue, must, without reserve, yield up
To the defense of yours.

Lud. Reserve your valors for a worthier cause,
Your Interests and the States must never be
Opposed by mine. My friendship never was
S'indiscreet, to prejudice the Owner,
Nor my Faith my Country.

Amb. Come; I have salve for all thy sufferings,
Embraces Lud. Whose splendor shall through these disorders move
True satisfaction from the sphere of Love.

Act I. Scene 4.
Orgula, Vergena, Amasia. One with a Cabinet of Jewels, another a
looking-glass. Or. So! now the distance of your servitude
Suspend a while. And to be free as thought;
Say, whose beauty holds the loudest Tennor
In the voice of Fame?

Ver. Madam! the question in it self implies
More than the Resolution can admit;
Propension in the quality. To dispute
The pre-eminence of your beauty; is to raise
A doubtful concurrent to its glory,
And make the excellence of another form,
More considerable in the comparison,
Than in their own perfection.

Or. This to Eumena were but passible:
Obsequiousnes the true attendant is
Of Greatness.

Amb. Under your Honors favor, the Homage
Of beauty far more universal is,
Than that of Majesty: by so much ods,
As natures bounds does Policies extend.
And if the excess of praise, from servile thoughts,
Be licensed, as the badge of Soveraginty,
Although conducing but to its reproach:
The ornaments of our Expressions
(From a delightful Rapture issuing)
May be authorized as the grace of love,
Which tends but to exalt the luster of
His object.

Or. From whence I may collect, you would Infer
My beauty must receive addition
From your flatteries.

Am. Pardon me,
Madam, not so; perfection does admit
No alt'ration; increase, implies defect.
But yet the satisfaction which does spring
From the applause we give, may animate
The hidden sources of its influence
Which reflects on us.

Or. My Faith is not so powerful to make use
Of this conclusion to the advantage
Of mine.

Amb. It moves not in his proper Element
From the equality of Sex: But when
By your pretenders it is published,
The effects will be more sensible.

Or. Well!
Not to resist the nature of our Sex,
Who soonest credit, what we covet most.
Agreement shall this controversy close;
And move another from your last evasion.
Distinguish the pretenders you propound,
And press the advantage you conceive they held
Over each other to make good their ends.

Amb. Madam,
Amongst the number of your unsought spoils,
Two only are considerable. The one
With Wealth and Power fully dignified,
(Two strong motives to a woman's Temper.)
The other with Virtue and true Valor
As amply qualified: Which with the former
Paralel'd, does no proportion hold
In their true values, to dispute their worths.
Divest but the Coloss of Wealth and Power
From their ostentive Bulks and limit them
To their peculiar use, they will appear
But Ministers to Necessity and Right,
Whose functions, bounteous nature, and good men
Make useless. If as they are in common
Usage taken, they will be found but aids
To Wantonness and Oppression. Whose yoke
They doubly suffer, that to them submit;
Of Greatness even the endearments are but
Insulting suffrages. While Virtue does
Erect a Bower, Love in Repose to Throne
And Valor from licentious tongues protects
Our Fame.

Ver. A mere Platonic Rapture, Madam,
Deduc't from the first Infancy of Time,
When Innocent man yet hardly knew the use
Of his own natural faculties.
Virtue is but the Fable now of Schools;
Nor Valor but the hardiness of Fools;
Whose ends should be from evil us to free,
Not with neglect to tempt them to our ruin,
Against which they potent safeguards are, she slights
In the comparison. And most of all
To us important. For the Soul even from
The nature of her first extraction, holds
A strong desire of Rule. From which our Sex,
Excluded in the Politic Body, gains
In the Natural, by the advantage
Of our Beauty. Whose vigor were more powerful
And legitimate, I will grant, then that
Of violence: since to us Inclination
Renders our Subjection voluntary.
And farther succor we should never want
Our Empire to confirm, did not the Rites
Of time too suddenly prevail against,
The Rites of our Prerogative; whose Power
To frustrate, least it ours supplant, to it
We timely must a counter-party raise
(While yet we have the means it to procure)
May our failing Authority support.
Which to us more assured cannot be
Than to acquire an opulent Dignity.

Or. A pretty slight to free us fromth' contempt
Of Age, whose unwelcome approaches make
Our beeings useless, often ridiculous.

Mundola with Ambigamor and Ludaster Enters. Mun. Madam, Your Honors Brother.

Amb. Sister,
Salu^e I joy to find the Messenger of fame,
Though glorious, yet too mean a Speaker
Of thy Form: It meets the expectation
Here at the full, Her flatteries else where,
Leave void, even in the first examination,
And yields an evidence of thy modesty,
More powerful, than are those Virgin stains
Revert the Guilt upon the loose Attempter:
In that we may from thence conclude, thy care
Nor studied was, nor vain, too lavishly
Those Graces to communicate to each
Lascivious sense, with Arts affetterie
Which bear the Figure of Divinity.

Or. Brother,
Those attributes you give, if placed in me,
Have found a happy way to please the Owner,
If you in them be satisfied.

Amb. I am, and shall more perfectly, when they
Are placed here.
Amb. presents to Or. Ludast^r. My thoughts can to themselves propound
No safer guides, than your Intensions.

Lud Madam, they are not fair to you in this,
I must be, though to my own affliction,
Their dilatour. Since they can only make.
M' happy, but with the brand of treachery,
It Would, in each vulgar eye, too ill become
The Honor of our friendship, to betray
The Miracle of Nature to the possession
Of a thing so mean, it wants a sense
To signify its being: Man; is too high
A dignity to qualify my essence;
To him inherent are Habitations,
Distinctions, possessions, in all which, I
Can no way find, the smalest Property
Beast; though the unruly motions of my thoughts
Approach their Nature, have a happier sense,
For of them all they know no difference.

Amb. Forbear you wrong our amity;
Our beings individual are.

Or. Sir,
Whence this distemper, flows, I cannot guess;
But far unsuitable, I Am sure, it is
To Lu. The Character both good and knowing men
Deliver of you. Man without reproach
Can safely speak himself in no extreme.

Amb. Thy innocence frees thee fro'th suspect of guilt;
Thou would not else suppose virtue could be
Without Oppression: Orgulea, I more
Plain must be with thee; In my long absence,
My thoughts incessantly have toyled more
Under the anxious burden of my care
To see that beauty in an happy Port,
Then to acquire the glory of a Soldier.
M' Eye has been nice, as wantonness of youth;
My judgment wary, as jealousy of Age,
In search of Him, might my endreavours crown.
Which that a happy period might ensue,
When sound, I in my letters figured
Him to thee, as Fancy would a Fable,
Yet swerved not from the truth, Imight not lead
But mark thy inclination out, the which
Thy Love in thy obedience had given ore
To mine: veiw here the true original.
From whom, malice her self can naught detract,
Though she his Honors and Possessions has,
Cut off from him, and what is worse, him from us.

Or. Your resolutions do beget new doubts.

Amb. Has not the rumor of our sufferings
Preceeded ns? Mischief is conscious
When she dares but whisper. Why? Orgeula,
Our glorious victory is, by the Law,
To Him we ow for it, imputed Treason;
And as such punished in Him and His.

Or. It can not be,
You would but sport with my credulity.

Amb. I Am serious; on my integrity.

Or. You'de astonish me.

Amb. Shake of thy trouble and thy doubts; we will
Seek out a clime, where goodness shall live free
From Injury.

Or. Women Travelers are held no members fit
For new discoveries; as I conceive,
The title of a Lady errant will
Unto our Honors no addition be.

Amb. But that of Pilgrim does grace Piety.

Or. The Zeal
Of my Devotion not so fervent is.

Amb. Thy words do into error prompt my sense,
Yet fain I would mistake, explain thy self;
Let virtue be thy guide.

Or. Our lives have other props then speculation

Amb. Reflect not o'th breaches of His fortunes,
They are made good in mine.

Or. Twill but ill become your fathers daughter
To be said your Pentionarie.

Amb. Have thou thy appearance so suddenly
Cast off? Awake, and reassume thy Temper.

Or. Did the Conjecture of my worth extend
But to your bare Esteem, it would have taught
Simplicit^, so f^r to prize it self,
As to preserve the Rites of Woman-hood.
We women are not wonn with the Reports
Of glory: Our accesses have degrees.
Why? Had you met my wishes in your choice,
He must, with the observance of a slave,
Have ages waited but for my Admittance,
Have kissed my Hand, he must have thrice redeemed
With hazard of his life, my fame; not from
Reproach alone, but from Pre-eminence.
Facility is beauties Infamy.

Amb. Nay, then I, must conclude, that Beauty is
From Heaven amongst us only cast, as a
Misplaced light, but to seduce the world.

Lu. Madam!
Disfigure not that Character you bear;
Over Misery to insult, those graces will
Divest of their Divinity: and leave
Them smothered in a cloud of Horror.
I do not come to violate the Rites
Of Love; But those of Friendship to preserve,
Which tendered; I take my leave.

Amb. Farewell thou Maq^ery of Nature.

Ex Lu. Amb. Ver. These Soldiers have not learnt the patience yet
TO attend the issue of a Seige, I see.
They are so hot on the Encounter.

Am. Their mouths in War are so full of Command*
They cannot stoop to other terms in Peace.

Mu. Madam!

Mundolo Enter The Lord Protector's newly entered.
Or. Give your attendance.
Sinevero Enter
Sin. Alone? Madam?
Where are the fluent Concourse of our youth,
Should with inspired zeal exalt their vows
To your Divinity? are they from this
Sequestered, in that they have of (...)
A Profanation made to meaner Dieties?
Or of those Charming Graces do thou thus
Into their center recontract their force?
They may with greater violence effuse
Their light, by this sought Intermission,
And so each time they are disclosed, passes
The world with a new Miracle? Madam,
Affect a meaner way to propagate
The glory of your beauty: to will involve
The world with less amazment, but with more
Delight: which fully to beget, there must
Be more equality betwixt the Object
And the Faculty.

Or. You Have taught me Sir, a pretty Art, in your
Reproof, to fill that disproportion
In my own defects:

Sin. Madam!
The Splendor of your Arms subdues,
You need not ad their force: yet you my words
To their contrary Sense do thus invert:
Whose truth to justify; witness all eyes,
Save such as shame and envy do corrupt;
Your own Glass, and my Captivity.

Or. Your Captivity!
Sure the prescriptions have a large extent.

Sin. That, Madam, I must learn of your consent

Offers to kiss her. Or. How, Sir, forbear; you have learnt the mystery
Of equivokes, I see; yet you mistake
She puts him by Ver. is staid by Sin. who gives her a Ring. Or. and Amb. Ex
This freedom marks not my intention;
But that which gives you license to be gone.

Sin. Her wit yet adds a luster to her form:
This Ring to help me to another view
Of your fair Lady.

Ver. As fit as it were made for me, in truth.
Sir, I accept your proffer, yet must doubt
You buy your Penance at too dear a rate.
I will attempt if you dare undertake.

Sin. Fear not; the danger of her eyes (If I
In vain must burn) is but Loves Sacrifice.

Ver. Have to the farther Galery,
I Will lead her that way to her Chamber.
Eu. sundry ways.
Act I. Scene 4.
Lizania. The Conflict of my mind devides it self,
Yet in Loves favor must suspend Loves Rite;
The troubles of his hazard whom I love,
Oppress my thoughts more than my love's success;
Which yet so doubtful is, I cannot say,
When he shall know it, does my passion sway.
Wayt. Madam, the Lord

A Wayt. Ent. Ambigamor desires your Conference.
Liz. Attend him hither.
How unwelcome are to us the Summons
Of misplac't affection; when as our thoughts
TO other Object are equally engaged.
Th'excess of Love, when it not ours meets,
Afficts as does the want of what we seek.
Yet I perhaps of him may somewhat learn
To pacify my apprehension.

The Wayter after some intermission conducts him in and returns. Ambigamor Ent.
Amb. As day springs from the bosom of the night,
With comfort, to the wandering traveller.
So from my absence flows to me this light,
Whose fair Idea has unblemisht here
Been kept alive in that obscurity,
By the refulgence of the flames of Love,
That to you Madam, now do come to prove,
Which is more fatal, Contention or Love.

Liz. It Is well you have escaped the greatest hazard, Sir,
The force of Love was never mortal thought,
To such especially, whose heart diverts
The violence in a division
Of his strength, 'twixt a Mistress and a Friend.

Amb. The Passion for my friend serves but to form
A fit receptacle to install my Love,
Whose Rites (thought it your censure should confirm)
Must somwhats intermit in favor of
His Interests; which yet may happy prove
If you vouchsafe to be their Advocate.

Liz. As how, I pray?

Amb. Madam, the rigor of the Law this night
Expels Ludaster forth his Country's bounds,
She seems troubled. Unless you by our Sovereigns means procure
His Reaple, This silence, Madam, speaks
Your trouble more than your consent.

Liz. The cause of virtue should universal be
In well affected minds; and sure in mine*
Not with such sense received might question
My Agreement to the succor, to which
I will address my self forthwith, and e're
The Evening close inform you the success.

Amb. I wish the glory of your undertaking
May not rest only in your fair intention.
(Though there enough to dignifie the Action)
But in a happy issue, to the world
Divulge the Honor of our safety, yours.
And prove to my ensuing Purposes.
A happy Omen.

Liz. going out encounter Eu. troubled in thought. Eu. seems not to mind her a
while, at length collects her self. Liz. So full of thought; what means this
sudden change?
Maddam, how busy is her fancy? Madam.

Eumia ent. Eu. Lizania, my course was in thy search.

Liz. Your senses then held no intelligence
With your Reason, Madam.

Eu. Why? Lizania.
It Was enforced to awake the one
To lend the other Faculty.

Eu. My thoughts have, since thy absence, strangely wrought
Pause On -- I know not, what unformed purposes.

Liz. Under your Highness favor, this is but
The last dimension to the Appearance;
The growth is of a longer Being; I
Have watch't to the progression the degrees.
Your speech abruptly intermits and flows:
The Offices of Night and Day in you
So strangely intermixed are of late,
I know not when you slumber, when you wake.
Pardon my Curiosity, if it
Too nighly has approacht your Privacy.
The freedom formerly you used me to
Has been in fault; which never did admit
A secret so long hid,

Eu. Alas! Lizania, it is yet such to me,
I am not well acquainted with my own
Distempers; which insensibly, I find,
Do grow upon my yielding Nature.

Liz. My own sufferings are my best informers,
Madam, if I might have the liberty.
To her self To judge, I truly should affirm it Love.
Witness the rising tincture on your cheek,
Which masks it self in guilt, unwittingly
To have disclosed more than I should have known.

Eu. Thy rashness has a bolder title given
To my Passion, than yet my Virgin thoughts
Durst to themselves a vouch: which now become
More hardy are by their discovery.
And press to move thy succor and advice.

Liz. Your Power over mine may challenge both,
Which in the int'rim, I must intercede
For the Protection of the innocent:
Then wait the enlighning of your purposes

Eu. Alas! mine fails me in my own Interests.
Yet shall not that form an excuse to thee,
Might figure a denial: whose is the Cause?

Liz. Ludaster's Exile moves for Reaple.

Eu. The first report thereof was thereto my
Direction: which to thy Father often
I in vain have pressed, whereto still h' objects,
I know not what, hid mysteries of State.
Not knowing that on his depends my Fate.

Eu. Why starts thou?

Liz. starts. Liz. How sudden and unruly is the sense
To her self. Of Love: Madam, the apprehension
Of the Consequence. If your Fate follow
His, ye both are to us lost.

Eu. Not lost to thee; nor, yet from thee divided;
Thy amity assures me that thou will
Participate with me in any change.

Liz. That were the smallest trial of my Faith.

Eu. Know then I am resolved, only with thee,
This Night (since I his exile can not stay)
To follow by my flight: which to secure,
As we the fresh air of the Evening take,
We of the Forest will our Covert make.

Liz. Your Highness sought my advice with my Aid,
Yet you conclude without it.

Eu. That in the sequel perhaps may use;
But where Necessity has lest no choice,
Counsel is vain.

Liz. Yet Madam your attention let me crave,
I shall submit to your Election.

Eu. What can thou say?

Liz. Under your Graces favor, you to chance
Precipitate, what time infallibly
Must without hazard ripen to your hand;
And leave you Power to cancel this Edict,
As it had never been.

Eu. My thoughts are fixed, prepare thee to their aid,
Attempt no more my Passion to or'esway.
Time has many Changes: Love brooks no delay.
Eu. Ex.
Liz. How full of opposition is my Fate.
Each Accident begets a new repugnance
To my Hopes: And to extend my sufferings,
Endeavors me to frame their Instrument.
So wills the duty to my Soveragin.
But since the Gods to punish crimes omit
Wrought in Loves favor, I may that forget.

Sinevero Ent. Sin. How Zizania! The Princess being alone,
You absent from your charge? see you attend
With stricter diligence, than you were wont:
She seems to me perplexed in her thoughts;
I cannot guess the cause: Be vigilant
In the search, and when you find her apt
For the impression, move your Brothers suit:
Women have seasons they can naught resist,
On which advantage your sex knows best
How to prevail.

Ziz. Sir,
My fear persuades me I already have
Disclosed thereto an obstacle, greater,
Than time or prudence can remove.

Sin. What may that be?
The discovery may in your censure
Blemish me with the reproach of levity,
So facilly to break a trust imposed
By the affection of my Sovereign,
Which no violence should have wrested from me,
Were not the ruin of the state engaged
In the privacy.
How fain my Love would my deceit disguise.

To her self. Sin. Be brief.

Ziz To my own sense I scarce dare whisper it,
Good Sir your ear.

Sin. How -- Ludaster -- this night --
Intermission. I amin wonder lost -- how confused are
My wandering thoughts -- dull faculty awake
I have it now -- yet stay -- it shall be so.
Zizania thou have discharged a duty
Far greater than the scruple ballanc't it,
Thy Country and thy Fathers Age thou have
Preserved from untimely fall; the which
To perfect, fulfill thy Mistress pleasure,
Leave me to frustrate her intention,
Farther you her design. Ask me not why
To rectify the errors of a Prince,
We with them to the issue must comply.

Ziz. Obedience is my best direction.
Ziz. ex.
Filathes ent. Sin. Whither, Filathes, so intentive bent?

Fi. Toward the Lodgings of the Princess, Sr.
You press the chase with too much ardour yet,
Your visits with adresse may frequent be,
Not importunate; times are not favoring,
Desist, and e're you sleep repair to me
For new advice.

Fi. My better Guide is your affection.
Fi. ex.
Nefarius Sin. Nefarius, thou anticipat'st my wish.
I must employ thee in an Action
Equal to my safety. Thou know well,
Time has not yet outstript my youthful heat;
I have a Mistress, whose wantonness
Dislikes my passive years, and shuns access,
This night, as I have learnt, she purposes
With one companion only of her sex,
TO invade the Forest for the evening fresh air.
My spy shall be at hand to mark their course:
While you prepare an Ambush to surprise
Them; which done conveigh them to Placentia,
My adjoining House; and there commit them
To their custody, whom I shall order
To receive them.

Ne. Your Honors will in every Circumstance
Shall be observed.

Sin. The undertakers shall want no reward,
You in particular.

Ne. I am your Honors Creature, and will strait
About it.
Ne. Ex.
Sin. Oh! I could hug my self,
It swells my tickling Fancy with delight
Equal to the approaching Nuptial
Of a Love sick-Bride. Thus wisdom rules
The Stars: Had my Invention been or dull,
Or slack: My ruin had been certain,
The Princes had escaped, Ludaster wed.
Whereby she of her Nonage had the term
Anticipated: Me of my dignity
And Power divested: My Enemy
Brought in with triumph to take full revenge
On me and my Accomplices. To this is
The influence of those erring Lights preside
The Offices of Nature directed:
But well digested Reason, who us frees,
From the subjection of the sense: In which
Frail Element their Empire only moves,
Propounds a fairer Issue to my Hopes,
In the Conversion of their fatal Order.
This flourishing twig, who in her hasty growt^
Strives to outstrip the summet of her Prop.
I will (my Power to support) or graft
Her on my stock, or else under color
Of this her flight, smother her memory
With her life: Her Line terminates in her;
And I do, by the Power I have engrost,
Stand fairest for the next Succession,
So shall I thrive by my own Stars digression.

Act II. Scene 3.
N^^arius with a Band of Villans. So now disperse your selves to several
Stations. Here shall be my stand to watch
The Passage of the Plain. Who makes the fir^^
Discovery, must give the signal to
The Rest; which, done; all thither must with speed
Repair. Away! the hour approaches.
Ex. several ways, Ne. remains hid. Eumena, Lizania. Eu. The Night is at her
full Obscurity.
Thou silent Harbinger of Love, my thanks:
These wandering steps, lost in thy gloomy shade,
Can, if persued, no more be traced out;
Then may the fleeting progress of a Bark
Upon the surface of the Ocean:
Cast off thy sullen vesture, and give way
To her supplies the Office of the Day,
Come, Lizania, where art thou?

Liz. Here, Madam.

Eu. Give me thy hand, Thou tremblest with thy fears.
This weakness of our Sex prevails in thee,
Because not armed with Love.

Liz. With equal Love; not equal innocence;
I do repent too late, what I too soon
to her self. Have done. Love is a hardy Champion
Madam, yet often undertakes beyond
His faculty. Pray Heav'^ it prove not so.
The secret working of my groundless fears,
Can, in my judgment, no fare presage be.

Eu. Thou art dismayed with nights obscurity,
Lets hasten forward.

Liz. For ought I know, we backward do return
Our erring steps find no direction.

Eu. To this Ascent I perfect knowledge have;
Where once arrived; we will attend a while
The rising of the Moon.

Ziz. And whither does your Highness purpose then?
To a sequestered society
Of Vestals, not far from thence: with whom we
(Pretending to be come with privacy
For our devotion) will some time remain,
Till we have learnt Ludaster's Residence.

Ziz Love may attempt with Resolution well,
Since he is as inventive, as he is bold.

Eu. Thy fears grow pleasant in security;
I like it well. Let us renew our course:

Ziz. If no prevention, naught can like me worse.
Ex. Ziz.
Ne. Approach not rudely, they are close at hand;
If possible, attach them without fright.

Ex. omn. Ne. whistles, his companions gather to him:

Shreek within. Act II. Scene 4.
Ludaster disguised in a Hermits habit. Fairwell thou splendid Theater of glory,
Whose active heat was wont to animate
These fluent veins beyond the faculty
Of nature: I have, though too late, disclosed
A fairer way true Peace to ratify,
Than yet the success of thy tragic paths
Has ever traced out. More noble far,
Though not so Popular; whose fame is raised
Not on the loud voice of the multitude;
But on the secret approbation
Of the Good. A Glory stable, 'cause not
Envied. A Triumph not enriched
With the Spoils of others: the price whereof
Is not the Widows nor the Orphans tears.
Alas! the happy issue of this strife
Tends not to extinguish, but reform a life,
Which Man too vainly seeking to cherrish,
Dissipates, catching at things unusefull,
Or superfluous, with such a greedy toil,
As his Existence merely did depend
On his own Industry: to which he wades
Through any difficulty: meets the vastest
Limmits of the Sea: Lays ope' the secret'st
Shadows of the Deep; And to each end his
Servile thoughts put on a several form,
And like a desperate Gamester casts at All;
A^ if the spacious world for All was framed,
Too little were for one.
How sweet a change my thoughts already prove!
Here no Alarm breaks a calm Repose,
Which gently slides but to discharge the debt
Of Nature, and without-starts discloses
As the Day; invited with the cheerful
Notes of the Hu'n neighboring Quire to view
The smooth face of Nature, which even smiles
With an affected flattery to charm
The soul in her deep speculation:
In which immoved with a future care,
She waits her flight, till she almost forget
Her Mansion's ministry. So Bounteous
Is the Law of Nature, whose Immunities
Even free the soul from all subjection.
Noise. Who Is there?
Fidelius e^. Fill. Your Servant Sir.

Lud. Fidelius! the happy relick of my churlish Fate,
What would thou?

Fill. Not to disturb your privacy, Good Sir,
You too much do endear your solitude.
I come to beg my Lute may to it yield
Some Intermission.

Lud. Thy growth in virtue has out-stript thy years:
Of thy observance this the tenderness
Can naught expect from me, but empty thanks,
A weak foundation to thy future hopes,
Thou art yet young, and wisely should direct
Thy Industry but to support thy Age.

Fi. Your unjust sufferings will, I need not fear,
Make useless to me such a Providence,
And early intercept the Course of Life:
If otherwise, Sir, I beseech you think,
My dillegence shall never be mercenary.

Lays his hand on his shoulder, and strokes him on the cheek. Lu. I do, I do,
thou have a mind too great,
To ground so mean a doubt; yet I could wish
Thou would more careful of thy welfare be,
Here Is no convenience, scarce for Necessity.
Thou lately in the Camp, did from me part
Most dangerously sick, sick past belief
Of safety. Trust me, Fidelius, there were
Affirmed they had seen thee buried.
Why blushest thou?

Fi. To find the error of Credulity.

Lu. Thy Relapse would to my Misfortune ad,
Which to prevent, I purpose to commend
Thy safety to my Friend, who shall provide
For thee a fit retreat, till time confirm
Thy strength.

Fi. I thank your Charity, Good Sir, but I
Find no such indisposition, as it
Figureth to you: to yield without need
To your appointment, were but to abuse
Your Goodness.

Lu It Is but the servor of thy will lends thee
Ability* The strictness of thy Love
Must not oppress thy Nature; be advised.

Fi. If your Intention tend to cast me off?
Proceed yet more directly; let me know
The Cause: My vanity, as yet, was never
So indiscreet to think I might not err:
Nor yet my frailty so indocile, as
To render a Correction frivolous.
If my Attendance, too Officiously,
Pressed with untimely duty, interrupt
The secret entertainment of your thoughts;
I will restrain it to a Modesty,
Indifferent as neglect; though it will be
More difficult then assiddutie
To me. Or if, as improfitable,
You would discarde me, a superfluous charge,
I will inure these hands, though yet unapt,
To make my service useful.

Lu. How! infinitely beyond all Art extends
The Innocence of thy expressions!
I could stand Ages here, still as the Night,
To hear thee plead to have; what, Nations fight
To shun. Thy servitude. In troth, it is well
Thy happy Nature guides thee to be good.
Thou have a native faculty would else
All justice have corrupted. I must yield.
Thou shall henceforth receive no Rule beyond
Thy own direction. Do as thou will.
Yet I would have thee secretly depart
From hence, to find Ambigam^r my Friend*
Him only of my being here inform.
And farther let him know, I lately have
Intelligence of some disorders sprung,
Amongst our disbanded troops; which to appease
(If yet their fury start beyond their murmur)
I here am placed at hand in this disguise:
And shall be succored, when occasion calls,
By some dispersed troops Gratianus
Holds in hand with hope of new Employment.

Fi. I strictly shall observe your will;
And with a speedy diligence return.

Lu. Not so, Fidelius, I would have thee stay
Sometime with him, the better to direct
His Messages to me; and cautious be
When thou return'st of thy Discovery.

Fi. Though naught in (...) pretends to avail,
Save Prayer. My absence of your safety will
Be jealous. Heaven be your safeguard Sr.

Lu. Farewell, my pretty Boy farewell.
Ex. Fi. Such Love would melt an unrelenting Heart.
All my misfortunes, fluent as they are,
Have not forced from me so much woman yet:
Seems to weep. Gratianus Ent. Gratianus! so suddenly, thou preced'st
My Expectation: what news abroad?

Gra. strange news Sir, news
Will awake all'that is Man about us.

Lu. Thy earnestnes does intercept thy have:
What is it?

Gra. The Princess, Sir, is given out for lost.

Lu. Good heaven forbid! as how?

Gra. Fled, as pretented is; a hoo^ for fools.
But those that have but half their senses, Sir,
Must judge there is juggling in it. The Fox's train*
Grows rank; and I prepare me for the Chase.

Lu. Temper thy Ardour to a soft restraint,
Thy rashness will ore-throw our purposes.

Gra. Why? can you to them e're expect to find
A fairer Introduction?

Lu. Thou do mistake, I question not the ground*
To be sufficient to declare our selves;
But think it wants time to ripen it.
Perhaps the Princess is thus privately
Retired only to some holy Place
For her devotion. Perhaps sequestered
From the importunate tumult of the Court;
To make her pleasures more agreeable.
Perhaps this rumor may suggested be
But to entrap a blind Temerity.

Gra. You say well; or this, or that may be;
In women's ways is little certainty.
You Are better read in Politiques, than I;
I know no virtue, but Fidelity;
Nor vice, but want of courage: what is, Sir,
To be done?

Lu. Time will bring truth to light; wait yet a while,
Set Spies to gather perfect Evidence:
Dispose your troops in readiness: and then
Repair to me, we on the manner will
Deliberate.

Gra. This shall be done immediately; but how
If in the interim you should discovered be?

Lu^ In case I should; I fear no violence,
But from the County Officers* Since I
Assure my self, no Soldier will attempt
The Attachement of my Person.

Gra. You may, upon my life, be confi^ent
On their Loves. But how resist the other?

Lu. I have the advantage of the H^ll, and on
The least emotion will a signal give
By flag, by day; by fire in the night.

Gra. I shall be vigilant, and certain in
My succor: Heaven favor our Endeavors
To repair your wrongs.

Lu. Thanks, honest, Gratia^us; make no ^^ay;
As haste is dangerous, so may prove delay.

Act III. Scene I.
Eumena. Eu. What place this is? or, why thus hither brought?
My best collected Sense cannot discover,
Yet if it fail not in his Ministry.
A noise within, she starts. The richness of these Ornaments pretend
To flatter me to a security.
My Fears pursue me still; each noise awakes
The terror of another violence
More hateful than the former. Certainly
The mark of the^^ should be Necessity,
Which here seems smothered in a vast excess,
To lodge no force, if not of wantonness.
Yet here misfortunes threatenings do not stay,
Sure if they did my Plaints were vain; since I
Have resolution to escape their malice.
Ills are scarce such which have their remedy:
Which wanting is, alas, to Loves restraint,
Whose jealous visions evils multiply
On every empty possibility.
Is Love quick-sighted only to afflict,
Not to relieve it self? vain Industry!
What power shall I invoke? whose aid implore?
Am I abandoned to each casual^ty
Without Protection of a providence?
If so? How hitherto subsisted I?
If otherwise? Why is that grace withdrawn?
My Innocence is the same; unless it be
A Crime to Love with true sincerity.

Zizania secretly listening. Ziz. Ent. Ziz. These plaints renew the horror of my
guilt,
Tto her self. Why shuns your Highness my Society?
I am no stranger to your sufferings*
Appear I less agreeable than I was?

Eu. takes her by the hand. Eu. Thou art to me the same thou ever were,
Why mov'st thou such a doubt, on such a ground?
My thoughts, seduced by my sorrows, stray^
Even from themselves* well may they thee deny
Their anxious burden.

Ziz My relation is nigher to their wrongs
Then e're yet it was: before I only
Was their Partner, now their Author am.

Eu. Thy grief distracts thee sure.

Ziz. Guilt of two frequent usage is with them,
Can harbor it without a secret sense.
Mine will over throw me, if my Penitence
Meet not your Pardon to restore my peace.

Eu. I hold no such Authority from heaven.

Ziz. Heaven is appeased, when those we do offend
Are pacified.

Eu. It must then be some other:
I have from thee received no injury.

Ziz. My crime in that assurance multiplies.
Madam! you have; for which I thus become
Ziz kneeles A suppliant, for your Pardon.

Eu. raises her. Eu. Dear Zizania rise: my Pardon, for what?

Ziz. That I could wish concealed
Till your agreement my request confirm:
The nature of my Trespass may perhaps
Revoke your Clemency.

Eu. That were but virtue meanly to disguise
With Sophistry: be it what it may, I
Do forgive thee.

Ziz. I have abused your trust, your purposes
Betrayed to them have hither you by force
Conveyed.

Eu. Thou could not be so wicked certainly?

Ziz. When my offense was known,
I knew you would retract your Charity.
Your mere rebukes are punishments to me.

Eu. I can but wonder at thy frailty: yet
Must wonder more what should induce thee to'^.

Ziz. The danger of your Highness rash attempt.
Which when my Prayers could not stay, I sought.
My Fathers succor to prevent, but was
Not privy to the means he used.

Eu. Astonishment gives place unto my fears;
But to what end my Liberty restrained?

Ziz. I cannot guess, unless it be to give
Freer access unto my Brothers suit.

Eu. No more of that*
Unless thou would possess me with belief,
That there are crimes which we can not forgive.

Ziz. Henceforth, I never will my safety hold
At so high rate, to purchase it with your
Renewed displeasure: which yet to confirm,
I will make use of this advantage gained
By my error to rectify it self.
The breach of your trust, wins a trust elsewhere,
Which I will break again, but to repair
The former. I am your only Wardor,
With some few servants under my Command,
Whose vig^lance, being ignorant to what
Addres't, I easily will blind, when time
Shall every circumstance fulfill, may make
Infallibly succesfull our escape.

Eu. Prithee, Zizania, may I credit this.

Ziz. Once culpable, and never free from suspect?
Madam, you may, by your fair Innocence
You may.

Eu. Another would believe this but a snare
To work upon their easines; but I
Will on thy promised faithfulness rely.

Ziz. And never more shall suffer in it by me.
Be pleased to withdraw your self a while:
I hear some one approach. Hard destiny!
My ruin must repair my Infamy.
Filathes Ent. Brother, what chance has led you hither?

Fi. No chance, Zizania, but Loves direction.

Ziz. It Was chance you erred not with so blind a guide.

Fi. Blind in his sense, not in his Intellect.

Ziz. Yet sensual, sure was your intelligence.

Fi. It Is true, Zizania,
We have a Father tender of us both.

Ziz. It Is manifest in your behalf: But how
In mine?

Fi. That in the sequel will apparent be,
First, tell me, how the Princess brooks this change?

Ziz. With longer use it may become less strange:

Fi. And how succeeds my Hopes?

Ziz. It Is time must be your better Advocate;
You have already opportunity;
Powerful disposers of a woman's will.

Fi. But how, by your art, find you her inclin'd^

Ziz. Not past possibility,
Nor yet so facile, as to flatter you.
Women have reserved motives not easy
To disclose.

Fi. When unto my admittance shall I come?

Ziz With formed purpose that must not be done;
But carelessly, on some slight Accident:
I will advise you in the manner, when
I find her temper, and the season fit.

Fi. Thou have a wit fit only to direct.

Ziz. But how all this concerns the care of me,
I cannot judge;

Fi. Thou have awaked my Memory.
I am to let thee, from my Father, know,
He has concluded of thy Marriage
With Ambigamor, confident his will
Disposes thine, in thy obedience.
To which he wills thee form thy resolution,
For thy advantage, and to farther his*
In his pretenses to fair Orgula.

Ziz. It Is very sudden.

Fi. Why seem thou troubled?
He is a man, in my opinion,
Whose full de^ert might make thy wishes vain.

Ziz. I think as much.
Nor is my trouble grounded on dislike,
But on a sorrow for occasion lost,
Might this Command have filled, if then but known,
And my Agreement veiled with Modesty*

Fi. What was it?

Ziz. Upon the importunacy of his suit,
But yesterday, I promised to consult
My Fathers will, and e're the Evening closed,
To send him my l^st Resolution.

Fi. Time is not so far spent, but this may yet
Be done.

Ziz. Not well without suspicion of my being.

Fi. I am indebted for my Interests:
And with an Equal care will tender thine;
Which thus securely may effected be.
The Messenger employed shall pretend
Your letter left unto his Charge last Night,
But the distraction of the Princes loss,
And yours, diverted him: to which the date,
And place agreeing; 'twill undoubted pass.

Ziz. It Is well advised, and I will follow it:
Walk but one turn in the lower Gallery;
I Will finish it immediately.

Ex. several ways. Act III. Scene 2.
Orgula. The Princes lost! it is incredible?
It can be but some idle Rumor sprung
From the distempered heat of wine: when as
The giddy Fantasy works high upon
Each slight Impression to make the tongue
Licentious: It is impossible!
Admit it true: what would vain Hope infer?
That I agreeing to Sinevero,
Stand fairest to succeed her Dignity.
Love interdicts that fond Reflection.
Tush! Beauty, if not joined with Majesty,
Is honored but for sensuality.
It Is well attempted to suppress my flame,
Yet vainly do my thoughts avouch to what
They cannot frame, and with a false apparel
Palliate my wound.
Mundelo Enter. Mu. Madam, the Princes is, for certain, lost.

Or. For certain then another must be found.
The Practice of the world has made thee wise,
Mundolo, which teaches thee to value
All public damages, no farther than
Our private Interests do on them depend.

Mu. 'Twas your Command that changed the Property.

Or. Which error now my second thoughts have found,
And blame that troubled curiosity.
Which to overpass, tell me, Mundolo,
What youth is that come lately to my Brother?
Or in what quality received?

Mu. His business speaks him a Messenger;
His Privacy a friend, beyond both which,
I yet have nothing learnt particular
Of him.

Or. Thou have then lost thy sensual faculty.

Mu. What means your honor to conclude of mine
Beyond the information of your own?

Or. Can any Eye, if not defective,
See and not judge him Natures miracle.

Mu. So far from that, mine cannot judge in what:

Or. Is not his form exactly excellent?

Mu. More than the bashful smoothness of his years,
Which reach not yet to the distinction
Of his Sex; I can not see.

Or. Thou stupid art beyond credulity.
Mundolo, while yet I was an Infant,
My Father, of a slave, designed thee
To my Attendance: since I have found thee
Diligent and faithful to my Purposes.

Mu. Your honor's Testimony is
The End and Glory of my Servitude.

Or. In that belief Mundolo, I intend
T'impart the secret of my Love to thee.

Mu. It is the general Subject of each tongue,
Which now prepare to publish through the world
Their vows to your obedience, as joined
To him extracts a Sovereign Right from that
Of our Protection.

Or. The vulgar voice is a mere babble grown,
Which reaches but to the first appearance
Of things to involve the world in Error;
In which, Mundolo, thou art also fallen,
If thy words truly figure thy Belief.
The Object of my Love the Subject is
Of our last difference, which thy sense finds
Not out because it not distinguishes.

Mu. Means your Honor the youth you spoke of last?

Or. The same*

Mu. The grounds of Love in their dependencies
Are imperceptible even to them
That suffer the Effects to which it may
Become the meanness of my Condition
To be an Instrument, no Counselor.

Or. I do approve thy modesty, and will
So far make use thereof.

Mu. My obedience waits on your Direction.

Or. Which is at present but to find the means
I may have private Conference with him.

Mu. The occasions fair, he being now without
Viewing intentively those Pictures sent
From Rome. I Will use some slight unwittingly
May guide him hither.
Ex. Mundolo
Or. Do, make trial of your Art.
How Imperious is the force of Love!
What are these glorious trophies which the world
Admire in their Captivity, since they
Waves her hand with a slighting gesture to her face. Must be laid down to
grace Another triumph
In my own; against the Rites of Beauty,
Or our Sex.

Fidelius Ent. Fi. That here should be a fairer piece than that,
I cannot cred^t, though I press to see.
Seems surprised, seems to retire. Hah! this fellow has abused me,
Your Honors Pardon.

Or. If your Intention guide you hither, Sir,
Here is no object will oppose your course.

Fi. It was but error Madam, which
Were multiplied in the continuance.

Or. The Error lies but in your own dislike,
Nor wants but your own satisfaction
To repair it.

Fi. It is your bounty* so to censure it,
Extended it no farther, he deserved
To bear his guilt that would not clear it so,

Or. If farther, it is in your own conjecture
Merely, not in mine.

Fi. It is against the Rule of civil ties,
To use their faculty to overthrow
Their Rites.

Or. Those truly are superfluous ceremonies,
Which custom has induced to blind the world,
She might those freedoms steal, Nature has sealed
To us, even in our first Production.

Fi. Without some order were no decency.

Or. Order is but a sluggish method formed
To shrowed the subtilty of the Cautelous.

Fi. The Nature of my error to confirm,
If I desist not, will beget another.
In this your opposition Madam

Or. It is but musical in our discourse,
Not reaching to the aversion of our wills.

Fi. Your Honors is so powerful, it must find
Concurrence every where in all that have
The Lights of Nature free.

Or. To which I doubt your own will scarce agree.

Fi. The fault is then in my Capacity

Or. Who moves another, may thereto ^onform
His own.

Fi. It must be when the Effects of both are known.

Or. Where the Cause is infallible the effects
Are manifest: which thus is farther proved,
Fire must burn, and Beauty must be loved.

Fi. When they do meet fit Subjects to receive
Those their Impressions.

Or. Not yet; this difficulty has too much Art
To be simplicity I must be pl^in.
To her self What defect can you find in ^e not to
Receive the latter?

Fi. In Excellence your own Supere^acy.

Or. That in th'e effects against your own is found
An Impropr^ety: since mine in vain
Inviteth: yours with success enforces
Love.

Fi. This only is in supposition,
Not in evidence

Or That to each sense appears which not^dverts
It se^f from this oreflowing P^ssion
Of my heart: by a disguised neglect.
Those blushe yield a luster yet untaught
To her self By Art: which though they (...) with blame
My loves access; they cherish still the flame.

A^ Attendant At. Sir, my Lord Ambigamor desires to speak with you.
^'me happily delivered:
To himself. I'was even at my last evasion
Your Pardon, Madam.

Or. M^ne submits to your will, even so, who Love,
Not by their own, but by another move.
Exit Or.
Act III. Scene 2.
Filathes. Women in their own Nature gen'rally
Deceitful are. It Is the defensive Arm
Of their security, framed to supply
The deffect of their own Ability.
But when this innate disposition meets
With a fit instrument of wit: it is then
Women outstrip the common reach of men.
The justest ground of my suspicion, is
This sudden change, so long pursued in vain.
My Signet perfectly agrees with this,
The Letter. And may without a blemish it reclose.
Sits down at a table. Opens the Letter and reads. My Lord Ambigamor.
The Messenger hereof delivers you
A false pretense, but to delude the hand
Directs it, with the assistance of my Brother,
A passionate Party in your Interests:
I thus advise you to restore your Friend.
The Prince^s (since her intercepted flight,
Occasioned only by ludasters Love.
For whose Reapeal she often moved in vain)
Intends the Evening that succeeds this date,
To meet him at the Forest hol^ Oak:
Disguised* alone, armed with the assurance
Of his virtue: Friendship confirms you best
Know how to yield him this Intelligence;
With which to join, your diligence to move;
Receive a farer title to my Love.
Zizania These are new mysteries, whose progress would
Prove fatal to us in their Consequence.
Siste^, you are a trust^ Advocate
Is then Ludasters Inte^ests become
More prev^lent with you, than mine? I must
Suppress the issue, though with grief my Friend
Ambigamor must be deprived thereby
The advantage which it brings unto his Hopes:
Lost in his Mistress scorn -- There is a mean
pause May favor his and farther yet my Ends.
To thy Example be propitious Jove!
Aid my deceit in Love -- It shall be so.
pause With little Art I may protract the Date
Hereof, whereon depends their meeting: whilst
I, in the Intr'm, at the appointed time,
Vayl'd with the approach of Night, may personate
My Rival with success: I Will fetch a Pen,
And alter it, with ease, it shall not be
Distinguished by the Eye that framed it.
Exit Fi. Leaving the letter on the Table. Sinevero Ent. Sin. Filathes! gone so
suddenly; he was
Intermission reads the letter left on the table. But now they told me in his
Closet -- How!
What this? with the assistance of my Brother.
A passionate party in your Interests --
Ludaster at the Forest Holy Oak --
The Evening that ensues this date -- Lets fall the letter from his eye
that is
To Night. Must then my children conspire
Against my safety, and th'immediate means
I have contrived to enlarge their Fates?
It Is time I should provide another stock,
To graft a more obedient issue on.
Flings the letter carelessly on the Table again. I Will not oppose their course,
their ways shall be
Their Snare: my care rests only on my own
Security: which to ensure, and these
My doubts confirm with farther certainty,
I must set Spies on the Delivery.

Ex. Sin. looks on the letter. Filathes re^ent with a Pen. Fi. This unite, if
converted into two,
Defers the present, till to morrow night.
seems to w^ite, closes it and seals it. It Is done most perfectly. I will
dispatch
The Messenger; then Heaven put out your light;
Loves sense is clearest in the darkest night.
Ex. Fi.
Act III. Scene 4.
Orgula, Mundolo. Or. To night, Mundolo, say thou?

M. Madam, this Night Fidelius must depart.

Or. What is the Reason of his sudden have?

Mu. Unless a letter lately sent my Lord
Ambigamor, my Observation
Can suggest no other.

Or. Must the malignance of my stars at once
Precipitate my Hopes, their rigor yet
Had taught me sufferance, if the change had
But flattered me to a suspense of Doubt,
Though it never reached to farther certainty.

Mu. Be not so moved. A fertile industry
Makes easy paths through every difficulty:
Mine, as in Duty bound, presents it self
To the undertaking.

Or. Endeavors happy that pretend to be,
Must work on Subjects have capacity.

Mu. Madam, this falls within that quality,
Though your fears lend it other appearance.
Were my life free (though far too mean a pledge
For your displeasure) it most willingly
Should balance the Event.

Or. What can be done on such an Exigent?

Mu. His journey may protracted be.

Or. Those purposes do many hazards run
Are grounded but on Possibility*
Where is the means?

Mu. To that,
Occasion is the fairest Minister,
Leave to my vigilance the Charge.

Or. Thy subtlety I know still equal is
To thy Fidelity. And ne^ there shall.

Return from my Employment empty.
Mu. Your honors bounty is my providence.

Or. How fleeting are th'impressions of my mind:
Were this successful my distracted thoughts
Would in themselves a new division find.
This innate passion of Supremacy,
Which the Soul holds from the Excellency
To her self Of her own Nature; scarce will intermit
To the Repugnance of another force.
Were but the Motions of Ambition traced,
Each President would show; even wantonness,
(When her Ri^es were in question) lost the use
Of sense: yet were these flames springs of delight,
If but one object could them both unite

Mu. Madam, your thoughts seem overcast again
With trouble: Appease them in assurance
Of my trust.

Or. Mundelo, thy faith has ever been,
Without reserve, the closet of my breast.
To limmit it with a Restriction now,
Were to offend thy Intrest, and betray
My own: know then Mundolo, I do find
A contradiction in my own desire,
And cannot reconcile the difference:
One part we have concluded on; the other
Remains without in Expection
Of my last Resolution.

Mu. Does your Honor mean my Lord Protector.

Or. I do; He with new violence pursues
His Pretenses to a sudden Issue.

Mu. What obstacle
In this can move you to deliberate?

Or. Is it not apparently repugnant
To my Love* to yield my self unto
Another End?

Mu. To this your fairest way, If I might be
Your guide: This youth is of condition mean,
And can not meet your wish, without reproach,
Which shrouded with another title might
Be done: custom makes it warrantable.
Wealth moves the world, yet is Loves Minister:
First we contract with this, then join with that.
Husbands are used, as Properties in Scenes,
To keep the inward motions undiscovered.

Or. We against our Reason easily conclude
When oversway'd by sense: Admit this were
To her self As you would figure it. It must distaste
A Virgin to yield up the passion
Of her first Embraces, from him she loves
Deservedly, to Age and Impotence.

Mu. Nor that, nor this, if you rely on me;
That Brain is shallow, which is only led
By common consequence, wisdom creates
New means, where none to sense was visible;
And fashions subjects were irregular
Directly to her Purposes.

Or. Such is the force of wisdom, I must grant;
But not as placed in our Humanity.

Mu. Distrust is only our Infirmity:
Our faculties often fail us in their use,
Wanting assurance to support their strength:
Yet to confirm your thoughts, I will disclose
The manner: My Father was an Artist,
Madam, honored in his time, though since,
The ignorance of every mounting Jack,
Has made the Function infamous. Of his
I have a Lodanum, so rarely mixed,
One scruple given in any liquid thing,
Holds with so dull a vapor every sense,
No force can wake them from its violence,
Till the course of the Operation pass.
This but infused upon your wedding night
Into his Cup you seemingly do yield,
The more agreeing Object I will bring
Unto your Bed.

Or. How bold are serv^le minds,
To her self. Upon the least discov'ry of our ills,
To tempt us unto greater -- I obey:
-- Intermission. Love and Ambition must work any way.
Mundolo, to warrant thy endeavors,
The Law allows me power of thy life;
To gratify them, if successful, I
Will raise thy Bondage 'bove thy Liberty.

Mu. I find it so already, Madam,

Or. It shall have larger proofs; I'^h' interim,
Give the direction to your own advice.

Mu Your honor then should suddenly conclude
Your Marriage with Sinevero: which done,
The rest lies in my execution.

Or. Follow thy course; be to thy self thy Fate,
Procure me Love: or to thy self my Hate.
Ex. Orgula
Mu. The true Reward of forward Servitude,
I have too far proceeded to look back:
My safety now must be the nightest end.

Ambigamor, Fidelius, Ent. Mu. Hah! so nigh!
I must lie close for new discovery.

withdraws behind the hanging Amb. gives Fi. two letters. Amb embraces Fi. Amb.
This to thy Master give with diligence;
Tell him the time and place inscribed shall
Present me to his succor: to which add
My Love. Farewell honest Fidelius.

Fi Your Honors humble Servant.

Ex. Amb. Fi. several ways. Mu. Sir,
my Lord Ambigamor.
Has somewhat farther to impart to you.

Mundolo discovers himself, and runs hastily after Fi. re-ex. Fi. points to a
contrary way. seems to lock a door on him. Fi. Which way went he?

Mu. This way Sir,
So, I Will follow, and close him in his cage,
If the^e he struggle, vain shall be his Rage.
Ex. Mun.
Act IV. Scene 1.
Sineverus, Nefarius. Sin. This day, on the declining of the light;
The place, Nefarius, is the Holy Oak,
Here in the Forest. See it fully done.
Your former instruments perhaps may be
Your safest undertakers.

Ne. They will! but how shall they distinguish them.

Sin. That by their Persons, or their Habits will
Uncertain prove, because they come disguised,
Their purpose being to entrap my life:
But you in time preceding them may soon
Discover them, by their intention,
Which in their actions they would seem to hide
I Will tripple the reward to them, and thee.

Ne. Your Honors pleasure is my recompense

Sin. This finished:
Ex. Ne. My joys are perfect, and my Fortunes full.
This toyling spirit then safe Harbor takes,
Where she the bre^ches shall restore of time
And casualty: knowing no Action
But what is practiced by the Gods, Repose.
While cherisht with the Flames of Beauty and
Of Love, an Essence I assume out^ lasts
The Age of Her, whose ashes does renew
Her kind -- Zizania.
Zizania Ent. I sent for thee, thou might partake my j^y.
I have shook off the tumults of the Court,
And with my Bride am to Placentia come,
To be thy guest, Zizania, Privacy
Adds, in our seeming stealth, to our delight,
What public freedom does in license loose,

Zi. My wishes should enlarge your happiness,
Were they as ready to my will, as it
Is in obedience unto yours.

Sin. Which only is at present to seclude
You and your charge from our discovery.
And secretly to give direction
For this Nights entertainment.

Ziz. To my best faculty I shall.

Sin. My care shall next supply the like Office
To thee.
Ex. Sin.
Ziz. Your tenderness gui^es my Fidelity;
Love is s^c^esse^ull to ^ecrepid Age,
While youth and beauty lose their influence.
Where lies the hidden virtue of force?
Not in the sense, this contradiction proves.
If in the Intellect, their Equality
Ob^forms would mutually each other
Pe^e^ate with like Impressions: But this
Alas! my sufferings also falsify.

Eumena Ent. Eu. Zizania,
(...) thou to the burden of my Fears?
Leaving me only to secure my Peace.

Ziz. I thought your Highness was disposed to Rest.

Eu. Such intermission seldom does invest
A Soul besieged with so many doubts.

Ziz. Your groundless apprehension does suggest
Vain forms, but to afflict your self.

Eu. Think thou it vain to doubt the certainty
Of my escape the hour at hand, and yet
The way not formed to my delivery

Ziz. You rashly do precipitate your censure:
Our better Fortune does present the means,
Which I already fully fashioned have
In my Intention: Madam, this day
My Father married is to Orgula,
With whom, more fully to enjoy themselves,
He privately is hither come;

Eu. What can from hence be gathered? this rather
Does oppose, than farther our design*

Ziz. Your Highness does conclude too suddenly.
Their entertainment lies in my charge,
Which, not appearing, I must secretly
Direct; under which color, on the approach
Of Night, our Domestique Attendants I Will
Dispose unto some rustique sport, in which
Divested of their usual Habits
To put on other Properties* we will
Assume their Figures to disguise our own.
Whilst in the Action they are busied,
We undiscovered safely may depart.

Eu. It Is well contrived; I wish the Issue may
As happily ensue.

Ziz. Distrust it not: Assurance fortifies
Our purposes.

Eu. It is in heaven decreed; succeed what may,
We must the Influence of their Lights obey.

(...) Act IV. Scene 2.
Mundolo Mu. I have wi^h pain this difficulty past,
But how I shall go thorough with the next,
Falls not as et in my Conception.
Was ever Culli'on forced to the Arms
Of so much Beauty yet? It Is the last time
(...) be undertaker to Another
Ple^sure A ve^tall far more easily
I might corrupted have, than him have moved
To the approach I was enforced to leave
My sl^ghts pretending that his gold had won
Me to the Change; whilst under the color
Of ayding his escape, I trained him through
The thickest of the wood* where seeming to
Have lost my self, I lodged him here until
To morrows light.

Orgula Enter. Or. Mundolo.

Mu. Madam

Or. How thr^ves our purposes?

Mu. As you your self could wish.

Or. Why? Have thou won him hither?

Mu. I have, and find this passive coldness
Is but the bashful softness of his youth,
Which veiled with nights obscurity will prove
More hardy.

Or. Where have thou lodged him?

Mu Close to your withdrawing room, wherein
Are Chambers only to my use assigned.

Or. It Is well, but have thou to Sinevero's cup
Infused thy Ingredient?

Mu. It Is done.

Or. I fear the failing of its force.

Mu. My li^e shall be the Forfeiture.

Or. I find in him no alteration yet.

Mu. It must have time to operate.

Ver. Hah! hah! hah!

Vergona, Amasia. Or. So full of mirth, Vergona.

Ver. Your Honors Pardon,
Who from the expression could restrain themselves,
Must have a temper more discreet than mine.

Or. What is the matter? speak Amasia, speak.

Am. My Lord the Bridegroom fain would be in Bed.

Or. With which of you? I pray ye are so pleasant grown.

Am. The fervor of his Inclination
Affects no Society

Or. No, what moves his Passion then?

Am. Upon my life no Action, Madam.
You need not fear he should disquiet you
To night.

Or. Thou art distracted sure.

Am. I should be so, held I your honors place,
It Would move the suff'rance of a longing Bride,
To lose her expectation fully raised*

Or. This but confirms me more in my belief.
Unvaile the mystery.

To Vergano. Ver. Madam, without more circumstance, my Lord
Traveled in fancy with too high delight,
Ere he to the Fruition came, makes
His Relaxes in a pleasant slumber.

Am. So Dull,
The Image scarce can be distinguished.
From what it represents.

Ver. No violence can move a sense of life,
More than he breaths.

Or. It Is strange, perhaps some lassitude of spirit.
See, ye disturb him not.

Am. A Trumpet or a Cannon will not do it.

Or. It works, Mundolo, vanished are my fea^s.

Mu. Your honor will have firmer confidence
In my Proceedings.

To Mun. privately to whisper. Or. I shall, and truly value them:

The waiting women one to the other Ver. We shall not need, Amasia to steal
Away the Bride to Night.

Am. Nor she, Vergona, to protract the loss
Of her Virginity with pretended Vows.

Ver. Twill save her Artificial modesty
From such constraint.

Am. Fie upon phlegm and age, which have not he^t
Enough to reach to ^he Encounter.

Ver. This interlude were rare to introdu^e
Another to her Bed.

Am. When he awaking should believe he had
What he found wanting, in a pleasant dream.

Ver. The slight would please beyond what follows it.

Or. It shall be so; Amasia, get things
To Mu. In readiness, I will to bed.

Am. Your Honor will not frustrate the design
Your Servants for your entertainment have
Already formed, and now without attend
You with a Banquet and a Masque;

Or. Go let them know their Lord being indisposed,
Their sports shall till to morrow be deferred,
Their Banquet place in my withdrawing room.

Am. We shall.

Ex. Am. Ver. Or. Mundolo, now
My joys have freedom to declare themselves,
And yield to thee their due acknowledgement.
A double vigor animates my sense:
The flames of Love I find more active prove,
When they approach their sphere, only to thee
Lays her hand on Mun. Their union must their mediation owe.
How fortunes malice labors to suppress
The light of Nature; her beauties casting
In obscurity: had they but agreed
In thy Production, thy wit had raised
A glorious title to thy memory.

Mu. Yet to your Honors Testimony far
Inferior.

Or. I shall find means to lend it Action
Worthy thy capacity: In The interim,
Proceed to perfect my intention,
Occasions ripe, and time does speedy grow,
Yet in his flight, to answer Love, too slow.

Mu. My diligence with like alacrity
Shall meet them both.
Exit Mun.
Or. Contract thy dulle^t vapor gloomy night,
Thou fully may thy right anticipate:
Veil every gaudy spangle of thy Robe,
Thy Beauty lies in thy obscurity.
With thy deep Lethargy charm every sense,
No Spy may intercept Loves Privacie.
Th^oughout thy silent Region, no breath move,
May once divert the Fancy of our Love.
And when thou must withdraw, least us thou should
Betray; precipitate not thy Course; but slide
By degrees away.

Act IV. Scene 3.
Zizania in a Forester^ disguise. What Law, so tyrranous, does us enjoin
With the first Rites of Nature to dispense?
Our common preservation should prevail,
Balanced against all other consequence.
Yet I unhappy must such ties inflict
Upon my self, as no Law would impose,
To save another, I my self must lose
This goodly light, whereof we so much boast,
Serves but to us our thraldom to install:
No sooner we do Reasons use attain,
But what, who want her, do with ^iberty;
Her strict prescriptions do to us deny.
Madam, where is your Highness?
Eumena Ent. disguised in a Foresters habit. Eu. Here, Zizania, here.

Ziz. I fearful am to lose you; this distance
Will too much endanger our division.
You seem not forward in your own desires;
What makes you slack your preintended speed?
If fear; Love has his resolution lost:
If lassitude; repose your self on me.

Eu. Neither: Zizania.
I stayed to gather somewhat I let fall.

Ziz. By your long silence, Madam, I should judge,
You^ thoughts do suffer some distraction.
This your escape would else be some degree
Unto your satisfaction.

Eu. Which is not figured soly in discourse,
Such entertainments now would only serve
But to disclose what our disguize conceals.

Ziz. Here are no witnesses, believe, but such,
Whose simple Nature can distinguish naught
We utter: or, if they did, the freedom which
They happily enjoy, would not betray
Our Liberty.

Eu. Are we yet far remote from whence we came,
Or whether we intend?

Ziz. From both past all distinguishing.

Eu. Thou have so many winding turnings trod,
I fear our unknown course should backward lead.

Ziz. This path does guide us to a little Plain,
Would pe^fectly to either us direct.

Eu. From which I gather what I have to shun,
to her self Zizania, hark, I hear some noise at hand;
Step thou before and make discovery.

Ziz. It Was but your Highness apprehension.

Eu. Think thou my fears so vain to agitate
Beyond the true direction of my sense.

Ziz. Your satisfaction moves my diligence.

Eu. I have at length attempted with success,
Who ^y one Party twice betrayed will be,
The Author is of his own mysery,
Had but my thoughts reflected at the first
On the extraction of this infamous
Betrayer of my trust; I had not now
Been forced to expose my wandering steps
To the uncertain chance of Night; nor yet
The fury of each savage Beast. Nature
In the firm Rule of her Productions would
Have taught me, she, according to each kind,
Does seldom fail in figuring of the mind.
The Fathers high Ambition I have found,
Which travels indirectly to supplant
Me of my Right: whose Power to oresway,
Both Love and Wisdom traceth out one way
Ex. Eu.
Ziz. It Was but the Image of your jealousy.
Ziz re-ent^ Madam! Madam! I am not surely come
Unto the Place I le^t her in. Heaven guide
My course aright, night may not us divide,
Ex. Zizi.
Act IV. Scene 4.
Voracho, Spura^ro. Encounter. Spu. Voracho!

Vo. Spuratro!

Spu. What booties are abroad?

Vo. I rounded have the Forest; but can find
Naught worth the undertaking.

Spu. Have thou seen any? I am honest grown
Fro want of practice; Thieves, like misers, should
Seek for great gains, but not neglect the small.

Vo. Two Forresters I often accosted have,
Who by their course seem but to lodge some Dear.

Spu. No matter what: Are their cloths good they wear:

Vo. Give ear a while; I hear some one draw nigh.

Spu. A certain prize,
close to our Ambush ply.

They hide themselves. Eumena ent. Eu. I have outstript the accents of her
voice,
And should by her expressions have escaped
The hazard of encounter or pursuit.
But whether my Intention should direct,
If my sense could distinguish where I am,
Is not yet formed in Resolution:
Fear ha^h till now usurpt that faculty,
And happily conducted nature so,
As the next means to preservation.
Difficulty is sooner overcome,
Than treachery: Thus this evasion past,
I should proceed to free me from the next:
But in this obscure Labyrinth I find
The more to disingage me I insist,
The more in error I my self involve.
These unfrequented shades, approaching night,
My senses seize with horror, captivate
My ^ight: ^enum'd with lassitude my limbs
Forget their use: yet when to me the cause
Presents it self, Love sweetens every clause.
Oh! cruel Villain!

shout, Eu. falls. Spu. It Was well directed, sirrah! he is fallen.

Vo. Quickly advance, and finish him, I Will wait
The Coast.

Eu. What seek you of me? if my life,
It is already to your hand betrayed;
A thing so vain, they would not it defend,
Had tried the evils has attended mine.

Spu. So willing to depart? had we but known
Your mind, you longer might have lived, we seek
Another life, but to secure our own.
Spu. goes about to rifle him: whistles. It Is money is our End.

Gratianus Ent. Spu. withdraws. Gra. The cry I heard upon the shot, was here,
If my sense err not: hah! a handsome youth
I yes weltring in his blood: what a^t thou? speak.

Eu. I shall not be, while I can let you know,
Without the help of charitable h^nds.

Gra. raises Eu. Gra. To your first succor, Sir, accept of mine.
So, so, gently rest har^ly on me.
Wh^ gaze you still with terror ^ound about?

Eu. Least my unhappy sufferings should betray
Your char^ty to the hands by which I fell.

Gra. Wh^t were the Villains?

Eu. By their intension I should judge them thieves

Gra. Take courage sir I h^ve at hand more ay^,
If need require, which want but on my Call.
Your wound, I do perceive, not mortal is,
Yet least your travel, and the ensuing cold
Of Night should farther hazard it, I will
Con^uct you to a holy man resides
Not far from hence, whose Piety and skill
Shall to your suc^our our certain s^fety b^ing.

Eu Your goodness sir, has taught me to believe
The gods as yet, have not abandoned me.
Nor shall my gr^titude be wan^ing to
Their Providence, or your humanity.

Gra. Mine, if successful, has his recompense.
Strain not your self, but rest upon my arm.

Eu. Heaven many times to good does turn our Harm.
Ex*
Act IV. Scene 5.
Ludaster. Man in himself should a new Nature form
To entertain himself without dislike,
Or lassitude: so many breaches has
Our frai^ty to repair, no sooner we
Step to supply the one, but suddenly
Another calls us to their succor, leaving
The vain in ^u^^ry of man both fruitless
And unsatisfied: such is the burden
Of my anxious thoughts, which on their own^
Reflection vainly toil to raise their own
Perfection, whose incapacity
Resists the Power even of Divinity:
And by conversion, in the passive sense,
Does seem to limmit that omnipotence.
Gra^ian^s, Eum^na Ent. Gra. Whilst there is change in things, though from the
world
She hide her self, virtue will be found out
To make her being useful unto others,
And in despite of her repugnant malice,
Fortune at length is forced to become
Her Minister: See here the Exemplar
Presents it self to yours.

Lu. How? wounded?
Your Stars good, sir, too meanly have, I fear,
Directed you, those tender years, I judge,
Will prove unapt to meet the inconvenience
Of this sterrile place: B^t if such defect^
May be supplied by my Industry;
Expect an issue equal to your Hop^^.

Eu. Goodness has surely quite abandoned
The sources of Civility. And now,
Retracting back to the Original
Of her first Re^or^ation, has forsook
The affluence of society, in this
Wild Desert to take up her being.
Next under Heaven, to your Humanities
I owe my second being: may the Gods
Afford suc^ess to lend me gratitude.

Lu. Exchange of words, will but exasperate
Your grief, which rest perhaps may mitigate,
Conduct him gently in

They lead him in. Lu. Gra. return after a little in^^rmission. Lu. So,
Gratianus, the Remedy applied
Twill not be now impertinent to ask,
What this youth is? or by what accident
Thus wounded?

Gra. More than the unaffected grace appears
In his demeanor, language and Aspect,
As certain marks of his Nobility,
I nothing farther can instructed be;
As through the Forest hither I was bent,
I from the hands of thieves delivered him.

Lu. An action becoming well your virtue.

Gra. Yet seeks to be, made good in yours.

Lu. The gods propitious prove to both our works.
But what new change abroad?

Gratianus. Gra. Nuptials, sir, which must solemnized be
In Funerals; the Fox this night is wed
To Orgula the Proud, and harbor takes
Where he, of late, has made the Rape of all
Our Hopes, in our fair Sovereign. This I
Learnt of some scattered outlaws lately joined
To our suspended troops, who therein were
Unwitting^y his Ministers: if we
May certain evidence collect both from
The Time and Persons.

Lu. Admit this true, which lies but in suspect;
What thereon would you next conclude?

Gra. This night with some selected troops to search.

Lu. The ground uncertain must be shaddowe^
With some other pretense, that if this fail,
Yet your retrait may be thereby secu^'d^

Gra. It Is well advis'd^ (...) Ar^iers shall be
The substitute^ ^will meet the so^ldiers
Liking, and not unaptly fit the time*

Lu. The issue with each circumstance make have
To let me know, we thereto fashion may
Lu. embraces Gra. Our following purposes: Night hastens on.
Farewell, the staff of all my trust; farewell.

Gra. May my endeavors meet your Interests.
Ex.
several ways. Act V. Scene 1.
Filathes. You inverst Eyes of Night,
Who on our easy Nature work our Fates,
Concur in your auspitious Ministry
To crown a flame,
As bright and lasting as your Essences^
Attract some vapor, that your ^^ght may be
Doubtful to us, as your uncertainty.
Loves superstitious reverence has seized
My heart: He prompts me to go on,
Yet interjects an Interdiction.
Styles violence t'him, what he enforces to:
And wills me leave, what he enjoins to do,
Enlighten thine own Mysteries, blin^e Pow'^^
Force not, or force permit; if that thy Eye
Be only placed in the fantasy;
My fear and thy Restraint are void. This shade
Translates me to the Image of her thoughts,
Where high consent shall meet in equal Fires,
And when the guilty blushes of the Morn,
Hastened by hers, betray the fallacy,
Her prepossessed fancy will reflect,
Upon the first Impression of delight,
Which will her ravished senses so suspend,
They will not find or not dislike the Error:
While struggling Honor, finding not a Name
To style the Act, is forced to assume
Those R^tes may yield it privilege.
Confirmed, I Will wait, when met; all still become,
Nature contract all senses into one.
Withdraws, ex. Fi. Zizania ent. Ziz. She Is lost to me, as I am to my self.
What unformed shaddows fancy works upon?
So busily, as thence she would create
New Essences without the Intellect.
Intermission. Work on -- Chance is a weak foundation --
Yet does the light of Nature captivate,
And by co-herence of her links drags on
The worlds important Agitation:
While every new occurrent she, but forms
Supplants the Fabrique of Resolution,
And in a Minute scatters what Reason
Has many Ages toiled to erect.
Chance past, since not sought, not attaints my will:
Succeeding blames not, if the same fulfill.
Assenting Love says force I can not suffer:
And passive Nature force I cannot act:
Without impulsion guilt is not in fact:
Yet if so far chance reach not, or their leave,
She others may, but shall not me deceive.
Hope is abandoned: what chance has begun,
I leave the sequel by her to be done.
Ex. Ziz.
Neforius and a band of Villains. Ne. Fate i^ our handmaid, the are met near to
part.
As lightning in your execution be
Swi^t and silent, it is double mercy thought,
Where Death implies Necessity.

1. Vil. You need not style it so to us, we shall.
Virtue's no motive in our Element:
Those are the shadows of our safety sir.

Vo. gives them money Ne. In earnest of your undertakings, hold.
Nay, it is all right; Man's better Angels.
Nefarius remains. Your purpose finished trebles your reward.

2. Vil. Soul-quickning action! think it already done.

Ne. Hah!
Ex. Vil. Shriking and nois^ within. If that this Organ can distinguish sounds,
Those voices it has been familiar with
The Agents discharged; I have a private light
Shall yield me safe intelligence.

Villains re-ent. 1. Vil. Their fates are spun, what is your pleasure more?

Ne. At present nothing; hold take your rewards
gives more. And now disperse you to your several beings,
To morrow wait for new directions.

2. Vil. We are your Creatures.

Ex. Vil. Ne. withdraws a while, after some intermission returns with a dark
lantern in one ^and, a ring and medall in the other. Ne. Now to my second
purpose.

Nefarius re-ent. Ne. New prodigies! massacre his children!
Nature is started forth her proper seat,
For lust and ambition to make way,
To which Idols no Sacrifice is dear.
He yields to this, that she might yield to that.
It must be so; a direful Commerce it is.
I have way'd deep in mischief: but till now,
Horror could never make my hand to shake.
This Mystery must still be such to me.
It is not safe to find what Tyrants seek
To hide: These unsuspected Emblems shall
To the Event be silent Evidence.
Who in a Tyrants bosom would^ securely rest,
Must seem to know, but what he finds expressed.

Act V. Scene 2.
A Banquet set with a s^ft kind of music. Fidelius, Mundolo, Enter. Fidelius
s^ems struck with wonder after so^e intermission. A SONG
Repugnant Powers long have swayed
My will, obscurely cl^s'd;
What Love designed Honor g^insay'd;
What Honor, Love opposed.
Neither prevayling, now agree,
Love lies dis^rm'd;
And Honor charmed
By his affected Cer'mony.
Wait all you Graces, happy How'rs!
To crown approaching joy;
And all your sense-refining Powers,
To fill delight, Employ!
At once let each sense captive be,
Vicissitude
May not intrude
Envy to eithers Ministry.
Fi. What means the flatt'^ies of this (...) Scene?

Mu. The charming preludes to a glorious Love.

Fi. My years reach not to the capacity,
Or to distinguish, or to relish them:

Mu. Our facile natures easily receive
The Elements of that Philosophy,
Which in our pleasure placed the chiefest good.

Fi. If grounded o'th sense: A false position,
The which another Sect abandons quite.

Mu. A rigid, Tenent, nature would distort
From her first purity her Functions
Making useless.

Fi. I question neither, since neither approve;
But sure I am so high a subject can
Not settle on the base of an extreme.

Mu. Nor doubt of that which is in evidence.
Let others search for that, which you, enjo^.
These Arguments admit no soloecisme
To cheat the sense. Their excellence persuades
shows him the banquet And satisfies: See here how splendid Lux
Has rifled Natures Treasury,
Not only to restore, but to ex^lt
Her faculties; which when dispensed, shall
Replenisht, flow from inexhausted Springs.
See, how the industrious hand of wanton Art,
Contracted has, in this small Epitom,
The scattered pieces o'th worlds perfections.
These Virgin Spangles guild Nights ^able robe,
Whilst from their Orbs we hear
Exclusive Harmony; not judging where.
Here Aromatique odours which perspire
In their immortal Essences. If yet
Thy years extend to be Opinion sick.
Shows him a Cabinet of jewels and gold. See, what beauty, use or difficulty
Has made precious in esteem: Here find no^e,
If honored not in yours, to whom they are
Presented.
Yet on these trifles, why should I insist?
Since she, to whom these glories hommage owe,
Is yours. She before whom their beauties vanish,
As things too mean to entertain the sense.
She adds fresh luster to the exalted Day,
The Object of all vows; of all desires,
Who moves more sprightly influence in her grace,
Than all those Dames Antiquity recites
To have made captive the worlds Conquerors.
Yet she, with equal spoils invested, is
Become your Captive, Sir, why suffer you
Those your distracted looks to speak repulse
In trouble. Those years and beauty promise
A more relenting Nature: To whose Rites,
If inclination will not yield: Be wise,
Comply, and to your fortunes minister.

Fi. Mine are already framed to my wish,
And find less agitation in their seat,
Though humble, sheltered by another care,
Than if more high, erected by my own:
Nor can you Nature blame, she answers not
To what her immaturity withholds.

Mu Art hastens that we see in fruits and flowers:
Nor will this all-informing l^ght of Love
Act less when you approach her Orb* Advise,
And be more flexible; let not your will
Transport your Reason to a stubornness.
If the enlargement of your Fate move not;
Yield to secure your present safety Sir,
Fi. starts Start not: I now s^eak but the resentments
Of another, not my own: yet figure
To your self the Rage of Love neglected,
High in Expectation^ as desire,
Me^ in a Subject, high in her own esteem,
And others; whose power, for an offense,
Has no bounds, but her will, to act vengeance.

Fi. Though high discourses in me cannot frame
A Resolution to remove my Fears,
The Office is supplied by Innocence,
And I, immoved, must the issue wait.

Mu Nay, then I beat the air; and cast away,
That time arows ripe to h^sten my own ruin --
pause
Mu. Awake dull temper! can thou only act
For others Interests, and not for thy own? --
pause Rise high you struggling spirits, and cast off
The servile badges of this suppressed mind,
Fear and respect, with this their ^ive^y.
casts off his cloak I have let in a flame, wild as the worlds
Embracement, when that proud Boy miscarried
In his Rule: And must pursue it, though it
Meet his Fate: Who falls in attempts are high,
Into Org. bedchamber. Erects his Fame unto Eternity.
Ex. Mu.
Fi. How strange a labyrinth am I involved in*
So full of error, Hope cannot figure
An Evasion: Why sport you so, you Powers
That guide our Fates, with our Infirmities?
If they offend, it is enough that you
Abandon them, to work their punishment.
My being so inconsiderable is,
Imagination could not once suggest
So weighty a dependence, as might move
For preservation; were it not engaged
In his peculiar interests: who does,
In his only bosom, virtue preserve
Alive in her unblem^sht purity.
May be, these new disorders you produce,
By farther opposition, yet to make
This his admired life more glorious:
And showing how far one man's strength may reach,
From others all excuses take away
Of humane frailty; Give me leave to say
It Is already at this height so penible,
The soon reputed will is easily
Induced to think 't past imitation:
Or if it yet want proof, it is in that part,
Might show undoubted Morderation,
Not his Constancy. Afford it matter;
Raise him to that height of Felicity,
Wants only durance but to equal yours;
Twill neither prove miscognisant to you;
To others insupportable; nor yet
Unto Himself obnoxious. For this,
My prayers shall never want or fervency,
Or perseverance to become successful.

Mundolo re-ent. unbutton'd in a loose posture. Mu. In this c^rcum^erence of
our Lives, I see,
Extremes meet in one point; delight will force
A breach to let out life, as well as grief;
to himself In which swelling excess, but now, I felt
My Soul even floating over these shallow banks.
Hah! it is with^n; hence ^ear; my Fate is full,
noise, looks behind Mu^ slinks behind the hanging, while Org. Nor can it meet
that change, shall force a wish
Once to retract my being.

Orgula Ent. enters in a night Robe, and dressing amorously accosting Fid. Or.
Why slides my Love so filently away,
As it were stealth but to exact his own?
Which offered is with so much Ardency,
As it enricht the greedy tenderer.
Why shifts those Scenes of Beauty in the Face?
Unless to take with new variety:
Let no motion raise, or retract thy bood,
Unless it be the Passion of thy Love.
Why so much distance, where Loves mysteries
Fi. seems to withdraw from her Already frame an union? Let our souls
Meet in their faculties, as their Organs have
In theirs: Hang not thy head down like a flower
Drooping for a timely shower. I Will transplant
Thee to my Breast from whence thou shall assume
Fresh vigor: where thus my soul I Will effuse
To multiply thy spirits.

She offers to him, he falls on his knee Mu. peeps. Mu. His coldness will
betray me.

Fi. Madam, place not my error in my will,
But my Infirmity.

She raises him Or. Why kneelest thou to her, over whom thou act'st
All Rights of Sovereignty. I farther will
Not hear thee in that unseemly posture.
Although thy undistinguisht Accents charm
Beyond the powerful Notes of Harmony.

Fi. Your pleasure is my Privilege, Madam,

Or. This disproportion still in our discourse
Fi. rises. Might well become Love in his Infancy;
But where his true maturity admits
Him to the full fruition of his Rights,
Ceremonies are then of us received
But as suspected Prefaces.

Fi. In me this title is litigious.

Or. Who then is the Competitor?
How pleasant it is to hear thee question that
Admits no Ambigulty.

Fi. Not in your own Opinion, Madam,

Or. And is not that enough to style it just,
Confirmed by my Election?

Fi. A frail one it is, which will not hold the trial.

Or. Thou art not so inconstant sure, a^t thou?
So soon to wipe out the Image of our Loves.

Fi. I first must have capacity to receive it.

Or. Pr'y thee no more;
Thou Wilt make me jealous of I know not what.

Fi. Ere to become a habit it have time,
Or. extends her hand. Lend me your hand to take away the Error.
Yet first I must beg two requests of you,
Your Pardon and your privacy:

Or. This serious preparation does o'recast
Delight: Yet thou of both may be assured.

Fi. Place your hand here it may distinguish that,
To which, perhaps your other senses would
Prove but suspected witnesses.

Opens his bosom. raises her hand and puts it into his bosom. Or. Hah! thou
have a Viper in thy bosom,
Whose poison has already seized my heart,
And changed my former passion to a fury,
Which is let loose, by one solution more,
To make the face of Nature, but one Scene*
For universal Tragedy.
Who entered has, or from my lodgings came?

Fi. None but your servant, Mundolo, Madam.

starts Or. How! Fury chase fury, hasten to their doom;
Rage on it self preys, till to Action come.
Ex. Orgula.
Mundolo, appears from behind the hanging. Mu. Consuming lightning flashed from
her Eye.
This Villain has betrayed me sure; Come sir,
To himself. Reveal the subject of your Conference,
Or this sharp steel it from thy Bosom digs

Mundolo draws a dagger. Fi. How sir, you will not kill me, will you?

Fi distracted runs up and down seeking some passage to escape. Mu. That is, as
I shall find your temper sir,
Or plyant, or inflexible: Nay! nay!
You rove in vain: here are no starting holes.
Be brief.

Fi. It can be no advantage unto you,
Since it concerns you not.

Mu. It matters not.
Her change assures me it must be of weight,
Speak, speak truth, and the whole truth, suddenly.
Or present tortures shall enforce thee to it.

Fi. Since in your satisfaction only
Fi. hastily flings a purse of money to Mu. with a letter. My safeties placed;
first give me leave to beg
Or purchase else thereto your privacy

Mu. A fair inducement, you shall have your wish,
Hah! a letter too.

Offers to catch it, but desists with much distraction. Fi. That was not my
intention Sir, I pray
Restore it back, without your violence,
Or turn the fury thereof upon me.

Mu. Forbear, so hardy grown to tempt your ruin:
New subjects for higher undertakings.
reads to himself Success in ills gives ills encouragement.
Unto whose tempting height I must ascend,
Or give my envied fall a glorious end.
A noise clattering to break down the doors. Hah! what strange alarum's this?
new terrors?
Hell is broke loose, it is time to shun the fury.

Mu. flies. Mu. runs frighted away, and drops the letter, which Fi. gathers up.
Gralianus, Serverus, Libranus, and a band of Soldiers, with Torches in one
hand, swords in the other. Gra. Fidelius! what make thou here? fear not:
I see a wild distraction in thy looks:
What caused in thee this trouble?

Fi. Your presence sir, has my delivery wrought.
Time must suspend civility a while,
To lend you fuller resolution.
I Have for my Master letters of Import;
Which have been intercepted in their course.
I must entreat of you, with speed to have
Safe conduct through the tumult of your Bands.

Gra. Thou shall, thou pretty piece of diligence.
Thou shall, be it your charge Lybranus.

Ex. Om. with fresh claimours. Act V. Scene 1.
Sinevero in a Nightgown. How cold a damp benums my senses still,
As if I had engendered with the Night;
And thus forsaken of the living, were
Already numbered amongst the Dead.
The error of her sense, in my distemper,
Might thus perhaps affright her from her rest.
What ho! who waits without there?
Nefarius. Ne. My Lord!

Sin. It is your Lady I enquire for.

Ne. I of her being can yield no account,
But newly entered from finishing
Your Honors last commands.

Sin. And how,
Are all my fears asleep? Nefarius.

Ne. If they extended only unto what
I had in charge: my Lord, I dare affi^m
They are.

Sin. Thou art my better Angel, only trust:
Yet joys are doubtful till they meet the sense.
Art thou assured of thy enterprise?

Ne. I am Sir.
Give him the ring and medal And brought these Relics to remove your doubts.

Sin. What sudden noise is that,
noise Startles my blood without intelligence?
Go learn the cause thereof, Nefarius.

Exit Ne. A table with pen, ink, and paper, and a watch is discovered. Looks
of the watch, be sets down thereat. It Is twelve: The Politicians hour to consult
His Fate; and visit the obstructive springs
Retard her motion, -- hah! What Object's this
Intermission. Curdles my blood in every shaking limb?
Mischief in me; never horror met till now.
These fatal tokens were the pledges of
Their tender Mothers latest Love, who them
Enjoined by vow from them, they never should be
Divided. --
Some secret and all-seeing power there is,
With which my soul was never acquainted yet,
Speaks loud in this to wake the sense of ills.
How sensibly their justice strikes, when as
The offense thus ministers the punishment.
Let it suffice soft Nature, to resent
Seems to weep. The motions of our common frailty
Tendered to thy Rites. Without insisting
By a wild revolt, to revive a light,
Custom has traveled so long to extinguish.
When as our misled purpose may perhaps
Question our safety yet; and call to act
A larger progress in our tragique Scene.
Clamor and noise. Looks back into his Chamber. This clamorous noise
approaches nigher yet.
Hah! An armed tumult questing for prey.
The Object of their Fury, questionless,
I am! It Is so. Hence you glorious shadows,
Whose proper lusters only obvious make
Your own distinctions. Retire from your Orbs
Flings off a rich nightgown and cap. Finding Mu. chake and hat, mufling
himself seems to steal away. To lend your owner safety. Hah! This vail
Is happily encountered.
Orgula her face full of fury and in her hand a poyniard. Org. Hah! Vanishing!
Take that to stop your Course*
And that, and that

Org. taki^g him for Mu. stabs him* he falls. Sin. Oh! Oh! 'Twas fatally
directed.

Org. Sinev'ro's voice -- hah! And his person too.

She unmuffles him. Sin. Orgula! Why that steel? Ire in thine Eye
Had force enough to change my destiny.

Faintly spoken. Org. astonished, her eyes fixed, as distracted turns him.
Gratianus and his Troop ent. Sin. expires. Gra. Who Is this Sinevero?
And you Madam, the fatal Minister?
'Twas rudely handled for the first encounter.
That just, though guilty Instrument, wrest from
They go about to force it from her, and she lets it go without any emotion.
Her hand -- Immovable -- Her eyes are fixed --
Madam -- Madam.

Looks on her. Pulls her by the sleeve. Or. It Is poor -- cast in -- of brass --
Or. speaks as if she had restrained her breath beyond the usual course. A Bull
bellowing forth flames of fire --
No, No -- Bound living to a stake whereon
Ser. Madam Is fixed a vulture preying on his heart.

Ser. She is distracted sure with the horror
Of her own remorse. How do you Madam.

Iogs her. Or. The starting Sinues fastened to a spring,
Snap -- Which wound, wound, wound up to the height -- Buz --
She laughs. And shrivel into Knots. Ha ha ha ha.

Gra. She Is evidently mad.
Serverus, be she your charge. Come Soldiers
The work is half advanced to our hands.
If that the sequel but successful prove,
Your own wishes crown with desert your love.
ex. om.
Act IV. Scene 4.
Eumena. Surely in each exterior Ministry
There is a secret Influence diffused
From the Intention first directed it,
According to which Agitation
The effect is wrought: it could else never be;
The hidden virtues, but of senseless things,
So suddenly should meet their Attributes.
As my late grief, assures my sense, they have.
raising her arm hung in a scarff, she casts her eye thereon. With what a
tender care the good old man
Breaks his own rest to officiate unto mine:
With so much fervency, as if those Powers
To whom he is devoted; only judged,
Like faithless man, the will by the event.
His sweet society, and sollitude
Would charm my mind to a secure neglect,
Had it Capacity but to receive
Their powerful Impressions.
But my sollicitous Passion will admit
No Object, but her own; or if it do,
It Is but as a predominant quality
All d^ffering humors does convert into
Their proper Aliment: often it over flows
To such distemper, that my Pious host
Seems to discover, in his suffering,
A civil notice often, which flatters so
My sense; I often prompted am to pour
The Rest in his religious bosom.
And crave thereto his farther charity.
Which see, how vigilant over my safety still!
Ludaster ent. Lu. Too long emotion yet brings accident
By inflammation or debility.
Retire your self, good Sir, to your repose;
On happy nature you too much presume.

Eu. Unto your charity and skill her bounty
And my error Sir, do their beings ow,
The one restored encouraged the other.

Lu. I joy to find such symptoms of success,
Which must be cherisht in their Infancy,
Till time confirm their issues evident.
Besides, excuse over busy observation,
If it judge, this loneliness may foment
Your minds distemper to the prejudice
Of your recovery, be not abash't;
My rudeness does affirm I have disclosed.
What those blushes assure* they would have hid.
A reverent fear intrusion shall restrain
From a more nigh distinction.

Eu. So indiscreet a jealousy, in me,
Might question my integrity and yours,
The former I assure you, only can
Be impeacht of Natures Infirmities,
Which presume the latter has convinced,
And challenge rather might the overture
Of mine, but for their safe direction.

Lu. Yours are not so remote from that instinct
Conducteth them in their first purity,
To want so frail a Ministry as his,
Whose more corrupting years has given over
To the digression of a froward will.

Eu. Which is to such conformity reduced
By an industrious prudence, that in you,
Virtue is now become a proper Habit,
Which in our undiscerning youth remains
A fleeting accident.

Lu. I rather will assume this vanity
The Error to confute of your belief,
Then farther to extend this Argument
To the hazard of your present welfare,
By too much thus effusing of your spirits,
Which for their Restitution must exact
Your rest.

Eu. Of your judgment l've proofs too sensible,
To question your prescriptions. I obey.

ex. Eu. Ludaster conducts Eu. in Lu. returns. Lu. So excellent a temper in a
mind
So young, I have not found; no^ yet oppressed
With so much Anxiety; which he endears
With so severe a privacy, as if
He on his trouble were enamored.
But time must be his better medicine.
Day waxes old. Trouble has seized my thought,
I Have from Gratianus no intelligence:
I fear his unrestrained courage should
Too high tempt danger to his overthrow.
Fi. en. Fidelius! Welcome.
Embraces him. Sweet reconciler of distractions!
Of Gratianus have thou nothing learned.

Fi. Let not the inquiry of his safety Sr.
Leave yours in hazard with the circumstance.
He is secure. This lettr, Sr, ere this, gives him a let.
Should have been guided to your hand by me,
But my unhappy Stars have in my course
Made frustrate my Endeavors.

Lu. Thy safety shall excuse their opposition.

Fi. Nor judge the freedom you have used me to,
So insolent as to forerun your hand
In the unclosure, 'twas a violence
M^l^fe escaped narrowly.

Lu. What need'st thou plead thy innocence, as I
Had any secret were not safe in thee,
Or from thee would not learn, if yet unknown.
Returns the letter. Let. read by Fi. according to the contents of the former
only signed Ambigamor. Thy lips shall give it evidence; Read out.

Fi. Sr. Not to blemish with suspect your choice,
Nor so far to presume as to intrude
My self your Counselor. Give duty leave
To move your caution in the enterprise.

Lu. It Is strange. Nay, even incredible.
Yet that hand signed it yields it certainty.
Friend, is a powerful charm against all distrust,
What he advises, that pursue I must.

Fi. Yet Sr. I must crave one request of you,
Since yo' are resolved the issue to attempt,
This masque of your disguise you would retain;
And suffer me but to become your scout,
While you at distance follow, that thereby
If treachery intended be, you may
Secure your person.

Lu. Thy Love is Zealous of my safety still.
Be it my guide. Who steareth by such light
Shall find no error in the obscurest night.

ex. Lu. Fi. Eu. re-ent. Eu. If my sense well distinguish, I over heard
Them name the Princess. I Will follow unseen:
That I my self my own affairs may know.
Who Is lost t'her self needs fear no overthrow.

ex. Eu. Act 5. Scene 5.
Ambigamor ent. This is the appointed place, and this the Hour.
Groaning heard within. Groaning again. Draws his sword What doleful groan
lends horror to a night
Whose flattering calmness but inviteth love.
Again, 't will scarce be charity to want.
Another Summon; yet stay Her Order
Wills us first our selves secure. It Is this way
The voice directs --
I^t^rmission. Withdrawing a while returns drawing as it were to the light, the
body of Z^zania. Thou glorious Plannet lends luster to the rest!
Revert the expansion of thy beams a while;
Sense may distinguish what but sense suspends.
The inarticulate accents of these groans
Awake a terror without evidence.
What art thou? speak, or who this fact has wrought?
Ziz. Oh! Ludaster!

In a languishing tone. Kneeling on his knee bends her forward in raising her.
Am. Zizania! confirm my sense again,
My tortured soul may with thee take her flight.
Speak yet again; art thou Zizania,
My loved Zizania?

Ziz. Zizania

raises himself destractedly. Am. That very sound's enough to extinguish life,
By preying on my languishing spirits,
Had love a temper to spin out my Fate.
Why trifle I with passion to unman
My self; and let shame with distraction play.
Resolution is but cheated by delay --
Offers to kill himself. pause. Hold --
Puts up his sword and kneels to raise and bow her as before. Due Rights must
first be tendered to her Ghost,
Whom I shall fear to meet yet unrevenged.
Pardon! thou Innocent Object of my vows,
If I disturb thy rest, yet once again,
To lend direction to just sacrifice,
My Honor, Love, and Vows have me engaged,
To offer to thy horrid sufferings.
Speak, and declare the barbrous instrument.

Ziz. Oh!

Bends her and chases her temples. Am. Lend so much vigor to her spirits yet,
You higher Powers! as may mark out your justice.
Speak, oh speak.
Who wast that wrought this bloody cruelty?

Ziz. Oh -- Ludaster!

Am. Forbid it Heaven! and be my safer guide!
Confirm't again; who was thy Murderer?
Speak!

Ziz. Oh! Ludaster.

Am. Why mock you thus our frailty with a Name
Would charm a dying Testimony?
Yet lend it but the next assertion,
And I pursue the tenor of my vows
Without a scruple to relation.
Speak who thus has spilt thy guiltless blood, speak.

Ziz. Oh! Ludaster.

Straining her forward. Kisses her. Am. Enough, farewell my souls delight! my
stay
Shall make our meeting more agreeable,
And thou Religious union of my soul,
Like a declining shadow vanish hence;
Nor leave behind the least Impression,
Since that light is extinguished formed thee.
Mundolo ent. mufled. Spying Mu. withdraws. Hah! more spies abroad st^ll
roving; I must
Obscure my self for new discoveries.

Mu. Precipitate thy course dull Night! take on
Thy deepest tinctures: Such, as when with spells
The Canting Hagg frights nature from her sent
To ma^que the tracts of Mischief and confound
The world in error. oh! how much shouldow
The inferior Kingdom to thy Ministry.
Were fear but an Authentike Evidence
To truth. The worlds Philosophy styles Ill,
What they would shun to suffer, not what they
Shun to act: Which practice makes good, where they
Are no relatives. Oh! the abusive world!
Whose well known Mysteries instruct my sense,
That ills are none which want their Evidence.
Fancy works high o'th Object of delight,
Yet let not joy elate the spirits; least
Thus rarefied, they should effuse themselves
Before they reach to Action. Hah! who is this?
Fidelius ent. If doubtful light may yield a Certainty,
This is the Stripling that escaped my fur^,
Whose bosom only can disclose the deed
I have already done; or yet pervert
What I intend to act; this both secures.

stabs him. Fi. Oh! oh! cruel villain!

Falls to the ground. Ludaster ent. Wounds Mu. who falls being hurt in the arm,
the dagger drops from him. Lu. So swift be justice in thy punishment,
And in the progress lasting, till it meet
A measure equal unto the dese^t.
Had thou of man so little left in thee,
To violate such tender innocence.
Speak, what art thou? or why this mischief w^ought?
Is insolence swelled up to stubbornness
In thy mouth, and daring in thine eyes? Speak.
That little life thou have shall be reserved,
binds and ties him to a tree with his girdle. kneels and raises Fi. To make
exemplar farther sufferings. --
Now my Fidelius what hopes of safety?

Fi. Little where yours is yet in hazard Sr.

Lu. It Is but the figure of thy jealousy.

Fi. Withdraw good Sr, and timely yet provide
For your security.

Lu. Thou would not have me yet more infamous?
Thus to involve thee in an accident,
Speaks nothing louder than my own dishonor,
And to abandon thee in this ex^ream.

Fi. Your presence Sr, may prejudice your being
Mine not suppo^t; past the capacity
Of succor.

Lu. Heaven is more gracious to my misery.
Nor let the fear of me suggest thy ills
To be more great than tho^ conceivest them.
Human^ty enjoynes us never to leave
The means so long as there is motive to 't.
Try if thy st^ength will suffer thee to be
Transported. So, gently.

raises him. Fi. Oh! I fa^nt:
My soul is sliding from her mansion.
Sets him gently on the earth again. Restore me to the earth: Th^ther I must,
O (...) Original: where set, I may
Spin o^t but so much breath as may remove
Doubt and dishonor from my memory. --
pause. Will you remember me when I am dead?

Lu. Else must forget my self.

Fi. 'Twere needful thereto that you knew me first.

Lu. Know thee! why so I do. I know thou art
Fidelius. My faithful loved Fidelius.

Fi. I would not rob you of his memory,
Who gave me access to your knowledge Sr,
Yet pardon me if I must say you err.

Lu. Err! in what my sweet Fidelius?

Fi. When you affirm me him you name.

Lu. Why, art thou not?

Fi. No.
Although our souls had but one motion,
Our bodies still held their distinction
He died when he departed from you sick;
With so much passion to your virtue Sr,
That I became transported with the admired
Idea, and took the advantage which
Nature had lent me in similitude,
I might succeed to his relation.
Yet with a flame so pure did never reach
To the distinction of my hidden Sex;
Which was the only difference made us known
Unto the womb that bore us.

Lu. Wonder has captived every faculty,
To the detention of their offices;
And but suspends a grief will soon or'eflow
Her shallow Continent, to pay the Rights
To double Interests: Yet say how must
They be distinguished.

Fi. Fidelia, twined sister to Fidelius.

Lu. As if nature had but one only frame
And Constellation, to produce so rare
And exact a moddell.

Fi. Oh!

Lu. Courage! thou miracle of Nature.

Fi. Oh! the cloud of death hangs over my senses,
And steals away my Spirits; yet I die
Content, in the belief I have received
The fatal stroke directed unto you.
Lend me your hand thereon my vows to seal.
Be all united here, which man calls weal.

Kissing his hand and languishingly uttering his last words dies. Lu. They are
divorced, fairwell the loveliest pair,
That ever made one happy union!
Kisses her cheek. Accept this offering to your virtuous loves
weeps. Though too too mean,
Yet struggling nature nere could force them forth
The tainted source of proper interest.

Ambigamor discovers. Amb. If yet in thy exterior part thou have
Thy self but truly figured unto me,
That habit and this place speak thee Ludaster.

Lu. Ambigamor!
Thou welcome balsome to my wounded soul!
Open thine Arms that I may slide into
Thy bosom, where mutual embraces may
Translate our Members to an union.

Lu. running to embrace him, Amb. puts him by with his hand. Amb. Forbear.

Lu. What new disorder has disguised thy love
In this sullen Austerity?

Amb. Such as that name of Friend thus casts off,
Like a despised triffe, and bids the
Waves his hand and draws his sword. To be such unto thy proper safety.

Lu. How strangely art thou wandered from thy self!
Collect thy thoughts to a becoming temper.

stands amazed. Amb. Play not with Rage. Be sudden in defense,
I east my distraction this proceeding judge
More grace than thy guilt deserves.

Lu. Let me first know the nature of my crime?

Amb. Persevere not herein. Ask me not why.
Who knows ills t'act, knows how them to deny.

Lu. I shall suspect the Base whereon I raised
That holy Title keeps my hand in Aw;
If thou insistest thus.

Amb. No more those vain illusions, Draw.

Lu. I will not, do thy worst, since thy folly
Has cast away the last thing I held dear:
Chance has left naught for chance to work upon.

Amb. Tempt not thy Ruin, from which this hand restrains,
But to take off the blemish of the manner.

Lu. Hold!
Casts off his disguise. Perhaps the cloud of this disguise resists
The influence of our Amity. Vainly
He Is hid from others, to himself is lost.
Does thy wild sense perceive thy error yet?

Amb. Those were the masks but to conceal thine own.
Draw, or the lightning is not swifter than
My execution.

Lu. Hold!
I to my self may prove an Homicide:
Who does betray his being by neglect,
Is guilty of his own destruction.
What Nature first commands, see, I obey,
What friendship, though contemned, thus I may.

Draws his sword. Letting the point of his sword fall on the ground. breaks off
the point with his foot. Amb. A handsome flourish, but I must not vie,
Revenge is not restrained by Gallantrie.

They fight. Lu. only defends himself. Eumena ent. Lu. Oh! thou have thy will,
he is but half guarded
I see, stands only on his own defense.

Eu Hold, I enjoin by your Allegiance, hold.
By all those ties are strictest to your soul,
If there rest any unattainted yet
to Amb. In this your violence.

Amb. It is the Princess voice.

Eu. And such her person, though misfortune has
Transfigur'd it in show as it has you
In truth.
Sharper Rebukes I should insist upon;
But that my love suspends my Ire awhile,
Nor shameth it my frailty to assume
That Attribute, which may a mind indue
Without distemper, by such object formed:
Why shifts those secret signals of thy thoughts
to Lu. So often their Scenes, as they gave place to trouble?

Lu. To find a ruder Sovereign intercept
The Rights I ow to that fair Majesty
By his untimely tribute.

Eu. Speak not my fears in mystery. What hurt?
Mine eye may find the proof without reply.
Approaches him as 'twere to search. Takes of her scarff to bind his wound, and
closes it with her handkerchif. Unhappy conducts of our destinies!
Why mock you thus our frailty. Whom I sought
You led me to by error. Whom I had
By error you took from me. Whom I find,
By error unrepar'd, is to me lost
For ever, Oh! Erring Ministry!
Over which you prudent Powers that preside!
Instruct our incapacities, and show,
Why you from man exact ought in his own
Direction; ^ince thus subordinate
Unto Others Rule, those faculties
Entangle in their Exercise, wanting
Of the Superior Clear Intelligence
How fi^d you Nature yet disposed in you?

Lu leaning on his sword she supports him on the other side. Lu. Like to an
Artificial fire to Heaven
Aspires, whose frail composure being unapt
Thereto; by his own violence consumed,
Touches his height, and drops to Earth again:
Such is the active and aspiring flame
Your Grace, and Graces have inspired in me,
Which meeting in a Subject far too mean
To reach so full proportion of Felicity,
Falls from't at Distance through his own defects.

Eu. The wide worlds fleeting Glories are too mean
Dignities but to instile thy Attributes,
And her vast Theater a receptacle
Too narrow to present the Action
Of thy Immortal virtues, whose only light
If rightly placed might free her course from Error.

^u. Your happy fortunes, and more Glorious Life
Will certainly make good all these in yours:
While mine rests doubtful in Opinion.

Eu. You Powers! of whose most Glorious Essences
These ^air Ideas we admire, are thought,
But the imperfect shadows! if not for ours
For your own Interests. If we you concern,
Restore your Beauties fairest Continent,
Least shallow man too suddenly conclude
You have your proper cause abandoned.
O^ else inform us, why virtue y' have raised
To virtues overthrow. Th^s valiant hand
Had power and cause sufficient to pursue
Their Ruin, who his shamefully procured.
Unhappy wretch! How art thou lost in shame!
turns to Ambig. they raise him and set him up. If not Remorse, let Pity speak
thee Man,
And lend thy hand, if yet in time it may,
To stop the nature of thy threatening guilt.

Gratianus, Liberan^s, Serverus, and other Soldiers with Ne^arius bound. Gra*
Is this the Scene unmasques your Mischief? speak,
Or farther torture shall enforce you to 't.

Ne. Of what I acted, I confess, it was*
And by over hear^ remorse; I judge there might
Be some mistake in the Execution;
But know not whether extended to these.

Gra. The circumstance is evidence enough.
What new disorder's here? Hah! Blood and Tears!

Eu. seems weeping over Lu. set in a ^h^re. Lu. Gratianus, thy only stay
retarded has my flight,
Receive my thanks for thy so faithful love,
Which if my will have force to guide it still,
As thy approved faith assures it has*
Let me transact it unto her suppo^^
May make it glorious and fruitful to thee.
Seal your engagement on the Princess hand.

Lu. takes the Prin. hand and extends it to Gra. who kisses it. Gra. Hah! the
Princess! my Duty Sr,
And your command meet equally in this.

Lu. Oh! fairwell to both, we must divide.
Take the supreamest tender of my Love. --

Intermission. Extending his arm to embrace them, dies. Eu. thereon sinks down
and expires. Gra. catches her in his arms and there holds her awhile till
others come to help him. Gra. Madam! how do you? help, your succor friends, --
Her eyes are fixed, her breath already lost.
Strange miseries that stop their sense with wonder!
I hope you can unty these Riddles Sr.

Amb. In part I can. The Princess death has paid
Her secret witness to Ludasters Love.
And his to mine.

Gra. The latter words will ask a Comment Sr.

Amb. I killed him to revenge my Love.

Gra. Be yet more plain e're I seal up thy last
draws his sword. Intelligence, to whom? or how?

Amb. To my beloved Zizania murdered
By him, and unto me confirmed by*
Her dying Accents.

Gra. As yet, I cannot pity thee enough
puts up his sword again. To kill thee: But here is one shall do it
With cruelty, if in thee yet be left
But so much Reason to distinguish guilt.
Speak Sirrah, was it not you and your Agents
That wrought this mischief on her, and her Brother?

Ne. It is confessed already.

to Amb. Gra. Nay! let not silent trouble speak your doubt;
His Evidence is valuable, it costs
Amb. stands confused. Him, Sr, his Life. This is more shameful ye^.
Amb. (...) kill himself but is disarmed. The nature of your crime will first
require
A larger time for penitence. Be he
Your Charge ilora^us. Hah! more spectacles
Of Horror yet, who is it, Fidelius!
spies fi. Grief will not yield a truce unto the sense
To ease it self in the effusion.
Search yet about there are more Actors yet,
discovers Mu. A Villain in his perfect character!
Unlose him, and to torture presently,
Until he makes a true discovery.

Mun. You shall not need, I love my crimes too well,
Not to revive their Memory, and scorn
Your punishments too much, once to disguise
Their Natures in the Circumstance.

Gra. Guilt has attained the height where it assumes
A Glory from the execution.
Pulls his hat sadly over his eyes, and marches out with the bodies. Which we
will hear, when pious Rites are done:
Grief speaks there loudest, where the Mourner's dumb.

FINIS.
ERRATA,
Epistle Dedicatory p. 3. l. 7. r. capacities, Epist. dedic. p. 4^* l. 9. r.
declares, p. ibid. l. 19. r. retain, p. ibid. l. 28. r. Narrative, Epist.
dedic. p. 5. l. 24. r. his. Page 14. l. 6. r. our, p. ibid. l. 12. r. to have,
p. 21. l. 8* r. possess, p. 27. l. 15. r. Sin, p. 30. l. 4. r. Eu. p. 70. l.
30. r. kiss him, p. 77. l. 22. r. which I.


