THE PARENTS PRIMER AND THE MOTHERS LOOKINGGLASSE.

OR, Counsel for Parents in the Education of CHILDREN: for their Temporal,
Spiritual, and Eternal HAPPINESS.

In a DIALOGUE between A MINISTER and a FATHER.

To which is added A Second Dialogue of the DECALOGUE.

And to that A Third DIALOGUE concerning The SABBATH DAY.

By J WAIT Minister of Gods Word, LONDON.

Train up a Child in the way he should go: and when he is old he will not
depart from it. Prove. 22.6. The Father to the Children SHALL Make known thy
Truth. Isa. 38.19. Bring them up in the Nurture and Admonition of the LORD.
Ephesians. 6.4. London, Printed by J. A. for the Author, and are to be sold by N.
Ponder at the Peacock in the Poultrey, and R. Janeway in Queens-head-Alley in
Paternoster Row, 1681.

To the Unskilful Reader.
WHether I speak with Tongue or Pen: I respect Them most who want my Help. If
you do so, and can own [Unskilfull] for a Fit Title: they say I am the Person,
for whose sake this Epistle is written. And for your sake, Let us desire the
Expert Reader, to dispense with your Passage through this Porch. In which I
desire You will remain my Scholar (one hour) and learn these Three Lessons.

First. To know the Points used in Print: 1 Lesson.
which are these Seven.

(1) A Comma. It Is a Point at end of a Short Part of a Sentence, without
Perfect Sense. And it is a note of some little Pause, Stop, or Breathing in
Reading. It Is marked Thus, (2) A Semicolon. It Is a Pause a little longer than a
Comma. It Is marked Thus; (3) A Colon. It Is a longer Pause than the former: and
its a part of a Sentence that makes Sense without the Full Sentence yet so as
the rest is expected to complete it. It Is marked Thus: (4) A Period. It Is a
full perfect Point, put at end of a complete Sentence. It Is marked Thus.
Observe the Sense contained in a Sentence, or you Read Confusion. (5) A note of
Exclamation, or Admiration. It Is put at end of an Expression uttered by way of
Outcry, or Wonder. It Is marked Thus! As [O how lofty are their eyes! Pro.
30.13.
(6) A note of Interrogation. It Is put at end of a Question. It Is marked Thus?
As [Why should we die in thy presence? Genesis 47.15.
(7) Parenthesis. It Is a Clause included, or shut in with two Semicircles, or
half Moons: though it give some Strength to a Sentence, yet if left out the
Sense remains Sound. It Is marked Thus () As [Let me (I pray thee) drink a
little water of thy pitcher. Genesis 24.17.

Second. To know where the Emphasis lays in a Sentence. Emphasis is an
Expression of the Mind, by a Word expressed with some Earnestness, or Force.
This Word I begin with a Capital, or Great Letter. Here note words which must
always begin with Capitals.

(1) The first Word of every Sentence. Pro. 9.10.
As [The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom] So if the Sentence begin
with a Single Letter. Pro. 1.5.
Joh. 10.11.
As [A wise man will hear [I am the good Shepherd [ O that they were wise, Deu.
32.29.
etc. (2) The first Word of the Saying of an Other, Related: though it do not
begin a Sentence. As, Joh. 7.46.
The officers answered [Never man spoke like this man] And many of them said
[He has a Devil, Chap. 10.20, 21.
and is mad] Others said [These are not the words of him that has a Devil. (3)
The first Word, or Letter of every Verse, or Line in Poety. As, A man without
learning, Cato does say:
May be compared to an Image of Clay.
(4) Proper Names. (1) Of God, as Jehovah] Of Christ, as, Jesus] Of an Angel,
as, Gabriel] Of Men and Women, as, Adam, Abel, Daniel, Dorcas] Of Countries,
as, Asia, England, Spain] Of Cities, as, London, Jerusalem] Of Towns, as,
Barnet, Bethany] Of Places, or Hills, as, Eden, Sinai] Of Rivers, as, Thames,
Jordan, Cedron] Of Months, as, Jan, Feb, Abib] Of the four Winds, as, East, W,
N, S.] Proper Names I put in Italian Different Letters: and so to put other
Names is Improper. (5) Appellatives or Common Names: which are common to all of
that Kind. (1) Of People, as, Jew, Hebrew, Gentile, Heathen, Christian,
Protestant, Papist, Pagan, Indian] Names of Arts, as, Printer, Painter, Mercer,
Grocer] Of Dignity, as, Emperor, King, Q, Prince, Pope, Duke] Of Offices, as,
Ambassador, Priest, Prophet, Pastor, Apostle, Elder, Deacon, Judge, General,
Captain] Of Days, as, Sabbath] Of Spirits, as, Angel, Cherub, Seraphim, Devil,
Satan] Note [god] if a false god, must begin with a small letter. But the true
[God] with a Capital. And, Father, Son, Spirit: Lord, Christ, Ghost] when they
Signify the True God, or the Persons in the Holy Trinity] To which I add
Names of Books (so many as are not Proper Names of Men and Women) as, Gen,
Exod] And of Tongues, as, Hebrew, Greek, Latin, English] Most of these Names,
Proper, and Appellative, stand Thin in this Book. In all these Words which
always begin with Capitals, the Emphasis seldom lays: when it does, I put
that Word all in Capitals that you know it at ease. When an other Word is all
in Capitals, it signifies the Greater Emphasis.
Now for Emphatical Words. The Emphasis is tied to no Word whatever. It is
sometime in a Substantial Word. Sometime in two or three such words together.
Sometime in a small Word, as [be, do, so, no, to, at, of, off, on, in, out] as,
[I will No more have mercy on the house of Israel.] In other place [no] has no
Emphasis, as, Pro. 3.30.
[Strive not with a man if he have done thee [no] harm] In other place it is in
the Substantial word Mercy, Mat. 15 22
as, [Have Mercy on me O Lord] As when Seamen are Sinking with this cry,
Mercy! Mercy! There is the Emphasis. In other place (by reason of the Excellent
Emphaticalness of the Expression) you may put it in This or That Word as you
Will, as, [I Will surely have mercy] I will Surely have mercy] I will surely
have Mercy upon him, says the Lord] Sometime the Emphasis, Jer. 31.20.
Is, and is Not in the Same Word, Pro. 31.2.
in the Same Sentence: as, [What my Son! and what the son of my Womb!] To
misplace it makes it give an unpleasant senseless sound: as, what the Son of my
womb] It Is in Vain to put Force upon a Wrong Word: it is like a Stroke at a
Wooden Bell.

These Emphatical Words observed, will help you to understand the Sense. And if
besides the Words which constantly begin with Capitals, there Be ever a Capital
that is not Emphatical: yet it is Substantial, and serves to show the Sense, as
all Emphatical Words do. Emphatical Words begun with Capitals, avoids that
Hodge Podge they make, who put Half their Words in Different Letters.

Third. To understand Abbreviation, 3 Lesson.
or Shortning of Words: which for Brevity Sake is used in Books. Some of them
are the First Letters of Latin Words; which many Authors use, but Explain not
for their English Reader. The most Necessary (of all which) to know are These.

etc et caetera] and the rest [or] and so forth.

Sc scilicet] to wit.

Viz Videlicet] to wit [or] that is to say.

i e id est] that is.

e g exempli gratia] as for example.

q d quasi dicat] as if he should say.

And the same q d serves for] as if She should say] as if You should say] as if
They should say] as if I, or We should say.]

It is easily understood in Reading.

N B Nota Bene] Mark this well.

O T Old Testament. N T New Testament. Q Question. A Answer. Ob Objection. Sol
Solution. D Doctrine. R Reason. U Use.

For you to Learn these Lessons Three:

As easy is as A B C.

Which you may Learn with little Leisure:

Then Read with Knowledge, Profit, Pleasure.

As for Hebrew, Greek, and Latin Words which I lay in your Way: they will be
no Stumbling Block, except you will Make them so. For you have it in English:
which you may Read on without Stumble, or Stop. And I desire you may So Read,
as to Reap much Good Fruit, by the Labor of

Your Loving Friend, J W.
London, May 26. 1681.
The General Contents of the First Dialogue.
A Salutation, and Preambulation, to the [Education] of Children. Parents
equally concerned in Education. [Education] reduced to two General Heads: viz.
[Instruction] and [Correction] First. Instruction] The word opened. 1 Genesis Head.
Instruction by [Doctrine] and [Example.] (1) By [Doctrine] The word Doctrine
opened. What D to instruct Children in. Twenty Documents for Instruction by D.
The Scripture to be Searched for more. Any thing in the Bible Useful: even the
words of wicked men, Devils, Proper Names. (2) Instruction by [Example] Word
opened. Example by Works, and Words. Circumstances of Education, Seven.
Direction if Children Will, or Will not hear. The Parent Corrected for Carnal
Language. The Second General Head, viz. [Correction. 2 Genesis Head.
] Correction twofold, viz. with [Word] and [Rod.] (1) Correction with [Word].
Six Directions for [Word] Correction. (2) Correction with the [Rod] Scriptural
Account of [Rod] fourfold. The Parallel of Rod, and Staff. Seven Directions,
for [Rod] Correction. Fourteen Ob against [Rod] Correction, Answ. Two ways
great wasters of Time; and many more wicked ways Witnessed against. Advice of a
Civil, Secular Concern, delivered in 12. Documents. The danger of Riches
discoursed. Counsel concerning Childrens Children. PRAYER for a Blessing on
[Education] Prayer [For] and [With] Children. (1) Prayer [For] them in Private.
Ten great effects of Prayer considered, to encourage to Prayer. Time, and Times
in a day for Private Prayers (2) Prayer [With] Children in Family. Ten
directions for Family Duty. Objections against Family Duty, Answ. Parents to
take their Children into their Closets. and Pray with them there. Parents to
teach Children to Pray. Objections against that, Answered. Parents to procure
the Prayers of Praying Persons for their Children. Ten Corollaries to quicken
Parents to their Whole Duty contained in this Conference.
THE PARENTS PRIMER AND THE MOTHERS LOOKING-GLASS In a Dialogue between A
MINISTER and a FATHER.
Minister. GOd Save you Sir, with your good Wife. Whither are you walking this
way this morning?


Father. To See Mr. C. What News Sir?


Min. News! I said in my heart what I should have. When will this Common
Question be out of use? Since the Popes Plot appeared, the Protestants have
spent more Time in Talking of it, than All the Papists in England are worth.
And you (living so near us) are like our London Christians: and they Too like
the Athenians; who spent their time in Nothing else, but to Tell or to Hear
some New Thing. And if there be no New; we talk over the Old without End. And
every Day is alike. If this was the way to do our work, viz, Self-Examination,
Humiliation, and Reformation, for the Sins that provoke God to suffer this
Bloody Beast thus to Push at us: I would not Oppose it. But it is the way to
Hinder Every good work: in Heart, and Life. And to render us Ridiculous to the
DEVIL and the POPE, to see what a Talking Trade we drive, and how we spend our
Days, while Death lies at our Doors.


Fath. I confess we spend Too much Time that way.


Min. Confession without Reformation, Preambulation.
is to Poor Purpose. Are these two little Lads which follow you, Your Children?


Fath. Yes they are both mine.


Min. Can you tell me any Good News of Them?


Fath. They are Pretty good Boys when they Please.


Min. They had need be made Better: to which end I pray what Good Discourse
have you had with them by the way? for you are now come a Mile from Home.


Fath. OH HO: I have told them the name of yonder Church Steeple. And of That,
I point at with my Cane. And of yonder High Brick House, with abundance of
Chimneys.


Min. And is this the Best Discourse you have had?


Fath. The Best: yes truly. What Discourse should a man have with Children?


Min. What Discourse! Godly Discourse.


Fath. What with Children?


Min. Yes with Children to Choose.


Fath. What Reason is there for That?


Min. There is Great Reason for it, which I shall not Now Render: but one thing
I shall Render which is Greater than Reason.


Fath. What is that I pray?


Min. God's Solemn Command] And these words which I command thee this day shall
be in thine Heart. Deu. 6.6, 7.
And thou shall teach them diligently unto thy Children, and shall talk of them
when thou sit in thine House, and when thou walk by the Way, and when
thou lie Down, and when thou risest Up.


Fath. I believe Few Fathers, or Mothers do so.


Min. In that, you believe Truth: but it is Sad Truth to believe: yet Too True,
I may well say. For of othis I have made Much Observation, for Many Years, in
Many Countries, in Professing Families without number. After all which
Observation, I may say with Solomon: There is an evil which I have seen under
the Sun, Ecl. 6.1.
and it is Common among men] Such men have Many a Day been to me an Amazing
Consideration. viz, That ever Persons professing Faith in gods Word of Truth
which testifies the Misery of ALL Mankind (that their Children are in a Sad
Condition is one part of their Profession) who have been Sensible of their Own
Misery, and Instruments to bring Poor Children into a Miserable World, in a
Miserable Condition: and yet so Careless to bring them Out of this Condition.
And so little concerned for a Safe passage Out of this World: over Hell, to the
desired Haven: Ezekiel. 19.14.
this is a Lamentation, and Shall be for a Lamentation.


Fath. But some Count that this Command was given to the Jews only.


Min. Read and Compare these two Texts, Deuteronomy. 4.10. Chapter 6.7.
and you will see it is the Moral Law or Ten Commandments, that Parents are
Commanded to teach their Children. To say [This Law belongs to the Jews only]
is plainly to say [We Gentiles are Lawlesse] And may worship Idols, Our being
under this Law Asserted.
take Gods name in Vain, profane the SABBATH, dishonor Parents, Kill, Steal,
commit Adultery, and what the DEVIL and We will.


Fath. But we Gentiles are under the Gospel, the grace of which teaches us to
Deny ungodlyness.


Min. There is none to Deny if there be no Law. Proved by being Opposed.
But this Position of Mine [We are Under the Law] needs No more Proof then this
Contradiction of Yours [We are Under the Gospel.] N B. The preaching of the
Gospel, is the Proffer of a Pardon. This plainly proves Persons under this
Proffer, to be Condemned. They are Condemned by the Law. They are Under it, or
could not be Condemned by it. It Is for Sin; which is the Transgression of the
Law. But where No Law is, there is No Transgression: And so no need of
Remission. N B. Under the Gospel a Person is either (1) In a Condemned State
under the Proffer of a Pardon: or (2) In a Justified State under the Privilege
of a Pardon. In both States he is under the Law. In the former, its Clear he is
under the Curse of the Law. In the latter he is freed from the Curse, and
Condemning power of the Law: but he is not freed from the Commanding power of
the Law. It Is to be his rule Of life, Temporal, and Spiritual, that thereby God
may be Glorified: though not his rule For life Eternal, that thereby he may be
Justified. Gal. 3.10.
He that obeys the Law for Justification is under Condemnation. And he that
believes the Gospel for Justification, without regard to the Law in his
Conversation; Jam. 2.20.
is in the Same Condition. The former expects Salvation, by Dead Works, without
Faith. The latter expects Salvation, by a Dead Faith, without Works: Both in a
Sad Dead Condition. And what ever be the State, yet Dead or Deeply Sleepy is
the Soul of such a Parent, who neglects his Children so contrary to this GREAT
Command DEU. VI.VI, VII.



Fath. I cannot deny your Doctrine. And seeing you are disposed to enter into
So Serious a Discourse about my Children: I desire your Advice, and Counsel in
their Education. And I will omit the Business I was going about, for this is
(I see) of Greater Concern.


Min. With a very good Will: I like your motion Well. But it will take up Much
Time. And therefore let us Seat our Selves in yonder Shadow, from the heat of
the Sun: as Abraham did, Genesis 18.1, 4.
when the Lord appeared to him. And if we spend our Time Well: God will be with
Us also.


Fath. We are come to the Place: I see here are convenient Seats: I am glad I
met with you so Near it.


Min. Very convenient. Come Sir, Sit You Down with your Wife as one. And with
your leave, let your Children Sit Down with us, and hear our Discourse.


Fath. Let it be so. We are all Seated: I pray proceed.


Min. Seeing Providence has placed us together upon this Account: I am glad
your Wife is present, because so much concerned. For by (...) Parents] in theh
plural, not two Fathers, but a Father and a Mother is intended. Joh. 9.2.
e g. Master, who did sin, this man or his Parents? And the Hebrew word (...)
Achild] comes of the Root and Verb (...) which signifies both To Beget and to
Bare. e g (...) Who has begotten me these Isa. 49.21.
(...) I Bare him with sorrow 1 Chapter 4.9. Mat. 19.5. Parents Parallels.
] they twain shall be one Flesh] Parents are Parallels. Equally concerned. When
one is Dead, the Care, and Industry of the Living is to be Double. But if one
be Dead while Alive, the Care of the Living is to be Trible. For the Dead
Parent will not Help, but Hinder the Living.


Fath. We desire to hear our duty.


Min. The Education of Children, Education two Heads.
is a Greater Work, than the Greatest part of Parents in the Whole World are
aware of. And that I may be as useful to you in One Conference as I can: I
shall reduce my Advice, and Discourse, to these two General Heads, viz
[Instruction] and [Correction.]


Fath. What is Instruction? Let me hear the word handled.


Min. Instruction, is a Latin word, Instruction opened.
of Instruo, (...), To set in order.] Instruction is a setting in Order, for
Children are Out of order, both in Heart, and Life. e g. The Soul in Every
Faculty, is out of order. The Imagination, Devises evil. The Memory, Retains
evil. The Understanding, is Dark: and Misjudgeth evil, and good. The Will, is
Opposite to the Will of God. The Affections, Love evil, and Hate good. And this
disordered Soul puts the Body out of order in Every Part. e g. The Eye, Beholds
vanity. The Ear, Hears it. The Tongue, Talks it. The Hands, Work it. The Feet,
Follow it. God set All in good order by Creation: but the Devil put All out of
order by Temptation: and all into Confusion and Desolation. And the simple verb
Struo, from whence comes [Instruction] signifies, To build. The Lord God formed
Man. Genesis 2.7.
] The rib which the Lord God had taken from Man (...) he Builded into a Woman.
Ver. 22.
This Stately Structure, which God set up by Creation: Satan has pulled down
by Temptation. Now, No Man can build upon That Foundation, which God at first
set ADAM upon. There is no coming At it for the Flaming Sword. But if you SO
Instruct your Children, as to bring them Unto, and build them Upon Jesus
Christ, that Sure Foundation: they shall be Safer than Ever was Adam in
Innocence, in Paradise. For the Gates of Hell shall Never prevail against them.


Fath. That is a Very desirable condition Indeed! How shall I So Instruct my
Children?


Min. By [Word] and [Deed] or by [Doctrine] and [Example. Instruction by D and
Exam.
]


Fath. How by Word or Doctrine.


Min. The Word Doctrine, (1) By Doct.
is derived of the Latin Word Doctrina, Learning] of Doceo, To teach] as
(...), of (...). And the Hebrew (...) Doctrine] comes of (...) To receive] for
you must Receive it from GOD: as you are desired to do, Receive I pray thee the
Law from his Mouth Job 22.22.
. And your Children are to receive it from You. Hear, O my Son, and Receive my
sayings Pro. 4.10.



Fath. What Doctrine am I to Instruct them in?


Min. The Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures. Tit. 2.10. 2 Jo. 9. Pro. 4.2. Tit.
2.1.
Called, The Doctrine of GOD] The Doctrine of CHRIST] Good Doctrine] Sound
Doctrine]


Fath. Draw me out some Documents, and lay some Lessons before me, to learn my
Children.


Min. Take these twenty] First. Doc 1. Of God
Teach them to know God Himself] His Eternity, in his Essence, and Being: from
everlasting to everlasting thou art GOD Psalm. 90.2.
.] His Infiniteness in his Attributes, viz, Wisdom, Knowledge, Power, Mercy,
Justice.] That He is the Only Wise GOD: Omniscient, Omnipresent, Omnipotent.]
That God does at Once, and Always: Know all, See all, Hear all. That he is in
every Place; and can do whatever he Please: in Heaven, and Earth, and Hell.

Second. Doc 2. Of Crea tion.
Teach them to know God to be the Wonderful Creator of the Whole Creation:
viz, Heaven, Earth, Sea, Hell. And of every creature in them. And all for his
Pleasure Rev. 4.11.
. And that God upholds the Whole Creation, by his Uncreated Power. And provides
for Men, Beasts, Birds, Fishes, Fouls, Flies. And learn your Children, to
remember GOD, as a Creator, not as a Father, in a State of Nature. And
themselves as Creatures; not Children of God, before they be Born of God.

Third. Doc 3. Of Man's First State.
Teach them to know the Holy, and Happy Condition, God made Man in at First.
And the Covenant God made with man. And how Man was to continue in that
Condition, by virtue of his Obedidience to that Covenant. And how all Mankind
were to Stand, and Fall: In, and With ADAM.

Fourth. Doc 4. Man's Fall.
Teach them to know Man's Fall. (1) INTO Original Sin:] by Satan's Subtilty. And
his Fall, (2) BY Original Sin:] From a Paradise, a Palace, a Pure State: into a
Dungeon, and Deluge of Woe. The Principal Effects of which Fall, are [Filth,
Guilt.] The Filth of Sin has spoiled Man of the Image of GOD: Impressed the
Image of the DEVIL upon him. And deprived Man of his Interest in GOD. He was
With God in Paradise: but being Drove out, he is Without God in the World Ephesians.
2.12.
. It has Debased him. He was made but little lower than the ANGELS: Sin has
debased Man, to a Hog, a Dog, a DEVIL. Sad effects of Sin.
Sin has so Darkened man's Soul: that GOD only (who is light) can Illuminate it.
It has so Deadned, and Killed him: that none but the Living GOD can Quicken
him. It has so Defiled him: that neither Fire, nor Water can Cleanse him. The
Flood of Water that washed away a World of Sinners: washed not away One Sin. The
Fire that shall burn up a World of Sinners, and burn them down to Hell, and
burn them there for Ever: shall Never burn away One Sin. (2) [Guilt] Adam's
Guilt is imputed to All. All guilty of Eternal Death by One man's Sin. Simile
As when the Head of a man's body plots Treason, the whole Body Hangs for it: So
of Adam the Head, and his posterity, the Body: if Pardon prevent not.

Fifth. Teach them to know [Actual Sin] viz. To know what IS Sin. Doc 5. Actual
Sin.
And to know what Sin IS. (1) The tranSgression of the Law, that IS Sin 1 Jo.
3.4.
. Transgression is a going beyond the Bounds of the Law. Or doing any thing
Contrary to the Command: in Deed, Word, or Thought. This is Sin. Here note the
danger of Small sins. Little sins lead to Greater. Small Sin dangerous.
The thief Little thought his Thest, would by degrees bring him to the Gallows:
when he began with a Pin, a Point, and a Penny. As little do men think such
Small Sins will bring them to Hell. Not only the Measure of sin, but the Nature
of sin is Damnable: if the Measure be Never so Small: the Soul that sins
shall Dic Ezekiel. 18.4.
. If so, what do Thousands, and Millions amount to! A Fly is a Small Creature;
yet Swarms destroyed Egypt Ex. 8.24.
. A drop of Water is a Small Matter: but drops enough Drowned the World. A
thread is a Small Thing; yet enough twisted together, will Bind the Strongest
Giant, or Hang the Heaviest man on Earth. Quid levius penna? What is Lighter
than a Feather?] yet enough of these Packed up together, will break the Porters
Back.

2. What Sin IS.] To the Law, and to the Testimony for Titles for it. Six
Titles of Sin.
Sin has Six Titles to make men Flee from it. (1) A Mire 2 Pet. 2.22.
] that makes a Soul like a Swine: so wallowing. (2) A Fire] that consumes to
Destruction Job 31.12.
: of Goods, Good Name, Body, Soul and all. (3) A Sepulchre] full of dead men's
Bones, and All uncleanness Mat. 23.27.
. (4) The Dogs Vomit 2 Pet. 2.22.
] i e, stinking Carrion, that the Stomach of a Dog cannot endure. (5) The
Poison of Asps To. 3.13.
] Tell your Children: an Oath, a Lie, a Wicked Word in the Mouth: is worse than
a Toad under the Tongue. And Sin in the Heart is worse than Poison in the
Heart: for that can but kill the Body. (6) The Plague of the Heart 1 K. 8.38.
] a Dreadful Disease! If the Plague be in London a Year, we think it a Long
Time for such a Dismal Disease to Last, and Wast. But this Plague of SIn has
been in the World, between five and six Thousand years. A strange disease! Few
are ever Sick of it, yet SO many Die of it; that all the World cannot Sum up
one Weekly Bill of Mortality. Sin is Worse than Sorrow. Some sorrow Kills Sin,
but Sin, (if not killed) Kills the Soul. Sin is worse than the DEVIL. Sin can
destroy a Soul without SATAN: but Satan cannot destroy a Soul without Sin. Sin
is worse than Hell. Hell is an Affliction, and Contradiction to the Will of
Man: but Sin is a Contradiction to the Will of GOD. And a Burden which God
sigheth under, saying; AH I will ease me (...) I will be comforted Isa. 1.24.
:] implying, a Grieving burden. [And a bitter burden: Ephraim provoked him to
anger most bitterly (...) with bitterness Ho. 12.14.
] A pressing burden: Behold I am Pressed under you Am. 2.13.
. A breaking burden: I am broken under your whorish heart Ezekiel. 6.9.
. Which argues NO weakness in GOD: but the Weight and Strength of Sin: I know
your Mighty Sins Am. 5.12.
.] Thus says the Lord, the Lord of Hosts, the Mighty one of Israel, AH I will
ease me Isa. 1 24.
. N B. The Mighty One complains of the pressure of Sin! Well may God say to
Man, Can Thy heart endure, or can thy hands be strong in the day that I shall
deal with thee? Ezekiel. 22.14.
i e, for Sin.] Seeing Sin is SO weighty,

Man's Sins are Debts, of which God keeps account;
Sinner can Tell to what thy Debts amount?
Thy Debts thou art increasing Every hour:
Into his Vials, God does also pour.
Pain for thy Pleasure, though thou will not Stop:
As certain as thy Death, there is Drop for Drop.
God's Cup is almost Full, as well as Thine:
When both are Full, OH then the Dreadful Time!
Sixth. Doc. 6.
Teach them to KInow, and cause them to be Well acquainted with the [Ten
Commandments:] Of the Ten Commands.
for they are the Pure, Precious Precepts, of the Holy Lord God. And with the
rest, Remember Well the Sabbath Day. I hope I need not forbid You to convert
the Commands into Prayers for your Children: according to the Course of Carnal,
Ignorant People. Learn them to know they are Gods Laws, to Rule man's Life. And
that they are to be Obeyed, in Deed, Word, and Thought. And whatever is
contrary to any one of these Commands: that is Sin against GOD. Learn them to
know the Necessity of these Laws being written in their Hearts, according to
the Promise. And let your Tongue be the Pen in gods Hand, to write them There,
if the Lord Please.

Seventh. Doc 7. Of Man's Obedience.
Teach them to know the Utter IOnsufficiency, of Man's Obedience to the Law, to
Save.] And that the most Excellent Moralist, has as Absolute a Necessity, of
Jesus Christ's Righteousness, to Justify him (and that without it he will as
Certainly be Damned) as the most Profane Person that ever pissed against a
wall, in the Whole World.

Eight. Doc 8. Of the Gospel.
Teach them to know the [Gospel.] The knowledge of the Law, is in Order to the
Acceptance of the Gospel. By the Law is the knowledge of Sin To. 3.20.
: without which, Who will regard the Gospel? What cares a Person for a Pardon,
who knows not that he is Condemned? In this Lesson, eye three things. (1) [The
Declaration of the Gospel.] viz, That GOD has chosen an innumerable company of
Mankind. And has given them to CHRIST. And sent him into the World, to Redeem
them from the Curse of the Law, by fulfilling the Law. N B. He was GOD, and
Man, in One Person. Man, to Suffer, and Die: God cannot Die. GOD to Satisfy,
in bearing Wrath Infinitely: which Man could not do. This GOD-man, did
Personate Man: and in Man's Stead, for Man; did Actively, and Passively, obey
the Law Perfectly. And so has procured Eternal Life. And this is Freely
offered, to all Dead Sinners, by the Declaration of the Gospel. And Christ's
desire that Sinnersshould obtain this Eternal Life: is expressed with Longing,
Sighing, Sweating, Weeping, and Dying. (2) The Condition of the Gospel] on our
part: by which Eternal life is made Ours: by which we have Right to the Tree of
Life. [That is FAITH.] Men are Dead. God has made a Law, viz, He that Believes
shall Live.] He that believes Not, shall Never Live, but Die for Ever.] A
Condemned Sinner is to be Justified by Faith, Without the deeds of the Law To.
3.27, 28.
: by the Law of a Just GOD, who thus Justifies the Ungodly Chapter 5.4.
. By which Law of Faith, without Works: boasting in Works is excluded. Isa. 55.
[Come buy Wine] Christ is bought by Believing. [Buy without Money] i e, Part
with Something worth Nothing: i e, Sin, Self Righteousness, Self and all. [Sin]
as to the Practice, and Pleasure of it. [Self Righteousness] as to any
Confidence in it. [Self] by giving up Body, and Soul to Christ 1 Cor. 6.20.
. (3) The Duties of the Gospel] viz, Good Works, as fruits of Faith. Faith
which alone Justifies before GOD: accompanied with such a Holy Conversation, as
will Justify before Men: That is the Conversation which becomes the Gospel.
BUT, let Justification, by Faith, without Works, be kept Clear. e g. Suppose, a
Man Famous for Wickedness (who never did any thing else but serve Satan by
Whole Sale) should come under a Sermon. And be convinced of his Sin, Sick of
Sin, Sick for a Savior, and Believe on Jesus Christ: H E is Justified. Christ's
Perfect Righteousness is Imputed. And if he should drop down Dead where he
Stands: before he have any time to Pray, or do any good Work: He is Certainly
Saved.

Now Sir, A Caution for the Mother.
though your Wife does not Object, but learn in Silence 1 Timothy 2.11.
(as best becomes her) with an intent to ask her Husband at home 1 cor. 14.35.
: Yet least she say in her Heart [What is it the part of a Mother to play the
Preacher?] I will give her an Instance of one who taught her Son, both Law, and
Gospel. The words of King Lemuel Pro. 31.1.
Lemuels Lesson Bathsheba's Catechism] Lemuel she calls him, because God owned
him. I will be his Father, and he shall be my Son 2 Sa. 7.14.
] Lemuel God with him [The Prophecy that his Mother taught him.] The word
[Prophesie] in the Hebrew is (...) A burden] of the Root (...) To bear] the
same word (...) is Englished, A burden Na 1.1.
.] This shows what a heavy charge lies upon Mothers: which she Thus discharges.
[ What, my SON! and what, the Son of my WOMB! and what the Son of my VOWS! Ver.
2.
Give not thy strength to Women Ver. 3.
] Here she teaches him Law, viz, Thou shall not commit Adultery. [ It is not
for KINGS O Lemuel, it is not for KINGS to drink Wine Ver. 4.
: Lest they drink and forget the LAW Ver. 5.
.] See how she Schools him. N B. The King of Israel was to keep the Law Deu.
17.19.
. King Solomon who was in twenty things a Type of Christ: was in his Obedience
to the Law a Type of Christ's Fulfilling the Law, to free us from the Curse:
from whence comes the Comfort of the Gospel. [ Give strong drink to him that is
ready to Perish ver. 6.
] Parallel, The great Trumpet shall be blown, and they which are ready to
Perish shall come Isa. 27.13.
. [And Wine to those that be of heavy Heart] Parallel, Come buy wine without
Money Isa. 55.
. [ Open thy mouth for the Dumb Ver. 8.
] This Phrase respects Solomon as a Type of Christ in his Intercession: who is
to Pray for Them that cannot Pray for Themselves. Who are swallowed up in
Silence, and Shame, under a Sight and Sense of Sin; At, or After convertion. Or
can say Nothing, For: but All, Against themselves. Christ Will speak a Good
Word for such: which Shall be answered with Good and Comfortable Words Zech.
1.13.
. Thus as Bathsheba teaches her Son Solomon, to officiate as a Type of Christ:
she teaches him both Law and Gospel.] And see how Solomon approves of the
Mothers Ministry, as well as the Fathers. My Son, hear the Instruction of thy
Father, and forsake not the Law of thy Mother Pro. 1.8.
] My Son, keep thy Fathers Commandments, and forsake not the Low of thy Mother
Chapter 6.20.
.] The Law of GOD is called the Law of the Mother. And she commanding her Child
according to that Law, Her Law is the Law of GOD. Of the neglect of which Duty,
let the Mother take heed: lest there come a time, when torment makes her Tare
the Hair off her Head.

Ninth. Doc 9. Of Faith.
Teach them to know the Necessity of True Faith.] Learn them to know it is the
Gift of GOD. And the Work of GOD. And that God makes Preparation for Faith, by
a threefold Conviction of Unbelief. (1) Of the utter Deficiency of Faith. (2)
Of the absolute Necessity of Faith. (3) Of the utter Impossibility of Faith, in
ones Own Power. Acquaint them with a threefold Effect of Faith, where its
wrought. (1) It makes the Heart Pure Act. 15.9.
. (2) The Conscience Peaceable To. 15.13.
. (3) It makes Christ Precious 1 Pet. 2.7.
. This Faith is an One thing necessary. For by a Fair Profession without Faith,
a Soul may seem to be Not Far from the Kingdom of Heaven, and yet Never the
near.

Civility gilds Fair, sets Off a Man:

Grace only makes a Golden Chris-ti-an.

Tenth. Doc 10. Of Repentance.
Teach them the necessity of Speedy Repentance.] That its not a Work to be put
Off, for a Year, a Month, or a Day. Let them know its the Gift of CHRIST Act.
5.31.
. And that a Sinner can No more Repent, himself, than he can Pardon himself.
Putting off Repentance proves, that the Sinner thinks he can Repent at his
Pleasure. Like him who put off Faith till Death. And being reproved for his
Loose Life, replied, It Is but believing in Christ at Last.] But at Last when
Dying, he lay ROARING: OH I have made a Plaster, but I cannot make it Stick.]
Show your Children how the Devil Steals away a Sinners Days, by a Day at once.
Should Satan suggest Thus, [Come Sinner, serve me to the Death: Live and Die in
my sweet service Without Repentance.] At this a Sinner would Startle, q d,
Satan's Subtlety.
So I may go to Hell.] No, but [Come serve me a Day more. Next morning, Away
without Prayer, to pleasure to Day, its but a Day.] This is easily granted. And
so on to the End. And when the Last Day of life begins, [Come go on, its but a
Day.] By and by, Down drops the Soul into the Dungeon of Hell. And then it will
be Cold Comfort to hear Satan say, [Come be quiet, thou have but an Eternity
to spend, in Repenting thy daily delay of Repentance in time.] N B. Without
True and Timely Repentance, For Sin, and From Sin: there is Nothing to be
expected, but a Certain, Fearful, Intolerable, and Eternal Damning for Sin.

Eleventh. Doc 11. Of Truth.
Teach them the Excellency of Truth in Tongue] i e, Truth in Word, that has
Truth in Heart, for its Root, and Truth in Deed, for its Fruit. Though this
Truth be not the Original Cause of Salvation: yet such Shall be Saved. And God
has left you Winning Words to entice them to Truth in Tongue. Surely they are
my People, Children that will not Lie, so he was their Savior Isa. 63.8.
. The lip of Truth shall be established for Ever Pro. 12.19.
. The rest read at leisure Psalm. 34.12.
N B. The good government of the Tongue, is a Great Task. And that you had need
begin to Guide, 1 Pet. 3.10.
as soon as it begins to Go. 2 Jo. 4.
For if long neglected, you may more easily weild a Wild Horse, or a Weighty
Ship driven with Fierce Winds Ja. 3.2. to 10.
. Augustus gave a Scholar this Lesson, [ I said I would take heed to my ways,
that I sin not with my Tongue Ps. 39.1.
] And bid him go and learn that Lesson and come again for another. His Scholar
goes, A hard task.
and comes again 19 years after, and Complains of his Lesson: viz, that it was
So Hard, he had not well learned it Yet.] There are Many Christians in City,
and Country, of more than 19 years Standing: who have this Lesson still to
learn.

Twelth. Doc 12. Of Early Piety.
Teach them the Excellency of Early Piety.] Of being Quickly Converted, and
made good Betimes. The Less time between the First, and Second Birth, the
Better. (1) Tell them Such are under that Sweet Promise, They that seek me
early shall Find me Pro. 8.17.
. (2) Of Such, God has a Sweet Remembrance, viz, I remember Thee, the
kindness of thy Youth Jer. 2.2.
. (3) Such have not that Mountainous Temptation to clime, which Old Converts
hardly Ever get Over, viz, [You come too Late.] (4) Its the way to be Eminent
with God: and Prevalent in Prayer. eg. The Child Samuel Ministered unto the Lord
1 Samuel 3.1.
.] MOSES and AARON and SAMUEL among them that call upon his name: they called
upon the Lord, and he answered Them Psalm. 99.6.
.] Though MOSES and SAMVEL stood before me, yet my mind could not be toward
this People Jer. 15.1.
] q d, If any Persons in the World prevail with Me, They are the Men. And how
Lamentable is the Loss of Such! When all the Congregation saw that Aaron was
Dead, they mourned for Aaron 30 days, even ALL the house of Israel Nu. 20.29.
.] The Children of Israel wept for Moses 30 days Deu. 34.8.
.] They Murmur against them while they Live: but Mourn for them when they are
Dead. Samuel died and All Israel gathered together and lamented him 1 Sa. 25.1.
] Jeremiah lamented for good young Josiah, and All the Singing Men, and Singing
Women spoke of Josiah in their Lamentations to this day 2 Chro. 35.25.
.] The First ripe Fruits, were Precious to God Exo. 22.29.
. And they were so to man Micha. 7.1.
. The Devil in his Old Enmity, against Early Piety, has Tipped the Tongues of
some with this Taunt: [ A young Saint and an old Devil.] Which Satanical
Saying, and Pestilent Proverb, I shall not ask Satan leave to turn thus: [ A
young Saint and an old ANGEL.] Let Satan say his Worst, to be Good betimes is
Best. Mistake me not, it is Being good, and not Knowing good only, that I plead
for. One may Know good, and Be evil. One may Know evil, and Be good. Its not
ones Knowing, Good or Evil, that makes one Good, or Evil: but its ones Loving
of Good, or Evil, which proves one Good, or Evil. If a man would know what City
he belongs to, Zion or Babylon: and whether he is going to Heaven or Hell: let
him ask his love.

Thirteenth. Doc 13. Of Gods eye.
Teach them to Know, that they are Always under the Open Eye, and Open Ear of
God.] Tell them God can see as well in the Dark, as in the Light. When Doors
and Windows are shut: and Curtains drawn Close, at Midnight: as well as at
Noon Day, on the House Top. Tell them God hears what they say, if they speak
Never so Softly. And knows what they Think, if they think Never so Secretly.
And Tell them, whatever they Think, Speak, and Act on Earth: God writes in
Heaven. What is Good, God looks upon with Love. What is Evil, God beholds with
Hatred. Thou art of Purer Eyes than to behold Evil Hab. 2.13.
. God beholds NO Evil with an Eye of Approbation: but ALL Evil with an eye of
Observation: in order to Damnation; if speedy Repentance prevent it not.

How Dare thou Sin in Secret? God does See:

And, Witness, Jury, Judge alone will Be.

Fourteenth. Doc 14. The uncertainty of Life.
Teach them to know the Brevity and Uncertainty of Life:] for Age, and Youth,
Old, and Insant.] Tell them, in Golgotha, are Sculls: and in the Church Yard,
are Graves, of All Sizes. Solomon tells of a time to be Born, and a time to
Die, but he tells us of no time to Live Ecl. 3.2.
. Tell them, Death is Most Certain: and may be as Sudden, as Certain. One may
be Alive, Young, Strong, Well, Sick, Dead, Damned, and all in a Day, or in an
Hour. (1) God the Donour, and Preserver of Man's Life, may Suddenly end it. (2)
The Devil the Envier of Man's Life, may Suddenly end it, as he did Job's
Children Job 1.10.
. (3) The Wicked, Satan's Workmen, may Suddenly end it: he rises up, and No man
is sure of his Life Job 24.22.
. (4) A man's own Relations may Suddenly end it]: as Cain who killed his Own,
Only brother Abel Genesis 4.8.
. (5) A man's own Hand may Suddenly end his own Life.] Ahithophels council to
Others, was as if a man had enquired at the Oracle of God 2 Sa: 16.23.
, but he could not council Himself, to keep from the Gallows! It Is dangerous
provoking GOD to displeasure. God can make a man his Own Enemy, his Worst
Enemy, his own Executioner here, and his own Tormentor in Hell Fire, for ever.
N B. Seeing Life is SO Uncertain and Short; Preparation for Death is a Solemn
Concern. When men had Longer lives, and Stronger limbs, than Now men have: they
seemed to be more concerned with Death, than Now men are. The First purchase we
read of in the Bible, was a Burying Place, not a Building Place, viz, Abraham
for Sarah Genesis 23.4.
.] Lo I die, in the Grave which I have Dug for me, there thou shall bury me:
said, Jacob to Joseph Chapter 50.5.
.] Kings and Counselors built Desolate places for Themselves Job 3.14.
.] Joseph laid Jesus in his Own Tomb Mat. 27.60.
.] Few (in our days) dig their Graves before they are dead: though the World
it self be dying.

Fifteenth. Doc 15.
Teach them to know the Difference between Temporal Life, and Eternal Life. The
Excellency of One above the Other.] e g. (1) Temporal Life is full of Corporal
Labor Eccl. 1.8.
. Eternal Life has none of this. There Remains a Rest Heb. 4.9.
: it Ever Remains, and Never Removes. (2) Temporal Life is full of Mental
Misery, viz. Care, Trouble, Vexation, Sorrow of Mind. Man is Born to trouble
Job 5.7.
. He is of Few days and Full of trouble Chapter 14.1.
. His days are Few and Evil Genesis 47.9.
. Eternal Life is Full of Joy without Sorrow. (3) Temporal Life is attended
with the Misery of Penury, Hunger, Thirst. Hunger without Bread, Bread without
Hunger, are both Miseries. Bread with Hunger is a Double Mercy, which Many
have, and Few prize. Eternal Life is free from both these Miseries of Hunger,
and Thirst. They shall hunger NO more, neither Thirst any more, etc Rev. 7.16.
. (4) Temporal Life is attended with many Diseases: Eternal Life has None. All
Diseases end at Death. A Saints Funeral, is the Funeral of All his Afflictions.
(5) Temporal Life is sometimes such that a man is Weary of it, and wishes for
Death: Eternal Life will Never weary one to All Eternity. (6) Temporal Life is
but Temporal: if it be the life of Methuselah, it must Certainly end, it may
Suddenly end; but Eternal Life is Eternal. Not any thing in Heaven, or Hell,
shall ever end it.

Sixteenth. Doc 16. Of Heaven.
Teach them to know how Desirable, Heaven is.] Tell them of its Titles, viz,
The Kingdom of GOD] The Kingdom of Heaven] The Heaven of Heavens] The Third
Heaven] A house Eternal in the Heavens] That will never Decay, or want Repair,
that the Inhabitant will never be Weary of, or turned Out of.] Abraham's Rosom]
i e, Sweet embraces.] Eternal Glory] Salvation with Eternal Glory] An Eternal
weight of Glory] which will never weary to bear it, but bare up above all
weariness for ever.] A Crown of Life] A Crown of Glory] A City of pure Gold,
it is Streets pure Gold, its Gates, Pearl Rev. 21.21.
.] A City that has NO need of Sun, Moon, or Candle Ver. 23.
. For there shall be NO Night there Chapter 22.5.
.

Seventeenth. Doc. 17. Of Hell.
Teach them to know how Dreadful Hell is.] Tell them of it is Titles, viz,
Destruction] A Furnace] Outer Darkness] Damnation] Everlasting Punishment]
Unquenchable Fire] A Place of Torment] Wrath to Come] A Prison] Everlasting
Chains] Everlasting Burnings] The Vengeance of Eternal Fire] The Second Death]
A Lake of Fire] The Bottomless Pit.] OH, How do Persons Play with Scripture
Thunder! The Word Printed, is like Fire Painted: which they can See, and Feel
without Fear. But, could they Stand at the Gates of Hell, and Hear the Damned
Howl, it would make their Hair stand an End, and Fill their Hearts with
Horror! But what shall we say of an Eternal BEING in that place of Torment!
The Damnation of Hell is beyond All Definition: much harder to Define, than the
Spanish Inquisition. Which a Painter despairing to do, Did not picture, One man
with a Knife in his his Throat, a Second with a Sword in his Heart, a Third
with his Arms Torn Off. But took a Table and Covered it all over with Blood,
crying out BLOOD! BLOOD! So may a Minister cry concerning Hell: FIRE! FIRE! for
a Definition of Damnation.

Eighteenth. Doc. 18. Of temporal Judgments.
Teach them to know what Temporal Judgments God has sent to Men, Women, and
Children, for Sin against God.] Tell them how God drowned the World with Water
from Heaven Genesis 7.
. And burned Sodom with Fire from Heaven Chapter 19.
. And Drowned the Egyptians in the Red Sea. And clave the Ground asunder to
Swallow up Korah, and his Company. And slew a hundred fourscore and five
Thousand in One Night, by One Angel 2 K. 19.35.
. And slew of Israel Five Hundred Thousand chosen men in One day Chapter 13.17.
Chap. 36.16.
. And gave All Israel into the hand of the King of the Caldees (that bitter and
hasty Nation) who slew their Young men with the Sword, had NO compassion on
Young Man or Maiden, Old man, or him that Stooped for age Chapter 36.16.
. Because they mocked the messengers which God in Mercy had sent among them.
Death came in at their Windows, for their Wicked Children. Bares tare them in
Pieces. The Mother was dashed in Pieces upon her Children Ho. 10.14.
.] The strength of Populous NO, was Infinite: Yet she was carried away into
Captivity, her Young Children were dashed in Pieces at the top of all the
streets. Na. 3.8, 9, 10.
Tell them also of Judgments threatened, viz, I will Kill you with the Sword,
your Wives shall be Widows, and your Children fatherless.] Exo. 22.24.
I will send wild beasts among you, which shall Rob you of your Children. Lev.
26.22.
Papists are coming to Rob our houses. of Children, and Parents both. Their
Children shall be dashed to pieces before their Eyes.] Isa. 13.16.
I will bereave them of Children. Jer. 15.7.
The Fathers shall eat the Sons, and the Sons shall eat the Fathers.] Ezekiel.
5.10.
And I (says Christ) will Kill her Children with Death. Rev. 2.23.


Nineteenth. Doc 19. Of Eternal Judgment.
Teach them to know the Eternal Judgment.] Tell them, Jesus Christ the Judge
shall come from Heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming Fire. With a Shout,
with the voice of the Archangel, with the Trump of GOD: to found and raise the
Dead. That the Godly shall rise in Glory; and all Christians Quick and Dead, be
made like Christ. That the Wicked shall rise Roaring: amazed one at another;
their Faces, Flames. Isa. 13.8.
That all Men, Women, Children, from Adam, to the end of the World: must Stand
before GOD. Rev. 20.12.
And give account of their Works, Words, Thoughts: all which God will bring
into Judgment. And whet his glittering Sword (which is now made Bright, and
Wrapped up for the Slaughter) Ezekiel. 21.15.
and fill it with the Blood of the Wicked. And heap Mischiefs upon them. And
spend his Arrows upon them. Deu. 32.23.
And make them drunk with Blood. Ver. 42.
And shoot his great Hail, which he has reserved for the Battle of that Great
Day of GOD Almighty. Job 38.23.
When the Sun, and Moon, and Stars shall be Drakened. Joel 3.15.
And the Heavens pass away with a Great Noise, and the Elements melt with
Fervent Heat: the Earth and the Works therein burnt up: 2 Pet. 3.10.
With a fire kindled in Gods Anger which shall burn to the Lowest Hell. Deu.
32.22.
When God shall Roar like a Lion, and Rend the Caul of their Heart. Ho. 13.8.
And they Groan with the Groanings of a Deadly Wounded Man Ezekiel. 30.24.
.] Alas! Who shall live when GOD does This! Nu. 24.23.
Tell some of this Day, [OH take You no care for Me: every Tub must Stand on
its own Bottom.] But how if it have no Bottom to stand on? [OH HO: we will do
well enough.] What will ye do in the day of Visitation? Isa. 10.3.
It Is a Scaring question. [If we cannot obtain mercy by Entreaty, nor victory
by Fight, we will Flee for it.] To whom will ye Flee for Help? A fearful
question. These are the men that must cry, Mountains fall on us, and hide us
from the face of him that sits on the Throne: Who will close this Day with
[Come ye Blessed] and [Go ye Cursed.] Then shall the King say unto them on his
Right Hand, Come ye Blessed of My Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for You
from the Foundation of the World.] Mat. 25.34.
Then shall he say also unto them on the Left Hand, Depart from me ye Cursed,
into Everlasting Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels.] Ver. 41.
And these shall go away into Everlasting Punishment: but the Righteous into
Life Eternal. Ver. 46.


Last. Doc. 20. Of Eterninity.
Teach them to think upon Eternity.] Tell them that after this Final Sentence
is Passed, viz, [Come ye Blessed] and [Go ye Cursed:] the Godly must dwell in
Heaven, and the Wicked must dwell in Hell for Ever and Ever. The Eternity of
GOD, has neither Beginning nor End. The Eternity of Man, has a Beginning, but
NO End. This EVER, is as near its End at its Beginning, as EVER it will be.
When the Wicked have been Howling in Hell, as many Thousand Years as the Number
of the Stars of Heaven: and the Drops and Sands of the Sea: they are then NO
nearer to the End of their Torment, than when it First Began.] Thus much for
Instruction by Doctrine.


But, Sir, you are not to Terminate in These Twenty Lessons. For I lay them not
down to Limit you, but to Lead you into the Scriptures, to Search for Twenty
times so many More. Every word of God in the Blessed Bible has something in it
for the Use of Man. The words of Wicked. Men, and DEVILS, which God has
pleased to Record for our Profit. To discover the Pride, Wickedness, Madness,
Folly, Enmity of the Wicked, and the Devil their Father: against GOD their
Creator; a few of which I leave you to consider at leisure. (1) Words of the
Wicked. Genesis 4.9. Chapter 11.4. Exo. 1.10. Chapter 5.2. Chapter 14.25. Chapter 15.9. Job 21.14.
Chapter 22.17. Psalm. 14.1. Ps. 83.4. Ps. 94. 7. Ps. 137.7. Isai. 10.13, 14. Dan.
3.15. Chapter 6.5, 20. Mat. 12.24. Chapter 27.40, 42, 43, 63, 64. Job. 10.20. Act.
28.4, 6.] (2) Words of the Devil. Genesis 3.1, 4, 5. Job 1.7, 9, 10, 11. Chapter 2.4,
5. Mat. 4.3, 6, 9. Chapter 8.29. Mar. 1.24. Luke 8.28. Act. 19. 15.] And the Proper
Names of Persons (which many think not worth the nameing) are Profitable more
ways than one. (1) To show that God fulfilled his Promise, of such a Numerous
Seed, so incredible to Reason, when Abram and Sarai were both Dead. q d, See
what a number of their names I have recorded in the Chronicles and other
places, to testify the Truth of my Promise. (2) The Signification of the
Proper Names of Persons, and Places; of both, take a few Instances.

(1) Persons, Adam (...) Earth, Red, Bloody] of (...) To be red.] Male and
Female created he them, and called their Name Adam. Genesis 5.2.
To tell Proud man, what a Material, and Metal, man is made of.] Noah (...)
Rest] of (...) To take rest.] He called his name Noah, saying, this Same shall
Comfort us. Genesis 5.29.
Noah was a Preacher of Righteousness: it Signifies what a Stay, such shall be
to a Tossed Church.] Abram (...) A High Father] Abraham, A Father of a
multitude.] i e, A Public President by his FAITH: for Jew and Gentile to
follow for Justification. Believers are Honorable. They have a High Father
Abram. And GOD is their Father who is Higher than the Highest.] Isaac (...)
Laughter] of (...) To laugh.] Sarah said, God has made me Laugh, so that all
that hear will Laughed with me. Gen 21.6.
Isaac was the promised Son, but both Father and Mother must be Dead, before
the Son is Born. N B. If God once Promise, if Never so great a Death fall in
before the Performance; Never fear it. Ver. 7.
Who would have said to Abraham that Sarah should have given Children suck, for
I (q d, OLD Sarah) have born him a Son in his OLD Age.] Solomon (...)
Peaceable] Mic. 5.5.
of (...) To complete Peace.] A Type of Christ the Great peacemaker, and our
Peace.] Ephesians. 2.19.
Delilah (...) Poverty, a consumer] of (...) To draw out.] As Delilah to
Samson, so Sin, Delilah, a beloved lust, will Impoverish, Consume, and Conquer,
a Samson like Soul for Strength.] Ishi (...) My husband] of (...) A husband,]
Thou shall call me Ishi.] Ho. 2.16.
To show the Sweet Affection, and Near Relation of God, to a Christian truly
betrothed to Christ.] Amos (...) A burden] of (...) To load] The land is not
able to bear all his words. Am. 7.10.
Thus is a faithful Prophet to the Profane.] Zerubabel (...) Repugnant to, or
a dispersion of confusion] of (...) To scatter (...) Confusion.] He was to lay
the foundation, and to finish. God has had his Zerubabels, Magistrates, and
Ministers called Saviors. Magistrates to save the Body, Ministers to save the
Soul. These were but Instruments, and the best but a Type of Christ, THE
Savior: Alpha and Omega, of the Work of Redemption: Author, and Finisher, from
the Foot, to the Head Stone, with Shouting, Grace grace to it. Zech. 4.7.


(2) Proper names of Places and Cities.] Babel, Babylon (...) Confusion,] of
(...) To confound.] Let us go down and there confound their language: Genesis 11.7.
So the Lord scattered them. Therefore is the name of it called Babel.. They
cry of Babylon, against Jerusalem, is, Raze, Raze it, even to the Foundation of
it. But God will Confound all Babilons Cries, and Consultations.] Rehoboth
(...) Room] of (...) To enlarge.] Isaac called the well Rehoboth, for which the
Philistines strove not, for Now (says he) the Lord has made Room for us. Genesis
26.22.
Considering how Contentious Philistines, and Heathens are, Christians should
call Every quiet place, for Meeting, and Dwelling, Rehoboth] Bethel (...) The
house of God] so Jacob called the Place where God appeared to him. Genesis 28.17.
So precious is Gods appearance, that it makes the place to Spangle: and that
place must have a memorable Title. And precious is the Humble Person, To whom
God appears. [I dwell with him that is humble.] Isa. 57.15.
He is Gods House; in what place soever he be, its Bethel.] Bochim (...)
Weeping] of (...) To weep.] The people lift up their voice and wept. And they
called the name of that place Bochim. Jud. 2.4, 5.
God will mark the place of Mourning and put the tears into his Bottle.] Achor
(...) Trouble] of (...) To trouble.] Achor is a name Joshua gave to a Valley
where they met with much Trouble. Jos. 7.26.
I will allure her and bring her into the wilderness, and speak Comfortably
(...) upon her Heart. Ho. 2.14.
N B. If God do bring into the Wilderness, that leads to the land of Canaan: he
will bring Safe Out to the Desired Haven. And turn Sorrow into Joy, yea give
Joy in Sorrow, and Life at the Point of Death, at the Dead Sea. For says God,
I will give her the Valley of Achor for a Door of Hope, and she shall sing
THERE.] Hos. 2.15.
Capernaum, (...), A field of Repentance] i e, where the Seed of it is Sown,
and not Received. Upon which account Christ does utter that Dreadful Thunder:
Thou Capernaum which art exalted to Heaven, shall be brought down to Hell.]
Mat. 11.23.
Bethesda (...), The house of Mercy] of effusion, i e, Pouring forth
plentifully.] It Is the name of a Pool at Jerusalem which cured Any Disease
whatever. Job. 5.2.
A type of Christ, who has for Every Disease an Infallible Remedy: and calls
the Sick to come, and buy All without Money. I will add no more of these
Instances, left I Weary you. But again I desire you to Search the Scriptures:
which to do, one had need outlive the Days of Methuselah. Tertullian has
this Expression. Adoro plentitudinem Scripturarum: I adore the fullness of the
Scriptures.] Let me say, There is a Mountain of Sense, in a Sentence of
Scripture. Into which let not the Least refuse to Look: for the Lamb may Wade,
though the Elephant Swim. Learn your Lambs to wade into the Scriptures, by a
Daily course of Reading Chapters And by a Custom of asking you Scriptural
Questions. When your Children shall ask in time to come, Heb (...) To morrow,
What means these Stones? Then ye shall Answer them: Jos. 4.6.
and with a Blessing God will Answer both.

To all which Instruction by Doctrine, I add this Exhortation. Take your
Children with you to hear Sermons. Stick not at a little trouble: but, bring
thy Sons in Arms, and thy Daughters upon Shoulders. Isa. 49.22. Simile
And what you hear preached, Improve for their Profit. As from a Garden,
Orchard, Banquet, Parents bring home Flowers, Cherries, Biskets for their
childrens Bodies: So do you from Sermons (in Spirituals) for your Childrens
Souls. And as a Compassionate Parent will give a Part to a Child that stands
By, having no Parent present to Pity it: So I pray do You; to Any Child as you
have Opportunity. But especially to Those under your Roof, Care, and Conduct:
whose Parents are Absent, out of the World, or at a Distance. Give them even
the Same Instruction with your Own. And let not Such a One be as a Sheep that
NO Man takes up. Isa. 13.14. Caution.
And do not Deceive your self by thinking you are only Drawn to this Duty, or
deed of Charity by my Desire: but See your self Solemnly Bound to it by Christ's
Command. As ye would that men should do to You, do you Even So to them. Mat.
7.12
Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy Self. Chapter 22.39.
Dread to be like the Dragon which says, My River is My Own, I have made it
for My Self. Ezekiel. 29.


Fath. I Pray God I may practice this Advice! and Learn my Children these
Lessons, and do my Part to Others.


Min. I Pray so too, or better you had Never heard them. He that knows his
Masters Will and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. N B. My words
which I commanded did they not take Hold of your Fathers. Zec. 1.6.
In Gods Command incumbent upon you for Education of Children, there is a
Preceptive Part, and a Penal Part. If you take not Hold of the Preceptive Part
to Do it: the Penal Part will take Hold of you, to Undo you.


Fath. Gods Command is almost forgotten by Me. And I perceive, some Professing
Parents carry it, as if they had Quite forgotten Gods Command.


Min. How if God should quite forget Them, or Theirs?


Fath. They hope he will not do So.


Min. Let them take heed of Vain hopes, And hear what God will speak in such
case.


Jehovah. Seeing thou have forgotten the Law of thy God, I will also forget thy
Children Ho. 4.6.
.


Min. What think you by this? Is it a light thing to forget the Law of God?
Shortly in some Peril or other the Child of such a Parent may as Certainly, and
Suddenly Perish, as if God had Quite forgot to preserve it.

Jehovah. I will make it as the mourning of an Only Son, and the end thereof as
a Bitter Day Am. 8.10.



Fath. The Lord have mercy on me, and mine! Let me hear how I am to Instruct my
Children by Example.


Min. You shall. By Example.
The Word [Example] is from Exemplum, (...), A Pattern, a Copy, an Example] for
one to follow. Look that thou make them after their Pattern Exo. 25.40.
. Heb (...) A Pattern] of (...) To build] Good Example, added to Good Doctrine,
builds upon a Good Foundation. He shall write him a Copy Deu. 17.18.
. Heb (...) A Copy or Example] of (...) To repeat.] Good Example must be
Frequent. I have given you an Example Joh. 13.15.
, (...), An Example] of (...), To shew] q d. Let men See your Good Works Mat.
5.16. Example by good Works.
. As Good Doctrine must be Audible: So Good Example, must be Visible. Good
Doctrine, and Good Example, must be Both linked together as Unseparable. If
Doctrine be Good, and Example Bad: you Do and Undo, and do Nothing, except what
is Worse than Nothing. As the foolish woman plucks down her House with her
Hands Pro. 14.1.
, So will you with Bad Deeds, pull down what you set up with Good Words. The
Moral of that Fable of the crooked Crab is to our purpose, viz, The Crab.
The Old said to the Young, Go forward] The Young said to the Old, Show me the
way then] The Old went Backward, and Side long: The Young followed, saying, See
Mother, I go Just as you do.] By Reason of your Childrens Corruptions, they
will Sooner follow your Bad Example, than your Good Doctrine. Let parents
Doings, or Sayings be Bad, their posterity Will approve them, Heb, they will
delight in their mouth Psalm. 49.13.
. N B. The Snuffers to Clear, or Mend the Light in the Tabernacle, were of Pure
Gold Exo. 37.23.
. So must your Life be, a Holy, Godly, Golden Life: if you will Mend the Life
of others. With what Indignation does Christ speak to them that will mend
Others: and will not mend Themselves! THOU Hypocrite, first cast the beam out
of thine Own Eye Mat. 7.5.
This following is a Fearful Reflection out of the Mouth of the Almighty. Thou
which teach Another, teach thou not thy Self? Thou that preachest a man
should not Steal, do THOU Steal To. 2.21.
? Thou that say a man should not Commit Adultery, do THOU Commit
Adultery? What will God say of such a man! Why is not here some Black Brand put
upon this Person? No, [ This is that King Ahaz 2 Chr. 28.22. A fearful favor.
.] Why not that Wicked King Ahaz? NO, that is too great a Favor for him: then
he goes among the Herd (of swine) and has a great many Fellows. [ O Generation
Jer. 2.31.
.] Why not of Vipers? for God bids the Heavens be astonished at their Sins. NO,
that is too Little: and God seems to be at a Loss for a Title, or a Brand,
Black enough for Such Sinners.

By good words.
Let Good Example be both in Works, and Words.] Some, when they have given Good
Doctrine by Words, give Bad Example by Words, viz, by Idle, Unprofitable
Prattle. And by Backbiting, and Clamouring against Christians, in their
Childrens hearing. When Parents Tongues are set on Fire of Hell, A pastime for
Satan.
then they make a Pleassant Ditty for the Devil, i e, To hear, and see them Sow
the Seeds of Indignation, (against Professors, and Religion at once) into the
Hearts of their Own Children. A wholesome Tongue is a tree of Life Pro. 15.4.
, but some Parents Tongues will be their Childrens DEATH.


Fath. That is Very Sad indeed. But are there not some Considerable
Circumstances, belonging to this Substantial Work of Education of Children?


Min. Yes, Very Considerable. The Circumstances of an Action are usually these
seven, Thus Versified [Quis? quid? quibus? ubi, cur? quomodo? quando?] The
Person, who.] The Thing, what.] The Means, by which.] The Time, when.] The
Place, where.] The Manner, how.] The End, to which.] As to this Action of
Education of Children, Here is,

First. The Person, Acting.] viz, Circum. 1.
The Parent, who has Begot, or brought Forth: for a Savior, or a Destroyer.
Who is under God's Solemn Charge: of which he must give Account to GOD. And
without whom, the Child had Never been Miserable: neither Here, nor in Hell.

Second. The Thing, Acted.] viz, Circum. 2.
The Education of the Child.

Third. The Means, Circum. 3.
by Which] the Child is Educated, viz, [Instruction] by [doctrin] and [Example]
Passed: and by [Correction] to Come.

Fourth. The Time, When. Circum. 4.
] (1) The Time of Life. Begin in the Morning of this Day, i e, as soon as Ever
a child is Capable of any instruction. Mane, Early] is Gods Adverb, and Hodie,
To day.] But, Mane, Stay, Defer till to Morrow] is the Devils Verb Imperative.
But, NOW is a Monosyllable, that will puzle a Philosopher to divide. Begin
Betime. The sooner the Safer, and the Easier. A Child is not hardened in Sin,
and settled on Sands, as a Man is. N B. Sin and Self, are the Principles, and
Ends of All carnal men's Actions. If one be a long time Rooted, and Settled in
Sin, he is as hardly changed as the Ethiopians Skin, or Leopards Spots Jer.
13.23.
: and So if one be long Settled on the Sands. OH this same Religious Self! Self,
Adorned with Duties, Excellent Painted Performances! A Self righteous Rock,
that has been building twenty or thirty years! To pull all Down, to Raze it,
to cast it Away as a Menstruous Cloth, and say unto it, Get thee Hence Isa.
30.22.
: this goes against the Hair. To deny Sinful Self, and Religious Self, of So
long standing: are Mighty Works. Once more I must say, Begin Betime. Your Lads
seem to be seven, or eight years Old. You should have begun five or six years
Ago. N B. From a Child, (...), From an Infant thou have Known the Holy
Scriptures 2 Timothy 3.15.
. N B. Parents Expressions, make Impressions, upon Childrens Memories, e g, A
Godly Woman being often in Trouble, did for her comfort, usually use these
words, [ The Lord lives Psalm. 18.46.
] At length she Sat Silent as one Swallowed up in Sorrow; A Pretty speech.
which her child observing, Said, [Mother, is God Dead now?] And this Shamed
her out of her Sorrow. This Instance shows, the Aptness of Children to remember
what they hear from their Parents: and, the Usefulness of Children to their
Parents, if Well Educated. Out of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings have thou
ordained Strength, to Still her Enemy Psalm. 8.2.
. By this Child's Words, it seems Satan was Stilled from his busy buffeting of
the Child's Mother. (2) The Time of Day. [When] thou sit in thy house,
[When] thou walk by the way, [When] thou lie down, [When] thou risest up
Deu. 6.7.
. Take Any opportunity: any Seasonable Time; and some Unseasonable. Be instant,
In season, Out of season 2 Timothy 4.2.
. Write Apelles Posie, upon your Posts, viz, [Let No Day pass without a Line.]
Draw One Line a day at Least. Do Duty Daily.

Fifth. The Place, Where.] When, Circum. 5.
expresses ['Time] and implies [Place] q d, [Where] thou sittest] viz, To Work,
To Rest, To Eat. (1) To Work] Talk of Gods Work. Men can talk of the World at
their Work. (2) To Rest] Talk of Eternal Rest, and Eternal Wrath. Men can talk
of the World when they are Weary. (3) To Eat] Talk of the Bread of Life. Turn
Temporal Mercies into Spiritual Discourses. Let Eternity be your Table-Talk.
This leads me to testify against the Vain Table-Talk, of Profane and
Professing People: which profits not, Soul, Body, Man, Woman, or Child: yet as
Common as the Day. And which (if a Stranger be at Table) consists much of a
Company of such common Silly Complements, as I am ashamed to name, viz, Pray
eat. Table trash.
You are very welcome. I am Sorry I am no better provided. I doubt I did not
cut well. Pray pick a bit where you like. You do not think your self welcome.
And Finally, I see I have but troubled you to sit down.] At which Trash I
wonder people do not Blush, and with Shame sweep it out at Door, as Dirt. It Is
Sad to consider what Superfluity of Vanity, flows from the Mouths of
Professors. And its a Marvel men have not Worded away All their Mercies. N B.
Moses Table talk.
Moses had a Great Stranger at His Table: and with him Aaron and all the Elders
of Israel: and, they came to eat bread before GOD Exo. 18.12.
. As in his Presence, with Reverence to feed with Fear, lest their Table be
made a Snare. To feed without Fear, is Fearful. Such are called Clouds without
Water, Trees without Fruit, Twice Dead, to whom is reserved the Blackness of
Darkness for Ever Jude 12, 13. Jesus table talk.
. See some of Jesus Christ's Table-Talk, who says to YOU, Learn of ME. Mat.
9.10, 11, 12, 13. Lu. 7.36, 40, to 50. Chapter 11.37, to 51. Chapter 14.7, to 25. Chapter
15.4, to 32. Chapter 22.14. to 39. But let us see where we are [Where] thou walk
by the Way.] Talk of the Way to Heaven, and Hell. Walk is frequently full of
Empty, Vain Talk: let your Walk be full of Virtuous Talk. [Where] thou lie
Down] i e, in Bed, an Emblem of the Grave. In which Bed a man is as Buried
Alive, above ground, all but the Head. And that is an Emblem of Christ, the
Christians Head, Emblem
who keeps out of the Grave while his Body (the Church) is buried: Death has
No more dominion over Him To. 6.9.
. [Where] thou risest Vp] i e, out of thy Bed in the Morning, an Emblem of the
Resurrection of the Body out of the Grave: by virtue of Christ's Resurrection,
and Life. By Reason of the Head being kept out of the Bed while the Body
Sleeps, the Body Rises in the Morning (for if the Head was buried in Bed as the
Body is, the whole would be Smothered and Dead) So by virtue of Christ the
Head, who is Above ground, above Death, Alive, THE Resurrection, and Life:
shall Saints be Raised out of their Sleep. I instance these Emblems to show you
how Lying Down, and Rising Up, does minister occasion of Talking to your
Children.

Sixth. The Manner, How. Circum. 6.
] (1) Speak Plainly.] In all Points, Study the most Plain Expression, and
Explication of Words imaginable. What I speak not so Plain to you, I leave with
you to Explain to them. I speak to a Man, you to Children. Simile
That Key which will most easily open the Door (though made of Iron or Wood) is
to be used rather than a Key of Gold that will not open it. So such Plain
Wooden Words, which do open Truths: rather than Fine Words, which like Paint on
a Window, that lets not In, but keeps Out the Light. I have heard a Man (a
Teacher of Men) speak to a Child in such a Pathetical, Rhetorical, Mystical
Strain: without Consideration of Condescension to the Child's Understanding:
that I have Utterly abhorred it. And had much rather Such had sat Silent,
though it was to my Own, which I Much Desire should hear the Words, by which
they may be SAVED. (2) Talk Enticeingly,] speak Pleasantly, Alluringly,
Affably, Kindly, Winningly. Deliver things in words of Down. Speak Roses, and
Honey into their Hearts. Let your lips drop as an honey comb. e g. [Come my Sweet
Child: Thou must not do SO, That is SIN: SATAN'S Service. He would have thee to
Hell: to pay thee with Eternal Pain. But do Thus: This is GODS Service. Love
GOD, Serve Him, Fear Him, and it will be well with Thee for Ever. I do SO love
thee, I Long to have thee Saved: I cannot Endure thou should be Damned. Be
Ruled without the Rod: it grieves me to whip thee, etc.] Thus Win them by
working on the Will. You know the Phrase [ John is a good Boy, when Will is at
Home:] an Up-hill way, is a Down-hill way to a Willing Mind. Let the Law of
Kindness be in your Tongue, and your Children will arise up, and Call you
Blessed Pro. 31.26, 28.
. (3) Talk frequently.] Thou sahlt teach them Diligently to thy Children, Heb,
thou shall Whet them to thy children Deu. 6.7.
. The Hebrew word (...) To whet,] has affinity with (...) To repeat] which
signifies, the Word Cuts, and Pierces, by Frequent Repition. An Edge-Tool is
Whet, by many Motions, and Rubs upon the Whet-Stone: and the Stone made Bright
thereby: So is the Word Sharpened, Simile.
and the Heart Brightened, and Quickened, by Frequent Repition. But this
requires Discretion, i e, so to whet as to set an Edge On, and not whet it Off
again: in which work, wisdom is profitable to direct Ecl. 10.10.
. She opens her mouth with Wisdom, and in her tongue is the Law of Kindness
Pro. 31.26.
. A law has Force, and Power to prevail: So words spoken with Wisdom. The
words of the Wise are as Goads Ecl. 12.11.
, they will Prick: and as Nails fastened, then is a Word well Driven, when it
Nails the Heart to God. Do not Do, and Undo, as you will if you Overdo.
Children must not be over-Driven. Let my Lord pass over before, and I will lead
on Softly, as the Children be able to endure Genesis 33.14.
. Then shall the Lambs feed after their Manner Isa. 5.17.
. N B. Children well educated, have Two Titles in the Bible to teach Parents
the Necessity of Frequent Instruction, with Discretion (1) [Arrows Psalm. 127.4.
.] Will a Knotty Crooked Stick be made a Straight Arrow with ease, without
Work, and Art? (2) Pollished Stones Psa. 144.12.
.] Will Rough, Rocky, Cragged Stones, become Smooth Pollished Stones, sit for a
Princes Palace, without Pains and Skill in Paring and Hewing? No, nor (some)
With it neither, who after Hewn, are Slain, as fit for nothing but Slaughter
Ho. 6.5.
. Its sad when the sword comes to contemn the Rod Ezrk. 22.13.
. The Rod is to Convert, and Save. The Sword to Kill, and Damn. When the sword
does it is Work, it contemns the Rod, because that did not Do it is Work. But
Frequent Instructions, are Frequently Effectual. The waters wear the Stones Job
14.19.
. How so? If a Flood fall on a Flint at Once, it wears it not: but it is falling
by a Drop at once, Does it. Gutta cavat lapidem, The soft drop hollows the hard
Stone,] i e, by falling from the Eaves of an House off the End of a Straw. Thus
words Frequently falling from Parents Mouths, upon Childrens Hearts. Small Acts
continued, will produce Great Effects.

Seventh. Circum. 7.
The End, to Which Children are Educated.] viz, That Children may be Converted,
and Saved, Soul and Body: from Hell, to Heaven. That Parents may be Satisfied,
and Comforted in them, in Life and Death. That God may be Served, and Glorified
by them. And, They Glorified with GOD, for Evermore. So much of the
Circumstances of Education.


Fath. If my Children be willing to hear and learn Instruction, how shall I
Carry it to them?


Min. If your Children deserve Praise, Pray let them have it: i e, So much as
will encourage them to Be, and Do better. Not too Much I pray. Praise may soon
Spoil. Caution.
As the fining pot for Silver, and the furnace for Gold, so is a man to his
Praise Pro. 27.21.
, i e, so is a man's Praise to Him.] The fining pot and furnace, Try the silver,
and Gold, Simile
and discover the Dross: so a man's Praise will Try what metal he is made of:
it will discover his dross, i e, Pride, Vanity, Levity. A man can neither be
too Worthy, nor too Wary of Praise.


Fath. How if All the good Instruction I can give them, has No good Operation
upon them.


Min. If Words will not Work, try what Tears will do. Go King Edwards way to
Work, viz, K. Edw. the 6th.
When he could not prevail against Cranmer, and Ridley with Arguments, he Wept:
he fell a Crying, and then they were overcome. Tears are Crying Words, Crying
Words
heard as High as Heaven: the Lord has heard the voice of my Weeping Psalm. 6.8.
. Tears have Piercing Tongues. One would think the Tears of a Father, should
break a Heart of Flint.


Fath. How if Crying Words will not work on the Hearts of my Children?


Min. Then try what Dying Words will do, when That Day Comes. Dying Words
Leave Dying Words behind you, to work when You are Dead. Dying Words may be
Living Words, by which you may speak when Dead, as Abel Did Heb. 11.4
. Gather your Children about you Deathbed, as Jacob did. Jacob called unto his
Sons, and said, Gather your selves and hear ye sons of Jacob, and hearken to
Israel your Father Gen, 49.1.
. q d, Come my Dear Children, Hear the words of your Dying Father. But, Do not
defer any one Days Duty, till your Dying Day. A Dying Days work is a Great
Days work of it Self, without any work that lays Behind. It Is the Greatest
Days work of All the Days of a man's Life. Die, a little word, a great work.
The Word [Die] is but Small, but the Work [Die] is Great. Besides, should you
defer your Duty till you come to Die, your Children will think you want Sleep,
and and are Lightheaded, (your talk being unusual, and strange) and so will
not regard your words. Do your Duty Daily while you Live, that when you come to
Die, you may say to your Children, as Mr. Bolton said to his when he was Dying,
viz, None of you will Dare to meet me out of Christ, in the Judgment Day. Now;
let us come to the Second General Head, viz, [Correction] But -- Do you not
See? One of your Sons has given us the Slip. Pray Recall him quickly.


Fath. HO Sirrah! Whither go You? Come again quick, I charge you. Come not near
that Coach there. You Jackanapes, will you Offer it. I would fain see that; Ay,
Do, I would you Durst.


Min. OH Good Lord have merey on these Poor Children! Parent corrected.
What words are here from a Father, to a Child. [Sirrah, Jackanapes] Atat!
Papae! Apage! OH! Alas, Out upon it [I would fain see that, Do, I would you
Durst] What is the Child's Disobedience, desirable to the Father? Consequently,
the Child's Damnation in Hell is desirable. Under the Law the disobedient Child
was stoned to Death: under the Gospel is Damned to Hell. Now I come to Direct
you to Correct your Children: it appears you need Correction your Self.


Fath. Why does he Anger me then? I use to speak so in my Anger: I cannot Help
it: I mean him no Hurt.


Min. Why does he Anger me] I thought I had been Speaking to a Man all this
while, Because your Son is a Child, You will be So too. Because He angers You:
You will anger GOD. [I use to speak so] OH How do you Accuse your self by this
Excuse! By this Reply, when a man is Accused of a Sin, he Accuses himself of a
Thousand more, to clear One: and all that Aggravates that One. If I should ask
such a man [Friend why do you Swear?] I am used to it, I cannot Help it, it is
an old Custom from my Cradle.] This Excuse is Gods Great Charge: This has been
thy Manner from thy Youth Jer. 22.21. Sad Security.
. And will a man clear himself with This? Will he defend his Neck with the Edge
of the Ax? Save himself from being Drowned by leaping into the Sea? From being
Damned, by leaping Headlong into Hell? When God (on his Throne) brings this
man to the Bar, q d, [Come Sinner, Thou have broken my Law, what Reason caust
thou render why I should not Rend thee in Pieces?] Lord I Used to do So.] What
will this man mock God to his Face? when Mighty Men cry Mountains fall on us,
and hide us from his Face.] But why do I talk to you? for [you cannot help it.]
If you cannot, you are under the Power of Sin: that is a Sad Case. But some
Cannot, because they (Care not, or) Will not. A carnal man Cannot, Believe,
Repent: these are the Supernatural Gifts of God. But a carnal man Can Forbear,
many Sins, if he Will. e g, Suppose, he that is Drunk must pay a Hundred pound,
or his Head. He that Swareth an Oath: Peril produces power.
Ten Pound or have his Tongue cut out. And this by a Law, the Penalty of which
there is No Possibility of escaping. Then men's Power to pass by an Alehouse,
and Bite in their Oaths, would appear. They that Cannot go in the Way of
heaven, because they Will not: Shall not go into the Joy of heaven, because GOD
Will not. When he that carnally cries [I Sin, I Cannot Help it,] shall cry
[LORD, Lord, Heaven GATE is Shut, I cannot Enter:] then (in effect) will God
reply [I Cannot Help it] I Must be Just.] Now in saying you Cannot help it,
when you Can: instead of Repentance for Sin, you add Sin to Sin: for this God
adds Woe to Woe. To cover Sin with Sin, is a Sad covering for Sin: for which God
covers Sorrow with Sorrow, by adding Sorrow to Sorrow. By this Plea, you think
to Palliate, and Lessen sin: That is the way to wash the Devils Face, but you
make it Never the Whiter. By this pretended Infirmity, you expect the Benifit
of Immunity: but, He that covers his Sins shall not Prosper Pro. 28.13.
: but Perish. A young man in the Tavern, seeing Diogenes, fled farther In, to
be out of his Sight. Nay, said Diogenes, the farther thou fleest In, the more
thou art In the Tavern.] And be sure your sin will find you Out Nu. 32.23.
. [You mean your children no hurt] Suppose you were Sick of the Plague, and
should go among your Children and breath into their Mouths: and I should cry
out, OH Mad Man, what do you Mean! Will you reply [I mean no Hurt.


Fath. I confess its very bad for Parents to use such words to Children. I did
not think there had been so much evil in such words as now I see there is. I
accept of Reproof for them. Now having Corected me for my Carnal language: I
Pray proceed to the Second Head, viz, Correction for my Children, and Direct Me
to Corect Them.


Min. I will so. Correction
The word [Correction] comes of the Latin Correctio, of Corrigo, To make
straight] of Rego To rule] as (...) of (...), because Children are Crooked, and
Unruly, i e, they do not acord in Heart and Life, with the Straight Line, and
Rule, of Gods Word.


Fath. What am I to Correct my children For?


Min. For what God Corrects His children. GOD corrects Man for Iniquity, and
Man must correct Children for the Same.


Fath. How am I to Correct my Children.


Min. Correction is twofold, viz, [Verbal] and [Verberal,] i e, with the [Word]
and with the [Rod.]


Fath. How with the Word?


Min. You must Rebuke, Reprove, and Chide your Children, for their Faults.


Fath. I had need have some Direction in so Doing.


Min. In this General Head, (1) Correction with Word.
viz, [Correction] both with [Word] and [Rod] I shall omit that sevenfold order
of Circumstance, used under the First General Head. And the Sum of So many of
them as are to our Purpoe: I shall Digest into a Rank of Directions.

1) Do it Timely, Direct. 1.
while Tender.] Take a twig of a years growth, Simile.
and you may bend it which way you Will: and straighten its crookedness at
Ease. But let it grow crooked many Years, and it will Break before it will
Bend. But you can neither Bend it, nor Break it. Parents from Children, must
their Vices Weed: As they spring Up, before they run to Seed.

2) Do it Secretly, Direct. 2.
and Sweetly.] Pills of Reproof for Children, are to be given Secretly: and in
Sugar, or Honey, Gilded over with Gentleness. Some Parents Rebukes, are like
Fools Bolts: Simile.
[Soon Shot:] Bolted out in Any bodies preence, Read
to the child's Discouragement Col. 3.21.
, Grief, and Disgrace. And if a parent takes away a child's Good Name, what has
it Left to Lose?

3) Do it Proportionably, Direct. 3.
to the Fault.] Reprove for Small Faults, with Soft Words. As Mary when she
supposed her Child was in Fault! Son, Why have thou thus dealt with us? behold,
thy Father and I have Sought thee Sorrowing Lu. 2.48.
. To Cauterize, and Cut a small swelling, which a little Soft, Sweet Ointment
will Assuage: is Vanity, and Cruelty. There is that speaks like the piercings
of a Sword: but the tongue of the wise is health Prove. 12.18.
.

4) Do it sometime more Pathetically, Direct. 4.
as you see Cause.] e g, What, my SON! and what, the Son of my WOMB! Pro. 31.2.
and give thy strength to Women, and Wine.] So you, What my SON! and Curse,
Lie, Steal. My SON! and a Swearer, a Sabbath-breaker, a Gamester, a Foolish
Jester. If a man sin against the Lord, WHO shall entreat for him 1 Samuel 2.25.
. If thou for sake him He will cast thee Off for EVER 1 Chro. 28.9.
.

5) Do it sometime more Piercingly. Direct. 5.
Accompany Sharp Words with a Cutting Countenance. Eli reproved his Sons for
their Great Sins, with Solemn Words, but not with Sharp Looks, Heb, (...) He
frowned not on them 1 Samuel 3.13.
. He ware too Smooth a Brow, for the work of Reproof, for Such Sins. The Heb,
(...) signifies to look Dark, frown and wrincle, as when the moisture is gone.]
In great grief the blood returns to the Heart for its relief, and that makes
the Face Pale as Death. Eli wanted a suitable Sense of his Sons Sin, to Sad,
and Horrifie his Heart, and make his Face look dark as Death on them, when
their Death lay at Door. What then? I will Judge his house for Ever for the
iniquity which He knows: because his Sons made themselves vile, and he
restrained them not, Heb, frowned not on them.

6) Do it Scripturally.] 6 Direct.
Oppose their Sin against GOD, with Gods Word, against their Sin. Oppose them
with Gods Commands, which are contrary to their Sin: by which their Sin is
Forbid. And with the Threats of Gods Judgments against Such Sin, as they are
Guilty of. Gods Word is called the Sword of the Spirit Ephesians. 6.17.
. Handle it Well toward the Spirits of your Children. And then the Word of
Correction, may be a Sword to Kill their Corruption. Thus far of Corection,
with the [Word.]


Fath. How am I to Correct my Children with the Rod?


Min. First let me give you some Scriptural Account of the word [Rod:] Rod
fourfold.
In doing of which I shall take notice of a fourfold Rod. (1) A Civil Rod] in
the hand of the Magistrate:] e g, Moses Rod. It was called the Rod of God Ex.
4.20.
. And it may be called a Miraculous Rod: by it Waters were turned into Blood
Chapter 7.20.
. Dust turned into Lice Chapter 8.16.
. Thunder and Hail fetched from Heaven Chapter 9.23.
. Locusts brought, such as Never the like before nor since Chapter 10.14
. The Red Sea divided. The Rock made to run Water Nu. 20.10
. And yet this was but the Staff, with which Moses had kept Jethro's Flock Exo.
3.1. Chapter 4.2.
: now set apart for other Service. And when Kingly Government was set up, God
took David (with his Sheep-Staff) from following the Sheep, to Feed, and rule
Israel Psalm. 78.70.
. And Kings did formerly use such Staves as grew out of the Ground: but
afterward for their Glory, they were made of Gold: The King held out the Golden
Scepter to Esther Est. 5.2.
. The Heb is (...) Sherbet, Greek, (...), Sceptron: Hence the word Scepter: The
Scepter shall not depart from Judah Genesis 49.10.
. Here the Heb is (...) Shebet: this word is frequently translated [Rod:]
Scepter or Rod it signifies Rule. It has been the custom of a Person in
Authority, to have a Staff or Rod in his hand as a sign of Dignity. It was a
custom to carry a Rod before a Roman Ruler. Some such custom is to this Day in
use [as with our Lord Major) to carry a Scepter, Sword, or Mace, as a Token of
Authority. This Civil Rod was Uncivilly used, and Horribly abused, when (with
it) the Jews smote Jesus the Judge of Israel upon the Cheek Mic. 5.1.
for which the Scepter departed from Judah. Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula
cautum. (2) An Ecclesiastical Rod] in the hand of the Minister.] Says Paul to
Christ's Church at Corinth, Shall I come unto you with a Rod 1 Cor. 4.21.
? viz, To rebuke the proud Spirits of such as were puffed up: with such
Reproofs, and Censures, as the Case of the Offender called for. (3) A Divine
Rod] in the hand of God.] This signifies Gods Sovereignty over All, to Rule as
he please: the Godly in Mercy, the Wicked in Judgment. God would Rule the Godly
by his Word. As he Saves by the Grace of the Gospel, he would Rule by the
Government of the Gospel: i e, his Holy Laws. But if the Word will not Rule,
the Rod shall. If for our Rule we would make More use of Gods Word: God would
make Less use of his Rod. Gods Rod with which he whips his children for Sin
(many times) is Men: I will be his Father and be shall be my Son: if he commit
iniquity, I will chasten him with the Rod of Men 2 Samuel 7.
. Solomon sinned, And the Lord stirred up an adversary, Hadad 1 King. 11.14.
. And God stirred him up another adversary, Rezon Ver. 23.
. And Jeroboam lift up his hand against the King Ver. 26.
. Thus God gathers a Rod, Ties these twigs together, Whips his Son, Does his
work upon Mount Zion: Then throws the Assyrian, the Rod of his Anger into the
Fire Isa. 10.5, 12.
. And Sickness is Gods Rod: Hear the Rod, and him that has appointed it Mic.
6.9.
I will make thee sick in smiting thee, because of thy sins Ver. 13.
. The wicked are spared, The Rod of God is not upon them Job 21.9.
: but when it comes it is to Ruin them: Thou shall break them with a Rod of
Iron Psalm. 2.9.
N B, If the Godly be not Ruled by the Word, they shall be Ruled by the Rod:
God will Rule or Ruin.
but if the Wicked be not Ruled by the Word, they shall be Ruined by the Rod or
by the Sword. (4) A Paternal Rod] in the hand of the Father:] with which he is
to Rule the Child, when the Word will not Do. The Parents Rod may bare all the
Former Titles. [A Civil Rod] as it respects the Faners toward Men. [An
Ecclesiastical Rod] as it respects the Child's Obedience to God. [A Divine Rod]
as it is by the Divine Appointment of God. Now N B, In all these, the Original
Word signifies a Staff, to Stay or Lean upon. e g, (1) The Civil Rod (...)
Matteh, A Staff Exo. 4.20.
. (2) The Ecclesiastical Rod, (...) 1 Cor. 4. 21.
] Provide no Staff, (...) Mat. 10.10.
.] Jacob worshipped leaning upon the top of his Staff, (...) Heb. 11.21.
.] In these 3 Texts the Greek word is the same. (3) The Divine Rod (...) Matteh
Baculus, A staff Mic. 6.9.
. (4) The Fathers Rod for the Child (...) Shebet, A staff to Stay upon Pro.
23.14.
.


Faith. What are we to learn by this?


Min. The Parallel of the Rod and Staff.] If a Staff be laid By, its no Stay:
but if it be Handled, and well Used, its a good Stay to the Body. So (1) If the
Magistrate handle his [Rod] i e, So officiate as to perfom his part Well: So
act as to exercise a Good Conscience: it will be a Good Stay to his Mind. In
that Rebellion of Korah against Moses the great Magistrate which made his Body
fall Flat Number. 16.4.
, what supported his Spirit? I have not taken One Ass from them, nor hurt One
of them ver. 15.
(2) The Apostles were pressed out of Measure, above Strength, despaired of
Life 2 Cor. 1.8.
: what was their Stay? Our rejoicing is This, the Testimony of our Conscience
ver. 12.
. (3) If God's Rod hang at our Back,] If we believe it is in Love, if we take it
in the hand of Faith for a token of Eternal Love, if we Thus handle it, it is to
us a Staff: Thy Rod and thy Staff, they comfort me Psalm. 23.4.
. David was in a Fearlesse, Faithful frame: and then though in the valley of
the shadow of Death, he would fear no Evil. God's Rod is sometimes Terrible: as
Moses Rod when turned to a Serpent. Simile
Fear makes him Flee from it Ex. 4.3.
. But when he handled it in Faith and Obedience, it ceased to be a Serpent to
Slay him, and became a Rod to Stay him. (4) The Fathers Rod] If he use it Well
it will be his Staff: Correct thy Son and he shall give thee Rest Pro. 29.17.
. If the Rod be So used as to fetch Folly out of the child's Heart, and make it
Wise, what then? My Son, if thine Heart be Wise, my Heart shall rejoice, even
mine Pro. 23.15.
. Thus if Good Success. But if No good success, yet if the Parent perform his
Part, it will be his Stay, though the Child falls Down into Hell Fire.


Fath. Now give me some Direction in this Rod Correction.


Min. I will so. 1 Direct. for Rod Correction
The first Direction shall be by way of Caution, with respect to the Original
Signification of the word Rod, viz, A Staff. Hence you are in NO wise to
imagine that you may beat a Child with a Staff, as if you were to beat a Bull
or a Bear: in so doing the Child may reply as the Philistine to David, Am I a
Dog? NO, but with a Rodof small Twigs, or such like, which will Smart, but not
Hurt.

2) Do it Timely] Chasten thy son while there is hope Pro. 19.18.
q d, 2 Direct.
There will be No hope if hardened by long neglect. So heart hardening is Sin,
that some Children under the Rod have replied to their Parents [Ay, Kill me if
you will, I will Never yield.] Childrens corruptions are the Cords, by which
Satan binds them to the Stake to be Burned: and draws them down to hell to be
Damned. If you will cut these Cords do it Early, and you do it Easily. But
while you neglect your Duty, Behold a Double Misery: viz, Satan is both
Softening your Childrens Hears for his own Suggestions; and Hardening them
against your Instruction, and Correction. So that the Heart will be as Soft Wax
to Satan's Temptation, to receive the Least Impresson: and as a Hard Flint to
GODS Word a Man's Rod. Past Cure.
Till at length it may be to as much Purpose to correct a Child, as to whip a
Post, or a Wild Beast.

3) Do it Tenderly, 3 Direct.
Lovingly, Pitifully, Patiently:] Not Passionately, Wrathfully, or Angerly. It
was a Sweet Saying of Plato to his provoking Scholar: Parent learn of Plato.
[ I could find in my heart to Beat thee, but that I am Angry with thee Parents
put Children to pain for Satan's pleasure.
]. Some parents will not correct their Children, till Provocation has put them
into a Passion. He that is moved by Passion to Correction, obeys not GOD, but
the DEVIL, and Passion: and God will not Bless, but Curse such correction. N
B, God corrects His Children in Love: to learn you to correct Your Children in
Love. Make it manifest to your childrens Consciences, and Capacities, that you
correct them in Obedience to GOD, and in Love to their Souls: and the it is like
to have Good Success.

4) Do it Secretly. 4 Direct.
Put not a poor Child to Public Shame. Let not a child be Corrected, as if a
man was to be Executed, i e, upon a Stage: but have it into the House of
Correction, i e, some close Corner, or Chamber. If your Childrens Faults are
offensive to your Neighbors, or Public: it is convenient to let them Know of
Correction, for good Example Sake: and lest they think you Wink at Wickedness.

5) Do it Unanimously. 5 Direct.
] Let Father and Mother remember, the Insitution, Conjunction, Injunction of
God, for their Union from the Beginning: They shall be One Genesis 2.24.
. Did he not make One? and wherefore One? to seek a Godly Seed, Heb, a seed of
God Mal. 2.15.
. God is speaking against Unlawful Marriage, and Disunion in Life. N B,
Marriage according to Gods Institution, accompanied with a Godly Conversation,
and Union in the Education of Children: is an Excellent way of Good Success in
seeking a Godly Seed. But if Disunited in this Deed, if there be a Disunion in
Correction, the Faulty Child flees from one, to the other, for Shelter. And
thinks the Child, of the next evil Act [I will Venture, for my Mother will save
me from my Fathers Rod.] This Hardens, and Spoils: and makes a child Love one,
and Hate the other: and love that parent Most, that Least deserves it. Note the
Fruit of this Parental Diversity of Education, by this Text. A Wise Son makes a
Glad Father Pro. 10.1.
: Why not a glad Mother too? It Is when the sons Wisdom is a fruit of the
fathers Wise godly education. [ But a Foolish Son is the heaviness of his
Mother:] Why not of his Father too? It Is when the sons Folly, is a fruit of the
mothers Fondness: which serves to make children Fools: which folly she must
Feed on as the bitter fruit of her doings. It' Strange yet True, viz, That
Mothers had need Learn to Love their Own Children Tit. 2.4.
If they do not, they are like to Love them so as to learn God to Loath them:
and so as to Shelter them from the Rod that should Save them. Parents must not
one Oppose another. But let Both agree, and Both be present, and Acquiesce in
this Act, of Rod Correction. Vis unita fortior.

6) Do it Proportionably to the Fault. 6 Direct.
] And that must be sometimes Softly and sometime Sharply. If God will Plague
David, and Spare Doeg, it is the Lord: let him do as he will. Gods Will is his
Rule: Gods Word is Man's Rule: by which Word the offender is to be beaten
according to his Fault, by a certain number of stripes Deu. 25.2
. To which the Law of the N T, is Consonant Lu. 12.47
. And Laws of Justice, among Christians, and Heathens: for even some of These
have been Excellent in their love To, and exercise Of Justice. Consider what
Circumstances of a child's Fault do Aggravate it. e g, Such a Time, Sabbath Day,
and in Sermon Time, Often Warned of it, Little Tempted to it, Done with
Delight. Sweet Meat must have Sour Sauce.] Consider what may Lessen the Fault,
e g, Much Temptation to it, Little Warning of it, Ignorance of the Evil of the
Act. He that knows and yet does evil, shall be beaten with Many stripes Lu.
12.47
: He that knows not, with Few stripes.] Much Correction, for Little
Transgression: is not Equity, but Cruelty. Little Correction, for Much
Transgression: is Impiety, Foolish Pity. Both Unjust, Unsuitable, Unprofitable,
next to Nothing, if not Worse than Naught.

7) Do it Effectually, 7 Direct.
] To which end it must (sometime) be done Smartly. A Rod is such a Plaster for
a child's Sore, as will not Cure without Smart. Let it Smart, till the child
Submit. Let not the Rod Go; till the Child do kindly Kiss it away. God will do
thus by His Children, and you must do thus by Your Children, or else you do
nothing. Some parents think, if they whip a way their. Own Anger, though not
the Child's Humor, the work is Done. There is a little Pleasure for the parents
Passion performed: Read
and the poor child Put into a Passion Ephesians. 6.4.
: in both which some Service for SATAN is done, and That is all. So much for
this Rank of Directions. Now, If you have any Objections against Rod
Correction, bring them Forth.


Fath. I perceive by these two Last Directions, against Rod Correction.
if my Children commit Great Faults, they must be Sorely Whipped. But I have such
a tender Love and Pity to my Children, that I cannot sind in my heart so to
whip them. I know not what misery they may endure when I am Dead: and I do not
intend to Torment them while I Live.


Min. I like not such Love: I am not pleased with such Pity: Love, Pity, do
you call it?


Fath. Yes, What else should I call it?


Min. Hatred, and Cruelty.


Fath. That is Very Strange.


Min. And it is Very True.


Fath. I believe not Such Truth.


Min. Will you refer it to the GOD of Truth, and believe Him?


Fath. God forbid, I should refuse that.


Min. Then hear the Answer of GOD.


Jehovah. He that spares the Rod, Hates his Son, but he that Loves him,
chasteneth him Betimes Pro. 13.24.



Min. So, now I hope you will believe it is Truth.


Fath. I dare not deny it, but I understand not how it is hatred and Cruetly.


Min. The Proverb will partly prove it, viz, Spare the Rod, and Spoil the
Child. Foolish Pity, spoils the City. By sparing the Rod you choose rather to
have your Child howl for ever in Hell, under Gods Wrath: than to cry a little
under a man's Rod. This pitiful Pity to the Body, is Cruelty both to Body and
Soul. And it makes a Man rather a Paricide than a Parent.


Fath. But may not I forbear when my child cries Grievously,


Min. No no, Let not thy soul spare for his Crying Pro. 19.19.
. The Rod signifies Nothing without Smart. Your love is such that you would
fain deal ill with your Child, and ill requite your Father also. N B, God did
not spare his Only Son, for his Strong Crying and Tears: viz, O my Father if it
be Possible let this cup pass from me Mat. 26.39.
Father Save me from this hour Joh. 12.27.
. From which he delivered him Not: but delivered him Up, to the Crused Death of
the Cross, for your sake. And you will not Whip Your Son with a Rod, that cuts
not Skin Deep, for his sake. They that will not Correct a son at Gods Command,
are very unlike to Kill a son at Gods Command Genesis 22.
: as Abraham offered to do, his Son, his Only Son Isaac whom he loved.


Fath. When I go to whip my child for a fault he Cries and Begs,


Min. And does he keep his promises?


Fath. I consesse he fails me in that.


Min. Why do you trust him then?


Fath. Because I hope he will be better next Time.


Min. Now you turn Child. This is a very Cheat. And what a Shame is it for a
Man, to be Cheated by a Child: and by his Own, whom he Knows has Deceived him.
This will encourage a child to do Any thing: for he will think [it's but Crying
a little when the Rod comes, and promising to do so no More: and my Father will
Spare me, and I shall come off Clear.] And this will learn a Child to set Light
by his Father, and So will he come under that Curse Deu. 27.16.
.


Faith. If I whip my Children,


Min. That Cry is an?Accident, and not your Intent. And you leave Off because
they give you cause to go On: for they are to be whipped for that Cry. And it is
a sign they want good government. But take heed you do not pretend Piety, when
you intend foolish Pity: or pretend Conscience, when you intend Negligence.


Faith. But one of my children has such Passions,


Min. Fear not its Dying, in doing your Duty. But let us hear the Answer of GOD
to this Critical Case.

Jehovah. Withhold not Correction from the Child, for if thou beat him with the
Rod, he shall not Die Pro. 23.13.
.


Min. So: I hope That fear is removed.


Fath. But how may I understand this [he shall not die?]


Min. Thus. (1) He shall not die under the Rod: Correction shall not Kill. (2)
He shall not die as a Malefactor by the hand of the Magistrate. For want of the
Parents Rod, some come to the Magistrates Sword, i e, the Gallows. (3) He shall
not die an Eternal Death. Thou shall beat him with the Rod and shall deliver
his Soul from Hell Pro. 23.14.
. Through Gods blessing, Correction shall Issue in the Child's Conversion.


Fath. A man cannot Convert a child by all the Instruction,


Min. By the same Argument all Ministers Living may leave Preaching. But who
would be thus deceive by SATAN? To make men Proud, he will suggest great
matters by Doing. To make men neglect their Duty, Satan's deceit.
he will suggest, their Doing will come All to Nothing. [All the Education in
the World cannot Save a child.] But when by Neglect a child is Lost, the same
Satan will suggest [if the Parents Duty had been Performed, the Child had been
Savewd.] (2) Though You cannot Convert your children, GOD can Convert them By
you. And make you Instruments in their Regeneration, as well as in their
Generation. In their Second Birth, as well as in the First. If you Will not be
Instruments in Gods hand, Tell him so. If you Will: Do your Part, and leave God
to do His. The endeavor and Care belongs to You: the Cure belongs to GOD. (3)
Though you cannot Convert vert them, you can Restrain them. For want of This,
god threatened to Judge Eli's house for Ever. (4) this Restraint, will prevent
much Trouble, if God convert them by Other means. Trouble for Sin at Conversion
from it: accords with the Measure of-Sin, in the Commission of it. The Greater
sin Before conversion, the Greater sorrow, At, and After conversion. the Parent
blames the Preacher for the Child's Terror: when the fault is in the Father and
Mother. (5) If your Children should Never be Converted, but for Ever Damned:
this Restraint will prevent much Torment. (6) And God will be Glorified by your
Service. You will be Instruments of his glory. And shall be Rewarded, though
Israel be not Gathered Isa. 49.3, 4, 5.
.


Fath. But I see no good, C say, it has done his Hurt: and if it were to do
Again, he would Never do it: let Preachers say what they please.


Min. I shall please to say this for him, He that will learn of none but
himself, is like to have but a Fool for his Master. No wonder if he slight a
Minister, for he will defy the Almighty, and charge Infinite Wisdom with
Folly. viz, To appoint, to no purpose. To command Correction to Cure, and Mend
children, which makes them Worse. Shall any teach GOD knowledge Job 21.22
? God is so wise, he Cannot be taught by Men. Some are so Unwise they cannot be
taught by men. And Mr C is so wise he Will not be taught by men. He will
neglect Correction, till a Child is Hardened. Then under Provocation, fall on
in a Passion. To which Correction, God cleaves his Curse. And then Mr C will
cast it Quite off, for he sees no good it does. Because he may not do it in the
Devils way, he will not do it at all. This Pest is so provoking, I Pass it: as
not fit to be spoken to with Patience.


Fath. I suppose there are as wise men,


Min. Tell not me of their Wisdom, if the Word of the Only Wise God was never
their Rule. Or if they have left Off to take heed to the Lord Ho. 4.10.
. The Wise men have rejected the Word of the Lord, and What Wisdom is in them?
Heb, the wisdom of What Thing Jer. 8.9.
? not of the Stork, Turtle, Crane, Swallow: they know their appointed Times:
but such people know not the Judgment of the Lord Ver. 7.
. Nor of the Ox, or Ass: That, knows his Owner, This, his Masters Crib, but
Israel does not Know Isa. 1.3.
poor silly Ant, the pitiful Pi?smire is preferred before Such wise men Pro.
6.6.
. Vain man, Heb, Empty man would be Wise, (ie, counted so) though man be born
like the Wild Asses Colt Job 11.12
. Man is so much a Beast, that he knows not he is a Beast, till God has taught
him. And he Never learns to be a Man, till he learns to know he is a Beast.
Ignorance is a Great enemy to Knowledge, but there is one Greater, ie,
Self-Conceitednesse. See thou a man Wise in his own Conceit? more hope of a
Fool than of him Pro. 26.12.
. They are the Wisest and Best Men, who Best know they are Beasts Psalm. 73.22.
Pro. 30.2. Object. 9.
.


Fath. But we must not take Gods work out of his hand.


Min. No: but we must take Our work into Our hand: and not suffer Satan to take
it Out of our hand. Your words, I once heard fall from a Ministers mouth: but
it was to me a Hateful Morsel. When a Parent is expressing his desire to do his
duty to his Children, then for a Preacher to reply [So so, we must not take
Gods work out of his hand.] Thus for him who should Provoke a parent to his
work, to Obstruct him in it: O Hateful, Sottish, Sensual, Satanical Saying!


Fath. I have heard Mr. C. say,


Min. SO: Cursed correction.
There is Correction, with an Execration, and No Benediction: and the parent
punished by way of Retaliation. His disobedience to GOD, in not giving his son
due Correction: is punished by his sons disobedience to Him, not counting
Correction worthy of Acceptance. The Father ran away from GOD: the Son ran
away from the Father. [Never heard of him more!] He may hear of him too Soon,
viz, that he has broken into some House, or is turned High-way-man, and taken
to be both Hanged and Damned, in One Day. And for his fathers neglect, to Howl
for ever in Hell. At which his father (if not hardened) may Howl in a Hell upon
Earth. And was his Father to be at his Sons Execution, it is probable he would
desire to be Revenged on him, for letting him come to Such an End. As that Boy
did, who (when he was going up the Ladder) required to Kiss his Mother: but to
be Revenged on her, Bit off her Nose, saying, Mr N.
[If you had given me Due Correction, I had Never come to This.] Let not your
Lads laugh at it. He would have Bit off her Head, and Pulled out her Heart had
it been in his Power. If Parents be without Natural Affection for their
Children: Children will be without Natural Affection for their Parents.
Witness that Wicked Boys reply to his Wicked Mother (who complained at Stake
she was exceeding Dry) viz, Mr N.
No Matter Mother, you will Burn the Better.


Fath. One Story and another is enough to Distract a man. You tell me of a Boy
that was hanged, because Not corrected. Another tells me of a Man that was
hanged, because his boy Was corrected. viz, He beat his Son so that he died,
and then was Hanged for him. It would make a man afraid to beat Children, I
think.


Min. That Man, or Monster, I knew: and see Hanged in [ Cambridge Castle-Yard.]
What then? was it Due Correction that killed him? God commands Parents to beat
children, From death, not To death. Had he used such a Rod as I have directed
you to use: and used it by the Rule of Gods Good Word: he had done his child no
Hurt. But he (with his Club Law) regarded No such rule: Devilish correction.
but was Ruled by his Passion, and his Parent the DEVIL: with whom (it is to be
feared) he is now in Hell Fire.


Fath. I suppose it is the safest way,


Min. I wish you knew the Right Hand from the Left in this matter. To avoid One
Extreme, you will run into Another. Both Extremes are Bad: and of two evils,
you will choose the Worst. I have exhorted you to use the Rod in Love. And I
exhort you to do All in Love. But, Fond affection, Sinful indulgence, and
Unseasonable smiles: I dehort you From, and charge you before God to beware Of:
as Vicious, and Perilous. And lest you Wink at this Warning, Hear some of the
Sad Effects, of such Parental Vices: of which a sew Instances. (1) Adonijah]
His father David had not displeased him at ANY Time, Heb, (...) from his
days,] Junius, Nunquam, Never] displeased him, in saying, Why have thou done
so 1 Kin. 1.6.
? And what is the fruit of this fond affection? even Adonijah's Self-Exaltation
to his Own Destruction. He exalts himself, saying, I will be King ver. 5.
: and that brings him home by the horns of the Altar: where he hardly escapes
Ver. 50.
. Then (to bring it about) he must have Abishag to wife: and that brings him
Quite to the Slaughter Chapter 2.25
. This laying the Reins on the Neck, has run Many a child to Ruin. Children
need No more to undo them than their Own Desires: No, nor Men neither. (2)
Absolom] He having Killed Amnon his Brother, comes and Bows to David his
Father: and the King Kissed Absalom 2 Samuel 14.33.
. After this he aspires the Crown, seeks his fathers Life, loses his Own Chapter
18.14
, and twenty thousand more Ver. 7.
. David was (comparatively) a good King: absolutely, a good Christian, a good
Prophet, a good Preacher: and yet a bad Father. Let the best in the World
beware. Even a David will Dote: and Eli will honor his Sons above God 1 Samuel
2.29.
. This makes gods of Children: and that is the way to make DEVILS of them, for
God to Destroy, or to Spare to their Parents Destruction, e g, Thy two
(indulged) sons Hophni and Phinehas shall Both Die in One Day Ver. 34.
. And the Man of Thine whom I shall not cut off, shall be to Consume thine Eyes
and of Grieve thy Heart Ver. 33.
. That some such gods are Suddenly gone, this True Story will Testify. [A
godly Father being set at a Festival Dinner, in comes a Curious Child: O (says
the Father speaking lightly) I fear I shall make a god of this Child. But the
End of that Dinner was a Bitter Day: Mr Jer Buroughs was present.
for before they rose from the Table, that Child was found Drowned in a Pond.]
You have your Items, viz, Item the Boy that Ran away from the Rod. Item the Boy
that was Killed with Correction. HERE be Items for you! Item, Adonijah, Item
Absalom. Item Eli's sons, whose end was Destruction, for want of Correction.
And Item the Idolized Child, that was Drowned (I doubt) because Deified.


Fath. These are Sad things to befall the Godly.


Min. Sad things (for sin) befall Such soonest of All: for, Judgment must Begin
at the House of God 1 Pet. 4.17.
. Such, sin against a Threefold light: viz, the light of Nature, the light of
Grace, and the light of Gods Word. Sin against Such Light, is a Great
aggravation of sin. Weigh a sin Single in the Scale, then add this
Circumstance, viz, it was against Knowledge: that weighs more than the Sin it
Self. Knowledge of GOD is a Great Good, no less than Eternal Life: sin against
Such Knowledge, must needs be a Great Evil. N B, If sin against Knowledge, be
against the Will, it is not So great: but Woe to them that sin against Knowledge,
With the Will. Let us take heed of Sin against London light. A Caution for
London.
. Sin at London, is Greater than sin in a dark Country: and the scourge Sorer
upon that account when it comes. WOE, woe, woe, to them that go into the Land of
Darkness, by London Light.


Fath. Many poor Parents want Time to Instruct,


Min. And so may Rich too, the course they take. Men have Many ways, to throw
their Time down the Stream: I shall Instance two, which are Common to men.


First. They Word it away. Precious time Prated away.
Let me say they Prate it away about impertinent things, to no Purpose, or
Profit, for Soul or Body, Self or Others, Church or State. They are for Any
thing, Every thing, which is worse then Nothing. Tell them of their Work: O
then, [We want Time.] But, let not Man be Deceived: GOD will not be Mocked. And
many times, Pertinent things, and Spiritual things too, are discoursed to No
Purpose at all. Will this discourse do in Dooms Day? to the Law (to try) and to
the Testimony, of Jesus. But I say unto you, That every IDLE WORD that men
shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the Day of Judgment Mat. 12.36.
.


Fath. What is an Idle Word?


Min. The Greek, word (...), Idle, Idle word opened
] of a privative, and (...), A work:] signifies, a Word without Work, a
Work-lesse word, a Saying without Service, ie, which neither profits Speaker,
nor Hearer. At the multitudes of Such Words, out of the mouths of Professors, I
have been amazed times without Number: to think, how CAN they look OVER, or
look ON, this Text as a Cipher MAT. XII XXXVI.
. As if they had got a License, to let their Tongues go as they List. There is
a time to Every thing Ecl. 3.1.
, and for some things that one would think there should be No Time for, viz, to
Kill, to Hate Ver. 3, 8.
: and yet we read of NO Time for Idle Talk. And that Christ has purchased
Precious Time, with his most Precious Blood, for Vain Talkers to spend THUS: I
leave it with them to Prove, or to Answer it in the Day of Judgment. And much
Time is thus lost about News, as forementioned in the Morning. Many wise men
resemble the Simple, who believes every word Pro. 14.15.
: though they know what an uncertain thing Report is: both by Experience, and
Sacred Scripture. e g, Tidings came to David, saying, Absalom has slain ALL
the Kings sons, and there is not ONE of them left 2 Sa. 13.30. Report makes an
uncertain Sound.
. When they were All alive but One who did not deserve to Live: nor to be
Counted One of the Kings sons: viz, Amnon who had forced his Sister Tamar. Thus
persons Prate away their Time.

Second. Precious time Piped away.
They Pipe it away with that Pidle: and Tobacco, that Bauble. Of which (because
I doubt it is your Vanity) Hear me a little. By way of Concession, I grant,
Tobacco is a Creature of GOD: and has its Virtue for the Use of Man: as every
Herb, Weed, and Toad has. It Is good for Cold, Moist Bodies, and such Diseases,
if moderately Used. Against the Good, Lawful, Convenient use of it, I say
Nothing By way of Conviction, of the Vanity, Inconveniency, and ill
Consequence, of the Common Abuse, or Immoderate Use of it. A woeful waster.
1) It Is Prodigiously Expensive, both of Time, and Coin. Some observe, [A man
may walk a Mile while he Puffs away a Pipe of Tobacco.] How many do they that
Dote, drink away in a Day! No wonder, such want Time for better work: Time to
lay up Eternal Treasure. Tobacco has not been of use in England 100 Years: in
which Term, It came by Sir Francis Drake 1585.
it has Stole away more Time, and Cost, more Coin, than all England is worth.
Doubtless (by God's judicial permission) the Devil had a hand in its
importation. Sharper is that Saying of a King. K James.
viz, Tobacco is a lively image of Hell. An if I was to invite the Devil to
Dinner, I profess (for one Dish) he should have a Pipe of Tobacco. 2) It is a
very Vain, Vicious, Foolish Custom. A very Toy.
It makes Men, turn Toys. And with their Mouth, Pidle, and Bauble, spend their
Time in Foming out Fume, to smoke the Air where they Sit, Walk, Ride, or lay in
Bed. As if men were Born to take Tobacco. Should it please God to raise a man
from the Dead (who died Anno 1580) and say, [Come, I will send thee to see the
Exercise of England:] the man would Wonder what men are Doing. This Smoking
Trade at Every Turn, would be as great a Wonder to Him, as his Rising from the
Dead would be to Them. It Is bewitching.
3) It is a Venity, which has a bewitching Faculty. It works on the Will, and
makes men Willing to be bewitched with it. It takes away appetite from Bread,
the Staff of Life: and begets an impetuous appetite after it Self. And so
brings a man under it is power: which Paul in All Points resolve against. All
things are Lawful, but all things are not Expedient: all things are lawful for
me, but I will not be brought under the Power of any 1 Cor. 6.12.
. 4) It Is an Epidemical, Infectious, Contagious Vice: where is it is like under
the Sun? Both Sexes, Men, and Women. All Degrees of Men: from the DUKE, to the
Drayman on the Dunghill. All Sects, in point of profession of Religion. In a
word All Men (some few excepted) are (more or less) Vitiously addicted to it.
5) This bewitching weed, this Indian Henbane, Hot Henbane.
is Hot and Dry in a High Degree. It Dries away the Juice and Moisture of the
Body, till it be like a Bottle in the Smoke. It inflames the Blood. It
distempers and intoxicates the Brain. And does the whole Man much hurt.
Physical.
6) It Is strongly Physical: therefore not fit for Food, nor Fashion. Too much
of the Best Food, will Soon fit a man for the Worms. Too much of the Best
Physic, will Send a man to the Same Place. Tobacco is a Physical Herb. To take
Physic at every turn: both Full, and Fasting. At every meals meat: in
Conclusion, a Potion. Another in Bed. As often as men Meet, on Any Occasion, to
take a Potion. And abroad in the Cold Air, to open the Veins and Pores of the
Body, to let in Death. This is a MAD TRADE. An ill master.
7) Where Tobacco has got the Mastery, it is a great Enemy. And the more a man
Loves it, and keeps it Company, as if it were a Friend: The more it is an
Enemy. And he that is under this Slavery, is not at Liberty, to order either
Body or Soul, as he should. Nor does he seem to Care, what becomes of one, or
the other. Let such beware lest they lose Both, by the Love of Tobacco. Let
such take heed they do not So smoke away their Time, as to smoke to Eternity:
in the sulpherous smoke of Fire and Brimstone: which ascends up for Ever and
Ever Rev. 14.10, 11. Caution.
. And let them that Preach Down any one Vice in their Pulpits, take heed they
do not Set Up this unparalled Vice for another in their Practice. And the
same I say, of All Professors of godliness. 8) The time may come when (if they
Had it and that would Do) Prodigal Parents would give Rivers of Oil, and
Sack-fulls of Silver and Gold, for the Golden hours they suffer to Swim Down
these Two Streams: and will not use them for the Education of their poor
perishing children. Job was very Officious for his Children, he Sent to them,
he Sanctified them, he Sacrificed for them, he rose up Early to do it, he did
it according to the number of them All, i e, he did his duty to Every one, for,
Job said, It May be my sons have Sinned Job 1.5.
. (How many do know Certainly, their sons have sinned Notoriously, and yet let
it pass unpardoned) Thus did Job continually (...) all the days Ver. 5.
, as long as they lived. And yet when Dead, what a Doleful Ditie does he makes
with his Elegy Chapter 29.2, 5.
. If So, how may Careless Parents Howl, if by Sudden death their Children Fall!


Fath. Pray did you never take Tobacco?


Min. Take it! Yes truly: and that took Me too into Custody and Slavery. But
having got Liberty it shall Never take me more: nor I That, by the help of God,
in whose Fear I forsook it.


Fath. I will never take Tobacco again as I have done. Two Pipes a day shall be
All. The good, lawful, convenient use of it you allow.


Min. True, but that respects him that can So use it. Who can have Himself, and
It at Command: make it his Servant, not his Master: Take it and Leave it as he
List, which Few can do. In these three words, [Good, Lawful, Convenient] are
employed two more, viz, [UndersTanding, Thanksgiving.] What you take of this
Physic, you must Understand to be Proper for your Distemper: and take no more
than does you Good: and for which you may with Boldness, and Acceptance to God,
give Thanks 1 Timothy 4.4.
. Far be it from you to take it for Fashion-sake. Or to p lease the Palate. Or
to show that piece of Breeding (so called) which every Clown has so long since
learned. And as to your Two Pipes (because I doubt you cannot Command it) I
conclude it is your Safest way to cast it Quite off. For if it be not a Servant
in Subjection, it will be a Mast er in Dominion. It Is like an encroaching
Parasite: give him an Inch, he will take an Ell. It Is like the Pope of Rome:
Simile.
He must Up, or Down, now in England. And if with you all England would Expel
this Vanity (as I pray they may do Popery) it would be a Thousand times better:
for where it does a Grain of Good, it does a Mass of Mischief. Were Englands
Wealth well Ordered, England would live Well. If what the Rich Wast in this
bewitching Weed was given to the Poor, (provided they leave Wasting) it would
make them all Rich. And the Rich not the Poorer, but the Richer: i e, with the
Reward they shall receive of the Lord, who lend to Him, by relieving the Poor
Pro. 19.17.
But if men have Smoked away their Senses, it is in vain to say, Lo, how Black
is this Crow! or how White is this Snow! Well, So or So, it gives me some
Content, that I have thus far cast Contempt upon the Abominable Abuse of this
Honorable Creature [Tabacco:] which has almost England at Command, beside
Other Countries. And whether I call this a Testimony for God against this
Vanity of Vanities, or No: yet Take it SO.

Sir, in pleading against Sin, Vanity, Carnality: I plead for GOD, against whom
it is Enmity. And whether You, or Others, will Hear or Forbear Ezekiel. 3.11.
, yet I will endeavor to deliver my Soul Ver. 19.
. For Gods hand is taking hold of Judgment. In the hand of the Lord there is a
Cup, it is full of mixture Psalm. 75.8.
, i e, of Judgments, without mixture of Mercy for the Wicked Rev. 14.10.
. It Is a mixture of Mercy, and Judgment for the Godly. And it is to be feared,
God will come Down with his Cup, and give England a Vomit, to make it Spew out
its Inhabitants, for their Abominations. viz, This Smoking Sin, Drunkenness,
Adultery, Fornication, Theft, Covetousness, Cursing, Swearing, Lying, Whoring,
Sabbath-breaking, Sodomy, Buggery, Blasphemy, Perjury, Pride, Deceit, Malice,
Envy, Hypocrisy, Treachery, Tyranny, Idolatry, Popery. False Oaths, by Baal
and Malcham Jer. 12.16. Zeph. 1.5.
. Covenant breaking. Contempt of God: his Word, and Ways. Formality without
Efficacy in Christianity. Against All which, I Testify, for GOD: He that
Hears, let him Hear, and he that Forbeareth, let him Forbear Ezekiel. 3.27.
.


Fath. I perceive you have done with Tobacco: T A say, All his time is too
Little to get a living for his childrens Bodies: though he Never spend any of
his time about their Souls.


Min. As to your repeated Plea for the Poor, I say, Parents Poverty is an
Argument for Industry for the Soul, and Diligence, not for Negligence. q d, We
are poor among Men, and so we are like to Live and Die. Come, let us labor
that We and our Poor Children may be Rich toward GOD. Thus Earthly Poverty,
should provoke Parents to procure Heavenly Riches. Christ's Precept should Drive
them to it, Seek ye first the Kingdom of God: and his Promise should Draw them
to it, these things shall be added Mat 6.33 Simile
. As the Seller, gives in the Paper, when the Parcel is Purchased. Let them
make Sure of Heaven, and trust God for Earth: in a way of Duty, and Industry.
Godliness has the promise of This life 1 Timothy 4.8.
: and before the Godly shall want Mercies, GOD will work Miracles. If this will
not Do, I would say to T A: Thou Wretch, who art thou Born (and Bound) to obey?
God or the Devil. Let them who are so full of Bodily business, that they are
necessitated, to neglect the Soul, A sinful necssity.
Consider: (1) Is not necessity Voluntary? do not I Choose to overcharge my
self with business? am not I carried into it by a Covetous Mind, after Much
Gain? If SO, let them expect it to End as the Act of Esops covetous Dog: Esop's
fable of the Dog.
who swimming over a River by Moonshine, catched at the Shadow of the meat in
his own Mouth, and So lost ALL. But (2) If necessity be Providential, and a man
be Very Poor, or unavoidably involved in abundance of business: let him be
Humbled under it, and lay it to Heart as a Sad Case: and Pray, and Implore God
about it. q d, OH Good Lord, what a Judgment am I under! shall I be under a
Necessity to neglect the One thing Necessary? A Sad necessity.
shall I and mine be under a necessity, So to Labor for our Bodies, as to Lose
our Souls? LORD Help, or Behold, we Die, we Die, Eternally Nu. 17.12.
. And who knows how Prevalent, prayer may be for Liberty, from such a Necessity
and Misery.


Fath. I perceive you slight All Objections against the Education of Children,
and so I shall add no more.


Min. I do so, Utterly. And shall do so, whosoever be the Opposer, All Ob
rejected.
viz, Parent, Professor, Preacher, Apostle or Angel. And do count them All as
Dirt, not deserving a Word in Answer. And I did think to have given No other
answer, to All yours. Nor would I, but to clear your Way to this Good Work.


Fath. Now it seems our discourse is at End.


Min. No, if So, it will not end well.


Fath. Sit you Silent then? go on to the end.


Min. To what end or purpose? except what is Past took more Place.


Fath. Solomon says, He that observes the Wind shall not Sow Ecl. 11.4.
.


Min. Well said. Then I will Sow On. But if you receive not the Seed into good
Ground, and bring not forth fruit well; it will be Worse for you, and Yours
too. Yea, Woe to you, if counsel be Well given To you, and Ill taken By you.


Fath. I will take it as well as I can.


Min. Seeing you promise so Fair, Advice, Civil, Secular.
I will proceed to give you some Advice of a Civil, Secular, Temporal concern.
This is employed In, and a part Of [Education] proposed to be spoken unto, as
the Subject and Sum of our discourse.


Fath. Pray do so, I much desire to hear that.


Min. This will have some respect to Spirituals, as Spiritual advice has
respect to Temporals. For by reason of the Union of Soul and Body, Good advice
for the Soul respects the Good of the Body: and Good advice for the Body,
respects the Good of the Soul. This advice, I shall deliver in these 12
Documents.

First. Docu. 1. Learning.
Give your children Learning.] Let them that Can, take Cato's Counsel.

Instrue praeceptis animum, nec discere cesses: Nam sine doctrina vita est
quasi mortis imago. With learning store thy mind, cease not to learn: Without
it none can life from death discern.

At least, learn them to read their Own Language Well. Some Persons (by their
Parents negligence) can look on a Bible to No more Purpose then to look on a
Blank or a Block. A sad case.
The Bible is a Sealed Book: when it lays Open before their Eyes. It Is as in
an Unknown Tongue: in their Own Language. It Is translated into English, and
some English men can No more read it, then if it was Still in Hebrew, and
Greek. The Blessed Bible, contains a Thousand Letters, of Gods good will and
mind to Man. And though all of Infinite concern, yet Some men Never read one of
them All while they live. They that can be content with This: their Sleep is
Deep, and their Hearts are Dead: yea Harder then either Flint, Adamant, or the
nether Millstone.

Second. As soon as children are Capable of it, Docu. 2. Employment.
Let them be some way well Employed.] Idleness is the hour of Temptation, to
Destruction. While the little Bird is in action, Emblem.
hopping from Bush to Bush, it is Safe: but when it sits Still it is soon Shot
to Death. Idleness is a time of Temptation to evil Action. And because
children are not well Employed, they Give and Take, much Mischief. All persons,
Poor and Rich, are to be well set a Work. That the Poor must work, I need not
tell you. But, Great Augusstus.
great Augustus Caesar, set his daughters to Spin and Card: and ware no
Garments but what They made him. Rich Rebekah (it seems) was a Rare Cook Genesis
27. 9
. And her mother Sarah Genesis 18.6
. And Tamar the Kings Daughter 2 Samuel 13.6.
. They had not the Art to Seek when they had occasion to Use it. And these
things were written for our Learning To. 15.4.
. But our delicate Damsels now a days, would ware Rebekahs Bracelets, but not
bare her Pitcher Genesis 24.15.
. And put on Tamars Coat of diverse Colors, but not put their hands into her
Kneading Trough. 2 Sa. 13.8.



Fath. But me thinks you Tie up Children very Strictly. Solomon seems to allow
more Liberty. What else means he by this Text? Ecl. 11.9.



Min. Not to give Liberty, for Vanity. Not to add Fuel to the Fire of
youthful lusts. But this is an Ironical speech, i e, by way of Derision.
Ironie.
And so sometime would Christ speak to his Own Disciples. e g, Sleep on now,
and take your Rest Mat. 26.45.
: q d, If you like it, with so many Halberts about your Heads. If God speak to
the Wicked, Ironically; he speaks Judicially. e g, God forbad Balaam to go with
Balak's Messengers Nu. 22.12, 19, 20, 31.
yet he detains them for a Further Answer from God. And he Has it, Woe to him
that God bids go against his Will.
God said, Go with them: q d, I know thy fingers Itch after Balak's Money-Bag:
Go, q d, if thou Dare, and then meets him with a Drawn Sword. Thus Micajah to
Ahab: Go up and prosper 1 K. 22.15
, when it was to perish. Thus Elijah to Baals Prophets, who were howling for
help: O Baal hear us Chapter 18.26
. Cry Aloud, says Elijah, for he is a god: either he is Talking, or he is
Pursuing, or he is in a Journey, or peradventure he Sleeps, and must be
Awaked ver. 27.
If men will mock GOD, God will mock Men. God bids men Pray: they Play. God
bids men Fast, and Mourn: they Feast, and Rejoice. God bids men run to Heaven:
they run to Hell. God bids men, Give diligence to make sure of Election, and
Salvation: they are diligent to make sure of Rejection, If men will be Cross,
they will be Crossed.
and Damnation. This presumption provokes God to speak Ironically, Angerly, and
in Indignation: and to give counsel Contrary to Salvation. Thus Solomon,
Rejoice, Let thy heart cheer thee, Walk in the ways of thy heart: q d, Seeing
thou Will do so, whether God will or No. But know Thou, that for all these
things God will bring thee into judgment Ecl. 11.9
. Here is the biting [But] at last: q d, But God will Hale thee to Judgment, if
it be Never so much against the Hair, and the Heart too with thee. Simile.
As a man to a wilful child, who will not go to School, but to Play: [Go, take
your course: but, I will make it Dear Play to you.] Now if the Youth will
sincerely desire to know what Solomon means in good Earnest, that they may hear
God speak Mercifully, and not Judicially. Then, Rejoice: is Repent. Let thy
heart Cheer thee: is, Let thy sins Grieve thee. Walk in the ways of thy Heart:
is, Walk in the ways of Gods Own Heart. And thus is this Text reconciled to,
Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth Ecl. 12.1.


Third. Teach them to be of Good Behavior.] Such as becomes the Children of
Men. Docu. 3. Comely Carriage.
And of Parents professing Godliness. Such Carriage as becomes the Children,
of the Children of God. Teach them to honor their Parents. Their Neighbors.
And Strangers. That salutation of Abraham's servant to Rebekah, and her
respectfull reply to his Petition: is recorded as an Ornament to both He and
She. viz, let me (I pray the) drink a little water of thy Pitcher.] And she
said, Drink my Lord, and I will draw water for thy Camels also Genesis 24. 17, 18,
19.
. Teach them to honor the Aged. Thou shall rise up before the Hoary head, and
honor the face of the Old man Lev. 19.32.
. For the Child to be have himself proudly against the Ancient: is spoken of as
a Judgment 1 Sa. 2.7.
Take heed they do not despise the Poor. Whosoever mocketh the Poor, reproacheth
his Maker Pro. 17.5.
the Lord makes Poor 1 Sa. 2.7.
. Let them not despise the Lame, the Blind, the Crooked, the Deformed. These
are Gods Workmanship. God has made them for his Glory: and not for Objects of
Scorn, and Contempt, for their Fellow Creatures. Dread the thoughts of their
despising the Godly. A Sad Monument.
Let parents remember that Monument of Vengeance: viz, Two Bears taring 42
children at Once, for mocking of One godly man 2 Kin. 2.24.
Barren Michael has Too many children in England, to mock at holy Habits, and
Excercises of godliness 2 Sa. 6.20.
Noah could not build an Ark without a Mock. But they had Done mocking when
they stood on Tip-toe, on the Top of the Mountains, Mocker, Remember this.
up to the Mouth in Water. And God will have a Time to Stop, every mocking
mouth. A Sad Shame.
In the mean time (to the SHAME of their Parents be it spoken) there are
Multitudes of Children in England, who have No more Christiauity, nor Civility,
than if they were the Offspring of Indians and Pagans: or the Seed of Savage
Wild Beasts of the Wilderness.

Fourth. Docu. 4. Care of Health.
Have a Special Care of their Health.] Endeavor to prevent Diseases, which
come by infected Houses, or Persons. Or by Idleness, and want of Exercise. Or
by Heats and Colds. By going too thin Clothed, or Wet. By any ill Diet in
Food. Or by eating Unripe Fruits: as Apples, Pears, Plums, Cheries. Or over
many Ripe. Thus some suffer their Children, to shorten their Days: and to be
sent to their Long Home, Long before their Time.

Fifth. Docu. 5. Gasualty.
Beware of, and Dread the danger of Sudden Death.] By falling into Rivers,
Brooks Ponds, Wells, standing Open, or with Rotten Covers. By climbing, and
falling from Ladders, Trees, Leads on the house Top. London! Look to it.
Or out at Wide windows, or Casements. By Timber, Stones, Bricks, falling on
them. By Coaches, Carts, Cars, Horses. By Swallowing any thing Perilous. And
let parents that count these Cautions Ridiculous, take heed God do not give
them more cause to Cry by suffering their children to Perish: then I do give
them cause to Laugh by seeking to Save and Preserve them.

Sixth. Teach them to have a care of evil Company, and evil Counsel.] Docu. 6.
Ill company.
An evil Companion, is an evil Counselor: and an evil Counselor is an evil
Companion: one is Both, and they are both One, as unseparable. Give warning of
this Gulf, with wise Solomon. My son, if sinners entice thee consent thou Not
Pro. 1.10.11.
. If they say, Come: it is the Devils call to a match of mischief. Let us all
have one Purse ver. 14.
: proves to be all one Gallows. Evil Company, and evil Counsel, has destroyed
many a one with a Double destruction: Body and Soul, both at once. An evil
Counselor, As evil as the Devil.
will speak Death in at the Ear, as the DEVIL at first did. Evil Counsel is
enough to bring the KING of a Nation to Confusion, and Destruction. I have read
of a king, A Kings Confession
who confessed at his Execution, that such Evil Instruments brought him to the
Block.

Evil discourse Infects: How often is Death? Blown into Souls, by an Infectious
Breath.

Seventh. Docu. 7. Restraint.
Take heed of allowing them too much Liberty, to wander abroad upon Pleasure.]
Dinah must go Gadding to see the daughters of the Land: and she comes home
Deslowed Genesis 34.1.
. And much more mischief follows. Simeon and Levi in their cursed anger, Kill
their Confederates, whom they had Coozened into a Covenant Ver. 25.
And it was a wonder, that Damsels walk did not end in the Destruction of
Jacob, and his House, as he feared Ver. 30.
. I may say to you, as Paul bid the Colossians say to Archippus: viz, Take heed
to the ministry which thou have received in the Lord that thou fulfill it Col.
4.17.
. Every parent is an Archippus, who has received a Ministry of the Lord in
Charge for children. Archippus is a Greek word, which signifies, A governor of
horses.] Children are Wild Colts Job 11.12
, who when grown Headstrong, will not regard the crying of the driver Job 39.7.
. Sir, you should seriously consider what a Roaring Lion the Devil is 1 Pet.
5.8.
: and how diligently he devises to Devour your children. And that it is not
your Own conversion that will prove their preservation, from Temporal, or
Eternal destruction: but Their godly education. God has sworn that, Noah,
Daniel, and Job, shall deliver neither Son nor Daughter by their Own
righteousness Ezekiel. 14.20.
. It Is not parents imputative righteousness for Justification, nor inherent
righteousness for Sanctification, that will Save their children. But it is
their righteousness in Conversation, viz, Godly Education, by which they must
become their Saviors. It Is not the Conversion of a Father, nor of an Emperor,
that can secure a poor child from Satan the Devourer. And therefore a Child was
he who cried out for joy at the Emperors conversion: [O! the Emperor is a
Christian!] q d, Emperor
Now we shall have Halcion days, a Heaven upon Earth.] To whom a wiser person
thus replied, But the DEVIL is not a Christian yet.] And so long as he is not
Converted, nor Confined to the bottomless pit: Christians must look for No
less mischief then he can do Them and Theirs too. He will go to the End of his
Bounds, to a Hairs Breadth (...) And here let me add this Caution, Caution
] (...) ^hen your children are under Convictions, enquire into Satan's
Temptations. For if once the children be come to the Birth, it will be (on the
Devils part) a day of Rebuke and Blasphemy 2 Kin. 19.3.
[Rebuke] to Conviction, Convertion, Faith, Hope, Prayer: q d, It Is too Soon,
thou art too Young, or too Good, to need such a Change. Or, its too Late, thou
art too Old, and too Wicked to be saved. [Blasphemy] by such suggestions from
SATAN, against GOD, CHRIST, the Spirit of grace, that the foul may think
Unpardonable. The Sum of all which is, (1) to make a soul Secure, and Presume
on salvation Without conversion: or (2) to drive a soul to Despair of salvation
With conversion.

Eight. Docu. 8. Examination.
Take an Acount of your childrens Practices, Purposes, Pretenses.] Even a Child
is known by his Doings, whether his work be pure, and whether it be right Pto.
20.11.
. The neglect of this Duty had like to lost David's Life. Absalom intends
Rebellion, and he pretends Religion: I pray thee let me go and pay my Vow which
I Vowed to the Lord in Hebron 2 Samuel 15.7.
. And the King said, Go in peace Ver. 9.
. Poor David! Ah pitiful reply! David should have Sifted the business about,
q d, How now! what, Vow a Vow to the Lord, and defer to pay it for 40 Years!
Ver. 7.
what fiery Fit is this you are fallen into? how comes it to pass you are Now
so conscionable who have been So long careless?] Had David been Considerate,
Absaloms design had been Frus^^^^^. But David makes No more to do: Go in peace,
q d, Absalom is in a Very good mind, I hope he will Now be a Comfort to me.] A
way goes Absalom, to make War with his father. This turns David's Tune: his
Harp into mourning Job 30.31.
: Behold my Son, which came forth of my bowels seeks my Life 2 Samuel 16, 11.
And besides Absalom's Death, and David's Dolorous Grief: this causes a
Slaughter of Twenty Thousand men. That Phrase has Too much foundation: In
nomine Domini incipit omne malum.

Ninth. Docu. 9. Partiality.
Take heed of fond Partiality.] It Is of evil Consequence. It sets that Root
which bears Gall Deu. 29.18.
. And sets children together by the Ears. And makes them Murder one another. e
g, Isaac loved Esau, but Rebekah loved Jacob Genesis 29.28.
Isaac called Esau HIS son Chapter 27.1.
: and Rebekah spoke to Jacob HER son Ver. 6.
. Esau was Isaacs boy: Jacob was Rebekahs boy. What is the fruit of this
parental partiality? even Esau's Partiality and Enmity to his Father, Mother
and Brother. Esau hated Jacob, q d, He has All my mothers heart: she has None
for Me: and I will have as little for Her. The days of mourning for my father
are at hand, then will I Slay my brother Jacob Ver. 41.
. q d, Not while my loving Father lives, to grieve him: but when he is Dead,
and my mother under Dolor: I will Double it by my brothers Murder. She thinks
Birthright, and Blessing, and All too little for him: but he shall not Long
enjoy it, nor She him. At Esau's threat, Jacob flees for his Life: yet takes
not Warning, but loves Joseph more than All his children Genesis 37.3.
For which Love, his brethren Hate him: conspire to Slay him: and Sell him into
Egypt, to his fathers Sorrow. And Gods Providence in this, will not justify
Jacobs inordinate Affection: nor his sons evil Action. N B. Children can
quarrel Too soon of their own Heads: though parents set them not together by
the Ears. e g. Two Brothers walked abroad in a Starlight night. Said A: A Sad
Story,
Would I had a Pasture as large as this Element. Said B. Would I had as many
Oxen as there be Stars. Said A: Mr Jer Buroughs, and Camerarius.
Where would you feed them all? Said B: In your Pasture. A, What whether I will
or no? B, Yes whether you will or no. A, What in Spite of me? B, Yes in Spite
of you. And thus from Words to Blows: till they Sheathed their Swords in each
others Bowels. Let Parents N B. The first murder in the World recorded in
Scripture, was between two Brothers: because One was respected, not the Other.
Because God countenances Abel, Cain kills him Genesis 4.
. God may Love one brother, and Hate another: but this is no Rule for Father or
Mother. And these are Ancient Things 1 Chapter 4.22 Docu. 10. To take heed of
Smooth Tongues.
.

Tenth. Teach them to take heed of being Deceived.] Learn them to be Very Wary
of fair false Pretenses, and Promises: and Satanical Subtilties, of Smooth
Tongues. e g, [Your Servant Sir, at your Command] and a Thousand Gingles.] When
[your Servant] seeks to serve Himself, and to Swallow up Him, Cursed
Complements.
and his Substance, whom he thus Cursedly complements. Caution your children to
be Very Wary of the Wicked Wits of the world. What says the Scripture, of
these Subtle Serpents? Their belly Prepares deceit Job. 15.35
. The man's mind is a Shop of deceit, where it is Framed as by an Artificer, and
Tools. It Is a Workhouse, and a Storehouse, for, he he Lays up deceit within
him Pro. 26.24.
. He has it Ready for an Opportunity: and then what the Mind has prepared,
the Tongue utters, and the Hands act.] His mouth is Full of deceit Psalm. 10.7
. If one pretense will not take, he has another. And if Specious Pretenses,
and Audacious Promises will not prevail: he will show [Sorrow] that there is so
much Deceit in the world: and [Fear] that it will fare the worse with Honest
men for Knaves. He will tell you, he would not have you Trust him, if you do at
All suspect him. For though your Goods or Money be Never so safe in his hand:
it may cause Fear, and Disquiet, which he would by No means occasion. And this
is Very Effectual.] Bread of deceit is Sweet Pro. 20.17. Secret sin is the
Devil's Inn.
: this entices him to his Trade. But when he eats the Sweet in Secret, the
Devil is at Inn in his Heart. And let him not think to Dine with the DEVIL, and
Sup with a Saint and an Angel: for afterward his mouth shall be Filled with
gravel: to trouble the Teeth till they Gnash, and torment the Conscience to
Eternity. David, deprecates a deceitful tongue: prays for deliverance From
it: and is at a loss for a Plague, Bad enough For it. What shall be given to
thee? or what shall be done to thee thou false tongue? Sharp arrows of the
mighty, Deeply piercing and wounding: Coals of Juniper Psalm. 120.2, 3, 4.
, i e, Fierce, and long lasting Fire. In the mean time, True Men suffer by
False Tongues: viz, in Goods, Good-name, Life and all: for, Death and Life are
in the power of the Tongue Pro. 18.21.
. [Death] by pleading Against a man: as them two sons of Belial against Naboth
1 K. 21.13
. [Life] by pleading For a man: as Israel for Jonathan 1 Sa. 14.45.
. [Death] in a man's Own Tongue, as Adonijah, who spoke against his Own Life 1
K. 2.23.
. And sometime by words drawn out by an Enemy, in Policy. Take heed (say some)
thy Own Tongue, do not cut thy Own Throat.] In a word, Arabic Proverb.
there is World of deceit in the world. Sir, it concerns you Seriously to
consider it: and to teach them to be as wise as Serpents, who must have to do
with Devils. Such a one was one [Squire] a Papist sent from Spain to Poison Q
Elizabeth: who, when to that End he was secretly poisoning the Pummel of her
Sadle, A white Devil.
prayed Aloud saying, GOD SAVE THE QUEEN.

Eleventh. Get good Trades, Docu. 11. Good Trades
or ways of Livelihood for your children.] that they may be Substantial, and
not need to be Supported by others. Friends are apt to Fail: trust not in them
Mica. 7.5. Brittle metal.
. Use them as Venice-glasses, i e, Very warily, and lean on them, Very lightly.
Nothing costs Dearer then Some men's Gifts. The donours Geese are such Swan: he
knows not When he is Satisfied. Freehearted Hiram (who was ever a lover of
David 1 K. 5.1.
) supplies Solomon with Wood for Building ver. 10.
: for which Solomon gives him 20 Cities Chap. 9.11.
: and who would have thought of a word of Discord between them two. Hiram comes
to see them, he is Displeased Ver. 12.
: What Cities are these thou have given me my brother? Ver. 13.
q d, Here be Cities indeed! and he called them (...) Cabul Displeasing,] of
(...) Fetters.] They were too Straight to fill his Heart: it would hold 20
more. His heart was so much Larger than his Liberty, that he was as Fettered,
and Prisoned in his Palaces. And so they were Displeasing: Cabul to this Day:
they Never pleased him.


Fath. What Trades do you commend to me for my children?


Min. I have not skill to choose Trades for children: but I will give you a
Caution. Caution.
Take heed how you judge of the Goodness of a Trade, by the Greatness, or
Gain of a Trade. To make the Greatness, or Gain of a trade, an argument for
the Goodness of a trade: may be Antiscriptural, and Heathenish. Demetrius, the
Silver-smith, had a Trade of No small Gain: it was not therefore Good Act. 19.24.
. The godly must eye Gods Glory, more than their own Gain. And the Public
good, of Church and State. A good Trade.
That is a Good Trade by which the body Lives, and with which the soul Thrives,
and grows Rich: and by which the Times are in some measure Mended, and the
Devil Troubled. His servants, Sanbalat, and Tobiah were Grieved that there was
a man come to seek the Welfare of Israel Neh. 2.10. A good ground of Bad grief.
. It Is better to be a grief to such Sanbalats, because we do Good, and grow
Good: than to be a grief to them, because we grow Great. Tell your children,
they are not the Richest who have most of the World, in their Possessions,
Purses, and Houses: but they who have most of the Word, Spirit, and Golden
Grace of God in their Hearts. And they are not the Wisest who are Ever seeking
that which will Never satisfy, if Never so much be obtained: but they who seek
that which will Sweetly Satisfy, and Eternally Content.


Fath. But I hope there is no Hurt in Riches, though they be not a Heaven upon
Earth, to afford full satisfaction.


Min. No HURT! wise Solomon was not of your opinion. There is a sore evil which
I have seen under the sun, viz, Riches kept For the owners thereof to their
Hurt Ecl. 5.13.
. It Is a Wonder if the worldling charge not the wise man with Folly, or the
Printer with Error: saying, Surely it is to be read [kept From them to their
Hurt.] For this is all his Fear: to have them kept For him, is all his Care:
though it be to his Hurt. How to his Hurt? Silver is not Sin: Pearls are not
Poison. No, but for man's Sin, the Ground out of which they come is Cursed Genesis
3.17
. Ground is comprehensive: All cursed to the wicked. Simile
As Paint proves not one to be of a good Complexion: Prosperity proves not one
to be in a good Condtion. That Gingle [God has blessed such a man with a Great
estate:] The sound of a London Cymbal.
has made my Ears to Tingle. For, in Truth, he being Carnal [God has Cursed
such a man with a Great estate.] To say [The man is grown Rich] is too Plain,
for our Fashionable Professors: therefore the Speech must be Adorned with [God
has Blessed.] And then this Fine Phrase, for man's Ornament and Gods Honor: is
a taking the Lords name in Vain, and a Very Lie. Whether or no the Person be
blessed, is not by such considered. But if I will know whether the Estate be
blessed, I must know whether the Person be blessed. If a Person be cursed, his
Estate is cursed, both Personal, and Real, and All to his Hurt. The fault is
not in a man's good Goods, Land, or House: but in his bad Heart. The mischief
lies not in the Lump of riches, but in the Love of riches. If the Lump of
riches gets into the House, the Love of riches gets into the Heart. If a man
love the World, he loves not God 1 Jo. 2.15
. What a man loves not, is not his god: his Goods are his gods: then no wonder
if God do Curse, him and his gods together. 2) Nor was a wiser than Solomon of
your opinion, viz, Jesus. Verily I say unto you, that a Rich man shall hardly
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And again I say unto you, It is Easier for a
Camel to go through the Eye of a Needle, than for a Rich man to enter into the
Kingdom of God Mat. 19.23, 24.
. At this the Disciples were so Amazed, that (I suppose) if great estates had
then been Offered to them, they durst not have Owned them. They seem to Faint
under the Fear of being Rich. A rare fear.
Strange men! Many fear Poverty: Few fear Plenty. Many fear they shall be Poor:
but who is afraid he shall be Rich? this is the most Dangerous condition: the
Mean is most Desirable: Give me neither Poverty nor Riches Pro. 30.8.
. 3) Nor was that Person of your opinion, who gave away his Goods, that he
might be the Lighter to climb up Jacob's Ladder: i e, Crates's conclusion with
his Coin.
into Heaven. 4) Nor was Crates of your mind, who took his Money and threw it
into the Sea: saying, [I will destroy Thee, lest thou destroy Me.] But he was
much of your mind, who being at Sea in a Sinking Ship, suddenly fills his
Pockets, and Bosom, with Silver and Gold, as fast as he could. And thus in a
few minutes he made himself Very Rich. The Rich poor wretch.
But, steeping out of the Sinking Ship, into the Swimming Boat, he was so
Weighty with his Wealth that he stepped Short, and Sank into the Sea, and was
Never seen more. If not money, yet, the Love of money, is the Root of All evil
1 Timothy 6.10.
: an Expression as if spoken of the Devil. If no hurt in the Love of money,
there is no hurt in the DEVIL, nor any hurt in Hell.


Fath. HA!
OH Master! Min.
Madam! Maiden! is it Meet
To set thy Heart where Beasts do set their Feet?
It Is not untruly Said if you be Told:
You dig for Dross, with Mattocks made of Gold.
Affections are too Precious to bestow:
Upon the New-things, No-things here below.
The Eagle Scorns to fall down from on High:
The Proverb says, to catch the silly Fly.
And can a Christian leave the love of GOD?
To love the Ground, and cleave unto a Clod.
Like him at Sea, who did his Cabin Sweep:
When All was going Down into the Deep.
Or like the silly Bird, that to her nest:
Is carrying Moss, and never is at rest.
Till feathered well it be, but does not See
The Ax below, that is hewing down the Tree.
Twelfth. If it shall please God to bless Education for Conversion, docu. 12.
Concerning. Marriage.
or to convert your children by other means:] Give not a child in Marriage to
one that is Wicked, or without a work of Grace. Marriage is a very Solemn
thing: in which Parents should be very Serious. Abraham was old, and he said to
his servant that ruled his house, Put I pray thee thy hand under my thigh: and
I will make thee swear by the LORD, the God of Heaven, and the God of the
Earth, that thou shall not take a Wife unto my Son of the daughters of the
Canaanites Genesis 24.1
. It Is probable Abraham remembered the Ruin, unlawful marriages brought upon
the Old World. The sons of God Genesis 6.2.
] i e, which were of the Church of God: the posterity of Seth (...) Put] in
Abel's stead, whom Cain slew Chapter 4.25.
. Saw the daughters of men] i e, Cain's posterity. [They took them,] and
forthwith are called [ Flesh, Chapter 6.3.
] and threatened with a Flood to destroy all flesh. And it is probable, the sons
of men took the daughters of God too: and so made the greater mixture, and more
Apostates, as the word (...) Giants] signifies, coming of (...) To fall Ver. 4.
. See what an End the son of the Israelitish woman (whose father was an
Egyptian) came to. She learned him to Speak: he learned him to Blasheme: for
which he is Stoned to Death Lev. 24.10.
. The Jews married wives of Ashdod Neh. 13.23.
: and their children spoke Half in the speech of Ashdod Ver. 24.
. Their fathers learned them to speak like Jews, and Hebrews: and their mothers
learned them to speak like Heathens: i e, to Swear, and Curse, for which their
parents were Cursed Ver. 25.
. What an unparalled wicked person is a Husband (sometime) by reason of a
wicked Wife. There was None like Ahab, who did sell himself to work wickedness
in the sight of the Lord, whom Jezebel his wife stirred up 1 Kin. 21.25.
. Jehoram slew all his brethren with the Sword, and slew the Princes of Israel
2 Chro. 21.4.
, and wrought evil in the eyes of the Lord, for he had the daughter of Ahab to
Wife Ver. 6.
. These kinds of Contracts are called Treachery: their seed called Strange
children Ho. 5.7.
: and the Parents appointed to Perish. Judah has dealt treacherously, has
married the daughter of a strange god: the Lord will Cut Off the man that does
this Mal. 2.11, 12.
. And if you say, What is this to us in England? they were Heathens: Paul
provides you an answer: Be not unequally yoked with unbelievers 2 Cor. 6.14.
. If unbelievers, it signifies Nothing to be Protestants and Professors. Such
contracts of believers and unbelievers (being as contrary to God as Darkness to
Light) I conclude are of the Devil. He has (sometime) No such infallible way
to Ruin a Christian as this. Then he tempts some one of his Servants to love
such a one. And sends him with his Suit: A bargain from the bottomless pit.
dressed up with his Tongue tipped with Goodly Talk. Deceitfully addicted to
Sermons. To praise the best Preachers. To complain of Sin. In all points to
feign a Conformity to Christianity. If it will not do, great Love, and Trouble
is professed. And it will be his Death: or he shall Drown himself, if his
desire be denied. But if granted, she shall have what Liberty she will. Ask
such a Shechem Never so much Dowry, he will give it, let him but have the
Damsel to wife Genesis 34.12.
. And when the Devils will is Done, and they be once One, they are soon Two.
Then she is Frowned upon, and Frumpt, and Fisted, and excluded at the door. She
would not hear God's warning Word, and show shall feel Gods scourging rod. It
shall be a Serpent, a Scorpion, a Plague. Better be bound Hand and Foot, to a
Dead body, and burried Alive, than thus married. Christians are Strangely
stupefied when careless of Gods Word, in such a Weighty concern. And they
shall be Strangely punished, to be awakened, and humbled: and Happy they if
ever saved. Yea, Happy are they, if they may have the happiness, to go through
a Hell upon earth, to Heaven.


Fath. How if my child make a Promise to such a Person, Before I know it.


Min. Then you must break it After you know it: and the Lord shall forgive it
Nu. 30.3, 4, 5.
.


To all which of Education, I add these two Exhortations, For childrens
Children.
for Time to come. (1) If you Live to it, and have Time, and Opportunity for
it: Teach your childrens Children Deu. 4.9.
. Let them be brought upon your Knees, to that End. Not to take their parents
work out of their hands: but to help them on in this Great good work
[Education.] While you live, think not your Time too much for GOD: were it to
our-last the age of Methuselah. But (2) Live or Die, Lay a very solemn
Injunction upon your children, to teach Their children. And to lay the like
Injunction on their children, to teach Their children. Thus leave an
Inheritance to your childrens Children Pro. 13.22.
. Make your practice profitable to Posterity, to convey conversion from
Generation to Generation: that Religion may run in a Blood, and flourish in
your Families throughout All generations: so long as the Sun and Moon endures.
These Scriptures do not stand for Ciphers, which I will only relate, and leave
with you to Ponder at leisure. Hear me, I will declare that which Wise men have
told from their Fathers, and have not hid it Job 15.18
. I will utter dark sayings of old: which we have heard and known: and our
Fathers have told us. We will not hide them from their Children, showing the
generation to Come the praises of the Lord. For he established a Testimony in
Jacob, and appointed a Law in Israel, which he commanded our Fathers, that they
should make them known to their Children. That the generation to Come might
know them, even the Children which should be born: who should arise and declare
them to Their children Psalm. 78.2. to 7.
. Hear ye Children the instruction of a Father, etc. For I was my Fathers son:
he taught. Me also, etc Pro. 4.1, 3, 4.
. The father to the children, SHALL make known thy Truth Isa. 38.19
. When I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in thee, which dwelt
first in thy Grandmother Lois, and thy Mother Eunice, and I am persuaded that
in thee also 2 Timothy 1.5.
. The Elder to the Elect Lady and her Children, whom I love in the truth: for
the truths sake which dwells in us and shall be with us for ever. I rejoiced
greatly that I found of thy Children walking in Truth, as we have received a
Commandment from the Father 2 Job. 1, 2, 4.
. Those things which are revealed belong unto Us, and to our Children for Ever
Deu. 29.29.
.

Fath. Now Sir I suppose we are at an end.


Min. NO no, the great work is yet behind.


Fath. A great Work behind STILL! what is That, I wonder?


Min. It Is PRAYER Parent! Prayer for a Blessing.
PRAYER! for a Blessing upon [Instruction] by Doctrine and Example: and upon
[Correction,] by Word and Rod: that Education may end in Salvation. N B, Let
Prayer and Endeavor be linked together. He that Prays, and not Endeavors,
mocks God. He that Endeavors, and not Prays, mocks himself. Prayer is to be
performed with much Frequency, Fervency, and Solemnity. You are to be very
Serious when by instruction and correction, you speak to a Child: how much more
Serious and Solemn, when by prayer you speak to God. Thus pray; FOR them, and
WITH them.


First. Pray, For children.
FOR them.] Lift up prayer, as for children that stick in the Birth: when there
is not strength to bring forth 2 Kin. 19.3, 4.
Lift up thy hands for the life of thy young children Lam. 2.19.
. Pray, For them, as if they were at point of Death. Pray, For them, as if they
were at brink of Hell. Pray, For them, as if they were possessed with the
DEVIL. e g. Master, I Beseech thee look upon my Son, for he is my Only child.
And lo a spirit takes him, and he suddenly cries out Luke 9.38, 39.
. And oft-times it has cast him into the Fire, and into the Waters to destroy
him Mar. 9.22 The poor man's prayer improved.
. Improve this thus. LORD have mercy on my child! an evil spirit is in him, and
he cries out Rudely, and Wickedly. And it often casts him into the Fire: of
Fury, of Envy, of Lust. And into the Waters: of Sinful Pleasures, of
Drunkenness: the water of danger of Drowning, and Damning. And I brought him
to thy Disciples, and they could not cure him Mat. 15.16.
. So you, q d, I have brought him to the Sermon, and to such a Disciple to
Document him, reprove, convince, convert and recover him: and Still he lies at
the Point of death: LORD come down ere my child die Job. 4.49.
. Help from Heaven is the Point, parents must Come to, and Prevail for: or
their children go down to Hell.

And to encourage you, Ten Con.
Consider how Prevalent, prayer has Been: and what great things it has Done.
e g. 1) Prayer has made the Sun and Moon, to Stand still Jos. 10.12
. 2) It has made the Sun go Backward 2 K. 20.10.
. 3) has fetched Fire, from Heaven 1 Kin. 18.36, 37, 38.
. 4) has fetched Water, from Heaven Jam. 5.18
. 5) has fetched a Soul, from Heaven Act. 9.40.
. 6) has fetched an ANGEL, from Heaven Jud. 13.8
. 7) It has fetched GOD, from Heaven Psalm. 18.6, 9.
. 8) It has fetched a Person, out of Prison: who was Guarded, and Chained, and
shut in with an Iron Gate Act. 12.4, 5, 6, 10.
. 9) It has helped a Soul, out of a Hell upon earth: even out of All trouble
Psalm. 116.3, 4, 8.
. 10) It has held Gods Hands from destroying Exo. 32.10.
: and has prevailed with God for Special blessing Genesis 32.28.
. As a Prince had Jacob power with God, and prevailed. He kneeled down Jacob,
and rose up Israel. A Divine Dignity. He took his brother by the heel in the
Womb, and by his strength he had power with GOD: yea he had power over the
ANGEL and prevailed. Even the Lord God of Hosts, the Lord is his Memorial Ho.
12.3, 4, 5.
. Godliness is a Mystery: there is no trade like Beggary. Carnal beggary at
Man's door is a Poor trade: but spiritual beggary at GOD's gate is a Rich trade.
A rich Trade.
A praying Christian is like a Courtier: who gets more by One suit in Season;
Simile
than a toyling Trades man gets in 20 years. A little of God's Gold got by
prayer, is worth more than a Great many Guinys. PRAY then with All
perseverance, lest you play the Hypocrites part. Of him, Job gives you a
Character in a Quaere: viz, Will he always call upon God? Job 27.10.
NOT He. God shall hear from him in Hell Lu. 16.24
. And it may be (first) in the hour of Death. He will cry when God kills him
Ps. 78.34 Simile.
: like the Swine, when the Knife is at his throat. It was a sad Argument, that
Atheist used in his [one prayer] at Sea in a Tempest: when he told God plainly
[He was no common beggar, Heylyn (...), p 376.
had never troubled him with prayer before, and if he would but hear him that
time, he would never trouble him again.] This argument which he thought to be
twofold For him, he little thought to be ten thousand-fold Against him.

Fath. How often in a day had I best to pray, that I may persevere?


Min. As to your Time and Times in a Day for private prayer,] if you will take
my Counsel, follow David's Example: viz, Times for private prayer.
Three times a day: Evening and Morning, and at Noon will I pray Ps. 55.17.
. And Daniel's example: he kneeled upon his knees Three times a Day, and prayed
Dan. 6.10
. And for a Type of our looking to Jesus in prayer, his windows shall stand
open toward Jerusalem, though Death come in at them, and carry him into the
Lions Den. Daniel will Pray though he go into the Lions Den for it. Some will
not Pray, Some do as Dives did: Perish first, and then Pray.
though they go into the Dungeon of Hell for it. And though Daniel's prayer did
not keep him Out of the lions den, it kept him In the lions den: which was to
God a greater Glory, and to Daniel a greater Mercy, and to his enemies a
greater Misery, than if he had Never come there. It was a Perilous time for
Prayer. Daniel's safety seems to lay in laying a Bed, and laying prayer Down
till the 30 Dog-dayes be out Dan. 6.7, Daniels safe danger.
. N B. In the most Perilous time for Prayer, then it is most Safe to be in that
Peril of prayer. The danger lays in the Neglect of prayer: take heed of That.
I have read of a Witch who much envied a godly man: Of the Witch.
and sent her Imps often times to destroy him. But they usually returned with
this answer [We cannot come at him, for he constantly prays to God.] At length
he (being in Have) went out one morning without prayer. And that day they did
him a greater mischief than Daniel's Devils did him in the Lions Den: viz,
brake some of his Bones. This the Witch confessed when imprisoned. Mr Have.
Remember this that morning [Mr Hast] is so great a Husband, as to call you out
before you have been in your Closet.

First worship God: he that forgets to Pray:

Bids not himself, Good Morrow, nor Good Day.


Fath. It would make a man afraid. But I believe many go out in the morning
without prayer, and come Safe home at night too.


Min. NO wonder. Them condemned Prisoners that lay at quiet in Fetters,
Allusion.
why should the Keeper of Newgate hurt? he knows they will be Hanged when it is
the Kings pleasure to appoint the Execution Day. But if one to his great Damage
do break away: WOE be to him, if he can come at him. God is not for speedy
execution. And what cares Satan for breaking men's Bones, who are Subject to his
Service. No, let them go whole-Footed, and whole-Handed to Hell. But if one
break Prison, for liberty to serve God: OUT comes the roaring Lion with a Hue
and Cry from Hell: to devour Him, if he may.


Second. Pray, With children.
Pray, WITH them, in your Family.] It Is to poor purpose for Parents to pray,
For children, and not With them. And for Masters to pray, For servants, and not
With them. Sir, you are Master of a Family. Set up the Worship of God in your
Family, or expect the Wrath of God to be rained down upon your Family Jer.
10.25.
: Fire and Brimstone and an Horrible tempest Psalm. 11.6
. But -- what causes your Countenance to change?

Fath. I am frighted with fearful words.


Min. This countenance is a Character of a guilty Conscience. No wonder, if you
are Frighted. It Is more Dreadful to stand before the Drawn Sword of God's
mouth without Shelter: than to stand naked before Cannon Shot.


Fath. I desire direction for Family duty.


Min. First. As to Time, and Times, Direct. 1. Times for Family prayer.
when and how Often.] I affirm, that you are to perform this duty of prayer, In
and With your family. Twice in a day: viz, Morning, and Evening. And this
without Fail, except in a case of Necessity, which has no Law. And the Lord
spoke unto Moses, saying, Command the children of Israel, and say unto them. MY
offering, and MY bread for MY sacrifices, made by sire for a sweet savor unto
ME, shall ye observe to offer unto ME in their Due season Nu. 28.1.
. Day by Day, Morning and Even, continally Exo. 29.38, 39.
. Though this be out of use as Ceremonial (and so Practical) it is not out of
use as Doctrinal, and directive to Gospel duty. Gospel duty contained in One of
Gods Two Testaments, Gospel duty Great.
New or Old: is a greater Sum then many Gospelers imagine. Masters give unto
your Servants that which is Just, and Equal, knowing that ye also have a Master
in Heaven. Continue in prayer Col. 4.1, 2
: i e, For them, and With them. Note these Phrases, Cornelius prayed to God
always Act. 10.2.
. Pray without ceasing 1 These. 5.17.
. Thou shall eat bread at my table continually 2 Sa. 9.7.
. Was Mephibosheth such a Cormorant, as to eat bread at David's table Day and
Night? is a man to do Nothing but Pray, as if he was an Angel who has no
earthly trade to follow? No: the Sense of these Sayings [Alway, Direct. 2.
without Ceasing, Continually] is, Do it Daily, at Set Times. 2) Choose the
Fittest, and Best part of these times: i e, Early in the morning, and Early in
the evening. Then are you like to be Best disposed: and your Service Best
accepted: They that seek me early shall find me Pro. 8.17. Direct. 3.
. 3) Choose the fittest Place. Christ commends a close Closet to a Christan, as
a fit place, for private prayer Mat. 6.6.
. Such a place is also fittest for a Family, which is freest from noise.
Distracting thoughts will come in too Soon, though they be not sent in by
Sounds, and caused by Clamours abroad. Direct. 4.
4) Be not hindered by Trifles, that is hateful to God. He that will not go to
Heaven till there be nothing in the Way, is Never like to come there. Direct. 5.
5) Lay all business By, during the Time of the duty. Order your Fire to be
freed from that evil kind of Forecast, of placing some Vessel upon it, to be
Stirred, or Tended upon, and took Off in prayer. Cursed fore cast.
Some forecast is as good as Work: but this is worse than Naught. 6) Gather
all your Family together, Direct. 6.
to prayer. Gather the people together, Men, and Women, and Children, and thy
Stranger that is within thy gates, that they may Hear, and Learn, and Fear the
Lord Deu. 31.12.
. All Judah stood before the Lord, with their Little-ones, their Wives, and
their Children 2 Chro. 20.13.
. Both Young men and Maidens, Old men, and Children, let them Praise the name
of the Lord Psalm. 148.12, 13. Direct. 7.
. 7) And, Far be it from you for Ever, to separate your children from Gods
Service, as some do: who for a peaceable preparation for prayer, Pack their
children to Bed, at 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 years of age: with such a Salvo
(forsooth) They will Cry, or Sleep, or Something, and disquiet in duty. Strange
peace! is This the way to train up a child in the way he should go? is This the
way to bring Up in the Nurture and admonition of the Lord? If they Cry, or
Sleep, it is the Parents fault. Late prayer, or some disorder, is the Matter.
Serve GOD, and the Soul; before you serve the Body. Go to prayer before Supper.
And make a Law, viz, They that Cry, shall be Whipped, and they that Sleep, shall
go Supperlesse to Bed. And do not drive your children away before the Duty,
Odious Order.
as if they were Dogs: and leave your Dogs in their room, as if they were
Christians (as some do) Both which are abominations. I have heard of a Youth,
who was Converted by an expression in prayer. It was because he heard it. If he
had been Packed to Bed that night before Prayer, to the prevention of his
conversion; doubtless it had pleased the Devil to Purpose. Cauttion
instead of praying For them: i e, by affected Phrases, and tinkling Tones.
Hateful is that prayer to GOD, which is devised, formed, and phrased to please
Man. And No better are the Prayers of some persons. The Devil is such a
Chemist, he can extract evil out of Good: and Poison a person with his Own
Prayers: by puffing him up with Pride in them. 1 Timothy 4.5.
. Read a Chapter before Prayer. And speak something to your Family, from what
you read. A Rule to read the Bible.
or Leap-Year 366. Read 3 Chapters a Day: and read so many Psalms a Day (when
you are at them) as to read them all in 20 Days in Bissextile, and in 19 Days
in another Year: this reads the Bible through in a Year, except One Chapter,
which is easily added to the last days Task. Or, if you have Bentley's Bible,
it has 375 Leaves. If you read one leaf a Day, this does it, except 9 leaves
in Bissextile, and 10 leaves in another Year: which is not one leaf a Month
more than one a Day. In a word, one quarter of an hour in 24 hours (with a
ready Reader) reads the Blessed Bible in a Year. And which of us does not
trifle away, Ten Times more Time than so. Unworthy is that Person of the Name
(and far from the Nature) of a Christians: who thinks SO little time too Much
to spend in Reading, God's Precious, Pure, Blessed Word. Thus far of Family
Duty.


Fath. But hear me before you proceed any farther. I am unfit for Family Duty,
because of my weakness to perform it.


Min. If you know what you say, and be as Willing as Weak, it is well: for then
you will venture on your Duty, and trust to Gods Strength, which will carry you
through what Ever he calls you to. Sufficient for satisfaction is that One
Promise: as thy Days, So shall thy Strength be Deu. 33.25
. Let the weak (believe and) say I am Strong Joel 3.10
But tell me true, is there not somewhat else at bottom?


Fath. Truly there is: I am ashamed to pray in my Family, among my Servants.


Min. Now you say Something, though worse than Nothing. The former was
Weakness, this is Wickedness. Ashamed! to speak to GOD! to serve GOD! to be
like GOD! what ashamed of GOD! OH dreadful! read this Text and Tremble.
Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words, of him shall the Son of man
be ashamed when he comes in the Glory of his Father Mar. 8.38.
According to Christ's glory, will the shame of such be: i e, Infinite. To see
what a glorious Person is ashamed to Own them. To see what a Master they have
been ashamed to Serve. To see shameful Spewing upon their Glory Hab. 2.16
. Shame is the punishment prepared for Christ's implacable enemies: HIS enemies
will I cloth with Shame Psalm. 132.18.
Its like clothes (1) They are Visible: so is Shame. Simile.
(2) Unseparable while the Person is visible: Dissimile.
so is Shame. It Is unlike clothes, they Cover nakedness: shame Discovers it
for ever. What shall I say? if Shame be your Sin: take heed Shame be not your
Sorrow. The Sin of shame, and the Sorrow of shame, are Both unspeakable. It Is
written of Ajax, the great Grecian warrior, Ajax's dying saying of Shame.
that he Died with Shame, and cried [No death like it.] And Christ's enemies,
who are ashamed of him (at last) are like to cry [No damnation like it. Sir I
must tell you (though you deferve not to be told) that you are ashamed of your
Glory. Grace makes a man glorious Within, and godliness makes a man glorious
Without. Your Duty is your Dignity: Do it, and God will Dignifie you For it.
Them that honor me, I will-honour 1 Sa. 2.30
. If any man serve me, him will my Father honor Joh. 12.26.
You count it an Honor to serve an Emperor: what is it then to be served By
an Emperor! yet all this is Dross to the Service of God. To be a Servant of
the great God, is a greater Honor than to be a Master of all the men in the
world. And yet is not this All, for he that serves God him will God serve. God
will shut the Door after his servant Noah Genesis 7.16
God will make the Bed Psalm. 41.3
: and he will wash the Feet Jo. 13.5.
He that will wait on God, on him will God wait Isa. 30.18
. Even GOD, who is King of Christans, King of Nations, King of Kings, King of
Heaven, and King of Glory. At whose Splendour, Angels Wonder: and each one
covers his Face, with two wings, as with a double Vail Isa. 6.2.
.


Fath. I will object no more against prayer.


Min. Then I will direct more, For prayer.

Pray with your children not only in your Family, but sometimes do You, Pray,
with children in Closet.
sometime let their Mother, sometime let both father and mother take their
children into their Closet, and pray with them There. (1) In this way you may
the more Freely confess their bad Herts, and Faults to God: bewail their
Condition, and speak to God for them. (2) This way will make it manifest to GOD
that you are in good Earnest for their Good. (3) It will make it manifest to
your Children that you have more than a common care of them, as in Common among
your Servants: for it will show them you have a Special respect for them. (4)
And it will have a Good Effect upon them. If the heart of the fathers be to
their children, the heart of the children will be to their fathers Mal. 4.6.
. Your Children will see the difference of this duty: and You will see it: for
it Will work, and it will NOT be so well without it.

Teach your children (a right way) to pray for themselves. To teach Children to
pray.
Teach them not to call God Father, in a state of Nature: as some parents do,
who teach their children to Lie to the Lord, and speak Blasphemy against God.
But, put them into Such a way to pray, as Such may use. viz, To pray for the
life of their Parents. And for their Own life. And for mercies to maintain
life: as meat, drink, clothing, protection from danger. And to pray for life
for their Souls. For a Sight, and Sense of Sin. For a Savior. For Pardon. For
grace in the Heart. For a new Birth. That they may be the children of GOD. And
be saved from the power of Sin, and SATAN, and Hell Fire. And may go to Heaven,
and be happy both in Body and Soul, for Ever.


Fath. If children be wicked, they may not pray:


Min. So is the Plowing of the wicked sin too Pro. 21.4.
By your argument the wicked must not Plough: i e, follow a Calling for a
Living: but Beg, Steal, or Starve. (2) I grant, whether the wicked Plough, or
Play, or Pray, they sin: yet they must Plogh, and Pray too, or do worse: for
the Neglect is worse than the Act. If to pray is Sin, not to pray is a Worse
sin. And of two evils, it is best to choose the Least, and refuse the Greatest
(3) The wicked are Created to pray Act. 17.26, 27.
(4) The wicked are Commanded to pray Act. 8.22.
(5) Prayer is put up (and recorded) for Wrath to be poured out upon them,
because they Do not pray Jer. 10.25.
. (6) A precept for parents to teach children to Pray, is Certainly employed in
these expresses for Education. viz, Train up a child in the way he should go
Pro. 22.6.
.] Bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord Ephesians. 6.4.



Fath. I have head a Professor say [To teach children to Pray, is the way to
make them Hypocrites.]


Min. He is not so sure of That, as I am of This: viz, To let them go
Prayerlesse, is the way to harden them for Hell Fire. OH what a Cutting Cry
will this be One-day in Hell! [I am Damned because my parents did not teach me
to Pray to be Saved.] He that forbids the wicked to Pray, if he is not a wicked
Man, yet his is a wicked Act. And whatsoever be his Condition, he is in that
Point under Delusion. Let such men say what they will: I say, teach your
children to Pray. And again I say, Do it: if in Doomsday God do Blame you for
it: Caution. Black Art.
I will be Bound to bear it. But, Let not your children learn that Black Art of
boldness by prayer: viz, To sin the more securely. Like that Religious Beast,
I have paid my Vows, therefore came I forth to meet thee: come let us take our
Fill of love Pro. 7.14, 15, 18. Mr Tho Shephard.
. Or like that London Monster, who haunted Taverns, Theaters, Whore-houses, all
day: but Durst not go out in the morning without prayer: and Then so bold, he
durst bid the Devil do his Worst. Or like such who serve God on the Sabbath
day, for a License to live licentiously all the Week after. For if the
Sacrifice of the wicked be Sin, how much more when he brings it with a wicked
mind Pro. 21.27. Procure prayer.
.

Last. Procure the prayers of Praying Persons for your children (as much as may
be) and esteem of such Persons, as Precious. Had I an opportunity of Preaching
to all the praying persons in England at Once: I would exhort and beseech them
All in general, and Every One in particular: to pray for ALL the children of
the children of God. Some have Observed, and Asserted, [That the children of
Many Prayers do Seldom miscarry.] So much concerning Prayer. I shall come to a
conclusion with Ten (considerable) Corollaries, Te Corol.
to quicken you to your Whole Duty, contained in this Conference.

First. 1. Coroll. Fathers Name (...) Ab.
The very Name of a father may be a Motive to duty. The Hebrew word (...) A
father] comes of the Root (...) he willed; desired] of the fathers affection to
his children, which does Naturally descend to them, with desire after their
welfare. If not Thus, a man deserves not the Name of a father. They who have
been instruments to bring children into a State of Condemnation, and care not
to bring them into a State of Salvation: are these Parents! shall Paul travail
in birth till Christ be formed in Christians? Gal. 4.19.
and be so concerned as to wish himself accursed from Christ for his Kindred?
Romans 9.3.
shall Ministers do their utmost to Save children? shall the Devil do his
utmost to Damn them? and shall their own father that Begat them, and their
mother that Bare them, carry it as if they care not whether they are brought
forth for a Savior or a Murderer? and are these Parents? Monstrum! Horrendum!
NB. Neglect of duty to a Child, to humor an angry Wife, had like to cost Moses
his Life: for, the Lord sought to Kill him Exo. 4.24
. Let careless parents have a Care, God do not kill them Quite. And let
Parents hear themselves spoken to in these Texts. Keep this man, if by any
means he be missing, then thy Life shall be for his Life I K. 20.39
If he Die in his iniquity, his Blood will I require at thy hand Ezekiel. 3.18.
They that are under Such words, abroad without Shelter, and do not hear it
Thunder: are very Dull of hearing:

Second. The child's tears at it is Birth, Coroll. 2. Child's Tears.
may he a Motive for parents, to Pity and Duty. These tears seem to Presage its
Sorrow. The poor child seems to cry to see into what a Stormy Sea it is
Lanched: in danger to be Swallowed up, Soul and Body at once. Or, to see upon
what a Shore of trouble it is Landed: to wander in a wilderness of Woe, among
wild beasts of Prey. Yea so Cruel are the Devils Creatures, that poor children
are in danger of their Death, before their Birth. Cruel cruelty.
The cruel Claws of these wild Beasts (sometimes) tare the Young out of the
Womb before they are Born Am. 1.13.
: and the Old out of the Tomb after they are Buried Chapter 2.1.
.

Third. Coroll. 3. Child's Dead state
The dead condemned State, children are Born in: and are in till Born again. It
is a Dead Life, between the first, and second Birth. One passing by the house
of a Sinful Sluggard, said [ Here lies (not lives) Such a One.] A natural life,
is a kind of a Lifelesse, Worthless life. The old youngman A strange Epitaph.
An old man converted a little before his Death, would have this Epitaph on his
Tomb [Here lies a very Old Man of 3 years old] Barlaam being asked how old he
was, said 45.] Said the other, Thou seem to be 70.] Yea (said Barlaam) if
you reckon ever since I was Born: but I do not Count the time I spent in Sin.]
Lay this Dead Life to Heart. Suppose you had a child condemned to Die: yet so
as there remains a possibility to procure a Pardon. The execution hour is
concealed in the Kings own breast. It may be the child has Ten Days to live:
it may be not Two Hours. How would you bestir you in Such Case? how restless
Night and Day till your poor child's Pardon is procured? except Jehoram-like you
were bereaved of Bowels 2 Chronicles. 21.19.
, and had not the least Pity left in you. This is your childrens Case, if
unconverted. As after the Sentence, a malefactor is a Dead man: so before the
Second birth, a child is a Dead child: i e, Sentenced, and Condemned, to be
Hanged, and Burned, and Racked in Hell. And peradventure you are driving on
designs to procure Portions, and not Pardons. OH Miserable man! to morrow may
be thy Son, or thy Daughters Damning day. And if Once the secret set time be
Out, the poor child is Haled away, into Endless Woe.

Fourth. Your condemned child, Coroll. 4. Supposed sad sense.
is also to be supposed, under a Sad Sense of it is condemned condition. Suppose
you should Act as if as Insensible of it, as a parent is of a child's Soul
condemned state. And at your Return in the evening (after all the trifling
Turns you take in a day) your poor child should Quaere with a Sad Countenance
[Father where have you Been to day?] Here and There, about This and That. [OH
Father! what have you not been with the King to day? and do not know but I may
be Hanged to morrow.] And as you sit Idleing, Sleeping, or Smoking in the house
[GOOD Lord! father, will you sit Thus and let me be Hanged!] What a Cutting
consideration is This! OH how Common is it for children to be in a
Soul-condemned condition! and will parents (who profess to believe it) Pipe,
and Pot, and Prate away their time, while their children stand on the brink of
Everlasting Burnings? will they take their Recreation while their children are
under Condemnation, near that execution and End to perish for Ever? the Plague
of Pharoh is upon such parents hearts. WHAT Faith have such in Gods word? what
Life is in their faith? the faith of DEVILS exceeds a Dead faith Jam. 2.19.
.


Fath. It is very Sad to consider a child in such Case.


Min. Very SAD! in so saying, you say Nothing. It Is most Deplorable, and
Lamentable: enough to make a merciful man wish his head Waters, and his eyes a
fountain of Tears: to weep Day and Night for children so Dismally miserable
Jer. 9.1.
. And its matter of mourning to think how Few Tears fall into Gods Bottle upon
this account.

Fifth. Coroll. 5.
The inhumanity, and cruelty of such careless parents. Cruelty.
They are said to be more Savage than Sea Monsters: for even They draw out the
breast and give such to their Young Lam. 4.3.
: but these Men-Monsters are like the Ostriches in the wilderness, with a
7-fold Similitude. (1) The Ostrich is between an unclean hateful Bird and a
Beast: has part of Both, Ostrich defined.
but No part of Man, as the Meraid has.] A sad Character for a father. (2)
Faith outwardly with feathers Job 39.13
.] So is a foul Pharisaical father. (3) She is Proud.] What time she lifts up
her self on High, she Scorneth the Horse and his Rider Ver. 18.
. (4) She is Foolish:] because God has deprived her of wisdom Ver. 17.
. In danger she hides her Head: and then thinks No body sees Her: because She
sees no body. Man thinks he is Safe because he sees not God. Man Cannot see, he
Will not see, and then says, God Shall not see Psalm. 94.7.
. (5) She is forgetful of the great concern.] She leaves her eggs in the
earth, and forgets that the foot may Crush them, or that the wild beast may
Break them Job 39.14 15.
. (6) She is without natural affection.] She is hardened against her young
ones, as though they were not hers Ver. 16.
. (7) She is of strange strong Digestion: eats Old Iron.] So such Savage men
can Swallow such sayings of God, as would Tare the very Heartstrings of a
tender Heart in sunder. These are 7 Sad Cursed Characters, of careless
parents. King Herod's cruelty to the children in Bethlehem ((...) the males Mat.
2.16 Augustus Caesar's saying.
) founded this phrase [Better be Herod's Swine than his Son] for some say his
Own was slain in that Storm. The cruelty of our Ostrich-like fathers may found
this phrase, [Better be such a man's Swine than his Son, who cares no more for
this sons Soul than if he was a Swine. Crates wish.
] Crates wished himself on the top of the highest Mountain in All the World: to
cry out against Parents, who are careless of their childrens Souls. The beasts
of the field that manifest love to their Young, and mourn if they are Lost: may
rise up in judgment, and Condemn these men.

Sixth. Coroll. 6. Prodigious effect of neglect.
The monstrous prodigious fruit and effect of Parental neglect, and Omission of
Education. viz, The universal vanity of Youth: and base brutishness of Boys.
Their epidemical disobedience to GOD: by Cursing, Swearing, Lying, Stealing,
profaning the Sabbath: the Day designed by them for Satan's Service. Their
disrespect to Superiors. Their disobedience to Parents. And to Mr, Mrs, and
Dame: of which there is such an universal Outcry in the Kingdom, as of some
pestilent Plague and Judgment. ALL lays Principally at Parents doors. For if
they would exercise that Authority over them which God has Given them; and
perform their Part according to Gods Precept; it would work a great Cure among
the contagious Scabs, Wounds, Bruises, Sores; which have over spread the Body
of Great Britain from the Sole of the Foot to the Head Isa. 1.6.
. But this neglect of parental duty, is like the Setting open of Sluices, and
Floodgates, to overflow the Land with a flood of Filthiness, and
Profaneness. And to make children Famous for (nothing but) Wickedness. To be
children of Belial 1 Kin. 21.13.
, Cursed children 2 Pet. 2.14.
, children of Perdition Joh. 17.12.
, children of the DEVIL Act. 13.10.
, and children of Hell, as the Scripture calls them Mat. 23.15.
. And parents do not only Lay the reins in their necks, to let them run
Headlong to Hell: but also do Lead them on to that Lake, by learning them to
Sin by their example. viz, To Swear, Lie, Curse, Scoff at the godly. It Is
probable the parents taught the children to Mock, which Bares tare for mocking,
as an Emblem of the Torment of Hell for mockers. N B. Wicked parents will
teach their children to do good men Hurt, rather than to do themselves Good.
Herodias would teach her Dancing-daughter to ask Herod for John Baptists Head,
rather than for Half the Kingdom Mar. 6.23, 24.
. N B. For parents to bring Forth in sin, and to bring Up in sin, is a Sure way
to bring Down into sorrow: both themselves and their children together, for
Ever, and Ever.

Seventh. Coroll. 7. Deaths small distance.
Consider what a Small distance Death may be from (or how near to) your
childrens Heart, or your Own. By reason of the uncertainty and shortness of
Life, and certainty and (sometime) suddenness of Death: a Man or Child may be
within a Step of death, and not have a Thought of death. Or else think it as
far Off as the East is from the West. (1) God may smite with a Secret Sudden
Stroke. (2) One may die a Natural, and Sudden death: of which no Reason can be
Rendered. (3) One may die Casually, and Suddenly, in Any place in the land of
the Living e g. If one be at Sea, or on the Thames in a Boat, there is but a
Board between him and Death: Life within, and Death without: and but a Thin
Board between. If at Land: but a Shoe-Sole between the Bottom of the Foot, and
the Top of the Grave. If in any Street or Lane in London: a Tile, or Brick may
Fall, and Kill. If in the Field, or Country in a journey: a Thief may murder.
If in a Wood: the same Death: or a wild Beast may Devour. That which has Life,
may take away Life. That which is Dead, may be a man's Death. The fall of Earth,
or Stone, or Timber: or a man's fall into Water: or off his Horse, or House, a
Hundred ways to fall Out of the world. What is your Life? it is even a Vapor
that appears for a Little time, and then vanishes away Jam. 4.14.
. What is Man? Psalm. 8.4.
q d, A little bit of breathing Clay, a little bit of creeping Clay, a little
bit of living Clay, a little bit of dying Clay. And yet what a Do will a Proud,
Painting Jezebel make with a bit of Dirt: which the Dogs are about to eat up
for an Excrement 2 Kin. 9.30, 36.
. O Earth, earth, earth! hear the word of the Lord Jer. 22.29.
. What is that? DVST thou art, and unto Dust shall thou return Genesis 3.19
.

Brave Madam Silkworm! O thou Clod of clay! May be to Morrow for the Worms
a Prey.

Eight. Coroll. 8. Dolorous Death.
Your child's condemned State spoken of in the third Corollary, peradventure is
by this time forgot. Suppose (by your neglect) your child Dies in this
condemned condition. And in Dying (to sting your Conscience) has its eyes
Opened, to see the mouth of the bottomless pit stand Open, to swallow it Down
into the Dungeon of Hell. At which sight it Shrikes out, O Father, Mother! did
you Know me to be in this condition and not Tell me of it, and labor to get me
Out of it? did you Know me to be born in Sin, to live Cursed, unconverted, and
Condemned; and not Acquaint me with it? did you profess to believe the
Necessity of a new Birth, a new Heart, a new Life: and let me Live and Die
without it? was you Willing I should go to Hell that you would not Tell me of
it, except in such a Sleighty way as begot disbeliefe of the Truth of it, and
of the Verity of my misery. Cursed be the Day that Ever such a father Begat me,
and that Ever such a mother Bare me. And then dies Roaring, as if already in
Hell. Can you give no guess at This, what This will be to you? when it is your
Case, none need to Tell you what it is. Then you may weep with Rachel, who
refused to be comforted for her children, because they Were not Jer. 31.15.
. And with Isaiah, who said, Look away from me, I will weep Bitterly, labor
Not to comfort me Isa. 22.4. Solon's Sorrow.
. And with Solon, to whom said one [Why do you weep? it will do no good now.]
Alas said he, I therefore weep because weeping will do on good.] And with the
woman who was so busied in saving her Stuff, that her child in the Cradle was
forgot, till the house (on fire) was Down, and the child Dead: and then she
remembered it Roaring [O my child, my child!] And with Jacob when he supposed
Joseph was torn in pieces: I will go down into the grave unto my son mourning,
thus his father wept for him Genesis 37.35.
. If Joseph had been torn in pieces with a wild beast as Jacob supposed; what
had that been to a child's being torn by Devils in Hell to all Eternity.

Ninth. Coroll. 9. Doomsday Dolor.
Consider the Doleful outcries of Damned children in Doomsday, against their
carnal careless profane Parents: who have Lamentably lost Themselves, and
their Children too. When poor children with Pale faces (yet as Flames) and
hearts full Horror, shall ROAR out [O Father, Mother! what have You done! I
must Burn for ever in Hell, for the Sins you learned me to live in by your
Sinful example. The oaths I have Sworn will Cursing of men, God will Curse me
for ever. You set me to Work, and let me Play on the Sabbath day. I had no rest
from Sin, and now I must have no rest from Sorrow: but Roar for ever. Now Gods
wrath will be Poured out upon me because I did not Pray. To pray you would
Never learn me, except to say the Creed, the 10 Commands, and the Lords Prayer:
by which you learned me to Lie, for which I must Lay in the Lake Rev. 21.8.
. You learned me to neglect Salvation: now I have Lost it. You learned me to
Mock the godly: now God Mocks at my misery. You led me after our Blind Guide,
who called us Christians, and Gods children: now we are in the ditch of
Damnation together Mat. 15.14.
. You let me Game away my time: by which I have lost Heaven, and won Hell. I
would have heard good Sermons, which I heard folks Commend, and say, Sinners
were Saved by them: but you would not Suffer me, but Shut up the Kingdom of
Heaven against me. OH that Dreadful Judge! will presently pass the Sentence,
Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire Mat. 25.41.
: and then we shall be a Hell in Hell, to each other for Ever. It will be a
Hell to me, to behold You in Hell: you Cursed father, and murderer. And it will
be a Hell to you, to hear me Howl and Roar: and Curse you to your Face, for
Ever. And a Thousand such Dolorous ditties: Ten thousand times more Terrible
than tongue can tell. Sir, though it be not your Portion to perish with a child
lost by your neglect; yet is it nothing Now to think, that when you are in
Heaven, you shall have a child to Howl in Hell, and curse you there for Ever?
or will it be Nothing to you in the judgment Day? seeing (as the Scripture
signifies) some Saints shall then be subject to Shame, Sorrow, and saved so as
by Fire 1 Cor. 3.15.
.

Last. Coroll. 10. Sweet fruit of good Success.
Consider the comfortable joyful effect, and Sweet fruit of such godly
Education as ends in Salvation: and that both in Time, and in Eternity. It may
be a comfort to you in Any condition on Earth, to think your children are
Heaven-born: Pardoned, Justified, Sanctified, and shall be Glorified. If they
should be Poor, yet they are Rich: and will be the Richer for their Poverty to
all Eternity. Whatsoever they Do, or Suffer, or Lose for God: he will Richly
reward them. Whosoever is their Enemy, God will be their Friend, and will Never
fail them. If they be Sick, or in any Adversity: Still they are Happy. If You
be sick, or in any trouble, they will Pray for you. If they Die while you live,
you may be more comforted in their Death, than a man can be in a child's Birth,
or wicked Life. If You die while they live, you may Sweetly say with Jacob,
Behold, I die, but GOD shall be with you Genesis 48.21.
. In the Judgment day! how Sweet to stand at Jesus Right hand! saying, Behold,
I, and the Children which God has given me Heb. 2.13.
: none Lost by my negligence: all Saved by my diligence. How sweet to be the
Subjects of this Golden Sentence, Come ye blessed of my Father! O festus dies.
while others are the Subjects of that most Direful Doom, Depart ye Cursed.
How Sweet to be for Ever in Heaven, to Trumpet out Eternal Praises, and Sing
Halelujahs for joy of Heart! while others howl for Sorrow of Heart in Hell. How
Sweet for you and your children, to be a Heaven in Heaven to each other! while
others shall be a Hell in Hell to each other for Ever. Yea, how Sweet may this
days Dialogue (under this tree) be to you in Eternity! if it may Issue in what
I aim at. And what shall I more Say? shall I Yet plead with you for pity to
your Own Children? if I was pleading with you for some small kindness for my
self, methinks I should prevail. If I was pleading with you to pity an Enemy,
who is ready to Perish for want of a Penny, me thinks I should prevail. And
shall I not prevail with you to pity your own poor perishing Children? what is
your Reply.


Fath. What shall one do who has long neglected his duty to his Children, till
they be hardened in Sin?


Min. Bewail it to GOD. Implore his Pardon. Confess it to your Children: with
Sorrow that you are so far in their Debt. Set upon your work with Shame. If
they reject your Counsel, bear it patiently. Lay their Disobedience at your Own
Door. And follow God with Petition, and your children with Instruction: till
(if possible) you Prevail, for their Conversion.


Fath. I hope I shall set about this Solemn Work of so Great Concern. God grant
I may, for I am much troubled at my long neglect.


Min. I perceive, what I have said shakes your Head: but GOD knows whether it
shakes your Heart. However I hope you will not spend your time in talking to
your children of Church-Steeples, and Brick Chimneys by the way back.
Conclusive Caution.
But, Take heed you do not deceive Me, nor your Self, nor your Children: God is
not Mocked. If you do indeed perform your part, Parent-like to the Purpose:
then may these children here Present, and the children which are yet Unborn,
arise up and Call you Blessed. To which more might be added, but it is Time to
Retire: for I see the Sun is walked far into the West. And so Sir, I shall take
my Leave, of You and Yours: wishing you all Well, for this World, and for that
which is to Come.


Fath. Sir, we wish You and Yours, the like Welfare. And we do give GOD, and
You thanks, for this Godly Advice.


TELOS.
POSTSCRIPT.
IN the Epistle, I direct to know Emphatical words by Capital letters: and
speak of beginning them words only with Capitals (except such words as are
always so to begin) and I did intend to do so. But after the Epistle was
composed by the Printer, I was disposed to begin many Substantial words also
with Capitals, which are not Emphatical. These are in the first 6 sheets
containing Instruction and Correction, and the An to Ob against Correction:
especially in the first 3 sheets, to the end of Instruction by Doct. These
words are begun with Capitals, that Men, Women, and Children may take the more
notice of such words and things, which are to them of so great concern. And
whether you call it a Benefit or a Burden, it is only for the first Edition:
for in the next (Deo juvante) I shall take them out, reduce it to the order of
the Epistle, and so make it more Euphonical and Grateful for the Readers
pleasure.

A SECOND DIALOGUE OF THE DECALOGUE: OR A DISCOURSE Concerning the Ten
COMMANDMENTS.

The Second Part.

I have written to him the Great things of my Law, but they were counted as a
Strange thing. Hos. 8.12. The Princes dug the well, the Nobles of the People
dug it by the direction of their Lawgiver. Nu. 21.18. The Lord is our
Lawgiver. Isa. 33.22. The Law of the Lord is perfect converting the Soul. Ps.
19.7. The Isles shall wait for his Law. Isa. 42.4. He will magnify the Law and
make it Honorable. Isa. 42.21. We have heard out of the Law that Christ
abides for Ever. Joh. 12.34. Do we then make void the Law through Faith? GOD
forbid! yea we establish the Law. Romans 3.31. LONDON, Printed by J. A. for the
Author, 1681.

The General Contents of the Second Dialogue.
TWelve Notes on the Ten Commandments. Ten Ob against the Second Note Answ. Of
Thunder, breaking, and new making the Tables. The Law a rule of Life for all
men. How we are under the Law as the Jews were, in Seven Particulars. How we
are Not under the Law as the Jews were, in Seven Particulars. An account of the
C L. An account of the Judicial Law. How the M L is abolished, and how not. How
the C L is abolished, and how not. How the Judicial Law is abolished, and how
not. The whole duty of man in Ten Words. Antinomian averseness to the Law.
Five Reasons of slighting the Law. Of preaching the Doct of the gospel only.
Four Reasons of such preaching. Sad effects of not preaching the Law. Pride of
some Preachers, their Wives, Children. Pride or sin in such prodigiously
perilous. Six sorts of Simple Hearers. Many in Profession like to be lost at
London. Conclusion by way of Exhortation.
Note these few abbreviations, M L Moral Law. C L Ceremonial Law. C W Covenant
of works. C G Covenant of grace.


A SECOND DIALOGUE OF THE DECALOGUE.
Fath. GOd Save you Sir. Since our Late Conference, I have desired some
Discourse from you of the Decalogue: for I am much persuaded there is more in
it than many Imagine. When you delivered me the Sixth Document, viz, To acquaint
my Children with the Decalogue, I desired to hear that Lesson Enlarged: yet was
loath to interrupt you: but now I come on purpose to desire you to give me some
account of the Ten Commandments.


Min. Sir, you are Welcome to me upon this account: for I had also a mind to
enlarge that Sixth Lesson upon the Law, but was loath to be too tedious: and am
glad of an opportunity to do it now. By the Title pages of old Books which lay
open in Moor Fields, I perceive there are some Tracts on the Ten Commandments
by way of Exposition: and so I shall not go that way to work: but shall give
you 12 Useful Notes upon the whole, to show you (in part) what is contained in
them. Between which Notes you may put in (and after them all add) what
Question you please.

First. 1 Note. The M L on Adam's Heart.
The Moral Law, Decalogue, or Ten Commandments was engraven on Adam's heart, as
a Primitive Perfect Law of Nature. Adam being created in God's Image, which
consists in Holiness and Righteousness, had the Law written in his Heart,
the Sum of which is Holiness and Righteousness. And Adam being capable of it,
God entered into a C W with him which contained (1) A peremptory precept, [Do
this:] (2) A conditional promise, [If thou Do, thou shall Live:] (3) A
conditional threat, [If thou Do not, thou shall Die.] To keep this C W for
Life, no man was ever able: except (1) Adam who brake it and ruined All
mankind: and (2) Jesus the Second Adam, who by his obedience to it has
recovered all the Elect. But though no man can keep it, yet Every unbeleever is
under it: and to Them it is a ministry of Condemnation 2 Cor. 3.9
.

By the way N B. A new State.
After the Fall there was a New Church State set up. Ceremonial Sacrifices for
God's service Instituted. And man accepted with God upon a New account: viz, on
Christ's account, who Substituted himself in man's stead to Die for him: by
virtue of which Death, believing man has Life and Favor with God. And that
for 2000 years (and more) from the Fall to the delivery of the Law on Mount
Sinai; the Substance of their Religion was the Same, as after the Public
promulgation of the Law. (1) Instances of the use of Ceremonial Sacrifice we
have in Abel Genesis 4.4.
, Noah Chapter 8.20.
Abram Chapter 15.9.
, and Job also Job 1.5.
, who was before the Law on Sinai, as is easily proved. THEN the master of a
family was King to rule, Prophet to teach, Priest to offer sacrifices (cut in
pieces) for the Sins of his family Genesis 15.10.
: so Now should masters Rule, Teach, and offer the Sacrifices of a broken, cut,
Exo. 29.17.
contrite Heart in prayer for the Sins of their families Psalm. 51.17.
. (2) And the M L of Nature did in part remain in the heart of man after the
Fall: and God made a Farther manifestation of it to man: else the world was in
a woeful wild posture for One 2000 years at least. A sottish conceit.
To think the world was without Law till they had it from Sinai, is a
ridiculous conceit: if So, for what was the world Drowned, and Sodom Burned?
for where no Law is, there is no Transgression Romans 4.15.
. If no Law in the world, no Sin in the world: but until the law Sin was in
the world Chapter 5.13.
, q d, until the law, the Law was in the world, for Sin is not imputed when
there is no Law: i e, such Acts are not counted Sin if no Law to forbid them. I
doubt Religious Persons knew the law Then, better than they do Now: since the
promulgation both of Law and Gospel too.

Second. 2 Note. The M L given to a people in a C G.
The Law delivered on Mount Sinai, with an audible voice as a Sermon from God
himself: was given to a People under a C G. This covenant God made with
Abraham, viz, To be a God to Him and his Seed Genesis 17.7
.] And renewed it with Them, Behold the Blood of the Covenant which the Lord
has made with YOU EXO. 24.8
. The blood of the C W is a saying of a Strange Sound: except you mean the
blood of the Breach of that covenant, i e, the blood of the Offender: which is
Execution, not Salvation. I will commune with thee from above the Mercy Seat
from between the two Cherubims of all things which I will give thee in
commandment unto the children of Israel Exo. 25.22.
. The faces of the Cherubims looked toward the Mercy Seat Ver. 20.
, to signify the desire of Angels to look into this mystery of Grace and Life
for man 1 Pet. 1.12.
, after God that cannot Lie had said Man must die. (...).
This covenant [Verbally] was made with all Abraham's seed Indefinitely: but
[Virtually and Efficaciously] so as to secure life Eternally, it respected a
Secret Distinction, and Vein of Election: for they are not all Israel which are
of Israel Romans 9.6.
, but the children of the Promise are counted for the Seed Ver. 8.
. God is LORD of ALL Mat. 11.25.
, but to These he is a GOD: God is not the GOD of the Dead but of the Living
Chapter 22.32
. They that did Believe were not under a C W, and Cured: but under a C G, and
Blessed with faithful Abraham Gal. 3.9.
. And the Covenant that was confirmed before of God in Christ, the Law which
was 430 years after cannot disanull Ver. 17.
. To our purpose is the Preface to the Ten commandments: viz, I am the Lord thy
God:] which cannot Be by a C W. It is not, Do this and I will be thy God:] but
I am thy God therefore Do this Deu. 5.15
.


Fath. God says, If ye keep my Covenant, Exo. 19.5
.


Min. So Jesus says, He that loves me shall be loved of my Father Joh. 14.21.
. In such sayings God speaks as a Father to children to draw to Duty: q d, Do
So, and I will Love thee. The child's love is not the Cause but the Effect, not
the Root but the Fruit of the fathers love to the child: we love Him because he
first loved Us 1 John 4.19.
. To a people under a C G the Law on Mount Sinai was delivered as on Mount
Sion, in the hand of a Mediator Gal. 3.19.
: without whom God had nothing to speak to man but Death. N B. From his Right
hand (i e, where Christ sits, and Then [virtually] sat) went a fiery law,
Heb (...) A fire of law] For them, not Against them: and how Formidable and
Fiery soever, yet it was a fruit of Gods love: yea he Loved the people Deu.
33.2, 3.
.


Fath. Not against them say you! Paul says it was against them, and so took
out of the way by Christ Col. 2.14.
.


Min. He speaks of the C L which to disobey was death Lev. 23.29, 30.
. The M L as a C W, is against all men under it, as well since Christ's death
as before. And as a C W, it was taken away Before Christ's death as well as
Since, for them that believe. And as a rule of life it never was against any
man since nor before. It was, and is against Sin: but it is For man, if God be
for him.


Fath. You say the law on Mount Sinai was delivered as on Mount Sion: Paul
opposes them one to the other: and speaks of one as Dreadful, of the other
as Comfortable Heb. 12.18, 22.
.


Min. Paul shows what you See not: viz, that the ministry of the Gospel on
Mount Sion, is attended with more terror than the Law on Mount Sinai was. e g.
Looking diligently lest any man fail of the grace of God, (...) Ver. 15.
, lest there be any fornicatour or profane person as Esau, etc Ver. 16.
, why so? for ye are not come to the mount that might be touched, etc Ver. 18.
, which was very terrible: but ye are come to Mount Sion, etc Ver. 22.
, what then? See that ye refuse not him that speaks: for if they escaped not
who refused him that spoke on Earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn
away from him who speaks from Heaven Ver. 25.
. Whose voice then shook the Earth, but now he has promised, saying, Yet once
more I shake not the Earth only but also Heaven Ver. 26.
He that despised Moses law died without mercy: of how much Sorer punishment
suppose ye shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of
God? Heb. 10.28, 29.
The Gospel is glad tidings: it is Season is a day of Salvation: but yet
attended with a day of Vengeance for disobedience Isa. 61.2.
, without which what dread is in the Law?


Fath. Surely the Law was delivered to the Jews,


Min. The Ten Commandments contain the Matter and Words of the C W. And they
were to acquaint Them (and are to acquaint Us) with the C W that All by Nature
are Under: that men may know what it is, and not trust to Death for Life. The
Jews had been so long in Egyptian darkness, that Religion was almost rooted
out of Heart and Life Jos. 24.14.
: and so needed to have a Rowsing Lecture read in their Ears. But that ever God
did (since man's fall) deliver the Law as a C W for man to be Saved by it, is
Quite besides the Book: contrary to the Gospel, a Weakness and a Shame for a
man (who has a Bible in his house) once to Imagine.


Fath. God says, Keep my Statutes, which if a man Do he shall live in them
Lev. 18.5.
.


Min. For one to think (from any such Text) that Ever man was saved by Works,
savours of Gross ignorance of the C W. This covenant requires a man to be as
perfectly Righteous as Jesus himself was: and if a man Once sin, though he
Never sin more, there is no More to be said: he can Never be saved by that
covenant. If then Eternal life be in this Text intended Lev. 18.5.
, the law of Faith is included, by which a person must be justified to live
Eternally. And then by Evangelical obedience to the Law he shall live, (1)
Temporally] for Godliness has the promise of the life that now is 1 Timothy 4.8.
(2) Spiritually] for the Righteous shall flourish Psalm. 92.12.
, as the Body by it is Food: for God deals out his Heavenly bread in a way of
Duty. But by defect in Duty, some die [Temporally] in Body 1 Cor. 11.30.
: and many die [Spiritually] in Soul, who do not die Eternally in both.


Fath. That Israel were under a C W is hard to beat out of my Head.


Min. A covenant between God and man is not Made, except GOD require, and Man
consent. (1) God did not Require: it is contrary to his purpose of Salvation by
Grace: and if by Grace, then is it no more of Works Romans 11.6.
, (2) Man did not Consent. If in saying, All that the Lord has spoken we will
do Exo. 19.8.
they counted to comply with a C W, they said they knew not what: nor are they
Commended for it. But when they said to Moses, Speak thou with us and we will
hear, but let not God speak with us lest we die Chapter 20.19
; then said Moses Fear not Ver. 20.
: and said God, They have Well said Den. 5.28
, i e, to desire a Mediator: these are no signs of a C W. Nor did they Consent
to a C W when they said [Amen] to the curses pronounced against him that
confirms not all the words of this Law to do them Deu. 27.26.
: but did acquiesce in the pronunciation of the Curse for him to whom it did
belong. Nor did Paul (in saying, As many as are of the works of the Law are
under the curse Gal. 3.10.
) say, They were all so. Nor does Moses (in describing the righteousness of
the Law, viz, The man which does those things shall live by them Romans 10 5.
) say, They were so to live: or that it was Possible for them. The man that
Does shall Live] is q d, The man that emptieth the Ocean with a Spoon, shall go
into the depth of it and not be Drowned: for, to fulfill the Law, and to empty
the Sea, are Parallel impossibilities.


Fath. But God speaks of a New Covenant Jer. 31.31.
, and this at Sinai is called Old Heb. 8.13
: so that it seems Not to be a C G as you call it: nor that they were saved
Before Christ's death as we are since.


Min. There is some Circumstantial difference, (1) The Old (as it is called)
comprehended the Promise of Canaan, containing many Temporal blessings. (2) The
Jews were by it Obliged to Ceremonial service. (3) Some few excepted, it was
confined to the Jews only. (4) It was Sealed with the blood of Sacrifices,
Typical of Christ to Come. These things being Transitory, it is said to wax Old
and vanish away Heb. 8.13.
: yet the covenant is One and the Same in Substance. AT Christ's death, it was
Sealed by his own blood [Actively:] Before, it was Sealed by his blood
[Virtually.] Since Christ's death, it is Signified by the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, which is Permanent till Christ come: so was the Ceremonial
Sacrifice till he came to Die: the blood of which signified Christ's blood Was
to be shed, as well as the Element of Wine signifies it Is shed. N B.
Covenants are Certainly the Same, if they accord in these 3 Substantials:
[Subject, End, Condition.] Jesus Christ as Head of the Elect, is the [Subject:]
Salvation is the [End] Faith is the [Condition] of Both: and so is the way of
Salvation the Same. Before Christ's death the Jews were said to be under a yoke
they were not able to bear Act. 15.10.
: what then? but we believe that by the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, we
shall be saved Even as they Ver. 11. Identity or the Samenesse of Salvation.
We Jews even as they Gentiles: for Christ, and Salvation, and the Way to it
are the Same: Jew and Gentile saved the Same way, Before and After Christ's
death. Before it, they were under the Gospel clouded with the Law. Since, we
are under the Gospel more clearly dispensed. They that God taught saw it Then:
no more see it Now: and from the Rest it is hid.


Fath. If the law was not delivered as a C W what signified the dreadful
delivery of it with Thunder and Lightning,


Min. God by delivering the Law on Mount Sinai at first with his own mouth, did
signify he had made a C W with Adam: and in him with all Men: and what he
might justly require of men. The thunder signified the dreadful effects of the
breach of that Covenant. It Is being written on Tables, signified it was written
on Adam's Heart: I will give thee Tables of stone and a Law which I have
written Exo. 24.12.
: they were the work of God without Moses, i e, without a Mediator. (2) The
tables being broken when Israel sinned, signified, the C W was broken when Adam
sinned: and was never to be made with Man more. God does not say, Moses mend
the Tables thou have broken: but Hew thee two (new Tables Chapter 34.1.
(3) The law written on the Tables a second time, signified, or was an Emblem
of the law written on the Heart of Christians, according to the C G. (4) God by
proclaiming his gracious name on Mount Sinai, and giving the law there the
second time to Moses alone Ver. 3.5, 6
, signified, he had made a C G with Christ for Christians: and had given the
law by Christ, by Angels in the hand of a Mediator. N B This M L thus written,
not as a C W; The Law the Rule.
but as it is the law of Christ, IS a Christians rule of Life. The Savior is
the Lawgiver, and Ruler Isa. 33.22
: the Decalogue is the Sum: it is branched through the Bible, for a rule of
righteousness, and Gospel obedience, for all Christians in all Nations,
throughout all Generations.


Fath. But some say,


Min. That a true Christian has the law written in his Heart, acts from a
principle of Love, is led by the Spirit of God, delights to do his Will, is
True: but [the law as written in the Bible is not a Christians rule of life] is
not only False, but Prefixed to the Rest, makes all to be a piece of ridiculous
Nonsense. Pestilent Opinion.
This pestilent opinion has 5 parts. (1) The law as written in the Bible is
not a Christians rule of life.] A. As the Gospel teaches how to Believe, and
is a rule of Faith: so the Law teaches how to Live, and is a rule of Life. As
the Gospel is an everlasting rule for Faith: so is the Law an everlasting rule
for Life. As the Civil law is a rule of Civil life: so is Gods Divine law a
rule of Godly life. Simile.
The law is as a Touchstone, Simile.
to try if gold be Good. The law is as a Line, to show what is Straight, and
what is Crooked. Simile.
A good workman will have his Rule ready at his Back, to try his work. So let
a Christian have the Law: not only in his Heart and Head, but also under his
Eye in the Bible: that standing Rule, that Sure word, more to be regarded than
what is spoken with an audible voice out of Heaven 2 Pet. 2.18, 19.
. The commandment is a Lamp, and the law is Light Pro. 6.23. Simile.
: the Sun is not more necessary by Day, nor the Moon by Night, nor a Candle in
a Coal-pit, or dark Dungeon, than the Law: without which the world would be a
Hell. Dr Luther.
(2) They are ruled by the law written in their hearts.] How shall we know
whether these Persons pretenses are pure? To the Law, if they speak not
according to this WORD, be they men or Devils or Angels, there is no Light in
them: Heb (...) no morning] Junius, nulla lucis scintilla, not a spark of light
Isa. 8.20.
. N B. There is an Outward law written in the Bible) and an Inward law written
in a true Christians Heart: the Outward law is the rule of Life, not the
Inward: for the outward is Perfect, the inward Imperfect. The outward law is to
Rule the inward: and the inward is to be Ruled by the outward. That the law is
written in the Heart that loves it not as written in the Bible, I utterly Deny:
Apage.
if the heart be not on the Law, the law is not on the Heart. (3) They are
acted by a principle of love.] As if a Person should profess to love his
Prince beyond him who in All points punctually obeys his Princes laws: yet will
not this person regard his Princes laws, for his Love (forsooth) must be his
Supreme Law. Whether this person have any love to his Prince or no, I will not
determine: but this is certain, his Prince has one Singular Self-conceited
Subject: A piece of Pride.
to whom he may say, Love me and love my law. They that love God love his law:
as says the man after Gods own heart: O how love I thy law! Psalm. 119.97.
there is NO more Lord-lovers than law-lovers. Some profess love who have
none: some deny it who have it: how shall we know who loves Christ? this
critical Question Christ himself resolves, He that has my commandments, and
keeps them, He it is that loves me Joh. 14.21.
. (4) They are led by the Spirit of God.] How shall a man know he is led by the
Spirit of God, but by the Word of God? i e, as it leads him according to the
Word. Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God 1 John 4.1.
. We must try the spirits by the Word and not the word by the spirits. (5) They
delight to do the will of God.] How shall a man know the Will of God but by the
Word of God? and how shall a man delight in the Will of God without delight in
the Word of God? if a man delight not in the will of God in his word for
Direction, how shall he delight in the will of God in his rod for Correction? e
g, Suppose God WILL take away Health, Wealth, Wife, Child. If once persons are
puffed up with Pride, they are soon filled with Swelling words of vanity 2 Pet.
2.18
.


Fath. It is clear to me that the law as written in the Bible is a Christians
rule of life: Q.
is it a rule of life for a Carnal man too?


Min. The law is for a rule of Life to all men Living who have it: A Rule for
All.
Jesus himself was not excepted when under it Gal. 4.4.
. N B, Man is to be considered in a twofold State, precedent to a State of
Grace. (1) In innocence.] In this State the law as a C W, was man's rule Of
life, and For life: so long as he Obeyed he lived. (2) In a Fallen state.] The
condition of the C W was such, that the Least sin Brake it: and brought man
under the Curse of it. Before sin man was under the Blessing of the covenant:
after sin man was under the Curse of the C W: and this is the Case of all
Carnal men. In this State the M L is a rule of Moral Life. And the more exactly
(to his light) a Moral man is ruled by it, the more he is to be Commended:
though thereby he is not Justified. And it is (in a Sense) a rule, To life
eternal: i e, as it is a Schoolmaster to direct to Christ to be Justified by
Faith. And this it does Occasionally, by showing Sin and Wrath: without a sight
of which, what cares a Sinner for a Savior. God likeneth his Law to a
Looking-glass Jam. 1.23 Simile.
. A glass by showing the Spots in the Face, Occasionally directs to water to
cleanse, though water be not seen in the glass. A sense of a Disease directs
to the Doctor for Cure, Simile.
though the Doctor be not seen in the disease. So the Law, though it do not
[Verbally] bid one go to Christ, or show the way of Salvation by it is light:
yet the law of the Lord is perfect, converting the Soul Psalm. 19.7.
But if this should never be (for some men were never made to be saved 2 Pet.
2.12.
) yet the Law is to be their rule of life: and by showing what is Good and
Evil, it is to restrain them from Evil, and to constrain them to Good: and the
more a man is thus ruled by the Law, the more Mercy may he expect here, and the
less Misery here and hereafter.


Fath. How was the M L a rule of life to the Jews before Christ's death? Q
how were they under it as we are Since his death?


Min. The Jews were (like Rebekahs Twins) two manner of people Genesis 25.23.
: viz, Carnal and Spiritual. The carnal and wicked (though Externally and by
Profession under a C G) were under the Curse of the Law: and for the Future it
was to Fare with them, as with those that never were under that C G. Behold the
days come says the Lord, that I will punish all them which are circumcised
with the uncircumcised: Egypt, and Judah, and Ammon, etc, for these nations, i
e, Egypt and Ammon are uncircumcised, i e, in Flesh: and the house of Israel is
uncircumcised in Heart Jer. 9.25, 26.
. So we in our Congregational Reformed Gentile Church: some Wise, some Foolish
virgins Mat. 25.2
. The wise are under the Law for rule of life: the Foolish for all their Church
member-ship, are under the Curse of the Law.

2) The Jews were under the law to Terrify and Humble them, to prepare them
for Christ: and So are we. Not that the work of the law in humiliation of
Heart, and reformation of Life, makes a Sinner acceptable to Christ, as if
Worthy because of this Humility. But it makes Christ acceptable to a Sinner:
Simile.
as a Physician to a Sick person at point of death, who Can and Will cure him
on Free-cost: for which the Sick will Love him when he is Well.

3) The Jews under this Legal Thunder, were prone to put themselves under the
hot Bolts of it, to avoid the Stroke of it: to run upon the Flaming Sword, for
Shelter from Slaughter. As many as are of the works of the Law, are under the
Curse Gal. 3.10
: and yet under it they would run with their daily Dialect: viz, What shall we
do? Act. 2.37.
Sirs, what must I do to be Saved? Chapter 16.30
So do we under Conviction without special Direction.

4) They that are under a C G (by which they are saved without Works) are under
a holy Covenant of good works. N B. In a Covenant between God and man, God
Requires and man Consents. God requires Holiness of Life, man consents to it,
else no Conversion. This holy Covenant the Jews were (and we are) under. God
required them to be holy, Ye shall be holy, for I the Lord your God am holy
Lev. 19.2
: they consent, All that the Lord has said will we do and be obedient Exo.
24.7.
: i e, Christian duties under a C G. This covenant Christians are ^ow under.
Gods command to the Jews was Be ye holy Lev. 20.7
: it is the same to us, Peter pleads the same Precept: be ye holy in all manner
of conversation, because it is written, Be ye holy for I am holy 1 Pet. 1.16
. N B. The Matter of this covenant was Proposed when the law was Delivered: the
ten commandments are called the Words of the Covenant Exo. 34.27, 28.
: but the covenant is not Made till we be Converted, till we cordially Consent.
Adam brought us into a C W, and under the Curse of it: Jesus Christ brings us
into a C G, and under the Blessings of it; but we must bring our Selves into
this Covenant, i e, it must be our voluntary Act, yet Gods Work. God puts
this Cry into the hearts of Converts: viz, Come, and let us join our selves to
the Lord, in a Perpetual Covenant Jer. 50.5.
.

5) This holy Life must spring from a holy Heart: which God does not only
Require, and Command, but also Promise to effect in the Elect: both Jew and
Gentile. Take some instances both of Precepts and Promises. Circumcise thy
heart Den. 10.16.
, there is the Precept: thy God will circumcise thine heart Chapter 30.6.
, here is the Promise. Cleanse your hands Jam. 4.8.
, there is the Precept: I will cleanse you Ezekiel. 36.25.
, here is the Promise. Make you a new heart Chapter 18.31.
, there is the Precept: A new heart also will I give you Chapter 36.26
, here is the Promise.

6) This Covenant the Jews were apt to break, and so are we. They have broken
the everlasting Covenant Isa. 24.5.
, Heb (...) the covenant of Eternity: [everlasting] for all ages [a covenant of
eternity] i e, Gods decree for a holy conversation is as Ancient as Election:
he has chosen us before the foundation of the world that we should be holy
Ephesians. 1.4.
. For ever O Lord thy Word is settled in Heaven Psalm. 119.89.
. This word and covenant Christians break by Sin, for which God breaks them by
Sorrow: for though we fail God, he will not fail us. Some will (contrary to
God) keep it as a C W to be Saved: or else cast it quite off and so be Damned.

7) The carnal Jews at length were utterly rejected for their Sins: but the
spiritual Jews were Saved, though in their sins there was (in a Sense) a
continuance Isa. 64.5.
. I will NO more have mercy upon the house of Israel, but I will Utterly take
them away: but I will have mercy upon the house of Judah, and I will save them
by the Lord their God Ho. 1.6, 7.
. Thus those of Us that are not Christians indeed, it will come to pass that
God will No more have mercy on such: no not so much as a drop of water to cool
the Tongue in Hell fire: but they that are sincerely Sanctified shall certainly
be Saved. Thus we are under the Law as the Jews were.


Fath. How are we Not under the law as the Jews were? Q



Min. The universal Body of the Jews were by Divine constitution a National
Church: a Sacred Society, under a C G: thus was never any Nation but they. What
one Nation in the Earth is like thy people, even like Israel whom God went to
redeem for a people to himself? 2 Samuel 7.23.


2) They were under the Primitive Public immediate ministry of the Law on
Mount Sinai: thus no other people ever was: he shows his word unto Jacob, his
Statutes and judgments to Israel, he has not dealt SO with any Nation Psalm.
147.19, 20.
. To them were committed the Oracles of God To. 3.2.
: to them the Adoption, and the Glory, and the Covenants, the giving of the
Law, the service of God, and the Promises Chapter 9.4.
. They were under the immediate ministry of God himself: Ye have seen that I
have talked with you from Heaven Exo. 20.22.
. The Lord talked with you Face to Face in the Mount, out of the midst of the
Fire Deu. 5.4.
. Ask from the One side of Heaven to the Other, whether there has been any
such thing Chapter 4.32.
.

3) They were under an Engagement to keep Gods Commandments different from us:
viz, 600000. delivered at once.
their deliverance from Egyptian bondage was Litteral, and Universal: their
whole Body being about Six hundred thousand men were all brought out Exo. 12.37.
, they left not an Hoof behind Chapter 10.26
. But our deliverance from Egyptian bondage is Mystical, and Particular: and
comparatively it is but a small Part of us Gentiles, who are thus Redeemed.

4) The Jews were under the M L as accompanied with the C L. If they sinned
against the M L, they must to their Ceremonial Sacrifices of sin offerings. And
they must pray, in, or toward the Temple: such a Place. They must confess sin
over the head of the Escape Goat: these were Types of Christ by whom they were
to be forgiven. By reason of these Ceremonial Shadows, elements, rudiments,
tutours and governors, fit to teach the Church by in it is Minority; the
Apostle compares them to Children Gal. 4.1, 3 Col. 2.17, 20.
: (q d) in their A B C, or in their Accidence.

5) The Jews were under the Law as preached Clearly, and under the Gospel as
preached Darkly. The O T was a clear Law, and a dark Gospel. In the O T the N T
was veiled: in the N T the O T is revealed. And upon this account, They are
said to be under the Law, and We are said to be under the Gospel. Christ was
preached to them not only Ceremonially, but also Doctrinally: but yet
Mystically. He was called a Rod, a Branch Isa. 11.1.
, Water, Wine, Milk Chapter 55.1.
, a Fountain Zec. 13.1.
: this was mystical Doctrine, their ignorance of which is sometime bewailed: Ah
Lord God! they say of me, Does he not speak Parables? Ezekiel. 20.49.
N B The Gospel to the Jews was like an inestimable treasure in a dark gay
Glass, Simile.
overlaid with fair Flowers, painted with Pictures, to signify the Substance
within: but they like children were apter to eye the Outside than the Inside.
The Gospel to Us is like the same treasure in a Clear glass, Simile.
plain without gays and pictures: so that we can see the inside. Simile.
Or it is like the same treasure in an open earthen vessel, or Shell, as the
word signifies 2 Cor. 4.7. (...). Testa, A Shell.
. Moses put a vail over his Face, and when Moses is read the vail is upon their
Heart: i e, their minds were blinded Chapter 3.13.
. Hence little Faith, much Fear: darkness and dread dwell together. Zion said,
The Lord has forsaken me Isa. 49.14
: they would conclude it from a cross Providence, e g, The Lord is with thee
thou mighty man of valor: and Gideon said, Oh my Lord, if the Lord be with us
why then is all This befallen us? but now the Lord has forsaken us Judge. 6.12,
13.
. Thus subject were they to slavish fear, and a spirit of bondage. But we being
under a clear Gospel have much light: light and joy are joined together Ps.
97.11.
: peace comes by the knowledge of God 2 Pet. 1.2
. If a fearful child meets his father in the Dark, Simile.
he dreads him as Death: for thinks he [that man will Kill me:] but if he meet
him in the Light, he runs into his Arms. Hence Christians under clear Gospel
light are said to have the Spirit of Adoption, crying, Abba, Father Romans 8.15.
: i e, Father, Father, child-like with much freedom from fear. This is called
the Spirit of the Son: God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your
hearts, crying, Abba Father Gal. 4.6.
. The excellency of which Spirit appears in this, viz, it acts a Soul to own
God as a Father, under the most Dismal dispensation: like the Spirit of the Son
under the Fathers wrath: crying, My God, my God, (though as forsaken) in that
dismal Doomsday of his Death, which made the air Dark, and the earth Quake.
Howbeit some Persons (at Times) did Act faith very Nobly under the Law also. e
g, When death is at the Door, if Esther the Queen will not speak a word to the
King for life, Noble Acts.
yet Mordecai will believe Deliverance shall arise for the Jews from another
place Est. 4.14.
. David will not fear when his Sins compass him about Ps. 49.5.
: nor when all Nations compass him about like Bees Psalm. 118.10.
: nor if the Earth be removed, and the Mountains into the midst of the Sea Ps.
46.2.
. If Gods Zeal, Strength, Bowels, Mercies, and all are restrained; yet
Evangelical Isaiah will say to God, Doubtless thou art our Father Isa. 63.15
16.
. Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-nego will believe in their God in the very Face of
the furious King: and at the Mouth of the Sevenfold fiery furnace Dan. 3.16
. And Daniel will do the like in the lions den Chapter 6.
. And some did Noble acts by faith, a Catalogue of which we have upon record
Heb. 11.
.

6) The Jews were under the M L as pointing at Christ to Come: to justify by
blood not (then) in Being. e g, If a man sin against any of the (ten)
commandments of the Lord, and his sin come to his knowledge (by the law is this
knowledge of sin, and by it is the Conscience troubled) he shall bring his
Sin-offering, a Kid of the goats, a Male without blemish, and kill it, and his
sin shall be forgiven him Lev. 4.
. Thus the M L by its Scourge, sent the Sinner to the C L the Sacrifice and
Type of Christ: and the Type pointed to Christ himself then to come: for they
drank of that Spiritual Rock that followed them 1 Cor. 10.4.
. Before faith came (i e, faith in Christ [actually] crucified) we were kept
under the Law, shut up to the faith which should afterward be revealed Gal.
3.23.
: i e, when Christ the Object of faith should be revealed, as manifest in the
Flesh, and So believed on in the world 1 Timothy 3.16.
: faith in Christ actually crucified. Christ was [Virtually] crucified from the
foundation of the World. And under the Law they were [Virtually] redeemed from
the Curse of the Law: but not [Actually] redeemed, but when the fullness of
time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman, made under the law
[Actually] to redeem them that were under the law Gal. 4.4, 5
.

7) The Jews were under many and great Promises of temporal Blessings annexed
to their obedience to the Law: even a full land flowing with Milk and Honey,
the glory of all Lands Ezekiel. 20 6.
. Thus we are not under the Law as the Jews were. Of the great judgments they
were under the execution of for their Disobedience to the M L, I say nothing:
but, they happened to them for Ensamples or Types: and they are written for OUR
admonition, upon whom the Ends of the world are Come 1 Cor. 10.11.
.

N B, A threefold Affirmation.
Under the Ministry of the Gospel, the C W requires as perfect obedience of
them that are under it, as it did under the ministry of the Law. (2) Under the
ministry of the Gospel, there is as high a degree of Holiness required of
justified Persons, as there was under the ministry of the Law. It Is a Mad
mistake to think the Law requires obedience to the law, A mad mistake.
but the Gospel requires no obedience to the law. (3) Under the Ministry of the
Gospel the Law is to be preached to prick the Heart, and prepare for Christ: as
Peter did by charging the Jews with the Murder of Jesus Act. 2.36, 37.
. They that say Nay, in effect say, Peter, Paul, Jesus himself, James, and
John, whom he Surnamed the sons of Thunder Mar. 3.17.
, were all a company of Dunces in their Doctrine. Therefore to say, [Before
Christ's death the Jews were all (by nature) under the law as a C W: A 3 fold
Folly.
but we are all freed from it, since Christ's death, under the Gospel. Or (2)
They (in a State of nature, or in a justified State) were under the law for a
rule of life: but not we. Or (3) They were under the law to humble and prepare
them for Christ, but not we:] these are false foolish Fopperies, to be fanned
away and Burned: as not deserving to be otherwise Answered. Yea such sottish,
doltish, Deep Dreams.
damnable Dreams; that I could hazard my heart Blood, to bear witness against
them.


Fath. You say Peter and Paul preached the law: Paul says they were Ministers
of the N T, not of the Letter, i e, the Law, which (says he) kills, and he
calls it a Ministration of death 2 Cor. 3.6, 7.
.


Min. There is a threefold killing by the law. (1) By applying the Curse to a
Profane person, and leaving him under it in despair. (2) By condemning a
Precise person, for his imperfect obedience. Thus many are killed, and yet
secure: but they will find themselves killed at Last, let them do their Best.
Thus the Law is a Ministry of death. (3) To kill self-confidence, in
self-righteousnesse. To make a Sinner sensible of the sentence of Condemnation
he is under: as one dead in Law, Simile.
at stake to be Burned, at pits brink to be damned: so as to be set a seeking
life by Free Grace. Thus the law is a Ministry of death too: but this is the
way to life. Thus Paul was killed, says he, I was alive, i e, I thought so, I
seemed so, without the law, i e, without the knowledge of the law, or killing
condition of the C W: but when the commandment came, i e, the knowledge of it,
sin revived, and I died To. 7.9.
. For without the law sin was dead Ver. 8. Simile.
: i e, Seemingly, as a Ban-dog in a deep sleep: but, wake him, and he will fly
in your face, to pull out your throat. Simile.
So sin when the commandment comes, as a messenger to tell a Prisoner, he is
condemned at Court to die. Obedience to the law for life is in no wise to be
preached up: so Paul was not a Minister of the law. But to preach the law to
convince Sinners, and counsel Saints, is the part of a Minister of the N T: and
he that refuses so to preach the law, is no Minister for me: nor do I value him
above them Popish Priests, who having heard the letter kills, cast off the
law, and all good literature, Mr T.
lest they should be killed with the letter.


Fath. I will no longer hinder you in your Twelve Notes promised: as yet there
is but Two delivered: I pray proceed, and let me hear the Rest.


Min. That is well if our strife be at an end: and will you also attend?


Fath. Yes, I desire to hear the end.


Min. Third. As a Minister when he has preached a Sermon gives it in writing
to one of a weak Memory, Note 3. Simile. The M L given as a Sermon.
or puts it in Print for Public profit: so when God had preached this Sermon
on Mount Sinai, he gave it to Moses for the use of Israel: on two Tables of
Stone, written with the Finger of God Exo. 31.18.
. The first Table contains the First four commandments, which declare man's
duty to GOD: obedience to which is properly called Piety. The second Table
contains the Last six commandments, which declare man's duty to Man: obedience
to which is properly called Equity. Christ is pleased to contract these Ten
into Two. Christ's contraction.
viz (1) Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, etc Mat. 22.37.
. (2) Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy Self. This contraction of ten into
two, is to teach us these Lessons. (1) That God is to be loved Before, and More
than all men: thou shall love the Lord, etc, this is the First and Great
commandment Ver. 38.
. (2) That the main Spring of man's obedience to both Tables must be LOVE: viz,
Love to God, Love to man. (3) A summary account of the large Extent of both
Tables: on these two hang All the law and the Prophets Ver. 40.
. (4) The impossibility of such perfect obedience as the law requires,
considered as a C W: that consequently it may become our School master to
Christ, to be justified by his obedience to the law: and not rest in our Own,
to our Ruin.

Fourth. Note 4. A Second Edition.
The law thus written on Tables of Stone was a Second Edition and Impression of
the primitive perfect law written on the Table of Adam's heart in Innocence. By
his Fall he brake this Table in pieces. And man having but a poor imperfect
knowledge of God's law left, God did graciously make known his law, by making
it audible to the Ear at Mount Sinai: and visible to the Eye on Tables of
Stone. Since which God has by his good Providence put it upon Paper: and
written a Book (responsible to Job's wish Job 31.35 The Book of Books.
) viz, the Blessed Bible. The O T in Hebrew: the language of Gods people of
Old. The N T in Greek: which when written was more generally known among the
Nations. Since both are Translated into the Native language of the Nations who
do enjoy them: and Happy are they that Well use them.

Fist. The M L which is an Epitomy, Note 5. The M L given in few words.
or Breviary, and the Sum of the Will of God, and Whole duty of man: God has
delivered in few Words (...) ten words Exo. 34.28.
:] a Command for it is Concisenesse called a Word. No more Commands than a man
has fingers on his Hands: that he may easily carry them in his Head, and get
acquainted with them: and not plead Largeness to excuse Ignorance, which
probably would be his Plea, if God had delivered his mind in a multiplicity of
Precepts, A Plea prevented.
and Words.

Sixth. God has (by his Servants the Prophets, Apostles, and by the Son
himself) Expounded, and Branched out in the Bible, Note 6. The M L branched by
10000. words.
these [Ten words] with more than Ten thousand words: to prevent this Pretense
also for Ignorance: viz, [This Brevity is Obscurity, this Shortness is
Darkness: a Word is for the Wise, we are Weak: if God would have Us understand
his Mind, he should have explained it with more Words.] It is Done: God has SO
spoke as to speak all men Speechless: Prudence prevents pretenses.
So as to stop every mouth, and make All the world guilty before God To. 3.19.
.

Seventh. Note 7. Eight Negatives in Ten.
All the ten commandments but two, i e [the fourth and fift] are delivered
Negatively: i e, by way of Denying and Forbidding of sin, to signify that the
Right way to be Religious or Practically obedient, is to be first Negatively
so. e g, Depart from Evil, and do Good Psalm. 34.14.
: cease to do Evil, learn to do Well Isa. 1.16, 17.
. If a man flee not Sinful Vices, it is in vain to follow Religious Courses. N
B, A precept for Faith is included in the First Commandment: which will appear
before we part. And it is in the Preface to all the Ten: to signify that Faith
and a New Heart, are necessary Antedecents for both Negative and Positive
obedience to follow: for a man must Be good before he can Do good.

Eight. Note 8. Negatives include Positives.
Every Negative command includes a Positive command: i e, when God forbids
evil Expressly, he bids good Implicitly. e g, Thou shall have no other gods
before me Exo. 20.3.
:] there is the evil of idolatry forbid Expressly: thou shall have Me for thy
God, there is the good of choosing God commanded Implicitly. Thou shall not
take the name of the Lord thy God in vain Ver. 7.
, this is the evil forbid: thou shall talk Virtuously, and Graciously of thy
God, this is the good commanded. Thou shall not Kill, commit Adultery, Steal,
etc Ver. 13, 14, 15.
, these are evils expressly Forbid: thou shall Prevent murder, adultery, theft
in Others by good counsel if thou can: this is good implicitly Commanded.
Positives include Negatives.
And Positive commands include Negative commands. e g, Remember the Sabbath day
to keep it holy Ver. 8.
, there is good expressly Commanded: remember it not to Profane it with thy
Own works, words, thoughts: there is evil implicitly Forbid. Honor thy father
and thy mother Ver. 12.
, is good Commanded: dishonor them not, is the evil Forbid.

Ninth. Note 9. A negative includes negatives.
A Negative command includes Many negative commands. The sin forbid, is forbid
in Act, Word, and Thought: and the Occasion of it, and whatsoever has a
Tendency to it. And these Inclusive commands are Expressed as they are Branched
out in the Bible. e g, Thou shall have no other gods before me: q d, No
National god imaginable, no Personal, or private god of wood to worship in thy
House: no god of Gold in thy Heart, thy Self, Wife, Child, House, Land, Friend,
Goods, Gold, shall not be thy gods; as they will Be if loved more than Me. And
see with what Caution the Occasion of idolatry is forbid in these Texts Deu.
12.30.
.] Thou shall not Kill: not with Hand, Chapter 13.1, 3. Mouth murder.
nor with Tongue, to be a Mouth-murderer as some call a Slanderer: and so we
may call an evil Counceller. Not with Heart, to be a Heart-murderer: he that
hates his brother is a murderer 1 John 3.15.
. Kill not by evil Counsel, or bad Example: neither Do, nor Say any thing that
may Tend to, or Occasion thy neighbors death: in Body, or Soul. Thou shall not
kill thy Self. Not with violent Hands, nor with Words spoken against thy own
life: nor by Carelessness of deaths and dangers: nor by ill Diet, not by
Drunkenness, nor by Gluttony. Plures periere Gula quam Gladio: more die by the
Board than by the Sword.] Thou shall not commit adultery. Not in Act, nor in
Heart: whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery
with her already in his Heart Mat. 5.28
. Christ calls a Thought, an Act: to signify, that Small sin in Man's sight,
is Great sin in GOD's sight. Thou shall not occasion it by unclean Cogitations,
and Contemplations: nor by adulterous Discourses with Delilahs: Remove thy way
F AR from her, and come not nigh the door of her house Pro. 5.8. Simile.
. As he that carries Gun powder about him, had need keep far from Fire: so he
that carries Corruption had need keep far from Temptation. As when children
meet a Horse, Simile.
Cart, or Cow, they will (if timorous) run Ten times farther out of the way
than need: so let men learn to flee from Sin. Keep thee Far from a false matter
Exo. 23.7
. Avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass away Pro. 4.15.
.] The law is Spiritual To. 7.14.
; it forbids the Least evil motion, and First carnal conception: it commands
our Spirits and Hearts to be holy: it condemns for the most Secret sin in the
Soul. It is called the Royal law, (...), the Kingly law Jam. 2.8.
: it is the law of the King of Kings. No earthly Kings law can condemn a man
for a secret thought against the King: Dissimile.
but this Divine Law of the King of Heaven can and does: it condemns a man
for the most Secret thought against the Lawgiver.

Tenth. Note 10. A positive includes positives.
A Positive command includes Many positive commands. e g, Remember the Sabbath
day to keep it holy. q d, Remember it to Prepare for it, to begin it Early, to
spend it in holy duties, in holy discourses, in holy meditations, to be in the
Spirit: to cause all under you to keep it holy.] Honor thy Father and thy
Mother. Honor them in Deed, in Word, in Thought, in their Presence, in their
Absence, in their Old Age, when tempted by the Devil, and by the disobedient to
dishonor them, when they Please thee, when they Displease thee, Rebuke and
Correct thee. N B, A Negative command inclusively commands All lawful means to
avoid the evil forbid: and a Positive command inclusively commands All lawful
means to perform the good commanded. On these things I have but Harped and
Touched, for One of these Ten Words is a great Text: and to show what is
contained in a Commandment would make a long Sermon: for thy commandment is
Exceeding Broad Psalm. 119.96.
.

This tenth Note having some respect to the Sabbath, A lesson for the Lords day.
leads me to leave this Lesson with you. viz, Fail not to learn your children
to Reverence the Sabbath day. FAR be it from you to follow our English
Heathens: Hateful Heathens.
who let their children Loose to serve Satan on the Sabbath day. Tell them of
the Sore judgments, God has sent upon Sabbath Breakers: for which Search the
Scriptures, and See the Practice of Piety, Practice of Piety preferred.
one of the Best Books (but one) that ever was written: and is like to rise up
in judgment against many. N B, God delivered no other commandment as he
delivered this for the Sabbath. e g. (1) It has a Memento presixt: viz,
Remember. (2) It is amplified with Arguments more than all the rest, except the
Second. (3) It is delivered [Positively] keep it holy: and [Negatively] thou
shall not do any work: and so is no other commandment delivered. FAIL not in
this for the Fear of God: this Glorious and Fearful name, THE LORD THY GOD
Deu. 28.58.
.

Eleventh. Note 11. Heaven and Earth made in Six days.
The GREAT GOD that was but Six days in making Heaven and Earth, was twice
Forty days and Forty nights in writing and delivering these Ten Words Ex.
24.18.
, to remain a Law and Rule for man's life. And Moses was as long waiting, Chapter
34.28.
prostrate on his Face fasting to receive them Deu. 9.9, 10, 11, 18.
: he did neither eat bread nor drink water, but did uncessantly attend this
Heavenly ministry of God. And these Ten words were written with the Finger of
God, upon two Tables of Stone Ex. 31.18.
: and put into an Ark of Shittim-wood Deu. 10.3, 5.
, very Durable, and counted incorruptible. There was nothing in the Arksave the
two Tables 2 Chro. 5.10.
: for thou have magnified thy word above all thy Name Ps. 138.2.
. God will magnify the Law and make it Honorable. If the Ark set forward, the
enemy must Flee before it Nu. 10.35
. If the Ark go through Jordan, the waters must make way Jos. 3.15, 16
. If the Ark be set up by Dagon, then Dagon must Down 1 Sa. 5.2, 3
. If Dagon will try the other fall, he shall lose his Head and Hands, and have
nothing left but his Stump Ver. 4.
: which can neither Invent nor Act, as head and hands do. If the law of God be
in the Heart, the reproach of men is not to be feared: for the Worm shall eat
them like Wool Isa. 51.7.
. The Ark containing the two Tables, was a Sacred Symbol of Gods presence. God
will be with his Law, and with the Lovers of it. God will keep them as the
Apple of his Eye, who keep his Law as the apple of Their eye: as he has
commanded Ps. 17.8. Pro. 7.2. The ark a triple Type.
. And the Ark was a type of Christ, who is the End of the law. (1) It was made
for him to Keep. (2) He was made to keep That. (3) He keeps it for Our use,
Ark-like. N B, As Jesus obeyed the law for our justification Perfectly, in love
to GOD, and to the Law, A sweet Simile.
and to Us: so we are to obey the law in our conversation Sincerely, in love to
GOD, and to the Law, and to the Lord Jesus. Was the only wise God twice 40
days and 40 nights engraving Ten Words upon Two Tables of Stone, and will vain
man make them Void? it is easier for Heaven and Earth to pass, than One Tittle
of the Law to fail Lu. 16.17.
.

Twelfth and Last. Note 12. A deep Decalogue.
The ten commandments are a Vast Continent. The M L is the fountain of all
laws: viz, Moral, Ceremonial, Judicial and Evangelical. They all belong to it,
it is the Root, they are the Branches: they are contained in it, and may be
reduced to it: on these two commandments (i e the ten) hang all the Law and the
Prophets Mat. 22.40.
. Here if we consider man in his threefold State, viz, of Innocence, of Sin,
and of Grace; we may see the M L contains man's duty in every State. First, in
Innocence.] Adam being capable of receiving it, Ten in One. Break one break all.
God gave him the ten commandments in One commandment: this is clearly employed
in Adam's breaking them All, by breaking that One. As the Sanction of the law
is Disjunctive, viz, Do or die; and the Injunction of the law Copulative, viz,
Do this and that and all; so is the law it self Copulative, i e, so linked
together that in breaking one he brake all. This M L then contained Adam's duty
in innocence, e g, in the first commandment, [thou shall have no other gods
before me:] that Negative implies this Positive [thou shall have me for thy
God] i e, by thy obedience to my M L: for no other was in use, yet all other
Laws were Conditionally contained in it. Second, Consider man in his Fallen
State,] and there other laws fall in as useful: they being conditionally and
providentially prepared thereunto. (1) The judicial law comes and kills him.
Adam's Death.
Adam's Soul died: i e, he was as disable to recover his Fall by a C W, or any
other way, as a Dead man is to live. And death of Body followed: and death of
Soul and Body passed upon all men To. 5.12.
. (2) Man being fallen, the law of faith falls in for his Recovery: for this
implicit Positive precept is still in force: viz, [thou shall have me for thy
God.] This must of Necessity imply, [thou shall believe on my SON] q d, For
having Lost me, thou have No other way left to Find me to be thy God. Thus the
law for Faith appears to be employed in the first Commandment, as I foretold
you. (3) Man being fallen, Ceremonial Sacrifices fall in as useful, from
Adam's Fall to Christ's Death: at which time they ceased. And since Christ's
death, Moral, Judicial and Evangelical laws are contained in the M L for man's
use in a Fallen State. Third, Consider man in a State of Grace,] and the same
laws are contained in the M L for his use: viz, Moral, Judicial, Evangelical
laws. The first commandment contains many Evangelical laws: this implicit
Positive precept, [thou shall have me for thy God,] implies thou shall Believe
in me, and in my Son: for faith in Christ is a Christians daily duty. And
Repentance, Love, Humility, Hope, Fear: are employed in this first precept:
[thou shall have me for thy God.] It is q d, If I be thy God, thou shall Repent
of thy Sins against me, thou shall Love me, thou shall walk Humbly with thy
God, and Hope in thy God, and Fear thy God. e g, Believe in the Lord your God 2
Chro. 20.20.
, Repent and turn from your Idols Ezekiel. 14.6.
, thou shall Love the Lord thy God Deu. 6.5.
, Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord Ja. 4.10.
, Let Israel Hope in the Lord Ps. 130.7.
, thou shall Fear thy God Lev. 25.17.
: these and the like are Branches of the first commandment.] The second
commandment contains Laws against Idolatry, Will Worship of man's invention:
worshipping of Images, Pictures, the Sun, Moon or Stars Deu. 4.19
: and laws for the True worship of God.] The third commandment contains Laws
for Prayer, Praise, giving of Thanks: for godly Discourse in Private, and
Public: which includes Preaching. And laws against Swearing, Cursing,
Blaspheming, and Murmuring against God: and speaking of God vainly, idly,
formally, unprofitably, proudly.] The fourth commandment contains Laws for
the Sanctification of the Sabbath day: and Laws against the Profaning of it.
This commandment is called, Custos primae tabulae: and this first Table
contains all man's duty to God.] The fifth commandment contains Laws for
honoring of Parents, and Ministers, and Magistrates, godly Governors, and
pious Princes called in Scripture Fathers Isa. 49.23
: and Laws against dishonouring them: and for Correction for disobedient
children.] The sixth commandment contains Laws against all kinds of Murder,
unjust Battles, Quarrels, Blows with hand or heart, to hurt in any part.] The
seventh commandment contains Laws against Adultery of every degree:
Fornication, Incest, Sodomy, Buggery: all uncleanness, wantonness, wearing of
apparel contrary to the Sex, whether Male or Female Deuteronomy. 22.5.
.] The eight commandment contains Laws against all kinds of Thefts,
Robberies, Rapines, Sacrilege, antiscriptural Usury Ex. 22.25 Deu. 23.19
, detaining of wages, pledges, fraud, deceit, false weights and measures Chap.
25.13, 14.
.] The ninth commandment contains Laws against false witness, backbiting,
tale-bearing, giving or taking of Bribes to blind the eyes to ill ends Ex.
23.8. Deu. 16.19
.] The tenth commandment contains Laws against evil thoughts: and is very
direct against desires after whatsoever is our neighbors: and as a Sword
should cut the cords of covetousness in Sunder. This Second Table contains
all man's Duty to man. Thus far of the M L.


Fath. What say you of the C L?


Min. The C L respected Typical worship: Of the C L.
of which Sacred Ceremonies there were 4 Sorts. (1) Holy Persons: viz, High
priests, Priests, Levites, Nazarites. (2) Holy Places: viz, the Tabernacle, the
Temple, and other places of Divine appointment, where God recorded his Name
Exo. 20.24.
. (3) Holy Things: viz, the Ark, Oil, Fire, Holy Water, First Fruits, Incense,
Burnt-offerings, Meat Offerings, Peace Offerings, Sin Offerings, Silver
trumpets. (4) Holy Times: viz, Holy days, as New moons, Ceremonial Sabbaths.
[Feasts,] viz, feast of Passe-over, and unleavened bread, feast of Pentecost,
feast of Tabernacles, feast of Trumpets, feast of Atonement. Holy years: viz,
the Sabbatical or Seventh year Lev. 25.2, 3, 4.
: the year of Jubilee or the Fiftieth year Ver. 8.10.
.


Fath. What of the Judicial Law?


Min. The Judicial Law was made to provide punishments for Offenders against
the M L, Of the Judicial Law.
and the C L: for a Rule to punish by according to Equity and Justice. For
Capital offenses the Jews had 4 kinds of death: viz, Stoning, Strangling,
Beheading, and Burning. Crucifying was not by their law, but by Pilate's the
Roman Deputy Mat. 20.19. Jo. 18.32.
. For offenses not Capital, they had Scourging, Imprisonment, Restitution,
Retaliation.

By these three Sorts of Laws the Jews were governed. By the M L as they were
Men, and a Humane Society: by the C L as they were a Church so constituted, and
a Sacred Society: by the Judicial Law as they were a Commonwealth, and a Civil
Society.


Fath. How is the M L abolished? and how is it not abolished?


Min. The M L as a C W, Abolition of the M L.
or the Curse and Rigor of the law which separateth man from God, is abolished
and made void for true Believers: but as to the Doctrine, Discipline,
Government of it for rule of life; it is as Permanent as Heaven and Earth.


Fath. How is the C L abolished?


Min. The Practice of the C L which separated man from man, viz, Jew and
Gentile, Abolition of the C L.
is abolished: for he is our Peace who has made Both One, and has broken down
the middle wall of partition between us Ephesians. 2.14.
. But though it is out of use as it was Practical, yet it is in use as it is
Doctrinall.


Fath. How is the Judicial Law abolished? Abolition of Ju Law.



Min. The Judicial Law is abolished as it provided punishment for Sin against
the C L. Like as Flowers or Plants are fenced to keep them from being broken
down while they are to Stand: Simile.
so was the C L fenced with the Judicial Law: but when these Plants are plucked
up, to what end shall the fence Stand? e g, The 10 day of the 7 month was a
Ceremonial holy day: he that did any work was to be destroyed by the Judicial
Law Lev. 23.27, 30.
: but now this C L is abolished, this Plant plucked up, the Judicial Law (the
fence) is gone too. But Judicial Laws to punish Offenders against the M L, are
not abrogate, but Permanent: and are to be used (with discretion) by the godly
Civil Magistrate, who is to administer Justice, and execute them on Offenders.
e g, If a man kill a man, and so break the Sixth commandment; he that kills
with the sword, must be killed with the sword Rev. 13.10.
:] whosoever sheddeth man's blood, (the Judicial Law is in full force) by man Shall
his blood be shed Genesis 9.6.
.

Thus God who foreknew man's Fall, Wonderful wisdom.
and made a C G, with Christ before he made a C W with Adam, has in wisdom So
delivered this Sacred Divine Law of the Decalogue, that it should contain in
Ten Words the whole Duty of man: to GOD and Man, in his threefold State. (1) In
a State of Innocence: (2) In a Fallen State: (3) In a State of Grace by Jesus
Christ. I conclude these 12 Notes on the Ten Commandments with David's prayer:
LORD! Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold Wondrous things out of thy LAW
Psalm. 119.18.
.


Fath. I see now my persuasion of the Decalogue was no delusion, but O how
little do I see! I and others had need use David's prayer for light in God's
law: but I fear our Antinomians who do so slight it, will never pray for light
in it.


Min. They that see by the light of Strange Fire, and are so deep-learned in
the Doctrine of Devils as to deny Gods law to be a rule of life; are never like
to use David's prayer for light in God's law: for their light being darkness,
they see not so much as their own ignorance, nor the danger of
self-conceitednesse: and so are like to go into the land of outer darkness.


Fath. God be merciful to me! and deliver me from Antinomian delusion:
sometimes when I talk with Mr A, I am ready to Q whether the law be any rule of
life or no.


Min. You pray well, but look a little dull: if it may recreate (and not
corrupt) you, let me tell you a Story. viz, A German woman desiring to rid the
house of her husband, German woman.
cast him into a deep sleep: and then Dresses, Shaves, Cuts and Clips him into
the fashion of a Friar. A godly Minister is my Author.
When he wakes she Stares and Storms, q d, What does this Friar here in my
house!] Friar! q d, Wife art mad! do not know thy husband? Still she storms,
bawls, and fumes against the Friar. The man being amazed looks in the glass to
see if he can know himself: but seeing himself in such a Shape, he almost
believed he was a Friar as his wife affirmed. Thus the Antinomians use the law.
e g, (1) They paddle with the Preface, viz, I am the Lord thy God which brought
thee out of the land of Egypt: that belongs to the Jews only, and so is
rejected.] Visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children: to cut off
that they bring this as a Sword, every one shall die for his own iniquity Jer.
31.30.
.] Remember the Sabbath day: forsooth that is Ceremonial, and so Snipt off.]
That thy days may be long in the land which the Lord thy God gives thee: that
belongs to the Jews, and so is clipped off. Having thus maimed and dismembered the
Decalogue they wholly reject it: that (with the German woman) they may be at
liberty to go a whoring from God. They are of kin to that cursed King, who
cut the Roll and cast it into the fire Jer. 36.23.
: but it was rescribed, and many like words added Ver. 32.
: if man will diminish the Preceptive part, God will add to the Penal part of
his Precept. There were desperate Antinomians in Job's days. e g, He
stretches out his hand against God Job 15.25
. Take this literally, and so did Julian the Apostate when (wounded in battle
and bleeding to death) he stretched out his hand to throw his blood up to
Heaven: Julian against Jesus.
saying in indignation to Jesus, Theod, l 3. Cap. 20.
O Galilean! thou have overcome me. And the Amalekites, who when they could
catch a Jew and kill him, would cut off the part that received the Seal of the
Covenant: and with an outstretched hand throw it up toward Heaven, Jerome.
with indignation against God for that institution. Take it metaphorically, and
so does he stretch out his hand against God, who uses his Wits and Words
against God: as the Antinomian when he argues against Gods law. A man should
not lift up hand, word, or thought against God: but hand, heart, tongue and all
For God: but he strengthens himself against the Almighty Job 15.25.
(...) Shaddai, Omnipotency it self who can do all things, and yet what can the
Almighty do for them? yet he silled their houses with good things Chap. 22. 17,
18.
, and yet what can the Almighty do for them? Reason will tell a man, the
Almighty can do All things. Reason differs the spirit of a Man from the spirit
of a Beast: what unreasonable blind beast is this then that thus argues? If the
Almighty can do nothing For, he can do nothing Against a man: and that I
presume is their hope: viz, the Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil
Zeph. 1.12.
.] He runs upon the bosses of his bucklers Job 15.26.
: alluding to the fierce assault of a Soldier. The buckler is Defensive
armor: the bosse Offensive, i e, a Sharp Spike, if a man come close it kills
him. God's Buckler is the Preceptive part of his law, by which he defends his
honor: his Bosse is the Curse, threat or Penal part, by which he kills them
that break his command. e g, Thou shall not eat of the tree of knowledge, there
is the Buckler: in the day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die Genesis 2.17
, there is the Bosse: Adam runs upon it and dies for it. Thus Job's Antinomian,
or ours, his Cousin German. He will offer violence to God, and his Law, with
Gospel in his mouth. He runs upon him, even on his neck Job 15.26.
. He will try a twich with God. He would pull God out of Heaven, and throw the
world out at Window. A Saint plays the man against Satan: but he plays the
Devil against God, who makes his Law void. Here is sin of a Size! what blows
big enough for sin So big? it will puzzle an Apostle and a Philosopher too, to
define it.


Fath. What may be the Reason of our Antimian averseness to the Law of God?


Min. (1) Because of its Antiquity, 1 R.
and their Novelty.] They have an evil eye upon the O T for its Names-sake.
Upon this account they may slight God himself, who is the Ancient of days Dan.
7.9.
. And on this account they may slight the Gospel (for that is as old as the
Law) as no doubt they will do when a New one comes up. And on the same account
they may slight their Own opinion, for it is as old as Adam's fall: Adam was an
Antinomian when he brake the Law. It Is older than Adam's fall: the Devil was an
Antinomian when he tempted Adam to be of the like Religion.

2) Because of its Purity. 2 R.
] It is a sacred, divine, perfect, pur Ps. 19.8.
, holy, spiritual Law Romans 7.12, 14.
. It binds hands, feet, tongue, heart and All to holiness. Antinomians are
Libertine, who love not to be bound by the bonds of Gods holy commands: but a
David loves the law upon this account: thy word is very pure, therefore thy
servant loves it Ps. 119.140.
.

3) Because of their own Obscurity, 3 R.
and ignorance of its excellency.] That excellent office of the law, viz, to
wound for Sin, and send to a Savior; they are Strangers to. They never saw
their own sins in Gods Looking-glass: but other men's sins in the Devils
Prospecitive-glasse: Simile. The young Blackmoor. Simile.
and so are like the Black boy that fled from his Black father to his White
mother, not considering his Own blackness. Antinomians slight the law, as the
Indians did their Gold, when they knew not its worth. And as a Natural man does
Gods gold (i e, Simile.
grace) which is to him as dross. And as the Jews did Jesus, not discerning
his Beauty, though altogether lovely Cant. 5.10.
. The very Name of Jesus was hateful to the Jews: they could not call him by
it, but, this fellow M. 26.61.
, that deceiver Chapter 27.63
, and the Carpenter Mar. 6.3.
: so is the very word [Law] contemptible to our Antinomians. But this is
madness with a Witness! for without law, what right has a man to any good?
viz, Temporal, Spiritual or Eternal. What right to house, goods, land without
law? or what Safety are lands or life in without law? what right to Christ,
Heaven, eternal life without law? It is by Law that Christ's righteousness IS
righteousness: i e, by the law of Works. It is by Law that Christ's
righteousness is a Christians righteousness: i e, by the law of Grace Jer.
23.6.
. It is by Law that Christians are Saved, i e, the law of Faith: and it is by
Law that sinners are Damned, i e, by the law of Works. God imputes
righteousness by law and Saves: and God imputes sin by law and Damneth: and
is LAW to be slighted! He that breaks one breaks all Ja. 2.10. Break one break
all.
: the breach of the ten commandments brings a man 10000 Talents into Gods debt
by Law: and is LAW to be slighted! Little England has a great deal of Rome in
it, and (seeing darkness is now a days so desirable) it is to be wished these
persons wish not for Popery and Tyranny, who do so disgust this good word LAW:
for if a man would have laws against Theft nulled, no doubt that man desires to
be a Thief: and so of any other such like desire to destroy Law. It is no
wonder these persons are in darkness, for they will shut their eyes against
Scripture Light, if it be contrary to their own conceptions. Simile.
They are like the Elephant, who makes the water Muddy, that he may not see his
Deformity. They will search Scripture for what seems to suit with their sinful
minds: but would bury the opposite truth in oblivion. They bring their opinions
to the Word, not to be discovered, but covered and maintained: and Role them
through the Bible to see what Moss they can gather to cloth them with.
Scripture with Scripture they will Not compare: but run away with a Piece of a
Scripture, as the Devil did Ps. 91.11. Mat. 4.6.
. If these persons were Indians, they were objects of pity: but if they will
shut their eyes in a land of light, let them go into the land of darkness, as
persons to whom is referved the blackness of darkness for ever Jud. 13.
.

4) Because of their Impurity and wickedness. 4 R.
] This cursed Doctrine of disowning the Law, comes from a corrupt Heart: and by
such it shall be drunk Up, and swallowed Down with delight. Such are glad of a
gospel that gives them liberty from Piety, to live in Iniquity. They love to
hear a smooth Sermon to day, to see a Play to morrow, to go to a Dancing-school
the next day: Chrysostom's saying of Dancing.
though Chrysostom says, Where dancing is, the Devil is.] And to go Gaudy in
their Garments, for the sake of a little cursed credit among the carnal: and
this at Such a time when God is calling so loud for Sackcloth and Ashes. And to
neglect their childrens Souls, when Papists are coming to cut their Throats,
and send them to Hell to howl there against their Parents for their Lawless
life. To say [the law is no rule of life] is for the Devil to speak with a
Tongue of flesh, enough to horrifie a man's heart to hear it. Such in effect say
Idolatry, swearing, Sabbath-breaking, killing, stealing, whoring, are no sin.
No wonder if such fall foul, and become vessels for the Devil to empty his
Excrements into, until they are full and flow over. A Story too true.
I knew a person Anno 1666 then a Preacher, who (in opposition to the use of
the law in preaching) said, I hate the law of God as Poison:] after which this
preacher turned adulterer: even when he had an amiable wife of his own. What
wonder? it may be the man did it to bear his testimony against the law of God:
which he used to complain of as the cause of the corruptions of his heart. God
will one day roar like a Lion against these Rebels, and rend the caul of their
heart Ho 11.10. Chap. 13.8.
: when he assaults ehm, q d, [Was I 40 days and 40 nights preparing a Law for
you to loath, slight, snuff at, and spit out your venom against?] Let such
expect the Antitype of the 40 days deluge for their portion, to last as long
as everlasting. N B, They that forsake God's Law, forsake God himself. Rehoboam
forsook the law of the Lord 2 Chro. 12.1.
: what then? Thus says the Lord, Ye have forsaken Me Ver. 5.
. To the same purpose is this saying, Ye are gone from mine Ordinances, return
unto Me Mal. 3.7.
: q d, In going from mine Ordinances ye are gone from Me. Some wicked men own
God in Words, and deny him in Works Tit. 1.16.
: Antinomians deny God in Words, and overpasse the deeds of the wicked. Jer.
5.28.
. Religion! I value it not with the dust of my Shoes, which I shake off as a
witness against them. It is worse to make the Law void than to make Heaven and
Earth void Luke 16.17.
: and he that had rather overturn heaven and earth than his own rotten opinion,
I fear will never find a place in Heaven, nor on Earth long: but in Hell ere
long.

5) Because of the Judgments of God which Antinomians are under: 5 R.
and they are twofold. (1) The judgment of Delusion, for their transgression.]
They have chosen their own ways, and their soul delights in their
abominations: I also will choose their Delusions Isa. 66.3, 4.
.] They received not the love of of the truth that they might be Saved: and for
this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they all might be Damned 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12.
. If once persons are made drunk with the wine of the wrath of God in the cup
of an imaginary gospel of liberty; then the Law is spewed out and cast behind
the back: like a mad man, Simile.
who cares not if he straw the street with Pearls. (2) The judgment of
Profanation.] Sometimes God punishes Sin with Sin, i e, one sin with another:
for sin he gives up to sin; for the practice and Pleasure of sin, God gives up
to the Power of sin: this is the way to prepare for the greatest plague in
Hell. Better be under all Job's boils, and Pharoh's plagues, and all the
Tyrants in Turkey, An unparalled plague.
than under this judgment of the Power of sin: though it be to the sinner a
Pleasure. To these judgments of Delusion, and Profanation; is linked the
judgment of eternal Destruction. Man chooses his abomination: God chooses his
Delusion: and God will choose his Destruction. Let no man think to choose his
work and his wages, his sin and his sorrow: if man will choose his Sin, God
will choose his Sword: and sharpen it for the Slaughter, to cut in pieces the
Sinner Ezekiel. 21.10.
.


Fath. It Is a sad case to be in: I told Mr A a piece of my mind one day: and he
was angry, and said, I had learned by Lesson of my Legal Preachers.


Min. Angry! Silly folly.
what kind of angry folly is this? for a man to show me a piece of Pitch, and
be angry because I say it is Black. [Legal Preacher!] They that call a Minister
[Legal Preacher] because he uses the Law lawfully, know neither Law nor Gospel:
and had need begin at great A. If a man be Practical, he will seem to be Legal:
though he be indeed Evangelical. Holy E Hunt.
[That holy man at Hitchin, E Hunt: when I first knew him, and observed how
much he delighted in Gods law, and did (in heart and life) adhere to holiness;
I feared he did rest in his own righteousness. But when he came to declare his
Conversion, and his Opinion in point of Justification; he made it appear that
he trusted in Christ only for That: and that he was in Practice an excellent
Person. The Lord make Me and Mine, and You and Yours like him.] And let Mr A
say what he will, I say; a man's spirit, thoughts, words, works are No more to
be approved than they are Legal: Legality a glory.
a man's legality is his glory, which is to the Antinomian a Mystery.


Fath. Mr. A says he has fulfilled the law in Christ, has Justification, and
Sanctification alike in Christ: and needs none in himself, in heart or life:
which he says is to Me a Mystery.


Min. A mystery of iniquity, of which let me make a discovery. Righteousness
for Justification is resident in Christ: Righteousness for Sanctification is
resident in the Christian: Mr A says they are both alike in Christ, none in
the Christian. N B, A man's own personal righteousness for Justification is to
be rejected and abhorred: by Mr A's rule, righteousness for Sanctification of
heart and Holiness of life, is to be abhorred too: Desperate Doctrine.
and not a Dram of grace suffered to be in the Soul. What then is an Antinomian
better than a Babylonian? who is the habitation of Devils, and the hold of
every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird Rev. 18.2
. The next time you see Mr A, pray give him this short Sentence: viz, He that
has Justification without Sanctification, shall surely have it without
Salvation.


Fath. I told Mr A of his loose life, and he said, Faith was greater than
Holiness.


Min. Greater or lesser, they are linked together: the one is not without the
other. Faith without works is no more alive, than the Body is alive without the
Soul Ja. 2.26.
. What does Mr A think to be saved by? faith without fruit! faith with froth
and filth! faith that makes void the Law! weigh such faith and the faith of
Devils together, and you will soon see which is the lighter. That faith which
has not obedience to the Law for its fruit, I deny. That gospel which is
without Law, a Lawless gospel, I disown as another gospel, the preacher of
which I count accursed, though he comes as an Angel from Heaven Gal. 1.8.
.


Fath. If I plead with Mr A for a holy life, he tells me Faith can do that for
me which Holiness cannot do for me.


Min. And Holiness can do that for you which Faith cannot do for you. e g,
Suppose you have faith, and fall into some sin: what shall be your defense from
the word of reproof and reproach, which is as an arrow shot out Ps. 64.3. Jer.
9.8.
? will you say, I have faith, I believe in Christ? your faith and you will be
abhorred together. But if you live holy, and be faisely accused, you have a
Breast Plate of righteousness to defend you from these Darts Ephesians. 6.14.
. N B. As faith justifies before God which works cannot do, so works justify
before men which Faith cannot do.


Fath. If Mr A heard you, he would count you ignorant of Christ and the Gospel.


Min. Mr A and Mr B too have their liberty to come and try whether they or I
can produce and declare, (1) The greatest sense of Sin, Gods wrath, Hell and
Eternity. (2) The clearest sight of the emptiness of Self-righteousness. (3)
The greatest and sweetest comfort and assurance of Salvation by Christ. Or, (4)
The greatest love to the Lord Jesus: to his Person now in Heaven.


Fath. It seems you have not got Gospel-Notions without Convictions, as Mr A
has. But some Ministers (which are not called Antinomians) preach nothing but
the Doctrine of Justification by believing: I wonder at them.


Min. That you wonder at such is no wonder: for such are Pieces of preachers:
if I saw a piece of a man in a pulpit, I should wonder with you. It seems by
such, that there are hundreds of Texts in the holy Scriptures; which stand for
Ciphers. If a Minister tell men only what God has done for them, and not what
they must do for God, their neighbor, and themselves; how does he declare the
whole council of God Act. 20 27.
? Is a man born to do nothing but believe? what strange trade is this! whether
such workmen do half their work? is a hard Question. Such preachers and hearers
are like to have their work to do in the grave, where it will never be done
Ecl. 9.10
. And how much Blood such Ministers will go Off under the guilt of, God only
knows: for their not informing men of the C W which they are under (by nature)
under the Gospel, will (I doubt not) occasion the damnation of Thousands of
Souls in this City.


Fath. They say, The grace of God teaches men to deny ungodliness Tit. 2.12.
.


Min. True: it is therefore a sign their single way of preaching the Gospel is
not blessed for the reception of that grace: seeing their hearers deny not
ungodliness.


Fath. What may be the Reason why such Ministers do not preach the Law?


Min. (1) A foolish fond affection for the Title of a N T Minister: Gospel
Minister: 1 R.
Preacher of Free grace. They are afraid of the Title [Legal] as if the word
[Law] which God has magnified and made so honorable, would dishonor them.

2) A man-pleasing spirit: 2 R.
loath to displease: love of the praise of men, more than the praise of God Joh.
12.43.
. Men will praise them that please them with fine stories of Gods favor
(concealing his displeasure) instead of showing them their foul faces in the
clear glass of God's Law. They like not to give occasion for this Reflection,
viz. What have I to do with thee, O thou man of God? art thou come to call my
Sin to remembrance? 1 Kin. 17.18.


9) Ignorance of the necessity of preaching Gospel Duty to the godly. 3 R.
Such preachers see not the Duty of the gospel, as necessary to be preached as
the Doctrine of the gospel. They fill the Head with gospel Notions: but does
Heart and Hand are empty of good Operations. Some write whole Volumes of
Notions, to Blaze abroad their Notion: which (Occasionally) will but treasure
up wrath for Writer and Reader, if Practice prevent not. ALAS! Alas! the
lamentable neglect of Duty and barrenness of Life is not laid to Heart. To
inform Christians of their duty; to direct, excite, provoke them to it; is no
small part of the work of a preacher: by the want of which, Christians are
almost in all evil, in the midst of the Congregation Pro. 5.14.


4. Ignorance of the necessity of a Law-ministry to awaken sleepy Sinners, 4 R.
and make them sound Saints: by warning them to flee from the curse of the Law
to Christ. Such gospel Ministers understand not how many of their Hearers are
asleep in their Sins, under their gospel Sermons, with all their Notions: and
what to be warned with Thunder and Lightning, to flee from Hell: whither they
are hasting with a lie in their right hand Isa. 44.20
.


Fath. It seems by these Reasons, the effects of neglect of preaching the Law,
are Sad.


Min. SAD! yes, and very sinful: as for instance in each of the ten
commandments. Its because the First commandment is not preached, that there is
so much monstrous Idolatry among men. Men make gods of Devils, of Men, of
Beasts; of Houses, of Lands, of Friends, of Enemies, of Themselves, of their
Bellies Phil. 3.19
, of their Wits, of their Works, of their Worship Hab. 1.16
. To which I may add, men's denying the very Being of God. e g, This last
Sturbridge Fair Anno 1681, a Cambridge Scholar in discourse said, I had it of
him that heard it.
I do not believe there is either God or Devil or Heaven or Hell. Here is an
eye for a Parish! what Doctrine will this person preach? who has took such a
Degree from the Devil and Hell. Another denied the Being of God to an honest
man's face who affirmed it: said the A theist, I will prove there is no God
thus, viz, I will fall a Swearing as fast as ever I can Swear, and let your God
come and hinder me if he Can.] And so fell into a Swearing fit, and Belched out
abundance of Oaths, as long as he list: then insulted over the honest man with
a [Where is your God?] intimating that he had infallibly disproved his Being. O
the patience of God! who did not turn such a wretch's Swearing into Roaring.]
It Is because the Second commandment is not preached, that men have so many
false Ideas of God in their minds. Some imagine God to be an Old Man sitting in
Heaven, A sort of Indians.
who will do them no hurt: and so fear the Devil only, but yet serve both. They
light up One candle to God that he may Help them: another to the Devil that he
may not Hurt them. Some few, fancy God to be all Severity: and so despair of
mercy. Many imagine God to be all Mercy; and so take liberty for Iniquity.
Antinomians are much like the Heretics of old, who held, that under the Law
God was a severe Judge: but under the Gospel all Mercy. But if God be
changeable, why may he not be all Justice again? and that in Judgment to them.]
It Is because the Third commandment is not preached, that men use the name of
God so lightly, vainly, irreverently: in discourse Of God, in preaching For and
From God, in prayer To God. And that men Swear so sadly, and frequently, even
All oaths small and great, from [God Save me] to that dreadful [God Damn me]
which last I tremble to relate. They that not only neglect to pray God to Save
them, but also do daily dare God to Damn them; I have No hope of their
Salvation: nor No doubt of their Damnation: they take Long steps to the Lake
that is but a little before them. They that swear [God Save me] may possibly be
penitent, pardoned, and Saved: but this dreadful [God Damn me] is like to
prove an unpardonable Oath to All that use it.] It Is because the Fourth
commandment is not preached, that the Sabbath is so Slighted, so Slept away, so
talked away about Trifles, and that Christians are so carnal in spiritual
duties: and enjoy so little of God.] It Is because the Fifth commandment is not
preached, that Children are at such a Pass: and do so many ways despise,
disobey, dishonor their Parents: and Kick up their heels at Correction when it
comes.] It Is because the Sixth commandment is not preached, that there are so
many Murders: with Heart, Hand, and Tongue.] It Is because the Seventh
commandment is not preached, that there are so many Adulteries: in Act Word,
Heart: which sin is sometimes of sad consequence. e g, One sent Luther a letter
to tell him this Story: viz, A letter to Luther.
A widow had a child by a Scholar: and the Priest would not baptize it, except
she would discover the Father. At this she killed the child: and Hanged her
self. The Scholar hearing this, Hanged himself. The Priest hearing this, Hanged
himself.] It Is because the Eighth commandment is not preached, that there are
so many Thefts with Hand, and Heart. And so much immorality, and want of Common
honesty among professors: so much fraud and deceit in dealing, the Least of
which is not to be allowed, but condemned: and he that uses it, not to be
trusted more or less, for he that is unjust in the Least, is unjust also in
much Lu. 16.10
. Never trust him with a Guiny who will deceive you of a Penny. It may seem a
small matter for a Weak woman under Strong temptation to take an Apple: but the
Lord God said unto the woman, What is this thou have done? Genesis 3.13
A Question enough to make a man Quake.] It Is because the Ninth commandment is
not preached, that there is so much evil Speaking; backbiting, devouring,
sowing discord, that surpassing service of Satan.] It Is because the Tenth
commandment is not preached, that men are so Covetous. With this cord, sin is
drawn as with a cart-rope Isa. 5.18.
. Covetousness comes of the love of the world: that root of all evil 1 Timothy
6.10.
. If this sin live in the Heart, I know not what sin will die: nor what sin
such a Soul shall escape the Snare of. What multitudes of murders does it make
men commit! how does it make men murder and ruin even their own relations!
sometimes themselves and all. I could tell you many a Dreadful Story had I
time: take 2 or 3 for a taste.

One left his Lover, for a Richer. In July 1681. A Knight that I can name.
The forsaken damsel, Drowned her self by London Bridge. This Ladies death
struck this Knight with grief, and Death: for in few hours after he died. And
now their Relations are lavishing out their hundreds at Law, for the thousands
these unhappy Lovers left behind.

Two fatherless Females lived in a Lone house. Mr W.
Their Uncle (who that day paid them their Portions) came with his Sons at
Midnight to murder them for their Money; He was killed, and his Sons taken and
hanged, by means of a Stranger who lost his way and lodged there that night:
which is a Story of such Singular Circumstances, I am sorry I have not time to
tell it out.

A man being long at Sea, at length came home to see his Father and Mother. Mr
C. Mr W.
This Seaman had a Sister living at Towns end, whom he called to see as he came
in the Even: and she knew him. But coming to his Parents, they knew him not. He
delighting to keep them in the dark for that night, to make merry with it on
the morrow, made himself a stranger, and desired a nights lodging. They lodge
him in a barn which he accepts: but desires them to lodge his bag of Money in
the house. They take it in: and in the night consult to kill him for it, and
did so: and so were soon made rich. But in the morning, his sister came betime
to see her brother. They understanding what they had done, ran Mad, and so were
hanged. Sir these are no Idle Tales.


Fath. Truly these are Sad Stories. And I see now, this defect in preaching sin
Down, and duty Up (by opening the glass of the Law to show sin) is the cause
why sin lives so much under Sermons. What symptoms of the sin of Pride in the
Heart, is in the Habit! it troubles me to see in what a Garb some go, that I
could name.


Min. O! pray take heed of that! it is good sleeping in a whole skin. Trouble
you! if you and I were well awake, it would make us tremble, to see persons
come to Sermons as if they came for Shows: and appear on Galleries, as if they
were on a Stage in Smithfield Fair, to act a part in a play. And how is it
possible these painted persons should be reproved by a preacher who appears in
a Pulpit in a monstrous Periwig? a Crown of Pride! N B, If these persons preach
not pride Down, their hearers go down to Hell: if they do at all attempt it,
it is impudence in them: and so it is to speak any word in the name of God Ps.
50.16.
O what a Shame is it for a man to pretend to have the spirit of God, and yet
go as if destitute of the dictates of Nature! for does not even nature it Self
teach you, that if a man have long hair, it is a Shame unto him 1 Cor. 11.14.
? A shame if it be his Own, which God and nature have given him: much more it
it be another man's hair, which comes not from God, nor nature, but Art, that
coins a man for the Court: or makes him liker a Courtier than a Preacher.
Scripture phrase.
Gods word in such a man's mouth is as a Jewel of Gold in a Swines Snout Pr.
11.22. Simile.
. And in handling it such do Swine-like, musle a Pearl up and down the Mire.
The lip of the Leper was to be covered Lev. 13.45.
: and the unclean spirit was to hold his peace Mar. 1.25
. Brethren to these in iniquity, are such Ministers who suffer their Wives and
Daughters to go like Ladies of honor: as if they came from a Court to wait on
a Queen: or were of Madam Guins Gang, though maintained byu the Congregation.

But O how perilous is Pride or Sin in such persons! The peril of pride.
when the Priests were to go into the Tabernacle, said the holy Lord God, They
shall wash their hands and their feet, that they Dis not: and it shall be a
Statute for Ever to them Exo. 30.21.
. When the Priests sons were wicked in worship, there went out Fire from the
Lord, and devoured them, and they died before the Lord Lev. 10.1, 2.
: a prodigious plague! If the Priests daughter did commit fornication, she was
doomed to the most dismal death, viz, to be burnt with fire Lev. 21.9.
: when others did not die at all for fornication Ex. 22.16
, though they did for adultery Lev. 20.10.
. These prodigious plagues, show how hateful sin is in Such, more than in
others. With such Ministers, we may rank such Members, who being Coached to
their meetings, suffer their Coachmen to sit at an Alehouse, in Sermontime:
and to sit drinking at the Table of Devils, while they sit at the Lords Table.
AY Sir! you can shake your Head and sit Silent, but I must Speak: these things
stink up to Heaven. The sins of professors of Religion, make religion Stink in
the nostrils of the profane Genesis 34 30.
: and make professors themselves stink in the nostrils of God Isa. 65.5.
. Let such preachers, and professors take heed, the Holy God, who hates pride
in a high degree, do not speedily Spew them out of his mouth. By reason of
proud persons God may say to London, Behold, this was the iniquity of thy
sister Sodom, Pride, etc Ezekiel. 16 49.
. PRIDE was one of the Engines that pulled down the fire of God from Heaven, to
burn them down to Hell. A proud person is in a Perilous condition: especially
if a Preacher, or a Professor. But whosoever it be, the higher in Pride, the
lower and farther from God: the liker the Devil, and the nearer Hell. Yet a
proud man is above God: for God will have his will in nothing but what is good
and just: but a proud man will have his will, right or wrong. How can a proud
person receive any grace from God? Bernards Simile.
God is the Fountain, his grace and mercy to man is the Stream: as in a
watercourse, the Stream can rise no higher than the Fountain from whence it
comes: so grace can rise no higher than God, which a proud man is above. N B,
Pride lifting up so high, will let fall full low at last: he that is above God,
will doubtless fall below the Devil.

Beware of World-likenesse. Caution.
Likeness in Christians to the world in Sin, causes likeness in Sorrow. When
the small Pox, or the great Plague rages, the Reason why God puts so little
difference between the Egyptians and Israel, is because Israel differs so
little from Egypt. They Live alike, and Die alike. Some professors promise
themselves safety in Pestilence from this promise, viz, 1000 shall fall at thy
side, and 10000 at thy right hand, but it shall not come nigh thee Ps. 91.7.
but why? because thou have made the Lord, the most high, thy habitation Ver. 9.
: this is a dwelling in God by a holy life; It is a promise of preservation
with a condition, such expect it without, why not Salvation too without
believing? Sir, I see by your looks, I have said more of preachers than has
pleased you: but if persons will not be reproved, and reformed when such a
Plague of darkness is approaching us from the Pit, to prepare us, or Ours for
that place of torment; we may write the Red Cross on our doors.


Fath. Let than pass. I spoke only against Pride: but I fear we have some who
hear to Poor purpose, besides such Proud persons.


Min. Now you talk of such hearers, and put it into my head, I tell you, here
are such Parcels as I could not have believed to be in London, had I not heard
and seen it. eg,

1) Some are pleased with their pure gospel, 1 Sort of simple hearers.
without Law or Duty: with faith without works. Let a Minister tell them a
story of Christ's benefits, etc, they think All is their own. Poor deluded
creatures! where is their Faith? they must show it by their Works, if God may
be Judge Ja. 2.18.
. If their gospel Minister should preach duty so necessary, and press the
power of godliness; they would leave him for a Legal preacher: not enduring
such sound Doctrine, for want of sound Hearts.

2) Other judge of a Minister, 2 Sort.
by the multitude of his auditors: being albe to give no other account of him,
than he who hastes to some Hurly-burly or Tumult in the Street: viz, he runs
because he sees others run before him. If this be a rule to judge a Minister
by, we may cry up the Quakers, and other who are unsound in Fundamentals: for
such have the great Assernablies.

3) Other are taken with Tones, 3 Sort.
and Accents: as if the life and power of Preaching lay in Points, and Tittles:
for if a Sermon be Substantial, yet if not Tonical, its to them a Toy. Or, let
the same sounding Sermon be delivered without Tone, or Read to them, its not
worth a Rush.

4) Other admire a Minister, 4 Sort.
who has a strange kind of confidence with God: though his boldness be a
fruit of his ignorance. And admire his out cries against the enemy: and the
broad sides he give them out of his pulpit, prophetically pulling them down
before their time: though this be a fruit of a 3-fold ignorance. (1) Of the
enemies power, and policy, rather than knowledge of Gods power and wisdom to
oppose them. (2) Ignorance of Englands Sins: for which God may justly suffer
Antichrist to make the Nations Shake at the sound of our fall, before he comes
down. (3) Ignorance of their own duty, to stay God's time: wait ye upon Me,
says the Lord, until the day that I rise up to the pray Zepb. 3.8.
Yet is this kind of confidence admired: and if a preacher be Sober, and do not
Hector and Vapor, his Sermon is snuffed at as a Cipher.

5) Other are in love with a loud noise: 5 Sort.
they like him best who speaks Loudest: though he desreve to be told as one
told the Nightingale in eating its little carkase, Vox tu es preterea nihil,
thou art nothing but noise.] It is not the Sermon, but the Sound, that is
Significant to such. If the same Sermon, or a much better, be delivered with a
low voice, though a substantial, sound, suitable Sermon, and preached in Print,
its not worth a Pin. I do not know but a Drum in a Pulpit, is as good for them
as good Doctrine. Call them to an account of their Canorous preachers
proceeding, they reply, O he is a Thundering preacher! he has a Rousing voice!
so it seems, if a man have but bare Brains, and strong Lungs, its enough,
though that be all. Simile.
Such hearers are like the Servant who came home crying up the Sermon to the
Clouds: to whom said his Mr, What was the Text? Sir it was taken out before I
came in. What of the application of the Sermon? I came out before he had done.
What of the middle of the Sermon? Sir, I was asleep then. I will trouble you
but with one sort more, and they are

6) A company of Children, 6 Sort.
who choose to hear Youths preach. These you will say are Young hearers, before
you hear that some of them have been hearers near half a hundred years.
Excellent Elihu was otherwise minded: viz, I said Days should speak Job 32.7.
. Surely such never read this Text, (...), not a novice 1 Timothy 3.6
.] Paul dehorts from despising Timothy's youth Chapter 4.12.
: but he was no Upstart, nor new plant (...).
: he had know the Holy Scriptures (...) from an infant 2 Timothy 3.15.
. It seems he was sanctified from the cradle, for that Sacred Service. He was
not prepared with a little humane learning, and some notions of Divinity
scraped up together into a Paper, to read over in a Pulpit: as some of our
Youths are, whose grace I doubt is not a Dram. If I was to hear a Sermon,
before I would go over a threshold to hear a youth, surely I would walk 7 miles
to hear some grave solid Senior: for with the Ancient is wisdom, and in length
of days, understanding Job 12.12
Sir, if I was informing some Ignoramus, it would be necessary to say, I
despise not any proper comely Accent, or audible voice in preaching: but you
are past a Child, to whom I speak.


Fath. I have observed some of these Simple things: I fear we have a pack of
pitiful professors here in London.


Min. Do you but Fear it! as for our Congregational (to say nothing of
National) professors in London, I am satisfied in this to my Sorrow, viz, that
the Religion of abundance of them is like the heart of the wicked: little worth
Pro. 10.20.
. And though they learn the language of Canaan, yet their end will be
destruction Isa. 19.18
: and they the people against whom the Lord has indignation for ever Mal. 1.4
. I reflect upon none truly gracious: or that carry it Christian-like. As for
others, never tell me, They are Churchmembers, and belong to this Minister, and
that Dr: let them leave off worldly-love, and others Vaities: part with their
Pride, and practice Piety, or never profess it more. And to all Libertines and
Antinomians at once, I say; Its obedience to the Law of God, in Love to God, as
a fruit of this root [the Grace of God,] done to this end [the Glory of God,]
that I plead for: and if this will not Down, let them throw their gospel after
the Law, and be so honest as to turn professed Atheists, and deceive the world no
more with the Name of Christ, and not depart from iniquity 2 Timothy 2.19.
.


Fath. You seem to of an implacalbe spirit against the Antinomians.


Min. I am so, every Inch of me: my spirit is like the Northern Iron and the
Steel Jer. 15.12
, to Stab their rotten religion to Death: for to reconcile Right Religion and
the Antinomian, is to bring God and Baal together.


Fath. I am of your mind, but I must desire, you to dismiss me, for my
occasions call me.


Min. If you be in have, Conclusion
I will make a hasty Conclusion, with this Exhortation. viz, Love the pure
precious Laws of the God of Love. Be grieved because they are Slighted Ps.
119.158.
. The more other slight them, the more od you delight in them. Keep them as the
apple of thine eye Pro. 7.2.
. Bind them upon thy fingers: write them upon the table of thine heart Ver. 3.
. Keep them in the midst of thine heart Chapter 4.21.
Esteem them more than your necessary food Job 23.12
. Let them be sweeter than honey, and the honey comb Ps. 19.10.
. Be legal in all your Life. Glory in legality. Never think well of what is not
done according to Law Ezra 10.3
. Labor for life: work as if you were to win Heaven by working Joh. 6.27.
Phil. 2.12. Heb. 4.11.
: and when you have done all, count all nothing in point of Justification. Rest
upon Christ only for That, as if you had done nothing at all. And follow not a
man living a Step farther than he follows Jesus Christ 1 Cor. 11.1.
: and so Sir, I bid you Farewell.


Fath. Farewell Sir: the Lord reward you.


(...)

A THIRD DIALOGUE Concerning the SABBATH DAY.

The Third Part.

Then I contended with the Nobles of Judah, and said unto them, What evil thing
is this that ye do, and profane the Sabbath Day? Did not your fathers thus,
and did not our God bring all this evil upon us, and upon this City? yet ye
bring more wrath upon Israel by profaning the Sabbath. Neh. 13.17, 18. Hallow
my Sabbaths and they shall be a Sign between Me and You, that ye may know that
I am the Lord your God. Ezekiel. 20.20. Blessed is the Man that does this, and the
Son of man that lays bold on it, that keeps the Sabbath from polluting it.
Isa. 56.2. Also the sons of the Stranger, that Join themselves to the Lord, to
serve him, Every one that keeps the Sabbath from polluting it: even them will
I bring to my hold Mountain, and make them joyful in my House of Prayer. Ver.
6, 7. And he saw that Rest was Good, and the Land that it was Pleasant, and
bowed his shoulder to bear, and became a Servant unto tribute. Genesis 49.15.
LONDON, Printed by J A for the Author, 1681.

The General Contents of the Third Dialogue.
THE Parents complaint of himself. The Parents complaint of Mr S, Mr A, Mr L.
Mr A with his Every day Sabbath confuted. Mr L with his Never a day Sabbath
confuted. The change of the Sabbath for Mr S's conviction. The beginning of the
Sabbath: the times contended for descoursed: viz, Morning, Noon, Even,
Midnight. Six Objections against the true time Answered. The time of Christ's
Resurrection occasionally discoursed. The day of Adams fall occasionally
discoursed. Satan's old enmity against the Sabbath, Noted. The month-day, and
weekday of Christ's death discoursed. The next day no Sabbath, proved. The Jews
various division of the day into hours. Of the Passover, Wave-day,
Seven-weeks, Pentecost. The Jews custom in Translating the Passover. The
opinion of Pentecost on the first day, disproved. Of the Disciples meeting on
the Pentecost. Of Gods countenancing the Pentecost. Of Jesus's exact
observation of the Passover: and Sabbaths, Moral and Ceremonial: and the whole
Law. The day of Jesus's death declared, and proved. Diverse Questions arising
thereupon, Answered. An account of the Authors way in this work. The Parent
Cautioned, and Counseled. Ten Directions dropped for the Sabbath day.
Wherein we have an account

Of The Day of Adams fall.] The day of Jesus's death.] Of The Sabbath ensuing,
the Wave-day, the Pentecost.] Of The time of Jesus's burial.] The time Jesus
lay dead.] Of The time of Jesus's Resurrection.] The beginning of the Sabbath.]
All contrary to the Common Account.
A THIRD DIALOGUE Concerning the SABBATH DAY.
Min. BEN! -- BEN! -- BEN!


Ben. Where? what? who calls me before I can see?


Min. O! Sleepy-head! hear you not low hastily some one knocks at the door?
Pray rise and know the matter. --


Ben. Sir I have been down to know his name, and his business: and he tells me
its he that, sat so long with you under the Tree: and he desires to speak with
you Presently.


Min. Strike a light and let him in: and tell him I will rise. --


Fath. God Save you Sir. I am compelled to come and visit you at an
unseasonable time: I hope you will hold me excused.


Min. Sir, you are welcome to me: but I wonder to see you in Town so Soon: and
am surprised to see you look so Sad. Pray what is the matter? is all well at
home?


Fath. All in health praised be God: Parents complaint. of Self.
but I am under Grief upon Grief. It has been a Sad time with me since we sat
under the Tree: though I concealed it from you in our last conference. SAD! I
have Reason to be Sad indeed, to think how sadly I have neglected my poor
children Souls. O to think how many times we have walked by the way, and not a
word of God! to think how many times they have been twatling about me in the
house, and not a word! how many times they have been packed to bed, and pulled
out, and not a Word of God have I spoken for their good! O it has cut me to
the quick! and put me upon prayer for pardon, space, and grace to do my duty.
And I did addict my self to it: and began to find peace in it. But yesterday
after the afternoon Sermon, as I was instructing my children about the Sabbath,
Parents complaint of Mr S Mr A Mr L.
in came Mr S in anger, and told me, I kept the wrong day: and said, I should
keep the Seventh day, first appointed, and never reprealed. When he was gone,
Mr A came in and Laughed at me, and my practice as a low thing: viz, to keep
One day in a week: and told me, I should keep Every day as He did. When he was
gone, Mr L came in and told me, I should keep Never a day Sabbath: for that
command for a Sabbath was Ceremonial, and long since ceased at Christ's death.
And my Children listened to this last with delight: and now they slight the
Sabbath, and whatever I say for it: and tell me Mr L is counted a wise man. And
under this Sorrow upon Sorrow I am so disquieted I am almost distracted. In
your last conference, at end of the Tenth Note, when you pressed it upon me to
learn my Children to reverence the Sabbath; I had a mind to ask you what
Scripture proof we have for the change of the Day: but I was loath to interrupt
you: but now being driven out in distress, I pray let me hear your reply to
all these Opinions, but chiefly for the change of the Sabbath Day.


Min. Did they use to be thus Opposite?


Fath. A little by the By, when other business brought us together: but now
they came on Purpose, and assaulted me as Never before.


Min. Just now! as soon as you are set upon a Solemn work: when the good seed
is sown, then comes the Devil Lu. 8.12.
. Indeed you are to be pitied, and so are they: but I fear some of them will be
plagued. As for your former Sorrow, its Always better than laughter Ecl. 7.3.
, Sometimes better than joy: there is sorrow that Dries the spirit, this will
Water it: and so I praise God for it, and pass it. But this Last is the Pest,
that carries the Poison in it: for which I must provide some Antidote to expel
it. As for my reply to these persons, Mr A who keeps every day Sabbath, and Mr
L who keeps never a day Sabbath; Every day Never a day.
you may put them together (for he that keeps Every day keeps Never a day) and
so look on them as two persons possessed by Satan: above the dominion of God,
and under the dominiof the Devil. But let us take them asunder again: and speak
to them apart.

1) This Every day Sabbath is none of God's ordinance, Mr A consuted.
for God's command is, Six days shall thou labor Exo. 20.9.
: it must therefore be the Devils ordinance, and to him its observed: as the
Priests which God did not appoint, are said to be ordained for the Devils 2
Chro. 11 15.
. Mr A is blown up into the Air with a blast from the bottomless pit, and puffed
up with Pride: a Sabbath day a week is a weak thing with him: he is a 7-fold
Saint or under a 7-fold Deceit, in the border of Heaven, whence he is like to
fall into the belly of Hell.

Mr L consuted.
Mr L who keeps Never a day Sabbath, but slights the Sabbath as Ceremonial, is
to consider, (1) The Sabbath was not given first to the Jews or seed of Abram,
as Ceremonies were: Sabbath was made for Man.
but it was given to Adam as a Public person, for him and his posterity, to be
obeyed whether man stood or fell: and this in Innocence before Ceremonies were
in use. And though Adam was not subject to weariness before sin, yet a Sabbath
was suitable for him, as a Sacred cessation from his calling. So God gave Adam
a Sabbath, and Blessed it: i e, to make it a blessing to him that kept it: and
Sanctified it Genesis 2.3
, i e, he set it apart for holy use. (2) The Sabbath was Certainly observed,
from Adam to the Law on Sinai, though not much expressed in Genesis, which is
but a very short Epitomy of 2000 years Acts, in which time many excellent acts
were done, which are omitted, and not recorded. Abraham's observation of the
Sabbath day, is without dispute: because he is so commended for keeping Gods
commandments Chapter 26.5.
. And that the Sabbath was known to Israel before Sinai, you may See Exo. 16.23.
: the breach of which command is counted as the breach of all Ver. 28.
. (3) This command for a Sabbath is one of the Ten, delivered on Sinai before
Ceremonies: Josephus's Sabbatical river that runs six days and rests one will
rise up in judgment with Mr L and Mr A.
and wrote on two tables of Stone, and put into the Ark, as no Ceremony ever
was. Mr L plays the Papist, who takes away one, and leaves but nine. (4)
Christ's precept for Prayer, to prevent flight on the Sabbath, which flight was
to be 40 years after Ceremonies ceased, proves the Sabbath no Ceremony: Pray
that your flight be not in the Winter, q d, that will wrong your Bodies:
neither on the Sabbath Mat. 24.20.
, q d, that will wrong your Souls. Mr A and Mr L are brethren, both under a
7-fold deceit: to undeceive them, let us put them together again to consider,
viz, God in wisdom did so order the change of the Day, that though it
occasioned two Sabbaths to come together, yet there was not Two in a week, nor
a week without One: to signify, there must be nor more nor less than One
Sabbath in One Week.


Fath. What say you of Mr S, and of the change of the Sabbath Day?


Min. As for Mr S who denies the change of the Day, The chang of the Sabbath.
I say; Though the Change of the Sabbath be not founded out with a Trumpet on
Sinai as the Command of the Sabbath was; yet have we so much in Scripture as
may Satisfy concerning it. They that say, Give me a plain precept for a
practice, or I will not regard it; may mean Honestly, but they speak
Ignorantly. For if from a Text we can draw a direct, sound Inference to prove a
practice, that (being the Sense of Scripture) is to be regarded as Scripture it
self. The sense of Scripture we are to seek as Silver: and if this be not to be
regarded, its vain to use any Scriptural Reason, or Argument in discourse as
Paul used to do Act. 17.2. Chapter 18.4, 19. Chapter 24.25.
: or to Study and expound the Scripture by preaching. Then put a Boy into a
pulpit to read a Chapter: for what other Sermon can an able Minister make? if
nothing but the very words of Scripture must be delivered. But let us see some
Scriptural proof for this practice.

1) The stone the builders refused, O T proof.
i e, for a foundation for Faith and Practice, is become the head Ps. 118.22.
, of the work of Redemption: he has laid the foundation and finished it by his
Resurrection. This is the day the Lord has made, i e, the day of the week on
which Jesus rose: we will rejoice and be glad in it Ver. 24.
, i e, to foresee it by Faith, if we live not to see it by Sight. Yet prays
pathetically and speedily for it: Save now, I beseech the, O Lord Ver. 25.
. God is the Lord which has showed us light Ver. 27.
i e, to foresse this Day. 2) Thus says the Lord, my salvation is near to come
Isa. 56.1.
, i e, Actually: it was come before Virtually. Blessed is the man that does
This, and the son of man that lays Hold on it, that keepth the Sabbath Ver. 2.
i e, a Sabbath in remembrance of Christ's Actual redemption. 3) When these 7
days are expired, i e, Eight is a Sabbatical and Vital Number.
by the death and Resurrectiof Jesus: it (i e, the Sabbath) shall be upon the
Eight day and so forward (the first day added to seven is the eight day) and I
will accept you says the Lord God Ezekiel. 43.27.
.

1) After Jesus's resurrection he said to his Disciples, All power is given to
me in Heaven and in Earth Mat. 28.18.
: which implies power to change the Sabbath. And Christ gave them Commission to
teach the Nations to observe all things whatsoever he had commanded them Ver.
19, 20.
i e, nor more nor less. N B, If Jesus did not ordain the first day Sabbath,
the Disciples (by their practice) have taught England and other Nations to
observe a New Sabbath of their Own invention. 2) The Disciples assembled on the
first day, and shut the doors for fear of the Jews; i e, because it was in
opposition to their seventh day Sabbath: and Christ came and Sealed their New
Sabbath with his sweet presence Joh. 20.19, 20.
. 2) Jesus was seen of the Apostles 40 days, speaking of the things pertaining
to the Kingdom of God Act. 1.3.
: of which the Sabbath is One, and none of the least. 4) The Disciples came
together to break bread upon the first day of the week Chap. 20.7.
: in remembrance of Jesus, for whose sake they observed that day. 5) The
congregation and Collection of the Churches of Galatia, and Corinth upon the
first day of the week, was by the Apostles order 1 Cor. 16.1, 2.
: to these at Corinth by writing, and says he, the things which I write unto
you are the commandments of the Lord Chapter 14.37
. 6) John being in Patmos said, I was in the spirit on the Lords day Rev. 1.10
A desert Island in the Aegean Sea.
. He does not give the day this name, but the day on which he was in the
spirit, he Signifies by its name, so well know to the Churches to whom he
wrote: i e, the Lords day, so called upon the same account as the Supper is
called the Lords Supper: viz, because Jesus (who is Lord of all) did institute
both to be kept in remembrance of him. 7. The first day is called Sabbath in
several Scriptures: e g, (...), the beginning of the Sabbath Mar. 16.9.
:] (...), the First of the Sabbaths Joh. 20.1 Cardinal for the Ordinal.
, i e, the New Sabbaths.] Paul went into the Synagogue on the (Jews) Sabbath
day Act. 13.14.
, and preached Jesus: and when the Jews were gone out of the Synagogue, the
Gentiles besought that these words might be preached to them the next Sabbath,
(...), the Sabbath between Ver. 42. See his Sermon. from Ver 15 to Ver 42.
] i e, between two Jewish Sabbaths, which Sabbath was the first day: and that
was the Reason the Gentiles durst not name it till the Jews were gone out. Thus
far for Scripture Proof: now for some Scripture Paralle.

1) The seventh-day was kept in remembrance of God's Creation: Scripture
Parallel.
the first day is kept in remembrance of a New Creation by Christ's Redemption.
As soon as man sinned, there was [Virtually] a dissolution: he and the world
was at an end with him. So as Christ was [Virtually] slain from the foundation
of the world, there was [Virtually] a New creation, by prevention of a
dissolution of the Old: for by him all things consist Col. 1.17.
. This new creation was called the world to come Heb. 2.5. 2 Paral.
. 2) The seventh day was kept in remembrance of Gods rest from his work of
Creation: the first day in remembrance of Christ's rest from his work of
Redemption: that all men should honor the Son even as they honor the Father
Joh. 5.23.
As from the conclusion of the Creation men were to honor the Father with a
day in remembrance of That: so from the conclusion of Redemption are men to
honor the Son with a day in remembrance of That. When God had actually
finished his work of Creation at end of the Sixth day, he instituted a Sabbath
the Seventh day: so when Jesus had actually finished his work of Redemption at
end of the Seventh day, he instituted a Sabbath on the First day. 3) The
seventh day was kept in remembrance of a Delivery from Slavery Deu. 5.15
: 3 Paral.
so is the first day to be kept. And though all men are not free indeed by
Christ's redemption, so as to obtain Salvation; yet is he (in a sense) the
Savior of all men 1 Timothy 4.10.
: and may command all men to keep this day in remembrance of him. N B, When the
seventh day Sabbath was in use, it was said, the government Shall be upon his
shoulder Isa. 9.6.
: the government is not Now in the hand of God as Creator, but in the hand of
Jesus as Redeemer: for the Father loves the Son and has given all things into
his hand Joh. 3.35.
, which he will deliver to the Father at last day 1 Cor. 15.24. Judgments of
God.
.

The Judgments of God which (on the first day) have befallen the prophaners of
it, will One day be a Witness for it: though at present the plague of Pharoh
be so upon the hearts of profane and professing people, that they are not
moved at them. viz, (1) Gods judgments on men's houses and goods by fire: e g,
Teverton, Chesterton, London: though in this last Hell-born bloody Sinners were
the Instrumental cause, yet the inhabitants Sin was the Meritorious cause. (2)
On Sabbath Breakers Bodies, who by the formidable hand of God, have been struck
Dead on this day in the very Act. (3) On Sabbath Breakers Souls, who have
proudly pretended to keep every day: such have been (and are) commonly Cursed
and Blasted, and with all their Blaze brought to naught. To which 1 add 2
Queries for consideration, and one Assertion for full satisfaction.

1) Was not the Fourth command for a Sabbath Day placed among (and one of) the
Ten, 1 Q.
to signify, it is Originally and Essentially Moral and Perpetual? and
sometimes put among Ceremonial Sabbaths Lev. 23.2. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
to signify, that in respect of that circumstance of Time, it was Typical, and
subject to change? viz, with respect to the Day.

2) Did not Adam fall on the Sabbath Day, 2 Q.
and so break the first Sabbath that ever was made? and if so, did not that
signify, the day was mutable? as the fall and breach of the Tables containing
the C W with Adam signified the mutation of that Covenant, and the making of a
New C from the beginning.

A first day Sabbath is (in a Sense) of as great Antiquity, Assertion.
as the first Sabbath ordained for Adam in Innocence. Though that was at the
end of Gods Works, it was at the beginning of man's Life. God Ended his week
with a Sabbath: but man Began his week with a Sabbath. It seems he was made at
end of the Sixth day, to begin his life on the Seventh day, which was his First
day, though he was made a moment before the day began. Adam was a Type of
Jesus, who began his New Life at his Resurrection with a Sabbath, the first day
of the week. And so must we begin our week with a Sabbath: a day for God First,
which is Certainly more acceptable to God, than to serve our selves Six days
first, and then put off God (blessed for ever) with an Od day at last. So much
for the change of the Sabbath Day.


Fath. I am satisfied in the change of the Sabbath: but I am at a loss to know
when the Sabbath begins: but I think its not much matter for that, so that a
man keeps a day.


Min. HOW! keep a Sabbath and not know when it begins nor ends! nor Care to
know! consequently you will not care to know when Christ rose from the dead,
for his resurrection gives beginning to the Sabbath. Nor will you care to know
how long he lay dead. What grown like Gallio! Act. 18.17. Simile.
Sir, I am sorry to hear such an ungracious speech fall from your lips. Suppose
your self taken by cruel Turks: a most loving friend (to rescue you) falls into
their hands himself: in which Skirmish you escape. But for your sake he is
cruelly used, wounded, mangled, imprisoned in a dismal dungeon, So many days.
Then escapes, acquaints you with it, and desires you (for his sake) to keep a
day in remembrance of his deliverance: beginning at the time when it was. What
would you not care to know when to begin nor End! nor how long your friend lay
Bound! truly you deserve to be retaken by the Turks without remedy.


Fath. I perceive by this, you hold Jesus went to Hell: but that many Divines
deny, and so do I: for its contrary to Christ's words upon the Cross, viz, To
day shall thou be with me in Paradise Lu. 23.43.
. If Christ went to Heaven, how could he go to Hell?


Min. If he went to Both, its not so great a mystery as the Trinity. God is in
Heaven and Hell at once Ps. 139.8
. And Jesus was in Heaven and Earth at once, before his death Joh. 3.13.
: and why not in Heaven and Hell at once, after his death? Take heed of unsound
notions of a Savior: if Jesus has not been in Hell for you, I fear you must
be there for your Self.


Fath. Well! let it pass. If it be of such concern to know when the Sabbath
begins, tell me the time: for there are diverse opinions about it.


Min. I need not instance every hour of the day, The Beginning of the Sabbath.
but only the time contended for: viz, Morning, Noon, Even, Midnight: and the
measure of the day, viz, 12 hours, and 24 hours.

1) I need not deny that it begins at [Noon] (as the Gypsies count) as if that
time was contended for in England: Not at Noon.
but though it be not the Plea, it is the Practice of some professors, who
begin to assemble in Gods service after noon, as it were by way of Recreation,
to serve God by the halves. Such have lost half the Sabbath long since. And it
is to be wished they turn not Aminomians and Libertines to lose it all, and
themselves too at length: for they by whom God is but half Served, are like to
be but half Saved.

2) Some Roman-like plead for [Midnight] to begin and end the Sabbath: Not at
Midnight.
for which they produce two Texts. (1) Paul preached on the first day till
Midnight Act. 20.7.
:] which is no ground for this beginning, for he preached till midnight because
he was to depart next morning with a final Farewell. (2) Samson arose at
midnight and carried away the gate of Gaza Judge. 16.3.
: which say such was a Type of Christ's rising at midnight.] Samson was a Type
of Christ in 20 things: but that he was a Type of Christ's death and
resurrection, in laying a piece of a night upon pleasure, is a very unlikely
matter. Had he lay 3 nights and days in a dungeon, there had been some color
for it.

3) For the [Morning] many will plead, Not in the Morning.
and so I suppose will you: but I shall oppose this Time, time it how you will,
and say what you can for it.


Fath. I will try that: what if it begin at Spring of day, and end at Dark
night?


Min. Not so: for in some Countries the day will be a month long: North.
for so long at least (sometime of the year) does daylight last.


Fath. What if the Sabbath begin at Sunrise and end at Sunset?


Min. Not so: for in some Countries the Sabbath would be more than a Month
long: In Russia Muscovia and Tartaria.
for so long goes the Sun a Circular course round about them in sight, except
Clouds come between: as you would easily understand if I had a Globe in my hand.


Fath. We have Morning and Even all the year: we may begin at morning and end
at night.


Min. Not so: its no meet measure: for the length of a Sabbath in June, will be
twice as long as in December.


Fath. But if we begin at Six and end at Six, the Sabbaths will be all of a
length all the year: now I hope I have hit on it.


Min. Not so: for a Sabbath must be the Seventh part of Time: a natural day of
24 hours. It is not enough to make one Sabbath equal with another but also
equal with another day.


Fath. Then it must be from morning to morning: from Spring of day to Spring of
day: or from Sun rise to Sun rise.


Min. Not so: for then the precedent day has two nights: or this precedent
night belongs to no day. Not to the seventh day, for that ends at Even: nor to
the first day, if it begins in the Morning: and so is cut off from both days,
like Job's cursed night, which he would have disjoined from the days of the
year Job 3.6.
. But who dares act so contrary to Gods ordinance? who dare divide the night
from the day? and Separate what God has Joined.


Fath. I can say no more for the Morning.


Min. Then we are come to the fourth and last time under Instance, Even, the
beginning of the Sabbath.
viz, the [Even:] and this I affirm to be the beginning of the Sabbath: and
from Even to Even is the measure of the Sabbath, from the beginning to the end
of the world. At first, where the Sixth day ended, the Seventh day
(successively) began: so where the Seventh day Sabbath ended (i e, at Even) the
first day Sabbath began. And thus of Ceremonial Sabbaths: from Even to Even
shall ye celebrate your Sabbath Lev. 23.32.
.


Fath. God made the day to beain at Even at first: Day and night shall not
cease Genesis 8.22.
. And morning is put before Even in this Psalm Ps. 92.2.
: the Title of which is, A Psalm for the Sabbath day: Ergo, the Sabbath begins
in the morning.


Min. God that made the world, made the day to begin at Even, from the
beginning to the end of the world, If after this. God alters the order of his
Words, that does not alter the order of his Works. Aaron was older than Moses
Exo. 7.7.
, therefore says God, These are that Aaron and Moses Chap. 26.
: in the next verse it is, these are that Moses and Aaron Ver. 27.
. You may as well say, Aaron was older than Moses at First, but Moses was older
than Aaron at Last, while they lived gogether: as to say, The night was before
the day at first, but now the day is before the night.] Honor thy Father and
thy mother Ex. 20.12.
: the father is put first, for Adam was first formed, then Eve 1 Timothy 2.13.
. (By order of the Creation of Man, and first institution of Marriage, the man
is to be older than the woman: else marriages are Monsters.) Yet God alters his
order of words, viz, Ye shall fear every man his Mother and his father Lev.
19.3.
: this is because children are more prone to despise their mothers than their
fathers.] Render to Caesar the things that are Cesars, and to God the things
that are Gods Mar. 12.17.
by your argument Caesar was before God, or to be preferred before him.


Fath. But some say, Ergo, it did not begain at Even as they did: its a day
without night.


Min. If a man had 7 pound in his purse, Simile.
and tells you he has spent just 6 pound, does he need to tell you what
remains? Simile.
If I had 7 days natural allowed me to live in a house, and tell you I have
spent just 6 nights and 6 days, do I need to tell you what remains? or if I
say, a Day remains, is it not ridiculous for you to conclude, it is a day
without night? I am ashamed of such Arguments: if men will make Mists, they
deserve to dwell in the Dark.


Fath. What time in the Even does it begin?


Min. Not at Sun set as you may suppose: The time of the Even.
but when its dark night: which time is both Scriptural and Rational, i e, it
agrees best with Gods Word, and man's Work. This last needs no more proof than
man's experience. That its Scriptural, see Scripture. When it began to be dark,
Nehemiah commanded the gates of Jerusalem should be shut Neh. 13.19.
: i e, that the Merchants might not come in to Sell and break the Sabbath. The
gate of the inner court shall be opened on the Sabbath, i e, at Even: and shall
not be shut till the Even Ezck. 46.1, 2.
. To begin the day at dark night, is Consonant to its beginning at the
Creation: the Evening and the morning were (...) one day Genesis 1.5.
. The Even or beginning of the night, is put for the whole night: Morning or
the beginning of the day, is put for the whole day. N B, The beginning of the
day was thus Counted, before the Sun was Created Ver. 16.
: to signify, its not Sunset that begins the day, but the beginning of
darkness, when light is at an end.


Fath. In Summer it is daylight all night.


Min. What then? count the night to begin when it is as dark as it will be,
near two hours after Sunset. Those Northern people who have daylight a month
together, and they who have Sunshine as long; can count the days, and tell
when a day begins and ends, by the Circular motion of the Sun.


Fath. To begin day at dark night is an unsettled Rule, December our Sabbath
will beain soon after 5 a clock: in June not till Ten.


Min. It is by the Suns Ascension and Declension, that night comes Sooner and
Later, with us on the North of the Line. But thus has God made the Sun to rule
the day: which we are to reckon as good a rule as if the Sun did rise and set
all year at the same time. And they that live East or West from us, are to
begin their Sabbath when it is Even with them, though it be Morning or Noon
with us, that is nothing to them. So we are to begin when it is Even with us,
though it be Morning or Noon with them, that is nothing to us: for the Sun
rules the day round the world.

This leads me to a Lesson for your Lads, A lesson for Lads.
who are apt to think, it is Day and Night, every where at once. To cure this
conceit, consider, When it is morning with us, a quarter part of the
Circumference of the world East, it is Noon: half way round, it is Even: three
quarters round, it is Midnight, quite round we are at home. Or when it is
morning with us, a quarter part West, it is Midnight: half way round, it is
Even: three quarters round it is Noon. And thus it is Morning, Noon, Even,
Midnight at once in 4 parts of the world, any hour of the day.


Fath. That I perceive:


Min. It does more than Seem unfit, to oppose the order of the Almighty: the
God of order. Why do not you argue thus? It is fit to begin the Sabbath with
night, because it is a day of rest. (2) Though it begin with Night, it is not
to begin with Sleep: sure there is Prayer and some holy exercise in Gods
service to preceed Sleep, if there be any Christianity in a Family. (3) The
night is sanctified of God (for us) as well as the day, and may be sanctified
to God by us: we are to Sleep to God as well as to Wake to God: in so Sleeping
God will be glorified, and we may be comforted Ps. 63.5, 6
. (4) Works of Charity and Necessity are lawful on the Sabbath day: and such
are eating, drinking, and sleeping, so much as is meet for us.


Fath. But the Sabbath must begin in the Morning, because Jesus rose then.


Min. He did not rise in the morning: there is not a Text in the Bible tells
you so.


Fath. You think I never search the Scripture.


Min. Yes perhaps with a Bible in one hand, and a Pipe of Tobacco in the other:
in Pastime, not in Pain, under your ignorance. Men may be Professors and
Preachers, and what they will: but except they are pinched to death under their
darkness, and both search and pray to God in good earnest, they are never like
to know the mind of God while they live. Lay both hands and heart too to this
work, lest you come off with a Curse, and a Blast, for a blessing.


Fath. I hope you will not deny this Text Mar. 16.9.
.


Min. I hope so too: God for bid I should: but for your satisfaction we will
see what all the Evangelists say. Matthew tells us, the two Mary's came to see
the sepulcher as it began to dawn toward the first day of the week Mat. 28.1.
.] Mark says they came at the rising of the Sun Mar. 16.2.
. This cannot be the first coming. These saw a young man Sitting. Mar. 16.5
. Some saw 2 men Standing Lu. 24.4.
. Mary saw 2 Angels Sitting Jo. 20.12.
. It seems Several came at Several times. Its probable, Mary Magdalene (who had
most love to Christ and to whom he first appeared Mar. 16.9
) came first along. Job. 20.1.
.] Luke says they came very early, (...), in the depth of the morning Lu. 24.1.
: i e, at Cock-crowing. Depth, signifies a thing did in the dark: the morning
was deep in the dark: the Spring of day was coming, but there was so much
darkness between, they could not discern it.] John says Mary came when it was
yet (...), darkness Job. 20.1.
: that is was be before Day ia as clear as the Sun. THEN said the Angels, Why
seek ye the living among the dead? he is not here, but is risen Luke 24.5, 6.
: q d, Long ago. Had Mary come at Midnight, she had heard the same for all you
know. None of the Evangelists tell us when Jesus rose. There had been a great
eath-quake, for the Angel descended and rolled back the stone Mat. 28.2.
: and for fear of him the keepers did shake, and became as dead men Ver. 4.
: and were revived and gone, for saifh Mary, They have taken away the Lord Job.
20.2.
. These things had a time to be acted over: but how long ended before Mary
first came (before day,) is not expressed. It is now a Maxim, viz, If the day
begins in the morning, Jesus did not rise on the first day.


Fath. Mary's coming to the sepulcher in the morning seems to signify, Jesus
was to rise in the morning.


Min. Not at all! it was not the least sign of his rising in the morning: nor
came they with any expectation of his Resurrection, but to anoint him Mar. 16.1.
, as if he had been to lay in the grave as another dead man. When Jesues
foretold his rising from the dead, his Disciples questioned what the rising
from the dead should mean Chap. 9.10.
. When Jesus told them he should be mocked, spitted on, scourged, put to death,
and rise the third day: they understood none of these things. Lu. 18.34.
. And when they saw he was risen yet they knew not the Scripture that he must
rise again from the dead. Job. 20.9.
.


Fath. But the plainest proof for Christ's Resurrection in the morning, you
leave out Mar. 16.9.
.


Min. It seems you will bring it in: but it will do you no service, for the
support of this opinion. Take this Text as translated, viz, When Jesus was
risen early, and the Sense is [when it was early Jesus was risen] which does no
more prove, Jesus rose in the morning, than to say at noon [ Jesus is risen]
proves he rose at Noon: Or than that saying the next Even the Lord is risen Lu.
24.34.
] proves he rose that Even. Or that expression of Paul so long after Christ's
Resurrection, [ now is Christ risen 1 Cor. 15.20.
] proves Jesus rose just then.


Fath. When then do you suppose Jesus rose?


Min. I do more than suppose, for I am fully satisfied, Time of Jesus's rising.
that Jesus rose from the dead in the Even, when the Jews Sabbath ended, and
our Sabbath began: for it is the Resurrection of Jesus that causes the Jews
Sabbath to cease, and gives Being and Beginning to our Sabbath: which begins at
^^en, as I have proved. This opinion of Christ's ^^^ng at Even, I will prove by
the same Scripture you produce to prove he rose in the Morning: viz, Jesus was
risen early the first day Mar. 16.9.
(...) signifies both [ early and morning.] Sometimes when fo is translated
morning, it signifies a time long before day: eg, (...) in the morning rising
up a great while before day Mar. 1.35.
. [The first day] does not properly express the Original: (...), the first of
the Sabbath, ie, the first Time or beginning of the Sabbath. N B, I am A and O,
the beginning and the end, the first and the last Rev. 22.13.
: beginning and first are One, end all last are One, and all signify Christ's
Eternity: the former signifies, he is From everlasting, the latter that he is
To everlasting. This is to show you that by [first] the beginning of the day is
intended. And this (...) first, is sometimes translated [beginning;] eg, the
latter end is worse than (...), the beginning 2 Pet. 2.20.
. And thus we are to take this Text Mar. 16.9.
, Jesus rose early, a great while before day, at the first, or beginning of the
Sabbath.] If some Critic was in our company, he would tell us, (...) Sabbath,
signifies sometimes a week: e g, (...), I fast twice on the Sabbath Lu. 18.12
: i e, two days a week. Here its necessary to understand it a week, for its
improper to say, I fast twice a day: but there is no necessity of such a Sense
here Mar. 16.9.
: yet if I grant it, all is One, for the beginning of the week, and of the
Sabbath is at the Same time.

For farther satisfaction, N B, Jesus was Buried at Even. And it was at the
very End of the day: for the day being almost at end, and Christ with his
companions still on the Cross, the Jews being netled with fear they should
hang there on their high Sabbath, besought Pilate that their legs might be
broken Job. 19.31.
, and so dispatched. Then came the Soldiers and braks the legs of the thieves
Ver. 32.
: but seeing Jesus dead, brake not his legs Ver. 33.
: but one of them with a spear pierced his side Ver. 34.
: q d, Thou hangest here like a hypocrite, feigning thy self dead to save thy
Shanks, but I will give thee a touch shall try thee. Now in the place where
Jesus was crucified was a garden, and in the garden a sepulcher, there laid
they Jesus, for the sepulcher was nigh at hand Ver. 41, 42.
. They hurried him into that hole being hard by, and had not time to carry him
farther, because their Sabbath was about to begin. Luke says, (...), the
Sabbath began to shine Luke 23.54.
, i e, with Starlight, At this Juncture of time, when that day ended, and the
next began, was Jesus buried: Ergo, Jesus must needs rise in the Even, to
complete the time Prefixed for his laying dead.


Fath. If Jesus rose in the Even, he lay but a day and a night in the grave:
for he was buried at end of the Sixth day, and (by your count) rose at end of
the Seventh day: how then did he fulfill his word in rising on the third day?


Min. Jesus did fulfill his word, and we must believe it, if we understand it
not more than the mystery of the Trinity. But why do you say Jesus died on the
Sixth day?


Fath. O! the Scripture is plain! he died the day before the Seventh day
Sabbath. And I have seen it thus confirmed by the learned: viz, Adam fell on
the Sixth day, proved by this Text Ps. 49.12.
: and the Paschal lamb was slain on the Sixth day, and Jesus died on the Sixth
day, and all about the same hour. These are Parallel proofs. Adam's fall on the
Sixth day, and the Lambs death on the Sixth day, prove Jesus's death on the
Sixth day: and Jesus's death on the Sixth day, proves Adams fall on the Sixth
day: as Jesus must dye [virtually] that day and hour Adam sinned, so [actually]
that day and hour of the week. This mutual harmony makes all very clear.


Min. As pithily proved as if you had said, The King of Spain and forty
thousand men: Went up the Hill and then came down again.

What a fine story is here! and very clear: as sometime a thing looks, for want
of light to look on it. Simile.
There is a sort of rotten wood, that shines at Night: but you see no luster in
it at Noon. That the Paschal lamb was slain on the Sixth day, as says your
Author, see his pithy proof Ex. 12.6.
: which Text tells the day of the Month, not of the Week. And whether he
falsisies, Ainsworth on Exodus Page 37.
Ainsworth, whom he quotes for his Author; I leave it with you to look. That
Jesus was virtually slain as soon as Adam sinned, Ideny not: no doubt he
undertook for man before man was Pro. 8.23 Rev. 3.14.
: but that Jesus's death which was 4000 years after man's fall, must needs be on
that day and hour of the week on which man fell, I reject as ridiculous. If
such had said, Jesus Rose on the week, day and hour that Adam Fell, it had
carried a fairer color. If men must search as far as the foundation of the
world, for a foundation to falsify the day of Christ's death; it is pity they
are not better busied. But if Adam's fall on the Sixth day. be a proof for
Christ's death on the Sixth day: let us lay aside the day of Christ's death a
little, and begin with Adams fall.

1) Adam was a glorious piece of Gods creation: Adam's Fall.
his Soul and Body was an Epitomy of Heaven and Earth: and an house for God to
inhabit. To say Adam fell on the Sixth day, is to liken God his Maker to a
foolish Builder: who lets the house fall under his hand before he can finish it.

2) It seems by Sacred Scripture, that neither Adam nor Angels fell on the
Sixth day: for in the conclusion of the Creation, at the Close of the Sixth
day, God saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was very good: and the
evening and the morning were the Sixth day Genesis 1.31.
: There is the Close up of the whole Creation complete.

3) As it seems by Scripture, Adam fell not on the Sixth day, so it seems by
Scripture, he fell on the Seventh day: and that is my persuasion. And I will
produce no other proof for it, than the same Scripture your Author brings to
prove Adam fell on the Sixth day: viz, that Hebrew Text (...) Adam in honor
did not abide a night Ps. 49.12.
. It seems he fell that first night, which was on the first Sabbath day
natural, which began at Even.

Note Satan's old enmity against the Sabbath. Satan's enmity at the Sabbath.
(1) He mystically murdered Adam and all his posterity, on the first Sabbath
that ever was. (2) The first Bodily murder (we know of) in the world, Satan
acted by the hand of his servant Cain on the Sabbath day: and for a Sabbath
days service, as I suppose by this Text (...) in the end of days Genesis 4.3.
the Seventh day was the end of days, for there never was more than 7 days.
(3) Satan sets his Servants a work many ways to break the Sabbath. And this
enmity is not only against Gods Sabbath, but also against man's Soul. In
indignation against both, this great governor drives on, as if he would drive
all before him into Hell fire. At his command, they curse, swear, whore, pot,
pipe, prate, sport, work, play, walk at pleasure: all which paths lead to the
Lake of fire. The Sabbath is spent as if it was the Devils day, and not Gods
day. It is the Devils great Trading day for Hell, and the wickeds great
Treasuring day for Wrath: for sin on Other days, does not fill the Vials of
Gods wrath so fast as it does on This day. Add to all, Satan's provoking his
servants to persecute Saints on Sabbath days for the Service of God:
disturbing them in their meetings, haling them to Prisions, for using the
liberty Christ has given them. (4) Satan is very busy with Saints on Sabbath
days. He tempts them to work, and buy, and sell, when the Sabbath is begun in
the Evening. To lay in Bed in the morning. To trifle away time when they are
Up. To talk of controversies, Saints both sleep and wake to Satan.
and impertineneies: to absent from Sermons: to Sleep to him at Sermons to Wake
to him at Sermons, by wandering thoughts, a thousands ways. Here you may see by
what spirit they are acted that are opposite to the Sabbath day. Mr A and Mr L
did not tell you they came with a message from the Devil yesterday to disturb
you in your duty. But let us proceed to the day of Christ's death.

Here let me premise a few Cautions. Cautions premised.
(1) Do not reflect on any thing that seems improbable: for it may be True
though at first it seem false. Nor any thing that seems impertinent (q d, to
what purpose is this? prove the Point) for it may be to some purpose though it
presently appear not. (2) This being an intricate point, for its clearing, some
Scriptures must be opened, and some reconciled, which cannot be done with few
words: in which I must cross my Self, for I affect to contract things in few
words. (3) It being new and contrary to the commmon Creed, you will Object your
All against it: your Objections you must hear orderly answered, or it will be
in vain to offer them. (4) Be very punctual in observing the day of the month I
shall have occasion to speak of, with its beginning and ending: else I speak
into the Air. If I digress, or go forward or back ward from any Day or Thing
before I have done with it; care not to carry it in your head, for I shall
bring you to it again. In a word, before I proceed, resolve to hear all, or
none at all.


Fath. I will hear what you have to say.


Min. To introduce the day of Christ's death, Of the day of Christ's Death.
I must begin with its lively Type, viz, The Lords Passe-over. This from its
first institution, was on the 14 day of the first month, Abib, or Nisan,
according to that Sacred account from the time of Israel's deliverance out of
Egypt Ex. 12.2.
. The Paschal lamb was to be taken up on the 10 day Ver. 3.
, and kept till the 14 day Ver. 6.
: probably that the sight of it might occasion Soul preparation. And it was to
be killed in the Evening Ver. 6.
: Heb (...) between the two Evenings: i e, say some, Sunset, and Dark night.]
Short work! though they eat it in have, I do not think they prepared it in
Post-hast.


Fath. What 2 Evens else had they?


Min. The division of the day by hours, was not used when the Passover was
commanded: the word [hour] except in Daniel) is not in the O T. But they
divided the day into 3 parts, called Morning, Noon, Even Ps. 55.17.
: from 6 to 10 was Morning, from 10 to 2 was Noon, from 2 to 6 at night was
Even. The beginning and end of this last part, were the two Evens between which
the Lamb was killed: and it was eat at night Ex. 12.8.
. Our Lord Jesus who came to fulfill the Law: kept this Passover according to
Law: he commanded his Disciples to kill and prepare it upon the 14 day, and he
eat it with them at Night when the 15 day began Mat. 26.17 to 20. Mar. 14.12 to
17. Luke 22.7 to 14.
.


Fath. You say I must punctually observe the day of the month: how shall I know
the 14 day ended, and the 15 day began that Even?


Min. Very easily. Pharoh rose up in the night, Ex. 12.30
, and they were thrust out of Egypt. Ver. 39.
. that night in which they eat the Passover. And they departed from Rameses in
the first month, on the 15 day of the month: on the morrow after the Passover
Nu. 33.3
. Here its necessary to Note, viz, A Day in Scripture falls under a twofold
consideration. (1) An Artificial day of 12 hours, from 6 to 6: of this, Jesus
speaks thus, Are there not 12 hours in the day? Job. 11.9.
(2) A Natural day of 24 hours, from Even to Even: of this, Jesus speaks this
night, Verily I say unto thee, that this Day, even in this Night before the
Cock crow twice, thou shall deny me thrice Mar. 14.30.
. Christ calls the night, Day: ie, the Dark part of the natural day. THIS night
Jesus Eat the Passover, Insticuted the Supper M. 26.26.
, Foretold the Traitor at the Table Lu. 22.21.
, Washed his Disciples feet Job. 13.4.
. Preached his Funeral Sermon for his Disciples consolation Chap. 14, 15, 16.
, Concluded it with Prayer Chap. 17.
. Then went out over the brook Cedron Chapter 18.1. (...)
, which word signifies black, sad: over this brook David the Beloved passed,
when his life was pursued: at which all the Country wept with a loud voice 2
Sa. 15.23.
. Then to the mount of Olives, near 2 miles from Jerusalem. M. 26.30. Mar.
11.1. Job. 11.18.
. NO rest! I have a (bloody) baptism to be baptized with, and How am I
straitened till it be accomplished! Lu. 12.50.
Then to Gethsemance, exceeding sorrowful even unto deaht, fell on his face
and prayed, O my Father! Did sweat quasi Great drops of blood falling down to
the ground Lu. 22.44.
, while his Disciples Sleep. Then goes into a Garden Job. 18.1.
: to which Judas (with his Cabal) came, with Lanterns, Torches, and Weapons
Ver. 3.
: where the Second Adam was taken in such a place as the First Sinned. Christ
was carried away with such an uproar, as raised a young man out of his Bed with
his Sheet about his back, to see the Sight Mar. 14.51.
. Jesus was led bound to Annas first Jo. 18.13
, who sent him bound to Caiaphas the high Priest Ver. 24.
, and with him were assembled all the chief Priests, Elders and Scribes Mk.
14.53 Scaliger.
, probably to keep the Passover that night. Jesus was mocked, Mat. 26.20 to
end. Mar. 14.17 to end. Lu. 22.14, to 66. Jo. 13.1, to Chapter 18.28.
blindfolded, buffeted, spit in the face: fear makes the Disciples forsake him,
and Peter deny him, for which he wept bitterly. This is an Epitomy of that
nights proceedings: of which at leisure, read at Large. In the morning the Jews
consulted and delivered Jesus to Pilate the Roman Deputy Mar. 15.1
, to fulfill this Saying, they shall deliver him to the Gentiles to Crucify M.
20.19
. Pilate sent him to Herod Lu. 23.7.
, he mocked him and sent him again to Pilate Ver. 11.
, he examines him, finds no fault in him Ver. 4.
, would fain release him, but the violent vox populi was such, that he
delivered Jesus to be Crucified Mat. 27.24, 25, 26.
. THEN they Stripped him, Crowned his head with thorns, Smote him, Spit upon
him, and (I suppose) plucked off his Beard Isa. 50.6. Ezra 9.3. Neh. 13.25.
. And at the third hour nailed him to the Cross.


Fath. What time of the day was that?


Min. The Jews counted their day of 12 hours, The Jews count of Lesser hours,
12 in a day.
from our Six in the morning to Six at night thus, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12, as we do from midday to midnight. Our 6 in the morning is their
12, so that their third hour is at 9 a clock.


Fath. But John says, It was about the Sixth hour before Jesus was Crucified
Jo. 19.14.
.


Min. They had another way to divide the day: The Jews Greater hours, 4 in a
day. Godwyn.
viz, as they divided the night of 12 hours into 4 watches, so they divided the
day of 12 hours into 4 quarters: each one Watch and Quarter contained 3 hours.
These quarters were called Great hours: and took their name from the last of
the 3 hours which closed the quarter. The first, from their 12 to 3, was called
the third hour: this is with us from 6 to 9. The second quarter, from 3 to 6,
was called the Sixth hour: with us from 9 to 12. Mark means the end of the
third hour, at 9 a clock: John means the beginning of the Sixth hour, which
begins when the third hour ends: and thus they agree. John tells not the hour
of Jesus's Death: but Matthew, Mark and Luke all agree, that it was After the
ninth hour M 27.45 Mar. 15.34 Lu. 23.44.
, i e, after 3 a clock afternoon: and buried at Even. Now we must take a step
back (Just a day long) to the Even when Jesus eat the Passover, and so
proceed. At this Even when the 14 day ended and the 15 day began, then began
the first day of the 7 days of unleavened bread Ex. 12.18 Lev. 23.6. Nu.
28.17. Ez. 45.21.
.


Fath. Why then is the 14 day called the first day of unleavened bread? Mar.
14.12.



Min. Partly because it was prefixed, and joined to them: and partly because the
Pass. over was killed on the 14 day, which was eat with unleavened bread at
Even, or beginning of the first day of unleavened bread. And so sometimes all
the 8 days are called days of unleavened bread Act. 12.3.
: and sometimes the feast of unleavened bread Lu. 22.1.
. But the days of unleavened bread (properly so called) were but 7, and
exactly bounded Exo. 12.18.
. N B, The first day of the 7 was the Feast of the Passover. In the 14 day of
the first month is the Passover: and in the 15 day of this month is the Feast
Nu. 28.16, 17.
.] Now before the Feast of the Passover Joh. 13.1
, Jesus instituted the Supper, gave Judas a Sop, and after the sop Satan entered
into him: then said Jesus, That thou do, do quickly Ver. 26, 27.
. Hence (he bearing the Bag) some thought Jesus had said, Buy those things that
we have need of against the Feast Ver. 29.
. N B, The first and last of these 7 days were holy Convocations: Seven days
shall ye eat unleavened bread: in the First day there shall be an holy
Convocation, and in the Seventh day there shall be an holy Convocation Exo.
12.15, 16.
. These were Ceremonial Sabbaths, and commonly called Sabbaths. But its the
first day of the 7, which falls under our consideration: viz, the 15 day of the
month, which you may see called a Sabbath Lev. 23.11, 15.
. N B, THIS is the Sabbath which the Jews made to follow Jesus's Funeral: and
which you suppose to be the 7 day Sabbath.


Fath. Suppose! Ay: well! let that pass at present. Then it seems this Sabbath
should have been that day on which Jesus died.


Min. Its well observed: and by this I see you observe what I say. The 15 day
of the month on which Jesus died, was the day: but they deferred it to the day
following, and called the 15 day, preparation day Jo. 19.42
.


Fath. Why did they so?


Min. As when a fixed Fair falls on Sunday, Jews Translation.
the Country keeps it on Monday; so if this Passover Sabbath, fixed on the 15
day of the month, fell on some certain days of the week, the Jews had a
Custom to Translate it to the next day, by their Rule (...) Badu Godwyn.
: of which one Eleazar is said to be the Author, who lived 350 years before
Christ's Birth Hospinian de Orig fest. P6.
. N B, That this Sabbath was thus translated, a man can no more deny, than he
can deny the Day to Spring, or the Sun to Shine.


Fath. I cannot deny it: but then I believe it was translated from the 6 day to
the 7 day: and so a double Sabbath, Ceremonial and Moral: and on that account
called a high day Joh. 19.31.
.


Min. That I deny, and this I affirm; The high Sabbath no Sabbath.
that (as to the Day) it was no Sabbath at all (Ceremonial nor Moral) but one
of their own invention. Hence sometime it has no Sabbatical Title: e g, John
speaking of the day of Jesus's death, says, It was the preparation of the
Passover Joh. 19.14.
: its no more but Passover. Matthew speaking of this high Sabbath, calls it,
The next day that followed the day of Preparation Mat. 27.62.
, Strange! a Sabbath! a Double Sabbath! a High day! and no other Title but [the
next day.] Thus God is pleased to drop words, to see what notice men will take
of them.


Fath. HOW! no Sabbath! why then is it called a High Day?


Min. The right day was a high day, for on it Israel went out of Egypt with an
high hand Exo. 14.8 Why a High Sabbath.
. And it was for a Monument of their miraculous deliverance: e g, This day
shall be unto you for a Memorial Chapter 12.14
.] Remember this day in which ye came out from Egypt Chapter 13.3.
.] And thou shall show thy son, etc Ver. 8.
.] And it shall be for a Sign unto thee upon thine hand, and for a Memorial
between thine eyes Ver. 9.
. And many such Solemn injunctions, to remember this day with wonder: viz, That
Pharoh who stood so many a Storm, like a person Plague-Proof, should rise up in
the night Chapter 12.30
, and call for Moses and Aaron, and say, Go serve the Lord as Ye have said Ver.
31.
: also take your Flocks, and your Herds, as Ye have said, and be gone, and
bless me also Ver. 32.
. That six hundred thousand men, besides women and children, should be pulled
out of Prison, from two hundred years Tyranny, and all in One night: a night
INDEED! to be much observed to the Lord Ver. 42.
. Upon this account, that Sabbath day was an High day Joh. 19.31.
. Good Josiah, and some few Princely Persons, spent at this Passover, oxen,
bullocks, and small cattle, forty one thousand, 41400 cattle killed.
and four hundred 2 Chro. 35.7, 8, 9.
: this was an High day. And whether they kept the right day or the wrong, it
was all one in their esteem: they pretended Reason, for its Translation. And in
case of necessity, Hezekiah translated this Passover to the Second month 2
Chro. 30.2.
: and in such case there was an allowance Number. 9.6 to 11.
. N B, This temporal deliverance on the 15 day, was a Type of Eternal
deliverance by Christ's death on the same day of the year. And though this
temporal deliverance was long before Christ's death, yet it was by Virtue of
Christ's death, who was [virtually] slain before the First Passover was killed.
This then should have been an High day on Christ's account: but him the carnal
Jews laid Low: they killed Christ on the Right day, and kept the Passover
Sabbath on the Wrong.


Fath. Bless us! no Sabbath! but the Scripture calls it a Sabbath.


Min. So does the Scripture call the Devil Samuel, 5 times in few words 1 Samuel
28.12 to 20. Satan called Samuel.
: and does not once tell us it was the Devil. In calling the Devil, Samuel, God
tells us what Saul, and the Witch called him: and leaves it with us to Judge,
whether a wicked Silly Witch had power to bring Samuel, Soul and Body from
Heaven and Earth. So in calling that a Sabbath, God tells us what the Jews
called it: and leaves it with us to Judge, whether Jesus or the Jews were
likest to break Gods Law. If that was a C Sabbath (not translated) Jesus was a
Sinner, not a Savior.


Fath. I know not what to say of the translation of the day. But for Jesus's
dying on the 6 day, the Scripture is clear: besides invincible Arguments, I
have yet to bring. The Scripture says, Jesus rose on the first day, you dare
not deny it: and though it does not say Jesus died on Friday, or the 6 day, yet
in saying he died the day before the Sabbath, and rose in the end of the
Sabbath Mat. 28.1
, I think its as plain as if the 6 day had been named.


Min. Mistake not the State of our difference. We differ not about the day of
Jesus's Resurrection, except the Time of the day: viz, you for the Morning the
midst of the day, I for the Even the beginning of the day. But our difference
is in the day of Jesus's Death: you say it was on the 6 day: I deny it, and do
plainly tell you, your proof by Inference from Scripture, is no better than a
Blind Conjecture. Let me hear your invincible Arguments also.


Fath. I have read in learned Authors, The Rd Bp of -- for One.
that the two days which bounded the feast of 7 weeks, viz, the first day and
the 50 day, fell (that year) both on the first day of the week. That the first
day of the 50 followed the Passover Sabbath, is as clear as the Sun Lev.
23.11, 15.
: seeing Jesus rose on that first day, and lay dead on the 7 day, and died the
day before; its also as clear as the Sun, that he died on the 6 day. Moreover,
says my Author, The resurrection was Tipified to be on the first day of the 50
by the Wave-Sheaf (of first fruits) which was a pregnant Type of Christ's
resurrection on that day, who was waved before the Lord by the Earthquake at
his rising that morning, and called the first fruits 1 Cor. 15.20.
. And the 50 day, that famous Pentecost, was Sealed for a New Sabbath by the
gift of the holy Ghost to the Apostles: by virtue of which, 3000 souls Act 2.41.
were converted as first fruits to God and the Lamb.] And this Harmony has
been a Confirmation of this opinion, viz, Christ's death on the Sixth day, for
many generations.


Min. If so, its high time it was laid low. I hope the best of that Bp: he was
no horned Beast: but this his opinion I approve not.
If I had no better foundation for my opposite opinion (I am not ashamed to
tell you) I should be ashamed to own it. This is such another Proof as Adams
fall was: and to as much purpose as the Story in the Greek Epigram: viz [Two
deaf men pleaded a Cause before a deaf Judge.] But let us look on these 50
days, The 50 days discussed.
in the letter of the Law. And ye shall count unto you from the morrow after
the Sabbath, from the day that ye brought the Sheaf of the Wave-offering, 7
Sabbaths shall be complete: even unto the morrow after the seventh Sabbath,
shall ye number 50 days Lev. 23.15, 16.
. This morrow or Wave-day is the first of the 50 days: 7 weeks is 49 days:
the morrow after the seventh Sabbath is the fiftieth day (as the Greek word
Pentecost signifies) and when the day of Pentecost was Fully come Act. 2.1.
, i e, when the seventh Sabbath was past, the 7 weeks were complete, then the
Pentecost was fully come. N B, The 50 day begins another week on the same day
of the week that the first day of the 50 began the first week of the 7: so that
the first day and 50 day fall both on the same day of the week. This a Child
can tell, but I mind you of it (though a man) that you may see, your 2 great
days for confirmation of your opinion, Stand and Fall together. And now I tell
you, these 2 days did not fall on the first day of the week. Your famous
Pentecost fell Not on the first day. But why do I talk? let us to work. That
the Passover was killed on the 14 day, that the Passover Sabbath was on the
15 day on which Jesus died, and that the Sheaf was waved on the 16 of Nisan; is
as plain as A B C: by your rule, Jesus rose from the dead the next day after
his death: buried at Even, and rose in the Morning. But suppose Jesus had rose
on this Shake-sheaf day As your Author calls it.
, yet what Type of Christ's resurrection was this Sheaf? there was an he-lamb
without blemish Lev. 23.12.
offered on that day too, which was as much a Type of Christ's Death on that
day, as the Sheaf could be of his Resurrection: by this rule Jesus both died
and rose in a day: into what a wilderness will the wit of man lead us! N B,
This wave-day (on which you say Jesus rose) was the first day he lay in the
grave: if your Author had said, The lamb was a Type of Jesus's death Before
that day, and the wave-sheaf a Type of his resurrection After that day, there
had been some shadow of Reason in his assertion. So you may see, that your
Pentecost proof is perished: and your invincible Arguments, are overcome.


Fath. You say the Jews translated the Passover to the next day: did they not
also translate the Pentecost from their Sabbath to our Sabbath? and so make it
fall on the first day.


Min. If so, that proves a false Pentecost to fall on the first day: but its no
proof for Christ's resurrection on the Wave-day: nor is the Pentecost to be
reckoned from Christ's resurrection (as our Calender men count) but the 16 of
Nisan is the Standing Rule to count the Pentecost from. Calender count false.
(2) If the Pentecost fell on the 7 day Sabbath, the Jews would translate it to
the first day, by their rule (...) Gahaz: Godwyn.
but that year, the Pentecost did not fall on the 7 day, nor on the first day:
not on their Sabbath, nor on Ours neither.


Fath. If the Pentecost fell not on the first day why did the Disciples observe
it, and countenance Ceremonies which were to cease?


Min. The Disciples being few, about 120 Act. 1.15.
, were at Jerusalem, because Christ had commanded them to continue there Ver. 4.
. The Pentecost being an holy Convocation, in which work was forbid Lev. 23.21.
, the Disciples might meet on that day, though the Pentecost was to cease: as a
Church may do now if work be forbid by Authority, though they approve not the
day. (2) Suppose the Pentecost not to be observed, yet the Disciples might not
understand the cessation of Ceremonies so suddenly: they were hardly brought
off Ceremonies some years after. (3) The Pentecost keeping the day of the
month, changed the day of the week every year; and could not be on the first
day 2 years together: Paul's Pentecost practice.
yet it was Paul's yearly practice to be at Jerusalem at Pentecost. e g, I will
tarry at Ephesus until Pentecost, for a great door and effectual is opened
unto me 1 Cor. 16.8, 9.
, i e, at Ephesus: and yet, q d, I will tarry but till Pentecost, and then I am
for Jerusalem.] When they desired him to tarry longer with them, he consented
not: but bad them farewell, saying, I must by All means keep this Feast that
comes, in Jerusalem Act. 18.20, 21.
.] Paul hasted, if it were Possible for him, to be at Jerusalem the day of
Pentecost Chapter 20.16
. Not because it was the first day, as your Authors imagine of this Act. 2.1.
: for the first day was the unlikest day of All for Christians to regard the
Pentecost, after Christ's resurrection: because on that day they met in
remembrance of That. Nor to support the Pentecost, though he went on the
account of no other day: but for advantageous opportunities of preaching Jesus
to the Jews. Paul could call the Gentiles together, but he could not command
the Jews: therefore he would watch for such Prizes as Ceremonial Sabbaths pun
into his hands, by bringing the multitude together. And sometime (for his
encouragement) he had liberty of preaching in their Synagogue on a Sabbath
freely offered: the rulers of the Synagogue sent unto them, saying, Ye men and
brethren, if ye have any word of exhortation for the people, say on: then Paul
stood up (as in his Element) and said, Men of Israel, give audience Act. 13.15,
16.
. And Paul thought good to smile on some Ceremonies for a season: for the Jews,
Carnal nor Spiritual could endure their Ceremonies should be suddenly forsaken.
Thou see brother how many Thousands of Jews there are that believe, and they
are All zealous of the Law Act. 21.20.
, i e, the C L: so the Christians counseled Paul to countenance them, and he
did so Ver. 23, 26.
. Not to uphold Ceremonies, but to get an interest in their affections, that by
degrees as they could bare it he might bring them Off: and had he not done so,
they had cast him off. Thus to the Jews he became a Jew to gain the Jews 1 Cor.
9.20.
.


Fath. But if Pentecost was not on the first day, why did God countenance it by
giving the Disciples the holy Ghost on that day?


Min. Because I would not only Silence, but also Satisfy you; I have been
willing to give you all the advantage I can, by stating things fairly for you:
and will do so still. Suppose then the Disciples met contrary to the mind of
God, and knew it: yet for fear or favor of the magisterial Jews, they conform
to keep the Pentecost: if God will be gracious, what then? I will not again
curse the ground for man's sake, for the imagination of man's heart is evil from
his youth Genesis 8.21
.] Let my Lord I pray thee go among us, for it is a Stiff-necked people Ex.
34.9.
. Strange Arguments! Gods Word is man's rule, but Gods Will is Gods rule: and if
God will be gracious to man, when man walks contrary to his Will; will man say,
Lord what do thou mean to have mercy on me? Will man call God to his Bar?
and bring him into judgment for his mercy. Mercy or judgment, if it be the
will of God, it is just. Yea if God should command man contrary to his own
command: e g, If God will forbid man to murder upon pain of Death, and then
command a man to kll his own Son Genesis 22.2
, who will say unto him, What do thou? Job 9.12.
God did not make man, to consult what promises God should make to man: nor
when he should fulfill them. God gave the Disciples a promise of the Spirit:
and he took this time [Pentecost] to fulfill it. 2) I would form a foundation
for a Question, for your consideration. viz, The 50 days bounded Harvest; the
first day was at Beginning of harvest: begin to number the 7 weeks from such
time as thou beginnest to put the Sickle to the Corn Deu. 16.9.
. The fiftieth day was at End of harvest. Harvest was in the land of Canaan: a
Type of Heaven. The 50 days contained 7 Sabbaths, a number noting Perfection.
These days were all linked to the Passover: and all Typical of eternal life.
Jesus began to observe this time (with the Passover) before his death. It
being so,


Fath. I may take it into consideration another time. But, Suppose the Jews did
not translate the Passover Sabbath, it fell on the 7 day Sabbath: then they
kept the 15 day, and Jesus rose the 16, and Wave-day: this proves Pentecost on
the first day, and Christ's death on the 6 day too.


Min. Now I can follow you no farther: I dare not Say the word [suppose] in
this case: nor dare I think such a wicked thought. But though I dare not Follow
you, I dare Meet, and withstand you to the Face. If you say the Jews kept the
right day, you say Jesus kept the wrong day. If you say the Jews did not
Translate the Passover to the day after the right day, you say Jesus did
Anticipate it the day before the right day: viz, Jesus died on the 14 day, and
killed the Passover on the 13 day contrary to the Law. In so saying, you make
Jesus a Transgressor. Thus by justifying the Jews, and condemning Jesus, you
hope to Hit it. Monstrum! Horrendum! this proof comes from the bottomless Pit:
and there being no other way in the world to prove your opinion, rather than
fail, you will make Jesus the Savior, and actual Sinner: at which attempt what
is that heart that will not tremble! Should you Suppose, You and I are now in
the EastIndies, or, London stands on the Main Ocean, or, there is no difference
between Heaven and Hell, I would as soon consent.


Fath. But we may Reason, and Question: Christ was Lord of the Sabbath, and had
power to change the Sabbath: might not he change the Passover and be no
transgressor?


Min. Though Jesus was Lord of the Sabbath, he was made under the Law Gal. 4.4.
, and Subject to it. Though he was the Sabbaths Lord, the Law was his Lord, and
had him at command, on which account it was honorable Isa. 42.21.
. And though Jesus changed the Sabbath, it was not while he was under the Law:
but at his Resurrection, when he had fulfilled it. Jesus stood in man's stead:
he was a debtor to the whole Law: the payment of which debt the Law required ot
the last mite. Christ's person is taken into custody, imprisoned in the grave,
till the debt be discharged, and justice satisfied: at his resurrection (being
acquitted) he was taken from prison and from judgment Isa. 53.8.
: alluding to a debtour who has satisfied the creditour. Then Jesus changed
the Sabbath.


Fath. It seems Jesus justified his Disciples in an unlawful deed on the
Sabbath day: for they eat Other men's Corn Mat. 12.1
.


Min. Not in the Least! the Law allowed that deed: e g, When thou come into
the standing corn of thy neighbors, then thou may pluck the ears with thine
hand Deuteronomy. 23.25.
. As for David's eating the Shewbread, and the Priests prosaning the Sabbath by
killing their Sacrifices Mat. 12.3, 4, 5.
; these according to the Letter of the Law were unlawful, but not according to
the Sense of the law; which provided liberty for works of Charity and
Necessity. And Jesus in pleading these practices to excuse his Disciples, does
q d, You count David and the Priests blameless in these necessitous acts, and
yet condemn my Disciples in the same Case.


Fath. But Jesus refused to go up to the feast of Tabernacles Job. 7.8.
, which Law he was under as well as this of the Passover: and if he could
dispense with That, why not with This?


Min. Jesus refused to go up by way of vain Ostentation, as his unbelieving
brethren would needs have him go, for say they, Show thy self to the World Ver.
4.
: that Jesus resused, saying, Go ye up to this feast Ver. 8.
, q d, by way of Ostentation if you will it being so Fashionable the world
cannot hate you Ver. 7.
for it, they will love their won. (2) Jesus refused to go with Them, because
the Jews sought to kill him Ver. 1.
: not at the feast for fear of an uprore Mat. 26.5
: but to Way-lay him, q d, He will come with his kindred as other people use to
do, and so we shall Snap him by the way. Therefore said Jesus, I go not up Yet
to this feast: q d, till Ye are gone, for my time is not yet fully come Job.
7.8.
: q d, my Meet time to go, or my time to be Taken, when it is I shall not seek
to Save my self. But when his brethren were gone up, then went he also up unto
the feast, not openly Ver. 10.
, i e, by the way, for at Jerusalem about the Midst of the feast, Jesus went up
into the Temple and taught Ver. 14.
. And in the last day, that Great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried,
saying, If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink Ver. 37.
. So you see, Jesus did not refuse to go up to this feast.


Fath. But you have said, Hezekiah changed the Passover, in case of necessity
Page 253.
.


Min. Hezekiah's Salvation did not depend upon his perfect obedience to the
Law: if it had, he had never been Saved: but upon Christ's perfect obedience,
without which, He nor We shall never be Saved.


Fath. If Christ kept the Passover a Day before the Right day, he kept it.


Min. Suppose you say to a Servant, Do such a work to Morrow. No Sir, faith he,
I will do it to day. Nay, say you, I am resolved to have it done to Morrow.
Away goes he and does it to Day: does this servant Obey or Disobey you?


Fath. I confess he Disobeys me, even in doing the work which I command him.


Min. How many times has God plainly expressed his mind in this matter! in the
Law which Jesus was under: viz, That the Passover should be killed the 14 day
of the month: by your Own confession, Christ was disobedient if he changed the
day. N B, Suppose you could prove, Jesus did Anticipate the Passover and not
sin; and that the Jews kept the 15 day; yet except you prove the 15 day of the
month to be the 7 day of the week, you neither prove Jesus rose on the
Wave-day, nor Pentecost on the first day, nor Jesus's death on the 6 day: and
so you are never the near. But if Jesus had brake any Sabbath, or Law of God in
the Least; he could not have been in the Least, any Savior Ja. 2.10.
. And that Jesus failed in the least Jota, Jod, Point, or Tittle; is folly,
wickedness, madness in a man once to imagine. Before Christ would have broken
any Command, he (upholding the whole Creation) would have let Heaven and Earth
fall: for had he failed a Tittle of fulfilling the whole Law, Gods purpose of
Salvation had fell. ERGO, this is an infallible Maxim, A Maxim.
viz, On the 14 day of the first month Nisan, Christ killed the Passover,
according to All the Rites of it Nu. 9.3.
: and on the 15 day he was killed himself: the 16 and Wave-day, was the first
day Jesus lay dead, therefore he rose not That day, nor could Pentecost fall on
the first day. So your Pentecost opinion is utterly overthrown: and that for
Jesus's death on the 6 day will follow: and you shall never recover them again
while the World stands.


Fath. I confess I cannot at present tell what more to plead, for One or
Other. But though you deny Jesus died on the 6 day, you do not declare on what
other day he died.


Min. Nor was it proper for me out of the place: every thing beautiful in his
time Eccl. 3.11.
. I could easily have done that at first in few words: but the work was to
Answer your Objections against my Judgment: and your Arguments for your Own.
Having done that, I can show my Opinion with pleasure: but not with submission
to better judgments, as some finely phrase it. When I speak my thoughts of what
I am uncertain, it shall be with such submission: but when I am well assured of
the truth of what I say, I shall neither submit to better nor worse, to Stand
or Fall, by this or that man's persuasion. I desire a better foundation, than
man's Praise, for my Opinion. And what that is concerning the day of Christ's
death, I will now declare: and were it to the whole World with your Self, I
would declare it. viz, Weekday of Jesus's death declared.
The 15 day of the first month Nisan, on which Christ was Crucified and Died,
fell that year on the Fourth day of the week, i e, Wednesday: at end of which
Day our Blessed Jesus was Buried: from which time to the end of the 7 day
Sabbath, was 3 days and 3 nights, N T proof.
the Term of time our Lord foretold he should lay in the grave Mat. 12.40.
. So there was two days between the day of Jesus's death, and the 7 day
Sabbath. And one day between that high Sabbath, and the 7 day Sabbath: had the
Jews kept the right day, there had been two days between their high Sabbath,
and the 7 day Sabbath: which you say were both on a day. The Reason of this
Translation, Reason of translation.
was because it fell on Wednesday: for if this Sabbath fixed on the 15 day, fell
on Monday, Wednesday, or Friday; the Jews Custom was to translate it to the
next day, Godwyn.
by the Rule 172 Badu. That year it fell on Wednesday, they kept it on
Thursday, the 16 or Wave-day: so now you may see, your Wave-day and Pentecost
were on Thrusday.


Fath. I begin to Stagger! have you any more proof for the day of Jesus's death?


Min. What need of more proof than Christ's Own words? but this Old world being
so full of Novelty, I thought a New Opinion must have a New Proof too: take one
then out of the O T. O T proof.
And after 62 weeks shall Messiah be cut off, but not for himself Dan. 9.26
: these are extraordinary weeks. And he shall confirm the covenant with many
for One week Ver. 27.
: there is no Prefix in the Hebrew to render it [for] one week, but (...) one
week] he shall confirm the covenant (with or rather) For many, i e, for all the
Elect, by being cut off according to the covenant Zech. 9.11.
. And he shall cause the Sacrifice and Oblation to cease: the Sacrifice was the
yearly Passover Ex. 12.27
, the Oblation was the daily Sacrifice Number. 28.2, 3, 4. Dan. 9.21.
: these two, viz, the Yearly Type and the Daily Type of Christ's death, when he
the Substantial Sacrifice was sacrificed for us, then he caused them Shadows to
cease. But when? in the Midst of the week he shall cause the Sacrifice and
Oblation to cease Ver. 27.
: this One Week was an Ordinary week of 7 days, the Midst of which is the
Fourth day, or Middle day, The time Jesus lay Dead.
having 3 days before it and 3 days after it, all which of these 3 last Jesus
lay dead. So you may see, though the Weekday of Jesus's death (so long since)
be not known to this Day; yet this day was foretold before Christ's Birth, by
the Scriptures of Truth: in which God drops words in the Dark, to see if men
will feel after him Act. 17.26, 27.
. Thus I have given you the Testimony, of Gods two Testaments, to prove my
Opinion.


Fath. I confess this is more than I looked for: but if Christ lay so long
dead, it will occasion some more Questions.


Min. Bring out them Questions, and let nothing remain to broile at bottom.


Fath. If there was a day between the 2 Sabbaths, why did the Jews go to Pilate
for an Order to secure the Sepulcher on a high Sabbath? Mat. 27.62.
and not stay till next day.


Min. As necessity has no Law, so necessity has no Holy Days. Necessitas non
habet Ferias.
What cannot be done Before, nor deferred till After, may be done on the
Sabbath. It could not be done Before: their crowns were so full of concern to
get Christ crucified, there wanted room for that consideration. And they had
been Up the night before that day Too: but having Slept upon it, and settled
their wicked wits, now Sir, we remember that that deceiver said After 3 days I
will rise again Mat. 27.63.
.] And it cannot be omitted till to morrow: q d, So he may be stole away to
night, by his deceitful Disciples Ver. 64.
.


Fath. If there was a day for work between the Sabbaths, why did not them
zealous women bring their Spices on that day? but stay till after the 7 day.


Min. Why lay the Popish Lords in the Tower? why the Prisoners in Newgate?


Fath. Because they cannot get out.


Min. No more could they get in. The Jews made the sepulcher Sure, sealing the
Stone and setting a Watch Ver. 66.
. It was made fast for 3 days, to prove Christ an Impostor.


Fath. Why did they stay till morning? and not come at Even, at the 3 days end.


Min. Why do not fearful folk who are scared at their own Shadows, go into
Churchyards among graves at midnight?


Fath. Indeed because they dare not.


Min. No more durst they go into a Tomb at night to the Dead. Frights make
folks fearful: it had been a Terrible time with them. When they came in the
Morning, they feared to go in. Mary stooped down and looked in Joh. 20.11.
: and the Disciple whom Jesus loved came Running to the Sepulcher: yet went not
He in V. 2, 4, 5.
.


Fath. How does your Opinion accord with this expression? he rose again the
third day 1 Cor. 15.4.
.


Min. This phrase [the third day] is most miserably mistaken if thus taken, A
miserable mistake.
viz, Friday 1, Saturday 2, Sunday 3: as if the day of Christ's Death, and the
day of his Resurrection were 2 of the 3 days: for neither is the One or the
Other any of that number. But [the third day] must be understood by these
Standing Rules, viz, the Son of man shall be 3 days and 3 nights in the heart
of the earth Mat. 12.40.
.] The Son of man must be killed, and After 3 days rise again Mar. 8.31
.] Christ's enemies could remember his words (though his friends forget them)
viz, We remember that deceiver said, After 3 days I will rise again Mat. 27.63.
.] The Angel said to the women, He is risen as He said Chap. 28.5, 6.
: i e, when the days and nights were ended which he prefixed.] On the first
day said Cleopas to Christ, To day is the third day since these things were
done Lu. 24.21 (...).
. This is a dark Text, and thus to be translated, To day the third day is Gone
since these things were done PAS LEX page 43.
.] Esther fasted 3 days, night and day Est. 4.16.
: yet she is said to put on her Royal apparel to approach to the King on the
third day chap. 5.1. completo die tertio. Junius.
: i e, at end of the third day.] Thus my Opinion does accord with the Word, but
how does Gods word and You agree! from the beginning of your count, viz, Friday
at Even to the time when Jesus rose is but a Night and a Day: and from the
beginning to the end, i e, the next morning, is but 2 Nights and a Day: how did
Jesus fulfill his word?


Fath. Synechdochically, I suppose Jesus was buried a little bit before the
Sixth day ended, and I count That for a day: and that he lay a moment on the
first day morning, and I count That for a day.


Min. Yet here is but 3 days and 2 nights: here is not a Bit of a third night.


Fath. Then the night preceding the Sixth day, must make it up.


Min. And can you imagine this to be Christ's meaning! In all this you do little
better than say, Jesus (the man of Sorrow) Jested, Joqued, and Juggled with his
death. I wonder in what Darkness we overlook this word NIGHT! If Jesus had
said, The Son of man shall lay 3 Days dead, you had some Plea for your
Opinion: for [Day] sometime signifies Day without Night, and so Part of a day
natural: but it is [3 days and 3 nights.] And I would know where in all the
Bible, this phrase [day and night] does once signify Day without Night, or
Night without Day, except in Heaven or Hell. But your First day (as you call a
Bit) is without Night: and your Last day (as you call a Night) is without Day.
By your Synechdochical rule you may argue, that Jesus lay 3 Years or 3 Ages
dead: for [Day] figuratively signifies a Year or an Age. A Hellhinge. A most
miserable mistake.
This taking Scriptures Figuratively which should be taken Literally, is the
Hinge on which them poor deceived people called Quakers turn all into
confusion, and overturn all the Fundamental truths of the Gospel, viz, The
birth, life, death, burial, resurrection, ascension, intercession, second
coming of Christ: the resurrection of the dead and eternal judgment: yea Heaven
and Hell, and all Figurative, and Within O! Great Gulf! Monstrum! Horrendum!
. This is a piece of the Pride of that Humble people, who count the Common
literal sense of Texts too Low for them.


Fath. How may we know when a Scripture is to be taken in a Figurative Sense?


Min. When a Literal sense is absurd, or contrary to the Analogy of Faith, or
good morality of Life. e g, To eat the flesh of Jesus, to drink his blood, to
cut off a right hand, to pluck out a right eye. To take such sayings in a
Literal sense, is absurd, foolish, agrees not with faith, or good life. N B,
Blessed are your eyes Mat. 13.16.
] take this literally and its ridiculous! to think their eyes were Blessed, and
all the body and soul beside Cursed: but this is by your figure Synechdoche,
when a Part is put for the Whole, or e contra: but the whole [3 days and 3
nights] are not put for parts, bits, and moments as you imagine. --

If your Qu be An, let us come toward a Close. I have given you a true account
of the Day of Jesus's death, of the Time of his burial, of the Time he lay
dead, of the Time of his resurrection. But you neither tell when Jesus Died, or
how long he lay Dead, or when he Rose: for you have nothing in the Bible to
prove your opinion by. (1) The day of Jesus's death is not said to be the 6
day. (2) The Sabbath ensuing is not said to be the 7 day. (3) The first day is
not said to be the morrow after That Sabbath: but when its spoken of, its thus
phrased, viz, the first day of the week Joh. 20.1.
.] When the Sabbath was past Mar. 16.1
, i e, the moral Sabbath.] (...), in the end of the Sabbaths Mat. 28.1
, i e, Ceremonial and Moral. N B, This moral Sabbath fell in between two
Ceremonial Sabbaths: viz, the first and last days of unleavened bread, and
after the 16 of Nisan. Such a Sabbath we read of, called the second Sabbath
after the first Lu. 6.1. Mat. 12.1. idem.
: so called because it followed the first, i e, the Passover Sabbath. (...),
the Second first Sabbath: so called because it fell after the first, and before
the second Ceremonial Sabbath. Scaliger de emend temp.
It was the next Moral Sabbath after the 16 of Nisan: which day was (...). the
Deutera, or second day of the 7, the Wave-day from whence they counted the
Pentecost. The Disciples rubbing the cars of Corn Lu. 6.1.
, tell us it was at this time of year which we are treating of: i e, at
beginning of Harvest, which began the 16 of Nisan, the first of the 50 days.
Hence the name of the month (...) Abib, which signifies an ear of corn: this is
in March Buxtorf Heb LEX Page 1.
. The fiftieth day, was at end of Harvest, in April, or May.


Fath. Well! you go quite cross to the common account of the Church for Ages:
and to Christians and learned Ministers now living: I fear this will be
offensive, if I should make it known.


Min. And as cross to my self you would say, if you knew how much its against
the hair with me to displease men. I design not to displease, or please men,
farther than for their profit. My main design is to please God and my
Conscience: if in so doing I do (accidentally) displease men, I must harden my
self in that sorrow Job 6.10.
. And may I but engage God and my Conscience to stand by me, I have enough,
were all the world to rise up in arms against me. As for men's Hearts, they are
in Gods Hand: and with him I leave it, to turn them To or Fro me as he please.
I have learned to know, I am not to live by men's Smiles, nor to die by their
Frowns.

Sir, Concession.
you are at liberty to tell your Authors what I have told you: but counsel them
not to Back-bite me, for that is uncomely. If they have any thing to reply more
than your Self, desire them to do it to my Face. But let them know, their
Replication must come from holy Scripture, else it will be lost labor. It will
be in vain to tell me, I oppose the opinion of the Church for So many ages: or
I am opposite to the Church that now is, National or Congregational I mean all
in separation from the National: and so in Page 213.
: or to this or that learned Minister, or Dr. The Question with me (concerning
an opinion) is not, Whose is it? but, What is it? If they bring any thing out
of Philo, Josephus, Manasse Ben Israel, or any of the Talmudical Doctors, or
Jewish Rabbis, that will give light to a Dark Text, I will embrace it: but if
it comes to darken a Clear Text, or to disprove a Plain Text, I shall utterly
reject it: and therefore (to convince me) it will be in vain to produce it.


Fath. I presume you have not been long of this persuasion. Did you never speak
of the time of Christ's resurrection in Preaching? pray what account did you
give the people of it?


Min. Sir, I shall deal ingeniously with you. The Author's way in his Work.
I have sometime preached a Sermon for the observation of the Sabbath day. For
a beginning I directed to the morning, supposing it to be the time of Jesus's
rising. But I secretly thought I wanted a bottom: for I could not tell what
time in the morning Jesus rose: and was as if my heart did not stand by me in
it. I marvel now in what Mist I was groping at Noon day, for the time of
Jesus's rising in the morning: for that was not at all to be expected. Nor need
the time of his resurrection be expressed, when the time of his Burial, viz,
Even, and the time of continuance in the Grave, viz, 3 days and 3 nights are
both expressed. The shame of this Bottomless counsel for a beginning of the
Sabbath, I am willing to bear: but I knew no better: yet my ignorance will not
excuse my negligence, I should have made better Search. But I was never
concerned about it till you and I had talked under the Tree: since that I have
been much persuaded, that the Common count for the day of Christ's death was not
True: but that he lay longer dead. And because I had never discoursed any man
concerning it, I searched some Expositors of Texts relating to it: and found
them all opposite to me: so I see, if I went on, I must go against the Stream.
And seeing I could find nothing For me, I sought to find all I could Against
me: and to know the Full strength of this Stream. This being found, I laid
these learned Authors By, and fell to work by the search of the Scriptures and
Prayer: for I could not give it over. And though many a time after Much study
and Little hope, I have been Crushed as if I should give up the ghost; yet I
could Not give it over: but continued in prayer to God, viz, that if the Common
count of the day of Christ's death was true, he would cause me to acquiesce in
it: but if my persuasion was true, that he would be pleased to help me to
understand it, and make it out to You, and not leave me to err in it. To this
purpose I did implore God with many prayers, and many t --, to say no more, he
knows the way I take Job 23.10 Prayer and Professors are Strangers.
. Prayer is another thing than many imagine: and many times I think I never
prayed yet: but if ever I prayed, it was for this. And praised be his holy
name, he has heard me, and helped me through this intricate work, which was
the hardest knot to untie, that ever I took in hand in my Time. I gave up my
self to the Conduct of God. As I was never for on work by any man's Word,
Letter, or Print, or ever had the least hint of this Opinion from man; so I
never asked any creature any one Question concerning it, in all the time I have
been upon the search of it. This I tell you to this end, viz, If you think I
err, you may blame no man but my self: and if you think I am right, you may
give God and not man the praise.

Sir, Parent Cautioned.
here is a Providence which you may not lightly pass over. viz, This concern
of the Sabbath falling on me so soon after our Conference under the Tree: which
seems to be for your Sake. I thought not of it in our First Dialogue. I was
concerned with it in our Second Dialogue, though (not being ready for it) I did
not tell you of it: but I am no sooner prepared for this Third Dialogue, but
you are driven out by Yesterdayes opposition to draw me to it. And let me tell
you, In all this labor, I have had you in my eye: much desiring your Sound
settlement for the Sabbath. Here is a voice of God, speaking to you: which I
desire you may hear. And I pray consider seriously with your self, what account
you will give at the Great Day, if you will not hear Gods voice so Audible, nor
see his word so Visible: but will bottom your Sabbatical opinion on man's
Tradition, which has no ground in Gods word.


Fath. I am shattered and unsettled, like a troubled Sea after a Storm, by this
New sudden assault of my Old opinion: but when there comes a Calm and my mind
Quiet, I suppose I shall settle upon your foundation: so you may freely speak
what you have farther to say, as if I was already of your mind.


Min. I counsel you to pray God to settle you on a sure foundation, Parent
Counseled.
as (day and night) I have done: and by which means I am at length come to the
desired Haven: toward which I have been long rowing. And though by the way, I
have had many a fall down into the deep; yet I ever rose upon this Text MAT.
XII.XL.
. And my Antagonists being Answered; upon this even, firm, sound ground I Stand
MAT. XII.XL.
: and from this Opinion I shall Never depart while I Live, except Christ comes
from Heaven, and declares me deceived.

Having set the Sabbath upon its own Base, or rather showed you where GOD has
set it, Praest at pauca avide discere quam multa cum taedio devorare. Erasmus.
and on what Foundation he has Bottomed its Beginning, and (as I hope) settled
you upon that Foundation; I shall for your profitable practice, Drop a few
Directions for the Sabbath Day, and so dismiss you.

1) Remember the Sabbath day before it comes, to Prepare for it: 1 Direct.
Memento.
and let none of yours remember it to Profane it. If you forget or neglect the
Sabbath, you lose it, and let it fall. If the Sabbath falls, Sin and Satan too
rises, to your Ruin. REMEMBE^ is a word of THUNDER! Remember, the Sabbath is
Never to be forgot, while the World stands. A Popish Opinion.
Popish writers say, There was no Sabbath before Sinai:] but the Sabbath came
in with the First man, and must go out with the Last man. REMEMBER! Prepare!
Simile.
If a great man was to come to your House, you would make great preparation.
REMEMBER! the Great GOD is to come (this day) to your Heart. Lift up your
heads, O ye Gates! etc. and the King of Glory shall come in Ps. 24.7. (...).
Septuag.
. The Septuagint Title of this Psalm shows it to be A psalm for a Sabbath.

2) Begin the Sabbath when the Sabbath begins: i e, at Even. 2 Direct.
End the work of the precedent day when the day ends: i e, at Even. If you care
not when you Begin the Sabbath, peradventure God will not care when you End it,
nor how unprofitably you Spend it.

3) Rise early in the morning. 3 Direct.
Sleep not away the Sabbath: so you may sleep away Salvation, and the Soul. Be
not Sleeping, when you should be Praying. Pray him to give Blessing to the
Sabbath, who gave Being to the Sabbath. Let the body be early Up, and the heart
early Open. Before you rise, count, Christ is calling as to Zacheus: viz, Make
have, and come down (UP) for to day I must abdie at thy house Lu. 19.5.
.

4) Be not slothful in duty on the Sabbath day. 4 Direct.
The sluggard is Satan's Cushen. Simile.
Come not to a Sermon to be a Seat for Satan to sit on. Satan entered J^^^s,
Simile.
at Supper-time: into idle souls, at Sermon time. The Sabbath is a day of
Merchandise for the Soul Better than of Silver and Gold.
. Idleness is Never good, nor Ever so had as on Sabbath-dayes. Some had rather
sweat their brows Six days for the Body, than their brains One day for the
Soul. Do your duty on this day, or you do nothing: and do every duty in Season.
You cry, O the Times! we must hear comfortable Doctrine to strengthen our
Faith.] In vain is comfortable Doctrine, without conformable Life. A Christian
weakens his Faith more by a Sin, than a Minister can strengthen it by a Sermon.

5) Be spiritual in every duty on the Sabbath day. 5 Direct.
In order to This, be spiritual on Other days. He that is carnal Six days, is
not like to be spiritual One day. Be not content with outward expressions and
actions, without inward affections: not with the Body of duty, without the Soul
of duty: not with the Gift, without the Grace of duty.

6) Beware of your own Works. 6 Direct.
Do nothing but of necessity: viz, what you cannot do the day before, nor
forbear till the day following. e g, To quench Fire, To stop Water Sea-bank
breaches.
To save the life of Man, or Beast, To move Malt, To gather, and save Saffron.
In such case, we break the Sabbath, except we break it. But do these
Spiritually, and with Speedy dispatch.

7) Beware of your own Words. 7 Direct.
What may not be Done, may not be Said, or talked of. Talk not of News, except
necessary. This discourse eats as a Canker! Simile.
and has eat out the Life of Religion long ago. We talk much of the Papal
Plot, as if we were well acquainted with it: but this Part of the Plot we are
ignorant of, viz, Satan's design to make us talk away our Time, till we talk our
selves down the Stream: Simlie.
like the Fool whose lips swallow up himself Eccless. 10.12.
. If men were acquainted with their ignorance of God, they would think all
their time too little to talk of God.

8) Take heed of your own Thoughts. 8 Direct.
By them, many break the Sabbath, and few know it. What men do Openly, or speak
Audibly, is seen and heard by men: but a man may think Ang thing, Every thing,
and all men know Nothing, but God knows all. The body, tongue, or hand may be
Bound up from sin, and the heart Bent for it against God. Such secret Sabbath
breakers, are reserved in Store, for the day of Wrath.

9) Be sorry for the sins of Sabbath days. Sigh and Cry! 9 Direct.
for all the abominations, that abound on Sabbath days. God groans under them:
if you are at ease while God is pressed, God will take no pleasure in your Rest.

10) Be acquainted with the emptiness of Religion, 10 Direct.
without a due observation of the Sabbath day. The 4. command for a Sabbath, is
called, Gustos primae tabulae, keeper of the first table:] the 5 command for
honor of Parents, is called Custos secundae tabulae, keeper of the second
table.] He that keeps not the 4 command, is locked out of the First table, and
is like to do GOD no Service: he that keeps not the 5 command, is shut out of
the Second table, and is like to do Man none, well: but to be Abominable, and
Disobedient, and to Every good work, Reprobate Tit. 1.16.
.

That these Drops may Water, Epilogue.
etc make Better, LORD! put Life to every Line and Letter.


Fath. That his may be as you do Say, I will go hasten home and Pray.


(...)
ERRATA.
Page 13, lin 25, for bitterness, read bitternesses. Page 19, lin 22, for Low,
read Law. Page 37, lin 24, for plentitudinem, read plenitudinem. Page 136, lin
17, for full Horror, read full of Horror.

