

OF the Principles and Duties OF NATURAL RELIGION: TWO BOOKS.

By the Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN late Lord Bishop of CHESTER.

To which is added, A SERMON Preached at his Funerals, by WILLIAM LLOYD, D. D.
Dean of BANGOR, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by A. Maxwell, for T. Basset, H. Brom, R. Chiswell, at the
George in Fleetstreet, the Gun at the Westend of St. Paul's, and the Rose and
Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1675.

THE PREFACE.
THE ensuing Treatise is sufficiently recommended to the World by the Name of
the Author, and needs nothing else to make way for its entertainment. I shall
only therefore give a short account of these Remains of that learned and
excellent Person, and of the particular design and intention of them.

He was pleased by his Last Will to commit his Papers to my care, and out of
his great friendship, and undeserved good opinion of me, to leave it wholly to
my disposal, whether any, or what part of them, should be made public. This
Treatise, I knew, he always designed for that purpose; and if God had been
pleased to have granted him but a little longer life, he would have published
it himself: And therefore though a considerable part of it wanted his last
hand, yet neither could I be so injurious, to deprive the world of it, because
it was less perfect than he intend ed it; nor durst I be so bold, to attempt to
finish a Piece designed and carried on so far by so great a Master.

The first twelve Chapters were written out for the Press, in his lifetime.
The Remainder has been gathered and made up out of his Papers, as well as the
Materials left for that purpose, and the skill of the Compiler would allow: So
that it cannot be expected, that the Work should be of equal strength and
beauty in all the parts of it. However, such as it is, I hope it may prove of
considerable use and benefit to the World, and not altogether unworthy of its
Author.

The Design of it is threefold.

First, To establish the great Principles of Religion, the Being of God, and a
Future State; by showing how firm and solid a Foundation they have in the
Nature and Reason of Mankind; A work never more necessary than in this
degenerate Age, which has been so miserably overrun with Scepticisme and
Infidelity.

Secondly, To convince men of the natural and indispensable obligation of Moral
Duties; those I mean, which are comprehended by our Savior under the two
general Heads of the Love of God and of our Neighbor. For all the great Duties
of Piety and Justice are written upon our hearts, and every man feels a secret
obligation to them in his own Conscience, which checks and restrains him from
doing contrary to them, and gives him peace and satisfaction in the discharge
of his duty, or in case he offend against it fills him with guilt and terror.

And certainly it is a thing of very considerable use, rightly to understand
the natural obligation of Moral duties, and how necessarily they flow from the
consideration of God and of our selves. For it is a great mistake, to think
that the obligation of them does solely depend upon the Revelation of Gods
Will made to us in the Holy Scriptures. It is plain that Mankind was always
under a Law, even before God had made any external and extraordinary
Revelation; else, how shall God judge the World? how shall they to whom the
Word of God never came be acquitted or condemned at the Great day? For where
there is no Law, there can neither be obedience nor transgression.

It is indeed an unspeakable advantage which we who are Christians do enjoy,
both in respect of the more clear and certain knowledge of our duty in all the
branches of it, and likewise in regard of the powerful motives and assistance
which our blessed Savior in his Gospel offers to us, to enable and encourage
us to the discharge of our Duty: But yet it is nevertheless very useful for us
to consider the primary and natural obligation to piety and virtue, which we
commonly call the Law of Nature; this being every whit as much the Law of God,
as the Revelation of his Will in his Word; and consequently, nothing contained
in the Word of God, or in any pretended Revelation from Him, can be interpreted
to dissolve the obligation of moral duties plainly required by the Law of
Nature. And if this one thing were but well considered, it would be an
effectual antidote against the pernicious Doctrines of the Antinomians, and of
all other Libertine-Enthusiasts whatsoever: Nothing being more incredible, than
that Divine Revelation should contradict the clear and unquestionable Dictates
of Natural Light; nor any thing more vain, than to fancy that the Grace of God
does release men from the Laws of Nature.

This the Author of the following Discourses was very sensible of, and wisely
saw of what consequence it was to establish the Principles and Duties of
Religion upon their true and natural foundation; which is so far from being a
prejudice to Divine Revelation, that it prepares the way for it, and gives it
greater advantage and authority over the minds of men.

Thirdly, To persuade men to the practice of Religion, and the virtues of a
good life, by showing how natural and direct an influence they have not, only
upon our future blessedness in another World, but even upon the happiness and
prosperity of this present Life. And surely nothing is more likely to prevail
with wise and considerate men to become Religious, than to be thoroughly
convinced, that Religion and Happiness, our Duty and our Interest, are really
but one and the same thing considered under several notions.

J. TILLOTSON.

THE Contents.
FIRST BOOK: Of the Reasonableness of the Principles and Duties of Natural
Religion.
Chap. I. COncerning the several kinds of Evidence and Assent. Page 1. Chap.
II. Two Schemes of Principles, relating to Practical things, whether Natural or
Moral; proposed in the method used by Mathematicians, of Postulata, Definitions
and Axioms. p. 12. Chap. III. Some Propositions necessary to be premised for
the removing of several prejudices in debates about Religion. p. 22. Chap. IV.
Concerning the Existence of a Deity; and the Arguments for it. 1. Arg. From the
Universal Consent and agreement of Mankind: And the Objections against it
answered. p. 36. Chap. V. 2. Arg. From the Original of the World. p. 62. Chap.
VI. 3. Arg. From the admirable Contrivance of Natural things. p. 78. Chap. VII.
4. Arg. From Providence, and the Government of the World. p. 85. Chap. VIII.
Concerning the Excellencies and Perfections of the Divine Nature: And first, of
those which are commonly called Incommunicable; namely, Simplicity, Unity,
Immutability, Infiniteness, Immensity, Eternity.

p. 100. Chap. IX. Of the Communicable perfections of God: And first of those
which relate to the Divine Understanding, viz. Knowledge, Wisdom, particular
Providence. p. 124. Chap. X. Of the Perfections relating to the Divine Will;
Goodness, Justice, Faithfulness. p. 135. Chap. XI. Of the Perfections belonging
to the Powers and faculties of Acting, viz. Power, Dominion, Distribution of
future Rewards and Punishments. p. 143. Chap. XII. Concerning the Duties of
Religion naturally flowing from the consideration of the Divine Nature and
Perfections: And first, of Adoration and Worship. p. 176. Chap. XIII. Of Faith
or Affiance. p. 189. Chap. XIV. Of Love. p. 200. Chap. XV. Of Reverence and
Fear. p. 216. Chap. XVI. Of Active Obedience to the Laws of God. p. 227. Chap.
XVII. Of Passive Obedience; or Patience and submission to the Will of God. p.
239.
SECOND BOOK. Of the Wisdom of Practicing the Duties of Natural Religion.
Chap. I. Showing in general, how Religion conduces to our happiness. p. 285.
Chap. II. How it conduces to our present Happiness in this world: And first to
the happiness of the Outward-man. 1. In respect of Health. p. 314. Chap. III.
In respect of Liberty, Safety, and Quiet. p. 324. Chap. IV. In respect of our
Estates and Possessions; Riches. p. 330. Chap. V. In respect of Pleasure; or
the cheerful enjoyment of outward blessings. p. 344. Chap. VI. In respect of
Honor and Reputation. p. 353. Chap. VII. How Religion conduces to the
Happiness of the Inward-man. As it tends to the perfecting and regulating of
our Faculties; and to the Peace and tranquillity of our minds. p. 372. Chap.
VIII. How Religion conduces to our Happiness in the next World. p. 388. Chap.
IX. The conclusion of the whole, showing the excellency of the Christian
Religion and the advantages of it, both as to the knowledge and practice of our
Duty, above the mere Light of Nature. p. 394.
THE FIRST BOOK: Showing The Reasonableness of the Principles and Duties of
Natural Religion.
CHAP. I.
Concerning the several kinds of Evidence and Assent.

I Intend, by Gods assistance, in this First Book, to treat concerning the
Reasonableness and the Credibility of the Principles of Natural Religion, in
opposition to that Humor of Skepticism and Infidelity, which has of late so
much abounded in the world, not only amongst sensual men of the vulgar sort,
but even amongst those who pretend to a more than ordinary measure of wit and
learning.

In my entrance upon this work, I am sensible of what ill consequence it may
be, to lay the stress of a weighty cause upon weak or obscure Arguments, which
instead of convincing men, will rather harden and confirm them in their Errors.

And therefore I cannot but think my self obliged in the management of this
Argument, to use my utmost caution and endeavor, that it be done with so much
strength and perspicuity, as may be sufficient to convince any man, who has
but an ordinary capacity, and an honest mind; which are no other qualifications
than what are required to the institution of men, in all kinds of Arts and
Sciences whatsoever.

In order to this, I judge it expedient to premise something concerning the
several kinds and degrees of Evidence and Assent, and to lay down some common
principles, which may serve as a foundation to the following Discourse.

The several ways whereby men come to the knowledge or belief of any thing
without immediate Revelation, are either by such Evidence of things as is more
Simple, relating to the Senses, Outward. Inward.
Understanding, arising either from the Nature of the things in themselves.
Testimony of others concerning them.

Mixed, relating both to the Senses and Understanding.


I. By Senses I mean those faculties whereby we are enabled to discern and know
such particular objects as are present. These are either

1. Outward, by which we can apprehend external objects, as when we see, or
hear, or touch any thing presented to us.

2. Inward, by which we can discern internal objects, and are conscious to our
selves, or sensible both of the impressions that are made upon our outward
senses, and of the inward motions of our minds; namely, our apprehensions,
inclinations, and the power of determining our selves, as to our own Actions;
and by which we can at any time be assured of what we think, or what we desire,
or purpose.

II. By Understanding, I mean that faculty whereby we are enabled to apprehend
the objects of Knowledge, Generals as well as Particulars, Absent things as well
as Present; and to judge of their Truth or Falsehood, Good or Evil.

That kind of Evidence may be said to arise from the nature of things, when
there is such a Congruity or Incongruity betwixt the Terms of a Proposition, or
the Deductions of one Proposition from another, as does either satisfy the
mind, or else leave it in doubt and hesitation about them.

That kind of Evidence is said to arise from Testimony, when we depend upon the
credit and relation of others for the truth or falsehood of any thing. There
being several things which we cannot otherwise know, but as others do inform us
of them. As namely matters of fact, together with the account of Persons and
Places at a distance. Which kind of Evidence will be more or less clear,
according to the authority and credit of the Witness.

Besides these, there is a mixed kind of Evidence relating both to the Senses
and Understanding, depending upon our own observation and repeated trials of
the issues and events of Actions or Things, called Experience.

These are the several kinds of Evidence, whereby we attain to the knowledge or
belief of things.

The kinds of Assent proceeding from them are reducible to these two Heads.

I. Knowledge or Certainty, which may be distinguished into three kinds, which I
crave leave to call by the names of, Physical. Mathematical. Moral.
II. Opinion or Probability.
I. That kind of Assent which does arise from such plain and clear Evidence, as
does not admit of any reasonable cause of doubting, is called Knowledge or
Certainty.

1. I call that Physical Certainty which does depend upon the Evidence of
sense, which is the first and highest kind of Evidence, of which humane nature
is capable.

Nothing can be more manifest and plain to me, than that I now see somewhat
which has the appearance of such a color or figure, than that I have in my
mind such a thought, desire or purpose, and do feel within my self a certain
power of determining my own actions, which is called Liberty.

To say that we cannot tell whether we have Liberty because we do not
understand the manner of Volition, is all one as to say, That we cannot tell
whether we see or hear, because we do not understand the manner of sensation.

He that would go about to confute me in any of these Apprehensions, ought to
bring a Medium that is better known, and to derive his Argument from somewhat
that is more evident and certain than these things are, unless he can think to
overthrow and confute that which is more plain and certain, by that which is
less plain and certain, which is all one, as to go about to outweigh a heavy
body by somewhat that is lighter, or to attempt the proving of ten to be more
than eleven, than which nothing can be more absurd.

2. I call that Mathematical Certainty, which does more eminently belong to
Mathematical things, not intending hereby to exclude such other matters as are
capable of the like certainty; namely, all such simple abstracted beings, as in
their own natures do lie so open, and are so obvious to the understanding, that
every man's judgment (though never so much prejudiced) must necessarily assent
to them. It Is not possible for any man in his wits, (though never so much
addicted to Paradoxes) to believe otherwise, but that the whole is greater than
the part; That contradictions cannot be both true; That three and three make
six; That four is more than three.

There is such a kind of Connection betwixt the Terms of some Propositions, and
some Deductions are so necessary as must unavoidably enforce our assent. There
being an evident necessity that some things must be so, or not so, according as
they are affirmed or denied to be, and that supposing our faculties to be true,
they cannot possibly be otherwise, without implying a Contradiction.

3. I call that Moral Certainty, which has for its object such beings as are
less simple, and do more depend upon mixed circumstances. Which though they are
not capable of the same kind of Evidence with the former, so as to necessitate
every man's assent, though his judgment be never so much prejudiced against
them; yet may they be so plain, that every man whose judgment is free from
prejudice will consent unto them. And though there be no natural necessity,
that such things must be so, and that they cannot possibly be otherwise,
without implying a Contradiction; yet may they be so certain as not to admit of
any reasonable doubt concerning them.

Under each of these Heads there are several Propositions which may be styled
Self-evident and first Principles.

Self-evident, because they are of themselves so plain, as not to be capable of
proof from any thing that is clearer or more known.

First Principles, because they cannot be proved a priori; That which is first
can have nothing before it.

Only they may receive some kind of Illustration, by Instances, and
Circumstances, and by such Universal effects as do proceed from them; and from
the monstrous Absurdities that will follow upon the denial of them.

Such deductions as do necessarily flow from these Principles have the same
kind of Certainty, whether Physical, Mathematical, or Moral, with the
Principles themselves from which they are deduced.

The two first of these, namely, Physical and Mathematical Certainty may be
styled Infallible; and Moral Certainty may properly be styled Indubitable.

By Infallible Certainty, I do not mean absolute infallibility, because that is
an Incommunicable Attribute. And it were no less than a blasphemous arrogance,
for any man to pretend to such a perfect unerring judgment on which the divine
power it self could not impose. But I mean a Conditional infallibility, that
which supposes our faculties to be true, and that we do not neglect the
exerting of them. And upon such a supposition there is a necessity that some
things must be so as we apprehend them, and that they cannot possibly be
otherwise.

By indubitable Certainty, I mean that which does not admit of any reasonable
cause of doubting, which is the only certainty of which most things are
capable; and this may properly be ascribed both to that kind of evidence
arising from the Nature of things, and likewise to that which does arise from
Testimony, or from Experience.

I am from the nature of the things themselves Morally certain, and cannot make
any doubt of it, but that a mind free from passion and prejudice is more sit to
pass a true judgment, than such a one as is biased by affections and
interests. That there are such things as Virtue and Vice. That Mankind is
naturally designed for a sociable life. That it is most agreeable to reason and
the common interests of those in society, that they should be true to their
Compacts, that they should not hurt an innocent person, etc.

And as for the evidence from Testimony which depends upon the credit and
authority of the Witnesses, these may be so qualified as to their ability and
fidelity, that a man must be a fantastical incredulous fool to make any doubt
of them. And by this it is that I am sufficiently assured, That there was such
a person as Queen Elizabeth; That there is such a place as Spain.

And so for the evidence of Experience, I am by that to a great degree assured
of the succession of Night and Day, Winter and Summer. And have no such reason
to doubt, whether the house wherein now I am, shall this next minute fall upon
me, or the earth open and swallow it up, as to be in continual fear of such
accidents.

II. That kind of Assent which does arise from such evidence as is less plain
and clear, is called Opinion and Probability. When though the proofs for a
thing may preponderate any thing to be said against it, yet they are not so
weighty and perspicuous as to exclude all reasonable doubt and fear of the
contrary.

And this does arise from a more imperfect and obscure representation and
conception of things, either by our Senses or Understandings, by Testimony or
by Experience.

When the Evidence on each side does equiponderate, this does not properly
beget any Assent, but rather a Hesitation or suspension of Assent.

CHAP. II.
Two Schemes of Principles relating to Practical things, whether Natural or
Moral, proposed in the Method used by Mathematicians of Postulata, Definitions
and Axioms.

HAving premised these things in general, concerning several kinds of Vid. Dr.
H. More.
Evidences and Assents: I shall in the next place offer some particular Schemes
of Principles, relating to Practical things, whether Natural or Moral, in the
same way and method as is used in the Mathematics, consisting of Postulata,
Definitions and Axioms.

A Scheme of Natural Principles.
Every thing is endowed with such a natural Principle, whereby it is
necessarily Postulatum.
inclined to promote its own preservation and well-being.

That which has in it a fitness to promote this end is called Good. And on the
Definition.
contrary that which is apt to hinder it is called Evil. Amongst which there
are several according as things have more or less fitness to promote or hinder
this end.

The lessening or escaping of Evil is to be reckoned under the notion of Good.
Def. 2.


The lessening or loss of Good is to be reckoned under the notion of Evil.

That which is Good is to be chosen and Axiom 1.
prosecuted, that which is Evil to be avoided.

The greater Good is to be preferred before the less, and the lesser Evil to be
endured rather than the greater.

Such kinds of things or events, whether Good or Evil, as will certainly come
to pass, may fall under computation, and be estimated as to their several
degrees, as well as things present. Because when such a space of time is
elapsed, that which is now future, will become present. Which is the ground of
men's dealing for Reversions.

And thus likewise is it for such things as may probably come to pass; Though
this probability should be somewhat remote. It is counted a valuable thing, and
may be estimated at a certain rate, for a man to be one amongst four or five
equal Competitors for a place, to be the fourth or fifth expectant of an
inheritance; though in such cases there be the odds of three or four to one,
yet the price that is set upon this, may be so proportioned, as either to
reduce it to an equality, or make it a very advantageous bargain.

A present Good may reasonably be parted with, upon a probable expectation of a
future Good which is more excellent. Which is the case of Merchants, who have
large estates in their own possession, which they may safely keep by them; and
yet choose to venture them upon a thousand hazards, out of an apprehension that
there is a greater probability of their gaining, than of their losing by such
adventures.

And this would be much more reasonable, if besides the probability of gaining
by these adventures, there were the like probability of their being utterly
undone and ruined, if they should neglect or refuse to venture.

The greater the advantage is, the more reasonable must it be to adventure for
it. If it be reasonable for a man to run the venture of 20 l. for the gain of a
hundred pounds, much more for a thousand.

The reason why men are moved to believe a probability of gain by adventuring
their stocks into such Foreign Countries as they have never seen, and of which
they have made no trial, is from the Testimony of other Credible persons, who
profess to have known those places, and the advantages of traffic thither by
their own experience. And this is generally accounted a sufficient argument to
persuade others unto the like trials.

The reason which moved men to adventure for the first discovery of unknown
Countries, is, because they had fair probabilities to persuade them, that there
were such places, which would probably afford very gainful Traffic.

And upon the same ground, if any considerable number of men, such whom we
esteem the most wise and the most honest, should assure us, that they did
firmly believe, (though they did not know it by experience), that there was
such an undiscovered Country, to which if men would make any ventures, their
gains would be a thousand times more than could be expected by any other way of
Traffic; and that upon this persuasion. they themselves did resolve to
venture their estates, and should withal offer such arguments for the
reasonableness of what they assert, as to any men, whose judgments were
unprejudiced, would render it much more probable than the contrary: In this
case, he that would act rationally, according to such rules and principles as
all mankind do observe in the government of their actions, must be persuaded to
do the like, unless he would be counted foolish, and one that did affect
singularity.

A present Evil is to be endured, for the avoiding of a probable future Evil,
which is far greater. Which is the reason of men's undergoing the mischiefs and
hardships of War, the charges and vexations of Lawsuits, the trouble of
Fasting and Physic. A man will endure the pain of hunger and thirst, and
refuse such meats and drinks as are most grateful to his appetite, if he be
persuaded that they will endanger his health, especially if he believe that
they are poisoned. He will choose to take nauseous offensive Physic, upon a
probable expectation, that he may thereby prevent or cure a dangerous sickness.

The greater the Evil is, the more reason is there to venture the loss of a
less Good, or the suffering of a less evil, for the escaping of it.

A Scheme of Moral Principles.
There are several kinds of Creatures Postulatum.
in the world, and several degrees of dignity amongst them, some being more
excellent than others, Animate more than Inanimate, Sensitives more than
Vegetatives, and Men more than Brutes. It is a greater pre-eminence to have
life, than to be without it; to have life and sense, than to have life only; to
have life, sense, and reason, than to have only life and sense.

That which does constitute any thing Defin. 1.
in its being, and distinguish it from all other things, is called the Form or
Essence of such a thing.

That state or condition by which the Desin. 2.
nature of any thing is advanced to the utmost perfection of which it is
capable according to its rank and kind, is called the chief end or happiness of
such a thing.

The nature of Plants does consist in having a Vegetative Soul, by which they
receive nourishment and growth, and are enabled to multiply their kind.

The utmost perfection which this kind of Being is capable of, is to grow up to
a state of maturity, to continue unto its natural period, and to propagate its
kind.

The nature of Brutes (besides what is common to them with Plants) does consist
in having such faculties, whereby they are capable of apprehending external
objects, and of receiving pain or pleasure from them.

The perfection proper to these does consist in sensitive pleasures, or the
enjoying of such things as are grateful to their appetites and senses.

The nature of Man (besides what is common to him with Plants and Brutes) does
consist in that faculty of Reason, whereby he is made capable of Religion, of
apprehending a Deity, and of expecting a future state of rewards and
punishments. Which are capacities common to all mankind, notwithstanding the
utmost endeavors that can be used for the suppressing of them; and which no
other Creature in this visible world, except Man, does partake of.

The happiness of man does consist in the perfecting of this faculty; that is,
in such a state or condition as is most agreeable to reason, and as may entitle
him to the Divine favor, and afford him the best assurance of a blessed estate
after this life.

That which every man does and must propose unto himself, is the being in as
good a condition as he is capable of, or as is reasonable for him to expect.
And the desire of this is not properly a duty or a moral virtue, about which
men have a liberty of Acting, but it is a natural principle, like the descent of
heavy bodies, it flows necessarily from the very frame of our natures; men must
do so, nor can they do otherwise.

The Customary Actions of men, considered as Voluntary, and as capable of
Defin. 3.
Reward or Punishment, are styled Moral.

As that which has a fitness to promote the Welfare of man considered Defin.
4.
as a Sensitive Being, is styled Natural Good; so that which has a fitness to
promote the Welfare of man as a Rational voluntary and free Agent, is styled
Moral Good. And the contrary to it Moral Evil.

That which is morally good is to be Ax. 1.
desired and prosecuted, that which is evil is to be avoided.

The greater congruity or incongruity Ax. 2.
there is in any thing to the reason of Mankind, and the greater tendency it
has, to promote or hinder the perfection of man's nature, so much greater
degrees has it of moral Good or Evil. To which we ought to proportion our
Inclination or Aversion.

There is in some things such a natural decency and fitness, as does render
them most agreeable to our reason, and will be sufficient to recommend them to
our practice, abstracting from all considerations of Reward. As in loving those
who are kind to us, and from whom we receive benefit: In compensating Good with
Good, and not with Evil.

It is most suitable both to the Reason and Interest of mankind, that every one
should submit themselves to him, upon whom they depend for their Well-being, by
doing such things as may render them Acceptable to him.

It is a desirable thing for a man to have the assistance of others in his
need and distress. And it is not reasonable for him to expect this from others,
unless he himself be willing to show it to others.

The rational nature and the Perfection Ax. 3.
belonging to it being more noble than the Sensitive, Therefore Moral Good is
to be preferred before Natural, and that which is Morally Evil is more to be
hated and avoided, than that which is Natural.

A present Natural Good may be parted Ax. 4.
with upon a probable expectation of a future Moral good.

A present Natural Evil is to be endured Ax. 5.
for the probable avoiding of a future Moral Evil.

CHAP. III.
Some Propositions necessary to be premised for the removing of several
prejudices in Debates about Religion.

BEsides what has been already suggested concerning the first foundations to
be laid, in order to a discourse about Natural Religion, I shall in the next
place offer to consideration these seven following Propositions, as being very
proper to prevent or obviate the Cavils of Skeptical captious men.

1. Such things as in themselves are equally true and certain, may not yet be
capable of the same kind or degree of Evidence as to us. As for instance, That
there was such a man as King Henry the Eighth, that there are such places as
America, or China. I say these things may in themselves be equally true and
certain with those other matters, That we now see and are awake, That the three
Angles in a Triangle are equal to two right ones. Though for the first of these
we have only the testimony of others, and humane tradition, whereas for the
other we have sensitive proof, and Mathematical demonstration. And the reason
is because all Truths are in themselves equal, according to that ordinary
Maxim, Veritas non recipit magis and minus. And therefore nothing can be more
irrational than for a man to doubt of, or deny the truth of any thing, because
it cannot be made out, by such kind of proofs of which the nature of such a
thing is not capable. A man may as well deny there is any such thing as Light
or Color, because he cannot hear it; or sound, because he cannot see it, as to
deny the truth of other things because they cannot be made out by sensitive or
demonstrative proofs. The kinds of Probation for several things being as much
disproportioned, as the objects of the several senses are to one another.

2. Things of several kinds may admit 2.
and require several sorts of proofs, all which Aristot. Eth. lib. 1. cap. 3.
Metaph. lib. 1. cap. ult.
may be good in their kind. The Philosopher has long ago told us, that
according to the diverse nature of things, so must the Evidences for them be;
and that it is an argument of an undisciplined wit not to acknowledge this. He
that is rational and judicious will expect no other kind of Arguments in any
case than the subject matter will bear. H^w incongruous would it be for a
M^^^^^atician to persuade with eloquence, to (...) all imaginable insinuations
and (...) that he might prevail with his hearers to believe that three and
three make six. It would be altogether as vain and improper in matters
belonging to an Orator to pretend to strict Demonstration. All things are not
capable of the same kind of Evidence. Though the Conclusions in Mathematics,
by reason of the abstracted nature of those Sciences, may be demonstrated by
the clearest and most unquestionable way of Probation to our reason, yet it is
not rational to expect the like proof, in such other matters as are not of the
like nature. This he himself applys to Moral things, which being not of such
simple abstracted natures, but depending upon mixed circumstances, are not
therefore capable of such kind of Demonstrative proofs. It Is a saying of
Jamblicus, That demonstrations are not to be expected Protrept. in Symbol. 25.
in matters concerning God and divine things. Nor is this any greater prejudice
to the certainty of such things, than it is that God is invisible. And thus
likewise it is, for the same reason, with many particular conclusions in
Natural Philosophy. And as for matters of Fact, concerning Times, Places,
Persons, Actions, which depend upon story and the relation of others, these
things are not capable of being proved by such scientifical Principles as the
others are. Now no sober man can deny but that several things in Moral and in
Natural Philosophy are in themselves as absolutely and as certainly true, and
as firmly believed by us, as any Mathematical principle or conclusion can be.
From whence I infer this, That it is not, ought not to be, any prejudice to the
Truth or Certainty of any thing, that it is not to be made out by such kind of
proofs, of which the nature of that thing is not capable, provided it be
capable of satisfactory proofs of another kind.

3. When a thing is capable of good proof in any kind, men ought to rest
satisfied in 3.
the best evidence for it, which that kind of things will bear, and beyond
which better could not be expected, supposing it were true. They ought not to
expect either sensible proof, or demonstration for such matters as are not
capable of such proofs, supposing them to be true. Because otherwise nothing
must be assented to and believed, but that which has the highest Evidence: All
other things being to be looked upon, as uncertain and doubtful, and wholly
excluded from all possibility of being known. And at this rate, men must
believe nothing at all in story, because such things cannot be demonstrated;
and it is possible that the rest of Mankind might have combined together to
impose upon them by these relations. And how abhorrent such Skeptical
Principles must needs be to common reason, I need not say. Those who will
pretend such kind of grounds for their disbelief of any thing, will never be
able to persuade others, that the true cause why they do not give their Assent
is because they have no reason for it, but because they have no mind to it.
Nolle in causa est, non posse praetenditur.

And on the other side, when we have for the proof of any thing, some of the
highest kinds of Evidence, in this case it is not the suggestion of a mere
possibility, that the thing may be otherwise, that ought to be any sufficient
cause of doubting.

To which I shall only add, that we may be unquestionably sure of many things
as to their existence, and yet we may not be able to explain the nature of
them. No man in his wits can make any doubt, whether there be such things as
Motion, and Sensation, and Continuity of Bodies: And yet these things are
commonly esteemed inexplicable. So that our not being able to see to the bottom
of things, and to give a distinct account of the nature and manner of them, can
be no sufficient cause to doubt of their being.

4. The mind of man may and must give 4.
a firm assent to some things, without any kind of hesitation or doubt of the
contrary, where yet the Evidences for such things are not so infallible, but
that there is a possibility, that the things may be otherwise. (i. e.) There
may be an indubitable certainty, where there is not an infallible certainty.
And that kind of certainty which does not admit of any doubt, may serve us as
well to all intents and purposes, as that which is infallible. A man may make
no doubt, whether he himself were baptized, whether such persons were his
parents, of which yet he can have no other Evidence than Tradition, and the
Testimony of others. Who is there so wildly Skeptical as to question, whether
the Sun shall rise in the East, and not in the North or West, or whether it
shall rise at all: Because the contrary is not impossible, and does not imply
any Contradiction? Suppose that in digging of the Earth amongst some ancient
ruins, a man should find a round flat piece of Metal, in the exact shape of an
old Medal, with the Image and Inscription of one of the Roman Emperors. Or
suppose he should dig up a large stone, of the shape of an ancient Tombstone,
with a distinct Inscription upon it, of the name and quality of some person
said to be buried under it. Can any rational man doubt, whether one of these
were not a piece of Coin, and the other a Gravestone? or should a man be bound
to suspend his assent and belief of this, barely upon this ground, because it is
possible that these might have been the natural shapes of that particular Metal
and Stone, and that those which seem to be letters or figures engraven or
embossed upon it, may be nothing else but some casual dents or cavities, which
by the various motions and temper of the matter did happen to them, amongst
those many millions of other figures which they were capable of? Who would not
think such a man to be strangely wild, and irrational, who could frame to
himself any real scruples from such Considerations as these? Why, it is the same
kind of absurd dotage that Scepticks in Religion are guilty of, in suspending
their assent merely upon this ground, because some Arguments for it do not so
infallibly conclude, but that there is a possibility things may be otherwise.
He that will raise to himself, and cherish in his mind, any real doubts,
according to the mere possibility of things, shall not be able to determine
himself to the belief or practice of any thing. He must not stay within doors,
for fear the house should fall upon him, for that is possible: nor must he go
out, lest the next man that meets him should kill him, for that also is
possible. And so must it be for his doing or forbearing any other action. Nay I
add further, that man is sure to be deceived in very many things, who will
doubt of every thing, where it is possible he may be deceived.

I appeal to the common judgment of Mankind, whether the humane nature be not
so framed, as to acquiesce in such a Moral certainty, as the nature of things
is capable of; and if it were otherwise, whether that Reason which belongs to
us, would not prove a burden and a torment to us, rather than a privilege, by
keeping us in a continual suspense, and thereby rendering our conditions
perpetually restless and unquiet? Would not such men be generally accounted out
of their wits, who could please themselves, by entertaining actual hopes of any
thing, merely upon account of the possibility of it; or torment themselves with
actual fears, of all such evils as are possible? Is there any thing imaginable
more wild and extravagant amongst those in Bedlam, than this would be? Why,
Doubt is a kind of fear, and is commonly styled formido oppositi, and it is the
same kind of madness for a man to doubt of any thing, as to hope for, or fear
it, upon a mere possibility.

5. It Is sufficient that matters of Faith 5.
and Religion be propounded in such a way, as to render them highly credible,
so as an honest and teachable man may willingly and safely assent to them, and
according to the rules of Prudence be justified in so doing. Nor is it either
Necessary or Convenient, that they should be established by such cogent
Evidence, as to necessitate assent. Because this would not leave any place for
the virtue of Believing, or the freedom of our obedience; nor any ground for
Reward and Punishment. It would not be thank-worthy for a man to believe that
which of necessity he must believe, and cannot otherwise choose.

Rewards and Punishments do properly belong to free Actions, such as are under
a man's power, either to do or forbear; not to such as are necessary. There is
no more reason to reward a man for believing that four is more than three, than
for being hungry or sleepy; Because these things do not proceed from choice,
but from natural necessity. A man must do so, nor can he do otherwise.

I do not say, That the Principles of Religion are merely probable, I have
before asserted them to be Morally certain. And that to a man who is careful to
preserve his mind free from prejudice, and to consider, they will appear
unquestionable, and the deductions from them demonstrable: But now because that
which is necessary to beget this certainty in the mind, namely, impartial
Consideration, is in a man's power, therefore the belief or disbelief of these
things is a proper subject for Rewards and Punishments.

There would be little reason for the Scripture so much to magnify the Grace
of Faith, as being so great a virtue and so acceptable to God, if every one
were necessitated to it, whether he would or no. And therefore God is pleased
to propose these matters of belief to us in such a way, as that we might give
some Testimony of our teachable dispositions, and of our obedience by our
assent to them. Ut sermo Evangelii Grot. de Verit. lib. 2.
tanquam lapis esset Lydius, ad quem ingenia sanabilia explorarentur, as the
Learned Grotius speaks concerning the Doctrine of the Gospel, whereby God was
pleased as with a Touchstone to prove and try what kind of tempers men are of,
whether they are so ingenuous as to accept of sufficient Evidence, in the
confirmation of a holy Doctrine. And the Scripture does in several places make
use of the word Faith, according to this notion of it, as it consists in a
readiness of mind to close with and give assent unto things upon such evidence
as is in it self sufficient. To which purpose is that expression of our Savior
to Thomas, Blessed are they that have not seen and yet have believed, Joh. 20.
29. Signifying it to be a more excellent commendable and blessed thing for a
man to yield his assent, upon such evidence as is in it self sufficient,
without insisting upon more; It denotes good inclinations in men toward
Religion, and that they have worthy thoughts of the Divine power and goodness,
when they are willing to submit unto such arguments in the confirmation of a
holy doctrine, as to unprejudiced persons are in themselves sufficient to
induce belief. It was this disposition that was commended in the Bereans, for
which they are styled (...), more Act. 17. 11
ingenuous, teachable and candid, more noble than others, Because they received
the word with all readiness of mind. (i. e.) Were ready and willing to assent
to the Gospel, upon such evidence as was in it self sufficient to convince
reasonable and unprejudiced men.

And on the other side, it was the want of this disposition which is condemned,
Mat. 13. 58. where it is said that our Savior did not many mighty works in his
own Country, because of their unbelief: (i. e.) That prejudice which there was
upon them, by their knowledge of his mean parentage and birth, and their
ignorance of his Divine commission and high calling, did indispose them for an
equal judgment of things, and render them unteachable. And having tried this by
doing some mighty works amongst them he would not do many, because of their
incapacity of receiving benefit by them.

Wicked men are in the Scripture phrase styled (...), filii insuasibilitatis,
unperswadable Ephesians. 2. ^, 5, 6.
men, such as no reason can convince. And elsewhere they are styled (...),
which we translate unreasonable Col. 3. 6. 2 These. 3. 2.
men. But the word may signify absurd, contumacious persons, who are not to be
(...).
fixed by any Principles, whom no Topics can work upon, being directly opposite
to this virtue of Faith, as appears by the next clause, For all men have not
Faith.

Supposing Mankind to be endowed (as all other things are) with a natural
principle, whereby they are strongly inclined to seek their own preservation
and happiness; and supposing them to be rational and free Creatures, able to
judge of, and to choose the means conducing to this end: Nothing can be more
reasonable in this case, than that such Creatures should be under the
obligation of accepting such evidence, as in it self is sufficient for their
conviction.

6. When there is no such evident certainty, as to take away all kind of
doubting; in 6.
such cases, a judgment that is equal and impartial must incline to the greater
probabilities. That is no just balance, wherein the heaviest side will not
preponderate. In all the ordinary affairs of life men use to guide their
Actions by this Rule, namely, to incline to that which is most probable and
likely, when they cannot attain to any clear unquestionable certainty. And that
man would be generally counted a fool who should do otherwise. Now let it be
supposed, that some of the great Principles in Religion, should not seem to
some men altogether so evident as to be wholly unquestionable, yet ought their
assent still to incline to the greater probability.

When it is said to be a duty for men to believe any thing, or to acquiesce in
such kind of Evidence as is sufficient for the proof of it: The meaning is not,
as if there were any moral obligation upon the Understanding, which is proper
only unto the Will; but the meaning is, That men should be careful to preserve
their minds free from any wilful prejudice and partiality, that they should
seriously attend to, and consider the Evidence proposed to them, so as to take
a just estimate of it. For though it be true, that the judgments of men must by
a natural necessity, preponderate on that side where the greatest Evidence
lies; supposing the mind to be equally disposed, and the balance to be just;
yet must it withal be granted to be a particular virtue and felicity to keep
the mind in such an equal frame of judging. There are some men, who have
sufficient abilities to discern betwixt the true difference of things; but what
through their vicious affections and voluntary prejudices, making them
unwilling that some things should be true; what through their inadvertency or
neglect to consider and compare things together, they are not to be convinced
by plain Arguments; not through any insufficiency in the evidence, but by
reason of some defect or corruption in the faculty that should judge of it. Now
the neglect of keeping our minds in such an equal frame, the not applying of
our thoughts to consider of such matters of moment, as do highly concern a man
to be rightly informed in, must needs be a vice. And though none of the
Philosophets (that I know of) do reckon this kind of Faith (as it may be
styled), this teachableness and equality of mind in considering and judging of
matters of importance, amongst other intellectual virtues; yet to me it seems,
that it may justly challenge a place amongst them; and that for this reason,
because the two extremes of it by way of Excess and Defect, I mean the
assenting unto such things upon insufficient Evidence which is called
Credulity, and the not assenting unto them upon sufficient Evidence, which is
called Incredulity or unbelief, are both of them Vices. Now where the Excess
and Defect do make Vices, or such things as ought not to be, there the
Mediocrity must denote something that ought to be, and consequently must be a
Virtue, and have in it the obligation of Duty.

7. If in any matter offered to Consideration, the probabilities on both sides
be 7.
supposed to be equal: (In this case, though an impartial judgment cannot be
obliged to incline to one side rather than to the other, because our Assent to
things must by a Necessity of Nature, be proportioned to our Evidence for them;
And where neither side does preponderate, the balance should hang even) Yet
even in this case, men may be obliged to order their Actions in favor of that
side, which appears to be most safe and advantageous for their own interest.
Suppose a man traveling upon the Road to meet with two doubtful ways,
concerning neither of which he can have any the least probability to induce him
to believe that one is more like to be the true way to his journey's end, than
the other; only he is upon good grounds assured, that in one of these ways he
shall meet with much trouble, difficulty, danger, which the other is altogether
free from: In this case, though a man be not bound to believe that one of them
is a truer way than the other, yet is he obliged in prudence to take the safest.

Nay I add further, If the probabilities on the one hand should somewhat
preponderate the other, yet if there be no considerable hazard on that side
which has the least probability, and a very great apparent danger in a mistake
about the other: In this case, prudence will oblige a man to do that which may
make most for his own safety.

These are those preparatory Principles which I thought fit to premise, as a
necessary foundation for any debate with captious men about these first grounds
of Religion. And they are each of them (I think) of such perspicuity, as to
need little more than the bare Proposal of them, and the Explication of their
Terms, to evince the truth of them.

CHAP. IV.
Concerning the Existence of a Deity, and the Arguments for it. The I.
Argument, From the universal consent and agreement of Mankind; and the
Objections answered.

THese things being premised, I betake my self to that which was at first
proposed as the chief design of this Book, namely, to prove the Reasonableness
and the Credibility of the Principles of Natural Religion.

By Religion, I mean that general habit of Reverence toward the Divine nature,
whereby we are enabled and inclined to worship and serve God after such a
manner as we conceive most agreeable to his will, so as to procure his favor
and blessing.

I call that Natural Religion, which men might know, and should be obliged
unto, by the mere principles of Reason, improved by Consideration and
Experience, without the help of Revelation.

This does comprehend under it, these three principal things:

1. A belief and an acknowledgment of the Divine Nature and Existence.

2. Due apprehensions of his Excellencies and Perfections.

3. Suitable Affections and Demeanor toward him.

Concerning each of which I shall treat in order.

I. There must be a firm belief of the Divine Nature and Existence. Primus est
Deorum culius, Deos credere, says Seneca. Answerable to that of the Apostle,
He that comes to God, must believe that he is. Heb. 11. 6.
Now that this is a point highly credible, and such as every sober rational
man, who will not offer violence to his own faculties, must submit unto, I
shall endeavor to evince by the plainest Reason.

In treating concerning this Subject, which both in former and later times has
been so largely discussed by several Authors, I shall not pretend to the
invention of any new arguments, but content my self with the management of some
of those old ones, which to me seem most plain and convincing. Namely, from

1. The Universal consent of Nations, in all places and times.

2. The Original of the World.

3. That excellent contrivance which there is in all natural things.

4. The Works of Providence in the Government of the World.

1. From the Universal Consent of Nations in all places and times, which must
needs render any thing highly credible to all such as will but allow the human
nature to be Rational, and to be naturally endowed with a Capacity of
distinguishing betwixt Truth and Falsehood.

It is laid down by the Aristot. Top.
Philosopher as the proper way of Reasoning from Authority, That what seems
true to some wise men, may upon that account be esteemed somewhat probable;
what is believed by most wise men, has a further degree of probability; what
most men, both wise and unwise, do assent unto, is yet more probable: But what
all men have generally consented to, has for it the highest degree of evidence
of this kind, that any thing is capable of: And it must be monstrous arrogance
and folly for any single persons to prefer their own judgments before the
general suffrage of Mankind.

It is observed by AElian, That the notions Var. Hist. lib. 2. c. 31.
concerning the Existence and Nature of God, and of a future state, were more
firmly believed, and did usually make deeper impression upon the illiterate
Vulgar, who were guided by the more simple dictates of Nature, than upon
several of the philosophers, who by their art and subtilty were able to invent
disguises, and to dispute themselves into doubts and uncertainties concerning
such things as might bring disquiet to their minds.

That all Nations of men now do, and have formerly owned this Principle, may
appear both from present experience, and the History of other Times and Places.
And here I might cite abundance of the best Authors that are extant, concerning
the truth of this in all other Ages and Nations. But for brevity's sake I shall
mention only two, Tully and Seneca. Quae gens est, aut quod genus hominum, quod
non habeat Not. Deor. lib. 1. 32.
sine doctrina, anticipationem quandam Deorum, quam appellat (...) Epicurus.
What kind of men are there any where, who have not of themselves this prenotion
of a Deity? And in another place: Nulla gens est, neque tam immansueta De
Legib: lib. 1.
neque tam fera, quae non etiamsi ignoret qualem habere Denm deceat, tamen
habendum sciat. Amongst all mankind there is no Nation so wild and barbarous,
who though they may mistake in their due apprehensions of the nature of God, do
not yet acknowledge his being. And elsewhere: Nulla est gens tam fera, nemo
omnium Tusc. Qu. lib. 1,
tam immanis, cujus mentem non imbuerit Deorum timor. There is no Nation so
immensely barbarous and savage, as not to believe the existence of a Deity, and
by some kind of services to express their adoration of him. So Seneca, Nulla
gens Epist. 11^.
usquam est, adeo extra leges moresque projecta, ut non aliquos Deos credat.
There is no where any Nation so utterly lost to all things of Law and Morality,
as not to believe the existence of God.

He that shall traverse over all this habitable Earth, with all those remote
corners of it, reserved for the discovery of these later Ages, may find some
Nations without Cities, Schools, Houses, Garments, Coin; but none without their
God. They may, and do vastly differ in their Manners, Institutions, Customs:
But yet all of them agree in having some Deity to worship.

And besides this Universality as to Nations and Places, it has been so
likewise as to Times. Religion was observed in the beginning of the World,
before there were Civil Laws amongst men, I mean any other than the mere wills
of their Princes and Governors.

The Works of Moses are by general consent acknowledged to be the most ancient
Writings in the world. And though the design of them be to prescribe Doctrines
and Rules for Religion, yet there is nothing offered in them by way of proof or
persuasion concerning the Existence of God; but it is a thing taken for
granted, as being universally acknowledged and believed. Nor do we read that
any of the other Ancient Lawgivers or founders of Commonwealths, who thought
fit to prescribe Rules for the Worship of God, have endeavored to persuade the
people concerning his Being; which yet had been most necessary, if any doubt or
question had then been made of it; as being the very foundation of Religion,
and a disposition so requisite to qualify men for Society and Government.

And as it has been thus in former times, so is it now amongst the Nations
more lately discovered, and not known to former Ages. It Is excellently said by
Tully, Opinionum commenta delet dies, De Not. Deorum, lib. 2.
Naturae judicia confirmat: That time wears out the fictions of Opinion, and
does by degrees discover and unmask the fallacy of ungrounded persuasions, but
confirms the dictates and sentiments of Nature; and it is a good sign that those
Notions are well established which can endure the Test of all Ages.

There are two things may be objected against this Argument.

1. That there is no such Universal Consent as is pretended.

2. If there were, This would signify but little, because it may as well be
urged for Polytheism and Idolatry.

1. That there is no such Universal Consent as is pretended, Because there are
some Nations in the world so wild and savage, as not to acknowledge any Deity;
which by several Historians is reported of the Cannibals in America, and the
Inhabitants of Soldania in Africa, who are so sottish and grossly ignorant, that
they differ very little from Brutes, having scarce any thing amongst them of
Civil Policy, and nothing at all of Religion, or any public Assemblies for
Worship: Besides such particular persons, pretending to Learning and
Philosophy, as in several Ages have openly asserted, and professedly maintained
Atheistical Principles, as Diagoras, Theodorus, Pherecides, and others are said
to have done.

To this it may be said, that supposing these reports to be true, There may
almost in all kinds be some few instances, besides and against the general
course of things, which yet can no more be urged as prejudices against the
common and most usual order belonging to them, than Prodigies may to prove,
that there is no Regularity in the Laws of Nature. Is there any Equity or the
least color of Reason in this? For a man to take an Essay of the nature of any
species of things from such particular instances, as in their kinds are
monstrous? Because beasts may sometimes be brought forth with five legs, and it
may be two heads, is it reason therefore to conclude, that no other shape is
natural to their kind? Specimen naturae cujuslibet, a natura optima sumendum
est, (says Tully) The Essay of any kind is rather to be taken from the best
and most usual, than from the worst and most depraved part of it. Will it
therefore follow, that Honey is not naturally sweet to our taste, because a
sick palate does not judge it to be so? Such dissolute persons, as are
altogether immersed in sensuality, whereby they have besotted their judgments,
cannot be looked upon as the most competent instances of what belongs to Humane
nature.

Where there is either a defect of reason, or a gross neglect in exciting a
man's natural faculties, or improving his reason, by a due consideration of such
consequences as do most naturally result from it: In such cases, it cannot
otherwise be expected, but that he must come short of that knowledge which he is
naturally capable of, and should have, were it not for these defects.

Some men are born blind, or have lost their sight, will it hence follow, that
there is no such thing in nature as Light or Color? Others are Lunaticks or
Idiots, should any man from hence infer, that there is no such thing as Reason?
No man may raise any doubt from such instances as these, but he that will make
it a serious Question, Who are the mad men, whether those in Bedlam, or those
out of it? Whether Idiots are not the wisest of men, and all others the veryest
fools, according as they are at the widest distance from them? Can that man be
thought to need any further confutation or pursuit, who is forced to fly to
such a retreat?

As for those instances of particular persons, whom stories deliver down to us,
as being professed Atheists, it may be said.

1. It Is plain, that some of these were counted Atheists and Despisers of
Religion, because they did endeavor to confute the fopperies of the Heathen
worship, and deny the Sun and Moon, and the several Idols that were adored in
their Countries, to be true Gods: The loose and vicious Poets, having so far
debaucht the understandings of the Vulgar, in those darker ages, as to make
them believe vile and filthy things of their Gods, unsuitable to all Principles
of sobriety and common reason. Upon this, several men, who were more judicious
and virtuous than others, thought themselves obliged to reclaim the people from
such mischievous fopperies: In order to which, besides the more serious
arguments which they made use of, they did likewise by jeers and scoffs
endeavor to render these vicious Deities contemptible, and to deride them out
of the world. And for this were they by the foolish superstitious multitude
counted Atheists, which was the case of Anaxagoras, Socrates, and others.

2. Let it be supposed, that some men have declared a disbelief of the Divine
nature in general; yet as there have been always some monsters amongst men, in
respect of their Bodies, so may there be likewise in respect of their minds.
And this no prejudice to the standing laws of Nature. And besides it ought to
be considered, that the same stories which mention such persons as professed
Atheists, do likewise give an account of diverse signal judgments, whereby they
were witnessed against from Heaven.

3. But I add further, There never yet was any such person, who had any full
and abiding conviction upon his mind, against the Existence of God. Mentiuntur
qui dicunt se non sentire esse Deum, nam etsi tibi affirment interdin, noctu
tamen and sibi dubitant. They lie who say that they believe there is no God
(says Seneca) though they may profess this somewhat confidently in the
daytime, when they are in company, yet in the night and alone they have
doubtful thoughts about it. It Is their wish, but not their opinion. The
interest of their guilt does make them desire it. But they are never able with
all their endeavors wholly to extinguish their natural notions about it.
Witness those continual fears and terrors, whereunto such kind of men are above
all others most obnoxious.

The second Objection was, That if the consent of Nations be a sufficient
evidence to prove the Existence of God, it may as well prove Polytheism and
Idolatry, for which the like consent may be pleaded.

To this two things may be answered:

1. Though the Unity of the Godhead, and the unfitness of worshipping him by
Idols, be discoverable by the light of nature; yet these things are not so
immediate, and so obvious to every ones understanding as the Being of God is,
but will require some deeper consideration, and some skill in the rules of
reasoning. Now it could not be reasonably expected, that either the generality,
or any considerable number of the Vulgar, should attain to such a degree of
knowledge as their own natural reason, duly exercised and improved, might have
furnished them with. Partly by reason of the prejudice of Education, which must
needs incline them to acquiesce in what is delivered down to them, as the
belief or practice of their Forefathers; and consequently hinder them from an
impartial enquiry into the nature of things: But chiefly for want of sufficient
leisure to apply themselves to the business of contemplation, by reason of
their being immersed in the affairs of the World, either pleasures, ambition,
riches, or else being wholly taken up with cares, about providing the
necessaries of life for themselves and their families; which must needs much
divert them, from the serious consideration of things, and hinder them from the
improvement of their natural light to all the due consequences of it.

2. The most considering and the wisest men in all Ages and Nations, have
constantly differed from the Vulgar in their thoughts about these things,
believing but one supreme Deity, the Father of all other subordinate Powers: --
Hominum sator atque Deorum.


Whom they called Jupiter or Jove, with plain reference to the Hebrew name
Jehovah. And to this one God did they ascribe several names, according to those
several virtues they supposed to be in him, or benefits they expected from him.
Bacchus, and Neptune, Nature, Fortune, Fate: Omnia quidem Dei nominasunt, vary
utentis sua potestate, says Seneca. So likewise Pythagoras, De Benefit. lib.
4. c. 7.
Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, etc. And they advise men, to worship this God not
so much by Images, or by Sacrifices, as by inward goodness, by endeavoring to
be like him; as I shall show more largely afterward. Now though the opinion of
the Vulgar, with the consent of the Wise, may be of great Authority; yet being
separated from or especially opposed unto, their opinion, who are best able to
judge, it must needs signify but little.

If the question should here be proposed, How comes it to pass, that mankind
should thus consent and agree in the notion of a Deity, and to what ground or
cause may it be ascribed?

To this I shall suggest something by way of answer, both Negatively, and
Positively.

1. Negatively, from what has been said it may appear, that this belief does
not proceed from any particular infirmity, or occasional prejudice in the
judgment, because it has been so constant and universal amongst Mankind. And
besides, there is not the least probability for those things which are assigned
as the grounds of this Prejudice, namely, Fear, Policy, Stipulation.

1. Not Fear, or a certain jealousy of the worst that may happen. For though
it must be granted natural to the minds of men, to be possessed with an awe
toward such things as are able to hurt them; yet it is much more probable, that
the fear of a supreme Being, is rather the consequence and Effect of such a
belief, than the Cause of it. For this reason, Because the Notion of a Deity
does comprehend under it infinite Goodness and Mercy, as well as Power and
Justice; and there is no reason why Fear should dispose a man to fancy a Being
that is infinitely Good and Merciful.

2. Not Policy or the device of Statists, to keep men's Consciences in awe and
oblige them to subjection. 1. Because the greatest Princes and Politicians
themselves, have in all ages been as much under this conviction of a Deity, and
the lashes of Conscience, as any other persons whatsoever; which could not be,
had they known this business of Religion to have been a device or state engine,
whereby their Subjects were to be imposed upon. 2. Because this belief is
amongst the more rude and savage Nations, such as in all other regards are
ignorant and wild and utterly destitute of all common Policy.

3. Not Stipulation or mutual agreement, for the same reason; Because it is
amongst those barbarous and savage people, who decline all kind of commerce
with others. Nor is it imaginable, how such kind of persons should agree
together to promote any opinion, who are wildly separated from one another, by
Seas, and Mountains, and Deserts; and yet not at so great a distance in their
Habitations, as in their Customs and Manners.

From all which it may appear, That this Opinion or Belief which is so general
amongst men, does not arise from any prejudice or partiality upon their minds;
But rather the doubting or questioning of these things, which belongs but to
few. There is reason enough to believe, that this may be founded in prejudice.
Nor is it difficult to determine whence their prejudice does arise, namely,
from the vicious inclinations of men, which will corrupt and bias their
judgments. When once men are immersed in sensual things, and are become slaves
to their Passions and Lusts, then are they most disposed to doubt of the
Existence of God. Whereas on the contrary, the more just and honest any man is,
the more willing and careful he is to walk up to the dictates of his natural
light, by so much the more firmly are such persons convinced of this Truth.
It Is the Conscience of Guilt which makes it the Interest of some that there
should be no God. And consequently being desirous to have it so, this makes
them studious how to find out some doubt and obscurity about it.

2. Affirmatively. It is a known Rule, That the Cause must be as universal as
the Effect is. If this belief have been one and constant in all places and
times, then must the cause of it be so likewise. And what is there imaginable
that has a fairer pretense to this, than the very nature of our minds, which
are of such a frame as in the ordinary exercise of their faculties, will easily
find out the necessity of a supreme Being. And it seems very congruous to
reason, that he who is the great Creator of the world, should set some such
mark of himself upon those Creatures that are capable of worshipping him,
whereby they might be led to the Author of their Being, to whom their worship
is to be directed; as is observed in a late Discourse, The Wisdom of being
Religious.
wherein there are many other things to this purpose.

Such kind of Notions as are general to mankind, and not confined to any
particular Sect, or Nation, or Time, are usually styled (...), Common Notions,
(...), Seminal Principles; and Lex nata, by the Roman. Orator, an innate Law,
in opposition to Lex scripta, and in the Apostles phrase, the Law written in
our hearts. Which kind of Notions, though they are of themselves above all
other matters most plain and perspicuous, yet because Learned men do somewhat
differ in their apprehensions concerning the first rise and original of them, I
shall therefore take this occasion to suggest briefly, that which to me seems
the most easy and natural way for the explaining of this, namely, by comparing
the inward sensation of our minds and understandings, with that of our outward
senses.

It has been generally agreed upon, and we find it by sufficient experience,
that the acts of our minds are reducible to these three kinds.

1. Perception of such single objects as are proposed to them, which is called
simple Apprehension.

2. Putting together such single objects, in order to our comparing of the
agreement or disagreement betwixt them, by which we make Propositions, which is
called Judging.

3. The discerning of that connection or dependence which there is betwixt
several Propositions, whereby we are enabled to infer one Proposition from
another, which is called Ratiocination, or Discourse.

Now as there is an universal agreement in the sensation of outward objects;
The Eye and the Ear of all sensitive Creatures, having the same kind of
perception of visible and audible things. Those things which appear Green,
Blew, or Red to one, having the same appearance to all others. So must it be
with the understandings of men likewise, which do agree in the same kind of
Perception or simple Apprehension of intelligible objects.

And as in making of Propositions, or compounding our Apprehensions about
sensible things, we determine that the Green in this object is like the Green
in that other, and unlike the Yellow or Blew in a third; That it is more, or
less, or equal, to something else, with which we compare it: So likewise is it
for compounding other simple notions belonging to the understanding, By which
we judge one thing to be like or unlike, agreeable or disagreeable, equal, or
more or less, in respect to something else compared with it.

Now those kind of Apprehensions wherein all men do agree, these are called
natural Notions. And of this kind are all those Opinions which have in them
such a suitableness to the minds of men, as to be generally owned and
acknowledged for true, by all such as apply their thoughts to the consideration
of them.

As for such Doctrines as depend merely upon institution and the instruction of
others, men do frequently differ both from themselves, and from one another
about them; because that which can plant, can supplant. If mere institution be
able to fix such opinions, it may be able to unsettle them again. Whereas no
kind of institution will be sufficient to eradicate these natural notions out
of the minds of men.

But now, though the understanding have naturally this power belonging to it,
of Apprehending, and Comparing, and Judging of things; yet is it not to be
expected, either from Infants or from dull sottish people, or from such as are
destitute of all the advantages of Education, that they should improve this
natural ability, to all the due consequences of it. But in order to this, it is
necessary that men should first be out of their Nonage, before they can attain
to an actual use of this Principle. And withal, that they should be ready to
exert and exercise their faculties to observe and consider the nature of
things, to make use of that help which is to be had, by the instruction and
experience of those with whom they converse. Nor can this be any just exception
against the naturalness of such notions, that they are promoted by the
experience and instruction of others; Because mankind is naturally designed for
a Sociable life, and to be helpful to one another by mutual conversation. And
without this advantage of discourse and conversation, whereby they communicate
their thoughts and opinions to one another, it could not otherwise be, but that
men must needs be strangely ignorant, and have many wild and gross
apprehensions of such things as are in themselves very plain and obvious, and
do appear so to others.

For the better understanding of this, let us suppose a person bred up in some
deep Cavern of the Earth, without any instruction from others, concerning the
state of things in this upper surface of the World: Suppose this person, after
he is arrived to a mature age, to be fetched up from this solitary abode, to
behold this habitable World, the Fields, and Towns, and Seas, and Rivers, the
various revolutions of Seasons, together with the beautiful Host of Heaven, the
Sun, and Moon, and Stars: It could not otherwise be, but that such a Person
must at first view have many wild imaginations of things. He might conceive
those useful and beautiful contrivances of Houses and Towns, to spring up and
grow out of the Earth, as well as Trees; or else that Trees were made and built
by men, as well as Houses. But supposing him to be a man, he must be endowed
with such a natural faculty, as upon further consideration and experience will
quickly satisfy him, That one of these was natural, and the other artificial;
And that the buildings were framed to that elegance and convenience by the Art
and Skill of men.

It would not at first seem credible to him, that a large Tree should proceed
from a small Seed or Kernel: That an Egg should produce a Bird. And as for Man
himself, he would not be able to have any conception of his true Original; how
it could be possible, that a young Infant should be bred in his Mothers womb,
where it should continue for so many months enclosed in a bag of water, without
breathing; yet upon experience these things would appear to him unquestionable,
and of Natural Evidence.

From what has been said, it will follow, That such things are evident by
natural light, which men of a mature age, in the ordinary use of their
faculties, with the common help of mutual Society, may know and be sufficiently
assured of, without the help of any special Revelation. And when it is said
that the Notion of God is natural to the soul, the meaning of it is, That there
is such a faculty in the soul of man, whereby upon the use of reason he can
form within himself a settled notion of such a first and supreme Being, as is
endowed with all possible perfection. Which is all I shall say as to this first
Argument. I shall be briefer in the rest.

CHAP. V.
2. Arg. From the Original of the World.

NOthing can be more evident, than that this visible frame which we call the
World, was either from all eternity, or else that it had a beginning. And if it
had a beginning, this must be either from Chance or from some wise Agent. Now
if from clear Principles of Reason, it can be rendered more credible, that the
world had a beginning, and that from some wise Agent, This may be another
Argument to this purpose.

I cannot here omit the mention of a late Discourse, wherein this subject has
Dr. Tillotson's I. Sermon.
been so fully treated of, that I shall need to say the less of it, having
little that is material to add to what is there delivered.

In the discussing of this, I shall purposely omit the mention of those
arguments which relate to Infinity, as being not so easily intelligible, and
therefore more apt to puzzle and amuse, than to convince. Let it be supposed,
that each of the two Theories, whether about the Eternity of the World, or its
having a Beginning, are not impossible, and that neither of them does imply a
contradiction. And further, that neither of them can be infallibly demonstrated
by the mere principles of Reason. In this case the question must be, which of
them is most credible.

He that would rationally fix his opinion and belief about this matter, has
but these two kind of Proofs to enquire after.

1. Testimony, or the Tradition of the most Ancient times.

2. Reason, or such Probabilities as do arise from the nature of the thing.

For the first of these Opinions, concerning the Eternity of the World, there
is very little to be said from either of these.

1. As to Testimony. Aristotle, who was a great Patron of this Opinion, and
held De Coelo lib. 1. c. 10.
that the world was a necessary Emanation from God, as light is from the Sun;
does of himself acknowledge, that the Philosophers before him, were of opinion
that the world had a beginning; which acknowledgment of his, is no small
prejudice to the Authority of his opinion, as I shall show afterward. And then,

2. As to Reason, It is a mere precarious Hypothesis, having no sufficient
argument that I know of, to render it probable.

But now for the other Opinion, namely, the beginning of the World, there are
as fair and convincing proofs for it, of several kinds, as the nature of the
thing is well capable of.

1. From Tradition. If the world were made and had a beginning, it is but
reasonable to expect, that so memorable a thing as this, should be recorded in
some of the most ancient Histories; And that some extraordinary means should be
used to perpetuate the memory of it, and to convey it down from one generation
to another by Universal Tradition: And if it shall appear, that all the
evidence of this kind is for this opinion, This must needs render it highly
credible.

Now the History of Moses, has been generally acknowledged, to be the most
ancient Book in the world, and always esteemed of great Authority, even amongst
those Heathens who do not believe it to be divinely inspired: And there is no
man of learning, but must allow to it (at least) the ordinary credit of other
ancient Histories; especially, if he consider what ground there is for the
Credibility of it, from the Theology of the darker times, which is made up of
some imperfect Traditions and allusions, relating to those particular stories
which are more distinctly set down in the writings of Moses.

Now Moses does give such a plain, brief, unaffected account of the Creation of
the world, and of the most remarkable passages of the first ages, particularly
of the plantation of the world by the dispersion of Noah's Family, so agreeable
to the most ancient Remains of Heathen Writers, as must needs very much
recommend it to the belief of every impartial man.

Though the Jews were but a small Nation, and confined to a narrow compass in
the world; yet the first rise of Letters and Languages is truly to be ascribed
to them. It is attested by several of the best and most Ancient Heathen
Writers, that the Hebrew Alphabet, or (which is all one) the Phaenician, is
that from which both the Greek and the Latin, and consequently the generality
of the rest now known, are derived, so Herodotus, Plutarch, Pliny, Curtius,
Lucan, etc. From whence it may be probably inferred, that the account given by
the first Language, is the most ancient, and therefore the most likely to be a
true Account of the first Original of things.

The usual course observed by all Nations to preserve the memory of things most
remarkable, which might otherwise in tract of time be forgotten, especially
amongst such as are not acquainted with Letters, has been by some practical
Institution, as by appointing some Festival for the Commemoration of such
things. And thus likewise has it been in the present case; The Sabbath (as
Moses expressly tells us) was instituted for this very purpose, to keep up the
memory of the Creation. And though perhaps it may be difficult to prove, that
this day has upon this Account been observed by any other Nation, but the
Jews; yet the division of Time by Weeks, has been universally observed in the
world, not only amongst the Civilized, but likewise amongst the most Barbarous
Nations. And there being no foundation in nature for this kind of distribution
of days, It must therefore depend upon some ancient general Tradition, the
original whereof, together with the particular reason of it, is preserved in
the most ancient of all other Histories, viz. that of Moses.

As for the derivation of this from the seven Planets, whose names have been
anciently assigned to them; this being well considered, will appear to be so
far from invalidating what I now assert, that it will rather contribute to the
Probability of it.

It is commonly believed, that the assignation of the names of the Planets to
the days of the week, was by the Chaldeans, who were much devoted to
Astrological devices, and had an opinion that every hour of the day was
governed by a particular Planet, reckoning them according to their usual order,
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercury, Luna; That Planet which was
ascribed to the first hour, giving name to the whole day; supposing Saturn to
belong unto the first hour of Saturday, then the second hour will belong to
Jupiter, the third to Mars, etc. and according to this order, the fifteenth
hour will belong likewise to Saturn, and so will the twenty-second, the
twenty-third to Jupiter, the twenty-fourth to Mars; and so the first hour of
the next day must belong to Sol, which must accordingly give the denomination
to that day; and so for the other days of the week.

Now if it may appear, that in this very account, which all sorts of Learned
men do agree in, there is such a special regard to the Jewish Sabbath, or
Seventh-day, as cannot be pretended for any other, This will still render it
more credible, That the Tradition of the Sabbath did precede these Astrological
Names. If we suppose these Astrologers to reckon from the first day of the
Creation, and to begin with the most noble Planet the Sun; Then the Seventh-day
will be Saturday, or the Jewish Sabbath: Or (which is more probable) if we
suppose them to begin their computation, from the first day after the Creation
was finished, and from the highest Planet, of slowest motion, and so more
proper to signify a day of rest; According to this way of Computation, there
is a peculiar privilege belongs to the Jewish Sabbath, which cannot be said of
any of the other days.

The Testimony of greatest Antiquity next to the Books of Moses, must be sought
for amongst those Ancient Nations, the Egyptians, Chaldeans, Phenicians, from
whom the Grecians derived their Learning, and amongst whom the first and most
famous Philosophers of Greece were wont to travel, for the improving of their
knowledge; It being probable that some Memorials might be preserved amongst
those ancient Nations, concerning the first beginning of things; and that they
were acquainted with what was the Universal Tradition of the first Ages. Upon
which account, those Grecian Philosophers before Aristotle, such as Thales,
Anaxagoras, Pythagoras, etc. who by their travel were conversant amongst these
Nations, must by this advantage be more competent Judges than he was,
concerning the general belief and opinion of former times, and what grounds
they had for it.

Now it is well known to have been a general Tradition amongst these Nations,
That the World was made, and had a beginning. And though there be some
prodigious accounts amongst them, which may seem inconsistent with the Writings
of Moses, as namely that of the Chaldeans, who reckon Forty-three thousand
years from the beginning of the World to the Time of Alexander: yet this way of
Computation is acknowledged by Diodorus Siculus and Plutarch, to be meant of
Lunary years, or Months; which being reduced to Solary years, will fall out to
be much about the time assigned by Moses for the Creation.

But besides these Testimonies of the Ancient Nations, and the first Grecian
Philosophers who conversed amongst them; This has been likewise believed and
professed by the most eminent Writers since, Socrates, and Plato, and Tully,
and Seneca, and the generality of the rest, whether Philosophers or Poets, of
greatest repute for their Learning, who have asserted, That God was the Maker
of the World.

There are several passages to this purpose amongst those ancient Greek Poets,
Linus, Hesiod, Orpheus, Epicharmus, Aristophanes, which relate to the Creation
of the World; and Ovid particularly, who fetched his matter from the Grecian
Writers, does give such a plain description of it, as if he had been acquainted
with the Books of Moses; in those known Verses: Ante mare and terras, and quod
tegit omnia coelum, etc. Metam. lib. 1.



Nor has it been thus only amongst the more civilized Nations; But the
Barbarous Indians likewise have owned this Tradition, and professed the belief
of it. Now it is not easy to imagine, how any such Tradition could arise so
early, and spread so universally, if there were not a real ground for it.

As for the Arguments from Reason, I would offer these things to consideration:

1. If the World had been either without a beginning, or else very old, much
older than the time assigned for it in the History of Moses; It Is not likely,
but there should be some kind of Memorials of those former Ages, or some real
Evidence that there had been such. Quis dubitet, quin Saturnal. lib. 1.
Mundus recens ac novus sit, cum Historia Graeca, bis mill annorum historiam
vix contineat? says Macrobius. The World cannot be very old, because the
Grecian History does scarce extend to Two thousand years. This was that which
convinced Lucretius, that the World could not be Eternal, Because there were
such obscure footsteps or relics in any credible story, either amongst the
Grecians or Romans, concerning any Persons that lived, or any considerable
Action that was done, much before the Trojan Wars.

2. The first rise and progress of Arts and Sciences in the world, may likewise
afford another fair probability to this purpose. Seneca asserts, that there was
not above a thousand years since the beginning of Arts and Sciences, to the
time wherein he lived. There is scarce any one of them so Ancient, but that the
Original and first Inventors of them are recorded in Story. Nor is there any
Nation in the world, now accounted Civil, but within the memory of Books, were
utterly rude and barbarous. Now it is not imaginable, that so sagacious, so
busy a Creature as Mankind is, could all of them have lived an infinity of
Ages, destitute of those Arts, so advantageous for the comfort and benefit of
human life, without some successful attempts for the supplying of their wants
by them.

If it be said, That it is possible there might have happened many general
Inundations, by which former Inventions might be lost and forgotten, and such a
kind of simplicity introduced into the world, as is proper to the first and
ruder Ages of it. To this, I have showed before, That a mere possibility to the
contrary, can by no means hinder a thing from being highly Credible. To which I
shall presently add something further.

3. If the World had been eternal, How comes it to pass, that it is not
everywhere inhabited and cultivated? How is it, that very probably a
considerable part of it is yet unknown? It is not yet two hundred years since,
that one half of that which is now known lay undiscovered. Whereas if we judge
of its beginning by the present Plantations and fullness of it, according to
those proportions wherein men and families are now multiplied, allowing for
such kind of Devastations, by War, Famine, Pestilence, Inundations, as are
recorded in Credible Story to have happened in former times; I say according to
this, it will appear highly credible, that the beginning of the world was much
about the time mentioned by Moses for the Creation of it; whereas had it been
Eternal, it must long ere this have been over-stocked, and become too narrow
for the Inhabitants, though we should suppose the addition but of one man every
year. Nay, though we suppose but the addition of one man for every thousand
years, yet long before this time there should have been a far greater number
than there could be sands in the earth, though the whole Globe were made up of
nothing else.

If it be said, That there may have been great checks given to the increase of
mankind by Wars, Famines, Pestilences, and Inundations.

To this it may be replied, That either these extraordinary devastations of
mankind, must fall out regularly, so as not to be too much or too little; and
in this case, they must be ordered by some Wise Agent, which is God; or else
they must be purely Casual; And then it is by no means credible, but that the
world must long ere this have been wholly wasted, and left desolate of
Inhabitants, or else frequently too much replenished.

But the most plausible shift against the force of this argument, is fetched
from the instance of Noah's Flood, by which the whole world was destroyed,
excepting one Family. The like whereto may frequently have happened before, when
perhaps one only Family did escape, and those such ignorant persons, as could
give no true account of what was before.

But neither will this shift serve the turn. Because no man can give any
rational account, how it is possible that such a general Flood should come, by
any natural means. And if it be supernatural, that grants the thing I am
proving, namely such a Supreme Being as can alter the course of nature? But let
it be supposed natural, How comes it to pass that so much as one Family does
escape. Such kind of Deluges, as must prevent the over-stocking of the world,
must be necessary once every ten or twenty thousand years. And there must have
happened many millions of them, from all eternity. And who shall take care for
the adjudging of them to their proper season? or for preventing the total
destruction of mankind? Though we should grant this possible casualty, yet he
who can believe that to be a probable casualty which has never come to pass in
an eternal duration, must not pretend to be an enemy to Credulity.

By what has been said it may appear, that there is a very great advantage in
the proofs for this opinion, concerning the beginning of the world, above the
other for the Eternity of it.

Now for the Difficulties on each side: Those relating to the Eternity of the
world, have been already discussed, in the proofs I have lately insisted upon.
And as for the Opinion, concerning the Creation of it, the chief difficulty
which Aristotle does mention, is from that Principle of his, Ex nihilo nihil
fit, which is generally acknowledged to be true concerning natural Generations,
but must not necessarily be extended to supernatural productions. It is one of
the natural notions belonging to the Supreme Being, to conceive of him that he
is Omnipotent. And it is very reasonable for us to believe, that our finite
understandings cannot comprehend the utmost extent of Omnipotence. And though
the making of something out of nothing do argue an inconceivable power, yet
there is no contradiction in it. And if such things must be denied which our
reasons cannot comprehend, we must then deny that any thing can be
self-existent, which yet is and must be supposed, on both sides; It being
altogether as difficult for us to conceive, how any thing should be of it self,
as how any thing should be made of nothing. So that this difficulty is not
sufficient to overthrow this opinion, and withal it does extend equally to both
sides.

So then if it do appear, that betwixt these two opinions the least and fewest
difficulties do lie, on that side which has the plainest and strongest proofs,
There is no question to be made, which way every impartial man will determine
his opinion.

I do not pretend that these Arguments are Demonstrations, of which the nature
of this thing is not capable: But they are such strong probabilities, as ought
to prevail with all those, who are not able to produce greater probabilities to
the contrary.

As for that other Opinion, concerning Epicurus his Atoms, It is so extravagant
and irrational, and has been so abundantly confuted by others, that I cannot
think it expedient to spend any time in the discussing of it.

CHAP. VI.
3. Arg. From the admirable contrivance of Natural things.

3. FROM that excellent Contrivance which there is in all natural things. Both
with respect to that Elegance and Beauty which they have in themselves
separately considered, and that regular Order and subserviency wherein they
stand toward one another; together with the exact fitness and propriety, for
the several purposes for which they are designed. From all which it may be
inferred, that these are the productions of some Wise Agent.

The most Sagacious man is not able to find out any blot or error in this great
volume of the world, as if any thing in it had been an imperfect essay at the
first, such as afterward stood in need of mending: But all things continue as
they were from the Beginning of the Creation.

Tully does frequently insist upon this, as the most natural result from that
beauty De divinatione, lib. 2.
and regularity to be observed in the Universe. Esse praestantem aliquam,
aeternamque naturam, and eam suspiciendam adorandamque hominum generi,
pulchritudo mundi ordoque rerum caelestium cogit confiteri. The great elegance
and order of things in the world, is abundantly enough to evince the Necessity
of such an eternal and excellent Being, to whom we owe adoration. And in
another place, Quid potest esse tam apertum, tamque perspicuum, cum coelum
suspeximus, coelestiaque De Nature. Deor. lib. 2
contemplati sumus, quam aliquod esse Numen praestantissimae mentis, quo haec
regantur. What can be more obvious than to infer a supreme Deity, from that
order and government we may behold amongst the heavenly Bodies?

The several vicissitudes of Night and Day, Winter and Summer, the production
of Minerals, the growth of Plants, the generation of Animals according to their
several Species; with the Law of natural instinct, whereby every thing is
inclined and enabled, for its own preservation: The gathering of the
Inhabitants of the Earth into Nations, under distinct Policies and Governments;
those advantages which each of them have of mutual Commerce, for supplying the
wants of each other, are so many distinct arguments to the same purpose.

I cannot here omit the observations which have been made in these later times,
since we have had the use and improvement of the Microscope, concerning that
great difference which by the help of that does appear, betwixt natural and
artificial things. Whatever is Natural does by that appear, adorned with all
imaginable Elegance and Beauty. There are such inimitable gildings and
embroideries in the smallest seeds of Plants, but especially in the parts of
Animals, In the head or eye of a small Fly: Such accurate order and symmetry in
the frame of the most minute creatures, a Lowse or a Mite, as no man were able
to conceive without seeing of them. Whereas the most curious works of Art, the
sharpest finest Needle, does appear as a blunt rough bar of iron, coming from
the furnace or the forge. The most accurate engravings or embossments, seem
such rude bungling deformed works, as if they had been done with a Mattock or a
Trowel. So vast a difference is there betwixt the skill of Nature, and the
rudeness and imperfection of Art.

And for such kind of Bodies, as we are able to judge of by our naked eyes, that
excellent contrivance which there is in the several parts of them; their being
so commodiously adapted to their proper uses, may be another argument to this
purpose. As particularly those in humane bodies, upon consideration of which,
Galen himself, no great friend to Religion, could not but acknowledge a Deity.
In his Book de Formatione Foetus, he takes notice, that there are in a humane
body above 600 several Muscles, and there are at least ten several Intentions,
or due Qualifications, to be observed in each of these; Proper figure, just
magnitude, right disposition of its several ends, upper and lower Position of
the whole, the insertion of its proper Nerves, Veins, and Arteries, which are
each of them to be duly placed; so that about the Muscles alone, no less than
6000 several ends or aims are to be attended to. The Bones are reckoned to be
284; the distinct scopes or intentions in each of these, are above forty, in
all about 100000. And thus is it in some proportion with all the other parts,
the Skin, Ligaments, Vessels, Glandules, Humors; But more especially with the
several members of the Body, which do in regard of the great variety and
multitude of those several intentions required to them, very much exceed the
Homogeneous parts. And the failing in any one of these, would cause an
irregularity in the Body, and in many of them, such as would be very notorious.

And thus likewise is it in proportion with all other kinds of Beings;
Minerals, Vegetables: but especially with such as are Sensitive; Infects,
Fishes, Birds, Beasts; And in these yet more especially, for those Organs and
Faculties that concern sensation; But most of all, for that kind of frame which
relates to our understanding power, whereby we are able to correct the errors
of our Senses and Imaginations, to call before us things past and future, and
to behold things that are invisible to Sense.

Now to imagine, that all these things, according to their several kinds, could
be brought into this regular frame and order, to which such an infinite number
of Intentions are required, without the contrivance of some wise Agent, must
needs be irrational in the highest degree.

And then, as for the frame of Humane nature it self. If a man does but
consider how he is endowed with such a Natural Principle, whereby he is
necessarily inclined to seek his own well-being and happiness: And likewise
with one Faculty whereby he is enabled to judge of the nature of things, as to
their fitness or unfitness for this end: And another Faculty whereby he is
enabled to choose and prosecute such things as may promote this end, and to
reject and avoid such things as may hinder it. And that nothing properly is his
duty, but what is really his interest: This may be another argument to convince
him, that the Author of his Being must be infinitely Wise and Powerful.

The wisest man is not able to imagine how things should be better than now
they are, supposing them to be contrived by the Wisest Agent; And where we meet
with all the Indications and Evidences of such a thing as the thing is capable
of, supposing it to be true, It must needs be very irrational to make any doubt
of it.

Now I appeal unto any considering man, unto what cause all this exactness and
regularity can be reasonably ascribed, Whether to Blind Chance, or to Blind
Necessity, or to the conduct of some Wise Intelligent Being.

Though we should suppose both Matter and Motion to be Eternal, yet is it not
in the least credible, that insensible Matter could be the Author of all those
excellent Contrivances which we behold in these natural things. If any one
shall surmize, that these Effects may proceed from the Anima Mundi; I would ask
such a one, Is this Anima Mundi an Intelligent Being, or is it void of all
perception and reason? If it have no kind of sense or knowledge, Then it is
altogether needless to assert any such principle, because Matter and Motion may
serve for this purpose as well. If it be an Intelligent Wise Eternal Being,
This is GOD, under another Name.

As for Fate or Necessity, this must needs be as blind and as unfit to produce
wise effects, as Chance it self.

From whence it will follow, That it must be a Wise Being that is the Cause of
these Wise Effects.

By what has been said upon this subject, it may appear, That these visible
things of the world are sufficient to leave a man without excuse, As being the
Witnesses Rom: 1. 20 Acts 14. 17. Psalm. 19.
of a Deity, and such as do plainly declare his great Power and Glory.

CHAP. VII.
4. Arg. From Providence, and the Government of the World.

4. FROM the Works of Providence in the Government of the world; And that
continual experience which we have of some Wise and Powerful Being, who does
preside over and govern all things; Not only by his general concourse, in
preserving all kinds of things in their Beings, and regulating them in their
Operations: But chiefly in his wise and just government over mankind and humane
affairs, which may appear by such effects

as are Ordinary, Extraordinary.

1. For the more common effects of it, namely that general success which in the
ordinary course of things does accompany honest and virtuous actions: And the
punishment and vengeance that does one time or other in this world usually
befall such as are wicked: Both Virtue and Vice being generally, and for the
most part, sufficiently distinguished by Rewards and Punishments in this life.

There are indeed some instances to the contrary, concerning the Miseries of
Good men, and the Prosperity of the Wicked; But these have been by several of
the wisest Heathen, Plato, Plutarch, Tully, Seneca etc. sufficiently
vindicated, by the clearest Principles of Reason, from being any prejudice to
the wise Government of Providence.

It is not either Necessary or Convenient, that Happiness and Prosperity in
this Life, which is the usual reward of Virtue, should have either such a
Physical or Mathematical Certainty, as could not possibly fail. Because,

1. It would not be consistent with our dependent conditions, that worldly
prosperity should be so infallibly under the power of our own endeavors, as
that God himself might not sometimes interpose for our disappointment. If I may
have leave to suppose, what I am now proving, namely a Wise and Omnipotent
Providence, It must needs appear highly reasonable, that it should be left to
his Infinite Wisdom and Power, to make what reserved cases he pleases, from the
ordinary course of things. From whence it will follow, that these unequal
dispensations can be no sufficient ground for the disbelief of Providence.

2. It would very much prejudice another great Principle of Religion, which is
of mighty influence for the regulating of men's lives and actions in this world,
namely, the Belief and Expectation of a future state of Rewards and Punishments.

3. If temporal prosperity did infallibly attend all good actions, This would
be a diminution to Virtue it self. Men would do good by a kind of natural
necessity, which would abate just so much from the Virtue of their Actions, as
it does from the Liberty of them. It is sufficient, that Moral Actions should
have Moral Motives. And that Virtue does generally and for the most part, make
men prosperous and happy in this world. We know by experience, that all Mankind
do in their most weighty affairs, think it sufficient to depend upon such
causes as do commonly and for the most part prove effectual to the ends for
which they are designed. So that this very thing which is usually looked upon
as the greatest objection against Providence, is really and truly an argument
for it.

2. For extraordinary effects of it. If we give any credit to the universal
History of all Ages and Nations, It will by that appear,

1. That there have many times happened such special signal Providence for the
punishing of obstinate sinners, and for the deliverance of such as were
Religious, in answer to their Prayers, whereby the Supreme Governor of the
World has so visibly pointed out his will and meaning, and so plainly
manifested his power, that every impartial man must be forced to say, doubtless
there is a God that judges in the earth.

2. That sometimes Miracles have been wrought, which could not be effected
without the help of some Superior Power; And sometimes there have been plain
prophesies and predictions concerning such future things, as in their various
circumstances were contingent. Of which the Annals of all Ages and Nations, as
well Heathens as Christians, do give very particular and large accounts. And
though we may safely grant, that some of the stories to this purpose, delivered
either from the more ancient or later times, were fabulous and vain; yet for a
man to deny that ever such things happened in the world, but that they were all
mere forgeries and designs to cheat Posterity, this were to subvert the Credit
of all History; which is so immodest a thing, as any sober man would be ashamed
of.

These arguments are more largely discussed by others, who have writ upon this
subject: But there is one particular which to me seems very considerable to
this purpose, though but little notice of it be taken by others: And that is,
The state of the Jewish Nation, who for these 1600 years have been driven out
of their own Country, having now no particular place of abode, belonging to
them as a Nation; but are scattered and dispersed over all the habitable world,
hated and despised wherever they are permitted to dwell; very frequently
persecuted, impoverished, banished, murdered in vast multitudes; And
notwithstanding all this, they are not yet so mixed and blended with other
Nations, as to be lost amongst them; But are still kept up a distinct people,
There being no instance like this in any story. As if they were intended for a
standing memorial and example to the world, of the divine power and vengeance.
To me it seems, amongst rational arguments one of the plainest, not only for
the proof of a Deity, and a just Providence in pursuing that Nation with such
exemplary Vengeance; But likewise for the authority of Scripture, and the truth
of the Christian Religion.

I might here add another argument to the same purpose, from Natural
Conscience, which is Gods Deputy, and does internally witness for him, as other
creatures do externally. It Is plain, that all mankind are in some measure
endowed with this; and one may as well assert, that Hope and Fear are not
natural to men, as that Conscience is not. To this purpose I might further
argue, from those natural notions of our minds concerning Good and Evil, the
bounds of which are fixed in the nature of things, and do not depend either
upon Custom or Positive Law. Those things which have in them a fitness to
promote our chief end, being styled Good, and implying in the very Definition
of them, Comeliness and Reward; Those things which have in them a natural
aptitude to hinder our Chief end being styled Evil, and implying in the
definitions of them, Turpitude and Punishment. From whence it will follow, that
there must be some Superior Power, who by framing things with such respects
toward one another, may be said to have declared this Law of Nature, and to
have taken care to enforce the observance of it; both these belonging to the
nature of a Law. But I may perhaps have occasion to speak more particularly to
this afterward.

These things put together, are so strong an evidence, and so sufficient to
convince the existence of a Deity, that that man must be very wilful, who does
not submit and acquiesce in it. And for this reason is it (says a Noble
Author) that God L. 5 Bacon. Essays.
never yet wrought any Miracle to convince an Atheist; because to a man that is
capable of being convinced, his ordinary works are sufficient to this purpose.
And I should think it much more easy and rational (says the same Author) to
believe all the fables in the Poets, the Legend, the Talmud, and the Alchoran,
than that this Universal Frame should be without a Creator and Governor.

And now it may not be improper to look back, and take a review of what kind of
Evidence has been produced in this matter. As for any immediate proof from our
outward senses, this cannot be pretended to for the demonstration of such a
Being as is supposed to be a pure Spirit and invisible; But for the mediate
proofs from the effects of a Wise Omnipotent Agent, we can look no where about
us, But every object does afford evidence of it. There is no conclusion in
Philosophy (not immediately apparent to the sense) that is capable of so full
and unquestionable an evidence from plain effects, as this.

As for that kind of Inward Sensation, whereby we can discern the impressions
of our own minds, They that have any sense of a Law written in their hearts, or
any natural notions about Good and Evil, must by these effects be convinced of
a Supreme Being. And as for that kind of Evidence which belongs to our
Understandings, If the Universal consent of mankind be of any authority: If this
Visible world, replenished with such admirable variety of Creatures, preserved
and governed in such an excellent order, be any evidence of Infinite Power and
Wisdom: If besides what we our selves have known by our own experience, any
credit be to be given to Universal History, attesting to many Signal
Providence that have happened in the world: Besides the several Miracles and
Prophesies, that have been taken notice of in several Ages and Nations. I say
if any, or all of these things be of any force, they must needs render the
thing I am proving to be credible in the highest degree, and even altogether
unquestionable.

In so much, that if a Deity be supposed, It is not imaginable by what other
kind of evidence we should be assured of it, than what we are now furnished
withal. And it was before laid down as a Principle, That when a thing is
capable of good proof in Chap. 3. Prop. 3.
any kind, men ought to rest satisfied in the best evidence for it which that
kind of things will bear, and beyond which better could not be expected
supposing it were true.

If any should imagine, that frequent Miracles might be a more powerful means
to convince men of this Principle. To this it may be said,

1. That this is not fitting: the proper work of Miracles being for the
confirmation of such doctrines as are not knowable by natural light, not for
such things of which men may be sufficiently convinced by reason.

2. It Is not so certain, that this would be effectual. Those frequent Miracles
in the passage of Israel out of Egypt, The dividing of the Red Sea, The waters
out of the Rock, The cloud and pillar of Fire, The Mannah, The Quails, The
destruction of Korah, etc. did not prevail with the generality of the
Israelites. Those constant Miracles under the Mosaical dispensation; The waters
of Jealousy; The extraordinary plenty of the sixth year; The Urim and Thummim;
The special Protection of the Coasts of Israel every third year, when all the
Males were to go up to Jerusalem to worship; which custom of theirs must needs
be known to their enemies, who lived round about them: None of all these, did
prove effectual for the conviction of obstinate men. Those occasional Miracles
wrought by our Savior, though they were so many and so great, as were never
before wrought by any one, yet did they not prevail with many of the Jews.

If it be said, That none of these proofs do so infallibly conclude, but that
there does still remain a Possibility that the thing may be otherwise. To this
I have showed before, That there may be an indubitable Certainty, where there
is not an infallible Prop. 4.
Certainty: And that a mere possibility to the contrary, is not a sufficient
cause of doubting. To which I now add, That if it should be supposed, that a
man could not be sure of the Being of God, Yet it is most evident that he could
not be sure of the contrary: For this plain reason, Because no man can be sure
of a Pure Negative, namely, That such a thing is not; unless he will either
pretend, to have a certain knowledge of all things that are or may be, than
which nothing can be more monstrously and ridiculously arrogant; or else,
unless he be sure that the being of what he denies does imply a contradiction,
for which there is not the least color in this case; The true notion of God
consisting in this, That he is a Being of all possible perfection.

If it be supposed, that notwithstanding all that has been said, there may yet
be some probabilities to the contrary. To this it may be answered, That unless
these probabilities were greater and stronger than those on the other side, no
man who acts rationally will incline to them. And if there be any such, why are
they not produced? where are they to be found?

If men shall yet pretend, That though they cannot answer these Arguments, yet
they do really find some doubt in their own minds. I would ask such, Have you
seriously and impartially considered, what is alleged in this case? It should
be no prejudice to any Proposition in Philosophy or Mathematics, that an
ignorant man who never applied his thoughts to such things, does pretend to
doubt of it. If you do in some measure understand, and have considered these
arguments, I would then ask, Have you not as much reason for this, as you your
selves would think sufficient, for the proof of any thing you were not
unwilling to believe? Do you not knowingly and wilfully entertain prejudices
against such things? Have you been true to so much light as you have received?
Or have you not rather withheld it in unrighteousness? If so, it is plain that
you have dishonest minds, that you measure by an unjust balance, and therefore
cannot be competent judges of truth or falsehood.

If it be supposed yet further, that the Probabilities on each side should be
equal, or that those on the other side should somewhat preponderate; yet if
there be no considerable hazard on that side which has the least probability,
and a very great and most apparent danger in a mistake about the other: In this
case, every rational and prudent man is bound to order his actions in favor of
that way which appears to be most safe and advantageous for his own interest;
as I have showed before. Prop. 7.


So that in such cases, as may seem unto us not altogether free from some kind
of doubt, and which we could not so far clear up to our selves, as to make them
appear wholly unquestionable; I say, in such cases, men that would act
prudently, should enquire, Where lies the danger of mistaking?

Why, on the one side, All the inconvenience of Believing this (if it be not
so), will be, that we are hereby occasioned to tie our selves up to some
needless restraints during this short time of our lives, wherein
notwithstanding there is as to the present, much peace, quiet, and safety; And
as for the future, our error shall dye with us, there being none to call us to
an account for our mistake.

But now on the other side, what if there should be a Deity so holy, and just,
and powerful, as is supposed? If this should prove to be a real truth (and no
man can be sure of the contrary), what vengeance and indignation may such vile
Miscreants and Traitors expect, who have made it their business to banish Him
out of the world, who is the great Creator and Governor of it, to undermine
his Being, to eradicate all notions of Him out of the minds of men; To provoke
his Creatures and Vassals to a contempt of Him, a slighting of his fear and
worship, as being but such imaginary Chimaera's as are fit only to keep fools
in awe? Certainly, as this is the highest provocation, that any man can be
guilty of, so shall it be punished with the sorest vengeance.

There are two things that Atheistical men propose to themselves by their
profane loose principles, namely, to avoid the imputation of Credulity, and
the fears and perplexities of mind, to which Religion makes men obnoxious. But
their principles are not more irrational, than their design is foolish; for of
all mankind these profane persons are,

1. The most Credulous, who can believe themselves to be wiser than all the
world, who can believe the Eternity of the world, or its production by a casual
concourse of Atoms, without any kind of argument for it, against the many
reasons that are urged to the contrary. Who if they should demean themselves
about matters of the world, as they do about Religion, would be counted
ridiculous, senseless persons, and altogether unfit for humane conversation.

2. The most Timorous. Tully has observed, Natura D^or. lib. 1. c. 86.
that no kind of men are more afraid of God, than such as pretend not to
believe his Being. These are the men who above all others are most liable to be
affected with dread and trembling, at thunder and lightning, at solitude and
darkness, and more especially then when it does most concern them to be freed
from such disquiets, namely, in the time of sickness, and the approaches of
death.

From whence it will follow, that upon all accounts Atheism may justly be
accounted Folly; both as it is directly contrary to the principles of reason,
and the rules of wisdom.

I have now done with the first thing required to a state of Religion, namely,
A belief and an acknowledgment of the Divine Nature and Existence.

CHAP. VIII.
Concerning the Excellencies and Perfections of the Divine Nature: And First,
of those which are commonly called Incommunicable, namely, Simplicity, Unity,

Immutability, Infiniteness, Immensity, Eternity.

I Proceed to the second thing proposed as a principal part of Natural
Religion, namely, Due apprehensions of the Divine Excellency and Perfections.
Without which, the mere belief of his Being, will contribute but little to a
true state of Religion. A man may have such unworthy notions of a Deity, that
it would in some respects be as good, nay much better, to be without a God,
than to have such a one, as he may frame. It would be better (says a great
Author) to have Lord Bacons Essays.
no opinion of God, than such a one as is unworthy of him; the one is but mere
unbelief, the other is contumely. It Is a common saying cited out of Plutarch's
book of Superstition, where he professes it much more desirable to him, that
posterity should say, that there never was any such man as Plutarch, rather
than that he was a fierce, unconstant, revengeful man, one who upon the least
omission of any small circumstance toward him, by men otherways virtuous and
worthy, would tear out their hearts, destroy their families and children, blast
their fields, spoil their cattle with lightning and thunder. This would be such
a representation as would make the notion and remembrance of him hateful; And
it were better to be forgotten, than to be remembered with infamy. Now there are
some opinions which do thus reproach the Deity, and render him under such a
notion, that if the Giants had prevailed in their attempt against heaven, that
place had not been worse supplied. This therefore ought to be most carefully
avoided.

Whereas the Divine nature is supposed to be the first and supreme Good,
therefore the Idea of all absolute perfection must be essential to the notion
of him. And though it be very difficult for us to raise our minds to any due
apprehensions of this; yet we must endeavor in our thoughts of him, so far as
our finite understandings are capable, to remove and separate from him whatever
is in any kind evil or unworthy, and to ascribe unto him the utmost degree of
all Goodness and Perfection.

The most general Notion that men have of God, is that He is the first cause,
and a Being of all possible Perfection.

Some of his principal Excellencies discoverable by the light of Nature, may be
reduced to these Heads; namely, such as are Incommunicable; Absolute
Simplicity. Essential Unity. Immutability. Infiniteness, both in respect of
Place and Time. Immensity. Eternity.

Communicable; belonging either to the Divine Understanding, Knowledge. Wisdom.
Particular Providence.
Will, namely, his Goodness. Justice. Faithfulness.
Faculties of Acting, his Power. Dominion over us in this life. Distributing of
future Rewards and Punishments.




Each of these Attributes are upon this account of very great consequence to be
believed and considered, because they are the foundations of those duties of
Religion which we owe to him. According as a man apprehends God to be, so must
his esteem be of him, and his demeanor toward him.

And whereas these great and necessary points, of so much influence to
Religion, have been usually treated of by others either too largely, by the
inserting of several things less pertinent; or too obscurely, by offering such
proofs concerning them as are less intelligible, or intermixing the discourses
about them, with such niceties as are neither very easy to be solved, nor
material for men to know: I shall therefore in this place endeavor to avoid
both these inconveniences, by treating concerning each of them with all
imaginable brevity and plainness: Observing this method.

First, I shall endeavor to explain and describe, what is meant by each
Attribute; And then prove, that these Attributes so explained, must belong to
the natural notion of God. Which I shall make out, both by the consent of the
wisest Heathen, expressed by their declared opinions, and by their general
practice suitable thereunto: And from the nature of the things themselves;
their congruity to the principles of Reason, and the absurdities that will
follow upon the denial of them.

Those are called Incommunicable Attributes, which are proper to God alone, and
not communicated to any Creature.

The first of these I have proposed to treat of, is his Absolute Simplicity. By
which I mean his freedom from all kind of composition or mixture, either of
Principles or of Parts: And that this does belong to the natural notion of the
Deity, may be evident,

1. From Testimony of the Heathen Philosophers, who do generally acknowledge him
to be the First Cause and the most Simple Being, and do frequently style him
men's pura and sincera segregata ab omni concretione mortali, etc. And not only
Scripture, but the very Heathen likewise do express this Attribute by the
similitude of Light, amongst all visible things the most pure and simple.

2. From Natural Reason, by which it will appear, that God cannot be compounded
of any Principles, because the principles and ingredients which concur to the
making of any thing, must be antecedent to that thing. And if the divine nature
were compounded, it would follow that there must be something in nature before
him. Which is inconsistent with his being the first Cause.

And here I shall take occasion to speak somewhat concerning the Spirituality
of the Divine nature, as having some affinity with this, though it be none of
the incommunicable Attributes.

I know it has been said, with confidence enough, that the notion of a Spirit,
or immaterial substance, does imply a contradiction; and that there is an utter
impossibility of any other Being besides Matter. But though this has been
said, yet was it never proved, nor can it be, till either a man be able to
evince, that the notion of the word Substance, according to the most general
use of it, (which gives signification to words), does necessarily imply
Corporeity, than which nothing can be more false; or unless a man shall pretend
to the certain knowledge and comprehension of all things that are or may be,
than which nothing can be more vain.

What the Positive notion of a Spirit is, is not so necessary to enquire after,
or determine. It Is sufficient, that we conceive of it by way of Negation,
namely, that it is a Powerful Intelligent Being that is not matter, without
figure or parts, not capable of rarefaction or condensation, not visible to our
bodily eyes, and therefore not to be represented by any kind of sensible Image:
Not subject to those necessary Laws of Matter, which cannot move unless it be
moved, and cannot but move when impelled by another. I say, it may be
sufficient in our apprehending the Spirituality of God, to remove all
Corporeity and Figure in our conceptions of him.

Now that this Attribute does belong to the Divine nature, may be made evident
both by Testimony and by Reason.

1. It has been generally owned, by the wisest and most learned Heathen.
Pythagoras is often cited for this; by whom (says Lactantius) God was wont to
be De Ira Dei. cap. 11.
styled incorporalis men's, an incorporeal Mind; and by Plato frequently (...),
without a body; by other Grecian Philosophers (...), the Mind that made the
world. Plutarch styles him (...), a separated form, not mixed with matter,
without any thing in him that is passible.

The Latin Philosophers do frequently Tus^^ul. Qu. lib. 1.
give him the Attribute of men's divina, men's pura and sincera, men's soluta and
libera, segregata ab omni concretione mortali.

2. By Reason. That Spirituality is a Perfection, and therefore to be ascribed
unto God; or rather, that Corporeity is an Imperfection, and therefore to be
removed from him, may appear from hence. Because the supposing of him to be
matter is inconsistent with diverse of his other most Essential Perfections; As,

1. His Immensity, If we do suppose these two reasonable postulata. 1. That
there are some other things in the world besides God. And 2. That two bodies
cannot be both at the same time in the same place. From whence it will follow,
that wherever any other Body or matter is, from thence God must be excluded;
and so many Chasmes or breaches must there be in the Divine nature.

2. His Knowledge and Wisdom, It being not imaginable, how mere matter should be
able to comprehend, much less to contrive all that variety of things in the
world, past, present, and to come.

3. His Liberty and Freedom, and consequently with his Goodness. That action
not being properly good, which is not done freely and out of choice. Now the
Laws of Matter are necessary, there can be no (...), or arbitrary principle in
mere matter. And it is worth observation, how this very argument puzzled
Epicurus and his followers, as is represented by Lucretius. If all material
things move by necessary Laws, and the parts of Matter be naturally so
disposed, that they do not move unless they be moved, and cannot but move when
pressed upon by other parts that are in motion; whence comes that liberty which
we may by an inward sensation perceive to be within us? Unde est haec inquam
fatis avolsa voluntas?


To which he gives so wild and irrational an answer, from the motion of
declining Atoms, as does sufficiently manifest him to be baffled by this
Objection.

The second Incommunicable Attribute to be treated of, is the Essential Unity
of the Divine nature. By which I mean, his being One and no more. And that this
perfection does belong to the natural notion of God, may be made evident both
by Testimony and by Reason.

1. By Testimony. I have showed before, how that notwithstanding that
Polytheism which did so generally abound amongst the Heathen, yet the wiser and
more considerate persons amongst them, have in all ages acknowledged One
Supreme Deity. The Egyptians of old, though of all others the most infamous for
their multiplicity of Gods, yet did assert One Maker and chief Governor of the
world, under whom they did suppose several subordinate Deities, who as his
Deputies did preside over several parts of the Universe.

The first occasion of these lesser Deities, was probably from a desire that
men had, to express their gratitude to, and to honor the memories of, such
Heroical Persons, as in those first and ruder ages of the World, had either by
their inventions or their prowess, been highly beneficial to mankind, or to
their own Countries; who thereupon were for such public services, thought fit
to be advanced to the highest honor after their deaths, and admitted in a
subordinate way, to some share of Government, especially in taking care of the
welfare of their Countries. And to this does the Apostle seem to allude, 1 Cor.
8. 4, 6. where he says, We know there is no other God but one, for though
there be that are called Gods, both in heaven and in Earth, (as there be Gods
many, and Lords many): But to us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are
all things, and we in him.

There are many attestations amongst the Heathen Writers concerning this
Attribute, the Unity of the Godhead. It is observed, that Orpheus was the first
amongst them that wrote concerning the Genealogy of the Gods, where he reduces
them to the number of 360. But he was afterward so sensible of this impious
folly, that he writes a particular discourse to his son Musaeus, and his other
friends, wherein he does solemnly recant these wild absurd Fables, professing
to them, that he thought himself obliged to rectify these errors and abuses,
which his former Poem might have occasioned. And here he does in the first
place admonish them, that there is but one God, of himself, and none besides
him; (...), by whom all other things are made, and upon whom they depend. And
then he goes on to show, that God is invisible, and yet sees and knows all
things; that as he is merciful, so is he just, being the Author of those
judgments which befall wicked men, with several other things to this purpose.
And though Homer do too often follow Orpheus in these fictions, concerning a
multitude of Deities, yet when he is most serious, he supposes but one, (...).
So Sophocles, -- (...)
(...).
There is but one God, who made the Heaven and the Earth.


So Pythagoras, and several others after him, style God by the name of Monas or
Unity.

It is commonly said, that Socrates was put to death for his endeavoring to
undeceive his Countrymen in that vanity they were addicted to, of worshipping
a multitude of Deities; and that this made the Writers after him, more shy in
speaking their thoughts about this matter: But though Plato do in some places
(for fear of incurring the same danger) seem to favor this popular error, by
defending Polytheism, yet he acknowledges these subordinate Deities to be
begotten; and he lays it down in another place as a Principle, that whatever is
begotten is corruptible, and therefore incapable of being properly a God. And
(if the 13th Epistle be truly his), there is a remarkable passage in it to this
purpose, where he gives this note, That in those Epistolary discourses, where
he designs to be more serious, he does mention the name of God in the singular
number; but when he is not so, then he mentions Gods in the plural.

Hierocles in his Comment upon Pythagoras golden verses, does style him (...),
God of Gods, the only maker of all things.

Arrian in his Dissertations of Epictetus, does assure us, that in his time
(which was about 120 years after Christ), it was an usual form in the prayers
of the Heathen, to say, (...), Lord have mercy upon us, whereby they did
acknowledge the Unity of that God whom they did invoke in their prayers. Which
clause is thought to be from that usage taken into the Liturgies of the
Christians. So far then as the consent of the wisest and best men, in former
times, is of any Authority, so far is this Attribute rendered highly credible.

I shall only add that remarkable passage in Maximus Tyrius: Though men
Dissert. 1.
differ much in their opinions about other matters, yet in this they all agree,
That there is one God, the King and Father of all; under whom there are
subordinate Deities, his offspring, who are admitted to some share of
government with him. In this the Grecian consents with the Barbarian, the
Inhabitants of the Continent with the Islanders, the Wise with the Unwise.

2. But besides the Testimonies to this purpose, it may likewise be made
evident by Reason, That a Plurality of Gods is not only unnecessary, and
therefore improbable; but that it is such a supposition as does imply in it
many inconsistencies, and therefore is impossible.

1. It Is unnecessary, and therefore highly improbable. Those have been always
esteemed good Rules, Frustra fit per plura, etc. Entia non sunt multiplicanda
sine necessitate. It is most suitable to that common analogy to be observed
amongst natural things, even in lesser matters, that there is nothing amongst
them superfluous or redundant; And therefore much more ought it to be so, in
the greatest and highest matters of all. Now nothing can be more evident, than
that one infinite Being may be sufficient to all purposes whatsoever; for if it
had any limits, it were not infinite; and nothing can be more absurd, than to
suppose more Gods than are necessary.

2. It Is not possible, that there should be two such infinite Beings. Because
either they must have several Perfections, or the same: Neither of which is
consistent with the most obvious notion of God, That he is a Being of all
possible Perfections.

To suppose two Gods, with several Perfections, some belonging to one, and some
to another, will plainly prove, that neither of them can be God, because
neither of them have all possible Perfections.

To suppose two Gods of the same and equal Perfections, would likewise prove,
that neither of them can be God, (i. e.), not absolutely perfect; because it is
not so great a privilege, to have the same equal perfections with another, and
in a kind of partnership, as to be alone and superior above all others.

And to suppose one of them, whether of several or the same kinds of
Perfections with the other, but only in an inferior degree, may sufficiently
evince that one of them is not properly God, because not supreme.

3. The third Attribute to be discussed, is the Divine Immutability. By which I
mean a freedom from all kind of change or inconstancy, both as to his Nature
and his Purposes.

And that this Attribute is likewise very suitable to those natural notions
which men have of God, may appear,

1. By Testimony. Plato having proposed In Phaed.
the Question, whether God be mutable and inconstant, answers expressly. It Is
most necessary that he should be always the same and alike. His words are most
emphatical, (...), that he is never in any wise capable of any kind of change
whatsoever.

And in another place, he mentions these De Republ. lib. 2.
two things, as being the grand principles of Religion. 1. That God is the
cause of all good, and in no wise of any evil. 2. That he is constant and
immutable, and cannot deceive by making various representations of himself.

So Seneca, speaking of the necessity of ascribing this Attribute to the Divine
Nature as to his Purposes or Counsels, has this passage; Statuerunt quae non
mutarunt, nec unquam primi consilii Deos paenitet. De Benefic. lib. 6.
God is always constant to his own Decrees, and does never repent of his
Purposes. And in another place, Necesse Not. Quest. 1. Praef.
est ei eadem placere, eui nisi optima placere non possunt; nec ob hoc minus
liber ac potens est, ipse enim est Necessitas sua. It Is necessary that he
should be always pleased with the same things, who can be pleased with nothing
but what is best: Nor can this be any prejudice to his Liberty or his Power,
since he is his own Necessity, i. e. nothing from without, but his own
natutural perfection lays this necessity upon him.

2. By reason. There is an excellent argument to this purpose, in that place
before-cited out of Plato, which according to his manner, he delivers in a more
copious way of expression. But the substance of it is this; All change must be
either involuntary and upon necessity, or voluntary and upon choice. Now God
being the most powerful Being, cannot by any thing be necessitated to an
involuntary change. And for any voluntary change, whereas it must be either for
the better or the worse, it is not imaginable, that any wise Being should be
willing to change for the worse; Nor is it possible that any perfect Being
should change for the better. And therefore it is necessary that the divine
nature should be immutable.

We esteem changeableness in men either an imperfection, or a fault. Their
natural changes, as to their persons, are from weakness and vanity; their moral
changes, as to their inclinations and purposes, are from ignorance or
inconstancy. And therefore there is very good reason, why we should remove this
from God, as being that which would darken all his other perfections. The
greater the Divine Perfections are, the greater Imperfection would Mutability
be. Besides, that it would take away the foundation of all Religion, Love and
Fear, and Affiance and Worship: In which men would be very much discouraged, if
they could not certainly rely upon God, but were in doubt that his nature might
alter, and that hereafter he might be quite otherwise from what we now
apprehend him to be.

4. Infiniteness is another Attribute most natural to the Notion of God. By
which is meant, his not being bounded by place, or space, or by duration, but
being Immense and Eternal.

1. This Attribute of Gods immensity does signify his not being so confined by
any bounds of space, but that he does spread himself to all places that we can
see or can imagine, and infinitely beyond: So as we cannot say, he is here and
not there, thus far he reaches and not farther. Some have thought, that it is
not absolutely necessary to believe such a kind of Omnipresence of the Divine
substance, as to be actually present in every place. But this is most necessary
to be believed, That God is everywhere in respect of his Power and Providence,
whereby he does influence and govern all things, (which is hardly possible to
conceive without his actual presence in all places) And in respect of his
Knowledge, whereby he does see and take notice of every thing, though never so
secret; and that he can pierce through all these created things, with greater
facility than the Light does through the Air. And that this does belong to the
natural notion of God, may appear,

1. By the general consent of the Heathen, testified by their praying to him at
any place or time, which shows that they were persuaded that he was always and
everywhere present, at least by his Knowledge and his Power. Tully cites
Pythagoras affirming, Deum esse animum per naturam rerum omnium intentum and
commeantem, De Nature. Deor.
That God is a Spirit or Mind, which does pass through all things. And in
another place, he cites it as Thales his De Legib. lib. 2.
saying, which he commends, Homines existimare oportere, Deos omnia cernere,
Deorum omnia esse plena, That men ought to think, that God beholds every thing,
and fills every place. Plato affirms, that God De Legib: lib. 10.
does see and take notice of all our actions, words, and thoughts. So Virgil,
Eclog. 3.
-- Jovis omnia plena. And in another Georg. lib. 4
place, -- Deum namque ire per omnes
Terrasque tractusque maris, coelumque profundum.


So Seneca speaking of God, says, Ubique Epist. 95.
and omnibus praesto est. He is everywhere, and always at hand. And in another
place, Benefic. lib. 4.
Quocunque te flexeris, ibi illum videbis occurrentem tibi, nihil ab illo
vacat, Opus suum ipse implet. We can turn our selves no-whither but we shall
meet him, no place is without him, he fills his own Work.

2. By the principles of Reason. If it were otherwise, and the Divine nature
should be limited, this would contradict his universal Providence, and render
all worship of him vain and useless. Why should a man either fear him, or serve
him, if he could neither hear our prayers, nor take notice of our wants, nor
receive our acknowledgments.

2. For the Attribute of Eternity, whereby is signified Gods being of infinite
duration, without beginning or end; that this likewise does belong to the
natural notion of God, may be evident,

1. By the general consent of the Heathen Philosophers. And though there have
been disputes amongst them, about some of his other Attributes, yet in this all
of them have agreed. They do indeed describe the Genealogies of their Heroes
and subordinate Gods, but for the supreme Deity, he is constantly acknowledged
to be without beginning of time or end of days. Epicurus himself, who had the
lowest and meanest opinion of God, and robbed him of as many of his other
perfections, as by the utmost straining of his wit he was able to do; yet is
forced to leave him this Attribute. So Tully relates of him, speaking to those
of that Sect, Ubi igitur vestrum beatum and AEternum, quibus duobus verbis Not.
D^or. lib. 1.
significatis Deum? Where is that blessed and eternal Being of yours? which are
the two usual words whereby you describe the nature of God? And Lucretius, who
made it his design to represent to the world the doctrine of that Philosopher,
does from him give this account of the divine nature, Omnis enim per se Divum
natura necesse est
Immortali aevo summa cum pace fruatur.


It is essential to the notion of God, that he should be happy and immortal.
The Poets themselves, who amongst all others had the wildest thoughts of God,
yet do continually give him the Title of (...), and seldom mention his name
without it. And the Oath most usual amongst them, was in this form, Deos testor
immortales, I appeal to the immortal Gods. Aristotle does in several places,
make Eternity to be essential to De coelo. lib. 2.
the notion of God. And Tully asserts it impossible to conceive of God without
this perfection; Nos Deum nisi sempiternum intelligere qui possumus? How is it
possible for us to conceive of God, but as being Eternal? There never yet was
any man, that had any conception of God, who did not esteem him to be
Everlasting. To speak of a God that should be corruptible and mortal, is so
monstrous an absurdity, that a man could not, though he should purposely study
for it, devise any thing more wild and extravagant, says Plutarch. Against
Colotes.


2. There is very good reason, why this Attribute should not by the most
Skeptical Atheistical men be esteemed impossible, because they themselves are
willing to grant it to the World, or at least to matter. And if we suppose God
to be the first Cause or Mover, it will thence necessarily follow, that he must
always be, and could not have a beginning; because if he ever were only in
possibility, he could not from thence pass into actual Being, without some
precedent Cause and Mover, which is inconsistent with his Being the first
Cause. And if nothing could cause his Being, then nothing can take it away, and
consequently he must be Everlasting.

It would be a great abatement to all the other Divine perfections, if they
were finite and perishing. Besides, that it would be altogether inconsistent
with some of them, namely, his Self-existence, and necessary Existence. And
withal, it must needs take off from the obligation to duty on the Creatures
part, if they were uncertain of the continuance of his Being, by whom Rewards
and Punishments were to be distributed in the world.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Communicable Perfections of God: And first, of those which relate to
the Divine Understanding, viz. Knowledge, Wisdom, particular Providence.

BEsides those incommunicable Attributes already insisted upon, there are
others styled communicable, because they are in some lower degree, and by way
of participation, communicated to other inferior Beings. And concerning these,
there is a necessity that we should make an estimate of them, by such rules and
measures as our natures are capable of. And because the chief perfections that
we can apprehend in any reasonable Essence, must refer to one of these three
things, the Understanding, the Will, the Faculties of working; for this reason,
these Divine perfections may be reduced to these three heads. And whatever is
the most excellent of rational Beings, must excel in each of these, (i. e.),
There is no kind or degree of perfection that our imaginations are able to
conceive, but these excellencies of the Divine nature, must run out still
beyond it, so as not to be determined by any real or imaginary bounds.

I purpose to treat particularly concerning each of them, beginning with those
perfections that belong to the Divine Understanding, namely, his Knowledge,
Wisdom, and particular Providence.

1. By the Knowledge of God, I mean that perfection or faculty whereby he
understands and considers things absolutely and as they are in their own
natures, their powers, properties, differences, together with all the
circumstances belonging to them. And it is necessary to the notion of God, that
this should be ascribed to him, in the utmost perfection of it, infinitely
beyond what the most knowing and the most learned men can pretend unto.

1. His Knowledge is most deep and intimate, reaching to the very essence of
things, ours but slight and superficial.

2. His is clear and distinct, ours but confused and dark.

3. His infallible, ours doubtful and liable to mistakes.

4. His easy, and without labor and difficulty, always present and actual;
ours gotten by sore travail, and easily lost again by the defects of memory or
age.

5. His universal, extending to all objects; ours short and narrow, reaching
only to some few things, That which is wanting Eccl. 1: 15.
cannot be numbered.

He has a perfect comprehension of all things, that have been, that are, or
shall be, according to all the various relations, dependencies, circumstances,
belonging to each of them. So that this Attribute of his must be infinite and
unbounded, both extensive, with respect to the several kinds of objects which
it comprehends; and likewise intensive, as it sees every single object with a
most perfect infallible view. He does not only understand all particulars; but
he knows every particular so exactly, as if he were wholly taken up and intent
in his thoughts upon that alone. There is a vast difference betwixt the wisest
of men, and such as are grossly ignorant and sottish; and much greater betwixt
men and other creatures, the little Insects, Ants and Worms, which are no ways
fit to pass a judgment concerning humane counsels and designs. And yet these
things hold some proportion to one another, being both finite; whereas betwixt
Gods knowledge and man's, the distance is infinite.

And that this Attribute does belong to the natural notion of God, may appear,

1. From the acknowledgment of the Heathen. Tully mentions it as an usual
saying of Thales, Deos omnia cernere, God beholds all things. So Seneca, Nihil
Deo clausum, interest animis nostris, and mediis cogitationibus intervenit.
Nothing is hid from God, he is intimate to our minds, and mingles himself with
our very thoughts.

Besides, that general practice amongst them of swearing by him, and attesting
him in their most solemn compacts, does sufficiently imply their belief of his
Omniscience.

2. From natural reason. Nothing can be more manifest, than that knowledge is a
perfection, and therefore ought to be ascribed to that Being which is supposed
to have all possible perfection. It Is a perfection that we know to be in some
of the Creatures, and therefore must be much more in the Creator himself. He
that made the eye, shall be not see? He that gives to men understanding, shall
not be know?

Besides, that the denial of this perfection, would necessarily infer many
other imperfections in the Divine nature. It would destroy his Wisdom,
Providence, Dominion. Where there is no knowledge, there can be no forecast or
provision for the future, nor any kind of regular government. In brief, the
denial of this Attribute must take away his Goodness, Veracity, Justice. That
Being cannot properly be said to be good, which does act either out of
ignorance or blind necessity.

2. As Knowledge does respect things absolutely; so Wisdom does consider the
relations of things one to another, under the notion of Means and End, and of
their fitness or unfitness for the various purposes to which they are designed.

And this likewise does belong to the natural notion of God, may be evident,

1. By Testimony. The Heathen Writers are full of expressions to this purpose.
Plato asserts Wisdom to be a thing of that excellency, that it cannot properly
be Phaed.
ascribed to any, but God. It is a saying of Tully, Sapiens est Homo, and
proptereae Deus; Man is wise, and therefore much Nature. Deor.
more God. And in the same Book, Deo tribuenda est ratio recta, constansque; To
Lib. 2.
God is to be ascribed right and steady Reason; and a little after he says, it
must be such as is perfect and absolute.

Nothing more frequent in Seneca, Epictetus, Antoninus, than to persuade men to
an acquiescence under all the dispensations of Providence, because they are
ordered by the highest Wisdom.

2. By Reason. The want of wisdom is counted a very great imperfection, and one
of the worst defects belonging to men; and that which every one is most
unwilling to own, being content to be counted any thing rather than a Fool. And
therefore there is very good reason, why we should remove this imperfection
from that Being, which is supposed to have all possible perfections. And what
was said before concerning the denial of his Knowledge, must be equally true
likewise in this case, that it must necessarily destroy his other perfections,
or render them insignificant. What reason would there be for men to trust
either to his Goodness, or his Justice, or his Providence in the managing of
things, if he were not withal infinitely wise. And as for his Power, that
without wisdom, would be but a kind of a blind force, as much to be feared and
hated, as loved and trusted to.

3. The third Attribute to be considered is his particular Providence, whereby
he does superintend and take care of every individual thing in the world;
continuing them in their Beings, disposing of their operations and effects in
such a wise order, as may be most suitable to those ends and purposes for which
they are designed. This likewise does belong to the natural notion of God.
Though it must be granted, that the belief of this Attribute has met with some
opposition from several of the Philosophers, chiefly Epicurus, who in truth was
an Atheist, and out of a pretended respect to the Deity, did think it to be
below his Greatness; and for the trouble of it, inconsistent with his
Happiness, to have any regard to these Inferior things, which he therefore
imagined to be left to their own courses, whilst the Divine nature is wholly
taken up in the contemplation of it self.

Semota a nostris rebus sejunctaque long. as Lucretius speaks. But because
this might seem to argue too slight and narrow apprehensions of the Deity,
therefore others to mend the matter, have thought that he might have leisure,
and perhaps an inclination, to extend his Providence to heavenly things, but
not to earthly. Others yet more bountiful, will allow it to reach both to
Celestial and Terrestrial things: But then it must be only to the general kinds
of them, which are to be put into a natural course; not to every particular of
each kind by it self, which they conceived must needs prove too great a trouble
and distraction to his mind.

But it is evident that all these wild conceits did proceed from a
misapprehension of what kind of knowledge or wisdom does belong to the Deity,
namely, infinite and absolutely perfect, not to be limited, nor capable of any
difficulty to be put upon it, by the nature or number of things.

Any particular man, whom we know to be a person of Diligence and Sagacity, may
without any trouble to himself undertake the management of any single business.
Why, God can with far greater facility provide for all, than any single man can
for one. Though we should suppose that the particulars to be taken care of, are
infinite, yet so is his Wisdom likewise; and there is the same proportion of
infinite to infinite, as of one to one. And that this Attribute does belong to
the natural notion of God, may be made evident,

1. By the more general consent of the wise and learned Heathen Writers
(notwithstanding the dissent of some amongst them). Aristotle himself, or
whoever else was the Author of that Book de Mundo, Cap. 6.
amongst other Testimonies he gives of the Divine Providence, has this for
one, That as a Governor is to a Ship, as a Law to a City, as a General in an
Army, so is God in the world; but with this difference, that they perform their
business not without labor, care and difficulty; whereas the Divine Providence
does dispose of all and every particular thing, without the least kind of
trouble. Tully does acknowledge that the Providence of God does extend not only,
universo generi hominum, sed Not. Deor. lib. 2.
etiam singulis, to mankind in general, but likewise to every particular
person. And in another place, Deorum providentia De (...).
mundus administratur, iidemque consulunt rebus humanis, neque solum universis,
sed etiam singulis. The whole world is governed by Divine Providence, and not
only human affairs in general, but likewise every particular business. Seneca
speaking of Not. Quaest. lib. 1. Praef.
such as denied particular Providence, has this remarkable passage, Sunt qui
putant, etc. There are some who think so well of their own minds, that they are
able to take care of their own business, and to provide for other men's affairs
likewise; And yet are so absurd as to question, whether this great Universe,
whereof they themselves are but a very inconsiderable part, be managed by any
kind of Wisdom or counsel, and not left wholly to Chance. Hierocles does
acknowledge, that the Providence of Py^^^. Carm.
God does extend to contingencies. And to say no more by way of Testimony, this
may sufficiently appear, by the general practice of swearing by Him, and
praying to Him, which does sufficiently evince their belief of his particular
Providence.

2. By Reason. The denial of this Attribute will evacuate several others,
namely, his Goodness, Justice, Dominion, which must all signify nothing
without Providence in the application of them. And withal, the denial of this,
does take away the ground of Worship. The belief of a particular Providence,
being necessary unto that adoration which we owe to the Divine nature. The
Greatness and the Excellency of the Deity in it self, abstracted from any
concernment of our own, will have but a very flat and jejune operation upon our
hearts. Do we not find by experience, that men have but little regard to the
great Mogul, The Cham of Tartary, The Emperors Amyraldus.
of China and Persia, and such other Potentates of remote Countries? who though
they are Princes of great power and magnificence, able to bring many hundred
thousands of fighting-men into the field; yet they having nothing to do with
us, nor we with them, we have therefore but a small regard for them. Whereas
the next ordinary Gentleman, who is but Lord of a Manor, or Justice of Peace,
with whom we are concerned to deal, and who has any power of punishing or
rewarding, of doing us either a kindness or a discourtesie, we use to be
accordingly affected in our esteem and veneration toward him. And thus must it
be likewise for our adoration of the Divine nature, which will be either more
or less, according as we conceive our selves more or less concerned in his
Providence toward us.

CHAP. X.
Of the Perfections relating to the Divine Will; Goodness, Justice,
Faithfulness.

2. THE Perfections belonging to the Divine Will, were before reckoned to be,
1. His Goodness. 2. His Justice. 3. His Truth and Faithfulness.

1. His Goodness. By which word is sometimes signified, the notion of
Perfection in general; and sometimes it denotes Moral goodness, in opposition
to all kind of moral imperfections. Of both which kinds of Goodness, God is the
Fountain and Author, the Rule and Measure, from whom all created goodness is
derived, and by conformity to whom it is to be estimated. But that more
particular sense of this word, according to which it is now to be treated of,
does respect the inclination of the Divine Will toward his Creatures; that
propension of his, whereby he is generally disposed to procure their happiness:
in opposition to envy or malice, which delights in withholding good from
others, or doing mischief to them. And that this Attribute is natural to the
notion of God, may appear,

1. By Testimony. There being no one perfection about which the generality of
men are more agreed than about this, (excepting only the Epicureans), who
attribute nothing to God but everlasting happiness and blessedness, which yet
cannot be without Goodness. Plato styles him (...), the best Being. And his
common title amongst the Latins, was Deus Optimus Maximus. And our forefathers
in this Nation, seem to have given this very name of God from Good. That is a
known and an excellent passage in Seneca, Primus est Deorum cultus, Deos
credere; deinde reddere illis Majestatem suam, reddere bonitatem sine qua nulla
Majestas. The most fundamental thing in Religion, is to acknowledge the Being of
God, and then to demean our selves toward him suitably to the greatness of his
Majesty, and to his Goodness, without which there can be no Majesty. And in
another place, He that does not acknowledge the Goodness D^ Benefi^. lib. 4.
of the Divine nature, does not take notice of the general custom amongst men,
of praying to him in their distress, and making vows both public and private,
which would not be, unless they had this persuasion well fixed within them,
that God was ready to hear and to help them, and that he is in his own nature
propense to kindness and pity. Nec in hunc furorem omnes mortales
consensissent, alloquendi surda numina and inefficaces Deos. Nor is it
possible, that all mankind should so unanimously agree together in so great a
madness, of praying to such Deities as they did not believe could either hear
or help them.

And in another place, Quaedam sunt quae nocere non possunt, etc. Some things
De Ira. lib. 2. cap. 27.
there are of so benign and helpful a nature, so mild and beneficial, that
nothing of evil or hurt can proceed from them: Such is the Deity, who neither
can, nor will, do any thing that is mischievous; being as remote from any
action, that is injurious to others as to it self.

And elsewhere, Ecce sceleratis sol oritur, and Piratis patent maria. He
causes Ibid. lib. 4. cap. 25.
his Sun to shine upon the just and unjust, and the Seas are open to Pirates as
well as Merchants. He communicates his bounty to us in our infancy and
childhood, when we can have no sense of it: Nor does he presently withdraw and
De Benefic. 7. 31.
cease his favors toward such wretches, as make a question and doubt
concerning the Author of them: Nor is there any person so miserable and
wretched, De Benefic. lib. 4.
who has not in several respects had experience of the Divine bounty.
Hierocles asserts, that God is essentially good; not Pythag. Carm.
by accident and from external motives and considerations.

2. By Reason. It is so plain, so fundamental a notion, that Goodness must
belong to God, that I know not how to go about the proof of it. It Is the
brightest ray of the Deity, the first and clearest notion we have of God. We
may see every day many thousand visible effects of this Goodness in the world.
And there are some glimpses and weak impressions of it amongst the Creatures,
and therefore much more must it be in the Creator himself.

This is the foundation of all Worship and Religion amongst men, the reason of
their Prayers to God, and Praises of him. Without this, his other Attributes
would not afford any sufficient ground for our Love and Adoration of him.
Knowledge and Power without Goodness, would be but craft and violence. He can by
his Wisdom out-wit his creatures, and easily impose upon them; and by his Power
he could tyrannize over them, and play with their misery; but that he will not
do thus, we are assured by his Goodness. This is so essential to him, that to
imagine him without Goodness, were to imagine a God without a Deity, i. e.
without that which chiefly constitutes him what he is: Nay, it were to imagine
instead of a God, a worse Devil, and more qualified to do mischief, than any is
now in the world.

2. The second Attribute belonging to the Divine Will, is his Justice. By which
is meant not only the rectitude of his Nature in general, but more specially
his dealing with his creatures according to the desert of their deeds.

And that this Perfection is natural to the notion of God, may appear,

1. By Testimony. It is an assertion of Plato, Theatetus.
(...), God cannot be said in any kind or respect whatsoever to be unjust, but
so far as is possible to be most just. Tully lays it down as a principle, that
before men are fit to associate under government, De Legibus lib. 2.
they ought to be first convinced, that God is the supreme Governor of the
World, and does take particular notice, Qualis quisque sit, quid agat, quid in
se admittat, qua mente, qua pietate religiones colat, piorumque and impiorum
habere rationem; what kind of person every one is, what he does, and what he
thinks, how his heart stands inclined to the duties of Religion, and will deal
with every one according to his reality or hypocrisy in such matters.

And that this was the general belief amongst them, may appear by the universal
custom of attesting him by solemn Oaths; whereby they did-appeal to him as a
Righteous Judge, who would certainly revenge all falsehood and injustice.

2. From Reason. And that not so much because Justice is a perfection, as
because Injustice is so great a blemish and imperfection; especially in the
great Sovereign and Judge of the world, who having all power and authority in
his hands, can have no temptation or bias imaginable to do any thing that is
unjust.

3. His Truth and Faithfulness. By which is meant, the congruity of his words
to his intentions, especially in respect of any promises which he has made.

And that this does belong to the natural notion of God, may be made evident,

1. From Testimony. Plato asserts, all De Repub. lib. 2.
kind of lying and falsehood to be imperfections most odious both to God and
man, and that the Divine nature is absolutely free from all kind of temptation
to it; so that there can be no imaginable reason why God should falsify.

Porphyrie in the life of Pythagoras tells us, that it was one of his precepts
(...), that men should most of all endeavor after truth, because this only can
make them like God. And he adds afterward, that Truth is so great a
perfection, that if God would render himself visible to men, he would choose
Light for his Body, and Truth for his Soul.

2. From Reason. It is one of the greatest reproaches, and an argument of
baseness amongst men, to be counted a Liar: And therefore must it necessarily
be removed from that Being which is supposed to have all possible perfections,
and to be the Father of Truth, as the Devil is of Lies.

That which tempts men to falsify, is usually either the fear of some evil, or
the hope of some advantage. The reason why they break their words, is either
because of their rashness and inconsiderateness in making promises, or their
forgetfulness in not minding them, or their inconstancy in not keeping to them,
or their impotence to perform them. But now the Divine nature being infinitely
wise and allsufficient, can have no temptation to be otherwise than true and
faithful. His infinite Knowledge and Wisdom does secure him, from being deceived
himself; his Omnipotence does exempt him, from standing in need of deceiving
others; and his Goodness secures us, from the lest suspicion of any inclination
thereto.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Perfections belonging to the Powers and Faculties of Acting, viz.
Power, Dominion, Distribution of future Rewards and Punishments.

THose Perfections which are essential to the Notion of God, with respect to
his faculties of working, are likewise three fold: 1. His Power or Omnipotence.
2. His Dominion or right to govern us in this life. 3. His Distributing of
future Rewards and Punishments after this life.


1. By the Power or Omnipotence of God is meant, an ability of doing all such
things, the doing of which may argue Perfection, and which do not imply a
contradiction, either in the things themselves, or to the nature and perfection
of the Doer. Some things are repugnant to the perfection of God, either
Naturally, as that he should be sick or dye; or else Morally, as that he should
lie or deceive: Both which imply imperfection. And some other things may imply
Contradiction, either directly, or by plain consequence. And of such matters it
is not so proper to say, that he cannot do them, as that they cannot be done.
As the object of the Understanding, the Eye, and the Ear, is that which is
intelligible, visible, audible: So the object of Power, must be that which is
Possible. And as it is no prejudice to the most perfect understanding, or
sight, or hearing, that it does not understand what is not intelligible, or see
what is not visible, or hear what is not audible; so neither is it to the most
perfect Power, that it does not do what is not possible. Every kind of faculty
being necessarily determined to its own proper object.

But as for all Possible things, it is natural and necessary to apprehend of
God, that he can do whatsoever any other single thing, or a combination of all
other things put together, can perform, and infinitely more; and that without
any kind of labor or difficulty: So that his Power must be infinite
extensively, with respect to all objects; and intensively, with respect to the
acts of it, together with the manner and degrees of them.

That this kind of Omnipotence does belong to the natural notion of God, may
appear,

1. By Testimony. It is a frequent title given unto God by the Grecian
Philosophers, who style him (...), Omnipotent.

And nothing is more frequent amongst the Latins, than the titles of Jupiter
Omnipotens, Optimus-Maximus: He is generally acknowledged to be the Creator and
Governor of the World, upon which account they call him, Opifex rerum, and
Rector mundi. It is an acknowledgment of Tully, Nihil est quod Deus efficere
non De Divinat.
possit, and quidem sine ullo labor. There is nothing which God cannot do, and
that without any kind of labor.

2. By Reason. If the power of God could be limited or circumscribed, it must
either be by something of greater power, which is inconsistent with the notion
of his being supreme and sovereign: Or else by the difficulty and repugnancy
which there is in the nature of things; which could not be in the first
creation of them, because there was nothing then to make any resistance, and
since that, there is nothing but what was made by him, derived from him, and is
dependant upon him, and therefore must be subject to him. And besides, all such
things being finite, must therefore be at a vast distance of inequality from
the infinite power of God.

To which may be added, that all his other perfections would be insignificant
and ineffectual, if his power of acting, whereby they were to be communicated
to inferior natures, were not answerable to them. Mere Knowledge without Power
would be but an idle speculation; Wisdom to contrive, without Power to effect,
would be but vain and useless. What could his goodness and mercy signify to
us, if he were not able to give any proofs of it. And so likewise for his
Justice and Faithfulness, which there would be no reason to fear or to depend
upon, if Rewards and Punishments were not at his disposal, and he had not
sufficient power to perform what he promises. Nor could there be any sufficient
ground for his being acknowledged the supreme Lawgiver. For why should any one
take upon him to intermeddle in the affairs of the world, and to prescribe Laws
to others, who had no power to dispose of things, and were not able to enforce
obedience to his own Laws?

In brief, without the belief of this Attribute, there can be no foundation for
Religion, amongst men; because there could be no ground for our Faith or Trust,
no reason for our Hope or Fear.

2. Besides this absolute consideration of the Divine Power, there is likewise
a relative notion of it, respecting that Dominion and Jurisdiction which he
has over reasonable Creatures, his right to govern them in this life; to
command, prohibit what he pleases, to reward and punish as shall seem good unto
him. And that this does belong to the natural notion of God, may appear,

1. By Testimony. Plato, and Tully, and Plutarch, do often style him, the Lord
of Symposiac. lib. 8. Q. 1.
all things, the Eternal God, Father and Creator of the world, and all things
in it. Deo nihil praestantius, ab eo igitur necesse est mundum regi, says
Tully, God is the Not. Deor.
most excellent Being, and therefore is it necessary that he should be the
Governor of the world. And in another place, Deorum immortalium numine, omnia
regi gubernarique credimus. We believe that God is the Governor of all things.

To which I shall add that testimony of a Heathen King, Nebuchadnezzar, in that
Dan. 4. 34, 35.
Remonstrance which he published to all people, nations, and languages, that
dwell in all the earth, viz. that Gods dominion is an everlasting dominion, and
his kingdom is from generation to generation, and all the inhabitants of the
earth are reputed as nothing before him. And he does according to his will, in
the armies of heaven, and amongst the inhabitants of the earth, and none can
stay his hand, or say unto him, what do thou?

And as this was their declared opinion, so was their practice suitable to it;
by owning that to be their Duty which they supposed to be agreeable to his
Will, and which would render them acceptable to him.

2. By Reason. If we consider those several titles which can give right to
Dominion amongst men, we shall find them all to concur in God. Now men claim a
right of Government, either by Conquest, or Purchase, or Compact, or by having
others born in a state of subjection under them, or by their having obliged
others with any special bounty or favor; but above all these, there is another
ground of subjection, which men cannot pretend to, namely, the giving of Being
to a thing. And this must needs, above all other claims, be the greatest
imaginable right, for the government and disposal of that thing, according to
the pleasure of him that made it. It is he that made us, (says the Psalmist)
Psalm. 100. 3.
and not we our selves; and therefore we are his people, and it is reasonable
that we should be under his dominion and government.

3. The distribution of future Rewards and Punishments to men, according as
their lives and actions have been in this world.

That this likewise does belong to the natural notion of God, may appear,

1. By Testimony. From all kind of Heathen Writers. Nothing has been more
universally believed in all places and times, not only amongst the civilized
Nations, the Grecians and Romans; but likewise amongst such as were most wild
and barbarous.

All sorts and Professions of men, of any special eminence, as Princes,
Statesmen, Soldiers, Philosophers, Poets, Artists, have had great impressions
upon their minds concerning a future state. And it may be reasonably presumed
(as Tully observes), Tuscu. Q. lib. 1,
that those who do so much excel others in their parts and their virtue, are
not generally mistaken in their judgments about a natural truth.

Whereas several other opinions and Doctrines, which at some times have
prevailed, have afterward been rejected; this has still kept up in its vigor
and authority, amidst all the various revolutions of Government and Religion,
of Nations and Churches.

The most ancient Philosophers amongst the Grecians, who reduced that people to
civility, were Thales, Pherecides, Pythagoras; the last of whom was for a long
time of so great authority, that no others were counted learned but such as
were his followers. And each of these have most expressly asserted this
Doctrine. And besides there are many other testimonies to this purpose, cited
out of Plato, Empedocles, Plutarch, together with Homer, Euripides, Sophocles,
for the Grecians; the ancient Druids amongst the Gauls; the Brachmans amongst
the Indians, who are all mentioned as bearing witness to this truth, by Justin
Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus, and others.

And as for the Latins, I shall mention only two testimonies; That of Tully,
Permanere Tuse. lib. 1.
animos arbitramur, consensu nationum omnium. We do believe that the Souls of
men do abide after death, by the consent of all Nations. And that of Seneca,
Cum de animarum aeternitate Epist. 117.
disserimus, non leve momentum apud nos babet, consensus omnium, aut timentium
inferos, aut colentium. When we dispute about the immortality of the Soul, the
general consent of men, either fearing or worshipping the infernal powers, is
of no small moment with us.

That common practice amongst the Heathen, of worshipping their departed
Heroes, does suppose a general belief that their Souls did remain after death,
and were advanced unto a higher state of happiness and power.

In brief, all the attestations amongst them, concerning the Souls immortality,
are founded in their belief of the necessity of this principle, That there must
be a future state of Rewards and Punishments.

Though it must be granted, that this state as to the manner of it, is by them
described in such a Poetical way, as is more fit to amuse and make impression
upon the vulgar, than to satisfy the reason of the judicious.

They tell us, that good men shall after their death be received into the
Elysian Fields and gardens, which are always flourishing and pleasant, where
men shall be continually exercised in such kind of employments as are most
suitable to their inclinations; Some in Combats, Running, Wrestling; Others in
Philosophical Discourses; others in Dancing or Music; where such kinds of
Actions or Things, whether in themselves worthy, or merely innocent, in which
good men during the time of their lives, did find any special pleasure, should
be enjoyed by them in the utmost perfection.

And as this shall be the state of such as have been Virtuous, so those who
have been Wicked shall be thrust down into the infernal Regions, into Prisons
and dark Caverns, where Furies are appointed for their tormentors, who shall
inflict upon them various kinds of punishments, according to the nature and
quality of the Crimes of which they have been guilty.

And though such kind of enjoyments wherein these Heathen placed their future
happiness, be not altogether so sensual as the Turkish Paradise, yet are they
too earthly and gross for any rational man to rest in as his chief felicity.
And must, even to the judgment of mere reason, seem altogether despicable in
comparison to the Christians Heaven; which consists in the raising of our
natures to the highest perfection of which they are capable, in a perpetual
vision and fruition of the Supreme Good.

It must be granted, that the principal evidence for this Doctrine concerning a
future state of Rewards and Punishments, is to be derived from Scripture,
especially from the New Testament, where it is said that life and immortality is
brought 2 Timothy 1. 10.
to light by the Gospel.

Not but that there is evidence for it, both from the Old Testament, and from
the light of Nature. It Is true indeed, that Temporal things are more expressly
insisted upon in the promises and threats of the Old Testament, upon account of
the grosness and dullness of the people of the Jews, who being more immersed in
sensible things, were therefore more easy to be wrought upon by such
considerations. But that these things were not then intended for the chief
motives of Religion, may appear from the Histories concerning such Religious
persons as lived in those first ages. Amongst whom, there were but very few (if
any) that did attain to any such perfect felicity in respect of worldly things,
but that they might very well apply to themselves the words of old Jacob, and
say with him, Few and evil have the days of my life been. And if God had
intended these temporal enjoyments, for the chief felicity which that Religion
was to entitle them unto; those very histories upon record, where these
promises are mentioned, concerning the sufferings of the best men in those
times, must needs have been a disparagement and confutation to these promises
themselves.

But besides the testimonies to this purpose from Scripture and revelation, it
is not imaginable that in a point of so great moment, and so universal
consequence as this is, God should have left himself without a witness unto all
the Nations of the world; but that all men should be endowed with such natural
capacities and notions, as being improved by consideration, will afford
sufficient evidence for the belief of this great and fundamental Principle.

As for such men who live under the sense of guilt, whose interest it is that
there should be no future account; It cannot be otherwise expected from such,
but that they should be willing to disbelieve this. And from hence it is, that
some of the ancient Philosophers have employed their learning and subtilty, to
dispute themselves into some kind of doubt and uncertainty about it. And yet
the generality even of these, have been forced to acknowledge it much more
probable than the contrary. And as for the vulgar sort of people, who are
guided by the more simple dictates of nature, these have in all Ages and
Nations submitted themselves to this doctrine, and professed a firm belief of
it. And though vulgar opinion be but a very bad Topic, about such matters as
may gratify men in their ease and sensual appetites; yet in such other
opinions as are cross to their worldly interests, it may argue such things to
be from some natural impression upon their minds, which they must believe, and
cannot otherwise choose.

The Arguments I would make use of to this purpose, may be reduced to these
three general heads:

1. The suitableness of this Principle, to the most natural Notions of our
minds.

2. The necessity of it to the government of men's lives and actions in this
world.

3. The necessity of it for the vindication of Divine Providence.

1. I begin with the first, The suitableness of it to the most natural Notions
of our minds, and those kind of impressions which belong to us, as we are
reasonable Creatures. We see by experience, that all other things (so far as we
are able to judge) Minerals, Plants, Beasts, etc. are naturally endowed with
such principles as are most fit to promote the perfection of their natures, in
their several kinds. And therefore it is by no means credible, that Mankind
only, the most excellent of all other Creatures in this visible world, for the
service of whom so many other things seem to be designed, should have such kind
of principles interwoven in his very nature, as do contain in them mere cheats
and delusions. And therefore whatsoever those things are, which the generality
of mankind, especially the most wise and the most considerate part of them, do
agree in, ought to be allowed for highly credible; otherwise it must follow,
that we are framed with such kind of Faculties, as in our most cautious
exercise of them, are more likely to seduce us and expose us to error, than to
direct and lead us to the truth.

But I shall endeavor to manifest this more particularly, by these three
considerations.

1. This principle is most suitable to the general apprehensions of mankind,
concerning the nature of good and evil.

2. To those natural hopes and expectations which the generality of good men
have, concerning a state of future happiness.

3. To those natural fears and expectations which the generality of wicked men
are possessed with, concerning a future state of punishment and misery.

1. This Principle is most suitable to the general apprehensions of Mankind,
concerning the nature of good and evil. All men heretofore have agreed, that
there is such a thing as the Law of Nature, whereby things are distinguished
into good and bad; according to which, the actions of men are determined to be
either virtuous or vicious. And as the one of these does in the essence of it
imply comeliness and reward, so does the other denote turpitude and punishment;
these things being implied in the very definitions of virtue and vice. And from
hence it will follow, That as there is some superior power who has put this
Law into our natures, so will he take care to enforce the observance of it, by
rewarding and punishing men accordingly. This being implied in the nature of a
Law.

If there be nothing in the naked essence of things that makes them to differ,
but what does merely arise from Custom and positive Laws; why then Custom and
Law would be able to render it a very virtuous and commendable thing, for a man
to be ungrateful, a breaker of compacts, a false witness, a perjured person;
which is so monstrous a position, that the common reason of mankind will abhor
it, upon the first proposal. Nothing is more obvious, than that there is an
universal desire amongst men, of seeming honest: The most impudent and
profligate wretch being loath to be esteemed what really he is. The very sin of
hypocrisy, so general amongst men, does give a large testimony to the beauty
of goodness, and the deformity of vice. Nor is there any account to be given,
why there should be impressed upon the nature of men such a value for the one,
and dislike for the other, if there were not in the things themselves,
something suitable to those contrary affections.

We see by experience, that there is such a kind of rest and acquiescence in
the mind, upon the discovery of truth, and the doing of virtuous actions, as
belongs to natural bodies when they are in their proper places; which may argue
these things to have some peculiar suitableness to the soul of man, and that
the opposites to them do offer violence to some natural principle belonging to
it.

2. This principle is most suitable to those natural hopes and expectations,
which the generality of good men have concerning a state of future happiness.
From whence does arise that confidence and courage, whereby those of meanest
quality and abilities (if otherwise virtuous persons) can support themselves in
their sufferings for that which is good; which does necessarily suppos^ in them
a strong and even a natural belief and persuasion of such a future state,
wherein their sufferings shall be considered and rewarded.

Besides that, there is a strong aversion amongst men, against a dark state of
annihilation, which no man can think of without great regret of mind: And
likewise a natural desire in all men after a state of happiness and perfection.
And no natural desire is in vain. All other things have somewhat to satisfy
their natural appetites. And if we consider the utter impossibility of
attaining to any such condition in this life, this will render it highly
credible, that there must be another state wherein this happiness is
attainable; otherwise mankind must fail of his chief end, being by a natural
principle most strongly inclined to such a state of happiness as he can never
attain to; as if he were purposely framed to be tormented betwixt these two
passions, Desire and Despair; an earnest propension after happiness, and an
utter incapacity of ever enjoying it; as if nature it self, whereby all other
things are disposed to their perfection, did serve only in mankind to make them
miserable. And which is yet more considerable, the better and the wiser any man
is, the more earnest desires and hopes has he after such a state of happiness.
And if there be no such thing, not only Nature, but Virtue likewise must
contribute to make men miserable; than which, nothing can seem more
unreasonable, to those who believe a just and a wise providence.

3. This principle is most suitable to those fears and expectations which the
generality of wicked men are possessed with, concerning a future state of
misery. Witness those natural suggestions of conscience in the worst of men,
that upon any wicked actions (though never so private) are oftentimes startling
of them, with the apprehensions of another Judicature and Tribunal, before
which they shall be called to an account for the closest sins. All that secret
regret, and those inward smitings, Laniatus and Ictus, which are so often felt
in the minds of men, upon the commission of any great sin, do argue some common
intimations, even in the light of Nature, of another Judgment after this life,
wherein they shall be accountable for such actions as men do not punish or take
notice of.

And these natural fears do usually seize upon all kind of men promiscuously:
Even those who are most potent, who by their own Will can give Laws to Nations,
and command mighty Armies; yet cannot they avoid these checks and lashes of
conscience, but that they will seize upon them, and shake them as well as the
poorest meanest Subject. Nor can such as are most obstinately wicked, who with
their utmost study and endeavor, apply themselves to the suppressing and
disbelief of these notions, so wholly stifle them, but that they will be
continually rising up in their minds and pursuing of them.

Now as there is no man whatsoever, that is wholly freed from these fears, of
future misery after death; so there is no Creature below Man, that has any
fears of this kind. And if there be no real ground for this, then must it
follow, That he who framed all his other Works with such an excellent
congruity, did yet so contrive the nature of Man, the most noble amongst them,
as to prove a needless torment and burden to it self.

If it be said, That these notions may proceed from such principles as men have
derived from Institution and the teaching of others, but that they do not imply
a necessity of any such natural impressions.

To this it may be answered, That it is sufficient to denominate them Natural
notions, if they have such a suitableness to the minds of men, as makes them to
be generally owned by all those who apply their thoughts to the consideration
of them: And that they have such a natural suitableness, may appear, because
Institution cannot so easily eradicate these notions, as it can fix them. Now
if the mere teaching of others were it self sufficient to impress these
notions, without any such peculiar congruity in the things themselves, it would
be as sufficient to deface them again: Especially considering the advantage on
this side, from that natural repugnancy which we have to any thing which brings
disquiet to our minds. And nothing is more troublesome in this kind, than the
fear which follows upon guilt.

But now, though there have been several men of no mean abilities, in several
Ages, who have made it their business to root out of the minds of men all such
troublesome notions about a future state, endeavoring to persuade themselves
and others, That as there was a time before they were born into the world, when
they were not; so at their dying or going out of it, they shall exist no more.
And yet, though it be their interest to believe this, though they make it their
study and business to persuade themselves and others of it; it may reasonably
be doubted, whether ever yet there has been so much as one person, that has
hereby become absolutely free from these fears: But for the most part, those
who would have them esteemed vain and imaginary, without any foundation in
nature, these are the persons who are most assaulted with them. Hi sunt qui
trepidant, and ad omnia fulgura pallent.


So powerful and unconquerable are these impressions, and therefore Natural.

2. The second Reason I proposed to speak to, was from the necessity of this
Principle, to the right government of men's lives and actions in this world, and
the preserving of society amongst them.

Nothing can be more evident, than that humane Nature is so framed, as not to
be regulated and kept within due bounds, without Laws; and Laws must be
insignificant, without the sanction of Rewards and Punishments, whereby men may
be induced to the observance of them: Now the temporal Rewards and Punishments
of this life, cannot be sufficient to this end; and therefore there is a
necessity, that there should be another future state of happiness and misery.

All the Rewards and Punishments of this life are to be expected, either from
the Civil Magistrate, who by virtue of his Place and Calling is obliged to the
duty of distributive Justice: Or else from Divine Providence, according to that
most usual course which we find by experience to be observed by him, in his
dispensation of these temporal things. Now neither of these can afford
sufficient motives, for the government of men's lives and actions.

1. Not all that may be expected from the Civil Magistrates, because there may
be many good and evil actions which they cannot take notice of; and they can
reward and punish only such things, as come under their cognizance. And if this
were the only restraint upon men, it could be no hinderance from any such
mischiefs or villainies which men had the opportunity of committing secretly.
Nor would it extend to those, who had power and strength enough to defend
themselves from the Law, and escape the penalty of it, but that such might
without any kind of check or fear follow the inclinations of their own
appetites: Nor would it afford any remedy in the case of such wicked
Magistrates as should invert the order of their institution, proving terrors to
well-doers, and encouragers to those that do ill.

2. Not all that may be expected from common Providence: For though it should
be granted, that according to the most usual and general course of things, both
virtuous and vicious actions are rewarded and punished in this life; yet there
may be many particular cases, which this motive would not reach unto; namely,
all such cases where a man's Reason shall inform him, that there is far greater
probability of safety and advantage by committing a sin, than can be reasonably
expected (according to his experience of the usual course of things in the
world) by doing his duty. Suppose the case of the three Children, or of any
other called to Martyrdom, who may be threatened with torments and death, unless
they will blaspheme God and renounce their Religion; if it appear to them very
probable (suppose a hundred to one), that upon their refusal, their persecutors
will really execute what they threaten: And if on the other side, it prove very
improbable (suppose ten thousand to one) that they shall be delivered by a
Miracle: In such cases, it is not to be expected, that the consideration of the
ordinary course of Providence in the dispensation of Rewards and Punishments,
should be sufficient to restrain a man from any kind of Blasphemy or Villainy
whatsoever.

But the thing I am speaking to, will more fully appear, by consideration of
those horrid mischiefs of all kinds, that would most naturally follow from the
denial of this Doctrine.

If there be no such thing to be expected as happiness or misery hereafter, why
then the only business that men are to take care of, is their present
well-being in this World. There being nothing to be counted either good or bad,
but in order to these: Those things which we conceive to be conducible to it,
being the only duties; and all other things that are cross to it, being the
only sins. And therefore whatever a man's appetite shall incline him to, he
ought not to deny himself in it (be the thing what it will) so he can have it,
or do it, without probable danger.

Suppose it be matter of gain or prosit he is disposed to; if he can cheat or
steal securely, this will be so far from being a fault, that it is plainly his
duty, that is, reasonable for him to do. Because it is a proper means to
promote his chief end.

And so for other cases of anger, hatred, revenge, etc. According to this
principle a man must take the first opportunity of satisfying these passions,
by doing any kind of mischief to the person he is offended with; whether by
false accusation and perjury, or (if need be) by poisoning or stabbing of him;
provided he can do these things so, as to escape the suspicion of others, and
humane penalties.

Now let any man judge, what Bears, and Wolves, and Devils, men would prove to
one another, if every thing should be not only lawful, but a duty, whereby they
might gratify their impetuous lusts; if they might either perjure themselves,
or steal, or murder, as often as they could do it safely, and get any advantage
by it.

But these things are so very obvious and undeniable, that the most profane
Atheistical persons do own the truth of them. And upon this they are willing to
acknowledge, That Religion and the belief of another life, is a very politic
invention, and needful for the well-governing of the world, and for the keeping
of men in awe, from the doing any secret mischiefs. Which (by the way) is a
concession of no small advantage to the honor of Religion, considering that it
proceeds from the greatest professed enemies to it. Whereby they grant, that it
is fit these things should be true, if they are not; or at least, that it is
fit that the generality of men should believe them to be true. And though
themselves pretend to believe otherwise, yet are they not so far out of their
wits, as to be willing that those with whom they converse, their Wives, and
Children, and Servants, should be of the same opinion with them; because then
they could have no reason to expect any safety amongst them. What security
could any man have of his Estate, or Honor, or Life, if such with whom he is
most familiar and intimate, might think themselves at liberty to do all the
secret mischiefs to them which they had the opportunity to commit?

But there is one thing more, which those who profess to disbelieve this
principle, should do well to consider; and that is this, That there is no
imaginable reason, why (amongst those that know them) they should pretend to
any kind of honesty or conscience, because they are wholly destitute of all
such motives as may be sufficient to oblige them to any thing of this nature:
But according to them, that which is called Virtue and Religion must be one of
the most silly and useless things in the world.

As for the principle of Honor, which some imagine may supply the room of
Conscience. This relates only to external reputation, and the esteem which we
have amongst others; and therefore can be of no influence, to restrain men from
doing any secret mischief.

From what has been said it will follow, That those who have any regard to
their own safety, ought to abandon all kind of society with such pernicious
persons, who according to their own principles, must take all opportunities of
doing any mischief to others, which they are able to effect with any advantage
to themselves.

Now if this be so (as I have proved), that the nature of man is so framed, as
not to be effectually persuaded and wrought upon, without the consideration of
such a future state; if it be necessary, to add everlasting motives, as the
Sanctions of that Law, by which the Humane Nature is to be governed; this must
render it highly credible, that there is such a state, because it must needs be
very unworthy of God, to conceive of him, that he has contrived the nature of
one of his best and most noble Creatures after such a manner, as to make it
incapable of being governed without falsehood and deceit. The necessity of this
principle to the government of men's lives and actions, is the ground of that
saying amongst the Rabbis, That Paradise and Hell are two of the seven Pillars
upon which God is said to have founded the World. As if it could not be upheld
without such a support.

3. The third and last Argument, I proposed to speak to, was from the necessity
of this principle to the vindication of Divine Providence. Nothing is more
universally acknowledged, than that God is Good and Just; That well-doing shall
be rewarded, and evil actions punished by him. And yet we see, that his
dispensations in this life are many times promiscuous and uncertain, so that a
man cannot judge of love or hatred, by all that is before him. The worst of men
are sometimes in the best condition, If in this life only we had hope, we
should be of all men 1 Cor. 15. 19.
most miserable, says the Apostle, speaking concerning those primitive times
of persecution, when the better any man was, the more was he exposed to
suffering. Nor is it thus only in the case of particular persons, or in the
success of private differences betwixt men and men; but likewise for some of
those decisions that are made by the Sword, in the public contests of Princes
and Nations; these may sometimes be so stated, as to the event of them, as may
in the judgment of wise and good men seem unequal, and not according to justice
and the right of the cause.

Now the greater uncertainty there is as to the present affairs of this world,
by so much greater is the certainty of a future Judgment. It is true indeed,
that virtue may be said to be a reward to it self, and vice a punishment; in
regard of that satisfaction, or that regret of mind which does accompany such
things. But these are not such kind of rewards and punishments, as Lawgivers
are to take care of; by which they are to excite those under the government, to
overcome the labors and difficulties that they may sometimes meet with in
doing their duty, and to restrain others from wicked actions.

It would seem a wild extravagant Law, which should propose by way of Reward,
that those who had upon account of Religion or Virtue, undergone any great
dangers and troubles, should for their reward be put again to undergo more and
greater. That they who had been guilty of Robbery, should by way of punishment
be obliged to commit Murder.

Besides those Moral advantages or mischiefs, which are properly the effects of
Virtue and Vice; there is likewise some Physical Good or Evil, that may be
expected as the reward and punishment of them.

Would it become a just Governor, to permit his rebellious Subjects, those who
contemn his Laws, to persecute such as were obedient to him, with all kind of
scorn and violence, stripes, imprisonment, torments, and death it self; and
that for this very reason, because they were willing to do their duties, and to
observe the Laws? Would it be a reasonable excuse for such a Ruler to say, That
one of these had received sufficient, punishment in the very commission of such
crimes; and that the other had a sufficient reward, both in the doing of his
duty, and in his suffering for it? What could be more inconsistent with the
rules of Justice, and the wise ends of Government?

What could be a greater disparagement to Divine Providence, than to permit the
calamities and sufferings which good men undergo in this world, many times upon
the account of Religion, to pass unrewarded; and the many mischiefs and
prophanations, which wicked men take the advantage of committing by their
greatness and prosperity in this world, to go unpunished?

What great glory would it be, to preside over this material World, Stars and
Meteors, Sea and Land, Plants and Beasts, to put these things into such a
regular course as may be suitable to their natures, and the operations for
which they are designed; and in the mean space to have no proportionable
regard, either for those that reverence the Deity, or those who contemn him?

It Is very well said to this purpose by a late Author, That not to conduct the
course Amyraldus.
of Nature in a due manner, might speak some defect of Wisdom in God; but not
to compensate Virtue and Vice, besides the defect of Wisdom in not adjusting
things suitably to their qualifications, but crosly coupling Prosperity with
Vice, and Misery with Virtue, would argue too great a defect of Goodness and of
Justice. And perhaps it would not be less expedient (says he) with Epicurus,
to deny all Providence, than to ascribe to it such defects: It being less
unworthy of the Divine Nature, to neglect the Universe altogether, than to
administer humane affairs with so much injustice and irregularity.

And therefore it is necessary for the vindication of Divine Providence, that
there should be a future state, and Day of Accounts, wherein every man shall be
forced to acknowledge, that verily there is a reward for the righteous,
doubtless Psa. 58. 11
there is a God that judges the earth.

CHAP. XII.
Concerning the Duties of Religion naturally flowing from the consideration of
the Divine Nature and Perfections: And first, of Adoration and Worship.

HAving dispatched the two first things I proposed as the principal Ingredients
to a state of Religion, namely, 1. A belief and an acknowledgment of the Divine
Nature and Existence. 2. Due apprehensions of his Excellencies and Perfections.
I proceed now to the third, namely, Suitable affections and demeanor toward
him. Which must naturally follow from the former. The serious belief and
consideration of those incomparable Excellencies which there are in the Divine
Nature, ought not to be terminated in mere speculation, but must derive an
influence upon the heart and affections; it being natural for men to proportion
their esteem of things, according to that worth and dignity which they
apprehend to be in them. And therefore that Being which has in it all possible
Perfections, may justly challenge all possible esteem and veneration, as due to
it.

In the enumerating of those several affections and duties, I shall observe the
same method which I have formerly used in reckoning up the Attributes
themselves.

1. Gods incommunicable Excellencies should dispose our minds to Adoration and
Worship.

2. The communicable Attributes, which belong to the Divine

1. Understanding, namely, his infinite Knowledge and Wisdom, and his particular
Providence, should work in us, Faith, Affiance, Hope, Confidence.

2. Will, namely, his Goodness, Justice, Faithfulness, are naturally apt to
excite in us, Love, Desire, Zeal.

3. Eaculties of Acting, namely, his Power, which should produce in us
Reverence and Fear: His Dominion over us, and distributing of future Rewards
and Punishments, which calls for our Obedience, both Active and Passive.

Though I cannot say, that each of these Affections and Duties are so to be
restrained to those respective Attributes unto which I have ascribed them, but
that the consideration of any of the rest, may have a proper influence to
dispose men to any, or to all of them; yet that there is some more peculiar
reference and correspondence betwixt these Attributes and these Affections and
Duties, as they are here conjoined, I shall endeavor to show in treating
concerning each of them.

1. Those incommunicable and superlative Excellencies of the Divine Nature,
whereby God does infinitely transcend all other Beings, are naturally apt to
work in us, a high esteem and admiration of him; a readiness of mind, upon all
occasions, to express our Adoration and Worship toward him.

That Worship is due to God, has been universally acknowledged, in all Ages
and Nations. And Aristotle asserts, that whosoever Topic. 1. 9.
does doubt of, or deny this, ought not to be dealt with by Arguments, but by
Punishments.

That it is the Excellency of any Being which is the proper ground of the
worship we pay to it, has been generally acknowledged. The Philosophers have
owned this. So Tully, Praestans Deorum natura, Not. Deor. lib. 1.
etc. The nature of God may justly challenge the worship of men, because of its
superlative Excellency, Blessedness, Eternity. For whatsoever excels, has upon
that account a veneration due to it. So Seneca, Deus colitur propter Majestatem
eximiam, singularemque naturam. God is therefore worshipped, because of his
excellent Majesty and incomparable Nature. And to this the Scripture likewise
does attest. All nations Psalm. 89. 9, 10;
whom thou have made, shall come and worship before thee, and shall glorify
thy name, for thou art great, and do wondrous things, thou art God alone.
And again, Psalm. 95. 3, having said, For the Lord is a great God, and a great
King above all Gods, it is presently subjoined, O come let us worship, and fall
down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker. And yet again, Psalm. 97. 7. Worship
him all ye gods: And the reason is given presently after, For thou Lord art
high above all the earth, thou art exalted far above all gods.

By Worship, I mean in the general, the highest esteem and admiration of him in
our minds, whereby we do continually bow down our souls before him, in the
acknowledgment of his Excellencies; depending upon him, invoking of him in our
necessities, making our acknowledgments to him, as being the Author of all the
mercies we enjoy; together with such external services, as may be fit to
testify unto others that inward veneration which we have for him, whether by
the humblest gestures, of prostration or bowing our selves before him,
kneeling, lifting up our hands and eyes unto him; being always ready to speak
good of his Name, to make his praise glorious. Which must be accompanied with a
hearty zeal and indignation, against all such things as reflect dishonor upon
him.

Besides this general habit of Worship, with which our minds should always be
possessed, there are likewise some particular actions and services, which by
the light of Nature, and the consent of Nations have been judged proper to
express our honoring of him: As the setting apart of particular Persons, and
Places, and Times, peculiarly for his Worship.

It has been the general practice of all Nations, to have amongst them a
distinct calling of men, set apart to officiate in Sacris, to assist the people
in their public Worship, to instruct them in their duties, and to excite them
to the performance of them. Which being a work of so public usefulness and
general necessity, common reason will assure us, that the best way of providing
for it, is by such persons as are bred up to it, and set apart for it. Such men
are like to have the greatest skill, who have made it their business and their
greatest care, and who are obliged to it by way of Office.

It is natural for men who are joined together in Civil Societies, to join
likewise in Religious Worship. And in order to this, it is necessary that there
should be public Places, and solemn Times set apart for such Assemblies. Which
has accordingly been the practice of all civilized Nations. And in the manner
of performing their public Worship, it was still required to be done with all
imaginable submission and reverence. This the Stoic commends, and cites
Aristotle for it; Egregie Sen. Not. Qu. lib. 7. cap. 30.
Aristoteles ait, nunquam nos verecundiores esse debere, quam cum de Diis
agitur, etc. Men are never more concerned to be humble and modest, than when
they have to do about God. We should enter the Temples, with an humble and
composed demeanor. When we approach to sacrifice, it should be with all
imaginable expressions of reverence and modesty, in our countenance and
carriage. As for the chief matter and substance of natural Worship, unto which
the light of Reason will direct, I know no other, than invoking of the Deity,
returning thanks to him, and inquiring after his Will. Those things which are
superadded to these, in that most acceptable way of Worship revealed in the
Gospel, are not proper to be discoursed of here, because they depend merely
upon revelation.

It is true indeed, that all Nations pretending to any Religion, from the most
ancient times to which any record does extend, have agreed in the way of
worship by Sacrifice. And from this general practice, there may seem to be some
ground to infer, this way of worship to have been directed by the light of
Nature. But when it is well considered, what little ground there is to persuade
a man, left to his own free reason, that God should be pleased with the killing
and burning of Beasts, or with the destroying of such things by Fire of which
better use might be made, if they were disposed of some other way; I say, when
it is well considered, what little reason there is to induce such a man to
believe, that the killing or burning of Beasts or Birds, or any other thing
useful to mankind, should of it self be a proper and natural means to testify
our subjection to God, or to be used by way of expiation from sin; It will
rather appear probable, that the original of this practice was from
Institution, and that our first Parents were by particular revelation
instructed in this way of worship, from whom it was delivered down to their
successive Generations by verbal Tradition; and by this means was continued in
those Families, who departed from the Church, and proved Heathen in the first
Ages of the world; amongst whom this Tradition was in course of time, for want
of care and frequent renewals, corrupted with many humane superinducements,
according to the genius or interests of several times, or Nations.

As for the Reasons, why God was pleased to institute to his own people this
way of worship, there are these two things may be suggested.

1. Sacrifices had a typical reference unto that great design which was to be
accomplished in the fullness of time, by the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross,
which is at large explained and applied in several parts of the New Testament,
particularly in the Epistle to the Hebrews, from whence many strong arguments
may now be deduced, for confirmation of the truth of the Gospel.

2. Because this way of worship was most suitable to those Ages; the Providence
of God having purposely adapted his own institutions of worship, unto the
abilities and capacities of men in several times. Discovering himself to his
people in diverse Heb. 1. 1.
manners, according to sundry times. And therefore in those first and ruder
Ages of the world, when people were more generally immersed in sensible things,
and stood in need of somewhat to raise and fix their imaginations, God was
pleased to amuse them with external pomp and solemnities, and to employ that
time of their nonage, about these plainer rudiments or elements of the world.
But when they Gal. 4. 3.
were grown up from this nonage, when the generality of men became more
notional, better able to consider and abstract things; when by the spreading of
the Roman Conquests, which extended to the most considerable parts of the
world, they had likewise spread their Arts and Civilities, reducing the
Provinces which came under their power, from that savageness and barbarism with
which they had formerly been overspread, to the love and desire of all peaceful
Arts, and the study of all useful knowledge, whereby the minds of men were
rendered more rational and inquisitive than before they had been, and
consequently better prepared for the reception of the Christian Religion: In
this fullness of time (as the Scripture styles it) did the Providence of God
think fit to introduce Christian Religion, a more rational and spiritual way of
worship, whose Precepts are most agreeable to the purest and sublimest reason;
consisting chiefly in a regulation of the mind and spirit, and such kind of
practices as may promote the good of humane society, and most effectually
conduce to the perfecting of our natures, and the rendering of them happy.

And that the most rational kind of worship does consist in such kind of
qualifications and services, besides the attestation of several Scriptures to
this purpose, may likewise be made evident by the acknowledgment of the wisest
Heathens. Eusebius quotes Menander a Greek Prepar. Evang. lib. 14 cap. 13.
Poet to this purpose, (sometimes cited by St. Paul), Men do in vain, says he,
endeavor to make the Gods propitious by their costly Sacrifices; if they would
have the Divine favor, let them love and adore God in their hearts, be just
and holy in their conversations. And in another place, he cites the like
sayings out of Porphyrie, in his Book de Sacrificiis, lib. 4. cap: 13.
and Apollonius, etc.

So Maximus Tyrius, speaking concerning Dissert. 38.
those diverse Solemnities wherewith several Nations did honor their Gods,
says, He would be loath, by denying any of these, to derogate from the honor
of the Deity; but men should chiefly labor to have him in their minds, (...),
they should principally endeavor to know him, and to love him.

So Seneca, having discoursed concerning Epist. 95.
those external adorations and ceremonies, whereby several men were wont to
express their devotion, he says, Humana ambitio iftis capitur officiis, Deum
colit qui novit; Such formalities may be acceptable to the ambition of men, but
he only can truly worship God who knows him. The first step (says he) unto
Divine worship, is to believe the Being of God, and then to demean our selves
toward him suitably to the greatness of his Majesty. Vis Deos propitiare,
bonus esto; satis illos coluit quisquis imitatus est. Would you render him
propitious to you, endeavor to be good; that man only does truly worship him,
who labors to be like him. So Tully, Cultus antem Deorum De Not. Deorum, lib.
2.
est optimus, idemque castissimus, atque sanctissimus, plenissimusque pietatis,
ut eos semper pura, integra, incorrupta mente and voce veneremur.

To which I shall only add that saying of Persius, where he prefers an honest
Satyr. 2.
and a virtuous mind, above all other costly Sacrifices and Offerings.
Compositum jus fasque animi, sanctosque recessus
Mentis, and incoctum generoso pectus honesto,
Haec cedo, ut admoveam templis, and far litabo.


If true worship did consist only in costly Sacrifices, then such alone as were
rich, could be religious; whereas God is more ready to accept the meanest
Offering, from a person of a just and worthy and generous mind, who does truly
love and devote himself to him, than of the most pompous costly Sacrifices from
others.

And thus have I done treating of those kind of affections, which naturally
follow from due apprehensions of the incommunicable Attributes belonging to the
Divine nature, namely, adoration and worship.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Faith or Affiance in God.

I Proceed to those other affections whereby we are to give unto God (so far as
Creatures are capable) that honor which is due to those communicable
perfections belonging to the Divine Understanding, Will, Faculties of Acting,
namely, his Wisdom, Goodness, Power, Dominion, and superiority over us, and his
distribution of future Rewards and Punishments; which should respectively
excite in us, Affiance, Love, Reverence, and Obedience, both active and
passive. And though each of these graces, have sufficient foundation in every
one of the Divine excellencies promiscuously, yet there is some more peculiar
reference and correspondence amongst them, according to this order.

I purpose to speak to each of them, severally and briefly.

First, Concerning Affiance; by which I mean an acquiescence of the mind,
whereby it is supported against all unnecessary doubts and fears, upon account
of the Divine All Sufficiency in general, with more special respect to his
Knowledge and Wisdom and Providence, whereby he does take notice of our
conditions, and is able to order all things for the best, and does not permit
any thing to befall us without his knowledge of it, and being concerned for it.
This Grace, according to its different relations, is usually distinguished into
these three branches: 1. As it respects an act of the judgment in assenting to
all divine truths, whether discoverable by Reason or by Revelation, so it is
styled Faith. 2. As it imports a resting of the will and affections in the
Divine goodness, whether discovered to us by the light of nature or by
revelation, so it is styled Trust; and according to the greater measure or
degree of it, Confidence and Plerophory. So the Heathen, who have no
revelation, can support themselves in their sufferings for that which is good,
with the consideration that God will take care of them. 3. As it relates to the
expectation and desire after some future good which we stand in need of, or the
escaping of some evil we are obnoxious unto, so it is styled Hope. But I shall
treat of these promiscuously, because they agree in the general nature of
Affiance. And how reasonable and proper this affiance in God is, will appear
from these considerations.

1. It Is necessary to our present state in this world, that there should be
something for us, to lean upon, and have recourse unto, as our support and
refuge.

2. God alone is an all-sufficient stay, upon which the mind of man can
securely repose it self in every condition.

1. It Is necessary to our present state in this world, that there should be
something for us to lean upon, and have recourse unto, as our support and
refuge. This the ancient Poets have signified in their fable of Pandora's Box,
which when Epimetheus had opened, and saw all manner of evils flying out of it,
he suddenly closed it again, and so kept in Hope at the bottom of it, as being
the only remedy left to mankind, against all those evils to which they are
obnoxious. Every man at his best estate, is but a feeble infirm creature; what
from the impotence of his mind, and the disorder of his passions from within;
together with the troubles and difficulties that he shall meet withal from
without; the great obscurity which there is in the nature of things, that
uncertainty which attends the issues and events of them; the mutability of all
humane affairs, which cannot possibly be secured by all the imaginable wisdom
and foresight which men are capable of. From all which it sufficiently appears,
that faith and hope and trust are altogether necessary to the state of men in
this world; and that they must always be in an unsafe, unquiet condition,
unless they have somewhat to support and relieve them in their exigences. It Is
observed of the Hopp, and other such climbing Plants, which are not of strength
enough to bear up themselves, that they will by natural instinct lean toward
and clasp about any thing that is next, which may help to bear them up; and in
the want of a Tree or a Pole, which is their proper support, they will wind
about a Thistle or a Nettle, or any other Weed, though in the issue it will
help to choke and destroy the growth of them, instead of furthering it. The
application is easy, All flesh is grass, and the Isa. 40. 6.
glory thereof, as the flower of the field, of a fading impotent condition,
standing in need of something without it self for its protection and support.
And a mistake in the choice of such helps, may sometimes prove fatal. Our
conditions in this world are often in Scripture represented by a state of
warfare, wherein the virtues of Faith and Hope are said to be our Brestplate, 1
These. 5. 8. Ephesians. 6. 17.
our Shield, and our Helmet, the chief defensive arms, whereby we are to be
guarded against all assaults. And sometimes by a state traveling by Sea,
wherein Hope is our Anchor, that which must fix and keep us steady in the midst
of all Heb. 6. 19.
storms.

2. God alone is an all-sufficient stay, upon which the mind of man can
securely repose it self in every condition. For which reason he is in the
Scripture phrase styled the Hope of Israel, the confidence of all the ends of
the earth, and of such as Psalm. 65. 5. Prove. 3. 26. Romans 15. 13.
are afar off upon the Sea, the God of Hope. Which Titles he has been pleased
to assume unto himself, to teach us this lesson, that our Faith and Hope should
be in 1 Pet. 1. 21.
God.

The principal conditions requisite in that person, who is fit to be a proper
object of our confidence are these four:

1. Perfect knowledge and wisdom, to understand our conditions, and what may be
the most proper helps and remedies for them.

2. Unquestionable goodness, love, faithfulness, to be concerned for us, and to
take care of us.

3. Sufficient power, to relieve us in every condition.

4. Everlastingness, that may reach to us and our posterity to all generations.
All which are only to be found in God. From whence it will appear, that as he
is the only proper object of our trust, so by not-trusting in him, we do deny
to him the honor which is due to these Divine excellencies, and consequently
are deficient in one of the chief parts of Religion.

1. He alone has perfect knowledge and wisdom to understand our conditions, and
what may be the most proper remedy for them. His understanding is infinite. Our
Psalm. 147. 5.
most secret thoughts and inward groanings are not hid from him. He knows our
diseases, and what Physic is fittest for us, the best means of help, and the
most fitting season to apply those means. He is infinitely wise to contrive
such ways of safety and deliverance, as will surmount all those difficulties
and perplexities which would put humane wisdom to a loss. He does sometimes
accomplish his ends without any visible means; filling men's bellies Psa. 17. 14.
with his hid treasure, making them to thrive and prosper in the world, by such
secret ways as men understand not. And sometimes he does blast the most likely
means, so that the battle is not to the Eccles. 9. 11.
strong, nor yet bread to the wise, nor riches to men of understanding, nor yet
favor to men of skill; but it may happen to them, as the Prophet speaks, that
though they sow much, yet they bring in but little, Hag. 1. 6.
they eat and have not enough, they drink but are not filled, they are clothed
but not warm, earn wages but put it into a bag with holes. And therefore upon
this account, there is very good reason why God should be the object of our
confidence.

2. He is likewise infinite as to his Goodness, Love, Truth, Faithfulness,
whereby he is concerned for our welfare, and does take care for us. The nearest
and dearest relations which we have in the world, in whom we have most reason
to be confident, Our father and mother may forsake Psa. 27. 10.
us: And as for such whom we have obliged by all imaginable kindness, they may
deal deceitfully with us, and prove like winter brooks, which in wet seasons,
Job 6. 15.
when there is no need of them, will run with a torrent, but are quite vanished
in a time of drought. Whilst we are in a prosperous condition they will be
forward to apply themselves to us, with great professions of kindness and zeal;
but if our condition prove any way declining, they presently fall off and
become strangers, forgetting and renouncing all obligations of friendship and
gratitude, rather than run the least hazard or trouble to do us a kindness.
That man has had but little experience in the world, to whom this is not very
evident. But now the mercy and goodness of God is over all his works, and Psalm.
68. 5.
more especially extended to such as are in a state of misery, the fatherless
and 145. 14.
widows, the prisoners, the poor, and the stranger. He is the helper of the
friendless. 146. 9. Psalm. 10. 14.
That which amongst men is usually the chief occasion to take off their
affection and kindness, namely, misery and affliction, is a principal argument
to entitle us to the favor of God, and therefore is frequently made use of by
good men in H. Scripture to that purpose. O go not far from me, for trouble is
nigh at hand, Psalm. 22. 11.
and there is none to help me; I am in misery, O hear me speedily.

3. He is of infinite Power, for our relief and supply in every condition;
being able to do whatsoever he pleases both in heaven and in earth, and in the
sea, and Psalm 135. 6.
in all deep places. He is the first cause of every thing, both as to its being
and operation. We depend wholly upon his power, not only for the issues and
events of things, but likewise for the means. And therefore it is in Scripture
made an argument why we should not trust in riches, or in any worldly thing,
because power belongs to God. And it is elsewhere urged for a Psa. 62. 10, 11.
reason why we should trust in the Lord for ever, because in the Lord Jehovah
is everlasting strength. And upon this consideration Isa. 26. 4.
Abraham is said to have hoped Romans 4. 18. 21.
against hope, being fully persuaded that what God had promised he was able to
perform.

4. He is everlasting, whereas all other helps and comforts which we can
propose to our selves are transient and fading. As for our fathers, where are
they? And Zech. 1. 5.
do the Prophets, or Princes, live for ever? Their days upon earth are a shadow
that fleeteth away, their breath goes forth, and they return to the earth, and
then all their thoughts perish: Whereas he is from everlasting to everlasting,
God blessed for ever; and his righteousness extends to childrens children,
even to all generations. We see by daily experience, persons of great hopes and
expectations, when their Patrons dye upon whom they had their dependence, to
what a forlorn and helpless condition they are reduced: But now this can never
befall the man who trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is. And it is
one Jer. 17. 7.
of the greatest privileges of Religion, that it does furnish a man with such
a sure refuge and support against all kind of exigences, whereby he may bear up
his spirit under those difficulties wherewith others are overwhelmed.

It Is true indeed, it cannot be denied, but that God does expect, and the
nature of things does require, that men should be suitably affected with joy or
sorrow, according as their conditions are; but yet with this difference, that
those who believe the Providence of God, should not be so deeply affected with
these things as other men, they should weep as not weeping, and rejoice as not
rejoicing. They should not upon any occasion fear or sorrow as men without
hope, but should demean themselves as persons that have an higher principle to
be acted by, and to live upon, than any of these sensible things.

I cannot omit to suggest one Observation concerning this duty of Affiance,
which I have now been insisting upon; That though this particular virtue, and
others of the like affinity, be evidently moral duties, our obligation to them
being clearly deducible from the light of nature and the principles of reason,
and consequently must be owned by the Heathen Philosophers; yet they do in
their Writings, speak but sparingly, concerning those kind of virtues which are
of a more spiritual nature, and tend most to the elevating and refining of the
mind. And on the other side, the Scripture does most of all insist upon the
excellency and necessity of these kind of graces. Which is one of the main
differences, betwixt the Scripture and other moral Writings. And for this
reason it is, that in speaking of these graces and virtues, I do more
frequently allude to Scripture expressions.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Love of God.

SEcondly, As for those perfections belonging to the Divine Will, namely, his
Goodness, his Justice, his Truth and Faithfulness: The due apprehension of
these, should excite in us the virtue of Love, with all the genuine fruits of
it. By Love, I mean an esteeming of him, and a seeking after him as our only
happiness.

So that there are two ingredients of this virtue of Love, Estimation and
Choice.

1. An Estimation of the judgment; a due valuation of those excellencies which
are in the Divine nature, whereby we look upon God as the supreme Being in
genere boni: From whom all created goodness is derived, and by conformity to
whom it is to be measured. And this notion is the proper importance of the word
Charity, whereby we account a thing dear or precious. And in this sense does
our Savior oppose despising to loving, Either he must hate the one, and love
the other; Mat. 6. 34.
or he must hold to the one, and despise the other.

Now these perfections of the Divine nature may be considered, either
absolutely or relatively.

1. Absolutely, as they are in themselves, abstracting from any benefit that we
our selves may have by them. And in this sense they can only produce in us an
esteem of our judgments, without any desire or zeal in our will or affections.
The Devil does understand these absolute perfections of the Divine nature, that
God is in himself most wise, most just, and powerful: And he knows withal that
these things are good, deserving esteem and veneration; and yet he does not
love God for these perfections, because he himself is evil, and is not like to
receive any benefit by them.

2. Relatively, with reference to that advantage which may arrive to us from
the Divine goodness. When men are convinced of their infinite need of him, and
their misery without him; and that their utmost felicity does consist in the
enjoyment of him: This is that which properly provokes affection and desire,
namely, his relative goodness as to us. There is scarce any one under such
transports of love, as to believe the person whom he loves, to be in all
respects the most virtuous, wise, beautiful, wealthy that is in the world. He
may know many others, that do in some, if not in all these respects, exceed.
And yet he has not an equal love for them, because he has not the same hopes
of attaining an interest in them, and being made happy by them. So that this
Virtue does properly consist in such a kind of esteem, as is withal accompanied
with a hope and belief of promoting our own happiness by them. And this is
properly the true ground and original of our love to God. From whence will
follow

2. Our choice of him, as being the only proper object of our happiness,
preferring him before any thing else that may come in competition with them.
Not only (as the Scripture expresses it) loving him above father and mother,
but Mat. 10. 3. Luke 14. 26. Philem. 3.
hating father and mother, yea and life it self for his sake: Counting all
other things but dross and dung, in comparison of him.

Now it cannot otherwise be, but that a due apprehension of the Divine
excellencies in general, especially of his particular goodness to us, must
excite in the soul suitable affections toward him. And hence it is, that the
misapprehension of the Divine nature, as to this Attribute, does naturally
produce in men that kind of superstition styled (...), which imports a
frightful and over-timorous notion of the Deity, representing God as austere
and rigorous, easily provoked by every little circumstantial mistake, and as
easily appeased again by any flattering and slight formalities. Not but that
there is sufficient evidence from the principles of natural reason, to evince
the contrary; but the true ground of their mistake in this matter, is from
their own vicious and corrupt affections. It Is most natural for selfish and
narrow men, to make themselves the rule and measure of perfection in other
things. And hence it is, that according as a man's own inclinations are, so will
he be apt to think of God; Thou thoughtest that I was altogether such an one
Psa. 50. 21.
as thy self. Those that are of ill natures and of little minds, whose thoughts
are fixed upon small and low matters, laying greater weight upon circumstances,
salutes, addresses, than upon the real worth of persons and substantial duties,
being themselves apt to be provoked unto wrath and fierceness, upon the
omission of these lesser circumstances, and to be pacified again by any
flattering and formal services; such men must consequently think themselves
obliged to deal just so toward God, as they expect that others should deal
with them. And according to the different natures and tempers of those men who
do mistake this notion of the Divine goodness, so are the effects and
consequences of this mistake various (as a learned man has well observed) When
Mr. Smith of Superstition.
it meets with stout and sturdy natures, who are under a consciousness of
guilt, it works them to Atheism, hardens them to an opposition of him, to an
endeavor of undermining and destroying the notion of that Deity, by whom they
are not like to be safe or happy. If with more soft and timorous natures, men
of base and slavish minds, it puts such men on to flatter and collogue with
him, and to propitiate his favor by their zeal in lesser matters. And though
in this kind of temper and carriage there may be a show of Religion, yet the
terminating of it in such things is most destructive to the nature of it,
rendering all converse with the Deity irksom and grievous, begetting a kind of
forced and praeternatural zeal, instead of that inward love and delight, and
those other genuine kindly advantages which should arise to the soul from an
internal frame of Religion.

And that the perfections of the Divine nature, and particularly his Goodness,
should excite our love of him, may be made evident by all kind of proofs. There
being no kind of motive to affection, whether imaginary or real, but it is
infinitely more in God than in any thing else besides. I shall mention only
these three things.

1. His absolute goodness and excellency.

2. His relative goodness and kindness to us.

3. The necessity we are under of being utterly lost and undone, without an
interest in his favor.

1. His absolute perfections are infinite, being the original of all that good
which we behold in other things. Whatever attractives we find diffused amongst
other creatures, by which they are rendered amiable, they are all derived from
him, and they are all, in comparison to him, but as little drops to the Ocean.
There is much of loveliness in the fabric of this beautiful world, the
glorious Sun, the Moon and the Stars which he has ordained; which is
abundantly enough to render the notion and the name of him excellent in all the
earth. We may perhaps know some particular persons so very eminent for all kind
of accomplishments, virtue, and wisdom, and goodness, etc. as to contract an
esteem and veneration from all that know them. But now the highest perfections
that are in men, besides that they are derived from him, are so infinitely
disproportionable to his, that they may be said not to be in any of the
creatures. There is some kind of communicated goodness, and wisdom, and power,
and immortality in men; and yet these perfections are in Scripture appropriated
to the Divine nature in such a manner, as if no Creature did partake of them.
There is Mat. 19. 7. 1 Timothy 1. 17. chapter 6. 15, 16.
none good, or wise, but he. He is the only Potentate; who only has
immortality. No man can take a serious view of the works he has wrought,
whether they concern Creation or Providence, but he must needs acknowledge,
concerning the Author of them, that he is altogether lovely, and say with the
Prophet, How great Zech. 9. 17
is his goodness? and how great is his bounty? The comeliness of them is upon
all accounts so eminent and conspicuous, as cannot but be owned by every one
who considers them. For any man to ask, what Beauty is, this is (...), as
Aristotle speaks, the question of a blind man. Every man who has eyes, may
judge of it at first view. Not to discern it, is a sure argument of blindness
and darkness. And that the Divine nature is not more amiable to us, shows the
great imperfection of our present condition. It shall be the perpetual
employment of our future state in heaven, to celebrate these excellencies of
the Divine nature. The blessed Angels, and the spirits of just men made
perfect, do receive a chief part of their felicity, by contemplating these
Divine perfections in the beatifical vision.

2. His relative goodness and kindness to us; testified in so many particulars,
that when we would reckon them up, they are Psalm. 100. 3.
more in number than the sand. He is the Author of our beings and our
well-beings. It is he that made us, and not we our selves. Psalm. 23.
He spreads our tables, and fills our cups, in him we live, and move, and have
our beings. He does daily follow us, compass us about, load us with his
benefits. He gives us all that we enjoy, and he is willing upon our repentance
to forgive us all that we offend. And to whom much is given, or forgiven, they
should love much. To love them that love us, is a duty but of a low attainment,
the Publicans and sinners do the same; nay, the very Beasts will do it, The Ox
knows his owner, and the Ass his masters crib. That person must be void of the
reason of a man, who will not admire and love God for his Excellencies; but he
that does not love him for his kindness, must be more stupid and senseless than
the brute creatures.

3. We are utterly undone, without an interest in his favor. So that if the
apprehension of his absolute goodness cannot work upon our reason, nor the
sense of his relative goodness or kindness upon our ingenuity and gratitude;
yet the consideration of our undone estate without him, ought to prevail with
all such, as have not forfeited the first and most universal principle of
self-preservation. The not having him for our friend, and much more the having
him for our enemy, putting a man into an absolute incapacity of all kind of
happiness. It Is a question proposed by St. Austin, why we are so often in
Scripture enjoined to love God and our neighbors, but have nowhere any
precept commanding us to love our selves? To which he gives this answer, Fingi
non potest major dilectio sui, quam dilectio Dei; The highest and truest
self-love, is to love that which can alone make us happy. Men do not need any
motive or argument to persuade them to love themselves. It Is a natural
principle, rather than a moral duty; they must do so, nor can they do
otherwise. Only this is that wherein they stand in greatest need of direction,
how to set this natural principle on work upon its due object. Felicity must be
every man's chief end, there is no need of persuading any one to that; all the
difficulty is to convince men, wherein this happiness does consist. And there
is no rational considering man, but must needs grant it to be in the fruition
of the first and supreme good; so that to love God as our happiness is to love
our selves, beyond which there is nothing to be said or fancyed by way of
motive or persuasion.

It Is a duty this, upon all accounts, so plain and reasonable, that no man
whatsoever can pretend to any kind of doubt or dispute about it. And therefore
I shall add no more by way of proof or confirmation of the necessity of it.

I shall only offer two considerations, which should engage men's utmost
diligence and caution in this matter.

1. It Is a business of greatest consequence, to know whether we truly love God.

2. It Is a matter wherein we are very liable to mistake.

1. It Is a business of unspeakable concernment, to understand whether we love
God or not: It being the same thing as to enquire, whether there be any thing
in us of true Religion, or not. It Is not a question about the fruits or the
branches, but about the root; not about the degrees, but about the very essence
of grace and holiness. There being no medium betwixt loving God and hating of
him. He that is not with me, is against me, (says our Savior), Luke 11. 23.

2. And then it is a matter wherein men are liable to mistake. There is
naturally in all Nations of men, who dwell on the face of the earth, a kind of
confused inclination toward God, whereby they seek the Lord, if happily they
might feel after him, and find him, as the Apostle speaks. Acts 17. 27.
And men are apt to mistake this natural propension for the grace of Love;
whereas this is rather an inclination, than a firm choice and resolution;
rather a natural disposition, than an acquired or infused habit. None could
have more confident persuasions of their love to God, and their zeal for him,
than the Jews had; and yet our Savior tells them, But I know Joh. 5. 42.
you, that you have not the love of God in you. It Is not an outward profession,
though accompanied with zeal, that is a sufficient argument of our love. Though
there are many in the world, who both live and dye under this delusion, Mat. 7.
22. Many will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in
thy name, and in thy name have cast out Devils, and in thy name done many
wonderful works. And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you, depart
from me you that work iniquity. It Is not the being gifted and called, for these
extraordinary works of prophesying and miracles; it is not an ability to undergo
the flames of martyrdom, and the giving our bodies to be burned: Neither gifts
nor privileges, nor some particular acts of duty, though of the most noble
kind and greatest difficulty, can be a sufficient evidence of this love. So
that it is a matter wherein men are very liable to mistake, and where a mistake
will prove of infinite consequence. And therefore will it concern us, to be
very considerate and cautious in our enquiry about it.

There is one kind of affection seated in the rational part of the soul, the
understanding and will; and another in the sensitive, the fancy and appetite.
The one consisting in a full conviction, deliberate choice, and firm
resolution; the other consisting more in some sudden impetus and transport of
desire after a thing. The first of these may be styled the virtue, the other
the passion of love. Now though a man should, in some fits of devotion, love
God with as great a degree of fervor, as to passionate sensitive love, as some
Martyrs have done; yet were it possible for him in his judgment, to esteem any
thing else but equally, or never so little more than God; such a kind of
affection, though it were sufficient to make the other a Martyr, yet could not
preserve him from being an Apostate, and renouncer or blasphemer of Religion
(as a learned Author has proved more at large); Mr. Pinke.
nay, I add further, from the same Author, though a man should love God with an
equal degree of affection, yet because the objects are so infinitely
disproportionable, and it is the nature of moral duties to be measured from
those motives by which we are to be induced to them; therefore of such an one
it may be affirmed, that he does not love God. He that makes him but equal to
any worldly thing* may be said infinitely to despise and undervalue him.

For the further explication of this, I shall suggest to you a distinction, not
commonly (if at all) taken notice of by others, betwixt natural principles and
moral duties. The misunderstanding of which is the occasion of many
difficulties and confusions, about this and some other points.

1. By natural principles, I mean such kind of impressions as are originally
stamped upon the nature of things, whereby they are fitted for those services
to which they are designed in their creation; the acts of which are necessary,
and under no kind of liberty of being suspended: All things must work according
to their natural principles, nor can they do otherwise; as heavy bodies must
tend downwards. The beauty of the world, and the wisdom of the Creation, is
generally acknowledged to consist in this, that God was pleased to endue the
kinds of things, with such natures and principles, as might accommodate them
for those works to which they were appointed. And he governs all things by such
laws, as are suited to those several natures which he had at first implanted in
them. The most universal principle belonging to all kind of things, is
self-preservation, which in man (being a rational Agent) is somewhat farther
advanced to strong propensions and desires of the soul after a state of
happiness, which has the predominancy over all other inclinations, as being
the supreme and ultimate end, to which all their designs and actions must be
subservient by a natural necessity.

2. Whereas on the other hand, those rules or means which are most proper for
the attaining of this end, about which we have a liberty of acting, to which
men are to be induced in a moral way, by such kind of motives or arguments as
are in themselves sufficient to convince the reason: These I call moral duties;
duties, as deriving their obligation from their conducibility to the promoting
of our chief end; and moral, as depending upon moral motives. So that
self-love, and the proposing of happiness as our chief end, though it be the
foundation of duty, that basis or substratum upon which the Law is founded, yet
it is not properly a moral duty, about which men have a liberty of acting. They
must do so, nor can they do otherwise. The most vile and profligate wretches
that are, who are most opposite to that which is their true happiness, they are
not against happiness it self, but they mistake about it, and erroneously
substitute something else in the room of it. So that if men were upon all
accounts firmly convinced, that God was their chief happiness, they would
almost as necessarily love him, as hungry men do eat, and thirsty men do drink.
I have enlarged somewhat the more upon this particular, the better to manifest
the true cause or ground of this love, to consist in this persuasion, that our
chief happiness is in the favor of God, and the enjoyment of him.

CHAP. XV.
Of Reverence and the Fear of God.

THirdly, As for those kind of affections, which should be wrought in us, more
especially from the apprehension of the Divine Power; these are reverence,
fear, humility, a submissive and filial awe, which is so suitable to the notion
of Omnipotence, and so necessary a consequence from it, as not to be separated.

By this reverence, I mean, such an humble, aweful, and ingenuous regard
toward the Divine nature, proceeding from a due esteem and love of him,
whereby we are rendered unwilling to do any thing which may argue contempt of
him, or which may provoke and offend him. It Is a duty which we owe to such as
are in a superior relation, and is in the fifth Commandment enjoined under the
name of Honor; which in the notion of it does imply a mixture of Love and
Fear, and in the object of it does suppose Goodness and Power. That power which
is hurtful to men, and devoid of goodness, may raise in their minds a dread and
terror, but not a reverence and an honor. And therefore all such doctrines as
ascribe unto God what is harsh, and rigorous, and unworthy of his infinite
goodness, instead of this filial, do beget a servile fear in men. This is the
meaning of that citation in St. Austin, where he mentions it as Varro's
judgment, Deum a religioso vereri, a superstitioso timeri. The passion of fear
and dread belongs to superstitious persons, but the virtue of reverence to
those that are religious. And that of Seneca, Deos nemo sanus Benefic. lib. 4.
cap. 19. Epist. 123.
timet, furor enim est metuere salutaria, nec quisquam amat quos timet. No man
in his right mind will fear God in this sense; it is no less than madness to
have frightful apprehensions of that which is most benign and beneficial; nor
can true love consist with this kind of fear.

But as for this reverence, or filial fear, it is so essential to a state of
Religion, that not only the Scripture, but the heathen Moralists likewise do
describe Religion it self by this very name of fearing God. And men who are
pious and devout, are by the Gentiles styled (...) and and (...), men of
reverence and fear.

Now though every one of the Divine perfections may justly challenge this
affection as due to it, particularly his infinite wisdom and goodness, yet does
it more particularly belong to his power. I shall speak briefly of each of
these.

1. For his infinite knowledge and wisdom, which are things that have been
always counted venerable. He knows all our infirmities and most secret faults,
and therefore ought to be feared upon that account. It Is a notable saying in
Cicero to this purpose; Quis non timeat omnia providentem and cogitantem, and
animadvertentem, and omnia ad se pertinere putantem, curiosum and plenum
negotii Deum. Who would not fear that God who sees and takes notice of all
things, so curious and full of business, as to have a particular concern for
every action and person in the world. And in another place he makes this notion
of the Deity, and the fear consequent thereupon, to be the chief basis of
Government, the first foundation of that civil policy whereby men are gathered
together and preserved in regular societies. Sit persuasum De Legib. lib. 2.
civibus, Deos, qualis quisque sit, quid in se admittat, qua mente, qua pietate
religiones colat, intueri; piorumque and impiorum habere rationem. This is one
of the first principles, which men who would associate under government, ought
to be convinced of, that God takes particular notice, what kind of person every
one is, with what mind and devotion he applies himself to the duties of
Religion, and will deal with men according as they are pious or impious. From
whence will follow, such a fear of offending him by any dishonest action, as
must make men capable of living under government.

2. His goodness, holiness, kindness, and mercy, do afford another reason why
he ought to be feared; though these are the most immediate objects of our love
and joy, yet will they likewise afford ground for our reverence. We read in one
Text, of fearing the Lord and his goodness; which Hosea 3. 5.
is, when men have such a sense of his goodness, as thereby to be affected with
an holy awe and fear of offending him. And elsewhere it is said, There is
forgiveness Psalm. 130. 4.
with him, that he ought to be feared. The meaning of which place may be this,
We stand in continual need of pardon and remission, being utterly undone
without it; and God only does give this, and therefore upon this account we
ought to reverence and fear him.

3. This duty does more especially refer to that Attribute of his power,
together with the effects of it, in the judgments which he executes in the
world. Now nothing is more natural to men, than to fear such as have power over
them, and are able to help or to hurt them. The Civil Magistrate is to be
feared and reverenced upon this account, because he bears the sword, and is a
revenger: Romans 13.
Much more the supreme Governor of the world. Men can but kill the body, and
after that must dye themselves; but God lives for ever, and can punish for
ever; he can cast both body and soul into hell: And therefore we have very
great Mat. 10. 18
reason to fear him. It Is mentioned in Scripture, as one of those Attributes
and Titles whereby the Divine nature is described, The fear of Israel, He that
ought Psa. 76. 11.
to be feared. And that by those who need not to fear others, the Princes and
Potentates of the world. Those very persons, whom others are most afraid of,
ought themselves to stand in fear of him; for he cuts off the spirits of
Princes, and v. 12.
is terrible to the Kings of the earth, as it follows in that place.

The great prejudice which ignorant men have against this affection of fear,
is, that it is a check and restraint to a man in his liberty, and consequently
brings disquiet to his mind; which is so far from truth, that on the contrary
it may be manifested, that one of the greatest privileges belonging to a state
of Religion, does arise from this true fear of God, as being that which must
set us at liberty from all other tormentful fears. That which has the greatest
influence upon the troubles and discontents of men in the world, whereby their
conditions are rendered uncomfortable, is their inordinate fear, those misgiving
thoughts and surmises, whereby they are apt to multiply their own dangers, and
create needless troubles to themselves. And whatever a man's outward condition
may be, as to the security and flourishing of it, yet whilst such fears are in
his mind, His soul does not dwell at ease, as the phrase is; whereas, Psa. 25.
13.
he that fears the Lord, his soul shall dwell at ease, i. e. such an one need
not be afraid of any thing else. Discat timere, qui non vult timere; discat ad
tempus esse solicitus qui vult esse semper securus, says St. Austin; He that
would not fear other things, let him learn to fear God; let him be cautious and
solicitous for a time, that would be everlastingly secure. And in another
place, Homo time Deum and minantem mundum ridebis; O man, learn to fear God,
and thou will despise the threatenings of the world. And again, Exhorresce quod
minatur Omnipotens, ama quod promittit Omnipotens, and vilescet mundus sive
promittens sive terrens; He that has a true fear of what the Omnipotent God
does threaten, and a love to what he promises, to such an one the world whether
smiling or frowning will seem contemptible. The heaven, and earth, and men, are
all but his instruments, and cannot do any thing otherwise than as they are
permitted or acted by him. Though they should seem to be angry with us, yet he
can restrain their wrath, and when he pleases can reconcile them to us. But if
he himself be offended, none of these things will be able to afford us any
comfort or relief. It Is above all other things the most fearful to fall into
the hands of the living God. That Is a notable speech to this purpose, which I
find cited out of Plutarch; They that look upon God as the chief rewarder of
Good and Evil, and fear him accordingly, are thereby freed from other
perplexing fears. Such persons, minus animo conturbantur, quam qui indulgent
vitiis audentque scelera, have more inward peace than others who indulge
themselves in their vices, and dare commit any wickedness.

And as on the one side, the more men have of this fear toward God, the less
they have of other fears: So the less they have of this, the more subject are
they to other fears. Amongst the many judgments denounced against the want of
this fear of God, the Scripture particularly mentions a fearful mind, If thou will not fear that glorious and fearful name, the Deuteronomy. 28. 58.
Lord thy God, the Lord will make thy plagues wonderful, etc. And this is
reckoned as one of them, The Lord shall give thee ver. 65.
a trembling heart. And if we consult experience, there are none more obnoxious
in this kind, than profane Atheistical persons, who by their vile doctrines
and practices, endeavor to harden themselves and others against this fear of
God. None so cowardly and timorous as these, none so easily frightened with the
least appearance of danger. The Satyrist of old observed it of them: Hi sunt
qui trepidant, and ad omnia fulgura pallent.


None are so fearful, as those that pretend not to fear God at all. And it is
but justice, that those who will not reverence him as sons, should be
overwhelmed with dread and astonishment toward him as slaves. And this
consideration ought to be no small inducement to men, to labor after this
disposition. As Abimelech said to the men of Sichem, Judge Judge. 9. 2.
I pray you, whether it be better for you, that threescore and ten persons
reign over you, or that one reign over you. So in this case, consider whether
it be better for you, to be distracted by the great variety of worldly cares
and fears, which as so many Tyrants, will domineer over you, and keep you in
perpetual slavery, or to submit your selves to this one fear, the fear of God,
which is perfect peace and liberty.

To all which may be added, That it is by this fear that we are to give unto
God the glory of his Power and Justice. It Is this that must make us pliable to
his will, and effectually remove all such obstacles as may hinder us from
submitting to him; subdue our reluctancies, and make us bow down before him.
Upon which account this expression of fearing God is frequently used in
Scripture for the whole business of Worship and Religion; because where this
fear is well fixed in the heart, all other parts of holiness and righteousness
will naturally follow.

It has a more peculiar influence to stir up in us watchfulness and caution,
and like a wary friend is apt to suggest to us the safest counsel and advice.
It Is the vigilant keeper of all virtues, that which must fortify us in our
temptations, and restore us in our lapses.

He that will but seriously ponder upon what the mere light of nature dictates,
concerning the Omnipotence of him who is the great Creator and Governor of the
world, his infinite holiness and justice, and that wise Providence which
extends to every particular person and action, whereby he takes notice of them,
and will be sure to reward or punish them, according as they are good or evil:
Such an one, must needs have his heart affected with a great awe and dread
toward the Divine nature.

The very Heathens were wont upon this account, to paint their Jupiter with a
thunderbolt in his hand; to strike an awe into men, from daring to offend him
who stands always ready armed with vengeance against such as provoke him.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Obedience: And first of Active Obedience to the Laws of God.

HAving dispatched the duties we are more especially obliged to, with regard to
Gods wisdom, goodness, power; I shall now treat concerning such other duties,
as refer more particularly to his Dominion and superiority over us, his right
to command and govern us, which are comprehended under the general name of
Obedience.

The Habit of which may be described to consist, in such a submissive frame of
spirit, whereby a man does always devote and resign up himself unto the
disposal of his maker, being ready in every condition, to do or suffer that
which he apprehends to be most reasonable and acceptable, and whereby he may
best express his love and subjection.

By which description it may appear, that this Obedience is of two kinds
Active. Passive.

1. Active. Which consists in a readiness of mind to do what God shall injoin.

2. Passive. In an acquiescence of mind under what he shall inflict. Both which
do necessarily flow from the apprehension of Gods dominion over us, his right
to govern and dispose of us as he pleases. Obedience, in the true notion of
it, being nothing else but that homage which we owe to such as are in a
superior relation, who have a right to command us. Every relation of
superiority and dominion being a distinct engagement to subjection; whether
Oeconomical, as that betwixt Parent and Child; Political, as betwixt Magistrate
and Subject; Moral, as betwixt Benefactor and Beneficiary; or lastly, that
which is Natural, which above all other things gives the highest title to
dominion, as that betwixt the Maker and his Work, the first Cause and that
which he bestows being upon. And God by all these Titles, and many more, may
justly challenge dominion over us.

Under this first kind of Obedience, styled Active, are comprehended these
three particulars: 1. A knowledge of, and an acquaintance with those Laws which
we are to observe. 2. A consent to them, or an approbation of them. 3. A
conformity to them.

1. An acquaintance with the Laws of God; whether discovered to us by
Revelation (the principles of nature obliging us, to observe and submit to all
things which we have reason to believe do proceed from God); or by natural
light, abstracting from Scripture and revelation, as the substance of that
which we call the Moral law is. Now though such persons only, are under the
obligation of those Laws which depend upon revelation, to whom a revelation is
made and sufficiently proposed; because Promulgation is essential to a Law: Yet
the Moral Law being discoverable by natural light, to every man, who will but
excite the principles of his own reason, and apply them to their due
consequences; therefore there must be an obligation upon all men, who have but
the use of their reason, to know these Moral Laws; and the ignorance of them
must be an inexcusable sin. Ignorantia juris can be no plea in this case,
because the Law is written in every man's heart by nature, and the ignorance of
mankind, as to any part of it, has been wilfully contracted.

The duties concerning natural worship, our adoration of the Deity by affiance,
love, reverence, praying to him, expecting mercies from him, returning to him
our thanks and acknowledgments, being reverent and solemn in all our addresses
toward him, our thoughts and speeches of him, and of the things that refer to
his service, may be evidently inferred from those natural notions, which we
have concerning the excellencies of his Nature, and our own dependence upon him.

The duties which concern the promoting of our own and our neighbors welfare,
that mutual justice, charity, helpfulness, which we are to exercise toward one
another; these may each of them be deduced from that common principle of
self-love, whereby every one does naturally seek his own welfare and
preservation. We are all of us desirous that others should be just to us, ready
to help us, and do good to us; and because it is a principle of the highest
equity and reason, that we should be willing to do to others, as we desire and
think them obliged to deal with us, this must therefore oblige us to the same
acts of charity and helpfulness toward them. Now the drawing out of these
general rules, and fitting them to particular cases; a studious and inquisitive
endeavor, to find out what our Masters will is, in several relations and
circumstances, this I call the duty of knowing the Commandments. And it is
necessary, that they should be thus distinctly known, before a man can keep
them.

2. A consent to them, or approbation of them, as being haly, just, and good.
Romans 7. 12
Which will necessarily follow from a true notion of the ground and reason of
them, and must necessarily precede a genuine obedience and conformity to them.
He that looks upon them as fetters and bonds, does rather endure them out of
necessity, than obey them out of choice and love. I consent to the Law, that it
is good, says Romans 7. 16
the Apostle, that is, I do in my judgment own the fitness and reasonableness
of the things therein injoined, as being the most proper means to advance the
perfection of our natures. The law of the Lord is Psalm. 19. 7
perfect (says the Psalmist); not only formaliter, in it self, but also
effective as to us, it makes us to be so. And in another place, Thy law is the
truth, namely, such as it ought to be. There is a congruity 119. 142.
betwixt our well-beings, and the nature of the things enjoined. And it is this
conviction alone, that must beget in us, a love of it, and a delight to
practice it. He that harbors any prejudice in his mind against the ways of
God, as if they were unprofitable, or unequal, can never submit to them
willingly, but out of a constraint; he may look upon them as his task and
burden, but not as his joy and delight. Our external submission to the Law, can
never be kindly and regular* till our minds be cast into the same mould with
it, and framed unto a suitableness and conformity to it. And such a temper
does, in the judgment of Seneca, render the mind truly great and noble, Hic est
magnus animus qui se Deo tradidit. De Vita Beata, 15.
And in another place, In regno nati sumus, Deo parere libertas est. Such a man
has a truly great and generous mind, who can resign up himself to Gods
disposal. The greatest liberty is to submit to the Laws of our Sovereign. His
service is perfect freedom.

3. An observance of them, and conformity to them in our lives. This is the end
both of the Commandments themselves, and likewise of our knowleldg and
approbation of them, namely, the practice of holiness and virtue in the conduct
of our lives; whereby we are to be advanced unto that state of happiness,
wherein the perfection of our natures, and our resemblance of the Deity does
consist.

And because the best of men do frequently fall short of that obedience, which
is due to the Laws of God; therefore in case of transgression, natural light
does direct men to repentance, which is an hearty sorrow for our neglects and
violations of the Divine Law, accompanied with a firm and effectual purpose and
resolution of amendment for the future. Which though it do suppose the
Commandments of God not to have been duly observed, yet is it the only remedy
left in such cases.

Some have questioned, whether there be any obligation upon us for this, by the
light of nature; partly, because the Stoics deny it; and partly, because
reason will tell a man that it cannot afford any compensation to Divine
justice. To which I should say, That the Stoics indeed do deny this, because
it implies passion, which their wise man must be without; yet they will admit a
man to be displeased with himself for any error or mistake, which is much the
same thing with sorrow, though under another name. And though this be not
enough to satisfy infinite justice, yet it is that which reason does oblige us
to. We expect from those who offend us, that they should profess their sorrow
and shame, beg pardon, and promise amendment. And the men of Nineveh did upon a
Natural principle betake themselves to this remedy, and with good success,
though they were doubtful of it, Who can tell if God Ion. 3. 9.
will turn and repent?

This conformity to the Law of God requires a twofold condition, Universality.
Regularity.


1. Universality; both as to the time, and the duties themselves; without any
such picking and choosing amongst them, as may bend the Laws to make them
suitable to our own interests and humors.

2. Regularity; in the due proportioning of our love, and zeal, and observance,
according to that difference which there is in the true nature and consequence
of the things themselves; preferring mercy and obedience, before sacrifice; and
the weighty matters of the Law, before tything of mint and cummin;
righteousness and peace, before meat and drink. It Is true, the least
commandment is not to be neglected, as having stamped upon it the authority of
the great God: But then we are to consider, that the same authority by which
that is injoined, does oblige us to prefer other things before it. So that a
man does disobey in doing a good thing, when upon that account he neglects what
is far better. And the mistake of men about this, is the true cause of that
which we call Superstition which is one of the opposites to Religion, and so
destructive to the true nature of it. Men being apt to think themselves
privileged for their neglects and failings in some greater matters, by their
zeal about lesser things.

Now nothing will contribute more to banish this Superstition out of the world,
than a sober enquiry into the nature and causes of things, whereby we may be
able to take a just estimate of their evidence and importance, and consequently
to proportion our zeal about them.

I mention this the rather, because it has been by some objected, that humane
Learning and Philosophy does much indispose men for this humble submission to
Divine Laws, by framing their minds to other notions and inclinations than what
are agreeable to Religion.

But that this is a false and groundless prejudice, may be made very evident;
The true knowledge of the nature of things, being amongst natural helps, one of
the most effectual to keep men off from those two extremes of Religion,
Superstition and Profaneness.

1. For Superstition; this does properly consist in a misapprehension of
things, placing Religion in such things as they ought not for the matter, or in
such a degree as they ought not for the measure; which proceeds from ignorance.

2. For Profaneness; this does consist in a neglect or irreverence toward
sacred things and duties, when such matters as ought to have our highest
esteem, are rendered vile and common. And this likewise does proceed from
ignorance of the true nature of things. Now one of the best remedies against
this, is the study of Philosophy, and a skill in nature, which will be apt to
beget in men, a veneration for the God of nature. And therefore to those
Nations who have been destitute of Revelation, the same persons have been both
their Philosophers and their Priests; those who had most skill in one kind of
knowledge, being thought most fit to instruct and direct men in the other. And
if we consult the stories of other places and times, we shall constantly find
those Nations most solemn and devout in their worship, who have been most
civilized and most philosophical. And on the contrary, those other Nations in
America and Africa, whom Navigators report to be most destitute of Religion,
are withal most brutish and barbarous as to other Arts and knowledge.

It cannot be denied indeed, but that a slight superficial knowledge of things,
will render a man obnoxious either to Superstition, or to Atheistical thoughts;
especially if joined with a proud mind and vicious inclinations. He that has
made some little progress in natural enquiries, and gotten some smattering in
the phrases of any Theory, whereby (as he conceives) he can solve some of the
common Phenomenon, may be apt to think, that all the rest will prove as easy
as his first beginning seems to be; and that he shall be able to give an
account of all things: But they that penetrate more deeply into the nature of
things, and do not look upon second causes, as being single and scattered, but
upon the whole chain of them as linked together, will in the plainest things,
such as are counted most obvious, acknowledge their own ignorance, and a Divine
power; and so become more modest and humble in their thoughts and carriage.
Such inquisitive persons will easily discern (as a noble Author has well
expressed it) that the highest link of Natures Chain is fastened to Jupiter's
Chair.

This (notwithstanding it be a digression) I thought fit to say, by way of
vindication and answer to those prejudices, which some men have raised against
humane Learning and the study of Philosophy, as if this were apt to dispose men
unto Atheistical principles and practices. Whereas a sober enquiry into the
nature of things, a diligent perusal of this volume of the world, does of it
self naturally tend to make men regular in their minds and conversations, and
to keep them off from those two opposites of Religion, Superstition and
Profaneness.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Passive Obedience, or Patience and Submission to the Will of God.

THus much may suffice concerning the nature and duty of Active Obedience.

I proceed to that of Passive Obedience, or patient submission under the
afflicting hand of God.

And though this may seem one of the most difficult of all other duties, and
most repugnant to humane nature; yet is there no subject more excellently
discussed by the Heathen Moralists, and wherein they seem more to exceed
themselves, than this.

I shall mention out of them some of those passages, which seem to me most
apposite and material to this purpose, under these four heads, which contain
the several Arguments to this duty; viz.

1. Such as refer to God, by whose Providence all our sufferings are procured,
or permitted.

2. Such as concern our selves.

3. Such as may be derived from the nature of affliction.

4. And lastly, such as refer to this grace of Patience.

1. There are many Arguments to convince us of the reasonableness of this duty,
from the Nature and Attributes of God, who either sends affliction, or permits
them to fall upon us. I shall rank them under these three heads: 1. His
infinite knowledge and wisdom. 2. His goodness and patience toward us. 3. His
power and dominion over us.

1. From the consideration of his infinite knowledge and wisdom, whereby he
takes notice of, and does concern himself about every particular event in the
world, making all things beautiful, and in their time, disposing of all to the
best. Which is an argument, that diverse of the Heathen Philosophers do very
largely insist upon. Particularly, Antoninus, who lib. 6. 39.
has this passage: If God (says he) do not take particular notice of, and
care for me and my affairs, why do I at any time pray to him; and if he does
exercise a special providence toward all events, no doubt but he does consult
well and wisely about them, nor would he suffer any hurt or prejudice to befall
me, unless it were for a greater good upon some other account, And in this I
ought to acquiesce. And in another place says the same Author. I Lib. 8. 23.
refer every thing that befalls me to God, as the contriver of it, by whom all
events are disposed in a wise order.

There are also many great and excellent sayings in Epictetus to this purpose.
Lib. 4. 6. 7.
That must needs be much more desirable, which is chosen by the wisdom of God,
than that which I choose. A reluctance against the Divine will, is the ground of
all Irreligion and Atheism in the world. Why may not a man refuse Lib. 1. c. 23.
to obey God in what he commands, as well as to submit to him in what he
inflicts? And then what ground can there be for any pretense to Religion? We
should all (says he) conform our minds to the will of providence, and most
willingly follow whither ever he shall lead us, as knowing it to proceed from
the best and wisest contrivance. I do Enchyrid.
in my judgment more consent to that which God would have, than to that which
my own inclinations lead unto. I would desire, and will just so, and Dissert.
3. 7. 2. 26.
no otherwise than as he does. And in another place, Use me as thou please, I
do fully consent, and submit to it, and shall refuse nothing which shall seem
good unto thee. Lead me whither ever thou will, put me into what condition thou
please, must I be in a private, not in a public station, in poverty not in
wealth, (...), I will not only consent to it, but make it my business to
apologize for it, to justify and maintain before all men, such thy dealing with
me to be most fitting and prudent, most suitable and advantageous to my
condition.

And besides the reasons to this purpose from natural light, which are so
excellently improved and urged by some of the Philosophers, there are likewise
several attestations of this nature in Scripture, wherein God is said to
afflict out of faithfulness. To be Wise in counsel, and excellent Psalm. 119. 75.
in working, signifying all the works of his providence to be most excellent,
because they proceed from the wisest counsel.

And though some particular dispensations may seem unto us to be difficult and
obscure, His judgments being unsearchable, and his ways past finding out; yet
we may be most sure that there is an excellent contrivance in all of them.
Though clouds and darkness may be round about him, yet righteousness and
judgment are the habitation of his throne.

And besides the more general assertions which the Scripture does frequently
mention to this purpose, It does likewise more particularly insist upon those
special reasons and ends, whereby the wisdom of such dispensations are to be
justified; as namely, To make us partakers of Gods Heb. 12. 11.
holiness; to work in us the peaceable fruits of righteousness; to save us from
being condemned with the world; to preserve 1 Cor. 11. 32.
in us a holy awe and reverence, They have no changes, therefore they fear not
God, Psalm. 55. 19. To quicken our relish of those mercies which we enjoy, and
our thankfulness for them: To wean our affections from the things of this
world; to prevent the surfeits of prosperity, to enlarge our experience, to
contract such a kind of hardiness, and courage as may become a militant state;
to keep up in our minds a continual sense of our dependent condition; which are
some of the principal things, wherein our happiness does consist.

To which may be added, that the Scripture does likewise contain several
express promises, to assure us of the benefit and advantage to be had by the
crosses that befall us. That all things in the issue shall work together for
our good, Romans 8. 28. So that there is not a trouble or affliction that we meet
with, which we could be without, but it has its necessary place and work, in
that frame and design of events, which the providence of God has ordained, for
the bringing of us to happiness. And though all of them may for the present
seem grievous, and some of them perhaps not suitable to the Divine goodness and
promises; yet of this we may be most assured, that all the ways of the Lord,
are Psalm. 25. 10.
mercy and truth, to such as keep his covenant and his testimonies. And there
are few persons who have been observant of Gods dealings toward them, but are
able to say from their own experience, that it is good for them, that they have
been afflicted.

2. A second Argument to this purpose, is from the consideration of Gods
goodness and patience toward us. I have showed before from several
acknowledgments of the Heathen, what apprehensions they had of the Divine
goodness and forbearance toward sinners, from whence it is easy to infer the
equity and reasonableness of our patient submission under his afflicting hand.
He is merciful and Exodus 34. 6.
gracious, longsuffering, abundant in goodness and truth. The Apostle speaks of
Romans 2. 4.
the riches of his goodness and forbearance and longsuffering. He does indulge
us in our failings, and infirmities, with such a kind of tenderness, as nurses
use to their young children. Now there is all imaginable equity in this
consequence, that if he bear with us in what we cannot lawfully do, that we
should bear with him, in doing what he will with his own. If he be patient
toward us in our sinning against him, when we oppose and provoke him, it is but
reason that we should be patient in our sufferings from him, when he endeavors
to heal and reclaim us.

It is of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed, and because his
compassions Lam. 3. 22.
fail not. It Is a great argument of favor and tenderness, that God is pleased
to spare us in the midst of our provocations. 'Twere but justice if he should
suddenly snatch us out of this life, and cast us into Hell: If he does abate
any thing of this, He does then punish us less than our iniquities deserve, and
we have more reason to praise him, than to complain against him: For he has
not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us according to our iniquities.

He that considers the mercies he injoys, as well as the evils he suffers, and
will impartially compare them both together, may find that though his
afflictions do abound, yet his consolations do much more abound; and that upon
the whole 2 Cor. 1. 5.
matter, when his condition is at the worst, it is much better than what he
himself deserves, or what many others enjoy.

They that are sensible of every thing they enjoy as being the free gift of
God, will not murmur against him, when he is pleased to resume any thing from
them. There must needs be much unreasonableness and want of equity in that
disposition, which cannot bear with some sufferings from that hand, from which
we receive all our enjoyments. Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and
shall Job 2. 10.
we not receive evil? The evils we suffer are much short of our desert, the
good we enjoy is much beyond our deserts. And therefore upon either account, it
must be highly unreasonable for a man to be guilty of impatience and murmuring.
Iniquus est qui muneris sui arbitrium danti non relinquit, says Seneca; That
man Ad Polyb. cap. 29.
must needs be unjust and unequal, who does not think fit to leave the Giver
unto the liberty of his own gift, to resume it again when he pleases. And such
an one may justly be reputed greedy, who is more sensible of loss in the
restoring of a thing, than of gain in the enjoyment of it. He is an ungrateful
wretch, who complains of that as an injury, which is but restitution of what
was freely lent. And he is a fool, who knows not how to receive benefit by good
things, any otherwise than by the present fruition of them.

So Epictetus, speaking concerning the Dissertat. lib. 3. cap. 26.
unreasonableness of murmuring at any cross events, he has this passage.
(...). What reason have I to fight against God? Why should I desire things not
desirable? He that gave has power to take, and why should I resist? This
would not only be great folly, to oppose one that is much stronger, but great
injustice likewise, to fight against a benefactor. You have received all that
you have, and your own very being from him, and why should you take it so
heinously, if he is pleased to resume something back again?

3. The consideration of the Divine power and dominion over us, must needs
engage us to a quiet submission under his hand. There are many excellent
discourses to this purpose amongst the Heathen Philosophers, as particularly in
Seneca. There is nothing (says he) more desirable than for a man to arrive
unto this temper of mind, to be able in all troubles and afflictions, to quiet
himself with this thought, Diis aliter visum est; God thinks not fit to have it
so, and therefore I ought to be content; which is the same sense with that in
the Scripture, It is the Lord Jehovah, let him do what seems good unto him. 1 Samuel 3. 18. Psalm. 39.
I was dumb and opened not my mouth, because thou did it.

In all those conditions which seem Epist. 96.
hard and grievous to me (says the same Author) I do thus dispose my self. I
consider they come from God, Et non pareo Deo sed assentior, ex animo illum,
non quia necesse est, sequor: And I do endeavor not merely to submit, but to
assent to him in his dealings, not to follow him only out of necessity, but out
of choice. And in another place, giving Epist. 107.
counsel to such as were in an afflicted estate, he thus advises, Quaecunque
fiunt, debuisse fieri put et, nec velit objurgare naturam: Optimum est pati
quod emendare non possis, and Deum (quo autore cuncta proveniunt) sine
murmuratione comitari: Let such a man think that nothing comes to pass, but
what ought to be; and let him not take upon him to reprehend providence: It Is
best for a man to bear what he cannot mend, and to follow God (by whom all
events are disposed) without murmuring. Let us (says he) bespeak God as
Cleanthes did, Duc me parens, celsique dominator poli,
Quocunque placuit, nulla parendi mora est.
Assum impiger; Fac nolle, comitabor gemens,
Malusque patiar, quod pati licuit bono.


Let the great Governor of the world, lead me into what condition he pleases,
I am most ready to follow him; or suppose I should find a reluctance against
his dealings with me, yet I will still follow him, though it be sighing, and
suffer that as an evil and wretched man, which I ought to bear as a good man,
with patience and submission. And a little after, Sic vivamus, sic loquamur --
Hic est magnus animus qui se Deo tradidit, and contra, ille pusillus ac
degener, qui obluctatur, and de ordine mundi male existimat, and emendare
mavult Deos quam se. It becomes men both to speak and live up to this
principle. He only is a truly generous man, who does thus resign up himself to
God, and on the contrary he is a little wretch of a degenerate mind, who
struggles against him, having a hard opinion of the government of the world,
and thinks it fitter to mend God than himself. Where is there any thing amongst
those who professChristianity, better and more becomingly said to this purpose?
Or how can the wit of man frame any sense or words, that do more fully express
this self-resignation, and submission to the providence of God, than is done in
these excellent speeches of a Heathen Philosopher?

Epictetus likewise, speaking concerning the reasonableness and fitness of men's
resigning themselves up to Gods disposal, has this passage. Quis vero es tu?
aut unde venisti? aut quare? Do you consider what you are, and whence you came,
and upon what business? Did not he give you a being in the world? endow you
with such a nature? put you into such a condition, wherein you should be
subject to his government and disposal? Did not he appoint the time, and place,
and part you are to act upon the Theater of this world? And this is properly
your business, to apply your self to the fittest means of representing the part
allotted to you, not to take upon you to murmur or repine against it. Hoc tuum
est datum personam been Enchyrid. cap. 23.
effingere, eam autem eligere alterius: It does not belong to us to choose our
parts, but to act them. Would it not better become us to go off the Stage with
adorations and praises of him, for so much as he has permitted us to hear and
see, rather than mutinying against him, because we had no more? And in another
place, he suggests this consideration, That our condition, Dissert. lib. 3.
cap. 24.
whilst we are in this world, is militant, wherein every one is without
reluctance to submit to the orders of his great Captain or General, in whatever
he shall appoint; whether or no it be to digg in the trenches, or stand upon
the watch, or to fight. Every man cannot be a commander, and a common soldier
is to obey, not to dispute or offer counsel. If thou may refuse the condion
or work assigned thee, why may not another do so, and according to this, what
order could there be in the world?

To the same purpose Antoninus. That Lib. 10. cap. 25.
man (says he) is to be esteemed a fugitive and an apostate, who runs away
from his Master. Now the great Lawgiver who governs the world, is our common
Master and Ruler, and his Will is the only Law we are to submit unto. And
therefore for a man to be angry or grieved, because things fall not out
according to his will, what is this but revolting from him, and declaring
enmity against him?

Besides these testimonies from some of the wiser Heathen, the Scripture
likewise does abound in several attestations to this purpose, as particularly
that in Job 34. 31, Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have born
chastisement, I will not offend any more; that which I see not teach thou me,
if I have done iniquity, I will do so no more. And chap. 33. 12, 13, God is
greater than man, why do thou strive against him? He gives not account of any
of his matters. As if he had said, that man does strangely forget his
condition, who by his murmuring and repining does think to call God to an
account; why, he is the supreme Lord of all, and may do whatever he pleases.
Should not the potter have power over the clay? There is no man but must think
it just that the potter should dispose of his clay as he pleases, giving it
such a shape, and designing it to such a use as he shall think meet. And can
any one judge it reasonable, that God should have less power over us, than we
have over the works of our hands? Behold O Lord thou art our father, we are the
clay and thou art the potter, Isa. 64. 8. Woe to him that striveth with his
maker, shall the potsheard strive with the potsheards of the earth? shall the
clay say to him that fashioneth it, what make thou? or thy work, he has no
hands? Isa. 45. 9. This sin of impatience and murmuring is here styled striving
against God; contesting with his wisdom and his power, saying to him, what
make thou, which reflects upon his wisdom; and he has no hands, which
reflects upon his power, as if he were not able extremam apponere manum, to
finish what he had begun; both which are not only high affronts to the Divine
nature, but exceeding foolish and mischievous in the consequence of them. The
mutual contention of men amongst themselves, testa cum testis, one potsheard
with another, may prove fatal to them: If two earthen vessels dash together,
they can get nothing by it, they may both be broken; but for the clay to strive
with the Potter, that is so foolish and so unequal a contention, as nothing can
be more, and must needs expose it to the worst of dangers. Murmurers are in the
Scripture Phrase styled children of rebellion, Numb. 17. 10. Because they that
speak against God, would actually resist him likewise, if they could.

If we receive all that we are or have, our beings and our well-beings from
God, nothing can be more evident, than that he may justly resume any thing
again, or inflict upon us any evil, that is either short of, or but equal unto,
the good he has bestowed upon us.

Thus much shall serve for the first kind of Arguments, referring to the Divine
nature and attributes.

2. I proceed to the second sort of Arguments to this purpose, from the
consideration of our selves; which I shall treat of in these three particulars.
1. We are men. 2. We are sinners. 3. We are living men. Upon each of which
grounds it will appear a very unreasonable thing, that we should murmur and
complain against God. The Prophet has put these three considerations together.
Why does a living man complain, a man for the Lam. 3. 39.
punishment of his sin?

1. We are men, which is a mercy far above any temporal affliction that we can
suffer. God might have made worms instead of men, such despicable creatures as
are below common notice. Whereas in being men, we are become Lords of Heaven
and Earth, having an excellency above all other creatures that ever God made,
excepting the Angels. And is it not a shame for such an one, to be a slave to
every slight trouble? that any light affliction, which is but for a moment,
should make our souls which are immortal to bow down under it? Should not the
nobility of our natures advance us to a more generous temper, and make us erect
and cheerful under such troubles? see how David was affected with this thought.
Lord! what is man that thou Psalm. 8. 4.
art mindful of him, or the son of man that thou visitest him? It Is a mercy and
a condescension to be admired, that God does so much as take notice of us,
though with his chastisements, and therefore ought not to be the ground of our
complaint. He might suffer us to go on securely in our sins, without any
restraint. We do not think our selves concerned to take notice of every little
fly or insect, or the poor worms under our feet. And therefore when he shall
take such special care of us, as to restrain us in our wanderings, to administer
Physic to us in our diseases, we ought upon this account, rather humbly to
thank and admire him, than to murmur against him.

Again, we are but men; creatures of a dependant being, not Lords of our own
happiness. And who art thou O man that reply against God? how vile and
despicable in comparison to him, and how unfit to judge of his ways? It is the
common condition of Humanity to be exposed to sufferings. For man is born to
Job 5. 7.
troubles as the sparks fly upwards, that is, by a natural unavoidable
necessity. And there is no temptation or trouble that befalls 1 Cor. 10. 13.
us, but what is common to men. We are born into, and must live in a troublesome
tumultuous world, where Luctus, and ultrices posuere cubilia curae,
Pallentesque habitant morbi; tristisque senectus.


Which is the proper place of grief, and care, and diseases, and the
infirmities of age; and therefore we cannot expect a total exemption from these
things. Omnia ista in longa vita sunt, quomodo in longa via, and pulvis, and
lutum, Sen. Ep. 95.
and pluvia. These things in a long life, are like dust, and dirt and rain in a
long journey, which it were a vain thing for a man to think he could wholly
avoid, but that he must sometime or other have his share of them. Now men
usually vex and repine at that which is extraordinary and unusual, not at that
which is general and common to all.

2. We are sinners, and so afflictions are our wages, our due; and there is no
reasonable man that will repine at just and equal dealing; there is a special
emphasis to this purpose in the very phrase of that Text forecited: A Man for
the punishment of his sins, implying, that if he be but a man, if he have but
rational principles, he must needs acknowledge the equity of being punished for
sin. The Thief upon the Cross had so much ingenuity, as to Luke 23. 41.
confess it reasonable, that both he and his fellow, should submit to just
punishment. Now the Apostle tells us, that every Romans 3. 19.
man is by a natural conviction concluded under sin, for this very reason, that
every mouth may be stopped, and that God may be justified in his saying, and
clear v. 4.
when he judges. One chief reason which makes men apt to complain, that Gods
Ezekiel. 18. 25.
ways are unequal, is because they do not consider that their own are so. It is
the pride and folly of our natures, as to ascribe all the good we enjoy to our
own endeavors and merit, so to murmur and complain against God for the evil we
suffer; than which nothing can be more false and unequal. The wise man has
observed it, that the foolishness of man perverteth his ways, and his heart
fretteth against the Prove. 19. 3.
Lord. We first run our selves into mischief and then complain against God;
whereas according to common reason, the blame should be where the fault is. It
would be a much more befitting temper, to demean our selves upon this
consideration, as Elihu advises; Surely it is meet Job 34. 31.
to be said unto God, I have born chastisement, I will not offend any more,
etc. And upon this ground it is, that the Prophet having in one verse, in the
forecited place, dissuaded from murmuring and Lam. 3. 39.
complaints, he does in the very next verse, exhort to self-examination; Let us
search and try our ways; implying, that he who rightly understands his own
sinfulness, will find little reason to repine at his sufferings.

3. We are living men, whereas the wages of sin is death; all the plagues that
we are capable of, either in this or the other world, being but the due reward
of sin. And we have no reason to repine at kind and moderated corrections. He
might have struck us dead in the act of some sin, and so have put us out of a
possibility of happiness. It was David's comfort, that though the Lord had
chastened Psalm. 118. 18.
him sore, yet he had not given him over to death: And the advantage which he
enjoyed in this respect, did abundantly silence him against any complaints in
regard of the other. It is of the Lords mercies Lam. 3. 22.
that we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not. The words are very
emphatical, mercies in the plural, for the number, intimating a multitude of a
favors in this one act of his forbearance. And it is compassions or bowels for
the nature of them, which signifies tender affectionate mercy.

3. From the consideration of afflictions, which in themselves are neither good
nor evil, but secundum modum recipientis, according to the disposition of the
subject. To wicked men they may prove curses and judgments, testimonies of Gods
hatred and anger. But to others they may upon these two accounts prove
benefits; from their Indication, what they signify. End, what they effect.


1. From the indication of them, what they denote and signify; not Gods hatred
of us, but his special care toward us. They may be testimonies or earnests of
Gods favor, for whom he loves he rebukes Heb. 12. 5. Rev. 3. 19. Psa. 94. 12.
Prove. 3. 12.
and chastens, even as a father a son in whom he delights. Blessed is the man
whom thou chastenest, O Lord. Ye are the children of God (says Seneca) and
therefore sicut severus pater durius educat, he carries a stricter hand over
you, as having a special regard to your welfare, that you may not miscarry,
or, as the Apostle expresses it, that you may not be condemned with the world.
The Holy Ghost esteems 1 Cor. 11. 32.
afflictions to be a special privilege, speaking of St. Paul's being a chosen
vessel, to Acts 9. 15.
bear his name before the Gentiles and Kings, in the next verse it is reckoned
up as another privilege, that he should suffer many things for his name sake.
And therefore the same blessed Apostle speaks of afflictions as a gift; To you
it is given, not Phil. 1. 29.
only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake. If ye are without
afflictions, Heb. 12. 8.
then are ye bastards and not sons. It Is reckoned upon as a curse to have our
good Luke 16. 25.
things in this life. And that was one of Gods severest punishments, which he
threatens to those, Hos. 4. 14, that he will not punish them for their
whoredoms and adulteries. Not to be troubled like other men, may be a sign of
neglect and disfavour. Psalm. 73. 5.
It Is necessary to our conditions in this world: and God does afflict his own
children out of faithfulness. He has so appointed, that the way to the
heavenly Canaan Psalm. 119. 75.
shall be through the Wilderness.

2. From the end of them, what they are designed for and effect, namely, our
profit and improvement; being intended either for our correction or probation,
for our amendment or trial, as I have showed before.

4. This virtue of patience and submission is highly reasonable, upon account
of those advantages which do follow such a temper of mind.

1. It keeps our happiness in our own power, by bringing our minds to our
conditions, which is the only remedy things are capable of, when we cannot
bring our conditions to our minds. Hanc rerum conditionem Sen. Ep. 107.
mutare non possumus, id possumus, magnum sumere animum, and viro bono dignum,
quo fortiter fortuita patiamur. It is not in our power to change our condition;
but this is in our power, to attain unto such a greatness of mind, as becomes
worthy men, whereby we may be lifted up above the hurt of outward crosses. If a
man would be sure never to meet with any impediment in the thing he desires,
never to be forced to any thing against his will, his only way is to conform
his mind to the will of God, and to let him do with us what seems good unto
him. If he would have me (says Dissert. lib. 3. cap. 26.
Epictetus) to be sick or poor, I will be willing to be so; whatever employment
he will design for me, I will not decline, and whatever he would not have me be
or do, I will be against it likewise.

2. It will be a means to promote our peace, comfort, quiet, and to alleviate
our troubles, and make our yoke more easy. Ducunt volentem fata, nolentem
trahunt. The struggling with our yoke will but make it gall us so much the more;
'twill be a greater ease for us, to follow it willingly, and to be led by it,
rather than to be dragged along with it. Nullum Seneca de Ira. lib. 3. c. 16.
tam arctum est jugum quod non minus laedat ducentem quam repugnantem. Unum est
levamentum malorum ingentium, pati, and necessitatibus suis obsequi. There is
no yoke so straight and hurtful in it self, but will prove more hurtful for our
struggling with it. The only allay under great sufferings, is to bear them
quietly, and obey necessity, to submit to what we cannot remedy. It may be in
the power of others to disturb our outward conditions, but it should be in our
power, that they should not disturb our minds. And so long as we can preserve
our tranquillity there, we may be said to be truly happy.

An impatient man is in the Scripture phrase, compared to a wild Bull in a net,
being full of the fury of the Lord, Isa. 51. 20. As that fierce creature, being
muzled in the Huntsman's toil, does by all his struggling but further entangle
himself; so do men increase their own perplexities, by their impatience under
them. There is no one thing wherein the folly of men does more appear, than
that foolish exchange which they make of their inward quiet and peace, for
outward trifles; both as to their impatience under the things they suffer, and
their impetuous desires after the things they want. Ex eo stupor noster apparet
(says Seneca) quod ea sola Ep. 42.
putamus emi, pro quibus pecuniam solvimus, ea gratuita vocamus, pro quibus nos
ipsos impendimus. Herein appears the stupidness of men, that they esteem those
things only to be bought, for which they pay money; but count such things of
free cost, for which they pay themselves, their inward quiet and tranquillity,
which is far more to be valued than their outward possessions. Whereas if they
were but as wise in this kind of merchandise as in others, they would consider
the just rate and value of every thing, and pay no more for it, either in the
purchase of it, or parting with it, than it is really worth.

3. It Is very much for our honor and reputation to bear afflictions decently.
'Take away from a good man (says Maximus Tyrius) the honor of his sufferings
(...), and you rob him of his Crown, you hide and obscure his glory. Si hominem
videris, Seneca, Ep. 41.
interritum periculis, inter adversa felicem, in mediis tempestatibus placidum,
ex superiore loco homines videntem, ex equo Deos, non subit te veneratio ejus,
etc. If thou see a man undaunted in the midst of danger, happy in adversity,
placid and serene in a tempest, placed in a station equal with the Gods, whence
he looks down upon other men, as being in a vale below him; Art thou not
presently possessed with a high reverence and veneration for such a person? And
in another place (says the same Author), Quam venerationem praeceptoribus Ep.
64.
meis debeo, eandem illis praeceptoribus generis humani. Speaking of such
persons, says he, such veneration as I owe to my Master and Tutor, such and
much more ought I to pay to these Teachers of mankind, who set them such
excellent lessons for their imitation.

God himself upon this account, seems (as it were) to glory and to triumph over
the Devil, in the behalf of Job: See thou my servant Job, that there is none
like Job 2.
him upon earth? 'Twas an high elogium that, and tended much to his honor. And
the Apostle tells us elsewhere, that 1 Pet. 4. 13.
a meek and a patient spirit is with God of great price. The spirit of glory,
and of God rests upon such as endure sufferings. Men think to set out
themselves, and to get repute amongst others, by their haughtiness, looking
upon every little injury as a high indignity; but of such a frame of mind, it
may be truly said, non est magnitudo, tumor est; It is not greatness, but a
swelling of mind. It shows a narrowness and littleness of soul. Invalidum omne
natura querulum. The more weak any thing is, the more apt to complain. Whereas
on the other side, patience does enlarge the minds of men, and raise their
esteem, making them triumphant without fighting. The Heathen and their
Idolatries were heretofore subdued, non a repugnantibus sed a morientibus
Christianis, as St. Austin speaks, not by the resistance, but by the patient
sufferings of the dying Christians. So mightily did this grace conduce in the
primitive times, to the spreading and propagation of Christianity through the
Heathen world.

But are all complaints then in affliction unlawful? To this I answer:

1. Natural expressions of grief are allowable. A man must be sensible of his
sufferings, and consequently cannot but grieve under them. That stupor and
benummedness of spirit, whereby men are made unapprehensive of their
afflictions, is in it self both a great sin and a great judgment.

2. But then these expressions of our grief must be rightly qualified with
their due circumstances:

1. They must not be disproportionable to the occasion. A great complaint for a
little cross, like Jonah's trouble for his gourd.

2. Not unsitting for the manner; not accompanied with bitter invectives
against second causes and instruments; they should rather express our humility,
than our anger.

3. They must not be immoderate for the degree; as if we were without hope,
like David's passionate complaints for the death of his son Absalom.

4. They must not be sinful for the nature of them, blaming Gods justice, and
reviling his providence.

And now that I have so abundantly showed the reasonableness of this virtue of
patience and submission, I am still sensible how hardly men are brought to it
when there is real occasion for the practice of it; and therefore I think it
may be of great use to add some directions which may help to prevent, or at
least abate our impatience under afflictions, and to promote this submissive
temper and disposition. And accordingly they shall be of two sorts, some
negative, others positive.

I begin with the negative.

1. Take heed of aggravating afflictions, beyond their due proportions. Do not
fix your eye or your thoughts, chiefly upon the smart of them, without
regarding the benefit of them? It Is true indeed (as the Apostle tells us) No
affliction is Heb. 12. 11.
joyous for the time, but grievous, nevertheless afterward it yields the
peaceable fruit of righteousness, to them that are exercised thereby. 'Twere an
unreasonable thing and an argument of great frowardness, for a patient to mind
only the bitterness of his potion, the corrosiveness of his plaster, without
having any regard to the remedy and the health which may be procured by them.
For a man always to have his hand upon his sore, will increase the pain, and
hinder the cure of it. To insist upon every particular circumstance whereby men
may aggravate their afflictions, is the ready means to add fuel to their
impatience, and to drive them to despondency. This is a sure way to bring upon
our selves much needless trouble. It Is all one as if a man should chew the
pills which ought to be swallowed whole, which will make us more sick, and
thereby rather hinder the due operation of them than promote it.

2. Beware of refusing comfort, or rejecting the means that are afforded us for
our relief and support under the troubles that befall us. This were to take
part with our disease against our selves, to refuse the physic, and to pull
off the plaster that should heal us; which argues much frowardness, besides
the folly and ingratitude of rejecting the consolations of God, as if they were
but small Job 15. 11.
to us, as Eliphaz speaks. Whatever our losses or disappointments are, he can
be ten times better to us, than those things are, by the loss of which we are
provoked to discontent and murmuring.

3. Do not give liberty to passions; which of all other things belonging to the
soul, are most impetuous and unruly, if not restrained within fitting bounds,
The sensitive appetite (to which the passions belong) is the inferior and
brutish part of the soul, answerable to the dregs of the people in a political
government, of themselves apt to be heady, tumultuous, rash, mutinous, if not
restrained by some superior power: So is it with the passions of the soul,
which therefore ought to be watched over, with great circumspection; and the
rather, because they have usually the Empire over us, during our younger years,
before reason comes to exercise its sovereignty: And if once we give way to
them, 'twill be a business of no small difficulty, to reduce them into order
again.

Those very thoughts which occasion much discontent and trouble to the soul,
whilst they lay in the breast in a huddle and confusion, if they be but
distinctly considered, and coolely debated, will seem much less, if not vanish
into nothing. It Is the nature of disorder, to make things appear more than
indeed they are. Which is one reason that Philosophers give why the stars seem
innumerable, because they are commonly looked upon, as being wildly scattered
up and down, out of all regular form. It Is so likewise with men's inward
discontents, which are exceedingly multiplied by the confusion of them; and
would appear much less, if but distinctly reduced and examined. Most of those
which occasion much perplexity, whilst they are mixed with many others in a
crowd, would upon a clear view and severe examination, appear much less
considerable: And that is another good means for the preserving of our minds
from this impatience; To put a stop to our passions in the beginning of their
course, before they be in their full carrear, and then grow too hard for us.

4. Do not chiefly regard the instruments of your troubles, which will be apt
to provoke impatience and distemper; but rather upon the supreme disposer of
them. Though men may deal very unworthily with us, yet God is just in all his
ways. This was that which satisfied old Eli, It is the Lord, let him do 1 Samuel
3. 18.
what seems him good. Though the Sabaeans had spoiled Job of his oxen and
asses, and the Chaldeans plundered him Job 1. 15, 17.
of his Camels; yet we find no complaints against them, he takes notice only of
God as the Author of these sufferings. The Lord gives and the Lord takes away,
and therefore blessed be the name of the Lord. It Is worth your notice to
observe the strange variety of David's carriage, according as he was either
mindful or forgetful of this consideration. How meek and humble upon the
rebellion of Absalom: If the Lord shall say, I have no delight 2. Sam. 15. 26
in thee; behold here I am, let him do to me as seems good unto him. And so
in the next chapter, when Shimei did ver. 10.
so bitterly revile him, that which pacified all impatient revengeful thoughts,
was this consideration, The Lord has bid Shimei curse. Whereas at another
time, when he was not so careful to fix his thoughts upon this, how strangely
is his carriage altered? How furious at the churlishness of Nabal? How
passionate at the death of Absalom? Such great power 1 Samuel 25. 22. 2 Samuel 18.
33.
is there in this one meditation, if seriously fixed upon, to subdue the
natural rage and distemper of our hearts. When he looks upon God, he submits,
and is silent. I was dumb and opened not my mouth, because thou did it. But
Psalm. 39.
when he considers the instruments, his heart begins to rise, and his passions
to tumultuate and ferment into a strom.

5. Take heed of engaging your desires upon these transient perishable things.
Learn to estimate every thing, according to its just rate and value; and this
will be a means to work in us weaned affections from the world. They that love
too much, must grieve too much. If we would weep as not weeping, we must
rejoice as not rejoicing. They that think the greatest gain to be but small,
will think the greatest loss to be so too. Neminem adversa fortuna comminuit,
nisi Sen. Helv. cap. 5.
quem secunda decepit. Those that are most apt to be deceived and puffed up by
the flatteries of prosperity, will be most apt to be dejected by the frowns of
adversity. And therefore one of the surest ways, to make all crosses easy to
us, is to have a low esteem of these temporal things; for which we shall find
reason enough, if we consider the vanity and vexation of them. There being a
thousand ways of fraud and oppression and casualties, whereby we may be
deprived of their possession; and as many, whereby they may be rendered useless
to us in their possession; as in the case of pain and sickness, either of body
or mind: And as many whereby they may be rendered hurtful, and expose us to the
envy of others, to many kind of temptations unto sin, and particularly to many
kind of griefs and vexations upon the account of our unwillingness to part with
them. All which are to be provided against, by our entertaining such thoughts
of them, as may be suitable to their value.

6. Take heed of being solicitous about the issue of things, and of determining
your selves too peremptorily to particular events. It Is our business indeed to
serve providence in the use of means, but the issue of things belongs to God.
We have nothing to do with them, and that which is not within our power, should
be out of our care. Every man's great end is happiness. The various events that
befall us in the world, are but several ways to this end. And therefore it is
very reasonable and congruous, that every one should have a Travelers
indifferency toward them. A man upon the road, who is traveling to such a
Town, and comes to some doubtful turnings, is not concerned either for the
right or left hand way, has not an inclination to one more than the other, any
farther than to be directed to that which is the true way, and will bring him
to his journies end. Now that way which the providence of God does lead us
into, must needs be the best and the surest way to this end.

Thou foolish man (says Epictetus) Lib. 2. c. 7.
do not thou desire that which may be most convenient for thee? And can there
be any thing better than what God appoints? Do but then consider (says he)
what is the meaning of being eagerly solicitous about particular events, (...),
thou do thereby as much as in thee lies to corrupt thy Judge, and seduce thy
counselor: than which there cannot be a greater folly. These are the negative
Directions.

I proceed to those that are positive; and

1. Labor for true apprehensions of the Divine nature and excellencies; his
infinite power, and wisdom, and goodness. When our hearts are once possessed with
right notions, and a due esteem of these perfections, they will not be so apt
to break out into murmuring against him. That which Benhadad spoke proudly to
Ahab; Thy silver and thy gold, thy wives 1 King. 20. 3.
and thy children are mine: That may God truly say to us; what have thou that
thou have not received? And if we have received it, as we have no reason to
glory in the possession, so neither have we to complain at the loss of it, when
he that has lent it us does resume it again. It is, or should be our daily
prayer, that Gods will may be done on earth as it is in heaven. And it were a
most unreasonable thing, for men to murmur at the grant of their petitions.
'Twas a notable saying, which is commonly reported of Luther, when Philip
Melancthon was much disquieted in his own thoughts, at the confused state of
things in the first Reformation; Monendus est Philippus, desinat esse rector
mundi: Melancthon is to be admonished that he would cease to take upon him the
government of the world, as if the issue of things did belong to his care. God
is infinitely wise and faithful, and will proportion our sufferings 1 Cor. 10.
13.
to our abilities. He has promised that all things shall work together for
Romans 8. 28.
our good.

2. Consider the mercies you enjoy, as well as the evils you suffer. That was a
most unworthy temper in Ahab, and in Haman, to receive no satisfaction in all
their great possessions and enjoyments, because they were disappointed in some
one small particular. It Is the advice of the wise man, Eccles. 7. 14. In the
day of prosperity rejoice, in the day of adversity consider. But what is that
which we should consider? Why, that God has set the one against the other: And
so should we too, set one against another; and then we shall find, that we have
as much reason to be patient under our sufferings, as to rejoice in our
mercies. It Is a remarkable passage that, concerning Mephibosheth; when Ziba 2 Samuel 19.
had by his false accusation, caused the King to confiscate his goods, and
bestow them upon himself; this had been enough one would think, to provoke
Mephibosheth unto high complaints, both against the injustice of David, and the
baseness and unfaithfulness of his Servant Ziba: But see how he demeans
himself, I have ver. 27, 28.
been slandered unto my Lord the King, but do what is good in thine eyes. Thou
have set thy servant amongst them that eat at thine own table, what right
therefore have I to cry any more unto the King? Where he makes the kindness
that David had formerly shown him, to weigh down and satisfy for the wrong
that he then suffered. And if men had but such a grateful temper of spirit,
they would not be so apt to murmur. Those that deserve least, do usually
complain most. The most unworthy are the most impatient.

Suppose all manner of evils and afflictions, which are now promiscuously
seattered up and down in the world, whether they concern soul or body;
spiritual blindness and obduracy, poverty, slavery, reproach, sickness, pain,
maimedness, deformity, etc. I say, suppose all these were now to be distributed
amongst mankind, so as every one were to have an equal share of them: Would you
be content to stand to this new distribution? I suppose there are not many
persons in this Nation, in so miserable and forlorn a condition, that upon
serious consideration of the special advantages they do or may partake of,
above many other millions in the world, would consent to it. And if this be so,
certainly then it must be both an unreasonable, and a very ungrateful thing for
such men to be impatient, who enjoy more than their share comes to.

3. Consider the deserts of your sins, and then it will easily appear, that
your condition is not at any time so bad, but you have deserved it should be
worse. That you have more reason to commend the care and wisdom of the
Physician, than to complain of the bitterness of the potion. Tanto quis
patientius ferrum medici tolerat, quanto magis putridum esse Greg. Moral.
conspicit quod secat; The more the patient does discern the corruption and
danger of his sore, the more willingly does he endure the lance of his
Chyrurgion. That is a remarkable story in Genesis, Chap. 42. to show that this
consideration of the desert of our own sins, is a very powerful means to
pacify us against all impatience under sufferings. The story concerns Joseph's
brethren, who coming into Egypt to buy Corn, were there roughly treated,
accused for spies, clapped into prison; so that one would have thought, they had
reason enough to fret and murmur at that hard unjust dealing. And yet we find
their carriage to be very humble and patient; but what that was which made them
so, you may see, ver. 21. they remembered their cruelty to their brother.
Joseph, and that brought them to acknowledge this distress to be deservedly come
upon them, because they had not pityed their brother, when he besought them in
the anguish of his soul. The like consideration did stop Job in his complaint,
after all his high contestations and arguings with God; he no sooner thought
upon his own vileness, but he was presently silenced. Behold I am vile, what
shall I answer thee, I will lay Chap. 40. 4.
my hand upon my mouth.

4. Be careful whilst you are in a prosperous estate, to prepare for trouble
and afflictions, by a prudent consideration of the mutability of things. This
will be a means to alleviate the burden of them. Praecogitati mali mollis ictus
venit. And Sen. Ep. 76.
in another place, inexpectata plus aggravant, Ep. 91.
novitas adjicit calamitatibus pondus; That stroke will have less force which
is foreseen and expected, whereas the suddenness and surprise of it, will add
to the weight and smart of it. In tanta rerum sursum ac deorsum S^^. Tranq. A^.
cap. 11.
euntium versatione, si non quicquid fieri potest, pro futuro habes, das in te
vires rebus adversis, quas infregit quisquis prior vidit; In that various
change and revolution of events which we behold in the world, if we do not look
upon possible dangers and troubles as future, we do thereby strengthen our
adversaries and disarm our selves. When we see at any time the losses and
imprisonments, or poverty, or funerals of others, we ought presently to reflect
this may be our case. Cuivis potest accidere quod cuiquam potest. One loses
husband, wife, children, estate: We ought from all such spectacles to infer,
that though this be not at present, yet it may shortly be our condition; and
accordingly by expectation to fortify our selves against it. Hic nos error
decipit, hic Sen. ad. Mutium, cap. 9.
effoeminat, dum patimur, quae nunquam pati nos posse praevidimus. Aufert vim
praesentibus malis, qui futura prospexit. This is the error which does deceive
and effeminate men, whilst they suffer such things as they did not expect, and
are not prepared for. It breaks the force of evils when they come, to foresee
they will come.

5. Often reflect upon your former experience. That will be a means to prevent
all despondencies, to work in us hope and confidence. There is no man so mean
and inconsiderable, if he will but take an impartial view of what he has
formerly seen and observed, concerning Gods dealing with himself and others,
but may upon this account find reason enough to allay all murmuring
discontented thoughts. We have frequent examples to this purpose in Scripture,
Jacob, David, Jehosaphat, Genesis 32. 10. 1 Samuel 17. 37. 2 Chronicles. 20. 7. 1 Cor. 1.
10.
the Apostle St. Paul, in several places, who all have had recourse to this
remedy, when they would strengthen themselves against discontent and
despondency. And I suppose, there is scarce any serious man of so little
experience, but has taken notice of, and can remember how some crosses and
disappointments, have in the issue proved mercies and benefits to him. And if
it have been so formerly, why may it not be so again.

6. And lastly, Labor after those particular virtues, which are of near
affinity to this of patience; whereby it will be very much strengthened and
promoted. There is a certain chain of them mentioned, Gal. 5. 22, and styled by
the Apostle the fruits of the spirit, as belonging more particularly to the
spirit of Christianity. The first is Love, (...), which bears all things and
endures all things: The next is Joy, (...), a cheerful temper of mind, in
opposition to moroseness and frowardness: Then Peace, (...), a composedness and
sedateness of spirit, free from all inordinate perturbations, and without any
kind of itch of quarrelling with others: And next Longsuffering, (...), whereby
the mind is not easily provoked or tired, but is easily appeased: Then
Gentleness, (...), generosity, benignity, which signifies' a mind most ready to
part with any thing, toward the help and relief of others in their
necessities: Then Goodness, (...), (i. e.) such an equal and ingenuous
simplicity of manners, whereby men are rendered easily tractable and placable,
and most amiable in the whole course of their conversations: Then Faith, (...),
a dependence upon God for our support and deliverance: Then Meekness, (...),
whereby we put a restraint upon our anger, so as not to be provoked for any
lesser cause, or in a greater measure, or for a longer time, than may be
fitting for the occasion; always preserving our minds free from any sudden
gusts of passion. And lastly, Temperance, (...), continence, whereby we contain
all our passions with their just bounds, either of joy in the affluence of
things, or of grief in the loss, or of desire in the want of them.

A mind that is modelled and prepared with these kind of virtues, will thereby
be rendered generous and courageous, fit for the undergoing of any kind of
trouble or suffering, which the providence of God shall think fit to call a man
unto.

I have now done with the First thing I proposed to treat of, namely, The
Reasonableness and Credibility of the Principles of Natural Religion; in which
I have endeavored to establish the belief of Gods being, to clear the natural
notions of his Excellencies and Perfections, and to deduce the obligation of
Moral Duties, from the belief and acknowledgment of the Divine Nature and
Perfections.

THE SECOND BOOK, OF THE Wisdom of Practicing the Duties of Natural Religion.
CHAP. I.
Showing in general how Religion conduces to our Happiness.

I proceed now to the second Part of my design, which was to show The Wisdom of
Practicing the Duties of Natural Religion. In which I shall endeavor to
convince men, how much it is, upon all accounts, their chief happiness and
interest to lead a religious and virtuous course of life.

Solomon, who is so much celebrated in Scripture for his wisdom and knowledge,
has purposely written a Book, the main argument whereof is to enquire, wherein
the chief happiness of man does consist: And having in the former part of it
showed the insufficiency of all other things that pretend to it, he comes in
the conclusion to fix it upon its true basis, asserting every man's greatest
interest and happiness, to consist in being religious. Let us hear the
cnclusion. of the whole Eccl. 12. 13.
matter; Fear God, and keep his commandments: for this is the whole of man.
That is, the serious practice of Religion is that which every considerate man
after all his other disquisitions, will find to be his chief interest, and that
which does deserve his utmost care and diligence.

And because these words of Solomon, do so fully express that, which is to be
the main argument of my following discourse, I shall by way of preface or
introduction to it, more particularly consider the commendation which he here
gives to the practice of Religion, in that full and significant expression,
this is the whole of man.

Which words are by the Septuagint and Vulgar thus rendered, this is All, or
Every man. The word duty which is supplied by our English, being not in the
original, or in other Translations. This ought to be the way and course of all
mankind, so the Targum. This is the course to which every man is designed, so
the Syriack. This will be most profitable and advantageous to men, so the
Arabic. Hoc est totum hominis. This is the whole of man; so some of our later
Interpreters, mosg properly to the scope of the place, it being an usual
Enallage in the Hebrew, totius universalis pro toto integrante, All for Whole.

So that according to these various interpretations of the words, they may
contain in them a threefold reference. To the Essence, the Happiness, the
Business of man.

According to which the sense of them must be, that Religion, or the fearing of
God and keeping his commandments is a matter of so great consequence to Humane
Nature, that

1. The Essence or Being of man may be said to consist in it.

2. The great Business or duty of man, is to be conversant about it, and to
labor after it.

3. The Happiness or well-being of man does depend upon it.

These particulars I shall endeavor to make out by such clear Principles of
Reason, attested to by several of the wisest Heathen Writers, as may be enough
to satisfy any serious man, who is able to understand the reason and
consequence of things, and will but attend and consider.

First: Religion is of so great importance, that the Essence of man may be said
to consist in it. Man may be considered under a twofold notion:

1. In his single capacity, according to that principle whereby he is
constituted in such a rank of creatures.

2. In Society, for which man seems to be naturally designed, and without which
he could not well subsist. Now Religion will appear to be Essential to him, in
both these respects.

1. As considered in his single capacity, according to those principles by
which he is framed. That which does constitute any thing in its Being, and
distinguish it from all other things, this is that which we call the Form or
Essence of a thing. Now the things which distinguish Humane Nature from all
other things, are the chief principles and foundations of Religion, namely, the
Apprehension of a Deity, and an expectation of a future state after this life:
Which no other creature, below man, does partake of; and which are common to
all mankind, notwithstanding the utmost endeavors that can be used for the
suppressing of them.

As for what is commonly alleged in the behalf of Reason, it may be observed
that in the actions of many brate creatures, there are discernable some
footsteps, some imperfect strictures and degrees of Ratiocination; such a
natural sagacity as at least bears a near resemblance to reason. From whence it
may follow, that it is not Reason in the general, which is the Form of Humane
nature; But Reason as it is determined to actions of Religion, of which we do
not find the least signs or degrees in Brutes: Man being the only creature in
this visible world, that is formed with a capacity of worshipping and enjoying
his Maker. Nor is this any new opinion, but what several of the ancient
Writers, Philosophers, Orators, Poets, have attested to; who make the notion of
a Deity, and adoration of him, to be the true difference betwixt Man and Beast.

So Tully: Ex tot generibus nullum est De Leg. lib. 1.
animal praeter hominem, quod habeat notitiam aliquam Dei; ipsisque in
hominibus, nulla gens est, neque tam immansueta, neque tam fera, quae non
etiamsi ignoret, qualem habere Deum deceat, tamen habendum sciat. Amongst all
the living creatures that are in the world, there is none but Man, that has
any notion of a Deity; and amongst mankind, there is no Nation so wild and
barbarous, but pretends to some Religion; whence it should seem that this is
the most proper difference betwixt man and beasts. And in another place, he
makes this to be the Character of that Reason, which is the Form of man, that
it is vinculum Dei and hominis, which imports both name and thing.

Of the same sense is that of the Satyrist, who speaking of Religion and a
sense of Divine things, says this of it. -- separat hoc nos
A grege mutorum, atque ideo venerabile soli Jur. sat. 15.

Sortiti ingenium, divinorumque capaces.


It Is this, says he, which does distinguish us from brute creatures, That we
have souls capable of Divine impressions.

There are abundance of expressions to this purpose in several other of the
Heathen Writers. That in Plutarch, where De superstistitione.
he styles irreligion, a kind of stupor whereby men are as it were deprived of
their senses. And in another place, he asserts it to be an exceeding improper
thing, to ascribe true reason to those, who do not acknowledge and adore the
Deity. So again Tully, esse Deos qui negat, Not. Deor. lib. 2.
vix eum sanae mentis existimem. I can hardly think that man to be in his right
mind, who is destitute of Religion. And in another place of the same Book. Quis
hunc hominem dixerit? etc. Why should any one style such an one a man, who by
what he sees in the world is is not convinced of a Deity, and a providence, and
of that adoration he owes to the Deity? Non modo non philosophos, Lactant.
sed nec homines quidem fuisse dixerim, (says another). Men that are destitute
of Religion, are so far from being learned philosophers, that they ought not to
be esteemed so much as reasonable men.

It Is true, nothing is more ordinary than for such persons as are skeptical in
these first principles, to entertain great thoughts of themselves, as if they
had considered things more deeply, and were arrived unto a higher pitch of
reason and wit than others. But yet the plain truth is, they who have not
attained to this conviction of placing their chief interest in being religious,
they are so far from exceeding others in degrees, that they come short of the
very nature and essence of men, as being destitute of those first Notions
concerning truth and falsehood, good and evil, wherein the essence of a rational
Being does consist: Besides their palpable deficiency in such plain
consequences and deductions of Reason, as would become those, who in any
measure pretend to that principle.

So that, by what has been said, it may appear, that the Definition of Man may
be rendered as well by the Difference of Religiosum as Rationale. As for that
inconvenience which some may object, That Atheistical and profane persons will
hereby be excluded: Why, so they are by the other Difference likewise; such
persons having no just pretense to Reason, who renounce Religion: And it were
well, if they might not only be reckoned among Beasts (as they are by the
Psalmist, where he styles them brutish), but driven out amongst them likewise,
and banished from all humane society, as being public pests and mischiefs of
mankind, such as would debase the nobility of our natures to the condition of
brute creatures, and therefore are fit only to live amongst them. Which brings
me to the

2d. Consideration of Man as a sociable creature. Religion is essential to him,
in this respect also; as being the surest bond to tie men up to those
respective duties toward one another, without which Government and Society
could not subsist.

There is a remarkable passage in Plutarch to this purpose, where he styles
Religion, (...), the cement of all Community, and the Against Colotes.
chief Basis of all Legislative power. And in another place he says, That it is
much more easy to build a City in the open Air, without any ground to found it
upon, than to establish Government without Religion. A City (says he) may make
some shift to subsist without Walls, Schools, Theaters, Houses; nay, without
Money, but not without Religion.

If it were not for this notion of a Deity, and those natural impressions which
we have concerning Justice and Probity, so necessary for the conservation of
humane society; instead of those well-ordered Governments and Cities which are
now in the world, Mankind must have lived either wild and solitary in Caves and
Dens, like savage beasts; or else in troops of Robbers, subsisting upon the
spoil and rapine of such as were weaker than themselves.

Pietate sublata, sides etiam, and societas Not. Deor. lib. 1.
humani generis, and una excellentissima virtus justitia tollitur, says Tully.
Take but away the awe of Religion, and all that Fidelity and Justice, so
necessary for the keeping up of humane society, must perish with it.

It Is this fear of a Deity, and the sense of our obligation to Him, that is the
only effectual means to restrain men within the bounds of duty. And were this
wholly extinguished, there would follow such wild disorders and extravagancies
amongst men, as would not leave so much as the face or least shadow of virtue
or honesty in the world. There being no kind of vice which men would not
abandon themselves unto, considering the impetuousness of their own natural
appetites, and the power of external temptations, were this restraint from
Religion once removed or abolished.

The two chief Opposites to Religion, are Profaneness and Superstition. Both
which are prejudicial to civil Government; the one by destroying conscience,
the strongest obligation to political duties; the other by perverting and
abusing it; introducing in the stead of it a new primum mobile, which ravisheth
the spheres of Government, and puts them into a praeternatural course, as a
Noble Author Lord Bacons Essays.
expresses it.

The two grand Relations that concern society, are Government and Subjection:
And Irreligion does indispose men for both these.

1. For Government. Without Religion Magistrates will lose that courage and
confidence belonging to their stations, which they cannot so well exert in
punishing the offenses of others, when they are guilty of the same or the like
themselves. Those that sit on the throne of judgment, should be able to scatter
away evil with their eyes, as Solomon speaks, Prove. 20. 8. By their very
presence and looks to strike an awe upon offenders. Which will not be so easily
done, if they lie under the same guilt themselves. Sine bonitate nulla
majestas, says Seneca; the very nature of majesty does denote Goodness as well
as Power. And without this, Governors may easily lose that Reverence which is
due to them from others, and consequently that Authority which they ought to
have over them. When they cease to be Gods in respect of their Goodness, they
will soon diminish in their Power. And though they should be able to keep men
under, as to their bodies and estates, yet will they decline as to that awful
love and reverence whereby they should sway over the hearts and affections of
men.

The Philosopher in the fifth Book of his Politics, does lay it down as a rule
Cap. 11.
for Magistrates, That they must be careful to give public testimonies of
their being religious and devout; for which he gives this double reason:
Because the people will be less subject to entertain any jealousy or suspicion
of suffering injury, from such whom they believe to be religious: And withal,
they will be less subject to attempt the doing of injury against such; as
knowing that good Magistrates are after a more especial manner under the divine
favor and protection, (...), having God to fight with them, and for them.

2. The want of this will indispose men for the condition of Subjects, and
render them loose and unstable in those duties of obedience and submission
required to that state. How can it be expected from that man, who dares affront
and despise God himself, that he should have any hearty reverence for His
Deputies and Vicegerents?

He that is subject only upon the account of wrath, and the power of the sword
which is over him, will be no longer so, when he has an opportunity of
escaping or resisting that power. Nor is there any possible way to secure men
in their quiet subjection and obedience, but by their being obliged for
conscience sake. And therefore such kind of persons, as Romans 13. 5.
by their open profaneness and contempt of Religion, do endeavor to destroy
conscience from amongst men, may justly be esteemed as the worst kind of
seditious persons, and most pernicious to Civil Government.

That temper of Profaneness, whereby a man is disposed to contemn and despise
all Religion (how slightly soever men may think of it) is much worse than
Infidelity, than Fanaticalness, than Idolatry; and of the two, it is much more
eligible for a man to be an honest Heathen and a devont Idolater, than a
profane Christian.

Whatever disputes have been raised, concerning the lawfulness of punishing men
for their dissenting consciences in matters of Religion; yet never any man
questioned the lawfulness of punishing men, for their profaneness and contempt
of all Religion. Such men as renounce conscience, cannot pretend that they
suffer for it. And certainly this Vice does upon many accounts deserve the
greatest severity of Laws, as being in its own nature destructive of the very
principles of Government, and the peace of all humane Societies: Besides the
mischiefs consequent upon it, from Divine vengeance.

It Is an observation of Seneca, That De Benef. lib. 3. c. 6.
several Countries do appoint several punishments for the violation of
Religion, but every Country appoints some, and it does not any where escape
unpunished. Plato in his Book de Legibus, would have it punished capitally, as
lib. 10.
being a thing of most pernicious consequence to Government. It Is a rule in the
Civil Law, that Religio contaminata ad omnium pertinet injuriam; The abuse Lib.
4. cap. de Haeret.
of Religion is to be looked upon as being a common injury, and every man is
concerned, to endeavor a vindication of it. And there are some instances in
story, Grotius de Jure belli and pacis, l. 2. cap. 20. sect. 51.
of Wars that have been undertaken upon this very account, to bring a Nation to
punishment for that profaneness they have expressed toward the Religion they
professed and pretended to, as being injurious to mankind, quod orbis viribus
lib. 8.
expiari debuit, as Justin the Historian speaks, which the whole world ought to
vindicate and expiate by their common forces.

There can be no assurance from loose irreligious persons, that they will be
faithful in the ordinary duties belonging to their several ranks and stations.
And as for any extraordinary Heroical action, by which the public welfare is
to be promoted, men that are without conscience of Religion, and a sense of
Virtue, can never apply themselves to any thing of that kind, as having their
minds destitute of all such principles as are sublime and generous, without any
the least seed of honor, and piety, and virtue; and therefore they can have no
sparks of magnanimity, nor any the least inclination to actions that are truly
great and noble.

So that upon all these accounts, it is very evident, That Religion is totum
heminis in this first sense, as it refers to the Essence of Man, considered
either in his single capacity, or as a member of Society.

2. It Is so likewise as it refers to the Business and Duty of Man, that which
he ought to be most intent upon, and conversant about, as to his employment in
this world: that General calling, in which every man of what rank or quality
soever, is to be engaged. Men are distributed under other particular callings,
according as their education, abilities, friends, and several opportunities do
dispose of them. But the obligation of Religion, being of universal
concernment, does extend to all and every particular, there being none exempted
from it. Hoc est omnis homo. Every man is concerned in it. And it is totum
hominis likewise; It Is his calling, the chief business about which he is to be
employed.

I do not say, that a man's thoughts are always to be taken up about the
immediate acts of Religion, any more than a Traveller is always to have his
mind actually fixed upon the thought of his journies end. This would be
inconsistent with the infirmity of our natures, and the necessity of our
conditions in this world. But yet, as he that is upon a journey, does so order
all his particular motions, as may be most conducible to his general end; so
should men habitually, though they cannot actually, in every affair have
respect to their chief end, so as to observe all the duties of Religion, and
never to allow themselves in any thing against the rules of it. And he that
has this care continually upon his mind (though he be but a secular person)
may properly be said to make Religion his Business.

The Wise man in the beginning of his Eccles. 2. 3.
Book, had proposed it as his great Question to be discussed, to find out what
was that good for the sons of men, which they should do under the Heavens, all
the days of their lives. (i. e.) What was the chief employment or business,
which they should apply themselves to in this world? And in the conclusion of
his discourse, after an induction and refutation of all other particulars,
which may seem to have any claim or pretense to this, He asserts it to be the
business of Religion, Fearing God, and keeping his commandments: Suitably to
that Precept of Moses, Deuteronomy. 10. 12. And now, O Israel, what does the Lord thy
God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, and to
serve the Lord thy God, and keep his commandments: And the Acts 24. 16.
Practice of St. Paul, who made this his daily exercise, to keep his conscience
void of offense, both toward God and toward Man.

To the Reasonableness of this, several of the wisest Heathens have attested.
That Is a remarkable passage in Aristotle Moral. 1. ad Eudem.
to this purpose, where he states that to be the most desirable proportion of
all worldly felicities and enjoyments, which is most consistent with men's
devoting themselves to the business of Religion: And that to be either too much
or too little of wealth, or honor, or power, etc. whereby men are hindered in
their meditating upon God, or their worshipping of him.

So Epictetus, discoursing concerning Dissert. 1. 6.
the work and business he was designed to, has this excellent passage: If I
had been made a Nightingale or a Swan, I should have employed the time of my
life in such a way as is suitable to the condition of those Creatures: But
being made a Man, capable of serving and worshipping that God, from whom I had
my Being, it is but reason that I should apply my self to this, as being my
proper work and business: (...): And therefore hereunto will I devote my self,
as being the chief employment to which I am designed. I am now as to the
condition of my body, lame and old (says he in the same place) to which he
might have added that he was sickly and deformed; and as for his outward
quality, he was poor and under servitude, being a slave to Epaphroditus, one of
the Roman Courtiers; which are conditions that usually expose men to repining
and discontent; and yet he concludes it to be his duty, wholly to devote
himself to the praises and worship of that God, who was the Author of his
Being. Which upbraids so many professors of Christianity, who have both more
advantages of knowing their duty, and greater engagements upon them to exercise
themselves in the duties of Religion.

There is another apposite Testimony to this purpose in Antoninus. Every thing
(says he) is designed for some kind Lib. 8. Sect. 19.
of work. Beasts and plants, the sun and stars; (...); And what do you conceive
your business to be? sensual pleasures? Bethink your self a little better,
whether this be suitable to your natural sentiments, to the nobility of your
mind, and those excellent faculties with which you are endowed.

Now it is the usual course of men to apply themselves to that as their chief
business, by which their interest is most promoted, and which may most conduce
to that main end which they propose to themselves. And can any thing be more
reasonable, than for that to be the chief business of a man's life, which is
the chief end of his Being?

3. Religion is totum hominis, with respect to the Happiness and well-being of
Man. That is properly said to be the chief end or Happiness of a thing, which
does raise its nature to the utmost perfection of which it is capable,
according to its rank and kind. This is the chief end which he ought to
propose, that alone wherein his true felicity does consist, that which does
advance his nature to the utmost perfection it is capable of. The chief good
belonging to a Vegetable or Plant, is to grow up to a state of Maturity, to
continue to its natural period, and to propagate its kind, which is the utmost
perfection that kind of Being is capable of. And whereas sensitive creatures,
besides those things which are common to them with Plants, have likewise such
faculties, whereby they are able to apprehend external objects, and to receive
pain or pleasure from them: Therefore the Happiness proper to them, must
consist in the perfection of these faculties, namely, in sensible pleasures, in
the enjoyment of such things as may be grateful to their senses. But now
Mankind (if we allow it to be a distinct rank of Creatures, superior to Brutes)
being endowed with such faculties, whereby it is made capable of apprehending a
Deity, and of expecting a future state after this life; It will hence follow,
That the proper happiness of Man must consist in the perfecting of these
faculties, namely, in such a state as may reconcile him to the Divine favor,
and afford him the best assurance of a blessed immortality hereafter: Which
nothing else but Religion can so much as pretend to.

It Is true indeed, the nature of Man, by reason of those other capacities
common to him with Plants and Brutes, may stand in need of several other
things, to render his condition pleasant and comfortable in this world, as
Health, Riches, Reputation, Safety, etc. Now herein is the great advantage of
Religion, that besides the principal work which it does for us, in securing our
future estates in the other world, it is likewise the most effectual means to
promote our happiness in this world.

In my discourse of this I shall first suggest something more generally,
concerning the nature of our chief end; And then descend to those particulars,
which are esteemed to be the chief ingredients to a state of Happiness.

Under the first of these I shall speak briefly to these Three things.

1. There is a necessity that every Man who will act rationally should propose
to himself some chief scope and end.

2. The chief end of every thing must be of such a nature, as may be most fit
to promote the perfection of that thing in its rank and kind.

3. This in rational Beings which are capable of it, must consist in a
communion with, and a conformity unto the chief Good, and consequently in being
religious.

1. There is a necessity that every man who will act rationally should propose
to himself some chief scope or end. The having of an end, is not so much a
moral duty, which supposes a liberty of acting, as a natural principle, like
that of the descent of heavy bodies; men must do so, nor can they do otherwise.
Such is the principle of self-preservation in all things; and this of acting
for an end, in all rational agents. The most loose and profligate wretches that
are, do and must act for an end, even in those very courses, wherein they put
the thought of their future state and their last account far from them. The
very suppressing and hardening themselves against the thought of their true
end, is in order to their present peace and quiet, which they do erroneously
substitute in the room of their chief end. That wherein men are commonly
defective, is in not exciting the thought of their chief end, and not
sufficiently considering and stating in their own minds, the most proper means
for the attaining of it. There are too many in the world that do (...), live ex
tempore, without any particular reference to their chief end, being immersed
only in present matters, animalia sine praeterito and futuro, without any
regard to what is past or future; like Ships upon the vast Ocean, without any
Compass or Pilot, that do rather wander than travel, being carried up and down
according as every wind or tide does drive them. And this the Philosopher does
worthily brand with the name of folly; Vita sine proposito, stultitiae
argumentum est; No greater Seneca.
argument of foolishness, than for a man not to be fixed upon some particular
design. Proponamus oportet, finem summi boni, ad quem omne factum nostrum Idem
Epist. 85.
dictumve respiciat; veluti navigantibus, ad sidus aliquod dirigendus est
cursus, says the same Author. There ought always to be some particular scope
and mark proposed, as the main end and drift of all our actions, as the star by
which we are to be guided in our voyage. Non disponet singula, nisi cui jam
vitae suae summa proposita est. 'Twill be a hard matter Epist. 31.
to proportion out particulars, till we know what is the main sum. This is the
true ground of the common mistakes amongst men, whilst they deliberate
concerning the several parts of their lives, but neglect the stating of what
should be the main design of the whole. He that intends to shoot at any thing,
must so manage the whole action, in levelling his arrow, and regulating his
hands, and exerting his strength so as may be most advantageous for hitting the
mark. As the efficient is in natural, so is the end amongst moral causes, of
principal efficacy. It Is this which is the chief rule of all our actions. And
therefore there is a necessity that some end be proposed and fixed upon.

2. The chief end of every thing must be of such a nature, as may be most fit
to promote the perfection of that thing in its rank and kind. Any thing that is
short of this, may be a means, or a subordinate end; but cannot be the chief
and ultimate end, if there be any thing desirable beyond it; (...), says
Aristotle; That is truly the chief Mag. Moral. lib. 2. cap. 2.
end, which is desired for it self; which being once obtained, we want no more;
That which does satiate and fill up the desires. Haec nihil vacare patitur
loci, totum animum tenet, desiderium omnium Epist. 74.
tollit, sola satis est, (says Seneca). In brief, it is that state, wherein a
thing enjoys all that good that it is capable of, and which is most suitable to
its nature.

3. This in rational Creatures must consist, in a communion with, and a
conformity to the supreme good; and consequently, in being religious. Which is
the meaning of those Scripture-expressions, of walking with God, and as becomes
the sons of the Most High; being followers of him; holy as he is holy; being
made partakers of a divine nature. And to this the Philosophers do likewise
consent. This is the meaning of that speech in Pythagoras, (...), Every man's
chief end should be a resemblance to God, a being made like to the Deity. So
Plato and Epictetus will have it to consist in following of God, (...). And
another, imitari quem colis, in imitating him whom we worship. So Seneca,
Summum bonum est, quod honestum est, and quod magis admirere, solum bonum
Epist. 74.
est quod honestum est. Not only the chief, but the only good does consist, in
what is honest and virtuous. Now the fruition of God cannot consist in any
external union or contact of our souls with the Deity, which Spirits are not
capable of; nor in any mere speculation, or intellectual gazing upon his
excellencies: But in such an influence, whereby he does communicate to us, such
divine qualities, as will exalt our faculties beyond their natural state, and
bring them into an assimilation and conformity to the most perfect Idea of
Goodness, together with an inward sensation of the effects of this in our
selves.

Having thus dispatched what I had to suggest concerning the nature of
Happiness in general, I proceed to speak to such particulars, as are esteemed
to be the most usual ingredients into such a state, and which do conduce to the
completing of it: whether they concern Our present condition in this world;
either our External welfare; consisting in 1. Health. 2. Liberty, Safety,
Quiet. 3. Possessions; with respect either to the sufficiency of them, for
answering our necessities; which is called Riches or Profit: Or to 4. The
Delight or Satisfaction we receive in these enjoyments, in the use and
suitableness of the things we possess; which is called Pleasure. 5. The Esteem
which we have amongst good men, whereby we are rendered acceptable and useful
to others; styled Honor or Reputation.
Internal welfare, or the happiness of our minds; which does consist in these
two things. 1. The due regulating and exalting of our faculties to their proper
function. 2. The Peace, Joy, Contentment, consequent thereupon.

The happiness of our future state. This does consist in such a fruition of the
supreme good, as our souls are capable of; and must depend upon such courses,
as can afford us the most rational assurance of blessedness and glory hereafter.


Now I shall endeavor to make it out by plain reason, that the Happiness of
our condition, in all these respects, does depend upon Religion. And that not
only morally, upon account of that reward, which virtuous actions do entitle a
man unto, from a just and wise providence; but naturally also, by reason of
that physical efficacy which the duties of Religion have, to procure for us all
those things wherein our temporal happiness consists; to promote the welfare,
not only of particular persons, but of public Communities of Mankind in
general, and of the whole Universe.

CHAP. II.
How Religion conduces to our present Happiness in this world: And first to the
happiness of the Outward man. 1. In respect of Health.

ANd because these things I have mentioned, (especially those of them which
concern our external happiness in this world) are the great aims and designs,
by which the generality of men are chiefly swayed in their actions; and
therefore like to prove very powerful motives to make men religious, if they
could be once effectually persuaded, that Religion is the most proper means for
the attaining of these things: I shall therefore endeavor to make out this
truth, by the plainest and most convincing vidence that may be. And the rather
because in such kind of assertions, as are besides the common opinion, and seem
paradoxes, men will be apt to be jealous of their being imposed upon by some
kind of Sophism or Fallacy.

In order to this, I shall observe this method: First, I shall endeavor to
state and define the nature of these things, and to show wherein the true
notion of them does consist. And then proceed to the proof of this proposition,
That Religion is the most proper means to procure and promote these ends. And
besides the evidence to this purpose, from the concurrent opinions of wise men,
in several ages; I shall likewise make them out both by reason, and by
experience, which are all the kind of arguments that such matters are capable
of.

Only I must premise one Caution; that when I say Religion is the cause of
these things, the meaning is not, that it is so necessary and so infallible a
cause, as can never fail of its effect. This would not be consistent with our
dependent condition, there being nothing in this world so much under the power
of humane endeavors, but that the providence of God may interpose for the
disappointment of it. To whom it must be left, to make what reserved cases he
pleases from the ordinary course of things. But though it be not an infallible
cause, yet is it such a cause as does generally and (...), produce its effect:
And all mankind do think it a sufficient inducement, to apply their endeavors
unto such courses for the procuring of any thing, as are the best means to be
had, and do for the most part effect the ends they are designed for.

This being premised, I doubt not but to offer such arguments for the proof of
these things, as shall be sufficient for the conviction of any man who will but
understand and consider them.

I begin with the First. The welfare of our present condition in respect of
our outward-man does depend upon Religion.

First, Religion is the best means for Health. By Health I mean such a
constitution of our bodies, whereby our members and faculties are enabled for
the due performance of their natural functions, and freed from pain; it is
properly opposed to sickness or Disease. As for the infirmities of old age,
these are so essential to all living creatures, so necessarily spring from the
very principles of our natures, that though they may be somewhat lessened and
alleviated, yet are they not capable of any complete remedy.

This blessing of Health is so necessary to our well-beings in this world, that
without it, we cannot enjoy any thing else, no not our own selves; insomuch
that men do, and may justly put a great value upon it, and are willing to
purchase it at any rate. And therefore to all such, this consideration must
needs be a very powerful motive.

Now I shall make it plain that this does depend upon Religion Morally.
Naturally.


1. Morally, By reason of those blessings of this kind, which by the light of
nature men may reasonably expect from the goodness of God, upon the observance
of his laws; besides the several assertions and promises in Scripture to this
purpose, where sin is often represented as the meritorious cause of sickness,
and diseases are often threatened, and accordingly inflicted as the due rewards
of sin: And on the other side, upon men's observing Deuteronomy. 28. 61.
the duties of Religion, God promises to take away sickness from the midst
Exodus 23. 25.
of them, to bestow upon them health and length of days. The fear of the Lord
Deuteronomy. 7. 15.
and departing from evil, shall be health to thy navel, and marrow to thy
bones. Prove. 3. 7, 8. Prove. 11. 19. As righteousness Prove. 4. 22. Isa. 58. 8.
tends to life, so he that pursues evil, pursues it to his own death. Chap.
2. 22, The wicked shall be cut off from the earth, and the transgressors shall
be rooted out of it.

2. Religion is the natural cause of health, which may appear upon this
twofold reason; because it does remove those things that will hinder it, and
does promote such things as will help it.

1. It does removere prohibens, it is apt to prevent and remove such things as
are the great impediments of our health. Nothing is more evident, than that
there are several vices which have a physical efficacy in the producing of
diseases, as all kind of intemperance of body, all inordinate passions of mind;
to one of which, the greatest part of the sickness amongst men may be ascribed;
and consequently the virtues opposite to these, Temperance, Sobriety,
Moderation, must needs have a natural causality for the hindering of these
diseases. It Is by Religion that men are enabled to prevent all such excesses as
are prejudicial to nature, to repress all such violent transports of passion,
Hatred, Anger, Fear, Sorrow, Envy, etc. as are in themselves very pernicious to
our bodily health, and by that violent commotion, which they are apt to put the
humors into, do sometimes cause present sickness, and always lay in us the
seeds of future Diseases.

2. It does promovere adjuvans, promote all such things as may most effectually
conduce to the improving of our health; by obliging us upon the account of duty
and conscience, to a careful observance of the most proper means to this end:
Keeping us within due bounds in our eating, drinking, exercise; preserving our
minds in an equal frame of serenity and calmness; supporting our spirits with
contentation and cheerfulness under every state of life; so that nothing can be
more true than that of Solomon, That A cheerful mind does good like a medicine,
Prove. 17. 22. 15. 13. 12. 25.
and makes a healthy countenance; whereas heaviness and cares will break a man's
spirit and make it stoop.

I know there are other means to be made use of in order to the procuring of
health, various kinds of Medicaments to be applied by the art of Physic,
according as the nature of several diseases shall require, which Religion does
oblige a man not to neglect: But yet this I think may be truly said, That
those who are most expert in the profession of Physic, are not able to
prescribe any Catholicon, which shall more effectually operate, both by way of
prevention and cure, than the observance of those duties which Religion and
virtue do oblige us unto.

Nor is this true only in Theory and Speculation, but it may appear to be so
upon common experience, to which I shall appeal for the further confirmation of
it. What kind of persons are those who enjoy the best state of health and the
longest lives? Are they not such generally who are most sober and regular in
their conversations, most temperate as to their bodies, most free from all kind
of inordinate passions, fierceness, anxiety, cares as to their minds? It Is said
of Moses, that though he were exceeding Deuteronomy. 34. 7.
old, yet his eye was not dim, nor was his natural force abated. Which (amongst
other causes) may be ascribed to those eminent virtues he was endowed with, the
temperance of his body, and meekness of his spirit. That beloved Disciple whose
thoughts and writings seem to be wholly taken up with the Divine virtue of
Love, is upon account of this temper of his mind, thought to have enjoyed a
more vigorous old age than any of the rest: Such a power is there in Religion,
though not wholly to prevent the infirmities of old age, yet in a great measure
to alleviate and abate them.

And on the other side, if we consult experience; Who are the men most
obnoxious to diseases? are they not such generally as are most vicious in their
lives? most given to surfeits, debaucheries and lewdness, whereby they do so
far inflame their blood and wast their spirits, as not to live out half their
days: Insomuch that no man of ordinary prudence, who is to take a Lease for
lives, will be content (if he can well avoid it) to choose such a one whom he
knows to be vicious and intemperate.

But these things are so obvious to common experience, that I need not enlarge
upon them: Only I would not be mistaken. I do not say that none of those are
Religious, who are liable to diseases, and are taken away in their younger
years; or that all such are religious, who are free from diseases, and live to
old age. Some may be naturally of so tender and brittle a make, that every
little blow will break them; others of so tough and strong a constitution, as
to hold out against many batteries and assaults; and yet neither of these to be
ascribed, either to the vices of the one, or the virtues of the other, but do
rather belong to their condition and temper, which being natural, and not
falling under the choice of our wills, is not therefore capable of any moral
good or evil.

Besides, there ought allowance to be made (as I said before) for such exempt
cases, as shall seem good to the providence of God in the government of humane
affairs. Some good men may be taken away from the evil to come, others may be
exercised with diseases in their bodies for the cure of their minds, or to make
their patience and courage exemplary to others. And some that are good men for
the main, may yet by their own carelessness in using the fittest means for the
preservation of their health, expose themselves to sickness; none of which can
be any prejudice to the thing I have been proving. This being that which I
affirm, that so far as the infirmities of our natural tempers are capable of
remedy by any thing in our power, It is the observance of the duties of
Religion, that does for the most part and generally prove the most effectual
means to this purpose. Which is all I shall say to the first thing I proposed
to speak to, concerning the health of our bodies.

CHAP. III.
How Religion conduces to the happiness of the outward man, in respect of
Liberty, Safety, and Quiet.

SEcondly, Religion is the most proper means to procure our external safety,
liberty, quiet.

By safety, I mean a freedom from those common dangers and mischiefs which
others are exposed to.

By liberty, the being at our own disposal, and not under bondage, restraint,
imprisonment.

By quiet, an exemption from those many molestations and troubles by reason of
disappointments, enmity, contentions, whereby the conditions of some men are
rendered very burdensome and uncomfortable.

I put these things together, because of their near affinity to one another.

Now Religion is both the moral and the natural cause of these things.

1. It Is the moral cause of them, upon account of that divine protection and
assistance, which the light of nature will assure us we are entitled unto in
the doing of our duties; besides the many assertions and promises in Scripture
to this purpose; of being protected in our ways, and secured in times of
danger. If you will Lev. 25. 18
keep my statutes, ye shall dwell in the land in safety. Whosoever hearkeneth to me
shall Prove. 1. 33.
dwell safely, and shall be quiet from the fear of evil. There shall no evil
happen to Prove. 12. 21.
the just, but the wicked shall be filled with mischief. The Lord delivers the
righteous Psalm. 34. 17
out of all their troubles. When a man's ways please the Lord, he will make his
enemies to be at peace with him.

2. It Is the natural cause of these blessings, by preventing or removing all
such things, whereby the contrary evils are occasioned. The most usual and
general cause of men's sufferings, is from the neglect of their duty, and the
violations of law; they are obnoxious to the punishments of banishment,
imprisonment, loss of goods, or of life, upon the account of some illegal
irreligious acts, murder, theft, sedition, injuring of others, needless
contentions, meddling in other men's affairs where they are not concerned. It Is
observable, that in the legal form of inditing men for crimes, our Law does
ascribe their guilt to their want of Religion, their not having the fear of God
before their eyes, which does dispose them to commit such acts as makes them
obnoxious to legal punishment. Now nothing can so effectually prevent such
things as Religion. This will teach men to obey laws, and submit to government:
This will keep them within the bounds of their duty, both toward God and man:
This will remove all those dividing principles, of selfishness, and pride, and
covetousness: It will teach them charity and meekness and forbearance, to study
public peace and common good, to be generous and large in their well-wishing
and their well-doing: Which are the most proper means to provide for our own
quiet and safety.

And the truth of this may be evident likewise from common experience; by which
it will appear, that for the general, no kind of men do enjoy so much external
peace and freedom and safety, as those that are truly religious. The Apostle
seems to appeal to that common notion in the minds of all men, concerning the
safety belonging to innocence, when he puts it by way of question, who is he
that will harm you, if you be followers of that which is good? Implying, that
it is a thing generally known and taken notice of, that there is a kind of
natural reverence and awe amongst the worst of men, toward such as are
innocent and virtuous.

And on the other side no men do incur so many hazards, molestations,
contentions, as those that are vicious; what from their violations of law,
their needless provocations of those they converse with, being scarce ever free
from danger and trouble; which the Wiseman seems to appeal to, as a thing
evident from experience, in those short questions which he proposes: Who has
woe? who has sorrow? Prove. 23. 29.
who has contentions? who has bablings? who has wounds without cause? who
has redness of eyes? It Is particularly spoken of the drunkard, but it is
proportionably true of other vices likewise.

There is one objection that lies very obvious against what I have been
proving; and that is from those Scriptures where it is said, that whoever will
live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution, and that the world should
hate them; besides what may be alleged from common experience to this purpose,
concerning the sufferings of some that are good men.

To this two things may be said by way of answer.

1. Every thing is not persecution for Religion, which men may be apt to style
so. Some persons who for the main may be truly religious, may yet by their own
follies and imprudence, expose themselves to needless sufferings. And in such
cases, Religion is not to be charged as being the cause of their suffering, but
their defect in it, and mistakes about it.

2. There may be (as was said before) some exempt cases from the general rule,
and such must those be granted to be, which concern times of persecution; when
Religion will be so far from protecting a man, that it will rather expose him
to danger and sufferings. And such were those primitive times to which these
Scriptures do refer, when it seemed good to divine providence, to make use of
this as one means for the propagating of Christianity in the world, namely, by
the suffering of those that professed it. And in such cases, when men are
persecuted properly upon the account of Religion, God does usually compensate
their outward sufferings with some inward advantage, supplying them with such
patience and courage, as will support them with joy and comfort in their
suffering for that which is good. But then it must withal be granted, that
these Scriptures are not equally applicable to such other times and places,
when and where the true Religion is publicly professed and encouraged, when
Kings are nursing fathers, and Queens nursing mothers to the Church; because in
such times and places, the profession of Religion will be so far from
hindering, that it will rather promote a man's secular advantage.

CHAP. IV.
How Religion conduces to the happiness of the outward man in respect of Riches.

THirdly, as to our Estates and Possessions, I shall show that Religion is the
cause of Riches. In order to the proof of this, the first thing to be enquired
into, is, what is the true nature of wealth or riches, and wherein it may
properly be said to consist. And here it is to be noted, that the word Riches
is capable of a twofold sense, Absolute, Relative.


1. In the more absolute sense, it may be defined to consist in such a measure
of estate as may be sufficient for a man's occasions and conveniences; when his
possessions are so proportioned, as may fully answer all the necessities of his
condition, and afford him a comfortable subsistence, according to his quality,
the station wherein he is placed. In which sense men of all ranks and degrees
are capable of being rich. A Husbandman, or an ordinary Tradesman may be as
truly styled a rich man, as he that is a Gentleman, or a Lord, or a King.
Though perhaps what these can very well afford to fling away upon their
diversions, be more than all the estate and possessions which the other can
pretend to. And upon this ground it is, that all men will grant, one person to
be as truly liberal in giving but a penny, or a poor mite, as another in giving
a hundred pounds, because these things are to be measured by the different
conditions of the givers: And a man may as well be rich with a little, as
liberal with a little.

2. In the more relative sense, Riches may be described to consist in the
having of large Possessions, when a man's Estate and Revenue is of such a
proportion as is commonly esteemed Great; whether with relation to the
generality of other men, and so only those at the upper end of the world are
capable of being counted rich; or else with respect to others of the same rank
and order, and so all such are counted rich, who do in their possessions exceed
the common sort of those that are of the same rank with them; this kind of
wealth consisting properly in comparison: There being not any one determinate
sum, or proportion of revenue, to which the name of riches may be appropriated,
but that it may be as much below the occasions of some persons, as it is above
the condition of others who yet live plentifully.

Now the first of these is the only proper notion of Riches, because this alone
is agreeable to the chief end of wealth, which is to free us from want and
necessity. And the other may be rather styled, the being proprietour of great
possessions, the mere having of which cannot denominate one a truly rich man
for this plain reason; because though such possessions be in themselves great,
yet they may not be sufficient to free the owner of them from want and poverty,
whether in respect to his real or imaginary occasions for more: And that is not
Riches which cannot free a man from being poor. And want of necessaries, is as
truly poverty in him that has much, as in him that has but a little. He that
in any one condition of life, has enough to answer all his conveniences, such
a man is more truly rich than he whose revenue is a thousand times greater, if
it be not equal either to his occasions, or to his mind.

Now when it is said, that Religion is the cause of Riches, the meaning of this
cannot reasonably be understood of Riches in the second sense, as if he that
were religious should be thereby advanced to the greatest possessions that any
man else does enjoy, from the condition of a Peasant or a Tradesman to that of
a Prince. Because this would no more consist with those several degrees and
subordinations required to the order of the Universe, than it would for every
common Soldier to be a General, or every private man to be a King. But the
meaning of this proposition must be, that Religion will be a means to supply a
man with such a sufficiency as may denominate him rich; and to free him from
such necessities, whether real or imaginary, as others of his rank and station
are liable unto.

So that by what has been said, it may appear, that the true notion of Riches
does comprehend under it these two things.

1. A sufficiency for a man's occasions and conveniences.

2. An acquiescence of mind, in so much as is in it self really sufficient, and
which will appear to be so, supposing a man to judge according to right reason.

And that this is not a mere fancy or notion, but the most proper sense of the
word Riches, wherein all mankind have agreed, may be made very evident.

Concerning the first of these there can be no color of doubt. All the scruple
will be concerning the second; Whether that be necessary to make a man rich.
And to this the Philosophers do generally attest. Aristotle in particular, does
affirm that the true nature of Riches does consist Rhet. lib. 1. cap. 5.
in the contented use and enjoyment of the things we have, rather than in the
possession of them. Those that out of penuriousness can scarce afford
themselves the ordinary conveniences of life out of their large possessions,
have been always accounted poor; nay, he that cannot use and enjoy the things
he does possess, may upon this account be said to be of all others the most
indigent, because such a one does truly want the things he has, as well as
those he has not.

That man who is not content with what is in it self sufficient for his
condition, neither is rich, nor ever will be so; because there can be no other
real limits to his desires, but that of sufficiency; whatever is beyond this,
being boundless and infinite. And though men may please themselves with an
imagination, that if they had but such an addition to their Estates, they
should then think they had enough; yet that is but a mere imagination, there
being no real cause, why they should be more satisfied then, than they are now.

He that is in such a condition as does place him above contempt, and below
envy, cannot by any enlargement of his fortune be made really more rich, or
more happy than he is. And he is not a wise man, if he do not think so; nor is
he in this either wise or worthy if he be so far solicitous as to part with his
liberty, though it be but in some little servilities for the increasing of his
Estate.

These things being premised, it may be made very evident, that the design of
being truly rich, that is, of having enough and being contented, will be most
effectually promoted by Religion; and that both Morally and Naturally.

1. Morally, upon which account this is by the Philosophers owned to be one of
the rewards belonging to virtue; good men only having a Moral title to wealth
upon account of fitness and desert. There are many assertions and promises in
Scripture to this purpose, of being prospered in our stores and labors, and
all that we set our hands unto, of lacking nothing Psalm. 34. 10
that is good for us. It Is this that must entitle us to the blessing of God,
and it is the blessing of God that makes rich. Solomon speaking of Religion
under the name of Wisdom, says, that in her left hand Prove. 3. 16 c. 7. 8, 18.
8. 21.
are riches, durable riches, that she causes those that love her to inherit
substance, and does fill their treasures. And the Apostle tells us, that
Godliness has the promises of this life.

2. Religion is a natural cause of riches, with reference to those two chief
ingredients required to such a state; namely, the supplying of us with a
plentiful sufficiency as to our possessions, and a satisfaction as to our minds.

1. A sufficiency as to our estates and possessions. There are but these two
ways that can contribute to the improving of men's possessions, namely, the Art
of getting and of keeping. Now Religion is an advantage to men in both these
respects. Nothing can be more evident than that there are many virtues which
upon these accounts have a natural tendency to the increasing of men's estates,
as diligence in our callings, The diligent hand makes rich; heedfulness to
improve all sitting opportunities, of providing for our selves and families,
being provident in our expenses, keeping within the bounds of our income, not
running out into needless debts: In brief, all the lawful arts of gain and good
husbandry, as to the exercise of them, are founded in the virtues which
Religion teaches.

On the contrary it is plain, that there are many kind of sins, which have a
direct natural efficacy for the impoverishing of men: As all kind of
sensuality, and voluptuousness, idleness, prodigality, pride, envy, revenge,
etc. of all which may be said what Solomon says of one of them, that they bring
a man to a morsel of bread, and clothe him with rags.

2. And as for the second requisite to riches, satisfaction of mind with our
conditions, and a free use of the things we enjoy. This is the property of
Religion, that it can enable a man to be content with his estate, and to live
comfortably without such things as others know not how to want. And the ability
of being content with a little, may be much more truly called riches, than the
having of much, without being satisfied therewith. It Is better to be in health
with a moderate appetite, than to be continually eating and drinking under the
disease of a voracious appetite or a Dropsy: And in this sense, A little that
the righteous has, is better than great riches of the ungodly. Psalm. 37. 16.


But this may appear likewise from experience. Let any man impartially
consider, what kind of persons those are amongst the generality of men, who in
their several degrees and orders are counted most able, and most wealthy, and
it will appear that they are such as are most serious in the matter of
Religion, most diligent in their callings, most just and honest in their
dealings, most regular and sober in their conversations, most liberal toward
any good work; upon which account it is, that such places, where men have the
opportunity of being instructed in, and excited to the Duties of Religion, do
thereupon thrive and flourish most; it being one property of Religion to
civilize men, and make them more inquisitive in learning, and more diligent in
practicing their several professions.

And as for contentment of mind, this being in it self a virtue as well as a
privilege, it is not to be attained but upon the account of Religion; nor are
there any that enjoy it, but such as are truly virtuous.

There are several objections that may be made against what I have been
proving, but all of them capable of a plain and satisfactory solution.

1. There are some kind of virtues that seem to have a contrary tendency; as
charity to those that want, bounty and liberality to any good work, which in
Aristotle's judgment is scarce consistent Ethic. lib. 4. cap. 1.
with growing rich.

By that saying of Aristotle, may be meant riches in the second sense, as it
denotes large possessions, which this virtue of liberality does not naturally
promote; but it may very well consist with riches in the first and most proper
notion of it, as it denotes sufficiency for our occasions; and the ability of
contributing in some proportion, toward any worthy and charitable work, is in
the esteem of every good man one of those occasions and conveniences required
to such a sufficiency, and cannot any more be a prejudice to it, than it would
be for a man to lay up some part of his wealth in the safest place, to lend it
out upon the best interest, to part with it for the purchase of the same favor
and assistance from others in the like exigencies; to lay it out upon his
pleasure, with respect to that inward comfort and satisfaction, which does
accompany the conscience of doing worthy things. And besides all this,
experience will assure us, that there is a secret blessing which does for the
most part accompany such actions; so that men grow the richer and not the
poorer for them: And they that in this kind sow bountifully, do very often,
even in this world, reap bountifully.

2. There are some kind of vices that seem to have a tendency to the enriching
of men, as fraud, extortion, sordidness, all kind of unlawful ways of getting
and keeping an estate. But to this it may be said,

1. These vices may tend to the increasing of men's possessions, but not to the
making of them truly rich: And it is a plain argument that such persons do not
think themselves to have a sufficiency, who can apply themselves to such
wretched courses for the getting of more.

2. It Is commonly seen upon experience, that there is a secret curse attends
such practices, a canker that eats into such gain, a hole in the bottom of the
bag, by which it insensibly dreins out and wastes away. As the Partridg sits
upon Jer. 17. 11.
eggs and hatcheth them not, so he that gets riches, and not by right, shall
leave them in the midst of his days, and at the end shall be a fool. As that
silly bird does sometimes take much needless care and pains, in sitting upon
and cherishing subventaneous eggs, such as can never be fruitful, which (as
Naturalists observe) that creature is very subject unto, or as the fecund eggs
of that bird being laid upon the ground, are many times trod upon by passengers
or wild beasts, after it has bestowed much pains for the hatching of them: So
are the wicked designs of gain often disappointed in the Embryo; and the
contrivers of them, instead of approving themselves to be more wise and subtle
men than others, do appear at last to be fools. He that will carefully observe
the usual course of things in the world, may from his own experience find
instances enough, to confirm those sayings of the wise man; There is that
scatters, and yet increases, and Prove. 11. 24.
there is that withholdeth more than is meet, but it tends to poverty. Wealth
cap. 13. 11, 22.
gotten by vanity shall be diminished. The wealth of the sinner is laid up for
the just. He that oppresses the poor to increase cap. 22. 16.
his riches, shall surely come to want. He that by unjust gain increases his
substance, cap. 28. 8.
shall gather it for him that will pity the poor.

3. There are some good men that are poor. And it is said that God has chosen
the poor of this world, to receive the Jam. 2. 5.
Gospel and to be rich in faith. To this it may be said,

1. The providence of God may so order it sometimes, as to reduce good men to
great exigencies, to wander up and down in sheepskins and goatskins, being
destitute, afflicted, tormented. But then these are such particular exempt
cases, as are not suitable to the most usual and general course of things. And
besides, such as are good men, may sometimes be defective in several of those
duties which Religion does oblige them to, diligence, caution, etc. And the
poverty of such may justly be ascribed to their defect in Religion.

2. As for that scripture that God has chosen the poor in this world, It is
not to be understood in the more absolute sense, for such as want necessaries,
because it is plain from other Texts, that though some of the primitive
believers, were by reason of the persecution of those times reduced to great
exigencies; yet the generality of the rest were very liberal in their
contributions toward them. But it must be understood in the relative sense,
concerning such as might be styled comparatively poor, (i. e.) such as are of a
lower rank and meaner condition than others, and consequently had less
temptation to corrupt and seduce them, than those that did more abound in these
earthly things.

CHAP. V.
How Religion conduces to the happiness of the outward man in respect of
Pleasure; or the cheerful enjoyment of outward blessings.

FOurthly, Religion is the most proper means to promote the interest of
Pleasure.

In the handling of this, I shall first endeavor to state the true nature of
Pleasure, and to show what is the most proper notion of it. Now Pleasure does
consist in that satisfaction which we receive in the use and enjoyment of the
things we possess. It is founded in a suitableness and congruity betwixt the
faculty and the object. Those are called pleasant tastes and smells, which are
apt to excite such a gentle motion as is agreeable to the nerves appointed for
those functions. Now it cannot be denied, but that beasts and insects may be
said to be capable of pleasure proper to their kind, as well as men. Only this
must withal be granted, that the more noble and the more capacious the
faculties and the objects are, the greater will the delights be that flow from
the union of them. Upon which account all intellectual delights, do far exceed
those that are sensual; and amongst persons that are capable of intellectual
pleasures, their enjoyments must be greatest, whose faculties are most enlarged
and most vigorous. It Is true indeed, men of vitiated and depraved faculties,
though they are thereby disabled for passing a true judgment upon the nature of
things, being apt to mistake sour for sweet; yet will it not thence follow,
that they are incapable of pleasure: They may have such peculiar kinds of
gusts, as will be able to find a satisfaction and sweetness in such things as
appear nauseous and loathsome to others. And it is the congruity of things that
is the foundation of pleasure. But then such persons are beholding to their
ignorance and their delusion, to the distemper of their faculties, for their
relish of these things. None but those that are foolish and deceived, and under
the servitude of diverse lusts, devoting themselves to such kind of things for
pleasures. Supposing Tit. 3. 3.
a man to have sound healthy faculties, such an one will not be able to find
any true satisfaction and complacence, but only in those things which have in
them a natural goodness and rectitude. They must be regular objects that have
in them a suitableness to regular faculties.

This being premised by way of explication, I shall proceed to prove, That
Religion is the most proper means for the promoting of this interest; and this
it does Morally, Naturally.


1. Morally; as it is one of the rewards belonging to virtue, which alone upon
its own account does deserve all such advantages, as may render its condition
pleasant and comfortable in this world.

Besides the several assertions and promises in Scripture to this purpose.
Prove. 3. 17. speaking of Religion under the name of Wisdom, it is said, that
her ways are ways of pleasantness. The yoke of it is easy, (...), gracious and
sweet, and the Matt. 11. 30. 1 John 5. 3. Gal. 5. 22.
burden light. The commandments of it not grievous. The fruits of it are love,
and joy, and peace. The duties of Religion are in several places of Scripture
compared to music and to feasting; and are said to be sweeter than the honey
and the honeycomb. I delight to do thy will, O my God, Psalm. 40. 8.

2. Religion is the Natural cause of Pleasure. Which I shall endeavor to make
out by Reason and Experience.

1. By Reason; Religion has a natural efficacy in promoting the interest of
pleasure, teaching a man a cheerful liberal use of the things he enjoys; how to
make his soul enjoy good in his labor; how to sweeten and allay all the
difficulties and troubles of this life. Nor does it restrain men from any such
sensible pleasures, as are agreeable to reason, or our true interests. It only
prohibits mistakes and excesses about them, teaches us so to regulate our
selves in the use of them, that they may truly deserve the name of Pleasure;
how to provide against that natural emptiness and vanity, which there is in all
such things, whereby they are apt quickly to satiate and weary us; and upon
this account it may be said to promote rather than hinder the interest of
Pleasure.

As for the Pleasures of the Appetite, these abide no longer than till the
necessities and conveniences of nature are satisfied; and so far Religion does
allow of them. When our hunger and thirst is well appeased, all that follows
after is but a faint kind of pleasure, if it be not rather to be styled satiety
and a burden.

As for those kind of things, which we call by the name of sports and
diversions, Religion does likewise admit of a moderate use of these; and what
is beyond such a moderate use, does rather tire men, than recreate them: It
being as much the property of such things, to weary a man when he is once
sufficiently refreshed by them, as it is to refresh him when he is wearied by
other things.

We read indeed of the pleasures of sin; but besides that they are of a baser
and grosser kind, it is said also, that they are but for a season, but for a
moment, and the end of them is heaviness. The ways Job 20. 5.
of sin may seem broad and pleasant, but they lead down to death, and take hold
of hell. There are some vices that seem Prove. 5. 5.
sweet to the palate, but do after fill the mouth with gravel. There are
several sins 20. 17.
which have very specious and tempting appearances, which yet upon trial do
bite like a serpent, and sting like an adder. 23. 32.


By what has been said, it appears, that Religion is a natural cause of
promoting these sensible pleasures; besides, that it affords delights
incomparably beyond all these corporeal things, such as those who are strangers
to Religion cannot understand, and do not intermeddle with.

2. But besides the Reasons to this purpose, it may appear likewise from
Experience, that the great pleasure of men's lives is from the goodness of them;
such only being capable of a free and liberal enjoyment of what they possess,
who know how to regulate themselves in the fruition of them, to avoid
extremities on either hand, to prevent those mixtures of guilt and fear, which
will imbitter all their enjoyments. Such persons only who have good consciences
being capable of having a continual feast.

The great objection against this will be, from the difficulty of the duties of
mortification, repentance, self-denial, taking up the cross, etc. All which do
imply in them a repugnancy to our natures, and consequently an inconsistency
with pleasure.

For answer to this it must be observed, That difficulty does properly arise
from a disproportion betwixt the power and the work; as when a person of little
strength is put to carry a great burden, when one of a mean capacity is put to
answer an hard question in learning. Now supposing men to retain their vicious
habits, it must be granted, to be as difficult for such to perform the duties
of. Religion, or to forbear the acts of sin, as for a lame and impotent man to
run, or for a man under a violent Fever to be restrained from drinking. But
suppose these men cured of these maladies, and their faculties to be rectified,
then all this disproportion and unsuitableness will vanish; and those things
will become easy and delightful, which were before very difficult and
unpleasant. Now it is the property of Religion, that it changes the natures of
men, making them new creatures. It puts off the old man, which is corrupt
according to deceitful lusts, and puts on the new man, which after God is
created in righteousness and true holiness. It removes our vicious habits, and
endows the mind with other kind of inclinations and abilities. And though there
should be some difficulties in the very passage from one state to another, yet
this ought not to be objected as a prejudice against Religion; because there
are far greater difficulties and pains to be undergone in the service and
drudgery of impetuous lusts. The trouble of being cured, is not so great as
that of being sick; nor is the trouble of being sober comparable to that of
being debauched and intemperate. That godly sorrow which is required as one of
the first acts in the change of our condition, is always accompanied with
secret pleasure: And as it is said of wicked men, that in the midst of laughter
their heart is sorrowful; so may it be said of good men, that in the midst of
their sorrow their heart is joyful. And when the conditions of men are once
changed, when they are passed over to another state, it will then prove as
easy to them to observe the duties of Religion, as it was before to follow
their own sinful inclinations. An evil tree does not more naturally bring forth
evil fruit, than a good tree does bring forth good fruit.

As for that moroseness and sowreness of carriage which some men, who pretend
to Religion, are noted for; This is not justly to be ascribed to their
Religion, but to their want of it: Joy and chearsulness being not only a
privilege, but a duty which Religion does oblige men to, whereby they are to
adorn their profession, and win over others to a love of it.

CHAP. VI.
How Religion conduces to our Honor and Reputation.

FIfthly, for the interest of Honor and Reputation. This is one of the
greatest blessings which this world can afford, much to be preferred before
Riches or Pleasures, or Life it self. A good name is rather to be chosen than
great riches, and Prove. 22. 1.
loving favor rather than silver and gold. One that is a generous virtuous man
will choose to dye, rather than do any thing that may expose him to infamy. St.
Paul was of this mind; It were better for me to dye, than that any should make
1 Cor. 9. 15.
my glorying void. And because it is a thing of so great excellency, therefore
we do pay it, as the best service we can do, to God, and to his Deputies,
Magistrates and Parents. It Is by this that we are rendered useful and
acceptable to others. And besides the advantage we have by it while we live,
it is one of those things that will abide after us, when we are gone out of the
world; and for that reason a special regard is to be had to it. And the more
wise and virtuous any man is, the more care will he take to transmit a grateful
memory of himself to future times; and since he must be spoken of after his
departure, to take care that he be well-spoken of, that his name may be as a
precious ointment, leaving a perfume behind it, that men may rise up at the
mention of it and call him blessed. Nor can any man despise honor, but he that
does either despair of it, or resolve against doing any thing that may deserve
it.

Now honor is properly the esteem and good opinion which men have concerning
the person or the actions of another, together with such external expressions
of respect as are suitable thereunto.

And I shall make it appear, that this kind of happiness does depend upon
Religion both Morally, Naturally.


1. Morally. Nothing being more generally agreed upon amongst all the
Philosophers, than that honor is the peculiar reward of virtue, and does not
properly belong to any thing else. And that shame is the proper reward of vice,
nor can it belong to any thing else.

The Scripture is very copious in expressions to this purpose. Such as are
religious, are styled the excellent of the earth, Psalm. 16. 3. and said to be
more excellent than their neighbors. Prove. 17. 27. They cap. 12. 26. Deuteronomy. 32.
9. Exodus 19. 5. Jer. 12. 7. Psalm. 4. 3.
are Gods peculiar treasure, the dearly beloved of his soul. He sets apart the
man that is godly for himself. Though such persons may be but low in their
outward condition; being put to wander up and down in sheepskins and goatskins,
being destitute, afflicted, tormented, seeking for refuge in deserts and
mountains, in dens and caves of the earth; yet are they, upon the account of
Religion, of such an excellent value, that in the judgment of the Holy Ghost,
the world is not worthy of them, Heb. 11. 37, 38.

The Wiseman speaking of Rellgion, says, that it shall be an ornament of
grace Prove. 1. 9. Chap. 4. 8, 9.
to thy head, and as a chain about thy neck. Exalt her, and she shall promote
thee, and bring thee to honor. She shall give to thy head an ornament of
grace, and a Crown of glory. God has engaged himself by promise to those
people that are religious, that he will set them above other nations; Deuteronomy. 28.
13.
they shall be made the head and not the tail. He will honor those that honor
1 Samuel 2. 30. Joh. 12. 26.
him. And certainly, he who is the King of Kings, must needs be the fountain of
honor, and be able to dispose of it as he pleases.

And on the other side, Shame is in Scripture said to be the proper reward and
consequent of sin, especially in the Writings of David and Solomon. Religion is
styled by the name of wisdom, and Sin by the name of folly. And the Wiseman
having said, Prove. 3. 35, that the wise shall inherit glory, it is added, but
shame shall be the promotion of fools: It shall be their promotion; the utmost
that such persons shall ever attain to, will be but disgrace; when they are
exalted and lifted up, it shall prove to their disparagement, to make their
shame more conspicuous. And Prove. 13. 5. it is said, A wicked man is loathsome,
and comes to shame. The word translated loathsome, properly denotes such kind
of persons to be as nauseous and offensive to the judgments of others, as the
most loathsome unsavory things are to their tastes or smells. They are styled
by the name of Wolves and Bears, Swine, Dogs, and Vipers, things both hurtful
and hateful.

Men that are truly virtuous, have a reverence paid them by all that know them.
And on the other side, vicious men are despised. Not but that wicked persons
may be inwardly honored, by such as do not know them to be wicked; and on the
other side, those that are good, may by others be esteemed and used, as being
the rubbish and offscouring of all things. But this is to be ascribed chiefly
to their mistake and ignorance of them, whilst they look upon such persons as
being the most dangerous pernicious persons. But the generality of mankind have
heretofore, and still do pay a reverence to any person whom they believe to be
innocent and virtuous.

2. Religion is the natural cause of Honor and Reputation, so far as such
things are capable of any physical efficacy. This I shall endeavor to prove,
both from Reason and Experience.

I. By Reason. For the better understanding of this, we are to take notice,
that Honor may be considered under a twofold notion.

1. According to the desert and foundation of it, in the person honored.

2. According to the acknowledgment or attribution of it, in the person
honoring.

Now Religion does by a natural causality influence both these.

1. According to the foundation of it, in the person honored, which is true
virtue and merit. I have showed before, that the Essence of man may be said to
consist in being religious, and consequently this must be the rule and measure
of a man's real worth; it must be our excelling in that which makes us men, that
must make us better men than others. All other things have some kind of
standard, by which the natural goodness of them is to be measured; so is it
with men likewise. And this is usually from their suitableness to that chief
end they are designed for. Quae conditio rerum, eadem and hominum est; navis
bona dicitur, non quae pretiosis coloribus picta est, etc. (says Seneca) We do
not therefore esteem a Epist. 76.
Ship to be good, because it is curiously painted and gilded, or carved and
inlay'd but because it is fitted for all the purposes of Navigation, which is
the proper end of a Ship. Nor do we therefore count a Sword to be good, because
it has a rich Hilt and an embroidered Scabbard but because it is sit for the
proper use of a Sword, which is to cut, etc. In homine quoque nihil ad rem
pertinet, quantum aret, quantum foeneret, a quam multis salutetur, sed quam
bonus sit. It should be so likewise in our esteem of men, who are not so much
to be valued by the grandeur of their Estates or Titles, as by their inward
goodness. The true stamp of Nobility is upon the minds of men, and does consist
in such virtuous habits, as will enable a man for worthy designs and actions;
when the image of God, who is the rule of excellency and the fountain of
honor, is in any measure restored upon it.

Every man is endowed with a natural principle, inclining him to a state of
happiness, and has in some measure both an ability to judge of, and a freedom
and liberty for applying himself unto, those duties which are the proper means
for the promoting of this end: Nor is he upon any other account to be justly
praised or blamed, but according to the right or wrong use of this natural
liberty. And therefore as such a man does find either in himself or others, a
constant and firm resolution to make a right use of this, so should he
proportion his esteem accordingly, preferring this inward greatness, this
rectitude of mind, whereby a man is resolved in every condition, to do that
which shall appear to be his duty, before any kind of external greatness
whatsoever.

There is a respect and honor due to all kind of virtues whatsoever, as
rendering men amiable and lovely. But amongst the rest, there are two, which
are by general consent esteemed venerable, and such as do greatly advance the
reputation of those who are endowed with them; namely, Wisdom, Courage.


Because they have a more intrinsic rise, and do less depend upon external
advantages, but seem rather to be rooted in the inward frame and temper of our
minds; and withal are most beneficial both to our selves and others: The
former signifying a man to have those inteltellectual abilities which are
proper to his kind, whereby the humane nature is to be distinguished from other
things: The other, because it argues a rectitude in the will, and a power to
subdue the passion of fear, which is most natural to our present state of
infirmity; and withal does support a man against difficulties, and enable him
for those two great services, of doing and suffering as he ought. And for this
reason, the vices that are opposite to these, are amongst all others counted
the most shameful; there being no greater reproach to be cast upon any one,
than to be esteemed a Fool or a Coward.

Now a man that is irreligious cannot justly pretend to either of these virtues.

1. For Wisdom. This is so essential to Religion, that in the Scripture Phrase
they both go under the same name. And there is very good reason, why it should
be so; because there is such an intimate agreement between the natures of them.
The Philosopher does define Wisdom to consist in an ability and inclination, to
make choice of right means in the prosecution of our true end. And nothing can
enable a man for this but Religion, both as to the subordinate end of temporal
happiness in this world, and chiefly with respect to that great and supreme end
of eternal happiness in the world to come.

2. And then for Courage. It Is not possible for a man to be truly valiant,
unless he be withal truly religious: He may be bold and daring, and able in a
fearless manner to rush upon any danger; but then he must stifle his reason
from considering what the consequences of things may be, what shall become of
him hereafter, if he should miscarry: There being no man whatsoever so totally
free from the apprehensions of a future state, but that when he is serious and
considerate, he must be startled with doubts and fears concerning it: So that
there cannot be any rational, sedate, deliberate courage, but only in such as
have good hopes of a better estate in the other world; And it is Religion only
that can enable a man for this.

2. Honor considered, according to the acknowledgment or attribution of it in
the persons Honoring; which is the external form, or as the body of honor,
being much in the power of others. And this may be distinguished into these two
kinds, Inward, Outward.


1. Inward, Honoring is properly an act of the understanding, in passing
judgment upon the nature of things: When we do in our minds, own and acknowledge
the real worth or virtue of a thing or person. And every one who will act
rationally, not miscalling good evil, and evil good, must proportion his esteem
of things, according to the real value of them. Nor is it in any man's power, so
far to offer violence to his own faculties, as to believe any thing against
evidence; to esteem that man to be either worthy or unworthy, whom he knows to
be otherwise. He may call him and use him as he pleases, and he may be willing
to entertain prejudices, either for or against him; And in this sense, Honor
est in honorante: But he cannot inwardly think or believe otherwise than
according to his evidence. For men of no real worth to expect this inward
honor from others, as it is very unequal, requiring brick without straw; and
very unlawful, It being as well a man's duty to contemn a vile person, as to
honor those that fear the Lord; so neither is it possible, because men must
necessarily judge according to the most prevailing evidence; nor can they
esteem such a one to be worthy whom they know to be otherwise, any more than
they can believe that to be white and straight which they see to be black and
crooked.

There are indeed some other things that do commonly go under this name, as the
several degrees of Nobility, Titles, and Places of dignity, which are usually
called by this name of honor; but these things (as they are abstracted from
Magistracy) being wholly extrinsecal, have no more due to them, but a mere
external respect: They may challenge from us that we should give them their due
Titles, and demean our selves toward them with that observance and ceremony
which becomes their quality: But then as for that inward esteem and valuation
of our minds belonging to good men; such persons can challenge no greater share
of this, than according as their real merit and virtue shall require. The Royal
stamp upon any kind of Metal may be sufficient to give it an extrinsick value,
and to determine the rate at which it is to pass amongst Coyns; but it cannot
give an intrinsic value, or make that which is but Brass to be Gold.

It Is true indeed there are some Callings and particular Relations of men, to
which an inward veneration is due, though the persons themselves should not be
virtuous; namely Magistrates, and Ministers, and Parents, and Benefactors; who
having somewhat of a Divine stamp and impress, may therefore challenge from us,
that we should demean our selves toward them, both with such an outward
respect as becomes their places, and with such an inward respect too, as may be
suitable to that image which they bear; to our dependence upon them, and
obligations to them. But then we cannot be obliged to think such persons good
men, unless we have some evidence to believe them to be so, or at least, not to
be otherwise; so that they are beholding to something extrinsecal to their
persons, namely to their Callings and Relations, for that honor which is paid
to them.

2. Outward Honoring is, when men do by their words or actions testify that
esteem and respect which they have for the worth of others. And this indeed may
be truly said to be in the power of others, because men have a greater command
over their words and actions, than they have over their belief. Now all men
that are truly virtuous and religious, will be ready to give unto every one
his due honor; and such are the best judges of it. Upon which account Tully
defines true honor to be consentiens Tusc. Q. 2.
laus bonorum, the concurrent approbation of good men; such only being fit to
give true praise, who are themselves praiseworthy.

As for vicious and irreligious persons, it is not to be expected that they
should be forward to commend that which is opposite to them. But then it is to
be considered, that these are no competent judges of such matters: And for a
man to resent deeply the contempt of unworthy persons, were overmuch to honor
them, as if their esteem could add any thing to his reputation.

And yet, even these persons cannot avoid having an inward veneration for
goodness and religion, which is the reason why they are so forward to dissemble
it, to disguise themselves under the show of it. Men do not use to counterfeit
common stones and metals, but such as are precious, Jewels and Gold; Nor would
any one take the pains to counterfeit being Religious, if he did not think it a
matter of some value, and a means to procure esteem from others. And when such
men do revile and persecute any one for being religious, yet is there such a
natural veneration belonging to the thing it self, as makes them to disguise it
under the name of Hypocrisy, Heresy, Superstition, etc. whereby they may
justify themselves in their opposing of it.

II. But this is only general discourse, and in the notion. The best argument
to this purpose would be from Experience; by which I mean that practical
knowledge, which every man may attain by his own observation of the usual course
of things in the world. And by this it will appear, that no kind of persons
have been more highly reverenced in the hearts and consciences of others, than
those that have been most eminent for their virtue and religion; which has
been always true, both with respect to public communities, and private persons.

1. For Nations. If we consult the Histories of former times, we shall find
that saying of Solomon constantly verifyed, That Righteousness does exalt a
nation, Prove. 14. 34.
but sin does prove a reproach to it. And more especially the sin of
Irreligiousness and Profaneness; As this does increase in any nation, so must
the honor and Reputation of that nation decrease. The Roman Empire was then at
the highest, as to its name and greatness, when it was so as to its virtue;
when they were most punctual in observing the Rites of their Religion (though
that were a false way of worship) most Heroical in their Justice, courage,
fidelity, gratitude; then it was that they deserved to govern the world, and to
be had in greatest honor above all other nations. And not only Cicero, and
Polybius, two Heathen Writers, who, upon that account, might be thought more
partial; But St. Austin also and Lactantius, two of the Fathers, do ascribe the
flourishing of that Empire, when it was at its height, to the Religion and
Piety and virtue of those times; and as they did afterward degenerate from
this, so did they decline likewise in their greatness and honor.

2. Thus also has it been with particular persons; Amongst the Heathen, what
Elogies do we find in the honor of Socrates, Aristides, Cato, Epictetus? The
last of whom, though but a poor slave, had yet such a veneration paid to his
memory, that his earthen lamp by which he was wont to study, was, after his
death, sold for Three thousand Drachms.

Nor was it otherwise amongst the Christians; The Apostles were but poor
Fishermen, illiterate Mechanics; many of the Martyrs were but of mean
condition, much opposed and persecuted in the world; and yet these men, during
the time of their lives, were highly reverenced amongst those that knew them;
and since their deaths, what can be more glorious than that renown which they
have amongst men, when the greatest Kings and Princes will not mention their
names without reverence, when whole Nations are willing to set apart, and to
observe solemn days and Festivals in honor of their memories?

And as it has always been thus formerly, so I appeal to every man's breast,
whether it be not so now. Let them but examine what their inclinations are
toward such persons whom they believe to be truly virtuous; not only to such
among them, as are their particular acquaintance and friends; but likewise to
strangers, nay to very enemies, whether they do not esteem and love them and
will-well to them.

It cannot be denied, but that there are too many in the world, who propose to
themselves such ways and courses for the promoting of their honor and
reputation, as are quite opposite to that which I have now been discoursing of;
namely, profaneness and contempt of Religion, despising that which other men
stand in awe of; by which they think to get the reputation of Wit and Courage;
of Wit, by pretending to penetrate more deeply into the nature of things, and
to understand them better than others do; not to be so easily imposed upon, as
other credulous people are: Of Courage, by not being so easily scared at the
apprehension of danger at a distance.

But the plain truth is, such persons do hereby prove themselves to be both
Fools and Cowards.

Fools; In mistaking their great interest, in making choice of such means, as
can never promote the end they design. There being no kind of men that are more
exposed (whatsoever they themselves may think of it) than those that seek for
credit by despising of Religion. Fools, in venturing their future estates and
their souls upon such hazards, as all mankind would cry-out-upon, for the most
palpable folly and madness, if they should do the like toward their Temporal
estates, or their Bodies.

Cowards; In being more afraid of little dangers, because they are present,
than of greater, because they are future, and at a distance. As that Soldier,
who does more dread the present danger of fighting, when he is obliged to it,
than the future danger of suffering by Martial law for running away, may justly
be esteemed a notorious coward; so may that man, who is more afraid of a
present inconvenience, by incurring the prejudice and displeasure of his loose
companions, to whom he would be acceptable, than of a future mischief from the
judgment of God. No man will esteem another to be truly valiant, because he is
not afraid to do such vile unworthy things as will expose him to the
displeasure and punishment of the Civil Magistrate; much less should he be so
accounted, for daring to do such things, as will in the issue expose him to the
Divine vengeance.

CHAP. VII.
How Religion conduces to the happiness of the Inward man, as it tends to the
regulating of our faculties, and to the peace and tranquillity of our minds.

AS for the Internal welfare of our minds, this (as I observed before) does
depend upon these two things.

1. The perfecting and regulating of our faculties, inabling them for their
proper functions, and the keeping of them in due subordination to one another.

2. In the peace, quiet, contentment consequent thereupon.

And both these do likewise depend upon Religion.

1. For the perfecting and regulating of our faculties, and inabling them for
their proper functions. These things do depend upon Religion, both Morally,
Naturally.


1. Morally; as these things are blessings and privileges, so do they belong
to Religion as the proper reward of it. Those men only being fit to have free
and large minds, and refined faculties, who are willing to improve them to the
best use and advantage. To this purpose there are several expressions in
Scripture: A good understanding have all they that do his commandments. Thou
through thy commandments have made me wiser than mine enemies. He that does the
will of God shall know it.

2. Naturally, as these things are duties, so are they the proper effects of
virtue.

The generality of the Heathen Philosophers have agreed in this, that sin is
the natural cause of debasing the soul, immersing it into a state of sensuality
and darkness, deriving such an impotence and deformity upon the mind, as the
most loathsome diseases do upon the body. And therefore it must be Religion and
virtue, on the other side, that must enlighten and enlarge the mind, and
restore it from the degeneracy of its lapsed estate, renewing upon us the image
of our Maker, adorning us with those beauties of holiness, which belong to the
hidden man of the heart. It Is the proper work of Religion, to frame the mind to
the nearest conformity unto the nature of God; upon which account it is said in
Scripture to consist in a participation of the 2 Pet. 1.
Divine nature. Other things may be said to have some remote resemblance to the
Deity; but man only amongst the visible creatures, is capable of those more
immediate communications from him, by Religion: And all kind of perfection is
to be measured by its nearness or remoteness to the first and chief pattern of
all perfection.

As all kind of vice does go under the name of impotence, so Religion is
described to be the spirit of power, and of a sound mind. Because it does
establish in a man a just empire over himself, over all those blind powers and
passions which of themselves are apt to raise tumults and commotions against
the dominion of Reason. That which health is to the body, whereby the outward
senses are enabled to make a true judgment of things, that is virtue to the
mind, whereby the inward faculties must be fitted and disposed to discern
betwixt things that differ, which those who are under the power of vicious
habits are not able to do.

But to speak more particularly, Religion does,

1. Enlarge the understanding, enabling it to see beyond the narrow bounds of
sense and time, to behold things that are invisible; God being in the
intellectual world, as the Sun is in the sensible world; and as natural
blindness does disable men from seeing the one, so will spiritual blindness for
the other.

2. It does exalt and regulate the will, to a desire after, and acquiescence in
such things as will promote the perfection of our natures, and consequently
will beget in the mind, the truest liberty, ingenuity, generosity, which are
altogether inconsistent with the servitude of lusts and passions.

3. It does reduce the passions, unto a due subordination to the superior
faculties; restraining the violence and impetuousness of them, from whence the
greatest part of the trouble and disquiet of men's lives does proceed. As he
that is of a healthy constitution, can endure heat and cold and labor with
little or no prejudice to himself; so can one of a virtuous mind undergo
various conditions without receiving any hurt from them. Such an one is not
lifted up by prosperity, nor dejected by adversity: He is not a servant to
anger, fear, envy, malice, which are the great occasions of disturbing our
inward peace and quiet.

2. The second thing wherein the welfare of our minds does consist, is peace,
tranquillity, joy, confidence, in opposition to inward disquiet, anxiety,
grief, fear, diffidence. And these do depend upon Religion likewise, both
Morally, Naturally.


1. Morally, as these things may be considered under the notion of blessings
and privileges, so they belong to the rewards of Religion. All Philosophers
having agreed in this, that inward serenity and composedness of mind is the
proper reward of moral virtue.

To which the Scripture does attest, in those expressions where it is said, that
a good man is satisfied from himself; in the fear of the Lord is strong
confidence. Prove. 14. 14. v. 26. c. 28. 1. Isa. 26. 3. Isa. 32. 17.
The righteous is bold as a Lion. Thou will keep him in perfect peace whose
mind is stayed on thee. That the fruits of righteousness shall be peace, and
the effect of righteousness, quietness and assurance for ever. That tribulation
and anguish shall be upon Romans 2. 9, 10.
every soul that does evil; but to him that does good, glory and honor and
peace, serenity and composedness of mind, peace that passes all understanding,
joy that is Gal. 5. 22.
unspeakable and full of glory.

2. Naturally; as these things are considered under the notion of duties, so
they are the most genuine fruits and effects of Religion; which does oblige us
to them, and enable us for them.

1. Religion does oblige men to joy and peace and confidence. The very Heathens
have acknowledged these to be such things, as all good men are bound to upon
the account of duty. And the Scripture does abound in precepts to this purpose.
Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say rejoice. Commit thy ways unto the
Lord, and he shall bring it to pass. Be carful for nothing. Cast thy burden
upon him, as knowing that he takes care for thee.

These kind of duties do formally and in the very essence of them, contain in
them the nature of happiness.

And on the contrary, the opposite vices do contain in them the true nature of
punishment, and render men formally miserable. Such a man must needs be
unhappy, who lives under the power of continual anxieties, sorrow, fears,
diffidence, selfwill, malice, envy, etc. of several of which, that may be said
which the Poet speaks concerning one of them. Invidia Siculi non invenere
Tyranni
Tormentum majus.


The Sicilian Tyrants, who were of old famous for inventing engines of Torture,
as that of Phalaris his Bull, were not able to find out any kind of Torment for
the body, equal to that which some of these vices do occasion to the mind.

2. And as Religion does oblige us to, so likewise does it enable us for this
kind of happiness, and that upon a twofold account.

1. From the general nature of Religion and Virtue considered in it self.

2. From the most natural effects and consequences of it.

1. From the general nature of Religion considered in it self. All kind of
virtues containing in their very essence, these kind of inward felicities,
either Formally or Virtually: The very foundation of happiness and misery,
reward and punishment, being laid in the very nature of these things
themselves. That natural appetite, whereby men are carried out after a state of
happiness, is for the nature of it so universal and radical, so closely fixed
to our first principles; and for the degree of it so ardent and impetuous, that
it is not possible for men to be disappointed in it, without a very quick
sensation, and some proportionable trouble for it. The more eager men are in
their desires, the more sensible must they be of gain or loss. Now all such
courses as have a natural tendency to the satisfying of this appetite, are upon
that account parts of our happiness. And on the other side, those which are
cross to it, must needs make us miserable. And if it be so (as I have already
proved) that our happiness must consist in such a similitude and resemblance to
the supreme good as we are capable of; it must hence follow, that Religion is
formally happiness. He that lives under the power of Godlike dispositions in
his mind, and does accordingly exercise them in the course of his life, may be
said eo nomine to be a happy man: Holiness and Happiness being but two distinct
names for the same thing. I showed before that the true nature of pleasure was
founded in a suitableness betwixt the faculty and the object: From whence it
will follow, that reasonable actions have in them a suitableness to reasonable
minds; And the more virtuous and religious any man is, the more delight must
such a man take in such kind of actions. That man who has a just sense of his
own impotent dependent condition, and how much it is for the interest of the
world, and the good of all humane affairs, that there is a supreme Governor,
who is infinitely wise, and powerful, and gracious, and how reasonable it is
that men should demean themselves toward him suitably to this belief: He that
is convinced how necessary it is for the promoting his own private, as well as
the public welfare, that men be forward to do all good offices of justice and
friendship toward one another: I say, he that is under this conviction, must
needs find much satisfaction and pleasure in such kind of actions. As for first
Table duties which consist in acquaintance with God, communion with him, in
meditating upon his wisdom, goodness, power, in affiance, love, reverence; if
these were not acts of the highest pleasure, they would never have been
appointed for the happiness of our future state in heaven. And as for second
Table duties, what greater pleasure and satisfaction can there be to a generous
mind, than to do worthy things, to be employed about acts of justice and
charity and beneficence, to promote public peace and good will amongst men?
Eating and drinking is not a more proper satisfaction to those natural
appetites of hunger and thirst, than the doing of good is to the rational
inclinations of a good man. As all light, and love, and joy are from above,
from the father of lights; so all darkness, sorrow, fear, disquiet, must be
from below, from the Prince of darkness. Wicked men are well compared to the
troubled sea, which cannot rest, but by reason of its being tossed to and fro
Isa. 57.
by contrary winds, is still casting up mire and dirt. He that lives under the
servitude of lusts and passions, must always be in an unquiet restless
condition; because such masters can never be satisfied in any one service they
employ us about; besides the interfering and contrariety of those employments
which they will exact from us. Vice is multiform, scelera dissident, and
therefore must they needs be inconsistent with rest and quiet. One principal
requisite to a state of serenity of mind, does consist in an uniform agreement
about that chief end which we are to pursue, together with the means conducing
to it; whereas they that have many and contrary things in design, must needs be
distracted about them. The soul that cannot fix it self upon the enjoyment of
God, who is the only all-sufficient Good, and consequently the only center of
Rest, must be like those disconsolate spirits, which our Savior speaks of, who
being Mat. 12.
cast out of their habitations, were put to wander up and down through desert
places, seeking rest, but finding none.

2. From the most natural effects and consequences of Religion, in respect of
that inward confidence, peace, joy, which must follow the conscience of
well-doing; insomuch, that there is not any kind of tree which does more
naturally produce its proper fruits, than the habits of virtue do bring forth
joy and serenity in the mind. When a man shall sit down and take a serious
review of what he hathdone, and finds it to be most agreeable both to his duty
and interest, from hence there must needs arise an inward satisfaction of mind.
And on the other side, a fountain does not more naturally send out waters, than
vice does punishment and misery. Nor is this any mere notion or fancy, which
some severe melancholy Divines would impose upon the world; but it is most
agreeable to those natural sentiments which the very Heathen have had and do
frequently mention: Seneca in particular; Res severa est verum gaudium; unde
sit, interrogas? dicam, ex bona conscientia, ex honestis conciliis, ex rectis
actionibus. All solid comfort must arise from a good conscience, and honest
actions.

I appeal to the experience of all considering men, whether this does not
appear to them, that the generality of those who live most pleasantly in the
world, are the most religious and virtuous part of mankind; such as know how to
regulate themselves in the fruition of what they have, how to avoid the
extremities on either hand, to prevent those mixtures of guilt and fear, which
are apt to sour and imbitter all our enjoyments? Whether lawful pleasures,
which a man may reflect upon without any sense of guilt, be not much to be
preferred before others? Whether those intellectual delights that flow from the
conscience of well-doing, be not much better than any sinful sensual pleasure?
Whether the doing of any worthy action, such as all good men must think well of
and commend, do not afford a more solid lasting pleasure than can be had from
any sensible enjoyments? Whether any thing can be more suitable, and
consequently delightful to a generous mind, than an opportunity of being
grateful to those by whom a man has been obliged; the making of an ample
return for the favors he has received? Whether that noble way of conquest,
overcoming evil with good, surprising an enemy by kindness, when we have it in
our power to be severe toward him, be not a far greater pleasure than that
which is by some counted the sweetest of all other things, Revenge?

Religion does likewise advance the soul to an holy confidence, concerning the
Divine favor and good will toward us. If our hearts condemn us not, we have
confidence toward God. A good conscience will set us above all those fears and
doubts and cares, whereby the lives of men are rendered uncomfortable. When in
decrepit age a man cannot find comfort in other things, when the grinders shall
be few, and appetite cease, then will this be a continual feast. The most
rational, solid, sublime, complete, durable delights, of all others, do flow
from the conscience of well-doing. It Is a chief part this, of that heaven which
we enjoy upon earth, and it is likewise a principal part of that happiness which
we hope to enjoy in heaven. Next to the beatifical vision and fruition of God,
is the happiness of a good conscience, and next to that the society of Saints
and Angels.

Whereas on the other side, he that lives under the sense of guilt, and a
consciousness of his obligation to punishment, must needs be destitute of all
inward peace and comfort: Such an one can have nothing to support him, with
patience, under a state of affliction in this world, nor can he have any
rational grounds to expect a better condition hereafter; and therefore must
needs have very dreadful apprehensions of dying, and be all his life time
subject to bondage through the fear of death. And that man must needs be very
miserable, who can neither have true joy in life, nor any hope in death.

This the Heathen Philosophers have acknowledged, That there is always a secret
dread which does accompany guilt. So Seneca in particular, speaking of wicked
men, he says, tantum metuunt quantum Ep. 105.
nocent, that such men must have fears proportionable to their guilt. And a
little after, dat paenas quisquis expect at, quisquis autem meruit expect at;
those men do really suffer punishment, who live under the expectation of it,
and whoever does any thing to deserve it must needs expect it. It Is not easy
to express the torment which those men undergo, -- quos diri conscia facti
Men's habet attonitos, and surdo verbere caedit,
Occultum quatiente animo tortore flagellum.
-- Men's sibi conscia facti
Praemetuens, adhibet stimulos, terretque flagellis.


It Is the unsupportableness of this, that many times does cause men in the
bitterness of their souls, to choose strangling and death rather than life. The
Heathens do set forth such a man's condition, by the fiction of Furies
continually haunting and scourging him: But Zophar does better describe it,
where he says, Terrors are Job 20. 25, 26.
upon him, all darkness is hid in his secret places, a fire not blown shall
consume him.

Though some men are so hardened against the sense of guilt, as to go on in
their sinful courses, without feeling any of this remorse for them; yet is
their peace so far from being a privilege, that it does render their condition
more desperate, because it supposes them to have a reprobate mind, and such a
stupidity upon Romans 1. 28 Ephesians. 4. 18, 19. 1 Timothy 4. 2.
their consciences, as makes them past feeling, being seared as it were with an
hot iron. Which though it may preserve them from those present lashes which
others are tormented with, yet does it argue their conditions to be more
remediless and desperate. All the difference is, the one is sick of a Calenture
or burning Fever, the other of a Lethargy or Apoplexy; the former more painful
for the present, but both of them very dangerous, only the latter less capable
of remedy than the former.

CHAP. VIII.
How Religion conduces to our Happiness in the next world.

AS Religion is the true cause of our present happiness in this world, whether
External, Internal.


So likewise is it the cause of that happiness, which we expect in our future
states: Which must depend upon such courses, as can give us the most rational
assurance of blessedness and glory hereafter.

I shall speak but briefly to this subject, because it is scarce possible for
any man to be so strangely infatuated, so wholly lost to common Reason as to
believe, that vicious courses, despising of Religion, walking contrary to God,
can be the means to entitle him to this future happiness, any more than
contempt and hatred of any one, is a proper means to procure his favor.

What kind of Happiness this is, which belongs to our future state, and wherein
the Glory of it does consist, is (...), a thing unspeakable, altogether above
the expressions of humane Orators, and passes all knowledge, the heart of man
being not able to conceive it: Nor can it be expected that we should be able,
in this state of flesh and mortality, to comprehend what kind of irradiations,
glorified souls are capable of. Only in the general, it is said, we shall be
like God, and see him as he is.

This state of future happiness, as it is above all other things of greatest
moment, so ought it to be proportionably labored after, with the greatest care
and diligence.

There are several varieties of metaphorical names or expressions whereby this
state is described in Scripture, but all of them do imply something of more
than ordinary care and industry to the qualifying of men for it, as Bellarmine
Lib. 5. 6. 9.
has observed in his Tract de AEterna felicitate sanctorum.

It Is styled.

The City of God, The heavenly Jerusalem. And it requires some care and
diligence for one that is a Citizen of this world, to be a fellow-citizen with
the Ephesians. 2.
saints; it being no easy thing for one that lives in this world, not to be of
it.

The House of God, where there are many mansions; But straight is the gate, and
Matt. 7.
narrow is the way to it.

An hid Treasure, a precious Pearl. Not to be obtained without putting such a
Matt. 13.
value upon it, as will make a man ready to part with all that he has, for the
purchase of it.

A penny. The wages of our daily service, not to be given but to such as labor
Matt. 20.
in the vineyard, and hold out to the end.

A Feast or rich supper; which they are altogether unworthy of and unfit for,
Luke. 14.
who do wholly devote themselves to the affairs of this world.

The Joy of our Lord and Master; which they only are admitted to, who are
careful Matt. 25.
to improve the Talents they are entrusted withal.

The solemnity of a royal wedding; from which all lazy, slothful people, who
have Matt. 25.
not oil in their lamps, and do not watch for the coming of the Bridegroom,
shall be shut out and excluded into outter darkness.

It Is a Prize; which they only obtain 1 Cor. 9.
who accomplish their race, and run to the goal.

It Is a Crown; which is due only to 1 Cor. 9.
such as fight valiantly and overcome.

It Is an Inheritance; and therefore belongs only to sons. It Is an Inheritance
of the saints; and therefore unsanctified persons can have nothing to do with
it. It Is an inheritance of the saints in light; and therefore cannot belong to
such as still remain under the powers of darkness.

Heaven may be considered under a twofold notion, either as a State, Place.


1. In the first sense, it is the same with Holiness, consisting in such Godlike
dispositions, as may make us partakers of the Divine nature.

2. In the second sense, It denotes that other world, where we hope to enjoy
the beatifical vision, in the blessed society of Saints and Angels. Which
Religion only and Holiness can qualify us for, by working in our natures such a
suitableness and congruity as must make such things to be felicities.

In brief; That Salvation and Glory, which the Christian Religion does so
clearly propose to us, is, as to the nature and essence of it, but the very
same thing with Religion; consisting in such a conformity of our minds to the
nature of God, whereby we are made capable of the fruition of him in Heaven. So
that in this respect also, Religion is the Whole of Man, that is, the whole
Happiness and well-being of man does depend upon it.

I have now dispatched what I intended in this Discourse, namely to prove the
Reasonableness and Credibility of the Principles of Natural Religion; which I
have made appear to be in themselves of so great evidence, that every one, who
will not do violence to his own faculties, must believe and assent unto them. I
have likewise made it plain, that it is every man's greatest Interest, to provide
for his present and future happiness, by applying himself to the Duties of
Religion, which upon all accounts will advance the perfection of his nature and
promote his true welfare, both in this world and the other. Insomuch that if
we were to choose the Laws we would submit unto, it were not possible for us to
contrive any rules more advantageous to our own interest, than those which
Religion does propose, and require us to observe, upon pain of everlasting
damnation, and in hope of eternal life which God that cannot lie has promised,
to all those who by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for glory and
honor and immortality.

CHAP. IX.
The Conclusion of the whole, showing the excellency of the Christian Religion,
and the advantages of it, both as to the knowledge and practice of our duty,
above the mere light of Nature.

I Have now at large considered the Credibility of the Principles of Natural
Religion, and our obligation to the several Duties resulting from those
Principles. The purpose of all which is to show how firm and deep a foundation
Religion has in the Nature and Reason of Mankind: But not in the least to
derogate from the necessity and usefulness of Divine Revelation, or to
extenuate the great blessing and benefit of the Christian Religion; but rather
to prepare and make way for the entertainment of that Doctrine which is so
agreeable to the clearest dictates of Natural light. For notwithstanding all
that has been said of Natural Religion, it cannot be denied, but that in this
dark and degenerate state into which Mankind is sunk, there is great want of a
clearer light to discover our duty to us with greater certainty, and to put it
beyond all doubt and dispute what is the good and acceptable Will of God; and
of a more powerful encouragement to the practice of our duty, by the promise of
a supernatural assistance, and by the assurance of a great and eternal reward.
And all these defects are fully supplied, by that clear and perfect Revelation
which God has made to the World by our blessed Savior. And although, before
God was pleased to make this Revelation of his Will to mankind, men were
obliged to the practice of moral duties by the Law of Nature, and as the
Apostle speaks, having Romans 2. 14, 15.
not the Law were a Law to themselves, showing the effect of the Law written
upon their hearts; yet now that God has in so much mercy revealed his Will so
plainly to mankind, it is not enough for us who enjoy this Revelation, to
perform those moral duties which are of natural obligation, unless we also do
them in obedience to Christ as our Lord and Lawgiver. As we are Christians,
whatever we do in word or deed, we must do all in Col. 3. 17.
the name of the Lord Jesus; and by him alone expect to find acceptance with
God.

How far the Moral virtues of mere Heathens, who walk answerable to the light
they have, may be approved of God, I shall not now dispute. Only thus much
seems clear in the general, That the Law of Nature being implanted in the
hearts of men by God himself, must therefore be esteemed to be as much his Law,
as any positive Institution whatsoever: And consequently, conformity to it must
in its kind, in genere morum, be acceptable to him. God loves the societies of
mankind, and because of the necessity of justice, and virtue, and probity to
the preservation of humane society, therefore he does generally give a blessing
and success to honest and good enterprises, and blasts the contrary with signal
judgments and marks of his displeasure. But we cannot from these outward
dispensations infer any thing certainly concerning such men's eternal conditions.

Some of the Fathers indeed, as Justin Martyr, and Clemens Alexandrinus and
Chrysostom, have delivered their judgments for the salvation of such Heathens
as live according to the light of Nature: But the general stream of the rest is
for the contrary opinion. I shall not now enquire into the particular grounds
and reasons of this difference. It may suffice to say in general, that the
goodness and mercy of God, as well as his judgments are a great deep; that he
will have mercy on whom he will have mercy; and that when God has not thought
fit to tell us how he will be pleased to deal with such persons, it is not sit
for us to tell Him how he ought to deal with them. Only of this we are
sufficiently assured, that in all ages and places of the world, all that are
saved are saved by the mercy of God, and by the merits of Jesus Christ, who is
the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world; the Scripture having expressly
told us, that there is no salvation in any other; for there is none other Name
under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved. To be sure, there is no
reason for any man, who lives under the dispensation of the Gospel, to expect
that he shall escape, if he neglect so great salvation. This is the tenor of
that Doctrine of the Gospel, which Christ immediately upon his resurrection
does commissionate his Disciples to preach; Mark 16. 16. He that believes
shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be damned. And Joh: 3. 18. He
that believes not, is condemned already. And presently it follows, This is the
condemnation, etc. And again Joh. 7. This is life eternal, to know thee the
only true God, and him whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ.

Now that to us, to whom the Christian Doctrine is revealed and proposed, the
belief and practice of it is the only way wherein we can hope to be accepted, I
shall endeavor to make out by these two arguments:

1. From the Evidence we have of its Divine Authority.

2. From the Excellency of the things contained in it; which are the two chief
grounds of our obligation to it.

1. From that Evidence which we have for the Divine authority of this Doctrine,
above any other. It seems to be a Principle of Nature, to which all Nations
have consented, That God himself should prescribe the way of his own worship.
All kind of inventions whatsoever, that have been any way useful to humane
life, especially such kind of Laws as concern Civil or Ecclesiastical
associations of men, have upon the first discovery of them been still ascribed
to the Deity. As if the Authors of them must needs have been first illuminated
with some ray of Divinity. Nor is it probable, that ever any Nation should,
with any degree of zeal, embrace the respective Ceremonies of their Religion,
unless they had first esteemed them to have proceeded from Divine Revelation.

Upon this account was it that Lycurgus, and Numa Pompilius, and Mahomet, and
the rest of those kind of Founders of Nations and Religions, when they would
obtain a reverence and devotion to the things they were to establish, they were
fain to pretend at least to Divine Revelation. Which proceeding of theirs,
though it did really abuse the people with gross delusions, yet was it founded
upon this common Principle, that none can think aright of God, much less serve
him in an acceptable manner, unless they are first instructed by him in the
true way of doing it.

Now that the Doctrine of Christianity is thus derived to us by Divine
Institution, we have as clear and convincing evidence, as things of that nature
are capable of.

As for the Old Testament, that has by the general consent of learned men, all
the marks of purest Antiquity; there being nothing in the world which in this
respect is equal to it, or which may pretend to be compared with it. All other
the most ancient monuments of Antiquity coming short of it by many Ages. It was
written in the first and most ancient Language; from which the very Alphabets
and Letters of all other Languages (in the opinion of the most learned Heathen,
Plutarch, Pliny, Tacitus, Lucan, etc.) were derived. The very number and order
of Letters most generally used in all kind of Alphabets, being very improper
and unnatural; which it is not likely men of several nations would have all
agreed upon, were it not barely upon this reason, that they were taken up by
imitation, and so did retain the errors and imperfections of that first
original from whence they were derived.

This Book contains as the most ancient, so the most exact story of the world,
The propagation of men, and the dispersing of families into the several parts
of the earth; as I showed before.

And though this Book were written in several ages and places, by several
persons; yet does the Doctrine of it accord together, with a most excellent
harmony, without any dissonance or inconsistency.

And for the manner of delivering the things contained in it, it is so solemn,
reverend and majestic, so exactly suited to the nature of things, as may
justly provoke our wonder and acknowledgment of its Divine original. Insomuch
that Longinus, a great master of eloquence amongst the Heathens, has observed
the decorum and majesty which Moses uses in describing the Creation, in those
words, God said, Let there be Light, and there was Light.

And as for the New Testament. Those various correspondencies, which it bears
to the chief things of the Old Testament, may sufficiently evidence that mutual
relation, dependence and affinity which there is betwixt them. That in such an
Age there was such a man as Christ, who preached such a doctrine, wrought many
miracles, suffered an ignominious death, and was afterward worshipped as God,
having abundance of disciples and followers, at first chiefly amongst the
vulgar, but a while after, amongst several of the most wise and learned men;
who in a short space of time did propagate their belief and doctrine into the
most remote parts of the world: I say, all this is for the truth of the matter
of fact, not so much as doubted or called into question, by Julian, or Celsus,
or the Jews themselves, or any other of the most avowed enemies of
Christianity. But we have it by as good certainty as any rational man can wish
or hope for, that is, by Universal Testimony, as well of enemies as friends.

And if these things were so, as to the matter of fact, the common principles
of nature will assure us, that it is not consistent with the nature of the
Deity, his Truth, Wisdom or Justice, to work such miracles in confirmation of a
Lie or Imposture.

Nor can it be reasonably objected. That these miracles are now ceased; and we
have not any such extraordinary way to confirm the truth of our Religion: It Is
sufficient that they were upon the first plantation of it, when men were to be
instituted and confirmed in that new Doctrine. And there may be as much of the
wisdom of Providence in the forbearing them now, as in working them then. It
being not reasonable to think that the universal Laws of Nature by which things
are to be regularly guided in their natural course, should frequently or upon
every little occasion be violated or disordered.

To which may be added that wonderful way whereby this Religion has been
propagated in the world, with much simplicity and infirmity in the first
publishers of it; without arms, or faction, or favor of great men, or the
persuasions of Philosophers or Orators; only by a naked proposal of plain
evident Truth, with a firm resolution of suffering and dying for it, by which
it has subdued all kind of persecutions and oppositions, and surmounted
whatever discouragement or resistance could be laid in its way, or made against
it.

2. From the Excellency of the things contained in it, both in respect of the
End proposed, Means for the attaining of it.


1. From the End it proposes, the chief reward which it sets before us, namely,
the eternal vision and fruition of God. Which is so excellent in it self, and
so suitable to a rational Being, as no other Religion or Profession whatsoever,
has thought of, or so expressly insisted upon.

Some of the learned Heathen have placed the happiness of Man in the external
sensual delights of this world; I mean the Epicureans, who though in other
respects they were persons of many excellent and sublime speculations, yet
because of their gross error in this kind, they have been in all ages looked
upon with a kind of execration and abhorrency, not only amongst the vulgar, but
likewise amongst the learneder sort of Philosophers. It Is an opinion this, so
very gross and ignoble, as cannot be sufficiently despised. It does debase the
understanding of man, and all the principles in him, that are sublime and
generous, extinguishing the very seeds of honor, and piety, and virtue,
affording no room for actions or endeavors, that are truly great and noble;
being altogether unworthy of the nature of Man, and does reduce us to the
condition of Beasts.

Others of the wiser Heathen, have spoken sometimes doubtfully concerning a
future estate, and therefore have placed the reward of virtue, in the doing of
virtuous things. Virtus est sibi praemium. Wherein though there be much of
truth, yet it does not afford encouragement enough, for the vast desires of a
rational soul.

Others who have owned a state after this life, have placed the Happiness of it
in gross and sensual pleasures, Feasts and Gardens, and Company, and other such
low and gross enjoyments.

Whereas the Doctrine of Christianity does fix it upon things, that are much
more spiritual and sublime; the Beatifical Vision, a clear unerring
understanding, a perfect tranquillity of mind, a conformity to God, a perpetual
admiring and praising of him: Than which the mind of man cannot fancy any thing
that is more excellent or desirable.

2. As to the Means it directs to, for the attaining of this end, they are
suitable both to the goodness and greatness of the end it self.

1. For the Duties that are enjoined in reference to Divine worship. They are
so full of sanctity and spiritual devotion, as may shame all the pompous
solemnities of other Religions, in their costly sacrifices, their dark wild
mysteries, and external observances. Whereas this refers chiefly to the
holiness of the mind, resignation to God, love of him, dependence upon him,
submission to his Will, endeavoring to be like him.

2. And as for the Duties of the second-Table, which concern our mutual
conversation toward one another; It allows nothing that is hurtful or noxious,
either to our selves, or others: Forbids all kind of injury or revenge,
commands to overcome evil with good, to pray for enemies and persecutors, does
not admit of any mental, much less any corporal uncleanness; does not tolerate
any immodest or uncomely word or gesture; forbids us to wrong others in their
goods and possessions, or to mispend our own; requires us to be very tender
both of our own and other men's reputations: In brief, it injoyns nothing but
what is helpful, and useful, and good for mankind. Whatever any Philosophers
have prescribed concerning their moral virtues of Temperance, and Prudence, and
Patience, and the duties of several relations, is here enjoined in a far more
eminent, sublime and comprehensive manner. Besides such Examples and
incitations to piety as are not to be paralleled elsewhere. The whole Systeme
of its Doctrine being transcendently excellent, and so exactly conformable to
the highest, purest reason, that in those very things wherein it goes beyond
the rules of Moral Philosophy, we cannot in our best judgment but consent and
submit to it.

In brief, it does in every respect so fully answer the chief scope and design
of Religion, in giving all imaginable honor and submission to the Deity,
promoting the good of mankind, satisfying and supporting the mind of man, with
the highest kind of enjoyments, that a rational soul can wish or hope for, as
no other Religion or Profession whatsoever can pretend unto.

What has briefly been said upon this argument may suffice to show the
exceeding folly and unreasonableness of those men who are skeptical and
indifferent as to any kind of Religion. It Is a vice this, that if it may not be
styled direct Atheism, yet certainly it is the very next degree to it. And
there is too much reason to suspect, that it does in this generation very much
abound, not only amongst the Vulgar, but such also as would be thought the
greatest Wits, and most knowing men. It has been occasioned by that heat and
zeal of men in those various contrary opinions, which have of late abounded,
together with those great scandals that have been given by the Professors of
Religion on several hands. From whence men of corrupt minds have taken occasion
to doubt of all kind of Religion; and to look upon it only as a Political
invention, which does no farther oblige, than as the Laws of several Countries
do provide for it. These common scandals have been the occasion, but the true
ground at the bottom of such men's prejudice and dissatisfaction, is the
strictness and purity of this Religion, which they find puts too great a
restraint and check upon their exorbitant lusts and passions.

I know they will pretend for their hesitation and indifferency in this kind,
the want of clear and infallible evidence for the truth of Christianity; than
which nothing can be more absurd and unworthy of a rational man. For let it be
but impartially considered; what is it, that such men would have? Do they
expect Mathematical proof and certainty in Moral things? Why, they may as well
expect to see with their ears, and hear with their eyes. Such kind of things
(as I showed at large in the beginning of this Treatise) being altogether as
disproportioned to such kind of proofs, as the objects of the several senses
are to one another. The arguments or proof to be used in several matters are of
various and different kinds, according to the nature of the things to be
proved. And it will become every rational man to yield to such proofs, as the
nature of the thing which he enquires about is capable of: And that man is to
be looked upon as froward and contentious, who will not rest satisfied in such
kind of Evidence as is counted sufficient, either by all others, or by most, or
by the wisest men.

If we suppose God to have made any Revelation of his Will to mankind, can any
man propose or fancy any better way for conveying down to Posterity the
Certainty of it, than that clear and universal Tradition which we have for the
History of the Gospel? And must not that man be very unreasonable, who will not
be content with as much evidence for an ancient Book or matter of Fact, as any
thing of that nature is capable of? If it be only infallible and mathematical
Certainty that can settle his mind, why should he believe that he was born of
such Parents, and belongs to such a Family? It Is possible men might have
combined together to delude him with such a Tradition. Why may he not as well
think, that he was born a Prince and not a Subject, and consequently deny all
duties of subjection and obedience to those above him? There is nothing so wild
and extravagant, to which men may not expose themselves by such a kind of nice
and scrupulous incredulity.

Whereas, if to the enquiries about Religion a man would but bring with him the
same candor and ingenuity, the same readiness to be instructed, which he does
to the study of humane Arts and Sciences, that is, a mind free from violent
prejudices and a desire of contention; It can hardly be imagined, but that he
must be convinced and subdued by those clear evidences which offer themselves
to every inquisitive mind, concerning the truth of the Principles of Religion
in general, and concerning the Divine Authority of the H. Scriptures, and of
the Christian Religion.

FINIS.
A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF THE Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN
Late Lord Bishop of Chester. At the Guildhall Chapel LONDON, On Thursday the
12. of December, 1672.

By William Lloyd D. D. Dean of Bangor, and one of His Majesty's Chaplains in
Ordinary.

LONDON: Printed for Henry Brom, 1675.

HEB. 13. 7. Remember them which have the Rule over you, who have spoken to you
the word of God; whose Faith follow, considering the end of their conversation.
IN handling this Text of holy Scripture, that we may mingle nothing of Humane
Affections, that our Passions may give no Interruption to you in hearing, or to
me in speaking; I should desire to suppress them quite, if it were possible.
And possible it is, where they are slightly raised, as upon common and ordinary
occasions: But where they are grounded and strong, where they dare argue, and
seem to have Reason on their side, as there is too much in sight for ours;
there I think it is in vain to endeavor it: The only way in this case, is to
give them some kind of Vent, to discharge them in part, and to govern what
remains of the Affections.

You will I hope the rather bear with my Infirmity, that I cannot contain from
deploring the Loss, the irreparable Loss that we suffer, I think all suffer, in
the death of this Eminent Person. He was the man in whom his Friends had
experience of much good, and had hopes of much more; not so much for his
greatness or power, as abstracting from these, for what they found in himself,
which was a great and manifold Blessing to all that lived within his
conversation. He was a Father, a Counselor, a Comforter, a Helper, a sure
Friend: He was all they could wish in every Relation, and by the course of
Nature, might have been for many years. But for our sins, (though for his
unspeakable advantage) the great and wise God was not pleased to continue that
Blessing; He took him out of this World, when for ought we could judge, there
was most need of such men to live in it; and when we had much reason to expect
more good than ever by his living in it.

Oh the Unsearchable ways and Counsels of God! Oh the Blindness of Humane hopes
and expectations! While we please our selves with the good we have in hand,
while we reach out for more, as if there would never be an end, within a few
days all withers, all vanishes to This: We have Nothing left, but what it
grieves us to see; We have nothing remains, but what we are willing to be rid
of, a poor shell of earth, that we make haste to bury out of our sight.

Yes; of wise and good men, which is their Privilege above others, there
remains after Death, a Memory, an Example which they leave behind them, as a
sacred Depositum for us to keep and use until we see them again. Are these
things Nothing in our sight? They are above all price in the sight of God; who,
that they may be so to us, both tells us the worth, and recommends them to
our esteem, and requires the fruit of them in many places of Scripture: But in
none with more Application to our present Occasion, than in my Text. I shall
sufficiently Justify my choice of it, if I can but make it be understood: I
shall show the full Import of it, in those duties which it contains: I shall
endeavor to stir you up to practice them with respect to this present occasion.

First, For the understanding of my Text, we are to look for no help from what
goes next before it, or after it: For the whole business of it is contained
within it self. It lies in the heap among other directions, which without any
certain connection between them, were given by the Writer of this Epistle to the
Hebrews, that is, to those Jews who were converted to be Christians.

For the time when it was written, we are certain of this, that it was while
Timothy lived; for he is mentioned as living in the 24 Verse of this Chapter.
And he being there said to have suffered Imprisonment for the Gospel, this
brings us a little nearer to the knowledge of the time: For then it must be
after both S. Paul's Epistles to Timothy. In the last of those Epistles, which
was some years after the other, S. Paul speaks much of his own Imprisonment for
the Gospel: He warns Timothy often, that he must suffer for the Gospel: He
instructs him what to do when God shall call him to suffer. Not a word of any
thing that he had suffered already: Nay, he counsels him as a young man, that
had never been tried. He invites him to Rome, which was the great place of
trial; in which place, as it appears in the close of this Chapter, Timothy did
suffer that Imprisonment for the Gospel, from which he was delivered, when this
Epistle was written. It appears, that after the Epistle to Timothy, how long
after we know not, he did go to Rome, as Paul willed him. How long he staid
there we know not, ere he did suffer imprisonment. How long he was in Prison,
we know not, ere he was set at liberty. Only we know, it was a considerable
time, we have reason to think it might be some years; it might be many years
that this Epistle was written after the second Epistle to Timothy.

And if so, then it was written, not only as Theodoret says, long after the
death of James the Brother of John: But account it how you will, this Epistle
was written, after the death of James the Brother of our Lord: Which James
being the first Bishop of Jerusalem, and the other James an Apostle, that is, a
Bishop at large, and both these being put to death at Jerusalem; Not to search
into Church History for those others of their order, who dyed before this time
in other places; nor to guess how many others were dead, that are not recorded
in Church History: If we think of no more but these two eminent servants of
Christ, we cannot be to seek of the understanding of this Text, nor of the
application to our particular purpose. I say not, but it may have a more
general extent. There is a memory due, not only to the Apostles of Christ, and
to the Bishops their Successors; but to all other good Ministers of Christ, yea
to all other exemplary Christians. But if the Apostle had meant this only of
Bishops, I cannot guess that he would have it expressed otherwise, than he has
done in my Text.

To prove this, I must have recourse to the Original, and not wholly depend
upon our English Translation. For that he meant this of Bishops, it appears not
sufficiently, and of them being dead, not at all, in our Translation. And yet
from the Original, I see no reason to doubt, that our Apostle in this Text,
meant no other but Bishops, and those departed this life.

For the Order of Bishops, it is described by those acts of Ruling and
Teaching, in the words of our Translation; but it is much more expressly by the
word (...) in the Original. For the meaning of which word, to whom should we
resort, but either to the Greeks, in whose Language; or to the Jews, for whose
immediate use this was written? Among the Greeks (...) is a general word, it
signifies Rulers Ecclesiastical or Civil. In this Verse they take it for
Ecclesiastical Rulers: So Chrysostom on my Text; and Oecumenius, (...), the
Apostle speaks of Bishops in this Verse. If the Jews would say so too, what
could we have more? They do say it, as much as we have reason to expect. In
their Traditional Language they call one of our Bishops (...) which in effect
is the word in my Text. So then we have the consent both of Greeks and of
Hebrews, that is, of them who had most reason to know the meaning of the word,
that Bishops are meant by the word (...) in my Text.

That the Apostle here speaks not of Living, but of Dead Bishops: of them that
Had the Rule before that time; though it is rendered, that Have, in our
Translation; it appears by other words in my Text. Remember them, says the
Apostle: What, those that are present? They are not the objects of Memory, but
of Sense. Remember (...), the good Bishops you have had: (...), them that have
spoken to you, that have spoken their last, and shall speak no more in this
world: (...), considering, looking back, or looking up to (...), the end of
their conversation. (...) signifies the whole course of this life, (...) is the
end or period of it. Look back, says the Apostle, to your Bishops deceased,
consider their end, or Exit, or going out of this world.

To confirm this, if any doubt, I shall desire him to compare this Verse with
the 17 of this Chapter. In both Verses the Apostle speaks of the (...), that
is, of Bishops, as I have interpreted and proved. In the 17. he shows our duty
to the living, Obey them, says the Apostle, and Submit your selves, for they
watch for your souls. In this Verse he shows our duty to Bishops deceased;
Remember them, and follow their Faith, considering the end of their
conversation.

I think more needs not be said, to show the scope of my Text, and how
applicable it is to our present Occasion. It being clear that the Apostle
speaks here of Bishops, and of them being departed this life.

I now proceed to the duties required at our hands; (...), and (...), Remember
and Imitate.

First, Remember. It Is a natural desire that men have, to be remembered when
they are dead. We do not find it is so in any other creature: They desire to
live as long as they can; but for ought we can judge, by any Indication, they
have no regard to what shall come after. The reason is plain, for their Being
determines with their life. But for man, among many other tokens of
Immortality, he has by secret Instinct, a Natural desire to be thought of, and
spoken of in aftertimes. We see this, not only in them that are inflamed with
the hope of a Future life; but even in those, that, for ought appears to us,
know or think little of any more but the present.

What else made the Egyptian Kings lay out their wealth on Pyramids, and the
like stupendous buildings? What moved the old Greeks and the Romans, with so
much care and expense to leave Statues and other Monuments, with Inscriptions
of their names? What meant those in the unlettered Nations, by the much harder
shifts they have made to convey any thing of themselves to Posterity? I need
not seek for instances of this in remote Times and Countries, when we see it is
so frequent in our Age, and perhaps nowhere more than in this City; for men of
design, that think long beforehand, above all other things, to provide for
this kind of Immortality. Some venture their lives, others wear out themselves,
they do and suffer any thing to get estates: Not for themselves, that might be
happier without them; nor so much for their known Heirs, whom they load with
Entails, as for men whom they know not, but only hope they will be in
aftertimes. For their inward thought is, that their houses shall continue for
ever, and their dewlling place to all generations: they call their lands by
their own names. This their way is their folly, and those that see it are such
fools to take after them, says David, Psalm. 49. 11.

But if this design take, it must be in spite of God, who has declared it
shall not do. He will thwart wicked men. They that provide not for the true
Immortality, shall lose their design in this shadow of it. Either their name
shall be forgotten; God has threatened he will cut it off, he will blot it out,
their memory shall perish with them: Or if it survive, it shall be to their
shame, their name shall rot, Prove. 10. 7. What they build for fame, shall be
like Absoloms Pillar, which remains to this day; but the passers by throw
stones at it, in detestation of his Memory: Such is generally, though not
always, the curse of God that pursues wicked men.

Whereas contrariwise it is the Promise of God to the Just, that they shall
always be had in remembrance, Psalm. 112. 6. And that their memory shall be
blessed as far as known, Prove. 10. 7. Promises which, as all other of Temporal
things, are to be understood with reservation to the Divine Economy, to that
wisdom of God which orders all things in the Government of the world. It
becomes not the Majesty of him that governs all things, to break his course,
and to work Miracles upon every particular occasion. It Is enough that he
generally provideth that the same thing may be done otherwise, and declares it
to those by whom it ought to be done. If they do it not, if there be a faileur
in them; his Promise is not void, his word is not broken, since it was given
with that Condition: Which being not performed by them that were to have done
it, he can make reparation to those that suffer by it; yea he has done it
already in this, that he has given them that which this typifies. And what if
they fall short of the shadow, when they have the substance, in a better and
true Immortality?

The mean while we see what is required on our parts. As the servants of God,
out of that store which he has given us, We are to pay what he has promised
good men. It Is that which all naturally desire, but wicked men shall not
attain; only to the just, God has promised that we shall remember ^^em, and he
commands that we should do it, especially for good Bishops departed this life.

Our remembrance of them does not differ in kind, but in degree, from what we
owe to the memory of others. It Is a duty we are to pay them above others, in
our Thoughts, in our Affections, in our Words, and in our Actions and Lives.

First, in our Thoughts; it is not a simple remembrance that God requires; for
that being an act of the sensitive soul, as I conceive, does not directly fall
under precept. For it is not in our power, to remember or forget, either what
or when we please. But it is in our power, to do those acts which conduce to
the exciting, or to the helping of our memory. This is that which God requires
at our hands, that we should endeavor to turn our minds toward such objects,
and contemplate in them the gifts and graces of God: that as often as we think of
them, we should acknowledge that good which was in them, and which we have
received by their means: That we should pay them that honorable esteem which
we owe to our spiritual Parents and Benefactors.

If we think upon them heartily in this manner, it will work something upon our
Affections. We cannot but be sensible of the want of such men, and therefore
grieved for our loss, when they are taken from us; as the Asian Bishops were at
those words of St. Paul, when he said, they should see his face no more. Though
God intend it for their gain, whom he takes to himself, and he takes them in
that time, which suits best with their Circumstances: Yet, even then, we have
cause to grieve for our selves, and for the Church, who are deprived of the
presence and use of such men. How much more, when for ought we know, they are
taken away for our sins? When for ought we know, it was because the age was not
worthy of them? For ought we know, it is in order to some judgment of God, which
will come the sooner when they are gone, when we have filled up the measure of
our iniquities?

When Elijah was taken away in a very evil age, Elisha cried out, O my Father,
my Father, the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel! What will become of Israel now
thou art gone? We dare not think so highly of any one man. We have no such
cause to despond of our Nation. When it is bad, we are to do our parts to make
it better, to pray that God would send more Laborers into his Harvest, that he
would double his gifts and blessings on those that are left.

And for those we have lost, we must resign them to God; both acknowledging his
bounty in giving them to us, and submitting to his will, in taking them to
himself. So S. Bernard on the death of his Brother Gerard, Lord, says he, thou
have given, and thou have taken away; though we grieve that thou have taken
away, yet we cannot forget that thou did give him. Yea, we owe not only
submission to God, but thankfulness too for their sakes who are delivered by
this means from so great and such manifold evils, as continually hover about us
in this life. From sickness and pain, from labor and danger, from sorrow, and
fear, and care, and what not? being delivered from Sin which is the Cause, and
from that Flesh which is the Center of all this.

They are past all evils else, that have overcome Death: They leave sorrow to
us, who call our selves the living: Their life, the only true life, is
immutable Joy, eternal Rest, Peace, and Felicity.

Which if we seriously believe, if we desire to be with them, we cannot sorrow
for our loss, without joy for their gain, and thanksgiving on their behalf, to
that good God, who has given them the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

But thus much we owe upon the death of every true Christian, though of never
so mean a rank and condition. We are to be thankful to God for his mercies, and
to profess it, as we are taught in the Offices of our Church; which have the
same words of burial, for the meanest of our communion, as for those that are
highest in their Graces and Gifts.

But there is a remembrance in Words that is due to these, and not to the
other; namely, the due praise of those their excellent Graces and Gifts; which
though they have not of themselves, but through the bounty and liberality of
God, who is therefore to be chiefly respected and glorified, in all the praise
that we give to his creatures: Yet since he is pleased to do them this honor
above others, and to make choice of them whom he so dignifies; we are bound to
allow it them, we are to follow Gods choice, to give them praise whom he has
so qualified for it. Only with this care, that we do it truly, not to flatter
the dead; and profitably, for the example and imitation of the living.

We have so much reason to do this, that they who had only reason to guide
them, the Gentiles, upon the death of any eminent persons, had Orations made
publicly in their praise. The Jews, without any particular Law for it, had
honor done to the Memory of Worthy persons at their Funerals, 2 Chronicles. 32.
ult. The Rites of it are partly described, 2 Chronicles. 16. 14. They laid their
dead in a bed full of the richest perfumes, which also were publicly burnt at
the Interment. To which I conceive the Preacher alludes, Eccles. 7. 1. where he
says, A good name is better than precious ointment, and the day of ones death
than the day of ones birth.

When one comes into the World, none knows how he may prove; if he do well in
it, he goes out with this public testimony. After which the Jews never
mentioned such persons without a blessing on their memory.

But above all others, the Primitive Christians were very observant this way.
They saw it was the will of their Lord and Master, that the good work which was
done upon him by Mary, should be kept in perpetual memory, and is therefore
recorded in the Gospel. They saw how the works of Dorcas were shown at her
death, the Coats and Garments which she made for the poor. They saw what need
there was of great Incentives, in those days, when Christianity was a most
dangerous Profession. It is of no small force, to make men love a Religion,
when they see it infuses excellent Principles, that it excites so suitable
practices, that it is proof against suffering and death. And the experience of
that power it has in some, provokes and animates others to the same.

Upon these and the like considerations, and perhaps with allusion to that
Text, where S. John is said to have seen the souls of the Martyrs under the
Altar; They had their Memorias Martyrum, their places of Worship, where they
placed the Altars over the bodies of their Martyrs. What, with any intention to
worship the Martyrs? It was so suggested by the Adversaries, and as vehemently
denied by the Christians of those times. By those of Smyrna, in the undoubted
acts of Polycarpus: We cannot (say they) worship any other than Christ; We love
the Martyrs as being followers of Christ; We celebrate the days of their
passions with Joy; We do it both in remembrance of those Champions of God, and
to train up and prepare others for the like conflicts.

Besides this, which was peculiar to the Martyrs, they had a lower degree of
remembrance, for Bishops, and Confessors, and all other eminent persons
departed this life: whom they not only praised in Orations at their Funerals,
but writ their names in their Diptychs, or two-leaved Records, which contained
in one page all the names of the Living; in the other, the Dead that were of
note in the Church.

All these were recited in the Communion-Service: Where, as the Living for
themselves; so for the Dead, came their Friends, and gave Oblations and Alms.
Which, before they were distributed among the poor, were first offered up to
God in a prayer, like that which we use for the Church Militant here on Earth.
These Doles were their only Sacrifices for the dead: Only Alms to the poor,
with which sacrifices God is well-pleased. And their prayers were not for any
deliverance from pains; unless the Patriarchs, and Prophets, and the Apostles,
and Virgin Mother of Christ, were in the same pains too, and needed the same
Deliverance. For they were all mentioned alike, and together, as it is to be
seen in the ancientest Liturgies.

Among all these Innocent Offices and Rites of the Primitive Christians, was
there any thing of prayer for souls in Purgatory? Was there any thing of prayer
to Saints departed this life? Was there any foundation for those superstitious
Observances, Of adoring their Relics, of Prostration to their Images, of
Pilgrimage to their Shrines, of making Vows, of saying Masses, of Offering to
them, and the like? The Papists say there was, they plead the practice of the
Church for it, they wrest places of Scripture to their purpose. Nay the
Rhemists and others, allege this very Text, without which I should not have
mentioned them at this time.

But as the Learned men among themselves have been so just not to charge this
upon my Text, and some of them confess they have no ground for these things in
any one Text of Canonical Scripture: So they would do us but right to
acknowledge, that none of these things was practiced for some hundreds of years
after Christianity came into the world.

In those Primitive times all their Offices for the Dead, were, either to give
Testimony of that Faith in which they died, and that death had not dissolved
their Communion with the Living: or they were to bless God for their holy Life,
and happy Death: or to Pray to him, not for their deliverance from Purgatory,
of which there was no Faith in those times; but for the Increase of that Good
which they believed them to be possessed of already, or for the Attainment of
that farther good which they thought they were sure of, namely, for their
speedy and happy Resurrection, for their perfect discharge at the day of
Judgment, for the Consummation of their bliss with their own in the Kingdom of
Glory.

Not to say how the Fathers differ among themselves in these particulars; or
how many of these particulars are omitted in the Roman Church as well as ours;
it is enough that here is nothing makes for them, but much against those their
Errors and Corruptions. All that is agreed on all hands, or that we find in the
Practice of the first Ages, being sufficiently contained in those Offices of
our Church; in the prayer for the Church-Militant, in the Collect on All Saints
day, and in the Office for the burial of the Dead; where we pray, That it would
please God of his gracious goodness, shortly to accomplish the number of his
Elect, and to hasten his Kingdom, that we, with all those that are departed in
the true faith of his holy Name, may have our perfect consummation and bliss,
both in body and soul, in his everlasting glory.

Lastly, Remembrance in Action is the other duty enjoined in my Text, (...),
Imitate their Faith, that is, their Christian profession and practice, their
whole Life and Conversation, according to their own belief of that word which
they have spoken.

The Reason of this duty is plain: for it is our business in this world to
recover the Image of God in which he created us; to be like him here in
Righteousness and Holiness, that we may be like him hereafter in Glory and
Happiness.

To this End, God has given us those Lineaments of himself, which are written
sufficiently in our Nature, but more fully and distinctly in Scripture. In
which Scripture, he so often and so vehemently requires us, Be ye Holy, as I am
Holy; be ye Just, as I am Just; be ye Merciful, as I am Merciful; be ye Pure,
as I am Pure; be ye Perfect, as your heavenly Father is Perfect.

This good Word of God, which was given by the Prophets and Apostles, is still
inclucated on us by them that speak to us the word of God. Which Office being
primarily of Bishops, as appears in my Text, They are first and above all
others to conform themselves to it, to show others how possible and how
practicable it is.

Our Apostle supposed this in those Primitive Bishops in my Text. God requires
it of all that succeed them in the Church. So of Timothy, though he were young
in Age, yet being in that Place, Be thou an Example to believers in word, in
conversation, in spirit, in faith, in truth, 1 Timothy 4. 12. and in the last
Verse, Take heed to thy Self, and to thy Doctrine: Do this constantly and
continually, and so thou shall save both thy self and them that hear thee.

Whether they do this or no, they are our Teachers and Rulers; therefore in the
17 Verse of this Chapter, while they live, we must obey their Word, and submit
to their Government. When they are dead, both for what they are, and were, we
may do well to say no ill of them; and since we can say no good, even forget
them, and leave them to God.

But if they are such as they ought, which the Apostle supposes in my Text, if
they live as men that believe themselves what they say: It Is our duty, not only
to submit and obey them while they live; but also to Remember them when they
are dead: Remember them, in our thoughts, with that honor they deserve; In our
Affections, with a due sense of our loss, and their gain: Remember them in
words, with the just praise of their actions and lives: In our prayers to God,
with due thankfulness for their graces and gifts in this life, and for the
glory they receive after death: Lastly, remember to follow them in that holy
way, which leads to so happy an end: In our Apostles words, follow their Faith,
considering the event, the blessed end of their good conversation.

What my Text says in general of Bishops deceased, it is most easy to apply. I
know it has been done all this while, by them that knew the virtuous and great
mind that lately dwelt in this body. They know the truth of all I shall say,
and much more that might be said in his just commendation. But the little I can
bring within the time I have left, being said from many years experience, will
at least stir up those that knew him not, to enquire; and if they find these
things true, they know their duty of Remembrance and Imitation.

I shall not be minute, in drawing all I say under these heads: for I speak to
them that can distinguish and sort things, as they belong to the one, or to the
other.

To begin with the Natural endowments of his Mind; I cannot think of him
without just reflection upon that Paradox, of the Equality of Souls. He was
surely a great Instance to the contrary; having that largeness of Soul in every
respect, which was much above the rate of ordinary men. He had an Understanding
that extended to all parts of useful Learning and Knowledge; a Will always
disposed to Great, and Public, and Generous things. He had a natural aversion
from all idle speculations, and from the eager pursuit of small and frivolous
designs. In great matters, he judged so well, that he was not usually surprised
with events. He pursued his intentions with such equalness of mind, that he was
never carried beyond the calmness of his Natural Temper, except through his
zeal for Public good, or where his Friend was concerned.

What he was in his Studies, I have reason to know, that have often been tired
with studying with him. He was indefatigable, and would have worn himself out,
if he had not been relieved with multiplicity of business. However, he impaired
by it, a Body which seemed to have been built for a long Age, and contracted
those Infirmities that hastened his death.

The effect of his Studies, in his Preaching and Writings, are sufficiently
known, and would have been much more, if God had given him time.

As for his Preaching, it was sometimes famous near this place; though he
sought rather the profit, than the praise of his hearers. He spoke solid truth,
with as little show of Art as was possible. He expressed all things in their true
and natural colors; with that aptness and plainness of Speech, that grave
natural way of Elocution, that showed he had no design upon his hearers. His
plainness was best for the instruction of the simple; and for the better sort,
who were in truth an Intelligent Auditory, it was enough that they might see he
had no mind to deceive them. He applied himself rather to their Understanding
than Affections. He saw so much of the beauty of Goodness himself, that he
thought the bare showing of it was enough to make all wise men, as it did him,
to be in love with it.

In his Writings he was judicious and plain, like one that valued not the
circumstances so much as the substance. And he showed it in whatsoever Argument
he undertook; sometimes beating out new untravel'd ways, sometimes repairing
those that had been beaten already: No subject he handled, but I dare say is
the better for him; and will be the sier for them that come after him.

If in these he went sometimes beside his Profession, it was in following the
Design of it, to make men wiser and better, which I think is the business of
Universal Knowledge. And this he promoted with much zeal and sincerity, in hope
of the great Benefit that may accrue to mankind.

It was his aim, as in all things, so especially in that which, I conceive, is
much more censured than understood; I mean, in the design of the Royal Society.
He joined himself to it with no other end, but to promote Modern knowledge,
without any contempt or lessening of those great men in former times. With due
honor to whom, he thought it lawful for others to do that which, we have no
reason to doubt, they themselves would have done if they were living.

I would not seem to excuse that which deserves commendation and
encouragement; or to commend other things, for want of subject in him.
Therefore leaving this Theme in better hands, I proceed next to speak of his
Virtues and Graces; and these the rather, as being both to be remembered and
followed.

And in speaking of these, where shall I begin? Nay when shall I end, if I say
all that may be spoken? I think it not worth while to speak of those that are
Vulgar, though he had them also in no common degree: Nor would I seem to make
any Virtue a Propriety. But there are those which are not common to many, and
were generally acknowledged to be in him; though they appeared not so to some
other men, as they did to those that intimately knew him.

His Prudence was great, I think it seldom failed in any thing to which he
applied himself. And yet he wanted that part, which some hold to be essential;
he so wanted Dissimulation, that he had rather too much openness of heart. It
was Sincerity indeed that was Natural to him; he so abhorred a Lie, that he was
not at all for show; he could not put on any thing that looked like it. And
presuming the same of other men, through excess of Benignity, he would be
sometimes deceived, in believing they were what they seemed to be, and what he
knew they ought to have been.

His greatness of mind, was known to all that knew any thing of him. He neither
eagerly sought any Dignity, nor declined any Capacity of doing good. He looked
down upon Wealth, as much as others admire it: He knew the use of an Estate,
but did not covet it. What he yearly received of the Church, he bestowed in its
service. As for his Temporal estate, being secured against want, he sought no
farther, he set up his rest; I have heard him say often, I will be no richer,
and I think he was as good as his word.

As for Revenge, how could it enter into the breast of him that hated nothing
but that which makes us hateful to God? I say not but he had a sense of
personal injuries; and especially of those that reflected upon his name, when
they proceeded from those that had good names of their own. What others said,
he despised; but by those he would often wish he had been better understood:
That he was not, he bore as his misfortune; he would not requite them with the
like, but mentioned them with all due Respect, and was always ready to oblige
them, and to do them good.

Yet it was not so desirable, (I say not to be his Enemy, for He did not
account them so, but) to be at those terms with him, as to be his Acquaintance
or Friend. They that were never so little familiar with him, could not but
find, as well Benefit as Delight in his conversation. His Discourse was
commonly of useful things; it never caused trouble or weariness to the Hearer.
Yet he would venture to displease one for his good; and indeed he was the man
that ever I knew, for that most needful, and least practiced point of
Friendship. He would not spare to give seasonable reproof, and wholesome
advice, when he saw occasion. I never knew any that would do it so freely, and
that knew how to manage that freedom of speech so inoffensively.

It was his way of Friendship, not so much to oblige men, as to do them good.
He did this not slightly and superficially, but like one that made it his
Business. He durst do for his Friend, any thing that was honest, and no more.
He would undertake nothing but what well became him, and then he was unwearied
till he had effected it.

As he concerned himself for his Friend, in all other respects, so especially
in that, which went nearest to him of all earthly concernments. He would not
suffer any blot to be thrown, or to lie upon his Friends good Name, or his
Memory. And that Office I am obliged to requite, in giving some account of that
which has been spoken by some to his disadvantage.

I shall neglect, for he did so, any frivolous reports; but that which seems to
have any weight in it, as far as I have observed, is, that he had not that zeal
for the Church, that they would seem to have that object this. He seemed to
look upon the Dissenters with too much favor to their persons and ways.

As to the persons: No doubt that goodness of Nature, that true Christian
Principle, which made him willing to think well of all men, and to do good, or
at least no hurt to any, might and ought to extend it self to them among
others. But besides, he was inclined to it by his education under his
Grandfather Mr. Dod, a truly pious and learned man; who yet was a Dissenter
himself in some things.

Not that he had any delight in contradiction, or could find in his heart to
disturb the peace of the Church for those matters: He was so far from it, that
as I have frequently heard from this his Grandchild and others, when some
thought their Dissents ground enough for a War, he declared himself against it,
and confirmed others in their Allegiance: He professed to the last a just hatred
of that horrid Rebellion. Now his Relation to this man, and conversation with
those of his Principles, might incline him to hope the like of others of that
way. And when he found them farther off from the unity of the Church; he might
possibly overdo, through the vehemence of his desire, to bring them off of
their Prejudices, and to reduce them to the Unity of the Church; in which his
Grandfather lived and dyed: Why might he not hope the same of other Dissenters?

As for himself, he was so far from Approving their ways, that in the worst of
times, when one here present bewailed to him the Calamities of the Church, and
declared his Obedience even then to the Laws of it: He encouraged him in it, he
desired his friendship, and protected both him and many others, by an interest
that he had gained, and made use of chiefly for such purposes.

How he demeaned himself then, is known in both Universities; where he governed
with praise, and left a very grateful Remembrance behind him. How in the next
times since, I cannot speak in a better Place. And when I have named this City,
and the two Universities, I think he could not be placed in a better Light in
this Nation. There were enough that could judge, and he did not use to disguise
himself; I appeal to you that conversed with him in those days, What zeal he
has expressed, for the Faith, and for the unity of the Church: How he stood up
in defense of the Order and Government: How he has asserted the Liturgy, and
the Rites of it: He conformed himself to every thing that was commanded. Beyond
which, for any man to be vehement, in little and unnecessary things, whether
for or against them, he could not but dislike; and as his free manner was, he
has often been heard to call it Fanaticalness. How this might be represented I
know not, or how his design of comprehension might be understood.

Sure I am, that since he came into the Government of the Church, to which he
was called in his Absence; he so well became the Order, that it out-did the
expectation of all that did not very well know him. He filled his place with a
Goodness answerable to the rest of his life; and with a Prudence above it,
considering the two extremes, which were nowhere so much as in his Diocese.
Though he was, as before, very tender to those that differed from him; yet he
was, as before, exactly conformable himself, and brought others to Conformity,
some Eminent men in his Diocese. He endeavored to bring in all that came
within his reach, and might have had great success, if God had pleased to
continue him.

But having given full proof of his intentions and desires, it pleased God to
reserve the fruit for other hands, from which we have great cause to expect
much good to the Church.

He was in perfect Health in all other respects; when a known Infirmity, from
an unknown cause, that had been easier to cure, than it was to discover, stole
upon him, and soon became incurable.

He was for many days in a prospect of Death, which he saw as it approached,
and felt it come on by degrees. Some days before he died, he found within
himself, as he often said, a Sentenoe of Death. In all this time, first of
Pain, then of dreadful Apprehension, at last in the presence of Death; Who ever
saw him dismayed? Who ever found him surprised? or heard a word from him,
unbecoming a wise man, and a true Christian? It was my infelicity to be so
engaged, that I could not duly attend him; and so deceived with vain hopes,
that I believed him not dying, till he was dead. But at the times I was with
him, I saw great cause to admire his Faith toward God, his Zeal for his
Church, his Constancy of Mind, his Contempt of the World, and his Cheerful
hopes of Eternity. I have heard much more upon these heads, from those that
were with him. Some of you may have heard other things from other men. It has
been the way of our Adversaries to entitle themselves to dying men, even those,
whose whole life was a Testimony against them. Thus after the Death of our
Famous Jewel, the Papists were pleased to say, he dyed of their Religion.
Militiere has ventured to insinuate the same, of our late King of blessed and
glorious memory. Men's Tongues and Pens are their own; but lest they should
abuse them and you, and the Memory of this worthy Prelate, as they have abused
others, (though nothing needs to be said to such groundless Calumnies) I
declare, and that upon most certain grounds, That he died in the Faith of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and in the Communion of the Church of England, as it is by
Law established.

He died only too soon for the Church, and for his Friends: But for himself he
had lived long enough. He has lived long enough that dies well. For whatsoever
he wants of that which we call time, it is added, though it adds nothing to
Eternity.

As for us that are now to try how we can bear the want of those many blessings
we enjoyed in him; What shall we say? We must submit to the Will of God. Our
Comfort is, that we shall follow, and come together again in due time. Till
when, Farewell pious and virtuous Soul, Farewell great and excellent man, Farewell
worthy Prelate and faithful Friend. We have thy Memory and Example, Thou have
our Praises and our Tears. While thy Memory lives in our Breasts, may thy
Example be fruitful in our Lives: That our Meeting again may be in Joy
unspeakable, when God shall have wiped away all Tears from our Eyes.

FINIS.

