Beatitas Britanniae; Or, KING CHARLES The SECOND, ENGLANDS BEATITUDE.

AS reached to the Incorporation of the HONOR of EAY, in the County of
Suffolk, March 31. 1661. being the Lords Day before their Election of
Burgesses, and the Week before the Choice of Knights for the County.

By EDWARD WILLAN Vicar of Hoxne in Suffolk.

Sen. Trag.

Decet tim^ri Caesarem: at plus diligi.

LONDON, Printed for John W^^^ams at the Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard 1661.

To the Right HONORABLE HENRY HOWARD, Brother to the most Noble EARL And
LORD LIEUTENANT of SUFFOLK.
Right Honorable,
IT is to God we live engaged for the blessing of a King so good, he made him
good, he made him King, and all his subjects blessed in him; fortunatos nimium
bona si Virgil.
sua norint. Yet to your good HOONU^ I stand for ever obliged also, for the
most early intimations of the Blessing, with the blesseful representations of
his Royal goodness. It was a favor like your self, Right NOBLE, a very ray of
your own Nobleness, to be a Phosphorus then to one so much benighted with
anxietudes for that long absence of our Phoebus. It is nothing now to be shown
the daylight of our glorious Day Star, it being of his essence so to (...)
Synes. de Regno. a Macroh.
shine. As Synesius said of that Light which rules by Day; that King of Stars,
the Day making Sun. But in that saddest night to show his lucifluous
irradiations, and to elongate the beams of his glorious luster to such a
distance as Hoxne was something indeed. Few or none would represent him
rightly, as your Honor did, before the smilings of that Aurora, at his rising
from the nether world. And that welcome day brake first from your
preenlightened self in these obscurer parts. Yea sub nocte silenti, your
softest syllables of such a day approaching made me soon rejoice in hope, and
in such hope as made me not ashamed, nor yet afraid to awaken others, and bid
them put on their loyalties Virgil.
again, so long laid off. Yea those twilight hopes of having a King again, our
own King, and he such a King, soon turned darker sayings, and Pulpit Aenigmaes
into broad day light expressions, Riddles of danger to Readings of happy
deliverance, Aposiop^sis to Pleonasmus, sic solet laetitia ^. Greg.
arcana mentis aperire. I could not but deem it an offense to the King of kings
not to preach my constant Auditors into resolves of open loyalty, or not to
press all others, wherever I came to pray for the blessing of such a
Sovereign, and his most expetible Restoration. No duty seemed more incumbent,
then the undeceiving of the seduced Many, nor any word of exhortation more in
season, then Reddite Caesari quae Caesaris sunt. Nor did any find better liking
with the best, then arguments of that complexion. I cannot forget the noble
favors, that one Sermon, for Gods own government, as the best, did find with
all the most honorable loyalties of Audley End, for the Arguments sake, and
for the rightest designations of it. For that was preached to prepare the
hearers for the happiness of a King, this to make its hearers see their
happiness in such a King. It is a Sermon of happiness, and the happiness of
the Sermon it will be to have your Honors tutelation. Be pleased to read your
interest in Englands Beatitude. And the God of all Beatitudes and Honors
bless your Honor with Beatitudes both lasting and everlasting, it is and
shall be the Prayer of

Yeur Honors most heartily devoted as obliged Servant. EDWARD WILLAN.

ENGLANDS BEATITUDE
Eccles. 10. 17. Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King is the sons of Nobles,
and thy Princes eat in due season, for strength, and not for drnnkennesse.
IT is the Desire of Pet Lom. sent. i^b. 4. Distin. 49. Aquin. sum. 12. q. 2.
ar. 7. (...) in Ho^^en^.
all Men to be blessed, but not the endeavors. And it is the endeavor of some
to be blessed, but not by light means. And some be blessed without their
endeavors, but will not rightly understand it. God blesses them, as he blesses
all the Land, but they can hardly deem it a blessing, or dain to bless him for
it, because not what their fanatic Crosse-grain'd souls desired. Their minds
were to bless themselves with that National ^^rse, the want of a King. But God
has crossed their minds with a National bless, even this of my Text. And
blessed be his Name for ever. Let all that love the Lord say so, though others
will (...) We are bound to bless the Lord, and rejoice in his mercy, ^^^ugh
some repine and pine away to see God truly good to this ou^ ^^rael. We can do
no less, to prove ^ur selves true sons of the (...), and loyal subjects. Nor
they much more to proclaim themselves right sons of Belial, very Malignants,
whose eyes are Deuteronomy. 13. 13. a Chron. 13. 7. Matthew. 20. 15. Prove. 25. 11. Ar.
Mont. Interpr.
therefore evil, because that God is good to England, and has blessed it
according to this Text, Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King, etc.

Verbum dictum super rotis suis, as it is in the sacred Adage, ^ word in due
season, and fit to season this, or any Assembly, a single assertion with a
double condition. Blessed art thou, O Land, that is the assertion: when thy King
is the son of Nobles there is the first condition, And thy Princes eat in due
season, for strength, and not for drunkenness, there is the second. On these
two conditions hangs all the certainty of the assertion, and to ascertain the
Land to be blessed, we need but ascertain these two conditions of a blessed
Land, when it may be truly said, as truly it may, Rex tuus natus clarissimis:
Thy King i^ the son of Nobles, and thy Princes eat in due season, for strength,
and not for drunkenness. It may as truly be said, beata te^^ blessed art thou,
O Land, Any Land may be so styled, that i^ so conditioned, and so may England
now as well as any. I^stead of ^^ata terra, blessed art thou, O Land, it may be
said, beata Britannia, blessed art thou, O England, Thy King is the son of
Nobles, etc.

But before I discuss these conditions, that speak a Lan^ blessed, let me
disclose the blessedness bespoken on the^ conditions. Beataterra, the sense of
beata is hinted by terr^ A blessed Land, the (...), blessed of it self is
(...), an^ could it have stood by it self, had been dubious, but bei^ adjected
to the Substantive Land, has singled out some certain significance, and can
import none other Beati^^de, b^ what befits a Land, blessed art thou, O Land,
figuratively spoken, locus pro incolis, the Land for the Inhabitants, by a
Mel^nymy of the subject; yet not intending (...), but National Psalm. 1. 1. 32.
2. Romans 1. 25. 9. 5.
blessedness to them.

In Scriptures we read of a (...) Land, of a blessed man and of God blessed
ever, but must not think them blessed all Psalm. 1. 1. 32. 2. Romans 1. 25. 9. 5.
one way, or with one kind of blessedness: they be three beatitudes, and all
of several species; that of a Land very good, that of man much better, but that
of God infinitely best. The blessedness of God is the greatest and highest
good, that of men next, that of a Land in suo genere, least and lowest; for
beatus homo is more in its proper sense then beata terra, but benedictus
Dominus more then both. God is blessed of man, man of God, the Land of both:
yea, God is blessed of man, and of himself too without man, and man is blessed,
but not of himself without God, but of God, and not without himself, and the
Land is blessed of God and man, or of God by man.

Gods blessedness is first, and he is first blessed of himself, S. August,
Supporta. par. 3. c. 2. Anselm. Meditat. lib. 1. cap. 2.
sibi sufficiens, says S. Austine, self sufficient. Blessedness it self, and
the fountain of blessings: fons vivus, says Anselmus, an ever flowing and an
overflowing fountain, from him all blessedness flows to persons and Nations,
and to him should all their blessings return as riverets and floods of water
Scalig. contra Carda. Exerc. 46^
to the main, from whence, as Scaliger notes, they borrow beginnings. By him it
is that man is beatus, and a Land beata, and by both should he be benedictus,
blessed of man, and of men for being so of himself, and for blessing them. But
he is not blessed of them, as they are of him. Man's blessing of God is merely
Declarative, but his blessing of man is more. Man does not make, but only speak
God blessed, and such a speaking of him so, adds nothing to his own
self-blessedness. God is not the less blessed indeed, though man blesses him
not: but man is, if God blesses not him. Man is not as God, of himseif blessed,
nor can he be: but God blesses him by communicating blessedness unto him. Gods
mere speaking of any man blessed, makes him blessed: as Aquinas well observes,
his fiat does it, nor can it be without him. He is vita beati hominiis, says
S. Austine, the life of the blessed man, S. August. de C^^itate Dei. l. 19.
his blessed life. Summum bonum, that makes it life and blessed. Now the more
man enjoyes him, the more he joys in him, and his fullness of joy will be in
his fullest enjoying of Idem Confess. lib. 12.
him, but so we shall not be blessed of him without our selves. He that made us
without our selves, will not save us without Id. de Tri^it.
our selves, as St. Austine well and truly. It is indeed by Grace we are saved,
but not without cooperating Grace, as that ornament Ephesians. 2. 5.
of Hippo calls it, we must be workers together with God, (...), says the
Apostle, and so work out our own salvation 2 Cor. 6. 1. Thil. 2. 12.
with fear and trembling. Though it be with respect to saving Graces, that men
be styled beati, yet not so much to their having as their using of them: as
beati immaculati, blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the Law of
the Lord. Blessed are they that keep his Testimonies, that seek him with the
whole heart. Psalm. 119. 1, 2. where blessed is twice ascribed to the using of
such graces, and that blessedness of another Nature, and higher worth then
this in my Text, that spiritual, this temporal. Yet this is of worth too, yea
of much worth, worth my pains in preaching, and yours in hearing, worth all
men's prayers, when they want it, and all their thanks and praises when they
have it, as, God be praised, Antecellens ^m ibus eruditione and ^opien^ia.
Arquer. Dictionar. The* 1 Kings 4. 29, 30, 31.
now they have. This well inspired Preacher, Solomon himself, esteemed it an
Argument worthy of himself, so did the Holy Ghost in putting it into the pen of
such an Amanuensis. yet it is but terrene blessedness, a temporal benefit, the
blessedness of a Land, Terra beata, blessed art thou, O Land.

Blessed of God and man, or of God by man, for God gives the man, and the men
by whom it is blessed. By him Prove. 8. 15.
Kings reign, and Princes have felicifying virtues, as that of Temperance, to
eat in due season. When such are beati, the Land is beata, blessed in them, and
blessed by them, or for them. Their blessedness spiritual conduces much to
that of the Land, which is but temporal, mere civil happiness, yet may help to
render some more then civilly happy. But not to mention what may be, it is
National blessedness, and must be answered with National thankfulness. We must
acknowledge Gods blessing in it, which is our way of blessing God, as says
Aquinas. Now to bless him so, let us reassume Benedic^re nostrum, est benefici
^ ejus agnoscere. Aquin. Tom. 13.
the consideration of the two conditions: the first concerns the King, as
supreme: the second his ministers, here styled Princes, as subordinate. As
touching the King, it is conditioned that he be the son of Nobles; as touching
the Princes, that they eat in due season, for strength, and not for
drunkenness, In each condition observe twice two considerables, first, two and
two ex part Kegis, concerning the King, and then as many again ex part
Principum, four and four in both, all gradual Mediums to National blessedness,
or to the perfection of it, see them in order, and first in reference to the
King these four.

1. That the Land has a King. 2. That it has but one King, it is Rex, not Reges
in the condition. 3. That it has its own King, Rex tuus, thy King. 4. That it
has him by succession, as descended from the race of Kings, filius candidorum,
the son of Nobles. Tantum cibi pot usque sumun^, quant^ viribus resiciendis
suffic^at, reliquum vero tempus omne fideliter Reipub. impendunt. Anton.
Corran. in locum.

Secondly, in reference to the Judges and Magistrates, and other Worthies of
the Land, here honored with the style of Princes, these four.

1. That there be Princes in the Land. 2. That they be Princes of the Land,
Principes tui, thy Princes. 3. That they be sober persons, such as eat in due
season* 4. That they be of public spirits, as public persons ought to be, and
aim at strength, not drunkenness in eating. At strength to do their office,
and serve their Country, not at Drunkenness to debauch their Honors, and
serve the Devil.
In those articles which refer to the King, we may see what should be, and is
in England, to make it blessed. In these which refer to the Princes, what is,
or should be, to complete the blessing. To have a King, and but one King, and
he both the right King, and a right King, is but what should be, and is, in
England, the Lord be blessed, to make it blessed, and to have Princes in the
Land, Peers, and persons of worth in Trust and Power, and they Princes of the
Land, right English Worthies, to whom there belongs jus imaginis, the
Ho^nours Id est, Jus Nobilitatis. Sigon. de j^re Romans lib. 2. c. 20.
of ancient families, and they so qualified, as Princes should be, with Noble
virtues, to do right honorable service to God, the King, the Country, eating
in due season, and aiming at strength for public performances, like public
persons, not Drunkenness, like sneaking sots in private Pemb. Analyt. Expos.
Com^dere enim debent ut vivant Deo; non vivere ut comedant. Hugo Cardinal. in
locum.
Debaucheries, not serving their own lust, but the good of others; as it is, or
should be, to make the blessedness complete. Now for certain we have all the
first in esse, and all the last at least in fieri. We have a King now, God be
blessed, and we have our own King, the good Lord bless him, and be blessed for
him, and he Rex Nobilis, a right King indeed. The son of Nobles in Solomon's
rightest sense. Gods blessing therefore to the Land, for blessed art thou, O
Land, when thy King is the son of Nobilitatem non dat unus dies. ^. ud. Vives
Satellit. See Switzerland in Mercator' s Atlas. And in Archbish. Abbot' s
Descript. of the World.
Nobles.

And we have Princes too, for an Honorable House of Peers again, to redeem us
from that other House, and they Princes of the Land, not subdititious Lords of
adulterine Editions, no Protectorian Mushromes, mere Nullities Ephemeral, but
(...), of right Royal Creations: vere Patricii, the right English Nobility, of
nobler minds then to come down to those unenglished Confederates in the Land,
that would have it like to the Land of Confederates, a very Anarchie; Heroic
persons, and of Princelike sobriety, to eat in tempo^^suo, and then but ad
reficiendum; as St. Jerome renders it, to renew their strength, exhausted with
public services. Publici boni amantes, as Corranus says they should be,
lovers S. Hieron. Interp. Bibl. Corranus in locum.
of public good. Such we have, God be thanked, though all, it may be, are not
such. And so all the Articles be true, though not of all, and known so to be,
though not to all. Certainly true of many, though not ascertained to the many.
^ea all be such forought I know; but certain it is that his Proclama. May 30.
1660. Proclama. Aug^st 13. 1660. Pro^lama. Septem. 29. ^660. Claudian. de 4.
Honor. Cons.
Sacred Majesty takes all due care to have all so, witness his several
Proclamations against Debauchery, wherein he commands both Princes and people
to be of sober Conversations, that he in them might be as blessed by that
condition on their part, as they are in him by that and all conditions on his.
O that Claudians, Regis ad exemplum, etc. were verified in this, as in matters
of less concernment, that such as love, or pretend to love his Majesty, would
show it in Joh. 14. 15. Seneca in Thyeste.
keeping those Royal Mandates as well as others. Rex vel^t honesta; Would to
God Seneca could now make good what follows, (...) non eadem volet. Were all
the people, are but all Princes such as the King would have them, the Land
would surely be as blessed, as Solomon can assert it by the Text.

But suppose some defects in some, and I do but suppose it, ^ suppositio nihil
ponit; yet all being perfect ex part Regis, ^^ Land may asself the title of
blessed; for as there is a blessedness on both conditions together, so in
either by it self. And they be not merely the joint conditions of one only
blessedness: but the different advantages of diverse, so the ^^ginal intends
it. (...) is plurale constructum, as well as ^^gulare. As it may be rendered
b^ata with St. Jerome, or be^^tu S. Hieron. Interp. Bibl.
with Pagnine and Mercer: so ^t may beatitudines tuae, (...) Montanus latins
it, thy blessednesses. And so much Bux^^f, a Master of that holy Language,
likewise observes, as Pagnine does with the Targum and Rabbinical Critics.
Some Pagninus The Lingu^ S^^ct. (...) M^nt. Bib. (...). (...) Rod. Hebra^^. in
(...) O q^e tu es bien heureux o terre.
of the French Translatours turn it by (...). O how happy art thou, O Land? As
w^ndring at the happiness or happinesses; happy in having thy King the son of
Nobles, and happy in having thy Princes, such as eat in due season, for
strength and not for drunkenness: beata in that, and beata in this, blessed in
either, but wonderful blessed in both together.

And not only so as by two single beatitudes, one by the one condition, another
by the other, but by many in each; As 1. Blessed art thou, O Land, in having a
King; and 2. blessed art thou in having but one King: and 3. blessed in having
thine own King: and 4. blessed in having such a King as thine own, a King right
Noble, the son of Nobles: and 5. blessed also in having Princes: and 7. blessed
in having them temperate persons, such as eat in due season: and 8. blessed in
having them aim at strength, not drunkenness in eating. And suppose them not
all several blessednesses, yet be they several addi^ions to that so accumulate
in the Text; and each addition is a blessing.

I cannot now review them all, but must take up with those of the King, or by
him, which speak us blessed, and blessed, and blessed, exceedingly blessed.
Shall I run them over again to open the palm of the Time with the Text? first,
blessed art thou O Land, in having a King. But secondly, more blessed in having
but one King. And thirdly, more and more blessed Filius Candidorum, Periphrasis
optimi Regis, been, b^ote, and sancte e^uducati. Anton. Co^^an. Annotar.
in having thine own King. But fourthly, most of all blessed in having such a
King as thine own, a King most truly Noble, composed all of Nobleness, of Noble
blood, and a Noble soul, Nobly descended, Nobly disposed, Nobly designed,
filius candidorum, the son of Nobles, and Noblest of such sons, as maximus
natu. A Noble Climax, the true Incrementum of Englands blessedness. Let us pace
the Gradation again, and with steps more deliberate.

And in the first place, let us well observe that our very first step toward
National bliss is our having a King. The Text supposes any blessed Land to
have so. Nor does it pronounce a Land blessed without one. The Land of Canaan
it self was very unhappy when it wanted a King, and was but merely miscalled
the holy Land. It was indeed neither holy not happy: but therefore unhappy,
because unholy, and therefore both because without a King. When there was no
King Judge 17. 6. 21. 25.
is Israel, every man did that which was right in his own eyes. And when every
man did so, but few or none did that which was right in the eyes of God. And
when it was so in the Land, how could it be blessed? Great was the wickedness
then, and great the wretchedness in Israel: witness those woeful stories
toward the end of Judges, where all the evils both (...) and poenae, of sin
and suffering be often ascribed to the Jud. 18. 1.
want of a King, non erat Rex, there was no King in Israel.

And as Isreal's woes in diebus illis were for want of a King: so were Englands
of late. Non erat Rex in Anglia, we had not our King in England. But almost
every man played Rex, and did what seemed good in his own eyes. Yea every man
but those good English Protestants that were true Royal^ists^, and had the fear
of God before their eyes. Alas! they only might not do what seemed right to
them, and was right indeed; or not without dangers of censure and suffering.
They might not do right to their God, nor right to their King, nor to their
Country, nor to their own souls, except in secret. They might not serve God as
they ought, nor pray for this blessedness of my Text, without hazzarding
liberties, livelyhoods, lives and all. Indeed much tender pity was then
pretended toward tender Consciences; but none intended indeed for any but
those erroneous. No kind of pi^tymight be extended to any good conscience that
obliged to Loyalty, nor to any pious soul that would not renounce the right
English Protestancy. The mercies designed for such were cruelties: unless
sequestrations, proscriptions and trucidations were Acts of mercy; or unless
the forcing of men from conscience with Covenants, and trappaning their souls
with snares were mercies. All sorts of Apostates might be indulged: but no
Invidiam sortita est Religio. S. August. (...). Joh. 17. 3.
true sons of the Church of England; as in Greece of old and in old Rome, men
might have worshipped any God, but only the God of Israel, the only true God;
or might have worshipped him with any but his own true worship: so in England
of late men might have been any thing but only what they should have been,
they might have been of any new Religion they listed, or of no Religion at all,
if they listed, as too many were. But might not be for that good old way Jer.
6. 16.
they had been, and ever should have been: any but the Divine service of our
Church might have been used, toleration for any besides might have been
purchased. The Jews might have a Synagogue, and had in Englands Metropolis to
deny our Savior, and contradicted his (...). But English Protestants might not
be protected. Many were ruined, Religi^nis ergo, and others ran the hazard.
Theirs was the saddest condition of any, because there was no King in England.

We then were like to Israel for want of a King, and should not be unlike the
better Israelites, now we have one. When God had blessed them with a King, they
loved him as their lives; and styled him the Lam. 4. 20. L^cernam Israel. 2 Samuel 21. 17. Quintus ^ Curtius de Gest. Alexandr. lib. 10. Job 28. 13. Psalm.
27. 13 142. 5. Isa. 38. 11. 53. 8. Ezec 26. 20 32. 23, 23.
Breath of their nosthrils, and the Light of Israel. We have now as just cause,
as I conjecture: for the Light and Life of this our Israel went and came with
our Sovereign. The whole Land without him was but Corpus sine Anima, a Body
without a Soul; as Q^ Curtius said of an Army without a General. We could not
then look upon England, as on Jobs, or David's, or Isaiahs, or Ieremies, or
Ezechiels Land of the Living. It was a dying Life, we living; or a living Death
we endured; a state worse then Death indeed. When this Preacher, Solomon, in
his days had considered the oppressions done under the Sun, and beheld the
tears of such as were oppressed, and had no Comforter. On the side of their
Oppressors there was power: but they had no Comforter. He praised the dead
more then the living, Eccles. 4. 1, 2. No^ could he have done otherwise of
late, had he considered the Oppressions done in England, and behold the tears
of such as were oppressed, and had no comforter. Proh dolor! non erat Rex in
Anglia, there was no King in England to relieve the oppressed; or to enliven
those that were even worse than dead. The Natural Body wants Life, when it
wants a Soul; so did the Body of this Land, when that Civil Soul, King was
parted from it. And Carkess-like, it corrupted apace, and bred devouring
Vermin, which lived like themselves, upon the Bodies of other Men's Estates;
while others, their betters did not, could not live as otherwise they might.
Alas! good Subjects did not live, but suffer; for, simplex vita non est vivere,
sed valere, It is not to live, merely to have life, but to enjoy it. But that
we did not, could not, when the Civil Soul of our Nation; and religious Soul of
our National Church was forced to a sorrowful state of separation. Most heavy
oppressions were all Surely oppression makes the wise man mad, Eccles. 7. 7.
abroad. Such as made some wise men mad, and some mad men Wise. So wise, as to
see their want of a King; yea so wise, as to understand, that England's real
Comfort is only in a Royal Comforter. It was merely by Antiphrasis, that some
would needs be miscalled Conservators, and others Protectors; when P^ety and
Loyalty could find no Protection, because no King in England. But blessed be
the King of Rev. 17. 14.
kings, we have one now, to do us right; one that has already enlivened, and
enlightened the Land, as holy Job has Job 33. 30.
it, Luce viventium, with the Light of the living. And nothing now can seem
more seasonable than Acts of Oblivion, in reference to the late Oppressors,
and to the Powers on their side. Yet nothing can be less suitable than present
forgetfulness of such Oppressions, in reference to God our Savior, who has so
redeemed us from them. It is indeed S. Chrysostom. Homil. ad popul. Antiochen.
(...), as S. Chrysostom says of Sadness, to retrive any thoughts of those
injurious Times. Yet must they be thought of: not to corroborate Animosities;
nor yet renovare dolores, to rub old sores; much less to beget Resolves,
cruorem cruore reponere (if Tertul. Lactant. Institut. l. 5. S. Hieron. Epist.
128. ad Fabiol. (...). Romans 12. 13. Memineris, quod servus fuisti in ^erra etc.
Deu. 5. 15.
noble Tertullian's phrase may be so taken) to recompense evil for evil. But
for more pious purposes.

As first, to perpetuate due Thankfulness to God, for so memorable a
Deliverance. That House of Bondage, our English Egypt, may not be forgotten,
nor the Bondage of that House; least we forget our Obligations to thank our
Redeemer. He has raised the Land from National death, by reuniting it is Soul
unto it. A blessfull Resurrection! we are blessed by it, a Blessed Land.

And secondly, those Miseries must be remembered, to make our present Mercies
appear the more like themselves. Contraria juxta se opposita, magis clucescunt.
By looking back to the Cursednesse of those merciless times, wherein we wanted
a King, we may the better heed the blessedness of these, wherein we have one.

And thirdly, we must keep those Times in mind, to keep us from the like. To
think of them may make men afraid to sin as they did, by un Kinging the Land,
or suffering it so to be un-Kinged. Let it never be forgotten, that for England
to be un-Kinged, is to be un-Churched, to be un-blessed, to be undone. Let us
so remember that shadow of Death wherein we sat, when the Light of the Land
was (...), Luke 1.
so put out, as never to suffer it again to be so extinguished. Yea let us ever
beware of those ill kinds of men, that be for Opposing, Deposing, and Killing
of Kings, such be all See Dr. Owen' s Puritan Iesuitisme. See AntiCotton. See
Sr Tho. Ashton' s Remonstr. and survey of Presbyt. See Arch B. Bancroft. sermon.
1 ^o^^. 4. 1. See Lysimach. Nican. Epist. Congratul. See Pet. du Moulin. jun to
the Scot Covenanteer.
Puritanizing Jesuits, and Iesuitizing Puritans; fratres in malo, both for
Coertion, and Deposition of Kings, and for Decollation too, Herod and P^late
reconciled. They differ de modis, but speak de rebus so like each other, that
there is hardly the difference of Iud. 12. 6 a See Cotton' s Declarator. let.
to the Queen Reg. See Maria^a de Rege, and Regis Institutione. G^^tz.
Vespertil. (...) ^onarse Amphitheatr. Honor. F^^^ Veron. Constan. Apolog. pro
Johan. Chastel. Andr. Eudae non. Joan Apolog Guigna^d Ribadeneira. T^uan Hist.
Shibboleth and Sibboleth in their speeches. And as near an agreement, if not a
nearer of late, there has been in their Actions. Unless some followers of
Lesley have quite ont-gone all those of Loyola, in the Hardiness of resisting,
and affronting Royal Majesty; and outdone them in their Boldness of Murdering
their Sovereign. Indeed they have set such a President of Kingkilling, as have
put down a Ravilliack himself; yea and Chastel, and Clement the Iacobin too, or
James Clement. Yea all those Treasons of Stueley, and Sanders, and Somervil,
and Crighton, and Parry, and Savage, and Babington, and Stafford, and Squire,
and Lopez were modest to that of the late Iesuitizing Puritans; and so was that
of Catesby, and Piercy, and Winter, and Faux; the Gunpowder Treason it self,
though horrid and hellish, even to astonishment, as is storied by that right
reverend b Bih. Carleton' s Thankful Rem^mb Bp. Barlow. Bp Andrews. (...)' s
Great (...) great Deliverance.
Bishop of Chichester, and others. And let it be remembered, as it deserves,
that those late Regicides were of two several fraternities: but both such
active Fanatics, as if they had been Iesuited Romists; or as if the souls of
Bristoe, and Garnet, and Oldcorn, and VVa^son; yea of Varade, and Verona, and
Heureux, and Emanuel Sa had all broke Purgatory, and by a kind of Mazarinean
(...) were organized by See Bp. Andrews his speech against Trask, inter Opusc.
Traskites and See Denison' s white Wolf.
Hethering tonians, and Bareboneans; yea by Smectymnuans, and Hendersonians,
and were acting them all in that Work for Rome, their King killing Reformation.
And if Causa caus^ be causa causati, as certainly it is, then by the Fanatics,
who began that Work, as Wicked Regicides as any others: yea the prime
Agitatours. And re vera, they gave the first fatal blow, though others gave the
last. They took the King's Crown off his head, though others took his Head off
his shoulders. Had not those first Fanatics so murdered his Royal Power; the
others had never so murdered his Royal Person. The younger enemies of his
Religious Protestancie could not have taken away his Life, had not the elder
taken away his friends in Church and State. Though the fatal Axe had an
Independent Handle; yet had it a Presbyterian Back, and Edge, as well as a
Iesuitical Head. Alas! the new modeled Factions were all but off sets of that
first wild Root of Bitterness. Their own eggs hatched by themselves into such
Cockatrices, to verify that Proverb, (...). E^asm. Adag.
They were laid in the nest of the Scottish League, and hatched into what they
have been. Let all therefore that value the Blessedness of my Text, take heed
of Fanatics, of that ring leading faction, as much as of others. Let all that
would keep their good King in just Power, Eras Ad^g. Camd^n' s Remains.
keep such out of Power. Ictus piscator sapit; The burned child the fire
dreads. Trust not Fanatics of either faction. In neither Barrel b^tter
Herring. Sero sapiunt Phryges. Though Christian piety may well forget to
punish them, yet Christian Polici^ should not forget to prevent them. And I
mind you of them, but only for Prevention; wishing there might be a
Pr^terition at least, if not a Reprob^tion of all Fanatic R^gicid^s in all
Elections for Trust and Power. And I only call them so, that will see no evil
in being so. But as touching any true Convert, I shall say, as it was of S.
Austine after his Conversion; Fuller' s Holy State: of S. Augustine' s Life.
' It Is Tyranny to trample on him that prostrates himself; and as that Seneca
Tragoed.
Tragoedian, Quem paenitet peccasse, pene est innocens. He that is such, will
surely wish, that all due care may every where be taken, to purge out that old
leaven, that the next Parliament may be a new Lump. That what the Healing His
Majesty's gracious Speech to both Houses of Parliam. D^cemb. 29. 1660.
Blessed Parliament has so well farthered, may by the next be as happily
finished. And blessed be the Memory of that Healing Parliament, that has so
piously, and so prudently helped us to the Blessedness of my Text; a joyous
Blessing, the Blessing specifical of Heaven it self. And Heaven were not it
self without the Blessing of a King: it could not be the place of Happiness,
were it not a Kingdom. I never knew it styled the Commonwealth of Heav^n, but
(...), Matthew. 32 23. 13. 1 ^or. 6 9 2 Thessalonians 1. 5.
the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Kingdom of God, and the Kingdom of Glory;
and the Glory of it is merely from the King of Glory: without the King of
Heaven, there could be no such Glory, no such Happiness, no such Joy, as there
is in Heaven. The Saints and Angels there may thank their King for all their
Glory, all their Happiness, all their Joy; and so they do with joyous
Acclamations, incessant H^llelujah's.

Yet some Fanatics dream of an Earthly Heaven without a King; or would make
Heaven it self without one for a thousand years, while the King of Glory
should Personally ^ign on Earth so long. Others would have an
EnglishCommonwealth* Heaven, for no less time, by levelling all ^o an absolute
Parity. A fanatic Dream, or monstrous ^ancy begotten by two Misconceits.

First, that all Subjection in the Family of Adam was mere^y caused by the fall
of Adam.

Secondly, that they be as free from sin as Adam before his ^ll; which is no
less than the giving of Scripture it self the ^e: for that has con^luded all
under sin, and that by a general (...). And if we say we have no sin, we
dec^ive our selves, Ioh. 1. 8.
^aith S John) and the truth is not in us.

But suppose there were no self-deceit quoad hoc in self-admiring Adamites.
Suppose them as free from sin as they bo^st themselves. Yet are they a^isse in
that other conceit. For Superior^ty and Subord^nation were rather corrupted
than caused by the sin of the Protoplast; and Sovereign Power was not brought
in, but broken by his fall. It fell in him, and was as much impaired by the
fall as he himself. God made him at first in his own likeness, with absolute
Dominion, Genesis 1. 26, 27.
in omnem terram, over all the earth; and as the Donation ran over all the
earth, it surely took in all Inhabitants by a Metonymi of the Subject; and
could not include all the Rational Creatures that were to replenish the earth,
as well Genesis 1. 28. Ephesians. 5. ^3. (...) 1 Pet. 3. 6.
as those Irrational. And that Dominion over Rationalls was first Martial, and
so Paternal, and so Imperial.

First, Martial, for ab initio the Husband was (...) the head of the Wife. And
it was as much the duty of Eve to Adam, as of Sarah to Abraham, to obey him and
^ell him Lord. The husband is the head of the wife, as Christ i^ the head of
the Church. And therefore (says St. Paul) as the Church is subject to Christ,
so let wives be to their own husbands in (...) A Christo Ecclesia sumpsit
initium; und^ s^bjecta est illi: ita and viro mulier sit subdita. St. Amb.
Explan. Epist. ad Eph^s.
all things, Ephesians. 5. 23, 24. Where wives ar^ commanded to be subject to their
husbands natural^l^g^; says St. Ambrose, by the law of Nature, because woman
ha^ beginning from man. Husbands are Types of Christ; so was Adam. And wives be
Types of Christ's Spouse the Church; so was Eve. And the Church is really the
Mother ^f all living, as Joseph. Antiquita, Ju^aic. lib. 1. cap. 2. Eucher de
Nom. Hebrai. St August. in Psalm 1^6. Nic de Lyra in Ge^. c. 2. St Amb^i^ Ephesians
cap 5.
Eve was Nominally. And as ou^ Mother the Church has a Royal Husband of the
Second Ad^m* from whom she had her being: so had our Grand mother Eve of the
first, from whom she had hers. Nor wa^ he the less her King for being her
husband. Nor she mo^ exempted from being a subject by being a wife; but
subject^ even ^o nomine, though of an higher form than other subjects. So
evident it is, that subjection was not brought into his family by his fall: but
was there before, brought in with that Honorable estate of holy Matrimony,
instituted of God in ^aradice, in the time of man's innocence. So his first
Dominion over rationals was Marital.

And so Secondly, Paternal, for this second was potentially and vertually in
that first. By being an husband, and with that benediction too, be fruitful and
multiply, and replenish Genesis 1. 28.
the earth; he was a father eminenter; God made him in his ^^^ likeness, as he
made him a man: and so he did, as he made him a father; but his likeness to
God in both, was his right of Dominion by both. He had the likeness of his
Maker, as he had (...). the likeness of Gods St. Chris. Ad Pop. Antioch. Hom.
7.
Principality: as St. Chrysostom well observes; By his Man^ood he was Gods
Representative in having Dominion over other Creatures. By his fatherhood, in
having Domi^ion over all his offspring, and Eve was one of them, though not
naturali modo. And so quatenus homo, he had ^uperiority over other Creatures:
quatenus maritus, over ^is wife; qua pat^r, over his children; and quatalis
pater, ^^ such a father, that had no father but God, he had supre^^y over all
mankind.

And so Thirdly, his power was fontaliter Imperial. So that ^d he not sinned,
to shorten his days, and l^ss^n his Do^^ions, he had surely been at last the
father of many ^^tions, actually, as at first he was Potentially. ^d he lived
to see the whole World peopled with ^^ Progeny; he had seen his Paternal Power
spread ^o Imperial; and his Empire greater then any since ^^ fall. Yea greater
than the Eastern and the Western ^oth together. It had surely been over all the
earth, ac^ording to that first Donation. Other Kingdoms there ^ight have been,
and should: but none like his. And other Kings; but none like him. But all
inferior and subordinate to him and his. His, like God's own Kingdom, had
ruled over all: and he, like God, had surely been, not merely 1 Timothy 6 15 Rev.
19. 16
a King; but (...). King of Kings, and Lord of lords. Though some of his Sons,
and of his Sons Sons might have multiplied so, as to have turned potestates
patrias into Regias. Yet all their Multiplications must needs have been
Descents from him by gradual filiations, and so subordinate to the Primacy of
his Fatherhood, and that Imperial Power belonging to it. Nor could any Regified
Sons in that state of Innocence, have refused to reverence that singular
likeness of God's Paternity and Power in him. The light of Nature, in that
state of better knowledge, would surely have shown them the duty of Sons to
such a Father; and the Power of such a Father over his Sons. Nor could any
have been like fanatic Adamites, in seeking to level his Power. And so indeed
there had been a kind of Heaven upon Earth, as all had been blessed, like those
in Heaven, with such a King, as by S. Chrysostom ^ Chrysostom. ad popul. An^ chapter
Homil. 20.
is defined (...). the highest and head of all But by the fall of Adam that
Universality of Kingly Power was broken; and the World's universal blessedness
lost thereby. And but some parts have been blessed since with smaller
Kingships; and but sometimes. So Canaan was; and England is. Blessed be God, he
has blessed the Land with a King. That Is the first.

The Second is, to have but one King. Two are too many for one Kingdom; Non
capit regnum duos, says Sen^ca: Seneca Trag in (...).
One Head is meetest for one Body. The Holy one^ Israel is so much for one, and
for but one, that for all Isr^ he appointed but one Moses, and but one Joshua,
and bu^ one of them at once, to order both the sword of Justice an^ that of the
Militia too. The Camp, and Congregation o^ Israel were both commanded by Moses
first, and then by Joshua, when Moses dyed. God knew, I believe, much better
then any Common wealth's man, what number was fittest for managing supreme
Power. Two heads may be better than one for Counsels, but not for Commands: see
it so in Bodies Polemical, and Bodies Political too.

First, in those Polemical, where there must be leading soldiers, and leading
Leaders too, that one may lead another, and all be lead by one in order. One
over all makes all as one. One Captain Commander of an Army was ever as
needful as many in it; yea many General Captains are apt, through emulation,
to quarrel one another. But one Captain General takes only the common Enemy
for the object of his Quarrels. The Romans for a while sent their Vell. Patere.
Romans Hist.
Consuls to war with joint Commands, and for a while their Military Tribunes;
but after a while, they found that error of dividing such Commands by the
fatal Division of such Commanders; and so would have but one at Quoniam dictis
ejus parebat populus. Godwin's Romans Hist. Antholog. lib. 3. sect. 2. cap. 12
Plin. Sec. Hist. Not. l. 8. c. 23.
once in absolute Power, whose Dictates all were to obey, from whence his Title
was Dictator. And in that singular Number they found more safety, and better
success than in their Plurals. The Body of an Army is ever in danger to be
pulled in pieces, when, like the serpent (...), which Pliny writes of, it has
two heads, one pulling one way, the other another. And more Heads may be more
dangerous. The Athenians had surely been ruined, when many were equal
Commanders with Mil^iades, had not wise Aristides foreseen and prevented it, by
persuading all the Commissioners to resign their conjoined Powers to the sole
H^raults Martial Discourses. Chap. 3.
management of Miltiades. And that ill success of Eumenes was thought to
happen to him, because the silver Shields were joined with him. Such Commanders
together can hardly agree to command as one. Al^ibiades and Niceas were ever
divided about the carrying on of their conjoined Powers: so were Fabius and
Minutius: nor would Varr^ and Paulus Amilius have agreed as one, had they been
never so long conjoined. The like may be said for others: but I need not look
back to Ancient Times; nor into the Tacticks of Lacedaemonians or Athenians, nor
into the ^eats Aelian. Tact.
of War taken out of Paternus, Frontinus, Trajanus, Hadrianus, Cornelius
Celsus, and Cato Censorius, by Flavius Vegetius, Vegetius de ^e Militar.
commanded by Valentianus Augustus. Nor need I ramble to Foreign Wars to note
the ill of many, or the good of one good General: our days afford an Instance
at home most notable. One good Albemarle has done that General good of
Restoring the Land to the blessedness of my Text; more good than many would,
or could have done. Committees of Safety were but miscalled so: the only Hom.
Iliad. ^. (...) Ephesians. 4 6. (...) Aristot. Ethic. 8. 11. Monarchia, in qua uni
imperanti reliqui omnes subjiciuntur, est consensu omnium optimus Reipub.
Status Dr. Prideaux. (...) Pelic. Tact. 1.
safety was in his secrecy, and that in his sole General Captain-ship; for
whose sake, let us for ever think the better of one Polemic^l Head, and best of
him: and be, as he therein, for one Political.

And so Secondly, See one head best for one body Politic (...) says the
Prince of Poets; Government by many is not good. God would have but one David,
and but one Solomon, and but one of them at once, to be King of Israel. Nor is
there more than one God to be King of Heaven. Nor can any Levelling
Commonwealths Man, without blaspheming Gods own way of Governing, affirm
Popularity to be so good as Monarchy. Monarchy by general vote has gone for the
best of States. And Vincent Lupan. Commentar. in Magist. and Pr^^ectur. fran^^r.
Lupanu^ might well say, quid melius unius principatu? What Is better then
Supremacy in one? It is enough that one be Magister Populi. (...), says St.
James: Be not many Masters. Many may do more hurt than good; as many did of
late. (...) says the Proverb: Many Rulers ruined Caria. And by many Masters of
Misrule this Land was near its utter Ruin. When Adrianus Caesar had found
Godwin's Romans Antiq. Erasm. Apothegm. lib. 6.
his error of having many Physicians, he alluded to that Greek Proverb saying,
Turba medicorum perdidit Caesarem: A Committee of Doctors have killed Caesar.
So did our many State Physicians, and worse; for they murdered CHARLES the
First, our English Caesar. God keep the Land for ever from such Physicians of
State. Let their (...) be strongly detested of all: cruel Phlebotomie! Who but
such a College would have cut off the Head to cure the Body? for their sakes
let us ever beware of many Tyrants. The poor Athenians smarted, when Thirty
domineered. Frieg. Quest. Polit.
Oligarchical Powers were never safe; but often times grievous to be born. So
Rome ^ound it, when that Vellius Patercul. Roman Hist. lib. 2. Lucan Pharsal.
l. 1.
Triumvirate of Caesar, and Pompey, and Crassus, acted most like it self. Then
Lucan could say, Nulla fides regni sociis. There is no faith in fellowships of
a Kingdom; for every supreme Power is ever impatient of a Partner.

Nec fert Pompeiusve parem, Caesarve priorem. Proud Pompey could not endure an
Equal; nor Caesar a Superior; yet Pompey was Popular, and seemed to act by a
self-denying Ordinance, as Statists do, when their designs See Plutar. in vit.
Pomp.
be merely selfish: But his ambition was too great to content himself with the
style of Pompey the Great. Pompeius Maximus was his least and lowest aim: He
liked no Caesar besides See St. Aug.
himself; nor could Caesar abide to be less than himself. d^ Civitate Dei l. 3
^ 6. (...) primi madu^runt s^ng^^ne muri* Luc Plars. (...) T^^bais petenda
erant ex^mpl^ ^arnab. in Lucan.
Aut Caesar, aut nullus, was each of their aims; and so into factions they
parted, a^ Supremacy-partners use to do. Rome might have known the cruel
impatience of such Partnerships, by that of Romulus and Rh^mus. And ^ L^^ can
needed not to ramble from Rome for Instances; nor ^ thither. Our own Chronicles
abound, and I need there in to look no farther than the Race of King Brutus,
from whom this Island took the Name of Britany, for that of Albion. There I
have read more than once those memorable Instances of Manlius, and Mempritius;
and of Morgan, See the Abridgement of the Chronicle of England
and Cunidagius; and of Ferrer and Porrer, who fell from Ruling together, to
ruining one another for sole Supremacy, till Ferrer ended his days, and Porrer
that Royal Race of Brutus soon after. So fatal it has been to have the Kingly
Power of this Land divided. Nor has it been less fatal to have this Kingdom
divided into many, as by the Saxons into Seven. The Land was never so blessed,
as since See Cambd. Britan.
that Heptarchy was turned to a Monarchy. Not many, but one Supreme felicifies
a Land. Homer's advice to Greece was ever Hom. Iliad. ^.
as apt for England, (...). Let their be one Lord Paramount, one King. One puts
by emulations; Claud. Dub^. Orat. in la^ l. Reg. Dignita.
as Dubrelius truly says. And for the Peace of the Land, now blessed be the
Author of Kingship, we have a King, and but one now. It is again a Monarchy,
as it should be; and so terra beata. That Is the Second.

And Thirdly, to bless us more and more, God has restored our right King to
us. We have our own King once again; not an Intruder, but the lawful Heir,
given us by him, who made him for us. One born for England: Hom. Iliad. Arist.
Ethic. lib 8. c. 11. Vt gregem. Psalm 77. 20. O (...) John 10. 11. verse. 2.
(...) verse. 1. Princeps Pastorum. 1 Pet. 5 4.
(...) as Homer styled his Agamemnon; The Shepherd of the People; appointed of
God without doubt, to lead his people like a flock. And like the good Shepherd
his entrance into his sheepfold was by the right way of Royal Right: that is
(...), by the door. Not like that late Intruder, who climbed up some other way:
(...) the same was a thief and a robber. But thanks to him who is (...) Our
rightest leader is returned in peace; though that Intruder was fetched away in
a bluster. Long may our welcome Shepherd lead the flock; Whose own the sheep
are, See Arist. Ethic. lib. ^, cap. 12.
and he cares for the sheep. No Protector to an own King, An own King takes
the good of his Kingdom for his own; and minds rem populi as his own. But own
advantage, Freigii Quaest. Pol. Aristot. Politic. l. 5. Dona^. Acciaiol.
Commentat. in Arist ^. Po^it. Osorius de Regis Instit. and Discipl. lib. 3.
own interest is the aim of Intruders and of Tyrants; as Freigius notes, with
Aristotle. And what was it but proprium commodum, that the late self-minders
miscalled The Good old Cause. No Tyrants to such intruding Saint seemers: They
commonly blasphemed our Noble Sovereign with the nick name of Young Tarquin;
but were themselves the proud Ravishers. They ravished the Body of his
Pol^tical Lucretia: they ravished his Kingdom, his Royal Palace, and his
Princely Revenues. And those By Proclamat. against Sequestrations, 1643. all
Intruders were proclaimed Abb^t^ors of Treason against K. Charles the 1. who
was traitorously murdered.
Intruding Pulpiteers, who Pimping for them (as some serving men use to do, to
debauch Young Masters) were Ravishers too, and taught them first the way by
ravishing all the fairest Personages in the Land with violent and adulterate
sequestrations; embracing filthy Lu^re, if not fair Lucretia too; and taking to
themselves the Bodies of other men's Estates, without taking care for the
estates of those other men's bodies; quite forgetting the Acts 3. 13
time of Restitution of all things; and as little dreaming of such a time as
this for the Restitution of some things. But blessed be that Dan. 7. 9, 13.
Ancient of days for restoring these days so like to those of old. The Land
begins to be like it self again, by it is own King, beata terra. That Is the
Third.

The Fourth is the Crown of all the former^ and most of all felicifies the
Land. It is that we have a Royal Sovereign, See Ari. Montan. See Vatabl. See
T^em. and Iun. See S. Jerome See also Dr. Crakenthorp. Ser. 2 Chronicles. 9. 5, 6, 7.
a right King; (...) the son of Nobles. Here the Preacher puts the Emphasis;
Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King is the son of Nobles. Some take it
literally, as Montanus renders it, filius Heroum, and filius Nobilium; the same
with our English, and Vatablus means the same by filius Candidorum; and so does
Tremellius by natus clarissimis. Others take it for a figurative Phrase: the
son of Nobles, for truly Noble. So S. Jerome has it, beata terra, cujus Rex
nobilis est. But I must not dilate upon the Grammar of the words. Two things, I
conceive, come under the sense.

1. That he be Rex Nobilis, a Noble King. 2. That he be Rex Natu, a King by
succession, as son of Nobles.
First, a Noble King: and a King may be so, by Extraction, or Education, or
Disposition. Nobly born, nobly bred, nobly minded. He is most truly noble, that
is so all three ways. And that's the Nobleness that so felicifies this Land.
See it in all three severally.

First, by Extraction; the primary meaning of (...), Son of Nobles: such a son
ship is an Happiness to a kingdom, and an Honor to a King; although
Malvezzi, to magnify Malvez. Romul. and Tarquin.
his Romulus, and vilify his Tarquin affirms, that he is not glorious, that is
born a Prince, but he that becomes one. By his good leave, and without it too,
we must needs honor Noble Birth, and deem it glorious to be nobly born; most
glorious to be born a Prince. We must give honor, to whom honor is due, and
unto Caesar the things Romans 13. 7 Mat^h. 22. 21.
that are Caesar' s; and honor is his, even from his Birth: the prime part of
Royal Birthright. The Text asserteth the Land's blessedness according to the
King's Nobleness, and this according to his Birth; the Son of Nobles. And it
is remarkable, that it says not Herois, in the Singular Number; but Heroum, in
the Plural; of Nobles. Which may be several ways.

First, in respect of both the immediate Parents. He that was of an Hebrew
father, or an Hebrew mother, was accounted Godwin' s Moses and Aaron. lib. 1.
cap. 3.
an Hebrew. But he that was of such a Father and such a Mother, was called an
Hebrew of the Hebrews; as S. Paul writes himself, Philip. 3 5. so he that is of
a Noble Father, or a Noble Mother may be deemed some way Noble; but he that is
of both Noble, is Noble of Nobles filius Nobil^um. That Is the first, but the
least.

Secondly, Son of Nobles may be in respect of several descents on either side,
or of several descents on both. The last is far most Honorable; and that is the
Nobleness of our Charles the 2. the Son of Nobles by many and many descents on
both sides.

First, on his Royal Fathers side, descended from many and many most Noble
Kings of several Kingdoms, and of all the most Noble Races in this. When the
Race of King Henry the 8. was ended with Queen Elizabeth, Pretenses were made
by diverse to the Crown of England: but after due enquiries made, they were all
found in the Royal Grandfather of our most noble Charles the 2. And when the
Business of Recognition was on foot in the Parliament Tertio Iacobi, it was
made evident by that Renowned Earl of Northampton, that the Pretenses of the
Britains from King The right Honorable Earl of Northampton's Speech for that
Recognition. M. S.
Brutus, were in King James, as from Cadwallo. Those of the Scots by Fergus;
those of the Picts, by the daughter of Hengist; those of the Saxons, by the
sister of Edgar; those of the Danes, by the daughter of King Christian; and
those of the Normans, by Margaret, eldest daughter to King Henry the 7. in whom
the Red and White Roses were most sweetly damasked: York and Lancaster well
united, by that happy Match of Henry the 7. Son to the Noble Earl of Richmond,
and Elizabeth eldest daughter to Edward the 4. from whom came Prince Arthur,
who died young; and Henry the 8. whose Race ended in Queen Elizabeth, and left
the Royal Dignities to the Race of Princess Margaret by James the 4. of
Scotland; and so they became the Royal Birthrights to King James the first of
England, and sixth of Scotland; and so to our most Royal Sovereign, Charles the
2. the rightest Lineal Descendant. (...) by many most noble Descents on that
side of his Royal Father.

Secondly, the Son of Nobles also, as descended from many Races of French
Kings, by that most Noble Daughter of France, his Royal Queen Mother. An Honor
of no little estimate; but so highly valued, as there is almost no Nation,
Lupan, Commen. de Magistr. and Traesectur. franc^r. Praefat.
says Lupanus, quae non ad francos Reges originem referat, adeo magnum ^st
fortibus nasci: which derives not some honor from French Kings, so much it is
to be of such consanguinity. Were it feasible in a Sermon to show you all the
streams of Royal Blood, that have flowed into the Noblest Veins of our most
Noble Charles the 2. from all the high born Kings and Queens on all sides in
all descents, you could not but most highly honor his Nobleness by Extraction;
and think it no Hyperbole, but his Birthright, to be Gwillim's Display of
Heraldry. Sect 6. c. 7.
styled the Noblest King in Christendom, as that Herald honors him; and
worthiest of all the Honors that Loyal Subjects can do a Sovereign, who is in
Solomon's rightest sense, The Son of Nobles.

The Second way of Nobleness is by Education, or Institution; a Nobleness
that God himself looks after. For when he designed Moses to be Ruler of his
People Israel, he preordained his Education to be in the Court of Egypt; and
not as a servant there, but as the son of a Noble Princess, Acts. 7. 21, 22.
who nourished him, (...) says St. Luke, as her own Son; and so he was learned
in all the Wisdom of the Deus effecit ut adoptaretur a fil^a Pharaonis. Macar.
Homil. 9.
Egyptians. A Prince-like Institution, and merely by Divine appointment, as
Macarius well observes. Nor would God have David to be a King, before he had
been a Courtier, and that not merely as one of King Readiness Retinue; but as of
Royal Affinity, Son in Law to the King; no light matter; as David himself
hinted to the servants of Saul, 1 Samuel 18. 23. But so he was to prepossess him
with a Noble Spirit, by Nobleness of Institution. Such regard has God himself
to Noble Education. Nothing more needful for improving innate Inclinations to
Noble Mindedness. And such Inclinations use to be in Noble Extractions;
seminals of right Nobleness. When Noble Birth and Noble Breeding Nicho^ de
Ly^a in hunc Verse. Dionys. Carthus. in L^cum.
meet, as they should, they make right Noble indeed; as Lyra notes: s^ inv^cem
ornant, says Dionysius Carthusianus, they mutually adorn each other; like a
precious Gem in an Ornament of gold. The Gold of Noble Extraction is ever fitly
adorned with the Gem of Noble Education; and right it is for both to be deemed
precious. Gold D. Ba^^hol. Chassan. de Glor. Mu^^ par. 8.
is so even from the very Mine, and so Nobility from the Womb; for as
Chassanaeus says, Nobilitas transit in filios in infinitum. The honor of
Noble Birth for ever descends, and that of Noble Breeding should ever ascend.
Noble Temperaments be in Noble Extractions, and Noble Tendencies in such
Temperaments; and such tendencies be easily heightened with right Institutions.
Well therefore might the Preacher bestow the Honor of the Text upon (...). The
sonship of Nobility has the start of others to be bettered by Noble Breeding.
And Nobleness of Breeding should ever follow that of Birth. And it is By I^st*
^^tion, in virtue, wisedom^, and poli^^^ which Education Son^ of Nobles,
^specially ought to have Pemb. Analyt^cal expos. a. i. e. Pacificus sive
pacatus, Eucherius de Nom^n. H^br. S. Hieron. Interp. Nom. Mat^h.
not unlikely, but Solomon might have an Eye to Nobleness of Breeding, in
asserting what he does of the Son of Nobles: who so eyes the Education of our
right a Solomon, may see him heightened by it to the Zenith of right Nobleness,
advantaged by Institutions, by Afflictions, and by Intercessions.

First of Institutions, both Civil and Sacred; these by such a
Church Discipline, those by such a Court-Discipline, as could not but season
him rightly for Court and ChurchConcernments. His Tutors in both were more than
Ordinary; and his Institutions by more than Tutors. No Vives, no Coxe, no
Ascham could have instilled better Principles into his Noble soul, then have
been by Tutors, nor any Bachanan so good. Much less could Aristotle, or Pl^to,
or Sen^^a, have bettered the same: though famous Tutors to great Princes. And I
may tell you, that his Nobleness of Education derives not all advantages, nor
most, from Tutors, though most able; but from a most Royal and most Religious
Father, of ever blessed Memory, in quo instar omnium auxiliorum erat; who could
do, and did as much as all besides, and much more. His Moods and Methods were
like himself, most truly Noble: witness (...). Chap. 27.
that part of his Royal Likeness, entitled, To the Prince of Wales. And
witness those Effects which verify S. Austin^ touching Discipline, who says,
it is Magistra Religionis and S. August. Sermon 52.
verae pietatis, the Tutoress of Religion, and real Piety. What pious and
prudent Counsels were given viva vo^e, I presume not to turn into Traditions.
But my thoughts are of what, being dead, he yet speaks, by his even inspir^d
Pen. That (...) is still pictural quens, and will for ever speak most Royal
Institutions, and other Oraculous Enunciations; such as have conduced to the
making of his Majesty CHARLES le Bon, and CHARLES le Grand; * Great in
Goodness, and Good in Greatness. (...). Arist. Eth. Lib. 5. c. 1. Secundum
^ian^em. *H (...). S. Chrysostom. Hom. 17. ad Popul. Antioch. Romans 5. 3, 4 (...).
The Mirror of Nobleness by right Institutions.

And secondly, his Nobleness of Education has been bettered much in the School
of Afflictions; (...) God himself, for diverse years, was pleased to School him
with the Severer Discipline of sad Providence. And with his Rod and Ferula
has surely beaten in the best of Wisdom, even that which is Experimental: For
Tribulation works patience, and patience Expertence, says the Apostle. And
to that his royal Father might allude in saying to him, He had the advantage of
wisdom above most Princes, in that he had spent some years of discretion in
the experience of Troubles, and exercise of Patience.

And thirdly, his Nobleness of Education was also advantaged much by
Intercessions to God for him. Some by Loyal people in private Devotions well
watered with tears; and others in public, by Loyal Pulpits, consigned and
sealed with earnest Amens of the like Congregations; besides the Prayers and
Tears of such a father as surely availed much. (...) Iam. 5. 16.
Well might the seeds of his Pious Nobility, and Noble Piety thrive, being so
well watered. It was rightly said to M^nica, as touching her Son Augustine,
that the son of so many Prayers and Tears, in all probability could not be for
ever lost. And who could expect any less, than, that God, in his due time,
should bless our Sovereign on better means; and make him a blessing? A right
noble soul he has made him, by such right means.

Now the last kind of Nobleness is that of disposition, Noble Mindedness; the
very (...) of Royal Dignity, and Crown of both the former. By this a King makes
good the Nobility of his Birth, and Honors of his Royal Progenitors; and
proves the Text most true. By this he becomes a Blessing indeed unto his
Subjects. Hug Cardina. in Locum.
Hugo Cardinalis expounds the Text of this, as the only right felicifying
Nobleness. And Diodati Annotat. in hunc verse.
Diodate takes him only for the Son of Nobles in Solomon's sense, who bears a
Noble Mind. But Carnis propagine and virtutum praeclar^^te. Dionys. Ca^thu. in
Locum.
Dionysius Carthusianus rightly thinks him most truly so, that is Noble by
Nobleness of stock, and also by a stock of Nobleness in himself, a Noble
stock of Heroic Virtues. Now this it is that beautifies our King, and
beautifies his Kingdoms Yea this has crowned him already, and rendered him most
worthy of that Royal Diadem ^ow ready for for him. It is this Nobleness that
inclines him so to Acts of Grace, as the like did Philip of Ma^edon's Life, by
S. G. S. at the end of those by Plu^ar.
Philip of Macedon; and makes him resolute with See Plut. in vit Alex. S Ambr.
in Apolog. 1. David. c. 6.
Alexander the Great, that nothing can be more Noble than to do well to them
that have deserved ill S. Ambrose thought it grande inventum in King David so
to bear the bitter words of one bold railing Shimei. What is it then in our
Sovereign, to forgive both the Lying ^od. lib 9. ^ 36. M^gni^ animi proprium
est p^acidum ^ss^ ^ranq^il^umq^e ac ^^jurias and ^ss^nsa^ superand^ desp^cere.
Senec. de Clemen. 1. 3. S^e Volater. Anthrop^log. lib. 1^. ^^utar in Aristide.
Tongues and Libelling Pens of many Shime^^s, and many Shebaes, and many
^^bshakehs, guilty of Crimes no less than Capital by Imperial Laws; and not
only to forgive them, but to practice the Art of Forgetting them too. Blessed
all thou, O Land, in a King so Nobly disposed, as to bury ten thousand Acts of
Rebellion in one Royal Act of Obliv^o^. Out acting that Aristides himself, so
renowned for not remembering his malignant enemies that had exlled him. Indeed
his exilement was only by an Ostracisme; and that ever was pro^erto tempore,
and commonly cum honor; a Relegation to some certain place for ten or fifteen
years at most But our Sovereigns profligation, or proscription, or cru^ller
persecution, was on worse terms, yet pardoned on 1 Pet. 2. 23. Cum enim
Princeps vir^^^ibus divinis ^r^natus, ad r^mp. gubernandam accesserit, non
homo, sed Deus ipse remp. illam gubernabi^ Deus enim in pectore sancti
principis inclusus ^um movebit; and facile* in studium publicae salutis
impellet. Hieron. Os^rius Lusitan. de Reg Instit. and discip. l. s.
better Principles. His greater indignities born, not only animo civili, with
that Worthy in Su^^oni^s; but animo ^^lesti, with that Worthy of Worthies in
St. Peter, Who when he was reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered,
threatened not; but committed himself to him that judges righteously. And it
is not only Noble mindedness, but Heavenly mindedness too in his Sacred
Majesty to have men live and mend. A disposition that proves him both the Son
of Nobles, according to his first Birth, and the Son of God according to his
Second. Of Civil and Sacred Nobleness too. It is his great Honor; and our
great Happiness that by Nature he is satus sanguine Diuum; the Son of
England's Mort^l Gods: but his greater Nobleness, and Englands greater
Happiness, that by Grace he is renatus sanguine Christi; a Son of God
Immortal, every way right Noble, according to that first acceptance of the Son
of Nobles.

The Second is, that a King be so by succession; born a King. A point that
merits more Observance, and a more deliberate Treatise, that can be ministered
in a breath or two at the very last gasp of a Sermon. Yet I must be at a very
point with it: otherwise I might at large have related how I^stus Lipsius
treating of Kings by El^ction, and Kings by Lip^^u^ Monit. ^o^^t. l. 2. c. 3. 4.
Succession, upon just reason, rejected Election, and electeth Succession. And
so must all that will yield to Reason, or to Religion. The Word of God ascribes
the Blessedness of a Land to a King by succession, or a King by Birth, the Son
of Nobles. And the common Course of Go has ever been to annex the
Administration of National Blessedness to some Princely Tr^be ennobled for
that purpose or to some certain Race of Kings. So he appointed the Noble Tribe
of Judah, with a promise that the Scepter should Psalm 7^. 68.
not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet Genesis 49. 10.
till Shiloh came. So he likewise named the Race of David, Psalm. 89. 35, 36. 37.
saying, His seed will I make to endure for ever, and his Throne as the days
of Heaven* Psalm. 89. 29. and farther declaring himself there so much for
Kingship by Royal Birthright, as that he vows to have it so. But so he would
not have done, had he seen election of Kings to be better than succession; and
he must needs have seen it, if it had been so. And as in Israel, so in other
Kingdoms, he has raised some certain Families nearest to himself for the
better management of his Public business with the people; and for the conduct
of Civil Blessedness unto them; Denying to bless them by Common Hands. When
Azarias and that Joseph son to Zacharias, in the time of the Mac^abees, would
needs undertake the procuring of some blessing of Gods people; God would not
bless their undertakings, nor his people by them: Because they were not of the
seed of those by whose hand deliverance was given to Israel; as it is given for
a Reason. 1 Maccab. 5. 62. Quia non erant de s^min^ illorum, etc. Such emulous
Undertakers were of late in England, who intended, or at least pretended, to
seek the welfare of the Land: But God would not let the Land fare well by their
pretenses; they were not of his approved Tribe. The son of Nobles was not
amongst them. Nor was it his Political Capacity in a Notional separation, but
his Personal in a National Conjunction, that God would bless his people by:
God would have the Redeemer of Israel to be born a King; and so the R^deemer of
England too. It is not for nothing, that the Holy Ghost would the world take
notice, that ou^ Saviors Kingship was by succession: (...), Born the King of
the Jews. A King by Royal Birthright: Ma^th. 2. 2.
Born with a right to sit upon the Throne of his Father David, Isa. 9. 7. And
so in Gods ordinary way, his Instruments of National Blessedness be born with
right to be inthroned. When such be, their People be blessed.

I shall only hint Two Reasons of Solomon's assertion, and so thank you for
your Noble Patience. The first inferred from the Common Infelicities that arise
with Ignoble Upstarts; such as be d^ vili loco assumpti, exhaled from low
Parentages to high Powers, ut pluries laedunt, says Aquinas: Aquin. de Reg.
Princip. lib. 4. c. 19.
for the most part prove destructive.

Asperius nihil est humili cum surgit in altum.

None to the beggar on horseback. Rome was never worse hacknied, then when
Ignoble Vpstarts mounted the saddle of Imperial Command. When Op^lius Macrinus
had Volateran Anthropol. lib. 23.
compassed the Death of the Emperor Caracalla, and caused the Soldiers of his
faction, Oliver like, to choose him, though of ignoble Birth, to be Emperor,
that is, Stilo novo, Lord Protector, he soon became of that Oliverian Pride
and Cruelty, that he plotted the ruin of all that were not See his Life
amongst the Roman Empero^s, by R. B. See his Life also, by R. B.
of his faction; or that would not comply with all his wicked purposes. So when
Maximinus of ignoble birth too, was made Emp^rour by his Army Officers, he also
sought the destruction of the friends of his late Sovereign, Alexander Severus;
and as O. C. did, overawed the Senate, and persecuted Christians, as English
Protestants were of late* Such be the common evils, when such evil Commons
aspire C^trari^rum co^trariae sunt causae. Beda
to Monarchize. Well therefore might Solomon say by the rule of Contraries.
Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King is the son of Nobles.

The Second Reason may be from the National felicities Me^and. in ^all.
that succeed with Noble Sovereigns. *o (...), says Menander; A good man is a
common good: true of every good man; but most certainly so of every good King:
Whose greatest Nobleness cannot but be the Royal Prerogative of greatest
goodness: yea most notable Blessings to Places and People, have mostly
attended most Noble Births. I may instance in Caesar Augustus, descended See
his Life written by S. G. S. at the end of Plutarch' s Live^.
from the Noble Octavians; whose public Designs reformed his State with good
Laws, repaired the Cities di^apidations; so modelled public Elections, that
honest Trustees might be empowered, (as our good Sovereign does with Religious
Care, to have such Burgesses chosen) Iani Templum sol^ claus^^, Musarum sol^s
aperuit. Emanuel Thesaur. Caes. Luc. 2. 14.
and labored so for a General Peace, that he caused the Temple of Ianus to be
shut up, as it was that Third Time, when the Prince of Peace, our Blessed
Savior came into the world, and was honored with that Anglical Birth. Song,
Glory to God in the high^st, on earth peace, etc. In honor of whose Birth,
that Noble Augustus erected an Altar of Noble structure in the Roman Capitol
with this Inscription; THE ALTAR OF GOD THE FIRST BORN: yea such a Lover of
public good he was noted Seneca de Clement. lib. 1. cap. 1^
to be, that he was worthily styled Pater Patriae. I may likewise instance in
that Noble Emperor Antoninus Pius, See his Life written by R. ^. amongst the
Roman Emperors.
which Surname was given him, for pardoning many Delinquents at his first
coming to Imperial Dignity. A branch of Royal Piety which has no less
flourished in our most pious Sovereign; for which Clemency, and other Noble
Qualities, that Antoninus was likewise called the Father of the Virtues; for
Placabilitie, Clemency, Sanctity, as faith Volateran, he was reputed another
Numa. I could instance also Volate^. Anthropol. lib. 23.
in the noble Emperor Gratianus, who did the public good of Banishing
turbulent Heretics, of reducing others See his Life by ^. B.
to the true Religion, and of repairing Churches for the public* Worship of
God. The time fails me to tell you of Noble Theodosius, and his Noble son
Arcadius, and others that have been Public Blessings to their subjects. I must
end with that Noble Emperor Iovinianus, a famous Defender of the true Faith,
and of such as were faithful to it; as our most gracious Sovereign shows
himself to be. Not mistaking faction for faith, nor fanatics for the
faithful; but taking such to do, by curbing their Contentious spirits, and
countenancing those that were Orthodox and Orderly, such as that holy Father
Athanasius, whom he restored to his Bishopric of Alexandria, as he did also
others to theirs See Socrates S^ol^st^ Eccle. Hist. l. 3. ^. 19* 20.
from which they had been unjustly sequestered. And by the leading example of
that good Emperor, many were induced to be Christened; and by his Christianity
many were redeemed from Barbarian Slavery. Such a memorable Benefit, and
public good; as our good Sovereign brought with him ^o this Land, where his
most Loyal Subjects were most barbarously enslaved by their fellow Subjects, of
all slaveries the most insufferable. But by his most happy coming again to the
Land, the Land is most happily coming again to it self. Terra Beata, a blessed
Land: Blessed in having a King; and blessed in having but one King; and blessed
in having our own King; and blessed in having such a King as our own, a King
right Noble in right acceptance of the Son of Nobles. Now the KING of Heaven
bless him, and be forever blessed for him.

And so let us Pray.

A Prayer.
Blessed Lord! thou have blessed us, and done great things for us, whereof we
are glad. Thou have turned away the Captivity of the Land; and brought back the
Captivity of our National Blessedness. We desire to bless thy Name for all
thy Mercies and Blessings; but especially for restoring our thrice Noble
Soveragin Charles the Second, to the Land; and the Land unto it self by him.
Thou have given him Possession of many and many Hearts. Lord help him to hold
Possession. Thou know the Mutability of the Many, whose Placets are easily
had, but hardly held; and whose humors are all for making a Darling great: but
their Consciences not at all, for upholding a just Greatness. But thou still
and still the same God of Love and Mercy, and Power unto him. Uphold and defend
him in his just rights and Regalities. Make both sorts of Independent Pride
come down to Allegiance: that of the Covenant, and that of the Engagement: the
Classical, and the Congregational. Make them both to bend under Royal
Authority. And keep down all such Corahs, as pretend Religion, and practice
Rebellion. Detect the Wickedness of all such falsaries and Impostours, whose
voices are the voices of Reformation, and Canting Incantamentations. But their
hands the hands of Violence, Oppression, Church-robbing, King-killing, and any
such hellish Devillisme. O thou God of Truth, suffer not such Supplanters any
more to cheat the credulous Many of their Loyalty, their Religion, their
Liberty, their Estates, their Consciences. Neither suffer such self-Sainting
sons of Cruelty to have any power to touch thine Anointed any more. Enervate
all their Arms of flesh, and cloth them with their demerited shame; but upon
himself let his Crown flourish. And bless him spiritually as well as
temporally; inwardly, as well as outwardly. Let not the Greatness of his Court
Royal lessen the Goodness of his Court of Conscience. Suffer not that White
Hall which is in him, to be lost in that White Hall in which he is. And let not
any Feast be a Voider to that, which has been his Continual Feast. But let that
Peace of Conscience, which sugared all his sufferings, and sweetened all their
Sharpness, be still and for ever thy Entertainment of him. Let thy Royalty be
Blessedness to him, as his is to thy People under him. And to make us all his
Obedient Subjects, make us thy faithful Servants. Help us to honor, and
humbly obey him in thee, and for thee. Direct us, and all that be concerned in
that great Concernment of the Land, the choice of Representatives. Let all
Elections tend to thy Glory, the Honor and safety of thine Anointed; the Peace
and Prosperity of this Nation, and National Church, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

FINIS.

