The Widows Mite cast into the Treasury of the Lord God, and given forth to
the Vpright-hearted.
THe Power of God is with them that trust in him, that have no other to lean
unto, nor depend upon, but himself alone, whose power has overcome my heart,
that I can even say, It is good to be here, in the power of God, not in any
thing below. I am not to stay, for the Word says and cries aloud, Come out of
Babylon stay not in all the plain, but hasi, have, and come to Mount Zion the
City of the living God, in it is safe dwelling, in the power of God; the
munition of Rocks, thy bread is sure, and thy waters shall never fail. It is
the desire of my heart, that God would establish every upright, honest, naked,
simple heart upon this Rock of Ages, the everlasting salvation of many
generations, that the Lord God may take delight to dwell in us, and to walk in
us, that he may not be unto us any longer as a waifering man, that tarrieth for
a night, that this immortal life of God (which dwells in the Light) may so
affect our hearts, that we may even be delighted to lie down in his Will, that
the Lord may delight in us to do us good, so we may come to love God with all
our hearts, and our Neighbor as our selves, which indeed is the sum of all.
Then shall the Captivity of Israel be returned, and thou shall discern between
him that fears God (in thy self) and him that serves him not, that the life
of God may be brought forth in his creature, that so all things may be again in
their right place.

And Friends, the Power that now is made manifest, I mean the power of God, it
will make manifest who they are that have sought the Lord in uprightness of
heart, and them that have followed for the Loaves. I say, The power of God will
try foundations whether they are upon the Rock or no. The true Mother will be
known, even she that has the living Child, seeing that one over-laid it; for
wise Solomon has taken his Sword into his hand to divide and to judge. The
living Child all feel brought forth in your selves, that you may feel the
overshadowings of the Almighty that generateth, and that brings it forth. It
has a dependence only upon God, and cries unto him, and God hears it; it
reaches unto heaven, and like a mighty Prince wrestleth with God, and will not
let him go, till it has prevailed with him; it has no other in Heaven nor in
Earth to cry unto but God. It has its dependence upon God alone, and God
looked down from heaven, and saw that there was none to help; mark, none to
help. Then, and not till then did his own arm bring salvation, and he was
clothed with Zeal as with a Cloak.

Well, sure God is risen, methinks I feel his power over all. It is even that
will rule and reign, and of the Increase of his Government there shall never be
any end. Surely he is the Anointing, that we that have sought the Lord in
upright-heartedness, have found within us; he is the Mighty God, the Prince of
Peace. Surely he is strength to them that have no Might, he is sight to the
Blind, and Wisdom to the simple-hearted. Surely he is all to them that have
only sought him. And Friends, he is the true Vine, know him to be your own, and
sit down under him: mark, under your own Vine, not under another, there none
can make afraid. And this is the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, gathering all
his Lambs and Babes that have been scattered upon the barren Mountains, like
Sheep without a Shepherd, and saying, Let them return every man to his own
Tent. This Tent or Tabernacle that God has pitched is with men, and he will
dwell in them, and walk in them. And he will establish his everlasting Covenant
with them, even the sure mercies of David. And he is come to whip out them that
have made have to defile his Temple, and to overthrow the earthly Tabernacles
that man has builded in his own will (and lived in.) Then shall the clear day
spring from on high, that many souls have breathed for, and Nations have
desired: wherein Unity and Amity shall be further manifested, and lived in,
even when man shall cease from his own building. In a word, he will overturn
and shake and throw down all that is builded and not upon the Rock. For thus
says the Lord, I will once more shake not the Earth only, but Heaven also: And
the old Heavens, and the old Earth shall pass away, and the new Heavens shall
remain, wherein dwells righteousness, Peace, Unity and Amity; and he will
rend the vail from off all faces, and all false coverings shall not any longer
he able to hide, for the Light does now so clearly shine, and the day is dawned
which is to the Adulterer as the shadow of death; yea verily, the Sun is risen
which shall never set. And this charitable Life, that thinks no evil, shall
prosper and out live all that is of a contrary nature: The mouth of the Lord
has spoken it. And this is the matter now in Controversy, Except ye eat My
Flesh, says Christ Jesus, and drink My Blood, you have no Life abiding in you.
My friends, friends of God, you must all come into his Life, and speak the word
from his mouth, and, the words that he speaks, they are Spirit and Life; and
you must speak it in faithfulness, and not add nor diminish. And it shall no
more be said, The burden of the Word of the Lord; but, The burden of Babylon.
The wind blows where it lists, and the Spirit rests where it pleases;
That which pleases him, is a naked Heart, that sits and waits at the feet
of Jesus (and hears the Word from his mouth) rather than Marthas great bulk
of service. This manifestation of the Spirit of God, is to help man to find the
Rock in this weary Land, that ye may have Oil of your own, for another will
not serve you. For the time is come wherein you must cease from man, and you
must have the Word of God abiding in you, or be separated. And this is the end
of my writing to you, to press you to your own; there cannot any thing else
stand in this day of winnowing and sifting, that is come and coming to try all
Nations, People, Kindreds and Families. And this is my Testimony for the Lord
God of Heaven and Earth, he does in them according to his good pleasure. And
thus said the Lord, the mighty God of Heaven and Earth, I will arise up, as in
Mount Perazzim, and I will scatter mine Enemies before me, I will hurry them
hither and thither, and I will terrify them in my sore displeasure, The mouth
of the Lord of Hosts has spoken it.

Therefore, yea simple ones, arise, arise, and shake your selves from the dust
(Serpents Meat) for this birth binds Kings in chains, and Nobles in fetters
of Iron.

And Friends, let us have care how we stand in any thing below the Life and
Power of God; do not stay any where before thou come to the Mountain Remember
Lots Wife. The seed is a traveling; yea my soul says, Who is this that comes
from Bosrah, with his dyed garments? it is the Mighty God, a wonderful
Councellor, ready to save; he travelleth on like a mighty Man, like a Giant to
run his race, he skippeth as with Hindes feet, surely he is near.

Gods everlasting Sabbath is known, the day is come wherein man must cease from
all his labors, for God is risen, and he will work, and none shall let. Man is
to be silent, peace and be still all ye that are come to the ends of the earth;
for as I said before, the Lord God of Heaven and Earth is risen, and he will
tread the Winepress alone, therefore are his garments dyed red; now it will be
known who they be that can live with everlasting burnings, and with devouring
fire, even he that has clean hands and a pure heart, without which no man
shall see God. And without this Charitable life, if a man could give his goods
to the poor, and his body to be burned, he is but a sounding brass, or a
tinkling cymbal. I mean that Life that suffers long, and has not envy in the
heart, nor double mindedness in all its dealings, that prefers another good
before his own, that thinks no evil, that is not peevish nor froward, nor
hasts to judge of any thing before its time; that can wait till he that is the
Judge of all things does arise in him, then shall his enemies be scattered
before him like dust before the whirlwind. And that that stays or Centureth
in any thing below the Life and Power of God, is that which tends to
Division: for the Captain of our salvation (as I said before) travelleth, and
we are to follow here, and be like him in all things. The Year of Freedom is
come, the Everlasting Jubilee is witnessed, wherein God has redeemed them that
have sought him, only from under the Bondage of Egyptian darkness, and from
all the sore Taskmasters that have dealt subtly with his Israel; and the
Ishmaelitish Merchants shall no longer make merchandise of his little children,
for he is come to lead and to teach them himself, and he will bring them to the
Mountain of the house of David, which is established above all the mountains,
and exalted above all the hills of imitation and imagination, and hills of
strife; and Nations shall flow thither and say, Come and let us go up to the
mountain of the Lords house, and he will teach us of his ways, and we will
walk in his paths, and every child shall be as David, and David shall be as
God, and here is no need of man's teachings, neither is there any need of the
Sun by day, nor the Moon by night, for the Lord God is the light of them, and
the Lamb that is in the midst of them, shall and has wiped away all tears from
all faces (that are come hither) there shall not be a place for a cunning
Workman, nor a Hammer to be heard in all Gods holy Mountain, The mouth of the
Lord of Hosts has spoken it.

And thus is the Lord God of Heaven and Earth a doing his own work himself, and
man is to be silent, and stand still, and see Gods salvation, which puteth an
end to those earthen tabernacles, which in the imaginary part, some that were
Christ's friends, would have builded in the Mountain on which he was
transfigured before them. And this manifestation of the Spirit, is the
substance of what then was figured forth, when he was taken out of their sight.
And thus are all the works of God wonderful, and of great and weighty
concernment: Yea, surely his Wisdom is passed by, and gone beyond the wisdom
and comprehensions of wise men, for that was too short and too narrow to
contain his mighty incomprehensible fullness, which cannot be limited nor
likned to any thing, time, or place; for his ways are unsearchable, and his
Judgments past finding out; praises endless be to his holy Name for ever, who
is King of Zion, he siteth upon the Cherubims of Eternity, and he will bow down
the high thoughts of man, be they never so much exalted.

And one thing I charge you to have care of, that you do not hide any sweet
morsel, nor a Babylonish wedg (though it may be of gold) under your Tents, for
the Lord God of Heaven and Earth will find it out; we must all be tried by the
Refiners fire, and washed as with Fullers soap, that we may have our garments
clean, that we may not longer lie among the pots, nor seek the living among the
dead. For he is arisen, therefore let him be your Head in all things; for if
any thing else be chief that will betray him. Therefore let us be diligent and
willing to follow the Lamb, and not froward and angry as Jonah was, when God
prepared a worm to destroy the gourd that had covered his head in the night,
wherein he had rested, and was so exceeding glad of it. So in the Innocent Life
of the Lamb, the Lord God preserve you and me faithful unto the end, that we
may finish our course with Joy, and we may stand upon Mount Zion with the Lamb,
and sing his Song for ever, which cannot be sung in Babylon, because it is a
strange Land. Thus in Obedience to the Spirit of God, I have born a faithful
Testimony for the Lord, and in it let me be received.

Richard Wait.

Postscript.
THe Woman, while her Husband lives, is bound by the Law to her Husband (and
not one jot nor tittle of the Law shall pass, till all be fulfilled) but when
he is dead, she is free from the Law, the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ
Jesus has made me free from the Law of sin and death; and thou to hate what he
controuleth, is the fulfilling of the Law, and the answering of him love for
love, by Obedience, which is better then sacrifices; So shall thou be Married
unto him in the Word of his Power, which will make thee willing: And so he
makes of twain one new man. And this is that ministration of Life and
Salvation, which has exceeded and outshined that of condemnation, which was
glorious in its time, but this has and shall exceed it in Glory.

By one who has a portion in the Man of sorrows, in whom was no form nor
comeliness, yet his Mercies indureth for ever, and of his loving kindness there
shall never be an END

R.W.


