A PANEGYRIQUE Humbly Addressed to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty: ON His
Auspicious Meeting His Two Houses OF PARLIAMENT, February the 4th. 5th. 1672/3.
And His Most Gracious SPEECH There Delivered on that Occasion.

By R. W.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT.



London, Printed by A. P. for Phillip Brooksby, next Door to the Ball in
West-Smithfield, near the Hospital-Gate. 1673.

A PANEGYRIQUE TO His Sacred Majesty OF GREAT BRITAIN.
GReat SIR! When ever your Gracious Voice we hear
Ravished we stand, and wish our selves all Ear;
Your Speech, which equal Joy and Wonder breeds,
Can be Excelled by nothing but your Deeds;
Those Glorious Deeds Heaven sent you here to Act,
To Scourge the Insolent, and Good Protect;
While with a strong, and yet a gentle hand,
You Bridle Nations, and our Hearts Command:
Secure us from Our selves, and from the Foe,
Make us Unite, and make us Conquer too
Those Fiercer Factions which Men's Souls did move,
Are by your Favor Reconciled in Love:
And now our only Strife is to Outvye
Each other in the Fruits of Loyalty.
When Fate or Error had our Age misled,
And over these Kingdoms black Confusion spread,
The only Cure which could from Heaven come,
Was so much power and Clemency in One;
The Genius of our Nation, with disdain
Beheld those Puppets which Usurped your Reign;
But longed, (with their Strange Madnesses oppressed,)
Upon your Bosom its sick Head to rest:
So when a Lion shakes his Dreadful Mayn
And angry grows, let Him that first took pain
To tame his youth, Approach, the Haughty Beast
Will bend to him, but fright away the rest.
By sweet, yet secret Politics you Reign,
Which Foreign Statesmen Pry into in vain;
The Nations Ancient Honor you increase,
And Heal, as well with Needful Wars, as Peace:
Heaven, that has placed this Island, to give Law,
To Balance Europe, and her States to Aw,
In this Conjuncture does on Britain smile,
The Greatest Sovereign, and the Greatest Isle:
Some think this Portion of the World, was Rent
By the rude Ocean, from the Continent;
But whilst your Forces with the French Combine,
You make the Lands more Terribly to Join.
Fame swifter than your winged Navy flies
Through every Land that near the Ocean lies,
Sounding your Name, and telling dreadful News
To all that Pyracy and Rapine use;
Algiers with trembling Knees for Peace does beg,
Undone by the Valor of your Noble Spragg:
And greater Pirates too, much nearer home,
Who thought to graspe a power great as old Rome;
Striving to carry all Commerce away,
And make the Universe their only Prey:
Are now forced to Disgorge, and sadly find
Nature has You, Lord of the Seas designed.
With such a Chief, the meanest Nation, blessed,
Might hope to lift her Head above the rest:
What may be thought Impossible to do
For us, embraced by the Sea and You:
Lords of the worlds great wast, the Ocean, we
Whole Forests send to range upon the Sea:
And every Coast may trouble or Relieve,
But none can visit us without your leave.
Angels and we have this Prerogative
That none can at our happy Seat Arrive:
Whilst we descend at Pleasure to Invade
The bad with vengeance, and our friends to aid:
Our little World, the Image of the great,
Like that amidst the boundless Ocean set,
Of her own growth has all that Nature craves,
And all that is rare, as Tribute from the Waves:
As Egypt does not on the Clouds rely,
But to her Nile owes more than to the sky:
So what our Earth, and what our Heaven denies,
Our ever constant Friend the Sea supplies:
That friend whom whilst base Neighbors seek to gain,
Your Thunder with their blood Purples the Main:
The Taste of hot Arabian Spice we know
Free from the scorching Sun that makes it grow:
Without the Worm, in Persian Silks we shine,
And without Planting, drink of every Vine:
To Digg for Wealth, we weary not our Limbs,
Gold, though the heaviest Metal, hither Swims:
Ours is the Harvest where the Indians Mow,
We Plow the Deep, and Reap what others Sow:
Things of the Noblest kind our own Soil breeds,
Stout are our Men, and Warlike are our Steeds:
Rome, though her Eagle through the world had flown,
Could never make this Island all her own:
Here the Third Edward, and the black Prince too,
Victorious Henry flourisht, and now You:
For whom, Proud Dutch, (reserved, like the Greek State,
Till Alexander came to urge their Fate)
Must make New Trophies, which the Couq'ring hands
Of Mighty York, or (who in's sted Commands)
The Matchless Rupert from the Sea do bring,
To Adorn the Triumphs of our Glorious King:
Whilst most Heroic Montmouth, to add more,
Transplants the Laurels of the Belgian Shore.
Yet need your Foes not Dread (if they will Submit)
Your Power, you with such Sweetness Temper it:
Preferred by Conquest, happily overthrown,
Falling they will Rise, to be with us made one
That Aerie Liberty, whereof they Boast
Is but a Spacious Shadow at the most:
For they will find on just Account of things
No Freedom* like the Rule of Pious Kings:
So kind Dictators made, when they came Home,
Their Vanquished Foes, Free Citizens of Rome,
Less Pleasure take, brave souls, in Battails won,
Than in restoring those that are Undone:
Tigers have Courage, and the rugged Bare,
But Man alone can, whom he Conquers spare;
To Pardon willing, and to Punish loath,
You strike with one Hand, but you Heal with both;
Lifting up all that Prostrate lie, you grieve
You cannot make the Dead again to Live:
Whilst your Arms make your Stubborn Foes to fall,
Your Gracious Favors needs must Conquer all.
What you have done already is well known,
And we with humblest Gratitude must own;
When in your Royal Robes, you lately went
To meet your Kind and Dutious Parliament,
(That healing Senate, which all Storms can Calm,
And cure the Nation with its Acts of Balm:)
Blessings and Prayers were sent to Heaven aloud,
By every Member of the Gazeing Crowd:
No sooner that Illustrious body saw
Their Dearest Sovereign, but a Loveing Awe
Shines in each Face, and with a greedy Ear
Receives those Oracles he uttered there:
Their Grateful Duties straight the Cause Espouse,
As Highly Just to make our Lion Rouse:
They Thank His Royal Cares so much has done,
And Vote supplies for what there is to come.
Ah! blessed fruits! such happy Union brings,
The Loyalst Subjects with the best of Kings:
Subjects that to maintain this needful War,
Freely will part with what he fain would spare:
Their public Purse they offer -- Let all go,
Rather then Truckle to the encroaching Foe:
When our Kings Honor, and our Countries good
Is touched, we value neither Coin nor Blood:
Cursed be he, those Sacred bonds that parts,
"Kings greatest Treasures, are their Subjects Hearts:
And there your Majesty has such a share,
No Earthly Monarch may with you Compare.
But our Weak Muse begs Pardon, that she dare
In The Face of Dazzling Majesty appear:
She only meant, her own full Ioys to sing,
Succeeding Times, shall Bays and Olive bring
To Crown your head, whilst you in Triumph Ride
Over Vanquished Nations, and the Sea beside:
Whilst all the Neighboring States shall unto You,
Like Joseph's Sheaves, pay Reverence, and Bow.
ITER BOREALE.

FINIS.

