MERCVRY, OR THE SECRET and SWIFT Messenger: Showing, How a Man may with
Privacy and Speed communicate his Thoughts to a Friend at any distance.

LONDON, Printed by I. Norton, for John Maynard, and Timothy Wilkins, and are
to be sold at the George in Fleetstreet, near Saint Dunstans Church, 1641.



To the Right honorable GEORGE, Lord Berkley, Baron of Berkley, Mowbray,
Segrave, and Bruce, and Knight of the Noble Order of the BATH.
My LORD:
I Do here once more present your Lordship, with the fruit of my leisure
studies, as a testimony of my readiness to serve you, in those sacred matters,
to which I devote my more serious hours. I should not have presumed to this
Dedication, had I not been encouraged by that generousnesse and sweetness of
disposition, which does so eminently adorn your Lordships place and abilities.

If your Lordship please to excuse this boldness, and to vouchsafe this
Pamphlet a shelter under your favorable patronage, you shall thereby encourage
me in those higher studies, which may be more agreeable to that relation,
wherein I stand, as being

Your Lordships servant and Chaplain, I. W.

To the Reader.
THat which first occasioned this Discourse, was the reading of a little
Pamphlet, styled Nuntius inanimatus, commonly ascribed to a late Reverend
Bishop: wherein he affirms that there are certain ways to discourse with a
friend, though he were in a close Dungeon, in a besieged City, or a hundred
miles of.

Which promises, at the first perusal, did rather raise my wonder then belief,
having before that time observed nothing, that might give any satisfaction in
these particulars. And I should have esteemed them altogether fabulous had it
not been for the credit of their reputed author.

After this, I did collect all such notes to this purpose, as I met with in the
course of my other studies.

From whence when I had received full satisfaction, I did for mine own further
delight compose them into this method.

This I have now published; not for the public good, (which I do not think
my poor abilities can promote) but to gratify my brother the Stationer.

The benefits of that trade do chiefly consist in the printing of coppies; and
the vanity of this age is more taken with matters of curiosity, then those of
solid benefit. Such a pamphlet as this, may be salable, when a more
substantial and useful discourse is neglected.

I have already attained mine own ends, both in the delight of composing this,
and the occasion of publishing it. And therefore need not either fear the
censure of others, or beg their favor. I could never yet discern that any
Reader has showed the more charity, for the Authors bespeaking it. Farewell.

I. W.

To Mercury the elder, On the most learned Mercury the younger.
REst Maja's son, sometimes Interpreter
Of Gods, and to us men their Messenger,
Take not such pains as thou have done of old,
To teach men Hieroglyphics, and to unfold
Egyptian hidden Characters, and how
Men writ in dark obscurity: for now
Trithemius and Selenus both are grown
Such Cryptographers, as they scarce will own
Thee for their Master, and Decipherers know
Such secret ways to write thou nere did show.
These are but Artists, which thou did inspire;
But now thou of a Mercury art Sire
Of thine own name, a Post with whom the wind,
Should it contend, would be left far behind.
Whose message as thy metal strikes the gold,
Quite through a wedge of silver uncontrold,
And in a moments space does pass as far
As from the Artike to the Antartike star.
So proving what is said of influence,
May now be said of his intelligence,
They neither of them having such a quality
As a relation to locality:
No places distance hindering their Commerce
Who freely traffic through the Universe,
And in a minute can a Voyage make,
Over the Oceans universal Lake.
This son of thine, could any words or praise
His learning, worth, or reputation raise,
We should be Suitors to him to bestow
Encomiums on himself, which we do owe
Unto his worth, and use that Eloquence,
Which as his own, must claim pre-eminence:
For thee, it is glory enough thou have a son
Of Art, that has thy self in Art outdone.
Sir Francis Kinaston Knight.

To the unknown Author.
OF old who to the common good applyde,
Or mind, or means, for it were Deifyde:
But chiefly such, who new Inventions found;
Bacchus for Wine, Ceres that tild the ground.
I know no reason time should breed such ods,
(We Have warrant for it) men now may be styled Gods.
By hiding who thou art, seek not to miss,
The glory due to such a Work as this;
But set thy name, that thou may have the praise,
Lest to the unknown God we Altars raise.
Anthony Aucher, Esquire.

To my friend the Author.
TO praise thy work, were to anticipate
Thy Readers judgment, and to iniure fate;
Injustice to thy self, for real worth
Needs not Arts flattery to set it forth.
Some choose selected wits to write, as friends,
Whose Verses, when the work fails, make amends.
So as the buyer has his pennyworth,
Though what the Author write prove spumy froth.
Thou, of a humor cross to that, have chose
A friend or two, whose Verse hops like rough prose,
From whose inexpert vain thou can not look
For lines that may enhaunce the price of the book.
Let it commend it self, all we intend
Is but to show the World, thou art our friend.
Richard Hatton Esquire.

To the Reader.
REader, this Author has not long ago
Found out another world to this below.
Though that alone might merit great renown,
Yet in this book he goes beyond the Moon.
Beyond the Moon indeed, for here you see
That he from thence has fetched down Mercury.
One that does tell us things both strange and new,
And yet believed thei'r not more strange then true.
I Am loath to tell thee what rare things they be,
Read thou the book and then thou wilt tell them me.
Tob. Worlrich. I. C. Doct.

To his honored Friend I. W. on his learned Tract, The Secret and Swift
Messenger.
INimitable Sir, we here discern
Maxims the Stagirite himself might learn.
Were Plato now alive he would yield to You,
Confessing something might be Known anew.
Fresh Heresies (New nothings) still appear
As Almanacks, the Births of every Year.
This Dutchman writes a Comment, that Translates,
A Third Transcribes; Your Pen alone Creates
New necessary Sciences; This Art
Lay undiscovered as the Worlds fifth part.
But Secrecie's now Published; You reveal
By Demonstration how we may Conceal.
Our Legates are but Men, and often may
Great State-affaires unwillingly betray:
Caught by some sifting Spies, or tell-tale Wine,
Which dig up Secrets in the deepest Mine.
Sometimes, like Fire pent in, they outward break,
And'cause they should be silent, therefore speak.
Nor are Kings Writings safe; To guard their Fame,
Like Scavola, they wish their Hand in the Flame.
Ink turns to blood; they often participate
By wax and Quill sad Icarus his fate.
Hence Noblemens bad writing proves a plot;
Their Letters are but Lines, their Names a Knot.
But now they shall no more Seal their own Fall;
No Letters prove Killing, or Capital.
Things pass unknown, and each Ambassadour's
Strict as the Breast of sacred Confessors:
Such as the Inquisition cannot see;
Such as are forced neither by Rack, nor Fee.
Swift Secrecy descends to Humane Powers;
That which was Plutoes Helmet, now is Ours.
We shall not henceforth be in pay for air,
Transported Words being dear as precious Ware;
Our Thoughts will now arrive before they are stale;
They shall no more wait on the Carriers Ale,
And Hostess, two Land Remoraes, which bind
All to a Tortoise pace, though Words be Wind.
This Books a better Arc; we brook no stay,
Maugre the deepest Flood, or foulest Way.
Commerce of Goods and Souls we owe to Two,
(Whose Fames shall now be Twins) Noah and You.
Each Bird is turned a Parrot, and we see
Aesops Beasts made more eloquent by thee.
Woers again may wing their fetterd Love,
By Noah's trusty Messenger the Dove.
Torches which used only to help our sight,
(Like heavenly fires) do give our Reason Light.
Deaths Harbingers, Arrows, and Bullets prove
Like Cupids darts, Ambassadors of Love.
Then your diviner Hieroglyphics tell
How we may Landskips read, and Pictures spell.
You teach how Clouds inform, how smoaks advise,
Thus Saints with Incense talk to Deities.
Thus by dumb Creatures we instructed are,
As the Wise Men were Tutored by a Star.
Since we true Serpents like do little wrong
With any other Member but the Tongue;
You tell us how we may by Gestures talk
How Feet are made to speak, as well as walk:
How Eyes discourse, how mystique Nods contrive;
Making our Knowledge too, Intuitive,
A Bell no noise but Rhetoric affords;
Our Music Notes are Speeches, sounds are Word^.
Without a Trope there is Language in a Flower,
Conceits are Smelt without a Metaphor.
Dark subtleties we now shall soon define,
Each Organs turned the sense of Discipline.
It Is to your Care we owe that we may send,
Business unknown to any but our Friend.
That which is English Friendship to my Brother,
May be though it Greek or Nonsense to another.
We now may Homere Iliads confine
Not in a Nut shell, but a Point, or Line.
Which Art though 't seem to exceed Faith, yet who
Tryes it, will find both Truth and Reason too.
It Is not like Juglers tricks, absurd, when shovvn;
But more and more admired, the more it is known.
Writing's an Act of Emanation,
And Thoughts speed quick and far as Day does run.
Richard West. C.C. Ox.

MERCURY. The secret and swift Messenger.
CHAP. I.
The dependence of this knowledge in nature. The Authors that have treated of
it. Its relation to the art of Grammar.
EVery rational creature, being of an imperfect, and dependant happiness, is
therefore naturally endowed with an ability to communicate its own thoughts
and intentions; That so by mutual services, it might the better promote it
self, in the prosecution of its own wel-being.

And because there is so vast a difference betwixt a spirit and a body,
therefore has the wisdom of providence contrived a distinct way and means,
whereby they are each of them enabled to discourse, according to the variety of
their several natures.

The Angels or Spiritual substances, Aquinas part. 1.
Per insinuationem specierum, (as the Schoolmen speak) By insinuating of the
species, Quest. 107. Zanch. de Operibus Dei. Part. 1. lib. 3. c. 19.
or an unveiling of their own natures in the knowledge of such particulars, as
they would discover to another. And since they are of a Homogeneous and
immateriall essence, therefore do they hear, and know, and speak, not with
several parts, but with their whole substance. And though the Apostle mentions
the tongue of Angels, 1 Cor. 13.
yet that is only* Per concessionem, and ex hypothesi.

men, that have Organicall bodies, cannot communicate their thoughts, so easy
and immediate a way. And therefore have need of some corporeal instruments,
both for the receiving and conveying of knowledge. Unto both which functions,
nature has designed several parts. Amongst the rest, the ear is chiefly the
sense of discipline or learning, and the tongue the instrument of teaching. The
communion betwixt both these is by speech or language. Which was but one at
first, but has since been confounded into several kinds. And experience now
shows, that a man is equally disposed, for the learning of all, according as
education shall direct him. Which would not be, if (as some fondly conceive)
any one of them were natural unto us. Valles^^^ Sacr. Phil^s. cap. 3.
For intus existens prohibet alienum.

Or suppose that a man could be brought up to the speaking of another tongue;
Call. Rhod. A^t. lect. lib. 2. 9. c. 14.
yet this would not hinder, but that he should still retain his knowledge, of
that which was natural. For if those which are gotten by art, do not hinder
one another, much less would they be any impediment, to that which is from
nature. And according to this it will follow, that most men should be of a
double language; which is evidently false. Whence likewise you may guess, at
the absurdity of their enquiries, who have sought to find out the primitive
tongue, by bringing up infants in such silent, solitary places, where they
might not hear the speech of others.

Languages are so far natural unto us, as other arts and sciences. A man is
borne without any of them, but yet capable of all.

Now, because Words are only for those that are present both in time and
place; therefore to these, there has been added, the invention of letters and
writing: which are such a representation of our words (though more permanent,)
as our words are of our thoughts. By these we may discourse with them, that are
remote from us, not only by the distance of many miles, but also of many ages,
Hujus usu scimus maxim constare humanitatem vitae, Not hist. lib. 14. c. 11.
memoriam, ac hominum immortalitatem, says Pliny. Quid hoc magnificentius?
quid ^eque mirandum? Antiq. lect. lib 4. cap. 3.
in quod ne mortis quidem avida rapacitas jus ullum habeat, says Rhodiginus,
This being the chiefest means, both for the promoting of humane society, and
the perpetuating our names unto following times.

How strange a thing this Art of writing did seem at its first invention, we
may guess by the late discovered Americans, who were amazed to see men
converse with books, and could scarce make themselves believe that a paper
should speak: especially, when after all their attention and listening to any
writing (as their custom was) they could never perceive any words or sound to
proceed from it.

There is a pretty relation to this purpose concerning an Indian slave,
Hermannus. Hugo de orig. Scribendi. Pras.
who being sent by his Master, with a basket of figs and a letter, did by the
way eat up a great part of his cartyage, conveying the remainder unto the
person, to whom he was directed, who when he had read the letter, and not
finding the quantity of figs answerable to what was there spoken of; he
accuses the slave of eating them, telling him what the letter said against him.
But the Indian, (notwithstanding this proof) did confidently abjure the fact,
cursing the paper, as being a false and lying witness. After this, being sent
again, with the like carriage, and a letter expressing the just number of
figs, that were to be delivered, he did again according to his former
practice, devour a great part of them by the way; but before he meddled with
any, (to prevent all following accusations;) he first took the letter, and hid
that under a great stone, assuring himself, that if it did not see him eat
the figs, it could never tell of him; but being now more strongly accused
then before, he confesses the fault, admiring the divinity of the paper, and
for the future does promise his best fidelity in every employment.

Such strange conceits, did those wilder nations entertain, concerning this
excellent invention. And doubtless it must needs argue a vast ability both of
wit and memory, in that man, who did first confine all those different sounds
of voice, (which seem to be almost of infinite variety) within the bounds of
those few letters in the Alphabet.

The first inventor of this, Cice. lib. 3. de Na. Deor. Polyd. Virg. de
Inventor. lib. ^. cap 6.
was thought to be the Egyptian Mercury, who is therefore styled the Messenger
of the Gods. Vossius de Grammatica li. 1. c. 9.
To which purpose the Poets have furnished him with wings for swiftness and
dispatch in his errands. Natal. Comes Mythol. lib. 5. cap. 5.
And because the Planet of that name, was thought to observe a more various and
obscure revolution then any of the rest, therefore likewise did they attribute
unto him, such secret and subtle motions, as might make him a trusty and
private messenger, and so the fitter for that preferment, to which for this
invention they had advanced him.

There is yet another way of discoursing, by signs and gestures. And thought
it be not so common in practice, as either of the other; yet in nature, perhaps
it is before them both: since infants are able this way to express themselves,
before they have the benefit of speech.

But now, because none of these ways in ordinary use, are either so Secret or
Swift, as some exigences would require; Therefore many of the Ancients have
busied themselves in a further inquiry how both these deficiencies may be
remedied: as conceiving that such a discovery would be of excellent use,
especially for some occasions that are incident to Statesmen and Soldiers.

That the ignorance of Secret and Swift conveyances, has often proved fatal,
not only to the ruin of particular persons, but also of whole Armies and
Kingdoms; may easily appear to any one that is but little versed in story.
And therefore the redressing of these may be a subject worth our enquiry.

Amongst the Ancients that have most labored in these particulars, [Aeneas,
[Poliorcetica.
Cleomenes, and Democritus, (as they are cited by Hist. l. 10.
Polybius) were for their inventions of this kind, more remarkeably eminent.
And that Polibius Ibid. ^
Author himself, has given us such an exact relation of the knowledge of
antiquity in these things, juxta finem.
that it is a wonder, these following ages should either take no more notice, or
make no more use of it. Besides these, there is also Julius Africanus, and
Philo Mechanicus, two ancient Grecians, who have likewise treated of this
subject.

The Military significations in use amongst the Romans, are handled by De Strat.
Vegetius, and De re mi^^t. lib. 3. cap. 5.
Frontinus.

Their notes of Secrecy, and Abbreviation in writing, are largly set down by
Li de notis ^ntiquis.
Valerius Probus, and Pet. Diaconus. There is likewise a volumne of these, set
forth by Ianus Gruterus, which for their first invention are commonly ascribed
unto Cicero and The father.
Seneca.

In latter times, these particulars have been more fully handled, by the Abbot
Lib. de Polygraph. item de Stenogra^.
Tritemius. ^ract. de ratione (...). linguarum.
Theodorus Bibliander, Lib. de Zyphris.
Baptista Porta. Cardan. Subtilit. lib. 17. de Var. C. 12. 6. Notis in Aeneae
Polyorcetica.
Isaac Casaubon. Fab. 9.
Johannes Walchius, de Cryptog.
Gustavus Selenus. de Gram. Lib. 1. c. 40.
Gerardus Vossius. Lib. de Or. Scrib.
Hermannus, Hugo, and diverse others, in particular languages.

Amongst the rest, our English Aristotle, the learned Verulam, in that work
truly styled the Advancement of Learning, has briefly contracted the whole
substance of what may be said in this subject. De Augm. Scientiar. Lib. 6. ca.
1.
Where he refers it to the art of Grammar, noting it as a deficient part. And
in reference to this is it handled by most of those Authors, who have treated
of it.

That art, in its true latitude comprehending a treaty, concerning all the
ways of discourse, whether by speech, or by writing, or by gesture, together
with the several circumstances, pertaining to them. And so this subject
belongs to the Mint of knowledge; Ibid.
Expressions being current for conceits, as money is for valuations.

Now as it will concern a man that deals in traficke, to understand the
several kinds of money, and that it may be framed of other materials, besides
silver and gold: So likewise does it behove them, who profess the knowledge of
nature or reason, rightly to apprehend the several ways whereby they may be
expressed.

So that besides the usefulness of this subject, for some special occasions,
it does also belong unto one of the liberal Arts.

From which considerations we may infer, that these particulars are not so
trivial, as perhaps otherways they would seem, and that, there is sufficient
motive to excite any industrious spirit, unto a further search after them.

In this following discourse, I shall enquire, 1 Concerning the Secrecy of
means, whereby to communicate our thoughts. 2 Concerning their Swiftness, or
quick passing at any great distance. 3 How they may be both joined together in
the conveiance of any Message.


In the prosecution of which, I shall also mention (besides the true
discoveries) most of those other ways, whether Magical, or Fabulous, that are
received upon common tradition.

CHAP. II.
The conditions requisite to Secrecy, The use of it in the Matter of speech,
either By Fables of the Heathen. Parables of Scripture.

TO the exactness of Secrecy in any way of discourse, there are these two
qualifications requisite.

1. That it be difficult to be unfolded, if it should be doubted of, or
examined.

2. That it be (if possible) altogether devoid of suspicion; for so far as it
is liable to this, it may be said to come short in the very Nature of Secrecy;
since what is once suspected, is exposed to the danger of examination, and in a
ready way to be discovered: but if not, yet a man is more likely to be
disappointed in his intention, when his proceedings are mistrusted.

Both these conditions together are to be found but in few of the following
instances; only they are here specified, to show what a man should aim at, in
the inventions of this nature.

The art of secret information in the general, as it includes all
significatory signs, may be styled Cryptomenysis, or private Intimations.

The particular ways of discoursing, were before intimated to be threefold.

1. By Speaking. 2. By Writing. 3. By signs or gestures.
According to which variety, there are also different ways of Secrecy.

1. Cryptologia. 2. Cryptographia. 3. Semaeologia.
Cryptologia, or the Secrecy of speaking, may consist either, 1. In the matter.
2. In the words.


1. In the Matter: when the thing we would utter is so concealed under the
expression of some other matter, that it is not of obvious conceit. To which
purpose are the Metaphors, Allegories, and diverse other Tropes of Oratory:
which, so far as they concern the ornament of speech, d^^ properly belong to
Rhetoric, but as they may be applied for the secrecy of speech, so are they
reducible unto this part of Grammar.

To this likewise appertains all that aenigmaticall learning, unto which not
only the learned heathen, but their Gods also were so much devoted, as
appears by the strange and frequent ambiguities of the Oracles, and Sybils.
And those were counted the most profound Philosophers amongst them, who were
best able for the invention of such affected obscurities.

Of this kind also were all those mysterious Fables, Fables.
under which, the ancients did veil the secrets of their Religion and
Philosophy; counting it a profane thing to prostitute the hidden matters of
either, unto vulgar apprehension. Quia sciunt inimicam esse naturae, apertam
nudamque expositionem sui; quae, sicut vulgaribus hominum sensibus, intellectum
sui, vario rerum tegmine operimentoque subtraxit, ita a prui dentibus arcana
sua voluit per fabulosa tractari, In Samn. Scip. Lib. 1. Cap. 2.
says Macrobius. The Gods and nature would not themselves have hidden so many
things from us, if they had intended them for common understandings, or that
others should treat of them, after an easy and perspicuous way: Hence was it
that the learned men of former times were so generally inclined, to involve all
their learning, in obscure and mysterious expressions. Thus did the Egyptian
Priests, the Pythagoreans, Platonicks, and almost all other sects and
professions.

And to this general custom of those ages (we may guess) the Holy Ghost
Parables.
does allude, in the frequent Parables, both of the old and new Testament.
Co^hmen, in Isai. 14.
Parabola est sermo similitudinarius, qui aliud dicit, aliud significat, says
Aquinas. It is such a speech of similitude, as says one thing, and means
another. The Disciples do directly oppose it to plain speaking. Behold now
speak thou plainly, Ioh. 16. 29.
and no Parables.

And elsewhere it is intimated, that our Savior did use that manner of teaching
for the Secrecy of it: That those proud and perverse auditors, who would not
apply themselves to the obedience of his doctrine, might not so much as
underst and it. To whom it is not given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom
of God, Mat. 13. 10. 11.
to them all things are done in Parables, Mar. 4. 11. 12.
that seeing they may see and not perceive, and hearing they may hear and not
understand.

The art of these was so to implie a secret argument, Glass. Phil^. lib. 2. pat.
1. tract. 2. Sect. 5.
that the adversary might unawares be brought over, to an acknowledgement, and
confession of the thing we would have. Thus did Nathan, unexpectedly discover
to David, 2 Samuel 12.
the cruelty and injustice of his proceedings in the case of Vriah. Thus did
another Prophet, make Ahab, condemn himself, for suffering the King of Syria
to escape. 1 King. 20. 39.
And by this means did our Savior in the Parable of the Vineyard, Mat. 21. 33.
and the unjust husbandman, force the unbeleeving Jews, to a secret
acknowledgement, of those judgments, they had themselves deserved.

Of this nature was that argument of an ancient Orator, who when the enemies
had proposed peace, upon this condition, that the City should banish their
teachers and Philosophers; He steps up and tells the people a tale, of certain
wars betwixt the woolves and the sheep, and that the woolves promised to
make a league, if the sheep would put away their mastiffe Dogs. By this means
better instructing them of the danger and madness there would be in yielding
to such a condition.

The Jewish Doctors do generally in their Talmud, and all their others
writings, accustom themselves to a Parabolicall way of teaching; and it is
observed that many of those horrid fables, that are fathered upon them, do
arise from a misapprehension of them in this particular. Schickard Examen Comm.
Rabbin. dis. 7.
Whilst others interpret that according to the letter, which they intended
only for the moral. As that which one Rabby relates concerning a Lion in the
forest of Elay, that at the distance of four hundred leagues, did with his
roaring, shake down the walls of Rome, and make the women abortive. Wherein he
did not affirm the existence of any such monster, but only intimate the
terriblenesse and power of the divine Majesty. But this by the way.

By this Art, many men are able in their ordinary discourses, so secretly to
convey their counsels, or reproves, that none shall understand them, but those
whom they concern. And this way of teaching has a great advantage above any
other, by reason it has much more power in exciting the fancy and affections.
Plain arguments, and moral precepts barely proposed, are more flat in their
operation, not so lively and persuasive, as when they steal into a man's
assent, under the covert of a parable.

To be expert in this particular is not in every man's power; like Poetry, it
requires such a natural faculty as cannot be taught. But so far as it falls
under the rules and directions of Art, it belongs to the precepts of Oratory.

In the general it is to be observed, that in these cases a man must be very
careful to make choice of such a subject, as may bear in it, some proper
analogy and resemblance to the chief business. And he must beforehand in his
thoughts, so aptly contrive the several parts of the similitude, that they may
fitly answer unto those particular, passages, which are of greatest
consequence.

CHAP. III.
Concerning that secrecy of speech which consists in the words, Either By
inventing new ones, as in Canting. Conjuring.
Or by a changing of the known languag, whither Inversion. Transmutation.
Diminution. Augmentation.

THe secret ways of speaking, which consists in the matter of discourse have
been already handled. Those that are in the words are twofold. Either

1. By inventing new words of our own, which shall signify upon compact.

2. Or by such an alteration of any known language, that in pronuntiation it
shall seem as obscure, as if it were altogether barbarous.

To the first kind we may refer the Canting of beggars; who though they
retain the common particles, yet have imposed new names upon all such matters,
as may happen to be of greatest consequence and secrecy.

And of this nature the charms of Witches, and language of Magitians seem to
be. Though of these it may well be doubted, whether they have any signification
at all; And if they have, whether any understand them but the Devil himself?
It Is probable, he did invent such horrid and barbarous sounds, that by them, he
might more easily delude the weak imaginations of his credulous disciples.
Tract. de superst^tionib^s.
Martinus de Arles, an Archdeacon in Navare, speaking of a conjuringbooke,
that was found in a Parish under his visitation, repeats out of it these forms
of discoursing with the Devil. Conjuro te per aelim, per aelim, per seboan,
per adonay, per allelujah, per tanti, per archabulon, etc. And a little after,
Sitis alligati and constricti per ista sancta nomina Dei, Her, aelli, habet,
sat, mi, filisgae, adrotiagund^, tat, chamiteram, etc. And in another place,
Coriscion, Matatron, Caladason, Ozcoz^, Yosiel, etc.

In which forms, the common particles and words of usual sense, are plainly
set down in ordinary Latin; but many of the other, which seem to have the
greatest efficacy, are of such secret sense, as I think no linguist
candiscover.

The inventions of this kind, do not fall under any particular rule or maxim,
but may be equally infinite to the variety of articulate sounds. Porta de s^r^.
(...) cap. 5.


The second way of secrecy in speech, is by an alteration of any known
language, Selenus de Cryptogra. Ph^^cao. 2. cap. 1.
which is far more easy, and may prove of as much use for the privacy of it,
as the other. This may be performed, four ways.

1. By Inversion, when either the Letters or Syllables are spelled backwards.

Mitto tibi METVLAS cancros imitare legendo, where the word SALV^EM is
expressed by an inversion of the letters. Or as in this other example, Stisho
estad, veca biti which by an inversion of the Syllables, is Hostis adest, cave
tibi.

2. By Transmutation, or a mutual changing of one letter for another in
pronunciation, answerable to that form of writing mentioned in the seventh
Chapter. And though this may seem of great difficulty, yet use and experience
will make it easy.

3. By contracting some words, and leaving part of them out; pronouncing them
after some such way as they were wont to be both written and printed in ancient
Copies. Thus aa stands anima, Ar^s for Aristoteles. But this can be but of
small use in the English tongue, because that does consist most of
Monosyllables.

4. By augmenting words with the addition of others letters. Of which kind, is
that secret way of discoursing in ordinary use, by doubling the vowels that
m^ke the syllables, and interposing G. or any other consonant K. P. T. R, etc.
or other syllables, as Porta lib. 1. cap. 5. de furtiv. liter. notis. Thus, if
I would say, Our plot is discovered, it must be pronounced thus, Ougour plogot
igis di giscogovegereged. Which does not seem so obscure in writing, as it
will in speech and pronuntiation. And it is so easy to be learnt, that I have
known little children, almost as soon as they could speak, discourse to one
another as fast this way, as they could in their plainest English.

But all these later kinds of secrecy in speech, have this grand inconvenience
in them, that they are not without suspicion.

There are some other ways of speaking by inarticulate sounds, Chap. 17 18.
which I shall mention afterward.

CHAP. IV.
Concerning the secret conveyances of any written message in use amongst the
Ancients, Either by Land. Water. the open Air.

THe secrecy of any written message may consist either in the Conveyance.
Writing.


1. In the Conveyance, when a letter is so closely concealed in the carryage of
it, as to delude the search and suspicion of the adversary. Of which kind, the
ancient Historians do furnish us with diverse relations, reducible in the
general unto these three heads. Those are the 1. By Land. 2. By Water. 3.
Through the open Air.


1. The secret conveyances by Land, 1. By Land
may be of numberless variety: but those ancient inventions of this nature,
which to my remembrance are most obvious and remarkable, are these.

That of Harpagus the Mede (mentioned by Herodotus and Justin) who when he
would exhort Cyrus to a conspiracy against the King his uncle, Herod lib. 1
cap. 123. Justin. lib. 1.
(and not daring to commit any such message to the ordinary way of conveyance,
especially since the Kings jealousy had stopped up all passages with spies and
watchmen) he put his letters into the belly of a hare; which together with
certain hunters nets, he delivered unto a trusty servant, who under this
disguise of a hunts-man, got an unsuspected passage to Cyrus. And Astyag^s
himself was by this conspiracy bereaved of that Kingdom which was then the
greatest Monarchy in the world.

To this purpose likewise is that of Demaratus, Justin. lib. 2.
King of Sparta, who being banished from his own Country and received in the
Persian Court, See (...) like related (...) Ham^^ar. Ibid. lib. 11.
when he there understood of Xerxes his design and preparation for a war
with Greece, he used these means for the discovery of it unto his country
men. Having writ an Epistle in a Such as formerly they were wont to write upon,
whence the phrase R^s^ tabu^^, and litera a litura.
Tablet of wood, he covered over the letters with wax, and then committed it
unto a trusty servant to be delivered unto the Magistrates of Lacedaemon; Who
when they had received it, were for a long time in a perplexed consultation,
what it should mean, they did see nothing written, and yet could not conceive,
but that it should import some weighty secret; till at length the Kings sister
did accidentally discover the writing under the wax, By which means the
Grecians were so well provided, for the following war, as to give a defeat
to the greatest and most numerous Army that is mentioned in History.

The Fathers of the Counsel of Ephesus, Isaac C^sa. Notis in Ae^^a (...) c. 31.
when Nestorius was condemned, being strictly debarred from all ordinary waves
of conveyances, were feign to send unto Constantinople, by one in the disguise
of a beggar.

Some messengers have been sent away in coffins as being dead. Some others in
the disguise of brute creatures, as those whom Josephus mentions in the siege
of Iotapata, De ^ello ^udaic. l. 3. c. 8.
who crept out of the City by night like Dogs.

Others have conveyed letters to their imprisoned friends, by putting them into
the food they were to receive, which is related of Polycrita. Laurentius
Medices involving his Epistles in a piece of bread, Herman. Hugode (...) Scrib.
c. 15.
did send them by a certain Nobleman in the form of a beggar. Solemn de
Cryptographia lib. 8. cap. 7.
There is another relation of one, who rolled up his letters in a wax candle,
bidding the messenger tell the party that was to receive it, that the candle
would give him light for his business. There is yet a stranger conveyance
spoken of in Aeneas, Poli^rce^. cap. 31.
by writing on leaves, and afterward with these leaves, covering over some
sore or putrid ulcer, where the enemy would never suspect any secret message.

Others have carried Epistles inscribed upon their own flesh, which is
reckoned amongst those secret conveyances mentioned by Ovid. Caveat hoc custos,
De Art Ama^d.
pro charta, conscia tergum
Praebeat, inque suo corpore verbaeferat.


But amongst all the ancient practices in this kind, there is none for the
strangeness, to be compared unto that of Hystiaens mentioned by Herodotus,
Herod. lib. 5. cap. 35.
and out of him in Aulus Gellius; N^ctes Atti. lib. 17. cap. 10.
who whilst he resided with Darius in Persia, being desirous to send unto
Aristagoras in Greece, about revolting from the Persian Government, (concerning
which they had before conferred together;) But not knowing well how at that
distance to convey so dangerous a business with sufficient secrecy, he at
length contrived it after this manner. He chose one of his household servants
that was troubled with sore eyes, pretending that for his recovery, his hair
must be shaved, and his head scarified; in the performance of which Hystiaeus
took occasion to imprint his secret intentions on his servants head, and
keeping him close at home till his hair was grown, he then told him, that
for his perfect recovery, he must travail into Greece unto Aristagoras, who
by shaving his hair the second time, would certainly restore him. By which
relation you may see, what strange shifts the ancients were put unto, for want
of skill, in this subject, that is here discoursed of.

It Is reported of some fugitive Jews at the siege of Jerusalem, Joseph. de
B^ll^ Judah. lib. 6. c. 15.
who more securely to carry away their gold, did first melt it into bullets,
and then swallow it down, venting it afterward amongst their other
excrements. Now if a man had but his faculty, who could write Homers Iliads,
Sol^^. Polyhist. cap. 6.
in so small a volume as might be contained in a nut shell, it were an easy
matter for him, by this trick of the Jews, securely to convey a whole packet
of letters.

2. When all the land passages have been stopped up, 2. By Water.
then have the ancients used other secret conveiances by water; writing their
intentions on thin plates of lead, and fastening them to the arms or thighs
of some expert swimmer. De Str^^^g lib. 3. c. 13.
* Frontinu^ relates, that when Lucullus would inform a besieged City of his
coming to succor them, he put his letters into two bladders, betwixt which a
common Soldier in the disguise of a sea monster, was appointed to swim unto
the City. There have bin likewise more exquisite inventions to pass under the
water, either by a man's self, or in a boat, wherein he might also carry
provision; only having a long truncke or pipe, with a tunnell at the top of it,
to let down fresh air. But for the prevention of all such conveyances, the
ancients were wont in their strictest sieges, to cross the rivers with strong
The. l. 10 cap. 37.
nets, to fasten stakes in several parts of the channel with sharp irons, as
the blades of swords, sticking upon them.

3. Hence was it that there have been other means attempted through the open
air. 3. Through the open air.
Either by using birds, as Pigeons and Swallows instead of messengers, of
which I shall treat more particularly in the sixteenth Chapter. Or else by
fastening a writing to an arrow, or the weight that is cast from a sling.

Somewhat of this nature, was that intimation agreed upon betwixt David and
Jonathan, 1 Samuel 20.
though that invention do somewhat favor of the ancient simplicity and
rudeness. It was a more exact invention mentioned by Herodotus concerning
Artabazus and Timoxenus, Vra^i^ sive lib. 8. cap. 128.
who when they could not come together, were wont to inform one another of any
thing that concerned their affairs, by fastening a letter unto an arrow, and
directing it unto some appointed place, where it might be received.

Thus also Cleonymus King of Lacedaemon, Polyaenus lib. 2.
in the siege of the City Trezene, See Plutarch in Cimon.
enjoined the Soldiers to shoot several arrows into the Town, with notes
fastened unto them having this inscription, (...) I come that I may restore this
place to its liberty. Upon which, the credulous and discontented Inhabitants
were very willing to let him enter.

When Cicero was so straightly besieged by the Galls, that the Soldiers were
almost ready to yield; Caesar being desirous to encourage him with the news of
some other forces that were to come unto his aid, did shoot an arrow into the
City, with these words fastened unto it; Caesar Ciceroni fiduciam optat, expecta
auxilium. By which means the Soldiers were persuaded to hold out so long,
till these new succors did arrive and break up the siege.

The same thing might also be done more securely, by rolling up a note within
the head of an arrow, and then shooting of it to a confederates Tent, or to any
other appointed place.

To this purpose is that which Lypsius relates out of Appian, ^^liorcet. lib.
4. cap. Dialog. 2. mentioned also by Heliod^^. Hist. Aeth^^. lib. 9.
concerning an ancient custom for the besieged to write their minds briefly
in a little piece of lead, which they could with a sling cast a great
distance, and exactly hit any such particular place as should be agreed upon,
where the confederate might receive it, and by the same means return an
answer.

Of this nature likewise are those kind of bullets, lately invented in these
Germane wars, in which they can shoot not only letters, corn, and the like:
but (which is the strangest) powder also into a besieged City.

But amongst all other possible conveyances through the air, World in the Moon
chap. 14.
imagination it self cannot conceive any one more useful, then the invention
of a flying chariot, which I have mentioned elsewhere. Since by this means, a
man may have as free a passage as a bird, which is not hindered, either by the
highest walls, or the deepest rivers and trenches, or the most watchful
Sentinels. But of this perhaps I may have occasion to treat more largely in
some other discourse.

CHAP. 5.
Of that secrecy which consists in the materials of writing, whether the Paper
or Ink.
THe several inventions of the ancients for the private conveyance, of any
written message, were the subject of the last Chapter.

The secrecy of Writing may consist, either in The materials, or The Form.

1. The Materials of writing are the Paper and Ink, Selenus de Cryptogra. lib.
8. c. ^. 4.
(or that which is instead of them), both which may be so privately ordered,
that the inscribed sense shall not be discoverable without certain helps and
directions.

1. The chief contrivance of secrecy by the paper, 1. The Paper.
in use amongst the Ancients, was the Lacedemoniar. Scytale: The manner of
which was thus: there were provided two round staves of an equal length and
size: the Magistrates always retaining one of them at home; and the other being
carried abroad by the General, at his going forth to war. When there was any
secret business to be writ by it, their manner was to wrap a narrow thong of
Parchment about one of these staves, by a serpentine revolution, so that the
edges of it might meet close together: upon both which edges they inscribed
their Epistle, whereas the Parchment being taken off, there appeared nothing
but pieces of letters on the sides of it, which could not be joined together
into the right sense, without the true Scytale. Thus is it briefly and fully
described by Ausonius. Vel Lacedemoniam Scytalen initare libelli, Ausonius ad
Paulinum.

Segmina Pergamei, tereti, circumdata ligno.
Perpetuo inscribens versu, deinde solutus,
Non respondentes sparso dabit ordine formas.


You may read in Plutarch, how by this means, Pharnabaz did deceive Lysander.
In Vta Lysandri.


It Is true indeed, that this way was not of such inextricable secrecy, but that
a little examination might have easily discover it, Exerc. 327
(as Scaliger truly observes) however in those ages, which were less versed in
these kinds of experiments, it seemed much more secret then now it does unto
us; and in these times, there are such other means of private discoursing,
which, even Scaligers eyes, (as good as they were) could not discover. And
therefore it was too inconsiderate and magisteriall a sentence of him, Voscius
de Ar^e Gram. li. 1. c. 40.
from thence to conclude, all this kind of learning to be vain and useless,
serving only for imposture, and to perplex the inquirer. It Is certain that
some occasions may require the exactest privacie, And it is as certain, that
there may be some ways of secrecy, which it were madness for a man to think
he could unfold. Furori simile esse videtur, Veget. de (...). lib. 3.
sibi aliquem persuadere, tam circumspectum hominem esse posse, ut se a furtivo
quodam scripto, abditaque machinatione tueri possit: nam astans quilibet, vel
procul distans loquitur, and factum nunciat, ut non solum a nemine percipiatur,
sed ne sic quidem significare quippiam posse existimet, says Vegetius. And
Baptista Porta (who had a strange and incredible ability in discovering of
secret writings, (...) 3. de furtivis notis.
yet does ingeniously confess, Multa esse posse furtiva scripta, quae se
interpretaturum quenquam polliceri, furorem ac delirium plane existimarem.

So that though the ancient inventions of this kind, were too easily
discoverable, yet Scaliger had no reason to conclude this to be a needless
art, or that therefore he could unfold any other way that might be invented.
But this by the way.

2. The other material of writing is the ink, 2. The Ink.
or that liquor which is used instead of it, by which means also, there are
sundry ways of secrecy, Porta. Magiae, lib. 16. Wecker. de Secret. lib. 14.
commonly mentioned in natural Magic.

Thus if a man write with salt Ammoniack, Ioacb. Fortius Experie^t.
dissolved in water, the letters will not appear legible, till the paper be
held by the fire: this others affirm to be true also in the juice of onyons,
Cardan. Subt. lib. 17. Item de varietate lib. 12. cap. 61.
Lemons, with diverse the like acid and corroding movstures.

And on the contrary, those letters that are written with dissolved Alum, Ibid.
will not be discernable till the paper be dipped in water.

There are some other juyces that do not appear, Bibliander de Ratione com.
linguarum.
till the paper be held betwixt a Candle and the eye.

That which is written with the water of putrified willow, or the distilled
juice of Glow-wormes, will not be visible but in the dark, as Porta affirms
from his own experience. Def^rtiv. lit. lib, 1. c. 15.


There is also a secret way of writing with two several inks, both of them
alike in color, but the one being of that nature, that it will easily be
rubbed or washed off, and the other not.

A man may likewise write secretly with a raw egg, the letters of which, being
thoroughly dried, let the whole paper be blacked over with ink, that it may
appear without any inscription. And when this ink is also well dried, if you
do afterward gently scrape it over with a knife, it will fall off from those
places, where before the words were written.

Those letters that are described with milk or urine, or fat, or any other
glutinous moisture, will not be legible unless dust be first scattered upon
them, which by adhering to those places, will discover the writing. This way is
mentioned by Ovid, De Art. Amand.
Tuta quoque est, fallitque oculos e lacte recenti
Litera, carbonis pulvere tange, leges.


And it is thought that Attalus made use of this devise, the better to excite
the courage of his Soldiers. Being before the Battle to sacrifice to the Gods
for success, as he pulled out the intrals of the beast, he described upon
them these words, Regis victoria, which he had before written backward in his
hand with some gummy juice. The intrals being turned up and down by the Priest
to find out their signification, the letters did by that means gather so much
dust as to appear legible. By which omen the Soldiers were so strangely
heightened in their hopes and valor, that they won the day.

Unto these experiments of secrecy in the Materials of writing, G^^l. Sole^^^
de Cryptogr^phia lib. 8. cap. 3.
some add those other ways of expressing any private intimation by drawing a
string through the holes of a little tablet or board; these holes should be of
the same number with the letters, unto which by compact they should be
severally applied. The order of the threeds passing through them, may serve to
express any words, and so consequently any sense we would discover.

To this purpose likewise is that other way of secret information, by diverse
knots tied upon a string according to certain distances; by which a man may as
distinctly, and yet as Secretly, express his meaning as by any other way of
discourse. For who would mistrust any private news or treachery, to lie hid in
a thread, wherein there was nothing to be discerned, but sundry confused knots
or other the like marks?

The manner of performing it, is thus. Let there be a square piece of plate,
or Tablet of Wood like a Trencher, with the twenty four Letters described on
the top of it, at equal distances, and after any order that may be agreed
upon before hand, on both the opposite sides, let there be diverse little
teeth, on which the string may be hitched or fastened for its several returns.
As in the following figure.

A b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w X Y Z ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

Where the string is supposed to be fastened by a loope on the first tooth,
toward the letter A, and afterward to be drawn successively over all the
rest. The marks upon it do express the secret meaning. Beware of this Bearer
who is sent as a spy over you. When it is taken off, and sent to a
confederate, he may easily understand its intention, by applying it to his
own Tablet, which must be answerable unto this. The instrument may be made
much longger then is here expressed: But if the matter to be revealed should
happen to be more then the Tablet would bear, then may it be supplied, either
by another string, or else by beginning again with that part of the same
string, wherein the last letter was terminated.

There may be diverse other inventions of this kind, but I have not observed any
more remarkable, then those which are already mentioned.

CHAP. VI.
Secret writing with the common letters, by changing of their places.
THat secrecy which does consist in the form of writing, Sele^us de
Criptographia lib. 2. cap. 5.
is when the words, or letters are so framed by compact, that they are not of
ordinary signification. Ars notari^ occul^ands inter arts Subti^itate
praestantes annumeranda est. Carden. Subtle, l. 17.
The inventions of this kind, may both for their pleasure and benefit, justly
challenge a place amongst our other studies.

Saint Austin speaking of such humane inventions as are to be embraced or
avoided, and rejecting all magical institutions and commerce with the Devil,
De Doctrine. Christiana lib. 2. c. 26.
he adjoynes. Eav^ro quae homines cum hominibus habent, assumenda, and maxim
literarum figurae, etc. Ex eo genere sunt etiam notae, quas qui didicerunt,
proprie notarii appellantur. Vtilia sunt ista, nec discuntur illicite, nec
superstitiose implicant, nec l^xis enervant, si tantum occupent, ut majoribus
rebus, quibus inservire debent, non sint impedimento.

This way of secret writing, may be contrived, either 1. By the common letters.
2. Or by some invented notes and characters in stead of them.


Both these being distinguishable into those kinds that contain either.

1. Equal. 2. Or more. 3. Or fewer signs then are naturally required to the
true framing of the word.
The particulars of these, may be altered to such great variety as cannot be
reckoned, and therefore I shall specify those only which seem most
remarkable, either for their antiquity or usefulness.

The way of secret writing by equal letters, is eitherby changing of 1. Their
places, or 2. Their powers


1. By altering of the places; Either of the Lines. Letters. Both.


1. A man may obscure the sense by perplexing the order of the lines. 1. By
transposing the lines.
If they be written, not only from the left hand to the right, but also from
the right hand to the left, as in the Eastern languages, or from the top to
the bottom, and so upward again, as is commonly related to be usual amongst
the inhabitants of Taprobana in the South Sea, Dioder. Sic, Biblioth. lib. 2.
with those in China and Iapan. Herman. Hugo de orig. Scrib. cap. 8.
According to this following example.

e r f d l e e l l t i e t o o s w i i h l s u u h h s n t e p h o t o a v c s
p p a h t t l t r h e u n t h e l s e t s s d i e l n g a o t y s w s b o n s d
i d p e i a t o e c l e e g e e b m a n e

In the reading of which, if you begin at the first letter toward the right
hand, and so downwards, and then upwards again; you may find these words
expressed.

The pestilence does still increase amongst (...), we shall not be able to hold
out the siege without fresh and speedy supply.

2. A man may obscure the sense of his writing, 2 By transposing the letters.
by transposing each letter according to some unusual order. As suppose the
first letter should be at the latter end of the line, the second at the
beginning, or the like.

3. The meaning of any written message may be concealed, 3 By tra^sposing both
the lines and letters.
by altering the order both of the letters and the lines together. As if a man
should write each letter in two several lines, thus.

Tcoliraclmsfmsesplvoweutel
hsudesralotaihd, upysremsyid
The Soldiers are almost femished, Supply (...), or we must yield.

This way may be yet further obscured by placing them in Or as many more as the
length of the epistle shall require.
four lines, and after any discontinuate order. As suppose that the first
letter be in the beginning of the first line, the second in the beginning of
the fourth line; the third, in the end of the first; the fourth in the end of
the fourth; the fifth, in the beginning of the second line; the sixth, in the
beginning of the third; the seventh in the end of the second; the eight, in the
end of the third, and so of the rest. As in this example.

Wmrpitahhscteinpke
hathfonoihkftoenil
a noerrocgttthmnvrl
eauomhteinlenettes
Which in its resolution is this.

We shall make an irruption upon the enemy from the North at ten of the clock
this night.

This way will vet seem more obscure, Walchius Fab. 9.
if each line be severed into such words as may seem barbarous.

All these kinds may be varied unto diverse other more intricate transpositions,
according as a man's fancy or occasion shall lead him.

CHAP. VII.
Concerning secret writing with equal letters, by changing their powers. The
use of this amongst the Jews and Romans. The Key-character.
AS a written message may be concealed by changing the places of the letters,
so likewise by changing of their Powers, putting one of them for another, as
suppose L for A, and A for L or the like. Schickard in Be^^^nath.
Answerable to that kind of Cabalisme in the Jewish learning, which the Rabbis
call (...) or Combinatio, Haperus. Disp l 4.
when the letters of the Alphabet are severally transposed, Glassi^^ Phil^log.
l 2. part. 1. tract.^^ sect. 3 act 7.
and taken one for another, after any known order. Of which there be as many
kinds, as there may be several combinations of the letters. But amongst the
rest, they observe two of more frequent use. The first is styled from the four
first correspondent letters (...) Albam: in which they are thus opposite to one
another. (...)

The other is from the same reason called (...) Athbash, wherein the letters
are thus mutually opposed (...)

Both these kinds of secret writing the Jewish Doctors think to be frequently
used by the sacred penmen of holy writ, amongst whom the Prophet Isaiah and
Jeremiah, are observed to be of more especial note for their skill in
Cabalismes.

By the first of these combinations called Albam, that place of Isaiah 7. 6. is
usually interpreted; where there is a person mentioned under the unknown name
of (...) Tabeal, whom the Prophet affirms to aspire unto the Crown of Judah,
meaning by a secret transmutation of the letters (...) Remaliah the King of
Israel, whom he was loath more expressly to nominate. And therefore he veiles
it by this kind of secrecy, instead of (...) writing the letter above it (...);
for (...) the correspondent letter (...), and so (...) for (...), and (...) for
(...). Which being joined together, do make (...), instead of (...).

By the second of these combinations called Athbash, is that place Ierem. 51.
1. translated: where by the original, (...) Cor insurgentium contra me, is
meant (...) the Chaldeans; And therefore both the Targum and the Septuagint do
unanimously translate it so, as if in their version of it, they had chiefly
respected unto this kind of Cabalis^^e. It^m ca. 25. ^ 26. vide Hieron. com. in
eundem locum.
So likewise in 41. verse of the same Chapter, by the fained name of (...) is
meant (...)

This way of secret writing, S^^ton, in vit^ ejus. Aul. Gelli^^ N^ct. A^u^.
lib. 17. c. 9.
has been also in use amongst the ancient Romans; Thus Sueto^ius relates of
Julius Caesar, when he would convey any private business, he did usually
write it, per quartam elementorum literam, that is D sor A, E for B. and so of
the rest. After this order. defghiklmnopqrstvwxyzabc.
abcdefghiklmnopqrstuwxyz.
Hasten unto me.
Ldwxhq yqxr ph.


And the same author reports of Octavius Augustus, that in the writing of his
secrets, he did Secundum elementum proprii loc^ substituere, set down the
second letter for the first, as B for A, C for B, and for A a double xx.

But now, because such an Epistle might be easily unfolded, being altogether
written by the same way, therefore this kind of secrecy, has by later
invention, been further obscured, by writing each several word or line, or
letter, by a diverse Alphabet.

For the performance of this, two friends must beforehand by compact, agree
upon some certain form of words, that may be insted of a key, serving both to
close, and to unlocke the writing; which words would be less discoverable, if
they be barbarous and of no signification.

But for the easier apprehending of this, I shall explain it in an example.

Suppose the key agreed upon, were only this one word Prudentia.

Having first framed several Alphabets according to each of its letters: Thus,

A bc def ghi klm nop qrs tuw xyz P qr stv wxy zab cde fgh ikl mno R st uwx yza
bcd efg hik lmn opq V wx yza bcd efg hik lmn opq rst D of ghi klm nop qrs tuw
xyz abc E fg hik lmn opq rst uwx yza bcd N op qrs tuw xyz abc def ghi klm T uw
xyz abc def ghi klm nop qrs I kl mno pqr stu wxy zab cde fgh A bc def ghi klm
nop qrs tuw xyz

I may write each line or word, or letter, according as the order of these
Alphabets shall direct. As in these examples.

1. In the lines.
Ixt hdk asytgh bkiycn
xfi nrel fx matlmrck;
npkkfs pn, im oczs qdff
uhy rox xr xlh hqmpmh.
2. In the words.
Ix^ kfmcuawik gpodhs
iru acry bs oiwnotem;
bdyytg us, dg lzwp qdff
uhyrox is gur ygcfcy.
3. In the letters.
Izz wshemit in pzgcwy
vfm zean xf kaxxznebr
skgkoc hm, xr izzb awet
rtm iox gh cht whmqwy.
Which examples being unfolded, do each of them express this inward meaning.

The Soldiers mutiny
for want of victuals;
Supply us, or they will
Revolt to the enemy.
These ways may be yet further obscured, if the first Alphabet, (according to
which the rest are described) be contrived after any mixed order. As suppose
instead of the ordinary A b c, etc. there be written these letters after this
manner. Rzkmpseblauftcygwhxoqind.

And then will they be liable to all those other differences of secrecy, that
are usually invented by the wheele-character, which you may see largely
described by Porta.

There may be diverse other ways to this purpose, but by these you may
sufficiently discern the nature of the rest.

CHAP. VIII.
Of secret writing by more letters then are requisite to the intended meaning.
THe diffe^^^t kinds of secrecy by equal letters have been already handled.
The next particular to be discussed, is concerning the ways of hiding any
private sense, under more letters then are required to the words of it.

Of which kind there may be diverse particulars, some of them in use amongst the
Ancients.

1. A writing may be so contrived, that only one letter in a verse shall be
significant. Sybilla Erythr^^.
As it was in those remarkable Acrosticks made by a Sybill concerning our
Savior: where the letters at the beginning of each verse, being put together,
made up these words, (...) (...) Jesus Christ the Son of God ^ Savior.

The translation of these you may see in St. Augustine de Civit. Bed^ lib. de
(...)
Dei lib. 18. cap. 23. And the original are mentioned by Ludevic^^ Vive^, in
his notes upon that place.

According unto this, does Plaut^ contrive the name ^f his Comedies in the
first letters of their arguments. But this way is so ordinary in practice, that
it needs not any further explication.

2. The inward sense has likewise been conveyed by some single letters of
several words in the same verse. As in that common distich. Mitto tibi caput
Veneris, Vale.
ventremque Di Anae
Latronisque caput, posteriorae can E.


3. Sometimes one letter in each word was only significant. By which way of
secret expression, the Holy Ghost (say the Rabbis) has purposely involved
many sacred mysteries in Scripture. When these significant letters were at the
beginning of each word, the Cabalists, in their learning, called such an
implicit writing (...) Capita dictionum. When they were at the latter end, then
was it styled (...) Fi^es dictionum. Both being reckoned as species of that
Cabalisme which they called (...) Notaricon, imposed by some later Rabbis from
the Latin word Notari^. The capital letters.


Of the first sort, is that collection from those eminent words, Genesis 49. 10.
(...) Shilo shall come, and in him, etc. where the capital letters make up the
word (...) Jesus.

So Psalm. 73. 17 (...) His Name shall continue, and in him shall be blessed,
etc. which place does expressly treat concerning the Messi^s his name, and
therefore seems unto the Jews, to be of strong consequence for the proof of
Christianity. For so much is that Nation befooled in their absurd dotage, upon
these trivial literal collections, that a reason of this nature is of greater
force unto them, then the most evident, solid demonstration that may be urged.
Ludovicus Carret a famous Jew, Lib. Vis^^^ Divi^^^^.
Physician to the French King, being himself converted, and writing an Epistle
to this purpose, unto those of his own nation, he does chiefly insist upon
the arguments of this kind, as being in his opinion of greatest efficacy to
prove the truth of Christian Religion.

Of the other sort is that passage Genesis 1. 1. The final letters.
(...) where the final letters make up the word (...) or Truth. Which kind of
Cabalisme is six times repeated in the history of the Creation. As if Moses by
such an artificial contrivance of the letters at the beginning of his
writings, did purposely commend unto our belief his following books. Unto
this David is thought to allude Psalm. 119. 160. The beginning of thy word is
(...) Truth. Of this nature likewise is that observation from Exodus 3. 13.
(...). when they shall say unto me, what is his name, etc. Where the final
letters answer (...) Jehovah.

It were an easy matter for a man that had leisure and patience for such
enquiries, to find out sundry arguments of this kind, for any purpose.

4. There is another way of hiding any secret sense under an ordinary epistle,
Cardau de subtle. lib. 17.
by having a * plate with certain holes in it, Porta de furt. lib. 2, cap. 18.
through which (being laid upon the paper) a man may write those letters or
words, Such as Printers use when they are to (...) diverse red letters amongst
the black.
that serve to express the inward sense; the other spaces being afterward
filled up with such other words, as in their conjunction to these former, shall
contain some common unspected business.

5. There is also another intricate way to this purpose, much insisted on by *
Iritemius, Porta and Selenus. When each usual word or form of an epistle, is
varied to as many differences as there are letters, unto which they must all of
them be severally assigned. But these two latter inventions (though they be of
great secrecy, yet) because they require so much labor and trouble in the
writer, I shall therefore pass them over without any further enlargement.

CHAP. IX.
Of concealing any written sense under barbarous words, and such as shall not
seem to be of any signification. How all the letters may be expressed by any
five, t^ree, or two of them. Of writing with a double Alphabet. How from these
two last ways together, there may be contrived the best kind of secret writing:
ALL the ways of secrecy by more letters, already specified, do make the
writing appear under some other sense, then what is intended, and so
consequently are more free from suspicion: There are likewise some other
inventions to express any inward sense by barbarous words, wherein only the
first, and middle, and last letters shall be significant. As in this example.

Fildy, fagodur wyndeeldrare disc ogure rantibrad.

Which in its resolution is no more then this.

Fly for we are discovered.

To this purpose likewise is that other way of expressing the whole Alphabet,
by any five, or three, or two of the letters repeated. And though such a
writing, to ordinary appearance, will seem of no signication at all, and so
may seem of less use; Yet because a right apprehension of these ways, may
conduce to the explication of some other particulars that follow, it will not
be amiss therefore to set them down more distinctinly.

All the letters may be expressed by any five of them doubled. Suppose ABCDE. A
aa B ab C ac D ad E ae F ba G bb H bc I bd K be L ca M cb N cc O cd P ce Q da R
db S dc T dd V de W ea X eb Y ec Z ed and ee


According to which, these words, I am betrayed, may be thus described.

Bd aacb abaedddbaaccaead.

Three letters being transposed through three places do give sufficient
difference, whereby to express the whole Alphabet.

A aaa B aab C aac D baa E bba F bbb G bbc H caa I cca K ccb L ccc M aba N abb
O abc P aca Q acb R acc S bca T bcb V bcc W bab X cba Y cbb Z cbc and bac
Hasten unto me.

Caa aaa bca bcb bba abb bcc abb bcb abc aba bba.

Two letters of the Alphabet, The whole Alphabet expressed by any two letters
in five places.
being transposed through five places, will yield thirty two differences, and
so will more then serve for the four and twenty letters. Unto which they may
be thus applied.

A. aaaaa. B. aaaab. C. aaaba. D. aaabb. E. aabaa. F. aabab. G. aabba. H.
aabbb. I. abaaa. K. abaab. L. ababa. M. abaab. N. abbaa. O. abbab. P. abbba. Q.
abbbb. R. baaaa. S. baaab. T. baaba. V. baabb. W. babaa. X. babab. Y. babba. Z.
babbb.
aababababababba aaaaababaaaaaaababba. f l y a w a y

There is yet another way of secrecy by more letters then are naturally
required to the inward sense, Writing by a double Alphabet.
if we write with a double Alphabet, wherein each letter shall in the fashion
of it, bear some such small distinction from the other of the same kind, as is
usual in common, mixed writing.

For Example.

The first Alphabet.

Aa. Bb. Cc. Dd. Ee. Ff. Gg. Hh. Ii. Kk. Ll. Mm. Nn. Oo. Pp. Qq Rr. Sss. Tt.
Vuv. Ww. Xx. Yy. Zz

The second Alphabet

Aa. Bb. Cc. Ddd. Ee. Ff. Gg. Hh Ii. Kk. Ll. Mm. Nn. Oo. Pp. Qq. Rr. Sss. Tt.
Vuv. Ww. Xx. Yy. Zz

1. Write an Epistle of an ordinary matter, or (if it be needful) contrary to
what you intend. Let the body of it consist chiefly of the first Alphabet,
only inserting (as you have occasion) such letters of the second, as may
express that inward meaning which you would reveal to a confederate. For
example, from those that are besieged.

We prosper still in our affairs and shall (without having any further help)
endure the siege.

In which clause, the letters of the second Alphabet are only significant,
expressing this inward sense.

We perish with hunger help us.

But because the differences betwixt these two Alphabets may seem more easily
discoverable, since they are both generally of the same kind; the letters of
the second being all of them more round and full then the other; Therefore for
their better secrecy in this particular, it were safer to mix them both by
compact, that they might not, in themselves, be distinguishable.

Now if this kind of writing, The best way of secret writing.
be mixed with the latter way of Secrecy, by two letters transposed through
five places; Bacon. A gment. scient. l. 6. cap. 8.
We may then write omnia per omnia, which (as a learned man speaks) is the
highest degree of this Cyphering.

For supposing each letter of the first Alphabet to be instead of the letter
A^, and those of the other for B, we may easily inscribe any secret sense in
any ordinary letter, only by a quintuple proportion of the writing, enfolding
to the writing infoulded. As for example.

All things do happen according to our desires, the particulars you shall
understand when we meet at the appointed time and place of which you must not
fail by any means The success of our affairs dos much depend upon the meeting
that we have agreed upon.

The involved meaning of which clause is this.

Fly, for we are discovered, I am forced to write this.

If you suppose each letter of the first Alphabet to be instead of A, and those
of the second for B, then will the former clause be equivalent to this following
description.

F Aabab l ababa y babba f aabab o abbab r baaaa w babaa e aabaa e aabaa a
aaaaa r baaaa e aabaa d aaabb i abaaa s baaab c aaaba o abbab v baabb e aabaa r
baaaa e aabaa d, aaabb I abaaa a aaaaa m ababb f aabab o abbab r baaaa c aaaba
e aabaa d aaabb t baaba o abbab w babaa r baaaa i abaaa t baaba e aabaa t baaba
h aabbb i abaaa s. baaab.
This way of secrecy may be serviceable for such occasions as these. Suppose a
man were taken captive, he may by this means discover to his friends the
secrets of the enemies Camp, under the outward form of a letter persuading
them to yield. Or suppose such a man were forced by his own hand writing to
betray his cause and party, though the words of it in common appe^rance may
express what the enemy does desire; yet the involved meaning, (which shall be
legible only to his confederates) may contain any thing else, which he has a
mind to discover to them. As in the former example.

But now if there be a threefold Alphabet, (as is easy to contrive,) then the
inward writing will bear unto the outward but a triple proportion, which will
be much more convenient for enlarging of the private intimations.

And this way of writing is justly to be preferred before any of the other, as
contavning in it more eminently, all those conditions that are desirable in
such kind of inventions. As, 1. It Is not very laborious, either to write or
read. 2. It Is very difficult to be decyphered by the enemy. 3. It Is void of
suspicion.


But by the way, it is to be generally observed, that the mixture of diverse
kinds of secret writing together (as suppose this with the key-character) will
make the inward sense to be much more intricate and perplexed.

CHAP. 10.
Of writing any secret sense, by fewer letters then are required to the words
of it. The use of this amongst the Jews and Romans.
AS the sense may be obscured, by writing it with more letters, then are
required to the words of it, so likewise by fewer. Abbreviations have been
anciently used in all the learned languages, especially in common forms, and
phrases of frequent use. Sometimes by contracting words, when some parts of them
did stand for the whole. Buxtorf. de Abbreviat. in in^tio.
So in the Hebrew (...) for (...) et totumillud, which is all one with our et
caetera etc. (...) for (...) Secundum dicere, equivalent to our viz. or v. g.
verbi gratia. So likewise in the Greek (...) for (...), and (...) for (...).
And in the Latin D ns for Dominus, aa for Anima, and the like. But these were
rather for the speed of writing then the Secrecy.

Sometimes words were expressed only by their first letters. Thus did the Jews
write all their memorialls, and common forms, which are largely handled by
Buxiorfe. Ibid.
Hence was it, that their Captain Judas had his name of Maccaby. For being to
fight against Antiochus, he gave that saying for his watchword, Ex. 15. (...).
Who is like unto thee (O Lord) amongst the Gods? inscribing in his ensigns the
capital letters of it; (...) Macabi. Whereupon after the victory, the
Soldiers styled their Captain by that name.

It Is observed by the Rabbis, that many grand mysteries are this way implied
in the words of Scripture. Thus, where it is said, Psalm. 3. (...) Many rise up
against me: it is interpreted from the several letters, Resh the Romans, Beth
the Babylonians, Iod the Jonians or Grecians, Mem the Medes. Answerable unto
which, that place in Genesis 49. 10. (speaking of Shilo, unto whom (...) the
gathering of the people shall be) is by another Rabbie applied to the Jews,
Christians, Heathens, and Turks.

Upon these grounds likewise, is that argument to prove the Trinity, from the
first verse of Genesis. (...). The word (...) Elohim, being of the plural
number, is thought to be that divine name, which denotes the persons of the
Deity; which persons are more particularly intimated in the letters of the
verb (...), that answers unto it: (...) Beth being put for (...) the Son,
(...) Resh for (...) the Holy Ghost, (...) Aleph for (...) the Father. And if
you will believe the Jews, the Holy spirit has purposely involved in the words
of Scripture, every secret that belongs to any Art or Science, under such
Cabalisms as these. And if a man were but expert in unfolding of them, it were
easy for him to get as much knowledge as Adam had in his innocence, or humane
nature is capable of.

These kind of mysterious interpretations from particular letters do seem to
be somewhat favored, by Gods addition of the letter (...) unto the name of
Abram and Sara, Genesis 17. 5. 15.
upon the renewing of his covenant with them: which in all likelihood was not
without some secret mystery. That being the chief letter of the
Tetragrammaton, might perhaps intimate that amongst their other posterity, with
the promise of which he had then blessed them, they should also be the parents
of the Messiah, who was Jehovah.

This likewise others have confirmed from the example of Christ, Vide Tertul. l
b. de praescr. c. 50
who calls himself Alpha and Omega. Revel. 1. 8.

But though such conjectures may be allowable in some particulars; yet to make
all Scriptures capable of the like secrets, does give such a latitude to men's
roving and corrupt fancies, as must needs occasion many wild and strange
absurdities. Iren. lib. 1. cap. 13.
And therefore Irenae^s does fitly observe, that from such idle collections as
these, many heresies of the Valentinians and Gnostics had their first
beginnings.

As this way of short writing by the first letters, was of ancient use amongst
the Jews, so likewise amongst the Romans: which appears from many of their
contractions yet remaining, as S. P. D. Salutem plurimam dicit. S. P. Q. R.
Senatus populusque Romanus. CR. Civis Romanus. VC. Vrbs co^dita. And the like.

These single letters were called Siglae, per Syncopen, from the obsolete word
Sigillae, whence Sigillatim. They were usually inscribed in their coins,
statues, arms, monuments, and public records. Lib. de liter. antiquis.
You may see them largely treated of by Valerius Probus, where he affirms the
study of them to be very necessary, As it is se^ forth by Iacobus Maz^chius
for one that would understand the Roman affairs. His enim exprimebant nomina
Curiarum, Tribuum, Comitiorum, Sacerdotiorum, Potestatum, Magistratuum,
Praefecturarum, Sacrorum ludorum, Rerum urbanarum, rerum militarium,
Collegiorum, Decuriarum, Fastorum, Numerorum, Mensurarum, Iuris civilis, and
similium.

They were first used by the Notaries at Senates and other public assemblies,
and from thence retained in their Statutes and civil Laws: Whence Manilius
makes it the note of a good Lawyer. -- Qui legum tabulas and condita jura
Noverit, atque notis levibus pendentia verba.


Thus (says Isidor) (A) inversed ^ did formerly stand for pupilla, Isidor.
and M inversed ^ for mulier. Bibliand. de ratione com. ling.
By these letters DERICP, is signified De ear ita censuerunt patres.

When the Judges were to inscribe their several opinions on a little stone or
Tessera, Pet. Cri^it. Honest. D^sc. lib. 6. cap. 8.
to be cast into the urne, by the note A, they did absolve, by From the Greek.
(...)
K condemn; by N. L. Non liquet, they did intimate that they could not tell
what to make of the business, and did therefore suspend their judgments.

But because of those many ambiguities, which this contracted way of writing
was liable unto, and the great inconveniences that might happen thereupon in
the misinterpretation of Laws: therefore the Emperor Justinian did afterward
severely forbid any further use of them, as it were, calling in all those Law
books that were so written. Lib. 1. Cod. Tit. 17. leg. 1. 2.
Neque enim licentiam aperimus ex tali codice in judicium aliquid recitari.

The chief purpose of these ancient Abbreviations amongst the Romans, was
properly for their speed. But it is easy to apprehend, how by compact, they
may be contrived also for Secrecy.

CHAP. 11.
Of writing by invented Characters.
The distinction of these into such as signify either letters. words. notions.


The general rules of unfolding and obscuring any letter-characters. How to
express any sense, either by points, or lines, or figures.

BEsides the ways of Secret writing by the common letters; there may likewise
be diverse others by invented notes.

The difference of characters, whereby several languages are expressed, is part
of the second general curse in the confusion of tongues. For as before there
was but one way of speaking, so also but one way of writing. And as now, not
only nations, but particular men, may discover their thoughts by any different
articulate sounds, so likewise by any written signs.

These invented characters in the general, are distinguishable into such as
signify either

1 Letters. 2 Words. 3 Things, and notions.
First, The letter character.
concerning those that signify letters. To which kind, some learned men refer
the Hebrew character that is now in use: Hieronym. praef. ad lib. Regum.
Affirming that Ezra first invented it, thereby the better to conceal the
secrets of their Law, Joseph. Scal. notis ad Eusebius.
and that they might not have so much as their manner of writing common with
the Samaritans and other Schismatics.

'Twere but needless to set down any particulars of this kind, since it is so
easy for any ordinary man to invent or vary them at pleasure.

The rules that are usually prescribed for the unfolding of such characters,
are briefly these.

1 Endeavor to distinguish betwixt the vowells and consonants. The vowells may
be known by their frequencie, there being no word without some of them. If
there be any single character in English, it must be one of these three
vowells, a. i. o.

2 Search after the several powers of the letters. For the understanding of
this, you must mark which of them are most common, and which more seldom used.
(This the Printers in any language can easily inform you of, who do
accordingly provide their sets of letters.) Which of them may be doubled, and
which not, as H. Q. X. Y. And then for the number of vowells or consonants in
the beginning, middle, or end of words, a man must provide several tables,
whence he may readily guess at any word, from the number and nature of the
letters that make it. As what words consist only of vowells; what have one
vowell and one consonant, whether the vowell be first. As in these words. Am.
an. as. if. in. is. it. of. on or. us. Or last, as in these words. Be. he. me.
by. die. ly. my. ty. do. to. so. etc. And so for all other words according to
their several quantities and natures.

These tables must be various according to the difference of languages. There
are diverse the like rules to be observed, which are too tedious to recite. You
may see them largely handled by Baptista Porta, and Gustavus Selenus.

The common rules of unfolding being once known, In these cases Orthographie
is nol to be regarded
a man may the better tell how to delude them. Either by leaving out those
letters that are of less use, as H. K. Q. X. Y. and putting other characters
instead of them, that shall signify the vowells: So that the number of this
invented Alphabet will be perfect, and the vowells, by reason of their double
character, less distinguishable. Or a man may likewise delude the rules of
discovery, by writing continuately, without any distinction betwixt the words,
or with a false distinction, or by inserting nulls and non-significants, etc.

These Characters are besides liable to all those other ways, whereby the
common letters may be obscured, whether by changing their places, or their
powers.

The particulars of this kind may be of such great variety as cannot be
distinctly recited. But it is the grand inconvenience of all these ways of
secrecy by invented Characters, that they are not without suspicion.

For the remedying of which, there have been some other inventions of writing
by points, or lines, or figures; wherein a man would never mistrust any private
message: there being nothing to be discerned in these kinds of intimation, but
only, either some confused, and casual, or else some Mathematical
descriptions. As you may see in these following examples.

By points alone.

scattered dots By lines alone scattered lines

By Mathematical Figures. By Points, Lines, and Figures mixed together.

Each of which figures do express these words.

There is no safty but by flight.

The direction both for the making and unfolding of these descriptions, is
this. Let the Alphabet be described at equal distances, upon some thin and
narrow Plate, Pastboard, or the like, thus.

A b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w X Y Z

Let the sides of the Paper which you are to write upon, be secretly divided
into equal parts, according to the breadth of the Plate: and then by
application of this to the Epistle, it is easy to conceive, how such a writing
may be both composed and resolved. The Points, the ends of the Lines, and the
Angles of the figures do each of them by their different situations, express a
several letter.

This may likewise be otherwise performed, if the Alphabet be contrived in a
Triangular form, the middle part of it being cut out.

And so for a square or round form.


The larger these Directories are, by so much the less liable unto error will
the writing be, that is described from them.

It is easy to apprehend, Ioh Walchius fab. 9.
by these particulars, how a man may contrive any private saying in the form
of a Landscape or other picture. There may be diverse the like ways whereby this
invention of secrecy may be further obscured; but they are in themselves so
obvious, that they need not any larger explication.

CHAP. 12.
Of Characters that express words. The first invention of these. Of those that
signify things and notions, as Hieroglyphics, Emblemes.
THe next particular to be discoursed of, is concerning Characters that
express words. The writing by these, is properly styled Stenographie, or
Shorthand, Cent. 1. ad Belg. Epist. 27.
Scripturae compendium, cum verba non perscribimus sed signamus, says Lypsius.
The art of them is to contrive such figures for several syllables, as may
easily be joined together in one form, according as different words shall
require. Thus it is ordinary, to represent any proper name, by some such
unusual character, as may contain in it all the letters of that name for which
it is intended. Of this nature was that angular figure, so much used by the
Grecians of old: Schikard. Happer. Disp. 5.
which might be resolved into the letters (...).



This mark was esteemed so sacred amongst the Ancients, that Antiochus Soter,
a perpetual conqueror, did always instamp it upon his Coin, and inscribe it
on his Ensigns; unto which he did pretend to be admonished in a dream, by an
apparition of Alexander the great. And there are many superstitious women in
these times, who believe this to be so lucky a character, that they always
work it upon the swaddling clothes of their young children, thinking thereby to
make them more healthful and prosperous in their lives. Unto this kind also,
some refer the characters that are used in Magic, which are mayntained to
have, not only a secret signification, but likewise a natural efficacy.

This shorthand writing, is now so ordinary in practice (it being usual for
any common Mechanic both to write and invent it) that I shall not need to set
down any particular example of it. In ancient times, it was not so frequently
used: And therefore Pancerollus reckons it amongst these later inventions, lib.
de Repert. tit. 14.
But then there was a twofold kind of it.

Private. Public.
These private characters were practiced by the Roman Magistrates, and others
of eminent favor amongst them: Who being often importuned to write in the
commendation of those persons they knew not, were feign to agree upon some
secret notes, whereby their serious Epistles, might be distinguished from those
of form. Casaubon. notis in Aene. Poliorcet. cap. 31.
Whence the Proverb arose, De meliori nota commendare.

The other characters of public and common use, are many of them explained by
Valerius Probus in his book de literis antiquis. De notis Tyronis and Senec.
And there is a whole Volume or Dictionary of them, set forth by Ianus
Gruterus. From the practice of these came the word Notarius, as Saint De doct.
Christ. lib. 2 cap. 26.
Austin observes.

The first invention of them is commonly ascribed to Tyro, who was a servant
unto Cicero. So In Chron.
Eusebius, and De invent. rerum lib. 2 cap. 8. De Polygr.
Polyd. Virgil. But Trithemius affirms that Cicero himself writ a Treatise on
this subject, which was afterward augmented by Saint Cyprian. And that he had
found in an old Library, the copy of a Psalter, written in these characters,
inscribed by some ignorant man, with this title: Psalterium in lingua Armenica.

That Cicero was not unacquainted with these notes, may be evident from that
passage to Atticus: Lib. 13. ad Attic. cp. 32
Quod ad te de legatis scripsi, parum intellexit, credo quia (...) scripseram.

Pet. Diaconus attributes the first invention of these, Prolog. not. Conrad.
Imp. Isidor. Orig. lib. 1. c. 21.
to the old Poet Ennius; whose beginnings in this kind, did afterward receive
successive addition, from the works of Tyro, Philargirus, Aquila, and Seneca
the Father, by whom they were increased to the number of 5000. De Orig.
scribendi, c. 18. juxta finem.


But Hermannus Hugo, a late Jesuit, will have this shorthand writing to be of
far more ancient use; affirming that David alludes to the practice of it, in
that phrase, Psalm. 45. 1. The pen of a ready writer. And that the writing upon
the wall in Daniel 5. 25. which so puzzled the Chaldean Wizards, was described
in such kind of Characters. But whether this were so or not, is not much
material: It is sufficiently pertinent to the present enquiry; that the use of
these word-characters may well enough conduce to the secrecy of any written
message.

The third and last sort of signs, that have been anciently used for the
expression of things and notions, are either Hieroglyphics or Emblemes.

1 Concerning Hieroglyphics. Of Hieroglyphics.
The word signifies sacred sculptures, which were engraven upon Pillars,
Obelisces, Pyramides, and other monuments before the invention of letters. Thus
the Egyptians were wont to express their minds, Tacit. Annal. lib. 11.
by the pictures of such creatures, as did bear in them some natural
resemblance to the thing intended. By the shape of a Be they represented a
King, Polyd. Vir. de Invent. lib. 3. c. 11.
intimating that he should be endowed with Industry, Honey, and a Sting. By a
Serpent with his tail in his mouth, the year, which returns into it self.
And (which was a kind of prophetical Hieroglyphicke) by the sign of a Cross
they did anciently denote spem venturae salutis, De honesta disciplina, lib. 7.
cap. 2
or vitam aeternam, as Pet. Crinitus relates out of Ruffinus. Lib. de vita
Mosis.
Philo reckons up the knowledge of these, amongst those other abstruse Egyptian
Arts, wherein Moses is said to be so expert. And Clemens relates of Pythagoras,
Lib. 1. Stromat.
how he was content to be circumcised, that so he might be admitted to the
understanding of those many and great mysteries, which were this way delivered
by the ancient Priests, who did conceal all their Learning under such kind of
Magical expressions, Lucan. l. 3.
as the Poet styles them. Nondum flumineas Memphis contexere byblos
Noverat, and saxis tantum volucresque feraeque*
Sculptaque servabant magicas animalia ling^as.


Plutarch speaks of a Temple in Egypt dedicated to Minerva, Libro de Isid. and
Osiride.
in the front of which, there was placed the image of an Infant, an old man, a
Hawke, by which they did represent God, a Fish the expression of hatred, and a
Seahorse, the common Hieroglyphicke of Impudence. The construction of all
being this, O ye that are born to die, know that God hates Impudence.

Of this nature were those presents sent unto Darius, Herodot.
when he was almost wearied in his war against the Scythians: Melpom. l. 4
cap. 130.
which were a Bird, Clem. Alex. Strom. 5.
a Mouse, a Frog, and certain Arrows: Intimating that unless the Persians
could fly as Birds, or hide themselves under water as Frogs, or inhabit the
cavernes of the earth as Mice, they should not escape the Scythian Arrows. Of
this kind likewise were some military signs amongst the Romans. When any
thing was to be carried with silence and secrecy, they lifted up the
representation of a Minotaur, Pie^ius Hieroglyph. l. 3 cap. 38.
thereby teaching the Captains, that their counsels and contrivances must be
as inextricable as a Labyrinth, which is feigned to be the habitation of that
Monster.

2 Like unto these Hieroglyphics, are the expressions by Emblems. Emblems from
the Greek word (...), interserere, injicere.
They were usually inserted as ornaments, upon vessels of gold, and other
matters of state or pleasure. Of this nature are the stamps of many ancient
medalls, the Impresses of Arms, the Frontispices of Books, etc.

The kinds of them are chiefly twofold.

1 Natural, which are grounded upon some resemblance in the property and
essence of the things themselves. So a Dolphin which is a swift creature, being
described upon an Anchor, which serves for the stay and rest of a Ship,
signifies Festina-lente, Deliberation in counsel, and Dispatch in execution. A
young Storke carrying the old one, Filial gratitude.

2 Historical, Those that refer to some common relation. So the picture of
Prometheus gnawed by a Vulture, signifies the desert of overmuch curiosity.
Phaeton, the folly of rashness. Narcissus the punishment of self-love.

It was formerly esteemed a great sign of wit and invention, handsomely to
convey any noted saying, under such kind of expressions.

CHAP. 13.
Concerning an universal Character, that may be legible to all nations and
languages. The benefit, and possibility of this.
AFter the fall of Adam, there were two general curses inflicted on Mankind:
The one upon their labors; the other upon their language.

Against the first of these, we do naturally endeavor to provide, by all those
common Arts and Professions, about which the World is busied: seeking thereby
to abate the sweat of their brows in the earning of their bread.

Against the other, the best help, that we can yet boast of, is the Latin
tongue, and the other learned languages, which by reason of their generality,
do somewhat restore us from the first confusion. But now, if there were such an
universal character, to express things and notions, as might be legible to
all people and countries, so that men of several Nations might with the same
ease, both write and read it; this invention would be a far greater advantage
in this particular, and mightily conduce to the spreading and promoting of all
Arts and Sciences: Because that great part of our time, which is now required
to the Learning of words, might then be employed in the study of things. Nay,
the confusion at Babel might this way have been remedied, if every one could
have expressed his own meaning by the same kind of Character. But then perhaps
the art of Letters was not invented.

That such a manner of writing is already used in some parts of the World, the
Kingdoms of the high Levant, may evidently appear from diverse credible
Relations. Histor. Sinens. lib. 1. cap. 5.
Trigaultius affirms, that though those of China and Iapan do as much differ
in their language, Bacon Augment. Scie^t. lib. 6. c. 1. Voss. ^r. li. 1. cap.
41. Herm. Hugo de orig. scrib. c. 4.
as the Hebrew and the Dutch, yet either of them can, by this help of a common
character, as well understand the books and letters of the others, as if they
were only their own.

And for some particulars, this general kind of writing is already attained
amongst us also.

1 Many Nations do agree in the characters of the common numbers, describing
them, either the Roman way by letters; as 1. 11. V. X. C. D. M. or else the
Barbarian way by figures, as 1. 2. 3. 10. etc. So likewise for that which we
call Philosophical number, which is any such measure, whereby we judge the
differences betwixt several substances, whether in weight, or length, or
capacity: Each of these are expressed in several languages by the same
character. Thus ^ signifies a Scruple, 3 a Drachme, and so of the rest.

2 The Astronomers of several Countries do express both the heavenly Signs,
and Planets, and Aspects by the same kind of notes. As,,,,, etc.,,,, etc.,,,,.
Which characters (as it is thought) were first invented by the ancient
Astrologers for the secrecy of them, the better to conceal their sacred and
mysterious profession from vulgar capacity.

3 The Chymicall Treatises that are written in different languages do all of
them agree in the same form of writing their Minerals. Those that are
attributed to any of the Planets are decyphered by the character of the Planet
to which they belong. The rest by other particular signs, as for Salt
Ammoniack, for Arsnick, etc.

4 Musical notes in most Countries are the same. Nor is there any reason why
there may not be such a general kind of writing invented for the expression
of every thing else as well as these particulars.

In the contrivance of this there must be as many several characters as there
are primitive words. To which purpose, the Hebrew is the best pattern, because
that language consists of fewest Radicalls.

Each of these primitives must have some particular marks to distinguish the
cases, conjugations, or other necessary variations of those derivatives that
depend upon it.

In the reading of such a writing, though men of several Countries should each
of them differ in their voices, and pronounce several words, yet the sense
would be still the same. As it is in the picture of a man, a horse, or tree,
which to all Nations do express the same conceit, though each of these
creatures be styled by several names, according to the difference of languages.

Suppose that Astronomicall sign were to be pronounced, a Jew would call it
(...); A Grecian (...); An Italian Toro; A Frenchman Taureau; A German Stier;
An Englishman a Bull.

So likewise for that character, which in Tyro's notes, signifies the world, A
Jew would read it (...); A Grecian (...); An Italian, il mondo; A French man,
le monde; A German, Belt. Though several Nations may differ in the expression
of things, yet they all agree in the same conceit of them.

The learning of this character will not be more difficult, than the learning
of any one Language, because there needs not be more signs for the expression
of things, than there is now for the expression of words. Amongst those in
China and Iapan, there is said to be about seven or eight thousand.

The perfecting of such an invention were the only way to unite the seventy two
Languages of the first confusion: And therefore may very well deserve their
endeavors, who have both abilities and leisure for such kind of Enquiries.

CHAP. 14.
Concerning the third way of secret discoursing, by signs and gestures, which
may signify either ex congruo. placito.

THe third way of discoursing was by signs and gestures, which (as they are
serviceable to this purpose) may be distinguished into such as are significant,
either 1 Ex congruo. 2 Or, ex placito.


1 Ex congruo, when there is some natural resemblance and affinity, betwixt
the action done, and the thing to be expressed. Of which kind, are all those
outward gestures, whereby not only dumb creatures; but men also do express
their inward passions, whether of joy, anger, fear, etc. For, Saepe tacens
vocem verbaque vultus habet.

And the Wiseman notes it of the scorner, Prove. 6. 13.
that he winketh with his eyes, he speaks with his feet, he teaches with
his fingers.

Of this kind likewise are many religious actions, and circumstances of divine
worship, not only amongst the ancient Heathen; but some that were particularly
enjoined the Priests and Levits of the old Law, and some too, that are now in
use, in these times of the Gospel. For by such bodily gestures and signs, we
may as well speak unto God, as unto men.

To this kind also are reducible, those actions of form, that are required as
necessary circumstances, in many civil affairs, and public solemnities;
which are usually such, as in themselves are apt to signify the thing for
which they are meant.

But now, sometimes the intended meaning of these gestures is concealed under a
secret similitude. As it was in that act of Thrasybulus, who being consulted
with, how to mayntain a tyranny, that was newly usurped: He bid the messenger
attend him in the field, wherewith his wand he whipped off those higher ears of
corn that did overtop the rest; intimating, that it consisted in cutting off
the Peers, and Nobility, who were likely to be most impatient of subjection.
This I may call a Parabolicall way of speaking by Gestures.

2 Ex placito, when these signs have their signification from use and mutual
compact; which kind of speaking, as it refers to lascivious intimations, is
largely handled by Ovid. de Art Amandi: Verba superciliis sine voce loquentia
dicam, Verba leges digitis, etc.

By the help of this it is common for men of several Nations, who understand
not one another Languages, to entertain a mutual commerce and traffic. And
it is a strange thing to behold, what Dialogues of gestures there will pass
betwixt such as are borne both deaf and dumb; who are able by this means
alone, to answer and reply unto one another as directly, as if they had the
benefit of speech. It Is a great part of the state and Majesty, belonging to
the Turkish Emperor, that he is attended by Mutes, with whom he may discourse
concerning any private business, which he would not have others to understand.

It were a miserable thing, for a rational soul, to be imprisoned in such a
body, as had no way at all to express its cogitations: which would be so, in
all that are borne deaf, if that which nature denied them, were not in this
respect supplied, by a second nature, custom and use.

But (by the way,) it is very observable which Sacra Philos. cap. 3.
Vallesius relates of Pet. Pontius a friend of us, who by an unheard of art
taught the deaf to speak. Docens primum scribere, res ipsas digito indicando,
quae characteribus illis significarentur; deinde ad motus linguae, qui
characteribus responderent provocando. First learning them to write the name of
any thing, he should point to; and afterward provoking them to such motions
of the tongue as might answer the several words. It Is probable, that this
invention, well followed, might be of singular use, for those that stand in
need of such helps. Though certainly that was far beyond it, (if true) which is
related of an ancient Doctor, Gabriel Neale, that he could understand any word
by the mere motion of the lips, without any utterance.

The particular ways of discoursing by gestures, are not to be numbered, as
being almost of infinite variety, according as the several fancies of men shall
impose significations, upon all such signs or actions, as are capable of
sufficient difference.

But some there are of more especial note for their use and antiquity. Such is
that upon the joints and fingers of the hand, commonly styled Arthrologia, or
Dactylologia, largely treated of by the venerable Lib. de loqucla per gestum
digitorum sive de ind^gitatione.
Bid, Hieroglyphic. lib. 37. c. 1. etc Calius Antiq. lect. l. 23. cap. 12.
Satyr. 10.
Pierius, and others. In whom you may see, how the Ancients were wont to
express any number, by the several postures of the hands and fingers; The
numbers under a hundred, were denoted by the left hand, and those above, by the
right hand. Hence Iuvenal, commending Pylias for his old age, says that he
reckoned his years upon his right hand. Faelix nimirum qui tot per saecula
vitam
Distulit, atque suos jam dextra computat annos.


There are diverse passages in the ancient Authors, both sacred and profane,
which do evidently allude to this kind of reckoning.

Hence it is easy to conceive, how the letters, as well as the numbers, may be
thus applied to the several parts of the hand, so that a man might with diverse
touches, make up any sense, that he has occasion to discover unto a
confederate.

This may be performed, either as the numbers are set down, in the Authors
before cited, or else by any other way of compact that may be agreed upon.

As for example. Let the tops of the fingers signify the five vowels; the
middle parts, the five first consonants; the bottomes of them, the five next
consonants; the spaces betwixt the fingers, the four next. One finger laid on
the side of the hand may signify T. Two fingers V the consonant; Three W. The
little finger crossed X. The wrist Y. The middle of the hand Z.

But because such various gesticulations, as are required to this, will not be
without suspicion; therefore it were a better way, to impose significations,
upon such actions as are of more common unsuspected use: As scratching of the
head, rubbing the several parts of the face, winking of the eyes, twisting of
the beard, etc. Any of which, or all of them together, may be as well contrived
to serve for this purpose, and with much more secrecy.

In which art, if our gaming Cheats, and popish Miracle-impostors, were but
well versed, it might much advantage them, in their cousening trade of life.

CHAP. 15.
Concerning the swiftness of informations, either by qualities, as the
impression of imagination, and the sensitive species; or by spiritual
substances, as Angels.
HAving already treated concerning the several ways of secrecy in
discoursing, I shall in the next place enquire, how a man may with the greatest
swiftness and speed, discover his intentions to one that is far distant from
him.

There is nothing (we say) so swift as thought, and yet the impression of
these in another, might be as quick almost as the first act, if there were but
such a great power in imagination, as some later Marsil. Fic^n. Theolog.
Platon. lib. 3. cap.1. Pomponatius de Incantat. Paracelsus.
Philosophers have attributed to it.

Next to the acts of thought, the species of sight, do seem to be of the
quickest motion. We see the light of the East will in a moment fill the
Hemisphere, and the eye does presently discern an object that is very remote.
How we may by this means communicate our thoughts at great distances, I shall
discourse afterward.

The Substances that are most considerable for the swiftness of their motion,
are either Spiritual. Corporeal.


Amongst all created substances, there are not any of so swift a motion as
Angels or Spirits. Spirits.
Because there is not either within their natures, any such indisposition and
reluctancie, or without them in the medium, any such impediment as may* in the
least manner retarde their courses. And therefore have the ancient Philosophers
employed these as the causes of that mad celerity, of the celestial Orbs;
though according to their suppositions I think it would be a hard match, if
there were a race to be run, betwixt the Primum mobile, and an Angel. It being
granted that neither of them could move in an instant, it would be but an even
lay, which should prove the swifter.

From the fitness of spirits in this regard, to convey any message, are they
in the learned Languages called Messengers. (...) Angelus.


Now if a man had but such familiarity with one of these, Plutarch. Maximus
Tyrius. Dissertat. 26, 27.
as Socrates is said to have with his Tutelary Genius: If we could send but
one of them upon any errand, there would be no quicker way then this for the
dispatch of business at all distances.

That they have been often thus employed, is affirmed by diverse relations.
Vatinius being in Rome, Lactant. Inst. lib. 2. ep. 8.
was informed by an apparition, of that victory which Paulus their General had
obtained over King Perses in Macedon, Val. Max. lib. 1. c. 8.
the very same day wherein the battle was fought; Florus lib. ^ cap. 12.
which was a long time before any other Messenger could arrive with the new.

And it is storied of many others, that whilst they have resided in remote
Countries, they have known the death of their friends, even in the very hour
of their departure: Either by bleeding, or by dreams, or some such way of
intimation. Which, though it be commonly attributed to the operation of
sympathy; yet it is more probably to be ascribed unto the Spirit or Genius.
There being a more especial acquaintance and commerce, betwixt the Tutelary
Angels of particular friends, they are sometimes by them informed (though at
great distances) of such remarkable accidents as befall one another.

But this way, there is little hopes to advantage our enquiry, because it is
not so easy to employ a good Angel, nor safe dealing with a bad one.

The Abbot Trithemius, in his books, concerning the several ways of secret and
speedy discoursing, does pretend to handle the forms of conjuration, calling
each kind of character by the name of spirits, thereby to deter the vulgar
from searching into his Works. But under this pretense, he is thought also to
deliver some Diabolical Magic. Vossius Gram. lib. 1 cap. 41.
Especially in one place, where he speaks of the three Saturnine Angels, and
certain Images, by which, in the space of twenty four hours, Polygraph. lib.
3. c. 16.
a man may be informed of news from any part of the World. And this was the
maine reason, why by Iunius his advice, Frederick the second, Prince Palatine,
did cause the original Manuscript of that work to be burned. Which action is
so much (though it should seem, Cryptogra. l. 3. cap. 15.
unjustly) blamed by Selenus.

CHAP. 16.
Concerning the swiftness of conveyance by bodies, whether inanimate, as
Arrows, Bullets; or animate, as Men, Beasts, Birds.
THe bodies that are most eminent for their swiftness, may be distinguished
into such as are either inanimate. animate.


These inanimate bodies, as Arrows, Inanimate bodies.
Bullets, etc. have only a violent motion, which cannot therefore be continued
to so great a distance, as some occasions would require: But for so much space
as they do move, they are far swifter then the natural motion of any animated
body. How these have been contrived to the speedy conveyance of secret
messages, has been formerly discoursed, in the fourth Chapter, which I now
forbear to repeat.

Those living bodies, that are most observable for their speed, and celerity in
messages: are either Men, Beast, Birds. Though I doubt not, but that Fishes
also may be serviceable for this purpose, especially the Dolphin, which is
reported to be of the greatest swiftness, and most easily cicurated, or made
tame.

Amongst the ancient Footmen, Men.
there are some upon record for their incredible swiftness. Ladas is reported
to be so quick in his running: Solinus. Polyhist. c. 6.
Vt arenis pendentibus and cavo pulvere, nulla indicia relinqueret vestigiorum,
that he left no impression of his footsteps on the hollow sands. And it is
related of a boy amongst the Romans, being but eight years old, Ibid.
that did run five and forty mile in an afternoon. Anistius and Philonides,
two footmen unto Alexander the great, are said to have run 1:00 stadia in a
day. Which relations will seem less incredible, if we consider the ancient
Exercises and Games of this kind, together with the public fame and rewards
for those that were most eminent.

Amongst the variety of beasts, Swiftness of Beasts.
there are some of more especial note for their strength and swiftness. Exer.
205.
Scaliger mentions a story, (though he distrust the truth of it) of a certain
beast called Ellend, two of which being joined in a little cart, are said to
pass three hundred leagues a day upon the ice.

In former ages, and in other Countries, the Dromedary, and Camel, and Mule
were of more common use: But in these times and places, the horse (for the most
part) serves instead of them all; by the help of which, we have our swiftest
means of ordinary conveyance. The custom of riding post, by renewing both
horse and man at set stages, is of ancient invention. Herodotus relates it to
be used by Xerxes in the Grecian war, Lib. 8 98.
and that it was by the Persians called (...). The particulars that concern
these kind of conveyances amongst the Ancients, are largely handled by
Hermannus Hugo lib. de origin scribendi, cap. 14.

Pliny tells us of certain Mares in Lusitania, Not. Hist. l. 8. cap. 42.
which do conceive merely by the Westwind; that alone (without the copulation
of any male) serving to actuate their heat, and to generate their young. Which
are likewise mentioned by Virgil. G^^^g. 3.
Exceptantque auras leves, and saepe sine ullis
Conjugiis, vento gravidae, etc.


Me thinks, these children of the wind, should for their fleetnesse, make
excellent posthorses, and much conduce to the speedy conveyance of any message.

The Paracelsians talk, of natural means to extract the metal and spirit out
of one horse, and infuse it into another, of enabling them to carry a man
safely and swiftly, through enemies, precipices, or other dangerous place. And
such Horses (say they) were used by the Wisemen of the East at our Saviors
Nativity: for they had not otherwise been able to have kept pace with a star,
or to have passed so great a journey as it was to Jerusalem, which is thought
to be five or six hundred miles at the least, from the places of their
habitation. If this conceit were feasible, it would much promote the speed of
conveyances, but I think it may justly be referred amongst the other dreams
of the Melancholicke Chymicks. The swiftness of Birds.


Amongst all animate bodies there is not any, that have naturally so swift a
motion as birds. Which if a man could well employ in the dispatch of any
errand, there would be but little fear that such messengers should be either
intercepted, or corrupted.

That this has been attempted, and effected by many of the Ancients, is
affirmed by diverse relations. Not. Hist. l^b. 10. c. 24
Pliny tells us of Volaterranus, that he discovered a conquest he had gotten,
unto the City of Rome, by sending out swallows, which should fly thither, being
anointed over with the color of victory. And of another, who sending one of
these Birds into a besieged City, (whence she was before taken from her young
ones) and tying a string unto her with certain knots upon it, did thereby
show, after what number of days their aids would come, at which time they
should make an irruption upon the enemy.

And elsewhere in the same book, he relates, Cap. 37.
how Hircius the Consul, and Brutus, who was besieged in Mutina, did this way
mayntaine mutual intelligence, by tying their Letters unto such Pigeons, as
were taught before hand to fly from the tents to the City, and from thence to
the Tents again.

How Th^urosthenes did by this means send the news of his victory at Olympia,
Histor. Animalium, l. 6 cap. 7.
to his Father at Aegina, is related by Aelian.

Anacreon has an Ode, upon such a Pigeon, which he himself had often used as
a Messenger, wherein the Bird is fained to say, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).


Unto this invention also, Satyr. 4. juxta finem.
Iuvenal is thought to allude, where he says, -- tanquam e diversis partibus
orbis,
Anxia praecipiti venisset epistola penna.


Lypsius relates out of Varro, Saturn. Sermon. lib. 2. cap. 6,
that it was usual for the Roman Magistrates, when they went unto the Theater,
or other such public meetings, whence they could not return at pleasure, to
carry such a Pigeon with them: that if any unexpected business should happen,
they might thereby give warning to their friends, or families at home.

By which relations, you may see, how commonly this invention was practiced
amongst the Ancients. Nor has it been less used in the^eter times,
especially in those Countries, where by reason of continual wars, and
dissentions, there have been more particular and urgent necessity for such
kind of conveyances. Not. in Aeneae. Poliorcet. cap. 31.
Nunc vulgatissimares est, columbas habere, ad ejusmodi jussa paratus, says
Casaubon. Harum opere, nostrates hoc bello civili, frequenter adjuti sunt,
Comment. in Veget. l. 3. c. 5.
says Godesc. Stewechius.

There are diverse other stories to this purpose, See Nunt. Inanimat. concerning
Amiraldus. Porta de furt. lit. li. 2 cap. 21. concerning Marches.
but by these you may sufficiently discern the common practices of this kind.
As it is usual to bring up birds of prey, as Hawks, Cormorants, etc. to an
obedience of their keepers: So likewise have some attempted it in these other
Birds, teaching them the art of carrying messages. There is a smaller sort of
Pigeons, Herm. Hugo. de Orig. scribendi cap. 15.
of a light body, and swift flight, which is usually made choice of for such
particulars; And therefore the kind of them is commonly called by the name of
Carriers. Thuanus Hist. lib. 17


CHAP. 17.
Of secret and swift informations by the species of sound.
HAving in the former Chapters treated severally concerning the diverse ways of
secrecy and sweetness in discourse; It remaynes that I now enquire (according
to the method proposed) how both these may be joined together in the conveyance
of any message. The resolution of which, so far as it concerns the particulars
already specified, were but needless to repeat.

That, which does more immediately belong to the present Qu^re, and was the
main occasion of this discourse, does refer to other ways of intimation,
besides these in ordinary use, of speaking, or writing, or gestures. For in the
general we must note: That Whatever is capable of a competent difference,
perceptible to any sense, may be a sufficient means, whereby to express the
cogitations. It is more convenient indeed, that these differences should be of
as great variety, as the letters of the Alphabet; but it is sufficient if they
be but twofold, because two alone, may with somewhat more labor and time, be
well enough contrived to express all the rest. Thus any two letters or
numbers, suppose A. B. being transposed through five places, will yield thirty
two differences, and so consequently, will superaboundantly serve for the four
and twenty Letters, as was before more largely explained in the ninth chapter.

Now the sensitive species, whereby such informations must be conveyed, are
either the species of sound, or the species of sight. The ear and the eye,
being the only senses, that are of quick perception, when their objects are
remote.

Vegetius distinguishes all significatorie signs into these three sorts. De
remilitari, lib. 3. cap. 5.


1 Vocalia. By articulate sounds. 2 Semivocalia. By inarticulate sounds. 3
Muta. By the species of sight.
The two last of these are chiefly pertinent to the present enquiry. Concerning
which, in the general it may be concluded, that any sound, whether of
Trumpets, Bells, Cannons, Drums, etc. or any object of sight, whether flame,
smoke, etc. which is capable of a double difference, may be a sufficient
means, whereby to communicate the thoughts.

The particular application of these, to some experiments, I shall treat more
distinctly in the remaynder of this discourse.

First, Secret and speedy information by the species of sound.
concerning the secrecy and swiftness of any message by the species of sound.
Though these audible species be much slower then those of sight; yet are they
far swifter then the natural motion of any corporeal messenger. The chief
use of these is for such as are within some competent neernes, as perhaps a
mile of. But they may also by frequent multiplications, be continued to a far
greater distance.

There is a relation in Ioach. Camerarius, Pro^m. in lib. Plutar. de defectu
oraculorum.
of some that have heard their friends speaking to them distinctly, when they
have been many miles asunder. Habui notos homines, neque leves, and non
indoctos, qui affirmabant, se audiisse secum colloquentes diserte, eos quos
tunc multorum millium passuum abesse certo scirent. But this he justly refers
to Diabolical Magic, and the illusion of spirits.

There are other natural experiments in this kind, of more especial note for
their antiquity. Such was that of King Xerxes, related by Cleomenes, as he is
cited by Sardus. Cleomedes in libro de circulis coelestibus scribit Xerxem toto
itinere a Perside in Graeciam stationes statuisse, De rerum Inventor. lib. 2.
and in iis homines ita prope, ut vocem alterius alter exa^diret; quo modo
quadraginta horarum spatio, ex Graecia in Persidem res nunciari poterat. But
this invention, besides the great trouble and uncertainty of it, is also too
gross for imitation, savouring somewhat of the rudenes of those former and
more barbarous ages.

Much beyond it was that experiment of the Romans, in the contrivance of the
Picts wall, Britan. de Vallo sive the Picts Wall. p. 654 Boter. Geog. l. 2. and
lib. 4 where he mentions also another wall of 8000 furlongs in China.
related by our learned Cambden, this wall was built by Severus in the North
part of England, above a hundred miles long. The towers of it were about a mile
distant from one another. Betwixt each of these towers there passed certain
hollow pipes or trunks in the curtains of the wall, through which the
Defendants could presently inform one another of any thing that was necessary.
As concerning that place wherein the enemy was most likely to assault them, etc.

Since the wall is ruined, and this means of swift advertisement taken away,
there are many inhabitants thereabouts, which hold their Land by a tenure in
Cornage (as the Lawyers speak) being bound by blowing of a Horn to discover
the irruption of the enemy.

There is another experiment to this purpose mentioned by Walchius, who thinks
it possible so to contrive a trunk or hollow pipe, Fabul. 9.
that it shall preserve the voice entirely for certain hours or days; so that
a man may send his words to a friend instead of his writing. There being always
a certain space of intermission; for the passage of the voice, betwixt its
going into these cavities, and its coming out; he conceives, that if both
ends were seasonably stopped, whilst the sound was in the midst, it would
continue there till it had some vent. Huic tubo verba nostra insusurremus, and
cum probe munitur tabellario committamus, etc. When the friend to whom it is
sent, shall receive and open it, the words shall come out distinctly, and in
the same order wherein they were spoken. From such a contrivance as this,
(says the same Author) did Albertus Magnus make his Image, and Friar Bacon,
his brazen Head, to utter certain words. Which conceit (if it have any truth)
may serve somewhat to extenuate the gross absurdity of that popish relic
concerning Joseph's [Hah] or the noise that he made (as other Carpenters use)
in fetching of a blow: which is said, to be preserved, yet in a glass amongst
other ancient Relics.

But against these fancies it is considerable, that the species of sound are
multiplied in the air, by a kind of continuation and efflux from their first
original, as the species of light are from any luminous body; either of which
being once separated from their causes do presently vanish and die. Now as it
would be a mad thing for a man to endeavor, to catch the Sunbeams. or enclose
the light; upon the same grounds likewise must it needs be absurd, for any one
to attempt the shutting in of articulate sounds: Since both of them equally
have the same intrinsicall and inseparable dependence upon their efficient
causes.

True, indeed, the species of sound may seem to have some kind of self
continuance in the air, as in Echoes, but so likewise is it in a proportion
with those of sight, as in the quick turning round of a fire-sticke, which will
make the appearance of a fiery circle: And though the first kind of these be
more lasting then the other, by reason their natural motion is not so quick,
yet neither of them are of such duration as may be sufficient for the present
enquiry.

None of all these inventions already specified, do sufficiently perform the
business, that is here enquired after: Nor are they, either so generally or
safely, appliable for all places and exigences.

The discovery that is here promised, may be further serviceable for such cases
as these.

Suppose a friend were perfidiously clapped up in some close Dungeon, and that
we did not know exactly where, but could only guess at the place, within the
latitude of half a mile or somewhat more: A man might very distinctly by these
other inventions discourse unto him. Or suppose a City were straightly besieged,
and there were either within it or without it, such a confederate, with whom
we should necessarily confer about some design: We may by these means safely
discover to him our intentions. By which you may guess, that the Messenger
which is here employed, is of so strange a nature, as not to be barred out with
walls, or deterred by enemies.

To the performance of this, it is requisite, that there be two Bells of
different notes, or some such other audible and loud sounds, which we may
command at pleasure; as Muskets, Canons, Horns, Drums, etc. By the various
sounding of these (according to the former Table) a man may easily express any
letter, Cap. 9.
and so consequently any sense.

These Tables, I shall again repeat in this place. That of two letters may be
contrived thus.

A. aaaaa. B. aaaab. C. aaaba. D. aaabb. E. aabaa. F. aabab. G. aabba. H.
aabbb. I. abaaa. K. abaab. L. ababa. M. abaab. N. abbaa. O. abbab. P. abbba. Q.
abbbb. R. baaaa. S. baaab. T. baaba. V. baabb. W. babaa. X. babab. Y. babba. Z.
babbb.


Suppose the word Victuals were this this way to be expressed. Let the bigger
sound be represented by A. and the lesser by B. according to which, the word
may be thus made up by five of these sounds for each letter.

V. baabb. I. abaaa. C. aaaba. T. baaba. V. baabb. A. aaaaa. L. ababa. S.
baaab.
That is, the lesser note sounded once, and then the bigger twice, and then
again the lesser twice, as (baabb) will signify the letter (Y). So, the bigger
once, and then the lesser once, and after that the bigger thrice together, as
(abaaa) will represent the letter (I:) and so of the rest.

If the sounds be capable of a triple difference, then each letter may be
expressed by a threefold sound, as may appear by this other Alphabet.

A. aaa. B. aab. C. aac. D. baa. E. bab. F. bba. G. bbb. H. bbc. I. caa. K.
cba. L. cbb. M. cbc. N. cca. O. ccb. P. ccc. Q. aba. R. abb. S. abc. T. aca. V.
acb. W. acc. X. bca. Y. bcb. Z. bcc.
V. acb. I. caa. C. aac. T. aca. V. acb. A. aaa. L. cbb. S. abc.


If these sounds do contain a quintuple difference, then may every letter be
signified by two sounds only, (which will much conduce to the speed and
dispatch of such a message.) As you may see in this other Table.

A. aa. B. ab. C. ac. D. ad. E. ae. F. ba. G. bb. H. bc. I. bd. K. be. L. ca.
M. cb. N. cc. O. cd. P. ce. Q. da. R. db. S. dc. T. dd. V. de. W. ea. X. eb. Y.
ec. Z. ed.


V. de. I. bd. C. ac. T. dd. V. de. A. aa. L. ca. S. dc.


It Is related by Porta, De furt. lit. lib. 1. cap. 6.
that when the Citizens in the siege of Navarre were reduced to such great
extremities that they were ready to yield; they did discover to their friends
the greatness, and kind of their wants, by discharging diverse Canons and
Ordinances in the night time, according to a certain order before agreed upon:
and by this means did obtain such fitting supplies as preserved the City.

CHAP. 18.
Concerning a language, that may consist only of Tunes and Musical Notes,
without any articulate sound.
IF the Musical Instrument that is used to this purpose, be able to express
the ordinary notes, not only according to their different Tones, but their
Times also; then may each Letter of the Alphabet be rendered by a single sound.

Whence it will follow that a man may frame a Language, consisting only of
Tunes and such inarticulate sounds, as no Letters can express. Which kind of
speech is fancied to be usual amongst the Lunary Inhabitants; who (as Or the
man in the Moon, written by the same Author of Nuntius Inanimat.
Domingo Gonsales has discovered) have contrived the Letters of the Alphabet
upon the Notes after some such order as this:

^

Where the five Vowels are represented by the Minnums on each of the five
lines, being most of them placed according to their right order and
consequence: only the letters K. and Q. are left out, because they may be
otherwise expressed.

According to this Alphabet of Notes, See Dom. Gonsal. 94.
these words, Gloria Deo soli, must be thus contrived.

^

By this you may easily discern how two Musicians may discourse with one
another, by playing upon their Instruments of Music, as well as by talking
with their instruments of speech. And (which is a singular curiosity) how the
words of a Song may be contrived in the tune of it.

I suppose that these letters and notes might be disposed to answer one
another, with better advantage then here they are expressed. And this perhaps,
would be easy enough for those that are thoroughly versed in the grounds of
Music, unto whose further enquiry, I do here only propose this invention.

But now if these inarticulate sounds be contrived for the expression, not of
words and letters, but of things and notions, (as was before explained,
concerning the universal Character) then might there be such a general
Language, as should be equally speakable, by all people and Nations; and so we
might be restored from the second general curse, which is yet manifested, not
only in the confusion of writing, but also of speech.

The utterance of these Musical tunes may serve for the universal language,
and the writing of them for the universal Character. As all Nations do agree
in the same conceit of things, so likewise in the same conceit of Harmonies.

This Curiosity (for ought I know) has not yet been mentioned by any Author,
but it may be (if well considered) of such excellent use, as to deserve a more
full and particular enlargement, in a Treatise by it self.

CHAP. 19
Of those common relations, that concern secret and swift informations by the
species of sight, which are either Fabulous, or Magical.
THe usual relations, that concern secret and swift conveyances by the
species of sight, may be distinguished into such as are, either 1 Fabulous. 2
Magical. 3 Natural and true.


First of those that are fabulous: 1 Of those fabulous relations to this
purpose.
In which kind, that of the loadstone is most remarkable, as it is maintained
by Lib. 2. prolus. 6.
Famianus Strada in his imitation of Lucretius his style, and diverse others.
The manner that is usually prescribed for the performance of it, is thus. Let
there be two needles provided, of an equal length and bigness, being both of
them touched with the same loadstone. Let the letters of the Alphabet be placed
in the circles on which they are moved, as the points of the compass under the
needle of the Mariners Chart. Let the friend that is to travail take one of
them with him, first agreeing upon the days and hours, wherein they should
confer together: At which times, if one of them move the needle of his
instrument to any letter of the Alphabet, the other needle by a Sympathy, will
move unto the same letter in the other instrument, though they be never so
far distant. And thus by several motions of the needle to the letters, they
may easily make up any words or sense which they have a mind to express. O
utinam haec ratio scribendi prodeat usu;
Cautior and citior properaret epistol^, nullas
Latronu^ verita insidias, fluviosque morantes,
Ipse snis princeps manibus sibi conficeret rem, etc.


Says Strada. But this invention is altogether imaginary, having no foundation
in any real experiment. You may see it frequently confuted, in those that
treat concerning magneticall call virtues. Non solum exibilandi sunt' sed etiam
male mulctandi Philoso^hica ferula, fabularum isti procusores, qui suis
portentis deterrent homines a praeclarissimo causarum studio, Philosop. Magnet.
lib. 4. c. 10.
says Cabaeus, to this purpose.

The first occasion of these relations, was the proof of that strange
immateriall powers of the loadstone, whereby it did work through thick and
solid bodies, as a table, or wall, or the like: as also of that directive
virtue, whereby it always tends to the poles; From whence others have
conjectured, that it might be serviceable also, for such a business, at so
great a distance.

But against this, it is considerable,

1 That every natural agent, is supposed to have some certain sphere, which
determines its activity.

2 That magneticall operations do not arise (as some fondly conceive) from a
Sympatheticall conformation of natures, which is the same at all distances; but
from such a diffusion of these magneticall qualities through the medium, that
they may be continued from the agent to the patient. And so these natural
powers, will not be of so great an extent, as they are supposed in this
experiment.

The utmost distance, at which we may discourse with another, by these
magneticall virtues, is two or three foot or there abouts; And this we may
do, S. Ward. magnetis Reduct. cap. 40.
though it be through a wall of that thickness. Fieri enim posse me docuit
experientia, ut open Magnetis, and instrumenti ad id aptati, See Cabaeus Phil.
Magn. lib. ^. c. 11.
amicus cum amico, in cubiculo proximo, trans crassum murum (puta bipedalem)
colloquatur, animi sui sententiam impertiat, and ad quaesita respondeat, (says
a late Author.) But in this experiment, it is not only the secondary virtue of
the needles that can be thus effectual (as is supposed in the former
invention) but there must be the help also of the loadstone it self.

As for the reason why these magneticall powers are able to work through solid
bodies; It Is considerable, that any quality may be diffused through such a
substance; as has no natural repugnancie unto it. We see the light does
pass as well through hot bodies as cold, through solid as fluid, etc. only
Opacitie keeps it out; because that quality alone is contrary to its nature. So
likewise is it with magneticall virtues, which do equally spread themselves,
through all kind of bodies, whether rare or dense, diaphanous or opacous, there
being no quality contrary to this; because it is that general endowment of the
whole globe, that universal quality to which all other particulars are
naturally subservient.

The second sort of relations to this purpose, 2 Magical.
are such as refer to diabolical Magic; Of which kind is that invention
thought to be, which is commonly ascribed to Pythagoras; of whom it is
reported, that he could write any thing in the body of the Moon, so as it
might be legible to another at a great distance. Occult. Phil^s. lib. 1. cap. 6.
Agrippa affirms this to be naturally possible, and the way of performing it,
not unknown to himself, with some others in his time. And Fridericus Risner
seems to believe it. Optic. lib. 3. prop. 36.
For speaking of the strange experiments to be wrought by some glasses,
Speculorum persuasio huc pervasit, etc.
he adds. Denique certo artificio, depictas imagines, a^t scriptas literas,
nocte serena, plenae lunae sic opponi possunt, ut radiis lunam irradiantibus,
ideoque reflexis, videas and legas, quae Constantinopoli Lutetiam tibi
nuncientur.

There is an experiment in Optics to represent any writing by the sunbeams,
upon a wall or front of a house: For which purpose, the letters must be first
described, with wax or some other opacous color, upon the surface of the
glass, in an inverted form; which glass, afterward reflecting the light
upon any wall in the shade, will discover these letters in their right form
and order. Unto some such invention, I did first (before I had well considered
these particulars) attribute the performance of those strange promises in
Nuntius inanimatus. World in the Moon. cap. 7.
But upon better thoughts, it will be found, that the species of reflection, in
this experiment, are so weak, that unless the glass and the letters be very
big, and the wall somewhat near, there will be no distinct appearance of the
writing. And therefore this way, there can be no thoughts of contriving any
reflected species, that shall be visible at so great a distance as the Moon.
Nor is there any other natural means conceiveable, by which so strange an
effect may be performed, which is the reason that it is so frequently
attributed to diabolical Magic, by almost all the Writers that have occasion
to treat of it.

But Agrippa in another place speaking concerning this invention, affirms that
it was performed thus. Pythagoras did first describe with blood any letters
which he thought fit, Agrippa de Vanit. Scient. cap. 48.
in some great glass, and then opposing the glass against the full Moon, the
letters would appear thorough it, as if they were writ in the circumference of
her body. Quae collibuisset sanguine perscripsit in speculo, quo, ad pleni
luminis lunae orbem obverso, stanti a tergo, res exaratas in disc^ lunae
commonstravit. In which passage he seems to intimate, that this writing in the
Moon, could not be visible at any great distance (as it is related in common
tradition,) but that it did appear to such only, betwixt whose eyes and the
Moon, this glass might be interposed. And according to this the wonder of the
relation ceases, nor may it truly be referred to Diabolical Magic.

More properly reducible to this kind, Ioach. Camerar. Prooem. in lib. Plutarc.
de defect. Orac.
are those inchaunted glasses, mentioned in diverse Authors: In which some
Magitians are said to contain such familiar spirits, as do inform them of
any business they shall enquire after. I have heard a great pretender to the
knowledge of all secret Arts, confidently affirm, that he himself was able at
that time, or any other, to show me in a glass what was done in any part of
the world, what ships were sailing in the Mediterranean, who were walking in
any street of any City in Spain, or the like. And this he did aver, with
all the labored expressions of a strong confidence. The man, for his
condition, was an Italian Doctor of Physic: for his parts, he was known to
be of extraordinary skill, in the abstruser Arts, but not altogether free from
the suspicion of this unlawful Magic.

CHAP. 20.
Of informations by significatory fires and smokes. Their antiquity. The true
manner of using them to this purpose. That these were meant in Nuntius
inanimatus.
THe experiments of this kind that are true, and upon natural grounds, have
been made either by fire in the night, or smoke and such other signs visible
at a distance in the day time.

These informations by significatory fires, have been of ancient use. The
first invention of them is commonly ascribed to Sinon in the Trojan wars.
Specularem significationem Trojano bello Sinon invenit (says Pliny.) Not.
Hist. lib. 7. c. 56.
This was the sign upon which he agreed to unlock the wooden horse. -- Flammas
cum regia puppis
Extulerat. V^rgil.
--


But Diodorus Siculus affirms them to be practiced by Medea in her conspiracy
with Jason. Bibliothec. lib. 4.
And they are frequently mentioned in other ancient Historians. Polymn. lib. 7.
cap. 182.
Herodotus speaks of them in the Grecian war against Xerxes. And Hist. lib. 2.
Thucydides testifies of them in the onsets that were made by the
Peloponnesians against Salamis, Item lib. 3.
and in the siege of Corcyra. So Curtius of Alex. M. lib. 5.
Appian speaking of Scipio at Numantia, how he divided his camp into diverse
companies, says that he assigned each of them to several tribunes, with this
charge. Si impeterentur ab host, de die, To this purpose the flags of truce or
defiance.
panno rubro in hasta sublato significarent, de nocte, igne. If the enemy did
charge any of them, they should signify it to the others, in the day time by
holding up a red cloth, in the night by fires. De re militar. lib. 3. cap. 5.
Vegetius affirms it to be usual, when the Army was divided, to inform one
another, in the day by smoke, Lyps. de milit. Roman. lib. 5. Dialog. 9.
in the night by fires. These significatory fires were by the Grecians called
(...), (says Suidas) and sometimes (...). Ae^eas Peliorce^. c. 31.
The use of them was chiefly for the answer of some particular Quaere, that was
before agreed upon: As concerning the coming of aids or enemies: if the
enemies were coming, they were wont to shake these torches; if the aids, they
held them still (says the Scholiast upon Thucydides.) Schol. in lib. 2. Thucyd.


But they have by more exact inventions, been enlarged to a greater latitude
of signification. So that now, any thing which we have occasion to discover,
We^ker de Secretis. lib. 14. cap. 1.
may be expressed by them.

The ways by which they may be contrived to this purpose, Port. de furt. lit.
lib. 1. cap. 10.
are diverse. I shall specify only the chief of them.

That which in ancient times was used by the Grecians, Cardan. de Variet.
Rerum. lib. 12. cap. 61.
and is particularly treated of in Histor. lib. 10. juxta finem. By ten torches.
Polybius, advises thus.

Let the letters be divided into five tablets or columns.

I II III IV V 1 a f l q w 2 b g m r x 3 c h n s y 4 d i o t z 5 e k p u

Let there be provided ten Torches; five being placed on the right hand, and
five on the left. Let so many torches be lifted up on the right hand as may
show the number of the table, and so many on the left, as may show the number
of that letter in it, which you would express. As in this following example,
wherein the several numbers, both at the right and left hand, do signify the
word HASTEN.

The right hand. The left hand. II H 3 I A 1 IV S 3 IV T 4 I E 5 III N 3

That is, two lights being lifted upon the right hand, show the second column;
and at the same time three torches appearing on the left hand, denotes the
third letter in that column, which is H. Thus a single torch being discovered
on both sides, does signify the first letter of the first column, which is A,
and so of the rest.

There is another way mentioned by Ioachimus Fortius, By 3 Torches.
unto the performance of which, Lib. de Experientia.
there are only three lights required. One torch being showed alone, shall
signify the eight first letters. A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. Two together, the
eight next, I. K. L. M. N. O. P. Q. And all three the rest. R. S. T. V. W. X.
Y. Z.

One light being discovered once, signifies A. If twice, B. Two lights being
showed once, do denote the letter I; if twice, K, etc.

According to this way, if I would express the word FAMINE: the torches must
be contrived. One light must be lifted up six times for the letter F. One
light once for A. Two lights four times for M. Two lights once for I. Two
lights five times for N.

But here it will be requisite, that there be some intermission, betwixt the
expression of several letters, because otherwise there must needs be a great
confusion, amongst those that belong to the same number of Torches. In which
respect, this way is much more tedious, and inconvenient, then the former
invention out of Polybius.

It is easy to conceive, By two torches.
how by the Alphabet consisting of two letters transposed through five places,
such a manner of discoursing may be otherwise contrived, only by two torches.
But then there must be five shows, to express every letter.

There is another way of speaking, by the differences of motion in two lights;
which for its quickness and speed is much to be preferred before any of the
rest. The manner of it is thus. Provide two torches on long poles: Let them be
placed so far from one another, that they may seem unto your confederate to
be about four cubits distance. By the diverse elevations or depressions of
these, enclining of them to the right hand, or to the left, severally or both
together, it is easy to express all the Alphabet.

One light alone being discovered, must stand for A. lifted up for E. depressed
for I. inclined to the right hand for O. unto the left hand for V.

Two lights elevated, for B: depressed for C: inclined to the right hand for D:
to the left hand for F.

Two lights being still discovered, and the torch at the right hand being
lifted up, shall signify G. Being depressed, H. Inclined to the right hand, K.
To the left hand, L.

The torch at the left hand, being elevated shall stand for M. Depressed, for
N. Inclined to the right hand for P. To the left hand for Q.

The torch at the right hand being moved toward the left hand, and that at the
left hand, being at the same time moved toward the right hand, shall signify,
R. The right hand torch being inclined to the left hand, and the other at the
same time being elevated signifies, S: being depressed, T. The left hand torch
being inclined to the right hand, and the other at the same time being
elevated, signifies W: being depressed, X.

The right hand Torch being inclined to the right hand, and the other at the
same time being elevated, may stand for Y; being depressed for Z.

When any thing is thus to be expressed; the two torches, being discovered,
must remain without any motion, so long, till the confederate shall by other
lights show some sign, that he is ready to take notice. After every one of
these particular motions, the torches must be carefully hidden and obscured,
that so the several letters expressed by them, may be the better distinguished.

The daytime informations by smoke, cannot so conveniently be ordered
according to this later contrivance. And therefore must be managed by some of
those other ways, that were specified before. To which purpose there must be
some tunnells provided for the orderly enclosing and conveying up the smoke.
The other particulars concerning this, are in themselves easy enough to be
apprehended.

How these significatory signs will be visible at a great distance; How by
multiplication of them in several places, See Barcla. Argen. lib. 1.
they may be contrived for many scores of miles; will easily be discerned from
the situation and use of Beacons: by which the intimations of public danger
and preparations, have been oftentimes suddenly spread, over this whole Island.

This may further be advantaged, by the use of Galilaeus his perspective.

It Is storied of the Inhabitants in China, Busbequius. Epist. Turc. ep 4.
that when any Merchants do happen upon the shores of that Kingdom, they are
presently examined, whence they come, what commodities they bring, and of what
number they are; Which being known, the watch (set for that purpose) do
presently inform the King of their answers, by smoke in the day, and fires in
the night: Who by the same means does as speedily return them his pleasure,
whether they shall be admitted or kept out. And so that is easily dispatched in
some few hours, which could not be performed the ordinary way, without the
trouble of many days.

The practice of all these secret and swift Messages, may perhaps seem very
difficult at the first: Polyb. lib. 10.
But so does also the Art of writing and reading to an unlettered man. Custom
and experience will make the one as facill and ready as the other.

That these ways of information already explained, whether by the species of
sound or sight, are the same with those intimated in Nuntius inanimatus, may be
clearly evident, to any one who does but thoroughly peruse that discourse, and
compare it with diverse other the like passages, of the same Author, in his
Domingo Gonsales.

1 For the species of sound, his words are these. Nunc Inani. page 16.
Auribus nihil percipi nisi per sonum, neminem fugit. Erit igitur necesse ut
is, cui aliquid audit^^ mediante nunciatum fuerit, sonos audiat, eosque
distinguibiles pro numero audiendorum; quae cum sint infinita, infinita etiam
sit oportet, sonorum edendorum varietas. Satis tamen erit ut distinguantur vel
genere, vel tempore, modo etiam and numero. Which passage, together with that
other invention in Domingo Gonsales, concerning the Language of the Lunary
Inhabitants, before explained in the eighteenth Chapter: I say, both these,
being compared with the discoveries and experiments of the same kind, that are
here discoursed of, may plainly manifest, that they are both performed by the
same means.

2 For the Species of sight, his words are these. Si oculis amici absentis
aliquid cupis representare, Nunc. Inanim. p. 16.
idque citius quam corpus aliquod sublunare ad locum tam longo intervallo
distunctum possit perferri; oportet ut ideae, sive formae visibiles, augeantur
quantitate, multiplicentur numero, and pro rerum significandarum varietate
varientur, vel qualitate, vel quantitate, vel situ, vel ordine. Which passage
being compared with that other way of compact, Man in the Moon. page 21.
betwixt Gonsales and his man Diego, mentioned in the other Discourse; It may
evidently appear, that the ways of intimation, which were there meant, are
performed after the same manner, according to which they are here discoursed of.

He does indeed mention out of Busbequius, the practice of these informations
amongst the inhabitants of China. And thinks that they were used too by the
Romans, but withal he wonders, how that now amongst us, they should be
altogether forgotten, and the restoring of them to these places and times,
seems to be his chief aim, in the promises of that discourse.

The particular example which he mentions, is this. Suppose that one at
London, would send a message to Bristow, Wells, Exeter, or though it were any
remoter place: Neque enim longinquitatem viae multum moror, si detur facultas
sternendi, and permeabilem efficiendi. That is, the greatness of distance can
be no impediment, if the space betwixt be fitted with such high Mountains, and
Beacon Hills, as may serve for these kind of Discoveries. Suppose (I say) this
Messenger should set forth from London, in the very point of noon, he would
notwithstanding, arrive at Bristow before twelve of the clock that day. That
is, a Message may by these means be conveyed so great a distance, in fewer
minutes then those which make the difference betwixt the two Meridians of those
places.

If according to this, we should interpret, that passage out of Trithemius,
concerning the three Saturnine Angels, See before Cap. 15.
that in twenty four hours can convey news from any part of the World; that
Author might then, in one respect be freed from the aspersion of Diabolical
Magic, which for this very reason has heretofore been imputed to him. But
this by the way.

It may be, the resolution of those great promises in Nuncius Inanimatus, to
such easy causes as they are here ascribed unto, will not be answerable to
men's expectation. every one will be apt to mistrust some greater matter then is
here expressed: But it is thus also, in every other the like particular, for
ignorance is the mother of wonder, and wonder does usually create unto it self
many wild imaginations, which is the reason why men's fancies are so prone to
atribute all unusual and unknown events, unto stranger causes shen either
nature or art has designed for them.

Conclusion.
The Poets have fained Mercury to be the chief Patron of Thieves and treachery,
Horat. lib. 1 Od. 10. Ovid. Metam. lib. 11 Homer. in Hymnis.
(...).

To which purpose they relate that he filched from Venus her girdle, as she
embraced him in congratulation of a victory, Not. Comes Mytholog. lib. 5. cap 5.
that he robbed Jupiter of his Scepter, and would have stolen his Thunderbolt
too, but that he feared to burn his fingers. And the Astrologers observe, that
those who are born under this Planet, are naturally addicted to theft and
cheating.

If it be feared that this Discourse may unhappily advantage others, in such
unlawful courses: It Is considerable, that it does not only teach how to
deceive, but consequently also how to discover Delusions. And then besides, the
chief experiments are of such nature, that they cannot be frequently
practiced, without just cause of suspicion, when as it is in the Magistrates
power to prevent them. However, it will not follow, that every thing must be
suppressed, which may be abused. There is nothing has more occasioned troubles
and contention, then the art of writing, which is the reason why the Inventor
of it, is fabled to have sown Serpents teeth; Caeli. Rhoantiq. Lect. lib. 22.
cap. 15.
And yet it was but a barbarous act of Thamus, the Egyptian King, therefore to
forbid the learning of Letters. We may as well cut out our tongues, because
that member is a world of wickedness. James 3.
If all those useful inventions that are liable to abuse, should therefore be
concealed, there is not any Art or Science, which might be lawfully professed.

FINIS.

