Glorious Inscriptions (Arts ornaments) ^ayt,
Truth to disguise, only on prosperous Fate;
Such Trains from Iauning, mercenary wits
His Fortune or his Temper not besitts
No Judge praeposest; if approved; his Fame
Shall want no other Monument but his Name.
(...)


ASTRAEA, OR, True Love's Myrrour. A PASTORAL. Composed BY LEONARD WILLAN, GENT.

Pace floret Amor,
Humilitate Innocentia.
LONDON, Printed by R. White, for Henry Cripps, and Lodowick Lloyd, and are to
be sold at their Shop in Popes-Head-Alley. 1651.

TO The Illustrious Princess, MARY Duchess of Richmond and Lennox.
Madam,
THis figurative Star presented to your view (no sooner formed generally
distinguishable to our Horison) becoming suddenly obscured by the Eclipses of
those greater Lights, from whom essentially it should have had both Influence
and Luster, has moved concealed many years; till now by the Reflection of your
affinitive eminence in Virtue and Beauty; It has presumed to assume a Being
more communicable. Reject not, Madam, the Access hereof, because transacted to
your hand by so despicable an Introducer. It soly is your Property, not only by
the advantage of Worth (in civil rights of Honor and Respect) your Present:
but by the advantage of Similitude (in rule of Dialect) your proper Attribute.
The pretended perfection of Astraea's Virtue and Beauty entitled her to a
celestial Figure: the essential Graces whereof in you, shall really translate
you to so transcendent a Glory, that those refulgent Lights are thereof but
imperfect Shadows. Those Objects of true Love figured in her so happily to
encounter as perfect a subject, to receive their Impressions, and mutually
communicate the like effects to the forming of one mysterious Union: are
visibly expressed in the admired, ravishing, and harmonious agreement of your
Hymeneal Amity. Astraea is figured to descend from noble Progeny, who to avoid
the Military Fury of debording Multitudes (which passing frequently through
Gaul, descended like an irresistible Torrent on the Roman Empire) were
constrained to betake them to the humble Sanctuary of a Pastorical condition:
This Circumstance will meet no trivial Analogy in the Eminence of your
Extraction, and Consequence of your present Rural Retreat: So that (with
permission) may evidently be concluded, that in reference to your Natural
perfections, Civil Transactions, or Accidental Occurrence, Astraea may (in
equity) presume to be either your Type, Parallel, or Character. Disdain not,
Madam, her Resemblance, in respect of the Humility figured in her condition;
since it is the perfect'st, and most proper Note of her Nobility: which (where
divided) show the Original of such ostentive Attributes (with what glorious
Titles soever illustrated) had but a reproachful Acquisition. And although your
virtues need no other Monument but their own perfection to constitute their
Memory eternal: yet since Fortune is the chiefest Agitator in humane
Occurrences, whose Power is still exercised in opposition of such eminent
Faculties, your Counterfeit (in Astraea) may happily outlast your marble
Epitaph or Figure: If so, It soly is the Crown and Glory of his Enterprise,
whose vanity can aspire to no higher Honor, then to survive the Malice of his
Fate in his unworthy Ministry to your Fame, under the Title of

Your Graces Humble Servant LEO: WILLAN.

Persons Represented.
Adamas, a Priest. Lindamor, Lover to Galataea, a Noble man. Ligdamon, a Noble
man, Lover to Sylva. Paris, alias Ergaste, supposed son to Adamas, but son to
Bellinda. Celadon, a Shepherd, Lover to Astraea. Sylvander, a Shepherd, Lover
to Diana. Lycidas, a Shepherd, Lover to Phillis, brother to Celadon. Tyrsis, a
Shepherd, who laments the loss of Cleon. Hylas, a Shepherd, an inconstant
Lover. Bellinda, Mother to Diana. Galataea, Princess of the Country. Leonida,
one of her Nymphs, Niece to Adamas. Sylva, one of Galataea's Nymphs. Astraea
Shepherdesses. Diana Shepherdesses. Phillis Shepherdesses. Leonice, a
Shepherdess, in Love with Tyrsis. Stella, a Shepherdess, the last Mistress of
Hylas.
The Scene.
THe frontispiece is a wreath of fresh Foliage, much like the entrance into a
close Alley, the tops whereof interlac'd, represent the perfect figure of an
Arch; at whose intersection is a kind of knot, whereon is enscribed in letters
of gold, FOREST: over which two little Cupidons by either hand support a
Garland little distant from the same. At either foot hereof is placed on little
pedistals the figure of a Shepherd and Shepherdess; the one in a pretty
posture, merrily playing on a Flute, the other very intentively ordring her
scattered flowrs in form of a Garland. To which succeeds, in prospective order,
close united Trees, which by degrees o^retop each other, the former not much
exceeding the height of a man, through which the sight is conveyed to a very
fair Palace; at foot whereof runs a winding stream; the Canopy of the whole
a Serene Sky.

THe Scene being a pretty while discovered, appears at far end thereof a
Shepherdess, with a little Dog parried in Ribbons of several colors; when
suddenly, privately within, are heard sundry voices, one answering the other,
till each have sung his part: at the end whereof all join their voices; each
voice is so ordered as may seem far distant from the Auditors, and a like
distant from each other.

SONG.
Sung by a Mean. WHen Days bright Star appears,
The ayrie Choristers fill our Ears
With cheerful Melody.
Our earthly Star, say, say,
Like Tribute, now, shall we not pay,
In our best Harmony.
A Treble answers. Yes, yes, alas we prise
But to behold her beauteous Eyes,
Aurora's lesser Light.
See, see, how envious Shame
With blushie Guilt her Cheeks does stain,
To see our Star more bright.
A Base answers. Shepherds, your Flocks unfold;
These glorious Beams you now behold,
Their Enemies disarm.
Whose savage Rage with fear
Allaies you Star in the upper Sphere,
This, with Love beauties Charm.
All. Those dreaming Shadows leave,
Your Fancies which deceive;
Your stupid Souls awak,
If true Ioys you will partake.
Or thus in Dialogue by a Treble and a Base. SONG.
1. WHat Star is that shoots through the Sky?
2. Blind Shepherd, it is Astraea's Eye.
1. How like approaching Day, she clears the calm smiling Air!
2. Yet where she appears, threats clouds of dark despair;
1. Cleared by pure Fire:
2. Or consumed by rash Desire,
1. A blessed Death
2. By her Breath
Our Souls so to expire.
Both. Let Us mix our Voices, each agree,
Merrily yield her his Liberty.
1. Unto her Altars Flowers bring,
2. There dwells everlasting Spring.
1. In Love's mysterious Orders, see, that they ranked be,
2. She may in them read our silent Elegy:
1. In Garlands woond,
2. Wherewith then our Summets crowned,
1. We gladly
2. So may die
Her Victims without wound.
Both. Let Us mix our Voices, all agree,
Merrily yield her our Liberty.
Which ended, the Shepherdess avanceth to the Frontispiece of the Scene.

ERRATA.
PAge 4. line 6. read now no time. p. 32. l. 1. r. Fate 's. p. 49. l. 5. r.
still keeping. p. 53. l. 7. r. How Mistress! p. 91. l. 25. r. her Orb. p. 93. l.
8. r. be Reproach. p. 93. l. 23. r. yet know. p. 99. l. 3. r. on Bounties. p.
100. l. 7. r. does spring. p. 102. l. 3. r. their Summons. p. 102. l 5. r. not
pretend p. 103. l. 17. r. laying waste. p. 111. l. 18. r. did draw

Scene 1. Act. 1.
Astraea. CEase Shepherds, cease, your Praises flattering bait
Deceives our Sex but through our self Conceit;
I am become distastful to my Sense;
You lose your Purpose in a vain Pr^tence:
If otherwhise, I glori'd in your Fame,
'Twas but to fann my Lovers gentle Flame,
Which now is extinguished with a new Desire,
Leaving my fallen Hopes to their fun'rall fire.
You that in Princes Palaces reside,
With wealth and honors to be dignified,
You Have some Pretense, when with obsequ'ous Phrase,
On weak Believers, you your Ends do raise:
On my abused Faith what can any gain,
Save from my Weakness, more reproachful Stain?
^ shameful Conquest it is by wyle t'erect
^ Trophy there, where Innocence blinds Suspect.
You Gods! (not to capitulate your Will,
^ut it enlightened better to fulfill)
^ay why, oh why did your first Law inspire
^v'n senseless things with this myster'ous Fire,
Which we call Love? Was It not in Peace to tie
^ach disagreeing part by Harmony?
^ach might by Nature's hid propensi'on know
What it supports, what it does overthrow:
Which else would (head long rushing to their End)
The rafters of this well framed World distend.
How come's it then that Reason has less power?
What you gave to preserve, does me devour;
It seems that Reason in this corrupt state,
Forsaking Nature, does prevaricate.
But why him clad in Natures best array?
As if through finest Lawn you would display
Your purest Essences obviou^ ^o Sense,
Which to all Fancies, else, were too immense;
Since he so much degen'rates from their kind,
In so fair Form bearing so false a Mind.
As Mortals, you your best works do not use
Our facile Faiths the sooner to abuse;
She lying on the Bank, which is raised with a little hollow to present a
^ivulet, calls ^er Dog to ^er. Rather thus much this seems to intimate,
Ungrateful Man all Ties will violate.
Come my Melampo! Grateful more art thou,
Who only Natures motives do allow.

Celadon. With equal reverence, as the swarthy Lay
Bow's to the early messenger of day,
I offer at thy shrine a purer Flame
Then his, to whom they Homage for the same.
You Gods allow't, since in her milder Eye
You Have raised a Throne more fit your Deity.
Why shrowd's those beams, like to a sullen Morn,
When, with contracted Clouds, she threats a Storm?

Astraea. S^^ rises. Thy feigned Ignorance does thy self accuse,
Whilst with thy Craft thou would me twice abuse;
Could else thy Souls so often vowed Unity,
Cease to inform thee by Loves Sympathy?
But since th'estrang'd Thoughts have that Virtue spilt,
Look in thine Heart, and learn it of thy Guilt.

Celadon. If yet to try my never fading Love
This Anger thou put'st on; invent and prove.
If thou would have me die, my Sentence give,
And I shall think it even a Crime to live.

Astraea. Whereas the Truth so plainly does appear,
We need no farther Proofs our doubts to clear;
For Punishment, no power is in my Breath,
Thy Life will make it greater, then thy Death.

Celadon. Thy Cruelty speaks truth in that! yet stay, She seems to fly from
him, who holds her, and kne^ls.
My Life, my Death, give ear what I shall say;
For unknown Crimes no pardon I pretend;
It Is guilt unpardonable, thee but to offend.
Severest Ex'cution do not defer,
Sure I deserv't, for sure thou can not err.

Astraea. Unskilful is that Pilot, against one shelf,
And by th'same storm, haps twice to loose himself.
Disloyal wretch (till bid) no more come nigh She forces her s^l^ from ^im.
The vastest compass of my mournful eye.

Celadon. Stay, stay, she is gone; and all of her me left,
Is this poor Riband, her Force made my Theft; Me kiss^^ it
Sacred Relic of my departed Saint,
Be not offended with my just Constraint.
But in my all, of all forsaken death,
Witness to whose loved will I yield my breath. He ties it t^ his ^rm.
Let no rude hand from this part ere thee force,
But ^e thou still the Orn'ment of my Co^rse,
And if the curious World do seek to know ^e c^st^ himself into a little
descending place representing a River. Astraea, being retired ^o ^e^rken what
^e would say, comes back with je^lousie to see what was become of him. She
seeing him fall into the River, ^als upon the bank thereof, and so ro^^s into
the same place where he ^ell.
How, or for what, I died, do thou it show.

Astraea. My jealous fear thus hastes my return,
The more I seem to quench, the more I burn:
I was too harsh! to hear him I denide:
Let Us haste to help, it is now time to chide.

Lycidas, Phillis encounter. Lycidas. WHat wanton God pursues thy flying Fear,
Making more Beauties, then thou would, appear
Let these mine arms thy Sanctuary be;
No violence here but what proceeds from thee.

Phillis. H^stily and in some dist^^ction. Licidas, well met, let'^ haste; from
yonder wall
I saw a Shepherd in the River fall.

Lycidas. Whereabouts was it? observed you well?


Phillis. Here, here*
The sad Object of my ill-boding Fear.
They li^^ her up, who seems to come to he^ (...). Astraea! oh, my dear
companion! speak;
Or to associate Thine, my Heart shall break.

Astraea. Why does untimely Charity affright
My resting Soul with horror of the light*
Natures decree enjoyneth but one Death;
Why force you me surrender twice my breath?
Lycidas! thy brother from the proud Stream save,
Or these sad Floulds yield me a second Grave. She se^^s ^ w^ep.

Phillis. Courage, my dear Companion; kinder Fate,
In this your safeguard, seems to cease his hate.

Scene 2. Act 1.
AFter some intermission, three Nymphs appear on the Scene, their heads crowned
with garlands; The sleeves of their garments turned up above the elbow, from
whence falls a fine transparent lawn plated and frows'd toward the hand;
whereto with bracelets of pearl they seem fastened: with gilt Quivers by their
sides; And each an ivory bow in her hand; the lower part of the garment turned
up on their hips; which discovers their gilt buskins to the mid-leg.

Galatea, Leonida, Sylva. Leonida. THis sure's the place; see how the impetuous
Brook
Seems that outlying Bank to overlook;
Then turning swiftly in his amorous Chase,
Does even with clasped arms the Shelf embrace.
Consider well, that little ^uft of Trees,
How well toth' glasses Figure it agrees.

Galatea. Yet is this unfrequented place, in sense,
Unlike to satisfy our chief Pretense.

Sylva. It Is not without appearance; for no Tree
The glass did represent, we here not see.

Galatea. Well, since this seems most likely to the place,
Let Us, for the issue, here attend a space.

Sylva. Pointing with ^er hand, ^iscovers Cead^n in the River. See! how that
shepherd hangs over the deep;
As rekeless of his life, he seems asleep:

Galatea. Peace, Sylva peace, disturb him not awhile,
We will his pretty Secrets him beguile.

Leonida. His hanging limbs float on each beating wave;
What you his Bed think, I believe his Grave;
They haste and take him ^p. Madam, it is guilt this doubt not to decide,
Slow Charity may prove an Homicide.

Galatea. She seems ^truck with love. Wonder of Nature^ has Death took this
shape
To make of mortals a more facile Rape?
Cupids unbanded Beauties being displaid,
Compared to this dead Figures seem to fade.
Or could these Graces in their Spears but move,
They Would force again from heaven the Queen of Love,
And make the horned Goddess of the Night
Forsake her Orb; here she might place her light.
Bow gently his fair Corpse; comes yet no heat? She l^ies her hand on his breast.
Me thinks I feel his panting heart to beat.
You Gods, by whose appointment here I stand
To take that Bliss you promised to my hand,
Afford him breath with mutual Flames to burn,
Or else enclose our ashes in one Urn.

Sylva. Madam, he breaths?


Leonida. Some fitter place must give
A second succor, 'ere he seem to live.

Galatea. Bear him to Coach! his welfare is my own;
Or live, or die, our beings are but one.

Scene 3. Act 1.
Lycidas encounters Astraea and Phillis. Lycidas. HIs Body's lost, him
churlish Fate denies
Even pious Rites of mournful Obsequies; Celadons hat he holds in his hands, he
flings it on the Scene with a little astonishment.
This slender Monument is all it gives,
In whose despite, yet in all hearts he lives.
How? Astraea! Can you restrain a Tear
For him, to whom, then Life, you were more dear?
Though his so faithful Love you have forgot,
Yet on Humanity lay not such a spot:
Thus unbewail'd of thee lived he again
But to behold, he surely twice were slain.

Astraea. Gentle shepherd! thy brother truly had
Parts considerable might afflict the bad.
It Is not his Love, his Death can make me mourn;
That Loss is light, where many Shares are born.

Lycidas. For Charities sake disquiet not the Dead,
By unknown Ils, thus heaping on his head.
The world thy jealousy will much deride,
If thou but think, his heart he could divide,
His parents Threats, Inemnity of blood,
His purer Fire ever has withstood.
Those unsought conquests, which his Beauty made,
His jealous Love to cherish was afraid:
Nay, I believe the less-priz'd-Deity
Thus punished his Idolatry of thee.

Astraea. It is no new thing Shepherd, what I say,
Whereto each eye was witness every day;
Which, undiscovered, often heard I have,
While to Aminta his vowed Love he gave.

Lycidas. Just heaven, you have disclosed I plainly see,
The guilty author of this Tragedy.
Celadon, of Love, and Courage had too much,
To live, and hear, that Tongue this Theme but touch:
For his Obedience he is justly paid,
His greatest Crime was that he thee obeyed:
How often on bended knees has he besought
Thee to revoke this burden from his Thought,
And to impose on him a milder Death,
Then fan a loathed Flame with fained breath?
Thou answer'd'st, no, thou shall perform this Wyle,
Our hostil Parents that we may beguile;
And those respects of Love that I you see
Tender to her, I Will take as done to me.
Take this, not thy unstable doubts to clear, He flings ^er a Lett^r
But that thy Guilt more Horror yet might wear,
If more thou seek'st; that Cypress tender Ryne,
More sensible then thou, more speaks thy Crime.
May thou, what Punishment guilt e're has tried,
Sue for, as Mercy, and be it denied.
While thy remorseful Soul by civil Jar,
Sets thy Self against thy Self at war. Lyci. ^xit.

Astraea. How wild a Sea chases my unstable Mind!
What I must seek, were even hell to find.
If just, I Am clear; if unjust be my Hate,
Each day a Death my Crime shall expiate.
These Lights are stopped with issue of my Tears;
Whilst I unlade Them, unlade thou my Fears. She gives her the Letter.

Phillis. Would heaven I could so soon bring to thee Rest.
It Is Celadons writing; be not so oppressed.
LETTER.
ENquire no longer the actions of my life, in asking me She reads the Letter.
what I do; know, still I continue in my wonted pain, to love, yet not dare to
show the same. Not love, yet vow the contrary. Dear brother, this is all the
exercise, or rather punishment of thy Celadon. Men say two contraries cannot be
in one and the same place at one and the same time: Nevertheless, true love,
and f^ined, are the frequent actions of my life; Wonder not thereat; for I am
forced to one by the perfection, to the other, by the command of my Astraea: If
this seem strange to thee, remember that Miracles are the ordinary works of
Divinity; And what can we less expect from my Deity!





Astraea. ^pe^king to her self s^^ewhat ^^r'd. Art thou so hardened with the use
of Ill,
As to withstand this Guilt, and not distill
Into a Sea? while thy unbounded Course
The narrow banks of guiltless Lignon force,
And from him, with his Channel, take his Name,
Lest after Ages, him, for thee should blame.
Here she ^^rns to the Cypres tree, where Licidas had told her that should ^ind
more concerned (...) subject. And thou, sad subject of Apollo's verse,
Who make even sorrow lovely on each Hearse,
Still fresh in mourning, as thou did request,
When thy rash Hand had robbed thee of thy Rest,
Thou more innocent Emblem of my Fate,
Denounce, if more thou know, t'inlarge Self-hate.

Phillis. She seems to look on the trunk of the tree. She seems (...) read
them. These Characters are fresh; the same subject,
And the same Hand, did sure the same direct.
Why tyrant Love constrain'st me to a Fact
Against those Laws thou do thy self enact,
Forcing those Rites are only due to thee,
Be tendered to a strangers Deity?
Be more Just to thy Self, to me less Cruel,
And take my Life for thy displeasures fuel.

Astraea. Each senseless thing upbraid's me my Offense,
Whilst my own Guilt yields them Intelligence;
^hee takes the hat ^p. Thou unsuspected messenger of Love,
Which to and fro in harmless Sports being drove
^hee looking in the hat, betwixt the linings discovers a Letter, with a little
astonishment. Into each others hands, conveyd'st our Lines,
Yet standers by partook not our Designs;
Did thou so little of thy Master know,
That to revenge his Death, thou'st naught to show?
LETTER.
FAir Astraea, if the Dissimulation which you enjoin be to kill me, you may
more easily effect the same by one word from your mouth; If it be to punish my
Presumption, you are too just a Judge to inflict less punishment then Death. If
it be to try the Power you have over me, why make you not choice of a more
sudden Experiment then this, whose length can be but wearisome to you. I cannot
believe'tis to conceal our Amity, as you pretend; Since not being able long to
live in so much Constraint, my Death will, without doubt, give too sudden and
deplorable Testimony thereof: Believe it, fair Astraea, what I have suffered is
enough; it is now time you suffer me to act the personage of Celadon; having so
long, and with so much pain, represented One that of all those in the world is
most contrary to him.





Astraea. Thou naught can add, I was so full before,
Thou shall again exhausted Grief restore,
Whilst restless I Life's weary minutes tell,
In Swan-like plaints sounding my Funeral knell.

Phillis. Sorrows first shock to no Advice will yield; To her self; then takes
her by the hand, who seems to re^^ on her.
Who struggle with it, wound, what they thought to shield.

Scene 4. Act 1.
Celadon, Leonida, Sylva. Celadon. NAture and Art seem married here to be,
Where each agreeing part's a Harmony;
To himself. Yet is it to me, like Horror of the Night
To the Guilty; Banished Astraea's Sight,
To them again. It seems designed an amorous Abode,
To shroud the pleasures of some rural God.
What place is that, whose close compacted shade,
Phoebus in highest pride can scarce invade?

Leonida. Gentle Shepherd, in the thickest of that Grove
Is placed the fountain of the Truth of Love,
Wherein each Lover may their loved see;
And if by them any then loved be,
Their Forms seem coupled; But as then, if None,
The single Figure does appear alone.
It was erected by the famous Skill
Of a Magitian, Jealousy to kill.

Celadon. I Have heard the fame thereof; being so nigh,
Are we not licensed the virtue to try?

Leonida. No gentle Swain, this fair Nymphs cruelty
On incen'st Love forbids that Liberty.

Celadon. As how I pray?


Leonida. That I shall strait relate. Pointing to Sylva.
Nay frown not Sylva, now it is too late.
This Nymph, whose Beauty, Worth and Grace,
In all their hearts, that see her, hold a place:
Amongst the rest, two noble Spirits rise,
In Emulation, to make her their Prize:
In Natures gifts and Fortunes both were rich;
And their own virtues such, as might bewitch
Any with Love, save Sylva's equal eye;
Which bred 'twixt Rivals equal Amity;
Long had they both without Advantage strove
Each of the Other, or of Sylva's Love;
At length, with one assent they both agree,
To the best prized of her, her to leave free;
Which her impartial Grace could not decide;
They therefore to this Fountain them applied;
Wherein each gazing with a greedy eye,
Who should be honored with Preheminencie,
Found neither loved, her Figure still Alone,
Together, and asunder, them being shown:
At which, their Love gave place unto their Ire;
With Magitians they secretly conspire,
This to make void; which not allowed to Art,
They to fell Lions do the Guard impart,
By art confined; nor can this Charm untie
Till the two perfect'st Lovers for it die:

Celadon. Sorrow attends my wonder!


Sylva. Me the blame,
While this home-friend seeks to extend my shame.

Galatea. She imbraceth Cal^^lon. My better self, I Have been too long away,
Each Minute spent from thee, is a lost Day,
He seems to faint, they support him. How fares my Life? some grief does thee
oppress,
I fear it is thy Fevors Re-access.

Celadon. They Are welcome Summons; such I would not fly.


Galatea. Render not fruitless so our Charity.


Leonida. Madam, this Shepherds safety does depend
On some skilled hand may give his griefs an end.

Galatea. Thee to believe my Fear does me invite,
But m'Honor's stained, he being exposed to sight.

Leonida. Madam, to me'tis dearer then mine own,
As by my careful service shall be shown.
My Uncles Skill, his Faith, and Love to you
(I know) your Grace misdoubts not to be true.
He Is your Creature, whose Prudence will conceal,
And further your intents as his own weal.
I Will thither haste with speed, if so you please,
That his presence your Griefs, in his, may ease.

Galatea. The Advice is good; yet him my Love not show, Extent All but Leo^^^^.
Haste, Leonida; Fear says thou art too slow.

Leonida. I will not tax thee for unequal Flames, To her self.
Titles are but Policies empty Names,
Whilst Love, like Death, casts those Scepters by,
And gives all Natures works Equality.
Had not the same Object, with equal Fire
Inflamed my Soul, I Would cherished thy desire:
Which in pretense of duty to the State,
My jealous Love by Craft must violate.

Scene 1. Act. 2.
Phillis, Diana, Astraea. Phillis. OUr discontinu'd Sports we must repair,
Lest yielding Sorrows should our thoughts ensnare,

Diana. I saw some Company in yonder Plain;
Let Us bend our Courses them to entertain.

Leonida. Leonida appears: With a little stop. ^^rook with a kind of wonder. To
her self. My uncles absence gives me leave awhile,
In rural Sports my Passion to beguile;
As if a second Emulation drove
T'a new Trial each goddess from above*
Nature is but a Niggard in our Courts,
Prodigal here, beyond weak Fames reports;
To them. Your flourishing Graces have made me poor,
In my weak wishes to salute your store.

Phillis. Fair Nymph, if any such in us you see,
It Is from your Presence they imparted be.

Leonida. Nay, fair One, to vie ('it is not my Pretense)
With such false Coin, might cost your Innocence.
Leave that unto the self-deceiving Court,
I come to partake of your Love and Sport.

Diana. Your honored Presence will their VVorths exter.
If your high raised Thoughts can so low descend.

Leonida. Rather such humble Calmness will inure* Sylvander appears on the
Scene, walking as ^ot heedi^^ them.
To greater Thoughts, true Greatness to ensure.
What Shepherd's that?

Diana. It Is One in whom appears
Nothing that is rustic, but the Coat he wears,
Yet so insensible (I mean to Love)
That any's Conquest he disdains to prove.

Leonida. Of whence?


Phillis. That were impossible to show,
Since he himself the same never yet could know:
His Extraction he thinks has been from hence,
Which makes him here to place his Residence.

Diana. He sees us not; else his civil Aboard
Would of himself more knowledge you afford,

Phillis. ^air Nymph, wilt please you him to entertain?


Leonida. ^our Character's too fair that to refrain.


Phillis He salutes them, but passes by, the speaking to him turns back. Is
this the fashion of those greater Towns
Where you were bred, who us entitle Clowns,
Our Entertainments thus to interrupt,
And second it with a Depart abrupt?

Sylvander. Since 'twas m'ill hap, such Error to commit,
The fault is less, not to continue it.

Diana. 'Twas rather that no Object here you saw,
You from your self thought worthy to withdraw;
Yet if on this fair Nymph your eyes you turn,
You Are too insensible if you not burn.

Sylvander. Fair Shepherdess, Loves sole attractive Ties
Are only bred by equal Sympathies:
The Disproportion 'twixt her worth and mine,
May easily discharge me of that Crime.

Leonida. Where Is the Difference? in Body or in Mind?
You Have equal Properties of both I find.

Sylvander. Fair Nymph, of every thing the real Prize,
Not from the Appearance, but the use does rise;
Else many Beasts'fore Man we might commend,
In many Properties they him transcend.
Yet since They for Man's Use, Man for the Gods
Was made, in Dignity this gives Man the odds.
The Gods which thus distinguished have each thing,
Imparting worth as they design their Being,
Were taxable, if equal Worth the ordain
In you for Nymph, in me but for a Swain.

Leonida. But why, these fair Ones then since as you say
Of like Condition, could not they you stay?

Sylvander. The Lesser still gives place unto the Great.


Diana. Disdainful Swain, so lightly us to treat.


Sylvander. That is not such, which of her is a Part.


Diana. We have enough to force a milder Heart.


Sylvander. The principal you want that to fulfill.


Diana. And what may that be?


Sylvander. Fair One it is your will.

Phillis. Which is so contrary to that Effect, To Sylva^^er.
As even Sylvander's is in the same respect.

Sylvander. ^air Astraea I be you my Sanctuary, He ^^em^ t^ ^ly behin^ A^tre^*
^o shield me from invading Treachery.

Diana. Mine Is the Outrage; whilst me thus to protect,
She renders both my Cause and Force suspect.

Sylvander. Rather by the last Stroke, seeing me overthrown,
She Would steal that Glory you had made your Own.

Phillis. As though your VVorth were so consid'rable,
To vanquish you were somewhat ho^'rable:
But leaving Words, it by the Effects let us prove,
What Shepherdess has it engaged to love?

Sylvander. All those to which it has applied my Thought.


Phillis. As you would say, you yet never any sought,
Which shows your want of Courage or of Wit,
Seeing what is lovely, and not loving it.

Sylvander. Or want of Will the same to undertake.


Phillis. Such is the proud Pretense you seem to make.
To this Troop I appeal; what words cannot clear,
Let Demonstration make it to appear.

Leonida. That is but just.


Diana. To that we all agree.


Phillis. Then fair Diana you the Judge shall be;
Enjoin him strait some Shepherdess to serve,
On whose forced Love he prove he does deserve.

Diana. Love violence to suffer does disdain,
But what his Object sweetly does constrain;
Yet thus much I ordain, on One he try,
With due Respect to gain an Am^ty.

Sylvander. Though you pass Judgment e're you hear me speak,
I do assent; Nor this decree will break,
Provided such she be, you me design,
Have Worth and Knowledge to distinguish mi^^.

Phillis. You seek Evasion you in vain to free;
For even Diana's self the same shall be;
She wants neither; none can it gainsay, Diana ^eem^ a verse to that motion.
She has Worth worth to judge, Worth worth to pay.

Leonida. Nay fair One you are engaged too far to fly.


Astraea. It Is the Nymphs request, you must not deny.


Diana. So that three Moons decreased he not presume
(My judgment past) such liberty t'assume.

Sylvander. To which he vows, with Purity no less
He kneels and kisses (...) hand. Then sacred Veftals, when they do profess.
To you, fair Mistress, one Plaint I prefer
For wrongs I suffer.

Diana. Say what you would infer.


Sylvander. If 'cause my Worth against one did it despise,
I vainly held, to Proof condemned arise;
Why ought not she, who, then I, vainer far,
Suffer the like, being Author of this war?

Astraea. So just a Suitor cannot be deny'de.


Leonida. It pretty Music is, thus to divide.


Diana. Say there what is it?


Sylvander. That she research in Love
Some Swain, the advantage of her Worth to prove.

Diana. 'Twere unreasonable; Reason does not tie
To make good ought with breach of Decency:
On some Shepherdess she shall try the same.

Phillis. Let it Astraea be.


Astraea. That were your shame,
That you suspect your Merit 'twill be thought,
To choose Work to your hand already wrought.

Leonida. This difference by one Judge should be decreed.


Astraea. Diana, it is your second Charge.


Phillis. She kisses Diana. Agreed.


Tyrsis, Leonice, Hylas. A SONG. They appear at far end of the Scene.
TH'all-conquering Archers, All Is Birth and End
For Mastery By Tyrsis.
Their Force do try
Their Empires to extend.
Death, in my Cleon, Loves Force did defeat:
Love in my Heart,
By her Desert,
Frames yet a living Seat,
Where she still lives; nor was it she that died;
Our mutual souls
Exchanging mouls,
It Is I that death have tried.
But thou, my Cleon, though thou scapd'st this*
As thy Death me,
My Sorrow thee
Will quickly overthrow.
Leonida. What Shepherd's that which Sings?


Sylvander. It Is one bewails
His Mistress Death, whom Love again assails
By the Importunities of a new Desire,
Inviting him to quench his former Fire.

Leonida. That Shepherdess you mean.


Sylvander. Fair Nymph, the same;
You more shall know, when we them entertain.

A SONG.
By Hylas. FIe, fie upon this whining Love,
Which Love's best flower fades;
Love should Delight, but no Grief prove:
Such Love weak Souls invades.
Each how'r a Beauty, as in May
You would a fragrant Rose,
Choose, choose; for wingy Times decay
Hastes e're It does disclose.
Leonida. This last it seems is of another Mind.


Sylvander. Fair Nymph, the pleasant'st that you e're shall find.
To all Objects he does his Heart enure,
That who gives him the wound, may give the Cure.

Leonida. He Is no Deceiver that declares the same.


Sylvander. He makes hi Glory what we think his Shame.


Hylas. Should I, as you, each Mistress Loss lament, l'th' intrim they come up
to the fire of the Scene.
Eternity not bound could griefs extent.

Tyrsis. Were you as I, you need lament but One.


Hylas. Were you as I, you would lament for None.
Heartless Mistress, will you not Courage take,
This Shepherds scornful usage to forsake?

Leonice. I grieve that thus my want of Power is shown,
Not for your Consid'ration, but my Own.

Hylas. Well, since you are of the same Humor still,
Though you command not yours, I do my Will,
I take my Leave, or else will give it you, Holds out his hand.
My love grows Stale, I must exchange a New.

Sylvander. To Tyrsis. Gentle Shepherd, the cause of your sad Fate,
Our Countries custom wills you to relate.

Tyrsis. Kneels. First unto Heaven my thanks, and then to you;
What you desire to hear, we both must sue:
By you it is th'Oracle does intend
To give our Difference and our Sorrows end.

Sylvander. How hap's e're now so much you me never told!
You Have seen me often.

Tyrsis. He takes a little bills out of his Scrip and reads the Oracle.
Oracle. Ev'en so Heaven it would.
Where Lignons crooked Stream does flow,
You shall a curious Shepherd see,
Who first shall seek your Griefs to know;
Him hear, for he your Judge shall be.
Here of the Issue we have long desired,
But you're the first that it of us required.

Sylvander. You must make vow t'observe what I decree.


Tyrsis. As to the Gods.


Leonice. We both to It agree.


Sylvander. To Diana, and takes her by the ^^nd. Fair mistress, are you not
disposed to sit?


Phillis. Your honor to the Nymph you do forget.


Sylvander. It should be so indeed in civil Ties; They sit all but Leonice, and
Tyrsis.
But Loves rights are preferred before Ceremonies.

Leonice. Most worthy judge, I hope you will condescend Addressing her self, to
Sylvander, who is more eminently seated then the rest.
To me, as Plaintiff, first your ear to bend.

Sylvander. It is your right:


Leonice. Be pleased then to know,
Unto what Country we our Beeings owe.
Night that great City, which, as says old Fame,
From the Goddesses Judge first took the Name,
Of one Cottage we are, and equal State;
Nature seemed each for Other to create,
Till like a harsh Stepdame she did produce
A third, whose memory these Floods unsluce: She seems to weep.
Whether with greater Endowments or less,
^ do not know; yet Greater you may guess,
Since he thought so, whose thoughts alone give prise
To all Beauty, at leastwise in my Eyes:
He, as I him, pursues with eager Flames
My happier Rival; me and my Love disdaines.
She yield's at length? for who could him resist
^n Love? I Am sure my bonds I often kissed
Neglected; here his cruelty not staid,
But with new slights he me the author made
Of my ruin; to cover, or provoke
their exchanged Fires; he stoopes to fained Yoke,
Makes me the Object, yet with her advice,
So cunningly; that, thriving his disguise,
As they intend, the worlds eye to divert,
He then on me the same craft would revert,
Though for unequal Purposes; for now,
Holding my facile Faith, with displeased brow,
He dislikes what he sought; The world, he says,
Does over clearly on our Freedoms gaze;
Which to prevent, though true, he seems to faign
Love unto Cleon, Cleon was her name:
And this his Craft yet better to disguise,
He me intreates her him to love advise;
But juster heaven, whilst me he thus deceaves,
By Cleons Death; Cleons Love him bereaves.
Yet, as to wrong my Love, he did delight,
Fantastique Love he cherishes with spite.
She making reverence, retires Justice, just Judge, for this Abuse, I crave;
Yet but his Love I seek, or else my Grave.

Sylvander. Gentle Shepherd, you have Liberty to speak.


Tyrsis. More Gentle Judge, more words we need not break,
With obei^ance The Truth is said; The Truth we must avow;
Yet this Request vouchsafe us to allow;
That each, by lot an Advocate may have,
So he appointed who the Oracle gave.

Sylvander. Giving each a glove, they draw Lots. It Is granted you; who takes
his Own must plead.

Hylas. Hylas for'th living;


Phillis. Phillis for the dead.


Hylas. Nature her self, whose true Rules cannot err, Hylas ^^^deth forth and
makes his obeisance.
Two invincible Arguments does infer
In this Different; and by a double Tie,
This our Cause grants, the others does deny,
In this Shepherdess, both Beauty and Love:
The 'ffect of One the Gods themselves do prove,
Pigmalyon^ like from the work of their hand:
The other is wise Natures firmest band,
Wherewith Sh'unites the world; whose purest Fire
(No other Incense) do the Gods require;
And shall weak Man then dare thus to reject,
What Gods and Nature hallow with Respect?
The other Objection, that does him deny
What he affects, Is Contrariety,
Love's only Opposite his Enemy;
Can there twixt Life and Death be amity?
Besides, Man's Piety should even dread
Thus to disturb the quiet of the Dead.
Just Judge, to you thus I my Reasons show, He make^^ obeisance, and reti^^^.
My charge to clear; not, that you them not know.

Phillis. That self same Nature, whose spotless Decree Phillis wi^^ obe^^ance
(...) the Judge ^tands (...)
You would wrest to your Purpose; she, even she,
By equal power of Beauty, and of Love,
Reigns in this shepherds heart; though yet above
To Hylas. Your Apprehension; or your Loves Pretense,
Which makes Love only the Object of the Sense.
But thou would have him them again to try,
As though in Natures Laws were a diversity.
No, Shepherd, no; Disorder would orethrow
What Nature Linkes, if she proceeded so.
True Love, of two souls is the unity,
Which may without the Bodies Union be.
If this you grant (as who can truth deny?)
His Loves Object still lives; Souls cannot dye:
But thou think, the are disjoined by heavens distance,
Know not her peircing nature, whose swift glance
Can pass each Sphere in twinkling of an eye,
Nor can hers less, puts on Divinity;
Besides, Love is an Act so freely born,
Even our own Wills subjection it does scorn.
How then can loathed Importunity gain,
What our conspiring Selves cannot constrain.
Just judge, they do themselves themselves deny,
That ask of us Impossibility.

Sylvander. The chiefest point wherein ye agitate,
With obey. ^ance she retires. Stands up. Is, if Loves Essence subject be to
Fate,
Perishable or not; Love has two objects,
The Body and the Soul; since both Effects
This Shepherd feels; The Gods in me pronounce
The Body perishable, such Love he renounce;
But since Souls Love, as herself, cannot dye,
He that continue to Eternity;
And that this Shepherdess her Pretenses cease,
Your vows observe, and sanctify your Peace.

Tyrsis. As ^eav'ns Edict!


Leonice. While my unruly Fire
Threatening Revenge exchangeth into Ire.

Scene. 2. Act. 2.
Paris, Adamas: encounter: Paris. IN your absence, Leonida has been here, With
re^erence.
With such a haste as might beget a fear.

Adamas. Pray heaven the Nymph be well; where is she gone?


Paris. To yonder Plain she bent her course, alone,
As I suppose her self to recreate
^n rural Pastimes innocent Debate,
Till your return;

Adamas. Haste, it to let her know.
And in thy search, Paris, be not too slow; -- E^it P^ris.
^ am in pain, till I the Subject hear Leonida appears: He ^^bra (...) her:
Of her arrive; and scarce delay can bear;
So unexpected! how Fares the Nymph?

Leonida. Lost
If by your happier hand that Sate's not crossed.

Adamas. Be brief;


Leonida. Oh sir! I Have scarcely had the time
To know my self, since I disclosed a Crime
Scarce hatched, from the Authors own glorying tongue.
From which, perhaps, our Ruins might gave sprung.
As in my way, days heat did me invade,
I sought the shelter of a milder shade;
Where being no sooner laid, a voice I heard,
Which I well knew, though naught of him appeared
It was Polemas, Lyndamors Rival,
Their Love to Galatea's known to all.
Polemas guilty of his own Desert,
His slighted Courtship did at length convert
To Stratagem; such, suspected of none,
Till now to me, unseen, It was made known.
While Clemanthe, (his Instrument) declares
Him the procession of their false affairs.
I blush to speak it; It was in this wise;
In Hermits habit, he did him disguise;
Nigh us, betakes him to a lonely Cell;
'Twere too tedious, each circumstance to tell;
How (when the Nymph did thither often repair,
As she intends, to sanctify her prayer.)
This Impostor did strangely us beguile;
In sum, as he could wish, so throve his wyle;
The Nymph wi^h Faith he did possess, that she
Should see that man, which should her husband be,
If she would happyness enjoy; if not,
Foretells, sh'incurtes a miserable Lot.
The Place he did discover in a glass:
Appoin'ts the Time, and Person, Polemas,
Who should have us incounter'd there; but he
Failing his Time; our well-led Charity
Succurred an half drowned Shepherd, in whom,
Galatea, prepossessed, believes her Doom;
But the inamor'd Shepherd does reject
Her Flames, seeming some other to respect:
Yet she against Honor, Reason, or his Hate,
Vows to inthrone him in her Bed, and State.
Yet my commission bids not this declare;
Sir, he is fallen sick; which threats a new despair;
In whose Succor I Am sent t'implore your aid;
Which cannot, but by miracle, be allaid;
Save him; or save him not; such is her Doom;
Her Honor, or her Self you must intombe.

Adamas. Do not despair, these clouds I Will quickly clear.


Leonida. Alas? my own love painteth thus my Fear! To herself.


Scene 1. Act 2.
Sylvander. Victorious Archer, whose self-pleasing Spoils
Fills my Bosom with these homebred broiles!
Accept thy Conquest: I do not resist;
But against a yiedling Heart no more insist:
Why represent'st thou still her glorious trayn
Of charming Graces to reinforce my Pain?
I before thy shrine, like innocent victime stand;
To sacrifice my self with mine own hand.
Thus sporting in thy Flame, like silly fly,
I singe my wings, and for that Folly die.
If this the sacred Storehouse of thine Arms
I have by stealth attempted, Mine own harms
Punish that Crime; while rashly I aspire,
Prometheus Pain must follow my Desire.
If for some Gods Abode this Structure's raised,
M Impiety's punished over curiously to ave gazed,
While this Diana's presence I invade;
Unto my rav'nos thoughts I am betrayed;
If, as her worth, thou seek'st to enlarge Despair,
I will, with thee, against my self prepare
This second Fuel: Her too much worth implies,
That I must prove her double Sacrifice.
Yet, Love, thou art too covetous b' unjust force
He seem^^ to l^e him down to sleep. All Duties to thy self thus to ingross:
Forget not Natures rights, lest hers orethrown,
Thou do thy self deprive thee of thine Own.

Leonida, Celadon. Leonida. Leonida and Celadon appear upon the Scene with a
woman's garment loosly cast about him. By this Disguise from those Bonds I thee
free,
Which all, (neglecting all) court, Sov'raignty:
Nor wonder I, that thou do it despise,
Thou more Subiect'st with those commanding Eyes;
Yet foolish I, thus to obey thy will,
Steal thee from other; but my self do kill:

Celadon. Fair Nymph, do not that Beauty so debase,
To sue, who should be sought to; nor desace
The image of that Love, I did discover;
I know you would not accept a faithless Lover.

Leonida. Well; since to other destined is that heart,
Gentle Swayn, vouchsafe me this to impart,
That in your memory friendly place I have.

Celadon. Worth'est of Friends, even such unto my grave,
Else may Heavens heav'est Vengeance me pursue.
A thousand Thanks. They embrace Exit (...),

Leonida. A thousand times adue.


Celadon. Alas! my flight my Prison but extend's,
Since with my life my Bondage only end's.
Can the World's vastest limits other be,
For bad b' Astraea Astraea not to see.
Thus being deprived my Sun, Days clearest light
Shall be to me but as the blackest Night.
I Will in this Desert seek some hollow Cave
Shall be to me a Mansion, and a Grave.
Asleep! if Grief these lights have not ore'thrown, H^ spies Sylvand^^ ^sleep.
Surely, me thinks this Shepherd I have known.
It is Sylvander, whose vet closed Lids,
His Sorrows swelling Ruptures not forbids:
Alas, poor Friend^ I have heard of the change
Thou have made of thy Peace; nor think it strange,
Thy Heart has still harbor'd noblest Desires:
And such Love thinks fittest for his fires:
Yet may thou happier therein be then I,
Whose only Love prove's only Misery.
The occasions fair; I will it not debate,
I feel the hasty Summons of my Fate,
Though Celadon b' exiled Astraeas sight,
He puts his hand in his scrip, takes out pen and paper, and writes, and folds
it up. Yet sure to Astraea Celadon may write.
More happy paper! haste unto her hand,
Not to recall her over-harsh Command,
But to assure her, since such is her Will,
Approaching Death her Sentence shall fulfill:
While, unrepining, Hers I do depart,
Though ruder Fate has robbed me of her Heart.
If but one tear her cheek thou chance to lave,
I wish no other Monument to my Grave;
Puts it in his hand. and goes ou^. Wakens and rising discovers the letter: He
reads it. To thee, Sylvander, this office I commend,
Even as the last any shall me befrend.

Sylvander. Ha! a letter! am I asleep or wake?
If I still dream not, how came I this to take*
LETTER. To the most loved and most fair Shepherdess of the universe, The most
unfortunate, and most faithful of her Servants, wishes that weal, which
Fortune him denies.
My extreme Affection shall never consent to give the name of Pain or
Punishment to what by your Command I suffer: Nor shall ever permit Complaint to
come from that mouth was only destined for your Praise: But It may permit me to
say, that the State wherein I am (which an Other would perhaps, think
insupportable) contenteth me; insomuch as I know, you will, and ordain It such.
Be not scrupulous to extend yet farther (if possible) your commands; I shall
still continue my Obedience, to the end that if my Life has not been capable
to assure my fidelity, my Death may.




It Is doubtless I; the Demon guardes my Soul,
Reading my passion, does it here inroule.
To the most fair; Diana must be she: Looks upon the letter.
And most beloved; that, sure is meant of me.
Then she, n' other object such love can give:
Then I, n' other subject such love receive.
Thanks my good Geni'us; better skilld then I,
With their own figure do my thoughts supply.

Scene. 4. Act. 2.
Leonice, Lycidas: encounter* Leonice. PRopitious Fate; as I could wish! it is
he; To herself.
Now thrive my Vengeance by my subtlety.
Gentle Shepherd! saw you not pass this way To him.
A lonely Swain, seems from himself to stray?

Lycidas. Fair Shepherdess, how should I know the same?


Leonice. It Is One, does his dead Mistress Loss complain;
I heard he in the Company should be
Of Phillis, and her Servant:

Lycydas. who is he?


Leonice. He Is sensible I see; -- It Is one they call
Silander or Sylvander, slender, and tall; To her self.

Lycidas. By what judge you him her Servant to be?


Leonice. By some seen freedoms of their Amity;
Which to my own Practice therein applyd,
That they are Lovers should not be denied,

Lycidas. To himself. She speaks my fears; yet she a stranger is
To them, or me, which confirms true it is.

Leonice. You saw none such?


Lycidas. Not any, pass this way.


Leonice. Good morrow Swain.


Lycidas. To you a better day.
Exit Leoni^ce What Perfection can Man in Woman find,
That may arrest the Levity of her Mind?

Phillis. Diana, Astraea, She aboards Lycidas who Walks in a discontented
posture. She takes him by the arm. He flings from her, goes out and she
follows him. Phillis. Why walks my Shepherd with so sad a cheer?


Lycidas. As thou were innocent! -- away, forbear.


Diana. What sudden change is this?


Astraea. His hate to me,
Since his brothers death.

Diana. Or his Jealousy.
Our purer Fire bent to each other sex,
This churlish Inmate us can never vex. She kisses her.

Astraea. I must not so conclude; for even now
I feel those Flames, that you so disavow,

Diana. As how?


Astraea. I fear by that intended Tress, Diana having a bracelet of hair in her
hand.
Others then I more favor should possess.

Diana. It Is but for Wager; I am wholly Thine; Smiling. Embraces her. They sit
down seeming to finish it.
Come, thou shall help the Residue to twine.

Astraea. You blame the Effects, yet still the Means supply
To administer to that Jealousy.
If Sylvander see this his Rival wear,
Impossible 'twere this Passion to forbear.

Diana. I think she sought it with the same Intent.


Astraea. And as unjustly you her it assent.


Diana. As how?


Astraea. In this to make his Enemy
Sylvander stralingly approaches. Triumph before determined Victory;
You are their Judge, and should with equal Eye,
As does the Sun, reflect your Clemency.

Diana. And surpriseth them. She for this Favor made to me her suit.


Astraea. And you, like Fortune, must reject the mute.


Sylvander. Kneels to Diana. If nothing else remain, on bended knee
I shall for It devoutest Suppli'ant be.

Astraea. How, Sylvander! are you become so bold
T'intrude your Mistress privacies, t'unfold
Her secrets?

Sylvander. Fair Shepherdess, they are mine Own,
Which not of her learnt, are to my Self unknown.
But my rude Fate leads now but me to show
In m'Enemies Glory mine own overthrow.
Fair Mistress, if but your self to free
Fro'th' violence of Importunity,
You granted this: to greater Flames design
Your equal Bounties; hers cannot equal mine.

Astraea. Why so? one Object does you both inflame;
Why follows not, the Effects should be the same?

Sylvander. Difference is not from the Agents Quality,
But from the Pati'ent's Incapacity;
So does the equal Sun on either shine,
Corrupt the Dunghill, but enrich the Mine.

Astraea. Then must her Love of yours the Advantage gain,
Since hers produces what yours cannot obtain.

Sylvander. Not by defect of Love, but unjust Fate,
Which against the worthi'st still does bend his hate.

Astraea. You have a double Conquest still in me;
Your En'my will your Intercessor be.
Shall Phillis Interest against us both prevail? Yo Dia^^.
My Share's but light if it cannot turn the Scale.

Diana. You wrong my Love Competitor to take; To Astraea.
The expired term must restitution make. She flings Sylvander the bracelet.

Sylvander. As for my Being such Gratitude I owe, To Phillis returning
somewhat disturbed. (...) shows the bracelet.
I pay it you, since you it better so.
Where Is now your boasting Ensigns of Desert?

Phillis. The want thereof that does on thee revert.


Sylvander. How mean you that?


Phillis. To the Balance light in weight
Must still be added a superflu'ous Freight.

Sylvander. So does the Envi'ous miserable blame
What his own fruitless Travel cannot obtain.

Phillis. To Diana and Astraea. It is to you my just Ire should extend,
Who violate the rights of Judge and Friend.

Sylvander. Fair Mistress, prudent Love that reads our hearts,
Has justly thus rewarded our Deserts;
For now you see her Jealousy does prove,
That she incapable is of true Love.

Phillis. How so?


Sylvander. Love still is an active desire,
Kindled by virtue of a secret Fire;
But Jealousy (you know) a passive Fear,
Which always barren coldness Ensigns bear;
In one at once Contraries cannot be,
Nor Phillis feel both Love and Jealousy.

Phillis. The coldest Flint often Fire does unfold.


Sylvander. ^ut yet the fire never produces cold.


Phillis. Ashes, which are, it does.


Sylvander So't may be sed,
Jealousy is sign of Love, but Love that is dead.

Diana. As ancient Ruins signs of Buildings are;
Not that still Such they be, but such they were.

Phillis. My Judge m' Adversary? my cause must fail, Sylvander lets fall a
Letter.
When they should It protect, do it assail.

Astraea. No more of this Subject; for as I fear,
Phillis in this Case has a Cause more near. Phillis takes it up.

Phillis. It Is Celadons; how comes it to his hand?


Astraea. His Mistress that of him may best command.


Diana. Servant: whose Letters this? to whom addressed?


Sylvander. With a little astonishment, mi^les the Letter. That ^n my Heart
your Beauties have expressed,
Conferred with the Inscription, 'To you which are
Of all the most Beloved and most Fair;
From your faithful, unhappy servant, me.

Diana. If so, this would your own handwriting be.


Sylvander. Finding a better Secretar'e then I,
With his Expressions I mine own supply;
Which must proceed from some Agent divine,
Since it to your Hand comes, as't came to mine.

Diana. What riddle's this?


Sylvander. Last night over charged with thought,
In yonder Grove my Sense asleep was brought;
Waking, with wonder I was seized to find
So lively Characters of my dying Mind,
Which I intended to your Self; but see
My better Genius has prevented me.

Diana. Could you not, think you, guide us to that place?


Sylvander. Takes her by the hand and leads her out. They follow My best
Endeavors shall that Hope embrace.


Scene 1. Act. 3.
Leonida, Adamas. Leonida. IT was not far from hence I saw him last,
Who^e scarce known Visage Grief had so o'recast,
As't had not left one Character to be
Decypher'd for another Misery.
So well delineated the angry Gods
To see in Criminals would let fall their Rods.
From yonder Stream often he his Thirst allaid,
And what his Hands took forth, his Eyes repai'd.
Him hasting to aboard, his flying Fear
Avoided me, his Sorrows to endear.

Adamas. The heavens will guide us, who do me ordain
To heal my Own, in curing of his Pain.
Their Oracle I late consulted have,
Who me, as readily, this Answer gave.

Oracle. Seek that Shepherd, and him unite
To his Mistress in Hymen's right;
So shall be ended his Annoy,
And thy Age crowned with endless Joy.

Leonida. I hear a voice, but the over charged Bows
T'approach the same no passage us allows.

SONG.
The Scene is changed by the discovery of an Arbor, wh^r^in ^eladon sits and
sings. DUll Jailer of Mortality,
Why will thou not accept this thy right?
Wait'st not sometimes on charity?
Or art thou always armed with spite?
I am nothing but voice,
To cry, to cry, Night and Day to cry
Ah! Astraea, Astraea, Astraea!
If Celadon be dead to your Eye,
Raise him with a milder Ray.
Or do her Image Reverence bear?
Thou dare not strike my flaming Heart.
Eternal be my Pain, thy Fear;
For from't I never will consent to part,
Echo like waste to voice,
To cry, to cry, etc.
Celadon. He comes forth his Arbor. Not only Death, but each thing does forsake
Their proper Nature, wretched me to make.
To himself. That angry God, whose force I long have tri'de,
Against his Power his Power seems to divide.
Love does It self, elsewhere, by Absence kill:
But ah! in Mine, Love does but Love fulfill.
These unfrequented Shades, m'infernal cell*
With hollow whist'ling Winds my funeral knell,
Though Emblems of Horror, cease to affright*
And to augment my Grief, do it delight.
And thou fair Stream, Repriever of my Life,
Thy Nature bad thee then to end this Strife;
But thou denyd'st, foreseeing from mine Eyes,
T'inlarge thy flood a second Source should rise. He discovers them and seems
to ^^ie. Takes hold of him.

Leonida. Fly not, but from thy self, whose Cruelty
Has thus betrayed our failing Charity;

Adamas. Was it for this that thou did me require,
Free thee from Others, against thy self conspire?
But thou to obey thy Mistress seem bent;
Not thee to lose, but try, was her Intent.
Improvidence 'twere that Trial t'undergo,
Wherewith we should the tried overthrow.

Celadon. Not me to try, but 'cause I incurred her Hate,
She thus ordains me to this banished State.

Adamas. That act of hate, was but the effect of Love,
Jealousy, which this Evidence does remove:

Celadon. Not her Sentence,


Adamas. Thus observed, did she know,
A second Sentence would that overthrow.

Celadon. She cannot err, nor other witness needs,
Save this my Heart which t'her immolish't bleeds.

Leonida. Will you then Murder to her charge thus lay,
For so you must, if thus your self you slay.

Celadon. No more then when before their Shrine does fall
The innocent Lamb, the Gods we guilty call.

Leonida. Those are their own, and they may them require.


Celadon. So am I hers, to whom I now expire.


Adamas. But you against Heavens will, cannot your self dispose.


Celadon. Such is Heavens will; those Beauties who disclose,
Printing thereon their vis'ible Majesty,
Not disobeyed without Impiety.

Adamas. Beauty, it is true, is of the Gods a Ray,
But not the Matter must the Form obey:
That were to change the order of Providence,
Since the one gives the other's Excellence.
Perhaps youl'l say it is the Intellectu'l part
That holds this Predominance over your Heart:
That neither must; for Forms Equality
Must not exact of Forms Sov'raignity.

Celadon. But by the power of Love ours One became;
And what One wills, the other wills the same.

Adamas. I must seek to supplant by Craft, not Strength. To himself.
Unto this course of Life, of Time what length
Do you assign?

Celadon. Alas! I must not choose;
My souls Functions, who I them gave, must use.

Adamas. Still seeking her Command, would you her see?


Celadon. Extend not Hope t'impossibility.


Adamas. The Gods by special order have decreed
You to my Charge, and if you be agreed,
I shall Means find to effect what I do say.

Celadon. I do assent, so I still her obey.


Adamas. Name the same Words, which her Command'ment bear.


Celadon. Till commanded before her I not appear.


Adamas. The Gods themselves do favor thy Content.
I have a Daughter for thy Safety lent,
Does so resemble thee in Form, like clad,
Knowledge of Either scarcely can be had.
She by the custom of our Law's designed
(From her Childhood) to live by vow confined;
Yetis dispensed the same to forego,
If slightest Sickness threat anOverthrow:
Great Ill't portends, if any there do dye;
She, I Will give out, is sick; while you supply
Her place, and Habit, t'entertain each day
Your fair Mistress, yet her notdisobey.

Celadon. How can that be?'fore her I must appear.


Adamas. As Alexis, not Celadon you were.


Celadon. I submit to yourPrudence.


Adamas. Thenretire,
And straight I Will send you disguisingAttire.

Scene 2. Act 3.
Sylvander, Diana, Astraea, Phillis. Sylvander. Leads her by thehand. SAy fair
Mistress, what Judgment may we prove
In yourfair Thoughts on different of ourLove?

Diana. Phillis,methinkes, scarce counterfeiteth well;
The mast'rie's yours; youher in It excel.

Sylvander. It were Impiety so toprophane
Divine Beauty with inexpi'able stain.
It Is true, at first, Love did lay down his Arms,
To Sport, not Fight, to shewth'force of your Charms
In this his facile Conquest; But ev'nnow,
That I his purest Flames do feel, do vow
Even by thoseyour own sacred Beams, whose light
Has found a way to Murder withDelight.

Diana. It Is better still toconfirm what I say,
But better lose this Subject then ourWay.
Have we yet far unto theplace?

Sylvander. You hill
Will our Journey, with your commandfulfill.

Diana. It seemsimpassible.


Sylvander. I Will force aWay. He makes (...) though he would gobefore.


Astraea. And leave yourEnemy here you tobetray.


Sylvander. Friendly warning; Fair Mistress her command
To this your Service that she join herhand.

Phillis. Now you are guilty ofthe same Suspect,
Of which you sought me lately todetect.

Sylvander. Not my Mistress, but Enemy it is Ifear.


Phillis. Therein your Jealousieof her is clear:
If you do not suspect your MistrisLove,
Why am I thus redoubtable It toprove?

Sylvander. Not of her Love, but of your Treachery.


Phillis. You Are Jealous then of her Sufficiency;
For to your advantage you heardher say,
I had no skill the Counterfeit toplay.

Sylvander. On that belief dothyour Advantage rise,
With greater ease, neglected, tosurprize.

Phillis. To Diana andAstraea. ^xtunt Sil. and Phil. I do assent to It, least
at thelength,
He say I him overcome with Slight, not Strength.

Diana. What does thisShepherd to thy Thoughts appear?


Astraea. Leonice ^^^alingly listens be^ind them. What youme ask u^nto your
self is clear,
Even so as Children in the Tapersflame
Sport with their finger till they burn the same.
Butwhat think you? how do you thisaffect?

Diana. Alas! my self I beginto suspect.


Astraea. Blush not, dear Companion, Love'sno Guilt; Leonice ^^^ires.
If such it were, Beauty andWorth were spilt.

Leonice. This wasbut wanting, full Revenge to take,
On which I will the sureFoundation make.

Sylvander, Hylas Phillis. Return Hylasencounters them. Sylvander. FairMistris,
the Passage now is free,
Something w'ave found worthCuriosity.

Hylas. Now Mistress, leavethat Shepherd; I suspect To Phillis.
That with his Venomehe will thee infect;
His false Axioms have buried one alive;
So will they thee, if thou with him survive.

Sylvander. What Is he?


Hylas. Tyrsis, who Mortals has forsook,
And to his grave, his Cell, has him betook,
In yonder Forest, where with howling note,
As do his fellow Wolves, set's forth his throat;
A pretty effect of Love to court the air,
And for what cannot be had so to despair.

Phillis. Servant, I think, my prayers were but in vain, To Hyla^.
Should I implore you not incur the same.

Hylas. Spare them good Mistress, you may well suppose,
That my wise Love some End will still propose.
To Sylvan^er. What End has his? you that his cause maintain's.

Sylvander. Love is a God, who himself entertains
Within himself; nor does he ought require
Without himself to cherish his Desire.
He is the Center of his own Being,
Whence his delight does ever fall and spring,
As you may see in a well figured Sphere,
His End's beginning and end is ev'rywhere.

Hylas. A pretty Mystery! Love does naught require
Forth his own self; Love then is no Desire,
Since no Desire from what we have is known,

Sylvander. But this Desire, that makes of Two but One,
Which both the Lover and the Loved so chains,
That wha^s desired It in It self contains.

Hylas. So, so, this proves my Grandames Saying true,
Of one Error another does ensue.
If Lovers to their Loved we changed could see,
Then I not Hylas, but Phillis should be.

Syl^^nder. That follows not; for you do not her love;
But such Effects I in Diana prove.

Hylas. Is not your Hat become her Hood? Looks on his hat.


Sylvander. Oh fie,
You know it is not my Hat that love's, it is I.

Hylas. A modest Sepherdess, and Breeches wear!
It Is very strange!

Sylvander. Thus I these doubts will clear,
It is the Soul all Actions does produce,
The Body but the instrument for her use;
So that 't being the Soul which only loves,
It Is the Soul only Transformation proves.

Hylas. But since I love the Body with the Mind,
Why do not I now my self Phillis find?

Sylvander. It is Equality, that Love begets;
The Body, Soul's inferior, it not admits;
The Soul only the Soul can love; But see
A more plain Reason for this Unity:
The Understanding, Will, and Memory
Are said the Soul in every Faculty.
Of only what we know, can Love remain,
The knowledge and thing known are but the same.
Like Transformation does each Function prove,
Since they all join the Affection but to move:
Will to the willed, the Memory is brought
Into the thing whereon 't imploys the Thought:
If thus each Function, then must needs the Whole
Transmute it self into the loved Soul.

Hylas. You fetch this far; yet this not much avails,
Since still the Bodies Transformation fails.

Sylvander. Phillis Body of here is no part; for dead,
Not that it is, but was Phillis, 'twould be sed.

Hylas. Unite me to her Body, take the Rest,
And see which of them both shall please us best.

Phillis. They advance to the far side of the Theater. You have too long
withheld us; Night draws near.


Sylvander. Hah! a Temple, whose Inscription does bear;
From hence, far, far, avoid all ye
Are untouched with Love's purit^.
Within this sacred Grove each day
Burns a true immolish't Heart,
Which lives only by loves Art
To Adore the Goddess Astraea.

Diana. Is this the place y'intended us to lead?

Sylvander. I never, before, on it did ever tread,
I have mistook that way.

Phillis. May we draw nigh?

Sylvander. Not without Reverence to this Deity.
Thou divne Power, who herein worshiped art, Make ^^^^^ance to the ^emple and
goes in.
Accept as thou requir'st so pure a Heart.

Hylas. I do suspect my own Love's purity,
He has so often told me the Contrary.

Phillis. Why how now Servant! is your Love so weak, They enter while Hyl^^
lies dow^ a^ the door.
It forces you our Company to break?

Hylas. It is an Argument of my Piety;
No jesting, Mistress, with a Deity.

Sylvander. The table of Love's laws, which to embrace He takes ou^ a ^able and
^eads.
He does command on penalty of Disgrace.
Who will a perfect Lover be,
Must what he loves, love inf^nitely:
Extremity gives Love the prize,
Mediocrity therein does rise
Rather from wa^'^ing Treachery,
Then from a firm Fidelity.
That he never love but in one place,
Which Love as a God let him embrace,
That he adore It above all*
Nor thereof but one object shall;
That every Bliss such do pretend,
Still in, and for that subject End.
All Pleasure he in it confine,
And that he fix his chief design
Unto that service, which to increase,
Self proper Love in him must cease;
Unless as loved of's loves Object,
Himself h'esteem for her Respect.

Hylas. I do believe what thou have read, is taken
From whence 'twas hatched, thy melancholy Brain;
Which thou ventest as from this Diety,
To give thereto better Authority.

Sylvander. That might well be, if none could read but I.


Hylas. Confirm me with the sight thereof.


Sylvander. Not I.
If your Body this holy place profane,
Their holier Laws much more your Eyes will stain.

Phillis. Hydas steals forth the table, where ^nseen he alters them.'It Is
Celadons hand.


Diana. And that Picture we see
Upon the Altar, should Astraeas be.

Phillis. Then it is an Argument h' is yet alive.


Astraea. My dying Sorrow do not again revive.


Phillis. This rather is a cause of Joy, then Grief.


Astraea. If you make him alive in my Belief,
And prove it not; he is twice slain to me.

Sylvander. Our Druy'ds do teach us this Divinity;
Those Bodies on earth unburie'd remain,
Their Souls still wander up and down the same;
Such may be his; whose body being drowned,
Could not b' interred, 'cause it could not be found.
Yet in this Case, the Ceremonies will
Appease his Ghost, if all rights we fulfill.

Astraea. Which my sad Piety shall undertake.


Diana. A Druy'd there is hard by; lets thither make.


Hylas. Mistress! I see, here dwells some Diety;
I feel a scruple of m' Impiety
In Love; and would an unfaign'd Convert be,
If that the Tables Laws I might but see.

Phillis. Why you have heard them*


Hylas. From an Enemy,
Against me framed of Contrariety.

Diana. That is but just,


Sylvander. Though unprofitable,

To fix a mind s'extreamly vari'able.

Hylas. Will thou engage thy self with me by vow,
What is therein to follow and allow?

Sylvander. I will dispense with yours: Love is my tie.


Hylas. Phillis brings the ^able to him, and he reads. And what I find therein,
such Ties will I,
If thou will perfect lover be:
What thou love, love not inf'nitely.

Sylvander. Read right Shepherd:


Hylas. Mistress; do you oresee.
Else he will suspect, it is but my Treachery.
Phillis overlookes him. Med'ocrity, gives love the prise,
Extremity therein does rise
Rather from a self Treachery.
Then from a firm Fidelity:

Sylvander. Can it be so?


Phillis. I Am sure, so I it find.


Sylvander. Then you must make me believe I was blind.


Hylas. Mistrists! had I not Reason to suspect?
And you, Shepherd, to your vow have Respect.

Diana. Here Is that will end the Difference; oh Deceit? Diana looking on the
table finds the deceit.
Neither need fail; here each reads his Conceit;
Both what 'twas and is;

Sylvander. It must repaired be
With his own hand;
All. E^^^t. To that we all agree.

A SONG.
THe purest love that ere adorned the Earth. Sung in the in^ermis^^^^.
Lies buri'ed in a wave.
Thus, what gave to his Beauteous Mother birth,
Gives him untimely Grave.
The Reason, We suppose, is palpable;
So purely burned his Flame,
A Sea of floods was only capable,
To extinguish the same.
Rest gentle Ghost, to consummate thy Night;
And gentle Earth unto his Bones be light.
Farewell Celadon, Celadon, farewell;
Our Doleful Notes thus ring thy sun'rall Knell;
Scene 3. Act 3.
Adamas, Alexis, Leonida. Adamas. Celadon in vestal. habit. Leonida encounters
them. To Leonida, WHat Musick's that which so far off we hear?


Leonida. My haste to you does that Relation bear,
Astraea this your Guest believing dead,
Thus celebrates his Funeral in yo^ Mead.

Adamas. It Is better still to further our Intent;


Leonida. Which finished, their Course is hither bent,
To visit this our fair disguised Druy'd.

Alexis. M' approaching ruin!


Adamas. Your Fancies still indu'd
With those vain shadows! To Leonida:
Where Is Paris, my Son?
To Celadon. Cast off thy Fears; our Joys are now begun:
To Leonida Bid him to haste before, them to receive;

Leonida. His Love has discharged that Duty, believe.


Adamas. Love! to whom?


Leonida. TO one, were not Celadon here;
I should say, she Astraea's equal were
In Beauty; it is the fair Diana:

Adamas. She!
He meets my wishes in that Amity;
Nor is it the meaness of a Stock so low
Shall me engage not suffer it to grow;
These Shepherds which on Lignon seated be,
Are of the Extraction of Nobility;
Who from the world seeking a calm Repose
To shelter them, this humble Being chose.
But our Devotions to their Rites me call,
So let them know; and kindly welcome all. Exit Adamas:

Leonida. Comfort, fair Dried; what you now fear to see,
Should your wishes,

Alexis. Rather my Ruin be;


Paris, Diana, Phillis, Stella Astraea, Hylas, Sylvander. Paris. ^uch Joy this
Place your presence does afford, Leading D^ana by the hand. To her:
^s if descending Jove did it aboard:
^ut for our Entertainment fain we would,
^ike him, on you distill a shower of Gold;

Diana. Gentle Paris! your worth and Courtesy
Have in my thoughts far greater Efficacy.

Paris. If Perfection of both extracted were,
In my eye, yet, too mean they would appear,
Did not Magnificence and Majesty meet,
Like humble vassals, prostrate at your feet.

Leonida. They insequence. Our hasty Loves, long expecting, would blame.
Had not this unexpected, cleared the same;

Diana. The bad Courtiers humor, is with us met;
Rather to make Present, then pay a Debt.

Astraea. Fair Nymph, you us t'excuse Custom invites,
Particulars are ^low to Common Rites.

Leonida. Yet, if most not mistake, this fair Abstract,
At your hands, more then common Rites exact.

Astraea. To Astrea presenting Alexis, she ta^^tes her. Such Perfections heaven
reserves for His use;
Particular Right to them were an Abuse.

Hylas. Hylas interpreseth them. With Heavens favor, and yours, I do prepare,
In those of this fair Dr^y ^^ to have a share.

Alexis. Returns ^^ Astrea. Those Graces which in you excelling are,
Can only speak a worthy Devotaire.

Hylas. Phillis My late Mistress adue, adue; Takes her by the hand.
Hylas before the Old preferrs the New;

Phillis. Will you leave me?


Hylas. I took you to that end.


Alexis. And so e're long to me you will pretend. Hylas kis^es Alexis hand.


Hylas. Suspect not Hylas, Hylas cannot change.


Phillis. For Hylas, so long Hylas, still will range.


Alexis. Those things by us may easily be spared,
Against whose loss Expectation is prepared.

Phillis. That he a sudden Penitent may be,
My worth in your Judgment now let him see, To Dla^^
Mistress, this is the day, the term's expired,
And from your self our sentence is required.

Diana. It must be granted; To Alexis.
If you not distaft,
Your better hours in tr^^^es so to waste.

Alexis. Not to partake your innocent Pastime,
Were against mine own Peace to commit a Crime.

Diana. To Leonida. Fair Nymph, it is but just; you see the end,
Since you the birth saw:

Leonida. Gladly I attend.
But what says Sylvander?

Sylvander. He cannot fear,
Spotless, before so just a judge, to appear.

Leonida. She gives Diana a garland* being all (...): Unto you first a Garland,
then a Seat;
And now the progress of your Loves repeat;
'Twas Phillis first began this Difference,
And Phillis first must speak her own pretense.

Phillis. She stands (...) and (...) (...) Fair mistress, now my Judge, wonder
takes place,
To see one yet alive of Ixions race,
Vain and pres^^^ p^uous, that durst undertake
Those divine Graces the Object to make
Of his aspiring Hope; All it so deem,
By his Service, thus to seek your Esteem.
But leaving this, Let Us first disclose the spring,
Whence issu'eth forth true Loves proper being;
Equality, and Sympathy (himself does say)
The sourses are; which Argument I may
Use against himself; So resemblance in Sex
Must give me to your Love fairest pretexe;
Whose nourishment from Conversation grows:
My habits therein on me most bestows;
Since even but yesterday he did obtain
Knowledge of your Beauties, or of your Name;
Besides, if worth herein may be a Plea,
The advantage therein can mine only be,
Be'ing of your Sex; nor can he it deny,
Without offense unto Loves Deity,
And yours: Besides, did ever any hear
Dissimulation Love-worthy should appear,
Which took not be'ing from his mistress Beauty;
But from our wager, and his vanity;
Or if I grant in true Loves flames he burn,
This does but still to my advantage turn;
Since I the Author am he undertook
On those divine Beauties with Love to look,
Which his own want of Courage or of wit
Would not have seen; or to Love him admit,
But that I did provoke him; more t'inferr, She with a ^ow reverence retires.
Would now but serve my Glories to deferr. Sylvander stands forth* and after
low reverence (...) kneels

Sylvander. Those Poets fain the last of heavenly Race
Was fled from Earth, foresaw not hers, your place.
Before our Astraeas Temple, I must join
With M' adversary; against my self combine;
Our difference was who should deserve your Grace,
By our poor Services; 'twas to embrace
(I yield to what she does allege) a clowd,
And give our too rash Thoughts too fair a Shroud;
The Gods, who only such Perfections frame,
In their Breasts Fire bear worthy of the same.
It Is nature I should blame, were I not sure,
All Mortals the same rig'rous Law endure.
Yet thus I may, why such Perfections gave,
And wrought naught worth Relati'on them to have;
What she in you requires, though I cannot give:
Yet what in me affords, I shall, whil' I live;
Nor can be taxed of Presumpti'on, herein;
Since from those forcing Beauties Love did spring;
Which cannot be slight, as M' Adversare objects,
Produced from such all excelling Subjects;
Nor is my pure Flame from Equality,
(As she insists) Natures common decree;
In mine, your excellence does most appear,
That thus my thoughts bove Natur's laws can rear.
Why do you say they want of Reason prove,
Who see what is am'iable, and it not love,
Yet not allow, even in the same Respect,
That this my Love, as such, she should protect.
For Love be'ing bred from what is good and fair,
What is bred often, such Nature still must wear.
It follows then, she like Resentments have
For those Effects which her own Beauties gave,
Unless you will profane her Capacity,
In giving it the same Deficiency;
But that, you will say, inferrs my Love, not me,
Should be esteemed; you yet do not foresee
My Love is joined with such mysterious ties;
Me thus to love, but proper Love implies;
You plead the advantage of your Sex, as bent
To love semblable were natures Intent;
In Beasts see where her motives simple be,
Their Preservations bind to each contrary.
The gentle Turtle mourns, her male Mate dead,
From whom removed, the Palm hangs down her head.
But it is perhaps, elective Love you claim,
By your so long Conversat'ion, the same
Your imperfections better do discover,
Showing you are an Insufficient Lover;
The Advantage of your Sex, again's your Aid,
Then ours more worthy; that is not gainsaid;
Nature to you most Perfections does lend,
Whence best Discourses take their births and end:
But you forsaking the Impress'ions She gave,
By your defect in Love are more deprave.
You pretend to the glory of my Love;
The Author thereof seeking your self to prove.
This must be judged according to the Intent,
Which but to Dissimusat'ion here was bent,
For which you deserve Punishment; My H'art
Did only true, unsaigned Love impart,
Which being produced beyond eithers Design,
Shows that the secret author was divine:
But both our Pleas and Services are vain,
Striving by either her Esteem to gain,
Perfect'ions bove Natures, her Laws her free; Makes low reverence* and retires.
Ours, not as Presents, but Rights tendered be.

Diana. The Subject now in Difference judged should be,
Not from words only, but the Effects we see;
Which since I both in equal balance way:
This Sentence, as your Judge, pronounce I may:
Phillis more ami'able, I do approve,
But Sylvander knows better to make Love. She takes Phillis by the hand and
sets her in her seat.
For which respects, to each, with equal hand,
You I ordain my Seat; you my Garland.

Alexis. An equal Judge: Nere Sentence was like this: On Sylvanders head
kneeling ^he places her garland, and gives him her hand to ki^^
Where thus each Party full contented is;

Hylas. A goodly Recompense! and must this be,
My fair Mistress, an Example for me?

Alexis. So much of me to your self not propose,
We are the God's; they only us dispose.

Hylas. Insomuch as when I would kiss those eyes,
To consult the Oracle, I must Sacrifice.

Alexis. They will not grant what is against our Vow.


Hylas. What then for all my service do y'allow?


Alexis. The satisfaction to have loved me.


Hylas. With that, the voyage not discharged will be.


Alexis. I see you seek Pretenses, me to leave.


Hylas. Mistress, I will no longer you deceive.
If you Shepherdess continue me to please,
As she has done within this hour, I seize
He kisses her hand and turns to Stella. Kisses Stellas hand. On a new Object;
yet grant me but this
For all my Services, your hand to kiss.
Fair One, to you I tender all the Grace
I'ere received, and seat you in their place.

Sylvander. They are but violencies.


Hylas. Him give no ear.


Stella. I know him well, your Enemy not fear.
Since you will me serve, I think ^^ fit we draw
Cov'nants of Love, may he to each a Law.

Hylas. My future Mistress, So I must you call,
Till by this Covenant, yours you me install,
So much delight from our Loves I foresee, He hastily takes a paper ou^ of his
Scrip, and seems to write, still reading, as he wri^^s.
This shall no longer di^^onti^n'd be.
That neither do usurp Authority
Over each other, which we call Tyranny;
That each the Lover and the Loved shall be;
Without Constraint shall be our Amity;
That each may Love so long as each shall please;
And that when either will, either may cease;
That when each will, each one may others love,
And keep our old Loves or the same remove.
That Jealousy, Sorrows, Complaints banished be,
As incompatible with our Amity:
That in our Words and Actions each be free,
Without the others Incommodity.
That none be liars in Word or Effect,
Terms of Fidelity and Love reject;
That both or one without the other may
Cease, or continue our Loves to obey;
That when both, or one, of love is deprived,
Of both, or one, again't may be revived:
That long Love and long Hatred we omit,
We will both Love and Injury forget.
Do you like them?

Stella. It cannot be denied.


Hylas. She seems to set her hand to it. Then next your Servants name your own
subscribe.


Sylvander. Hold, I think fit this other added be,
Without Constraint to keep your Liberty.

Hylas. What may that be?


Sylvander. That each may, when each lift,
From any One or All these Laws desist.

Hylas. He ^^ems to write.'It Is not amiss, the Counsel is so good,
Though from m' En'my, it must not be withstood.

Astraea. Over envious Night with clowdy brows deni^
Farther Delight to our Societies.

Alexis. The loss is ours, but each Day shall renew
Our pa^ting Pleasures with fresh Enterview.

Scene 1. Act. 4.
Leonice. I too long do neglect my Love, I find,
So sweet is Revenge to an injured Mind.
A new Occasion I have found this day,
Which for the Execut'ion shall make way;
I wait fit time, Then Tyrsis to thee fly,
In solitude to gain thy love or die.
Fortune my Hope does still anticipate;
Here is the ground where I must sow Debate. They appear.

Phillis, Hylas, Diana. Phillis. And what will Stella say that you her leave?
Hylas leads Diana by the hand.


Hylas. My late Mistress, you do your self deceive;
I do but give her Company; and will
What is contained in our Laws fulfill.

Phillis. But what Sylvander, when he this shall see,
Who is your Rival and your Enemy?

Hylas. 'Twil make my fading Love more fresh, more keen.


Diana. Where should he be, so long we have not seen?


Leonice. Sylvander is it you seek?


Phillis. Him we would find.


Leonice. I saw him late with so perplexed a Mind
Take leave of his Madontha, who this day,
Alone accompanied her on her way:
Her Denyals, nor Modesty availed:
Against them both his Love and Tears prevail^d.

Phillis. Sure you mistake; Sylvander Love does fly.


Hylas. Of all Attaints but fair Diana's eye.


Phillis. Which but for wage^ is.


Leonice. So, often he vowed
Unto Madontha, when she 't disallowed.
I would, said he (then Tears gush^ out at^ain)
You in her place, she in yours might remain;
Then should you see how each Day should invite
To feast our Fancies with a new Delight.
But I must cherish now thy Memory,
In whom Fate grants a mean Resemblancy;
Which with persev'ring ^^int I will embrace,
As the imperfect Figure of thy Face.
While what is to you indiff'rent I make known,
I forget what is important of mine own.
Know ye not, gentle Swains, where Tyrsis is?

Hylas. M' ancient Mistress, I Will show you for a kiss.


Leonice. You may oblige me.


Hylas. Mistress, with your leave,
But to restore what Hatred would bereave.

Leonice. Fair companions, To Die^r. good day.


Phillis. To you the same.


Diana. Oh man's Ingratitude! my only Shame!
Was it for this I suffered thee to cover
All thy proceedings, as a feigned Lover,
With greater Liberty me to entertain
Of (thought) true Love; true Love thou did but feine.
Was this so often praised Beauty no more prized,
Then for Madontha's thou should it despise?
Or has't Inconstancy so long assailed
^n Others, It against thee has prevailed?

Phillis. I have no Faith in this.


Diana. Faith did foretell
No less at first, he counterfeits so well.

Phillis. I see no ground for this Report.


Diana. What Ground
Can thou demand where Levity is found?
Let not th'Incredulity him excuse;
Unless thou would Diana twice abuse;
But force from him the Bracelet which he wears,
On that possess'ion depend all my fears,
Least he should triumph in his Victory
Raised on my Weakness and his Treachery.

Phillis. But will you him condemn before you hear?


Diana. As thou me love, me to dissuade forbear.


Phillis. It is a Charm, but see unhappy Fate
Affords no time your Ire to mitigate.

Sylvander. Sylvander appears. Diana hides herself. Fair Enemy, retain you
still that Name?
Or since our Quarrel's ended, ends the same?
Why so alone, and with dejected Eye?

Phillis. Poor Shepherd, it foretells thy Destiny,
That Bracelet which you wear, you must restore
Unto my hand, whose Right it was before.

Sylvander. Our Contenti'ons must then have no respite,
Since even your Sorrows thus in them delight:
By whose Authority?

Phillis. Hers you it gave.


Sylvander. My Mistrisses! With astoni^^ment.


Phillis. I know none such you have;
The Term's expired, and both you must resign.

Sylvander. Oh wherein is it? of Love you Powers divine,
I have transgrest.

Phillis. In vain you do him prove,
Who still neglects all Deceits in Love.

Sylvander. Why, does she think me false?


Phillis. Else all not true.


Sylvander. She taking off the ^racel^t. he falls in a swonn. Then to my dying
Soul, such, Gods, be you.


Phillis. He faints! Sylvander! oh, Sylvander! hear,
And let thy setting Soul once more appear.
Leave not the world unto eternal Night
Diana app^ar^. Of Love and Virtue; you only it inlight.
Alas Diana! we have Sylvander slain.

Diana. She kn^els by him.'Twere double Guilt these chaste Tears to refrain.


Phillis. Now you will believe, unless, as of us sed,
You think he still dissembles being dead.

Diana. My self, then thee, I far more wounded have;
Thy dying proves to me ^ living grave.
Which to adorn, I will imbalm thy Hearse
With these warm Tears, whilst I thy Love rehearse.

Phillis. Diana retire^. He begins to (...) to himself. I feel him breath; you
with your Grief retire;
Concealed still should be a Virgin Fire.

Sylvander. Where, or from whence, I know not: but still why
Thus disturbed, I have fresh Memory;
Why took ye not this Function of my Soul,
Which serves but my Mis^ries to enrole?
If I the common Instrument have left,
Why not of what subsists by is bere^t*
This is an Argument I still do live,
But to a second Death my self to give.

Phillis. His wild Aspect denotes distracted Sense,
As on Himself he would act Violence. To herself.

Sylvander. What bright shadow art thou?


Phillis. He does me take
^or his good Angel; such my self I Will make, To herself.
To remove his Despair: -- your better Guide, To him.
Who comes for your Safety to provide;
Ere three days, if you frustrate not the same,
Your Mistress Favor shall return again. Exit.

Sylvander. I thank thy Charity; Hope me quickened has; He rises.
Heaven leads me now in a directer Path. Exit.

Scene 2. Act 4.
Alexis. WHy sad? thou grasp'st a full Felicity
In her Favors, in her Society:
(...) Liberty thou have on her to gaze,
and lose thy Senses in a lovers Maze;
^eginning where ending; ending where begun,
^o long, till like a Statue I become;
^^ile she with blushing Smile awakes delight,
And left over suddenness should it affright,
Softly she whispers, yet fearing too loud,
Her amorous Accents 'twixt my lips does shroud,
With so long fixed self-ravishing Desire,
As that great Workman did his work inspire;
Whilst I new Being take, my self again
To lose my self cannot my self refrain.
Such heavenly Raptures only are expressed
When Immortality does the Soul invest,
Which to make perfect, she often plays my part,
Exchanging Beings by our amorous Art:
No place is left for Wish, Hope is but vain,
Yet all is fruitless wanting Celadons name.
'Twixt my divided self there is Debate;
Celadon envieth Alexis State;
Alexis fearth His; Nor can have bliss
In any place where Celadon absent is.
Desirable is the state of Celadon,
But redoubtable if to her made known.
Desire must cease where naught it higher rears,
And where so wretched is no place for Fears:
Yet still fresh Torments of them Both me press,
The One would regain what he did possess;
The Other strugleth what he has to hold,
And still denies the Other to unfold.
But while my self thus does my self revise,
He lai^s himself to sleep. Nature's 'oft Slumbers would us reconcile.

Astraea. I am become a Truant in my Love,
So long dull Sleep the Object does remove.
It Is full an hour since Days alarm rung
Her lofty Notes to greet the approaching Sun.
Yet why by them do I account my Time?
It must be late, my Star has left her Clime:
But see, her watchful Thoughts are forced repay
What they took from the Night unto the Day.
Thou universal Minister of peace,
T'exact these thy untimely Tributes cease;
Whisper unto her while she it enlight,
The world is covered in a mourning Night;
Yet least thou should astonish her with Fear,
See that in my shape thou to her appear.
While I stolen Tributes of my Love exact, Kisses her.
And yet but satisfy half the Contract;
Since thou from me withhold'st the better Share,
These little more then dreaming Shadows are:
How my Tongue unawares leads me to truth!
This, though awake, is but the object of Ruth;
Which rather then my Senses should delight,
It should with Horror of my Guilt affrigh^:
Yet since to cherish Celadon Death denis,
I Will worship here his sweet resembling Eyes.
Why, oh why! does now churlish Fate refuse
Him thou present'st the Figure thus to use; Kisses her.
These Kisses would not be less innocent,
If on more Heat and Moisture they were spent;
My better Self, my Pardon, I have broke She awake*
Those balmy Slumbers, Love did it provoke.

Alexis. Dear Astraea! how long here thus alone?


Astraea. No longer then two Kisses I have stolen.


Alexis. Love was consenting, who these Pleasures knew, Kisses her.
But dreaming false, awaking to be true:
Yet why so early?

Astraea. My unquiet Heart
Admits no Truce foreseeing your depart
To your devout Society, unless
With you I may enjoy like Happiness,
To which lend me your Aid.

Alexis. For my Aid sue!
Alas! it is that I must attend from you.

Astraea. To you wherein can I be Profitable?


Alexis. That we for ever be Inseparable.


Astraea. It Is mine own Wish, which but on you depends.


Alexis. In our Agreements both must have their Ends.


Astraea. To mine ye holy Powers Witnesses be,
Which broke, punish with just Severity.

Alexis. It is enough, yet one thing more remains.


Astraea. Hasten it quickly, then our Souls enchains;
Nothing if not impossible it be,
Can hinder this our sweet Felicity.

Alexis. Then command me; but -- She ab^^pti^ stops, and seems to faint: I^
supported by A^rr^.


Astraea. Your grief to assuage.
Do you want nothing?

Alexis. Nothing but Courage.


Phillis, Lycidas, Diana. Phillis. 'Twas just; the Author of your Jealousy
Has from her own mouth given the Remedy.

Lycidas. Which gives a new Displeasure; my Remorse, Gi^^ him he^ (...) to ki^s.
That durst attempt our Loves so to divorce:

Phillis. Which thus I cancel.


Lycidas. With a firmer Tie, To Diana;
To bind our Loves unto Eternity.

Phillis. Next is your part.


Diana. Which I shall expiate
^t first Encounter.

Phillis. Pray heaven not too late.


Astraea. From whence, my dear Compan'ions, pleased so well?


Phillis. From discov'ring Treason by Miracle,
As we to shun the rigor of Days pride
Did us a well united shade provide;
We heard to Tyrsis Leonice recite
The foul Effects of her incensed Spite
Against me, and Sylvander; Who (as you know)
Did by his Judgment her Love overthrow.

Astraea. Diana was there.


Phillis. Or else still (I fear)
Would last her Jealousy.

Diana. Which now is clear.


Alexis. Sylvander must have Right.


Diana. I not deny,
Preserving still a Virgins Modesty.

Sylvander. Appears in ^ discontente^ posture. Phillis. Sylvander, the Triumph
at length is mine,
And you your usurped Trophies must resign;
Whether by Force or by Subtility,
Matters not which; glorious stil's Victory.
Do you remember by fein'd Love to me
You strove to increase Licidas Jealousy.
I now am quit, that Message which I brought
Was but the Stratagem wherewith I fought.

Sylvander. What do you mean?


Phillis. Those Words I said to you,
Were things invented Diana never knew.

Sylvander. No more my Foe, and justify but this,
Who by you is subdued, crowned is.

Phillis. For better proof, first I surrend my Theft, Flin^s him (...) bra^^^
Those Tears content me which it has berest.

Sylvander. To heaven, to you, and to Diana give
My humble thanks, I by your Favors live. K^tel^, kisses the bracel^^, and
puts it on his arm. Who was ^^ distance before appro^ches.

Diana. What part have I in your Discourse? I hear
You named me.

Phillis. Not now such are, but were;
As pleased me to represent you still,
In Words or Actions both framed by my Will.

Diana. I thank you, but I hope you have well chose,
Since you so freely of them both dispose.

Diana. As for mine own Advantage best might prove.


Phillis. I thank you dear Companion for your Love.


Sylvander. The Satisfaction's greater which I have,
To Phillis. Then the Displeasure which before you gave;
But know, the unhappy Effects of this Strife
Can never cease but with m' unhappy Life.

Phillis. My Vengeance never did so far pretend.


Lycidas. Those Ils ar^ great which cease but with our End.


Diana. It Is just, me thinks, that Phillis bear her share,
Since she the Author was of his Despair.

Lycidas. Unto the Cure at least.


Phillis. Provided still,
That you to effect the same will grant your Will. To Dia^^.

Diana. Your Skill on others Help you do repose.


Alexis. You cannot deny what Char'ity does propose.


Diana. I m^st submit.


Phillis. The Cure I Will undertake,
If he have courage his Ils known to make,

Sylvander. Know then, by this your Wyle, over charged with Grief,
I to the Oracle flew for my Relief,
But in the Answer more cause of It found,
With this irr'evocable Edict be'ing bound.

Oracle. Thy present Ils e're long shall end; ^^ take a little bilk^^ and read^.
But Her thou would, Paris shall wed.
To thy Desires do not pretend,
Until such time Sylvander's dead.
Thou fair Disposer of my Soul, though Fate ^^^els ^ Dian^.
On this poor trunk seem^ thus to vent his Hate.
Lest I you Others see, suffer me die,
Then suffer still of Death's variety:
It Is but the hastening of mine own Desire,
Which is accomplished when I do expire.

Phillis. Phillis having paw^'d a ^hil^. No, no, this Oracle no such Sense
bears,
Each Oracle mysterious Senses wears;
Diana, you will not from your Promise fly?

Astraea. We all become therein her Suerty.


Phillis. First, that your present Ils e're long should end;
On what is now past plainly did depend:
Next is, but whom thou would, Paris shall wed*
Wed is often in a double sense used,
The Priests office herein it does include:
Paris, whom you would, wed's to you as Druy'd.

Sylvander. But where (your Desire's not pretend) it is sed,
What Remedy until Sylvander's dead.

Phillis. O thou Ignorant in Love's Mysteries,
Who loves an Other, to Himself he dies.
It Is your own Doctrine.

Lycidas. Nothing is more clear.


Alexis. As she with Heaven Intelligencer were.


Phillis. Diana's promise must the Rest fulfill.


Diana. Wherein? I see no need thereof.


Phillis. Your will:
Without you aid him this cannot be tr^e,
That he should dye in Him, and live in You;
Such Mystery in Love, as yet, was never known,
This could in any wise subsist by One.

Alexis. We are engaged.


Astraea. And must not see you fail.


Diana. What is required of Both must needs prevail.


Phillis. Since he unto Himself must cease to live,
You must likewise your Self unto him give.

Diana. It is too much.


Sylvander. For my Worth.


Phillis. But no less,
From her own Self exacteth her Promess; Phillis tak^^ Diana by the hand, and
gives it Sylvand^^ ^^ kiss.
Here, take her Hand, and thereon seal your Vows.

Sylvander. Thus guarded, Heaven i^ vain you bend your brows.


Scene 3. Act 4.
Paris in ^^ep^eards ^pp^rrel. Leonida, and Par^s encounter. Leonida. What
M'etamorphis's this? Paris a Druy'd
Become a Shepherd?

Paris. Even such, well viewed,
All powerful Love transformed all powerful Jove,
No wonder Mortals such Effects do prove:
But could you view my Inside, you should see,
Paris within yet far more changed to be.
My thoughts do feel an universal Spring,
And charm themselves with Harmony they sing:
Each Fancy does beget a various Flower,
(As does, in April, a distilling Shower)
TO enamel richly our Hymenal Wreath,
Which shall with every wanton Zephire breath
More fragrant odors, then the Arabian hills,
When each perfumed Le^f with honey fills
The no more busy Be, who thus o'reflow^
With plenty of delight, becomes a Drone;
While we therewith be'ing crowned by Virgin hands,
Unite our Souls in everlasting Bands.

Leonida. Oh excellent! But whence all this? or why?


Paris. To welcome my fulfraught Felicity;
Thou know my Love to Diana, and how
My Father gladly did the same allow;
My wingie Passions, greedy of their Prey,
Have got the Mothers Will; Children obey:
So said she, when my Love I did disclose;
She had no Power, Bellinda must dispose.
Our Parents are agreed, the Contract's don,
And nothing wanting but to morrows Sun.
Who shall with such a Reverence be beheld,
As other Lights, Himself he had excelled.

Leonida. Inure your Pass'ions to a milder Strain,
You are not sure Diana's Will to gain.

Paris. She is the Image of true Piety;
Her Obedience to doubt were Her'esie:
But here in vain my hours I do waste,
To find her out I will renew my haste.
My stay here was my Happ'iness to make known,
Which was imperfect till to others shown. Exit.

Leonida. It Is very sudden, this Report be'ing true,
To Sylvander, pray Heaven, no Ill ensue. Alexis appears.
Now fair disguised Druy'd, what monstrous Race
Must we expect of this Cloud you embrace?
Thrice has the Moon filled full her horned Crest:
And thrice again her Orbs she has deprest,
Since you this Habit took, and yet I see
Of this our Purpose no Fertility,
Unless you do delight your selft'inflict,
(As did the Gods their Host, they did convict)
Placed in happiness to the very Lip,
Yet not suffer your thirsty Soul to sip.

Alexis. Here cause is of your Pity.


Leonida. Or my Blame,
That you so often have abused the same;
Frustrating It with your own self-Neglect.

Alexis. Blame rather my Love's too severe Respect.


Leonida. Respect, to what?


Alexis. To what I do obey.


Leonida. Which her Repentance cancels every day;
Those Tributes of her Love she pays to thee,
Are Sacrifices to thy Memory,
Unto her dead; not by hers, but thy Guilt
Art thou become so, since so it thou will:
Nor do I think she would thee e're forgive,
Knew she thou from her hold'st whom thou could give:
How often thee in her amorous Arms inchain'd,
Has she thee in her stifled Sighings named.
Wishing thee Such, yet jealous of each Ear,
Scattered the Motions of her modest Fear
Into her Cheeks, which there such Thoughts betrayed,
As such, she would thou were, she were afraid.

Alexis. This be'ing granted, why does she not revoke
Her own Sentence, and ease me of my Yoke?

Leonida. She knows not that you are, or if she did,
Not knowing where you are, why it forbid?
Advise betimes, you long not concealed can,
A woman's Habit long not hides a Man:
Besides, if such discov'ry you befall,
To Adamas 'twill be a reproach, to All.

Alexis. Alas! I often it attempted have,
But want of Courage often Repulses gave.

Leonida. See, see, is this an Object to affright? Astrea appears.
It rather is an Object to invite;
Still so intentive on your amorous Chase, Astrea ab^^^ds Alexis and (...) her.
I know you Celadon rather had embrace
Then this fair Druy'd; Nay, let not his fair Name
Dye those fair Roses in a deeper Stain,
Unless it be it silently t'avow,
That is no Crime to which the Gods do bow.

Astraea. Fair Nymph, I know not why I should aver
Before Alexis Love I His prefer.

Leonida. In vain you do from me your Passions hide,
I have to trace them a more subtle Guide
Then you yet known of, who has to me shown
Each passage of your Loves to your selves known:
For proof whereof, the Cause of his late Death
Was not, as you report; your Aid, but Breath.

Astraea. I am amazed with wonder; but whereby
Comes this to your Knowledge?

Leonida. I Will satisfy
Your Thoughts in that, provided you conceal,
As religi'ous Secrets, what I reveal.

Astraea. I shall.


Leonida. My Uncle has a secret Art,
Which he to me not long since did impart;
By which, of what is, was, or yet shall be.
We have true Knowledge: this said Mystery
Enlightened me in what I you disclosed,
And more had said, had you it not opposed.

Astraea. It were a second Inj'ury to his Love,
Should I deny that I such Passion prove;
Nor shall ought I can hear of him offend,
Unless it be the Subject of his End.

Leonida. If you him love, you would him wish to see.


Astraea. Beyond imaginary Felicity.


Leonida. Then know, the Power of my Art I Will try,
Provided you your Succor no^ deny.

Astraea. I am afraid we shall disturb the Peace
Of his eternal Rest.

Leonida. Those your Fears cease.


Astraea. Nor shall I Courage have to see the Air
With horror maskt, while you your Charms prepare.

Leonida. Nothing less, the Air shall be more calm, more bright,
And smile on each thing with more fresh delight.
Each Tree, and Flower, reassume their Spring,
Each eary Chorister more clearly sing.

Astraea. ^ do assent.


Leonida. Then you must first untie
What your Command imposed; That to your eye
He may appear.

Astraea. If my Love still have force
^o reunite, as it had to divorce;
^eladon, I command thee to appear,
and leave those Bonds of thy respectful Fear.

Leonida. Leonida with a book of Characters in one hand, and a bough in the
other, after many turnings, kneels and invokes. Enough. You happy Spirits, who
still prove
The everflourishing delights of Love;
Afford us One from your Society,
We will rear Altars to your Diety.
There he is, do you not him see?

Astraea. Not I.


Leonida. Your Intents wanting to his Liberty,
Although your Words seem essent'al to be.

Astraea. They both are truly present.


Alexis. So is he;
Alexis falls ^n his knee and embraces Astraea's. Recieve thy Cel'adon, whom the
milder Wave,
Least it should quench his Flame, denied a Grave.

Astraea. Why do you mock me? sweet Alexis rise.


Alexis. Alexis I am not, but in Disguise;
See here the spoils unwittingly I forced
She shows her from her breast fir^^ a ribbon, then a picture. From thy fair
self, when from't I was divorced;
Or if thy Celadon thou know not,
See if thine own Face thou have not forgot.

Astraea. Ah cruel wretch! thy Impr'dence has betrayed,
With thy false Charms, the Modesty of a Maid:
Thou Impudent Attempter against my Fame,
How dare thou to thy Treach'eries feal thy Name?
Or before me thy self thus represent,
Whose knowledge all my life I must repent:
Diss'yal Deceiver! haste thee from mine Eye
Unto thy Ruin, hence, away and dye;
Since thou had Courage to incur my Hate,
Take it again the Same to expiate.

Alexis. Still honored Mistress, I ne'^e did attend, He holds her who sirngles
to be gone.
To what you me reproach, a fairer End;
Yet since you do Deaths Sentence me pronounce,
Tell me what kind of Death you do denounce. She flings from him, whom Leo,
^id^ runs after.

Astraea. Such as thou will, so thou may cease to be. But seeing Celadon fly
another way, she pursues him with distraction,


Leonida. Astraea, Celadon, why thus disagree.


Scene 4. Act 4.
Lycidas, Phillis, Diana. Phillis encounters them in (...) Lycidas. SEE whom we
seek?


Phillis. Lycidas, my hasty fear
Must fill with Wonder thy ast^nish't Ear,
And yours Diana; Celadon yet lives,
But whom Heaven did, Astraea not forgives;
Celadon did, in Alexis disguise,
Both him present, and withhold from our eyes,
Which known to Astraea, her offended Shame,
That she too lavishly had fed her flame
On this false Object, who from her again
As lavishly had still r'exact the same:
Has rashly him pronounced a second Doom,
Thus of our Joys, Grief must possess the room.
But he by none to be resisted, fled
Into the Woods: And as soon lives, is dead,
Unless your hasty search do him prevent,
But my Relation precious Time has spent.

Lycidas. So strange Amazement has my sense bereaved,
That I can scarce believe I Am not deceived.

Diana. Nor I.


Lycidas. Sure Nature did herself belly,
To such Beauty gave no Humanity.

Di^na. It Is very strange.


Lycidas. Prodigious Amity
That works the Effects of stern Hostility.

Phillis. Her now collected Sense the same repents,
And what she did desire, done, she laments,
Stay not, in her reviles, your search.

Lycidas. Exit. I fly.


Phillis. With your leave; her to comfort. To Diana. Exit.


Diana. I to die.
Fond Astraea! thus to build thy Mishap
On Beauties Fortune showred in thy lap,
Thou art thy self unto thy self ill Fate,
Too hasty Ils thus to anticipate;
And why thus does thy Happiness distaste?
Because, before thou would, thou happy wast.
Alas! had Fate to me been half so kind,
I had not, sure, as thou, been half so blind:
What lessens thine, me double Grief does frame,
In that the author I must never blame.
My Mother it is; my Mother who me bred,
By whom I am to Execution led*
Whose former Pie'ty nothing does avail,
If on pretended piety sh' assail
My ruin; must from my Obedience rise,
To fill, and justify her Sacrifice;
But she, alas, claims Natures laws her due,
As if against her Laws, what she framed destrue,
It Is none of hers; abandoned hers we have,
Who sweetens Evils, even those she gave
Were but to salve those that our selves we give,
Whilst we more careless of our selves here live.
Blind Customs (from blind opinion sprung)
They are, observed because once begun.
What more ^njust against Nature or all Right,
Thus wilfully t'extinguish eithers Light,
Those, One observes with so much Piety,
Another thinks offends his Deity;
If our mild mother-Nature's laws they were,
All would agree in what they were to bear.
The gentle Dove elects her loved Mate,
Without Control, or Envy, or Debate:
Which from a secret Sympathy does spring,
At whose approach Love Harmony does sing,
Without Discourse, Direction or their Will;
B'instinctive Motives, they their Loves fulfill:
Happy Couples, thus joined, happy forlorn,
Who may alone each others Losses mourn!
Sylvander appears in a discontented posture. He not seeming to look up, she
goes to him and joggs him. But while in Plaints Grief would it self subdue,
The Object, see, does it again renew.
Sylvander, Sylvander, must Diana be
Thy often Invoker, yet thou her not see?

Sylvander. He starts as ami^d^ Ha! who called? I heard Diana named,
It is her self, and by her self am blamed.
Pardon thou sweet Attracter of my Soul,
Kneels and rises. My too wild Thoughts labored but to inroul
My own Losses, with such intentive Care;
Unhappy Stewards, as thy Treasures were.
But thou in this fair Volume have laid open
Briefer Accounts of my dispensed Hope:
Diana is Another, the whole Sum
Not able to discharge, I Am quite undone.

Diana. I am thy equal Partner; one poor Bark
Bore both our Fortunes fired by one Spark.

Sylvander. Alas, it was with such Abundance fraught,
I still mis^oubted it would never be brought
To Harbor, Heaven doubting our Content
Should It forget, thus did our Loves prevent;
Nor was it just that Diana should be
Linked to a Vagabond in her Amity.
Go give to Paris happier Birth, and Wealth,
What would have been to me but counted Stealth.

Diana. Why wrongs Sylvander his Diana's Choice,
Staining thy self with thy distempered Voice?
Though thou a Stranger be, poor and unknown,
Yet by thy richer Virtue it is well shown,
Thy Stock could not be mean; Nor in my Eyes,
Can any Riches equal thy Loves prise?

Sylvander. Be merciful, and cherish not my ^lame,
It thus to fan, thou do ^'inflame the same;
Tell me thou do me hate, invent some Spite,
With less Displeasure I may leave the Light.

Diana. And leave me charged, with a distastful Crime
Would never be wiped out with any Time;
Nor must you reassume the right you gave
To your disposure; which I only have;
By force whereof, I charge you not exact
Of your own self any unlawful Act
Against thy self; Do thou believe my Love
Is yet so faint, it gladly would not prove,
Even what thou now against thy self do threat,
I would it often on my self repeat,
Until this Trunk, Sacrifices became
Num'rously infinite, as our fair Loves flame,
But that those Powers divine who have us plac'^
In these fair Holds, forbid to have them rac'd
By us, to whose Charge they did them commit,
Which Office we, till called, must not remit.

Sylvander. Such are the Summons, the Oracles Decree,
Which must by Mortal not rejected be.
Sylvander, his desires must not peetend,
Until the same Sylvander have an End:
Why should we struggle with their immov'd Will.
To them be pious, grant I may it fulfill;
Else kind to me, withhold not my Desire,
Accomplish it; but bid me to expire.

Diana. No more with these Fears my frail thoughts distract,
Till I am Others, see thou it protract;
Mean while, take this assurance which I give,
Then not as thine, rather I had not live:
She gives him her hand to kiss. Farewell, I fear my Mothers sad Surprise.

Sylvander. Naught fear I worse, then parting from those Eyes.


Scene 1. Act 5.
Alexis. LOnely D^sert! affrighting Solitude!
Such winding Path like Error has indu'd
My wilder Thoughts; whose Turnings as thine might
Lead to the entrals of eternal Night;
How you become my Fortunes thus of regrown
With Time, and Neglect, and thus still alone:
No rude Hand comes to fell your high raised Crown,
To lop your Branches, or your Trunks cut down,
Unless some Tempest do a Member tear;
Yet none, but such, as long corrupted were,
Which like a faithful Surgeon takes away,
Le^t it the Whole to ruin should betray;
While you close rank't in your united Band,
His rude Encounter securely withstand.
Alas, my scattered Thoughts disbanded are,
And wage against themselves a civil War,
In their divided discord lying waste,
What should, like thine, a mournful Peace have graced;
The Cause I would relate; But that, I fear,
It would to you it self so much endear;
In tears you would your fertile Juice dispend,
So with your fragrant Burdens you would end
Continual Food her Altars to supply,
Whose acceptable Sacrifice, I dye.
Never Victim yet immolish't twice became,
It Is only I must suffer twice the same;
And since my Love all others does exceed,
It Is fit more often I for it should bleed:
Nor yet Astraea, shall less cruel Fate,
As once before, again renew thy Hate.
Not thy Sentence to shun, I yet do live,
But greater glory I the same may give;
My better Genius prompts me to an Act
Does hitherto mine own sought End protract,
Wherein, as Authors, those fair Eyes shall be
True VVitness to true Loves Fidelity;
I hear the Boughs rustle; my self I Will hide,
Retires. Lest to prevent me Fate some hither guide.

Sylvander. Wy against the Heavens irrevocable Decree
Yet struggles th^s my weak Humanity?
If it not power have these twins to divorce,
Yet sure Diana's Sentence is of force.
I charge thee, said she, till I others be,
Against thy self act no Hostility;
I am from that Protraction now dismissed,
And from the Execution long will not desist,
As curious Fear me to you Valley led,
I met a Swain, whose care-discharged head
Rung on his Oaten Reed such merry Notes,
As Birds when Emulation strains their throats.
His nimble Feet did equal Measure beat,
To what his nimbler Fingers did repeat;
I him approacht, and of him sought to know
Why he in Mirth did so much overflow?
Who said, our Shepherds Glory's wed to day,
And it is our universal Holiday.
A secret Fear seized my distracted Sense
Presaging strait without Intelligence
That it Diana was; which true I found,
When of his Mirth he had disclosed the Ground.
Cruel Diana! did thy command intend
To witness this should be deferred my End?
But it is no Time for Plaints; both Heaven and thee
Do glut your selves with your slow Cruelty;
Yet stay! what shall the welcome Agent be?
Or Sword, or Flood? in neither's Certainty;
I Will to you Heaven neighboring Mountains summit,
And where he does his head out hanging jet,
I will precipitate my self to Dust,
And make my hasty Execution just;
He, that pretends to such Divinity,
Must fall like him, who to the Heavens would fly. Alexis discovers her self,
and holds him.

Alexis. Stay thy rash Execution yet a while;
Of thy charitable Office, not beguile
(In Misery) thy Companion.

Sylvander. Celadon!
For such, disguised, thou we^'t to me made known.


Alexis. And such I am.


Sylvander. Wherein can I thee aid?
Who to my own Misfortunes am betrayed?

Alexis. If that my own Griefs had left any room
For an Increase, they greater would become;
Let thy Favor give to my Grave a Peace,
And from me bid m'incensed Brother cease
His renewed Enmity to Astraea's Race,
Whose Command, dying, tell her I embrace;
And will revive to all Posterity
The forbid Fountain of Loves Verity
With my own Death, wherein she plain shall see,
My Love most prized by that Divinity.

Sylvander. I envy this thy Glory, and do blame
My self, I thought not to attempt the same.
Like Charity I must request of you,
That which you sought of me, to me now show;
Admit me Partner to your Enterprise,
From you the Glory only shall arise.

Alexis. Preserve thy Virtue to a greater End,
It may a Nation, nay a World defend.

Sylvander. I must not leave you.


Alexis. They (...) Nor must be denied,
With thee it is Glory Glory to divide.

Scene 2. Act 5.
Astraea, Diana. Astraea. WHile yet Death's elder brother does exact
His welcome Tributes; with Death we contract,
Hid with the Vale of yet unmasked Night,
From all Attachments we secure our Flight.
Yet by fair Cynthia's glim'ring light we see,
I judge this our intended Path should be.

Diana. How hardy Love the frailty does subdue
Of our weak Sex? No Fear does us pursue,
The horror of Night, unguarded and alone
Dismaies us not, because no Evil known.

Astraea. Such are thy happy Sufferings; but my Guilt
Is only cleared, when for it my Blood is spilt:
Thou art not faulty, cause another Force,
Not thine, as mine, wrought thy fair Loves Divorce.
It Is just for it that I should only die.

Diana. Envy me not in Death Society;
Thine own Words plead thy Life, all do agree,
That Victyms spotless, innocent should be.

Astraea. And such shall make me these repentant Floods. She seems to weep.
Desist to dye; needless are both our Bloods;
One only of our Sex must satisfy
Of true Loves Fountain the Divinity;
Whose VVisdome will provide a Lover fit
For the Releasment worthy to submit.

Diana. With your Pardon, why should it not be I?
My Heart tells me it feels an Amity,
^s such as is required; a faithful pair
Of the most perfect Lovers ever were,
Whose only Deaths the secret Charm unties.

Astraea. Disputes are vain to make known Amities.
Fair Diana, the Gods betwixt us judge,
Who will I hope preserve thee.

Diana. Do not grudg^
Me thy fair Glory thus but to partake.


Astraea. Love in his Glory will no Rival make.
Our difference ends! see, see, the new born day,
The fountains discovered, they approach, and Astraea first kneels. The
Fountains figure to us does display:
All powerful Love, who Nature do preserve,
But me destroy'st; unband thee and observe,
As my pure Love is perfect in thine Eyes,
Receive me worthy for thy Sacrifice,
To Appease thine Ire; this Fountain to set free,
And render Lovers thy hid Mystery.

Diana. She kneels. Thou divine power of Love, I need not tell
My Love is perfect, for thou know it well.
Command thy Lions insensible to be
To fair Astraea, spare her sweet Beauty,
Else you destroy the Power you have got,
Amongst Mortals your Name will be forgot;
Your Temples rac't, your Tapers no more shine,
Your Altars smoke, nor you no more divine.
Accept my Death, your Anger to assuage,
I yield my Corpse to satisfy their Rage.

Astraea. Dear Diana, wrong not your self and me,
It Is even herein your own preheminency
That pleads your preservation, if the Gods
Be just, and can distinguish Beauties odds;
Therefore I do again your Powers implore,
Preserve her, and preserve your Treasures store. She kneels again. Diana would
kneel, but is withheld by, Astraea. They embrace one another, and fall one
(...) the (...) side of the fountain, the other on the other, fa^^ asleep.
No more; I do conjure thee by our Love,
Against my Desire, and Peace, the Gods not move.

Alexis, Sylvander. Alexis. Each Mountains pride with new gilt Crown appears,
And fair Aurora has dried up her Tears;
Let us renew our Speed; I fear some sent
In search of us, should our Design prevent.
Ha! Astraea!

Sylvander. They draw nigh the fountain, and discover Astrea and Di^^^. Good
Gods! Diana see.


Alexis. Or does Heaven mock our weak Humanity?
If she, you Gods, why grant you such Repose
To her unjustly caused me mine to lose?

Sylvander. What has ye hither brought, ye beaut'ous Pair?
Was it again our Lives to reinsnare?
They are become your Triumphs and your Spoils.
Cease yet again thus to renew their Broils.

Alexis. Kneels. You Soul-charming Power! unclose her Eye,
Not to appease, but see her Cruelty.
You do withhold an Object more would please,
Then does this your untimely flattering Ease:
But you know better it does her delight,
Thus to deprive me of her loved Sight;
In vain I you implore; Astraea has shown
Div'nities now insensible are grown.

Sylvander. Thou fair Inchainer of my Soul, receive
Kisses Diana. My last Farewell; And do not me bereave
Thy blessed Memory; Which Favor if thou give,
I shall not dye, but in thee still shall live,
Kisses her hand. Filled with those Joys, which Mortals do recite,
When to the Gods they shall themse^ves unite.

Alexis. Kisses Astrea. The like Farewell to thee, thou glorious Pride
Of her that framed thee, now we must divide.
But to what Heaven so ever I do go,
Deprived of thee, I shall not think it so.
I Will there attend thee like a mournful Dove,
Kisses her hand. Perhaps when dead, thou will approve my Love;
Why tempt we so our Frailty? thus to greet,
Approaching Death makes Heaven with Hell to meet.

Sylvander. They both rise. Yet be persuaded gentle Friend to live,
She that was once offended may forgive;
Can any think, who sees that heavenly Face,
Anger there moves a Circulary Race.

Alexis. A greedy Partner thus to dispossess
Him that did give thee to thy Share Access.
My jealous Love would me provoke to chide* They ^^brace. He kneels (...) the
fountai^.
But that we must Unite e're we divide,
You Power inclined to Pity, who inspires
This only Cure to unquiet Desires,
Least that my Grief, as your Divinity;
Both immortal, and infinite should be,
Receive this Body for your Sacrifice,
My Soul too you should have, but that her Eye
With sacred Charms so captive it retains,
(Though cruel she) It other Bonds disdains,
Yet let my Death, to satisfy her Crime
Against my Love, be to you a Victyme.
Let the Subject of our unhappy Strife
Be subject to prolong her Peace and Life.

Sylvander. Kneels to (...) fountain. Thou cruel Power, whose irrevocable Law,
My Soul through all those Ils could hap, did draw. He rises.
See your Sentence fulfilled, and see that you,
As in the Evil, in the Good be true.

Alexis. I fear these Beasts should forth their Limits stray,
And hurt these fair Ones.

Sylvander. Let Us bear them away.


Alexis. The eager Beasts approach.


Sylvander. Let Us them defend.


Alexis. Alexis hastily enters, Sylvander follows and (...) down as the entry.
Rather secure them avancing our End.


Phillis, Adamas, Bellinda, Paris, Lycidas, Hylas, Stella, Leonida. Phillis.
Undoubtedly they are there, the Shepherd said
He saw them both asleep, but be'ing afraid,
Durst not approach, the Lions being nigh
Unto the same place, whereon both did lie.

Adamas. It Is very strange! from thence we are not far.


Phillis. Approaching, She spice them. Whereof Each one may be Discoverer.


Bellinda. The company afar off seem distracted with wonder. B^llinda would run
to her daughter, but i^ withhold by Adamas. Oh my Shame I thus unto the world
made known,
And in thy Disobedience only shown.

Adamas. Stop your rash Speed, you must approach no nye'r,
We must invent some Means them to retire.

Paris. Betwixt my Wonder, Sorrow and my Love,
I strange Distractions in my self do prove.

Lycidas. But see, me thinks in the Fountain does appear,
As if two other Persons yet there were,

Phillis. By their Habits they should your Brother be,
And Sylvander.

Lycidas. Would Heaven I could him see!


Adamas. How strangly has the Day forsook his Light,
Our scarce born Noon is even become our Night! After thunder and lightning, a
flaming Cupid, on a Porphir Pyramid, appears as 'twere in the midst of the
fountain. They fall on their knees; after some intermission the Oracle is
delivered.
See, how contracted Clouds do mask the Sky,
Almost forbidding their Discovery.

Oracle. Let this your Wonder cease,
Your Murmurs not increase
Against my Miracles:
Those Corpse convey away;
And next ensuing day,
Consult my Oracles. Cupid v^. nisherb; they approach the fountain, and find
the bodies as dead, and without blemish, Lions converted to marble.

Adamas. Ha! they are unblemish't.


Lycidas. And yet are dead.


Phillis. Without a Bruise.


Paris. Or any Blood being shed.


Adamas. These Lions which so fearful did appear,
To coldest marble now converted are.

Bellinda. Of Diana. Thy just Punishment, but my double wrong.


Lycidas. Too soon I find, what I have sought too long.


Paris. Oh my afflicted Soul!


Phillis. Oh cruel death!


Adamas. Heaven has you charged to cease your murmuring breath.


Hylas. They carry forth the corpse. See now the wise Effects of constant love,
Which in their ends such Tragedies still prove.

Scene 3. Act 5.
Leonice. What I have often heard, now true I see;
The Wise are to themselves their Destiny.
The favorable Gods do still assist
Those that untir'd with Industry persist:
How long them unrelenting I assailed
With Tears, Vows, Prayers, and yet herein failed
Of what my Subtilty has brought to pass.
My Joy is doubled, I the Author was*
Who secretly, and in the dead of Night
This Desert did invade; what could affright
Being armed with Love, and my Tyrsis to find,
Whose Plaints became my Guides; till then never kind,
Unseen at Distance following to his Cave,
Which when securest sleep had made his Grave,
I entered, him with feigned Voice to awake,
Reciting often Tyrsis, Tyrsis, then spoke
These hollow Accents, I the shadow am
Of her thou vainly love, and now came
But to conjure thee to yield up my Right
To Leonice; cease unto her thy Spite:
Heaven wills it so, and Cleon it commands,
Who shall delight in your united Bands.
When strait he it confirming with a Groan,
I vanished, and left him there alone;
But lest he should believe it but Conceit
Wrought on his Fancy, again my Deceit
Attempts a second Proof: But see the effect,
Which in my Search his wandering steps direct;
Yet what with Crast I sought, with Crast I Will shun, She retires on one side,
Tyrsis enters.
Lest I should mar what is so well begun.

Tyrsis. Thou blessed Shadow, whom I yet adore,
Why do thou thus command me to restore
Thy Right unto Another? can it be
That thou art tired with Importunity
Of Love? or do my Sighs and Tears disdain,
As too mean Offerings, empty, fruitless, vain?
Alas! though these effects often fail, and die,
The cause endures to Eternity:
My love which now an unknown Trial proves,
Since to destroy it self thy Will it moves,
Tempt yet the same to possibility,
Inflict some yet unheard of Cruelty:
(If any yet is left, I did not try)
And I shall count it Guilt thee to deny:
Which now is such, thee even to obey,
Since thou command'st my Love, my Love betray.
Who shall dispense those holy Vows did tie
Our sympathising Souls in Harmony?
Even she whose Power only did them frame,
Her Power only must dissolve the same.
If but t'unloose my Love she did intend,
Why since hers could not, seeks she not my End?
Perhaps, when Souls cast off this Earth, delight
T'in infinite objects their loves to unite:
No Jealousy can touch their pure Essence,
Which only but the Object is of Sense:
All all possess in so equal degree,
Even 'twixt themselves Distinction cannot be.
Why then defer I her to satisfy?
He discovers Leonice. Propitious Heaven! see that Divinity,
Who my Commander was, is now my Guide.
She seems to ^^ie, he takes hold on her and kneels. Leonice! even she that did
us divide,
Is now become the means us to unite.
If for my Punishment your exchanged Spite,
Then mine more just, have not overthrown your Love.

Leonice. What Miracle is this? you Gods above
Mock not our Frailty; if this Tyrsis be,
What I of him sought, why seeks he now of me?
Or is it but his shadow you have taken,
To Increase my Sorrow, and reproach my Shame?

Tyrsis. It Is that Tyrsis, who for Cleons Respect,
Did long so much thy injured Love neglect;
But be'ing by her discharged from my vow,
No other Object can my Love allow.
Then thy fair self; let no Reproach reveal
He kisses her hand. My Shame; on this true Penitence I seal.

Leonice. This does confirm that you are truly he;
But your intention yet I cannot see.

Tyrsis. Ever to be yours, if my former Hate
My true Love and Remorse may expiate.

Leonice. How shall either be known?


Tyrsis. Heaven's holy Bands
Shall both confirm, joining both Hearts and Hands.

Scene. 4. Act. 5.
Stella, Hylas. Stella. YOur pleasant Humor you have left, I find;
If not to me, be to your self more kind:
Shake Dullness off; can his own Enemies Death
Thus droopingly stop merry Hylas breath?

Hylas. It was from his my Harmony did spring,
And now is ended where it did begin;
Opposites support each other; one Wit Enter Phillis with a merry countenance
smilng on Hylas.
Begets Another, and subsists by It.
How, Phillis! does that Countenance become
These Times? Or has thy Inmate left his room?
In your Sex never Inhabitant was Sorrow,
For still it is here to day and gone to morrow.

Phillis. Hylas! I Would persecute thee thus an Age,
And change thy wonted Mirth into a Rage,
Leonice and Tyrsis listen at distance to their discourse. Could I my Joy
within it self contain;
Know then, whom thou thought were, are now not slain:

Hylas. Hah!


Phillis. Astraea, Diana thou shall see,
With Celadon and Sylvander living be.

Hylas. By what strange Miracle?


Phillis. It seems the force
Of Magic Charms were here, not to divorce
The Soul and Body, as thought, but t'invade
The deprived Senses with Death's seeming shade,
A breathless Slumber, which now having end,
New life to us in their revivings send.

Hylas. I do begin m' Heresy to forsake,
But such another will a Convert make.

Leonice. Leonice and Tyrsis en^er. By such Another, such you Other see.
Phillis me pardon your Loves Jealousy.

Tyrsis. And let the Innocent your Grace partake.


Phillis. Ye both are such, if such I both can make.


Hylas. I Am thunder-strucken! how, join quick and dead?
I will believe now any thing can be sed.

Leonice. We did partake your Sorrows when t'us shown,
Which by your Joy had death so soon as known.

Tyrsis. To perfect which, let us them haste to see,


Phillis. To that your eyes may present witness be.


The whole troop of Shepherds enter in solemn manner, with great silence; which
at distance making a stand, after a while Adamas alone approaches the Temple,
and kneeleth: which done, all the rest do the like at that distance they were
at. Adamas. Adored Divinity, fair Venus son,
Who Agent art of all that e're begun,
Foe to Confusion; first of Heavenly race;
As thou did Chaos, so vouchsafe thy Grace
Our amazed Doubts to order and enlight.
We come not Cur'osity to delight,
But thy prescribed Ord'nance to obey,
In consulting thy Oracle this day.
Pronounce thou God in favor of our Groves,
What Destiny thou do disign their loves.
The object of our Demands is to please thee; A ^aming Cupid appears in the
midst of the fountain (...) ^ Porphis pedestal.
Let our Content thy Answers Subject be.

O^acle. Since that faithful Lover required,
Alexis, is to all expired,
Celadon receive thy happy Choice,
Astraea thee Heaven does present,
The price of thy long Discontent,
To which let none oppose his voice.

Celadon. My humble thanks, just Love, for this thy Grace; Heavante^^ and again
kneels in Shepherds habit.
Thy Ordinances still I will embrace
Above all Deities: To thee each day
I will fresh Tributes of Devotion pay;
In stead of Sighs and Tears, I will renew
The purest Flames thy Altar ever knew,
Which shall like Vestal's fire never dye,
Replenish't still by her Sun-staining Eye;
And since thou have in Love given me the Prize,
I will for ever be thy Sacrifice.

Adamas. Celadon rising, retires to the rest of the company: all continue
kneeling. Great God, propitious still, once more disclose,
How of Sylvander does your Will dispose.

Oracle. Sylvander must no longer live.
To Paris I Diana give,
And Adamas my just Command
Bids that he die by thine own Hand.

Sylvander. Cupid vanishes. Sylvander hastily runs and casts himself on his
knees before the Altar, while all the rest rise. Thou ireful God, who become
envi'us art
Of my Fdelity; glut thee with a Heart
Inshrines a Beauty would thee dispossess
Of thy usurped Power, did not supress
By unjust Force her humble Devotairs,
Winding them thus in these thy cruel Snares;
Yet this I have to thank thee for, that I
He rises. Shall have the Glory thus for her to die.

Diana. You cruel Gods, mix Mercy with your Spite,
Both Lives and Loves see that you disunite.

Paris. My Soul does grieve it cannot happy be
Without this his preceding Misery.

Celadon. My Joy's imperfect.


Lycidas. Alas poor Lover!
He has tried one Death, now must try 'nother.

Adamas. The Gods more cruel are! who me to live
Do suffer yet, then that they Death thee give;
Yet must our Piety obey their Will.
Prepare you strait their Sentence to fulfill.

Sylvander. He approaches to Diana, kneels and kisses her hand still holding
it. First then to thee fair Author of this Strife,
Not to the Gods, I offer up my Life;
They it compelled, but thou it willing have,
With more Piety, since heaven's in thee placed.

Diana. I will precede thee in thy hasty Flight, She faints, and is supported
by her mother. Astrea, and Phillis.
And vail my Soul in ever mournful Night.

Sylvander. Let naught disturb your Joys, to all Adue,
Now in my blood your zealous Sword imbrue.

Adamas. An Officer stands ready with a ba^^a. Sylvander kneels. First to
observe our wonted Ceremony,
With Victims blood the Altar sprinkled see,
Truss up your Sleeve, and then extend your Arm.
That wel-known Mark my feeble Senses charm; Here he stops, and after some
amazement, falls on his neck; Sylvander still kneeling. He rises* shows the
company his arm.
My Son! Paris my Son! Gods cannot lie,
For by my hand does now Sylvander die:
Let Wonder cease; see, see, a Branch! see here,
Of that fresh Tree, we welcome the new Year!
This confirms thou art mine, whom Soldiers Rage
In unjust War made innocent Pillage:
Paris, but for thy sake, is Paris named;
Thou art my Son* him only such I fram
To salve my Sorrow with a false relief;
Turns to Paris. Still thou art such in Love; forsake thy Grief.
I will unite thy Alliance to my blood.
She pawses, while he gives Paris hand to her. Here Niece to thee.

Leonida. You must not be withstood.


Adamas. With half my Wealth; nor is he of Stock mean,
As I suppose; I found him nigh yon Stream;
A child of equal Age and Fate to mine
Whom I had lost, and even about that time.
About his neck did hang in Chain of gold
A rich Jewel did this Inscription fold,
Born of a Lion; Which he still does wear
They look on it. Bellinda knowing it falls upon his neck. As to all Eyes it
plainly may appear.

Bellinda. My son Ergaste! My too long lost Son!
Not of a Lion born, but of Alion.

Astraea. Fie, Diana! lift up thine Eyes, see, see,
Sylvander shall again thine living be.

Diana. Sighing awakes as out of a dream. Why do you thus my dying soul
distract.


Bellinda. Taking Sylvander and joining his hand with Diana's. I will it cure
with this welcome Contract.


Diana. Sylvander presenting himself on his knees is by Adamas separated. They
kneel. Adamas takes him by the hand, and again leads him to the Altar, with a
silent astonishment of all the troop, expecting some new trouble. If yet I
dream, then let me never wake,
Lest these unexprest Joys I should forsake.

Sylvander. They are Essential.


Adamas. Yet a while forbear;
Once more before the Gods you must appear.
You holy Powers, does this you satisfy,
That thus Sylvander does in Paris die?
If not, although it sealed be with mine own,
Paris with Sylvander shall be overthrown.

A still kind of music is heard with great Reverence, and once more Cupid
appears in white; In either hand a Garland of Myrrh, which he casts to
Celadon and Sylvander, at which he vanishes.

Then is heard this Song. SONG.
It Is enough, Mortals, dry up your Tears;
The smiling God is satisfied,
Whose Cunning now may be descri'd,
Inciting so often succeeding fears;
It was but to prepare your heightened Appetites
More eagerly to feast on plentiful Delights.
Each now a double Tribute exact,
Of your Flames, which so purely burn,
Since what ye take, ye do return,
Though extort, you justify the Fact.
Rifle those uncoucht Treasures then, make them your spoils,
A Harmony springs from Lovers civil broils.
At which many little Cupidons appear joining their Voices, and casting
Garlands of Myrrh to the whole Troop.

Adamas. Thus Heaven and I you join. Adamas takes Silva^. and gives him to
Diana.


Hylas. More wonders still! Hylas extends his hand to Stella.
Which I mean with a greater to fulfill;
Stella, thy hand; no longer Mistress now,
The whole (...) smile to see Hyla^ ^^rious. That Name I Will cancel with another
vow.

Phillis. Myraculous!


Adamas. Now Celadon approve
The fountains Force.

Celadon. 'Twere Injury to Love.


Adamas. Astraea, your Command.


Astraea. 'Twere Jealousy
Of Both our loves, not suffer both to try.

Adamas. Celadon first enters, they all follow. A perfect Myrrour of each
perfect Mind,
Which shall a Heaven in their nigh Unions find,
By mine own Hands; But first your sports prepare
To greet our Princes, Galataea fair;
I at my house do Her expect to Night;
Let each Invention spring a new Delight.

Scene 5. Act 5.
Lindamor, Galataea, Silva, Ligdamon. Lindamor. WHat strange Disorder we in
each part find!


Galataea. As if the world were forsook of Mankind.


Ligdamon. With one Consent all from themselves are fled.


Lindamor. Nor has the chasing of a Foe this bred,
Unless the feavor of distemp'red Broils
Has made him to forget his better Spoils.

Silva. The wandering flocks do stray without their Guides.


Lindamor. Some Panick Terror thus their Fear derides.


Galataea. Here Is one will clear our Doubts; Adamas, why Adamas enters, kneels
and kisses her hand.
Thus all hid, lost, or dead?

Adamas. Madam! that I
Must leave our Lovers to relate; But know,
Fair Princess, thus our Joys do overflow.

Galataea. We have in part had thereof a Report,
Which is one Cause why hither we resort.

Adamas. Madam, your Vassal still receives from you
Additions of Honor; One more endew
My zealous Duty, your Aventure show.

Galataea. It Is crowned in Polemas overthrow,
By this blessed Hand, with which I come to tie, Takes Lindamor by the hand.
In Hymen's rights, our purest Amity.

Adamas. My feeble Sense, like an o'refruitful Tree,
Threatens my Ruin, thus o'recharg'd to be.

Galataea. ^^t why us thus your Company berest?


Adamas. He turns behind him and shows the maskers who placed in several
po^^^res as disco^sing with their Mistrisses. The figure is a round mount
encompassed with Sicamo^^, and in the midst is a greater, that o'respreads all
the (...). To render more agreeable my Theft,
See Madam.

Galataea. Hah! a lovely spectacle!


Lindamor. A fair Troop!


Ligdamon. A smiling Miracle!


A Chorus appearing (consisting of Shepherds) in order, at some distance one
behind another, on either side of the Scene, by degrees approach to the
frontispiece thereof, singing as follows: Which ended, and they retired, the
Shepherds descend and dance their Masque. SONG.
Cyn^hi' a give place
You glittering spangles of the sable Night,
Hide now your face;
Mortals no more shall want your feeble Light;
Nor yet Presage of you require;
With your Infl'ence
We will dispense,
Cherish't by a heav'nlyer Fi're.
Chorus.
No Cloud shall mask our serene Air,
Unless the more pleased Senses to unite;
Nor whispering Sigh murmur Despair,
Unless expired in Excess of Delight.
Each happy Mind
By Loves mysterious Unanimity,
Here Heaven does find,
Reflected from mut'al Divinity:
Which our mean Thoughts to that height rears,
As ravished
Our souls are led
Dancing to their harmonious Spheres.
No cloud shall, Chorus.
etc.
Adamas. First, I restore what I berest by Craft. Takes Celadon by the hand and
leads him to Galatea.


Galataea. Celadon, Cupid has exchanged his Shaft;
But still I love thee, though with other Flames.

Adamas. These my exchanged Sons have changed Names. The like by Paris or
Ergaste. She courteously receives them; they kiss her hand.


Galataea. Mysterious Joys!


Adamas. My Niece does humbly crave She kisses her hand.
Your Pardon and your Favor she may have.

Galataea. Receive it with my Grace, and thanks to all;
Such meeting Joys Mortals seldom befall.

Lindamor. Now let us to the holy Temple haste,
Each may Loves long wished fruitful Harvest taste.

Galataea. Which shall with full Delight our Spirits move,
When each recites the Story of his Love.

Where at the Chorus of the Shepherds placed in their first stations, sing as
follows. 1.
Song. YOur Ecstasy of Wonder cease,
Astonished Spectators, know,
True Judgment may Delight increase,
But blind Amazement it overthrow:
Though these fair Troops have charmed
Your ravished Sense,
So powerfully armed
With Excellence:
Yet we must truly tell
You, they are Humane; our Desire
Is not to make them yet divine,
That, then they are, would make them less,
And them of Glory dispossess,
Their Natures they excel.
Chorus. Your high raised Fancies wake from birthless Dreams
Here taste of Pleasures more essential Streams.
Haste, haste away, with them your Band unite;
So changed, not ended, shall be your Delight.
2.
Though their Appearance we translate,
The^^ supposed Natures they retain
Desiring to communicate
Their Graces in your Entertain;
Fly from your Orbs, fix here,
That you may lend
New motion to this Sphere,
Sprung from its end:
Here it redoubled shall
Not add to Time plumes, but to Love,
Whose active Flames do higher move,
And purge their own Refulgency,
When quickened by sweet Harmony,
Their food material.
Chorus. Your high raised fancies wake, etc.
Whereat the Theater is opened, and both Compan^ uniting themselves, spend the
rest of the Night (...) their accustomed Dances. FINIS.

