A DISCOURSE Concerning the GIFT of PRAYER SHOWING What it is, wherein it
consists, and how far it is attainable by Industry, with diverse useful and
proper directions to that purpose, both in respect of Matter, Me^^od,
Expression.

By John Wilkins, D. D.

Whereunto may be added ECCLESIASTES: OR, A Discourse concerning the GIFT of
PREACHING by the same AUTHOR.

London, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for SAMUEL GELLIBRAND, at the BALL in Paul's
Churchyard. 1653.

TO THE Reader.
IT may justly seem a wonder, that amongst the vast multitude of Books,
wherewith the world does abound, there should be so little written of this
subject here insisted upon, being in it self of such great consequence, and
general concernment.

There is scarce any kind of skill, or ability which may be taught and learnt,
but it has been reduced to an Art, and laid down according to some rules and
method, for the more facil and full comprehension of it.

How copious are the Treatises concerning humane Oratory? and diverse have
written particularly of the Gift of Preaching, besides the many Examples of it
in Homilies, or Sermons. And so likewise for the models or patterns of
devotion, which are very numerous, almost in all Languages But for the Gift of
Prayer, or the rules whereby a man may be directed to an ability of expressing
or pouring out his soul in this duty; there is (for ought I can find) but
little written of it in any ^anguage, though it be of such general use for all
kinds, and professions of men, and though the Gift be as much better then the
Pattern, as the Receipt is better then the Medicine.

I am very sensible that the performance of this duty in a spiritual manner, is
by infusion from above, and does not fall under the rules of Art, but yet there
are some special advantages in the performance of it, both for the furnishing
of the judgment, and the exciting of the affections, which a man may be
supplied with by study and premeditation; and the enquiry after these is the
proper subject of this discourse.

Every one will be ready to acknowledge it for an excellent ability, when a man
can readily suit his desires unto several emergencies, and upon any occasion
pray without book; but many look upon it as being extreme difficult, and not
for an ordinary person to attain. That which is here endeavored, is to make
it plain and facil.

There are three special hindrances which do indispose men for this service;
want of Matter, and Order, and Words; for the supply of which, here is proposed
a copious field of Matter, a regular frame for method, and Scripture phrase for
Expression, which no man need be ashamed to imitate or borrow.

The knowledge and consideration of these things, must needs be very useful
for all callings of men, (every one being concerned to perform the duty, and
consequently to labor after the Gift) Especially for such whose business it
is, after a more peculiar manner to give themselves unto Prayer, Acts 6.4.
and the Mimistery of the Word. And amongst these chiefly, for such younger,
unexperienced men who have not their senses exercized to discern what is proper
and fitting. Heb. 5.14.
And therefore when they are put upon this service, may be apt by their
ignorance in this kind to prostitute the solemnity of this duty.

This discourse was at first intended only for private use and direction, it
was for the substance of it drawn up diverse years since, as it is now
represented, before I knew so much as any one Author, who had formerly
attempted this subject; Since that, I have met with and perused the profitable
labors of some others in this kind. M r. Elnath Abba Father.
Parre, Holy Incense.
Mr. Clarke, De Precatione. Guil. Parisiensis de Rhetorica divina. Wesselus
Geoningensis de Oratione. Alfonsus Rodericus Exercit. Perfectionis. Tract. 5.
de Oratione.
Scultetus. I have l^kewise consulted such other Treatises as did seem most
nearly to border upon it; Not neglecting the discourses of those who are styled
Magistri rerum spiritualium, concerning the Rules they prescribe for Mental
prayer.

I have formerly published some other preparations of a like nature, upon
another subject, by which I am encouraged unto some hope that this likewise may
be acceptable.

A DISCOURSE Concerning the GIFT of PRAYER.
CHAP. I. What this Gift is, why ascribed to the Spirit; the ingredients
required to it.
THe true happiness of every Christian, does properly consist in his spiritual
communion with God.

This Communion is chiefly exercised in those two acts of Religion Prayer.
Hearing the Word.


Prayer may be considered under a twofold notion, either as a Duty. Gift.


It is of very great concernment for every man to be rightly acquainted with it
in both these respects: How it must be performed as a Duty, and how it may be
attained as a Gift.

I am at this time to discourse of it only in this latter sense: The Gift of
Prayer may be thus described-

It is such a readiness and faculty proceeding from the Spirit of God whereby
a man is enabled upon all occasions in a fitting manner to express and to
enlarge the desires of his heart in this duty.

Unto the attaining of this Gift in its true latitude and fullness, there are
three sorts of ingredients required.

1. Something to be infused by the Spirit of God, who must sanctify, and
spiritualize the judgment and affections, before we can either apprehend, or
desire any thing as we should.

2. Some natural endowments and abilities disposing us for this Gift, as
Readiness of Apprehension, Copiousnesse of Fancy, Tenderness of Affection,
Confidence, and volubility of Speech, etc. which are very great advantages to
this purpose, being naturally much more eminent in some then in others.

3. Something to be acquired or gotten by our own industry. Namely, such a
particular and distinct apprehension, both of our sins and wants, and the
mercies bestowed upon us, that we may be able to express the thoughts and
dispositions of our minds concerning them, in such a decent form, as may
excite both in our selves and others suitable affections.

The first of these is by some styled the Spirit of Prayer: the two later the
Gift of Prayer: the two first of these do not fall under the rules of Art,
being not to be taught or learnt, and therefore to these our endeavors cannot
of themselves contribute, the one being a special grace, the other a common
gift of the Spirit grounded upon innate propensity of temper or constitution;
and so it is the third chiefly that concerns our present inquiry.

Each of these may be separated from one another. There may be true grace in
the heart, where there is but a very small measure either of this natural or
acquired ability. And on the other side, a man may have the Gift of Prayer, who
has not the Spirit of Prayer; that is, there may be a great degree of these
common gifts in such as are altogether estranged from the life of grace. Psa.
68.18
It Is probable that Judas was eminent for these, and therefore was chose an
Apostle; and so those others, who at the last day shall plead for themselves,
Lord have not we preached in thy name, and cast out Devils, etc. they did all
this in his Name; Mat 7.22.
that is, they were by him both outwardly called and gifted for these services.

Such as have only the second of these may sometimes exceed those that have
the third, whence it comes to pass that men of very ordinary parts in respect
of any acquired abilities, may be more ready and copious in this service, then
those who in respect of other knowledge are much beyond them.

But then only is this Gift complete, when there is a joint concurrence of all
these three ingredients, when the heart is sanctified, and the natural
abilities improved by industry.

That is a very apposite text to this purpose, and does treat particularly
concerning this subject Prayer, under the notion of a Gift, Romans 8.26. The
Spirit helps our infirmities for we know not what we should pray for as we
ought: but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us with groanings which
cannot be uttered.

The chief Scope of that place may be comprised in these three Propositions.

1. That of our selves we are very ignorant, and impotent in this business of
Prayer, having many infirmities, not knowing what to pray for as we ought. Not
but that a mere natural man upon the sense of any present want or danger, may
apply himself unto this duty for remedy (as the Mariners in Jonah) this being a
common instinct of nature; But to perform it acceptably, either for the
matter, what we should pray for, or the manner, as we ought; this is a
business of much greater difficulty, because it is required to be according to
the will of God. verse. 27. And the natural man understands not the things of
God, 1 Cor. 2.14
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. But is
disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate, Tit. 1.16
(...), void of judgment; being alienated from the life of God, Ephesians. 4.18.
through the blindness that is in him.

There is naturaly in every man* both an impotency of judgment, an enmity and
averseness of desire toward all holy duties in general, and particularly to
this of Prayer: We cannot order ^ur speech to God by reason of darkness, Job
37.1.
says Eli^u; and therefore the Disciple upon their first conversion, being
sensible of their own disability in this kind, they made their addresses to
our Savior, that he might teach them how to pray.

2. The Spirit of God must be our guide and assistance in this duty; Luke 11.1.
He must help our infirmities, and make intercession for us. Not that the Holy
Ghost is our Mediator of intercession, that is properly the office of the
Son, who is therefore styled our Advocate. There is one Mediator betwixt God
and Man, 1 John 2.1 1 Timothy 2.5
the Man Christ Jesus. It Is He only that in respect of his merits and
sufferings does make intercession for us, Romans 8.34. But now because the Spirit
of God does excite our hearts to prayer, and infuse into us holy desires,
stirring us up, and instructing us in this duty; therefore is he said to
intercede for us. So Gal. 4.6. there the Spirit is said to cry Abba Father:
Romans 8.
God has sent the spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying Abba Father;
and yet verse. 15. of that forecited place, it is said, We have received the
spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father. In which places being compared,
the Spirit is said to cry Abba Father, because it makes us to do so: So is he
said to pray for us, because he does inform and quicken us to pray for our
selves.

It Is one of his peculiar titles to be styled the Spirit of Supplication; Zach
12.10.
because of that special influence which he has in the bestowing of this gift.
Psalm. 51.15
He must open our lips, before our mouths can show forth his praise.

Not that the other persons of Trinity are excluded from a joint concurrence in
this work. Opera Trinitatis ad ex^ra sunt indivisa. All the actions of the
blessed Trinity (excepting only those that are of intrinsecall ^elation) being
the undivided works of all the three. But now because our gross understandings
are not able to conceive of this Trinity without some distinction of their
offices and operations in reference to us, Dr. Sanderson in 1 Cor. 12.7.
therefore does the Scripture condescend so far to our capacities as to speak
of these common works by way of appropriation. Thus Power and Creation is
commonly ascribed to the Father: Wisdom and Redemption to the Son: Goodness
and all habitual graces, or gifts to the Holy Ghost.

These general operations of the Spirit are usually distinguished into two
sorts.

Either (...). Grace. (...). Gift.


Or in the common expression of the Schools there is: 1. Gratia gratum
faciens, which referres to those gifts of Sanctification, that do more
especially concern our own happiness: 2. There is gratia gratis data, which
concerns gifts of Edification, whereby we are made useful to others,
according to our several stations.

Of the first kind are all those spiritual Graces, Faith, Repentance, Humility,
etc. infused into us in our regeneration.

Unto the other are reducible all kind of secondary endowments, or abilities
whatsoever that belong to the reasonable soul (excepting only those first
faculties, that flow immediately, a principiis speciei, Dr. Sanderson. ibid.
and are in all men alike) I say all kind of abilities or good habits, are
reducible under this head. Whether or no they are by extraordinary and
immediate infusion, as were those gifts in the Primitive times of tongues,
miracles, healing, etc. 1 Cor. 12.

Or whether they are natural abilities, arising from men's several tempers and
dispositions; as strength of judgment, quickness of fancy, warmness of
affection, readiness of speech.

Or else whether they are intellectual habits which are acquired, and
perfected by Education, Industry, Experience, as when men become skillful in
any particular Art, or profession. That skill of Bezaliel and Aholiab for those
curious artificial works of the Tabernacle, to work in gold, and silver, and
brass, and cutting of stones, and carving of wood, was from the Spirit of God,
Exodus 35.31. The secular policy of Achitophel; The natural wisdom of Solomon;
The skill of the Plowman, both in sowing, and threshing does proceed from the
same Spirit; Isa. 28.26, 29.
from whom every good and perfect gift does come. In brief, when men become
skillful and expert in any faculty, whether, Disputing, Oratory, Preaching,
Praying, etc. each of these does proceed from the Spirit of God, as the
principal Author of them; dividing to every man severally as he will. All
other helps, 1 Cor. 12.11.
whether from nature or industry; being but secondary, subordinate Aides, which
are by Him made effectual for the accomplishing of these ends. That Question of
the Apostle being fitly applyable unto all preheminences of this kind. Who
made thee to differ from another? And what have thou that thou have not
received? 1 Cor. 4.7.

So then all kind of good habits or abilities, and particularly this gift of
Prayer, with the several degrees, or ingredients of it are to be ascribed unto
the Spirit of God, as being the chief donor of them.

3. This gift of the Spirit is not barely by infusion, but by assisting our
endeavors, by helping together with us, (...). collaborantes adjuvat. He
helps together with, and over against us, (so the Original word does properly
signify) as when another man sets to his shoulder, to bear a part with us in
the lifting of any burden: We must put forth our best endeavors; and then we
shall not want his assistance. The Spirit of God does ordinarily work by means,
and it is an old rule in Divinity. Habitus infusi infunduntur per modum
acquisitorum. Infused habits are usually wrought in us after the same manner as
acquired; that is, gradually, and not without humane endeavor and cooperation.

In the Primitive times indeed when the Church was in its Infancy, then the
teat was put into their mouths, they were extraordinarily inspired with these
gifts by immediate infusions, without the usual means of study and labor; but
that Mannah was only for the Wilderness, when other common ways could not be
made use of; whereas, when the Church is grown up to the estate of Manhood, and
is possessed of the Land, God does now expect that we should plow and sow, and
eat the fruit of the Earth in the sweat of our brows; that we should serve his
Providence, and depend upon him only in the use of means; and as children do
not learn to speak distinctly, but after many trials; so neither can a
Christian be able (as he should) to cry Abba Father, till he has bestowed some
time and experience in the learning of it.

CHAP. II. Two extremes that make men defective in this Gift. Confining
themselves wholly to set-formes. Depending wholly upon sudden suggestions.
FRrom what has been already said, it is easy to infer that there are two
extremes which usually hinder men from a proficiency in this Gift.

1. When they so confine themselves to the help of books and particular
set-formes, as not to aim at or attempt after any farther improvement of their
own knowledge and abilities in this kind.

2. When men depend altogether upon sudden suggestions, as if it were a
quenching, or confinement of the Spirit, to be furnished beforehand with matter
or expressions for this service.

Unto those that err in the first kind, I would suggest these considerations.

First, by way of concession: As for those weaker Christians and new Converts,
who have not their hearts enlarged with an ability to express their own wants
and desires, it is both lawful, and convenient for such to help themselves, not
only in their families, but even in their secret performance of this duty, by
the use of some good book or prescribed form, until by farther endeavor and
experience, they may attain unto some measure of this gift.

Such persons may perhaps find oftentimes their own case and condition more
pithily and affectionately set down in a prayer penned by another, then they
are able to express it themselves. And if the use of such a form do prove a
means to warm their affections, and enkindle their graces, certainly then it
cannot be justly styled a quenching of the Spirit. It Is not essential unto the
nature of prayer, that it be either read, or rehearsed by memory, or by
immediate and sudden suggestion; (these things being such circumstantiall
adjuncts, as have not any absolute intrinsecall necessity or unlawfulness) but
rather that it be delivered with understanding and suitable affections, with
humility and confidence, and an inward sense of our conditions. Nor is there
any great difference (as they are considered in themselves) betwixt repeating
by memory, and reading out of a Book; the memory being but a kind of invisible
Book for the register of our thoughts, though in this case it should be
specially remembered, that in the use of such prescript forms, to which a man
has been accustomed, he ought to be narrowly watchful over his own heart, for
fear of that lip-service, and formality, which in such cases we are more
especially exposed unto. This I thought good to premise for the removal of
prejudice on the one hand.

But now in the second place, for any one so to set down and satisfy himself
with his Book-Prayer, or some prescript form, as to go no farther, this were
still to remain in his Infancy, and not to grow up in his new nature: This
would be as if a man who had once need of crutches, should always afterward
make use of them, and so necessitate himself to a continual impotence. It Is the
duty of every Christian to grow and increase in all the parts of Christianity;
as well gifts as graces, to exercise and improve every holy gift, and not to
stifle any of those abilities wherewith God has endowed them. Now how can a man
be said to live suitable unto these rules, who does not put forth himself in
some attempts, and endeavors of this kind? and then besides, how can such a
man suit his desires unto several emergencies? What one says of counsel to be
had from books, may be fitly applied to this Prayer by book; That it is commonly
of it self, something flat and dead, floating for the most part too much in
generalities, and not particular enough for each several occasion. There is
not that life and vigor in it, to engage the affections, as when it proceeds
immediately from the soul it self, and is the natural expression of those
particulars, whereof we are most sensible.

And if it be a fault not to strive and labor after this gift, much more is it
to jeer and despise it by the name of ex tempore Prayer, and praying by the
Spirit; which expressions (as they are frequently used by some men by way of
reproach) are for the most part a sign of a profane heart, and such as are
altogether strangers from the power and comfort of this duty.

Whereas it is commonly objected by some, that they cannot so well join in an
unknown form, with which they are not beforehand acquainted; I answer; that is
an inconsiderate objection, and does oppose all kind of forms that are not
publicly prescribed. As a man may in his judgment assent unto any divine
truth delivered in a Sermon, which he never heard before; So may he join in his
affections unto any holy desire in a Prayer, which he never heard before. If he
who is the mouth of the rest, shall through imprudence deliver that which we
cannot approve of, God does not look upon it as our Prayer, if our desires do
not say Amen to it.

If it be again objected, that this ability of praying without Book, may
perhaps be fit for Ministers, and such as are of more eminent learning and
knowledge, but is not to be expected from others.

I answer, it is true, such persons are more especially concerned in this Gift,
and it is the greater fault and shame for them to be without it; but yet others
are not exempted from laboring after it, no more then they are from the
occasions, or need of it, or performing the Duty. And as for the pretended
difficulty of it, I shall in this discourse make it evident, that if it be but
seriously attempted (as all religious businesses ought to be) it is easy to be
attained by any one that has but common capacity.

Unto those that are in the other extreme, depending altogether upon sudden
infusion, and neglecting to prepare themselves for this service, by study and
premeditation, unto such I would propose these considerations.

1. By way of Concession. It Is true, a man ought not to tie himself, so
precisely unto any particular form of words (though of his own composing and
fitted to his condition) but that he may either add or alter, according as any
emergent occasion, or some new affection suggested shall require. Sometimes
perhaps he shall feel his heart more warm, his desires more vigorous, and his
expressions more copious and ready. And in this case he should not suffer
himself to be streightened, or confined within any old form, but may expatiate
more freely according as he finds his inward inlargements.

But then to the second place, this does not hinder, but that generally it is
both lawful and necessary to prepare our selves, as for this gift in general,
so for every particular act of it, by premeditating; (if we have leisure for
it) both matter, and order, and words. For though it be a gift of the Spirit,
yet it is not to be expected, that it should be suddenly infused into us,
without any precedent endeavors of our own, no more then the Gift of
Preaching, for which the ablest Ministers are bound to prepare themseves, with
diligence and study, there being not any ground for a man to expect more
immediate supplies from above in the duty of Prayer, then in that of Preaching.

But here it should be considered, that there is in this business of
preparations great difference to be allowed for, in respect of Persons. Times.


1. There is a vast distance betwixt the abilities of several persons, even
those that have been practiced and experienced in this kind, some being
naturally of a warmer temper, more easy affections and ready expression;
others more cold and slow in each of these. Now the same ^^udy and strictness
in the preparation of matter and words, is not alike required from each of
these. The proportion of gifts, which any man has received, is the measure of
his work and duty: To whom much is given, of him much will be required, in
respect of pre-eminence and ability: And when the iron is blunt, a man must
put to the more strength, in respect of care and diligence; one of these ought
to be the more able and eminent, the other ought to be the more studious.

The measure of one man's gifts is not a rule for another man to work by, or to
be censured by. And therefore (by the way) it is a great mistake in those who
are apt to judge one man as coming short in his duty, because he has not the
same eminency of gifts with another; though such an one perhaps, can with
fitting, proper expressions, enlarge himself in this duty upon any sudden
occasion, yet he should not condemn another that cannot. Our abilities are not
rules for other men's actions. God accepts according to what a man has, 2
Cor. 8.12
and not according to what a man has not. In respect of duty we should labor
to emulate the best, but in matter of Gifts, as we must not neglect the means
of improving them; So we must be content with our portion, though we come
behind others.

It Is true, if our affections could always lead our prayers, then the
expression would be more facil, and the premeditation might be the less. But
because there will be sometimes a necessity that our affections should follow,
and be stirred up by our expressions, (which is especially to be aimed at, when
we pray in public, in reference to those that join with us) and will very
often fall out likewise in our secret devotions; therefore it is requisite that
a man should be always furnished with such premeditated forms, as may be most
effectual to this end, namely to excite the affections.

And to this purpose, if those heads, which will be always pertinent, and of
continual necessity, were comprehended in some set form, studied with care and
diligence, they might perhaps be more serviceable for the stirring up of our
faith, and affections, then they could otherwise be, if they did proceed only
from our own sudden conceptions.

2. We should likewise distinguish betwixt the several times, and occasions of
performing this duty, when we are called to it, either publicly with others,
or secretly betwixt God and our own souls. Now there is not the same degree of
premeditation and study required for each of these; A man may in secret take a
greater liberty, to enlarge himself in such sudden expressions, as are not in
themselves perhaps so proper, and significant, which yet may be suitable to the
present intention, because they set forth his own immediate thoughts. But now
when we are to be the mouth of others, then our business must be to engage
their affections that join with us, and therefore our expressions here should
be so proper, and deliberate, as may be most effectual to this end; now such
kind of unpremeditated forms; as may serve well enough to set forth our own
desires, will not perhaps be so proper to excite another.

That is certainly the fittest form, which does most adequately answer the
chief end of Prayer, namely, to stir up the affections, and express the
desires: Now this in our public devotions, where we are to join with others,
and to make impression upon them, I say in such cases this may generally better
be done by study and premeditation, then by leaving it to sudden conceptions.
Such crude notions, and confused matter, as some men by their neglect in this
kind will vent, does rather nauseate and flat the devotion then excite it.

And therefore upon such occasions we should take care that our expressions be
so weighty, and serious, as may be suitable to the end, and the solemnity of
this service; and the less any man's former practice and experience has been,
by so much the greater ought his wariness and study to be at such times.

And here I cannot but observe two kind of imprudencies, with which good men
are sometimes apt to be overtaken, an affectation of length, and an affectation
of continual varying their phrase, when as their inward inlargements do not
perhaps fit them for either.

And by this means, they become exposed unto some empty, impertinent, unseemly
expressions. They should consider, that though it be in it self very useful,
and argues an excellent ability to do these things well, yet there may be too
great an affectation of them. And then besides, neither is every man, nor
perhaps any man at all times fit for them; I mention these only as righthand
infirmities, upon which profane men will be apt to take great advantages, and
to confirm themselves in their prejudices, and therefore every prudent
Christian should be watchful against them.

There is nothing more unsuitable to the solemnity of this duty, to that
reverence which we owe unto the divine Majesty, then to bespeak him in a loose,
careless, empty manner, though God is not bettered by any thing we can give or
do; All our services being to him as nothing; yet he is pleased to esteem of
them by their commensuration to us, if in respect of our abilities they are the
best, and with any thing below our best, we cannot expect he should be
satisfied. All kind of worship should proceed from a desire, and study to
honor God, and therefore ought to be performed with our utmost care and
abilities. Under the Law men were bound to Sacrifice unto God the best of their
substance; and if sacrifice be a type of Prayer, then also we are bound to pray
unto him in the best manner and form that we can invent; and consequently in a
premeditated form, when that may be most effectual to direct us in our
desires, and to stir up our affections. The multiplicity of our wants, the
unfaithfulness of our memories, the dullness and slownesse of our
apprehensions, the common extravagancies of our thoughts, will all require our
best care for the remedy of them and premeditation may be a very proper means
for this purpose.

Job 9 14. Mr Caryll
Job speaks of choosing out his words, to reason with God. As it is amongst
persons and things, so it is amongst expressions too; some are choice and
beautiful, others refuse and improper. Now a man should be careful to select
the fittest words to express himself in this duty. And it is a very solemn
Caveat which the Wiseman gives, Eccles. 5.2. Be not rash with thy mouth, and
let not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing before God; for God is in
heaven, and thou upon earth, therefore let thy words be few; as if he should
have said, when thou do approach before the Divine Majesty in the duty of
Prayer, be sure that thou first ponder with thy self the greatness of that
business; settle and compose thy ^houghts to the solemn performance of it.
Betware of crude, tumultuary meditations; of idle, impertinent, wild
expressions; Take heed of all empty repetitions, digressions, prolixity; for
God is most glorious and wise, whereas thou art a poor unworthy creature, and
therefore should not dare to bespeak him, without a great deal of fear and
preparation. Let thy words be few; Not that brevity, or fewness of words is
the proper excellency of Prayer; God is as little taken with that, as with the
length of them; He is not wearied and tired, as men are: But because those that
speak little, do probably study, and ponder more upon what they say.

And to this purpose it is said, that the wise Preacher sought out, and gave
good heed to find, and to set in order acceptable words, Eccles. 12.10. and of
such words it is said in the next verse, that they will prove as goads and nails
fastened by the Masters of Assemblies, that is, when they are deliberate and
proper, they will leave a strong and lasting impression upon the hearers.

If it be objected, that set forms are properly helps of insufficiency, and
therefore should not be used by those that have abilities of their own.

It may be answered, though set forms made by others be as a crutch or help of
our insufficiency, yet those which we compose our selves are a fruit of our
sufficiency; and may likewise prove a very great advantage, for the more solemn
performance of this duty, (especially in public, and with others) both for the
direction of our desires, and exciting of our affections: Though a man ought
not to be so confined by any premeditated form, as to neglect any special
infusion. He should so prepare himself, as if he did expect no assistance; and
he should so depend upon divine assistance, as if he had made no preparation.

If it be objected again, that men ought to rely upon that promise, Dabitur in
illa hora, Matthew. 10 19. Take no thought what ye shall speak, for it shall be
given you in that same hour.

I answer, it is true, when God does call men to extraordinary services, of
which that Scripture speaks, he does accordingly fit them with extraordinary
assistance. But yet when men may use the common means, it is there a great
presumption to depend upon extraordinary help. That Is a remarkable saying of
the son of Syrach: Before thou prayest, prepare thy self, and be not as one
that tempts the Lord. Ecc. 18.23
He that rushes upon this duty, without using the common means of fitting
himself for it, does tempt God; for to tempt God, is to expect any thing from
him without using the ordnary helps. So our Savior answered the Devil, when
he would have persuaded him to fling himself from the Temple, when as there
were stairs for descent, Matthew. 4.7. Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. And
of this fault are those guilty, who depend so much upon immediate infusion, as
to neglect all premeditation or previous study.

If any should think that that phrase of the Apostle, of praying with the
Spirit, does imply a total resignation of a man's self to his immediate
suggestions; That may easily appear to be a gross mistake, for in the very
same place, 1 Cor. 14.14, 15. He speaks likewise of singing with the Spirit.
And I presume no man would think it fitting, to rely wholly upon his bare
infusions, in the duty of singing without preparation both of matter and words
too.

I have been the longer upon this subject because I would willingly remove
those inconsiderate prejudices, which some of good affections may be
transported with in this point; And that this holy duty might not so often
suffer in the solemnity of it, by men's presumptions, and negligence in this
kind.

CHAP. III. Arguments, or motives to excite men unto the labor after this Gift.
HAving thus discoursed concerning the nature of this Gift, together with the
two extremes which on either hand do so much hinder men's proficiency in it; I
shall in the next place briefly suggest some few arguments or motives to engage
us upon the diligent enquiry after it.

1. From the excellency of it in comparison to those other abilities, which are
so much valued, and sought after in the world. As for Manual trades, men are
content to bestow the labor of seven years in the learning of them. And so for
the Liberal Ar^s, you know what numerous and large volumes are written
concerning them: how much time and pains men will lay out in the study of them,
counting their labor well bestowed, if after many tedious watchings they can
attain to any kind of eminency in these professions; And yet these things can
only accommodate us with some outward conveniences, and help us in our
conversing with men; whereas this Gift of Prayer is of much higher, more
universal efficacy, and does enable us to converse with God, and therefore may
much better deserve our enquiry. It Is counted a commendable thing for men to
have any special skill in Arts that are merely for recreation and diversion of
the mind* How much more in this Gift, which is the chief refuge, and
refreshment of the soul in all its dejections? It Is a desirable thing to be
expert in humane Oratory, whereby we are able in ordinary affairs, to persuade
and prevail with men: How much more in this divine Oratory, which in matters of
nearest and greatest concernment does give us power to prevail with God?

2. From the suitableness, and necessity of it, in respect of that Religion
which we profess; unto which this gift is of such great consequence, and has
such immediate relation. An ingenuous man would be ashamed to pretend unto any
Art or faculty, wherein he is grossly ignorant: So may that man be to profess
Religion, who neglects to attain this Gift. A Christian that cannot pray, is
like an Orator that cannot speak, or a Travellour that cannot go; there being
no other ability more necessary for us in our particular callings* as we are
Artists, then this is for our general callings, as we are Christians. Now as a
man would be loath either to be, or to be accounted ignorant in the mysteries of
his profession, so should it be a shame to us to be very defective or negligent
in this gift. It Is part of our spiritual Armor; and for a Soldier to be
without any skill in the use of his arms, is both an unsuitable and a
dangerous condition.

3. From the special advantages and fruits of this Gift, enabling a man upon
all occasions to relate his condition, according to the special circumstances
of it; to suite his desires and expressions according to several emergencies,
which in the midst of all our dejections and tumultuous thoughts, will be a
means to induce a quietness, and Serenity of mind, if a man can but pour out
his soul, and lay open his case before God. So that by this means he may have
a continual supply of comfort upon every occasion; besides those special
raptures and elevations of spirit, which men that are much conversant in this
duty, and inquisitive after this gift, shall sometimes be affected with.

4. From the inconveniences that a man shall be exposed unto by the want of
it, when he is surprised by any sudden exigence, or lies under any great
strait, wherein he cannot expect any help, but from the hand of God; (as who is
there that can promise himself a continual freedom from such extremities, but
that they may at some time or other befall him?) I say, that in such a case a
man should not know how to relate his own condition, or to bespeak Gods
assistance without having recourse to some prescribed form, which perhaps has
no proper reference to the particular occasion; How inconvenient and
prejudicial would this be? Our liberty of recourse to God in such cases, is
one of the greatest privileges of a Christian, and therefore our ignorance in
the due manner or proper way of this address, must needs be a great
disadvantage; there being but little difference betwixt not having a medicine,
and not knowing how to apply, or make use of it.

True indeed, the best men have sometimes found such a straitness upon their
spirits, and such unaptnesse for expressions, that they have not been able to
pour out their souls in this duty, but then they have still complained of this,
as being a great discomfort and unhappiness. Isa. 38.14.
So Hezekiah, I did chatter as a Swallow, and mourn as a Dove, mine eyes fail
with looking upwards. And David, Psalm. 55.2.
Behold, how I mourn in my prayer, and make a noise. And therefore it must
needs be a much greater unhappiness to be always in this condition, and under
a continual disability of expressing our own wants and desires in this duty.

These particulars rightly considered cannot but inflame our hearts unto an
earnest desire of this Gift.

CHAP. IV. The general directions for the attaining of this Gift. Namely Rules
and Practice. Some particular Rules to engage the affections in this service.
What we are to do upon any invincible indisposition or aversness from it.
THe next thing to be discussed is concerning the means, or directions, for the
more facill attaining of this Gift* where there are these two general things to
be prescribed; Namely Rules and Practice, which are likewise necessary for all
other acquired habits.

1. Without Rules a man will be apt to go compass, and roving in the enquiry
after this Gift, not the shortest and most proper way.

2. Without frequent Practice, according to these Rules, he shall never attain
this habit. It Is not the bare knowledge of a way, without walking in it, that
will bring a man to his journeys end. Habits are both acquired and improved by
exercise. Those things that we learn for practice, we learn by practice (says
the Philosopher.) And that is one reason why many ignorant men do sometimes in
this Gift excel those that are much more eminent for learning and knowledge;
because though these do better understand the Rules, and Theory, yet the other
do practice more; and by that means attain to a greater readiness and facility
in this gift, and this likewise is the reason why in these later times, diverse
men have attained to a greater pre-eminence this way, then was usual
heretofore, because formerly this kind of study and endeavor was less in
use: Men did generally confine themselves to particular forms, and did not make
it their business to improve in this ability.

The Rules to this purpose are chiefly of two kinds. Namely such as concern,
1. The stirring up of the affections. 2. The informing and furnishing of the
judgment


1. It Is convenient that the affections should be so engaged in this service,
as that they may lead the way and guide us both in our matter and expression,
to which purpose the most proper means will be to get a clear and distinct
apprehension of our own conditions in these two respects.

1. In respect of that necessity that lies upon us,

2. In regard of that possibility which there is of obtaining by this means
help and supply. These two arguments will be of greatest efficacy to excite the
affections.

1. We must labor to work in our selves a true sense of our own necessity. A
Malefactor that is presently to be sentenced, and executed* will not need any
prompter to quicken his desire of pardon. Men that are in such a condition,
(says Parisiensis) Nullum habent Doctorem, De (...) cap. 26.
qui illos supp^icare doceat, and precari; non habent librum, quem
inspitientes, accipiant inde disertitudinem illam deprecationis) will not need
any Master to teach them how to supplicate, nor any book out of which they
might learn a set form of petitioning. The apprehension of their present
danger will make them both importunate and eloquent, in the desire of mercy.
And thus will it be in proportion, with every one as he does apprehend his own
necessity, in respect of any want, or danger. To which purpose that grace of
Humility, will be of special advantage, which is always sensible of it is own
need and poverty; and the more it does receive, by so much the more does it
bemoan it is own indigence.

Now, when a man has brought his heart to this temper, it will be most proper
for him to lay aside all needless artifice, or affectation, behaving himself
in his addresses unto God with the same plainness, and simplicity* as we use
to do with men. Let him seriously consider. 1. What sins those are which (if he
were now to die) would most affright his conscience. Confess them in
particular, aggravate, and bewail them* 2. What that is he would choose above
all other things to desire of God, if he were sure to have his wish; Pardon,
Grace, Perseverance, Contentment, Heaven, Protection* etc. and let him beg each
of these, urging the promise to this purpose. 3. How his condition does differ
from others below him. What blessing there is that he could least spare.
Others, perhaps, are wretchedly ignorant, profane, necessitous, sick, etc.
whereas he is exempted, and therefore ought to give thanks for each of these
enjoyments.

And in in the mention of these, he may pour out his thoughts in the most
obvious expressions, As suppose after this manner. O Lord my God, I am at this
present guilty of such or such a sin, which I have relapsed into,
notwithstanding my conviction and promises; I desire to be humbled for it, and
to renew my resolutions against it; and do earnestly beg thy mercy in pardoning
of it, thy grace to strengthen me for the future. There is such a blessing I
stand in great need of: It Is not in mine own power to procure it, thou can
easily, and thou have promised to bestow it, etc. There is such a mercy which I
see other men want, and this makes their condition sad and miserable; and
therefore I desire to be truly sensible of thy favor in my enjoyment of it.

Thus going over particulars, in the most facil natural expressions, and if new
matter does not presently occur, a man need not therefore break off this
exercise, but may take some time to meditate and consider of his condition, to
recollect some other particulars.

It Is not necessary that he should still keep on in this duty, in a continued
frame of speech (I speak of our secret, Closet-devotions betwixt God and our
own souls; for as for public prayer, wherein we are to join with others,
though but in a family, we ought there to be more close and exact in our
preparations, as being to work upon the affections of those that join with us)
But I say in these private devotions a man may take a greater freedom, both
for his phrase and matter, he may be sometimes at a stand, and make a pause,
there may be many intermissions and blanck spaces, in respect of speech,
wherein by meditation he may recover some new matter to tontinue in this duty.

Now to him that shall attempt it after this manner, it will not be very
difficult to pray in private, without the help of books, or prescribed forms.
And it is not easy to express what a vast difference a man may find in
respect of inward comfort and satisfaction, betwixt those private prayers that
are thus conceived from the affections, and those prescribed forms, which we
say by wrote, or read out of books.

This will be one good way so to engage the affections upon this service, that
they may go before and lead us on in the particular subject of our prayers, in
which frequent practice will make a man very expert; especially if by
observation he be furnished with a t^easury of the most proper matter and
expressions to this purpose; whereby when his affections are dull, and
indisposed, he may be able to quicken them. For as the affections when they are
vigorous, will guide us unto matter and expression: so when they are heavy and
dull, then premeditated matter and expression will help to excite them, these
being of mutual efficacy and advantage. But of this I shall have occasion to
speak afterward.

2. Besides the sense of our own necessity, it is requisite likewise that a man
should apprehend the possibility of receiving help and supply by this means. A
poor beggar will with much patience and diligence attend that door, where he is
confident of obtaining an alms; and till a man be thus persuaded he can never
be earnest in his desires. To this purpose that grace of faith is so often
required for the right performance of this duty; and for the strengthening of
this, God is pleased to give us leave to argue with him, Isa. 1.16, 18. He
invites those that are washed and reformed to reason with him, Ply^. Epist lib.
2.
Come now, and let us reason together, says the Lord, etc. Rogat
efficacissime, qui causas rogandireddit. That man does beg most powerfully, who
backs his requests with arguments. And the Scriptures do afford us frequent
examples of such humble and reverent expostulations, wherein holy men have with
many reasons pleaded their cause before God. So Jacob, Genesis 32, 11, 12. And
Moses, Exodus 32.11, 22 And David very frequently. Not that any of our arguments
are able to move, and alter him in whom there is no shadow of change: But they
may be effectual in the strengthening our own faith and fervency, which is the
proper scope and end of them

The usual Topics to this purpose do concern either God. Our selves.


1. The Arguments from Gods nature and Attributes are reducible to some of
these heads.

1. From his Power. So Moses argues with him: O Lord God, Deuteronomy 3:24
who have begun to show thy servant thy greatness, and thy mighty hand; for
what God is there in heaven, or in earth, that can do according to thy works,
and according to thy might? I pray thee, Psalm. 86.8, 10.
etc. Thus Jehosaphat pleads, 2 Chronicles. 20.6. O Lord God of our fathers, art not
thou God in heaven? And rulest not thou over all the Kingdoms of the Heathen?
and in thine hand is there not power, and might? so that none is able to
withstand thee.

2. From his Wisd^m and Providence, Job 365. God is mighty in strength and
wisdom, Psalm. 59.13. Let it be known that God rules in Jacob, Jer. 10.12.
Dan. 2.20, 21.
and unto the ends of the earth. He is the only wise God, 1 Timothy 1.19. who
makes every thing beautiful in his time, Eccles. 3.11.

3. From his Justice, Psalm. 5.3, 4. My voice shall thou hear in the morning, O
Lord, for thou art not a God that have pleasure in wickedness, neither shall
evil dwell with thee, Psalm. 143.1. Hear my prayer, O Lord, give ear to my
supplication, in thy faithfulness answer me, and in thy righteousness.

4. From his Truth, Psalm 69.13. O God, in the multitude of thy mercy hear me,
in the truth of thy salvation, 2 Samuel 7.28. And now, O Lord God, thou art that
God, and thy words be true, and thou have promised this goodnsse unto thy
servant, therefore now let it please thee, etc.

5. From his Mercies, Psalm. 6.4. O save me for thy mercies sake. Psalm 86.5. and
15.
Psalm. 25 6. Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies, and thy loving kindnesses,
for they have been ever of old. Isa. 63.15. Look down from heaven, Dan. 9.18.
and behold from the habitation of thy holiness, and thy glory, where is thy
zeal and thy strength, the sounding of thy bowels, and of thy mercies toward
me? are they restrained?

6. From his Glory, Josh. 7.9. What will thou do unto thy great Name? 2 Kings
17.19. Now therefore O Lord our God, I beseech thee, save thou us out of his
hands, that all the Kingdoms of the earth may know that thou art the Lord God,
even thou only. Pal. 79.10 Wherefore should the Heathen say, where is their
God? Verse. 9. Psalm. 10^. Verse 21.
Jer. 14.21. Do not abhor us for thy names sake, do not disgrace the Throne of
thy Glory.

7. From his Covenant and Promise, 1 Kings 8.25, 26. O Lord God of Israel, keep
with thy servant David my father, Neh. 9 8.
that thou promisedst him, etc. And now, O God of Israel, let thy word I pray
thee, be verified, Numb. 23 19.
which thou spakest unto him, etc. Psalm. 74.20. O deliver not the soul of thy
Turtle unto the multitude of the wicked, forget not the Congregation of the
poor for ever. Have respect unto the Covenant, etc. Jer. 14.21. Remember, break
not thy Covenant with us.

8. From his Command of calling upon him, and appointing this Ordinance, as the
means of our help and supply in any condition, Psalm. ^7.8. Thou said, Seek ye
my face, my heart answered, Thy face, Ps. 31.17.
Lord, will I seek, Psalm. 50.5. Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will
deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. Psalm. 86.5. For thou, Lord, art good,
and ready to forgive, and plenteous in mercy unto all them that call upon thee.

2. The second sort of arguments, from our selves, are derivable from some of
these heads.

1. From our Relation to him as being his people, servants, children, Psalm
74.1, 2. Exodus 9.29
Why does thine anger smoke against the sheep of thy pasture? remember the
Congregation which thou have purchased of old, the rod of thine inheritance,
which thou have redeemed; this Mount Sion, wherein thou have dwelt. Psalm.
116.16. O Lord, truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant, Ps. 86.16.
and the son of thine handmaid, thou have loosed my bonds. Psalm. 143.12. Of thy
mercy cut off mine enemies, and destroy all them that afflict my soul, for I am
thy servant. Isa. 63.16. Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham be
ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not; thou, O Lord, art our Father,
our Redeemer. Isa. 64.8. But now, O Lord, thou art our Father, we are the clay,
and thou our Potter, we are all the work of thine hand. Be not wroth very sore,
O Lord, neither remember iniquity for ever. Behold, see we beseech thee, we are
all thy people. Jer. 14.8, 9. O! the hope of Israel, the Savior thereof in
time of trouble, why should thou be as a stranger in the land? and as a
wayfayring man, that turns aside to tarry for a night? Why should thou be
as a man astonished, as a mighty man that cannot save? yet thou, O Lord, art in
the midst of us, and we are called by thy name; leave us not.

2. From our own sincerity, Psalm 40.16. Let all those that seek thee, Psalm.
5.12 Psalm. 25 21 Psalm 86.2. Ps. 44.18.
rejoice and be glad in thee; let such as love thy salvation say continually,
The Lord be magnified. Psalm. 119.38. Stablish thy word unto thy servant, who is
devoted to thy fear. verse. 94. I am thine, save me, for I have sought thy
precepts. verse. 159. Consider how I do love thy prece^t, quicken me, O Lord,
according to thy loving kindness. Isa. 38.3. Remember now, O Lord, how I have
walked before thee, in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that
which is good in thy sight.

3. From our present Dependence upon him, Ps. 7.1. 2 Chronicles. 14.11.
O Lord my God, in thee do I put my trust, save me from all them that persecute
me. Psalm. 2^.2. O my God, Ps. 31.1.3.86.2.71.5.
I trust in thee, let me not be ashamed. verse. 20. Keep my soul, and deliver
me, let me not be ashamed, for I put my trust in thee. Psalm. 57.1. Be merciful
unto me, O God, be merciful unto me, for my soul trusts in thee, yea, in the
shadow of thy wings will I make my refuge, until these calamities be over-past.

4. From the greatness of our Need and sufferings, Psalm. 25.19. Consider mine
enemies, for they are many, Ver. 17, 18
and they hate me with a cruel hatred. Psalm. 60.1, 2, 3. Psalm. 6.2, 3 and 7.6.
O God, thou have cast us off, thou have scattered us, thou have been
d^spleased; O turn thy self to us again; thou have made the earth to tremble,
thou have broken it, Ps. 80.1, 2.
thou have showed thy people hard things, thou have made us to drink the wine
of astonishment. Psalm. 79.8. Let thy tender mercies speedily prevent us, for we
are brought very low. Ps. 86.1, 14. 123.3, 4.
Psalm. 142.6. Attend unto my cry, for I am brought very low; deliver me from my
persecutors, Isa 64.10, 12.
for they are stronger then I.

5. From the Benefit of his hearing, and granting our requests, Psalm. 80.18.
Psalm. 9 14.
So will not we go back from thee: quicken us, and we will call upon thy name.
Psalm. 102.15. 35 18, 28.
So the Heathens shall fear the name of the Lord, and all the Kings of the
earth thy glory. verse. 18. 43.4.61.8
This shall be written for the generations to come, and the people which shall
be created, 79.13.
shall praise the Lord. Psalm. 106 47. Save us, O Lord our God, and gather us
from among the Heathen, to give thanks unto thy holy name, and to triumph in
thy praise.

6. From our Experience and former examples, Judge. 15.18. Thou have given this
great deliverance into the hand of thy servant, and now shall I die for thirst,
and fall into the hand of the uncircumcised? Psalm. 22.4, 5. Our fathers trusted
in thee, and thou did deliver them. They cried unto thee, Ps. 71.5.6.
and were delivered; they trusted in thee, and were not confounded. Psalm. 27.9.
Thou have been my help, Ps. 80.8, 9 143 5. Is. 51.9.10
leave me not, neither forsake me O God of my salvation.

To these may be added in the business of Imprecation another Topicke, from
the insolence, Deuteronomy. 9.28 Psa. 74.10 22.23. Psalm. 83.2.139.20.
and impiety of Gods enemies, Exodus 32.12. Wherefore should the Egyptians say,
for mischief did he bring them out, to stay them in the mountains, and to
consume them from the face of the earth? Psalm. 140.8. Grant not, Psalm. 10.13.
Deuteronomy. 9.28
O Lord, the desires of the wicked, further not his wicked device, lest they
exalt themselves.

From some of these heads a man may fetch arguments, to quicken and confirm
his faith, to persuade the possibility of obtaining help by this duty. And that
is another good means of engaging the affections upon this service.

Sometimes indeed, the Spirit of God may raise in a man such vigorous
inlargements of heart, that he shall not need any distinct application of his
thoughts to these rules; but at other times when he is more heavy and
indisposed, then ought he to be the more careful in using these means; when the
wind does not blow to help us by the sails, we must ply the oars so much the
harder.

But now, if notwithstanding all our endeavors in this kind, we do still
find in our selves a barrenness, distraction and averseness from this service
(as that may be frequently our condition) in this case there are these two
remedies to be considered.

1. Bewail, and pray against that indisposition in particular, and though you
can say nothing else, yet say this, O Lord, as this coldness and deadness of
heart, is my fault, so I desire to repent of it, and to be humbled for it; but
as it is thy will and chastisement, most justly inflicted for my former
negligence, and formality, so I desire to submit unto it, thy will be done; but
yet I will not cease to beg pardon for it, and power against it.

A man does not only then pray well, when his devotions are accompanied with
some special comforts and inlargements; but then also when he is sensible of
much coldness and indisposition. The right performance of this duty, does not
so much consist in the acts of the sensitive appetite, as in the regulating of
the will. As God takes the Will for the deed in sinful actions, so much more in
good duties, as being more ready to reward then to punish,

2. What you want in the degrees of your duty, be careful to make up in your
humility, and this will be the most proper improvement of all our failings,
when we can strengthen our selves by our very infirmities. O Neminem a Deo
derelictum, quando etiam vilitas ipsum seminarium est sublimitatis, (says one
of the Ancients. Wesselus Gronigensis de orat. c. 3.
) That man has no great reason to complain of desertions, who can by them take
advantage to improve his graces, and raise himself by his very falls. Our most
enlarged devotions are nothing worth, without this fruit of humble and upright
conversations; and with this consequent, our coldest, most restrained prayers,
may be looked upon as succesfull.

Thus much for the first sort of rules that concern the stirring up of our
affections.

CHAP. V. Other Rules to furnish the Judgment in respect of Matter, Method,
Expression.
THe second kind of Rules for the attaining of this Gift, are such as concern
the furnishing the Judgment both in respect of Matter. Method. Expression.
Answerable to these three defects that men usually complain of, Namely

1. Dryness, or emptiness for want of Matter,

2. Confused, tumultuary repetitions, or digressions for want of Order.

3. Crude, unseemly, improper phrase, for want of fitting Expression.

Whereas on the contrary each of these may be remedied if a man be furnished
with

1. A treasury of Matter. This will help us in the enlarging of our affections,
preventing empty and needless repetitions, making the mouth to speak, from the
abundance of the heart.

2. A fitting Method will teach us how to guide and regulate our thoughts, that
they may be delivered in their true place and order, without unseemly hudling,
or impertinent digressions.

3. An expertnesse in proper phrase and expression will enable a man so to
deliver his thoughts, as that they shall make reflection back upon his own
heart, and have more powerful efficacy upon others.

Now for the fitting of the judgment in these respects, there are these
directions to be observed.

1. For the supply of Matter; a man should be careful to keep by him, some
register of the most rem^rkable passages of his life, both in respect of Gods
dealing with him, amd his carriage toward God. Having several Catalogues, or
Common-place-heads, unto which the emergencies of these diverse natures may be
distinctly reduced. This I conceive to be the meaning of those places that
speak of watching unto prayer and thanksgiving; Ephesians. 6.18 Col. 4.2. 1 Pet. 4.7.
which do not only signify a di^igence in respect of the act or exercise of
this duty, but likewise a care of improving in the habit, or gift of it; A
vigilance in observing and gathering up fit matter for our Confessions,
Petitions, Thanksgivings, according as our daily occasions, and the several
conditions of our lives may require. Mark your sins and defects, your
sufferings and wants, your mercies and enjoyments; make a distinct register of
them that you may have them in readiness upon any special occasion.

It Is usual for younger students to be very careful in gathering of
Commonplace books, for other matters, (of which notwithstanding, when they
come to riper judgments they will find but very little use.) But now of how
much greater advantage would it be, if they were but diligent to collect under
proper references any such particular matter, or expressions in Prayer,
wherewith at any time they find themselves to be more especially affected?

It would very much conduce to the promoting of this gift, if men would first
propose to themselves, some brief Systeme or Logical frame (as suppose this
that follows, or the like) containing distinctly, the chief parts to be
insisted upon in prayer. And then use each of these as a several head of
reference by way of commonplace, to which they might reduce any more pertinent
observable passage which they shall either hear or read. This course
industriously observed, might probably in a short space raise a man to a great
ability in this kind, and would be a good means to preserve the memory of
such passages, as we have at any time experimented, to be more especially
quickening and efficacious upon our own hearts, which otherwise we are so easily
apt to forget.

If any shall object that this course will require much study and care; It Is
considerable that no eminent gift in any kind, is attained without
proportionable diligence. He that would be expert in any other common ability,
whether pleading, disputing, etc. must apply himself to those Arts and
exercises whereby they are to be learnt; and therefore much less should a man
grudge his pains in such a weighty business, of more then ordinary consequence.

Men that would be thought wary and thriving in the world, are thus observant
of their temporal estates, keeping Books of account for their revenues and
expenses. And why should not those who would be thought truly religious, be as
watchful and observant of their spiritual conditions?

2. For Method, though there may be several kinds of it, yet that is to be
esteemed the best, wherein these rules are most closely observed. Namely, 1.
That it be Comprehensive, and take in all the parts* 2. That generals be
mentioned first, and particulars after. 3. That things of the same kind and
nature be put together; and this should be observed in all the parts of Prayer.

Now the parts of Prayer may be Generally distinguished into these two kinds.

1. Less principal Preface. Transitions. Conclusion.
2. More principal Confession. Petition. Thanksgiving.

The first thing in a form of Prayer is the Preface, which does chiefly consist
of these particulars. 1. The titles of invocation. 2. Some general
acknowledgement of our own unworthiness. 3. An expression of our purpose and
desire to make our addresses to him in this duty. 4. With the impetration of
his assistance and attention.

Next unto the Preface, any one of the three principal parts of Prayer may
succeed, either Confession, Petition, or Thanksgiving, according as several
occasions shall require. But in general, and common use, it is most convenient
that Confession should precede the other, because it prepares for them, and may
serve to stir us up unto a true sense, both of those mercies which we want, and
those which we have received.

Confession, according to its proper latitude and extent, does imply in it an
acknowledgement both

Of Sins by Enumeration Original, in our Inward Man. Outward Man.
Actual, against the Law National: Personal.
and Omission. Commission*
Gospel Thought, Word* Deed.


Aggravation of them, in General Multitude. Greatness.
Special, the kinds of sin. Particular, the circumstances.

Punishments External, in our Bodies. Friends. Estates. Names.
Internal, in respect of blessings Natural. Spiritual.
Eternal, of Loss* Pai^.




Next to Confession, Petition may succeed; but for the better connection of
these two, it is requisite that they be joined together by some fitting
Transition. The most natural, and genuine matter for which may refer to some
one of these heads. Either, 1. A Profession of our shame and sorrow, in the
consideration of our many sins, and the punishment due unto them. 2. An
Expression of our desire to renounce our own righteousness, to fly utterly out
of our selves. 3. A promise of greater care and strictness in our ways for
the future. 4. A brief Application unto our selves, of such mercies and
promises, as do belong unto those that believe and repent.

For the chief heads of Petition, we are directed in the Lords Prayer, that
being given us as a Summary, or brief Model, wherein are contained the most
principal and necessary materials of all our desires.

That which is accounted the first Petition, Hallowed by thy name, does more
especialy concern the chief end of all our desires, namely, the glory of God;
and is there set down to teach us what we are principally to intend and aim
at, in all those prayers that we make, either for our selves or others.

The three next clauses do concern the obtaining of good. The first of them
for the sanctifying of our hearts and natures, into which we wish that his
Kingdom may come. The second for the obedience of our lives, Thy will be done
on earth as it is in heaven. The third for the necessities of this present
life, Give us this day our daily bread.

The three last Petitions do concern the removal of evil. The first of them
being against the evil of Sin, Forgive us our trespasses. The second against
the evil of Tentation, Lead us not into tentation. The last against the evil of
Punishment, Deliver us from evil.

All of them being in the plural number, Our Father, and Give us, and Forgive
us, etc. which shows our duty to petition for others, as well as our selves,
and then the whole Prayer is sealed up with this Argument: For thine is the
Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory for ever and ever, Amen. Wherein we
acknowledge that it is he alone who is able to grant our requests, thereby
teaching us to back our Petitions with such arguments, as may serve to
strengthen our belief concerning the success of them.

So that according to this pattern, the chief materials of our desires (the
order only being made more suitable to the precedent method observed in our
Confession) may be thus analyzed.

All Petition is either For our Selves: Supplication Deprecation against the
evil of Sin in respect of its Guilt Pardon. Evidence.
Power.
Temptation by Our corrupt natures. The Devil. The World.
Punishment.
Comprecation for good Spiritual Sanctification of our natures, in the Inward
Man. Outward Man.
Obedience of our lives, by our Performance In all duties of Law. Gospel.
Continuance In all duties of Law. Gospel.
Increase In all duties of Law. Gospel.


Temporal Provision for us. Protection of us.


For others: Intercession In General. The Catholic Church. In special Ordinary
for the Nations Uncalled Infidels, Jews, etc.
the Nations Called Allies. O^rown Nation.

Occasional in times of War, Famine, Pestilence


In particular. Ordinary for all relations of Order Public, and Political.
Private, or Oeconomical.
Freindship, and Enmity. Neighborhood.
Occasional, for the afflicted in Mind. Body.





This part should be connected to the next by some such Transition, as may
fitly serve to seal up the one, and begin the other, which may be taken either.
1. From our Confidence of obtaining the things we desire, by our experience of
those former mercies we have already enjoyed. 2. From the danger of ingratitude
in hindering the success of our Petitions.

The chief materials to be insisted upon in our Thanksgiving, are reducible
under these two general heads. Either Enumeration, of mercies. or
Amplification of mercies.


Mercies to be Enumerated are either Ordinary Temporal. Private concerning
Generally the whole man's Being, Nature. Birth, Education. Preservation.
More particularly our Souls, Bodies. Friends, Names. Estates, etc.

Public, in respect of Healthful seasons. Fruitful seasons. Peaceable seasons.

Spiritual Election. Redemption. Vocation. Justification. Sanctification. Hope
of Glory.

Occasional, for some particulars Preservation of our selves in soul. body.
others in soul. body.

Recovery of our selves in soul. body.
others in soul. body.

Deliverance of our selves in soul. body.
others in soul. body.



Amplified Generally, by their Multitude. Greatness, in respect of Giver.
Receiver.
Continuance.
Particularly, by their Circumstances. Degrees. Contraries.


The Conclusion should consist of some such Doxologies as may help to
strengthen our Faith, and leave some impression upon our affections.

This may serve for a Scheme of Method, comprehending all the chief parts
according to a fitting order, for the regulating of our thoughts in this duty.

If there be any that should deny the use of Method, and the like helps, as
being humane inventions; such persons will not deserve an answer. They may as
well account the rules of reasoning and dispute to be unlawful, reducing all to
their own Enthusiasmes; and so are not capable of being dealt with in any way
of debate.

3. The third thing to be enquired into, is Expression, which will of it self
naturally follow upon such a preparation of matter and method. But because the
language of Canaan, the style of the holy Ghost is undoubtedly the fittest for
holy and spiritual services; with which, for diverse reasons we should labor to
be familiarly acquainted; therefore we should rather choose, (where we may) to
speak in Scripture-expression. To which purpose, there are diverse instances for
each of the foregoing heads, that may be observed and collected from several
books in Scripture. All prohibitions and threats, will administer both matter
and phrase unto Confession and Deprecation: All precepts and promises unto
comprecation and thanksgiving. Besides that, it is easy to reduce the usual
expressions of other kinds, to be proper and helpful unto this purpose.

There are two extremes to be avoided in our Expression. Namely, Negligence.
Affectation.


1. Negligence, when men vent their thoughts in a rude, improper, unseemly
phrase; as if they had no awe upon their spirits, and did not care how they
spoke.

2. Affectation, either of too much neatness and elegance, or else of a
mystical kind of phrase, not to be found either in Scripture, or any sober
writer (though much in fashion amongst some men in these times) which, it may
be, sounds well to vulgar ears; but being reduced into plain English, will
appear to be wholly empty, and to signify nothing, or else to be full of vain
repetitions.

Each of these extremes will be apt to nauseat an intelligent hearer, and is
very unsuitable to the solemnity of this duty.

There are some Rhetorical ornaments and varieties in the manner of expression,
which may be very proper, and powerful, both for the expressing and exciting
our affections, such are these four.

1. Exclamations; which serve to set forth an affectionate wonder, Psalm. 31.19.
O! how great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee,
which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee before the sons of men!
Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am! who shall, etc.

2. Expostulations; which are fit to express any deep dejection of mind. So
Psalm. 77.8. Will the Lord cast us off for ever, and will he be no more
entreated? Is his mercy clean gone? Psalm. 13.1.
etc. Psalm. 80.4. O Lord God of Hosts, how long will thou be angry against thy
people that prays? Isa. 63.15.
etc. Psalm. 44.24. Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and forgettest our
affliction, and our oppression?

3. Option, Fit to set forth serious and earnest desires, Job 6.8. O that I
might have my request, and that God would grant me the thing that I long for!
that it would please him, etc. Psalm. 119.5. O that my ways were so directed,
that I might keep thy statutes!

4. Ingemination; which argues eager and inflamed affections, Psalm. 94.1, 2. O
Lord God, to whom vengeance belongs, O God, to whom vengeance belongs, show
thy self, lift up thy self thou Judge of the earth, etc. Dan. 9.19. O Lord
hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken and do: defer not for thine own sake, O
my God.

He that will seriously endeavor and accustom himself to deliver his thoughts
in a proper, full, significant expression, and to be well acquainted with those
many examples, which the Scripture does afford to this purpose, such an one may
by practice and experience arrive to a good ability and readiness in this
kind.

CHAP. VI. Concerning the most proper materials for the Preface.
HAving in the former Chapter laid down some directions in reference to the
Order and disposition of parts to be observed in this duty, I come in the next
place to treat concerning the amplification of these several parts; and to
show how the Scripture will afford various matter for the enlargement of each
of them. So that any one, who will be but careful to collect any other
apposite matter, or observation that he shall meet with, and amongst these to
refer it under its proper head; such a one may quickly be furnished with a very
copious Treasury to this purpose.

The first thing to be thought of in composing a form of prayer, is the
Preface. The most necessary and chief materials for a Preface, were formerly
specified to be four.

I.
I. The titles of Invocation, or the style of salutation, wherein we bespeak the
person whom we pray unto; who should be expressed by such divine compellations
as may excite in our hearts either some, or all of those affections that are
more especially required in this duty.

These Compellations may consist either of. 1. Gods Names, or Titles. 2. His
Attributes, or Properties. 3. His Promises, or Threats. 4. His Works, or ways;
By all of which he has been pleased after a more special manner to declare,
and make himself known.

In the choice of these, we should select such as may be most suitable unto
that frame and temper of mind, required in that kind, or part of Prayer,
which we have occasion to insist more largely upon. As the matter of fire is,
Eccles. 28.10.
so it burns. (says the son of Syrach,) so from the diverse meditations of
God will arise diverse affections toward him.

1. The consideration of his infinite Power, Wisdom, Holiness, Justice,
Omnipresence, Majesty, etc. is apt to produce in us reverence, shame, fear,
sorrow, and the other affections of this nature, which are most suitable to the
business of Confession.

2. The thought of his Mercy, Truth, Patience, is fit to excite Faith and Hope,
and consequently is proper for the duty of Petition.

3. The meditation of his bounty and goodness, will provoke Love and Gratitude,
and is therefore fit to prepare us for Thanksgiving.

According as our thoughts are severally fixed upon any of these; so may our
affections be disposed and qualified in our prayers unto him. To this purpose
it is convenient that we take special notice of those divine Titles and
Attributes in Scripture, which may be most suitable to such various occasions.

1. Of the first kind are such as these.

Ps. 24.7.10 The King of glory.

Isa. 1.24. The Lord, the Lord of Hosts, the mighty one of Israel.

Rev. 19.16 The King of kings, and Lord of lords.

Exo. 15.11 Who is glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders.

Number. 16.22. The God of the spirits of all flesh.

Deuteronomy. 4.24 Who is a consuming fire, even a jealous God.

Deuteronomy. 10.17. The God of gods, and Lord of lords, a great God, mighty and
terrible, which regards not persons, neither takes rewards.

Deuteronomy. 32.4 Whose works are perfect, and his ways judgment; A God of truth,
and without iniquity, just and right.

1 Samuel 4.4 1 King. 8.27. The Lord of Hosts, who dwells between the
Cherubims; whom the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain.

1 King. 19 15. O Lord God of Israel, which dwells between the Cherubims,
thou art the God, even thou alone of all the Kingdoms of the Earth: thou have
made Heaven and Earth.

2 Chronicles. 20.6. Who rules over all the Kingdoms of the Earth; in whose hand
there is power and might, so that none is able to withstand him.

Before whom no unclean thing should enter.

2 Chronicles. 23.19. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Who searchest all hearts, and understandest all
the imaginations of the thoughts.

1 Chronicles. 29.11. The Lord God of Israel, to whom belongs greatness, and
power, and glory, and victory, and Majesty; for all that is in the Heaven and
in the Earth is thine; thine is the Kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted as
head above all.

Verse. 12. Both riches and honor come of thee, and thou reignest over all; and
in thine hand is power, and might; and in thine hand it is to make great, and
to give strength unto all.

1 Chronicles. 16.27. Glory and honor are in his presence; strength and gladness
are in his place.

Neh. 9.5. Whose glorious name is exalted above all blessing and praise.

Verse. 6. Thou, even thou art Lord alone, thou have made Heaven, the Heaven of
heavens with all their Host; the earth, and all things that are therein; the
seas, and all that is therein, and thou preservest them all, and the Host of
Heaven worshippeth thee.

Verse. 32. The great, and mighty, and terrible God, who keeps Covenant and
mercy.

Job 4.18. Who charge his Angels with folly.

Job 5.9. Who does great things, and unsearchable, mavelous things without
number.

Verse. 10. Who gives rain upon the Earth, and sends waters upon the Fields.

11 To set up on high those that be low, that those which mourn may be exalted
to safety.

12 Who disappointeth the devices of the crafty, so that their hands cannot
perform their interprize.

13 Who takes the wise in their own craftiness, and the counsel of the
froward is carried headlong.

14 So that they meet with darkness in the daytime, and grope in the
noonday, as in the night.

15 But he saves the poor from the sword, and from their mouth, and from the
hand of the mighty.

Job 9.4* He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength: who has hardened
himself against him, and has prospered?

Verse. 5. Which removes the mountains, and they know not, which overturneth
them in his anger.

6 Which shakes the Earth out of her place, and the pillars thereof tremble.

7 Which commands the Sun, and it rises not, and seals up the stars.

Verse. 8. Which alone spreads out the Heavens, and treads upon the waves of
the Sea, etc.

Job 15.15. Who puts no trust in his Saints; yea, the Heavens are not clean
in his sight.

Job 26.6. Before whom Hell is naked, and destruction has no covering.

Verse. 7. Who stretches out the North over the empty place, and hangs the
Earth upon nothing.

8. Who binds up the waters in his thick clouds, and the cloud is not rent
under them.

9. Who boldeth back the face of his throne, and spreads his cloud upon it.

10. Who has compassed the waters with bounds, until day and night come to an
end.

11. The pillars of heaven tremble, and are astonished at his reproof.

12. Who divides the Sea by his power, and by his understanding he smites
through the proud.

13. Who by his Spirit has garnished the Heavens, and his hand has formed the
crooked Serpent. Who is perfect in Knowledge.

Job 37.16 Verse. 22.23. With whom is terrible Majesty.

We cannot find him out, he is excellent in Power; and in Judgment, and in
plenty of Justice: He respects not any that are wise of heart.

Psalm. 8.1. Whose Name is excellent in all the Earth, who has set his glory
above the Heavens.

Psalm. 33.6. By whose word the Heavens were made, and all the Host of them by
the breath of his mouth.

Verse. 7. Who gathers the waters of the Sea together as an heap, and lays
up the deeps in storehouses.

8. That all the Earth might fear him, and all the inhabitants of the world
stand in awe of him.

10. Who brings the counsel of the People to naught, and makes the devices
of the people to be of none effect.

11. Whose own counsel stands for ever, and the thoughts of his heart to all
generations.

13. Who looks down from Heaven, and beholds all the sons of men.

14. From the place of his habitation, he looks upon all the inhabitants of the
Earth.

15. Fashioning their hearts alike, and considering all their works.

Psalm. 47*2. Who is the Lord most high, and terrible, a great King over all the
Earth.

Psalm. 57.5. Who is exalted above the Heavens, and his glory above all the
Earth.

Psalm. 65.6. Who by his strength sets fast the mountains, being girded with
power.

Verse. 7. Who stilleth the noise of the seas, the noise of their waves, an^ the
tumult of the people.

Psalm. 66.5. Who is terrible in his doings toward the children of men.

Verse. 7. Who rules by his power for ever, and his eyes behold the Nations.

Ps. 68.33. Who rides upon the Heaven of heavens, which were of old.

Psalm. 72.2. Who shall judge the people with righteousness, and the poor with
judgment.

Verse. 11. All Kings shall bow down before him, and all Nations shall do him
service.

17. Whose name shall endure for ever, and be continued as long as the Sun, and
men shall be blessed in him, and all Nations shall call him blessed.

18 Who only does wondrous things.

Ps. 83.18. Whose name alone is Jehovah, who is the most high over all the
Earth.

Psalm. 89.6. Who in the Heaven can be compared unto the Lord? Who among the
sons of the mighty can be likened unto the Lord?

Verse. 7. Who is greatly to be feared in the Assembly of his Saints, and to be
had in reverence of all those that are about him.

8 O Lord God of Hosts, who is a strong God like unto thee? or to thy
faithfulness round about thee?

9 Thou rulest the raging of the Sea, when the waves thereof arise, thou
stillest them.

10 Thou scatterest thine enemies with thy strong arm.

11 The Heavens are thine, the Earth also is thine, as for the world and the
fullness thereof, thou have founded them.

13 Thou have a mighty arm, strong is thine hand, and high is thy right hand.

14 Justice, and Judgment are the habitation of thy throne, mercy and truth
shall go before thy face.

Psalm. 95.3. Who is a great God, and a great King above all gods.

Verse. 4. In whose hands are the deep places of the Earth, the strength of the
Hills is his also.

5 The Sea is his and he made it; his hands formed the dry land.

Psalm. 96.6. Before whom are Honor, and Majesty; and in whose sanctuary are
strength, and beauty.

Psalm. 99.2. Verse. 3. Who is great in Zion, and high above all people.

Whose Name is great and terrible, for it is holy.

4 Who loves judgment, and does establish equity; executing judgment, and
righteousness in Jacob.

Psalm. 103.19 Who has prepared his throne in the Heavens, and his Kingdom
rules over all.

Ps. 104.1 O Lord my God, thou art very great, thou art clothed with Honor and
Majesty.

Verse 2. Who coverest thy self with light as with a garment. Who stretchest
out the heavens like a curtain.

3. Who lays the beams of his chambers in the waters, and makes the clouds
his charet, and walks upon the wings of the wind.

4. Who makes his Angels spirits, his Ministers a flaming fire.

5. Who laid the foundations of the Earth, that it sheuld not be removed for
ever.

9. Who has set a bound to the waters of the Sea, that they may not pass
over; that they turn not again to cover the earth.

10, Who sends the springs into the valleys, which run among the hills.

11, To give drink unto every beast of the field: the wild asses quench their
thirst.

13. Who waters the hills from his chambers: the earth is satisfied with the
fruit of his works.

14. Who causes grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the service of
man: that he may bring forth food out of the earth.

19. By whose appointment the Moon has her seasons, and the Sun knows his
going down.

24. O Lord, how madifold are thy works! in wisdom have thou made them all; the
earth is full of thy riches.

Ps. 111.9. Ps. 113.4. Holy and reverent is his Name.

Who is high above all Nations; and his glory is above the Heavens.

Verse 6. Who humbles himself to behold the things that are in Heaven.

Ps. 139.2. Who knows our down-sitting, and our up-rising, and understands
our thoughts afar off.

Verse 3. Who compasses our path, and our lying down, and is acquainted with
all our ways.

Psalm. 145.13. Whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and his dominion
endures throughout all generations.

Verse. 17. Who is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works.

Ps. 146.6. Who made Heaven and Earth, the sea, and all that therein is, who
keeps truth for ever.

Act. 4.24. Verse 7. Who executes judgment for the oppressed, and gives food
for the hungry.

Prove. 21.30, 31. Against whom there is no wisdom nor understanding, nor
counsel; from whom alone safety must come.

Eccles. 12.14. Who will bring every work unto judgment with every secret
thing, whether it be good or evil.

Isa. 2.17. Before whom the loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and the
haughtines of men shall be made low.

Verse 19. And they shall go into the holes of the rocks, and into the caves of
the earth, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his Majesty, when he
arises to shake terribly the earth.

Isa. 6.2. Before whom the Seraphims do cover their faces.

Isa. 28.29. Who is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working.

Isa. 40.12. Who has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, and meted
out the heavens with a span, and comprehended the dust of the earth in a
measure, and weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance.

Isa. 40.15. Before whom the nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted
as the small dust of the balance, who takes up the Isles as a very little
thing.

Verse 17. All nations before him are as nothing, and they are counted to him
less then nothing and vanity.

22. Who sits upon the Circle of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are
as Grasshoppers, that stretches out the heavens as a Curtain, and spreads
them out as a tent to dwell in.

23. Who brings Princes to nothing, and makes the Judges of the earth as
vanity.

Isa 41.14, 15. Who can make the worm Jacob to thresh the mountains, and beat
them small, and make the hills as chafe.

Isa. 42.5 Who created the Heavens, and stretched them out, who spreads forth
the earth and that which comes of it, who gives breath to the people upon it,
and spirit to them that walk therein.

Isa. 44 24. Who formed us from the womb, who makes all things, who
stretches forth the Heavens alone, and spreads abroad the earth by himself.

Verse 25. That frustrateth the tokens of liars, and makes diviners mad, that
turns wise men backwards, and makes their knowledge foolish.

26. That confirms the word of his servants, and performs the counsel of
his messengers.

Isa. 46.10. Who can declare the end from the beginning, and from ancient
times, the things that are not yet done, whose counsel shall stand, and he will
do all his pleasure.

Isa. 48.12^ Who is the first and the last, whose hand has laid the
foundations of the earth, and his right hand has spanned the Heavens.

Isa. 50.2. At whose rebuke the sea is dried up, and the rivers become a
wilderness, their fish stinketh, because there is no water, and die for
thirst.

Verse. 3. Who cloatheth the heavens with blackness, and makes sackcloth their
covering.

Isa. 57.15^ Who is the high and lofty one inhabiting eternity, whose name is
holy, who dwells in the high and holy place.

Isai. 66.1. Who has the heaven for his throne, and the earth for his foot
stool.

Jer. 10.10. The only true and living God, the everlasting King, at whose
wrath the earth does tremble, and the nations are not able to abide his
indignation.

Verse. 12. Who made the earth by his power, and has established the world by
his wisdom, and stretched out the heavens by his discretion.

Jer. 11.^0. The Lord of Hosts that judges righteously, that tries the reins
and the heart.

Jer. 17.10 Who gives to every man according to his ways, and according to
the fruit of his doings.

Jer. 23.24. From whom no man can hide himself, that he shall not see him who
fills heaven and earth.

Jer. 31.35. Who gives the Sun for a light by day, and the ordinances of the
Moon, and of the Stars for a light by night; who divides the sea when the
waves thereof roar, the Lord of Hosts is his name.

Jer. 31.17. Thou have made the heaven and the earth by thy great power and
stretched-out arm, and there is nothing too hard for thee.

Verse. 18. Thou show loving kindness unto thousands, and recompensest the
iniquities of the fathers into the bosom of their children after them. The
great, The mighty God, the Lord of hosts is his name.

19. Great in counsel, and mighty in work, for thine eyes are open upon all the
ways of the sons of men, to give to every one according to his works, and
according to the fruit of his doings.

Jer. 51.15 Who made the earth by his power, and established the world by his
wisdom, and has stretched out the heavens by his understanding.

Dan. 5.23 In whose hands our breath is, and whose are all our ways.

Dan. 7.10 Whom there are thousand thousands that minister unto, and ten
thousand times ten thousands stand before him.

Am. 4.13. The Lord God of Hosts, who formed the mountains, and created the
wind, and declares unto man what is his thought, that makes the morning
darkness treads upon the high places of the earth.

Am. 9.5. When he touches the land, it shall melt, and all that dwell therein
shall mourn.

Verse. 6. Who builds his storehouse in the heavens, and has sounded his
troop in the earth, that calls for the waters of the sea, and pours them
out upon the face of the earth.

Hab. 1.13. Who is of purer eyes then to behold evil, and cannot look upon
iniquity.

Romans 4.17 Who quickens the dead, and calls those things that be not as
though they were.

Romans 11.33. Whose judgments are unsearchable, and his ways past finding out.

Who is over all, God blessed for ever.

Romans 9.5. 1 Cor 4 5. Who will bring to light the hidden things of darkness,
and will make manifest the counsels of the heart.

Ephesians. 1.11. Who does every thing according to the counsel of his own will.

Ephesians. 3.20. Who is able to do exceeding abundantly, above all that we can ask
or think.

Col. 1.16. By whom all things were created that are in heaven and earth,
visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or
Principalities, or Powers.

1 Timothy 1.17 Who is the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God.

Chapter 6.15. The blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of
lords.

Verse. 16. Who only has immortality dwelling in the light which no man can
approach unto, whom no man has seen or can see.

Heb. 4.13. In whose sight there is no creature that is not manifest, but all
things are naked and opened unto the eye of him to whom we have to do.

Heb. 13.8. Rev. 6.15. Who is yesterday, to day, and the same for ever.

At whose dreadful appearance the Kings of the earth* and the great men, and
the rich men, and the chief Captains, and the mighty men shall be willing to
hide themselves in the dens, and in the rocks of the mountains.

Verse. 16. Crying to the mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the
face of him that sits upon the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb.

II.
Invocations of the second sort, are such Scripture-expressions as these.

Ex. 34.6. The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and
abundant in goodness and truth.

Verse. 7. Keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and
sin.

Neh. 9.17. Who is a God ready to pardon, gracious and merciful, slow to anger,
and of great kindness.

Psalm. 9.9. Who is a refuge for the oppressed, a refuge in time of trouble.

Verse 10. Who will never forsake them that seek him.

Psalm. 33.4 Whose word is right, and all his works are done in truth.

Verse 18. Whose eye is upon them that fear him, and upon them that hope in his
mercy.

Verse 19. To deliver their souls from death, and to keep them alive in famine.

Psalm. 34.8, 9. Who will not suffer them to want that fear and trust in him.

Verse 15. Whose eyes are upon the righteous, and his ears are open to their
cry.

Verse 17. To hear and deliver them out of all their troubles.

Verse 18. Who is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart, and saves such as
be of a contrite spirit

Verse 22. Who will redeem the soul of his servants, and none of them that
trust in him shall be desolate.

Psalm. 36.5. Whose mercy is in the heavens, and his faithfulness reaches to
the clouds.

Verse 6. Whose righteousness is like the great mountains, and whose
judgments are a great deep, who preserves man and beast.

Psalm. 46 1. Our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble.

Psalm. 65.2. The God that hears Prayers, unto whom all flesh should come.

Verse 5. The confidence of all the ends of the earth, and of them that are
afar off upon the sea.

Psalm. 72.12. Who delivers the needy when he cries, the poor also, and him
that has no helper.

Verse 14. Who shall redeem their soul from deceit and violence, and precious
shall their blood be in his sight.

Ps. 103.8. Who is merciful and gracious slow to anger and plenteous in mercy.

Verse 9. Who will not always chide, neither will he keep his anger for ever.

Verse 10. Who does not deal with us after our sins, nor reward us according to
our iniquities.

Verse 13. Like as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that
fear him.

Verse 14. He knows our frame, he remembers that we are but dust.

Verse 17. Whose mercy is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear
him, and his righteousness unto childrens children.

Verse 18. To such as keep his Covenant* and to those that remember his
Commandments to do them.

Ps 145.8. Who is gracious and full of compassion, slow to anger and of great
mercy.

Verse 9. Who is good to all, and his tender mercies are over all his works.

Verse 18. Who is nigh unto them that call upon him, to all that call upon him
in truth.

Verse 19. He will fulfill the desires of them that fear him, he also will hear
their cry and will help them.

Isa. 51.6. Though the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth
shall wax old like a garment, and they that dwell therein shall die in like
manner. Yet his salvation shall be for ever, and his righteousness shall not
be abolished.

Isa. 66.2. Who has great regard to them that are poor, and of a contrite
spirit, and tremble at his Word.

Jer. 14.8. Who is the hope of Israel, and the Savior thereof in time of
trouble.

Ezekiel. 33.11. Who has no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but rather that
he should turn from his way and live.

Mich. 7.18 Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes
by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage, who retains not his
anger for ever, because he delights in mercy?

Verse. 19. Who will turn again and have compassion upon us, subduing our
iniquities, and casting all our sins into the depths of the sea.

Mat. 18.20. Who has promised where two or three are gathered together in his
name, to be in the midst of them.

Romans 2.4. Who does abound in riches of goodness and forbearance, and long
sufferance, which should lead us to repentance.

Who is rich unto all that call upon him.

Romans 10.12. 2 Cor. 1.3. Ephesians. 1.17. Who is the Father of mercies, and the God
of all comfort.

The God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory.

Jam. 1.17. The Father of lights, from whom every good and perfect gift does
come, with whom there is no variableness, neither shadow of turning.

2 Pet. 3.9. Who is not willing that any should perish, but that all should
come to repentance.

III.
Divine compellations of the third sort may be derived from such Scriptures as
these.

Neh. 1.5. Who keeps Covenant and mercy for them that love him, and observe
his Commandments.

Job. 5.19. Who will deliver us in six troubles, yea in seven there shall no
evil touch us.

Verse 20. Who in famine shall redeem us from death, and in war from the power
of the sword.

O thou Preserver of men.

Job 7.20. Psalm 8.1. O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the
world.

Psalm 18.2 My rock, my fortress, and my deliverer, my God, my strength, in
whom I will trust, my buckler, the horn of my salvation, and my high tower.

Verse 3. Who is worthy to be praised.

Ps. 19.14 Ps. 22.9, 10 My strength, and my Redeemer.

Who tookest me out of the womb, and have been my hope and my God, since I was
upon my mothers breast.

Psalm. 27.9. The God of my salvation.

Psalm. 33.5. Who loves righteousness and judgment, and the earth is full of
his goodness.

Verse 12. Blessed is the Nation, whose God is the Lord, and the People whom he
has chosen for his own inheritance.

Verse 20. Ps. 35.27. Ps. 36.7. Our help and our shield.

Who has pleasure in the prosperity of his servant.

How excellent is thy loving kindness O God, therefore shall the sons of men
put their trust under the shadow of thy wings.

Verse 8. They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house,
and thou shall make them drink of the river of thy pleasures.

Verse 9. For with thee is the fountain of life, and in thy light shall we see
light.

Psalm. 46.1. Our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble.

Psalm. 63.3. Whose loving kindness is better then life.

Psalm. 65.8. Who makes the out goings of the morning and evening to rejoice.

Verse 9. Who visits the earth and waters it, and greatly enricheth it with
the river of God.

Verse 10. Who makes it soft with showers, and blesses the springing thereof.

Verse. 11. Who crowns the year with his goodness, and his paths drop
fatness.

Verse. 13. Who cloatheth the pastures with flocks, and covers the valleys with
corn.

Psalm. 66.9. Who holds our soul in life; and suffers not our feet to be
moved.

Psalm. 72.4. Who shall judge the poor of the people and save the children of
the needy, and shall break in pieces the oppressor.

Verse. 12* He shall deliver the needy when he cries, the poor also, and him
that has no helper.

Verse. 13. He shall spare the poor and needy, and shall save the souls of the
needy.

Verse. 14. He shall redeem their soul from deceit and violence, and precious
shall their blood be in his sight.

Ps 37.25. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I
desire besides thee.

Ver. 26. My flesh and my heart fails, but God is the strength of my heart,
and my portion for ever.

Psalm. 80.1. The shepherd of Israel.

Psalm. 89.17 Who art the glory of our defense, and in whose favor our horn
shall be exalted.

Verse. 18. For the Lord is our defense, and the holy one of Israel is our King.

Psalm. 91.2. He is my refuge and my fortress, my God, in him will I trust.

Verse. 4. He shall cover me with his feathers, under his wings will I trust,
his truth shall be my shield and buckler.

Ps. 103.3. Who forgives all our iniquities, and heals all our diseases.

Verse. 4. Who redeemes our life from destruction, who crowns us with loving
kindness and tender mercies.

Verse. 6. Who executes righteousness and judgment for all that are
oppressed.

Thou art good, and thou do good.

Ps 119 68 Ps. 145. Who is greatly to be praised, and whose greatness
unsearchable.

Who preserves all them that love him.

Verse. 20. Isa. 40.11. Who shall feed his flock like a Shepherd, and shall
gather his Lambs with his arms, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently
lead those that are with young.

Isa. 51.3. Who will comfort Sion, and build her waste places, making her
wilderness like Eden, and her Desert like the garden of the Lord, so that joy
and gladness shall be found therein, thanksgiving and the voice of melody.

Verse. 5. Whose righteousness is near, and his salvation gone forth, whose
arms shall judge the People, the Isles shall wait upon him, and in his arm
shall they trust.

That pleads the cause of his people.

Verse. 22. Jer 14.8. The hope of Israel, the Savior thereof in the time of
trouble.

Jer. 16, 19. O Lord, my strength, and my fortress, and my refuge in the day
of affliction, to whom the Gentiles shall come from the ends of the earth; and
shall say, surely our fathers have inherited lies, vanity, and things wherein
there is no profit.

Besides whom there is no Savior.

Hos. 13.4. Acts 14 17 Who leaves not himself without a witness unto all the
Nations of the world, doing them good, giving them rain from heaven, and
fruitful seasons, filling their hearts with food and gladness.

Act. 17.28. In whom we live, move, and have our being.

Ephesians. 1, 3. Who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly
places in Christ.

Ephesians. 2.4. Ephesians. 3.14. Who is rich in mercy.

The Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom the whole family in Heaven and
Earth is named.

2 These. 2.16. Our Father who has loved us, and has given us everlasting
consolation, and good hope through grace.

1 Timothy 4.10. 1 Timothy 6.17. Hebr. 13.20. Who is the Savior of those that
believe.

The living God, who gives us richly all things to enjoy.

The God of peace, who brought again from the dead the Lord Jesus Christ, that
great Shepherd of his sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant.

1 Pet. ^.10* The God of all grace, who has called us into his eternal glory
by Christ Jesus.

Rev. 15.3. The King of Saints, whose works are great and mavelous, and his
ways just and true.

There may be diverse the like expressions of each kind collected from several
places of Scripture: Of some or more of these the first and chief material of a
Preface should consist.

These several kinds may be variously intermixed according as diverse occasions
shall require: The Scriptures do afford sundry examples to this purpose.

Neh. ^.5. Dan 9.4. O Lord God of Heaven, the great and terrible God, that
keeps Covenant, and mercy for them that love him, and observe his
Commandments.

Psalm. 46.7. Isa. 43.3. The Lord of hosts, the God of Jacob our refuge.

The Lord our God, the holy one of Israel our Savior.

Verse 14. The Lord our Redeemer, the holy one of Israel.

Isa 45.21. Who is a just God, and a Savior, and there is none besides him.

Isa. 49.26. The Lord who is our Savior and Redeemer, the mighty one of Jacob.

Isa. 54.5. Our Maker, and our Husband; whose Name is the Lord of Hosts, our
Redeemer, the holy one of Israel, the God of the whole Earth.

Our Father, which art in Heaven.

Mat. 6.9. I have been the larger in the recital of such passages, because they
will not only afford us matter for a Preface, but supply us likewise with
diverse proper Arguments, upon several occasions for the exciting of our faith,
and fervency in the business of Petition.

II.
The second Material in a Preface, to be joined with the former, is some
general acknowledgement of our own unworthiness, as, that

Genesis 18.27 we who are but dust and ashes.

Genesis 32.10 Less then the least of all his mercies.

Job 13.25 As leaves driven to and fro, and as dry stubble.

Psalm. 14.3. Altogether abominable and filthy,

Psalm. 22.6. Worms, and no men.

Psalm. 95.7. The people of his pasture, and sheep of his hands.

Ps. 103.15 Whose d^yes are as grass, as the flower of the field, so he
flourishes.

Verse 16. When the wind passes over it, it is gone, and the place thereof
shall know it no more.

Psalm. 144.3 Lord, what is man that thou take knowledge of him? or the sonn^
of man that thou make account of him?

Verse 4. Man is like to vanity, his days are as a shadow that passes away.

Isa. 2.22. Whose breath is in his nostrils, and wherein is he to be accounted
of?

Isa. 40.17. All Nations before him are as nothing, and counted to him less
then nothing.

Prodigal children, unprofitable servants, of polluted lips, and uncircumcised
hearts, etc.

1 Timothy 1.15. The chief of sinners.

III.
III. An expression of our purpose to approach unto him, in this duty. That we
do desire

Psalm. 95.6. To worship, and fall down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker.

Number. 5.15 Number. 29.7. Jer. 17.17. To bring our iniquity to rememberance.

To afflict our souls in his sight.

To make him our hope and refuge in the day of evil.

To seek his face, to meet him in his ways: To speak good of his Name: To wait
upon him in his Ordinances.

Psalm. 65.4. To approach before him in his courts, that we may be satisfied
with the goodness of his house, even of his holy Temple.

Psalm. 66.2. To set forth the honor of his Name, and make his praise glorious.

Verse 8. To bless our God, and make the voice of his praise to be heard.

Psalm. 96.8. To give unto the Lord the glory due unto his Name, to bring an
offering, and come into his Courts.

Verse 9. Psalm. 99.5. To worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness.

To exalt the Lord our God, and to worship at his footstool.

Psalm. 116.17. Verse 18. To offer unto him the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and
to call upon the name of the Lord.

To pay our vows unto the Lord in the presence of his people, in the Courts of
the Lords house.

Ps. 138.2. To worship toward his holy Temple and to praise his Name for his
loving kindness and for his truth.

Ps. 145.5. To speak of the glorious honor of his Majesty; and of his
wondrous works:

IV.
IV. A desire of his assistance, acceptance, and attention; that we may be
enabled to perform this duty in an acceptable manner; with such holy
affections as he has required.

Romans 8.26. Romans 5.5. Isa. 64.7. That his good spirit may help our infirmities,
and make intercession for us.

That he would shed abroad his love in our hearts, and stir up our souls to lay
hold of him.

Ps. 51.15. That he would open our lips, that our mouths may show forth his
praise.

Isa. 45.19. That we may not seek his face in vain.

Ps. 80.18. That he would quicken us to call upon his name.

Verse 19. That he would cause his face to shine upon us, and lift up the light
of his countenance.

1 Kings 8.28. Have thou respect unto the prayer of thy servant, and to his
supplication, to hearken unto the cry and to the Prayer, which thy servant
prays before thee to day.

Verse 30. Hear thou in Heaven thy dwelling place, and when thou hear,
forgive.

2 Kings 19.16. Lord bow down thine ears, and hear; open Lord thine eye and
see.

Neh. 1.6. Let thine ear now be attentive, and thine eyes open, that thou may
hear the prayer of thy servant

Psalm. 5.1. Give ear to my words, O Lord, consider my meditation.

Verse. 2. Hearken to the voice of my cry, my King, and my God, for unto thee
will I pray.

Psalm. 18.6. That he would hear our voice out of his holy Temple, and let our
cry come before him even into his ears.

Ps. 19.14. That the words of our mouths, and the meditations of our hearts may
be always acceptable in his sight.

Psalm. 27.7. Hear, O Lord, when I cry with my voice, have mercy also upon me,
and answer me.

Ps. 55.1.2. Give ear to my prayer, O God, and hide not thy self from my
supplication. Attend unto me, and hear me.

Psalm. 88.2. Let my Prayer come before thee, incline thine ear unto my cry.

Psalm. 130 2 Lord, hear my voice, let thine ear be attentive to the voice of my
supplication.

Psalm. 141.2 Let my Prayer be set forth before thee as Incense, and the lifting
up of my hands as the evening sacrifice.

Psalm. 143.1. Hear my Prayer, O Lord, give ear to my supplications, in thy
faithfulness answer me, and in thy righteousness.

Verse. 7. Hear me speedily, O Lord, my spirit fails; hide not thy face from
me, lest I be like unto them that go down into the pit.

Isa 63.15. Look down from Heaven, and behold from the habitation of thy
holiness, and of thy glory.



Some one, or more of these Particulars, may upon several occasions afford
fitting matter for a Preface; which is the first thing to be considered and
enlarged, in conceiving a form of Prayer.

CHAP. VII. Confession of sins, by enumeration of them, and first of Original
sin.
NExt to the Preface, Confession does, according to the more usual, and
ordinary course, succeed.

The first thing to be confessed in the Enumeration of sin (as is before
expressed in the scheme of Confession) is Original sin.

Whereas God at first made man upright, he has since corrupted himself,
Eccles. 7.29.
by seeking out many inventions.

He planted our first Parents a noble Vine, a right seed; but they quickly
turned into degenerate plants of a strange Vine. Jer. 2.21.


So that we are transgressors from the womb.

Isa. 48.8. Psalm. 51.1. Isa. 1.4. Romans 11.17. Ephesians. 2* 1. Verse. 3. Romans 6.6.
Romans 7.24 Verse. 23. John 3.6. Romans 7.17. Verse. 21. Heb. 12.1.
Being shapen in iniquity, and conceived in sin.

A seed of evil doers, children that are corrupters,

Branches of the wild Olive.

Being naturally dead in trespasses and sins.

Children of wrath, bearing about us, the old man.

A body of sin, and of death.

A law of our members.

Being born only of the flesh.

Having sin that dwells in us.

And is always present with us.

And does so easily beset us.

This Original sin has been propagated to us, both by Imputation. Real
Communication.


1. By Imputation of Adams particular transgression, in eating the forbidden
fruit; for we were legally parties in that Covenant, which was at first made
with him, and therefore cannot but expect to be liable unto the guilt which
followed upon the breach of it. By one man sin entered into the world, and death
by sin, Romans 5.1^
and so death passed upon all men.

2. By real Communication of evil concupiscence, and depravation upon our
natures, which was the consequent of the first rebellion; We were all of us
naturally in our first Parents, as the streams in the fountain, or the
branches in the root, and therefore must needs partake the same corrupted
nature with them; For who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? And what
is man that he should be clean? Job 14.4* Job 15.14
or he that is borne of woman that he should be righteous? This might justly
make us more loathsome and abominable in Gods eyes, then either Toads or
Vipers, or any other, the most venomous, hurtful creatures are in ours: and
for this alone, he might justly cut us off, and condemn us, though it were
merely for the prevention of that mischief and enmity against him, which the
very principles of our natures are infected with.

Though man were at first made little lower then the Angels, being crowned with
glory and honor, Ps* 8.5.6.
having dominion over the other creatures, all things being put under his feet,
yet this corruption of our nature has now made us become more vile then the
beasts that perish. Psalm. 49.20


It Is the root and the fountain of all other sin, from whence every actual
abomination does proceed. Atheism, and Pride, and baseness, and cruelty, and
profaneness, and every other vice, which the most wicked wretch in the world
is guilty of, does proceed from hence. Hell it self which is the proper place
of sin, is not more full of sin, for the kinds of it then our natures are. If
there be any particular sin which we have not fallen into in our lives, it is
not for want of corrupt principles and dispositions in our natures, which do
incline us to all, but by reason of Gods restraining or renewing grace, which
has as yet withheld us from them; without which we should break out into as
great abominations, as were ever committed by the vilest of the sons of men.

All that pravity and baseness, which fills up every part and power about us,
are but diffusions of our Original corruption: what a world of mischief is
there in our several parts, our Wills, Affections, our Tongues, Eyes? And yet
all these are but as little rivulets: The fountain, or rather the Sea that
feeds them, is our corrupted nature.

It Is this that fills us with enmity against all spiritual truths and
Ordinances; makes us (what we should tremble to think of) haters of God, though
he be the God of our life, and of our happiness; in whom we live, and move,
and have our beings.

Romans 7.21 Verse. 13
Hence is it, that when we would do good, evil is present with us; that we have
a law in our members, rebelling against the law of our minds, and bringing us
into captivity to the law of sin.

It Is this that makes us like corrupted vessels, to pollute all the gifts that
are poured into us; those graces and abilities which from God are bestowed upon
us, pure and excellent, when they are by us put forth in duties, are not
without some favor of our own corruption.

This contains in it, not only an utter deficiency of all good, but also a
loathing and disliking of it: Not only a liablenesse to evil, but also an
inherent propension, and strong desire to it. All which is as natural to us, as
blackness to an Ethiopian; and like the fretting Leprosy, adheres to our
natures with so much pertinacy, Levit. 14.45
that it cannot be utterly removed while we are on this side the grave, till
these our earthly tabernacles shall be dissolved. No soap or nitre can purge
it. Jer. 2.22.
The general deluge could not wash it away; that swept away sinners indeed, but
not one sin. Neither shall the fire of the last day cleanse it.

It does totally overspread both our Inward man. Outward man.


1. Our Inward man is hereby depraved both in respect of 1. Understandings. 2.
Consciences. 3. Affections. 4. Wills. 5. Memories.


1. Our Understandings are hereby become full of vanity, inconsiderateness,
ignorance; Romans 3 11 Genesis 6.^.
neither knowing nor enquiring after God: Every thought, and imagination of the
heart being only evil, and that continually. So that we are not of our selves
sufficient to think any thing that is good, 2 Cor. 3.5.
being given over to a reprobate mind, (...), a mind void of judgment, not
liking to retain God in our knowledge. Romans 1.28
Becoming vain in our imaginations, having our wicked hearts darkened. Verse.
21. Jer. 4.24. 1 Cor. 2.14 Romans 8.5. Verse. 7.
Being wise to do evil, but foo^ish to that which is good. Counting the things
of God foolishness. Being carnally minded, which is enmity against God. For it
is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be.

Full of pride, prejudice, and contradiction against all sacred truths, setting
up our own imaginations, and fleshly reasonings against the spiritual notions
that are dictated to us. Being alienated from the life of God, Ephesians. 4.18.
through the blindness that is in us.

2. Our Consciences are hereby become full of stupidity, and insensiblenesse,
past feeling, being feared as with an hot iron; Ephesians. 4.19.
Altogether defiled; Not performing their office of bearing witness, 1 Timothy
4.2 Tit. 1.15. Romans 2.15.
accusing, or excusing us rightly according to several occasions. Being deaf
unto every holy suggestion of Gods Spirit, secure against all the threats, and
judgments of the Law.

Genesis 8.21.
3. Our Hearts and Affections being evil from our youth: full of wicked
policies, and unsearchable deceits. Jer. 17.9.
Deceitful above all things, and desparately wicked, who can know them? Full of
lustings against the Spirit of God: Gal. 5.7.
Sending forth evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, Mat.
15.19
false witness, blasphemies, full of folly and madness; preferring empty,
transitory contentments, Eccles. 9.3
before those great matters that concern our eternity. Altogether obdurate
against the means of grace; not to be wrought upon either by hopes or fears,
by mercies or judgments; slighting the threats of God; undervaluing his
promises; distrusting his power; abusing his patience; quickly revolting, Jer.
5.23. Pro 14.14
and backsliding from every holy desire.

Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sins? Pro. 20.9.


4. Our Wills have now lost their first native freedom, making us become
servants unto sin: Joh. 8.24. 2 Pet. 2.19
Bringing us into bondage unto corruption: Being full of loathing and
averseness, full of enmity, and obstinacy against any thing that is good.

Casting Gods laws behind our backs, Psalm. 50.17
and hating to be reformed.

5. Our Memories being naturally very unfaithful, Heb. 2.1.
and slippery in letting out things that are good, but very tenacious in evil
matters.

II. Our outward man, II.
which was at first created with a kind of divine Majesty above the other
creatures, is now become weak and vile, exposed to all manner of infirmities,
diseases, sins. So that we are all over nothing else but a body of sin, Romans
6.13
and of death, our members being instruments of unrighteousness.

Eyes full of Adultery, Pride, Envy. 2 Pet 2.14 Act. 7.51.


Ears uncircumcised, deaf unto every holy suggestion, easily open and
attentive to vanities, lies, slanders.

Tongues unruly, and full of deadly poison, Jam. 3.8.
containing a world of iniquity; defiling the wh^le body, setting on fire the
course of nature, Verse. 6.
being themselves set on fire of Hell. Given to unsavory, unedifying
discourses, revilings, profaneness, blasphemies. Psalm. 57.8. Psalm. 108.1
That which should be our glory, the best member that we have, is by this
Original corruption, become the worst, defiling all the rest.

Our Throat being as an open sepulcher; with our tongues we use deceit, Romans
3.13
the poison of aspes is under our lips. Verse. 14.15.16.17.18.
Our mouth is full of cursing and bitterness; our feet are swift to shed
blood; destruction, and misery are in our ways: and the way of peace have we
not known; there is no fear of God before our eyes.

All which will yet appear more deformed and loathsome, if we look upon our own
natures in the rage, blasphemies, baseness, madness of other men's lives:
There being not any kind of evil, which either man, or devil has committed*
but there are in our natures the principles and inclinations to it; The best of
us being by nature as bad as the worst of sinners.

To which may be added our aptness to slight and undervalue the thought of
this Original corruption, though it has already brought so much mischief upon
all mankind, wholly depraved us in our faculties, and principles, and spread a
curse and deformity upon the whole creation,

CHAP. VIII. The enumeration of actual sins, both National and Personal,
against the Law and Gospel, and particularly against the first Commandment.
IN the Enumeration of sins, next to Original, we are to acknowledge our
Actual transgressions, which flow from the other, as acts do from their habits.

These in the general are distinguishable into sins National, and Personal; of
Omission, and Commission; in thought, word and deed; the particulars of which
do refer to some kind of breach against the Law. First Table. Second Table.
Gospel.
and may properly be enumerated under those heads to which they appertain.
Every commandment having in it both a Positive Negative
part, and comprehending the obedience of the whole man.

But now because it may be sometimes convenient to make a distinct recital of
National sins, therefore we ought to be observant, and prudent, in the choice
of fitting matter to this purpose.

There are three things that will raise a sin to a public guilt, and make it
become National.

1. Common practice. Heb. 2.12
2. Public establishment or connivance. 3. General insensiblenesse.
These are variously applicable (according to the condition of several times)
both to offenses against the first and second Table. 1.
As Idolatry, Superstition, Heresy, Profaneness, Encouragement to wild and
desperate errors, Ingratitude and unfruitfulnesse under public and common
mercies; security and inadvertency under all those various dispensations that
befall us, inconsiderateness of the day of our visitation, and the things that
concern our peace, loathing of our spiritual Manna, breach of our public and
solemn Engagements.

Blood-guiltinesse, Cruelty, Injustice, Oppression, 2.
Perfidiousnesse, Bitterness; A spirit of Disobedience, Confusion, Giddiness,
in respect of Civil order, etc.

Hitherto appertain the iniquities of our fathers, and of all public orders
and degrees of men; Dan. 9.17.
Our Kings, our Princes, our Priests; which ought upon some special occasions
to be acknowledged and bewailed. Neh. 9.34
But these are not reducible unto any particular Catalogue, because they do
continually vary according to several times.

In the enumeration of Personal sins, a man ought chiefly to insist upon those
particulars, whereof he is more especially guilty; But withal he should know
(and upon several occasions) be able to reckon up the species and kinds of
all sins. See Bishop Downhams Abstract.


These may best be discovered by looking upon the divine law, according to its
latitude and fulness, Bishop Andrews Catechis. Master Brinsley's Watch. 1. Part.
examining what is therein Enjoined Forbidden
concerning either the duties of Piety toward God in the first Table, or the
duties of Charity, toward our Neighbor in the second Table.

The first Commandment does forbid the not having Jehovah alone for our God,
and consequently the not knowing, not believing, not adhering, not submitting
to him; The not behaving ourselves toward him in all respects, as our God.

So that we sin against this by ignorance, when we do not labor after such a
measure of knowledge in divine truths, Ignorance
as is proportionable to the callings wherein we are, Heb. 5.12.
the time and means, which we have had. When we do not desire the knowledge of
Gods ways; Job 21.14 Mat. 4 16
Being content to sit in darkness and in the region and shadow of death.

Not endeavoring to acquaint our selves with his Power, Majesty, Justice,
Mercy, Wisdom, Unchangeablenesse, and those other Attributes of the Divine
nature. Not searching the Scriptures, proving the things that are more
excellent. Phil. 1.10.


When our knowledge is only literal and uneffectual, Luke 12.47.
not working answerable obedience in our lives; when we are not careful to
observe and consider, and treasure up in our hearts those holy truths, which at
any time have been discovered to us; But suffer them to slip from us, by
inadvertency or forgetfulness; Heb. 2.1.
Not ruminating upon them, or recalling them to mind, according to our several
occasions.

Infidelity.
By Infidelity, when we do not assent unto his law, as being holy, just and
good; Not laboring to strengthen our faith in his holy Attributes and Word.
Not so firmly believing his threats and judgments as to be humbled thereby; Or
his Promises, as to be invited by them unto newness of life.

Diffidence
By Diffidence, not adhering to him with all our hearts, not casting our burden
upon him; Not trusting him in the want of outward means, Ps. 55.22.
full of carking and solicitous thoughts; Apt to put our confidence in arms of
flesh, Jer. 17.5.
broken reeds, lying vanities.

Want of Love,
By want of Love, not loving of him with all our affections and might,
preferring the love of our selves, of pleasure, riches, honor, and the like
earthly vanities, before the infinite, and absolute good that may be found in
him. Suffering our shame, worldliness, security, hopes, fears, dependancies,
want of leisure, and such like poor respcts, to seduce our affections from
him, and to hinder our communion with him. Loving his creatures, his enemies,
any thing, rather then himself, forsaking the Fountain of living waters, and
hewing out unto our selves broken Cisterns that will hold no water. Jer. 2.13.
Spending our time, and our money for that which is not bread, and our labor
for that which satisfies not. Isa. 55.2.


By want of zeal, not being zealous for his glory in the forward and cheerful
use of such means whereby it may be promoted; Want of zeal.
in a fervent and resolute opposition of those things that may hinder it; in an
hearty sense and sorrow for those reigning corruptions, either public in the
times, or private in our own souls, whereby it has been abused; wronging good
causes, either by our lukewarmnesse, or else by our blind, indiscreet zeal.

By want of rejoicing in him, not serving him with gladness of heart: Not
rejoicing in the Lord; Want of joy. Deuteronomy. 28.47. Is. 61.10.
Not finding any such relish in his holy Word and Ordinances, whereby they may
seem sweeter then the honey and the honey-combe, but rather counting his ways
grievous and burdensome unto us.

By Unthankfulness for those great mercies which are freely bestowed upon us;
Unthankfulness. 2 Chronicles. 32.25.
not rendering unto the Lord according to the benefits we receive, failing in
the acknowledgment of them, letting them slip by us without any regard or
notice; Being too apt to ascribe Gods blessings unto our own deserts and
endeavors; Sacrificing to our own nets; Hab. 1.16
Subject to forget his favors, though he does renew them every moment: And
amongst those few that we do take notice of, and remember, yet our
thankfulness for the receipt of them, is no way proportionable to our
importunity in the want of them: Expressing our slighting of them, even in our
very thanksgiving for them: Not mentioning them with any hearty sense or
affection: Not willing to acknowledge them by charity toward his distressed
members, according to our abilities and opportunies; But rather returning evil
for good, and hatred for his good will. Ps. 109.5. Deuteronomy. 32.15
Like Jeshurun, waxing fat and kicking with the heel. Abundance making us
wanton, and contemptuously to spurn at his laws. Lading and wearying him with
our sins, whilst he does continually heap upon us his unwearied mercies.

Impatience.
By our Impatience under those small crosses that are justly inflicted upon us.
Not behaving our selves humbly and cheerfully under Gods fatherly
chastisements. Levit. 26.41. Ezra. 9.13 Mich. 7.9
Not accepting the punishment of our iniquity, though it be much less then we
have deserved. Not bearing the indignation of the Lord, as considering how we
have sinned against him. Being subject to murmuring, and repining, to fainting
and despair, to seek help and deliverance by unlawful means.

Disobedience.
By want of submission and obedience unto him, according to our duty and
profession, very inconstant in our holy services, temporary, and by fits,
subject to backslide, and revolt upon every slight temptation. Hos. 6.4.
Our goodness being as the morning cloud, and as the early dew which passes
away. Not Universal in our obedience, but partial, and by halves, apt to pick
and choose in our duties, according as they may best suite with our own humors,
and the course of the times, not having respect to all his commandments. Ps.
119.6. Verse. 128.
Not hating every false way. Not hearty and sincere in our performances, doing
them with all our might, but Hypocritically, Perfunctorily, Negligently.

Security and Presumption.
By our not fearing of God, according to the infinite power, justice, majesty,
of the divine Nature; or according to those manifold sins whereby we have
provoked his wrath: Behaving our selves with much security, and inadvertency,
under all the various dispensations of his providence, as if we our selves were
not at all concerned in them. Not regarding the works of the Lord, nor
considering the operation of his hands, Isa. 65.2:
still going on after the imagination of our own hearts, as if we had made a
Covenant with death, Isa. 28.12.
and with hell were at an agreement; very apt to promise to our selves peace
and impunity, though we do still persevere in our wonted rebellions; very
subject to slavish worldly fears, of men that shall die, and the sons of men
that shall be made as grass: Isa. 51.12, 13.
Forgetting the Lord our Maker, who stretched forth the heavens, and laid the
foundations of the earth: Not grieving when he strikes us, refusing to receive
correction, though he does consume us, making our faces harder then a rock, and
refusing to return.

By not demeaning our selves humbly before him, according as our own vileness,
Jer. 5.3.
Pride.
and the greatness of his mercy does require.

Behaving our selves in our general course, as if we were desirous to live
without God here, and content to be annihilated hereafter, so we might but in
this world enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season.

CHAP. IX. Sins against the second Commandment.
THE Second Commandment does concern the Manner, and Means of Gods worship.
Against this we sin, not only by representing and worshipping of him in
Images, but also by entertaining gross mis-conceits of the divine nature, by
mixing any will worship, superstition, or our own inventions with his service,
when we do not serve him after such a way as is agreeable to his nature, and
required in his word, that is, not in spirit and truth; Not with uprightness,
Joh. 4.24.
sincerity, cheerfulness.

1. It will here concern us to examine how exceedingly we have failed in the
manner of those good duties which we have attempted; Manner.
How much averseness there is in us from setting about them: How much
distraction, and benummednesse of spirit in the performance of them: How much
impotency and weariness in the Continuance of them: How much pride,
unspiritualnesse, formality, want of relish, deadness, uncomfortablenesse
there is mixed with our best services: Serving God with feigned lips: Drawing
near to him with our mouths, and honoring him with our lips, when our hearts
are far from him: Psalm. 17.1*
Resting our selves in the mere outsides of duties, Isa. 29.13.
when we do not enjoy any Communion with God in them.

2. We ought to examine our failings, in respect of the means or kinds of
divine worship. Our carelessness to keep our selves close in a constant holy
communion with God by the right use of all his sacred Ordinances. Means.


1 Prayer, both Private. Public.
2 Ministry of the Word. Our failings in Prayer.
3 Receiving of the Sacraments.
1. Our Negligence in setting any solemn time apart for our secret devotions
betwixt God and our souls. Omitting them upon every trivial occasion, or slight
pretense of business. Our carelessness in the private observance of this duty
with our families, and near relations, and in public with the Congregation.
Our approaching before God without that preparation, reverence, or attention,
as becomes such vile creatures speaking to so great a Majesty, Regarding
iniquity in our hearts, not calling upon him in truth: Ps. 66.18. Ps. 145.18
Ps. 78.36.
Flattering him with our mouths, and lying to him with our tongues, when our
heart is not right with him.

Not Confessing our sins with that sorrow, shame, Dan. 9.8.
and confusion of face, as having thereby so much dishonored his glorious
name, and endangered our own salvations: Being rather apt to cover our
transgressions with Adam, Job 31.33.
by hiding our iniquity in our bosom. Or if we do acknowledge them, yet we are
not careful to forsake them, but do still go on in a continual round of
confessing, and committing, committing and confessing again.

Failing very much in the Matter of our Petitions, 1 John 5.14*
not asking those things which are according to his will. Apt to make our
prejudicate opinions, and passionate wishes, the subject of our Prayers,
instead of the holy, and unchangeable will of God. For the manner of them, not
with faith and fervency, as being truly sensible of our own wants, or as if we
did really believe this duty to be an effectual means for the supply of them.
Not tenderly affectionate in our forgiving of others, or our interceding for
them.

In our thanksgiving, not mentioning the favors we have received with any such
hearty sense of them, as may stir up in our souls, cheerfulness, love,
gratitude. Not praising God with our whole hearts, Psalm. 9.1. Ps. 103.1.
and all that is within us.

Coming before him with customary devotion, rather to satisfy the scruples of
a natural conscience, then out of any true love to this duty it self, or
experimental evidence of comfort to be had by it, our hearts being apt to
wander from him, even whilst we are speaking with him, to think but lightly of
him, whilst we pretend much honor to him.

Not retaining any taste or relish of these duties, after they are ended; Not
living suitably to them; Not taking notice how God does answer our Prayers in
the several passages of his Providence toward us.

2. For the Ordinance of Preaching, the Minister does herein offend, Failings
in respect of the Ministry of the Word.
by being negligent and slothful in his calling, not preaching with that
constancy, faithfulness, simplicity, judgment, authority, courage,
demonstration of the Spirit as he should; The People by neglecting to hear and
read the Word, according to their several opportunities. Before.
By not preparing themselves for this holy exercise. Not coming unto it with
hungring and thirsting desires, and loving, believing, prizing it, as being of
such great efficacy, and necessity for our everlasting well-beings, able to
save our souls; Bringing with them much carnal security, which makes them
without any desire or care to profit by it; much impenitence and hardness of
heart; Not without some secret resolutions of continuing in their former
courses, whatever shall be said to the contrary; Many worldly cares and
thoughts with high conceits of their own sufficiencies, prejudice against their
Teachers, curiosity, not to learn, but to censure, itching ears, rather to
please the fancy, then reform the life.

Not harkening to it without much irreverence, At.
distraction, infidelity, misapplication, obstinacy, dullness, weariness; Not
receiving it into a good and honest heart, with desire to retain and practice
it.

Not careful (after they have heard it) to root and fix it in their hearts by
Prayer, Meditation, After.
Conference; Not expressing the fruits of it in their conversation, slighting
those many gracious opportunities, wherein God has reached forth unto them the
proffers of mercy and salvation; and though he has with much patience waited
for their amendment, yet they have still hardened their hearts, and
notwithstanding the former and the latter rain, do remain like dry stakes in
an hedge, barren and fruitless, without any spiritual life or growth,
answerable to the means which they have had.

3. For the Sacraments, Baptism. Failing in the Sacraments. Baptism.
Supper of the Lord.


Our slighting, and renouncing that Covenant which we made in Baptism, abusing
that good profession, 1 Timothy 6.12.
which we have professed before many witnesses. Not walking as those that have
been received into the bosom of the Church, and distinguished from others that
are without. Not fighting against the world, the flesh, and the Devil, as
becomes such, as are listed into the number of Christ's faithful soldiers, and
servants.

The Lords Supper.
And so for the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, our not hungring and
thirsting after it, not partaking of it so frequently as our necessities, and
opportunities have required.

Before.
When we have approached unto it, have we been careful beforehand to set any
solemn time apart, for the fitting of our selves unto so holy a work? have we
not been unwilling to ransack and examine the secret corners of our hearts; 1
Cor. 11.28.
to find out, and to purge out those particular bosome-sins, unto which our
natures do most incline us? after a more especial manner, to excite and stir up
in our selves the graces of Gods holy Spirit to renew those conditions of the
Covenant, required on our parts, Faith and Repentance?

A^.
In the receiving of the Sacrament, have we no^ been too apt to slight and
dis-esteem it, as if i^ were but an empty common ceremony? have we behaved our
selves with so much fear and reverence, as might become such a sacred mystery,
with such spiritual joy and delight, a^ should be in those who are fit guests
for tha^ table?

After.
After the receipt of it, have we not quickl^ forgotten our good resolutions,
relapsed into our old sins again, not feeling or regarding an^ such comfort or
profit as is promised to the right partaking of this ordinance? have we no^
often eat and drunk unworthily? and consequen^^ly eat and drunk judgment to
our selves? 1 Cor. 15.27. Verse. 29.
becoming guilty of the body and blood of Christ, doing that horrid act which
we so much detested in the Jews, crucifying again our blessed Savior, Heb. 6.6.
and by slighting the proffers of mercy in this Sacrament, 1 Cor. 1.17.
doing as much as in us lies to make his Passion of none effect?

CHAP. X. Sins against the third and fourth Commandment.
THe third Commandment does forbid the abuse of Gods name. By the Name of God
we are to understand any thing whereby he may be known, as his Titles,
Attributes, Ordinances, Works.

So that we sin against this Commandment by wicked Oaths, Cursed execrations,
unlawful Vows, every light irreverent mention of God, all such idle words as
do no way tend to the sanctifying of his name.

By breaking the Vow of our Baptism, neglecting all those good promises and
resolutions which since we have made. Psalm. 78.8.
Dealing falsely in our Covenants, when our heart is not set aright, and our
spirit not steadfast with God.

By our not acknowledging, and effectual remembrance of his holy titles and
attributes as we have had occasion. Not delighting to speak good of his name,
and to make his praise glorious.

By an irreverent and customary mention of his great and glorious name, upon
trivial occasions.

By our not thinking and speaking of his word, so frequently with that
holiness and reverence as we should; sometimes pretending to declare his
statutes, and to take his Covenant into our mouths, whereas we hate
instruction, Psalm. 50.16
and cast his Law behind us.

By our Carelessness in vindicating the glory of his Name and truths, when they
are vilified by others.

By profaning our profession of Christianity, with an unholy conversation; Not
behaving our selves so sincerely in regard of God, nor so inoffensively in
respect of men as we should.

By defacing his glorious image instamped upon us, in our Creation: Becoming
more vile and foolish then the beasts that perish In our regeneration, Ps.
49.20.
relapsing into the sins of our unregeneracy. Not walking worthy of that
vocation whereunto we are called. Ephesians. 4.1.


By our carelessness in discovering, and acknowledging the divine power, and
wisdom, in those special passages of his providence which befall us.

The fourth Commandment
The fourth Commandment does forbid all carelessness, in sanctification of
Sabbaths, Ordinary. Extraordinary.


So that we sin against this when we do not remember to keep the Lords day
holy, that is, when we are not mindful beforehand to prevent and avoid all such
businesses as may distract us in those duties that belong unto this day.

When we our selves do not rest from our usual works and sinful desires, but
mis-spend much of that precious time in idleness and vanity; or else satisfying
our selves in a superstitious, customary observation of the outward rest,
without regarding the means or the works of sanctification.

When we are not careful to prepare our selves for public duty, by praying for
Ministers in general, that God would endow them with fitting gifts and
abilities, prospering their endeavors, by giving happy success unto their
Ministry: More particularly for the Pastor to whose charge we belong, that God
would direct him to speak unto our hearts and consciences.

When we are careless in the performing of our public duties, not with so much
reverence, sincerity, spiritualnesse, attention as we should.

When we are negligent in looking to those that are under us, who by our
carelessness or connivance, may be encouraged to the Profanation of this day.

When we fail in those private duties th^^ concern the Sanctification of the
Sabbath, Meditation of the Word we hear, Searching the Scriptures, to prove the
truth of it, Application of it to our selves, examining our own hearts, private
prayer, conference, whetting the Law upon one another, mutually exhorting and
stirring up each other unto holy duties, contemplating the creatures and the
Providence of God. Deuteronomy. 11.19. Psalm. 92.


When we are weary of the Sabbath, and wish it were gone, Amos 8.^5
and cannot call it a delight.

Isa. 58.13.
And so for extraordinary days, lawfully set apart for solemn Feasts. Fasts,
Public. Private.



When we mispend our occasional Festivals, altogether in outward carnal mirth,
without those inward spiritual duties of love and thankfulness which God
requires; not keeping them holy unto the Lord, Neh. 8.9.
as we ought to do; Not thereby taking occasion to enlarge our bounty to our
poor brethren.

And so for days of humiliation, which are called Sabbaths in Scripture;
Levit. 23.28.
Our neglect of these when there is any special occasion for them, either
public or private; our insensiblenesse of dangers and judgments, like the old
world, keeping on in the road of our secular employments, Matthew. 24.38.
eating and drinking, buying and selling, etc. putting far away the evil day,
chanting to the sound of the Viol, Amos 6.3, 6.
drinking wine in bowls, but are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph; Not
sighing and weeping for the abominations that are committed in the midst of us.
Ezekiel. 9.4.


When we do observe these days, we are ready to rest our selves in bodily
abstinence, outward mortification, hanging down the heads, sad countenances,
without inward afflicting of the soul; Jer. 14.10.
Not breaking, bruising, renting of our hearts; Refraining not our feet, but
loving to wander; Jonah 3.8.
Not turning from all our evil ways, and the violence in our hands.

CHAP. XI. Sins against the second Table.
THe second Table does enjoin the duties of Charity and Justice toward our
neighbor.

Against this we sin when we do not love our neighbors, with such true,
unfeigned love as our selves, when we do not deal so with others, Mat. 7.12.
as we desire they should deal with us; when we do not pray for them, and
endeavor their good as our own.

In the fifth Commandment are forbidden the Vices which concern the relations
of Superiors. Inferiors.


So that we sin against this by not behaving our selves answerably to our
several relations; Not modestly and gravely to our Inferiors, going before
them in an example of good life; Not humbly and dutifully to our Superiors, 1
Pet. 2.13.
not submitting to them for conscience sake, Romans 23.1, 2.
as being ordained of God; Not thankfully to our Benefactors, either not
remembering, or not acknowledging, or not esteeming, or not requiting them as we
might.

Subject to envy, and extenuate those special gifts of others, whereby they
have attained any pre-eminence above our selves.

Hitherto likewise appertain the vices which do more particularly concern the
relations of

Parents: Not educating, instructing, chastising their children so carefully;
Not providing, and praying for them as they should.

Children: Not loving and reverencing their Parents, not submitting to them,
not being so thankful toward them as they might.

Husband: Not behaving himself as a Head to govern, instruct and cherish his
wife.

Wife: By being irreverent, unquiet, not an helper, but an hinderer of her
Husbands good.

Masters: Not careful in directing, governing, punishing, rewarding their
servants.

Servants: Disobedient, slothful, unfaithful, answering again, murmuring.

Aged: Not sober and grave, not wise and exemplary in their carriage.

Younger: Irreverent toward the persons of the Ancient, neglecting of their
good counsels and examples.

Superiors; in gifts, whether inward of the mind, or outward of the estate,
in respect of Nobility, Riches, etc. abusing of their gifts unto scorn, pride,
oppression; Not doing so much good as the advantage of their abilities and
places does require.

Inferiors; Either too much disdaining, or too much flattering those above
them.

Magistrates: Want of diligence and uprightness in the discharge of their
places.

Subjects: Not so respective, serviceable, submissive, as they should.

Teachers: Negligent in taking all occasions of instructing, reforming others
by Counsel. Example.


Learners: Not teachable, inquisitive, etc. The sixth Commandment.
The sixth Commandment does forbid all those sins which are against the health
and welfare of our own, or our Neighbors Bodies. Souls.


So that we sin against this, not only by outward acts of violence* but also by
an aptness to entertain prejudices and misconceits against others; By rash,
immoderate anger, injurious, Mat. 5.22*
revengeful thoughts, secret grudges, hatred, and implacablenesse. 1 John 3.15


By failing in those particulars which concern the maintenance of mutual peace
and friendship amongst one another; By haughty, insolent carriage; Reviling,
scoffing, provoking speeches.

Being senseless and hard-hearted in the miseries of our brethren; not weeping
with them that weep; not being heartily affected at those public evils wherein
we our selves are not more immediately and particularly concerned.

By wounding and murdering the souls of others through scandal Active,
misguiding them, Passive, grieving them,
when we encourage them in their evil courses, either by Provocation, Counsel,
Example, Connivance.

By the levity and unprofitablenesse of conversing amongst others; when we do
not labor to stir them up unto holiness, according to our several
opportunities and relations; Not instructing the ignorant, comforting the weak;
admonishing, exhorting, encouraging others unto well-doing.

By neglecting our own bodily health and welfare, through intemperance,
immoderate passions, etc.

By being careless of our own souls, not providing for the days of death and
judgment, but thrusting them far from us, bidding those days care for
themselves. By quenching and suppressing those holy motions that are at any
time suggested unto our hearts, preferring the base things of this world before
those great matters that concern eternity.

The seventh Commandment does forbid all kinds of uncleanness, The seventh
Commandment.
both of body and soul, together with the means and signs of it.

Against this we sin, not only by committing any outward act of uncleanness
either by our selves or with others; But also

By the Adultery of the heart, by having our minds full of unchaste desires,
Mat. 5.28.
by cherishing in our selves any lustful, unlawful affection: By delighting our
thoughts in the fancy and speculation of those lusts which we have not
opportunity to act.

When we do not labor to quench our fleshly concupiscence, by vigilance over
our own hearts and ways, by avoiding all evil company, and such other
occasions as may inflame us; when we are not moderate in our delights; modest
in our carriages; temperate in our diet; diligent and painful in our callings.

When our eyes are full of adultery, when our ears are willingly open to
filthy and unclean communication, when our tongues are given to rotten and
unsavory speeches.

When we are not wary and circumspect in avoiding all suspicions and
appearances of this evil.

The eighth Commandment does forbid all those vices which do concern our own,
The eighth Commandment.
or our neighbors outward estate; as Theft, Oppression, Deceit, Sacrilege,
Usury, Bribery, Prodigality.

We offend against this, not only by those external acts of theft and
injustice, which humane law does take notice of, but also

By the Love of money, 1 Timothy 6.10.
which is the root of all evil, by being discontent at our estates, greedy of
gain, full of restless and insatiable desires after these earthly profits.

When we are not so strict, and conscionable in the means of getting wealth,
either negligent and idle in those callings, wherein we should provide for our
selves and our families; or else too much hastening to be rich, by violence and
oppression, Prove. 28.20.
craft, or overreaching, by being unfaithful in our words and promises; Not so
upright and sincere in our dealings with others, not conscionable in paying
their dues.

When we are not wise and moderate in the use of these outward things; Not so
discreet in laying out the Talents committed to our stewardship; too sparing,
and parsimonious unto good purposes; too lavish about dishonest and unnecessary
occasions.

The ninth Commandment does forbid those vices, which concern our own, The
ninth Commandment.
or our neighbors reputation, as Slander, Credulity, Hearing of tale-bearers,
Censuring, Sinister suspicions, Flattery, Silence in defending, etc.

Against this we sin, not only when we do publicly concur with others in false
judgment against our neighbors; But also

When we are not charitable in our speaking, hearing, thinking of others.

Subject to reviling, scornful, slanderous speeches, very ready to speak ill,
and to spread the faults of our neighbors, when it does no way concern us, or
is like to benefit others.

Willing to entertain Back-biters, Tale-bearers, Scoffers, ready to listen unto
any report that tends unto the defamation of others, too much affected unto
flattering tongues and deceitful lips; Busy, and meddling in the affairs of
others where we are not concerned.

Full of Credulity, and rash belief, in judging of ill rumors, too liable unto
uncharitable suspicions, apt to interpret good things ill, and doubtful matters
in the worst sense.

Not so careful in upholding our neighbors credit, by admonishing, exhorting,
rebuking him, according to our Callings and opportunities.

Subject to arrogant, high conceits of our selves, and yet very negligent in
those ways whereby we may establish our reputations; Not laboring to be such as
we would seem to be; Not endeavoring to keep a good conscience before God, and
a good report before men; Not avoiding all appearances of evil.

The tenth Commandme^t.
The tenth and last Commandment does forbid any concupisence against our
neighbor, though before the consent of the will; whether by covetousness,
self-love, evil thoughts, envy.

Against this we sin, when we have not such a holy disposition in our minds
unto the duties of charity, as God has required.

When we are apt to favor and entertain the temptations that are suggested to
us.

When our minds are full of evil fancies and wicked perturbations, arising
from our corrupted natures.

When we delight our selves in any evil imagination, keeping it close, Job
20*12, 13.
and rolling it in our thoughts, though our minds (perhaps) do not consent to
the acting of it.

CHAP. XII. Sins against the Gospel.
NExt to these transgressions against the Law, we ought to enumerate our sins
against the Gospel, which for the general kinds of them are reducible to these
two heads Unbelief. Impenitence.


1. Our Unbelief, in the several degrees of it.

Not laboring to acquaint our selves with the duties, promises, privileges of
the Gospel, 1. Unbelief.
though it does contain the best glad tidings, and of the greatest consequence
that can possibly be imagined.

Our not assenting to it, according to its full latitude, being easily carried
about with every wind of doctrine, any wild erroneous fancy, apt to turn
aside unto our own crooked ways; And to have our mind corrupted from the
simplicity that is in Christ; Ps. 125.5.
2 Cor. 11.3 Tit. 1.13.
Not being sound in the faith.

Our not loving and esteeming of it. Not sufficiently admiring that miracle of
divine bounty wherein the Love of God was more especially commended and
manifested toward us, Romans 5.8.
in that he sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live
through him. 1 John 4.9.


Our too much slighting and under-valuing the great love and merits of our
blessed Redeemer. Treading underfoot the Son of God, Heb. 10.29.
profaning the blood of the Covenant, and doing what we could to make Christ's
passion of none effect. Being apt to prefer dross and dung before the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord. Phil. 3.8.
Not counting him all in all. Not rejoicing in God through our Lord Jesus
Christ, Col. 3.11. Romans 5.11
by whom we have received the Atonement. Not glorying alone in Christ, and him
crucified. Gal. 6, 14.
Not counting his favor and loving-kindnesse to be better then life. Psalm.
119.115.
Not claiming his promises as our heritage, esteeming them the joy of our
hearts. Not looking upon them as being unsearchable riches, Ephesians. 3.8. 2 Pet.
1.4.
exceeding great and precious.

Our not living by faith, in all estates and conditions; Not embracing the
promises of the Gospel with so much readiness, nor adhering to them with so
much stedfastness, as the excellency and certainty of them does require.

Not improving and applying this rich treasure of Gospel-promises unto the
various changes of this temporal life, in respect of Prosperity. Adversity.
being very apt to be altogether immersed in sensitive, external things;
without reflecting upon those advantages we might from thence enjoy in this
regard.

And so for our spiritual life, being apt to rely on our own righteousness,
and self-justifications, thereby endeavoring (as much as in us lies) to
deprive Christ of his Saviour-ship.

Not owning of Christ in all his offices, not willing to accept of him as well
for our Lord, as our Savior.

And this heart of unbelief does prove unto us a root of Apostasy, Heb. 3.2.
making us to depart from the living God.

2. Our Impenitency, 2. Impenitency.
in that when God had in some measure discovered unto us our own miserable
condition, by reason of the Covenant of Works, we have not yet humbled our
selves in any proportion to the multitude or greatness of our sins; Nor
applied our selves with any fervency of heart unto the only means of pardon
and reconcilation in the Covenant of Grace.

Not being inquisitive after our sins, not endeavoring to examine and find
out our particular failings, but rather to hide and excuse them.

Not being humbled and grieved for them, as considering that wretched
injustice, folly, unkindnesse, that we have expressed by them.

Not resolving and striving against them, not improving all advantages for the
avoiding and subduing of them.

Refusing to repent, though God has vouchsafed us time and means. Rev. 2.21.
Joh. 3.19. 2 Cor. 6.1.
Though light be come into the world, yet loving darkness rather then light.
Receiving the grace of God in vain. Turning it into wantonness. Jude v.4.
Tempting, grieving, quenching the holy Spirit of God, whereby we should be
sealed to the day of redemption. Ephesians. 4.30


Hardening our selves, by a custom and delight in sin, and by this means,
Treasuring up for our selves, wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of
the righteous judgment of God. Romans 2* 5.


It Is here to be observed, that though these two sins be more immediately and
directly against the Gospel, yet the other breaches of the Law before
mentioned, are in some sense reducible also under this head, Evangelical
obedience including Legal, as subordinate to it; and the Law being the rule of
Gospel conversation. And for this reason I am the more brief upon this head.

We should here likewise remember that all these offenses before enumerated,
are but the generals and kinds of our sins. The particular acts of them being
past our numbering. To all which may be added, our pronenesse to maintain,
justify, extenuate our offenses.

CHAP. XIII. Concerning the aggravation of sins.
BEsides the Enumeration of our sins, it is also requisite that we understand
somewhat concerning the aggravation of them, whereby they may appear exceeding
sinful, that so we may be the better affected with a selfe-abhorrency and
humiliation for them. Romans 7.13.


Aggravation may be either of Sin in General. Kinds of sin. Particular sins.
Ma^ifold transgressions and mighty sins



1. Sin in general may be aggravated, either by its Greatness Multitude
in both which respects it is eminent above any thing else; as for other
matters if they be great they are but few; if many, Am. 5.12.
they are but small. But sin exceeds in both these.

1. The greatness of its evil may be discerned in its Nature Effects,
both in regard of Christ. Mr. Goodwin's aggravation of sin.
Our selves. Other creatures.


1. All sin in its own nature and essence is enmity against God, Romans 8.7.
Now as he that hates his brother is a murderer: So he that hates God, 1 John 3.15
may be said to be a murderer of him. Because in his heart he wishes that he
were not. The holy Ghost fitly styles it, The excrement, (...). Jam. 1.21.
The superfluity of naughtiness, implying, that if all other evils were to
have a scum, a superfluity, it is sin must be it. It Is worse then the Devil
himself, it made him to be so. It Is worse then Hell, that is but opposite to
the good of the creature; this of the Creator. And if the greatness of the
malady may be judged by the cost and difficulty of the Cure; It will easily
appear that no evil is so great as this, because nothing could serve for the
remedy of it, but the infinitely precious blood of Jesus Christ: It Is so great
an evil, that there can be no greater punishment of it, then by it self; when
God would deal with a man as a most desperate enemy, he give him up to sin.
There can be no worse epithet or expression for it, then it self. When the
Apostle would speak the worst of it he could, he calls it by his own name,
sinful sin.

Romans 7.13
2. For the effects of it, in regard

1. Of Christ, who had it only by imputation as our Surety. It was the cause of
all his bitter Agonies; It afflicted his soul and broke his heart, making him
to cry out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

2. In respect of our selves; it has utterly undone all mankind, debased our
souls which were fit companions for God himself, unto a servile, shameful
condition: Deprived them of that glorious Image, wherein all our happiness and
excellency did consist; and made us more vile then the beasts that perish.

3. In respect of the other Creatures; it has brought a vanity and curse upon
the whole Creation, Romans 8.23. Genesis 3.17. Hag. 2.13.
causing all the miseries and sorrows in this world, and those eternal torments
in the world to come.

All which mischief is contained in the nature, and might be effected by any
the least particular sin. Now if every sin have in it so much deformity and
danger; if our least offenses do contain in them more enmity and injustice
against God, then could be expiated by the whole Creation, and of themselves
would be enough to sink us into eternal perdition: how desperate then are those
greater abominations, Is. 1.18.
those crying sins, of a scarlet and crimson dye, wherewith our lives have been
defiled?

If an infinite wrath be due to our idle thoughts, what may we expect then for
our unclean, covetous, malicious, proud, Atheistical, Blasphemous thoughts?

If every vain word does deserve hell, what depth of damnation then shall be
inflicted for those many cursed oaths, lies, bitterness, railings, and other
unsavory discourses, whereof we have been guilty?

If our Righteousness be as filthy rags; if the iniquity of our holy things be
enough to condemn us, what dregs of indignation may we then expect, for our
many rebellions, profane, hypocritical, actions? if our sacrifice and
obedience may be counted abomination, what shall be thought then of our
Sacrilege and Rebellion?

2. For the multitude of our sins; who can tell how often he offends? Ps.
19.1^. Ezra 9.6 Ps. 40.12.
Our iniquities are increased over us, and our trespasses are grown up unto the
heavens. They are more then the hairs of our head. Neither the tongue of men
or Angels is able to reckon them up; if there be any impiety which we have not
fallen into, it is not for want of sinful inclinations in us: but rather because
we had not temptations, means, opportunities for the acting of it. To which may
be added our continuance in sin, as a fountain casts out her waters, Jer. 6.7.
without intermission.

Now if one sin alone be enough to expose us to damnation; O then how shall we
be able to stand before so many sins, which we know by our selves, besides
those many secret sins which we have not known? many that we never considered,
and very many that we have quite forgotten.

If all the plagues and curses of the law be due unto those who continue not in
all things written in that book to do them; Gal. 3.10.
What fury and wrath then may they look for, who have persevered in a continual
rebellion against all Gods holy Laws and Commandments?

If one sin in Adam were enough to condemn the whole world, what then may a
world of sins in every one of us?

All which sins will yet appear more heinous by comparing them with those many
and great favors which we have received.

2. The Kinds of sin may be aggravated.

Kinds of sin.
1. By comparing them with others which are less evil. 2. By examining them
according to their full latitude, showing how many impieties are involved in
every one. 3. By distinguishing them into their several degrees.

1. By comparing them; for example, sins of Commission are in themselves more
heinous then sins of Omission. Heb. 10.28, 29. 2 Cor. 3.8.
Sins against the Gospel are in some respects much worse then sins against the
Law, because they are against greater light and mercy; and the more means any
have enjoyed, the greater shall their condemnation be. Corazin and Bethsaida,
Mat. 11.21, 22.
being upon this ground pronounced by our Savior to be in a worse condition
then Tire and Sidon. As in matter of grace, God does not weigh it by the
Scales, but try it by the touchstone; not so much regarding the number as the
truth of duties. So it is likewise for sins; a lesser sin against light and
love does more provoke him, then a much greater with reluctance, or from
surprisal.

Transgressions against the first Table, are worse then those against the
second. If one man sin against another, the Judge shall judge him: 1 Samuel 2*25.
But if a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him? and for this
reason the first Table is called The great Commandment. Mat. 22.38.


Neglect of a principal duty of the first or second Table, is a greater sin
then the neglect or omission of that which is circumstantial or ceremonial:
Obedience and Mercy being better then sacrifice. 1 Samuel 15.22.


Sins against the clear light of nature or reason, are in many respects worse
then those that are discovered to us by the written Word. The more obligations
are broken, the greater still is the sin, as when our offense is not only
against the Word of God, but likewise against the Law of Nature, Conscience,
particular Promises and Vows.

2. By examining the latitude and comprehensiveness of any kind of sin, though
it may more especially refer to the breach of some one Commandment, yet if we
search into its utmost compass and extent, we shall find that it does also
refer unto diverse others; So the sins of the second Table, do not only entrench
upon one another, but also upon those of the first Table, by reason of that
disobedience which is in them, unto the Command of God.

3. By distinguishing the degrees of sin, the first Consent being not so bad as
the Act, nor the Act so bad as the Custom and delight; A particular offense
being not so bad as an habitual reigning sin, that wastes the conscience.

Particular sins.
3. That which does more especially concern us in our Confessions, is the
aggravation of particular sins. Because a general view of them, is more apt to
produce a confused stupor and amazement, rather then any proper and genuine
humiliation. Every man has some black days in his Calendar, some more
notorious sin, whereof he has been guilty. He should in his private
humiliation endeavor to call those to fresh remembrance, Ps. 51.3.
and set them before him. Not forgetting that horror and dread which appeared
to him, when God did first discover them to his conscience. And therefore it
will concern us to labor after a more distinct discovery of the heinousness
of our particular offenses, which will best appear by examining them according
to their diverse circumstances. Quis, ubi, quid, quibus auxillis, Cur, quomodo,
quando.


Now the Circumstances of actions are usually reckoned to be these seven. 1.
The Person. 2. The Place. 3. The Thing. 4. The Means. 5. The End. 6. The
Manner. 7. The Time.

1. The Person.
1. The Person is considerable under a twofold capacity, either for the Person
Offended. Offending.


1. The Person offended, the Creator and Governor of the world; The Person.
so eminent for his Greatness and Majesty, which does add much to the
offense; An ill word against the King, being high Treason, whereas the greatest
offense against another is not so much. So that it may be very helpful to set
forth the heinousness of any sin, to consider who it is that is offended by
it. Not only our Brethren, Superiors, Equals, Inferiors, or our selves; but
the great God, who is able with the blast of his mouth, with a frown of his
countenance to ruin us eternally, and cast us into hell. And it must needs
argue extreme folly for men to contend with their Maker, 1 Cor. 10.22.
to provoke him to jealousy, as if they were stronger then he.

So infinite in holiness, and knowledge; of pure and piercing eyes; abhorring
sin infinitely, and yet necessarily beholding it. Though men may stop their
ears, or shut their eyes against what they dislike, yet God cannot go out of
the hearing or seeing of sin. He hears every one of our vain and sinful words.
He sees into the secret corners of our hearts, the least glimpse of any sinful
contrivement, which we our selves can scarce take notice of; and should we
provoke the eyes of his glory?

So terrible in his Justice and Majesty, Isa. 3.8.
who shall one day come with thousands of his glorious Angels, in flaming fire
to render vengeance upon all those that know him not, or obey him not.

So merciful and gracious unto us; The Lord our Redeemer, the holy One of
Israel our King; Our Father who has loved us, and has given us everlasting
consolation, 2 These. 2.16* Ps. 109.5.
and good hope through grace. And shall we return evil for good, and hatred for
his good will? Shall we thus requite the Lord? Is not he our Father that bought
us? has he not made us, and established us? Deuteronomy. 32.6


The Person offending; a frail creature, of a dependant being; preferred out of
nothing, to the noble condition of the humane nature. One that has taken upon
him the Profession of Religion, engaged himself to the duties of Christianity
by a solemn Vow in Baptism, participated the means of Grace in a greater
measure then others; and has had so much experience of Gods more especial
favor toward him. One who is called a Christian, and rests in the Gospel, and
makes his boast of Christ, Romans 2.17 18.
and knows his will, and approves the things that are more excellent, etc.

2. The Place. Isa. 26.10.
2. The Place, where we have enjoyed the liberty and sunshine of the Gospel; In
the land of uprightness dealing unjustly. In that very place which has so much
abounded with temporal and spiritual blessings; flowing with milk and honey,
and that which is more nourishing and pleasant to the soul, then either of
these to the body; The Word and Ordinances of God in sincerity and power: It Is
recorded of the Israelites, Psalm. 106 7. that They provoked God at the sea, Ps.
106.7.
even at the red sea; which is repeated with an Emphasis, as being the place of
mercy where they had lately seen so miraculous a deliverance, which
circumstance did add a great aggravation to their rebellion.

3. The Thing.
3. The Thing; that which we have so often relapsed into, against which we have
so frequently resolved, being in it self (it may be) of a more foul and
scandalous nature, etc. Hitherto does belong the aggravations which concern the
kinds of sin, which were mentioned before.

4. The Means; with hypocritical pretenses, 4. The Means.
making Religion the veil for our unlawful desires, fighting against God with
those abilities, with which we should serve him. Abusing that health, wealth,
strength, wit, and all the other Talents we have received; not only neglecting
to improve them unto the glory of the Giver, but wastefully lavishing of them,
so that we cannot with the foolish servant give God his own again; using them
as weapons against him, thereby resisting his Spirit and Ordinances.

5. The End; for lying vanities, 5. The End.
the short pleasures of sin, which are not without some mixture of sorrow, in
the very enjoyment of them, and do afterward fill the soul with guilt and
fear. Forsaking the Fountain of living waters, Jer. 2.13.
and hewing out unto our selves broken Cisterns that will hold no water.
Spending our money for that which is not bread, Is. 55.2.
and our labor for that which satisfies not. Prosecuting those things whereof
we might be ashamed; the end of which will be death. Romans 6.2^


6. The Manner how; 6. The Manner.
which is capable of much amplification, it being a great addition to the
heinousness of any sin, when it is committed, either,

Out of ignorance, when we have had means of being better informed; Out of
impudence, against the dictates of nature; Heb. 10.26.
the light of reason and education; some taste and relish of spiritual things;
the checks of conscience; former promises and resolutions. After much
consideration and debate with our own hearts. Against our own experience and
observation of many judgments that have been inflicted upon such a sin.
Against many examples, much patience, the means of remedy, in which respects
the sins of men are much worse then those of the devil: for he never sinned
against example, being the first offender; nor against patience, being
immediately upon the first offense cast into hell; nor against remedy, there
being no possible means allowed him for his recovery. Out of base ingratitude,
against the frequent and favorable motions of the blessed Spirit: Despising
the riches of Gods goodness, Romans 2* 4
and forbearance, and long-suffering, whereby we should have been led to
repentance. After frequent relapses, which do multiply the guilt of sin, 2 Pet.
2.22
like the increase of figures; though the first fault be but as one, yet the
second relapse makes it as ten, the third as an hundred, the next as a
thousand, and so on, according to this multiplied proportion. Out of
presumption and forestalling of pardon, making the mercy of God to lead us unto
sin. Ps. 50.17
Out of much obdurateness and pertinacy, casting his laws behind our backs,
Isa. 5.18. Romans 2.1. Isa. 43.24
and hating to be reformed. Drawing iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as
it were with cart-ropes: Treasuring up wrath against the day of wrath, as if we
would weary God with our iniquities; with much forwardness, and constancy,
notwithstanding the great trouble and difficulty there has been in the service
of sin; without any, or with very small temptation; with much cheerfulness and
delight, Job 15.16 Ephesians. 4.19. Number. 15.30. Jer. 5.3. Isa. 65.3. 1 Cor. 10.22.
as if there had been pleasure in destruction; with much eagerness, and
desire, drinking inquity like water; working all uncleanness with greediness;
with an high hand, as if we would reproach the Lord, refusing to return unto
him; with mad impudence, provoking God to his Face, as if we were stronger then
he.

7. The Time when: 7. The Time.
Not only in our childehood, but in our manhood; not only when we sat in
darkness, in the days of our unregeneracy; but since he has called us into
his mavelous light, since the glorious Gospel has shined into our hearts,
having, (perhaps) but lately suffered under such an affliction, and received
such a special deliverance, upon which we did renew our Covenant with God by
fresh resolutions of strict and circumspect walking.

Each of these circumstances may be otherwise more largely amplified, according
to the several natures of those sins to which they are applied in our
confessions; but by that which has been already said, it may sufficiently
appear how the distinct understanding and consideration of them may be very
useful in this business.

CHAP. XIV. Of our acknowledging the punishments that are due to sin.
WHen we have thus acknowledged our sins by an Enumeration and Aggravation of
them; we are in the next place to own the punishments that are due unto them,
thereby the better to affect us with sorrow and indignation at those evil
courses, which will expose us to so many fearful dangers. That thus remembering
our doings which were not good, Exek. 36.31.
we may loath our selves for our abominations: Acknowledging that we are not
worthy the least of his mercies, Genesis 32.10
or truth, that he has showed unto us; Desiring to abhor our selves, Job.
42.6.
and repent in dust and ashes.

Thus the Prodigal in his submission to his father; first he acknowledges his
offense, I have sinned against heaven, Luke 15.18, 19.
and against thee; and then he ownes the punishment, And am no more worthy to
be called thy son. There being a natural consequence betwixt these two. For if
God spared not the Angels that sinned, 2 Pet. 2.4, 5, 6.
but delivered them into chains of darkness to be reserved unto judgment; if
he spared not the old world, but brought a flood upon them; if the cities of
Sodom, and Gomorrah were turned into ashes, being condemned unto a dreadful
overthrow, that they might be examples to those that after should live ungodly;
Romans 11.21.
if God spared not the natural branches, but cut them off for their
disobedience and unbelief; we may certainly then conclude, that though sentence
against other evil works be not executed speedily, Eccl. 8.11.
yet they shall not go unpunished; Ps. 140.11
But evil shall hunt the wicked person to overthrow him. And therefore besides
the confession of our sins, it is also requisite that we own, and acknowledge
the punishments that are due unto us for them.

Now these punishments are either External. Internal. 1. External.
Eternal.


1. The External are those that concern the outward man; either in Body,
Friends, Name, Estate.

1. In our Bodies: 'Twere but justice if God should deprive us of our health;
if he should smite us with a consumption, and a fever; Deuteronomy. 28.22. Verse. 27.
with an inflammation, and an extreme burning, with the botch of Egypt, with
the Emrods, and with the Leprosy, whereof we cannot be cured; if he should
send upon us sore sicknesses, and of long continuance; Verse. 59.
if he should suffer us with Job to be so wholly overspread with sores, Job,
7.5. Verse, 15.
that we should become loathsome to our own selves. That we should choose
strangling and death rather then life.

It were but justice if he should strike us blind, or deaf, or lame; if he
should take from us those senses by which we have so much dishonored, and
provoked him; if he should deprive us of those limbs and members, which we have
used as instruments of sin, and weapons of unrighteousness.

2. In respect of our Friends: We might justly expect that God should cast us
into a forlorn, destitute condition, when there should be none to relieve or
pity us. He might take from us the help and comfort of our Friends, either
turning their hearts against us, or depriving us of them by death.

3. In regard of our Names and Credit: He might give us over to those
notorious, scandalous censures, by which we should be made ashamed to live, and
afraid to die. He might justly make us an astonishment, Deuteronomy. 28.37^. Psalm.
44.13, 14. Deuteronomy. 29.20. Isa. 28.7.
and a proverb, and a byword amongst all Nations; To be laughed to scorn, and
had in derision of them that are round about us. He might blot out our names
from under heaven.

4. For our Estates: If God should lay judgment to the line, and righteousness
to the plummet; he might number every one of us to the sword, and to captivity,
and to ruin: Depriving us of our liberty, Liberty.
peace, plenty. It were but justice if he should suffer us to be shut up in
some prison or dungeon, where we could not enjoy the mercies that we possess:
If he should lead us into captivity, sell us unto some cruel slavery, and
bondage; Scatter us abroad amongst all the Kingdoms of the earth; Deuteronomy. 28.25.
Heb. 11.37
Causing us to wander about in sheepskins, and goat skins; being destitute,
afflicted, tormented; Verse. 38.
Being dispersed in the deserts, and mountains, in dens and caves of the earth.

If he should take from us that peace, quietness, comfort, which we have
formnrly enjoyed, filling us with confusion and trouble; Peace.
giving us over to the rage and malice of our enemies: Causing the Sun to go
down at noon, Amos 8.9
and darkning the earth in the clear day; Surprising us with sad confusions
when we think our selves most secure and happy. Turning our feasts into
mourning, and our songs into lamentation; Verse. 10.
bringing sackcloth upon all loins, and baldness upon every head; making us
to eat our bread with carfulness, Ez. 12.19.
and to drink our water with astonishment.

If he should deny us his creatures, when we want them; Plenty.
take them from us when we have them; withhold his blessing from attending
them; debar us from the comfortable enjoyment of them; sending upon us
cleanness of teeth: Amos 4.6 Ezekiel. 5.16
The evil arrows of famine; breaking the staff of our bread; taking away our
corn in the time thereof; making the heaven over us to be brass, and the
earth under us to be iron; Hos. 2.9. Deuteronomy. 28.23.
If he should rain fire and brimstone down upon us; if he should afflict us
with hunger, and thirst, and nakedness, and the want of all things; if he
should send a rust, Verse. 48. Jam. 5.3. Hag. 1.^.
and canker upon our estates, making an hole in the bottom of our bags; by
which our gains should insensibly drop away, and slip from us; if he should
curse us in the city, and in the field, Deuteronomy. 28.16, 17, 18.
in our basket and in our store; in the fruit of our land, and the increase of
our cattle, in all our endeavors* and the works of our hands: Feeding us with
the bread of affliction, and with the water of affliction: 1 King. 22.27.
Giving us to drink the cup of trembling and the dregs of the cup of his fury:
Stretching out upon us the line of confusion, and the stones of emptiness;
Isa. 51.22. Isa. 34.11. Psalm. 11.6.
if he should make the portion of our cup to be snares, fire, and brimstone,
and an horrible tempest.

2. Internal punishments are those that concern 2. Internal
the soul, and inward man; either in respect of blessings Natural. Spiritual.


It were but justice if God should take from us our wits, Deuteronomy. 28.28.
reasons, memories: If he should smite us with madness, Dan. 4.16
and astonishment of heart: Giving us the hearts of beasts, making us become
raving and desperate, or stupid and brutish; if he should deprive us of our
inward peace and quietness, giving us a trembling heart, and sorrow of mind:
Deuteronomy. 28.65. Job 7.14.
Scaring us with dreams, and terrifying us with visions: Making our guilty
consciences to fly into our faces; to gnaw upon the soul with fierce and
restless accusations, to fill the thoughts with terrors and amazement.

It were but justice if he should deprive us of all his holy Ordinances;
sending upon us a famine of the Word: Am. 8.11. Isa 30.20. Mic. 3.6, 7
Removing our Teachers into corners* so that our eyes cannot see them; making
the night to come upon us, wherein we should not have a vision, that it should
be dark unto us, that we cannot divine; that the Sun should go down over our
Prophets, and the day be dark over them, that the Seers should be ashamed, and
the Diviners confounded, all of them covering their lips, because there is no
answer of God.

If he should reject all our holy services, hide himself from us when we seek
his face; stopping his ears when we cry unto him; laughing at our calamities,
Pro. 1.26*
and mocking when our fear comes; if he should fling our Prayers back into our
faces; with a curse in stead of a blessing; if he should take our confessions
as an evidence against our selves, and condemn us out of our own mouths.

If he should subtract the means of grace, and not any longer, continue the
proffers of mercy to those who have so much undervalued and abused them* If he
should cause his grieved Spirit to retire from us, and finally give us over to
our own desperane hardness, and impenitency, to vile affections, to a seared
conscience, and a reprobate sense, whereby we might be continued in our evil
courses till the day of his vengeance.

3. Eternal punishments are such as concern our immortal conditions after this
life; 3. Eternal.
They are either of Loss. Pain.


1. The punishment of loss does consist in being for ever banished from the
blessed presence of God, and the joys of heaven. In being punished with
everlasting destruction, 2 These. 1.9
from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power.

2. The pain of sense does consist in those most exquisite and unexpressible
torments, which shall be inflicted on the damned, set forth in Scripture by
everlasting fire; utter darkness; the worm that dies not, and the fire that
is not quenched; Matthew. 15.41.22.13. Mar. 9.40.2 et. 2.4. Jude 13. Rev. 19.20 2
Pet. 2.1.
Chains of darkness: The blackness of darkness for ever: The lake of fire,
burning with brimstone.

It were but justice if God should cut us off with swift destruction; snatching
us out of the land of the living, with our sins, and fears upon us; and cast
us into those regions of darkness, those black and cruel habitations where
there is nothing but weeping and gnashing of teeth.

2 These. 1.8
If he should take vengeance upon us in flaming fire; making us to drink the
wine of his wrath, which is poured out without mixture into the cup of his
indignation: Rev. 14.10
Tormenting us with fire and brimstone in the presence of his holy Angels.

Should God deal with us according to our deserts, it would have been much
better for us that we had never been borne. He might justly inflict upon us all
the plagues of this life, and eternal torments in the life to come. There is
nothing could remain for us to expect, but a certain fearful looking for of
judgment, and fiery indignation to devour us.

It were easy to amplify each of these heads, from those many curses, and
judgments denounced in Scripture, which are all of them appliable to this
purpose, as being the desert of sin.

The serious consideration, and application of these things, will very much
conduce to the exciting of such affections in us, as do become the duty of
confession.

CHAP. XV. Of the proper materials for a Transition, whereby Confession and
Petition may be annexed.
THus much briefly concerning the Matter and Method to be observed in our
Confession.

That which should succeed next unto it, is Petition. But for the better
connection of these two it is requisite that they be joined together by some
fitting Transition. The most natural materials for which, may be referred unto
some of these heads.

1. A profession of our shame and sorrow in the consideration of our many sins,
and the punishments due unto them. Eze. 36.31
A readiness to loath our selves for our abominations. To judge and condemn
our selves, that we may not be condemned of the Lord. A willingness to set our
sins ever before us, as considering that though the acts of them be past, yet
the guilt, and the danger may be present; and that there may be many now in
hell, who have not been so great sinners as we. Of this kind is that speech of
Ezra: O my God, I am ashamed, Ezra. 9.6.
and blush to lift up my face to thee. And Job: I abhor my self, Job 42.6.
and repent in dust and ashes. And Daniel: O Lord, to us belongs confusion of
face, Dan. 9.8.
because we have sinned against thee.

2 An expression of our desire to fly utterly out of our selves, to renounce
all our own righteousness; How should man be just with God? if he should
contend with us, Job 9.2, 3
we could not answer for one of a thousand. If thou should be extreme to
mark what is done amiss, Ps. 130.3, 4
O Lord, who may abide it? but there is mercy and forgiveness with thee that
thou may be feared, thou know our frame, and considerest that we are but
dust; Psalm. 103.4
frail, infirm creatures, and therefore thou do not expect perfection from
us; if we could have no sin, we should have no need of a Redeemer, we are of
our selves altogether impotent, and unclean, and our righteousness as filthy
rags. Isa. 64.6.


3. A promise of amendment for the future; Renewing our Covenant with God by
fresh resolutions of astrict and holy conversation; Neh. 9.38 Chap. 10. verse.
29.
Professing our desire to fear his name, and to be engaged to him, by an
everlasting Covenant, never to depart from him again. O that my ways were so
directed, Psalm. 119.5
that I might keep thy Commandments always! O that thou would enable us to
repent and be converted; that our sins may be bletted out, Acts 3.19.
when the times of refreshing shall come! It is the desire of our souls to
walk more holily and humbly before thee for the future; to keep a stricter
watch over our own hearts and ways.

4. A brief application unto our selves of such mercies and promises, as belong
to those that believe and repent. Though we have not expressed the dutiful
affections of children, yet God cannot renounce the tender compassions of a
Father; and if earthly Parents can give good things to their children, will not
he be much more ready to be gracious to his? With the Lord there is mercy, and
with him is plenteous redemption. Psalm. 130. ^ Jo^. 2.1
And we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, who is
the propitiation for our sins. He has promised to hear, and grant the
requests, that are put up in faith; that he will have respect to those of an
humble and contrite heart; that those who do not hide their sins, but confess
and forsake them, shall find mercy; Ez^. 33.11
That he delights not in the death of a sinner, but rather that he should be
converted, and live. Ps. 51.17.
That the sacrifices of God are a broken spirit; a broken and contrite heart he
will not despise. And now, O Lord, thou art that God, and thy words be true, 2 Samuel 7.28.
and thou have promised such mercies unto thy servants; therefore now let it be
unto us according to thy word. We desire to lay hold on that word of promise,
that thou will heal our backslidings, Hos. 14.^.
and love us freely; that thou will not turn away from us, to do us gond; but
wilt put thy fear into our hearts, Jer. 32.40.
that we shall not depart from thee. O think upon thy servants, as concerning
this word of thine, Ps. 119 49
wherein thou have caused us to put our trust! Truly our hope is even in thee.
It Is the desire of our souls to seek after thee, and to come unto thee, and
thou never failest them that se^k thee: Of those that come unto thee, thou
put away none. Psalm. 9.10. Joh. 6.37.
O be pleased to establish this word of thine unto thy servants, and let them
not be disappointed of their hope!

Though the wages of sin be death, yet this is our comfort, that the gift of
God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Scripture is very copious in other pertinent expressions for each of these
heads, and to some of these the most proper matter for Transition is reducible.

CHAP. XVI. Conrerning Deprecation of evil, with several Arguments to back our
requests of this nature.
THe chief heads of matter for Petition are summarily comprehended in the Lords
Prayer, as has been showed before. Chap. 5.


All Petition is either for Our selves. Deprecation. Comprecation.
Others. Intercession.


In petitioning for our selves, the first thing to be explained, is
Deprecation, which concerns the prevention, or removal or lessening of evil.

1. Sin.
The first evil to be prayed against, is that of sin, and therein we should
deprecate both the Guilt. Power.


1. The guilt of sin is that imputation whereby we are obliged to the wrath of
God, 1. The guilt of sin.
and all the curses of the Law, and therefore we have great need to pray that
he would forgive us our debts; Isa. 44.22.
That he would blot out our Transgressions as a cloud; That he would open unto
us the fountain for sin, and for uncleanness; Zach. 13.1
That he would have compassion upon us, subduing our iniquities, and casting
our sins into the depths of the sea; Mic. 7.19.
That we may be justified freely by his grace, Romans 3.24.
through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ; That he would cleanse us from
all filthiness both of flesh and spirit; 2 Cor. 7.1.
That he would blot out the handwriting that is against us, and take it out of
the way, Col. 2.14.
nailing it to the Cross of Christ.

Of this kind we have sundry Deprecations in Scripture; So David, Remember, O*
Lord, Ps. 25.6, 7.
thy tender mercies, and thy loving kindnesses, for they have been ever of old.
Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions: for thy names sake, O
Lord, Verse. 11.
pardon mine iniquity, for it is great.

Lord, be merciful unto me, heal my soul, Psalm 41.4.
for I have sinned against thee.

Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness, Ps. 51.1, 2.
according to the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions;
wash me thoroughly from mine iniquities, and cleanse me from my sin. Purge me
with Hysope, and I shall be clean, wash me, and I shall be whiter then Snow.
Verse. 7.
Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities. Verse. 9.


O remember not against us our former iniquities, Ps. 79.8, 9
help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name. Deliver us, and
purge away our sins for thy names sake.

Look thou upon me, and be merciful unto me, Psalm. 119.132.
as thou usest to do unto those that love thy Name.

Take away all our iniquities, and receive us graciously. Hos. 14.2.


Heal our backslidings, and love us freely.

Verse. 4.
Now because this is one of the chief wants, against which we should petition;
therefore we should endeavor to back our requests in this kind, with such
Arguments as may serve to stir up our fervency, and strengthen our faith in
this desire.

1. From the mercy of God, who desires not the death of a sinner, but at what
time soever he shall truly repent, has promised to forgive him. He has
commanded us to ask daily pardon, Ezekiel. 18.21, 22.
as well as daily bread, showing thereby that as the best man shall continually
need pardon, so he is more ready to give it, then we are to ask it. He has
entreated us to be reconciled unto him. He does invite, and call us, when we
are impenitent, and therefore he will be much more ready to embrace and accept
of us, when we desire with repentance to return unto him. He would not have us
send our neighbor away empty, when that which he would borrow is with us; Prove
3.8.
How much more then shall he who is the Father of Mercies, in respect of whom
all the compassion in man is not so much as a drop to the Ocean? How much more
shall he accept and grant the desires of his children? for with the Lord there
is mercy, Psalm. 130.7
and with him there is plenteous redemption. He has enjoined us to help our
enemies Ox or Ass, Exodus 23.5.
when they are in danger. And does God take care for Oxen? has he not a far
greater esteem of his own Image in man? 1 Cor. 9.9
Will he not much rather extend his bounty and goodness unto such as are
oppressed under the burden of their sins? Though no sin be little in it self,
yet the greatest sin is but little in comparision to his mercy. The more our
offenses have been, the more may he glorify himself in the pardon of them.

2. From the merits of Christ, 1 John 2.2.
who is the propitiation for the sins of the whole world. He came to save that
which was lost: Mat. 18.11
To quicken those that were dead in trespases and sins. To this end was he
borne, and for this and came he into the world, Ephesians. 2.1.
that he might save sinners. He was wounded for our transgressions, Joh. 18.37
he was bruised for our iniquities, Isa. 53.5.
the chastisement of our peace was upon him, that with his stripes we might be
healed. He has satisfied for us as our surety, and has suffered the
punishments that were due unto our sins; and it cannot stand with the justide
of God, to require a debt twice over, to punish them again in us, when he has
already punished them in Christ.

3. From our own frailties; Job 15.14
What is man that he should be clean and he that is borne of woman that he
should be religious? God will pity those that fear him, because he knows
their frame, Ps. 103.14.
he considers that they are but dust. He remembers that they are but flesh, and
no flesh can be righteous in his sight. Ps. 78.39.
Before him no man living can be just^fied. The greatness and the sense of our
unworthiness does make us the fitter objects for his mercy. Ps. 143.2.
Mat. 9.12.
The whole have no need of the Phisician, but the si^k.

And as we are to pray for the pardon of our sins, against the guilt of them;
so likewise for the sense and evidence of this pardon, against our own doubts,
that being justified by faith we may have peace with God through our Lord Jesus
Christ; Romans 5.1.
that we may be sealed with the holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of
our inheritance, Ephesians. 1.13, 14.
until the redemption of the purchased possession; of this kind are those
Petitions of David.

Psalm. 35.3. Ps. 51.12.
Say unto my soul, I am thy salvation.

Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, and establish me with thy free
spirit.

Ps. 4.6.
Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us.

Ps. 90.14.
O satisfy us early with thy mercies, that we may be glad and rejoice all our
days.

Ps. 119.135
Make thy face to shine upon thy servant, and teach me thy statutes.

The reasons to back this request, may be,

1. From the justice of it, we do but ask an acquittance, where the debt is
paid, (Christ having already satisfied for our sins. Genesis 18.25
) And shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? He has promised to be
found of those that do not seek him, and to seek after those that go astray
from him; and will he not much rather accept, and be favorable to such as
desire to seek after him, and to wait upon him in the observation of his own
Ordinances? He has said that we shall not seek his face in vain. Isa. 45.19.


2. From the facility of it; it is but saying the word only, and we shall be
whole; if we could relieve all those that beg of us, with mere words, there is
none should ask without success. But now with God, it is all one to do a thing
as to speak it. Ps. 85.8.
It Is but speaking peace to our souls, and we shall have it. Jer. 32.27.
Behold thou art the Lord, the God of all flesh, there is nothing too hard for
thee.

2. Next to the Guilt of sins, 2. The power of sin.
we should pray against the Power of them, that we may not relapse into them
again for the future, that sin may not reign in our mortal bodies; Romans 6.12
Verse. 23.
That we may not be brought into captivity unto the law of sin, which is in
our members; That God would redeem us from all our iniquities, Tit. 2.22. Heb.
9.14
and with the blood of Christ, purge our consciences from dead works to serve
the living God; That he would enable us to put off, Ephesians. 4.22.
concerning our former conversation, the old man, which is corrupt according to
decei^ful lusts; Gal. 5.24.
to crucify the flesh with the affections, and lusts of it: That we may have
no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness: Ephesians. 5.11. Heb. 3.13. Ephesians.
2.2, 3
That our hearts may not be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin: That we
may not walk according to the course of the world, fulfilling the desires of
the flesh: 2 Cor. 10.5.
That he would cast down every imagination, and high thought that exalts it
self against the knowledge of God; and bring into captivity every thought unto
the obedience of Christ.

Of this kind is that Petition of David, Psalm. 19.13 Psalm. 119.133.
Keep back thy servant from presumptuous sins, let them not have dominon over
me. Order my steps in thy word, and let not any iniquity have dominion over me.

It Is not here necessary to make any large recital of the kinds of sins,
mentioned before in confession; but to insist more fully and particularly in
such to which we are more especally inclined, that they may be mortified and
subdued.

The Arguments to strengthen our faith and fervency in this desire, may be such
as these.

1. From the fitness of it in respect of his glory* it is not for his honor
that his servants should be under the yoke of his enemies.

2. From our own impotency for it evil, being always present with us, and sin
so easily besetting us. And of our selves we are no more able to lay aside
these weights, and to cast off our sins, then an Ethiopian is to cast off his
blackness, or a Leopard his spots.

3. From the facility of it to God, he is stronger then the strong man, Phil.
3.21
and can subdue all things to himself.

4. From his Promise and Covenant, whereby he has engaged himself to subdue
our iniquities, and to keep us from departing from him. Mich. 7.19


2. Temptation.
2. Another evil to be prayed against, is Temptation, according to that in the
Lords Prayer, Lead us not into temptation; That we may be freed from Trials
themselves, so far as may stand with Gods good pleasure; especially the evil
of them, that we may not be overcome by them, nor faint under them.

Temptation is of three kinds.

1. From our own corrupted natures, by which we are very apt to be drawn aside
and enticed to all manner of sins; Jam. 1.14.
there being no kind of impiety, but what this does make us capable of; and
will (without Gods restraining or renewing grace,) at some time or other
dispose us unto. And herein more particularly, the blindness of our
understandings, our wicked imaginations and fleshly reasonings, the
perverseness of our wills, the hardness and earthinesse of our affections, the
insensiblenesse of our consciences, the depravation of all our faculties.

2. The malice and subtilty of the Devil, who as a roaring lion walks about, 1
Pet. 5.8.
seeking whom he may devour; and is still provoking us to those evils which are
most suitable to our particular occasions and dispositions: 2 Cor. 2.11. Luke
22.31
Watching for advantage against us, desiring to fifth and winnow us as wheat;
and therefore we had need to pray, that we may be sober and vigilant, having
upon us, Mat. 26.41 Ephesians. 6.11.
the whole armor of God, whereby we may withstand the wiles of the Devil; that
we may constantly resist him, 1 Pet. 5.8. Rev. 2.24 1 Timothy 3.7. Romans 16.20.
being steadfast in the faith, taking heed of the depths of Satan: That we do
not fall into reproach, and the snare of the Devil, That the God of Peace would
bruise Satan under our feet.

3. The allurements, or terrors of the world, either by profits, pleasures,
honors on the one hand; or losses, dangers, troubles, disgrace, persecution on
the other. The rain descending, the floods coming, the winds blowing, and
beating upon us. Mat. 7.27.
The evil customs and examples of the generation wherein we live, the slavish
hopes and fears of men.

Besides these kinds of temptation, we are likewise to pray against the
degrees of it, suggestion, consent, practice, delight, Jam. 1.14.
habitual custom and necessity.

That God would enable us always to watch and pray, lest we fall into
temptation. Mat. 26.41


And because every man has some particular sin, or temptation, to which he is
more especially exposed, belonging either to his age, temper, calling;
therefore he should endeavor to observe and find out, and more fully to
enlarge himself in his deprecation against that.

3. The last sort of evil to be prayed against, is that of Punishment; 3.
Punishment.
The kinds of which were mentioned before, under the head of Confession, and
are likewise reducible under that other head concerning Protection; and
therefore it will be needless here to make any particular recital of them.

In the general, we are to pray against all those judgments which may be
inflicted upon us, either in our bodies, friends, names, estates. Against those
more eminent miseries of Sword, Famine, Pestilence, (which three being of a
public nature, concerning the Nation and community in which we live, may be
more particularly insisted upon under the head of Intercession) against
distraction and sorrow of mind, trouble of conscience, the loss of Gods holy
Ordinances, and eternal damnation.

That no evil may befall us, neither any plague come nigh our dwellings. Ps.
91.10.


That he would not rebuke us in his anger, neither chasten us in his
displeasure. Psalm. 6.1.


Ps. 51.11.
That he would not cast us away from his presence, nor take his holy Spirit
from us.

Those judgments ought to be more particularly deprecated, with which we are
at any time frighted or afflicted.

CHAP. XVII. Of comprecation for spiritual good things* The sanctification of
our Natures, the obedience of our Lives.
NExt to Deprecation against evil, may succeed Comprecation for that which is
good.

Now because good things may be wanting, either in whole, or in part, or in
respect of Duration, and some intermissions; therefore we should petition not
only for the things themselves, but also for the increase and continuance of
them.

Good is either Spiritual. Temporal.


In asking of spiritual good things, 1. The sanctification of our natures. Ez.
36.26.
the first and chief matter to be prayed for, is the sanctification of our
natures, That Gods Kingdom may come into our hearts; That he would give unto
us a new heart, and put a new spirit within us; That he would take from us our
stony heart, and bestow upon us hearts of flesh; That he would put within us
the law of the Spirit of life, Romans 8.7.
which may make us free from the law of sin and death; That we may put on the
new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness; Ephesians.
4.24.
That we may be regenerate and become new creatures, 1 Pet. 1.23
being born again of that incorruptible seed, the Word of God.

That God would grant us according to the riches Ephesians. 3.16.
of his glory, to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inward man.

1 These. 3.13.
That he would establish our hearts unblameable in holiness before God, even
our Father, at the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ with all his Saints.

That the Spirit of Christ may dwell in us.

Romans 8.11 Act. 13.43 Col. 1.13
That we may continue in the grace of God, and in the faith, grounded and
settled, and may not be moved away from the hope of the Gospel.

Of this kind is that Petition of David for himself, Ps. 51.10.
Create in me a clean heart, O Lord, and renew a right spirit within me. And
the Apostle for others: The God of Peace sanctify you throughout, that your
whole spirit and soul and body may be preserved blameless unto the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ. 1 These. 5.23.


Here we are more particularly to insist on the renovation of our several
Faculties. Parts.
answerable to what we did acknowledge, 1. Our inward man.
concerning the Depravation of them, in the Confession of our Original sin. For
our understandings.

Romans 12.2 1 Cor. 2.14 Romans 16.19.


As first for our faculties.

1. That we may be transformed by the renewing of our minds, that we may be
able to have a spiritual discerning of the things of God, being wise to that
which is good, but simple and harmless to that which is evil.

2. That he would purge our consciences from dead works to serve the living
God; Our conscience. Heb. 9.14
that they may be tender of his glory, and our own good, truly performing the
offices which belong unto them, both in accusing and excusing us according to
several occasions.

3. That he would circumcise our hearts, Our affections.

Romans 2.20 Colos. 3 2 Phil. 1.10.


that we may set our affections on things above, and not on earthly matters,
that we may not be deceived with false appearances, but may approve the things
that are most excellent.

4. That he would reform and sanctify our wills, that we may in every thing
submit them unto his, delighting to do his will. Psalm. 40.8 Joh. 5.30.
Not seeking our own wills, but the Will of him that sent us.

5. That he would rectify our memories, Our memories.
making them more faithful in retaining all such holy Lessons as we shall
learn, in recalling them to mind according to several opportunities, that we
may be always ready to stir up our minds by way of remembrance, 2 Pet. 3.1.
Deuteronomy. 8.11
that we may never forget God.

And so for our Parts, or outward man, 2 Our outward man 1 Cor. 3.16 Romans 12.1
that we may become the Temple of God where his Spirit may dwell; That we may
present our bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is our
reasonable service; That all our parts and members may be instruments of
righteousness unto holiness. Romans 6.13 19


In which desires we may strengthen our faith with such arguments as these.

1. God only is able for this great work; Romans 7.18
In us dwells nothing that is good; It is he that must work in us both to
will and to do of his good pleasure. Phil. 2.13.
It Is not in our power to regenerate our selves, for we are not borne of blood,
nor of the Will of the flesh, John 1.13
nor of the Will of man (that is not of any natural created strength) but of
God. Ephesians. 3.20.
And he is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we can ask or think.
It Is as easy for him to make us good, as to bid us to be so.

2. He is willing and has promised to give unto us a new spirit: Ez. 36.26.
Jer. ^1.33. Luke 11.13
To put his law into our inward parts, to write it in our hearts. And if men
that are evil know how to give good gifts to their children, how much more
shall our heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him? He has
professed it to be his own Will, 1 T^es. 4.3
even our sanctification; And he cannot deny us the performance of his own
Will. He has promised that those who hunger and thirst after righteousness
shall be filled. Mat. 5.6.
And therefore if he has in any measure given us this hunger, we need not
doubt but he will give us this fullness likewise. He has said that he delights
to dwell with the Sons of men; and what reason have we to doubt the success of
our desires, Prove. 8.31
when we do beg of him to do that which he delights in?

2 The obedience of our lives.
2. The next thing to be prayed for, is the obedience of our lives, answerable
to that in the Lords Prayer: Thy will be done one earth, as it is in heaven.
And here likewise we are to petition for spiritual grace and ablities, both to
perform, and to continue, and to increase in all holy duties.

Psalm. 23.3. 2 Cor. 1.12
1. For the Performance of them, that he would lead us into the paths of
righteousness; That with simplicity and godly sincerity we may have our
conversation in this world; That denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts,
Tit. 2.12.
we may live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world; That God
would give us grace, Heb. 12.28
whereby we may serve him acceptably with reverence and godly fear; That we
may not any more be conformed unto this world; Romans 12.2
That being dead unto sin we may live unto righteousness: 1 Pet. 2 21
Not any longer spending the rest of our time in the flesh, to the lust^ of
men, 1 Pet. 4.2, 3
but to the Will of God; That the time past of our lives may suffice to have
served diverse lusts; That for the future we may walk as obedient children, not
fashioning our selves according to the former lusts of our ignorance, but as he
that has called us is holy, 1 Pet. 1.14
so we may be holy in all manner of conversation.

To this purpose is that desire of David, Ps. 119.5.
O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes! and in another place,
Teach me to do thy Will, for thou art my God, Ps. 143.10
let thy good Spirit lead me into the land of uprightness; and elsewhere, Show
me thy ways, O Lord, and teach me thy paths, Ps. 25.4, 5.
lead me in thy truth, and teach me, for thou art the God of my salvation;
Teach me thy ways, O Lord, Ps. 86.11.
and I will walk in thy truth, unite my heart to fear thy name.

2. For our continuance in them. Luke 1.74, 75.
That we may serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him
all the days of our lives. Being steadfast and unmovable, 1 Cor. 15^58. 1 Timothy
1.19
always abounding in the work of the Lord: Holding faith and a good
conscience: Patiently continuing in well doing, without wearines, as knowing
that in due time we shall reap if we faint not: Romans 2.7. Gal. 6.9. Heb. 10.23
Heb. 13.9. Job 2.3.
Holding fast the profession of our faith without wavering, that our hearts may
be established with grace; that amidst all outward changes, and losses we may
still hold fast our integrity.

Thus the Apostle prays for the Thessalonians, that God would stablish them in
every good word and work. 2 These. 2.17.


3. For our Increase in them, That God would make all grace to abound toward
us: 2 Cor. 9.8 1 These. 4.1
That we always having alsufficiency to all things, may abound to every good
work: That we may be strong in the Lord, Ephesians. 6.10 Phil. 1.11
and in the power of his might: Being filled with the fruits of righteousness,
unto the glory and praise of God: Phil. 3.14
That forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching unto those things
which are before, we may continually press toward the mark, for the price of
the high calling of God.

Heb. 13.20, 21.
Thus does the Apostle pray for the Hebrews. The God of peace make you perfect
in every good work to do his will, working in you that which is well pleasing
in his sight. And Epaphras for the Collossians; that they might stand perfect,
Col. 4.12.
and complete in all the will of God.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the several graces and duties enjoined in the first
Commandment.
THe graces that we should pray for, are many of them briefly summed up
together, in several Scriptures. But for our more full and distinct
apprehension of them, Gal. 5.22 1 Timothy 6.11 Tit. 2.12
they may be more particularly considered, according to their distinct
relations, either to the Law. Gospel.


The duties enjoined by both these, may be easily collected from those vices,
and failings mentioned in our Confession.

The first Table in the Law, does concern our duty to God.

The first Commandment does enjoin us to have Jehovah alone for our God; that
is, in all respects to behave our selves toward him as our God. So that by
this we are directed to pray for these graces and duties, viz. Knowledge and
Belief of him, Trust and Hope in him, Love toward him, Zeal for him, Rejoicing
in him, Gratitude toward him, Patience under him, Obedience to him, Fear of
him, Being humble before him.

Because it is not good that the soul should be without knowledge, Knowledge.
Prove. 19.2 Prove. 2 2.
we should therefore pray that he would be pleased to incline our ears unto
wisdom, and apply our hearts to understanding: That he would open our eyes to
behold the wondrous things of his Law: Ps. 119.18
That he would give unto us the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the
knowledge of him; Ephesians. 1.17.18.
that the eyes of our understandings being enlightened, we may know what is the
hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the
Saints, and what is the exceeding greatness of his power to usward, who
believe according to the working of his mighty power: That he would enable us
to be more inquisitive after those sacred truths revealed in the Word; more
diligent to acquaint our selves with his holy attributes, and works; more
mindful of his Holiness, Justice, Truth, Power, Omnipresence; that he is
about our paths, Psalm. 139.3.
and beds and acquainted with all our ways. He does search and know us,
understanding our thoughts afar off, all things being naked, and open in his
sight.

Col. 1.9, 10.
That we may be filled with the knowledge of his will, in all wisdom, and
spiritual understanding; that we may walk worthy of the Lord, unto all
pleasing; being fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge
of God, that we may follow on to know the Lord.

Hos. 6.3.
That he would sanctify to us the knowledge we have already attained, that it
may not be idle, and ineffectual; but may produce in our lives answerable
obedience, that we do not with-h^ld any truth in unrighteousness. Romans 1.18


That he would open our hearts to believe all those truths revealed in his
Word; Belief.
that he would enable us to take diligent heed, Heb. 3.12.
lest there should be in any of us an evil heart of unbelief, in departing
from the living God; That we may firmly assent unto his promises and threats;
and as we do profess our selves to believe in God, so we may be careful to
maintain good works. Tit. 3.8.


Trust.
That we may not rely on such outward means as cannot help us; but in all our
wants and troubles, we may place our chief confidence on him, as knowing that
he is infinitely wise, powerful, merciful, both able and willing to succor us;
that when we know not what to do, our eyes may be upon him: 2 Chronicles. 20.12.
That in our greatest exigences, when we are in a state of darkness, and can
see no light, we may then trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon our God.
Isa. 50.10.
That we may still cast our burden upon him, Psa. 55.22 Psalm. 91.1. Psalm. 37.5.
Phil. 4.6.
and abide under the shadow of the Almighty: Committing our ways unto the
Lord: Being careful for nothing, but in every thing by prayer and
supplications, make our requests known unto God, who cares for us, and will
never leave, or forsake us.

That we may labor to stir up, and strengthen our hope in him, Hope.
such hope as may be well grounded, and will not make us ashamed, of which we
may be always able, Romans 5.5. 1 Pet. 3.15
and ready to give answer to every man that asks us a reason. That we may
look more at the things which are not seen, 2 Cor. 4.18
then at those things which are seen. That in times of fear and danger we may
fly for refuge to lay hold on the hope set before us; Heb. 6.18 Verse. 19.
which hope may be as an Anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast. That no
condition, Heb. 10.35 2 Pet. 1.10
or temptation may make us cast away our confidence; That we may give all
diligence to make our callings and elections sure; To clear unto our selves,
the evidences of our own everlasting well-beings.

That we may love the Lord our God with all our heart, with all our soul, and
with all our might, Love. Deuteronomy. 6.5.
so far above that natural affection which we do bear to those other things,
whether father or mother, wife or children, brethren or sisters, Luke 14.26
yea and our own lives also, that we may be said to hate, and despise them in
comparison of him. Phil. 1.9, 10.
That our love may abound yet more and more in knowledge, and in all judgment,
that we may approve the things that are excellent; That we may delight in all
those holy duties, whereby we may enjoy communion with him. That we may
earnestly long and thirst after the enjoyment of him, Psalm. 42.2.
when we shall come and appear before him.

Zeal.
That he would make us Zealous, and fervent in all holy duties; resolute, and
courageous in standing to the truth, Tit. 2.14.
not to be deterred by hopes or fears: Not wronging any good cause, either by
our cowardice or indiscretion. Not resting our selves in a lukewarm
profession, being neither cold nor hot, Rev. 3.16 Jer. 9.10. Romans 12.11. Gal.
4.18. Romans 1.6.
but being valiant for the truth, and fervent in spirit; Always zealously
affected in a good thing: Not being ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, which is
the power of God to salvation, considering what he has said; That if we shall
be ashamed of him in this adulterous generation, he also will be ashamed of us
when he comes in the glory of his Father, Mar. 8.38.
with his holy Angels.

Rejoicing in him.

Psalm. 37.4. Jer. 9.24. Deuteronomy. 28.47. Psalm. 4.6, 7 Psalm. 63.3.


That we may rejoice and glory in the LORD, placing our chief happiness in a
spiritual communion with him; Serving him with joyfulnesse and gladness of
heart; Delighting greatly in his Commandments; Finding more happiness in the
light of his countenance, then in the increase of corn and wine: preferring his
loving kindness before life it self.

That he would make us more heartily sensible of those many great favors which
are continually multiplied upon us. Gratitude.
That he would draw up our hearts to heaven, in the acknowledgement of his
bounty and goodness; that our souls may bless him, and our desires may be
always toward him; Ps. 40.10.
that we may be ready to talk of his loving kindness, and to speak good of his
name; endeavoring to express our gratitude, by the readiness, and
cheerfulness of our obedience; Seeking to glorify his name by bearing much
fruit unto him. Joh. 15.8.


That we may be patient under his afflicting hand, Patience.
as considering that he is the Author as well of the evil we suffer, as of the
good we enjoy. And shall we receive good from the hand of God, Job 2.10.
and shall we not receive evil? The greatest judgment that can befall us in
this life, is far less then our deserts; It Is the Lords mercies that we are
not consumed, because his compassions fail not: Lam. 3.22
And then besides, he has promised that all things shall work together for the
good of them that love him. And though the cup may be bitter, Romans 8.28
yet it proceeds from the hand of a Father. That we may count our selves happy
in what we suffer for righteousness sake; because the Spirit of God, Joh^
18.11. 1 Pet. 3.14.
and the Spirit of glory rests upon us. That we may rejoice and glory in our
tribulations; Romans 5.3, 4, 5.
as knowing that tribulation works patience, and patience experience, and
experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed. Reckoning with our selves, that
the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be compared with the
glory that shall be revealed in us. Romans 8.18
That in all our sufferings we may trust in the living God; committing our
souls unto him, 1 Timothy 4.10
who is their faithful Creator, and righteous Judge. 1 Pet. 2, 23.4.9. Levi.
26.41 Isa. 26.8. Lam. 3.29


That we may accept the punishment of our iniquity; waiting upon God in the way
of his judgments. Being willing to put our mouths in the dust, rather then to
open them in murmuring against him. Considering how unjust and unreasonable it
is for a living man to complain, Lam. 3.39
a man for the punishment of his sins. And that it is rather meet to be said
unto God, Job 34.31, 32.
I have borne chastisement, I will not offend any more; that which I see not
teach thou me; if I have done iniquity, I will do no more; I will bear the
indignation of the Lord, Mich. 7.9.
because I have sinned against him. Ez. 9.13.
He does punish us less then our iniquities deserve. Not dealing with us after
our sins, nor rewarding us according to our iniquities; and we have no reason
to repine at kind and moderated corrections. Though in some respects he has
chastened us sore, yet he has not given us over to death. Ps. 118.18
He does not afflict willingly, Lam. 3.33
nor grieve the children of men; and therefore we have great reason totally to
submit and resign up both our selves and affairs, to be governed by his wise
providence; 2 Samuel 15.26. 1 Samuel 3.18 Obedience. 2 Kin. 20.3
and to let the Lord do with us what seems good unto him.

That we may be constant, universal, sincere in our obedience; Walking before
him in truth, and with a perfect heart; and may do that which is good in his
sight. That in the general course of our lives, we may demean our selves in a
settled, regular way of submission, and obedience; having respect to all Gods
Commandments; Obeying from the heart the form of doctrine delivered to us;
Psa. 119.6. Rom* 6.17 Number. 14.24* 2 Timothy 3.5
Following the Lord fully, walking exactly, and precisely before him. That we
may have not only the form of godliness, but the power also.

That we may sanctify the Lord God of Hosts, making him our fear and our
dread; Fear. Isa. 8.13. 1 Pet. 4.7.
considering that the end of all things is at hand, when we must all appear
before his dreadful tribunal, 2 Cor. 5.10
every one to receive according to that he has done in his body, whether it be
good or bad. That we may be less afraid of other matters that cannot hurt us,
men that shall die, and the sons of men that shall be made as grass; Isa*
51.12. Mat. 10.28
but may chiefly fear him who is able to destroy both body and soul in hell.
Behaving our selves, as being always in his sight and presence; as considering
that our most secret, bosome-sins, which with such Art and care we have
endeavored to conceal from men, are all of them naked and open in his sight,
before whom we must be judged at the last day.

That we may be humble before him, Humility.
ascribing nothing to our own power, or merit. That our hearts may not be
lifted up to forget the Lord, Deuteronomy. 8.14 Dan. 5.20. Hab* 2.4.
nor our minds hardened in pride; as considering, that his soul which is
lifted up, is not upright in him. And that if any man think himself to be
something, when indeed he is nothing, he deceives himself. Gal. 6.3.
That we may be clothed with humility; counting it our safest defense, and most
comely ornament. 1 Pet. 5.5.
That we may not mind high things, Romans 12.16.
nor be wise in our own conceits. Considering the baseness of our Original,
the many diseases and miseries which our bodies are liable unto, the sinful and
slavish condition of our souls, our nothingnesse as creatures, our vileness as
sinners.

CHAP. XIX. What are we directed to pray for out of the second Commandment.
THe second Commandment does enjoin us to worship God, after such a spiritual
manner, and by such holy means, as is agreeable to his Nature, and required in
his Word.

So that from hence we are taught to pray for the direction and asistance of
his Spirit in all our holy duties; that he would work in us an holy frame and
temper of heart, without which it is not possible for us to perform any
acceptable service; That he would quicken our affections to a greater fervency,
and delight in our attendance upon him.

That he would make us more careful in enjoying and increasing our communion
with him, by a conscionable observance of all those holy ordinances which he
has appointed; particularly, 1. Prayer. 2. Ministry of the Word. 3. Receiving
of the Sacraments.


1. Prayer. Zach. 12.10
1. That he would pour upon us the Spirit of prayer and supplication; make us
diligent and constant in our Public Private
devotions, that we may accustom our selves to them with a greater
forwardness and delight, as being the chief means to ease our hearts of all
troubles and sorrow, Joh 16 24
to fill up our joy.

That we may be more solemn and reverent in our approaches before him, as
considering that we who are but dust and ashes, vile, despicable creatures, are
to speak unto that dreadful Majesty, before whom all the world shall be judged
at the last day.

That we may be more vigilant over our own hearts, in respect of roving,
distracted thoughts, which are so apt to interrupt us in this duty. That we may
stir up our selves to lay hold on God, Isa. 64.7.
and set our faces to seek him: Not pouring out words only, but our souls
before him: Romans 1.9. Heb. 10.22
Serving him in our spirits: Drawing near unto him with a true heart, sprinkled
from an evil conscience.

That he would be pleased to assist us, and to accept of us in this duty: Romans
5.5* Psalm. 51.15
Shedding abroad his love in our hearts: Opening our lips, that our mouths may
show forth his praise. And then that the words of our mouths, Psalm. 19.14
and the meditations of our hearts may be always acceptable in his sight.

That we may confess our sins with a greater sense and sorrow for them,
Confession.
feeling in our selves a greater loathing and detestation of them;
Acknowledging our transgressions, Psalm. 51.3.
and setting our sins before us; Abhorring our selves for them, Job 42.6.
and repenting in dust and ashes.

That we may put up our petitions with a greater faith and fervency, Petition.
as being truly sensible of our own wants, and those gracious promises which he
has made for the supply of them: Drawing near in the full assurance of faith
nothing wavering: Heb. 10.22 Jam. 1.6. 1 John 5.14
Asking such things as are according to his will. That his Spirit may help our
infirmities, and make intercession for us; and that he would remember the
promise which he has made to be nigh unto them that call upon him in truth,
and to fulfill the desire of those that fear him. Ps. 145.18


That we may give thanks with greater cheerfulness, Thanksgiving.
and love, and sense of his favors, with such heartinesse, and fervency, as
may be in some measure proportionable to our importunity* in the want of
mercies. That we may be ready to speak the praises of our God, whilst we have
any being; Psalm. 104.33, 34.
that our meditations of him may be sweet, and we may be glad in the Lord.

That we may retain a relish and taste of this holy duty in our minds after
the performance of it; behaving our selves answerably in the course of our
lives, observing what return is made to our prayers. Hearkening what God the
Lord will say. Psalm. 85.8.
Considering the several ways and dispensations of his providence toward us;
that we may understand the loving kindness of the Lord. Ps. 107.34.


This Commandment does likewise concern the duties which belong to that other
Ordinance, 2. Ministry of the Word.
the Ministry of the word, in reference both to Minister. People.


The Minister may hereby be directed to pray that God would endow him with all
those graces and abilities, which may fit him for the discharge of his calling,
both in respect of his Life, Doctrine,
that he may both save himself, and them that hear him. 1 Timothy ^4.16.


Tit. 2.7.
1. For his Life; That he may show himself as a pattern of good works; Of a
blameless conversation; not self-willed, not soon angry. Tit. 1.7, 8.
Not given to wine, no striker; not given to filthy lucre, but a lover of good
men, sober, just, holy, temperate, 2 Timothy 2.24.
gentle unto all men, apt to teach, patient. Renouncing the hidden things of
dishonesty; 2 Cor. 4.2
Not walking in craftiness, but by manifestation of the truth, commending
himself unto every man's conscience in the sight of God. 1 Cor 4.1.
Behaving himself as a steward of the mysteries of God. Not seeking so much his
own profit, as the profit of many, that they may be saved, 1 Cor. 10.33. 1 Cor.
9.27
that after he has preached unto others, he himself may not become a castaway.

2. For his Doctrine, that he may study to approve himself unto God, 2 Timothy
2.15.
a workman that needs not to be ashamed; rightly dividing the Word of truth.
That he may preach the Word, 2 Timothy 4.2
being instant in season and out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all
long-suffering and Doctrine; 2 Timothy 2.25.
with meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure
will give them repentance, to the acknowledgement of the truth. 1 Pet. 5.2.
Feeding the flock of God, not by constraint, but willingly; Not for filthy
lucre, but of a ready mind: That he may speak as the Oracles of God: 1 Pet.
4.11 1 Cor. 2.4. Tit. 2.7. 1 These. 2.4
That his doctrine may be in demonstration of the spirit, and of power; with
uncorruptnesse, gravity, sincerity, not as pleasing men but God, who tries the
hearts.

The People or hearers may be hereby directed to pray for a greater love and
esteem of his Word, 1 Love and p^izing of the Word*
as being the Ordinance of his infinite wisdom, which he can make effectual
for the Conversion and salvation of souls. Considering that the fashion of this
world passes away. Pleasures shall die and vanish, Honors shall be laid in
the dust, gold and silver shall rust and canker, but the word of God abides
for ever; This alone is able to make us wise unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.23. 2 Timothy 3.15. Joh. 12.48
and to save our souls, being that word by which we shall be judged at the
last day. That therefore we may value it above gold and silver, finding a
relish in it sweeter then the honey and the honeycomb. That we may always
love the beauty of his house, Psalm. 19.10. Psalm. 26.7, 8.
and the place where his honor dwells; To publish with the voice of
Thanksgiving, and to tell of all his wondrous works. This one thing have I
desired of the Lord, Psalm. 27.4.
that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the
days of my life; to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his
Temple. Psalm. 96.6.
Strength and beauty are in his Sanctuary.

That we may have a greater care to know and practice his will: As newborn
babes desiring the sincere milk of the Word, to grow thereby. That he would
teach us so to prize and improve the present liberty and Sunshine of the
Gospel, 1 Pet. 2.2.
that we may be careful in this our day, to lay up for our selves a good
foundation against the evil time.

2 Due preparation for it* and a blessing upon it.
That we may approach unto this Ordinance with such reverent and prepared
affections, as may become his more especial presence amongst us; Considering
our feet, when we draw near before him; that he would overawe our spirits with
an holy fear and reverence in the apprehension of his presence, and beholding
of us, who is a God of infinite holiness, and glorious Majesty; that we may
bow down our souls with a willing subjection unto every sacred truth; That he
would subdue the pride of our hearts, 2 Cor. 10.5
Cast down every imagination that exalts it self against him, and bring into
subjection every thought, unto the obedience of Christ: and because the Word of
it self is but a dead letter, and it is not in the power of any outward means,
the wisdom or preparation of weak sinful man, to subdue the power of sin, the
Kingdom of Satan, or to create men in Christ Jesus unto good works: Ephesians. 2.10.
that therefore he would be pleased to accompany the outward means, by the
inward efficacy and operation of his Spirit. Man can speak only unto the ear,
but he can speak unto the heart, and it is as easy for him to make us good, as
to bid us be so; and he has promised to meet such as desire to wait upon him,
and to remember him in his ways: Isa. 64.5.
That he would remove from our understandings the veil of ignorance and
infidelity, whereby we are made incapable of spiritual truths; that he would
take from our affections that natural pravity and malice, whereby we are made
enemies to spiritual notions, that we may receive the truth, not only in the
light, 2 These. 2.10 Romans 1.18
but in the love of it; not withholding any truth in unrighteousness: That he
would strengthen us against all temptations of Satan, cares of the world,
hardness of our own hearts, or what ever may hinder our profitable and saving
hearing: That he would take from us all irreverence, distraction, prejudice,
dullness in hearing of his Word; and because it must redound either to the
glory of his justice in our farther hardening, and final condemnation; or to
the glory of his mercy, in our conversion and salvation; that he would
therefore sanctify it to our good, that as the rain comes down from heaven,
Isa. 55.10, 11.
and returns not thither, but waters the earth, and makes it fruitful, so
the Word that goes out of his mouth may not return unto him void, but
accomplish his good pleasure, and prosper in that to which it is sent: That it
may be unto us sharp as a two-edged sword, to the dividing asunder of the soul
and spirit, Heb. 4.12
the joints and marrow, discovering the very thoughts and intentions of the
heart. And because Paul may plant, and Apollos may water, 1 Cor. 3.6.
but he only can give the increase; That therefore he would be pleased to give
a blessing and success to his own Ordinance: That his Word may be unto us a
word of power, converting the soul, Psalm. 19.7^
and making wise the simple; that he would give unto us hearing ears and
understanding hearts, that we may believe and be saved: Pro. 20 12
That he would write his laws in our inward parts: That he would open our eyes
to behold the wondrous things of his law: Jer 31.33. Ps. 119 v. 18, 36.133
Incline our hearts, to affect, direct our steps, that we may walk in the
paths of his precepts. Show us thy ways, O Lord, and teach us thy paths; lead
us in thy truth, Ps. 25.4, 5.
and guide us, for thou art the God of our salvation.

Teach us thy ways, O Lord, and we will walk in thy truth, Ps 86.11.
unite our hearts to fear thy name. Show us the way that we should walk in, for
we lift up our souls unto thee; Psalm 143.8, 10
Teach us to do thy will, for thou art our God. Let thy good Spirit lead us
into the land of uprightness.

3. Our demeanor.
That we may behave our selves with humility, attention, alacrity, laying down
all high thoughts, fleshly reasonings, stubborn resolutions, being ready to
receive with meekness the ingraffed word, Jam. 1.21
which is able to save our souls. That we may enjoy communion with him in his
Ordinances, that he would fill us with all joy and peace in believing; Romans
15.13.
That he would sanctify our judgments, affections, memories, that we may
apprehend and believe, and affect and retain those sacred truths that shall be
delivered. That he would inlighten our minds, open our hearts, soften our
consciences, compose our thoughts to attend unto his Word with meekness and
faith, Luke 8.15.
receiving it into good and honest hearts, with full purpose to walk answerably
to it in our conversations. That Christ may be formed in us, that our hearts
may be established in every good word and way. That our meeting together may
prove for the better, and not for the worse.

That we may after the hearing of it, digest and settle it in our minds, by
prayer, meditation, 4 Profiting by it afterward.
conference, practice: Expressing the power of it in our lives, in all
well-pleasing conversation, and godliness: Having our fruit unto holiness,
that our ends may be everlasting life. Romans 6.22
That he would prosper unto us the precious seed sown amongst us, that neither
the fowls of the air devour it, Luke 8.5.
nor the thorns choke it, but that it may sink down into our hearts, and
spring up in our conversations, bringing forth in us the fruit of repentance
and amendment of life; that it may be effectual for the subduing of our sins,
the strengthening of our graces: Transforming us daily into his Image, from
glory to glory. 2 Cor. 3.18
That we may lead our lives, in some measure answerably to the knowledge and
means we have had, as considering that to whom much is given, of them much will
be required: Luke 12.48
That we may not receive his grace in vain: Not being forgetful hearers, but
doers of the word. 2 Cor. 6.1.
That we may be able to say by experience, Jam. 1.25.
It is good for us to be here, and to wait upon God in his Ordinances: That we
may grow in grace, 2 Pet. 3.18
and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

That he would lead us forward to perfection, guiding us by his grace, and
after bringing us to his glory; that in this life beholding his face in
righteousness, when we awake up in the resurrection, Ps. 17.15.
we may be fully satisfied with his Image.

3. Sacraments.
3. Under this Commandment likewise, are comprehended the duties that concern
our reverent esteem and use of the Sacraments.

Baptism.
1. For that of Baptism. That we may be truly sensible of the free mercy of
God, in making a gracious Covenant to us and our posterity, and condescending
so far unto our humane frailties, as to afford us outward and visible signs
and seals of this Covenant, to present that to our senses, which ought to be
apprehended by our faith. That we may more frequently consider, and esteem of
this singular prerogative, of our being actually admitted into his family, and
having his name put upon us. That therefore we may resign up our selves wholly
unto his good pleasure, choosing him to be our Governor, and our portion for
ever; that we may be more careful in observing that solemn Covenant, which our
Baptism did engage us unto. To forsake the Devil and all his works, the
vanities and lusts of the world, and to continue faithful in our service to
him; That this Ordinance may not be unto us only an outward washing away of
the filth of the flesh, but the laver of regeneration, 1 Pet. 3.21
working in us a good conscience toward God; and may effctually seal unto us
our adoption, remission of sins, and eternal life; with all those promises
that are contained in the Covenant of Grace; that as we are received into the
bosom of the visible Church, and distinguished from those that are without, so
we may labor to walk as becomes this relation, that the body of sin may be
destroyed in us, and his Image may be renewed in us daily: That we may serve him
in holiness and righteousness all the days of our lives,

2. For the Lords Supper: The Lords Supper.
That he would continue unto us our liberty unto that precious Ordinance,
raising our hearts to an higher esteem and love of it; Quickening us to a more
frequent attendance upon him in it, with fervency and delight: That he would
prepare us for it, assist us in it, and make it effectual to us afterward.

That he would furnish us with all those graces which may make us worthy
Communicants at his holy Table: Affecting our hearts with an holy awe and
reverence, upon our near approaching unto him in this solemn Ordinance, left we
should be found amongst the guests at his Table, without having the wedding
garment; That we may after a more special manner stir up in our selves the
graces of his holy Spirit, impartially examining the condition of our own
hearts, how we stand to him in regard of knowledge, repentance, faith; to men,
in respect of our love and chariity, that we may renew our Covenant with him,
by fresh resolutions of strict and circumspect walking, and that he would make
good his Covenant with us in taking from us the guilt and power of our sins,
and in giving unto us a new nature, with all those other privileges that were
purchased for us by the death of Christ, which is herein represented.

At the receiving of this Sacrament, that he would enable us to behave our
selves with reverence and true devotion; to use it as a sacrifice of praise
unto him, a memorial of Christ's death for us, and a means to confirm our faith
in him. That as we do by our senses receive the common element of bread and
wine to our corporal nourishment, so we may by our faith receive the body and
blood of Christ to our spititual nourishment, that he may live in us, and we in
him; that this may renew in our thoughts, the remembrance of Christ's Death and
Passion for us, and our own duty of love and obedience to him; that it may be a
means to weaken our corruptions, to strengthen our graces, to renew us in the
spirit of our minds, according to the Image of him that created us.

That we may afterward labor to feel the benefit of it in our lives, and
conscionably to perform all those good resolutions, which in the time of our
preparation we have purposed and promised. That we may be careful to examine
our improvement by it in respect of growth in grace, power against corruption,
comfort and enlargement of heart, laboring to walk worthy of the grace of God
herein proffered and represented, as becomes those who have received so great
pledges of salvation.

CHAP. XX. Of the duties required in the third and fourth Commandment.
THe third Commandment does enjoin the sanctifying of Gods Name.

By this we are directed to pray that he would enable us to bear a reverent and
high esteem unto all his glorious Titles and Attributes; his holy Word, the
Religion we profess, his mighty works.

That we may fear that glorious and fearful name the Lord our God, Deuteronomy. 28.58.
1 Pet. 3.15
that we may sanctify the Lord God in our hearts; being more careful to
observe and meditate upon his holy Attributes and Titles, more solemn and
reverent in mentioning his names and word upon every good occasion.

That we may be more conscionable in observing all those good promises and
resolutions which we have made.

That we may walk worthy of that vocation wherewith we are called, Ephesians. 4.1.
laboring by an holy life to adorn our profession, and bring glory to his
name. That we may be blameless and harmless, the sons of God, without rebuke,
Phil. 2.15.
in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, amongst whom we may shine
as lights in the world: That he would make our light so to shine before men,
Mat. 5.16.
that they seeing our good works may glorify our Father who is in Heaven.

That we may never grieve the hearts, or shame the faces of true Professors.

That we may walk honestly to those that are without, 1 These. 4.12
behaving our selves so warily, that we may never occasion his name to be
blasphemed. That with well-doing we may put to silence the ignorance of foolish
men. Romans 2.24. 1 Pet. 2.15 1 Pet. 3.16
That they may be ashamed who speak evil of us, and falsely accuse our good
conversation.

That we may be more ready to observe, and extol his great power, wisdom,
goodness, so evident, Psalm. 145.5
both in his making and governing of the world; His various, and manifold
works, that are done in wisdom; Ps. 107.24
More especially those particular passages of his providence, which concern our
selves; Verse. 43. Ps. 92.5, 6.
That we may understand the loving kindness of the Lord: O Lord, how great are
thy works? and thy thoughts are very deep; a brutish man knows not, neither
does a fool understand this.

The fourth Commandment does enjoin us to remember, The fourth Command.
and to sanctify the Sabbath Ordinary. Extraordinary.


So that from hence we are taught to pray, that God would teach us to esteem of
the Sabbath, as an holy honorable day, Isa. 58.13.
set apart from common use, consecrated to his peculiar worship and service;
that we may call it a delight, finding a great pleasure and sweetness in those
sacred duties that belong unto it. That they may not seem tedious and irksome
unto us; especially since we all profess to wish, and hope for such a blessed
Eternity hereafter, as shall be nothing else but Sabbath.

That we may always remember to fit our selves for the sanctifying of this day,
by laying aside all secular businesses and diversions, endeavoring by Prayer
and Meditation to put our hearts into such an holy frame, as is required of
those that desire to wait upon him in his Ordinances.

That he would be graciously present with all those assemblies of his Saints,
which do on that day meet together for his worship and service, in any part of
the Christian world: That he would be pleased to assist and direct his
Ministers, that they may deliver his Word with plainness, and power, to the
capacity of the weakest, and conviction of the wisest; That the people may
receive it with meekness and faith, that so it may accomplish that good work
for which it is sent; Isa. 55.11.
and mightily prevail to the casting down the strong holds of sin, the
edifying of his Church, and the making up the number of his Elect.

That he would more especially direct and assist the Minister unto whose charge
we belong, to speak unto our consciences, giving unto him the tongue of the
learned, Isa. 50.4.
that he may know how to speak a word in season to him that is weary. Being
careful to feed the flock, strengthening the diseased, Ezekiel. 34 4
healing that which is sick, binding up the broken, seeking that which is
driven away, and lost. That he would give unto us Pastors after his own heart,
who may feed us with knowledge and understanding; Jer. 3.15
and that the work of the Lord may prosper in their hands. Isa. 53.10.


That he would remove from us all irreverence, distraction, dullness, prejudice
in hearing of his Word: That he would enlighten our minds, quicken our
affections, and strengthen our memories for the receiving, and retaining of it.

That we may be careful of all those public and private duties, which concern
the sanctification of this day, both in respect of our selves, and those
committed to our charge. Not doing after our own ways, Isa. 58.13.
nor finding our own pleasures, nor speaking our own words: But may consecrate
our whole selves, both souls* bodies and services to his more especial Worship;
spending the whole day with cheerfulness in the duties of Religion, necessity
and mercy.

And so for extraordinary Sabbaths Festivals. Fasts.


1. For occasional Festivals, the solemn times of Joy and Thanksgiving; That
we may be careful to keep such times holy unto the Lord; not resting our selves
in external jollity, Neh. 8.9.
and freedom, but may seriously ponder the mercies which we celebrate,
endeavoring to have our hearts affected and enlarged with love and gratitude:
That our mouths may be filled with his praise; that by our experience of his
goodness, we may learn to depend upon him, and to be more confident in him, in
all future exigences, exciting others unto this duty. Psalm. 34.3.
O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his Name together. Endeavoring
to express our thankfulness to him, by our readiness to relieve and supply
his poor members: Sending portions to those that have nothing; Hest. 9.22 Neh.
8.10
that we may make the joy of the Lord to be our strength.

2. For days of Fasting, which are styled Sabbaths in Scripture; that we may
not neglect this duty, when we have any extraordinary call unto it; that we may
not satisfy our selves in the outward observance of it, but may be most
careful of the inward duties, Renting of the heart, afflicting of the soul;
Abhorring our selves, and repenting in dust and ashes: Job. 42.6 Ez. 36.31
Remembering our evil ways and doings which were not good, and loathing our
selves for them: Romans 6.21 Neh. 9.31
Being ashamed of our former works of darkness: Renewing our Covenants with
God; expressing a readiness and zeal in the works of mercy and
righteousness; Isa. 58.6.
loosing the bands of wickedness, undoing the heavy burdens.

CHAP. XXI. What we are directed to pray for in the second Table.
THe second Table does enjoin us to love our neighbors as our selves, that is.
1. We should not wish any evil more to others, then to our selves* 2. We should
desire, (and as much as we can) endeavor all good Natural, Spiritual,
for others, as we ought for our selves.

So that by this we are directed to pray, that we may be kindly affectioned
one to another, with brotherly love, Romans 12.10. Verse. 9. 1 John 3.18 1 Pet.
1.22 Heb. 13.1 1 These. 3.12 Phil. 1.9. Gal. 6.10.
without dissimulation; Not in word only, and tongue; but in deed, and truth;
Loving each other with a pure heart fervently; That our love may continue and
increase, abounding more and more toward one another, and toward all men; in
knowledge and in all judgment: As we have opportunity, doing good unto all
men, but especially to the household of Faith. That we may love our enemies and
bless them that curse us, Mat. 5.44.
and pray for them that despitefully use us, and persecute us; Considering one
another, Heb. 10.24
to provoke unto love, and good works.

The sixth Command.
The fifth Commandment does enjoin the duties which concern the degrees and
relations amongst men, whether Superiors. Inferiors.


By this we may learn to pray for all those graces and abilities, whereby we
may be fitted for the filling up of our several relations; that we may be
careful to acknowledge and observe that order which God has appointed amongst
men, and to demean our selves toward them, according to their places and
degrees; Gravely and modestly toward our Inferiors; Reverently and dutifully
to our Superiors; Humbly and thankfully to our Benefactours; Being kindly
affectioned toward our Equals; in honor preferring one another. Romans 12.10*


More particularly, we may hence learn to pray for those graces which concern
the relation of

Parents; That they may be careful in providing for the welfare of their
childrens souls and bodies. Teaching of them diligently, admonishing, and
correcting of them seasonably, Deuteronomy. 6.7. Ephesians. 6.4.
bringing them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.

Children; That they may love, honor, Levit. 19.3 Col. 3.20.
and fear their Parents, obeying them in all things; striving upon all
occasions to express their thankfulness to them.

Husbands; Col. 3.19^ Ephesians. 5.28. 1 Pet. 3.7.
That they may love their wives as themselves; Not being bitter unto them;
Giving honor to them as to the weaker vessels, and as being heirs together of
the grace of life; Bearing with their infirmities, providing for them,
protecting of them, delighting in them, behaving themselves with much prudence
and tenderness toward them.

Wives; That they may help, reverence, and be in subjection to their husbands;
Ephesians. 5.33.
laboring chiefly to be adorned with a meek and quiet spirit; continuing in
faith, and charity, and holiness, 1 Pet. 3.1, 4.
with sobriety; Being careful, and helpful in all those familie-duties, that
concern their relations, studying to be content, in the midst of all
marriage-cares, and troubles.

Masters; That they may behave themselves prudently, justly, gently to their
servants, as considering that they also have a Master in Heaven. Col. 4.1. Ephesians.
6.9.


Servants; 1 Pet. 2.18
That they may be subject to their Masters with all fear, not only when they
are good and gentle, but when they are froward; Not with eye-service as
men-pleasers, Ephesians. 6.6, 7
but willingly, and from the heart, showing all good fidelity.

Tit. 2.10. Pro. 16.31 Tit. 2.2.
Ancient; That they may be found in the way of righteousness. Being sober,
grave, temperate, sound in the faith, in Charity, and Patience; that so they
may behave themselves worthy of that crown of old Age, and the honor due unto
it.

Tit. 2.6. 1 Timothy 5.1
Younger; That they may be sober-minded, reverencing the aged as Fathers; being
ready to be taught by their wisdom, experience, and to follow their good
Counsels. Examples.


Superiors in Gifts; That they may acknowledge all their abilities to be the
free gifts of God, being willing to improve them unto his glory and the good of
their inferiors. 1 Cor. 4.7
Not despising those below them, bearing with the infirmities of the weak; Romans
15.1, 2.
using their liberty for edification, and not for offense.

Inferiors in Gifts; That they may acknowledge every gift of God in those
above them, not either judging, envying, or flattering, but truly reverencing
and esteeming them for it.

Magistrates; That they may be upright, and conscionable in the establishment
of justice, and peace, and Religion; Behaving themselves as Gods Vicegerents;
Remembering that those who rule over men must be just, 2 Samuel 23.3. Romans 13.3
ruling in the fear of God; using their power for the encouragement of those
that do well, and the terror of evil doers. Having respect to the faithful in
the land, and those that walk in a perfect way. Ps. 101.6* 7
Being severe toward deceitful and wicked doers; being diligent in the
discharge of their places with piety, wisdom, courage, clemency, etc. that
those under them may lead a peaceable and quiet life, 1 Timothy 2.2
in all godliness and honesty.

Subjects; That they may be endowed with humble and peaceable affections; Heb.
13 17
Obeying them that have the rule over them: Submitting unto the higher powers
out of Conscience, as being ordained of God.

Teachers; That they may be careful, and conscionable, both in their examples,
and counsels; watching for the souls of those who are committed to their
charge, that they may give an account with joy, Heb. 13.11
and not with grief.

Learners; That they may esteem highly of their Teachers in love, for their
works sake; 1 These. 5.13
improving all opportunities of benefiting by them.

The sixth Commandment does enjoin all those duties which concern the health
and welfare of our Neighbors, The sixth Command.
and our own Bodies, Souls,
and consequently the graces of friendship, mercy, peaceablenesse, meekness,
temperance, etc. By this we are directed to pray

That we may be restrained from all acts of violence, either on our selves or
others; avoiding the company of angry, contentious persons.

That God would give unto us mild, Pro. 22.^^
and peaceable spirits, that we may be slow to anger, putting on bowels of
mercy, kindness humbleness, of mind, Jam. 1.19. Colos. 3.12, 13. Ephesians. 4.32
meekness and long-suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one
another, even as God for Christ's sake, has forgiven us.

That we may be careful in observing the duties of mutual friendship and peace;
more mild and courteous in our behavior; Ephesians. 4 31
putting away all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil
speaking. Romans 12 18.
That as far as it is possible, and as much as in us lies, we may have peace
with all men.

That we may have a mutual sense, and compassion of one another conditions, as
being fellow members of the same body, 1 Cor. 12.26. Romans 12.15. Gal. 6 2.
rejoicing with them that rejoice, and weeping with them that weep; bearing one
another burdens: Relieving the needy, visiting the sick, delivering the
oppressed; being innocent, and helpful toward all.

That we may be wary, and inoffensive in our carriages, not wronging the souls
of others, but endeavoring as much as we can, to promote their spiritual
well-farre, Romans 14.19.
by following the things whereby we may edify one another. Instructing the
ignorant, reproving offenders, comforting the weak, quickening, and encouraging
the backward.

That we may be careful to preserve our own bodily health, by wise preventing,
and avoiding of dangers. Being sober in our diet, moderate in our care and
passions, temperate in our recreations, cheerful in our business.

That we may be diligent in working out our own salvations, and providing for
the welfare of our souls, against that time, when all earthly contentments
shall vanish away.

The 7th. Command.
The seventh Commandment does concern the duty of chastity in the Kinds Means
Signs
of it, and that both in respect of our selves, and others.

By this we may learn to pray, that God would enable us to possess our
vessels in sanctification and honor; 1 These. 4.^ 1 Cor. 6.18, 12. Verse. 15.
Colos. 3 5.
that we may not sin against our own bodies, but may keep them undefiled, as
being Members of Christ, and Temples of the holy Ghost; mortifying our members
which are upon the earth, fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil
concupiscence.

That we may be pure, and chaste in all the thoughts of our hearts; abstaining
from fleshly lusts, 1 Pet. 2.^^
which fight against the soul.

That we may make a strict Covenant with our eyes, lest they should ensnare us,
Job 31.1*
by beholding vanity, that we may set a watch before our mouths and ears, Colo
(...)
that no filthy communication do proceed from us, or enter into us; that we may
be watchful, and sober in our conversations; avoiding idleness, intemperance,
evil company, and all other such occasions, whereby we may be tempted to this
sin; Keeping under our bodies, and bringing them into subjection. Romans 9.27.


That we may endeavor, according to our several opportunities, to promote this
grace of chastity in others, by our prayers, counsels, examples.

The eighth Commandment does enjoin those duties which concern our own, The
8th Command.
or our neighbors outward estate: Referring to justice, diligence in our
callings, frugality, liberality, Alms, Hospitality, Restitution.

By this we are taught to pray, that we may not wrong or defraud our brethren,
1 Cor. 6.8.
by any outward act of oppression, injustice, or deceit.

That our hearts may not be troubled with any sollicitous, or carking cares;
that our conversation may be without covetousness, Heb. 13.5
being content with such things as we have, trusting in his promise; that he
will never leave us, nor forsake us; that they who seek the Lord shall lack
nothing that is good: Psa. 34.10
Remembering how he has commanded us to cast all our care upon him, and how he
provides for the fowls of the air, and the beasts of the field; and that in
our greatest discontents, we are in much better condition for the world, then
many of his blessed Saints and Martyrs, who were forced to wander up and down
in sheepskins, H^b. 11.37
and goat skins; and that we enjoy more then our blessed Savior himself did,
who though he were Lord of the world, yet had not whereon to rest his head.

Phil. 4.11, 12.
That he would teach us how to abound, and to want, and in all estates to be
content: That he would moderate our desires to these earthly things; 1 ^oh.
2.15 1 Cor. 1^.31. Luke 12.31
that we may not too much love the world, nor the things of the world; that we
may covet earnestly the best things, seeking first the Kingdom of God, and the
righteousness thereof; expecting other matters as additions thereunto: To
esteem godliness for the greatest gain, and as for these outward things, not
to desire any abundance of them; but if we have food and raiment, to be
therewith contented. 1 Timothy 6.6, 8.


That we may be just and upright in the ways of getting wealth; that we may
not go beyond, 1 These. 4.6
or defraud any one, as knowing that the Lord is the revenger of all such;
being diligent in our callings, working with our own hands the thing which is
good, Ephesians. 4*28
that we may be able to give to them that need: Being conscientious in repaying
that we owe, in making restitution of that wherein we have wronged any one.

That he would give us hearts to use, and enjoy the estates which we possess;
Ecc. 5.19
Power to eat thereof, and to take our portion, and to rejoice in our labor.

That we may be wise and faithful in laying out the talents committed to our
trust: Not lavishing of them by any idle and vain expenses, as knowing that we
are but stewards of our estates, being to give an account of them to our Lord
and Master: Not niggardly and sparing toward any work of charity: 1 Timothy 6.17,
18, 19.
Not trusting in uncertain riches, but in the living God; that we may do good,
be rich in good works; ready to distribute willing to communicate; laying up in
store for our selves a good foundation against the time to come, that we may
lay hold on eternal life: Making our selves friends of unrighteous Mammon, Luke
16 9.
which may hereafter receive us into everlasting habitations: Laying up for our
selves treasures in heaven; Considering that he who sows sparingly, Luke
12.33 2 Cor. 5.6.
shall reap sparingly; and he who sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully.

The ninth Commandment does refer to duties which concern our Neighbors,
The ninth Command.
or our own reputations.

From this we may learn to pray that we may be tender and charitable, in
upholding the credit of others: willing to speak, and hear, and judge the best
of them: Prove. 17.9
Covering their infirmities in love.

Psalm. 15.3
Not backbiting with our tongues, nor taking up a reproach against our
Neighbors. Tit. 3.2.
Not speaking evil of any one, but being gentle, showing all meekness to all
men.

That we may not be willing to listen unto, and hearken after any rumor, which
tends to the defamation of our Neighbor, but may rather rejoice in their good
report: Disliking all flatterers* Tale-bearers and such other persons, as do
usually raise, and spread ill rumors.

That we may not be pragmatical, or censorious in the affairs of others, where
we are not concerned: But may study to be quiet, and to do our own business; 1
Pet. 4.15 1 These. 4.11 Mat. 7.5
being careful to pull the beam out of our own eyes, before we find fault with
the mote in others: Doing nothing through strife, or vainglory, Phil. 2.3.
but in lowliness of mind, each one esteeming of others, better then of
himself.

That we may be lowly in our own eyes; Not thinking of our selves more highly
then we ought to think; Romans 12.3
that we may be careful by all good means to advance our own reputations;
Valuing a good name above great riches; Prove. 12.1 Ephesians. 5.15.
laboring to be such as we would seem to be, walking circumspectly, not as
fools, but as wise, approving our selves unto him who tries the hearts:
Avoiding all appearances of evil, 1 These. 5.22 Phil. 4.8.
and following matters of good report.

The tenth Commandment does require a sincere, and upright heart, to our
selves, The tenth Command.
and our Neighbors.

By this we are directed to pray, that God would cleanse our souls from that
evil concupiscence so natural unto them, endowing us with a sincere
inclination to all the duties of charity.

That he would make us more watchful over our own senses, and hearts, in
keeping out and extinguishing all those evil fancies and imaginations, which
may arise within us. And to this purpose, that he would bestow upon us the
whole Armor of God, whereby we may cast down all fleshly reasonings, and
imaginations, 2 Cor. 10.5
and bring into subjection every thought unto the obedience of himself.

That we may make a Covenant with our thoughts, not to please our selves in the
speculation of any sins, not to think of them without soathing and detestation;
That we may never make provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof, 1
Cor. 7.29, 30.
that our hearts may be dis-ingaged from the world.

That he would give unto us the Spirit of wisdom to discern in what things we
are most obnoxious to temptation, and to be most vigilant over our hearts in
respect of those particulars: That we may keep our hearts with all diligence.

That we may never envy our neighbors well-being; nor rejoice at his
sufferings. Prove. 4.13
Job 31.29


CHAP. XXII. Of the graces that are more particularly required in the Gospel.
NExt to the Precepts of the Law, we are to consider the duties which the
Gospel does require of us, namely that we should repent and believe; That we
should be careful to perform, to continue, and increase in all those particular
duties and graces, which are comprehended under these two general heads.

So that from hence we are directed to pray

1. For Repentance; That since God has in love to our souls, vouchsafed unto
us in his Gospel this Privilege of repentance, which the Covenant of Works did
not admit of, that he would also give us hearts for it, Act. 11.18
granting us repentance unto life; That he would convince us of the danger and
folly and pollution of our sins, enabling us to mourn over them, bestowing upon
us broken and contrite spirits: Dissolving our stony hearts into that godly
sorrow which works repentance to salvation, Psalm. 51.17
2 Cor. 7.10
not to be repented of. That we may search and try our ways, and turn unto the
Lord: Lam. 3.40 Mat. 3.8.
Bringing forth fruits meet for repentance: Laboring to draw nigh unto God, by
cleansing our hands and purifying our hearts. James 4.8.


2. For faith; that God would discover to us the great need of a Savior, and
since he has set forth his Son to be a Propitiation through faith in his
blood; Romans 3.25
Heb. 5.9.
and has made him the author of eternal salvation to all that obey him: That
he would win over our souls to an earnest endeavor of acquaintance with him,
and high esteem of him.

That God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, would shine into
our hearts, 2 Cor. 4.6
to give us the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ; That he would make us more especially inquisitive after the saving,
experimental knowledge of him, in whom are laid up the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, Col. 2.3.
whom to know is perfect wisdom and eternal life.

That he would count us worthy of his holy calling, 2 These. 1.11, 12.
and fulfill in us all the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of
faith with power, that the name of the Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in
us, and we in him. That Christ may dwell in our hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3.17, 18.
that we being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all
Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and to know the
love of Christ, which passes knowledge, that we may be filled with all the
fullness of God.

That we may truly value the exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness
toward us through Christ Jesus: Glorying in his Gospel, Ephesians. 2.7.
as being the power of God to salvation: Counting all things but loss and dung
for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus; Romans 1.6 Phil. 3.8, 9.
that we may win him and he found in him, not having our own righteousness,
which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ.

That in all estates and conditions we may learn to live by faith.

1. In regard of our temporal life, with all the various uncertainties of it,
whether Prosperity, that by this grace of faith we may keep our hearts in an
holy frame of humility, meekness, dis-ingagement from the world, and all
outward confidences; or Adversity, wherein this grace may serve to sweeten our
afflictions, to support us under them, teaching us to profit by them, to bear
them meekly, to triumph over them; assuring the heart that nothing befalls us
but by the disposal of Gods Providence, who is infinitely wise, and merciful,
and faithful.

2. In regard of Spiritual life, both for our Justification, that we may not
expect it from our own services or graces. Phil. 3.9.
Not having our own righteousness, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith. And so for the life of
Sanctification, that we may not live unto our selves, 2 Cor. 5.15
but unto him who died for us, Phil. 1.27
and rose again. That our conversation may be as becomes the Gospel of Christ,
standing fast in one spirit with one mind, striving together for the faith of
the Gospel. Always remembering that we are not our own, 1 Cor. 6.20
but bought with a price, and therefore should make it our business to
glorify Christ with our bodies and spirits, which are his.

Jam. 2.20.
That he would work in us such a lively faith, as may make us rich in good
works, that we may demean our selves, as becomes our professed subjection to
the Gospel of Christ; walking worthy of that vocation wherewith we are called,
2 Cor. 9.13 Ephesians. 4.2.
as becomes children of the light: Chapter 5. v. 8. 1 Pet. 1.15 Romans 13.14. 1 Timothy
4.7 Gal. 2.14. 1 Timothy 5.10 Jam. 3.13. Tit. 2.10.
Being holy in all manner of conversation: Putting on the Lord Jesus Christ:
Exercising our selves unto godliness: Walking uprightly, according to the
truth of the Gospel: Diligently following every good work: Showing out of a
good conversation our works with meekness and wisdom: That we may adorn the
doctrine of God our Savior in all things; Considering that we are created in
Christ Jesus unto good works, that we should walk in them: Having our
conversation in heaven, Ephesians. 2.10. Phil. 3.20
walking worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in all good
works. Gal. 1.10.
That every one of us who professes the name of Christ, may depart from
iniquity: Because for this reason was the Gospel preached to those that are
dead in sin, 2 Timothy 2.19
that they might live according to God in the Spirit. 1 Pet. 4.6.


That we may give all diligence to add to our faith, virtue; and to virtue,
knowledge; 2 Pet. ^.5, 8*
and to knowledge, temperance; and to temperance, patience; and to patience,
godliness; and to godliness, brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness,
charity; that these things being in us, and abounding, we may not be barren and
unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, but may hereby clear up
unto our selves the evidences of our calling and election.

That we may deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, living soberly, Tit.
2.12, 13, 14.
righteously and godly in this present world, looking for that blessed hope,
and that glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ, who
gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify
unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works: Considering that he
shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, 2 These.
1.7.
to take vengeance on those that obey not his Gospel, who shall be punished
with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory
of his power, when he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be
admired of all them that believe in that day: Heb. 10.28
For if he that despised Moses law, died without mercy, under two or three
witnesses; of how much sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy, who has
trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the Covenant
an unholy thing, and has done despite to the Spirit of grace?

1 Pet. 5.10.
That the God of all grace, who has called us into his eternal glory, by
Christ Jesus, would make us perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle us.

Col. 1.23
That we may continue in the faith, grounded and settled, and not be moved away
from the hope of the Gospel, Col. 2.7
being rooted, and built up, and stablished in the faith: Laying aside every
weight, and the sin that does so easily beset us, Heb. 12.1, 2.
and running with patience the race that is set before us: Holding fast our
profession without wavering; that we may abide in Christ, and his words may
abide in us: Heb. 10.23 John 15.7 2 Timothy 3.14. Rev. 2.10. Col 3.16. 2 Pet. 3.18
Continuing in the things which we have learned. Being faithful unto the death,
that then he may bestow upon us a crown of life.

That the Word of Christ may dwell in us richly, in all wisdom: That we may
grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: Being
filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.11.
unto the glory and praise of God: That we may be strong in the grace that is
in Christ Jesus. 2 Timothy 2.1


That having fought a good fight, and finished our course, and kept the faith,
2 Timothy 4.7, 8.
we may receive that crown of righteousness, which at the last day, the Lord,
the righteous Judge will bestow upon all those that love his appearing: That he
would carry us on, through faith unto salvation.

And because, when we have reckoned all the duties we can, we shall leave out
many particulars, therefore for the supply of those which we cannot specify,
we may use some general form answerable to that exhortation of the Apostle,
Phil. 4.8.
that whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever
things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely,
whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, and if there be
any praise, that we may think of, and do these things.

Being blameless, and harmless, Phil. 2.15.
the sons of God without rebuke in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation,
among whom we may shine as lights in the world.

CHAP. XXIII. Of petitioning for temporal good things, Provision and Protection.
NExt to spiritual good things, we are permitted to pray for those matters
which concern our Temporal welfare, answerable to tha^ Petition in the Lords
Prayer, Give us this day our daily bread; under the expression of daily bread,
we are to understand all those particulars that are either necessary or
convenient for our natural life in respect

Both of Provision for us in our Souls. Bodies. Callings. Names. Friends.
Estates.
Protection of us in our Souls. Bodies. Callings. Names. Friends. Estates.



1. For our Souls; that God would be pleased to bless and continue to us the
use of our wits and memories, that he would give us power to enjoy these
temporal blessings; filling us with gladness of heart, Act. 14.17
with peace and serenity of mind, expelling from us all unnecessary cares,
earthly sorrows, unprofitable dejections.

2. For our Bodies; that he would continue to us our health and strength, the
free use of our senses and limbs, supplying, directing, blessing us in the use
of all such means as shall conduce to our preservation and well-being.

3. For our Callings; that he would furnish us with wisdom and abilities
suitable to our several vocations, making us diligent and industrious in them,
whereby we may be enabled in our places to promote his glory, 1 These. 2.10.
Gal. 5.13.
and to be instrumental for the good of others. Being just toward all men, and
ready to serve one another in love; and because without his blessing it will be
in vain for us to rise up early, Ps 127.2.
and to sit up late, and to eat the bread of carfulness; Therefore we should
likewise pray that he would bless our endeavors, and all that we set our
hands unto: Deuteronomy. 28.8 Ps. 90.17.
Prospering the work of our hands upon us.

4. For our Names; that he would take care of our reputations, restraining
others from reproaching and slandring of us, and restraining us from scandalous
sins; and appearances of evil; that he would teach us to behave our selves so
wisely and circumspectly, that we may bring credit to our persons and
professions, growing in favor both with God and man. That he would deliver us
from those, Psalm. 57.4.
whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongues a sharp sword.

5. For our Friends; that he would raise up for us such as may be kindly
affectioned to us, blessing us in all our near relations, kindred, families,
friends, neighbors, acquaintance, continuing to us the help and comfort that
we have by them.

6. For our Estates; in respect. 1. Of Liberty, that he would still preserve us
in our wonted freedom, from bondage, captivity, imprisonment. 2. That he would
be pleased to restore and continue that precious blessing of Peace, both in our
Nations, Towns, Families, Conversations. 3. That he would make us Plenteous in
the fruit of our ground, and in the increase of our cattle; Deuteronomy. 28.4.
Crowning the year with his goodness, Verse 11.
opening to us his good treasures, the heavens; Putting a force and efficacy
into their influences, Verse 12.
and fruitfulness into the earth, that it may yield us the staff of bread, to
strengthen our hearts. Hos 2.21. Ps. 104.15. Prove. 30.8
That he would always supply us with food convenient for us; so much as may
with sobriety serve to conveigh us through this earthly Pilgrimage.

In brief, that he would be pleased to bless unto us the things we have, and
bestow upon us the things we want.

And as we should beseech God to provide for us, so likewise to protect us in
all these respects; more especially according to those diverse seasons wherein
our prayers are to be framed, whether for the Day, or Night: For the Day is
his, the Night also is his, Psalm. 74.16
he has prepared the light, and the Sun; They continue still according to his
Ordinances, for all things serve him. Ps. 119.91.
It Is he that turns darkness into light, Ps. 104.30.
and renues the face of the earth.

1. For our morning addresses, O God thou art my God, Ps. 63.2.
early will I seek thee, my soul thirsts for thee, my flesh also longs
after thee; we should herein petition for his protection of us the day
following, that he would watch over us for good, by his fatherly providence;
and defend us from all those sins and dangers to which we are exposed, that we
may not be ensnared by any of those temptations which we shall meet with: That
he would give his Angels charge over us, to keep us in all our ways. Ps. 91.11.


That he would be pleased, so far to afford us his assistance and direction,
that we may glorify his name, both in our Thoughts, Words, and Actions; and to
this end, that he would put good meditations into our minds, and holy desires
into our hearts, truth into our inward parts: That he would set a watch before
our mouths, Psalm. 51.6.
and keep the door of our lips, Ps. 141.3^
that we offend not with our tongues: That no corrupt communication may proceed
from us, Ephesians. 4.29.
but such as is good to the use of edifying, and may administer grace to the
hearers: That amongst our other businesses and employments, we may not forget
that one thing which is most necessary: But may be more especially careful
about all such matters as may prepare us for our appearance before him, and
farther us in that reckoning which we are to make at the great day of accounts.

That we may walk circumspectly, not as fools, Ephesians. 5.15
but as wise. Considering that God is about our paths, and is acquainted with
all our ways; Ps. 139.3 Heb. 4.1,
Every thing being naked and open unto the eyes of that dreadful Majesty,
before whom all the world must be judged at the last day. That we may redeem
the time, because the days are evil; ^
improving the present opportunity of our health, peace and prosperity, unto
the best advantage of our spiritual wel-being. In this our day considering the
things that belong unto our peace.

That we may be wise and modest in our carriages, humble and moderate in our
passions, temperate and sober in our diet, diligent and cheerful in our
business.

That he would give us success in all our honest undertakings, making us wise
and prosperous (...) them. That the glorious Majesty of the Lord our (...) may
be upon us, prospering the work of our hand, ^
(...) Abraham's servant, O Lord my God, I beseech (...) send me good speed this
day, and show kindness unto me, etc. It is he alone, that must work all our
works (...) us, and for us: The way of man being not in himself, ^
neither is it in him that walks to direct his steps; that he would therefore
lead us in the way that we should go; teaching us to make straight paths to our
feet, and the rather because we are now fallen under a crooked and perverse
generation; that he would counsel and guide us in all our doubts and
difficulties.

That he would enable us every day to poceed somewhat forward in our spiritual
growth, to get the mastery over our own evil hearts and affections: To renew
and practice all those holy purposes and resolutions which we have formerly
made, that proceeding from grace to grace, we may at length come to be perfect
in Christ Jesus.

2. In our evening prayers we should likewise petition him for his particular
protection over us the night following. Because he has commanded his loving
kind^esse in the d^y time, Ps. 42.8.
therefore in the night shall our song be with him, and our prayer unto the Go^
of our life.

It is the frailty of our natures to need a continual reparation of our
strength by sleep. But God is the Keeper of Israel, Ps. 122.4.
who neither slumbreth nor sleeps, and therefore we should beseech him that
he would wake for us, watch over us for good. Commanding his Angels to incamp
round about us, that we may not be afraid of any terrors by night, Ps 34.7. Ps
91.5. Psalm. 48. Psalm. 127.2
but may lie down in peace, and sleep, and that he would make us to dwell in
safety: That he who gives his beloved sleep, would refresh us with quiet rest:
That we may hear of his loving kindness betimes in the morning, Ps. 143.8.
for in him is our trust

That in the time of our waking he would fill our souls with the meditations of
himself, that he would teach us to commune with our own hearts upon our beds,
and be still: To remember his all-seeing eyes, that the darkness hides not
from him, but the night shines as the day, Ps. 139.12
the darkness and light to him are both alike.

That though perhaps we have foolishly wasted the day past amongst the many
other days of our lives which he has allotted for our repentance and
amendment; yet that he would still be graciously pleased out of his free bouty
to continue his former protection and care over us, to refresh us with
sufficient rest, that thereby we may be enabled to do him better service in the
duties of the following day: Psalm. 31.5.
Expressing our desires of commending our spirits and bodies into his hands who
has redeemed us, and is the Lord God of truth.

That by our sleep this night we may be put in mind of our last sleep by death,
of the days of darkness, which shall be many; Eccl. 11.8
of that time which will shortly come, when these our bodies shall be stretched
on a bed of earth; That when a few days are come, Job 16.2^
we shall go into the place whence we shall not return: That many go well to
bed and never rise again till the day of judgment: That every day which
passes over us does bring us nearer to our last day, our dissolution; and that
dreadful judgment, when we must give a strict account of all our actions, and
receive an eternal doom, according to the works which we have done: That these
considerations may make us walk warily, as being in continual expectation of
the time of our departure: That we may labor to grow better, as we grow older;
that the nearer we come to our latter ends, the nearer we may approach to him
and his glory.

That if he has determined to take us out of the world, before we have another
opportunity of approaching unto him in this holy duty, that then he would be
pleased to pardon our sins, and save our souls.

CHAP. XXIV. Concerning Intercession, more General, both Ordinary and
Occasional.
NExt to praying for our selves, we should likewise be careful to intercede for
others, because we are all fellow members of one body; And the members should
have the same care one of another. 1 Cor. 12.25.


These Intercessions are either General. Special. Particular.


1. General. For the whole Catholic Church Militant here on earth, Ps. 122.6.
dispersed over the face of the whole world: Ephesians. 6.18.
That peace and mercy may be upon the Israel of God, that he would give his
Gospel a free, 2 These. 3.1.2.
and an effectual passage, prospering it where it is, and sending it where it
is not; that it may be delivered from unreasonable and wicked men: That his
delight may be in mount Sion: That he would grave her on the palms of his
hands, and let her walls be continually before him; Isa. 49.16, 17.
that her builders may make haste, and that he would cause her destroyers, and
such as would lay her waste, to depart from her: That he would be merciful unto
all his elect people, and bless them, and cause his face to shine upon them;
Ps. 67.1, 2.
that his way may be known upon earth, and his saving health among all Nations.

That he would enlarge the borders of Christ's Kingdom, Act. 2.47. Luke 1.79.
and add daily to the Church such as shall be saved: Enlightening those that
sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, and guiding their feet into the
way of peace.

And here we may derive arguments from those many promises that are made in
Scripture to this purpose that he would give unto Christ the heathen for his
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession. Ps. 2.8.


That the mountain of the Lords house shall be established on the top of the
mountains, Isa. 2.2.
and shall be exalted above the hills, and all Nations shall flow unto it.

That the whole earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the Lord, as the
waters cover the Sea. Isa. 11.9.


That the worm Jacob shall thresh the mountains, Isa. 41.14, 15.
and make the hills as chafe: Speaking of the Kingdom of Christ under he
Gospel.

That all the ends of the earth should see the salvation of God. Isa. 52.10


That all the Kingdoms of the world should become the Kingdoms of the Lord,
and of his Christ. Rev. 11.15.


And to this purpose that he would afford the means that are requisite to this
end; that he would inform the ignorant, reclaim the erroneous, encourage the
backward, strengthen the weak, bind up the broken, succor the tempted,
comfort the sorrowful, restore the sick, deliver the prisoners, relieve the
needy, break every yoke of the oppressor, and hasten the coming of his
Kingdom.

That he would sanctify the several gifts distributed in the Church, Ephesians.
4.11, 16.
for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the
edifying of the body of Christ: Till we all come in the unity of the faith and
of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the
stature, of the fullness of Christ: From whom the whole body fitly joined
together, and compacted by that which every joint supplyeth according to the
effectual working in the measure of every part, may increase, and edify it
self in love.

2. Special Intercession may be either Ordinary. Occasional.


1. In Ordinary, or common we are to pray for the Nations uncalled, whether
Jews. Infidels.


1. For Jews, that God would persuade Sem to dwell in the tents o^ Japhet;
Genesis 9.27.
that he would not forget his old loving kindness to his firstborn, the seed
of Abraham his friend; that he would raise up the Tabernacle of David which is
fallen, Am. 9.11.
and close up the breaches thereof: And make Jerusalem a praise upon the whole
earth: That he would do good in his good ple^sure unto Sion, Ps. 51.18.
and build up the walls of Jerusalem; that he would open their eyes to see him
whom they have pierced; Zach. 12.10. Mat. 27.25
that the merit, and not the guilt of his blood may be upon them and their
children.

2. For the uncalled Gentiles whom he has decreed to salvation, who are
without the pale of the visible Church; that God would wisit them with the
Dayspring from on high, send forth his everlasting Gospel amongst them, and
bring in the fullness of the Gentiles; Romans 11.25. See before.
and make us all one sheepfold, under one shepherd according to those many
promises which he has made to this purpose.

Amongst the Nations that are called, we are to pray more especially for them
to whom we are allied by Neighborhood, League, Religion, etc. But chiefly for
those of the household of faith; the Nations and Families that call upon his
Name. Gal. 6.10
Let all those that put their trust in thee rejoice, Ps 5.11, 12
let them shout for joy, because thou defend^st them; let them also that love
thy name be joyful in thee: For thou, Lord, wilt bless the righteous, with
favou will thou compass him as with a shiel^.

O continue thy loving kindness to them that know thee, and thy righteousness
to the upright in heart. Ps 36.10.


Let all them that seek thee, Psalm. 40.16
rejoice and be glad in thee, let such as love thy salvation, say continually,
The Lord be magnified.

Do good, O Lord, unto those that be good, Psalm. 1.5, 4.
and to them that be upright in their hearts and let peace be upon Israel.

But above any other, we are to pray more especially for our own Nation, the
land of our nativity; to which as we have a nearer relation* so ought we to
have a greater affection; That God would pardon our crying sins, purge out
our corruptions, heal our distempers; that he would remove the judgments under
which we suffer, and prevent those which we have most justly deserved; that he
would continue to us the mercies we enjoy, and bestow upon us the blessings we
want.

That he would teach us to observe, and understand his meanings toward us in
all his public dispensations, that we may accordingly apply our selves to meet
him in his ways.

That he would sanctify unto us every condition, and make us wise by the
example of others, that we may be willing to learn righteousness, Isa. 26.9
when his judgments are abroad in the world: To hear his rod, and who has
appointed it; Mich, 6.9.
as knowing that every judgment has as well a noise to inform, as a blow to
correct, and that if we will not amend by the sound of them upon others, we
shall feel the smart of them our selves^

These are some of the general heads, which ordinarily, may be insisted upon,
and enlarged, in our intercessions for National mercies; upon occasion of any
extraordinary want, or judgment. We ought in a more particular manner to frame
our petitions, according to the present condition of a people, in regard of any
public necessity; but chiefly in respect of those three principal judgments,
War, Famine, Pestilence.

Against War.
1. In times of War, that he would take care for the interest of his own
people, and cause, in the midst of all confusions: That he would behold the
tears of those that are oppressed, and have no comforter; that he would be
strength to the poor, and to the needy in their distress, Isa. 25.4.
a refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat, when the blast of the
terrible ones is as a storm against the wall; That upon all the glory there
may be a defense. Isa. 4.5. Psalm. 31.7, 8.
That he would consider their troubles, and know their souls in adversity, and
not shut them up in the hand of their enemies. That they may not any longer
hear the sound of the Trumpet, Jer. 4.19.
and the alarm of War.

That he would remove that judgment from them, and let them not fall into the
hands of men, 2 Samuel 24.14. Psalm. 49 9.
whose mercies are cruel. He can make war to cease in all the world, breaking
the bow, and cutting the spear in sunder. Isa. 2.4.
And he has promised a time when men shall beat their swords into plow-shares,
and their spears into pruning hooks, when Nation shall not lift up sword
against Nation, neither shall they learn War any more. He is the great
Peacemaker, the Prince of peace, who did find out away hidden from ages, Col.
1.26.
and generations, to reconcile the sinful world unto himself. He can bring
light out of darkness, and settlement out of confusion. He can with a word of
his mouth rebuke, and alay the tempestuous winds and sea. He can still the
raging of the seas, the noise of his waves, and the madness of the people.
Psalm. 65.7.
He can create peace where there is no pre-existent disposition, or preparation
toward it. He can make the wrath of man turn to his praise, and when he please
he can restrain it. That he would think thoughts of peace toward us, and not
of evil, to give us an expected end. Jer. 29.11.


That he would repair the desolations that have been hereby occasioned; Jer.
31.27.
that he would sow the wast places with the seed of man and of beast; and as he
has formerly watched over them, to pluck up and to destroy, so he would now
watch over them to build and to plant.

To this purpose the book of Psalms does abound with many petitions and
complaints.

O let the wickedness of the wicked come to an end, but establish thou the
just. Psalm. 7.9.


Show thy mavelous loving kindness, Psalm. 17.7.
O thou that savest by thy right hand them that put their trust in thee, from
such as rise up against them.

Let not those that wait on thee be ashamed. Psalm. 25.3, 22. Psalm. 66.1, 2.
Redeem Israel, O God, out of all his troubles.

O God, thou have cast us off, thou have been displeased, O turn thy self to
us again. Thou have made the land to tremble, thou have broken it; heal the
breaches thereof, for it shakes. Thou have showed thy people hard things; thou
have made them to drink the wine of astonishment. Give us help from trouble,
for vain is the help of man. Verse 11.


Let God arise, and let his enemies be scattered; let them also that hate him,
fly before him. Psalm. 68.1.


Ps. 74^19, 22.
O deliver not the soul of the turtle unto the multitude of the wicked; forget
not the congregation of the poor for ever. O let not the oppressed return
ashamed, let the poor and needy praise thy name. Arise, O God, plead thine own
cause, etc.

Ps. 79.4, 5.
We are become a reproach to our neighbors, a scorn and derision to them that
are round about us. How long, Lord, will thou be angry for ever? shall thy
jealousy burn like fire? O remember not against us our former iniquities, let
thy tender mercies speedily prevent us, for we are brought very low. Help us, O
God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name, deliver us, and purge away our
sins for thy names sake.

Ps. 86.14.
O God, the proud are risen against me, and the assemblies of violent men have
sought after my soul, and have not set thee before them. But thou, O Lord, art
our God, full of compassion and gracious, long-suffering and plenteous in mercy
and truth. O turn unto me, and have mercy upon me; give thy strength unto thy
servant, and save the son of thine handmaid. Show me some token for good,
that they which hate me may see it, Psalm. 94.2.
and be ashamed, because thou, Lord, have helped me, and comforted me.

Ps. 102.13
Arise, O Lord, and have mercy upon Sion, for the time to favor her, yea the
set time is come.

2. Against Famine.
2. In times of Famine; We should pray that our land may yield us bread without
scarceness: That he would not send upon us the evil arrows of famine, Deuteronomy.
8.9. Ezekiel. 5.16 Hos. 2.9. Amos 4.6 Isa. 9.20.
nor break our staff of bread: Nor take away our corn in the time thereof,
nor afflict us with cleanness of teeth; When men shall snatch on the right
hand, and be hungry, and shall eat on the left hand, and shall not be
satisfied: but every man shall eat the flesh of his own arm: When we shall
pine away, Lam. 4.9,
and be stricken through for want of the fruits of the earth: When we shall eat
bread by weight, and with care, and drink water by measure, Ez. 46.16.
and with astonishment: When the land shall mourn, and every one that dwells
therein shall languish, Hos. 4.3.
with the beasts of the field, and the fowls of the Heaven: When the
husbandman shall be ashamed, Joel 1.11.
and the vine-dressers shall howl, because the harvest of the field is
perished: The fig tree shall not blossom, Hab. 3.17
neither shall fruit be in the vine, the labor of the Olive shall fail, and
the fields shall yield no meat; the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and
there shall be no heard in the stalls: When we shall sow much and bring in
little, when we shall eat and not have enough, drink and not be filled, Hag.
1.6.
cloth our selves and not be warm.

That he would according to his promise, abundantly bless our provision, Ps.
132.15 Ps. 144.13
and satisfy our poor with bread: That our Garners may be full and plenteous,
affording all manner of store; That he would hear the Heavens, and let them
hear the Earth, Hos. 2.21, 22.
and the Earth hear the Corn and the Wine and the oil, and that they may hear
his people.

Now because Famine is usually occasioned, either by immoderate rain, or
drought, therefore in our intercessions against this National judgment, we may
frame our Petitions more immediately against each of these, as necessity shall
require.

1. Against immoderate rain: That God would remember the Covenant which he
has made, and though our wickedness be very great upon the earth, Genesis 6 5.6
so that he might justly repent that he has made us; and now again resolve to
destroy us from the face of the earth; yet he has promised that he will not
any more cut off all flesh by the waters of a flood, Gen 9.11.
neither shall there any more be a flood to destroy the earth.

Joel. 2.23. Prove. 28.3
That he would give us the former and the latter rain moderately, and not punish
us with a sweeping rain, which leaves no food.

Genesis 7.11. Job. 5.10. Isai. 50.3.
It Is he alone, by whom the windows of Heaven are opened, who gives rain upon
the earth, and sends waters upon the fields; Who cloatheth the Heavens with
blackness, and makes sackcloth their covering; Who calls for the waters of
the Sea, Am. 5.8. Job 36.27
and pours them out upon the face of the Earth; He makes small the drops of
water, they pour down rain according to the vapor thereof, which the clouds
do drop, and distill upon men abundantly: He covers the light with clouds,
and commands it not to shine: Ps. 78.23
He commands the clouds from above, and opens the doors of Heaven.

That he would so order all those things which are at his disposal, as that the
earth may yield her increase, Ps. 97.6, 7
and all the ends of the earth may fear him.

2. Against Drought; That he would open to us the good treasures of Heaven,
Deuteronomy. 28.22. Job 38.28 Verse. 37. Job. 26.8.
and give rain to our land in its season, and bless the labor of our hands:
He is the Father of the rain, and does beget the drops of dew: The bottles of
heaven are at his command to open, and shut them as he pleases: He binds up
the waters in thick clouds, and the cloud is not rent under them: It Is he that
does stay the heaven over us from dew, Hag. 1.10. Amos 4.7
and the earth from his fruits: Who does withold the rain from us, causing
it to rain upon one City, and not upon another: It is by his command that the
Vine-tree is dried up, Joel 1.12.
and the Fig Tree languisheth, and all the trees of the field are withered: The
seed is rotten under the clods, the garners are laid desolate, the barnes are
broken down, Verse 17.
for the corn is withered; the beasts groan, and the herds of cattle are
perplexed, because they have no pasture, and the flocks of sheep are made
desolate. Verse. 18.


It Is at his command that the clouds do not rain upon us; He makes the heavens
over us to be brass, Isa. 5.6. Deuteronomy. 28.23, 24.
and the earth under us to be iron, and the rain of our land to be powder and
dust: He causes the land to mourn, and the herbs of every field to wither;
Jer. 12.4. chap. 14.4^
When the ground is chapt for want of rain, when the plowmen are ashamed, and
cover their heads; when the wild Asses do stand in the high places, and snuff
up the wind like Draggons, and their eyes do fail because there is no grass.
Verse. 6.


And therefore unto him it is that we must make our addresses, for help and
supply in all such exigences; That when heaven is shut up, 1 Kin. 8.35, 36.
and there is no rain, because of our sins against him; Yet if we shall pray
unto him, and confess his name, and turn from our sins when he afflicts us;
That then he would hear in heaven, and forgive the sins of his servants, and
teach them the good way wherein they should walk, and give rain unto the land,
which he has bestowed upon them for an inheritance.

Are there any among the vanities of the Gentiles that can cause rain? or can
the heavens give showers? Jer. 14.22.
art not thou he, O Lord, our God? therefore we will wait upon thee, for thou
have made all these things.

That he would open the windows of heaven, and cause the rain to come down in
his season, and let there be showers of blessing; Ez. 34.26 Ps. 104.14
making grass to grow for the cattle, and herbs for the service of men: That
we may fear the Lord our God, who gives us rain, Jer. 5.24*
both the former and the latter in its season, reserving unto us the pointed
weeks of harvest.

3. In times of Pestilence: 3. Against Pestilence.
That he would (according to his promise) deliver us from the noisome
Pestillence; Psalm. 91.3, 5, 6.
that we may not be afraid for the terror by night, nor for the arrow that
flies by day, nor for the Pestilence that walks in darkness; nor for the
destruction that walks at noonday; that no evil befall us, nor any plague
come nigh our dwellings: Verse. 10
That he would command his destroying Angel to put up his sword again into the
sheath thereof. 1 Chronicles. 21.27.


That he would teach us to see the plague of our own hearts, 1 King. 8.38.
and to return unto him with unfeigned repentance, that he may return unto us
in mercy and compassion, and pardon our sins, and heal our land.

Jer. 47.6.
O thou sword of the Lord, how long will it be ere thou be quiet? put up thy
self into thy scabberd, rest, and be still.

Job. 6.4.
That the arrows of the Almighty may not be any longer within us, nor the poison
thereof drink up our spirits.

Jer. 9.21.
That death may not come up into our windows, nor enter into our palaces, to cut
off the children from without, and the young men from the streets; that he
would not sweep us away with the besome of destruction; Isa. 14.23.
but would be pleased now at length to heal us, and to restore comfort unto us,
Isa. 57.18.
and to our mourners.

We are consumed by thine an^er, and by thy wrath we are troubled; Ps. 90.7, 8
thou have set our iniquities before thee, and our secret sins in the light of
thy countenance: Return, Ver. 13.14
O Lord, how long? and let it repent thee concerning thy servants: O satisfy
us early with thy mercies, that we may rejoice and be glad all our days.

For the better strengthening of our faith and fervency in our intercessions
for any National mercy, we may back our requests with some of those Arguments
which the Scripture does afford to this purpose

God has styled himself a refuge for the oppressed, a refuge in times of
trouble, Ps 9.9, 11
and that he will never forsake them that seek him.

He is a present help in trouble, Ps. 46.1. Ps. 35.27.
and has proclaimed himself to be a God that has pleasure in the prosperity
of his servants.

He has promised that the poor shall not always be forgotten, Psalm. 9.18. Ps.
72.14.
the patient abiding of the meek shall not perish for ever. But he will redeem
their souls from deceit and violence; He hears the poor, Ps. 69.33.
and despises not the prisoners.

He has said, that he will not always contend with the children of men, lest
their hearts should faint, Isa. 57.16.
and their spirits fail within them. Deuteronomy. 32.36 Isa. 63.5.5.
But when their power is quite gone, then it shall repent him for his servants;
when there is no other help or uphold, then the arm of the Lord shall bring
salvation.

He has assured us, Psalm 37.5,
that if we commit our way unto the Lord, and trust in him, he will bring it to
pass; That the m^ek shall inherit the earth, Verse 11. Verse 19.
and delight themselves in the abundance of peace. That the upright shall not
be ashamed in the evil time, and in the days of famine they shall be
satisfied; that though the wicked does watch the righteous, and seek to slay
him, Verse 32.
yet the Lord will not leave him in his hand, Verse 33.
nor condemn him when he is judged. But if we wait on the Lord, and keep his
way, he will exalt us to inherit the land. Verse 34.
That the salvation of the righteous is of the Lord, who is their strength in
tim^ of trouble. Verse 39.
The Lord shall help them and deliver them, he shall deliver them from the
wicked, and save them, because they trust in him. Verse. 40.


He has promised that the rod of the wicked shall not always rest upon the lot
of the righteous. Ps. 125.3.


The Scripture is very copious in such expressions as may afford Arguments to
this purpose, besides those that were mentioned before in the fourth Chapter,
which are properly reducible to this place.

CHAP. XXV. Of Particular Intercession for our several relations.
PArticular Intercession may be distinguished into two sorts, Ordinary.
Occasional.


By Ordinary I understand our prayers for those particular persons, whom we are
bound in our common and usual course to remember, as we should all those to
whom we are tied by any near relation, whether of See fifth Com. before.
Order. Friendship, or Enmity. Neighborhood, or converse.


1. For the relations of Order. These are either public and Political, or
private and Oeconomicall.

1. Concerning our Public relations, the Apostle does enjoin us to pray for
Kings, and all that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable
life, in all godliness and honesty; 1 Timothy 2.2
that he would give unto them wise and understanding hearts, to judge their
people and to discern between good and bad. 1 King. 3 9 Romans 13.3. Isa. 49.23.
That they may be a terror only to evil doers; but an encouragement to those
that do well. That he would (according to his promise) make them nursing
fathers unto his Church and People, that they may prove friends to his friends,
and enemies to his enemies. Considering that those who rule over men must be
just, 2 Samuel 23* 3.
ruling in the fear of the Lord.

That they may know the God of their fathers, and serve him with a perfect
heart, and with a willing mind; 1 Chronicles. 28.9.
that it may be well with them, and their posterity after them.

That he would make them to believe, and to consider, that it is not only their
duty, but their honor, and their interest, to promote the power, and the
reputation of Religion.

For all public Counselors and Judges, that he would make them wise, and
upright, and successful in the discharge of all those difficult businesses
that they are called unto. That they may not turn judgment into wormwood, by
unjust decrees, nor into Vinegar, by long delays; that he would be unto them,
Amos 5.7
both a Sun and a Shield. A Sun to direct them, and a Shield to protect them in
all their ways. Pro. ^0.26
It Is he alone who is able to instruct Magistrates, Ps. 84.11.
and teach Senators wisdom; Ps. 105.22.
that he would remove from them all negligence, cowardice, prejudice,
self ends* or whatever may hinder them in the free and equal administration of
justice. Am. 5.24.
That judgment may run down as a river, and righteousness as a mighty stream.

For the Nobility and Gentry, that he would endow them with such virtue and
spiritual graces, as can alone truly ennoble them, whereby they may be made the
children of God, and heirs of Heaven; that they may strive to become as
eminent members in the mystical body, as they are in the civil.

For all inferior Magistrates, those more especially under whose Jurisdiction
we live, that they may be men of courage, Exodus 18.21.
fearing God, wise and faithful in their places, Haters of reward, and without
respect of persons.

For Ministers, more particularly those to whose charge we belong, See before
in the duties of the 2. and 4. Commandment. Mat. 9.38. Jer. 3.^5.
that God would root out of the Church all ignorant, scandalous, factious
Ministers, and send forth faithful laborers into his harvest; that he would
give unto all his people, Pastors after his own heart; such as may be peaceable
and gracious in their lives, painful and powerful in their doctrine, such
diligent watchmen, as may with wisdom and fidelity discharge the office
committed to them, taking heed to their ministry to fulfill it. Col. 4^17.
That they may not prostitute their holy callings, to serve the interests of
men, but may be truly conscionable both in their lives and ministry, that they
may save themselves, and them that hear them; that he would support the^ under
all that opposition and contempt that they meet with.

For all Nurseries of good learning and true Religion, that he would purge and
reform them from all their corruptions, uphold and encourage them against the
opposition of all unreasonable men. That he would root up every plant which our
heavenly Father has not planted. Mat. 15.13 Joh. 15.2.
That he would take away those branches which bear no fruit, and purge those
which do bring forth fruit, that they may bring forth more; that those places
may abound in trees of righteousness; which being planted by the rivers of
water, Is. 61.3. Psalm. 1.3.
may bring forth their fruit in due season. That he would blow upon those
gardens, Cant 4.16
that the spices thereof may flow out. That he would water them with the dew
from heaven, and make them flourishing and fruitful.

That he would cast salt into those fountains, and heal waters thereof both from
death and barrenness: 2 Kin. 2.23
That from thence may proceed such wholesome streams, as may refresh the thirsty
corners of the land, that those fountains may never be dried up, Hos. 13.15
Jam. 3.11.
and that they may not send forth bitter waters.

For the Common people, that he would make them humble, peaceable, charitable,
steadfast in the faith; not so easily carried about with every wind of
Doctrine: Zealous for the establishment of peace and truth, that he would
dispel those mists of ignorance and profaneness which do so much abound in
many corners of the Nation.

That all orders and degrees of men, in their several places and callings may
join together for the glorifying of his name, the establishment of peace and
justice, and the propagation of his truth and Gospel. See before in the 5th
Commandment. Romans 9.3.


2. We should intercede for our private or domestical relations, for those to
whom we are tied by blood and affinity, for our brethren and kindred according
to the flesh; that God would make them near unto him by grace, as they are unto
us by nature; that they may be all careful to do the will of our heavenly
Father, Mat. 12.50
and by that means become the brethren and kindred of Christ; that we may be
ready to express our mutual affections to one another, by a special care and
endeavor, to promote our spiritual wel-beings.

Besides the relations of Order, we should likewise pray for those to whom we
are related.

By any special friendship or kindness, for those that do remember us in their
prayers; for such as have been any ways instruments of our good, either in our
souls, bodies or estates; That God would remember them for good in the day of
their trouble, and recompense them an hundred fold into their bosoms, for all
the kindness that we have received from them.

And so on the contrary for our Enemies, because their sins do particularly
concern us: Psalm. ^5.13, 14 Mat. 5.4. Acts 7.60.
That their offenses against us may not be laid to their charge: That he would
take pity on such as hate us without a cause, and convert their souls unto
himself: And that we may consider them as his instruments, in all the wrongs
and oppositions which we suffer from them.

And lastly, for those that are near unto us by neighborhood and familiar
converse: The Towns, Societies, Families to which we belong, that we may live
at peace and unity amongst our selves, faithfully discharging our several
duties, adorning our professions, considering one another to provok unto love
and good works: And that he would be pleased to dwell with us, to manifest the
tokens of his presence, amongst us: To let the light of his countenance shine
ever upon us, whereby we may be filled with righteousness, and peace, and joy
in the holy Ghost; that we may be able cheerfully to serve him in our places,
and patiently to wait for his glorious appearing.

CHAP. XXVI. Of occasional intercession for those who are afflicted either in
Mind. Body.

OCcasional intercession is when we pray for such persons as suffer under any
special trouble or affliction in whose behalf we may petition in the general;
Of patience See before in the first Commandment.
That God would give them patience under their afflictions, Profit by them, and
in his good time ease and Deliverance from them.

That God would enable them with quietness and contentment to submit themselves
unto every condition which he shall think fittest for them, as believing and
considering

1. That he is the author of all the miseries which we suffer. Affliction
comes not forth of the dust, Job 5.6.
neither does trouble spring out of the ground.

2. That he makes every thing beautiful and seasonable; Eccl. 3.11.
whatsoever comes to pass by his wise providence, is far better then human
wisdom could possibly contrive it, even those events which do most of all
thwart our private hopes and desires (could all circumstances be duly
considered) would appear to be most comely and beautiful, and therefore we have
reason, with lowlines and humility to submit unto his wise providence, and in
all our troubles and confusions, to acknowledge, that great and mavelous are
thy works, Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy ways, Rev. 15.13
thou King of Saints. I know, O Lord, that thy judgments, are right, and that
thou in faithfu^nes have afflicted me.

3. We have most justly deserved all that we suffer. Ps. 119.75
Thou, O Lord, art just in all that is brought upon us, Neh. 9.33
for thou have done right, but we have done wickedly. The least mercy we enjoy
is far greater then our deserts, and the greatest misery we suffer is far less
then our sins. Shall we receive good from the hand of God, and shall we not
receive evil? Job 2.10.


4. That these afflictions are the signs and effects of his love for whom he
loves he chasteneth, Heb. 12.6
and corrects every son whom he receives.

5. That every thing shall in the issue prove for the best to them that love
him. And that though all chastening for the present be grievous, Ver. 11.
nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness to
them that are exercised thereby.

That they may labor to make the right use of their troubles, to search and
try their ways and turn to the Lord. Lam. 3.40.
To humble themselves under his mighty hand, that he may exalt them in due
time. 1 Pet. 5.6, 7.
To cast all their care upon him, because he cares for them. To find out
those particular failings, which he aims at in his corrections. To observe and
understand his meaning in the troubles that befall us, that we may accordingly
apply our selves to meet him in his ways.

These occasions for particular intercession, are distinguishable into several
kinds, comprehending all manner of inward or outward exigences, all
difficulties and doubts, in respect of any weighty business, or temptation,
but the two chief kinds of them are troubles of conscience, sickness of body.

1. If the occasion be trouble of Conscience, and spiritual desertions, in such
cases the petitions and arguments beforementioned in our deprecation against
the guilt of sin are fitly applyable, See before Chap. 16.
to which may be added such other desires as these.

That God would enable them to believe and consider, that fears, and doubts,
and temptations are an unavoidable part of our Christian warfare, that not only
his dearest servants, Job, David, etc. but also his only Son Christ himself
has suffered under them. That he being touched with a feeling of our
infirmities, Heb. 4.16.
might be ready to help us in the time of need.

That God is faithful, and will not suffer us to be tempted above what we are
able, 1 Cor. 10.13.
but will with the temptation also make away to escape, that we may be able to
bear it. He has promised that he will not contend for ever, Isa. 57.16.
nor be always wroth, lest the spirits of men should fail before him, and the
souls which he has made; Is. 54 7, 8.
that though for a small moment he does forsake us, yet with great mercies will
he gather us; though in a little wrath he does hide his face from us for a
moment, yet with everlasting kindness will he have mercy upon us. Ps. 145.14
The Lord upholdeth those that fall, and raises up all those that be bowed
down. Ps. 34.18.
He is nigh unto them that be of a broken heart, and saves such as be of a
contrite spirit.

That as for our infirmities, the best men in this life are not without them,
nor shall they be imputed to us, If we do that which we would not, Romans 7.20
it is no more we that do it, but sin that dwells in us; and as for our
wilful sins if they be particularly repented of, and forsaken, though they be
as red as scarlet, yet he will purge us from them; if we do count them as a
burden, Isa. 1.17. Mat. 11.8.
and come unto Christ for help, he will ease us of them.

That God in the New Covenant does undertake for both parts, that our hopes are
not now to be grounded upon our own works or sufficiency, but upon the
infallible promise of God, and the infinite merits of Christ; that if we were
without sin, or could do any thing perfectly, we should not in that respect
have need of a Mediator.

From all which considerations, those who are afflicted with spiritual
desertions, may receive sufficient comfort, in respect of their sins past, and
for the future we should pray in their behalf;

That God would enable them to put on the breast plate of faith, and love, and
for an helmet the hope of salvation. 1 These. 5.8 1 Timothy 1.19.
That they may labor to keep a good conscience, to be observant of all those
experimenss which they have had of Gods love unto them, for experience works
hope. Romans 5.4


Unto this head, concerning comfort against the dejections of mind, and trouble
of conscience, those expressions of the Psalmist may be fitly applied.

Psalm. 6 3, 4.
My soul is sore vexed, but thou, O Lord, how long? Return, O Lo^d, deliver my
soul, O save me for thy mercy sake.

Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me, for I am desolate and afflicted,
Ps. 25.16, 17.
the troubles of my heart are enlarged, O bring thou me out of my distresses:
look upon mine affliction, and my pain, and forgive me all my sins. O keep my
soul and deliver me, let me not be ashamed, for I put my trust in thee. Let
integrity and uprightnes preserve me.

Ps. 27.9.
O hide not thy face from me, neither cast thy servant away in displeasure.

Ps. 31.16.
Make thy face to shine upon thy servant, O save me for thy mercy sake.

Ps. 40.11.
Withhold not thou thy tender mercy from me, O Lord, let thy loving kindness and
thy truth continually preserve me, for inumerable evils have compassed me
about, mine iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not able to look
up; they are more then the hairs of my head, therefore my heart fails me. Be
pleased, O Lord, to deliver me; O Lord, make haste to help me.

Ps. 57.1.
Be merciful unto me, O Lord, be merciful unto me, for under the shadow of thy
wings shall be my refuge, until my calamities be overpast.

Ps. 94.19.
In the multitude of the sorrowful thoughts within me, let thy comforts, O
Lord, delight my soul. Remember me, O Lord, with the favor that thou bear
unto thy people, O visit me with thy salvation. Ps 106.4, 5
That I may see the good of thy chosen, and rejoice with the gladness of thy
people, and glory with thine inheritance.

Do thou save me, O Lord, for thy name sake, Psalm. 109.21, 22.
for I am poor and needy, and my heart is wounded within me.

2. If the occasion be Sickness of Body, in this case we ought to intercede
for others.

That God would teach them quietly to submit unto his afflicting hand, as
considering, that diseases do not arise merely from natural, or accidental
causes, without the particular appointment and disposal of his wise providence,
which does extend to the very hairs of our head, much more to the days of our
lives, and the health of those days; and that he is faithful, and true, having
engaged his promise, that all conditions, (though never so troublesome,
Tribulation, and anguish, and sickness, and death it self) shall work together
for the good of those that belong unto him.

That he would sanctify their pains, and troubles unto them, giving them a
true sight of their sins, an unfeigned sorrow for them, and a steadfast faith
in the merits of Christ, for the remission of them: That he would recompense
the pains, and decays of their bodies, with comfort and improvement in their
souls: That as their outward man does decay, 2 Cor. 4.16
so their inward man may be renewed daily.

That he would fit them for whatever condition he shall call them unto: That
Christ may be unto them both in life and death advantage.

That if it be his will, he would recover them from their pains and diseases,
and restore them to their former health. That he would direct them to the most
effectual means for their recovery, and bless unto them those that have been,
or shall be used to that end.

Of this kind are those petitions of the Psalmist for himself.

Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak, O Lord, Ps. 6.2, 5.
heal me, for my bones are vexed; for in death there is no remembrance of thee,
and who will give thee thanks in the pit?

Psalm. 31.9.
What profit is there in my blood, if I go down into the pit? shall the dust
praise thee? shall that declare thy truth? Shall thy loving kindness be
declared in the grave, Psalm. 88.11, 12.
or thy faithfulness in destruction? Shall thy wonders be known in the dark,
or thy righteousness in the land of forgetfulness?

Psalm. 39.12, 13.
Hear my prayer, O Lord, give ear unto my cry, hold not thy peace at my tears,
O spare me a little, that I may recover strength, before I go hence, and be no
more seen.

Psalm. 119.75, 76.
I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are right, and that thou in faithfulness
have afflicted me. Let I pray thee, thy merciful kindness be my comfort, let
thy tender mercies come unto me, that I may live.

Job 10.20.21.
Thus does Job petition for himself, Are not my days few? cease then, and let me
alone, that I may take comfort a little, before I go, whence I shall not
return, even to the land of darkness, and the shadow of death.

And thus the Prophet Jeremiah, Heal me, O Lord, and I shall be healed; Jer.
17.14.
save me, and I shall be saved; for thou art my praise.

For the better strengthening of our faith and fervency in this desire, there
are such considerations as these.

He has commanded us to call upon him in the time of trouble, and has
promised to deliver us; Psalm. 50.15
it is in his power alone to kill, and to make alive; to bring down to the
grave, and to raise up again. 1 Samuel 2.6.
He has styled himself the God of Salvation, to whom belong the issues of
death. He can give power to the faint, Ps. 68.20.
and to them that have no might, increase of strength. Isa. 40.29.
He has professed, that the death of his Saints is dear and precious in his
sight. Ps. 116.15
He has promised to strengthen them upon the bed of languishing, Psalm. 41.3.
and to make their bed in their sickness. He has said, that the prayer of
faith shall save the sick. He has permitted us, Jam. 5.15.
concerning his sons and his daughters to command him, Isa. 45.11.
thereby implying, that in our intercessions for one another, we may be as sure
of success, as we are of those things which are in our own power to command.
To which may be added our former experience of his truth and mercy in the like
cases; from all which we may be encouraged to come with boldness to the throne
of grace, that we may obtain mercy in the time of need. Heb. 4 16.


But if he has otherwise determined, and the days of their warfare be
accomplished, that then he would fit them for death, and make them meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of his Saints in light; that they may be willing
to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better, Phil. 1.23 Isa. 57.1.
then still to be exposed to the evil to come; to sinful temptations, pains
and diseases of the body, troubles and vexations of the vain world; especially
considering that now death has lost its sting, and is swallowed up in victory.
And that it was the end of our Saviors passion to deliver them, who through
the fear of death, 1 Cor. 15.54. Heb. 2.15. Romans 8.38.
have been all their lifetime subject to bondage. That neither death nor life,
nor things present, nor things to come shall be able to separate us from the
love of God, in Christ Jesus our Lord. That by this means we must be brought to
enjoy the beatifical vision of God, the blessed company of innumerable Angels,
Heb. 13.22
and the spirits of just men made perfect.

That he would be pleased to shine graciously upon them with his favor, and
reconciled countenance, to fill their hearts with such divine joys, as belong
unto those that are heirs of a celestial kingdom, and are ready to lay hold
on everlasting life.

2 Cor. 4.17
That this light affliction, which is but for a moment, may work for them a far
more exceeding, and eternal weight of glory.

2 Cor. 5.1.
That when this their earthly tabernacle shall be dissolved, they may have an
house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens.

That his blessed Angels may convey their souls into Abraham's bosom.

Now as in such cases we should thus intercede for others, so likewise may we
hence take fit occasion to pray for our selves.

That in the diseases and pains of others, we may consider the frailties of
our own conditions; the desert of our own sins, and may magnify his special
mercy in sparing of us so much, and so long.

That we may be more seriously mindful of our later ends, as knowing that he
will bring us also to death, Job 30.23
and to the house appointed for all the living; and that, Job 16.22
when a few days are come, we shall go the way whence we shall not return:
That we are but strangers, and pilgrims in this world, dwelling in houses of
clay, being here to day, and not to morrow, in the morning and not at night,
that our days on earth are as a shadow and there is none abiding, our years
pass away as a tale that is told; Our life is but as a vapor that appears for
a while, and then vanishes away; coming forth as a flower that is suddenly cut
down; flying as a shadow, that continues not; Our times are in the hands of
God, all our days are determined, the number of our months is with him: Job.
14.5
He has appointed our bounds that we cannot pass.

Lord, let me know mine end, Psalm. 39.4
and the measure of my days, that I may know how frail I am.

So teach us to number our days, Ps. 90.12.
that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.

That he would give unto us the Spirit of judgment, whereby we may discern
the true difference betwixt this spanne of life, and the vast spaces of
immortality: Betwixt the pleasures of sin for a season, and that everlasting
fullness of joy in his presence: Betwixt the vain applause of men, Ps. 16.11,
and the testimony of a good conscience.

That in the present days of health, and peace, and prosperity, we may treasure
up for our selves such spiritual strength and comforts, as may hereafter stand
us in stead, when we come to lie upon our deathbeds, when all other
contentments shall vanish away, and prove unable to help us; when the
conscience of well-doing in any one action, shall administer more real comfort
to the soul, then all our outward advantage, or enjoyments whatsoever.

That our conversations may be in heaven, Phil. 3.20.
from whence we may continually expect the coming of our Lord and Savior: Job
14.14.
That all the days of our appointed time, we may wait till our change shall
come.

That since we all know, and cannot but be amazed to consider of that dreadful
day of judgment, when every one must appear before the Tribunal of God, to
receive an eternal doom according to his works, that therefore he would make
us such manner of persons as we ought to be in all holy conversation, and
godliness, 2 Pet. 3.11, 12, 14.
looking for, and hastening unto the coming of the day of God; wherein the
heavens, being on fire shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with
fervent heat, that we may labor diligently to be found of him in peace,
without spot, and blameless.

CHAP. XXVII. Concerning Thanksgiving by enumeration of Temporal favors.
THe third, and last part of Prayer is Thanksgiving: This (according to the
method proposed) may be connected with the former, by some fitting Transition,
which for the matter of it, may consist of some such considerations as these.

1. Our confidence of obtaining the things we petition for, by our experience
of former mercies; though they are many and great things, which we are suitors
for, yet when we reflect upon Gods continual bounty toward us, and how much we
do every day receive from him, we have no reason to doubt of his favor, but
still to depend upon him in every condition.

2. The danger of ingratitude, in hindering the success of our petitions: He
that is not careful to pay his old debts, cannot expect so much credit, as to
run upon a new score. Under the Law, when any one came before God, to make any
special request for himself, he was to bring with him a peace offering, that
is, an offering of thanks for the favors he had already enjoyed, thereby to
prepare himself for what he expected.

The matter of our Thanksgiving is reducible to these two general heads. 1. The
Enumeration of mercies. 2. The Amplification, or heightning of them.

1. In our Enumeration of mercies, those particulars before mentioned in our
Confessions, Deprecations, Petitions, will each of them administer some help,
both in respect of matter and expression, according as our conditions may be in
respect of freedom, or deliverance from those evils which we confess, or
deprecate, or the enjoyment of those good things which we have petitioned for,
and upon this account, I shall not need to be so large upon this head as the
former.

2. The Amplification or heightning of mercies may be either in General, by
their multitude, greatness, continuance, which is capable of a distinct
enlargement by its self. Or else in particular, by their circumstances,
degrees, contraries, which are to be insisted upon in the mention of those
particular mercies to which they belong.

In the Enumeration of mercies, we are to take notice of those that are either
Ordinary. Occasional.


By Ordinary I understand such as we enjoy in our common course, without
relation to any particular necessity, or deliverance; these again are either
Temporal. Spiritual.
Temporal, are those which concern our well-beings in this life, as we are men,
whether in our Private Public
capacities.

The Private, or personal favors, which we are to acknowledge, do belong,
either Generally to the whole man, in respect of his being, nature, birth,
education, preservation; or more Particularly in regard of his Soul, Body,
Friends, Name, Estate.

In the recital of the mercies which we enjoy, we are not to be unmindeful of
those common favors which are bestowed upon us; in respect

1. Of our Creation and Beings, that God did not suffer us to beswallow'd up in
our primitive nothing

2. Our noble Natures, that we were not made senseless things, but endowed with
living souls, Men, and not beasts. He might have made us worms and no men; of
a despicable, perishable condition, whereas he has created us after his own
image, but little lower then the Angels, Ps. 8.5, 6.
capable of enjoying eternity with himself in the heavens; Crowning us with
glory and honor, putting all things in subjection under our feet.

3. Our Birth, that we are freeborn, not slaves; of generous, not base and
ignominious parentage; that we were brought forth in a place and time of
Religion. He might have sent us into the world without the pale of the Church,
in some place of idolatry, or ignorance; amongst the blaspheming Turks, or
wild Americans; We might have been born in those bloody times of persecution
and martyrdom: And therefore we have reason to acknowledge it for a great
mercy, that he has brought us into this world, both when and where his Gospel
has been professed and flourished.

4. Our Education, by honest, loving, careful Parents and Tutors; under good
Magistrates, pious Ministers, in Religious families: We might have been
forlorn, and exposed to the wide world, as many others are, following the
dictates of our own corrupt natures, without any restraint upon us: We might
have been put under the Tuition of such Governors, as by their Negligence,
Example, Advice, would have encouraged us in evil courses; and therefore we
ought to acknowledge it for a great mercy, that we have had such Religious, and
ingenuous education.

5. Our Preservation: God might have cut us off in the womb, and being children
of wrath, he might from thence have cast us into hell, and therefore we have
reason to praise him; in that he has covered us in our mothers womb, Psalm.
139.13, 14.
where we were fearfully and wonderfully made, and curiously wrought in the
lowest parts of the Earth: Being clothed with skin, and flesh, fenced with
bones and sinews: Job 10.1^, 12.
Where he granted us life and favor, and by his visitation has preserved our
spirits. He took us out of the womb, Ps. 22.9, 10
and made us hope when we were yet on our mothers breasts; We were cast upon
him from the womb, and he is our God from our mothers belly: He might many
times since justly have snatched us out of this world, with our sins, and fears
upon us: It is from the Lords mercies that we are not yet consumed, because his
compassions fail not. Lam. 3.^^


There may be many now in hell, who have not been so great sinners as we, and
therefore we are bound to magnify his name for his good providence over us
through the whole course of our lives: That he has hitherto made us to dwell
in safety; Psalm. 4.8
and watched over us in journeys, sicknesses, and common dangers, whereby so
many others have been surprised and swept away round about us: For defending us
under the shadow of his wings, Ps. 91.4, 11
and protecting us by his blessed Angels; more particularly for his
preservation of us the Night Day
past.

1. The Night past, for refreshing our bodies with rest and sleep: For
lightening our eyes, that we slept not to death: Psalm. 13.3.
For bringing us to the light of another day; and that notwithstanding those
many opportunities which we have formerly abused. It is a good thing to give
thanks unto thee, Psalm. 92.1
O Lord, and to sing praises unto thy Name, O thou most high: to show forth
thy, loving kindness in the morning, and thy faithfulness every night. He
might have made our beds to be our graves, and surprised us with our last
sleep. He might appoint wearisome nights for us; Job 7.3, 4.
so that when we lie down, we should say, When shall we arise, and the night be
gone? and should be full of tossings to and fro, unto the dawning of the day:
When we expect that our bed should comfort us and our couch ease our complaint,
Ver. 13, 14
then he might scare us with dreams, and terrify us through visions; and
therefore we have very great reason to praise him for our freedom in this
kind, that when we lie down, Prove. 3.24
he makes our sleep sweet unto us.

2. The Day past, that he has not given us over to the sinfulness of our own
natures, the subtlety and malice of the Devil, the temptations of the world;
but has by his good providence withheld us from many of those sins and
dangers, to which of our selves we were exposed: There are many others in the
world, who have this day (perhaps) been surprised by some mischief, or have
fallen into some great sin, and the same might have been our condition: and
therefore we have reason to be sensible of his favor in exempting us from it;
that he has in any measure afforded us direction, and success in our
affairs, and not blasted our endeavors; accompanying us in our goings out and
comings in. Psalm. 42.^.
Because the Lord has commanded his loving kindness in the day, therefore in
the night shall my song be unto him, and my prayer unto the God of my life.

Next to these, we may recite those temporal favors which do more particularly
concern us, either in our Souls. Bodies. Friends. Names. Estates.


1. Our Souls, in respect of our Understandings, Memories, Consciences,
Affections; that we were not made idiots or blockish; Deuteronomy. 28, 28.
we might have been possessed with stupidity, and forgetfulness; with madness
and astonishment of heart: with wild and raving passions. And therefore we
have reason to be sensible of that great favor we enjoy, in respect of the
clearness of our understandings, strength of our memories, peace in our
consciences, moderatnes in our affections, etc.

2. Our Bodies, in regard of Health, Senses, Limbs; That he does not send upon
us sore sicknesses, Deuteronomy. 28.50. Job 33.19 20.
and of a long continuance, and make us Prisoners to the bed of languishing.
That he does not chasten us with strong, pain upon our beds, so that our life
should abhor bread, and our soul dainty meat. That we are not tormented with
grievous aches, with loathsome diseases, and sores, that we have the free use
of our senses; not blind, or deaf, or dumb, etc. that we are sound and perfect
in our limbs, not maimed or deformed, as many others are, whereby their
condition is made very uncomfortable, in comparison to ours.

3. Our Friends, that God has inclined the hearts of others to show us any
favor; that we do enjoy the acquaintance of such, in whose society and
converse we may relieve and refresh our selves, amidst the ma^y perplexities
that we shall meet with. It Is the case of many others, to be left in a forlorn,
and friendlesse condition, with Ishmael to have every man's hand against them;
and therefore we have great reason to bless God for raising us up friends and
benefactors, and continuing them to us.

4. Our Names, that he has bestowed upon us any reputation in the hearts, and
reports of others, and not given us over to such scandalous sins, as would have
made us a proverb and reproach; that we are not Cains to kill our Brethren; nor
Amnons, to commit incest; nor Absaloms, to attempt the ruin of our Parents;
nor Judases to murder our selves. The seeds and principles of all these
abominations being in our natures, it must needs be acknowledged for a great
mercy to be withheld from them. That he has in any measure restrained the
malicious tongues of others from aspersing of us

5. Our Estates; and therein for plenty, liberty, quietness, suitableness.
God might have placed us in some needy, slavish* unquiet condition; in some
calling disproportionable to our inclinations, and gifts; and therefore we have
reason to acknowledge his mercy, in bestowing upon us competency of means,
freedom, and seemlines of condition, wherein we are not forced to flatter, or
borrow fitnes of calling, etc. That we have opportunity to serve the Lord our
God, with joyfulnesse and with gladness of heart in the abundance of all
things; Deuteronomy. 28.48.
Whereas it is the case of many others that they are forced to serve their
enemies in hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedness, and in want of all things.
There may be some poor Christians perhaps at this time under cruel restraint,
and imprisonment; others it may be wallowing in their blood, by reason of
bitter and fierce persecutions for their bearing witness unto the truth of
Jesus. Ephesians. 4.21. Heb. 11.37, 38.
Other precious Saints, of whom the world is not worthy, may be now under great
necessities, wandering up and down, in deserts, and mountains, being destitute,
afflicted tormented; having not a place whereon to rest their heads. Whereas
it is our happiness, that we are supplied with all things convenient for us;
having bread to eat, and clothes to put on, Genesis 1.20.
and many other particular favors, which are renewed to us every moment; the
very continuance, and commonnesse of which does take away their observation.

And as we are thus to remember private mercies, so likewise should we take
notice of those temporal favors, which concern the public, the peace, plenty,
strength, safety of the Nation wherein we live. For that every one may sit
under his own vine and fig tree, there being none to make us afraid. Mich. 4.4.
2 Chronicles. 29.8.
That he has not delivered us to trouble and astonishment, and to hissing.
Jer. 7.20.
That whereas his anger and his fury has been poured out upon other places,
upon man and upon beast; upon the trees of the field, and upon the fruit of the
ground; yet the overflowing scourge has not come near us. He might make us a
reproach, and a taunt, and an astonishment unto the nations that are round
about us: Isa. 28.15.
Executing upon us judgment in anger, Ez. 5.15.
and in fury, and in furious rebukes. He might infatuate our Governors, and
mingle a perverse spirit in the midst of them. Is. 19.13.14
This is the condition of other places, and we have reason to praise him if it
be not so with us.

In a more especial manner we ought to take notice of our freedom or
deliverance from those sore judgments, Ez. 14.21.
the sword, the famine, and the pestilence.

1. For our Peace, for delivering us from the hurtful sword, Psalm. 144.10, 14.
Deuteronomy. 32.42.
that there is no breaking in, nor going out, nor any complaining in our
street; whereas he might whet his glittering sword, and make his hand take hold
of judgment, till his arrows he drunk with blood, and his sword to devour
flesh: Ps. 147.14.
Yet he has made peace in our borders; so that violence is not heard in our
land, nor wasting or dest^uction within our borders. Isa. 60.18. Judge. 5.6, 7
Whereas other countries are made desolate, so that their high ways are
untrodden and the travelers walk through by-ways, and the inhabitants of the
villages cease: Yet he has been pleased to make us like the garden of Eden,
Eze. 36.35
our Cities being fenced and inhabited; and has not taken away our peace from
us, Jer. 16.5.
his loving kindness and mercies.

2. For our Plenty, that he has (according to his promise) called for the
corn and wine, Ez. 36.29
and increased it, and laid no famine upon us, multiplying the fruit of the
trees, and the increase of the field, that we do not receive the reproach of
the famine amongst the heathen. For crowning the year with goodness, Ps. 65.11.
and making his paths to drop fatness.

Jos. 2.23. Jer. 15.24
1. For bestowing upon us the former and the later rain moderately, and in his
season; that he does not persecute us with his tempests, and make us afraid
with his storms; Psalm. 83.15
nor sweep us away with a general deluge, as he did the old world.

2. For visiting the earth, and watering it, Psalm. 65.9.
and greatly enriching it with the river of God, providing for the corn,
settling the furrows thereof, and making it soft with showers, and blessing the
springing thereof; so that the pastures are clothed with flocks, and the
valleys are covered over with corn; for that he has sent us a plentiful rain,
whereby he has confirmed, Psalm. 68.9.
and refreshed his inheritance when it was weary.

3. For healthful seasons; that he has delivered us from the noisome
Pestilence, that walks in darkness; and from the destruction that walks at
noonday, Psalm. 91.3.
so that no evil does befall us, Verse. 10.
nor any plague come nigh our dwellings, but has satisfied us with long life,
and showed us his salvation; Verse. 16. Lev. 18.25.
That he has not made the Land to spue out her inhabitants.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the kinds of spiritual mercies to be enumerated.
THese Temporal favors which we ought thus to enumerate, though they are very
excellent in themselves, and far beyond our deserts, yet are common with us, to
Hypocrites, and such as shall hereafter be damned, and therefore it is requisite
that we should after a more especial manner, magnify his glorious name for
those spiritual mercies that concern our eternity. Chiefly for the Lord Jesus
Christ, the author, and finisher of our faith, the fountain of all the other
mercies which we enjoy. For his Birth, Incarnation, Sufferings, Death,
Resurrection, Ascension, Intercession, with all those unspeakable benefits that
we receive by them; for blessing us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly
places in Christ.

Ephesians. 1.3.
More particularly for those remarkable effects of his love and merits in our

1. Election: For that God has predestined us unto the adoption of children
by Jesus Christ to himself, Ephesians. 1.5.
accordng to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his
grace, whereby he has made us accepted in the beloved; 2 These. 2.13
and has from the beginning chosen us to salvation, through sanctification of
the Spirit, and belief of the truth. He might have designed us for vessels of
wrath, as he did the fallen Angels, and then we had been eternally undone,
without all possible remedy. There was nothing to move him in us, when we lay
altogether in the general heap of mankind. It was his own free grace and
bounty, that made him to take delight in us, to choose us out from the rest, and
to sever us from those many thousands in the world, who shall perish
everlastingly.

2. Redemption: For that incomprehensible miracle of his wisdom and mercy, in
the contrivance of our redemption by the death of Christ. For he has redeemed
us by the precious blood of his dear Son, Ephesians. 1.7. Colos. 1.13, 14. 1 Timothy 2.6
2 These. 2.14. 2 Timothy 1.9.
who is the Image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every creature, who
gave himself a ransom for all.

3. Vocation: That he has called us by the Gospel, to the obtaining of the
glory of the Lord Jesus Christ: And that with an holy calling, not according to
our own works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us
in Christ Jesus before the world began.

4. Justification: For pardoning our sins, the least of which would have been
enough to have undone us to all eternity. Col. 2.13, 14.
For that he has forgiven our trespasses, blotting out the handwriting of
Ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of
the way, nailing it to the cross. Ephesians. 1.7, 8
For the remission of our sins, through the blood of Christ, according to the
riches of his grace, wherein he has abounded toward us in all wisdom and
prudence.

5. Sanctification: For renewing upon our souls in any measure the blessed Image
of the Lord Jesus Christ, the least glimpse whereof is infinitely more worth
then the whole world: For that he has changed our vile natures, and made us
partakers of the divine nature; Of strangers and foreigners, Ephesians. 2.19. Col.
1.12, 13. 2 Pet. 1.3.
raising us up to be fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of
God: Making us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light;
delivering us from the power of darkness, and translating us into the Kingdom
of his dear Son.

And because our Sanctification is considerable, both according to the Parts
Means
of it, therefore it may be further amplified from each of these.

1. For the Parts of it, both in respect of our Judgments, Affections,
Conversations.

1. For our Judgments, that he has not given us over to blindness of mind,
a reprobate sense, to wild and desperate errors, by which we see so many
others deluded, but has in some measure revealed unto us those mysteries of
godliness, which are hid from many wise and great ones of the world; and has,
according to his divine power, given us all things pertaining to life and
godliness, through the knowledge of him that has called us to glory and
virtue,

2. For our Affections: That he has not given us over to hardness of heart,
slightness of spirit, that he has in any measure weaned our souls from
looking after solid contentment in the creatures, and raised them up to any
love of holiness, any desire of a nearer communion with himself.

3. For our Conversations: That he has in any measure enabled us to do him
service, to renounce the hidden things of dishonesty; to walk in some degree,
as becomes children of light; 2 Cor. 4.2.
Having no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness; not allowing our
selves in any course, Ephesians. 5.11.
which we know to be unlawful.

The Means of our Sanctification, are principally these five.

1. His Spirit, to convince, direct, assist, comfort us, to preve^t, and follow
us with his grace* to support us in afflictions, to strengthen us in
temptations, to quicken us to duty, and to seal us up unto the day of
redemption.

2. His Word, so powerful in discerning the thoughts, and intents of the heart,
Heb. 4.12.
able to make us wise unto salvation being profitable for doctrine, 2 Timothy 3.16
for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man
of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good work; for his holy and
righteous Law; for the many gracious invitations, and promises in his Gospel.

3. The Sacraments; That he has not left us as strangers, without the Covenant
of promise, but has ordained visible signs and seals, to represent that to
our senses, which we ought to apprehend by our faith.

4. The Sabbaths and public Ordinances, that we have liberty to behold the
face of God in his sanctuary, and to enquire in his Temple that amidst some
outward troubles, Isai 3^.20.
the bread of adversity, and the water of affliction, yet our Teachers are not
removed into corners, but our eyes may see them. 1 Samuel 3.1.
That vision does not fail in our days, that we are not punished with a famine
of the Word; Am. 8.11.
that the Sun does not go down upon our Prophets. Mich. 3.6.


5. The Communion of Saints: for the benefit that we enjoy by their examples,
counsels, experience. For all those who have been instruments of our good by
their Prayers, Writings, Preaching, etc.

6. For Hopes of Glory, 2 Pet. 1.4.
for giving unto us exceeding great and precious promises; that by these we
might be partakers of the divine nature. Having according to his abundant mercy
begotten us again unto a lively hope of an inheritance, incorruptible,
undefiled, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4
and that fades not away, reserved in heaven for us. For lifting up the light
of his countenance upon us, which is better then life it self; for any
comfortable evidences of our own salvation.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Occasional thanksgiving, either for inward, or outward mercies.
BEsides these several heads of thanksgiving, by which we should be directed in
our ordinary, and usual course, there are others likewise not to be neglected,
which are extraordinary and occasional, according as our particular wants and
exigences may be.

In the General we are to be thankful for the success of our prayers,
whenever God does vouchsafe to hear and grant our requests, either in the
behalf of our selves, or others; that instead of rejecting of our services, and
casting them back as dung into our faces (which we might justly expect) He does
vouchsafe to accept of them, and to return them with a blessing; more
particularly upon any special Preservation, either of the Soul. Body.
Recovery, either of the Soul. Body.
Deliverance, either of the Soul. Body.



1. In case of inward fears, desertions, temptations. For that in the multitude
of our sorrows his comforts have refreshed our soul^. Ps. 94.19.
For that he has restored unto us the joy of his salvation, Ps. 51.12.
and established us with his free spirit: Ps. 18.16.
Delivering us from those deep waters, that were ready to overwhelm our souls;
for bringing us out of an horrible pit, Ps. 40.2.
out of the miery clay, and setting our feet upon a rock; freeing us from
darkness and the shadow of death, Ps. 107.14.
and breaking our bonds in sunder: for keeping us in the hour of temptation.

Rev. 3.10.
2. In the case of outward exigences and troubles for delivering us in
journeyes, that he has been with us, and kept us in our places whither we did
go, and brought us again in safety; Genesis 28.15
whereas many others have been overtaken with desperate mischiefs. For
defending us in common dangers, oppressions; for hedging us about with his
favor and protection, that he has not called us away in the midst of our
days, but has holden our soul in life, Ps. 102.24. Ps. 66.9. Deuteronomy. 33.27. 1 Samuel 25.29. Ps. 27.5.
and not suffered our feet to slip; for being our refuge in distress, and
putting his everlasting arms under us; for binding up our souls in the bundle
of life, for hiding us in the time of trouble in his pavilion, in the secret of
his Tabernacle, under the shadow of his wings; for being a strength to the
poor, and to the needy in their distress, Isa. 25.4.
a refuge from the storm a shadow from the heat, when the blast of the terrible
ones is a storm against the wall; for breaking the bands of the yoke, and the
rod of the oppressors, Ez. 34.27.
and delivering us out of the hands of them that served themselves of us; for
the comfort that we have had in all our tribulations. 2 Cor. 1.4.


For delivering us from sore pains, and desperate sicknesses of body, when we
had reason to think and say, that we should go down to the gates of the grave,
and be deprived of the residue of our years, Isa. 38.10, 11.
and not see the Lord in the land of the living, nor see man any more, with the
inhabitants of the world; but our age is removed from us as a shepherds tent,
and we shall be cut off with pining sickness, from day even to night will he
make an end of us: yet then did he, in love to our souls, Verse. 17. Verse 20.
deliver us from the pit of corruption; therefore will we sing songs unto him
all the days of our life.

I will extol thee, O Lord, for thou have lifted me up, Ps. 30.1, 3.
thou have brought up my soul from the grave, and have kept me alive, that I
should not go down to the pit. Ver. 11, 12
Thou have turned my mourning into dancing, thou have put off my sackcloth, and
girded me with gladness. To the end that my glory may sing praise unto thee, and
not be silent, O Lord, my God, I will give thanks unto thee for ever.

I love the Lord, Ps. 116.1, 2. Verse 8.
because he has heard my voice and my supplications, because he has inclined
his ear unto me, therefore will I call upon him as long as I live; He has
delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling.
Ver. 12, 13
What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me? I will take
the Cup of salvation, and will call upon the name of the Lord. I will offer
unto thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving, Verse 17.18, 19.
I will pay my vows unto the Lord, now in the presence of all his people, in
the court of the Lords house, in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem.

Ps. 118.5.
I called upon the Lord in distress, the Lord answered me, and set me in a
large place. He has chastned me sore, but he has not given me over to death.
Verse 18. Verse 21.
I will praise thee, for thou have heard me, and art become my salvation.

Ps. 103.2. Verse 4.
Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits, who redeemeth thy
life from destruction, and crowns thee with loving kindness and mercy.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Amplification of mercies. The Conclusion.
BEsides the Enumeration of mercies, we may likewise find abundance of matter
for the Amplification, or heightning of them; which may be either in General.
Particular.


1. In the general, by their Multitude. Greatness. Continuance.


1. From their multitude; Many O Lord, my God, are thy wonderful works which
thou have done, and thy thoughts which are to usward, Ps. 40.5.
they cannot be reckoned up in order unto thee. If I would declare, and speak
of them, they are more then can be numbered. How precious are thy thoughts unto
me, O God, how great is the sum of them! Ps. 139.17, 18.
If I should count them, they are more in number then the sand.

2. From the greatness of those mercies we receive, which may appear by
consideration of the Giver. Receiver.


1. The Giver, the great God, who is of infinite, incomprehensible power. The
heavens are full of the Majesty of his glory, of absolute perfection, and
alsufficiency in himself, and cannot expect any addition from man's love, or
gratitude. My goodness extends not unto thee. Now the greatness of the
person, Psalm. 16.2
does add a value to the favor; it is counted an honor but to kiss a Kings
hand.

2. The Receiver: So vile, and despicable in comparison of him, as creatures;
So loathsome and abominable before him, as sinners: When we were nothing, Romans
9.11
he took care of us, and since we have been worse then nothing, Enemies, Romans
5.10
he has been pleased to pay a price for our reconciliation to him: Luke 6.35
Romans 10.20.
He is kind to the unthankful and to the evil; to those that do neither seek
nor ask after him; and at the best (...) return nothing to him again, but some
poor words or thoughts, which bear no commensuration to those real infinite
mercies which we receive from him: Job 22.2, 3
Can a man be profitable unto God? Is it any benefit to the Almighty, that thou
art righteous? Or is it gain to him, that thou make thy ways perfect? Lord,
what is man, Ps. 8.4. Genesis 32.10
that thou art mindful of him, or the son of man that thou visitest him?
Behold, I am less then the least of thy mercies. Now the vileness and
unworthines of the receiver, may be another argument to set forth the greatness
of the gift.

3. From their Continuance: Ps. 103.17
The mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear
him: He had thoughts of love to us, before ever the world was made, and his
mercy endures for ever, till time shall be no more. His favor is renewed to us
every moment; and that notwithstanding our continual provocations against him.

From these and the like considerations, we should labor to affect our souls
with wonder, and thanks, to quicken and raise up our hearts in offering up unto
God the sacrifice of praise, that we may come before his throne with
Halelujahs, loud voices of joy and thankfulness.

2. The Particular amplification of mercies from their Circumstances, Degrees,
Contraries, has been touched upon already, in the Enumeration of their several
kinds and acts of favor, to which the arguments of this kind may be properly
annexed.

The conclusion should consist of some brief affectionate Doxologies, which may
both express and excite our love and confidence, such are those
Scripture-expressions.

My mouth shall show forth thy righteousness, and salvation all the day long,
Ps. 71.15.
for I know no end thereof.

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who only does wondrous things, Psalm. 72.18
and blessed be his glorious name for ever, and let the whole earth be filled
with his glory: Amen, Amen.

Ps. 103.2
While I live, will I praise the Lord, I will sing praises to my God whilst I
have any being.

Ps. 145.1, 2
I will extol thee, O God, my King and I will bless thy name for ever and
ever: Every day will I bless thee, and praise thy name for ever and ever.

Ephesians. 3.20, 21
Now unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly, above all that we can
ask or think, according to the power that works in us, unto him be glory in
the Church of Christ Jesus, throughout all ages, world without end. Amen.

Blessing and honor, and glory, and power, and salvation, Rev. 5.13. Chapter 7.12
Chapter 19.1
and thanksgiving be unto the Lord our God, for ever and ever.

FINIS.

