THE ARRAIGNMENT OF A SINNER At the Bar of DIVINE JUSTICE.

Delivered in a SERMON in St. Mary's Church at Oxford, March the 5. 1655.
before the Right Honorable, the Judges of Assize, etc. BY ROBERT WILD, B. D.
Minister of the Gospel at Ayno in Northamptonshire.

GENESIS 18. 25. Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do rightly? Quia impunitum
non debet esse peccatum, puniatur a te, ne tu pro illo puniaris; peccatum tuum
te Iudicem habeat, non patronum. August. de utilitate agendae poenit. LONDON,
Printed by I. G. for Nathanael Webb, and William Grantham, at the black Bear
in St. Paul's Churchyard near the little North-dore. 1656.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, JOHN CARTWRIGHT of Ayno, Esquire. High Sheriff of the
County of Oxford, 1655. My ever honored Patron.
SIR,
OF those many hundreds of Sermons, which you have heard from me, (since you
pleased to call me to the work of the Gospel in your place) The lot of being
published is only fallen upon this single one, preached at your Command, to the
Country then under your Command. I will not adventure at an Apology for my
printing it, for I look upon the press as a common Midwife for poor folks,
as well as rich; and an advantage (not only to the grand Masters of Learning,
and parts, but) to all other men, who desire a cheap, easy, and ready way of
Communication: Neither does this Sermon (a Zacheus rather than a Saul) come
forth because it is higher by the head, or of a goodlyer Stature, or Complexion
then its brethren (for no man that sees it will by its looks guess that it was
born in an University) nor do I print it, for any thing that it has done
beyond others upon the Subject which it handles, for I am not worthy (with
Ionathans Lad) to run, and gather up their Arrows; but, because the Lord
pleased to bless it with some good success (the Reverend Judges and many
others being much affected with it) and because I cannot (as yet) find any way
of expressing my due respects to your self so publicly as this.

The best word it had after it was preached (and I never desire better) was,
that it was An honest Sermon, and as it is usually said of an honest man, that
he may travel all the world over, and need not fear looking any one in the
face, so I hope may an honest Sermon. And, to him that shall examine this
Messenger of mine, whence he comes, and whither he goes, and what is his
business? If he say, From Ayno, with an Hue and Cry after a company of
self-condemned sinners, who have broken the prison of conscience, and run up
and down in their chains, to apprehend them; and withal makes mention of
your name, and warrant for so doing, I hope it shall be neither danger, nor
dishonor to you: There is never a Magistrate in England but I am sure ought,
and never a good one but will assist this work of Gods word to suppress sin
and open wickedness.

There is a suite (I confess) depending amongst Divines about Gods Vindictive
Justice, and its necessary working; and excellent pleaders there are on both
sides: Now although this Sermon speaks on the defendants side, yet I hope its
testimony shall offend none who shall consider that the chief tendency of my
speech (and indeed of that point) is to the glory of Gods holiness, Justice,
and mercy, and the beating down sin, and those slight thoughts of ungodly men
concerning it: if therefore this comes into a good man's hands, he will not be
the worse for reading it; if into an evil man's, he may be the better; and if
into a learned man's, he will have cause to bless God, that he can write far
better, My only request is, that when it comes into your hand, it may be
accepted with the right hand, even as it is tendered.

All that I have to add, is to acknowledge, and to leave this with you as a
testimony of my gratitude for your many favors, and of your diligent, and
exemplary attendance at, and countenance of the public Ordinances and worship
of God under my Ministry: And to beg of God on your behalf, that you may
flourish in your spiritual estate, even as you do in your temporal. That in
your Magistracy, you may be wise, and zealous, that you may be eyes to the
blind, and feet to the lame; that you may be a terror to evil doers, and a
praise to them that do well; that the poor and oppressed may wait for you as
the rain, and you may cause the widows heart to sing for joy; That in your
family you may walk with a perfect heart, not suffering an evil doer, or
wicked servant to tarry in your sight. In a word; that by an holy, and
cheerful improvement of your time, Interest, and many talents, you may
glorify the great God, credit the Gospel, uphold sinking Religion, be one of
those innocents, that may preserve the Island; do good, be fruitful in good
works, relieve the poor, and needy (which indeed you do more than many that
make a greater noise) strengthen the hands of the Ministry, and so express
your affection to Learning (which I know you prize) that poor I may stand by,
and more excellent pens come forth publicly to acknowledge you, and bless
God for you, and you may be the blessed of the Lord, and your seed after you.
Sir, These are, and such as these shall be the humble, and daily prayers of

Your most willing and ready Servant in all civil and Christian Offices,
April 20. 1656. TO: WILD.

ROM: 1. 32. Who having the judgment of God (that they who commit such things
are worthy of death) not only do the same, but take pleasure in them that do
them.
SUch Malice as the Jews (formerly dwelling in England) showed, when they
poisoned Springs and Fountains; and such subtle cruelty as the enemies of
Israel (in the wars betwixt Barak and Sisera) practiced, Judge. 5. 11.
viz. to shoot most fiercely at the places of drawing water: Such has been the
subtilty, cruelty, and malice of the enemies of Scripture, and Men's souls, who
have either corrupted the Originalls, and labored the poisoning of them with
unsound translations and Glosses; or else strongly opposed those that have
desired to go down and draw for themselves and their Flocks, water of life out
of those pure Springs and wells of salvation Es. 12. 3. Campanella de Monarch.
Hispan.
It was for this, that Campanella gave that pestilent rule to the King of
Spain, that he should never suffer his Students in divinity to be much
exercised or acquainted with gramatical disputes concerning the Originalls of
Scripture, as an expedient very probable to keep them from heresies. But (as
subtle as that Serpent was) it has proved (as time and experience shows it)
only a stratagem against themselves, Keeping their leaders in perverseness, and
their poor people in much leanness, whilst they nurse them with traditions
and unkind translations, and deny them the Sincere milk of the Originalls.
Here is now before us a Text, which (if they will allow the Epistle to be
Greek, as indeed they do) suffers by their vulgar Latin which Lyranus, Tolet,
and the Rhemish, and most Romish writers do and will follow) in the very sense
and substance of it. For they read it thus, Who knowing the Justice of God,
understood not that they which do such things are worthy of death, etc. By
which, they (first) insert (non intellexerint) which is not to be found in any
Greek Copy, and then that which they do put in is not the Herb John (as we
say) but very Colloquintida, which infects the whole Mess; making thereby the
Gentiles (who are the Subject of the Apostles discourse) to be nescious and
ignorant, that Sin deserved at Gods hands death, and so the more excusable;
when as the very thing which the Holy Ghost seems apparently to drive the
whole Argument at is quite contrary, ( viz.) to aggravate and accumulate to
their Guilt, (1) that They knew sin to be sin. (2) that they knew that sin
(some sin at least) deserved death, ver. ^^.
and yet (3) that they did hold down, and violently keep under this known
truth, like a Prisoner, and in despite of it, dared to commit those Sins; Nay
(4) not only so, but also that they did connive, yea consent to, yea Patronize
and applaud Others who did so also, so that They sinned not through ignorance,
infirmity, or temptation, but out of choice and Election, and with Deliberation
and Delight.

But I must remember I am not at home, but in a place, which needs not to be
taught how to read or expound Scripture. That I may therefore present you the
words in a Metaphorical language proper to this days occasion, and yet not
wrench'd and fore'd; Methinkes I see Saint Paul in this Epistle (as in a
triumphant Chariot) riding by the Spirit a Circuit, about the world; first
like a Severe but just Judge to try and condemn all guilty ones; and then
(according to his commission in the Gospel) to offer unto all penitents a
pardon from Jesus Christ the King of Peace.

His whole Expedition, he divides into two parts* as it were two
Goale-deliveries; One of the Gentile world, whom he sits upon and tries by the
Law of Nature, written in all their Hearts (something blurred, yet legible) and
by the works of Creation and Providence obvious to their very Senses. The other
is an Assize upon the Jews, with whom he proceeds to a trial according to the
Laws of their own Moses, written in their Books, upon their Walls, Doors,
and Phylacteries; and also according to their great privileges, and Gods
special dispensations toward them; and this is the work of the second chapter.

My Text is the issue of his Arraignment of the Gentiles, begun at ver. 18. And
with some light and assistance from the context lays before us these
particulars. 1. The Judge. 2. The prisoners. 3. The Indictment. 4. The Law etc.
5. The Jury. 6. The Verdict. 7. The Sentence.

First, the Judge. Saint Paul, Once a guilty and condemned Malefactor Himself;
But pardoned, made a Favorite, raised to the dignity of an Apostle and
Ambassador, sent out, and by special commission of Oyer and Terminer (as I may
say) given him from heaven by word of mouth from Jesus Christ, the King of all
the world, authorized to try and judge the Gentiles: And accordingly in this
chapter he sits upon them, opens his commission, publishes it, and then
proceeds with them upon an issue of Eternal Life or death. Such an other Judge
was the Prophet Ezekiel. Will thou Judge them Son of Man, will thou judge them?
chap. 20. 3. And (that I may seasonably magnify our vilified office) Such a
Judge is every true Minister of the Gospel (being all put into commission as
well as the Apostles, Math. 18. 19. 20.) As very scar-crowes as the wicked
world make of them; having a power as authoritatively to declare and pronounce
Sentence of life or death (from the Pulpit) upon the Souls of men, as any Judge
on earth has upon the bodies and lives of Malefactors, from the Bench. And the
effects and Success of our Sermons do oftentimes make this appear, causing
Sinners that stand below as at a Bar, to grow pale, wring their hands, to
tremble, and cry out (like those in the Acts) Men and Brethren what shall we
do? As we read Judge Faelix himself did, 2. Cor. 10. 3. 4. 5. 6.
who when he sent for Paul to hear him, Heb. 4. 12.
thought only of some neat discourse, but it proved a Judiciary Trial of Him
for intemperance and injustice, The poor prisoner proving to be the Judge, and
the Judge the prisoner.

2. The prisoners at the Bar of Paul's Ministry are the whole body of the
Gentile-nations, spread all over the Earth, Greeks and Barbarians, Princes,
Philosophers, Poets, Orators, wise, unwise, rich, and poor, all, all. There is
I confess a Learned Annotator of our own nation, who as he too much has
gratified the Church of Rome, laying the great Mystery of Iniquity at the door
of the Gnostics, (a Mungrel Sect made up of Gentilisme, Iudaisme, and
Christianity, living in the Apostles time) So also he loads them with the heavy
Burden of both these chapters. But I find him in this latter opinion to stand
alone and by himself, and not so much as his Friend H: Grotius with him. The
general vote of Expositors being that the Gentiles were the men, whom the
Apostle here charge.

3. The Indictment, and Articles of Crimes laid to their Charge, we have
ranked under three Heads. (1) against God (2) their neighbors (3) themselves,
many or most of them are found to be Felones de se. Not to name All, Here is
within the compass of three verses (29, 30, 31.) a Bill brought in against
them consisting of Treasons, Murders, Felonies, Riots, Buggeries, Perjuries,
and all sorts of misdemeanors, no less than 23. in number, etc.

4. As for the Law by which he proceeds in their trial, it is here produced,
[(...)] the Ancient and Fundamental Law of Divine Justice. From whence (as the
very Fountain) have issued all the just and good Laws both Divine and Humane
in the world. The word in the plural number (as Beza observes) is promiscuously
used both for the Mandates of God, ( Moral, Judicial, and Ceremonial) and
also for his Judgemen^s. Romans 15. 4. But in the singular (as here) it either
signifies that Divine Law of Righteousness; written in all men's hearts, with
the obligation to vengeance upon the transgressors, (and so comes to as much as
the Synteresis and Syneidesis in natural conscience.) Or else it imports that
just execution of punishment due for sin: So Aristotle defines it. Ethic. Lib.
5. chap. 6.
Iustitia poenalis, Suidas calls it, and our English Translation in the Text,
The Judgment of God. So then the Law is, (1.) A common and universal Law,
called by some The Law of Nature, by others, Ius Gentium, and (...), The Divine
Law. (2.) A Just and Equal Law, translated sometimes, The righteousness of
God, dealing with sinners according as they are (...). (3.) A known and
divulged Law. Every son and daughter of Adam has a Proclamation of it nailed
by God upon his conscience. (4.) An approved Law, by consent of all men under
it, (Iure Die agnito) That they who committed wickedness were worthy of death.
Lastly, an immutable and indispensable Law, it being an essential property in
God, Pareus in Locum.
and necessarily proceeding from him in the government of the world. So that
for matter of Law, the Prisoners here have (you see) as fair a Trial as heart
can wish.

5. But what Jury have they? and who has the impanelling of it, you will say?
for that is very considerable. Why for that, The Jury is not only taken out of
the neighborhood and among their peers, but (which is an Indulgence not
allowed by men's laws) from among themselves and out of their own consciences.
Such a One as we read of (Esaias. 5. 3.) Judge I pray you betwixt Me and my
Vinyard etc. The very same grand Jury which shall be made to serve betwixt the
Lord and the whole Earth, at that great day of Assize.

6. This Jury (like some that in very clear causes never go from the bar)
quickly bring in their Verdict upon Two Bills, In both which the prisoners are
found guilty. In the first as Principalls, They were Actors of all those foul
crimes charged on them in the Indictment at large* verse 29. 30. 31. In the
Second, As Accessories, Abetters, Aiders, Countenancers, Mantainers and
Defenders of Others in the same and the like outrages, which (although
according to humane Laws the accessories are less guilty) yet according to
Gods Law, in many cases is greater than to be the principal.

7. There is yet one thing more (implicitly) in the Text, and that is this; The
prisoners (being thus cast) seem to be called upon by the Judge what they can
say for themselves, That the Sentence of death of which they were worthy (being
found guilty) might not pass. To which the poor wretches all stand silent:
neither being able to cavil at the Court, to demur to the Bill, to except
against the Jury, to evade the Law; nor to plead ignorance of it, for the Text
says they knew it, that They which do such things were worthy of death: nor
lastly To plead Infirmity, incogitancy, chancemedly, and that they did it
against their wills; For they did not only do such things, but they were
((...)) Master of the Trade, professors and practitioners of the very Mysteries
of iniquity, nay they were such as did consent, countenance, commend, applaud,
yea command others to do the same, delighting and taking pleasure in them that
did so. For all this and more is in the nerves of the word ((...)) according to
Beza, Pareus, Piscat. etc.

And thus these Gentile Sinners being brought by the Apostle under an
inevitable conviction and Selfe-condemnation, and all excuses (like father
Adams fig leaves) taken away. They are left under the Sentence of death, either
to expect the execution thereof every moment from the avenging Hand of a just
God; or else (which Saint Paul like a merciful Judge puts them in mind of, and
persuades them to it) to fall down and cry for a Psalm of mercy, and the
Benefit of the Book (viz.) the Gospel in the Hand of that great and only
Ordinary and Bishop of our Souls, JESUS CHRIST, that so they might be pardoned
and live.

And thus Sacco soluto reluxit argentum (as Ambrose says concerning Benjamins
Sack, My Text being like That opened) This point of divine Learning (far richer
and finer than Silver or Gold) like Joseph's cup appears in the mouth of it, By
which (as was said of that) I shall be able anon to divine what Estate you are
in, whether of death or life, and whether you be come hither this day any of
you as spies to find out the weakness of the Sermon, or indeed to get some
spiritual bread. It is this.

That man (whoever he be on earth) Who knows that according to the
righteousness of Gods vindictive justice, Doct.
a wicked life deserves eternal death; yet dares both to do wickedly himself,
and also to abet, countenance, uphold and applaud others, is an inexcusable
selfe-condemned man and in a most desperate estate. A Theme not improper for
any Pulpit in this land and age, where men profess to know so much, and surely
do know very much, yet live (too many) as if they knew no law, no sin, no God,
no judgment: but I have thought it a very suitable subject (were it in an hand
that could well manage it) for this Mornings exercise. That all you who are
come together to enquire after, to try, and accuse, and condemn to death those
poor prisoners, who shall be found worthy thereof according to our Laws, may
hear of a justice and wrath (the righteous judgment of God) which no
impenitent soul shall escape, much less they who judicially bring others to
their deserved shameful deaths, and yet allow themselves, and delight in
others who commit things worthy of Eternal death; yea and many times of a
sentence too from the Bench; were you but discovered here, as you are sure to
be hereafter.

In my prosecution of this point (begging some grains of allowance for want of
Academicall exactness) I shall briefly speak of these 4. things most
material. (1) That there is in God an Avenging justice, engaging him to punish
sin (the breach of his Law) with the eternal death of the sinner. (2) That
there is in sin that which deserves and it worthy of such judgment. (3) That
this merit of sin, and vindictive justice of God is sufficiently made known to
all men. (4) That notwithstanding this discovery of divine justice, yet
multitudes every where do not only commit wickedness themselves but delight
in it, and in them that do it, The rest shall be all in application.

1. Concerning the Justice of God (which is a very large and comprehensive
subject) I must not be allowed to read a Lecture of it here. Let this suffice
to lead the way to my purpose. There are not only in the Scriptures (where the
eradiation of Gods glory shines brightest) but even in profane and natural
writings, four Acceptations of Righteousness or Justice; all which are more
truly, properly and naturally in God, then in either humane or Angelical
natures.

1. The first is called Universal righteousness, which (as the Sun is the
Fountain of light) does bestow not only luster and beauty, but life and being
upon Bonity and goodness of all kinds, so the Scripture uses it to express
both Moral, Prove. 14. 34.
Civil, and Evangelicall exactness, Righteousness exalts a nation, but sin
is a reproach to any people; sin in that place is in its Latitude made the
antithesis to righteousness in its extent, and so the word (...) is equivalent
to (...). (...). Ethic. lib. 5.
And this notion Aristotle was acquainted with, (...), A just man (says he) is
one that is possessed of every virtue. And truly in this sense, Justice is so
proper to God, that it is his peculiar, none but his, who is Goodness it
self, and can do no iniquity, nor approve it, whose will (though eternally
and perfectly free) yet is not like man's will (when at the best) to be free to
choose good or evil, but his will is the very constitutive of all goodness and
justice, and all creatures and their Actions are so far and no further right
and just as they conform to his will.

2. A second Righteousness is that special and proper virtue, which
denominates a person (as he is considered in such and such a condition and
capacity) to be justus qua sic, as a just Magistrate, Judge, Husband, Steward,
etc. And this is most proper to God in his performance of those several
offices and stations which he is pleased to take upon him to personate; He is a
most just and righteous Lord, Father, Husband, witness, judge, there is no
unrighteousness in him.

(3) Not only Christians, but Heathens also bestowed the name and honor of
Justice upon Faith and verity in promises, Covenants, reports, Testimonies, yea
and all speeches; Cicero in his Offices calls it Fundamentum Iustitiae, the
very Basis of righteousness. And this is also so natural to God, and so
immutably in him, that it is given to him alone, Romans 3. 4.
Let God be true, and every man a liar. Indeed upon this (and therefore it had
need be unchangeable) stands the Being and Well-being of us all, and all we
have or hope for ever.

4. Lastly, Justice (yet more narrowly restrained and limited) is that virtue,
of which Aristotle, Cicero, and others have treated of at large, described by
Plato to be, (...). And by the learned in the Law, virtus suum cuique
tribuendi, and is commanded as a Christian duty by the Apostle, Romans 13. 7.
Render to every man his due. And this is that which we call distributive
Justice, and Aristotle contends to have the name of it, Arist. l. Ethic. 5.
cap. 7.
(...) from which comes (...) -- (...), (...) -- and (...)) to come from (...),
a division into two parts, wherein each part has its due proportion, and
neither more nor less than what of right belongs to it. And here now comes in
the (...), of my Text, That natural and immutable justice of God, engaging him
(not by constraint but most freely) to deal with Angels and Men over whom he
is Lord and Governor, Certae and justissimae Dei voluntas atque decretu^
^lciscendi injurias sibi suisque factas. Zanch.
by way of just Rewards and punishments. Our work lies with this Justice in its
severe proceedings with sinners, commonly called vindictive Justice, by which
God necessarily and immutably takes revenge on Angels and men, for injuries and
offenses which by them are committed against him or his. For although the Lord
does what ever he please in heaven and earth, yet it must be understood, that
as actually it has not pleased him to let sin go unpunished, so indeed it
could not possibly have pleased him. Deus potest potentia executiva quicquid
non involvit contradictionem procedere ab aliis attributis, and perfectionibus
simplicibus.
His liberty (though he be agens liberrimum) does no ways make him changeable,
but many things there are which (notwithstanding his good pleasure, will and
Omnipotency) he cannot do, and some things which he cannot choose but do. This
language with reverence must be allowed us (and himself allows it) or else we
cannot speak of God positively and negatively. Many things he has done which
he will do no more, many things he will do, Quis nescit hoc esse dei proprium
velle ac voluisse and const^^^sse punire iniquitates? I^o Deus just^^ non esset
nisi hac fecisset.
never yet done, many, which he can do, but yet will not, and many which he
cannot, and it is willing cannot; for he naturally will not do them. He cannot
deny himself, he cannot sin, he cannot but hate sin. It is impossible for God
to lie, says the Apostle, Heb. 6. 18. And among many other negative
Excellencies (as I may call them) he can not but be just in his rewards and
punishments. Si Deus p^ss^t sui naturia sceleratos non odisse, and puni^e, sed
amare, non Deus esset sed diabolus* quod est horrendum cogitatu. Par. in locum.
As it was pleaded to his face by his friend Abraham in the case of Sodom, and
accepted as an infallible plea, shall not the Judge of all the earth do
rightly? Zanchy is bold and peremptory, and says, God had not been just (and
so not God) if he had not done thus with sinners. But learned Pareus ventures
higher, and cries, were not this Gods nature, non deus esset sed diabolus.

This is that eternal, unchangeable, and Essential property of God, which
(when it was the good pleasure of his will to make a world, and to set up a
Royal Court and House keeping, and to Create Angels to wait upon him in his
Presence chamber above, and men here below, and that they should know his mind
and pleasure what he looked for at their hands, leaving them by their natures in
a condition of freedom, to do well, or to disobey) did move him to make a
local Hell in a readiness (as a prison or dungeon) for the manifestation and
satisfaction of his glorious justice upon those, Es. 30. 33.
either Men or Angels that should turn head and rebel against his
Sovereignty. Math. 25. 41.


This is that which being not contingent, but immutable and natural in God,
and necessarily flowing from him in the Government of the world, was also
naturally and originally con-created and fixed in the consciences of Angels and
men, that they should know it to be Gods nature, and know what to look for and
trust to, having this (...) abiding in them, as is more fully to be proved
anon. And accordingly, this vindictive justice upon the fall of the Angels,
from their Allegiance and duty, would not connive, nor suffer them to plead
that it was primum Tempus, or that it was indifferent to God either to punish
or pardon it if he pleased, Jude 6.
but it dispatched them instantly, and tumbled them down into chains of
darkness.

Nor when Man (an earthly Creature, not so excellent as the Angels, yea set
upon and tempted by them, all which might make his case differ from theirs) yet
when he fell into the hands of this Attribute, did he escape, neither indeed
could; but (as Bernard brings in elegantly a conference and a plea (as it were)
between several of Gods Attributes, Peace, Mercy and Love on man's side,
Truth, Justice and Wrath against him) the Lord having from all eternity chosen
a number of mankind, Sic Iustitia and pix osculabantur, etc.
in the salvation of them, contrived it by his glorious Wisdom and Council to
give content to both sides; and though Mercy and Free grace was to be
magnified, Psalm. 85. ^1. Bernard.
yet vindictive Justice carried it to have an Adam for an Adam, an eye for an
eye. A surety for the debt due to her to be paid in specie. A person to suffer
more willingly, than the sinner sinned. It yielded to nothing but a Commutation
which is proper for justice to do.) And by the Exchange, had gold for dross,
a richer and nobler draught of man's blood, than if the whole species had
suffered eternally.

And (that none but the Elect party might by this expedient escape Eternal
punishment) In the whole Instrument and Indenture betwixt God and our Goel,
Ruth 3. 12.
our kinsman and undertaker, Jesus Christ; This vindictive Justice has these
provisoes most strictly inserted, to be inviolably observed,

(1.) That whosoever should not have the Benefit of Christ's death and
satisfaction, should personally suffer, and as certainly dye, as if there had
been no such way of salvation found out. (2.) That none of those (for whom he
should dye) should be allowed to live as they list, to commit sin and delight
in wickedness, or ever come into heaven where God had to do with the least
spot of sin upon them, but that Christ should look to them, and sanctify
their natures, and make them by his spirit fit and meet to be partakers of the
inheritance, etc. And (3.) In order to all fair proceedings betwixt Grace and
Justice, Acts 17. 31. 1.
a certain, fixed Day is pitched upon unalterably, wherein the date of this
Covenant shall expire, and cease, and that even Jesus Christ himself who had
for so many thousands of years gratified Mercy, should in person appear to
see vindictive Justice righted to the utmost; In order whereunto all Mankind,
dead and alive, young and old shall be called together, viewed and examined
impartially, and that then, All wicked and ungodly men, who were not suffered
for, and paid for by Christ, and made new Creatures (however they sped in the
days of their flesh) shall both Soul and Body, all of them to a man) most
certainly and eternally be damned, as if there had been no such Savior in the
world at all. And (lastly) Because it was the Lords good pleasure and purpose
(for the glory of his blessed patience, and many other weighty causes him
thereunto moving) to let the world continue long; and if Justice should not
show its self, and exercise its wrath at all, until the last Judgment day,
the children of men would grow intolerable in their blasphemies and impieties
against God, and be ready to think him such a one as themselves* and break out
also into blood, rapine and confusion among themselves: It was therefore
resolved and agreed, That the Covenant of Grace should not hinder, or bind up
Divine Iustice's hands, but that God might reveal wrath from Heaven, Psalm. 82.
6.
when, how, as often, and upon whomsoever he pleased, provided they were out of
the book of life. And also that vindictive Justice shall have her Officers and
Deputies (by the name of Magistrates and earthly Gods) who should have power
and authority from God to punish sinners, Romans 13.
according to the merit of their crimes, and as far as a temporal life goes.
Yea, and over and above all this, that the world might know and be well
satisfied, that Jesus Christ and his Religion were no enemies to, or would any
ways abate the power of Justice, and of Magistrates, by patronizing or
protecting the wickedness of wicked men; He also has done Justice this
further right by the Gospel, by granting not only that no badge of
Christianity; or Church-priviledge what soever (let the Pope answer for his
counterfeit power as well as he can) shall excuse, much less exempt any one
from the hand of Justice; but also by setting up a new and high Court of
Justice, within his Church, inabling them to proceed further with open and
scondalous sinners, then the Magistrate does or can (viz. 1 Cor. 5.5.
) to punish their very Souls and Consciences, 1 Timothy 1. 20.
by delivering them up to Satan, and accursing them, he engaging himself to see
it made good; Quid ultra potuit facere quod non fecit? What could be done more,
and what more need be said to prove (against all doubters and disputers) that
Justice to punish sinners, is none of those indifferent Acts of God, which he
might do or not do (as the making of the world, and but one world, etc?) But
yet more (and in a far more excellent manner) is spoken be Lactantius in his
dispute against the stupid and sottish Stoics and Epicures. La^^. lib. de Ira
dei.
By Pareus against the subtle and sinful cavills of the Socinians, Pareus in
Genesis cap. 2. ver. 17.
who pull hard to overthrow this Doctrine, thereby to make their way easier to
invalidate the merit of Christ's death. Dr. Owens Diatrib:
And lately by a learned Pen of one of your one in this place. I shall only
add this, That upon this Hinge all piety and righteousness among men turns,
for if God should be uncertain in his rewards, who would serve him? if in his
punishments, who will fear him? and I conclude this point with that
determination of the Father, Lactant.
Iraquae ad correctionem vitiorum pertinet, nec homini adimi debet, nec Deo
potest.

2. Concerning the second thing, that there is in sin (in every sin) that
which deserves the death, the Eternal death, (as well as the Temporal) of the
sinner, I have not provided to say much, neither indeed need I. Socinus
himself grants the merit of Eternal destruction, which is the greater, and
every Protestant and Orthodox Writer against the Papists distinction of sins
Venial and Mortal, have sufficiently cleared both: Many Scriptures I could
call in to make proof hereof, let two be enough; (I.) The words of the Text,
((...)) Worthy of death. By Death all good Expositors do understand, and take
in all evils of punishment; death in its latitude, death corporal, and
spiritual, temporal, and eternal, of sense and of loss, the full vialls of
wrath. And by the word ( worthy) is meant due, deserved, just and
proportionable: Beza says the word ((...)) is taken from the even and equal
poising, and weighing things in a Balance, (an ancient Emblem of Justice) so
that though Cain or any man may say truly enough, My punishment is greater than
I can bear; Ob hoc inflexibilis and obstinatae meniis malum punitur
aeternaliter, qui^ si nunquam moreretur, nunquam velle peccare defineret: uro
semper vivere vel ^et, ut semper peccare posset. Ber. in Ep. 252.
yet no man can say and say truly) that his sufferings are more or greater than
he deserves: Dives in Hell cries out of his torments, but not a word against
the Judge, or the Sentence that sent him thither; the enemies of God have cause
to bless God, that spared them, and kept them so long alive, but no cause to
cavil at their punishment, for eternal death is full weight, and yet but
weight for sin; even among men (whole scales cannot be carried with so even
an hand as Gods) Corrective Justice has an Eye to the quality of the party
wronged, and proportionates the punishment to his dignity and greatness; Ad
magnam Iudica^is justitiam pertinet, ut nunquam carcant supplicio qui in bac
vita nunquam noluerunt carere peccato. Greg Hom. 13. in Evang.
an abused Majesty makes that high Treason, which committed against a meaner
subject, would be but Felony, or Mis-demeanor; Peccanti in summum bonum, summum
debetur supplicium, He deserves to suffer the greatest evil, who sins
against the greatest good. The second Scripture shall be that of the Apostle,
Romans 6. last. (...). The wages, the reward, the stipend, the stipends of sin,
of any sin, of every single sin are death, all kinds of death, eternal
death. Thus the words are diversely read, and that eternal death is clearly
employed, may be gathered from the Antithesis in the words following, The gift
of God is eternal life. The Greek word for Wages, is that which was properly
paid in Victuals to the Roman Soldiers, by the Commissary of the Army, in
lieu of Money, and was a valuable payment, and stipend for their warfare, so
that it seems for a sinner to dye the death is as just, as a pennyworth for a
penny; and this shall be enough upon the second Particular.

The third follows, Third Partic.
viz. That as it is natural in God to punish sin with death, so it is
natural to Man to know so much. It is true, that the first sinner had both the
precept, Thou shall not eat, etc. and the penalty, Thou shall dye if thou
do, given him positively over and above what was stamped on his heart; but
that Justice being offended would be satisfied most certainly, this was in him
naturally: and therefore as soon as ever he had sinned, expectation of
vengeance made him fly for the same, and to skulk and hide himself, Paradise
being now but a Prison to him. Me thinks I hear the Dialogue, Adam, Adam (so
God comes cooly, and friendly to him) what is the matter Adam? what (Man?) hide
thy self? Lord of the Earth, Gen 3. 9.
and Prince of this place and hide thy self? The most exact and beautiful piece
which I have made and hide thy self? What Is the cause of this shamefastness? Oh
my Lord (says the poor sneak) I heard thy voice in the Garden: Why what then?
was my voice so terrible? thou have heard my voice before now. Did I thunder?
did I threaten? did I call thee out of thy name? Come, come, that's not it. Yea
but Lord I was afraid, and hid, because I was naked. Oh, was you naked? and
what then? naked? why so you was before, this is not the first time that I have
seen you naked. No, no, that's not it (thou wretch and Rebel) but the naked
truth is, thou know thy desert, and doom; thy coat of Maile was thy
Righteousness, and that is gone; thy Soul is naked, and lies open now as well
as thy Skin, for my wrath and vengeance. Truly this was it: He looked upon Gods
Justice as Gods Nature, never dreaming or imagining to stand it out, with hopes
that God would let it got for nothing. And it is very observable, that
(although he knew God to be a merciful and loving Lord) yet not knowing how
Mercy and Justice might both meet in his case; he therefore in all the defense
which he made for himself, never pleads, Lord what need this satisfying of
Justice? if thou please, thou may let this fault escape, and look for no
satisfaction. Had he said thus, he had sinned yet more, even against Gods
Nature, as any one of us should also do, should we ask a pardon at Gods hands,
without adding for whose sake God should bestow it on us.

As it was in Adam to know and fear Justice, so it remained in all his
posterity, as the Apostle before he leaves this argument, proves Romans 2. 15.
They having not the Law, are a Law to themselves, their Consciences excusing or
accusing one another. The great Fall of Adam, that broke his Soul in pieces,
dashed out the knowledge of the true God, yet left this natural principle in
Man; If thou do well, Gen 4.
thou shall receive well. And we find the Lord pleading the force of this with
Cain as an unalterable Rule, and natural notion. If thou do well, shall thou
not receive well? The interrogation is a clear and strong proof of this Candle
yet shined in his spirit.

There are certain Common and Universal principles, (...).
Aphorisms and Fundamental truths kept alive in all men, as that there is a
Deity, (it is believed, that even Diagoras and Protagoras could not utterly
deny it) That the Divine Power is to be observed and worshipped; that we ought
to hurt none, do as we would be done to, that there was an Eye which viewes
men, (and among the rest) that the Blasphemers of the Gods, and vicious,
flagicious persons deserved death. Some pretty glimmerings of the light of this
very Doctrine which I preach, the Heathens had. Hence came their Fancy of
Nemesis, or Rhamnusia, to be a Deity, whose very work was to revenge
wickedness, and reward goodness, and it is to my purpose, that they called
her the daughter of Jove, and Necessity, implying that to be a God, and not
necessarily to punish offenders, could not consist.

The Egyptian Theologues placed her Throne above the Moon, (...) etc. Suidas.
Ut inde, veluti e speculo, haec inferiora despiceres, That she might from
thence behold things here below. Hesiod and Homer also ascribe a Deity to a
Virgin, by the name of ((...)) paena (as Suidas calls it) a companion and
councellor to love, sitting always by his Throne, and pouring down vialls of
wrath upon vile and vicious men here below. In their very Plays and Tragedyes,
when they personated any impious or wicked villain on the Stage, then they
would discover some of the Gods looking from behind a Frame or Skreen, and an
Angry Fury hanging over him with Rods of Scorpious, Virgil.
and to this purpose (for example) one of their Poets bring in one Plegas (a
villain) under a 1000 torments in Hell, roaring (like Dives in our Bibles)
Discite justitiam moniti, and non temnere Divos, By me learn Justice and be
wise. Do not the Holy Gods despise.

And truly as this light was in men by nature, so they could not blow it out,
but (in the second place) it would work upon their Consciences. These Gentiles
in the Chapter, often attempted to smother it and extinguish it. Usurpatur de
iis qui (...) and custodia detinentur Leigh. Crit. Sacr.
They did [(...)] Hold down, and with violence imprison this natural truth,
but yet it would break Prison and get out, and often make them prisoners and
fetter them in their own fears and terrors of mind, so that they needed not
any other Torments than their own awakened consciences, which would make them
(though Emperors and Conquerours) to quake and hide themselves. Caligula.
Yea, Thirdly, as by the light of nature, and the pangs of conscience, so, most
evidently men every where and in all ages, have known what sin deserves, by the
sad effects, and direful judgments, the wrath of God has (ever and anon)
been revealed from heaven ( ver. 18.) that is, as Beza expounds it; The wrath
of God is every where under heaven made so manifest against sinners, that they
who would stifle and imprison this evidence, cannot, although they should the
other. These three ways the justice of God against sin, has shined abroad all
over the earth. But to those within his household and kingdom of light (the
Church) A far more glorious Sunshine has appeared. The Bible (a book sent
out of heaven, made by the true God) has like wisdom cried out in our streets
continually and aloud, from one end of the Scripture to the other; Psalm. 11. 7.
The Lord, the Lord beholds from Heaven all the children of men, Exodus 31.
the righteous Lord loves righteousness, Psalm. 11. 6^
he is a just God, a jealous God, one that hates sin and all iniquity, one
that will by no means let the guilty go unpunished, one that will rain
snares, fire and Brimstone, and give it to the wicked as their portion, etc. An
hour would not serve us to hear all the evidences of this book, for truly,
though some Critics have found out one Canonical Book, The book of Esther.
which has not the word [God] in it, yet is the Word of God, yet I think none
can find a book in the Bible, which has not some proof or testimony of Gods
eternal displeasure against sin.

Not withstanding all which knowledge, Fourth Party.
both of the Almighties words and deeds against sin (set on oftentimes closer
then Conscience can do it) by the heavy hand of God himself upon the Souls
and Spirits of guilty ones, even kindling an Hell fire in their bosoms, and
making them (like poor Spira) to yell and shreek, and to have such Devils in
them, as no Disciple can cast out, no Minister can quiet. Yet (oh wonder!) How
rife and rank is all manner of wickedness to this very day in the world! nay,
in the best part of it, in the civilized, cultivated, enlightened, baptized part
of the world. In England (whose sins are her only shame, and I fear will be
her ruin) In England, old England, as much as any where, and that not only
for the multitude of sinners (take so many for so many) but for the variety of
sins. Blush o ye Heavens over our heads, and thou Earth tremble under us, for
I fear there is not a sin (natural or unnatural) to be found upon record in
this sad Chapter, to have been committed by the Gentiles against their
star^light; but (after an 100 years Gospel in this Island, and now of late 12
or 14 years judgments of an angry God amongst us) is still to be found
amongst our debaucht ones, and I pray God your Lordships do not, to the grief
of your hearts meet with most of them, even in this one Circuit, before you
return. Surely, surely, these days are the dreggs and very bottom of Time,
and if the abounding of Iniquity be one of the signs of the worlds end, it
cannot be long before the Judge of Quick and Dead rend the Heavens, and comes
down.

Alas for us! How do men sin with their eyes open, their cares open, their
Consciences wide open! In the face of the Sun, of the Minister, of the
Magistrate, of God himself! Men every where know that he is a jealous God, a
just Judge, an Avenger of all impieties and unrighteous courses, that
themselves are such, and that God has his quiver full of arrows, and some
arrows upon the very string; and they the mark against which they are levelled,
that they are within shot, that hell gapes for them, and in Hell everlasting
torments, that there is no Gospel in the grave, and they may be there the next
ste^ that vengeance (like the sword hanging over Damocles by an horse hair) is
ready to drop: In brief, men generally, great ones too, and Scholars too (as
too too many) know all this and a thousand times more, and yet sin, and
sin, and sin, and make a mock of sin, delight in it, defend it, and them
who do it; as if Religion were but a piece of Pageantry, and this Holy book
(the Bible) but a Romance.

Tell not me (any nice and curious Auditor among you) that I might have brought
hither some other subject (not so common as this is) to have discourst of in
such an Assembly. I know I might, and confess to you that the commonnesse of
it stuck a while with me in my Study, and pleaded so hard, that I cast it by
twice or thrice; but it was my foolishness, and I could not well be at quiet,
until I returned to it again, being convinced that it was indeed one of the
best and most seasonable subjects in the world. And you all will say so too, if
you will but lay to heart these few things;

First, there is not one Soul here (or that could be here) but is concerned
very nearly in this point, having too often finned, presuming so to do
himself against this Justice of God, made known to him, and also one way or
other to countenance it in others.

2. Preaching and declaiming against sin, as loud and allowed as it is, (and
the Lord make it sevenfold more common, and powerful then it is) is not,
neither can be so common as committing it.

3. It is that one common enemy of Heaven and Earth, of God and Men, of the
Creater and all his Creatures; against which God, Christ, the Holy Spirit,
Ministry, Magistracy, all means possible have been engaged ever since it first
entered into the world; and yet it will not yield, but fights it out by Inches.

1. The Lord (when it had of old overspread all mankind, and filled the Earth
with Corruption, such as poisoned the very Air, and ascended up, and stunk in
his nostrills, and caused him to repent that ever he made such a Creature)
resolved that he would wash this filth away, or else he would wash his hands of
all the world, Genesis 7.
and accordingly he did by the Deluge destroy all the race of Adam (with a
purpose to get rid of sin) save only eight persons (the best he could pick
out) whom he kept alive to preserve a better seed to people the world again.
And yet' (would you think it?) Sin escaped drowning, though the Sinners did
not, that crept into the Ark, and came out safe, and fell to work afresh, and
made ashift quickly to drown Noah himself in wine, whom all the waters could
not touch, and with that small stock of Eight, set up, and thrived again so
fast, that it soon recovered that ground which it had before lost.

A while after, the Lord tried it with another fierce Element, to see if he
could fire it out of a place, Raining down fire and brim stone upon sinful
Sodom, Genesis 19.
and burning it to ashes, carrying out but one righteous Lot to save alive, and
yet in saving only him, sin enough was saved, to fetch out of his loins two
cursed Nations, enough to people all the world with sinners, if there had been
no more left but they: Thus did sin (like Paul's Viper) leap out of the fire
of Sodom, it leapt upon Lot, who could not so easily shake it off, but it
stuck and stung him. Neither Water, nor Fire have prevailed over it, but it
has lived and reigned, and will do (I doubt) till the Universal Fire come
down from God, and burn the world about sinners ears.

2. As for Christ, he came down in the similitude of sinful flesh, Romans 8. 3.
for the nonce to destroy sin in the flesh, to save the sinner and slay his
sins. He lived without, preached against it, prescribed antidotes to prevent,
remedies to cure it: He raised forces, armed his Soldiers against it, and
Himself at last (by hanging upon the Tree, the most sad and ghastly spectacle
in the eyes of God, Angels, Men, and Devils, that ever was or shall be seen)
full of the stings of this Serpent, for his poor sinful peoples sake, gave
thereby an incomparable Record to the world, of his Fathers wrath against it;
and also at that time and encounter broke the head of it, and yet it lives and
is lively, though this was above 1600 years ago.

3. When Christ in his person went off the field, he presently dispatched away
the Holy Ghost; what to do? why to begin there where he had left, and to
convince the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment, John 16.
8. And accordingly this good spirit of God has been striving, pleading,
persuading, arguing, threatening, using sinners now gently and kindly, anon
roughly and sharply: Cant. 16.
The South wind has breathed, the North blustred, all winds blewn, and yet
sin (though chafe) is not winnowed out.

4. What shall be yet farther done? peradventure sinners had rather deal with
Moses than with God; Man (it may be) will hear reason from Man like himself:
God has therefore gone that way to work, Exodus 20. 19.
and has set up the Office of Ministers, and Leger-Ambassadors, whose very
business in the world is to Reprove, Instruct, correct, 2 Timothy 4. 1
exhort, knowing the terrors of the Lord to persuade men. 2 Cor. 5. 11.
To be overseers, and watchmen. To haunt, and follow, and cry after, and give
sinners no rest.

Nay, yet further, because Ministers words may and do too often prove wind
and be slighted; he has raised up, and ordained Magistrates, and given them
power from himself, Romans 13. to be Avengers of Evil, as far as to life it
self: and ever and anon (besides all this) he fights against sin himself,
even from Heaven, by Plagues, Famines, Wars, desolations of Countries;
throwing down mighty ones (for their mighty provocations) from their places of
Dignity, and lifting up others in their steads to try conclusions, who have
(nevertheless) dared to succeed them, and sometimes out-sin them in their
vices as well as places. And still Iniquity abounds, and Sin lives; Vivit,
and vivit, non ad deponendam, sed ad confirmandam audaciam, as was said of
Catiline: And now therefore seeing I have proved it, that the point I have
pitched upon is so needful to be preached, suffer me to furbush it, and make it
glitter in your eyes like a sword, and let it (like that flaming sword that
turned every ways) move round about this Congregation.

1. In the first place I beseech you All (Saints and Uses.
Sinners) in the fear of God. To be more and more convinced of, and confirmed
in this truth, which flesh and blood would feign have disputed and confuted.
Keep it as fixed and immovable in your souls, as the Sun is in Heaven, and let
it have its influence. Oh be satisfied concerning the true nature of Sin
against God, and God against Sin, and that one Heart can never hold them here,
no more than one Heaven above. Oh good people stop your ears, and bless your
selves from all those cursed hellish opinions of Epicures of old, and of
Atheists now raised up afresh out of the bottomless pit by Rebellious Ranters,
Hectors and Heretics; To extenuate sin, to apologize for sin, yea to find out
Arguments, Providence, Successes, to make a plea for sin, and would fain find
out a Gospel, to reconcile (not a sinner to God, our Gospel does that, but)
God to sin. Oh beware of the witchcraft (all you young Students) that is in
books: take heed of those which beat about for Arguments to gratify the flesh,
and accommodate broken and corrupt nature; as all Familisme, Antinomianisme,
Arminianisme and Popery do: But especially that cursed devilisme of
Socinianisme, which goes deeper into the heart of Christ, than the Spear which
let out his lifeblood, and in comparison of which, all other Heresies are but
as the nails in his hands and feet. And which (in a word) stands more in need
of an Arraignment than any Argument.

Secondly, be alarmd, awakned, and look about you, all Christlesse, graceless,
and unsanctified natures, who have attained to more clear and distinct
knowledge of sin, and what it deserves, then these poor Heathens in my Text,
had, but no more mind, will, or power to forsake it (though it cost you the
life of your Souls) than they, and yet have more to answer for, and for want of
grace (the means of which you slight, and the work of which in your hearts
you resist) are like (if there come no change) to go to Hell with this Gospel
of Mercy like a Millstone about your necks. Alas (my Brother) as safe and
civil as thou think thy self, because of thy ingenious nature, and
well-educated Soul, Thou art very tender to any spark of sin that falls. There
is no safety on this side of Regeneration* no man (gentle or simple, until God
has made him and created him a new) can tell what kind of sinner he himself
shall prove ere he dies; A Cain, an Esau, a Pharaoh, an Hezael, a Judas, a
Demas, a Julian, an incarnate Devil. Well might Austin say after his
conversion, He would not be an unregenerate man again, no not for half an
hour, for the whole world.

3. Is it the voice of Divine Justice, death to every sinner, double death to
every knowing sinner? Then let me be true to my trust, who am sent hither to be
the voice of a Crier; Oh suffer me to cry aloud and not spare; Tremble at your
condition and station, all ye bold and impenitent sinners, (who came in hither
to judge the Sermon, and little thought of an attachment) tremble at your
fickle hold, at your slippery standing. You cannot set your feet upon one foot
of safe ground, you are sinking every moment, though you are not like Corah and
his company swallowed up in a moment; yet a little while and you are gone. Oh
how can you buy or sell, work or play, eat, drink, or sleep? what poppy
stuffes your pillowes? what opium is in your cups? seeing you know that
Judgment sleeps not, and your Damnation slumbers not. The Philistims are upon
you, look about you, the wrath of God abides upon you; it is like Fire already
upon your clothes, which as yet you feel not, but it will burn through, and be
at your flesh presently. Death is gone out against you to apprehend you, and
carry you away, and why he may not do his office at the next turning, I know
not. If you be in your sins, there is nothing betwixt your Bodies and the
Grave, your Souls and Hell, but Gods Patience, and you have abused that too
much already, and cannot be sure of it a day longer; This night, this hour
your Souls are required, or as it is in the Greek, (...). Luke 12.
They require your Soul, They? who? Oh enough, the Law, the Justice of God,
the Devils, tanquam satellites and lictores, like so many black officers and
Sergeants, as Calvin observes in that place. O ye distracted sinners, who feel
your Consciences, (those worms with venomed teeth) gnawing you within (more or
less) when will you yield? Plutarch tells a story of a bold and hardy Boy, who
having stolen a Fox (a live Fox) was pursued and overtaken by the Owners, In
vita Licurgi.
and whilst he was examined, he held the Fox close and secretly, stoutly
denying the fact. The Fox gnawes, the Boy feels and yet denies, and held it out
denying, until the very bowels of him were pulld out and himself fell down
dead before them. Such desperadoes there are among men, who account Confession
cowardice, and Repentance sneaking, and a tender conscience, womanish, and will
hold out and carry it high and stiffly, though horrors within do twinge and
tear their hearts, and they ready to fall down under the wrath of the Almighty.

3. Oh hearken, and give me leave to expostulate (especially with all those
selfe-condemned sinners, who not only know, and have lived to see Gods
judgments even to desolation, ruin and death upon their neighbors; have also
had (as Paul in Stephens) some special hand therein, justly it may be enough)
as Magistrates, Justices, Committees, Prosecutors, Witnesses, Juries,
Sequestrators, etc. and yet live to do the same, the like, or worse things
themselves. Oh inexcusable men, how will you escape the righteous judgment of
God? Of a truth, nothing goes so deep with me, and makes me horribly afraid for
poor England as this [(...)] self condemnation. My Brethren, suppose the Judge
of Heaven and Earth (who stands before the door) were this morning come down,
that you saw the Court set, the Books open, all men summoned and appearing, and
you heard such a voice as this; Set by a while all Nations of the earth, and
bring forth before me the Inhabitants of England to the Bar, that Land of
Mercies, that Land of Knowledge, where a man could scarce commit a sin of
Ignorance, that Land of Bibles and good Books (at such cheap rates,) that Land
of rare Deliverances, rich Providence, and precious Ordinances, that Land of
Vows and Covenants of Reformation, real, national, personal. Oh how would
those Magistrates, men of Power, Place and Interest, be able to look Jesus
Christ, the astonished Angels, and those grimme Ghosts in the face (who shall
cry to be their Tormentors) whom they have punished, ruined, and cut their
lives short for those very crimes which they now do themselves, and far
worse? Oh my Soul! what deplorable and unparalleld spectacles of Heaven* daring
Hypocrisy and Apostasy has this age produced! Men, who have pretended to
walk so Spiritually, as if they had no Bodies, and yet have practiced so
carnally, as if they had no Souls; Men, who have talked as if they had cloven
Tongues, yet have walked as if they had cloven Feet; Iamjam tacturos sydera
summa putes; Ovid.
Iamjam tacturos Tartara nigra putes. Sometimes they offer so fair for Heaven,
as if they would with Elijah enter it, though in the fiery-Chariot of
Martyrdom: A little after they fall like Lightning from Heaven, as low as
Earth or earthy trash, yea as low as Hell, in plots, designs, and
contrivements, as if Satan himself had been their only Tutor. And, Secondly,
where would those Ministers and Preachers appear? or how could they stand in
judgment, who should have been as unchangeable as the Truth which they
delivered, but yet have turned (like the Cock on their Steeples) to every wind
that has blown strongest; who have formerly much declaimed against
non-preaching Prelates, Prebends, and Priests, yet now ( adempto fine cessat
motus) begin to have the same Quinsey in their own throats; who have heretofore
accounted it (and that very justly) to be Jesuiticall to reserve meanings,
private senses, and to equivocate, and yet have at a pinch, rather than give
out and suffer, done so themselves; who have taken other men's livings, and
quickly learned to live their lives; who have (like thunder-clowds) made a
noise and ratled over the heads of sinners, but yet have been as black and
dark in themselves? Gentlemen, such work as this will come, as sure as the
Heavens are over our heads; and what will the guilty do at that day? Oh let us
lay it to heart this day I beseech you.

5. Lastly, One word of Exhortation brings my errand to an end: Does the
Justice and wrath of God deservedly follow, [(...)] Oh then, my Honorable and
Reverend Lords, the Judges, and all ye Worshipful Magistrates of this City
and County, who are solemnly met at this time, to do God and your Country
what service you can against sin and sinners; Hearken I beseech you to one
who though he do (like Amos) dwell in Tekoa, yet is called now to drop a word
in Bethel, and hear me of your Clemency a few words; By your Christianity and
Holy Religion, by your high Callings and worthy Offices and professions, by
your considerable Interests and wealthy possessions, by your experiences and
what you have seen of Gods judgments: by your ponderous Oaths and Obligations,
and by Jesus Christ the Judge of all men; I beseech you, if there be any
sparks of this vindictive Justice of God in you (as there ought, and I hope is
some of that heavenly Fire in you all,) Oh let my poor breath blow it up into a
Flame, that it may blaze out, scorch, burn and consume sin. Oh let not sinners
warm themselves by that Fire, which should either refine them or burn them to
ashes. You are great Trees (trees of righteousness) let not any unclean Fowls
build their nests in your branches, or perch themselves upon your Arms, let
not any noisome Beast or Vermin lodge under your shadow. Shall the righteous
suffer, or the ungodly escape this day? that be far from you to do on this
manner. The Lord has imparted his very own name to you, oh be not Idol-Gods,
that have eyes and see not, ears and hear not, hands to handle Briars and
Thorns roughly, and to pull them up, but yet handle not. Much less be ye as
the Gods of the Heathens, patrons, and protectors of villainy. He that
commits sin is of the Devil, but he that commits, connives, commands,
commends it, when he is entrusted to punish it, is not only of the Devil, but
a Devil, and a great one too. It was charged home and stoutly by an Advocate
once to a Judge in Germany, who was laying the Law to a Malefactor before him,
and aggravating the guilt, in as much as he had murdered now six men by times;
no (my Lord) cries the advocate, he (...) but one, and your self killed the
other five, who had him before you for the first, and let him escape. Fiat
Iustitia and pereat mundus: Oh be severe, the drossy case of our Land calls for
it, and God looks for it. Better ungodly men should fall by your hands, who can
but kill the body, then that you and they should together fall into the hands
of the living God, who can cast Soul and Body into Hell fire. Oh remember what
the Lord our God has done, has done to unjust Officers and Magistrates, and
what your eyes have seen. Let none of your hearts entertain, or tongues
express that vile opinion and speech of Lysander, That children are to be
cheated with Checkstones, and men with Oaths. But do you this day remember the
presence, and the great and terrible name of the Lord our God, by which you are
sworn and shall swear, who will be avenged speedily on all that take his name
in vain: Be ye holy and just (all of you) and consider what sad offices and
places (of all men) wicked and profane Magistrates and Ministers are in. If
they do not preach against sin, and punish sinners, they are guilty; and if
they do discharge their Consciences, whilst they let fly against the faces of
others, their guilt (like a foul and rusty Gun) recoyles and flies in their
own faces. Beware therefore that this accursed thing sin be not in your own
Tents, as in Achans; and then look to your Sons, Servants, Clerks, your
Gehizies, that this Leprosy cleave to none of them. Let not your eyes spare
nor pity, but cry out (with Canutus, a King of the poor barbarous Vandalls,
when he was pleaded with to spare his own Son, found guilty of a capital
crime) Filio nostro sublimiorem crucem ponite, Make the Gallows higher for my
Son, who durst break the Laws not only of his King, but of his Father.

Secondly, Would you be free from the sins of others? Then look to your
Edicts, your Warrants, your Orders, your Licenses. Let not any iniquity be
established by a Law, or any thing like it. Not by a Testimony, not by a Plea,
not by a Verdict, not by a Sessions order. Public persons (like Briareus) have
an 100 hands to do good or evil withal. There is a Woe (and that little word
has the whole wrath of God and Hell in it) hanged over the heads of them that
decree unrighteous decrees. When Saul set Doeg to fall upon the innocent
Priests, 1 Samuel 22. he had better have gone the nearest way, and have destroyed
them with his own hands, for then he had not been a sinner, and a
sinner-maker. Oh beware, all you that have good heads, great parts, acute wits,
eloquent tongues, how you employ them. They were (among these Gentiles) their
wise men, Philosophers, Poets, Orators, that became both practitioners and
Patrons of vice, some of them would for a fee, or in an humor, or to show
their parts, openly defend, (...): That there was no such thing as Virtue or
Vice. That Revenge, Incest, Sodomy were but (...), things indifferent.
Gentlemen, Scholars, and Lawyers, better it were that any of you had been born
dumb, or Idiots, or had not known Letters, than to prostitute your fair and
beautiful parts for base gain, (as an Harlot does her body) and to sell
arguments to uphold, or under prop the work of the Devil, which must, and will
down, and fall upon your heads, that do offer to buttris up any baseness.
Take heed Sirs, when God is the Plaintiff, (Jehovah litigat. Hos. 4. 1.) that
none of you be Sollicitors, Attorneyes, Council or pleaders for the Defendants.

Thirdly* Take heed, that you entrust not known Knaves, and wicked men in any
place, or office under you, for all the Evil which they do, will be found
lying at your doors. And here I must beg leave that I may pay my Vows,
which I made to God in my distress, when I was a prisoner (some years ago)
in yonder Castle, the common Jayle of this county. It was something like that
of the chief Butler to Joseph, that if ever it should go well with me and I
came to be restored to my office and liberty, and should have such a duty and
opportunity put into my Hands (as I have now this day) I would then remember
them that are in bonds (bound Body and Soul, poor wretches) who from the time
of their Imprisonment, are commonly made seven times more the children of wrath
than they were before: And all for want of good doctrine, good discipline, and
good example. I do verily believe that in that place (where the condition of
men require Prayer, and Teaching and Mortification, more then any) I saw more
drinking and fighting, and heard more swearing and cursing, that in many a
year abroad. Two things (Gentlemen) would make your Jailes not to be such
Hells as they are, A godly Keeper, and a powerful preacher. Oh if any wealthy,
worthy person would do good and lay out a sum of money well indeed* He could
not think of a better way, than to allow a good stipend, to keept a godly,
grave, zealous Minister, not only to preach, but even to dwell there, to be
allwaies preparing those poor creatures to live or die better then (I fear)
they do; The blessing of them that are ready to perish, would light on such a
Benefactour.

Fourthly, One request more; Beware whom you trust with that great (but too
common) Trust and License of Selling Ale and strong drink; and of connivance
at any that are lawless and unlicens'd, all which I look upon as so many open
pits and Sepulchers for men. Never expect (so long as this deluge of drink
still covers our English earth) that ever the Arc of Gods presence should
settle, or rest amongst us. As much as men whine and complain of Taxes, I do
believe that there is that drink needlessly, sinfully and shamefully guzled away
in England, which would pay the Tax thrice told, and no man feel it. For
justice and mercy sake do something vigorously for reforming this sin, which
(like a Trojan horse) has an army of sins in the bowels of it, and now lay
your Axes to the root of those rotten trees, the signe-posts.

I must give over; Seeing that sin and wickedness, is that which deserves
Gods judgment and eternal death, and that this is made known to all men. Oh
let us all arm and engage against it, ye that love the Lord, hate evil: The
Lords people are not like to be all of a mind in all things, till they come to
Heaven, but whoever are not of this mind, are none of the Lords people. Oh
therefore, let Magistrates punish it, let Ministers preach against it, Lawyers
plead against it, Soldiers fight against it, Scholars study, and write books
against it; all the Ink in the world is not enuogh, nor black enough to paint
it, and though the world be full of books, yet still there are too few on this
subject. Dr. Reynolds.
One little piece of the sinfulness of sin, Mr. Tho. Goodwin.
and Aggravation of Sins against Knowledge, will go further, and do more
good, than a whole Library of learned wranglers. Finally, my Brethren, let us
all (in the fear of God) arise and practice against it, whilst we live, let us
cry out, Vivat Christus, Moriatur Barrabbas, Let God arise, and sin and
sinners be scattered, and when we dye, let us give up our ghosts with the words
of Sampson, Let me dye with these Phylistims* Amen.

FINIS.

