Iter Boreale. With large Additions of several other POEMS BEING An EXACT
COLLECTION of all hitherto Extant.

Never before Published together.

The Author R. Wild, D. D.

Printed for the Booksellers in London; MDCLXVIII.

House of Hanover bookplate MVNIFICENTIA REGIA. 1715.

GEORGIUS D. G. MAG. BR. FR. ET HIB. REX F. D.

J. P^^^ Sculp


Iter Boreale. Attempting something upon the Successful and Matchless March of
the LORD GENERAL George Monck, From SCOTLAND to LONDON, in the Winter, 1659.
I.
THe day is broke! Melpomene, be gone;
Hag of my Fancy, let me now alone:
Nightmare my Soul no more; Go take thy flight
Where Traitors Ghosts keep an eternal night;
Flee to Mount Caucasus, and bear thy part
With the black fowl that tears Prometheus heart
For his bold Sacriledg: Go fetch the groans
Of defunct Tyrants, with them croke thy Tones;
Go see Alecto with her flaming whip,
How she fi^ks Nol, and makes old Bradshaw skip:
Go make thy self away, -- Thou shall no more
Choke up my Stand^sh with the blood and gore
Of English Tragedies: I now will choose
The merriest of the nine to be my Muse:
And come what will, ^le scribble once again:
The (...) Sword has cut the nobler Vein
Of racy Poetry. Our small-drink-times
Must be contented, and take up with Rhimes.
They Are sorry toys from a poor Levites pack,
Whose Living and Assesments drink no Sack.
The Subject will excuse the Verse (I trow)
The Ven son's fat, although the crust be dough.
II.
I He who whileom sat and sung in Cage
My Kings and Countries Ruins by the rage
Of a rebellious Rout; w^o weeping saw
Three goodly Kingdoms (drunk with fury) draw
And sheath their Swords (like three engaged brothe^s
In one another sides, ripping their Mothers
Belly, and tearing out her bleeding heart;
Then jealous that their Father fain would part
Their bloody fray, and let them fight no more,
Fell foul on Him, and slew Him at His door.
I that have only dared to whisper Verses,
And drop a tear (by stealth) on loyal Hearses;
I that enraged at the Times and Rump,
Had gnawed my Goose-quill to the very stump,
And flung that in the Fire, no more to write,
But to sit down poor Britains Heraclite,
Now sing the triumphs of the Men of War,
The Glorious Rays of the bright Northern Star,
Created for the nonce by Heaven to bring
The wise men of three Nations to their King:
MONCK! the great Monck! that syllable outshines
Plantagenet's bright Name, or Constantine's.
'T was at His Rising that Our Day begun,
Be he the Morning Star to CHARLES our Sun.
He took Rebellion rampant, by the throat,
And made the Canting Quaker change his Note;
His hand it was that wrote, (we saw no more)
Exit Tyrannus over Lamberts door.
Like to some subtle Lightning, so His Words
Dissolved in their Scabbards Rebels Swords.
He with success the Sovereign skill has found
To dress the Weapon, and to heal the Wound.
George, and his Boys (as Spirits do, they say)
Only by walking, scare our Foes away.
III.
OLd Holofernes was no sooner laid,
Before the Idols Funeral Pomp was paid,
(Nor shall a penny ere be paid for me;
Let fools that trusted his true Mourners be.)
Richard the Fourth, just peeping out of Squire,
No fault so much, as the old one was his Sire;
For men believed, -- though all went in his Name,
He Would be but Tenant till the Landlord came:
When on a sudden (all amazed) we found
The seven years Babel tumbled to the ground;
And he, poor heart, (thanks to his cunning Kin)
Was soon in Querpo honest Dick again.
Exit Protector. -- What comes next? I trow,
Let the State-Huntsmen beat again. -- So-ho,
Cries Lambert, Master of the Hounds, -- Here sits
That lusty Puss, The Good Old Cause, -- whose wits
Showed Oliver such sport; That, that (cries Vane)
Lets put her up, and run her once again:
She Will lead our Dogs and Followers up and down,
Whilst we match Families, and take the Crown.
Enter the old Members: 'T was the Month of May
These Maggots in the Rump began to play:
Wallingford Anglers (though they stunk) yet thought
They would make baits, by which Fish might be caught;
And so it proved, they soon by taxes made
More money than the Holland Fishing Trade.
IV.
NOw broke in Egypts Plagues (all in a day)
And one more worse than theirs, -- We must not pray
To be delivered: -- Their scab'd folks were free
To scratch where it did itch; -- So might not we.
That Meteor Cromwell, though he scared, gave light;
But we were now covered with horrid night:
Our Magistracy was (like Moses Rod)
Turned to a Serpent by the angry God.
Poor Citizens, when Trading would not do,
Made brick without straw, and were blasted too:
Struck with the botch of Taxes and Excise;
Servants (our very dust) were turned to Lice;
It was but turning Soldiers, and they need
Not work at all, but on their Masters feed.
Strange Catterpillars are our pleasant things;
And Frogs croakt in the Chambers of our Kings:
Black bloody veins did in the Rump prevail,
Like the Philistims Emrods in the Tail.
Lightning, Hall, Fire, and Thunder Egypt had,
And England Guns, Shot, Powder, (that's as bad.)
And that Sea Monster Lawson (if withstood)
Threatened to turn our Rivers into Blood.
And (Plague of all these Plagues) all these Plagues fell
Not on an Egypt, but our Israel.
V.
SIck (as her heart can hold) the Nation lies,
Filling each corner with her hideous cries:
Sometimes Rage (like a burning Fever) hearts,
Anon Despair brings cold and clammy Sweats;
She cannot sleep: or if she does she dreams
Of Rapes, Thefts, Burnings, Blood, and direful theams;
Tosses from side to side, then by and by
Her feet are laid there where the head did lie:
None can come to her but bold Empericks,
Who never meant to cure her but try tricks:
Those very Doctors who should give her ease,
(God help the Patient) was her worst disease.
The Italian Mountebank Vane tells her sure
Jesuits Powder will effect the Cure.
If grief but makes her swell, Martin and Nevil
Conclude it is a spice of the King's Evil.
Bleed her again, another cries; -- And Scot
Says he could cure her, if 'twas -- you know what:
But giddy Harrington a whimsey found,
To make her head (like to his brains) run round:
Her old and wise Physicians, who before
Had well nigh cured her, came again to the door,
But were kept out, which made her cry the more,
Help, help, (dear Children) Oh! some pity take
On her who bore you! help for mercy sake!
Oh heart! Oh head! Oh back! Oh bones! I feel
They Have poisoned me with giving too much steel:
Oh give me that for which I long and cry!
Something that is Sovereign, or else I dye.
VI.
KInd Cheshire heard; -- And like some son that stood
Upon the Bank, straight jumped into the flood,
Flings out his arms, and strikes some strokes to sivim
Booth ventured first, and Middleton with him;
Stout Mackworth, Egerton, and thousands more,
Threw themselves in, and left the safer shore;
Massey (that famous Diver) and bold Brown
Forsook his Wharf, -- resolving all to drown,
Or save a sinking Kingdom: -- But, O sad!
Fearing to lose her prey, the Sea grew mad,
Raised all her billows, and resolved her waves,
Should quickly be the bold Adventurers graves.
Out Marches Lambert, like an Eastern Wind,
And with him all the mighty waters joined.
The Loyal Swimmers bore up heads and breasts,
Scorning to think of Life or Interests;
They plied their Arms and Thighs, but all in vain;
The furious Main beat them to shore again;
At which the floating Island (looking back,
Spying her loyal Lovers gone to wrack)
Shriekt louder then before, -- and thus she cries,
"Can you be angry heavens, and frowning skies,
"Thus countenance rebellious Mutineers,
"Who, if they durst, would be about your ears?
"That I should sink, with Justice may accord,
"Who let my Pilot be thrown overboard;
"Yet 'twas not I (ye righteous Heavens do know)
"The Soldiers in me needs would have it so:
"And those who conjured up these storms themselves,
"And first engaged me amongst these Rocks and Shelves
"Guilty of all my woe, have raised this weather,
"Fearing to come to Land, and choosing rather
"To sink me with themselves, -- O cease to frown
"In tears (just Heavens!) behold! my self I drown:
"Let not these proud waves do it: Prevent my fears,
"And let them fall together by the ears.
VII.
Heaven heard, and struck the insulting army mad
Drunk with their Cheshire Triumphs, straight they had
New Lights appeared, and new Resolves they take,
A Single Person once again to make.
Who shall be he? Oh! Lambert, without rub,
The fittest Devil to be Beelzebub.
He, the fierce Fiend, cast out of the House before,
Returned, and threw the House now out of door:
A Legion then he raised of Armed Sprights,
Elves, Goblins, Faires, Quakers, and new Lights,
To be his under Devils, with this rest
He Soul and Body (Church and State) possessed:
Who tho they filled all countries, towns, and rooms
Yet (like that Fiend that did frequent the Tombs)
Churches, and Sacred Grounds they haunted most,
No Chapel was at ease from some such Ghost.
The Priests ordained to exercise those Elves,
Were voted Devils, and cast out themselves:
Bible, or Alchoran, all is one to them,
Religion serves but for a stratagem:
The holy Charms these Adders did not heed,
Churches themselves did Sanctuary need.
VIII.
THe Churches Patrimony and rich Store,
Alas! was swallowed many years before:
Bishops and Deans we sed upon before,
They were the Ribs and Surloyns of the Whore:
Now let her Legs (the Priests go to the Pot,
(They have the Pope's eye in them) spare them not:
We have fat Benefices yet to eat,
(Bell, and our Dragon-Army must have meat:)
Let us devour her Limb-meal, great and small,
Tithe Calves, Geese, Pigs, the Petitoes and all:
A Vicaridg in Sippets, though it be
But small, will serve a squeamish Sectary.
Though Universities we cannot endure,
There Is no false Latin in their Lands (be sure.)
Give Oxford to our Horse, and let the Foot
Take Cambridge for their booty, and fall to it.
Christ-Church i will have (cries Vane;) Disbrow swops
At Trinity; Kings is for Berry's chops;
Kelsey, take Corpus Christi; All Souls, Packer;
Grave Creed, St. John's; New College leave to Hacker;
Fleetwood cries, Weeping Maudlin shall be mine,
Her tears I Will drink instead of Muscadine*
The smaller Halls and Houses scarce are big
Enough to make one dish for Hasilrig;
We must be sure to stop his mouth, though wide,
Else all our fat will be in the fire (they cried:
And when we have done these, we will not be quiet,
Lordships and Landlords Rents shall be our diet.
Thus talked this jolly crew, but still mine 'Host
Lambert resolves that he will rule the Roast.
IX.
BUt hark! Methinks I hear old Boreas blow;
What mean the north-winds that they bluster so?
More storms from that black nook? Forbear (bold Scot!)
Let not Dunbar and Worc'ster be forgot:
What? would you chaffer w'us for one Charles more
The price of Kings is fallen, give the Trade over.
And is the price of Kings and Kingdoms too,
Of Laws, lives, oaths, souls, grown so low with you?
Perfidious Hypocrites! Monsters of Men!
(Cries the good Monck) we will raise their price again
Heaven said Amen, and breathed upon that Spark;
That Spark (preserved alive in the cold and dark)
First kindled and enflamed the British Isle,
And turned it all to Bonefires in a while:
He and his fuel was so small, no doubt,
Proud Lambert thought to tread or piss them out.
But George was wary; -- His cause did require
A Pillar of a Cloud as well as Fire:
'Twas not his safest course to flame, but smoke;
His enemies he will not burn but choke;
Small Fires must not blaze out, lest by their light
They show their weakness, and their foes invite;
But Furnaces the stoutest Metals melt,
(And so did he) by fire not seen, but felt;
Dark-lanthorn Language, and his peep-bo-play,
Will-E-Wispt Lambert's new Lights out o'th way.
George and his boys, those thousands (o strange thing)
Of Snipes and Woodcocks took by Lowbelling.
His few Scotch-Coal kindled with English Fire
Made Lamberts great Nowcastle heaps expire.
X.
SCotland (though poor and peevish) was content
To keep the Peace, and (O rare!) money lent;
But yet the blessing of their Kirk was more;
George had that too, and with this slender store
He and his Mirmidons advance: -- Kind Heaven
Prepared a Frost to make their March more eaven
Easy and safe; it may be said, That year
Of the Highways Heaven it self was Overseer,
And made- November ground as hard as May;
White as their Innocence, so was their Way:
The Clouds came down in Feather-beds, to greet
Him and his Army, and to kiss their feet.
The frost and foes both came and went together,
Both thawed away, and vanished God knows whither.
Whole Countries crowded in to see this friend,
Ready to cast their bodies down to mend
His Road to Westminster; and still they shout,
Lay hold of the Rump, and pull the Monster out:
A new one, or a whole one (Good my Lord)
And to this cry the Island did accord,
The Echo of the Irish hollow ground
Heard England, and her language did rebound.
XI.
PResto- Jack Lambert, and his Sprights are gone
To dance a Jig with his brother Oberon:
George made him, and his Cutthroats of our lives,
Swallow their swords as Juglers do their Knives.
And Carter Disborough to wish in vain,
He now were Waggoner to Charles his Wain.
The Conqueror is now come into the South,
Whose warm Air is made hot by every mouth;
Breathing his welcome, and in spite of Scot,
Crying -- The whole Child (Sir) divide it not:
The Rump begins to stink; Alas! (cry they)
We Have raised a Devil which we cannot lay.
I like him not -- His Belly is so big,
There Is a King in it, cries furious Has^lrig,
Let Us bribe Him (they cry all) Carve him a share
Of our stolen Venison. -- Varlets forbear,
In vain you put your Lime twigs to his Hands
George Monck is for the King, not for his Lands,
When fair means would not do, next foul they try,
Vote him the City Scavenger, (they cry)
Send him to fcowr their Streets. -- Well, let it be;
Your Rumpship wants a fcowring too, (thinks he)
That foul house where your Worships many year
Have laid your Tail, sure wants a Scavenger:
I smell your Fizzle, though it make no Crack,
You Would mount me on the Cities galled Back,
In hope she will cast her Rider: If I must
Upon some Office in the Town be thrust,
I Will be their Sword Bearer, -- and to their Dagger
I Will join my Sword: -- Nay, (good Rump) do not swagger,
The City feasts me, and as sure as Gun)
I Will mend all Englands Commons e're I Have done.
XII.
ANd so he did: One morning next his heart
He goes to Westminster, and played his part;
He vampt their boots (which Hewson never could do)
With better leather, made them g'upright too.
The Restored Members (Cato-like, no doubt)
Did only enter that They might go out;
They did not mean within those Walls to dwell,
Nor did they like their Company so well:
Yet Heaven so blessed them, that in three weeks space
They gave both Church and State a better face;
They gave Boath, Massy, Brown, some kinder lots;
The last years Traitors, this years Patriots:
The Churches poor Remainder they made good,
And washed the Nations Hands of Royal Blood;
And that a Parliament (they did devise)
From its own ashes (Phaenix-like) might rise;
This done, By Act and Deed that might not fail,
They past a Fine, and so cut off the Entail.
XIII.
LEt the Bells ring these Changes now from Bow
Down to the Country Candlesticks below;
Ringers, hands off; The Bells themselves will dance
In memory of their own deliverance.
Had not George showed his Metal, and said Nay,
Each Sectary had born the Bell away:
Down with them all, they are Christened (cried that Crew)
Tie up their Clappers, and the Parsons too;
Turn them to Guns, or sell them to the Dutch.
Nay, hold, (quoth George) my Masters, that is too much
You will not leap over Steeples thus, I hope
I Will save the Bells, but you may take the Rope.
Thus lay Religion panting for her life,
Like Isaac, bound under the bloody knife;
George held the falling Weapon, saved the Lamb:
Let Lambert (in the Briars) be the Ram.
So lay the Royal Virgin (as it is told)
When brave S. George redeemed her life, of old.
Oh that the Knaves that have consumed our Land,
Had but permitted Wood enough to stand
To be his Bonfires; -- We Would burn every stem,
And leave no more but Gallow-trees for them.
XIV.
MArch on, Great Hero! as thou have begun,
And crown our Happiness before thou have done
We have another CHARLES to fetch from Spain,
Be thou the GEORGE to bring him back again:
Then shall thou be (what was denied that Knight)
Thy Princes, and the Peoples Favorite.
There is no danger of the Winds at all,
Unless together by the Ears they fall,
Who shall the honor have to waft a King:
And they who gain it, while they work shall sing.
Methinks I see how those Triumphant Gales,
Proud of the great Enployment, swell the Sails:
The joyful Ship shall dance, the Sea shall laugh,
And loyal Fish their Masters health shall quaff:
See how the Dolphins crowd and thrust their large
And scaly shoulders, to assist the Barge;
The peaceful Kingfishers are met together
About the Decks and prophecy calm weather;
Poor Crabs and Lobsters are gone down to creep,
And search for Pearls and Jewels in the deep;
And when they have the booty, -- crawl before,
And leave them for his welcome to the Shore.
XV.
Methinks I see how throngs of people stand
Scarce patient till the Vessel come to Land,
Ready to leap in, and if need require,
With Tears of Joy, to make the waters higher.
But what will London do? I doubt Old Paul
With bowing to his Sovereign will fall,
The Royal Lions from the Tower shall roar,
And though they see him not, yet shall adore:
The Conduits will be ravished, and combine
To turn their very water into Wine:
And for the Citizens, I only pray
They may not overjoyed all die that day:
May we all live more loyal and more true,
To give to Caesar and to God their due.
We Will make his Fathers Tomb with tears to swim
And for the Son we'll shed our blood for him.
England her penitential Song shall sing,
And take heed how she quarrels with her King.
If for our sins -- our Prince shall be misled,
We Will bite our nails, rather than scratch our head.
XVI.
ONe English George out-weighs alone (by odds)
A whole Committee of the Heathens Gods;
Pronounce but Monck, and (it is all his due)
He is our Mercury, Mars, and Neptune too.
Monck (what great Xerxes could not) proved the man
That with a word shackled the Ocean;
He shall command Neptune himself to bring
His Trident, and present it to our King.
Oh do it then, great Admiral: -- Away,
Let him be here against St. George's day;
That Charles may wear His Dieu Et Mon Droit,
And Thou the Noble Garter'd Honi Soit.
And when thy Aged Corpse shall yield to Fate,
God save that soul that saved our Church and State:
There thou shall have a glorious Crown, I know,
Who Crown'dst our King and Kingdoms here below.
But who shall find a Pen fit for thy glory;
Or make Posterity believe thy Story?
Vive St. GEORGE,
THE TRAGEDY OF Mr. Christopher Love, Late Minister of the Gospel; Acted upon
TOWER HILL, August 22. 1651.
The Prologue.
NEw from a slaughtered Monarchs Hearse I come,
A Mourner to a Martyred Prophet's Tomb:
Pardon, great Charles his Ghost, my Muse had stood
Yet three years longer, till sh'had wept a Flood;
Too mean a Sacrifice for Royal Blood.
But she must go, Heaven does by Thunder call
For her Attendance at LOVE's Funeral:
Forgive, great Sir, this Sacriledged in me,
The tenth Tear he must have, it is his Fee;
It Is due to him, and yet it is stolen from Thee.
The Argument.
'Twas when the Raging Dog did rule the Skies,
And with his scorching Face did tyrannize,
When cruel Cromwell, Whelp of that mad Star,
But sure more fiery than his Sire by far,
Had dried the Northern Fife, and with his heat
Put frozen Scotland in a Bloody Sweat:
When he had conquered, and his furious Train
Had chased the North-Bear, and pursued Charles Wain
Into the English Orb; then 'twas thy fate
(Sweet LOVE) to be a Present from our State.
A greater Sacrifice there could not come,
Than a Divine, to bleed his Welcome home.
For He, and Herod think no Dish so good,
As a John Baptists Head, served up in Blood.
ACT. I.
The Philistims are set in their High Court,
And Love, like Samson's fetched to make them sport:
Unto the Stake the smiling Prisoner's brought:
Not to be tried, but baited, most men thought:
Monsters, like Men, must worry him; and thus
He fights with Beasts, like Paul at Ephesus.
Adams, Far, Huntington, with all the Pack
Of foisting Hounds, were set upon his Back.
Prideaux and Keeble stand and cry, Halo^o;
'T was a full Cry, and yet it would not do.
Oh how he foiled them! Standers by did swear,
That he the Judge, and they the Traitors were:
For there he proved (although he seemed a Lamb)
Stout, like a Lion, from whose Den he came.
ACT. II.
It is decreed; nor shall thy Worth, dear Love,
Resist their Vows, nor their Revenge remove.
Though Prayers were joined to Prayers, and tears to tears,
No Softness in their Rocky Hearts appears:
Nor Heaven nor Earth abate their Fury can,
But they will have thy Head, thy Head, good Man.
Sure some She-Sectary longed, and in haste
Must try how Presbyterian Blood did taste.
'T is fit she have the best, and therefore thine,
Thine must be broached, blessed Saint! it is Drink divine,
No sooner was the dreadful Sentence read,
The Prisoner straight bowed his condemned Head:
And by that humble Posture told them all,
It was a Head that did not fear a fall.
ACT. III.
And now I wish the fatal Stroke were given;
I Am sure our Martyr longs to be in Heaven,
AndHeav'n to have him there: one moments blow
Makes him triumphant; but here comes his woe,
His Enemies will grant a Months Suspense,
If It be for the nonce to keep him thence:)
And that he may tread in his Saviors ways,
He shall be tempted too, his forty days:
And with such baits too, Cast thy self but down,
Fall, and but worship, and your Life's your own.
Thus cried his Enemies; oh 'twas their pride,
To wound his Body, and his Soul beside.
One Plot they have more, when all their own do fail
If Devils cannot, Disciples may prevail.
Lets tempt him by his Friends, make Peter cry,
Good Master, Spare thy self, and do not die.
One Friend entreats, a second weeps, a third
Cries, Your Petition wants the other word:
I Will write it for you, says a fourth; Your Life,
Your Life, Sir, cries a fifth, Pity your Wife,
And the Babe in her: Thus this Diamonds cut
By Diamonds only, and to terror put.
Methinks I hear him still, You wound my heart;
Good Friends, forbear; for every word's a Dart:
'T is cruel pity, thus I do profess,
You Would love me more, if you did love me less:
Friends, Children, Wife, Life, all are dear, I know
But all is too dear, if I should buy them so.
Thus, like a rock that routs the waves, he stands,
And snaps asunder, Sampson-like, these bands.
ACT. IV.
The Day is come, the Prisoner longs to go,
And chides the lingering Sun for tarrying so:
Which blushing seems to answer from the Sky,
That it was loath to see a Martyr dye.
Methinks I heard beheaded Saints above
Call to each other, Sirs, Make room for LOVE.
Who when he came to tread the fatal Stage,
(Which proved his Glory, and his Enemies rage)
His Blood never run to his heart, Christ's Blood was there
Reviving, it, his own was all to spare:
Which rising in his Cheeks, did seem to say,
Is this the Blood you thirst for? Take It, I pray.
Spectators in his Looks such Life did see,
That they appeared more like to die than he.
But oh his Speech! methinks I hear it still;
It ravished Friends, and did his Enemies kill:
His keener Words did their sharp Ax exceed;
That made his head, but he their hearts, to bleed:
Which he concluded with so^t Prayer, and so
The Lamb lay down, and took the Butchers blow:
His Soul makes Heaven shine brighter by a Star,
And now we are sure there is one Saint Christopher.
ACT. V.
LOVE lies a bleeding, and the World shall see
Heaven act a part in this black Tragedy.
The Sun no sooner spied the Head of the floor,
But he pulled in his own, and looked no more.
The Clouds, which scattered, and in colors were,
Met altogether, and in black appear:
Lightenings, which filled the Air with blazing light,
Did serve for Torches at that dismal Night:
In which, and all next day, for many hours,
Heaven groaned in Thunder, and did weep in Showrs.
Nor do I wonder, that God thundered so,
When Is Boanerges murdered lay below:
The High Court trembled, Prideaux, Bradshaw, Keeble,
And all the guilty Rout, looked pale and feeble.
Timorous Jenkins, and cold-hearted Drake,
Hold out, you need no base Petitions make:
Your Enemies thus Thunderstruck, no doubt,
Will be beholding to you to go out.
B^t if you will recant, now thundering Heaven
Such Approbation to Love's cause has given,
I Will add but this; Your Consciences perhaps,
Ere long, shall feel far greater Thunderclaps.
The Epilogue.
But stay, my Muse grows fearful too, and must
Beg that these Lines be buried with thy Dust:
Shelter, blessed Love, this verse within thy Shroud,
For none but Heaven dares take thy part aloud.
The Author begs this, lest, if it be known.
Whilst he bewails thy Head, he lose his own.
R. W.

UPON The much to be Lamented DEATH OF THE Reverend Mr. Vines.
ARt thou gone too (thou great and gallant mind)
And must such Sneaks as I be left behind?
If thus our Horsemen and Commanders die,
What can the Infantry do then but fly?
Oh Divine Vines! tell us, why would thou go,
Unless thou could have left thy Parts below?
If there is a Metempsuchosis indeed,
Tell us where we may find thee at our need?
Who has thy Memory? thy Brain, thy Heart?
Whom did thou leave thy Tongue? (for every part
Of thee can make a Man.) What if we find
(As I Will not swear this Age will not change her mind)
Prelacy (though her Lands are sold) revive?
Or Independency (who hopes to thrive,
No where suits Trump) should dare dispute at length?
Where have thou left thy Presbyterian Strength,
With which thou got'st the Game in the Isle of Wight,
Where the King cried that Vines was in the right?
When Essex died (the Honor of our Nation)
Thou gav'st him a new life in thy Oration.
But when great Fairfax to his Fate shall yield,
Whom have thou left -- to fetch from Naseby-field
The Immortal Turf, and dress it with a Story,
That shall perpetuate his name and glory?
Where Is thy rich Fancy (man?) To whom (beneath)
Did thou thy lofty and high strain bequeath?
Tell us for thy own sake; for none but he
That has thy Wit, can write thy Elegy.
Till he be found, let this suffice, which I
Leave on thy Stone: -- Here lies the Ministry.
R. W.

TO THE MEMORY OF Mr. Jeremy Whitaker, Powerful in Prayer and Preaching, Pious
in Life, Patient in Sickness, etc.
NAy, now forbear; for pity sake give over,
You that would make the Clergy none, or poor:
We are made miserable enough this year,
That we have lost our Reverend Whitaker;
Loss above Deaus and Chapters! had but he
Lived still and preached: Ziba take all (for me.)
Nay I believe had sacrilegious hands
Fingered our poor remains of Tithes and Lands,
Whilst he survived they had but prayed in vain,
Whitaker would have prayed them back again,
As Luther did a young man's Soul repeal,
Given to the Devil under Hand and Seal,
A Chariot and an Horseman we have lost,
In whose each single Prayer encamped an Host.
How have I heard him on some solemn Day,
When doubtful War could make all London pray)
Mount up to Heaven with armed cries and tears,
And rout, as far as York, the Cavaliers!
Have you not seen an early-rising Lark
Spring from her Turf, making the Sun her mark,
Shooting her self aloft, yet higher, higher,
Till she had sung her self into Heaven's Quire?
Thus would he rise in Prayer, and in a trice
His Soul become a Bird of Paradise:
And if our faint Devotions Prayers be,
What can we call his less than Ecstasy?
On his Preaching.
If with the Almighty he prevailed so,
Wonder not that he Wonders wrought below:
The Son of Consolation and of Thunder
Met both in him, in others are asunder.
He was (like Luke) Physician of both kinds,
Wrought Cures upon Men's Bodies and their Minds,
The Falling Sickness of Apostasy,
Dropsy of Drunkenness, Prides Tympany,
The Meagrim of Opinions, new or old,
Palsy of Unbelief, Charities cold,
Lusts burning Fever, Angers Calenture,
The Colic in the Conscience he could cure:
Set the souls broken bones; by holy Art
He has dissolved the Stone in many a Heart,
Harder than that he died of -- O come in,
Ye multitudes whom he has healed of sin,
And thereby made his Debtors -- Pay him now
Some of those tears which he laid out for you;
Interest-tears, I mean; for should you all
Weep over him both Use and Principal,
'Twould wash away the Stone (which covers him)
And make his Coffin (like an Ark) to swim.
Now wipe thine eyes (my Muse) and stop thy Verse
(Thy Ink can only serve to black his Hearse,)
Yet (stay) i will drop one Tear, sigh one sigh more,
It Is this, although my Poetry be poor
O what a mighty Prophet should I be,
Had this Elijah's Mantle fallen to me!
Oh might I live his Life! I Would be content
His sore Diseases too should me torment:
And if his Patience could mine become,
I would not be afraid of Martyrdom.
R. W.

UPON THE DEATH OF So many Reverend Ministers of late.
STill we do find, Black cloth wears out the first;
And fruits that are the choicest keep the worst.
Such men? So many? and they die so fast?
They Are precious (death) on do not make such waste.
Scarce have we dried our eyes for loss of one,
But in comes tidings that another's gone.
Oh that I had my former Tears again,
(All but those few laid out upon my sin,)
Had I an Helicon in either Eye,
I have occasion now to verse them dry.
Triumph (licentious Age) lift up thy Song,
Presbytery shall not trouble you ere long;
Those that tormented you before your day,
Are now apace removing out of the way.
Yea, rather tremble (England) stand aghast,
To see thy glorious Lamps go out so fast;
When Death (like Sampson) thus lays hold upon
The Pillars of the Church, -- The Building's gone.
When we do see so many Stars to fall,
Surely, it boads the World's great Funeral.
London, look to it, and think what Heaven is doing
Thy Flames are coming when thy Lots are going,
Well may we all fear God intends Wars,
When he commands home his Ambassadors.
That Venerable Synod, which of late
Was made the Object of Men's Scorn and Hate,
(For want of Copes and Mitres, not of Graces)
Are now called up (with Moses) and their Faces
When they return, shall shine; God sees it fit,
Such an Assembly should in Glory sit.
The learned Twisse went first, (it was his right)
Then holy Palmer, Borroughs, Love, Gouge, White,
Hill, Whitaker, grave Gataker, and Strong,
Pern, Marshal, Robinson, all gone along.
I have not named them half: their only strife
Has been (of late) who should first part with Life.
Those few who yet survive, sick of this Age,
Long to have done their parts, and leave the Stage.
Our English Luther, Vines, (whose Death I weep)
Stole away (and said nothing) in a Sleep:
Sweet (like a Swan) he preached that day he went,
And for his Cordial took a Sacrament:
Had it but been suspected -- he would die,
His People sure had stopped him with their Cry.
My blearey'd Muse ('it is tears have made her so)
Must wash his Marble too, before she go.
AN ELOGY UPON THE Earl of Essex HIS FUNERAL.
ANd are there all the Rites that must be done
Thrice Noble ESSEX, Englands Champion?
Some Men, some Walls, some Horses put in black
With the Throng scrambling for Sweetmeats and Sack;
A gaudy Herald, and a Velvet Hearse,
A tattar'd Anagram with grievous Verse,
And a sad Sermon to conclude withal,
Shall this be styled great ESSEX's ^^neral?
Niggardly Nation, be ashamed of th'odds,
Less Valor among Heathen made men gods:
Should such a General have died in Rome,
He must have had an Altar, not a Tomb;
And there, in stead of youthful Elegies,
Grave Senators had offered Sacrifice
To Divine Devereux: O sor a Vote,
(Ye Lords and Commons, ye are boun^ ^o do it)
A Vote, that who is seen to smile this year,
A Vote, that who so brings not in a Tear,
Shall be adjudg'd Malignant: It were wise
T'erect an Office in the Peoples eyes,
For issuing forth a constant sum of Tears,
There Is no way else to pay him his Arrears:
And when we have drein'd this Ages eyes quite dry,
Let him be wept the next in History;
Which if Posterity shall dare to doubt,
Then Glosters whispering Walls shall speak him out:
And so his Funeral shall not be done,
Till he returnith' Resurrection.
To the Father of a very virtuous Virgin, Deceased; who desired an obscure
Person to make an Elegy, etc.
SIr, Be advised; She Is not your Daughter now,
But a crowned Saint in Heavens great Court, and you
Must take heed what you offer to her Shrine;
You Will be profane, if that be not Divine.
Sternhold (who killed the Psalms, and David too
In Meeter and good meaning) did not do
More, violence to Heaven, than you to her.
If, whilst you think it a kindness, you shall blur
Her Honor with my Ink: it is a disgrace
To set black Spots upon a glorious Face.
Disdain will burst her Coffin (sure) to have
Such dirty Feet as mine stand on her Grave.
Besides, it is niggardly to weep in Verse,
Tears without measure best become her Hearse,
The talking Book is shallow, still we see
Great Sorrows, like deep Rivers, silent be.
Were I Apollo's Priest indeed, and fit
To send a Poem up in flames of Wit,
Yet i am but one; Sir, to her Altar's due
Whole Hecatombs of Verse, and Poets too.
Go search St. Pauls-Church-yard, employ choice eyes
To scan all Epitaphs and Elegies;
All the rich Fancies, sacred Raptures, all
The Pearly drops which ever yet did fall
On spotless Virgins Tombs: then make your claim
Print and devote them to your Daughters name.
Those vast Hyperboles, those lofty Notes,
Which cracked the Muses Voices, rent their throats
Offended scrup'lous Readers, made them think
Poetry only strong Lines, and strong Drink,
Allayed by her merit, soon will be
Reduced to sober Truth, and Modesty,
But stay, this counsel is but simple stuff,
(Englands Divine) Reynolds has done enough:
His Sermon is her Monument in print,
And has more Honor than all Poems in it.
That does not only speak her Saint, and more,
Can make him one too, who but reads it over.
Reynolds records her Saint, and you may hope
That Is more than canonizing by a Pope.
IN MEMORY Of Mris E. T. Who dyed April 7. 1659.
IT was the Spring, and Flowers were in contest,
Whose smells should first reach Heaven, and please it best;
Then did Eliza's sweetness so surpass
All Rival Virgins, that she sent for was.
'Twas April when she died; no Month so fit
For Heaven to be a mourner in, as it.
'Twas Easter too; that time did Death devise
Best for this Lamb to be a Sacrifice.
It was the Spring; The way 'twixt Heaven and Earth
Was sweetened for her passage, by the Birth
Of early Flowers, which burst their Mothers womb,
Resoly'd to live and die upon her Tomb.
It was the Spring; Between the Earth and Sky,
To please her Soul as it was passing by,
Birds filled the Air with Anthems, every nest
Was on the Wing, to chaunt her to her Rest:
Not a Pen-feathered Lark, who never tried Wing,
Nor Throat; but ventured then to fly, and sing:
Following the Saint toward Heaven, whose entrance there
Dampt them, and changed their Notes. Then pensive Air
Dissolved to tears, which spoiled the feathered Train
And sunk them to their nests with grief again.
Mean time, me thought, I saw at Heavens fair Gate
The glorious Virgins meet, and kiss their Mate.
They stood a while her Beauty to admire
Then led her to her place in their own Quire:
Which seemed to be defective, until she
Added her Sweetness to their Harmony.
As Meddals scattered when some Prince goes by,
So lay the Stars that night about the Sky.
The Milky Way too, (since she past it over)
Methinks looks whiter than it was before.
AN EPITAPH Upon E. T.
REader, did thou but know what sacred Dust
Thou tread'st upon, thou would judge thy self unjust
Should thou neglect a shower of tears to pay,
To wash the Sin of thy own Feet away.
That Actor in the Play, who looking down
When he should cry, O Heaven, -- was thought a Clown,
And guilty of a Soloecism -- might have
Applause for such an Action over this Grave.
Here lies a piece of Heaven, and Heaven one day
Will send the best in Heaven to fetched away.
Truth is, this Lovely Virgin from her Birth
Became a constant strife 'twixt Heaven and Earth:
Both claimed her, pleaded for her; either cried,
The Child is mine; at length they did divide:
Heaven took her Soul; The Earth her Corpse did seize,
Yet not in Fee, she only holds by Lease;
With this Proviso -- when the Judge shall call,
Earth shall give up her share, and Heaven have all
UPON The Learned Works of the Reverend DIVINE Ed. Reynolds, D. D.
REader, who e're thou art, here thou may find
Within these Works, a rare, rich, glorious mind
O Golden Precepts, which, alike, do show
What Is thy D stemper how to cure it too:
Do pains oppress thy Body? Sorrow Mind?
Draw near to God, Prayer will acceptance find;
And then no doubt, he will grant, thy Bodies Grief
May bring thy sinking soul some small Relief:
Do Passions overtop thy will? beware,
Virtue consists not in so high a Sphere:
If thou the Golden Medium wilt find,
Shun thou too high, and too too low a mind.
Pleasures are gilded Nothings, which like bubbles fly,
Swollen big with Emptiness so burst and die.
Do darkest times of ignorance draw near?
The rather view these weighty Lines: nor fear,
Nor wonder much at this resplendent Light:
Diamonds shine brightest in the darkest night.
The Merchant-man sold all he had, to buy
The rich, rare, Gospel Jewel: O then why
Art thou so backward, since that thou may make
This Gem thine own, yea, at a cheaper rate?
The foolish Virgins, when their Lord of Light
Past by, their lights were out: So that eternal night
Was their reward, and just, for they that deem
Pains cost of greater worth, shall never be seen
Within his Courts, who is great, good, and just.
Is Folly thus repaid? Reader, we must
Look that it never be said of thee or I,
That our Neglest should cause our light to die.
R. W.

Another.
LOok wishly (friend) thou seldom see such men
Heaven drops such Jewels down but now and then,
One in an Age, or Nation: oh it is rare,
Two Reynoldses should fall to Englands share!
Could Rome but show one such, and this were He,
His Picture could not escape Idolatry:
Whom Papists (not with Superstitious Fire)
Would dare to adore, we justly may admire.
R. W.

Aliud.
LEarning, whose Forces did dispersed lie
(Of late alarmed by the Enemy)
Calling a Council, did resolve at lengt^*
To choose one General over all her strength:
Divinity (who had the choice) did Name
Reynolds? All Voices centered in the same:
Now here he stands and heads such Books as bear
Truth in their Van, and Triumph in their Rear.
R. W.

AN EPITAPH For a Godly Man's Tomb.
HEre lies a piece of Christ, a Star in Dust;
A Vein of Gold, a Chind Dish that must
Be used in Heaven, when God shall Feast the Just.
AN EPITAPH For a Wicked Man's Tomb.
HEre lies the Carkase of a cursed Sinner,
Doomed to be Roasted, for the Devil's Dinner.
A Letter to a Friend.
Generous Sir,
ON Saturdy last (the Day and Weather being as sad and dumpish as old Saturn
himself) whilst I was in my Study (my Books and my self musty and melancholy)
and my provisions for the next Day as poor as ever were made by Country
Curate, sometimes scratching that which goes for my Head, and then biting my
Nails for offending my Noddle; In comes your Friendly Letter (the welcomest
Quartermaster that ever came to my House) to take up Quarters for that gallant
Man's Works (and if ever Good Works merited, they do) Doctor Reynolds. Sir, They
no sooner entered my Study -- but all my Books seemed to disappear, as the Stars
do at the rising of the Sun: You cannot imagine what fear, shame, confusion,
and envy, my poor Shelves discovered; Some poor Authors stood gasping -- others
tumbled down, and others burst their Bindings -- resolving to break Prison,
rather than stand before such a Judge of Learning. Those few Fathers (which I
had) seemed to meet in a Council, what they should do, whether stay or depart.
Old Origin began, but he was so full of Allegories, and whimseys, they could
not tell what to say to him; but sure he and they all were troubled, for fear
(good men) that they should now be ejected in their old Age. Just in thought
that he should again be a Martyr, and burnt to light Tobacco. Tertullian began
to make Apologies; and Austin himself fell to his Confessions and Retractions.
As for Hierom, as good a Scholar as he was, he wished himself again on his
Pilgrimage: and my poor Countryman Bid got into a corner, and fell to his
Beeds. On another shelf (for I have not many) my Schoolmen looked like
Schoolboys, and stood with their strings untied, ready untrussed for
Correction. Aquinas himself wished he had not such sums to reckon for; and all
the Popish Authors I had fell to crossing themselves. But what a case (if my
stout Folioes and old Authors fainted thus) do you think my Infantry -- my.
Modern men, my Quarto and Octavo Striplings were in? Yea, some of our own
English (men of many Editions, and worthy to be bound and gilded) gave back,
and thrust one another: Dod and Clever were both silenced; Doctor Prestons
All Sufficiency pleaded Insufficiency -- Thomas Goodwin pulled his Caps in his
Eyes, and became a Child of Light in Darkness -- As for John Goodwin, he logot
for a General Redemption of them all; but his Subsizer, poor Pierce, was
afraid. at the Doctors coming in, that he and his corrected Copy, should be
again sent to the House of Correction. As for my Pamphlets and trash, they
crowded together; and having no manner of Cover for themselves, many of them
wished Giles Calvert hanged for Printing them, and themselves burned out of the
way. Thus Sir, It was with my Study: But for my self, oh how I was revived and
ravished! No sooner did that Book, big with Christ, enter and salute me (pardon
the allusion) but my heart, like John in his Mothers belly, leaped for joy. No
sooner did open, and taste the Honey, but mine Eyes were enlightened, and I
mended in an instant. The Vanity of the Creature made me serious, the
Sinfulness of Sin humbled me, the Life of Christ quickened me; the 110 Psalm
made me sing, the Lords Supper feasted me, -- the Prophet Hosea inspired me,
and the Passions exceedingly affected me. What shall I say, or do? I cannot
hold, but must fall out of trotting heavy Prose into an amble of Rhyming. --

From a kind Hand there came to enrich a place
In my poor Study, -- the rare Works and Face
Of Learned Reverend Reynolds -- I receive
The Book with joy -- but no Gift (by your leave)
And for the Book, and for my self, I vow
I never had Piece could make me Preach till now:
I Will pay for it (Sir) And -- (which I never shall do)
When I can write such -- you shall print them too.
Mean time I prophecy, this Volume will
Make both your Rose and Crown to flourish still.
Sir, accept and pardon this trash, -- next Term I shall be in London, and then
personally prove what I now set my Hand to -- (viz.) That I am

Yours most Cordially, R. W.

Alas poor Scholar, VVhither will thou go? OR Strange Alterations which at this
time be, There Is many did think they never should see.
IN a Melancholy Study,
None but my self,
Methought my Muse grew muddy;
After seven years Reading,
And costly breeding,
I felt, but could find no pelf:
Into Learned Rags
I Have rent my Plush and Satin,
And now am fit to beg
In Hebrew, Greek, and Latin;
In stead of Aristotle,
Would I had got a Patten.
Alas poor Scholar! whither will thou go?
Cambridge now I must leave thee,
And follow Fate,
College hopes do deceive me!
I often expected
To have been elected,
But Desert is reprobate.
Masters of Colleges
Have no common Graces,
And they that have Fellowships
Have but common Places,
And those that Scholars are
They must have handsome faces:
Alas poor Scholar, whither will thou go?
I have bowed, I have bended,
And all in hope
One day to be befriended.
I have preached, I have printed
What ever I hinted,
To please our English Pope:
I worshipped toward the East,
But the Sun does now forsake me?
I find that I am falling,
The Northern winds do shake me:
Would I had been upright,
For Bowing now will break me:
At great Preferment I aimed,
Witness my Silk;
But now my hopes are maimed:
I looked lately
To live most stately,
And have a Dairy of Bell-ropes Milk;
But now alas,
My self I must not flatter,
Bigamy of Steeples
Is a laughing matter;
Each man must have but one,
And Curates will grow fatter.
Alas poor Scholar, whither will thou go?
Into some Country Village
Now I must go,
Where neither Tithe nor Tillage
The greedy Patron
And parched Matron
Swear to the Church they owe:
Yet if I can Preach,
And pray too on a sudden,
And confure the Pope
At adventure, without studying,
Then ten pounds a year,
Besides a Sunday Pudding.
All the Arts I have skill in,
Divine and Humane,
Yet all is not worth a Shilling;
When the Women hear me,
They do but jeer me,
And say, I am profane:
Once, I remember,
I preached with a Weaver,
I quoted Austin.
He quoted Dod and Clever;
I nothing got,
He got a Cloak and Beaver:
Alas poor Scholar, whither will thou go?
Ships, Ships, Ships, I discover,
Crossing the Main;
Shall I in, and go over,
Turn Jew, or Atheist,
Turk, or Papist,
To GenevA, or Amsterdam?
Bishoprics are void
In Scotland, shall I thither?
Or follow Windebank
And Finch, to see if either
Do want a Priest to shrive them?
O no, it is blustering weather.
Alas poor Scholar, whither will thou go?
Ho, ho, ho, I have hit it,
Peace good man Fool;
Thou have a Trade will fit it;
Draw thy Indenture,
Be bound at adventure
An Apprentice to a Free School;
There thou may command
By William Lylies Charter;
There thou may whip, strip,
And hang, and draw, and quarter,
And commit to the Red Rod
Both Will, and Tom, and Arthur.
l, l, it is thither, thither will I go.
R. W.

THE Norfolk and Wisbich. COCK-FIGHT.
By R. W.
GO you tame Gallants, you that have a Name,
And would accounted be Cocks of the Game;
That have brave Spurs to show for it, and can crow,
And count all Dunghil-breed, that cannot show
Suc^ painted plumes as yours; which think it no vice
With Cock-like lust to tread your Cockatrice;
Though Peacocks, Weathercocks, Woodcocks you be,
If you are not Fighting Cocks, you are not for me.
I of two feathered Combatants will write;
And he that means to th'life to express their Fight,
M^ke his Ink the blood which they did spill,
An^their dying Wings must take his quill.
No so^ were the doubtful People set,
The Match made up, and all that would had bet;
But straight the skilful Judges of the Play
Brought forth their sharp-heel'd Warriors; and they
Were both in Linen Bags, as if 'twere meet
Before they died, to have their Winding Sheet.
Into the Pit they are brought, and being there
Upon the Stage, the Norfolk Chanticleer
Looks stoutly at his ne'r-before-seen Foe,
And like a Challenger began to crow,
And clap his Wings, as if he would display
His Warlike colors, which were black and gray.
Mean time the wary Wisbich walks and breathes
His active Body, and in fury wreaths
His comely Crest; and often looking down,
He beats his angry Beak upon the ground.
This done, they meet, not like that coward Breed
Of Aesope's; these can better fight then feed:
They scorn the Dunghill; it is their only p^ize
To dig for Pearls within each others Eyes.
They fought so nimbly, that 'twas hard to know,
To the skilful, whether they did fight or no;
If that the blood which died the fatal floor,
Had not born witness often. Yet fought they more,
As if each wound were but a Spur to prick
Their fury forward. Lightnings not more quick
Or red, then were their Eyes: 'Twas hard to know
Whether 'twas blood, or anger made them so.
I Am sure they had been out, had they not stood
More safe, being walled in each others blood.
Thus they vy'd blows; but yet, alas, at length,
Although their courage were full tried, theirstrength
And blood began to ebb. You that have seen
A Watery Combat on the Sea, between
Two angry-roaring-boiling Billows, how
They march, and meet, and dash their curled brow;
Swelling like graves, as though they did intend
T'intomb each other, ere the quarrel end;
But when the wind is down, and blustering weather,
They are made friends, and sweetly run together;
May think these Champions such: their blood grows low
And they which leaped but now, now scarce can go
For having left the advantage of the Heel,
Drunk with each others blood, they only reel;
And yet they would fain fight: they came so near,
Methought they meant into each others ear
To whisper wounds; and when they could not rise
They lay and looked blows int' each others eyes.
But now the Tragic part! After this fit,
When Norfolk Cock had got the best of it,
And Wisbich lay a dying, so that none,
Though sober, but might venture seven to one,
Contracting, like a dying Taper, all
His strength, intending with the blow to fall,
He struggles up, and having taken wind,
Ventures a blow, and strikes the other blind.
And now poor Norfolk, having lost his Eyes,
Fights guided only by Antipathies:
With him, alas! the Proverb is not true,
The blows his Eyes never saw, his heart must rue.
At last, by chance, he stumbling on his Foe,
Not having any strength to give a blow,
He falls upon him with his wounded Head,
And makes his Conquerors wings his Featherbed.
His friends ran in, and being very chary,
Sent in all haste to call a Pothecary:
But all in vain, his body did so blister,
That 'twas not capable of any Clyster.
Physick's in vain, and 'twill not him restore;
Alas poor Cock, he was let blood before
Then finding himself weak, opening his Bill,
He calls a Scrivener, and thus makes his Will;
Imp. First of all, let never be forgot,
My Body freely I bequeath to the Pot,
Decently to be boiled; and for its Tomb,
Let it be buried in some hungry Womb,
Item, For Executors I Will have none,
But he that on my side laid seven to one;
And, like a Gentleman that he may live,
To him, and to his Heirs, my Comb I give,
Together with my Brains, that all may know,
That oftentimes his Brains did use to crow.
Item, For Comfort of those Weaker ones
Whose wives complain of, let them have my Stones
For Ladies that are light, it is my Will,
My Feathers make a Fan. And for my Bill;
I Will give a Tailor: But 'faith it is so short,
I am afraid, he will rather curse me sor't.
And for that worthy Doctor's sake, who meant
To give me a Clyster, let my Rump be sent.
Lastly, because I find my self decay,
I yield, and give to Wisbich Cock the day.
R. W.

UPON THE DEATH OF Dennis Bond, Esquire; Who died four Days before the LORD
PROTECTOR.
NOw whilst Whitehall wears black, and men do fear
It Is Treason any Color else to wear;
Whilst Mourners, like a flock of Crows, resort
To the great Lion's Carcass, at the Court;
Whilst the sad Members of the The Other House
(That Mountain which last year brought forth a Mouse)
Lament his Fall, who Madam'd all their Wives,
And Thurloe wishes he had nine Lives;
Whilst some lament, he died without an Ax,
And fear the Funeral will cost Tax;
Whilst cunning Scotland counterfeits a Groan,
And Ireland cudgelled into her A hone;
Whilst England puts her Finger in her Eye,
And Welchmen use their Leeks to make them cry;
Whilst Grief does chime All-in, and every Tribe
Eycleped, Mayor and Aldermen, subscribe
(Or make their Marks at least) how full of Sadness
That Oliver is dead, and eke of gladness
That Richard reigns! though the Slaves lie, I fear,
For their old Gowns are lined with Cavalier:
Whilst the sad Poetasters of the times
Plaster the Hearse with miserable Rhymes,
And I, poor Man, might mend my Fortune too,
As sure as ever Lord Hewson mended Shoo,
If I could baste my Muse, and make her go:
I, by that great Ghosts leave, am well content
To wait upon a meaner Monument;
Yet fit to stand by this, if not above,
As having, though less Pomp, yet no less Love;
It Is Dennis Bond, that true bred English Squire,
Whose worth, if my rude Fancy should aspire
To reach the Sinews; just, pious, valiant wise,
Able for Counsel or for Enterprise;
Fit to set Cato Copies, if alive,
Able to make a Bankrupt Nation thrive;
The Alchimy of whose single Judgment could
Convert a Leaden Council into Gold.
Atlas of State! oh! if King Charles that is gone,
In stead of Digby and old Cottington,
Had had one Dennis; he had stood till now,
And kept the Crown fast on his Royal Brow.
Cromwell could not outlive him; so our State
In one week lost their Pilot, and his Mate:
And though he died in's Bed, it is not denied;
Yet was his Head struck off when Dennis died.
Adieu, brave Bond! My aged Muse shall burn
Her withered Laurel at thy scared Urn.
Live thine own Monument, and scorn a Stone;
Marbles themselves have flaws, thy Name has none
That plat of Earth which grasps thee in her womb,
Proud of such Treasure, swells into a Tomb.
When the next Parliament together come,
And miss their Western Patriot from his room,
Despairing that their Meeting will not speed,
Grief will dissolve them, no Protector need.
R. W.

Upon some Bottles of Sack and Claret, laid in Sand, and covered with a Sheet.
ENter, and see this Tomb (Sirs) do not fear
No Spirits, but of Wine, will frightyou here:
Weep over this Tomb, your Sorrows here may have
Wine for their sweet Companions in the Grave.
A dozen Shakespears here interred do lie;
Two dozen Johnsons full of Poetry.
Did not the Mother Hogshead, from whose womb
These Babes sprang forth, burst when she saw this Tomb,
And swell with grief? Did not the Butler sink,
To see himself turn Sexton to his Drink?
'Twere commendable Sacrilege, no doubt,
Could I come at your Grave, to steal you out:
However, from this thy anxious Grave I will
Some virtuous Ashes take, wherewith I Will fill
The Glass I preach by; for I must be just,
There lies Divinity within thy Dust.
Unhappy Grape, could not one pressing do,
But now alive you must be buried too?
Sleep on, but scorn to die, immortal Liquer:
The burying of thee thus will make thee quicker:
Mean while thy Friends prayloud, that thou may have
A speedy Resurrection from the Grave,
AN ESSAY Upon the late VICTORY obtained by His Royal Highness the Duke of
York, Against the DUTCH, upon June 3. 1665.
By the Author of Iter Boreale.
GOUT! I conjure thee by the powerful Names
Of CHARLES and JAMES, and their victorious Fames,
On this great Day set all thy Prisoners free,
(Triumphs command a Jail-delivery)
Set them all free, leave not a limping Toe
From my Lord Chancellors to mine below;
Unless thou giv'st leave this day to dance,
You Are not the old Loyal Gout, but come from France.
It Is done, my grief obeys the Sovereign Charms,
I feel a Bonfire in my joints, which warms
And thaws the frozen jelly; I am grown
Twenty years younger; Victory has done
What puzzled Physic: Give the Dutch a Rout,
Probatum est, 'twill cure an English Gout.
Come then, put nimble Socks upon my Feet,
They shall be Skippers to our Royal Fleet,
Which now returns in dances on our Seas,
A Conqueror above Hyperboles.
A Sea which with Bucephalus does scorn
Less then an Alexander should be born
On her proud Back; but to a Loyal Rein
Yields foaming Mouth, and bends her cursed Main:
And conscious that she is too strait a Stage
For Charles to act on, swelled with Loyal Rage,
Urges the Belgic and the Gallick shore
To yield more room, Her Master must have more,
Ungrateful Neighbors! 'twas our kinder Isle,
With Her own Blood, made Your Geneva Style
Writ in-small Print [Poor States and sore Perplexed:]
Swel to the [HIGH AND MIGHTY LORDS] in text;
And can ye be such Snakes to sting that Breast
Which in your Winter gave you Warmth and Rest?
Poor Flemish Frogs, if Your Ambition thirst
To swell to Eng^ish Greatness, You will burst.
Could you believe Our Royal Head would fail
To Nod those down, who fell before our Tail?
Or could Your Amsterdam by her commands,
Make London carry Coals to warm her Hands?
A bold attempt! Pray practice it no more;
We saved our Coals, yet gave you fire good store
It is enough; The righteous Heavens have now
Judged the Grand Quarrel betwixt us and you.
The Sentence is -- The Surface must be ours,
But for the bottom of the Sea it is yours:
Thither your Opdam with some thousands, are
Gone down to take possession of your share.
Methinks I here great Triton sound a Call,
And through the affr^ghted Ocean summon all
His scaly Regiments, to come and take
Part of that Feast which Charles their King does make;
Where they may glut Revenge, quit the old score,
And feed on those who fed on them before;
Whom when they have digested, who can find
Whether they are fish, or flesh, or what is their kind?
Van-Cod, Van-Ling, Van-Herring, will be cried
About their Streets; All Fish, so Dutchifi'd.
The States may find their Capers in their Dish,
And meet their Admirals in buttered Fish.
Thus they will imbody and increase their Crew;
A cunning way to make each Dutchman two.
And on themselves they now must feed or fast;
Their Herring Trade is brought unto its Last.
To the KING.
GReat Sir, Beloved of God and Man, admit
My Loyal zeal to run before my Wit.
This is my Pens miscarriage, not a Birth;
Her haste has made her bring blind Puppies forth,
My aims in this attempt, are to provoke,
And kindle flames more Noble by my smoke;
My wisp of straw may set great Wood on Fire,
And my weak Breath Your Organs may inspire.
Amongst those Flags you have taken from the Dutch,
Command your Denham to hang up his Crutch,
He is a man both of his Hands and Feet,
And with great numbers can your Navy meet,
His quicker Eye Your Conquest can survey;
His Hand, York's Temples Crown with flourishing Bay
Waller (great Poet and true Prophet too)
Whose curious Pencil in Rich Colors drew
The Type of this grand Triumph for your view.
(The Fishers (like their Herrings) bleeding new)
With the same hand shall give the World the Sights
Of what it must expect when England Fights.
That Son and Heir of Pindars Muse and Fame,
Your modest Cowley, with Your breath will flame,
And make those Belgic Beasts, who live aspire
To fall your Sacrifice in his pure Fire.
He shall proclaim Our JAMES great Neptune's Wonder,
And, like a Jove, Fighting in Clouds and Thunder.
THE GRATEFUL NONCONFORMIST: OR, Return of Thanks to Sir J. B. Knight who sent
the Author Ten CROWNS 1665.
TEn Crowns at once! and to one man! and h^
As despicable as bad Poets be!
Who scarce has Wit (if you require the same)
To make an Anagram upon your Name!
Or to out-rime a Barber, or prepare
An Epitaph to serve a Quinbrough Mayer!
A limping Levite! who scarce in his prime
Could woe an Abigal, or say Grace in rhyme!
Ten Crowns to such a Thing! Friend, it is a do^^
Able to raise dead Ben, or Davenant's Nose;
Able to make a Courtier prove a Friend,
And more then all of them in Victuals spend.
This free, free-Parliament, whose gift does sou^^
Full five and twenty hundred thousand pound:
You have outdone them, for yours was your own,
And some of it shall last when theirs is gone.
Ten Crowns at once! and now at such a time,
When Love to such as I am, is a Crime
Greater then his Recorded in Jane Shore,
Who gave but one poor loaf to the starved Whore.
What, now to help a Nonconformist! Now
When Ministers are broke that will not bow!
When it is to be unblest to be ungirt!
To wear no Surplice, does deserve no shirt:
No Broth, no Meat; no Service, no Protection;
No Cross, no Coin; no Collect, no Collection!
You are a daring Knight, thus to be kind;
If trusty Roger get it in the wind
He Will smell a Plot, a Presbyterian Plot,
Especially for what you gave the Scot!
And if the Spiritual Court take fire from Crack,
They Will clap a Pariter upon your back:
Shall make you shrug, as if you wore the Collar
Of a Cashiered Red-coat, or poor Scholar.
What will you plead, Sir, if they put you to it?
Was it the Doctor, or the Knight did do it?
Did you as Doctor, flux some Usurer?
And with your quick, did his dull Silver stir?
Or did your Zeal, you a Knight-Templer make,
To give the Church the booties you should take?
Or was it your desire to beg Applause?
Or show affection to the good old Cause?
Was It to feed Faction, or uphold the stickle
Betwixt the old Church and new Conventicle?
No, none of these, but I have hit the thing,
It was because you knew I loved the King.
Ten Crowns at once! Sir you will suspected be
For no good Protestant, you are so free.
So much at once! sure you never gave before,
Or else, I doubt, mean to do so no more.
This is enough to make a man protest
Religio Medici to be the best.
The Christians, for whose sakes we are undone,
Would have cried out, oh! it is too much for one
Either to give or take! what needs this wast?
Oh, how they love to have us keep a Fast!
Five private Meetings, (where at each, four men
In black coats, and white caps, (you will call them then
A teem of Ministers) have tug'd all day,
Deserving Provender, but scarce got hey;
Where I my self have drawn my part some hours,
Have not afforded such return as yours.
I Would wish them watch, and keep me sober still;
Not want of guilt in them, nor want of will
In me, but want of Wine does make me lame,
Or else I Would sacrifice them to the flame
Of a high blazing Satyr. Here Is a man
Who never pretended at your rates, yet can
More freely feed us, with Wine and good Dishes,
Then they (yet that is their alms) with sighs and wishes
Oh, for a Rapture! how shall I describe
The love of thousands to their Reading Tribe!
Who so maintaind them, when they lost their places
They did not loose one pimple from their faces;
But after all, full fraught with flesh and flaggon,
Came forth like Monks, or Priests of Bell and Dragon
One would have judged by their high looks and smells
They had been kept in Cellars, not in Cells:
Where they grew big and batten'd; without doubt
Some that went Firkins in, came Hogs heads out.
But ours in two years time are skin and bones,
And look like Gran-dames, or old Apple John's:
One Lazarus amongst us was too much,
But ere't be long we all shall look like such;
And when that comes to pass, the world shall see,
Who are the Ghostly Fathers, they or we;
And then our bellies (without better fare)
Will be as empty as their Noddles are:
Though we are silent, our guts will not be so,
But make a Conventicle as they go:
Poor Colon peace, and cease thy croking din,
Thou art condemned to be a Chitterlin.
N^ggardly Puritans! blush at the odds
Betwixt the Bonners and the meagre Dodds;
You give your Drink in Thimbles, they in Bowls,
Your Church is poor St. Faiths and theirs is Paul's;
And whilst you Priests and Altars do despise,
Your selves prove Priests, and we your Sacrifice.
But why do I permit my Muse to whine?
I wish my Brethren all such cheeks as mine,
And those that wish us well, such hearts as thine,
My Noble Baber, I have chosen you
For my Physician, and my Champion too;
Give me but sometimes such a dose, and I
Will never wish other Cordial till I die,
And then Proclaim you a most Valiant Knight,
(Show but such Mettle) though you never Fight.
A POEM UPON THE Imprisonment OF MR. CALAMY In NEWGATE.
THis Page I send you Sir, your Newgate Fate
Not to condole, but to congratulate.
I envy not our Mitred men, their Places,
Their rich Preferments, nor their richer Faces:
To see them Steeple upon Steeple set,
As if they meant that way to Heaven to get.
I can behold them take into their Gills
A dose of Churches, as men swallow Pills,
And never grieve at it: Let them swim in Wine
While others drown in tears, i will not repine,
But my heart truly grudges (I confess)
That you thus loaded are with happiness;
For so it is: And you more blessed are
In Peter's Chain, than if you set in's Chair.
One Sermon has preferred you so much Honor,
A man could scarce have had from Bishop Bonner;
Whilst we (your Brethren) poor Erraticks be,
You are a glorious fixed Star we see.
Hundreds of us turn out of House and Home,
To a safe Habitation you are come.
What though it be a Goal? Shame and Disgrace
Rise only from the Crime, not from the place.
Who thinks reproach or injuries is done
By an Eclipse to the unspotted Sun?
He only by that black upon his brow
Allures spectators more; and so do you.
Let me find Honey, though upon a Rod,
And prize the Prison, where my Keeper's God:
Newgate or Hell were Heaven, if Christ were there,
He made the Stable so, and Sepulcher.
Indeed the place did for your presence call;
Prisons do want perfuming most of all.
Thanks to the Bishop, and his good Lord Mayor,
Who turned the Den of Thieves into a House of Prayer:
And may some Thief by you converted be,
Like him who suffered in Christ's company.
Now would I had sight of your Mittimus;
Fain would I know why you are dealt with thus.
Jailer, set forth your Prisoner at the Bar,
Sir, you shall hear what your offenses are.
First, It is proved that you being dead in Law
(As if you cared not for that death a straw)
Did walk and haunt your Church, as if you would scar^e
Away the Reader and his Common Prayer.
Nay 'twill be proved you did not only walk,
But like a Puritan your Ghost did talk.
Dead, and yet Preach! these Presbyterian slaves
Will not give over Preaching in their Graves.
Item, You played the Thief, and ift be so,
Good reason (Sir) to Newgate you should go:
And now you're there, some dare to swear you are
The greatest Pick-pocket that e're came there:
Your Wife too, little better then your self you make
She is the Receiver of each Purse you take.
But your great Theft, you act it in your Church,
(I do not mean you did your Sermon lurch,
That Is crime Canonical) but you did pray
And preach, so that you stole men's hearts away.
So that good man to whom your place does fall,
Will find they have no heart for him at all:
This Felony deserved Imprisonment;
What cannot you Non-conformists be content
Sermons to make except you preach them too;
They that your places have, this Work can do.
Thirdly, it is proved, when you pray most devout
For all good men, you leave the Bishops out:
This makes Seer Sheldon by his powerful spel
Conjure and lay you safe in Newgate-hell:
Would I were there too, I should like it well.
I would you durst swap punishment with me;
Pain makes me fitter for the company
Of roaring boys; and you may lie a bed,
Now your Name's up; pray do it in my stead,
And if it be denied us to change places,
Let us for sympathy compare our cases;
For if in suffering we both agree,
Sir, I may challenge you to pity me:
I am the older Goal-bird; my hard fate
Has kept me twenty years in Cripple-gate;
Old Bishop Gout, that Lordly proud disease,
Took my fat body for his Diocese,
Where he keeps Court, there visits every Limb,
And makes them (Levite-like) conform to him,
Severely he does Article each joint,
And makes enquiry into every point:
A bitter enemy to preaching; he
Has half a year sometimes suspended me:
And if he find me painful in my station,
Down I am sure to go next Visitation:
He binds up, loses; sets up and pulls down;
Pretends he draws ill humors from the Crown:
But I am sure he makes such ado,
His humors trouble Head and members too:
He has me now in hand, and e're he goes,
I fear for Heretics he will burn my toes.
O! I would give all I am worth, a fee,
That from his jurisdiction I were free.
Now Sir, you find our sufferitgs do agree,
One Bishop clapped up you, another me:
But oh! the difference too is very great,
You are allowed to walk, to drink and eat,
I want them all, and never a penny get.
And though you be debarred your liberty,
Yet all your Visitors I hope are free,
Good Men, good Women, and good Angels come
And make your Prison better then your home.
Now may it be so till your foes repent
They gave you such a rich Imprisonment.
May for the greater comfort of your lives,
Your lying in be better then your Wives.
May you a thousand friendly papers see,
And none prove empty, except this from me.
And if you stay may I come keep your door,
Then farewell Parsonage, I shall never be poor.
ON THE DEATH OF MR. CALAMY, Not known to the Author of a long time after. Anno
1667.
ANd must our Deaths be silenced too! I guess
It Is some dumb Devil has possessed the Press;
Calamy dead without a Publication!
It Is great injustice to our English Nation:
For had this Prophet's Funeral been known,
It must have had an Universal Groan;
Afflicted London would then have been found
In the same year to be both burned and drowned;
And those who found no Tears their flames to quench,
Would yet have wept a Shower, his Hearse to drench.
Methinks the Man who stuffs the Weekly Sheet,
With fine New-Nothings, what hard Names did meet.
The Emp'ress, how her Petticoat was laced,
And how her Lacquyes Liveries were sac'd;
What Is her chief Woman's Name; what Dons do bring
Almonds and Figs to Spain's great little King:
Is much concerned if the Pope's Toe but aches,
When he breaks Wind, and when a Purge he takes;
He who can gravely advertise, and tell
Where Lockier and Ronland Pippin dwell;
Where a Black Box or Green-Bag was lost;
And who was Knighted, though not what it cost:
Methinks he might have thought it worth the while,
Though not to tell us who the State begnile,
Or what new Conquest England has acquired;
Nor that poor Trifle who the City fired;
Though not how Popery exalts its head,
And Priests and Jesuits their poison spread;
Yet in swollen Characters he might let fly,
The Presbyterians have lost an Eye.
Had Crackf -- 's Fiddle been in tune, (but he
Is now a Silenced Man as well as We)
He had struck up loud Music, and had played
A Jig for joy that Calamy was laid;
He would have told how many Coaches went;
How many Lords and Ladies did lament;
What Handkerchiefs were sent, and in them Gold
To wipe the Widows, he would have told;
All had come out, and we beholden all
To him, for the ovreflowing of his gall.
But why do I thus Rant without a cause?
Is not Concealment Policy? Whose Laws
My silly peevish Muse does ill to oppose:
For public Losses no Man should disclose;
And such was this, a greater loss by far,
One Man of God then twenty Men of War;
It was a King, who when a Prophet died,
Wept over him, and Father, Father cried.
O if thy Life and Ministry be done,
My Chariots and Horsemen, strength is gone.
I must speak sober words, for well I know
If Saints in Heaven do hear us here below,
A lie, though in his Praise, would make him frown,
And chide me, when with Jesus he comes down
To judge the World. -- This little He,
This silly, sickly, silenced Calamy,
Aldermanbury's Curate, and no more,
Though he a mighty Miter might have wore,
Could have vi'd Interest in God or Man,
With the most pompous Metropolitan:
How have we known him captivate a throng,
And made a Sermon twenty thousand strong;
And though black-mouths his Loyalty did charge,
How strong his tug was at the Royal Barge,
To hale it home, great GEORGE can well attest,
Then, when poor Prelacy lay dead in'ts nest;
For if a Collect could not fetch him home,
Charles must stay out, that Interest was mum.
Nor did Ambition of a Miter, make
Him serve the Crown, it was for Consciencesake.
Unbribed Loyalty! his highest reach
Was to be Master Calamy, and preach.
He blessed the King, who Bishop him did name,
And I bless him who did refuse the same.
O! had our Reverend Clergy been as free
To serve their Prince without Reward, as he,
They might have had less Wealth with greater Love:
Envy, like Winds, endangers things above;
Worth, not Advancement, does beget esteem;
The highest Weathercock the least does seem.
If you would know of what disease he died,
His grief was Chronical it is replied.
For had he opened been by Surgeons art,
They had found London burning in his heart;
How many Messengers of death did he
Receive with Christian Magnanimity!
The Stone, Gout, Dropsy, Ills which did arise
Form Griefs and Studies, not from Luxuries;
The Megrim too, which still strikes at the Head;
These he stood under, and scarce staggered.
Might he but work, though loaded with these Chains,
He Prayed and Preached, and sung away his pains.
Then by a fatal Bill he was struck dead,
And though that blow he never recovered,
(For he remained speechless to his close)
Yet did he breath, and breath out Prayers for those.
From whom he had that wound: he lived to hear
An hundred thousand buried in one Year,
In his Dear City; over which he wept,
And many Fasts to keep off Judgments kept;
Yet, yet he lived, stout heart, he lived to be
Deprived, driven out, and kept out, lived to see
Wars, Blazing-Stars, Torches, which Heaven never burns,
But to light Kings or Kingdoms to their Urns.
He lived to see the Glory of our Isle,
London, consumed in its Funeral Pile.
He lived to see that lesser day of Doom,
London, the Priests Burnt-sacrifice to Rome;
That blow he could not stand, but with that Fire,
As with a Burning Fever, did expire.
Thus died this Saint, of whom it must be said,
He died a Martyr, though he died in's bed.
So Father Eli in the Sacred page
Sat quivering with fear, as much as age,
Longing to know, yet loath to ask the News,
How it fared with the Army of the Jews.
Israel flies, that struck his Palsie-head;
The next blow stunned him, Your Sons are dead;
But when the third stroke came, The Ark is lost;
His heart was wounded, and his life it cost.
Thus fell this Father, and we well do know
He feared our Ark was going long ago.
The EPITAPH.
HEre a poor Minister of Christ does lie,
Who did INDEED a Bishopric deny.
When his Lord comes, then, then the World shall see
Such bumble Ones, the rising-Men shall be.
How many Saints whom he had sent before,
Shouted to see him enter Heavens door:
There his blessed Soul beholds the face of God,
While we below groan out our Ichabod.
Under his burned-Church his Body lies,
But shall it self a glorious Temple rise:
May his kind flock when a new Church they make,
Call it St. Edmundsbury for his sake.
R. W.

THE Loyal-Nonconformist; OR An Account what he dare swear and what he dare not
swear. Published in the year, 1666.
I Fear an Oath, before I swear to take it;
And well I may, for it is the Oath of God:
I fear an Oath, when I have sworn, to break it:
And well I may, for Vengeance has a Rod.
And yet I may swear, and must too, it is due
Both to my Heavenly, and my Earthly King;
If I assent, it must be full and true;
And if I promise, I must do the thing,
I am no Quaker, not at all to swear;
Nor Papist, to swear East, and mean the West;
But am a Protestant, and shall declare
What I cannot, and what I can protest.
I never will endeavor Alteration
Of Monarchy, nor of that Royal Name,
Which God has chosen to command this Nation,
But will maintain his Person, Crown and
Fame:
What he commands, if Conscience say not nay,
(For Conscience is a greater King then he)
For Conscience Sake, not Fear, I will obey;
And if not Active, Passive I will be.
I Will pray that all his Subjects may agree,
And never more be crumbled into parts;
I will endeavor that his Majesty
May not be King of Clubs, but King of Hearts.
The Royal Oak I swear I will defend;
But for the lvy which does hug it so,
I swear that is a Thief, and not a friend,
And about Steeples fitter far to grow.
The Civil-Government I will obey;
But for Church-Policy I swear I doubt it;
And if my Bible want the Apocrypha,
I Will swear my Book may be complete without it.
I dare not swear Church Government is right
As it should be; but this I dare to swear,
(If they should put me to it) the Bishops might
Do better, and be better than they are.
Nor will I swear for all that they are worth,
That Bishoprics will stand, and Doomsday see;
And yet I Will swear the Gospel holds forth
Christ with his Ministers till then will be.
That Peter was a Prelat they aver;
But I Will not swear't when all is said and done:
But I dare swear, and hope I shall not err,
He preached a hundred Sermons to their one.
Peter a Fisher was, and he caught Men:
And they have Nets, and in them catch Men too;
Yet I Will not swear they are alike, for them
He caught he saved: these catch, and them undo.
I dare not swear that Courts Ecclesiastic
Do in their Laws make just and gentle Votes;
But I Will be sworn that Burton, Pryn and Bastwick
Were once Ear-witnesses of harsher Notes.
Archdeacons, Deans and Chapters are brave men,
By Canon, not by Scripture: but to this,
If I be called, I Will swear, and swear again,
That no such Chapter in my Bible is.
I Will not condemn those Presbyterians, who
Refused Bishoprics, and might have had'em:
But Mistress Calamy I Will swear does do
As well as if she were a Spiritual Madam.
I will not swear, that they who this Oath take,
Will for Religion e're lay down their Lives:
But I will swear they will good Juglers make,
Who can already swallow down such Knives.
For Holy Vestments I Will not take an Oath
Which Linen most Canonical may be;
Some are for Lawn, some Holland, some Scots-cloth;
And Hemp for some is fitter than all three.
Paul had a Cloak, and Books, and Parchments too;
But that he wore a Surplice I Will not swear,
Nor that his Parchments did his Orders show,
Or in his Books there was a Common Prayer.
I owe assistance to the King by Oath;
And if he please to put the Bishops down,
As who knows what may be, I should be loath
To see Tom Beckets Miter push Crown
And yet Church Government I do allow,
And am contented Bishops be the men;
And that I speak in earnest, here I vow
Where we have one, I wish we might have ten.
In fine, the Civil Power I Will obey,
And seek the Peace and Welfare of the Nation:
If this will not do, I know not what to say,
But farewell London, farewell Corporation.
R. W.

THE RECANTATION Of A Penitent PROTEUS; OR, The CHANGLING.

As it was acted with good Applause in St. Mary's in Cambridge, and St. Paul's
in London, 1663.

To the Tune of Dr. Faustus.

London, Reprinted in the year, 1668.

Proteus his penal Resolution, speaking alone in the Tyring-house before his
entering the Pulpit.
OH I am almost mad, 'twould make one so,
To see which way Prefe^^ents game does go.
I ever thought I had her in the Wind,
And yet I Am cast above three years behind.
Three times already I have turned my Coat;
Three times already I have changed my Note:
I Will make it four and four and twenty more,
And turn the Compass round ere I Will give ore.
Love to Church Members I will give no more;
For how I Will only court the Scarlet Whore.
I Will ask the Bishops blessing; and goodnight
To Thomas Goodwyn, and his Child of Light.
Poor man, he wears his Capps too much in's eyes
To be my Guide, No, I must be more wise.
On all my Brethren I will look awry,
And cry, Stand farther off to Philip Nigh.
Ambition, my great Goddess and my Muse,
Inspire thy Prophets all such Arts to use,
As may exalt; Betwixt this and my Grave
A Miter, or a Halter, I must have.
Tell me (Ambition) prithee tell me why
So many Dunces Doctors and not I?
A Scarlet Gown I must and will obtain,
I cannot else commence a Priest in grain.
Among the Doctors I can get no room
Till I recant; that is my shameful doom.
Hang shame, I Will do it, and my end's to gain,
I Will cant, recant, and re-recant again.
Now help me great Ambition, for thy sake
To break my sleep, to break my Brains, to break
My Faith and Oaths, and so to act my part,
That men may think I have a broken Heart.
When I do preach my tears do trickle down;
But in my sleeve (my Cassock sleeves and Gown)
I laugh, to think how by my whining trade
So many Fools in one day I have made.
Help me my Muse, a new Song I desire
By thee may be prepared for the Quire,
That when my Recantation Sermon's done,
This Penitential Anthem may be sung.
But yet one thing ere I begin, I crave
A benefit, which Poets use to have,
That now and then, to make my Rimes agree,
What ends in Lie, may be pronounced LEE.
The Second Part; Or, the Changling in the Pulpit. To the same Tune.
ATtend good People, lay by scoffs and scorns,
Let Round-beads all this day pull in their Horns,
But let Conformists and brave Caveliers
Unto my doleful Tone prick up their Ears.
Take from my neck this Robe, a Rop's more fit;
And turn this Surplice to a Penance-sheet,
This Pulpit is too good to act my part,
More fit to preach at Tyburn in a Cart:
There I deserved to have taken my degree,
And Doctor Dun should have presented me;
There with an Hempen Hood should be sped;
And his thee-corner'd Cap should crown my head.
Here I am come to hold up guilty hand,
And of the Beast to give my self the brand;
Here by confessing I have been in the wrong,
I come to bore my self through my own tongue.
In Learning my poor Parents brought up me,
And sent me to the Universitie;
There I soon found bowing the way to rise:
And the only Logic was the Falacies.
In stead of Aristotle's Organon,
Anthems and Organs I did study on;
If I could play on them, I soon did find,
I rightly had Preferment in the wind.
I followed that hot scent without control,
I bowed my body, and I sung Fa Sol;
I cozened Doctor Couzens, and ere long
A Fellow ship obtained for a Song.
Then by degrees I climbed, until I got
Good Friends, good Clothes, good Commons, and what not?
I got so long, until at length I got
A Wench with Child, and then I got a blot.
Before the Consistory I was tried,
Where like a Villain I both swore and ly'd
And from the whore I made I was made free,
By purging of my self Incont'nent-LEE.
But as I scorned to father mine own Brat,
'Twas done to me as I had done with That;
The Doctors all, when Doctor I would be,
As a base son, refused to father me.
With much ado, at length by art and cunning,
My Tears and Vows prevailed with Peter Gunning
Me to adopt; and for his love and care,
I will devote my self to Peter's Chair.
Cambridge I left with grief and great disgrace,
To seek my fortune in some other place;
And that I might the better save my stake,
I took an Order, and did Orders take.
Amongst Conformists I my self did list,
A Son o'th Church as good as ever pist.
But though I bowed, and cring'd, and crossed and all,
I only got a Vicarage very small.
Ere I was warm (and warm I never had bin
In such a starved hole as I was in)
A Fire upon the Church and Kingdom came,
Which I straight helped to blow into a flame.
The Third Part.
MY Conscience first, like Balaam's Ass, was shy,
Bogled and winc'd; which when I did espy,
I cudgeld her, and spurred her on each side,
Until the Jade her paces all could ride.
When first I mounted on her tender back,
She would not leave the Protestant dull Rack,
Till in her mouth the Covenant Bit I got
And made her learn the Presbyterian Trot;
'Twas an hard Trot, and fretted her (alas)
The Independent Amble easier was,
I taught her that, and out of that to fall
To the Tantivy of Prela^ical.
I rode her once to Rumford with a pack
Of Arguments for the Covenant on her back.
That Journey she performed at such a rate,
Th 'Committee gave me a rich piece of Plate.
From Hatfield to St. Albans I did ride,
The Army called for me to be their Guide;
There I so spurd her, that I made her fling,
Not only dirt, but blood upon my King.
When Cromwell turned his Masters out by force;
I made the Beast draw like a Brewers horse;
Under the Rump I made her wear a Crooper,
And under Lambert she became a Trooper.
When Noble Monk the KING did home conveigh,
She (like Darius Steed) began to neigh.
I taught her since to Organ Pipes to prance,
As Banks his Horse could to a Fiddle dance.
Now with a Snaffle, or a twined thread,
To any Government she will turn her head:
I have so broke her, she does never start,
And that is the meaning of my broken heart:
I have found out a cunning way with ease,
To make her cast her Coat when ere I please;
And if at Rack and Manger she may be,
Her Colts tooth she will keep most Wanton-LEE.
I Will change as often as the Man in the Moon;
[His frequent Changing makes him rise so soon]
To eat Church Plumb-broth e're it all be gone,
I Will have the Devil's spoon but I Will have One.
For many years my Tongue did lick the Rump;
But when I saw a KING was turned up Trump,
I did resolve still in my hand to have
One winning Card, although 'twere but a Knave.
If the Great Turk to England come, I can
Make Gospel truckle to the Alchoran;
And if their Turkish Sabbaths should take place,
I have in readiness my Friday face.
If lock in Iron Chest (as we are told)
A Loadstone their great Mahomet can hold:
The Loadstone of Preferment (I presage)
To Mahomet may draw this Iron Age.
The Congregation way best pleased my mind;
There were more She Is, and they most free and kind:
By Chamber practice I did better thrive,
Than all my Livings, though I skimmed five.
Mine Eyes are open now my Sins to see,
With Tears I cry, Good People Pardon me;
My Reverend Fathers Pardon I do crave,
And hope my Mothers Blessing yet to have.
My Cambridge sins, my Bugden sins are vile,
My Essex sins, my sins in Ely-Isle,
My Leicester sins, my Hatfield sins are many,
But my St. Albans sins more red than any.
To CHARLES the first I was a bloody foe,
I wish I do not serve the Second so:
The only way to make me leave that trick,
Is to bestow on me a Bishopric.
This is St. Andrews Eve, and for his sake
A Bishopric in Scotland I could take;
And though a Metropolitan there be,
I Would be as Sharp, and full as Arch as he.
Now may this Sermon never be forgot,
Let others called a Sermon, I a Plot,
A Plot that takes, if it believed be;
If not I shall repent Unfained-LEE.
I must desire the Crack-fart of the Nation,
With rev'rance to let fly this Recantation;
Our Names tied tail to tail, make a sweet change,
Mine only is Strange-Lee, and his Le-strange.
THE PORING DOCTOR, OR The Gross mistake of a Reverend Son of the Church, in
bowing at the nam^ of Judas at St. Paul's, November 5. 1663.
THe Papists, God wot,
made a notable Plot
Against the Church and the State;
Which some with good reason,
Call Gunpowder-Treason,
Discovered ere 'twas too late.
Those who before,
Had weltred in gore
Of Protestant Martyrs slain,
Resolved with one breath,
Of Hell beneath,
To blow up all by a Train
The Bishops, good men,
Were in jeopardy then,
The Lords, the Commons, the King;
Religion, and Laws,
For the Catholic Cause
To be made a Burnt Offering.
Thus swelled with dispight,
To raise darkness and night,
Heaven caused the brood to miscarry;
That day big with Thunder,
Held forth Mercies wonder,
And therefore kept Anniversary.
You the present Lord Mayor,
And Brethren repair,
With the several Corporations,
To Paul's Church to pray,
And solemnize the Day
That so seasonably saved three Nations.
But good Doctor --
When he came before ye
The Sacred Gospel to read,
At Judas his name,
(O horrible shame!)
He bowed his Reverend head.
Some say that his fight
(Poor man) is not right,
I wish that it be no worse;
But others think he,
To Judas bowed the knee,
For love he bears to the Purse.
His Worship made doubt,
Where the battle was fought,
When Michael did prevail;
But to me it is clear,
For an hundred a year
He Will bow to the Dragons Tail.
Twelve Spiritual Promotions,
A head full of Notions,
With stomach more sharp than a Sithe,
Some of Bishopsgate there,
Perhaps did appear,
Whose Clothes were pawned for his Tithe.
These things set before,
And some small reasons more,
His slender wit had overthrown,
Nor can he tell how,
To read, cring or bow
By any one's Book but his own.
What then shall we say,
Can he Preach, can he Pray,
Or put to rebuke the Gainsayer,
Who in reading the Word,
Discerns not our Lord
From him that was his betrayer?
Sure this doting Fool,
Must once more to School
Before his return to the Altar,
Such another mistake,
May possibly make
His neck to deserve a Silk H --
THE FAIR QUARREL. By way of Letter, Between Mr. Wanley, a Son of the Church;
and Dr. Wild, a Nonconformist.

Published in the Year, 1666.

London, Reprinted in the year, 1668.

Mr. Nathan Wanley to Dr. Wild, who was laid aside for Nonconformity.
SO the bright Taper useless burns
To private and recluded Urns.
So Pearls themselves to shells confine,
And Gems in the Seas bottom shine,
As thou my WILD while thou do lie
Huddled up in thy privacy,
And only now and then do send
A Letter to thy private Friend;
Take once again thy Lyre, and so
Let thy selected Numbers flow,
As when thy solemn Muse did prove
To sing the Funeral of Love;
Or, as when with the Trump of fame
Thou did sound forth great George's name,
In such a strain, as might it be,
Did speak thy self as great as he.
For while great Cowley seeks the shade,
And Denham's noble Wit's mislaid;
When Davnant's weary Quill lies by,
And yields no more of Lumbardy;
While the sweet Virgin Muses be
By Wild led int' a Nunnerie;
While thus Apollo's Priests retire,
The Females do begin to aspire,
Pretending they have found a flaw
In great Apollo's Salique Law;
These grasp at Laurel, only due
To such as I have named, and you.
Dr. Wild to the Ingenious Mr. Wanley.
WHat jolly Shepherds voice is this
Would tempt me from my private bliss,
After his Pipe to dance, while Thunder
Threatens to rend that Oak in sunder,
Under whose boughs in fairer days
We sat secure, and sang the Praise
Of our great Pan, whose care did keep
The pleasent Shepherds and their Sheep?
Is this a time with wanton strains
To whistle forth the Nymphs and Swains
To sport amd dance, while Wolf and Fox
Lie lurking to devour our Flocks,
And Romes Sheep-stealers ready stand
To give them their red letters brand?
Do thou not know, my sanguine Son,
What the Plague and Fire have lately done?
London has sent up such a smoke;
As may the Angles voices choke,
And make tears big enough, to vent
sears in a deluge, to lament
The raging fury of that Flame,
But more of those that made the same;
And when St. Paul has lost his Qnire,
Twere Sacrilege to touch my Lyre.
None but a monster Nero may
Over a burning City play.
Nor would I sing, were I a Jew;
To please a Babylonish Crew.
Now since the time for sorrow cries;
In this I freely temporize.
So the bright Stars draw in their light;
When Clouds club for an ugly night.
So all the Birds of Music sleep
On stormy days, and Silence keep.
So frost-nipt Roses droop and fall,
Perfuming their own funeral.
So you have seen a well-tuned Lyre
Swelling it self with grief and ire.
In gloomy air, each heart-broken string
Its own last passing bell does ring.
So when Bellona's Trumpet sounds,
Our softer Muses Music drownds.
Sir, by my many soes you know
My Poetry is but so so.
But why do thou disdain or fear,
That Female brows should Laurel wear?
Have thou forgot that Noble Tree
It self was made out of a she?
The Muses and the Graces all
We of the Female Gender call;
And so if you have not more care,
You Will find the Furies likewise are.
Nor would I have you wonder why
Our Poets all amort do lie,
When Claret and Canary cease,
The Wits will quickly hold their peace.
Vintnars and Poets fall together,
If once the lvey-Garland wither.
Sweet Cowly thought (as well he might)
He should hrve shined in Phoebus sight;
But Clouds appeared, and he that made
Account of Juno, found a shade;
And though on David's Harp he played,
The evil Spirit cannot be laid:
Therefore the Groves and Shades he loves,
And his own Secretary proves.
Your next man's temples Laurel scorns;
Since greater pride his brows adorns.
He to Pernass. bears no good will,
Becanse it proves a horned hill.
The very thoughts whereof I dread
Will never be got out of his head.
Gondebert's silent, suppose,
Because his Muse sings through the nose,
One syllable of which poor he
Did lose by an Apocope.
Wild says, kind Wanley you are to blame
Amongst these Swans his Goose to name,
Yea though his lucky gagling yaul
Once help to save one Capital;
His love to Love then made him fear
His neck, not brow, a Wreath should wear.
Next he did one a Loyal string
His Georgicks and his Carols sing;
But now because he cannot toot
To Organtunes, he is made a mute;
And though alive, condemned to death;
Therefore, dear Sir, in vain your breath;
Although persum'd and hot does come,
To blow wind in a dead man's bumb;
Yet as a gteateful Legacy,
He leaves to thee his Nunnery,
Not doubting but if need require
Thou Wilt prove an able loving Friar.
2. Mr. Wanley to Dr. Wild.
WHat sullen wary Shepherds voice is this,
That will not be tempted from his private bliss,
But arbor'd up in Eglantine, while Thunder
Threatens to rend and rive that Oak in sunder,
Under whose boughs himself in fairer days
Did sit secure with us, and sang the praise
Of that great Pan, whose watchful care did keep
At once the pleasant Shepherd and his Sheep?
Is this a time for Shepherds to retreat,
And seek out Coverts from the scorching heat?
Is this a time for an inglorious sloth
To hug it self, not daring to peep forth
Into the open field, while the crafty Fox
Lurks in the bushes to devour our Flocks,
And Wolves of Romulus are grown so bold,
To fright the silly Sheep even in their Fold?
Do thou not know what crops the Plauge his made
And, Sampson-like, heaps upon heaps has laid?
That if Heavens wrathful Anger thus proceed,
There will no Flocks be left for thee to feed.
London has sent up such a darkning smoke,
And shall it too the Angels voices choke?
Shall it make Clouds so thick and dark, that we
Shall never more thy public Censers see?
It Is Sacrilege to rob the Church; and thence
Since you have stole your self, what is your offense?
When the white Harvest for more Reapers cries,
How can thou freely sit and temporize?
So Stars reserve themselves for pitchy night,
When Phoebus pouders all his locks with light.
So feral Birds delight to sit alone,
Till the Days glories are packt up and gone.
So Roses fall in June when frosts are past,
And on dull earth lie blushing out their last,
So the Musician smothers his Sol fa,
When he is entreated or to sing or play.
So when the fierce Bellona's Drums do beat,
Who has no mind to fight, seeks his retreat.
And so I Have seen a long miswonted Lyre
Sigh its own Dirge with its own broken wire,
And seems to shiv'r at the downfall of Paul's Quire.
Say we not well, Agues will have their course?
Yes, yes, they must remember with remorse
The Ivy Garland's withering, dearth of Liquer,
That would make Caput Mortuum the quicker. But why should thou, kind soul,
be in such fear,
That plump Lyceus should grow lean this year?
Have thou forgot how fatal the Grape-stone
Did whilom prove to poor Anacreon?
Which of the Muses or the Graces all,
Did ere for Claret or Canary call?
Is it not sung by the Venetian Swain,
How the brisk Wine gives Horns to the poor man?
And if you have no greater care, no doubt
You Will find the Claret will revive your Gout,
And then we shall hear thy Goose-gagling yaul
Cry out for help to save thy Pedestal;
Then we shall see thee, standing on one foot,
Practice worse tunes than Organs ever toot.
This is a vain presage; thou say, the Dead
Have outlived this, and have no Gout to dread.
But art thou dead indeed? Though dead thou art,
Hark how the dead man's bum does let a fart.
When as my bashful Muse did to thee come,
'Twas not so kindly done to turn thy bum;
To vote her of the Babylonish Crew;
And set the Furi^s on her with ha-loo.
This it is to gad abroad, it is just upon her;
Had Dina kept at home, she would saved her Honor.
But I Am thy Son, and must corrected be;
But why then do thou turn thy bum to me?
Do think thy Son so sanguine and insano,
To probe thee with a Fistula in Ano.
This I should leave to any of the Crew,
You may believe me though I were a Jew.
And may my breath be still perfumed, why not?
Since dead Corpse smell when they begin to rot.
And he whose Muse such wondrous heights did fly,
That it did seem to top the very Sky;
And though he may have reason to be proud,
Instead of Juno did embrace a Cloud;
May he resume King David's Harp and play
The Tarantul' of discontent away.
If Denhams has so foully bin betrayed,
And his Enclosure against his will surveyed:
May he recover all his Wits and more,
And with such keen Iambricks brand the Whore,
That all may dread it worse then loss of life,
To turn a Poet frantic for his Wife.
Poor Davenant's Nose it seems is grown so sore,
It scarcely will abide one smart Jest more.
Well may the bridge be down, when time does meet
To press it with his Satyr cloven feet.
And thou with thy Apocopes art wont
To scater balls of thy Wildfire upon it.
But shall I not, kind Wild, remember thee,
Who have bequeathed me such a Legacy?
It Is thine for life, we know thy subtle head;
Wills have no force till the Testator's dead;
And that none can have ought by thy bequest
Till thou art better dead then in a Jest:
Nor would I that in tenderness to me
Thou shoulst suspect thine own sufficiency;
Enjoy it freely, since thou have it wed,
It Is Incest to ascend the Fathers bed.
What though thou ownst me for thy sanguine Child,
Yet I have not so much my Sire of Wild.
And thus far is thy Fry'r able to see
His Covent's better than thy Nunnerie.
He Is loving too, it is true, he nothing gives,
As thou, at his decease, but while he lives
All these good wishes, such as he can spare.
And if thou have them, will help mend thy fare.
May every Knight about us, that is inclind,
Be unto thee, as Sir John Baber, kind.
Ten Silver Crowns let each of them send thee,
And be so paid for all in Verse as he.
May the poor Scholar never want Sunday Pudden,
When he is not like to preach for it on the sudden.
May thy afflicted Toe never feel the Gout;
Or if it must, let the Dutch have a Rout;
That thou may yet (at last) once more Protest
That Recipe wants no Probatum est.
May thou next send me what is worth thy Pen;
May I have brains to answer it again.
May all that are of such good wishes sullen,
Live till their good Friends bury them in Woollen.
Dr. Wild to Mr. Wanley.
HOnestly done however, though the Stuff
You sent be course the measure's larg^ enough.
The first Cup thou beganst I could not pass,
The Wine was brisk, and in a little glass:
But now to pledge thee I am not inclined,
You Sons o'th Church are for large draughts I find.
Prithee leave off, for thou have been so free
In sending such a brimmer unto me,
That Sunday last, long of that frolic bout,
Thy Parish had but half a glass I doubt.
Besides the drink is small, you have changed your gill,
I wish you would kept in your hogs-head still.
Yet, upon better thoughts, small drink is fit
To cool the stomach, though not help the wit;
And that might be thy case: for certainly
Those salt bits I had sent thee made thee dry;
Or sick, which made thee drink small drink, and strain
To cast them undigested up again.
Twelve lines returned the very same, that I
Must call the Hickup, rather than Reply;
Or, by rebounding of my words, I dread
There is some Echo in thine empty head:
Or rather thou my Cockril art, and so
The young one learneth of the old to crow.
Nay my brave Bird, thou dare spur and peck;
I wish that Shrovetide hazard not thy neck:
Now prithee Chick beware, for though I find
That thou art right and of the fighting kind,
Yet thou art not my Match, and soon wilt feel
My Gout lies in my Toe, not in my Heel.
Take this advice bofore you mean to fight,
Get your Comb cut, and leave your treading quite.
Thy Barber, or his Wife, if he should fail,
Has skill to clip thy wings, and trim thy tail;
And thereby hangs another Tail, I find
Thy subtle nose has got my breech in the wind.
If thou can catch poor farts that Prison break,
A notable Bumbayliff thou will make.
Hark, hark, say thou, he let a fart! what though?
It breaths forth no Sedition, Sir, I trow;
Nor is there any Statute of our Nation
That says, in five miles of a Corporation
If any Outed-man a Fart should vent,
That you should apprehend the Innocent.
If you so soon could smell the Pouder-Plot,
What had you said if I had bullets shot?
Fie man! our mouths were stopped long ago,
And would you have us silent too below?
But I displaid my bum before thine eyes
Unkindly thou say, I say otherwise;
For there thou might have thy resemblance took,
Dead men's blind cheeks do very wanley look.
And For the crack it gave, that did but mind thee,
To strive to leave a good report behind thee.
As for the gall which in your Ink appears,
That in our sufferings we are Volunteers;
I Will not say much, I have more wit than so,
It Is scurvy jesting with edg-tools I know:
But Sir, it is cruelty in you, to whip
Your Brothers back which you did help to strip.
Yet thus your Grandsire Levi did before,
Who killed those, whom his Covenant had made sore.
And you know who they were that gave the blow,
And then cried, Prophecy who smote thee so?
We durst not keep our Livings for our lives,
But they must needs go whom the Devil drives.
Yea but we left our Harvest, left our Sheep,
And would not work in one, north' other keep.
I answer. No great Harvest yet appears,
I Am sure your Churches hang but thin with ears.
And though the Foxes breed, what need you care,
When As your Shepherds such Fox-catchers are.
For pardon, Sir, my serious soul now cries,
Your knocking me did make this froth to rise.
Once for my Age, Profession and Degree,
To fool thus is enough, and Twice for thee.
Thus great Estates b'imprudent owners may,
When staked at Ticktack, soon be played away.
Let Us wind this folly up in this last sheet,
And friendly part, as we did friendly meet.
Yet, to requite thy Legacy to me,
Accept this Litany I send to thee.
May thy rich Parts with saving Grace be joined,
As Diamonds in Rings of Gold enshrined;
May he that made thy Stars, create a Sphere
Of heavenly frame of life, and fix them there;
May that blessed Life credit Conformity,
And make e'ven Puritans to honor thee.
May thou to Christ such shore of Converts bring,
That he whose place thou fill'st, for joy may sing.
May God love you, and you love God again;
And may these Prayers of mine not be in vain.
THE TABLE.
ITer Boreale. p. 1 The Tragedy of Mr. Chr. Love, late Minister of the Gospel,
Acted upon Tower Hill, Aug. 22. 1651. p. 22 Upon the much to be lamented Death,
of the Reverend Mr. Vines. p. 29 To the Memory of Mr. Jer. Whitaker. p. 31 Upon
the Death of so many Reverend Ministers of late. p. 34 An Elegy upon the Earl
of Essex his Funeral. p. 36 To the Father of a very virtuous Virgin deceased,
who desired an obscure person to make an Elegy. p. 38 In memory of Mris E. T.
p. 40 An Epitaph upon E. T. p. 42 Upon the Learned Works of the Reverend
Divine, Mr. Edw. Reynolds. p. 43 Another. p. 45 Aliud. ibid An Epitaph for a
Godly-mans Tomb, p. 46 An Epitaph for a Wicked-mans Tomb, ibid. A Letter to a
Friend. p. 47 Alas poor Scholar, etc. p. 51 The Norfolk and Wisbich
Cockfighting. p. 56 Upon the Death of Dennis Bond, Esquire; p. 60 Upon some Bottles
of Sack and Claret, laid in Sand, and covered with a sheet. p. 63 An Essay upon
the late Victory obtained by his Royal Highness the Duke of York, against the
Dutch, June 3. 1663. p. 64 The Grateful Nonconformist; or a Return of Thanks to
Sir J. B. Knight. who sent the Author Ten Crowns p. 66 A Poem upon the
Imprisonment of Mr Calamy in Newgate. p. 71 On the Death of Mr. Calamy, no^
known to the Author of a long tim^ after. p. 73, 74 The Loyal Nonconformist,
or an account what he dare swear, and what he dare not swear. p. 84 The
Recantation of a Penitent Proteus; or the Changling: as it was acted with good
applause in St. Mary's in Cambridge, and St. Paul's in London: in three parts.
p. 91, 93, 96. The Poring Doctor; or the gross mistake of a Reverend Son of the
Church, in bowing at the name of Judas, November. 5. 1663. at St. Paul's. p. 100
The Fair Quarrel: by way of Letter, between Mr. Wanley, a Son of the Church,
and Dr. Wild, a Nonconformist. 107
FINIS.

